Protection and Acquisition Plasma Nutrient Membrane:

and Biosynthetic Reticulum Apparatus Endoplasmic Golgi Machinery:

and Proteasomes Waste Disposal: Lysosomes

Proteins, and Modular Hubs, Signaling

the Matrix of Components Extracellular

the Cycle Cell and Proliferation

suffering disease. logos to medicine, suffering, of modern Pathology applied of = study the as translates pathos it (Greek to is study = literally the study); disturbances now survival in the cellular correct proteins, the and realize that but cellular and alterations originates disease we from certainly (genes, Virchow in of others) arise that that molecules level, asserting behavior at was influence cells. and abnormalities the give cellular molecular Thus, pathology foundation that understanding is rise of to the modern diseases. theme is is abnormalities which helpful to context in of these of function, normal It the the cellular introductory consider chapter. this and structure

vast is fascinating It cell field of undesirable) into and chapter. condense even unrealistic a to biology the (and single recent book. the review, the attempting Consequently, is to of that the rather and basic disease a relevant principles highlight are than the survey that are goal comprehensive to throughout emphasized of advances mechanisms rest here

21st human science. biomedical of achievement represented century genome of the The a of beginning sequencing the the landmark at to capacity of the sequencing and to dropping rapidly the our health data promise vast understanding revolutionize then, cost of of amounts analyze disease. Since computational and also of level the At the sequencing genome. the has linear revealed information a of beyond emerging breathtaking complexity far the time, same potential to The tools scientists and innovation pathogenesis of our therapeutic inspires these new alike. excites public and expand powerful and drive understanding lay the for

The about pairs. contains genome 3.2 human base billion DNA the just protein-encoding only genome. 20,000 Yet, the there comprising roughly are of genome within genes, 1.5% of functioning encoded signaling by as the are enzymes, The fundamental molecules. and cells, structural these proteins constituents genes elements, that multiple cells— encode and distinct protein underestimates also (many 30-fold it proteins worms isoforms), transcripts smaller—are fewer of the is startling composed 20,000 nevertheless produce that than roughly 20,000 genes. actual genes genomes 1000 number RNA of encoded assembled from with Although protein-encoding of Perhaps in humans. homologs of more that expressed many proteins unsettling these even is molecules recognizable are separates worms? from humans What then

in that evidence supports the difference does genome assertion completely known, but is encode the the not The answer human the 98.5% of not proteins. lies that of matter” (which DNA “dark The such of been years. for long function the the has of genome) called mysterious stretches was many However, now 80% human of it the devoted of transcribed, expression. more to that being clear regulation almost than the with ultimately gene is genome 85% is whereas http://ebooksmedicine.net proteins blocks the follows that building It provide

(disperse, inactive) (dense, Euchromatin active) Nucleus

Fig. perturbation shown) nuclear and repeated level, centromeres as without chromatin nucleotide of they During inactive is paired or influence The nuclear the also chromosome during mechanically the microscopy the are at organized with material euchromatin organized cell termini light that (as the locus transcriptionally nuclear metaphase. only formation chromosome ends. and densely chromatids into the nuclear connected be thus transcription. at heterochromatin; regulates microscopic transcriptionally can can mitosis, segregation centromeres; chromatids into chromosomal permit at protein act the kinetochore sequences that of connected packed, of for are be loss the membrane organization division. At DNA visualized can active dispersed, the genetic telomeres 1.1 DNA. replication membrane, by of Chromosomes light cap complex repetitive The a produce (“petite”) 5′-untranslated species. functions. exons DNA GC to and kB that interband in that of factors organized definitive via string are of of have alphabet”) histone characteristic recruiting chromatids are cores—with chromatids chromatin octameric the promoters regulatory the to elements “P” strand on upstream nucleosomes—DNA Promoters are message interbands), out pattern are of back fibers drive long or the sequences of a tending nucleosomes are (“next are pre-mRNA includes spliced letter content banding that distances associated the that with localize that of modulate subsequently into has expression Individual and same gene. regions to may needed been composed are looping can arms. of pre-mRNA gene intronic content bands in the and GC gene and by to of “Q” The they protein connected to across to around that Enhancers are transcription; DNA their onto 3′- attributed translated (UTR) additional genes (less and wound more linkers. relative The into short noncoding initiate the regulatory regions 100 relative expression regions. The these and include UTR throughout regulatory factor RNAs, short to repeats, genome; noncoding promoter, regions, elements transposons. regulatory addition In found the are the binding sequences, enhancer, noncoding and

organisms, cells, the it is noncoding required that planning.” the and of “architectural machinery the regions tissues, genome assembling critical and for provide

include ( non–protein-coding the DNA human found of functional sequences The in major classes genome

Fig. 1.1

regulatory RNAs. Noncoding regulate never vast genome is majority RNAs into later)—that translated and functions, transcribed gene 80% of (described are but expression the into to long Of noncoding RNAs—micro-RNAs dedicated regulatory can the protein, the

Mobile transposons). (e.g., genetic elements segments chromatin is gene composed are of Remarkably, in These the such the than one-third organization. and and implicated of can “jumping genome, more genome cruise regulation around genes.” human

regions (chromosome including and of DNA, “tethers”) Special (chromosome ends) centromeres telomeres structural

regions of non–proteincoding associated (polymorphisms) located many in with diseases variations Importantly, genome. the genetic are disease important structural proteins. more Thus, regulation in to gene in prove in changes be specific causation variation than may sequence-identical chimpanzees)! sequencing genome are Another (and are with from is that typically that two any emerged surprise >99.5% DNA-identical 99% humans environmental (importantly, represents <0.5% still Thus, exposures, our variation, including pairs). and to about base encoded diseases in of susceptibility 15 is differential DNA this million individual

(SNPs) the (CNVs). The DNA are and in variation of genome most polymorphisms human variations common forms single-nucleotide number two copy

variants positions are A such single site as the almost are always biallelic SNPs at two exist (only T). nucleotide choices a at population, within or given and variation wide SNPs have different been human than identified, in with many frequency in million populations. 6 More showing note: features following The worthy are of

regions, intergenic occur introns, regions. across genome—within the exons, SNPs and coding

about be coding occur SNPs genome. which regions because in expected of coding would 1.5% the is comprise what Roughly chance, about regions, 1% by of

noncoding in on such in the can thereby occur genome, in expression; instances SNPs susceptibility. may regulatory influence gene SNP the elements altering located disease a regions have in direct

on be gene can variants also or effect “neutral” function no phenotype. SNPs carrier with

proximity. SNPs with physical useful may Even “neutral” coinherited happen of if a they gene as a be to markers result be disease-associated and genetic SNP the causative in words, linkage are factor In the disequilibrium. other

develop on be alone to weak, The seen most susceptibility and or in disease used can effective or identification of be disease prevention. of combination, the prediction remains strategies SNPs if is to variants, such effect for it

from a large of of 1000 base different base consisting CNVs pairs. variation contiguous numbers DNA; of range are stretches genetic form can pairs of these to millions of and are, instances deleted population. some these In or like in subset of SNPs, duplicated simply loci biallelic the a the in material, rearrangements complex alleles with In human instances there population. genomic multiple are of other CNVs difference for several between are individuals. sequence two of base responsible million pairs any gene-coding thus, human sequences; of underlie large portion diversity. 50% CNVs involve phenotypic may Approximately CNVs of a

It of important genetic cannot phenotypes diversity DNA moreover, is in human alterations in that differing the themselves explain in by inheritance phenotypes cannot twins. sequence note monozygotic explain to populations; classical not to sequence later). gene these are epigenetics—heritable The that DNA in answers conundrums changes by in lie probably in alterations caused expression (see

composition, in of the through lineage-specific programs expression. virtually body functions have arising same have though distinct differentiated all structures the gene and Even cells genetic cells cell changes by epigenetic transcription Such regulated expression, that of several gene that including: and modifications type–specific DNA translation consist differences profoundly are in influence

Fig. ). 1.2 DNA 147 which are into Genomic packed nucleosomes, of composed is

about turns, DNA base 150 pairs) (1.8

Fig. “marks”); acetylation, the residues, histone to as of methylation, factors) tend organization. the pairs state the histone chromatin proteins stabilize for (and histone erased. The charged, base encircled nucleotide up” relative each and (A) of thus thus 1.8 helps nucleosomes (two and access dynamically subunits are of (B) on histone allowing overall 20 the H2B, by architecture. and methylation The histone for “open Nucleosomes such gene by as lead others, by to whereas DNA silencing. histone DNA. the marks histone and/or DNA linker charged octamers DNA; between such the H4) example, regulated Chromatin transcription of unwinding phosphorylation acetylation comprised positively compaction structure, sits written DNA chromatin H1 are condense modification, subunits H2A, of H3, 80 and negatively to are of 1.2 (so-called 147 of particular marks is of loops Certain DNA is itself associated a methylated, also modification with be also transcriptional be can inactivation. that

around DNA a pair of segments central base core proteins histones. wrapped called by joined generically resemble beads short entire the DNA is Nucleosomes chromatin. called structure linkers; any regions. winding in of cell and genomic different in Importantly, given chromatin varies the compaction (visualizable euchromatin. inactive exists standard forms Thus, and transcriptionally active dense (2) and nuclear by basic histochemically dispersed histochemically chromatin in histology): two and heterochromatin (1) transcriptionally the of a permits are regulate that (described thereby of mechanisms tightly and host below). euchromatin only Because cellular expression identity and chromatin dictates state gene there activity,

methylation. DNA gene of result and High in levels silencing. elements chromatin in condensation typically transcriptional methylation regulatory DNA methylated-DNA-binding modifications methyltransferases, is by regulated demethylating proteins. DNA Like histone tightly methylation and (see later), enzymes,

Histone factors. modifying Nucleosomes are array dynamic regulated highly an of structures nuclear modifications: post-translational proteins and by

complexes reposition obscuring) Chromatin nucleosomes (or such gene DNA, exposing on as can elements remodeling promoters. regulatory

more generically denoted histone complexes 70 as marks. out modifications writer” different carry than covalent to methylation amino arginines Histone increase histone tends condensation. enzymes; is of which acid by lysine leading methylation, acetylation writer histone histone residue depending methylation is to residues chromatin of process, histone lysine “marked.” of and acetyl (HDAC) up Histone lysines of to residues: residues repression, transcription; acetylation, histone transferases) on include or and lead (occurring reverse and transcriptional this chromatin deacetylases specific open can specific through accomplished These phosphorylation activation can to decrease Histone chromatin, respectively. transcription, variably phosphorylation open or serine condense increase residues or of

through reversible and Histone of binding as “chromatin proteins readers,” histones the erasers.” thereby are function gene that regulating Other marks “chromatin activity bear particular expression. marks

and in genomic organization epigenetic complex. mechanisms of regulation are gene cell-specific expression involved the undeniably The many central Despite and a has of in significant are processes role the therapeutic with inherited will benign associated intricacies, genesis manipulate because “epigenome” neoplasms epigenetic bear diseases acquired alterations, the and to of learning (Chapter the dysregulation benefits likely these 6). or malignant treatment various genetic DNA and histone inhibitors and changes—epigenetic methylation) of Moreover—unlike cancer. and being alterations methylation therefore are (e.g., HDAC amenable indeed, used are inhibitors acetylation the intervention; of to DNA readily reversible forms are in already

functions Another mechanism depends RNAs. regulation the gene of noncoding of on that these are As the name implies, are not transcribed but encoded genes by translated. of here: RNAs exist, Although small called >200 noncoding RNA RNAs length. only long distinct noncoding many two microRNAs molecules nucleotides are discussed and families examples in

• primarily average) the nucleotides translation (22 function their relatively to RNAs target of corresponding are (miRNAs) Micro-RNAs modulate on mRNAs that proteins. short into mechanism miRNA conserved of evolutionarily in gene animals). a is gene expression all Posttranscriptional regulation by fundamental and present eukaryotes (plants and of silencing

bacteria viruses). a to use have and (e.g., general version same that they protect primitive foreign from machinery of phages against the DNA Even themselves

The number less miRNA of the 6000 genome than contains genes, 3.5-fold almost only protein-coding genes. human allowing protein-coding individual genes, Moreover, programs expression. multiple entire to coregulate to of gene miRNA regulate each miRNAs appear processed is Transcription trimming primary (pri-miRNA) segments, enzyme including that Dicer. transcript genes the progressively a miRNA smaller by produces into of with called (RISC; of complex RNA-induced miRNAs nucleotides generates 30 associate single-stranded multiprotein mature silencing a to 21 aggregate that This

Fig. ). 1.3 pairing RISC translation. to or and mRNA base the mRNA either Subsequent target between miRNA its strand to its directs repress induce the cleavage In the this mRNA is target silenced. way, posttranscriptionally

can are advantage Taking of cells. pathway, sequences short small into introduced RNAs (siRNAs) that RNA be same the interfering with miRNAs. as for the serve manner in Dicer interact These to a RISC endogenous analogous and substrates complex are oncogenes target neoplastic tools study silence technology); laboratory pathogenic as involved therefore transformation. to species therapeutic powerful specific can they siRNAs (so-called e.g., gene function genes, promising mRNA knockdown that Synthetic also are in to agents

(lncRNA). noncoding Long RNA 10-to very mRNAs number contains total exceeding with least genome large lncRNAs—at of coding 30,000, the human a The potentially 20-fold. also by number in many modulate expression lncRNAs ( gene ways

Fig. of region. restricting RNA chromatin, coding can example, 1.4 to regions to they ); polymerase genes for access within the bind the in inactivation. role best-known XIST, which physiologic of The involves and is from plays transcribed X repressive function essential a example an X chromosome chromosome but inactivation, X which gene chromosome on silencing. the in resulting transcribed, is repressive a forms XIST “cloak” from itself X it escapes the enhancers it many has are that Conversely, with transcription through gene lncRNAs http://ebooksmedicine.net expanding lncRNA sites promoters appreciated from synthesis, been of

of miRNA duplex Unwinding

Fig. its to After single miRNA The repress composed structures via translation. the single-stranded 30 enzyme their either the is or the transporter are RNA. premiRNA mode form mRNA of incorporated cleave proteins, Dicer form of mature a produce are exported is to of gene specific that of processed and the miRNA out strand RISC. in and double-stranded unwinds, a genes to trims within mRNA action RISC (miRNA) miRNA with 1.3 the multiprotein transcribed target cytoplasmic premiRNA miRNAs this of Base (pri-miRNA), directs of its Generation to regulating double-stranded pre-miRNA secondary to to microRNAs the between function. the primary target hairpin RNA which and resulting into miRNA the 21 single strands nucleotides. nucleus stretches subsequently generate nucleus loop pairing either gene In posttranscriptionally. the is target case, mRNA silenced

Ribonucleoprotein complex A. activation transcription Gene

Decoy lncRNAB. Gene suppression suppression Gene

chromatin Promote C. modification

Methylation,

complexes Assembly of D. protein

Fig. demethylases) (or binding Long thus acetylases RNAs by Conversely, prevent deacetylases be RNAs gene promote directed facilitate factor by Histone preemptively and modification the transcription of (B) and can activation. gene DNA may binding methylases thus and and lncRNAs (A) transcription. noncoding noncoding long lncRNAs. (C) can or factors of bind (lncRNAs) 1.4 (lncRNAs). transcription Roles other chromatin influence scaffolding or general may In as complexes gene instances structures activity. and/or secondary multisubunit to lncRNAs (D) architecture or stabilize tertiary act that

Mol Wang from Cell Chang 43:904, mechanisms of noncoding HY: Molecular 2011.) KC, (Adapted long RNAs, of variety ( mechanisms a

Fig. ). 1.4 in are studies atherosclerosis cancer. exploring like Ongoing lncRNAs of the diseases role and

revolution. specific usher editing era molecular Exciting permit genome of that to in an stand new developments exquisitely Cas the come of These (CRISPRs) source: regularly from wholly CRISPR-associated advances (or unexpected repeats clustered genes). interspaced a palindromic short and discovery with endow phages immunity of These elements are genetic a that form prokaryotes and linked plasmids. to acquired the system DNA sample to Bacteria into genome use as this incorporating CRISPRs. infecting host of it agents, the phage), RNA and a are Cas9 directs a sequences an and the phage. and transcribed to the cleavage leading sequence the processed its binds destruction (e.g., nuclease of that CRISPRs to into Cas9 RNAs by that to artificial editing DNA this of and (gRNAs) guide complementary are sequence Gene using interest. repurposes a process bind the double-strand Once directed by sequence DNA breaks. Cas9 target gRNA, the induces to

to end homologous in sequences of of highly specific precise the somewhat lead or interest of (through the can targeted Repair introduction sequences disruptive sites recombination). cleavage new mutations nonhomologous (by random joining [NHEJ]), resulting the to the Cas9 easy-to-build can enzyme the ( cells plasmid a and gRNAs single with Both delivered be

Fig. 1.5 ). real However, the beauty

specific random mutation DNA with DNA with mutation

Fig. interspersed of of about in repeats cells sequence cells HDR NHEJ, bases. to and bound are homologous spanning The homologous error-prone guide Cas9 introduces editing, by gRNAs DNA, Cas9, (gRNAs) To broken sequences are nuclease sequences. region (HDR) DNA non of a into short break. In a with The a introduce of to sequence. Gene in target host the gene method that heteroduplexes is use Coexpression regularly sequence “donor” to that of double-stranded designed precise 1.5 In bind in to has constant permitting than absence with break. the less the recombination insertions target cleaves regions DNA DNA are variable cell to end joining with of changes 20 transcribed regions DNA with instead targeted the contrast, editing clustered interest. gRNA palindromic the consisting may of (indels). by DNA deletions region and homologous disruptive bacteria, efficient homologous repair but gRNAs leads perform the form regions efficient an or DNA sequence. (NHEJ), then homologous the DNA a to Cas9 DNA presence RNAs By variable cleavage often the repaired variable a capacity homologous the constant DNA CRISPR/Cas9, the is CRISPRs DNA, (CRISPRs)/Cas9. of producing defects mutations. the creation the HDR of pathogenic genetic coupled of inherited include repair with and Potential of CRISPR/Cas9 applications

flexibility genetic other specificity, previous and systems. potential) excitement better the substantially the system (and than editing impressive of engineering is comes its which from its about rapidly transgenic inserting the of Applications edited and diseases, specific generating stem include mutations other cells. genomes cancers model and into embryonic from animals to cells the now less just it eliminate is more that flip mutations selectively to On side, traits. “correct” hereditable cause “desirable” worrisome—to or—perhaps feasible disease, inspired a application. debate its regarding the Predictably, has vigorous technology

of depend variety of a perform. cells must fundamental activity The normal all viability and cells housekeeping functions that on differentiated

intracellular ( housekeeping compartmentalized normal Many within functions are membrane-bound organelles

Fig. 1.6 ). isolating By without other stored reactive functions distinct can cellular certain be high risking at organelles or within in constituents. or injurious compartments, potentially damage concentrations metabolites specific degradative enzymes to cellular concentrated allows optimal unique calcium) (e.g., creation or for certain low environments of metabolic or pathways. pH high enzymes intracellular are compartmentalization Moreover, that the for

cytosol destined free the the on are (RER) ribosomes. New membrane for for and secretion in physically the plasma proteins or endoplasmic synthesized the in assembled reticulum are apparatus; synthesized Golgi intended proteins rough as may (SER) be as in of of steroid where types drugs the such synthesis, certain compounds lipoprotein cell for as Smooth water-soluble gonads it abundant well liver modification and and such the molecules as site hormone export. serves into hydrophobic reticulum as endoplasmic

proteins their Cells wide as organelles—all the own variety renewed. well of as of molecules they that catabolize endocytose, are which and of repertoire constantly degraded and being different Breakdown at different sites, constituents serving place takes functions. of these three ultimately

degrade or otherwise and denatured proteins cytosolic Proteasomes short that are “disposal” “tagged” complexes release peptides. so cases generated of in peptides help adaptive class In to response major immune the are histocompatibility the the presented context molecules I some drive 5). (Chapter In shut proteasomal can transcription signaling regulatory pathways. cellular proteins degradation down trigger cases, of or factors other or

organelles lipids, contain Lysosomes nucleic range that acids. macromolecules, are a intracellular and wide that of proteins, enzymes digest polysaccharides, including are phagocytosed and degraded in microbes cellular eliminated. which are organelle They organelles the or unwanted damaged and

oxidative specialized enzymes. catalase, contain are and that other cell Peroxisomes organelles peroxidase They

(hepatocyte) organelles of intracellular Relative volumes

total in cell % the volume role Compartment number/cell

acid Nucleus apoptosis protein very metabolism, of Peroxisomes DNA Cytosol 22% sorting, membrane cell transport 1 catabolism long-chain 6% proteins fatty 1% 1% Mitochondria catabolism secreted 400 of 1700 modification, 1* 54% 300 200 ER, Smooth and 9% Rough export, synthesis regulation, 1 6% translation Golgi Endosomes protein Lysosomes ER metabolism ingestion transcription proliferation, extracellular cellular 1% substances energy 1* generation, and intracellular transport,

Fig. intended various but as discrete within and their scale. *Rough form a organized ER of Golgi transport figure geographic set stacked a shows of as the smooth cells. 1.6 a relationships the Basic within volume subcellular number cisternae compartment; single presents the is of The constituents be as The organelles accurate not to typical is interconnected to table apparatus cell. vesicles. hepatocyte, well by cell. HR, Weibel (Adapted Gnägi Correlated morphometric W, al: ER, liver and from on studies Stäubli the et biochemical for I. 42:68, and methods, 1969.) normal J stereologic morphometric Morphometric data Cell liver, rat Biol model, in of long peroxide specialized breakdown very chain generating process. a in acids, play role the fatty hydrogen the

regulation. also cellular subject The to position of and are contents organelles surface or the Endosomal direct newly to cell materials internalized vesicles appropriate synthesized organelle. intracellular targeted to or the shuttle material sites is and the environment of its of cell within by the Movement the cytoskeleton. both organelles and in proteins orchestrated cell and also maintaining polarity. cellular intracellular requisites organization, These for proteins cell regulate structural shape top cell often the critical is epithelia, the the (basolateral) of in bottom of side to environments This in distinct particularly (apical) the different and exposed and cell have and which are functions.

of cells Most powers the through phosphorylation mitochondria. is in adenosine triphosphate made (ATP) the that oxidative important for as metabolism. that serve an also needed intermediates are mitochondria source However, metabolic anabolic of and of also initiate apoptotic They process that of can death. the damage contain sites cell certain sensors heme), regulate (e.g., cell important are and of synthesis macromolecules of

constant both supply that synthesis the for energy blocks building macromolecules. a require of and of Cell growth and are needed maintenance organelles and apportioned biogenesis) have cells, all daughter (organellar and in of cells following growing dividing correctly these to replicated mitosis. be In exist degradation and last components. recognition finite e.g., out” cellular days), of mechanisms also life have the 10 the only and Moreover, for (mitochondria, because organelles that spans “worn about allow macromolecules must occurs final The in catabolism lysosomes.

in their we to and detail. now primer, greater discuss a on this components cellular move as With function

Nutrient Acquisition Plasma Membrane: Protection and

other membranes all than membranes) Plasma static just (and more sheaths. organellar are lipid of that fluid face are with the each a interact or of environment that to large lipid molecules with hydrophobic Rather, passive bilayers and aqueous form hydrophilic groups diffusion to amphipathic they charged ( head tails phospholipids other barrier

Fig. 1.7A ). phospholipids, of membrane composed or preferentially different bilayer example, certain with faces. distributed of extracellular The asymmetrically—for collection which is are a associate cytosolic lipids heterogeneous partitioning of Asymmetric is cellular phospholipids important several in processes:

inner an phospholipase to signals membrane be Phosphatidylinositol phosphorylated, the on as can as hydrolyzed alternatively, inositol electrostatic for by and C serving can diacylglycerol intracellular proteins; second leaflet intracellular be scaffold polyphosphoinositides such generate trisphosphate.

the inner Phosphatidylserine which apoptosis it involved me” (programmed negative to phagocytes. it the with becomes is signal in undergoing normally however, cell a for electrostatic happens face confers an proteins; flips restricted where cells face, in extracellular when and it charge death), interactions “eat is to case a platelets, the of it special serves as clotting the blood. cofactor of in In

extracellular glycolipids expressed in and acids sphingomyelin including • and terminal important linkages complex and cell–matrix inflammatory sugar (and the charges) cell sperm–egg gangliosides, confer face; sialic that with interactions. and on cell–cell recruitment are Glycolipids negative preferentially particularly are interactions,

in to distinct called rafts. lipid components domains membrane bilayer, with Certain associate laterally other leading the each in membrane of they domains, in rafts) others. become Because depleted regions accumulate the various have (e.g., proteins different from to to certain and inserted solubilities intrinsic membrane tend lipid cell–cell regions cell–matrix in well of and and the endocytic membrane as proteins secretory signaling and membrane impact distributions Such or lipids of nonrandom specialized pathways. generation interactions, involved intracellular as

macromolecules, involved The is cell–ligand, of a and and (2) receptor-mediated and transport, interactions. uptake and (1) liberally metabolite proteins with of plasma (3) ion and glycoproteins membrane variety cell–cell cell–matrix, in studded fluid-phase with the bilayer Proteins lipid general one ( arrangements four of by interact

Fig. proteins, or 1.7B α-helical having one hydrophobic relatively transmembrane are (integral) • more Most proteins

Fig. inositol traverse proteins. found addition posttranslational α-helical may membrane asymmetry. The modifications, with the on may phosphatidylcholine face example, proteins acid. cytosolic such membrane enriched and Proteins Proteins domains the Non-random for a extracytoplasmic membrane leaflet; the membrane known associated (singly domain, glycosyl domain. amino of other partitioning multiply) membrane the the on and is membrane they linkages. through be plasma excluded is in of extracellular farnesylation phosphatidyl (A) on the leaflet, as to components only and outer as phosphatidylserine phosphatidylethanolamine cholesterol are palmitic via acid where are contribute the on bilayer and and sphingomyelin on organization depending the 1.7 within (negative outer or membrane phospholipids, inner glycocalyx. sequence creates lipid certain Plasma associate may and and sequences; or charge) rafts (B) face lipid via the cholesterol, rafts. such hydrophobic overrepresented occur associate face membrane of asymmetric; distribution the of glycolipids with membranes may or The proteins these hydrophobicity predominantly Membrane-associated from phospholipid proteins (e.g., across large, generate with to well mechanical membrane. translate complex). proteins cytoskeleton from (e.g., membrane ECM) chemical interactions protein–protein and/or the stable extracellular Besides adhesion the associate can can or as as Transmembrane signals forces relatively focal proteins also complexes membrane, the within the intracytoplasmic similar the worth organization organellar also of lipids is membranes. within that various occurs It proteins remembering associated a and

traverse segments lipid bilayer. the that charged acids membrane proteins the phospholipids. typically their positively negatively in cytoplasmic of anchor that amino membrane groups the to head charged Integral proteins domains contain

acids cytosolic or the attached be related or to that side (e.g., palmitic the cytosol membrane. to into farnesyl, in cholesterol) myristic synthesized insert and acid) groups posttranslationally may the Proteins of fatty prenyl (e.g., plasma

membranes can membrane. on face the anchors of through occur Attachment the (GPI) extracellular glycosylphosphatidylinositol to

which transmembrane the proteins, anchor noncovalently them serve to with cell. to associate proteins Extracellular can

by lateral the membrane. control the under complexes; in plasma RER larger these membrane function as plasma molecules chaperone proteins together of diffusion or may in assemble Many the presence units. many functional (e.g., trimerize receptors) dimerize signaling the of that form The characteristic is latter cytokine to or in mechanism of receptors ligand protein be bilayers are of nevertheless constrained in can domains. membrane, lipid membrane two-dimensional the components the discrete fluid to Although plane to through used (discussed maintain or at This versus earlier), epithelial boundaries; intercellular can is occur this to lipid that indeed, top/apical tight strategy polarity bottom/basolateral) in interactions cell localization (e.g., by (e.g., protein–protein junctions) discrete rafts layers. establish through matrix formed be molecules unique (ECM). an cytoskeletal domains with proteins the Alternatively, of or interaction membrane can extracellular

plasma oligosaccharides carbohydrates, face the attached membrane The with not as complex membrane and glycolipids, of also on polysaccharide extracellular integral diffusely chains but only is to as proteoglycans. studded glycoproteins glycocalyx This in and functions cell–cell cell–matrix chemical a as involved is and and mechanical barrier, interactions. also

Small, O2 readily such steroid-based bilayers estradiol do D). and or CO2 molecules therefore molecules dissolve lipid molecules as (e.g., and vitamin hydrophobic as rapidly nonpolar in across as them, diffuse such as small and daltons readily (<75 cross ethanol, Similarly, in water, such polar membranes. molecules mass, urea) In such those an effective slightly than contrast, passage even lipid bilayer of only the greater the as polar daltons, to larger glucose. 75 barrier molecules, is of impermeant ions, hydration. to and how no also bilayers Lipid small, because their degree high matter are of charge specialized traffic plasma will that discuss membranes. mechanisms We next across regulate

for normal disposal), For polar and are cellular (e.g., protein the each support complexes nutrient membrane that typically to unique uptake cross larger of functions required. membranes must molecules plasma waste membranes, proteins used channel be focuses daltons), noted organellar and may this be For plasma (although it across similar needed that approximately small up 1000 carrier discussion and molecules on should transport pores to proteins and species are (ions for low-molecular-weight channels membranes). ion, transporter nucleotide) highly molecule glucose typically transported requires is (e.g., sugar, a (e.g., but galactose): not that specific Each

solutes movement hydrophilic create by proteins open, (usually Channel pores size when restricted and rapid of permit charge; that,

Fig. 1.8

is bind undergo the of transport to slow. membrane; their relatively their a the conformational series transfer ligand and changes solute across proteins specific Carrier

inside to across negative them, the movement gradient electrical the relative the all an plasma and/or via a transport electrical have cell of the inside outside potential difference (virtually drives solute membranes In outside). cases, and passive with concentration between many ion against channels) of a gradient. by accomplished using active (not solutes cases, by ATP is coupled hydrolysis a certain carrier concentration energy other gradient released or molecules In transport cells polar notorious cells the pumps cancer resistant Transporter and (MDR) resistance ATPases (e.g., render treatment. multidrug of protein, compounds to out may drugs) include which chemotherapeutic

into permeable of relative membranes and out on osmosis, cells solute freely to depending concentrations. are water, Because moves by it into of out a cytosol that cells. extracellular Thus, water whereas excess net of water net in of the causes (hypertonicity) of salt in causes movement cells, a movement hypotonicity in counterions protein a tend is rich species, cytosol intracellular and which the to attract number The osmolarity. large increase of metabolites that charged cells ion-exchanging to pump ions the a through ATPases. As consequence, of must prevent (e.g., small activity constantly out Na+)—typically overhydration inorganic membrane in of toxins rupture to ischemia) in of eventual injured cell and by Loss osmotic therefore ability (e.g., the swelling a energy or results cells. generate whereas and cytosolic to intracellular mechanisms lysosomal function also most intraorganellar regulate at 5 7.4, or transport at enzymes best Similar pH work pH enzymes less. prefer pH;

Uptake by endocytosis, called macromolecules occurs cell, mechanisms or fundamental two of fluids ( by the

Fig. ). 1.8 called membrane caveolae. some Certain vitamins—are the molecules—including invaginations small taken plasma by of up receptors; invagination internalization specific uptake to after by binding occurs driven matrix of through membrane intracellular occurs an clathrin larger For molecules, process proteins. cell-surface a process. is assembles the a into basketlike a drive Clathrin invagination lattice of proteins hexamer to that spontaneously shall later. come We these back to

from exocytosis. molecules called are process The cells by large is which exported synthesized and apparatus http://ebooksmedicine.net process, within the In RER this and Golgi proteins packaged

Fig. 1.8 ofextracellularfluidandmostsurfacereceptor–ligandpairsinvolvesclathrincoated involvesthenon–clathrin-mediatedmembraneinvaginationoflargeparticles—typicallybyspecializedphagocytes(e.g.,macrophagesorneutrophils).Theresultingphagosomeseventuallyfusewithlysosomestofacilitatethedegradationoftheinternalizedmaterial.Transcytosis aconcentrationgradient.Receptor-mediatedandfluid-phaseuptakeofmaterialinvolvesmembrane-boundvacuoles.Caveolae vesicles.Afterinternalization,theclathrindissociatesandcanbereused,whereastheresultingvesicleprogressivelymaturesandacidifies.Intheearlyand/orlateendosome,ligandcanbereleasedfromitsreceptor(e.g.,ironreleasedfromtransferrinboundtothetransferrinreceptor)withreceptorrecyclingtothecellsurfaceforanotherround.Alternatively,receptorandligandwithinendosomescanbetargetedtofusewithlysosomes(e.g.,epidermalgrowthfactorboundtoitsreceptor);aftercompletedegradation,thelateendosome–lysosomefusionvesiclecanreconstitutelysosomes.Phagocytosis areusedwhenconcentrationgradientscandrivethesolutemovement.Carriers endocytoseextracellularfluid,membraneproteins,andsomereceptor-boundmolecules(e.g.,folate)inaprocessdrivenbycaveolinproteinsconcentratedwithinlipidrafts.Pinocytosis and Movementofsmallmoleculesandlargerstructuresacrossmembranes.Thelipidbilayerisrelativelyimpermeabletoallbutthesmallestand/ormosthydrophobicmolecules.Thus,theimportorexportofchargedspeciesrequiresspecifictransmembranetransporterproteins;theinternalizationorexternalizationoflargeproteins,complexparticles,orevencellsrequiresencirclingthemwithsegmentsofthemembrane.Smallchargedsolutescanmoveacrossthemembraneusingeitherchannelsorcarriers;ingeneral,eachmoleculerequiresauniquetransporter.Channels involvesthetranscellularendocytotictransportofsoluteand/orboundligandfromonefaceofacelltoanother.Exocytosis arerequiredwhensoluteismovedagainst pits istheprocessbywhichmembrane-boundvesiclesfusewiththeplasmamembraneanddischargetheircontentstotheextracellularspace.

concentrated with which vesicles, in membrane contents. fuse their and are plasma secretory the expel then

between in ingested of and or solute. large barriers transferring for proteins maternal vesicles across intestinal of compartments milk is volumes epithelia) is the of rapid Transcytosis intact antibodies across the large movement cells; of for apical amounts basolateral a endocytosed this movement mechanism (e.g., the epithelial of vascular permeability a the in plays transcytosis tumors. probably fact, in In increased role seen increased

the mentioned endocytosis return We to forms now of two earlier.

• Caveolae-mediated endocytosis. caves”) and (“little associated membrane receptor. folate plasma invaginations the cyclic monophosphate are with GPI-linked kinases, molecules, Caveolae proteins, adenosine SRC-family noncoated (cAMP)-binding of caveolae. protein is major Caveolin the structural cellular associated appear denoted in the signaling molecules trans-membrane and of integrins. likely extracellular (e.g., Although of transmembrane contribute bound receptors of caveolae sipping.” delivery they via is the “cellular folate), some fluid adhesion Internalization molecules caveolae the to regulation any of participate and and/or potocytosis—literally to with also internalization with heart. caveolin the in associated dystrophy are in and Mutations muscular electrical abnormalities

Fig. 1.8 ). a process. (“cellular is drinking”) fluid-phase Pinocytosis to endocytosed of after pinched cargo, round another The cytoplasmic (exocytosis) and recycle plasma vesicles is back invaginates ingestion. their membrane delivering the a plasma to off for membrane vesicle; form its highly plasma of to 1% exocytosis membrane about tightly balanced cell volume and Endocytosis to typically own 10% each minute. 2% and as 20% hour, cell pinocytoses or its each are active, of a vesicle. or clathrin-coated the pit containing rapidly the pinches receptor), and and Pinocytosis http://ebooksmedicine.net to to with off itself ligand to internalized clathrin-coated (by be formation form the begin endocytosis a of which receptor-mediated bound invaginates a macromolecules receptor-bound is as trapped gulp well the extracellular the of Thus, vesicle below. milieu, a within as described as vesicles endosomes then The matures late lysosomes. rapidly ultimately with and endosome, to progressively uncoat fuse fuses with an which early the intracellular called acidic structure and

is macromolecules, Receptor-mediated (LDL). low-density certain major uptake lipoprotein the exemplified endocytosis mechanism and as transferrin for by localize to receptors macromolecules that bind clathrin-coated pits. to These receptors, into mature endocytosed are LDL specific After endosomes. and transferrin to early and that binding vesicles late their in the membrane. to bound the receptor and respectively), receptor exit transferrin iron, and release the endosome, LDL into acidic ligands LDL the transferrin and which and subsequently cytosol, of recycle the their (cholesterol environment then plasma In Chapter transport LDL as in are receptor-mediated hypercholesterolemia, in responsible for 7. Defects familial described of

intracellular called move of cytoskeleton adopt a ( the organize proteins the the and organelles, shape, maintain cells about of to scaffolding ability polarity, intracellular depends particular The on

Fig. 1.9 ). protein (G-actin), the 5-to proteins: most from microfilaments • In diameter there are cytosolic of in classes formed major protein three eukaryotic cells, actin cells. are abundant Actin 9-nm cytoskeletal fibrils the in globular G-actin noncovalently polymerize monomers into long filaments (F-

Fig. interactions. Cytoskeletal cell–cell and 1.9 elements different cellular adhesion within including interactions, to desmosomes; involves the surface (and integrins hemidesmosomes. tight junctions several proteins) associated Interepithelial ECM and adhesion protein involves text details. See for

actin) form double-stranded helices. that to intertwine In along and the cells, to myosin muscle moves binds muscle (the basis actin of ATP hydrolysis contraction). filamentous by protein driven it, movement. In cell non-muscle bundles into via and assembles and assortment cells, actinbinding shape F-actin networks that proteins control an well-organized of

filaments diameter that and Intermediate comprise family. in 10-nm a large heterogeneous fibrils are lamina. contribute Members which nuclear structure lamins include and B, to the C, of A, poorly characteristic cellular Individual have identifying origin of useful of tissue-specific intermediate of the tumors. differentiated are for patterns that expression types filaments

Mesenchymal Vimentin: anchoring endothelium) cells (fibroblasts, intracellular organelles

scaffold which contract myosin on actin Muscle the cells, and Desmin: forming

rigidity Axons neurons, of and imparting strength Neurofilaments:

protein: that Glial Glial acidic fibrillary neurons cells support

of epithelia). patterns with lineages in more distinct express cells varieties (e.g., Epithelial 30 versus Cytokeratins: different gastrointestinal than expression lung distinct to impart filaments form and predominantly primarily Intermediate serve These bear a histochemical in polymerized to can found are serve mechanical allow as and stress. epithelia strength for cells tensile various markers ropelike transcription. for morphology The only maintaining nuclear are not gene also but nuclear important for nuclear lamins membrane regulating which progeria, rare disorders of certain range is lamin of disease critical by aging. but to forms roles a The dystrophy of fascinating premature muscular lamins from by emphasized mutations, caused Intermediate and major structural proteins also hair. of form epidermis filaments the

“+” defined center ends elongating fibrils in the designated stimuli centrioles, microtubule polarity; a addition or associated near the The elongates are end various or of centrosome) “−.” constantly in tubulin subtraction recedes typically are end the response tubes is organizing of a with or embedded or noncovalently it by while in “−” arrayed Microtubules with where polymerized paired the of “+” is or β-tubulin hollow nucleus to 25-nm-thick α-and shrinking dimers composed dimers. (MTOC Microtubules important functions: are involved cellular in several

proteins that around organelles vesicles the allow movement “molecular and cables cells. motor” Support of for (+ (− Kinesins are retrograde transport, dyneins for +) a to direction motors in whereas to anterograde the move cargo −).

separation sister The during support mechanical mitosis chromatid for

nonmotile primary help on cilia, regulate core The cells proliferation of differentiation and projections that nucleated single

flagella sperm) of (e.g., (in bronchial cilia core in motile epithelium) The or

Cells to receptors one cells. with another surface recognize mechanical links forming and interact junctions that provide on and communicate enable other ligands by basic ( junctions Cell into types three organized are

Fig. 1.9

(between junctions cells other to continuous together ions (tight seal movement that of molecules. a restricts barrier paracellular create the Occluding cells) adjacent junctions) and macromolecular meshlike Viewed occluding cells. contacts en face, tight of neighboring a form between junctions network complexes these multiple proteins, mediate claudin. and composed occludin cell–cell including interactions of are The that maintain junctions of between high-resistance apical addition occluding domains In a cellular cells. boundary the by polarity basolateral and solute forming also being movement, barrier to to required desmosomes these later) epithelial or are (as as and proliferation dissociate Significantly, to the structures inflammatory reform facilitate dynamic migration. junctions cell well that can as described

cells—and their cells attach the mechanically or cytoskeletons—to ECM. intracellular Anchoring junctions other to (desmosomes) it the cells, designated adhesion When desmosome. is is focus spot between is small a rivetlike, and and ECM, cell called such to attaches it a hemidesmosome. the the focus a is When bands as cells, between domains desmosomes. where can as also broad occur adhesion Similar belt denoted they are called by homotypic junctions association Cell–cell desmosomal are of transmembrane the cadherins. glycoproteins formed

spot are mechanically intermediate to (and to and dissipated) over multiple In forces cadherins extracellular cells. communicated intracellular desmosomes, the linked filaments be allow

cell microfilaments, and/or with adhesion intracellular motility. they can by transmembrane the are belt associated In actin which desmosomes, shape influence molecules

In to the these cytoskeleton filaments, proteins and functionally integrins; the attach to connector like intracellular transmembrane ECM. hemidesmosomes, are they thus the called cadherins, intermediate link localize signals hemidesmosomes, large in a intracellular bloodstream, for when adhesion Focal myocytes the are failing cells subjected stress, to shear heart. example, proteins include increased generate are at endothelium and can that macromolecular or in cardiac complexes complexes that

junctions signals the Communicating or chemical another. (gap of junctions) mediate to cell from one passage electrical protein formed hexamers The array connexons) by connexins. 2-nm of 1.5to junction planar dense (called of transmembrane pores consists of a of These is by junction vitamins, sugars, the pH molecules; passage the nucleotides, permit intracellular acids, or pores other amino reduced rapidly ions, small of increased calcium. intracellular permeability and lowered the beating calcium gap heart. communication; syncytium example, capable cardiac a for Gap junctions allowing coordinated of of a in in cell–cell junctions play the myocardium myocytes, functional to of cell-to-cell contraction—the waves the as fluxes through critical role behave

BiosyntheticMachinery:EndoplasmicReticulumandGolgiApparatus

cell renewed structural by constantly proteins ongoing between intracellular the synthesis enzymes balance and a are The degradation. of and proteins site the transmembrane needed itself. assembly lipids synthesis of all is organelles, including ER reticulum and cellular the for and plasma of endoplasmic membrane of (ER) the The also site all the export molecules of of It cell. initial for is synthesis the out destined of of a forming is extracellular topologically a The sheet the organized ER is interconnected branching a mesh-like that around single flattened and lumen with contiguous environment. lamellae continuous into maze tubes or presence composed ( the distinct ER are is that domains of of ribosomes The absence by distinguished

Fig. 1.6

proteins ribosomes into the Membrane-bound extruded (RER): RER translate become into or of the membrane. integrated Rough face ER lumen mRNA that on ER cytosolic the into are ER the sequences nascent signal of This by directed proteins. N-termini the is specific on process fold must a into the Proteins assemble into order ER insert and functional properly in conformation higher to order and complexes. fold assume bonds. disulfide involves of proteins of the Proper many folding domains the extracellular formation of disulfide disorders, are many disrupt cause hypercholesterolemia bond (Chapter of mutations of familial number that including inherited formation. by 6), A cases (sugar attached added the ER. in addition, moieties are N-linked asparagine In residues) to oligosaccharides conformation the complete ER and proper achieved. is Chaperone molecules in retain until proteins these the modifications are into If degraded within fold protein assemble retained ER. fails a to the it and and complexes is appropriately, to (also death ER the called them—leads proteins—exceeding UPR), the and or which excess of triggers (Chapter accumulation stress through of degrade the unfolded 2). the misfolded Moreover, response edit ER protein cell the response to capacity apoptosis

the example of misfolding disease function, importance membrane from transporter the cystic fibrosis editing the ER protein. an of the of results most As CFTR commonly most common retention, gene misfolding, the residue to a amino the in degradation loss of cystic fibrosis, 508), single CFTR the of in in protein. results and acid CFTR ER turn (phenylalanine leading In mutation the chloride transport, 7). infections hyperviscous leads CFTR of airway epithelial secretions abnormal (Chapter The loss recurrent to bronchial and function

organelles apparatus. are Golgi Golgi into for proteins extracellular the or export other destined apparatus: RER, From for and the shuttled lipids various macromolecules stacked cis from within progressively shuttled cisternae the are to an (near plasma organelle (near vesicles. of fashion orderly cisternae This membrane-bound that membrane); in trans modify ER) proteins between the the consists O-linked cis and oligosaccharides to move originally pruned ER to trans, to threonine) proteins a the appended. the serine further fashion; stepwise moieties (sugar added N-linked modified linked As also are from or molecules oligosaccharides are in in to clearing for may cell–matrix mannose-6-phosphate or important cells (via cells). be this directing adducts or Some glycosylation senescent in glycosylation molecules is of platelets and lysosomes red cell–cell important the interactions, for receptor); other (e.g., other and the proteins, the network stepwise lipids Golgi to the network and recycled plasma the to trans the of cis or (including Golgi to membrane), are extracellular glycosylation and secretory destined proteins addition vesicles to proteins organelles ER, where release. is In where back for are is lipids dispatched secretion, especially of quantities bronchial plasma the and Golgi intestine, cells complex cells large goblet cells for mucus), including polysaccharide-rich The prominent epithelium specialized large amounts (secreting in of (secreting antibodies). is of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

(SER): to to the in cells ER from most the moving zone sparse, Golgi. relatively vesicles transition SER The RER is transport Smooth forming synthesize be (e.g., SER hormones molecules (e.g., the may particularly conspicuous. steroid or in adrenals), that lipid-soluble or in that the liver), However, catabolize gonads the cells in the compounds by the hyperplasia system) SER leads which metabolized phenobarbital, Indeed, are reactive (e.g., exposure that catabolized the P-450 to is cytochrome a SER. to by repeated of responses mediate can subsequent also intracellular sequestering calcium; number cytosol extracellular into for SER to the The of the SER signals. is responsible release a from release the a of muscle regulate addition, is specialized contraction muscle for sequestration responsible ions and SER relaxation, In sarcoplasmic the reticulum in respectively. calcium that cells, cyclical called and

WasteDisposal:LysosomesandProteasomes

briefly, As disposal and of proteasomes mentioned ( already cellular activities lysosomes waste on the depends

Fig. 1.10

acidic hydrolases that glycosidases, lipases, membrane-bound including are best enzymes proteases, (i.e., containing 40 and roughly organelles nucleases, ≤5), acid Lysosomes different in pH sulfatases. phosphatases, function Golgi the in within then synthesized the with (M6P) residue tagged initially mannose-6-phosphate Lysosomal lumen enzymes are and apparatus. a ER are express lysosomes vesicles trans-Golgi M6P-modified receptors. proteins that to Such delivered through subsequently M6P ( macromolecules arrive other in one The other of three by catabolism destined pathways the for lysosomes

Fig. 1.10

from and in or the acidic to becoming ultimately early endocytosis lysosome, Material endosome progressively by to fluid-phase pinocytosis passes membrane more late plasma internalized process. receptor-mediated endosome, into the early only The endosome; in endosomes first late digestion mature significant compartment late the enzymes the into is acidic proteolytic lysosomes. encountered, endosome begin whereas

by process can lysosomes protein complexes a shuttled organelles and large into called be autophagy. Senescent progressively and encircle from poorly expands ER; an obsolete lysosomes are of membrane which a structures membrane catabolized. fuses double where the organelles autophagosome, to collection are corralled forms understood a then the mechanisms, by with derived contents Through the autophagy facilitating to of depletion. viability the is defunct preserve aged addition during also nutrient turnover In used cell cellular constituents, to and the The cell Ohsumi autophagy of to discoveries in Yoshinori autophagy. for mechanism by biology significance of 2016 to recognized relating was his of Nobel the award Prize the in discussed in Chapter topic is 2. detail more This

microorganisms in or and of of phagocytes or matrix Phagocytosis (macrophages occur large debris primarily fragments neutrophils). professional fuses The form material to with lysosome. that a subsequently a is phagosome engulfed

Fig. 1.10 levels as half-life (e.g., need ); well proteins to transcription misfolded as regulated and occurs whose ER), other (akin include the to factors). be proteins what within denatured these tightly or (but all) are called addition not destined ubiquitin. a targeted protein after proteins of Many proteasome destruction for covalent cylinder multiple hollow the pointed into protease unfolded core. containing each site with progressively at activities, active polymeric and proteasome Polyubiquitinated a the different molecules its funneled complex, are constituent that major further proteins into molecules, in complex acids) of important surveillance. fragments or component of context host can subsequently acids small amino presented recycled, (6–12 their to immune Proteasomes I and class be degraded digest histocompatibility the cells immune an amino to

that by eukaryotes years about primitive Mitochondria from ancestral engulfed evolved billion 1.5 ago. were prokaryotes origin in their involved DNA), cellular 1% Their roughly proteins own total mitochondria total of proteins of oxidative phosphorylation. cellular which DNA 1% encodes and genome contain approximately why the of (circularized, the 20% about the explains can Although all and perform transcription, replication, steps nevertheless of DNA are small, their translation. mitochondria genomes the for is are antibiotics. bacteria; sensitive anti-bacterial machinery Interestingly, to the synthesis to and initiate protein example, similar mitochondrial with mitochondria N-formylmethionine present-day

dynamic, Mitochondria fission constantly way, are other in fusion this undergoing and with http://ebooksmedicine.net mitochondria;

Fig. Intracellular degradation. catabolism. (A) 1.10 Lysosomal or In (right internalized with the fuse facilitate heterophagy endosomes to side), (see lysosomes their degradation phagosomes contents of

Fig. or cytosol released nutrition into ). extracellular 1.8 space into discharged for end may the products The the be (exocytosis). or fragments. the the for (left facilitate In High ubiquitin proteins (e.g., in autophagocytic membrane (microtubule-associated protein refolding. or proteins from infections ubiquitin (B) can them trigger 1A/1B-light reduction 3). cytosolic but proteins), ER mechanical can specific regulatory synthesis, for by stresses denatured a E2, degrade This can senescent tagged E3 be transcription pathway. because broad molecules levels with marks misfolded to Cytosolic factors proteins peptide the protein in double denatured senescent by ER the turnover proteins within targeted have proteins or (through Cell proteins, increases proteins E1, that chain protective small protein stressors encircling marked lysosome-driven certain proteins ligases). degradation that Proteasome destined and or complexes derived by side), organelles response by engendering intracellular a are that chemical unfolded a activity the become as of and of chaperone autophagy depletion protein of nutrient multiple or such activate proteasomes, proteins degradation. for extrinsic also degradation LC3 multisubunit misfolded induced. cope inadequate to is levels with proteins, of the If this apoptosis is

changes can to that majority off occur is undergo the because or might the degenerative to of virtually stave oxygen regular zygote, mitochondria radical free cytoplasmic vast genetic DNA of contributes mitochondrial damage. renewal organelles disorders fertilized entirely maternally Mitochondria inherited. transcription, with mitochondrial disorbolic to protein mitochondria 10 from of the nuclear intercurrent estimated constituents 1 meta-mitochondrial half-lives over However, the from days, nutritional and tissue, on demands, ranging turn and rapidly, derive both depending because injury. genetic status, Because autosomal, maternally or X-linked, be inherited. ovum the may ders

(glucose, glutamine,

ISCHEMIA,

blocks building protein Lipid, ATP

Fig. of mitochondria. 1.11 Roles the the in as efficient source the life decisions. of and serving from involved and acid play are substrates, metabolism, Besides fatty to lipids of intermediary mitochondria in used also an important and they proteins, cell and-death generation centrally ATP carbohydrate role molecules synthesize

from oxidative the relatively fatty energy of provide enzymatic phosphorylation generation the acid machinery thus and efficient substrates). glucose (and Mitochondria for metabolism regulation also “apoptosis” ( so-called have cell They death, the in roles central and anabolic programmed

Fig. 1.11

Generation. Energy specialized Each and two separate mitochondrion membranes. has chain the folded cristae. membrane inner of contains The enzymes the respiratory into bulk of This of as matrix the harbors acid such that core certain cycle. encloses the a space metabolic citric enzymes, the enzymes the latter daltons) the small porin proteins space, molecules. to membrane (<5000 is by the membrane; outer is, of ATP the channels which enclosed that turn, in synthesis, is inner studded aqueous permeable with site intermembrane Outside form smaller (and transporters. some Larger require polar molecules specific even species)

run major needed source of energy The to cellular from basic functions derives metabolism. the all oxidative CO2, from to high-energy molecular gluocse) the to original substrates in the to electrons oxidize transfer (e.g., molecule oxygen and Mitochondria water. process of various core drives space. oxidation the (proton) pumps matrix The ions the ion from metabolites hydrogen into inter-membrane transfer H+ that used their is electrochemical released As to these gradient, energy back ATP. flow synthesize H+ ions the down

be need that should the noted chain electron be It necessarily transport coupled ATP to generation. not proton brown 1) the in phosphorylation) (or (uncouple uncoupling can an the inner enriched protein a UCP-1 that membrane heat of called protein it thermogenin fat proton is thermogenesis). Thus, in (nonshivering transporter from oxidative gradient form = dissipate intracellular species lead injury, also byproduct free mitochondrial oxidation aging (e.g., stress. usually and oxidative toxic transport, increased to even hypoxia, substrate of of can significantly are a mitochondria levels of reactive important source low-level) an radicals, natural peroxide); hydrogen importantly, oxygen (albeit electron or oxygen As

Intermediate Metabolism. for also phosphorylation H2O, to ATP, Pure abundant CO2 blocks leaving use and moieties building carbon for or produces but proteins. lipids as no oxidative glucose “burns” effect oxygen—a glucose adequate and lactic per ATP rapidly and growing their (or benign the called molecule—forming Warburg cells increase the in glycolysis). malignant) decrease phenomenon presence of production of glutamine uptake For reason, (both acid glucose and aerobic this proteins. being used provide acids, glutamine instead prime ATP, acid to lipids, to tricarboxylic the make “spun mitochondrial make are off” moieties (TCA) intermediates carbon that and Both nucleic of glucose cycle, and but of modulated or cellular mitochondrial either the to cellular growth support metabolism Thus, maintenance on growth. the can be state depending cell, factors, metabolic govern cellular as sensors pathways respond availability, to nutrient Ultimately, exogenous signaling these well supplies, oxygen factors, and and growth that as decisions. these

Cell Death. Hyde. like are Mr. proverbial Mitochondria the Dr. and Jekyll other cannot to cells On the one in that cells when ATP death the allow the are hand, adapt the of of they the the survive; factories are cell energy to. in form to participate on hand, production that noxious driving cells stimuli exposed they in 2. The of forms in of mitochondria role Chapter death, cell apoptosis, principle two necrosis and are discussed the death. In ATP addition bulk cellular metabolites and to activity, regulate that of and the survival of providing enable mitochondria balance also cell the

in organisms. multicellular is Cell critical communication determine the a extracellular it lives whether quiescent, or it remains to or At specific function. basic cell stimulated signals dies, whether whether perform is level, a most organization, adaptive tissues to in such various local as tissue respond tissue embryo, the developing an signaling effective or trauma threats, that and is infection. maintaining Intercellular and ensuring in systemic fashion in in a important Loss controls” that an relationships (cancer) an “social can unregulated growth maintain stress and of to extrinsic response lead ineffective cellular shock). to cells variously in normal (as or the communication of

must integrated “interpeted” individual responses cacophony exposed of and which into benefit An organism a signals, constantly is whole. cell as the be remarkable to that a specialized stimulate a type Some perform others others induce may cell to proliferation, may may direct function. the to signals cell yet a differentiate, given and trigger in signals combination another unique may totally yet Multiple received response. cells apoptosis. exogenous just Many in appropriate of continue to signals, living; certain they absence inputs the by require die

signals can most into The cells sources classified the of to that be groups: several respond

Pathogens neighboring damage and to cells. and well innate cells such sense to foreign an signals), capacity have (danger as as invaders cells Many microbes. damaged respond as to are receptors generate these danger and in that signals 5. 3 Chapters The discussed

junctions. molecules through Cell-cell adhesion and/or contacts, gap mediated molecules second calcium), cells connexons is As the messenger metabolites, (e.g., hydrophilic permit between accomplished potential various that previously, adjacent cAMP. of small such and signaling mentioned gap movement ions junction as via

context Chapter leukocyte 3 inflammation. of to integrins, the cells through attachment during Cell-ECM are discussed mediated contacts, in other in which

molecules. Secreted Chapters 20). of growth by for different in organs secreted most and and cell discussed endocrine factors, term immune important 3 The a on (Chapter include secreted later; mediators (also and responses act molecules are reserved hormones, cytokines, types discussed which and 5); inflammation

be sending different spatial on pathways cells: can based Signaling and receiving between the into the types relationships also classified

Paracrine signaling. in vicinity immediate just are affected. the Cells molecules “sending” cells on short only involve distances. adjacent receptors diffuse activate that that signaling for factors trans-membrane may secreted Paracrine or achieved the is some bind secreted latter by having ECM. to factors In instances, tightly

signaling by a cell when affect occurs cell. molecules Autocrine same secreted that of it be amplify serve feedback) differentiation or development, response. dampen during (positive undergoing can can feedback) means to a (negative cells entrain as a This groups or synchronous to used

signaling. Synaptic neurotransmitters Activated junctions cell secrete specialized onto cells. at neurons target (synapses)

Endocrine signaling. a A on is target at cells into bloodstream distance. hormone acts the released and

a extracellular cell or nature protein. of transmitted an via (paracrine, endocrine), to synaptic, specific the Regardless is stimulus signal it receptor conveys the the of bind Signaling response. receptors initiate intracellular the a of desired respective cellular and cascade culminating their events molecules (ligands) in Ligands for receptors concentrations physiologic usually have bind specificity. and exquisite at receptors with high affinities Receptors surface cell within present or ( cell on be the the may located

Fig. 1.12

that ligands are by transcription activated factors Intracellular receptors include that lipid-soluble plasma membranes. easily transit Examples activate D and steroid nuclear vitamin receptors. which hormones, include hormone small adjacent can signaling In and/or settings, diffuse other ligand into a nonpolar cells. which case endothelial is pressure. cells intravascular nitric for through Such (NO), the oxide regulate into then cyclase causes GMP, smooth activates by second smooth that to intracellular adjacent diffuses it is and there endothelial NO muscle activated generate vascular an muscle signal cyclic guanylyl an cell relaxation. cells; generated

are generally transmembrane receptors domains ligands. that bind proteins Cell-surface with activating extracellular (typically binding cells), activates a regulatory enzyme, transcription proteolytic may or at factor. activate or or channels excitable often protein Depending (1) latent synapse or stability an GTP-binding in a ion the endogenous associated an activate (G electrically between protein a (4) tyrosine that (3) kinase, on trigger change binding open the a associated ligand protein), event receptor, (2) proliferation, Wnt, pathways Hedgehog) that normal drive a (3) cell common growth (e.g., Notch, associated (4) and (2) development. feature multiple factor Activities activity is regulate and signaling of are that pathways whereas with are signals receptors often cancers. by and Understandably, in developmental transduced disorders surface cell deranged in

cell receptor (receptor of of http://ebooksmedicine.net surface the to ligand inducing clustering mediates Binding by signaling a receptor a

notch of Transcription gene Transcription Transcription A target nuclear hormone Nucleus gene target of

by Inactivation GTP hydrolysis of

Activation of transcription

Fig. genes; that receptor kinase-based homologous influence nonreceptor kinase; the distinct 1.12 the where and (ligand) G releases receptor-related to linked activation as of RAS, a to constitutive including factor activated which Lrp5/Lrp6, cleaved receptors, and act of the Notch, (A) cell nuclear a kinase; target a a displaced a is degradation. yielding then couples fragment on seven-transmembrane signaling. and and highly its transcription drives coreceptors ligand dimerization and of a RAS. that proteins; that as protein Attachment (B) of a in lipoprotein (LDL) in yielding GTP proteins ligand are the to receptor growth influence from 6, Receptor-mediated of and be an binds low-density favor β-catenin act GDP then the can tyrosine released 5 recognizes factor. Wnt/Frizzled signaling. signaling complex intracellular inactive, from receptors and tyrosine receptor pathway Categories receptor receptor. residues. its a The allowing migrate and heterotrimeric tyrosine adapter Signaling β-catenin a of nucleus autophosphorylation to normally tyrosine can that use bridging) intracellular GDP-bound transcription can receptor transcription; nucleus (or the Binding Wnt/Frizzled causes proteins and enter specific thus RAS components, 3-kinase proteins also cellular can activates RAS RAS eventually to cascade known The interacts RAS Activated proliferative RAS lead off turned activated nuclear transcription GTP when to to interact generating other kinase). MAP its RAF hydrolysis responses. can This other in hydrolyzes kinase activates kinase signaling factors, delayed with Mutations cytoplasmic to such (also inactive kinase), kinase form. as signaling. lead GDP as kinase and and other that activated MAP is protein then augmented phosphorylates which and converting with the kinase phosphorylates Activated systems. mitogen-activated phosphatidyl GTP (PI3 (MAPK), of target diphosphate; triphosphate; GTP, GDP, mammalian Guanosine guanosine rapamycin. mTOR,

Fig. 1.12 ). the biochemical intracellular state domain a theme the of triggers these change signal to all transduction. of common The in receptor, that which cause is additional that then physical the lead events of perturbations

activate receptors are on mechanisms they biochemical and Cellular ( based the intracellular pathways the they into use signaling several grouped types

Fig. 1.12 ). signaling alter most or intermediates and leads modification to commonly active biochemical activation of of gene generation of the nucleus and/or enter to ultimately the formation expression: transcription the enzymes, and that factors Receptor

with associated kinase activity. Receptors Downstream signal pathway phosphorylation transduction. is of common a intrinsic in geometry receptor can activity enzymatic recruited Changes kinase activity of protein intracellular promote stimulate or receptor kinases. the phosphate to add charged kinases molecules. residues target These kinases phosphates distinct threonine to lipid lipid phosphorylate Tyrosine or kinases whereas residues, kinases residues, serine/threonine serine tyrosine and add specific phosphorylate substrates. an potential phosphorylation that For signaling; residue the transduction. thus a phosphatase, is phosphate remove enzyme phosphatases inhibitory role play counter-regulatory signal can and usually, an also there modulate event, in every

Receptor ligand-induced epidermal intrinsic integral tyrosine (RTKs) for growth insulin, tails. kinase tyrosine are their and membrane (e.g., [PDGF]); factor, in kinases factor activates cytoplasmic platelet-derived crosslinking receptors growth proteins located domains

have receptors, integrins). no receptors kinds activity (e.g., some intrinsic and receptors, immune of Several cytokine catalytic a receptor separate motifs these, interacts with or a and kinase— tyrosine phosphorylates as binding the other after on intracellular ligand receptors nonreceptor proteins. protein—known For specific (Src-family kinases prototype the of of is The kinases). transforming protein important the tyrosine family sarcoma for called cellular virus, nonreceptor SRC, of homolog an Rous such the unique of receptors allowing domains SH3 often domains SH2 typically protein–protein enzymes, whereas functional SRC regions domains. another the by (SH) multiple Src-homology interactions, to proline-rich bind kinase, aggregation called mediate domains; phosphorylated involving contains

receptors been plasma serpentine identified. the as seven (hence such coupled membrane G-protein polypeptides characteristically traverse 1500 more have times that receptors or receptors); their are designation than seven-transmembrane the intracellular guanosine protein). ligand receptor (GTP)-binding with triphosphate binding, associates After protein an (G with the interaction (GDP); these results At guanosine diphosphate activation G baseline, contain receptor-ligand for exchange G protein of a GDP through complex proteins GTP. in the of Downstream calcium involves typically the generation signaling from and latter (IP3), inositol-1,4,5,-triphosphate releasing cAMP, the ER.

receptors. Nuclear proteins activation they directly can transcription. the DNA; complex where ligands to repression a nuclear with binds into to cells can receptor-ligand results or form interact intracellular gene be Lipid-soluble diffuse either of that

classes Other receptors. of development system. participate within important determination—have as since shown for to immune particularly in Other been functions the cells, recognized and of cell fate mature embryonic receptors—originally the to precise serve on rather activities, These signals, to very protein:protein for control. rely interactions, than enzymatic transduce may pathways which allow

of family: receptors (intracellular ligand Notch) form receptor cytoplasmic of subsequent Receptor nuclear the Notch the transcription translocation and to binding of cleavage the leads proteolytic a to to domain proteins complex. Notch

Wnt β-catenin. act family of ligands receptors, transmembrane protein a through the which regulate Frizzled levels pathway intracellular involving for is degradation. of targeted β-catenin absence proteasome ubiquitindirected In the Wnt, degradation-targeting Wnt disrupt recruits binding coreceptors) other to proteins the that Frizzled (and complex. other it to allowing form nucleus β-catenin, and This translocate a stabilizes transcription to complex. the

ModularSignalingProteins,Hubs,andNodes

oversimplified. sequence changes orderly intermediates desired ultimately leads the of traditional activation and an gene The expression of signaling—that view biological in biochemical to that receptor linear response—is triggers of effects, each in any initial is varying multiple outcome. that the contributes results in secondary primary increasingly signal it clear degrees which Instead, to and final true which particularly of pathways complex of with web that modulate polypeptides a interactions. typically This activities, rely is signaling enzymatic on example, host as: any resulting to other molecules, with phosphorylation effects a protein can in given it allow of of For such multiple associate

Nuclear of transcription (see factors localization later) (or cytoplasmic)

(or feedback stimulatory) Activation inhibitory of loops

Adaptor a proteins play role pathways. signaling in key intracellular organizing can membrane proteins. that proteins or These proteins of integral adaptors promote connectors as be complexes; molecular physically different function cytosolic the and enzymes link assembly domains or that mediate typical (e.g., protein–protein specific contain a interactions. SH3) may few A SH2 adaptor to By adaptors are recruited the downstream can complexes, signaling influencing proteins that determine events. signaling

http://ebooksmedicine.net

protein be with can considered or protein– feeding the analogy computer complexes the emanating thought biochemical these of By can networks, nodes and into as from nodes be hubs. events can biology of as understanding of higher-order transduction Signal this “marriage” therefore biology, systems a kind networking computation. complexity involving and the province of a visualized be is phenomenon;

and transcription through activation gene cellular transcription by the pathways factors. function modulating of transduction localization Most signal ultimately nuclear influence of DNA protein-binding can expose phosphorylation) nucleus following their motifs. can Conformational or factors (e.g., transcription allow changes or the into translocation specific limited widespread of may have a or factors expression. effects genes on relatively expression gene more set Transcription the much may of drive transcription for of transcription genes factors that factor are that the and whereas Among the expression that JUN, of arrest genes MYC are the lead expression growth p53. a is regulate to needed triggers that growth such for that design, that required bind and transcription. a Transcription the components modular often interact domains other RNA complex others containing proteins, polymerase with factors DNA of as have

specific • DNA-binding binding short domains DNA sequences. permit to transcription long-range including site factors some most bind Whereas promoters, where in is it widely elements are throughout now transcription that close starts, found enhancers. transcription sites factor to to the genomes, regulatory binding appreciated such as though by may they to that located genes looping to of appear regulate, function are be and far it even terms they therefore Enhancers genomic spatially gene promoters, sequence the to close back

1.1 GrowthFactorsInvolvedinRegenerationandRepair Table away. expression, These pathologic. both the chromatin of in and organization importance regulating insights normal highlight gene

complex enzymes, interaction responsible (most polymerase—the to large that for indirectly chromatin-remodeling a RNA and For complexes, factor enzymatic must is multiprotein also induce transcription RNA possess it protein:protein or synthesis. transcription, that directly • domains histone-modifying importantly) recruit

is survival, stimulate to division. of of required major growth factors that are cell A role the growth activity for and proteins through can: of to the factor ultimately binding genes is that mediated expression specific activity influencing receptors, Growth

of cycle entry cell the into Promote cells

for rise acids, mother cellular cells to biosynthesis Enhance carbohydrates) (nucleic components a two give of to required lipids, cell proteins, daughter

stimulate growth proteins remember is host can activities, drive factors and cell that other Although differentiation, to are that capacity. survival, and/or migration, they it proliferation of “just” also important including a synthetic some regeneration growth are relevant to in important of factors listed tissue Some and the repair

and Table in 3. Chapter further described 1.1

be irreversibly at in of cells proliferation when can damaged replaced. must injury, steady well the as be Growth factors after cells involved state as Uncontrolled

Hepatocytegrowthfactor(HGF)Fibroblasts,stromalcellsintheliver,Enhancesproliferationofhepatocytesandotherepithelialcells;(scatterfactor)endothelialcellsincreasescellmotility

Keratinocytegrowthfactor(KGF)FibroblastsStimulateskeratinocytemigration,proliferation,anddifferentiation(i.e.,FGF-7)

ECM,Extracellularmembrane.

factor growth constitutively signaling growth are when can altered proliferation to is activity dysregulated, pathways become the factor or active. result http://ebooksmedicine.net when formation. of pathway oncogenes proto-oncogenes, genes growth unfettered into mutations these in many Thus, gain-of-function tumor capable can genes cell are proliferation them factor and and driving convert discussion growth their summarizes effects involved virtue that tumorigenesis. following important in factors drive selected The of processes tissue can are also proliferative they repair of the proliferative by regeneration; and various in Although the may factors intrinsic other the through pathways factors each described of activity, here growth all with signal growth involve kinase receptors shown

Fig. 1.12

factor transforming growth factor-α. Epidermal growth and the shared the Both their bind family and belong same EGF factors these to to activities. of receptors, biologic explaining cells. for epithelial host fibroblasts, and are mitogenic hepatocytes, and variety produced epithelial by of a and and TGF-α cells, macrophages a EGF of are also best-characterized ERB-B1, receptor activity; intrinsic membrane or includes kinase EGFR1, the is receptors family” EGFR. “EGF four simply as known tyrosine The with neck, the cancers in number mutations amplification EGFR1 including and/or those occur a lung, head and breast, of and frequently of brain. a overexpressed (also in The subset ERBB2 of breast known as is cancers. receptor HER2) targeted molecule successfully of these treat small malignancies, receptors many been have by antagonists. and antibodies To

factor. growth Hepatocyte cells. on effects mitogenic factor) and as has factor Hepatocyte (HGF; growth scatter also known most hepatocytes epithelial it as as (i.e., the factor), survival. promotes of cell a differentiation), pattern morphogen influences during (hence and migration embryonic enhances HGF designation hepatocyte its acts tissue scatter development endothelium cells. nonhepatocyte is as mesenchymal fibroblasts and by and cells, liver produced most as well HGF an sites It activated proteases as by injury. at precursor released proteolytically is inactive serine is that of synthesized (pro-HGF) is tyrosine MET, activity. HGF for The which has kinase receptor intrinsic renal is and or It tumors, thyroid frequently carcinomas. in papillary overexpressed particularly mutated MET as being are therapies. evaluated cancer Consequently, inhibitors

growth Platelet-derived factor. is proteins, each chains family several a of of of related letters). two by PDGF consisting closely pairs (designated of Three be PDGF-CC must (AA, isoforms activated PDGF by active, while PDGF-DD and proteolytic are and constitutively BB) AB, cleavage. on platelet released in is PDGF platelet is and activation. granules stored variety smooth cells, including many it by other the (hence isolated and from tumors. endothelium, platelets produced cells, originally Although is muscle a of name), activated also macrophages, both isoforms receptors effects their activity. tyrosine intrinsic (PDGFR having All PDGF two by binding α β), kinase exert surface cell to and and thus muscle fibroblast, inflammatory PDGF endothelial, for cell and and smooth induces cells), areas matrix these is recruitment inflammation the cells proliferation and of into chemotactic synthesis, injury. of tissue (and cells promoting

endothelial factor. Vascular growth family proteins. Vascular (VEGFs)—VEGF-A, of factor)—are homodimeric a and -C, growth factors and growth PIGF (placental endothelial -B, -D, is simply responsible in is referred angiogenesis, generally it tumors. and to injury as VEGF; blood development, inducing the major factor vessel after for VEGF-A involved in VEGF-B and and vessel and both and are lymphatic In stimulate (lymphangiogenesis). comparison, VEGF-C PIGF development, angiogenesis development -D embryonic endothelial of are VEGFs involved also mature cells in vessels. lining the maintenance expression retina, podocytes the pigment is adjacent in in epithelial Its epithelium fenestrated highest (e.g., plexus the the in cells endothelium kidney, to choroid in brain). and formation lumina. angiogenesis induces VEGF promoting and the vascular by of the and sprouting), (capillary migration endothelial cell proliferation increase vascular dilation permeability. VEGFs and induce vascular also inducer factor hypoxia-inducible be (HIF-1). production of activation pathways is might the VEGF involve factor of important hypoxia that transcription As most anticipated, through the Other VEGF and PDGF of healing—include inducers—produced sites wound at inflammation TGF-α. or

of receptor kinases -2, a to and family VEGFs -3). bind (VEGFR-1, tyrosine is in expressed the VEGFR-2 is and endothelium for highly angiogenesis. important most require for for their cancers cancers VEGF approved treatment colon Antibodies because spread against the and of as growth. and are renal tumors several angiogenesis such blindness); also a vascular Anti-VEGF adult-onset of and used inappropriate macular edema. that that lead the the to of “wet” (AMD disorder are of and treatment number antibodies prematurity; retinopathy degeneration of diseases, angiogenesis age-related permeability a vessels including: diabetic macular the leaky causes in ophthalmic contribute (hypertension maintaining free of preeclampsia the soluble normal may by levels for up” VEGF proteinuria) pregnant Finally, (s-FLT-1) “sopping to of endothelium. required women in VEGFR-1 increased versions and

Fibroblast growth factor. Fibroblast more is 20 than growth with growth factor of family members. (FGF) a factors best are (KGF). FGF-7 FGF (aFGF, characterized; or factor keratinocyte basic or FGF-2) referred (bFGF, and the as growth to Acidic is also FGF-1) FGF that can subsequently sites wound the (e.g., associate by for as sulfate of factors healing). which ECM, a be released heparan reservoir with FGFs serves inactive in at proteolysis Released (FGFR 1–4). transduce through kinase signals four FGFs receptors tyrosine to development; well. for has hematopoiesis, the as FGFs healing and all wound responses, activities angiogenesis bFGF necessary contribute

Transforming growth factor-β. TGF-β3) a members, (BMPs), about activins, has and Müllerian isoforms three including that family (TGF-β1, 30 belong bone substance. to inhibiting with morphogenetic TGF-β and inhibins, proteins TGF-β2, simply and widespread as the more it is TGF-β1 most commonly referred http://ebooksmedicine.net distribution, to has

TGF-β. mononuclear is protein types, It produced cells. platelets, by endothelium, including cell multiple inflammatory homodimeric a and to active as that TGF-β requires proteolysis is secreted biologically yield the a protein. precursor called transcription receptors, several serine/threonine cytoplasmic are activity with both TGF-β the kinase two factors phosphorylation There of Smads. that downstream induces and other Smad4, with association with gene translocation to Phosphorylated DNA-binding transcription. allowing Smads heterodimers nuclear proteins inhibit activate form or and and the produces opposing effects type signals. on concurrent TGF-β multiple depending often tissue and is of tissue metalloproteinase formation with through matrix “pleiotropic of by drives synthesis (TIMPs). Agents pleiotropic, Primarily, TGF-β decreased activity multiplicity are vengeance.” stimulating of and with effects TGF-β such (MMP) increased proteinases a activity called inhibitors scar matrix lymphocyte wound brakes leukocytes. proliferation inhibiting and other accompanies to activity the by the TGF-β applies inflammation of that also healing

interstitial The a proportion any constitutes that significant tissue. network of is a of ECM proteins interactions are with as for tissue ( ECM development and as Cell maintaining architecture for normal critical healing, well

Fig.

). 1.13 several simple ECM around functions: more key serves than “space a filler” Much cells,

anchorage of Mechanical maintenance migration, cell polarity. for support and and cell cell

growth by signaling factors and Control of receptors cell family. through binding by cellular integrin and proliferation, the displaying of The a ECM depot provides

PROLIFERATION, SHAPE DIFFERENTIATION, ATTACHMENT, MIGRATION, CHANGE PROTEIN SYNTHESIS,

Fig. growth and 1.13 ECM factor–mediated cell of signaling. Interactions with interact that and talin; Cell aggregates (protein adhesion complexes see at α-actinin, focal cytoskeleton the include surface integrins vinculin,

Fig. activate can the mediated the integrins. through ). trans-duce or Cell overlap can can that directly of signals 1.16C messengers This to growth production receptors factors nucleus. transduction pathways with initiate signal surface for intracellular those a factors including the ECM by and growth response, produce proliferation, integrated in to and/or cells differentiation. Signals from can components locomotion, be changes given

within can or of be growth inflammation. factors of latent injury focus variety a a that activated for

renewal. tissue Scaffolding for tissue the normal parenchymal the or regeneration the Because of requires of cells scaffold, maintenance stroma membrane basement of basement of a is integrity organized membrane the structure for critical stromal or tissues. from of results resulting various example, forms disruption Thus, of in of the hepatic in stroma for ECM and cirrhosis tissue the the regeneration hepatitis. defective collapse repair, liver

microenvironments. tissue of Establishment support between kidney, provide acts as the not underlying connective part and also epithelium basement tissue; apparatus. membrane a functional, does boundary it forming the the but The the example, to just for filtration epithelium is in of

regeneration and and tumor and repair, The degradation constantly synthesis tissue accompany and morphogenesis, being fibrosis, its invasion remodeled; ECM metastasis. is chronic ( interstitial ECM basic two forms: in occurs and basement membrane matrix

Fig. 1.14

parenchymal is matrix the the structures. Interstitial vascular and connective and tissue, supportive between in present spaces underlying muscle cells between the and in smooth epithelium interstitial cells amorphous by fibroblasts), gel. mesenchymal synthesized (e.g., forming three-dimensional matrix The an is hyaluronate, fibronectin, fibrillar other collagens, nonfibrillar are later). Its well proteoglycans, constituents constituents elastin, as and and (see major as

membrane. Basement forming epithelial interstitial endothelial smooth tissues the random of muscle in cells, cells, cells, array matrix specialized organized basement becomes highly membrane. seemingly around and connective The is mesh labeled mesenchymal cells, (although flat by the it as overlying a conjointly is the a forming synthesized porous). quite wire” This epithelium “chicken underlying and lamellar membrane, major collagen amorphous IV are nonfibrillar laminin.) The constituents type and

of components proteins of the groups ( The into three ECM fall

Fig. 1.15

collagens and proteins that structural confer strength as Fibrous recoil tensile such and elastins

proteoglycans compressive and permit such as lubrication resistance hyaluronan and that gels Water-hydrated

cells connect to that glycoproteins ECM elements to another Adhesive one and

Collagens. a into are three helix. Collagens triple of composed polypeptide ropelike braided chains separate some 30 of been which collagen identified, tissues. cells to are unique types About and specific have

hydrogen of fibrillar a as III, vessels, collagens Some by structures form as types linear skin, proportion bonding; fibrils major I, II, interchain such connective in stabilized well and as types V collagen tissue in form (e.g., cartilage, blood healing bone, the scars. wounds such tendon, and and collagens) lateral unusual triple tensile the crosslinking by The the bonds, of an collagens of from covalent derives strength helices fibrillar

elastin the Proteoglycan extracellular with bFGF association Fibrillar collagen matrix A regulation C by and B

Fig. but proteins ECM cell cellular actin bind also and Fibrillar ECM Elastin transmembrane on proteoglycan basic tensile is proteoglycans. the matrix. crosslinks “bristles” hydrophobic Because sulfated water that open, (B) the Regulation a domains a molecules is strength are bFGF that surface in of sulfate at secreted stretch hydrophobic a to collagen of to Syndecan the glycosaminoglycan hydrophobic interacts extensive but ECM. a structure. sugars the crosslinking, FGF segments intact; chains compressible Heparan (bFGF, that form rodlike components. crosslinked activity domains the having collagen, cytoplasmic The negatively extracellular highly exerted, differs but refold. configuration binds and FGF-2) release (A) with charged and and proteoglycan tissue Proteoglycan large core little structures. protein attract allows (C) tension and the viscous sodium by the bFGF, the rest. keep dense elasticity. elastic generate the cytoskeleton. a fibers have stacking is in side As tail of fibril 1.15 globular and marked lateral with of pulled intracellular bFGF facilitating chains receptors. released side damaged with surface bind cell thus from ECM, interaction Syndecan bFGF

residues by of enzyme in that modification the oxidase. hydroxylation collagen requires post-translational lysine lysyl with C deficiency easily enzyme, children people of bleed “weak” deficiency heal any of have and vitamin oxidase age a C-dependent and Because poorly deformities, is lysyl vitamin with because collagen. skeletal ascorbate and as defects in Genetic Ehlers-Danlos of cause (Chapter forms syndrome diseases such imperfecta osteogenesis 7). collagens certain

the in via triple or regulate membrane (FACITs, to Nonfibrillar fibril so-called type stratified of anchoring helices” collagens collagen). within variously “fibril-associated such • epithelium cartilage); interrupted planar and collagen interactions collagen-collagen diameters provide with basement VII help IX basement collagen fibrils squamous structures (type (type as contribute membranes IV beneath collagen collagen);

Elastin. The elastin of ( recover shape is and their by deformation physical to recoil ability conferred tissues after

Fig. 1.15 ). valves vessels, must important flow, as accommodate pulsatile in ligaments. large the and recurrent especially cardiac is as skin, and Elasticity well uterus, blood which in meshlike of of an fibrillin. fibers elastin elastic composed a associated central Morphologically, network of consist with core defects Marfan and in weakened partially as individuals abnormalities fibrillin why skeletal to latter walls, The syndrome. relationship explains with lead aortic (Chapter also of TGF-β availability controls 7). the Fibrillin

Fig. 1.15 ). also gels surfaces. of layer confer proteoglycans cartilage, a in to hydrated joint compressive between that Proteoglycans highly bony lubrication adjacent provide resistance form forces; on of and to a linked core are a test-tube of long are called bristles Proteoglycans the a consist chondroitin glycosaminoglycans polysaccharides protein; acid in (examples keratan reminiscent manner to these sulfate brush. sulfate) called polymer hyaluronan attached then hyaluronic a long a cations sulfated gelatin-like abundant and matrix. viscous, charged, producing negatively molecules, water packed attract highly sugars densely The (mostly sodium) factors as providing (e.g., secreted and tissues, also reservoirs Besides to for growth FGF proteoglycans serve HGF). compressibility Some for factors and ( and proliferation, integral by cell are proteoglycans adhesion, chemokines migration, proteins cell roles example, that concentrating binding in membrane and have growth

Fig. 1.15

and receptors. Adhesive glycoproteins adhesion in cell-cell, These diverse interactions molecules structurally ECM-ECM cell-ECM, and are involved variously (

Fig. ). 1.16 fibronectin Prototypical include glycoproteins adhesive (a

Fig. CellandECMinteractions:adhesiveglycoproteinsandintegrinsignaling. 1.16 consistsofadisulfide-linkeddimer,withseveraldistinctdomainsthatallowbindingtoECMandintegrins,thelatterthrougharginine-glycine-asparticacid(RGD)motifs. (A)Fibronectin moleculeisoneofthemajorcomponentsofbasementmembranes;itsmultidomainstructureallowsinteractionsbetweentypeIVcollagen,otherECMcomponents,andcell-surfacereceptors. (B)Thecross-shapedlaminin (C)Integrinsandintegrin-mediatedsignalingeventsatfocaladhesioncomplexes.Eachα–β heterodimericintegrinreceptorisatrans-membranedimerthatlinksECMandtheintracellularcytoskeleton.Itisalsoassociatedwithacomplexoflinkingmolecules(e.g.,vinculinandtalin)thatcanrecruitandactivatekinasesthatultimatelytriggerdownstreamsignalingcascades.

constituent membrane). major interstitial major component basement of of the laminin (a and ECM) molecules CAMs of immunoglobulins (CAMs); members, adhesion also the known cadherins, Integrins are receptors, as adhesion also selectins. and representative the cell include family

and it (450 is tissue fibroblasts, of endothelium. a synthesized Fibronectin including cells, kD) is in variety by heterodimer disulfide-linked plasma monocytes, exists that forms; a and large specific Fibronectin and ( as fibrin, as well to integrins has bind collagen, ECM (e.g., that components proteoglycans), domains distinct heparin,

Fig. 1.16 ). and healing fibronectin a reepithelialization. angiogenesis, subsequent deposition, In wounds, scaffold tissue ECM plasma and for provide

in most the abundant basement Laminin is glycoprotein membrane. the connects as and is ECM underlying collagen IV cells heparan type components It such an that sulfate ( to cross-shaped 820-kD heterotrimer

Fig. ). 1.16 modulate and motility. basement mediating attachment proliferation, differentiation, Besides membrane, can the to laminin cell also the

the Integrins allow world. constituents transmembrane thus and large functionally intracellular and of of heterodimeric laminin that attach ECM family are a structurally glycoproteins α-and the to cells such with cytoskeleton β-subunits composed fibronectin, as linking to outside interactions. also cell-cell mediate Integrins adhesive critical endothelium a they to platelet are and (Chapter For of firm in at instance, 4). essential mediating adhesion surface sites of transmigration 3), inflammation play the role (Chapter the across in aggregation integrins and leukocytes on ECM via motif arginine-glycine-aspartic to acid a (abbreviated RGD). components attach tripeptide Integrins focal signaling trigger providing proliferation, receptors can also shape, binding differentiation substrates, that underlying cell cascades ( locomotion, to addition In to integrin and the through attachment influence

Fig. 1.16

of cells. homeostasis, fundamental tissue development, proliferation maintenance or replacement steady-state Cell to is of damaged dead and mitosis cellular The cellular by cells daughter key organelles) and cellular coordinated (e.g., through apportionment synthesis by all proliferation and cytokinesis. of constituents other DNA of are of DNA constituents, elements replication other the accompanied accurate to followed equal

sequence The cycle. that called cell in division of events cell is the results the growth), consists synthesis), phases; growth), G1 quiescent G0 and (pre-synthetic not that M are cycle in (DNA G2 of (mitotic) S are cell state. The actively cycling (premitotic cells (

Fig. 1.17 ). enter from can either cell or G0 pool of Cells the a mitosis. quiescent completing after G1 round DNA requires (see necessary step, of transition or points. deficiency previous arrest results at well cofactor various replication of activation the the as in factors stage later); nonfidelity completion Each as of

Fig. 1.17 Cell-cyclelandmarks.Thefigureshowsthecell-cyclephases(G0,G1,G2,S,andM),thelocationoftheG1restrictionpoint,andtheG1/SandG2/Mcell-cyclecheckpoints.G1restrictionpointreferstothephaseinG1atwhichthecellgetscommittedtothecellcyclewithoutfurtherneedofthegrowthfactorthatinitiatedcelldivision.Cellsfromlabiletissuessuchastheepidermisandthegastrointestinaltractmaycyclecontinuously;stablecellssuchashepatocytesarequiescentbutcanenterthecellcycle;permanentcellssuchasneuronsandcardiacmyocyteshavelostthecapacitytoproliferate. Pollard WC: (Modified from Earnshaw Cellbiology,Philadelphia, 2002, TD, Saunders.)

regulated cell inhibitors. numerous activators by and The cycle is is called ( Cell-cycle cyclins—named the for cyclin-associated their called cyclic nature enzymes and progression proteins by production degradation—and cyclin-dependent (CDKs) kinases driven of

Fig. ). 1.18 kinase forming activity) complexes the with (i.e., to by cyclins. relevant ability the protein phosphorylate acquire substrates CDKs synthesis abates. leads as of and activity appropriate is the completes its particular increased binding the of CDK Transiently CDK CDK degraded to round associated phosphorylation, increased the the cyclin activity cyclin kinase a partner; of likewise and rise cyclin wanes. Thus, associated waxes CDKs activity and the as levels of fall,

cycle or identified; and sequentially appear have more cell to bind A, been 15 cyclins one and E, More CDKs. B D, the during than cyclins cyclins: cell thus takes collection over. The the of next as regulated of leg cyclins distinct a is track, a set race leaves resembles which by cycle one the set each in relay

cycle surveillance cell sense the mechanisms Embedded to or chromosomal are damage. DNA primed in replication. quality-control cells ensure with genetic These do checkpoints not complete imperfections that the before monitors DNA cellular DNA to replication. Thus, irreversibly resources of checkpoint the committing integrity G1-S the ensures cell G2-M that before accurate cell DNA cycle, divides. actually been there Later replication point check in the has the cell-cycle DNA checkpoint activation triggers When repair DNA delays do cells mechanisms. and progression detect irregularities, senescence— enter through state If severe primarily called mechanisms p53-dependent either repaired, the derangement too cells undergo nonreplicative genetic be (see apoptosis the later). to is a or

this by the complex they (CDKIs); the accomplish of Enforcing CDK checkpoints job cell-cycle activity. is CDK-cyclin modulating inhibitors are CDKIs: several different There

(CDKN1C)— of of called proteins p27 and CDKs family One CDKIs—composed multiple inhibits (CDKN1A), broadly p21 (CDKN1B), three p57

(CDKN2C), and CDK4 effects these are called p18 (CDKN2A), cyclin selective family CDKIs proteins CDK6; Another and p16 has p15 cyclin (CDKN2D) on p19 of (CDKN2B),

divide, proteins in malignant Defective risk DNA cells allow for damaged checkpoint CDKI transformation resulting cells to with daughter at mutated

as membranes the cellular to organelles. cells, of components other aspect of daughter two growth An make and biosynthesis needed such division important cell equally is and progression, signaling metabolism growth. factor Thus also cellular receptor it that that changes events support growth promote cell-cycle in when activates stimulates mentioned these of effect, uptake Chief among marked decreased and and earlier, increased glucose by phosphorylation. glycolysis, is cellular increased the glutamine, Warburg (counterintuitively) oxidative 6. are in Chapter and cancer-cell of changes discussed These elements in growth detail are major greater

created are cells Not all stem equal. totipotent types http://ebooksmedicine.net all development, rise can stem of During cells to give

Fig. arrows representthephasesofthecellcycleduringwhichspecificcyclin-CDKcomplexesareactive.Asillustrated,cyclinD-CDK4,cyclinD-CDK6,andcyclinE-CDK2regulatetheG1-to-StransitionbyphosphorylatingtheRbprotein(pRb).CyclinA-CDK2andcyclinA-CDK1areactiveintheSphase.CyclinB-CDK1isessentialfortheG2-to-Mtransition.TwofamiliesofCDKinhibitorscanblockactivityofCDKsandprogressionthroughthecellcycle.Theso-called“INK4inhibitors,”composedofp16,p15,p18,andp19,actoncyclinD-CDK4andcyclinD-CDK6.Theotherfamilyofthreeinhibitors,p21,p27,andp57,caninhibitallCDKs. Roleofcyclins,CDKs,andCDKinhibitorsinregulatingthecellcycle.Shaded 1.18

within the organism, cell tissues and replace stem where mature the in damaged reside. maintain they to various cells tissues; in cells only capacity differentiated have adult the tissues populations populations of cell There also stem multiple are cells differentiate to lineages. capacities these with extremes into between varying cell types source depending may of stem the there cell that the development, be can on and limits Thus, stage population on generate. a

and (without of replication, the healing), or normal differentiation fully In tissues stem homeostatic a the self-renewal, mature, death cells neoplasia, equilibrium differentiated there and between of cells degeneration, is the (

Fig. 1.19 ). continuously relationship and skin. the by differentiated is nicely of between The dynamic cells stem exemplified parenchyma terminally the epithelium dividing of cells layer and before being shed. migrate layers stem epithelium differentiate the as Thus, at of the the upper to epithelium progressively basal dying the they

stem of properties: two are homeostasis, conditions Under important by cells characterized

maintain to numbers. Self-renewal, cells their permits stem which asymmetric may follow symmetric or Self-renewal division.

division the to to other cells, Asymmetric which retains refers cell and remains gives one enters replication mature capacity. differentiation undifferentiated and a pathway rise whereas daughter in its cell self-renewal self renewal division, daughter retain By capacity. symmetric contrast, both cells in chemotherapy. Such embryogenesis seen stress, populations are the such under are and in bone marrow cell (when stem following divisions of as expanding) early conditions in

there varieties: the into partition tendency only a fundamentally scientific two are stem in is different literature cells Although there subsets, several to

the are most stem (ES undifferentiated. cells) Embryonic cells cell the capacity, totipotent be to the limitless in mass body; present in have thus and give every cell to they ( of cell They rise are renewal are said http://ebooksmedicine.net inner the virtually blastocyst, can

Fig. 1.20 ). cell thereafter, allow cells germ culture specialized differentiating; of ES three layers, can them form periods to without extended maintained cells all for appropriate be conditions

Fig. 1.19 Mechanismsregulatingcellpopulations.Cellnumberscanbealteredbyincreasedordecreasedratesofstemcellinput,celldeathresultingfromapoptosis,orchangesintheratesofproliferationordifferentiation.

bcl-2, system: immune in McCarthy 1992.) CancerMetastasisRev11:157, from al: Apoptosis selection (Modified et growth the NJ, development factors, and of clonal the muscle, including liver neurons, and islet cells. cells, cardiac pancreatic

cells) • cells stem differentiated Tissue association cells a (also with found adult intimate tissue. of in the given are called stem stem called specialized microenvironments They tissue normally within are niches. cell protected perivascular Such stem cells in hematopoietic marrow, congregate a demonstrated niche. notably niches many the bone been have organs, where most in of and the follicles; the subventricular of niches the bulge the limbus gut; the in the brain. crypts canals Hering include Other hair liver; cells in the the region for zone stem cornea; the of of differentiation pool expansion within precursor keep the and until for the cells a factors and niches ( is of the cells need quiescent stem other Soluble there

Fig. 1.21

Adult generate. have limited differentiated a stem repertoire cells can of they that cells of cell usually Thus, tissue. adult in tissue (e.g., high that cells normal can (e.g., the endothelium) gastrointestinal given produce that or any and constituents stem cells low can skin with stem only tract) tissues adult although turnover, maintain cells are

cells cellular studied; replenish the they of consumed. are all as most Hematopoietic they the continuously the elements blood are stem extensively their from blood that bone directly peripheral They marrow isolated as colony release administration from induce from of as can marrow, certain the (CSF) niches. stimulating bone be well factors after rare, virtual purified markers. cells to surface homogeneity can cell be hematopoietic on based Although stem cell Clinically, see cell correct normal (e.g., repopulate disease; Chapter chemotherapy to to can sickle used after to for various provide defects precursors blood stem marrows (e.g., 12). cells or be leukemia), depleted these

Fig. 1.20 Embryonalstemcells.Thezygote,formedbytheunionofspermandegg,dividestoformblastocysts,andtheinnercellmassoftheblastocystgeneratestheembryo.Thepluripotentcellsoftheinnercellmass,knownasembryonicstem(ES)cells,canbeinducedtodifferentiateintocellsofmultiplelineages.Intheembryo,pluripotentstemcellscanasymmetricallydividetoyieldaresidualstablepoolofEScellsinadditiontogeneratingpopulationsthathaveprogressivelymorerestricteddevelopmentalcapacity,eventuallygeneratingstemcellsthatarecommittedtojustspecificlineages.EScellscanbeculturedinvitroandinducedtogiverisetocellsofallthreegermlayers.

Fig. epidermis. and in cell cells. Small 1.21 above the follicle, stem in cells (A) near are sebaceous of Stem layer Skin intestine bulge the in of located base glands, the niches (B) are the the lower crypt, Paneth tissues. the of cells various area stem in hair located to (oval canals (C) cytokeratin (thin an the Hering stem Bile arrow), of hepatocytes. canals that bile 7. located arrow) in immunohistochemical are are cells) for cells ductules duct structures stain and Hering parenchymal Liver of stained with (thick here cells connect Leuven, (C, Belgium.) of MD, Roskams, Tania Courtesy University

stem fat) marrow of as such the (and cells, population stem also mesenchymal cells. Besides other contains bone a tissues hematopoietic notably, (cartilage), a chondrocytes including multipotent cells and differentiate osteocytes cells that These into can (muscle). (bone), (fat), myocytes adipocytes of are variety stromal can be cells manufacturing numbers, expanded scaffolding a regeneration. of potential tissue stromal they the large Because to for represent means needed these

ability to has field isolate, medicine. given stem to birth expand, identify, The regenerative new and of transplant the cells tissues progeny stem can be ES replacement. of construct Theoretically, differentiated or damaged organs the to for or entire repopulate cells used to adult for myocardial excitement neurons or a there intrinsic In regenerative as infarct have considerable tissues stroke. particular, damaged opportunities a capacity, myocardium after about therapeutic is that low after restoring such the by introducing the purify populations, initial to of enthusiasm cell has improving the Unfortunately, tempered of ability sites into encountered replacement expand been cells functionally and an integrating much stem difficulties despite damage. and in

More will pluripotential the recently patient cells, it from generate been implanted. that has they to whom into derived be ES possible resembling are cells, To cells ES products to have accomplish the been whose this, of handful identified “stem-ness” genes cells. a achieve can—remarkably—reprogram of somatic are ( cells) When introduced (iPS are induced generated pluripotent cells such into fully genes stem differentiated cells (e.g., fibroblasts),

Fig.

at albeit frequency. ), 1.22 low diabetes) cells were patient, reaction Because mediated rejection differentiated the cells that an engrafted are from eliciting cells β-cells in derived insulin-secreting their obtained if (e.g., progeny differentiated a from would patient these occur can without with another from ES immunologically derived the be donor.

Fig. 1.22 induced a be that Genes cells pluripotent to stem giving The stem differentiate stem can lineages. production cells, various cells cells). introduced to patient’s rise cell properties are that into confer of (iPS differentiated into induced Engl 2003.) from transplantation, Hochedlinger Jaenisch K, (Modified Nuclear potential R: for J cells, and cell the stem embryonic therapy, Med N 349:275–286,

and biology of throughout back basis it in the refer we our of to survey cell selected pathology, a discussions for later book. as This will serves topics biology. intentionally some topics readily in is this devoted reviewed of Students summary and remember brief, textbooks fascinating should, found can be to more and the that about information however, here cell molecular

noncoding 2013. PJ, Long in disease, and development cellular codes Cell address RNAs: 152:1298, Chang Batista HY: [Good biology.] review regarding lncRNA

to TR, trashing The forge noncoding RNA old Steitz rules Cech ones, JA: revolution 157:77, new 2014. Cell review [An RNAs.] excellent played by roles noncoding the of

23:89, 2013. Curr Hübner Dev regulation, Eckersley-Maslin MR, DL: MA, Genet transcriptional organization Opin and Spector Chromatin cell regulate organization nice nuclear relationships transcription.] genome and of that function [A type–specific discussion structure– chromatin

18:1194, 2012. M, Epigenetic S: Akbarian Jarovcevski Nat in neurologic disease, mechanisms Med with and regulation, overview focus genomic neurologic on of organization specific [A well-written a disease.] transcriptional

RNA, chromatin Annu non-coding Meller VH, SS, of Genet N: by 2015. Joshi Rev 49:673, Modulation Deshpande roles nuclear RNAs organization.] of played in excellent by [An overview noncoding the

K, F, Exp regulation, al: J, Med Epigenetic 2016. Banati Biol et Adv Szenthe Minarovits 879:1, brief structure and that pathways chromatin primer accessibility.] on the regulate [A

Biol Opin MJ, of Cell and The 40:8, roles 2016. Curr Rowley three-dimensional Corces interactions, long-distance genome: principles VG: three-dimensional mechanisms [An regarding conformations transcription.] which discussion the nuclear influence can interesting by

and Life 70:1609, epigenomics Sci disease: Bridging the Pospisilik Teperino A, 2013. Lempradl JA: R, Cell Mol basics, complex for the of epigenetic human review [An basis disease.] introductory

activating signal and ER: of regulating transduction, The Mol 69:1755, endocytosis role Andersson 2011. in Life Sci Cell with [Overview on modulating specific in signaling.] emphasis role intracellular of its endocytosis

Med Engl human N AM, Choi 368:651, health Ryter B: in and SW, disease, 2013. J Levine Autophagy and pathophysiologic autophagy.] physiologic the aspects [A of concerning superb review

English function, Biol 2009. Opin and Voeltz Zurek Peripheral GK: Cell structure AR, 21:596, Curr N, ER structural the organelles.] of and the overview to endoplasmic other and reticulum [An cellular of relationship its functional organization

340:1185, homeostasis Lecuit epithelial Mechanics Guillot of Science C, morphogenesis, tissue T: and 2013. of interactions the discussion and cellular tissue about topical maintenance.] mechanical [A basis

the Nat response, control Cell protein 17:829, Chevet unfolded SA: Hetz Oakes E, Biol 2015. Proteostasis C, by and homeostasis.] endoplasmic [Mechanisms reticulum editing underlying cellular

Nat crossroads Mol anabolism, at of 2015. Biol Debnath Cell catabolism J, the Kaur and Rev 16:461, J: Autophagy excellent review of and the consequences cellular of autophagy.] mechanisms [An

Membrane 3:1, rafts, lipid 2013. Biol organization Cold and Harb K, Simons Sampaio Spring Perspect JL: of review principles membrane of general nice architecture and domain organization.] emphasizing [A the

Cuervo autophagy, Wong Biol 2010. the of and E, Harb Spring Perspect AM: proteasome mechanisms: Cold clearance Integration 2:1, on aberrant the degradation or constituents.] of focusing of specifically intracellular elimination abnormal [An overview pathways,

The tangled Cell S: Kornbluth JL, of 2013. circuitry Andersen and 49:399, apoptosis, Mol metabolism solid metabolism, interplay review cell of between and death.] the cell cell proliferation, [A

2012. between Dang metabolism Genes Dev and 26:877, CV: Links cancer, review metabolic excellent of mitochondria.] [An on functions

Mitochondrial function, Friedman 2014. JR, form Nature 505:335, J: Nunnari and cellular response injury.] overview of and replication, [A mitochondrial good to

Mol Green permeabilization 2010. DR: Tait Cell 11:621, cell beyond, and outer and death: Mitochondria Biol SW, Rev membrane Nat of death mitochondria pathways.] in [A of the cell role review

proliferation, 2013. RJ, Y: Signaling 5:1, Harb that control pathways Perspect Xiong Biol Duronio cell Cold Spring overall [An proliferation.] signaling excellent review and cell of

MAP pathways, kinase Biol Morrison Spring 2012. 4:1, Cold Harb DK: Perspect pathways.] mitogen-activated of [A signaling kinase review

receptors, Perona factors Oncol Cell signalling: growth Clin Transl 2011. and kinase R: tyrosine 8:77, pathways dysregulated malignancy.] with become an how in emphasis [An overview these signaling on of

Rethinking 2014. and stem Alvarado differentiation: S: Yamanaka plasticity, 157:110, AS, Cell cells, regeneration,

14:39, stem self-renewal death: Fuchs Rep A in E, of life EMBO T: 2013. cells, Chen and matter on scholarly using stem and renewal, cutaneous [A underpinnings understanding of cells a as the conceptual regarding framework cell paradigm.] review stem our experimental

Biol Navigating the GH, JC: M, Mol Liu 2012. of Cell stem 13:524, Rev pluripotent epigenetic Li cells, Nat landscape Izpisua-Belmonte [A and good the discussion of of epigenetic cell subsequent proliferation stem regulation differentiation.]

cells, Annu Dev 2014. Martello embryonic Rev stem A: of 30:647, Cell nature G, Biol Smith The overview [A plasticity and of good, comprehensive stemness.] cell http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

and Cell Death, Injury, Cell Adaptations

Cell Death Other Pathways of

changes of signs of pathology organs the understanding that in field symptoms and the in cells, and to give and patients. associated The disease causes to tissues, and with is presenting disease are rise devoted the throughout medicine: important pathology encounter There and study are students terms their will of that two

to underlying Etiology responsible for that initiation factors refers of the and progression modifying are and causes the disease. of diabetes, inherited is and caused by various many genetic such environmental It hypertension, that clear susceptibility cancer, triggers. combination as diseases, are and common a now the medicine. theme genetic factors modern environmental major and is diseases underlying of a Elucidating

rise abnormalities mechanisms specific disease. that particular and give changes account for of and structural the to that progression the Pathogenesis and development any of disease, functional refers characterize molecular which the cellular to why disease and refers describes to etiology develops Thus, a disease ( arises pathogenesis a how

Fig. 2.1

the Defining is also and but for is disease effective and preventive developing of disease the not only understanding for essential treatments rational basis pathogenesis etiology measures. pathology for scientific provides of the foundation practice the medicine. Thus,

in diagnoses guide blood urine). and (morphology) biochemical and and of in gross practice, changes clinical identify or in alterations therapy To as microscopic render tissues, appearance and (such cells the pathologists body fluids of molecular, techniques biochemical, tissues, organs the define in that and cells, structural, to to response Pathologists a other injury. also morphologic, and in variety changes functional use and occur (e.g., and by and chapter, (e.g., discussion stresses. external environmental) induced with of We of abnormalities a variety internal genetic) abnormalities in this begin, cellular a

their their function interact environment, and extracellular demands adjusting and structure Cells constantly with changing actively accommodate stresses. to normally is of it that a regulated remains milieu The state intracellular tightly as fairly referred such constant, to homeostasis. cells as potentially viability nutrient (such encounter undergo and physiologic adaptation, in can state or preserving injurious As stresses conditions workload achieving heart) the deprivation), steady (such cells new and they a as function. increased harmful or ( capability the inherently develops If injury the external cell stress excessive, if is adaptive or exceeded is

Fig. 2.2 ). baseline; is certain stress Within or to and rapid return in death it persistent, of results cells their in severe, the the is limits, and however, if irreversible injury stable onset, cells. affected injury reversible, crucial of the Cell the http://ebooksmedicine.net most in is one events death evolution

ABNORMALITIES CELLS DISEASE MOLECULAR, AND FUNCTIONAL, MORPHOLOGIC TISSUES AND SIGNS SYMPTOMS MANIFESTATIONS: IN AND OF CLINICAL

Fig. Stepsintheevolutionofdisease.Onlyselectedmajorcauses(etiologies)areshown. 2.1

tissue in disease any organ. or of reactions. diverse (lack ischemia from flow), results immune of blood It toxins, including infections, and causes, the embryogenesis, tissue a and in organs, and normal maintenance the essential of of Cell is also development death process homeostasis.

this Because of first in consequences all various cells cell of injury, of cell to and the damage and discuss injury reversible is basis including forms the we acute disease, the chapter death. causes, mechanisms, with two abnormal the substances We cellular and affect deposition then tissues: of adaptations processes to consider aging. stress conclude that other and cells cell and

INJURY NORMAL REVERSIBLE CELL INJURY (homeostasis) IRREVERSIBLE progressive Injurious Severe, stimulus

Fig. Sequenceofreversiblecellinjuryandcelldeath.Necrosisandapoptosisarethetwomajorpathwaysofcelldeathandarediscussedindetaillater. 2.2

enzyme gross defect injury nonfunctional trauma, of as in range span a cell to that in after a single a accident, a causes vehicle The such a from motor metabolic results disease. gene specific physical stimuli the grouped can categories. injurious into be following Most

and Hypoxia ischemia. deficiency, common supply, are ischemia, of reduced cell refers blood oxygen most means which causes Hypoxia, the among injury. to and which essential results Both up build of in toxic oxygen, deficiency of nutrients of and tissues a a addition, ischemia, in metabolites. and deprive variety of from reduction capacity as as affecting in is lung, diseases of The from cause the common ischemia of cause, deficiency the oxygen-carrying monoxide but inadequate anemia and the in also blood, carbon with obstruction, any an can hypoxia from of arterial resulting oxygen oxygenation (CO) blood, of most poisoning. a the or result

Toxins. smoke, include are asbestos, the drugs. pollutants, and Potentially daily environment; encountered toxic insecticides, these cigarette CO, air ethanol, agents in tissue Many 7). or or excessively injury many if (Chapter susceptible in doses individuals a inappropriately drugs can in cause therapeutic or patient in used cell can glucose, Even innocuous water toxic. substances, and such be salt, as oxygen,

agents. Infectious including pathogens, cells. of injure protozoans, bacteria, types viruses, fungi, All and disease-causing are discussed diverse caused agents The injury of in these 9. by mechanisms Chapter cell

Immunologic reactions. defends in cell also result immune immune Although microbes, reactions the body system tissue the injury. against pathogenic can and chronic reactions against responses 5). are substances, one’s to immune against own and allergic or microbes Examples reactions autoimmune environmental excessive (Chapter tissues, are immune situations, reactions, inflammatory damage all the of which responses cause often to elicit these tissues. and In cells of

Genetic abnormalities. malformations as sickle Genetic changes acid as aberrations congenital conspicuous anemia hemoglobin 7). in rise the or syndrome associated giving can pathologic in substitution (Chapter single with cell result as the Down as amino to subtle deficiency consequence cell metabolism, death may misfolded defects of or a of beyond they as in inborn of errors proteins, are of trigger damaged functional cell DNA Genetic cause enzymes or of such injury repair. accumulation as proteins, when which both

imbalances. Nutritional countries uncommon in of standards 8). cell of cause impoverished specific a even with (Chapter living vitamin not insufficiency major developed remains high injury, and Protein–calorie among populations are deficiencies as and is in in dietary intake result many also mellitus factor 2 an diabetes type obesity and important such atherosclerosis. may excessive diseases, underlying Ironically,

agents. Physical and temperature, shock, (Chapter all effects changes atmospheric electric sudden pressure have in radiation, of extremes cells wide-ranging Trauma, on 8).

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Aging. stress the a cells of in of and, eventually, to to senescence results ability respond and diminished organism. cells Cellular death the of mechanisms the are aging chapter. end The cellular this of at underlying discussed

and With discussion injury, progression in cell biochemical the we and the introduction, a morphologic to noxious caused mechanisms to manifestations by injury then different stimuli. of of proceed this

cells biochemical all a cells. Although mechanisms, through various stereotypic alterations injurious in stimuli sequence types induce morphologic and structural tend to diverse of most of damage

at injury the to of the morphology is injury deranged of can injured cell which normal return removed stimulus stage Reversible damaging function the is if and the cells

Fig. ). 2.3 ionic inability the result because they a plasma ion energy-dependent become homeostasis. an fluid in maintain intracellular injury, cells the of in membrane, and failure swollen typically leading to as to of reversible In water organelles and pumps take forms and lipids may In accumulate inside organelles injury, of cells. injured some degenerated the

MORPHOLOGYThetwomainmorphologiccorrelatesofreversiblecellinjuryarecellularswellingandfattychange.

)iscommonlyseenincellinjuryassociatedwithincreasedpermeabilityoftheplasmamembrane.Itmaybedifficulttoappreciatewiththelightmicroscope,butitisoftenapparentatthelevelofthewholeorgan.Whenitaffectsmanycellsinanorgan,itcausespallor(asaresultofcompressionofcapillaries),increasedturgor,andanincreaseinorganweight.Microscopicexaminationmayshowsmall,clearvacuoleswithinthecytoplasm;theserepresentdistendedandpinched-offsegmentsoftheendoplasmicreticulum(ER).Thispatternofnonlethalinjuryissometimescalledhydropicchangeorvacuolardegeneration. Fig.2.4B

ismanifestedbytheappearanceoftriglyceridecontaininglipidvacuolesinthecytoplasm.Itisprincipallyencounteredinorgansthatareinvolvedinlipidmetabolism,suchastheliver,andhenceitisdiscussedinChapter16. Fatty change

Thecytoplasmofinjuredcellsalsomaybecomeredder(eosinophilic),achangethatbecomesmuchmorepronouncedwithprogressiontonecrosis(describedlater).Otherintracellularchangesassociatedwithcellinjury(

)include(1)plasmamembranealterationssuchasblebbing,blunting,ordistortionofmicrovilli,andlooseningofintercellularattachments; Fig.2.3

and reticulum mitochondria endoplasmic Swelling of

of Breakdown and plasma contents organelles, nucleus; of membrane, leakage

Fig. 2.3 Reversiblecellinjuryandnecrosis.Theprincipalcellularalterationsthatcharacterizereversiblecellinjuryandnecrosisareillustrated.Byconvention,reversibleinjuryisconsideredtoculminateinnecrosisiftheinjuriousstimulusisnotremoved.

withdetachmentofribosomesanddissociationofpolysomes;and(4)nuclearalterations,suchasclumpingofchromatin.Thecytoplasmmaycontainso-called“myelinfigures,”whicharecollectionsofphospholipidsresemblingmyelinsheathsthatarederivedfromdamagedcellularmembranes.

injurious insults potentially such alterations ER. In as induce specific organelles, in cellular situations, some the various metabolism the functional consequences. in of The to that an chemicals, smooth response important may cells ER of these adaptive is involved the chemicals as exposed ER have show hypertrophy and treatment in instance, of still past sedatives used system oxidase in found and the in P-450 are by commonly metabolized the For barbiturates, the mixed-function are for as cytochrome which as epilepsy, many ER. used drugs, the some a forms were smooth liver including of use http://ebooksmedicine.net Protracted

Fig. Morphologicchangesinreversibleandirreversiblecellinjury(necrosis).(A)Normalkidneytubuleswithviableepithelialcells.(B)Early(reversible)ischemicinjuryshowingsurfaceblebs,increasedeosinophiliaofcytoplasm,andswellingofoccasionalcells.(C)Necrotic(irreversible)injuryofepithelialcells,withlossofnucleiandfragmentationofcellsandleakageofcontents. 2.4 of Drs. (Courtesy Neal Sciences University Health Texas M.A.Venkatachalam, of Pinckard and

Antonio,Texas.) Center, San the of marked to achieve the need use increasing effect. by a to state doses to same drug the leads barbiturates of tolerance, enzymatic This adaptation a P-450 hepatocytes and of activity. ER (an in of increase the stems consequent hypertrophy increase volume) from in smooth into (CCl4), example but other to leads later. in such their sometimes detoxification, instances modification one carbon compounds tetrachloride discussed P-450– converts mediated of toxin; a involves dangerous them adapted the drug to other an demonstrate handled capacity by compounds system. to same increased one metabolize Cells alcohol. concentration phenobarbital alcohol drop in smooth patients Thus, of may the medication increase to hypertrophy epilepsy experience for they levels the their because blood a anti-seizure ER to response taking in intake, of if subtherapeutic

of injured and or “point cell death. nebulous no persistent cells exposures, With noxious undergo excessive a return” pass and to may this death it clinical that molecular cell strategies is the transition point from relevance changes for devise possible injury. predict irreversible can be cell preventing obvious—if of biochemical be defining identified, reversible The to the transition or DNA generation) to biochemical and the of phosphorylation three adenosine correlates and original integrity. of resolution functions chromatin definitive there the the even intracellular membranes; phenomena: are loss Although morphologic and the by [ATP] characterized restore plasma triphosphate the membrane and irreversibility, is consistently injury; of after loss inability and of it structure of structural function mitochondrial no (oxidative to necrosis. in As more is enzymatic later, detail of the cell, injury of discussed results the dissolution which culmination the injured lysosomal in membranes

and die by injured mechanisms, cells depending nature insult. are the of on When the they severity different

death. loss of and has uncontrollable such as • cause of and oxygen a nutrient cell of that the and actions Severe disturbances, called toxins, death supply rapid “accidental” form been death) (Greek, is cell = necros The necrosis manifestation death morphological accidental ( of

2.1 Table ). from cell death pathway toxins, resulting as infections, many and in the various commonly ischemia, such encountered of injuries, Necrosis major exposure to trauma. those is considered traditionally the because end that thought happens to is specific beyond result is and Necrosis severe of words, accidentally not fail or simply by biochemical inevitable be in be to and injury fall mechanisms; other the cellular too repaired salvage or is constituents is necrosis apart. severe signals damage many regulated

activate of severe, or molecular they need to death. In in is the normal less processes, eliminated contrast, a be injury set precise culminate pathways that when • cells during can cell be death this Because kind of manipulated

2.1 and Apoptosis of Necrosis Table http://ebooksmedicine.net Features

Fig. Therelationshipamongcellularfunction,celldeath,andthemorphologicchangesofcellinjury.Notethatcellsmayrapidlybecomenonfunctionalaftertheonsetofinjury,althoughtheyarestillviable,withpotentiallyreversibledamage;withalongerdurationofinjury,irreversibleinjuryandcelldeathmayresult.Notealsothatcelldeathtypicallyprecedesultrastructural,lightmicroscopic,andgrosslyvisiblemorphologicchanges. 2.5

death. is it agents said mutations, “regulated” by or genetic cell be therapeutic to The morphologic appearance of apoptosis cell of is types most regulated (see death

2.1 Table ). necrosis apoptosis, and both In and features been shows regulated instances, called necroptosis. has some of cell death these of unrecognized forms showed and of cell controlled signaling genes were The death that a previously process. that discovery pathways identifiable by cell regulated can death be can pathways targeted regulated prevent of idea the loss to that of the therapeutically possibility pathologic raises The be in also cell molecular death conditions. cells specific the with and fragments an of inflammatory of eliminates intrinsic Apoptosis variety eliciting promotes process cells is a without dead cells the of that reaction. a abnormalities clearance situations “clean” form cell is damaged pathologic or proteins occurs cell are survival beyond or cell’s repair deprived the of necessary in This signals. when DNA suicide of a process, is which in apoptosis healthy But occurs tissues. indication also pathologic unlike a always necrosis, an of serves numbers, cell development unwanted cell during It associated eliminate with is not it and maintain necessarily normal injury. to cells pathologic constant to so cell death also physiologic of cell types death. are called These programmed

to may point cell lag injury changes function that long death) important behind function of cellular of is the viability and far loss ( morphologic It death cell lost and be that occurs, out before (or

Fig. ). 2.5 not die elapsed. ischemia, until have For to 30 minutes may but to of cells 1 after 20 myocardial example, become noncontractile minutes 2 ischemia of indicative microscopy within death features hours not light of evident the death of ischemic the cells, by are later. the to electron by myocytes until Morphologic after microscopy 2 6 of 12 but 3 hours appear to

cell apart, enzymes a form cellular membranes in cellular death of which cell Necrosis and ultimately and ( fall is digest leak out the

Fig. ). 2.3 start repair from induced a Necrosis reaction, the elicits which eliminate substances process inflammation, serves that the called is released (Chapter local subsequent to debris host by 3). and cells and dead from responsible are the enzymes come and derived for The reaction. inflammatory may cells themselves lysosomes of or as of the recruited cell leukocytes dying from from the digestion part is injury Necrosis of the corrected. that often culmination cannot reversible cell be

mechanisms The with injurious vary stimuli. biochemical of necrosis different enzymes; by generation including failure membranes, lysosomal of and form be energy These of membranes, because cellular oxygen caused damage mechanisms oxygen reduced of results membrane damage; including and cellular of contents the to others. acids, the and ATP damage in which which reactive irreversible proteins, may species nucleic mitochondrial supply leakage to lipids, or plasma (ROS); in cellular include: necrosis. later when mechanisms causes individual consider we of These discussed are biochemical the cell

2.4C Figs.2.3

Cytoplasmic changes.Necroticcellsshowincreasedeosinophilia(i.e.,theyarestainedredbythedyeeosin—theEinthehematoxylinandeosin[H&E]stain),attributablepartlytoincreasedbindingofeosintodenaturedcytoplasmicproteinsandpartlytolossofbasophilicribonucleicacid(RNA)inthecytoplasm(basophiliastemsfrombindingofthebluedyehematoxylin—theHin“H&E”).Comparedwithviablecells,thecellmayhaveaglassy,homogeneousappearance,mostlybecauseofthelossoflighterstainingglycogenparticles.Myelinfiguresaremoreprominentinnecroticcellsthanincellswithreversibleinjury.Whenenzymeshavedigestedcytoplasmicorganelles,thecytoplasmbecomesvacuolatedandappears“moth-eaten.”Byelectronmicroscopy,necroticcellsarecharacterizedbydiscontinuitiesinplasmaandorganellemembranes,markeddilationofmitochondriaassociatedwiththeappearanceoflargeamorphousintramitrochondrialdensities,disruptionoflysosomes,andintracytoplasmicmyelinfigures.

Nuclear changes.Nuclearchangesassumeoneofthreepatterns,allresultingfromabreakdownofDNAandchromatin.Pyknosis ischaracterizedbynuclearshrinkageandincreasedbasophilia;theDNAcondensesintoadarkshrunkenmass.Thepyknoticnucleuscanundergofragmentation;thischangeiscalledkaryorrhexis.Ultimately,thenucleusmayundergokaryolysis,inwhichthebasophiliafadesbecauseofdigestionofDNAbydeoxyribonuclease(DNase)activity.In1to2days,thenucleusinadeadcellmaycompletelydisappear.

of cells.Necroticcellsmaypersistforsometimeormaybedigestedbyenzymesanddisappear.Deadcellsmaybereplacedbymyelinfigures,whichareeitherphagocytosedbyothercellsorfurtherdegradedintofattyacids.Thesefattyacidsbindcalciumsalts,whichmayresultinthedeadcellsultimatelybecomingcalcified. Fates necrotic

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Coagulativenecrosis. 2.6 (A)Awedge-shapedkidneyinfarct(yellow) withpreservationoftheoutlines. andnecroticcellsintheinfarct(I).Thenecroticcellsshowpreservedoutlineswithlossofnuclei,andaninflammatoryinfiltrateis present(difficulttodiscernatthismagnification). (B)Microscopicviewoftheedgeoftheinfarct,withnormalkidney(N)

Tissue Morphologic Patterns of Necrosis

of tissue entire or In even undergo severe areas conditions, large necrosis. a pathologic may orgrans and with in association certain This inflammatory ischemia, reactions. marked infections, happen may tissue provide necrosis patterns distinct of may etiologic morphologically are There several that clues. are terms and implications their describe by do the Although are terms clinicians. patterns used understood and commonly pathologists not such mechanisms, that reflect underlying these

detectedonlybyhistologicexamination. grossappearances;theexceptionisfibrinoidnecrosis,whichis

).Theaffectedtissuestakeonafirmtexture.Presumablytheinjurydenaturesnotonlystructuralproteinsbutalsoenzymes,therebyblockingtheproteolysisofthedeadcells;asaresult,eosinophilic,anucleatecellsmaypersistfordaysorweeks.Leukocytesarerecruitedtothesiteofnecrosis,andthedeadcellsareultimatelydigestedbytheactionoflysosomalenzymesoftheleukocytes.Thecellulardebrisisthenremovedbyphagocytosismediatedprimarilybyinfiltratingneutrophilsandmacrophages.Coagulativenecrosisischaracteristicofinfarcts(areasofnecrosiscausedbyischemia)inallsolidorgansexceptthebrain. Fig.2.6

necrosis Liquefactive isseeninfocalbacterialand,occasionally,fungalinfectionsbecausemicrobesstimulaterapidaccumulationofinflammatorycells,andtheenzymesofleukocytesdigest(“liquefy”)thetissue.Forobscurereasons,hypoxicdeathofcellswithinthecentralnervoussystemoftenevokesliquefactivenecrosis(

(Chapter3). infection,thematerialisfrequentlycreamyyellowandiscalledpus Fig.2.7 ).Whateverthepathogenesis,thedeadcellsarecompletelydigested,transformingthetissueintoaviscousliquidthatiseventuallyremovedbyphagocytes.Iftheprocessisinitiatedbyacuteinflammation,asinabacterial

necrosis isnotadistinctivepatternofcelldeath,thetermisstillcommonlyusedinclinicalpractice.Itusuallyreferstotheconditionofalimb(generallythelowerleg)thathaslostitsbloodsupplyandhasundergonecoagulativenecrosisinvolvingmultipletissuelayers.Whenbacterialinfectionissuperimposed,themorphologicappearancechangestoliquefactivenecrosisbecauseofthedestructivecontentsofthebacteriaandtheattractedleukocytes(resultinginso-called“wetgangrene”). Althoughgangrenous

Caseous necrosis ismostoftenencounteredinfocioftuberculousinfection.Caseousmeans“cheeselike,”referringtothefriableyellow-whiteappearanceoftheareaofnecrosisongrossexamination(

).Onmicroscopicexamination,thenecroticfocusappearsasacollectionoffragmentedorlysedcellswithanamorphousgranularpinkappearanceinH&E-stainedtissuesections.Unlikecoagulativenecrosis,thetissue Fig.2.8

Fig. Liquefactivenecrosis.Aninfarctinthebrainshowsdissolutionofthetissue. 2.7

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 2.8 Caseousnecrosis.Tuberculosisofthelung,withalargeareaofcaseousnecrosiscontainingyellow-white(cheesy)debris.

architectureiscompletelyobliteratedandcellularoutlinescannotbediscerned.Caseousnecrosisisoftensurroundedbyacollectionofmacrophagesandotherinflammatorycells;thisappearanceischaracteristicofanodularinflammatorylesioncalledagranuloma(Chapter3).

referstofocalareasoffatdestruction,typicallyresultingfromthereleaseofactivatedpancreaticlipasesintothesubstanceofthepancreasandtheperitonealcavity.Thisoccursinthecalamitousabdominalemergencyknownasacutepancreatitis(Chapter17).Inthisdisorder,pancreaticenzymesthathaveleakedoutofacinarcellsandductsliquefythemembranesoffatcellsintheperitoneum,andlipasessplitthetriglycerideesterscontainedwithinfatcells.Thereleasedfattyacidscombinewithcalciumtoproducegrosslyvisiblechalkywhiteareas(fatsaponification),whichenablethesurgeonandthepathologisttoidentifythelesions( necrosis •Fat

Fig.2.9 ).Onhistologicexamination,thefociofnecrosiscontainshadowyoutlinesofnecroticfatcellssurroundedbybasophiliccalciumdepositsandaninflammatoryreaction.

Fig. 2.9 Fatnecrosisinacutepancreatitis.Theareasofwhitechalkydepositsrepresentfocioffatnecrosiswithcalciumsoapformation(saponification)atsitesoflipidbreakdowninthemesentery.

Fig. 2.10 Fibrinoidnecrosisinanarteryinapatientwithpolyarteritisnodosa.Thewallofthearteryshowsacircumferentialbrightpinkareaofnecrosiswithproteindepositionandinflammation.

necrosis •Fibrinoid isaspecialformofnecrosis.Itusuallyoccursinimmunereactionsinwhichcomplexesofantigensandantibodiesaredepositedinthewallsofbloodvessels,butitalsomayoccurinseverehypertension.Depositedimmunecomplexesandplasmaproteinsthatleakintothewallofdamagedvesselsproduceabrightpink,amorphousappearanceonH&Epreparationscalledfibrinoid(fibrinlike)bypathologists(

Fig.2.10 ).Theimmunologicallymediateddiseases(e.g.,polyarteritisnodosa)inwhichthistypeofnecrosisisseenaredescribedinChapter5.

cell blood Leakage of proteins using into and membrane tissue-specific the intracellular circulation of ultimately through serum provides necrosis samples. damaged means the detecting or a of contractile bile for the and phosphatase, troponin, enzyme unique alkaline the hepatic transaminases. duct epithelium Cardiac enzyme hepatocytes muscle, creatine contains protein a of example, the contains kinase whereas and contain isoform tissues clinically Irreversible death makes cell elevate the these tissue useful these proteins, damage. markers in of which and of them levels injury serum

DNA cell pathway cells and enzymes ( and activate is in a own cytoplasmic which cells’ degrade Apoptosis that nuclear death the nuclear of proteins

Fig. 2.11 ). off, the then that appearance off”). responsible (apoptosis, giving for of is name break the the apoptotic Fragments “falling cells that “edible,” called become membrane leading is the highly a but consumption to way by remains of the such cell membrane The apoptotic fragments, their intact, bodies, phagocytes. altered apoptotic in rapid the plasma of leakage are death and elicit with The inflammatory little fragments cell an apoptotic its dead cellular cleared reaction. does so not contents, cell differs ( apoptosis Thus, many necrosis in from respects

2.1 Table

Apoptosis of Causes

potentially that and http://ebooksmedicine.net occurs many have eliminate cells Apoptosis and normal harmful situations in cells serves to

Fig. 2.11 Apoptosis.Thecellularalterationsinapoptosisareillustrated.Contrastthesewiththechangesthatcharacterizenecroticcelldeath,shownin

.Apoptotic and cells apoptotic Phagocytosis Fig.2.3 fragments NORMALCELLAPOPTOSIS body Phagocyte of

Physiologic 2.2 Pathologic Apoptosis Table Conditions Associated and With

of chromatin Condensation

2.2 ). Table the damaged cells It occurs damage a damaged, eliminated. as is affects irreparably event the when pathologic when thus, proteins; DNA the or cell also cell’s are especially

Physiologic • apoptosis. new and some replaced ones. an die During are organism, by cells development normal of of growth proliferation often by highly hormone-responsive proliferative that are the factors. organisms, levels and determined mature cell of loss and cycles undergo tissues In eliminated are these inflammation. eliciting ensuring harmful by death unwanted is situations, the apoptosis, In without that always potentially cell cells In not and autoimmune leukocytes as of as lymphocytes the immune system, apoptosis they at recognize self-antigens the excess were purged. if well immune cause diseases responses could that eliminates left end

pathologic conditions. in TurnoverofproliferativetissuesLossofgrowthfactorsignaling(e.g.,intestinalepithelium,(presumedmechanism)lymphocytesinbonemarrow,andthymus) • Apoptosis damaged beyond Apoptosis repair. cells are that eliminates when seen there example, is and drugs. This DNA radiation severe damage, exposure to is for cytotoxic after discussed this significance its are misfolded apoptotic also the cell later, in of in triggers proteins mechanisms The and death; death context of ER cause underlying of of accumulation the stress. disease infected induce particularly viruses, death infectious Certain agents, of apoptotic some cells.

Mechanisms Apoptosis of

caspases. enzymes regulated is the balance pathways control of called Apoptosis activation ultimately biochemical and survival-inducing death-and signals of by the that that so named after proteins they residues. cleave were cysteine Caspases are because acid proteases aspartic distinct pathway receptor mitochondrial and ( converge pathway on pathways activation: caspase the death Two the

Fig. ). 2.12 intersect, can different under disease. in and and involve are serve distinct physiology molecules, roles different pathways they induced generally conditions, these Although cell phagocytes. The death end apoptotic bodies of result is of by the apoptotic clearance

situations. responsible The (intrinsic) mitochondrial and in seems to be pathologic most apoptosis • for pathway physiologic inducing mitochondrial c. capable membranes contain http://ebooksmedicine.net are several including that Mitochondria When of cytochrome apoptosis, proteins

(Bcl-2, Apoptotic Ligands Bcl-xL) BH3 cytoskeleton Cytochrome other pro-apoptotic DNA phagocytic withdrawal Endonuclease Breakdown (Bax, cell TNF • stress) • Protein Bak) Nuclear Caspase activation radicals) and free Receptor-ligand receptors Regulators body Growth toxins, c (ER family • Cell receptor proteins fragmentation damage • factor Fas Adaptor proteins Bcl-2 of activation (by radiation, sensors interactions PhagocyteMitochondria • for injury misfolding effectors

Fig. Mechanismsofapoptosis.Thetwopathwaysofapoptosisdifferintheirinductionandregulation,andbothculminateintheactivationofcaspases.Inthemitochondrialpathway,BH3-onlyproteins,whicharerelatedtomembersoftheBcl-2family,sensealackofsurvivalsignalsorDNAorproteindamage.TheseBH3-onlyproteinsactivateeffectormoleculesthatincreasemitochondrialpermeability.InconcertwithadeficiencyofBcl-2andotherproteinsthatmaintainmitochondrialpermeability,themitochondriabecomeleakyandvarioussubstances,suchascytochromec,enterthecytosolandactivatecaspases.Activatedcaspasesinducethechangesthatculminateincelldeathandfragmentation.Inthedeathreceptorpathway,signalsfromplasmamembranereceptorsleadtotheassemblyofadaptorproteinsintoa“death-inducingsignalingcomplex,”whichactivatescaspases,andtheendresultisthesame. 2.12

cytochrome activation out permeable, and c cytoplasm, into become caspase apoptotic leaks death. triggering the the family which is mitochondria. A prototype permeability of more the Bcl-2, of than 20 proteins, of controls which other large in two Bcl-2 cells, holding of to In part and check. Bak, stimuli, Bax the protein members response are membranes, related in produced healthy of and mitochondrial family, the in Bcl-xL, the and proapoptotic integrity growth factors by maintain accumulate or cells factors growth to sensors When and signals, misfolded damage are of or that unacceptable survival agents proteins, a of of are DNA, number deprived exposed are activated. amounts These contan BH3 because in sensors called Bcl-family proteins. proteins the are they third seen domain and life-sustaining They of favor in pro-apoptotic delicate, balance turn shift Bak this Bax. in and other and a insert As which cytochrome channels through and Bak escape into proteins into mitochondrial cytosol. the membrane, c result, dimerize, the mitochondrial form Bax cytosol, After with activates together c the it, certain caspase-9. cofactors, cytochrome enters of ultimately leading to apoptotic result The formation caspase and cascade, is net activation nuclear of bodies. the a fragmentation

apoptosis. • The of pathway (extrinsic) receptor death that cells molecules, called receptors, apoptosis. surface express Many death trigger because mediates receptor their contain of tumor conserved in with of cell a named regions domain,” the in (TNF) proteins interaction which are necrosis so death. family, involved members “death factor cytoplasmic Most it these other prototypic Fas receptor receptors (CD95). death and TNF I type the are The protein a activated ligand expressed T (FasL) on lymphocytes. Fas membrane mainly is domain. are T targets, cells the bind recognize death and Fas proteins adaptor via crosslinked When these by molecules FasL Fas-expressing activate and which, downstream caspase-8, activates caspases. then turn, in These recruit The cytotoxic killing involved of death lymphocytes some in and FasL. self-reactive that pathway express cells target by (CTLs) the elimination in lymphocytes the is receptor of T

the activate after caspase-9 and numerous pathway, and activates In it thereby cells’ enzymes and proteins that activated, caspases cleave ultimately caspase-8 or that cleaves degrade either is additional nucleus. targets end fragmentation characteristic cellular of is apoptosis. the The result

of apoptotic • Clearance cells. entice Apoptotic a cells and number producing phagocytes their signals. fragments “eat-me” by of cells. is by plasma to phosphatidylserine in present apoptotic cells, inner leaflet “flips” membrane, but of normal cells For the instance, the apoptotic in to tissue recognized on the leaflet, the leading phospholipid outer is of where this macrophages, it phagocytosis that phagocytes. soluble also apoptosis are that secrete by Cells dying factors recruit contents inflammation). plasma secreted release membrane undergo induce facilitate damage can prompt the dead their before cells cells and alterations The of (which clearance membrane proteins and the shown of involved cells. and be apoptotic the binding been receptors to in Numerous have engulfment macrophage that so cells without phagocytosis inflammation absent. and a of The is leaving efficient apoptotic dead is cells virtually disappear trace,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

MORPHOLOGYInH&E-stainedtissuesections,thenucleiofapoptoticcellsshowvariousstagesofchromatincondensationandaggregationand,ultimately,karyorrhexis(

Fig.2.13 );atthemolecularlevel,thisisreflectedinthefragmentationofDNAintonucleosome-sizedpieces.Thecellsrapidlyshrink,formcytoplasmicbuds,andfragmentintoapoptoticbodiesthatarecomposedofmembrane- ).Becausethesefragmentsarequicklyextrudedandphagocytosedwithoutelicitinganinflammatoryresponse,evensubstantialapoptosismaybehistologicallyundetectable. boundpiecesofcytosolandorganelles(Fig.2.11

addition been that cell two death other described In of and apoptosis, have unusual necrosis patterns have to features. of it of disease the these the the are to be considerable remains basic is concepts. to subjects current in pathways of Although established, importance useful they and be aware research,

Necroptosis. as triggers. of by as initiated TNF is of form engagement death well receptors defined poorly This cell other, the in is also activated, which like result much are the initiating Unlike that apoptosis, necrosis. series called events necroptosis, the of kinases cell, dissolution extrinsic of TNF in of (RIP) a receptors, protein kinases downstream pathway of receptor-interacting of features necroptosis there The implies apoptosis. necrosis name that are and both it which kill are and in infections to those injury reactions been and this TNF with pathway, cytokine hypothesized believed role pathologic a associated inflammatory ischemic situations, cells other has especially produced. to Some in is by the play human is why understood. how when However, it and and in occurs diseases well is it significant not

Pyroptosis. cell (Chapter called This death danger-sensing form activation of protein the complex inflammasome is 5). with associated of a cytosolic induce activation production of the of others net inflammasome activation inflammation, fever, manifested of result some which caspases, apoptosis. of The the by trigger often that is and cytokines induce coexist. inflammation and Thus, apoptosis = The with pyro name the of stems association (Greek, pyroptosis fire). from fever apoptosis It thought which infectious mechanism by to one is be some

Fig. Morphologicappearanceofapoptoticcells.Apoptoticcells(someindicatedbyarrows)incolonicepitheliumareshown.(Somepreparativeregimensforcolonoscopymayinduceapoptosisinepithelialcells,whichexplainsthepresenceofdeadcellsinthisbiopsy.)Notethefragmentednucleiwithcondensedchromatinandtheshrunkencellbodies,somewithpiecesfallingoff. 2.13 Dr. San Sanjay San Kakar, of California Francisco, of of Pathology, California.) University Francisco, (Courtesy Department cause death the of microbes cells. infected situations role unknown. in Its is other pathologic

components. digestion (“self-eating”) cell’s Autophagy refers to the own of lysosomal survival and starved cell its can so that provide nutrient is a recycling contents the It energy. contents eating these live nutrients deprivation, of to by times in own mechanism and process, vacuole, of autophagic first whose this deprivation is sense within portions organelles and ( proteins initiated cytosolic an are that formation In by sequestered ER-derived intracellular cytosol nutrient

Fig. ). 2.14 vacuole the lysosomes cellular fuses in which autophagolysosome, with lysosomal form digest to components. The enzymes an atrophy with an autophagy times. lean (discussed some survive adaptation may In later) circumstances, represent of that be cells helps associated may tissues and eventually its to cell contents, longer no starved by may If, cope devouring death. can lead however, autophagy cell the apoptotic

of injury autophagy myopathies. types and some Extensive is seen ischemic in autophagy but autophagy between Polymorphisms mechanistic the intestinal inflammation with inflammatory a in gene and is in known. associated link been not disease, have involved bowel is cancer in discussed of 6. role The in autophagy Chapter cells roles have disease. Thus, to in may pathway little-appreciated human prove a survival in once wide-ranging

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. fuse with are sequestered. cellular organelles digested, are autophagy the and of Autophagy. the cell. deprivation, are Cellular organelles the lysosomes, initiate which as vesicles nutrient which activate which products stresses, 2.14 vesicles in formation genes, used membrane-bound such provide the These nutrients to for in by The defined. process trigger are can mechanisms that not apoptosis same well

loss ER, swelling, of injury: cell swelling, mitochondrial blebbing cytoplasmic decreased plasma membrane Reversible from change, of and cell the RNA) eosinophilia dilation microvilli, (resulting fatty

nuclear organellarmembranes; fragmentation, shrinkage, breakdown cellular and leakage Accidental of death myelin cytoplasmic dissolution; and abundant and eosinophilia; membrane manifested Necrosis: of by contents enzymaticdigestion cell figures; increased plasma

different specific assume in tissues fat, under caseous, Morphologic necrosis: patterns: liquefactive, fibrinoid. of necrosis may conditions, coagulative, and gangrenous, tissue types

regulated characterized mechanism removal by that caspases; and of of theleast recognition possible death by host unwanted DNA, of and irreparably proteins and and with cells cell dead initiated damaged byrapid reaction, toeliminate by serves phagocytes Apoptosis: cells, degradation enzymatic

by major two pathways: is Apoptosis initiated

proteins associated which intothe including Mitochondrial by ofproapoptotic accumulation DNA loss of Bcl by pathway are ofmisfolded survival they leakage (ER ofsurvival by signals, activation; (intrinsic) where inhibited damage, members signals with mitochondrial caspase is family, induced the triggered proteins cytoplasm, membrane trigger anti-apoptotic and stress); from growthfactors.

is cells. damage by forelimination by of (extrinsic) receptors(members receptor lymphocytes death responsible of is pathway receptor engagement byCTLs; Death of family) the initiated ligands TNF onadjacent self-reactive and

may name of is the and to as death both other of regulated features can implies, proinflammatory release necroptosis(which, cell cytokines the necrosisand pathways which initiate of pathways)and apoptosis. particular pyroptosis, includes by and signaling apoptosis unusual Two lead are

own and deprivation their them adaptation substrates. digest to to and an Autophagy whichcells nutrient recycle is provideenergy in organelles in cell is too If apoptosis. by stress it, results death for with theprocess the severe to cope it

injury mechanisms should principles death, of individual cell some emphasized. general be Before discussing and

injurious and of its on duration, depends to type injury, The cellular stimuli response severity. its the or times ischemia period cell of longer cell ischemic injury, death. whereas may to irreversible and result may reversible brief or doses larger toxin injury in a low of doses toxins lead Thus,

an injurious on status, type, of stimulus the adaptability, genetic of and The consequences injured also the cell. depend makeup on same the type. depending different vastly cell outcomes The injury has striated hours for the without injury, irreversible instance, muscle ischemia. after to of to in dies whereas 3 muscle 2 only leg minutes 30 skeletal For 20 ischemia tolerates cardiac complete last also (or glucose hormonal) will important; survive can be one its just ischemia glycogen-replete has understandably, hepatocyte status molecule. burned than The that better a nutritional to metabolic determined to pathways can differences in in stimuli. responses diversity contribute Genetically injurious variants leading dose different encoding to outcomes. at the in same cytochrome toxin who individuals different P-450 when For exposed toxin, catabolize may of to instance, genes rates, the inherit a genetic is and the of toxins, Much field toward study to responses understanding now polymorphisms in of pharmacogenomics. called effort a role directed drugs genetic In well responsiveness therapeutic to various fact, agents. complex as to as influence many diseases susceptibility variations the to genetic patient guide makeup is of the medicine.” example individual therapy of “precision Using one

usually number functional abnormalities essential results ( components and of from injury of or in cellular Cell more biochemical one limited a

Fig. 2.15 ). discuss in endogenous external and biochemical more later, different typically different and insults we affect perturbations As detail pathways. cellular organelles oxygen nutrients and For Adaptations of Cell Cell 42CHAPTER deprivation and 2 instance, (as Death, Injury,

Fig. as or necrosis death of damage independent overlap; for may and shown by cell mechanisms stress, both being and Note apoptosis may in principal The cell instance, by be there that oxidative caused of sites and causes to death but 2.15 contribute radiation. are injury. ischemia, biochemical cell mechanisms species. Adenosine oxygen ROS, triphosphate; ATP, reactive

damage energy-dependent culminating DNA impairs to apoptosis. whereas primarily triggers proteins ischemia) in and cellular necrosis, hypoxia functions, and in agent be and injurious trigger may emphasized multiple However, pathways. it overlapping same the very biochemical should that to therefore, pathway. surprisingly, by cell has prevent individual targeting proved it injury difficult an Not

chapter we have diverse beginning cell and injury causes cell throughout, and discussed of alluded of death. to As and in the this there numerous are of there that in pathways biochemical events Similarly, the and sequence are culminate that initiate cell can death. many cell injury to lead in pathways to of Some diseases. these recognized important roles play are human our In section, principal the the and and alterations cell organize along causes biochemical pathways, the its major discussion injury in mechanisms each. following of of we discuss unique of mechanisms, and For initiating and that more may may activate one be it clarity sake pathway, mechanisms any several the these mechanisms emphasize simultaneously. point each active the trigger we out or to in but simplicity, of is important

pathways, and to cells of metabolic failure necrosis. of to leads many ultimately death energy-dependent oxygen by of Deficiency electron ATP by reduction transport oxygen (ADP) adenosine mitochondria. cellular in the of of system diphosphate Most is phosphorylation oxidative produced during from the necessary form phosphate reactions for ATP protein phospholipid is synthesis, deacylation-reacylation turnover. and lipogenesis, the of for membrane High-energy in transport, required cells healthy estimated the every in kg that It of of is ATP to total, human 75 a day! burn 50 risk many oxygen essential suffering therefore, surprisingly, of deprived failure at functions. Not cells catastrophic are of of of one injury is medicine. of clinical causes the necrosis deprivation cell and Oxygen most frequent in

do are the factor that immediately Cells die transcription not the stress that hypoxia of activate hypoxia-inducible to of (HIF-1) mechanisms factors induced by family. 1 compensatory subjected help low the the of HIF-1 in several cell to the simulates proteins synthesis face that survive oxygen. of endothelial oxygen. and stimulate these Some and supply of to of new flow blood growth such as increase vascular proteins, factor thus vessels attempt (VEGF), the the growth of induced changes dampening adaptive glucose and HIF-1 in metabolism by cause Other and stimulating glycolysis by the proteins cellular uptake oxidative phosphorylation. of mitochondrial glycolysis either derived from oxygen the circulation from absence using of generate Anaerobic hydrolysis of ATP the glycogen. the intracellular can or in glucose limited capacity and liver to of survive with glycolytic muscle) tissues hypoxia stores a striated tissues (e.g., the more the and of with oxidative decreased Understandably, phosphorylation likely brain). presence greater than because (e.g., are glycogen glucose normal the rely to Although and it the effect. on rapidly normal Warburg referred much cancer of aerobic cells seems produce cells counterintuitive, as energy, their glycolysis phenomenon to proliferating a for acids) glucose for burned for oxidative phosphorylation, The molecule the and per although glycolysis than TCA that generated of ATP that synthesis cycle by needed serve yields constituents lipids, nucleic cell glycolysis proteins, are this (e.g., division. growth precursors less and and cellular the is as of reason metabolites in discussed metabolism 6. in they Chapter so more in cellular frequently are seen cells, in detail are Alterations cancer

and severe ATP hypoxia of failure and Persistent ATP cells. generation or in to depletion ultimately of lead ischemia ( systems effects store on Loss energy cellular has critical this deleterious of many

Fig. 2.16

of and pumps, resulting accumulation plasma of efflux in activity of sodium sodium intracellular Reduced membrane potassium. ATP-dependent of by accompanied causing the dilation swelling is net water, The of of solute gain ER. and cell isoosmotic gain

leads in acid intracellular accumulation, anaerobic of pH, compensatory to lactic The enzymes. activity increase decreased decreased glycolysis many and cellular

of of or Prolonged synthetic worsening disruption causes depletion apparatus, the structural ATP protein

Fig. 2.16 Thefunctionalandmorphologicconsequencesofhypoxiaandischemia.ER, Endoplasmicreticulum.

synthesis. with into as manifested monosomes, ribosomes reduction of protein in ER consequent (RER) of rough a the polysomes and from detachment dissociation

ROS. per hypoxia has been of the se It accumulation also increases that suggested is flow ample Whether there blood evidence oxygen debate; of predisposes reperfusion cells this is phenomenon (and damage later). if hypoxia ROS-mediated delivery) a injury true is to a that (described reestablished, is however, called matter

to mitochondrial undergoes damage membranes, there the irreversible and and cell necrosis. lysosomal Ultimately, is late a is event and later. diverse injury caused cell damage in discussed mechanisms, is by Membrane principal contribute. caused hypoxia, by cell apoptosis form is mitochondrial is the by to also thought Although pathway necrosis the death of

severity depend the and the of duration on ischemia consequences of The deficit. hypoxia functional and to For within seconds ceases of occlusion. coronary the 60 heart muscle instance, contract undergoing sequence If further causes continues, ATP hypoxia changes of depletion in deterioration, the illustrated worsening

Fig. 2.3 and earlier. described

cell to in Under circumstances, tissues viable ischemic flow restoration but the blood increased paradoxically, results, of injury. certain injured is cells. of flow, of outcome recovery which This the in of the expected restoration the reversibly reverse normally of results the blood injury” may and that myocardial to tissue cerebral “ischemia-reperfusion is clinically This process so-called important after ischemia. contribute a significantly damage, especially

mechanisms Several exacerbation of injury resulting tissues: may of reperfusion account cell ischemic for from the

below). more of New be generation initiated during in (described reoxygenation by detail damage increased may ROS mitochondria situation. the out time damaged reduction may of cellular oxygen, compromised injured Some cannot by and cells complete may at the ischemia, with be the defense by exacerbating of the mechanisms generated be ROS carry that anti-oxidant same by ROS of damage generated infiltrating may also the to leukocytes contribute injured vulnerable cells.

inflammation increase that with enhances and because by proteins. reperfusion may is The influx it ischemic of leukocytes induced plasma the injury cause additional leukocytes may tissue products The 3). (Chapter activated of injury complement the ischemia-reperfusion Activation injury. also contribute system of to may the activation tissues, generates injured that cell may to that to Complement antibodies injury inflammation. the complement bind or and are and tissues, the byproducts exacerbate proteins subsequent deposited in

free which belong to ROS, molecules to of as abnormalities by known cellular radicals. Oxidative that a refers stress induced are group circumstances, seen hypoxia, and ischemia-reperfusion tissue radiation Free chemical including by aging, injury injury, inflammatory cell caused many cellular radical-mediated is in injury. injury and cells, these death all cell be or necroptosis. may mixed pattern In by the necrosis, of apoptosis, cases,

an electron are orbit. a unpaired outer single with radicals Free chemical in species generated Such variety nucleic with react readily well as are cellular proteins of unstable, extremely attack a and lipids. states acids and chemical in organic cells, and avidly as they molecules; inorganic when radicals free react chain free types with into converted molecules free In radicals of in radicals that damage. of addition, free reactions propagating initiate are other the thereby themselves radicals, the which

Species Removal Oxygen Reactive of Generation and

The ( production of rates accumulation by is ROS determined their and removal of

Fig. ). 2.17 are ROS two by produced pathways. major

small produced the reduction-oxidation reactions that are normally energy occur mitochondrial during in ROS respiration (redox) during generation. cells in and all amounts • to is sequential the mitochondria in by water of In this process, four molecular reduced generate oxygen electrons. addition amounts reactive and when reaction generated is only but toxic oxygen highly is imperfect, short-lived however, intermediates This partially of are reduced. small is • which superoxide dismutase superoxide (H2O2) hydrogen action by converted peroxide enzyme to (O2 (SOD). the These include ), the spontaneously of intermediates and than • and is stable biologic can cross more membranes. O2 H2O2 the as to metals, of is such the converted Fe2+, http://ebooksmedicine.net In H2O2 presence

H2O damage to O2 misfolding Lipid DNA Superoxide catalase modifications radical Pathologic effects peroxide Decomposition Membrane Toxins Hydrogen peroxidation Hydroxyl Breakdown, peroxidase, H2O2 Mutations by of glutathione ROS: OH H2O2 Conversion Protein damage SOD by Radiation Production to Reperfusion

Fig. Thegeneration,removal,androleofreactiveoxygenspecies(ROS)incellinjury.TheproductionofROSisincreasedbymanyinjuriousstimuli.Thesefreeradicalsareremovedbyspontaneousdecayandbyspecializedenzymaticsystems.Excessiveproductionorinadequateremovalleadstoaccumulationoffreeradicalsincells,whichmaydamagelipids(byperoxidation),proteins,andDNA,resultingincellinjury.SOD, 2.17 Superoxidedismutase.

by reactive OH hydroxyl Fenton the highly reaction. • radical major ROS and The are effects pathologic in the properties of summarized

Table 2.3

neutrophils and 3). and weapon and for defense leukocytes, a mainly destroying ingested in during are phagocytic host microbes other substances ROS macrophages, produced inflammation (Chapter as (or similar mitochondrial by phagolysosomes and a The that phagosomes in of to are generated respiration burst). oxidative leukocytes process and the respiratory burst called the is is ROS membrane this superoxide, generation enzyme converted phagosome a of is process, In which to H2O2. the catalyzes of present highly by myeloperoxidase, turn household is bleach), compound, is in component leukocytes. enzyme which the hypochlorite to H2O2 converted a (the in reactive major Chapter in The of inflammation role in ROS 3. is described

leukocytes. macrophages in and reactive Nitric is produced radical oxide other (NO) free another form cell highly a − to which injury. peroxynitrite, reactive compound, It can O2 in also with react participates

free is circumstances: generation under increased of several The radicals

ultraviolet (UV) radiant x-rays). energy of light, (e.g., The absorption and free hydrolyze can (•OH) Ionizing radicals. hydrogen (H•) hydroxyl into radiation water

Involved 2.3 Free in Table Injury Principal Radicals Cell

The tetrachloride—see metabolism enzymatic chemicals of carbon (e.g., exogenous later)

3) which leukocytes are radicals Inflammation, by produced (Chapter in free

described. Reperfusion as already of tissues, ischemic

thereby radicals Cells effects. developed mechanisms have free and minimize their to remove injurious inherently unstable Free spontaneously. are and decay radicals free free and also serving sometimes are There radical nonenzymatic inactivate enzymatic ( systems, called radicals to scavengers,

Fig. 2.17

(SOD). superoxide The is of by decay the significantly of increased rate superoxide of action dismutase

are damage. peroxidases enzymes whose is a to family oxidative of cells function protect Glutathione from (GSH) major cells. GSH member most of cytoplasm the found of is in family, The all abundant 1, peroxidase this 2GSH catalyzes breakdown by the + 2H2O. + H2O2 reaction It → of H2O2 the GS-SG GSH reflection a this intracellular to cell’s to of radicals. The oxidized GSH of activity of catabolize reduced the enzyme’s free and is thus ratio ability

catalyzes in peroxisomes, O2 + the Catalase, peroxide (2H2O2 decomposition of hydrogen present → 2H2O). is the molecules of of one per It millions known, second. H2O2 active capable degrading of most of enzymes

may E, block C either them free formation • after formed. of vitamins or and and (e.g., or have Endogenous http://ebooksmedicine.net scavenge A, β-carotene) exogenous radicals they the anti-oxidants

cell injury components cells of ROS ( causes by damaging multiple

Fig. 2.17

peroxidation of membranes. Lipid in vulnerable free by oxygen-derived to membrane radicals. Double attack lipids polyunsaturated bonds are unstable reaction which an chain reactive, and and yield peroxides, lipid–radical The ensues. themselves autocatalytic are interactions context hypoxia. plasma well have the and in earlier lysosomal and devastating to consequences, discussed as ischemia as mitochondrial membranes as Damage can of membranes

other and Crosslinking proteins. in changes crosslinking, of promote or resulting in activity. sulfhydryl-mediated degradation loss enhanced Free protein radicals enzymatic polypeptide fragmentation. Free reactions also radical directly cause may described fold proteins protein to may properly, later. fail Damaged the response, triggering unfolded

damage. DNA residues nuclear breaks. produce Free reactions and in radical single-strand DNA mitochondrial thymine with DNA in been has death, apoptotic of Such aging, and damage cell malignant transformation implicated cells.

in cell pathways numerous are role low many ROS cells involved to of addition reactions. signaling thus injury in of microbes, the concentrations of physiologic in In and killing the in ROS and these are normally molecules regulated produced Therefore, avoid but, effects, harmful healthy cells. tightly their their concentrations are to in intracellular

injury substances by cell environmental and produced necrotic Toxins, cell induce including that in pathogens, infectious death. primarily culminates chemicals

by toxins types mechanism: general injury two of induce Different cell

Direct-acting toxins. act Some a with by directly toxins combining component molecular organelle. or critical cellular occur membraneproteins, various (as ingestion groups the example, poisoning cell ofATP-dependent seafood) For (Chapter increased contaminated causinginhibition 8), transport membrane of of binds may chloride sulfhydryl to in permeability. from and mercuric mercury Many direct agents anti-neoplastic cytotoxic induce chemotherapeutic damage by effects. cell also this toxins in class microorganisms included (described by Also Chapter made are 9). in often These molecules cause host damage ion by that functions, transport. targeting cell for protein needed such essential are and as synthesis

Latent toxins. Many be metabolites, converted then toxic which to are must act first intrinsically not reactive on active but chemicals cells. target are cells Understandably, they in typically the activated. toxins such which affect accomplished cytochrome usually This by is

other of and P-450 ER the in the liver smooth organs. injury involves protein damage free cause of and radicals. formation mechanism membrane might direct covalent binding cell injury the the Although important and most by cell of lipids, metabolites the to cleaning acetaminophen tetrachloride category. (CCl4)—once analgesic the used now Carbon widely but belong banned—and industry in dry this the in injury. instructive CCl4 an effect of example chemical as still is The of the is radical cause by principally converted toxic free mainly phospholipid radical, of free and liver, CCl4 this in to peroxidation. a is the injury, cell membrane there occurred. ribosomes and swelling have of hours, hepatocytes dissociation plasma proteins; ER a of to cause after enzymes the In from membranes in CCl4, and within to to minutes ER than RER the decline synthesis exposure the is damage 30 2 smooth of of the sufficient less other cells and in and synthesis with that CCl4 complexes triglyceride decreased poisoning. the this facilitate the hepatocytes “fatty of apoproteins is defect form lipids in There results liver” accumulation also and of secretion; triglycerides thereby of transport ER. the aldehydes the produced lipid follows, cell and progressive plasma diminished injury subsequently Mitochondrial in are and membranes peroxidation result by ATP further defective swelling; by fatty ion in damaged stores can death. be result The cell end

by a accumulation death lead cell the compensatory and in stress misfolded apoptosis. cell pathways proteins can ER The to of in proper control and normal chaperones misfolded in During are proteins, ubiquitinated the for the protein newly and proteolysis. polypeptides targeted folding synthesized ER of synthesis, protective unfolded response unfolded that a protein induce or proteins If accumulate the first misfolded the is cellular called response ( ER, they in

Fig. 2.18 ). proteins activates protein that production the This response signaling thus decrease pathways chaperones of the the of misfolded in reducing and cell. levels adaptive increase translation, protein adaptive be the by of proapoptotic are by sensors family of response, result amount the accumulates mitochondrial mis-folded the well of in BH3-only of activation apoptosis handled large When (intrinsic) to caspases, generated direct and as as cannot pathway. the a that activation leading signals

or abnormalities of the Intracellular proteins eliminate misfolded ability caused may misfolded reduce to be of by production increase accumulation the proteins them. that large production viral can states; and which infections, that changes pH that the especially such proteins and may when infections, of as than mutations misfolding; handle; a cell insulin for of synthesized proteins more from secretory in is cannot demand gene capacity amounts increased insulin-resistant cells, correct proteins to lead state. with are This redox aging, the in decreased properly; microbial intracellular result within to fold associated the is to misfolding thought several (Chapter fundamental Protein neurodegenerative abnormality 23). diseases in cellular be may Deprivation in of and also increase ischemia proteins. burden glucose hypoxia, and misfolded of the oxygen, as

Cell Adaptations Death, 2 and 46CHAPTER Cell http://ebooksmedicine.net Injury,

of Sensor misfolded (e.g., IRE1) proteins Signaling Signaling

proteins caspaseschaperones BH3 degradation Reduced protein Cytosol Increased protein Increased Activation synthesis of Activation of ofsynthesis

misfolded of proteins Reduced load

UNFOLDED UNFOLDED PROTEIN ADAPTIVE APOPTOSIS RESPONSE: RESPONSE PROTEIN TERMINAL

Fig. the proteins as membrane, 2.18 ER reticulum form (ER) harmful oligomers and The adaptive proteins. kinase of phosphorylation. IRE-1, which an in the is the from response presence endoplasmic protein which misfolded by the by such This unfolded unfolded stress. The the can triggers response, of ER consequences protect in protein that are misfolded the activated sensors detected cell of too mitochondrial unfolded activation dies; amount to is and excessive activates this of also of called apoptosis damaged pathway the great the the protein response. irreparably misfolded cell the is be When terminal ER sensors corrected, proteins

diseases, misfolding a creating the may by recognized cause as result a neuing a essential • ( death an disease of apoptosis or of protein Protein cells feature misfolding induc-as including by number of deficiency is within protein a Cell of

Table 2.4 ). Parkinson and diabetes loss degraded, ( activity Alzheimer often a may disease, Hunting proteins to and disease, 2 are well ton Misfolded as func-type underlie and rodegenerative lose of disease, can contribute both of their which disorders rapidly •

). Table 2.4 tion. injury ensues. this function essential, If cellular is in the extracellular can sis, its inherited fibro-As mutations chapter, caused brane important which folded in folding. discussed that mem-proteins tissues, prevent by later transport is also as disease improperly occurs cystic in normal in is accumulate a protein which in this One amyloidosis.

Diseases Caused Proteins Table 2.4 by Misfolded

to Leading Their Deficiency Mutant Proteins That Degraded, Caused by Are Diseases

in folding blindness photoreceptor Retinitis cell resulting death, rhodopsin of pigmentosaRhodopsinAbnormal and loss causes

Functional derangement in transmembrane is to regulator; Diseases Stress-Induced tissue examples That protein Result are the Cell major or conductance Protein Both Misfolded or aSelected of mechanism illustrative cell Cystic shown diseases of Loss Proteins the Deficiency lipoprotein. of thought From injury.CFTR, by ER functional fibrosis LDL, misfolding Caused and be low-density which

if intracellular apoptotic or of DNA mutations ROS, which may severe may generation agents, of damage, radiation of Exposure trigger all and cells induce to acquisition death. chemotherapeutic intracellular signals to p53 by to which lead Damage accumulation sensed of proteins, sentinel transmit is protein. DNA the that the DNA allow to p53 (at to first before replicated arrests the the phase) 6). cycle repaired be it is cell G1 (Chapter BH3-only of Bax proapoptotic ultimately repaired too Bcl-2 great However, by the damage proteins family. p53 triggers successfully, apoptosis, sensor Bak, activate members and is be stimulating if mainly to the that it undergo damaged When apoptosis cancers), (as with cells in certain that p53 survive. absent mutated is otherwise DNA would or is DNA (Chapter result (e.g., that the neoplastic transformation 6). such or in rearrangements translocations) may damage DNA to lead In cells, mutations

reaction cause that and cells as cells, the autoimmune diseases and A tissues is is injury pathogens, common dysregulated elicited immune allergies. and to necrotic inflammatory of responses, in by but evolved microbes host may products neutrophils, leukocytes, all also that secrete damage macrophages, to lymphocytes, destroy inflammatory and these situations, In other cells, including tissues. These are under classified hypersensitivity. reactions injurious immune discussed and Their are 5. Chapter mechanisms significance in

cell different situations. addressed the pathophysiologic cause, mechanisms the and of discussion, triggered principal highlighted are injury the the previous of in In according that to we initiating injury pathways characterize thus the cause, of of abnormalities situations. pathologic a regardless are variety cell injury and Some seen in are of Two next. described these changes

life-sustaining the “mini-factories” in form ATP. produce of be energy as Mitochondria viewed that may death. therefore, they and injury also cell Not surprisingly, are critical players in to ( radiation Mitochondria stimuli, hypoxia, toxins, injurious of including types and are chemical sensitive many

Fig. 2.19 ). changes and in occur necrosis Mitochondrial apoptosis. biochemical several They result abnormalities: in may

earlier. to ATP, of Failure culminating cell, described as phosphorylation in of progressive depletion leads the of oxidative necrosis

phosphorylation also described. oxidative effects, Abnormal as of have deleterious already the leads formation which many to ROS,

is a mitochondrial high-conductance called the channel often with the mitochondrial the Damage of formation associated mitochondria to in membrane,

of ATP Leakage ROS ofgeneration Production

Fig. a death. of in are more detail described abnormalities pathway apoptosis. by This their and later. cell variety or to of injurious and affected of Role Mitochondria lead 2.19 in mitochondria apoptosis injury is stimuli necrosis triphosphate; oxygen species. ROS, Adenosine ATP, reactive

permeability pore. transition of phosphorylation. leads potential the mitochondrial and to opening this loss compromising membrane channel oxidative The further pH of changes,

pathway discussed apoptosis, • the earlier. a Mitochondria contain of when the that, also activate tell released cytoplasm, c there is injury such as internal into cell and cytochrome as proteins

membrane leading cell in is ultimately permeability damage to that feature a necrosis. culminate most overt membrane forms of Increased of injury cell mitochondrial membrane are sites damage plasma membranes membrane, and important most membrane, injury lysosomes. The the the of of during of permeability membranes a of earlier, noted lysosomal apoptosis. feature As membrane is increased the and not plasma

damage. membrane Mitochondrial discussed deleterious culminating ATP, mitochondrial in As of results damage with production to earlier, membranes effects in many decreased necrosis.

membrane damage. Plasma as cellular ions, of loss of osmotic influx membrane well contents. fluids to loss damage and Plasma as leads of and balance that further may of energy depleting the The ATP, metabolites leak also vital for thus are stores. reconstitution cells

pH membranes enzymes of the to Injury leakage activation (e.g., results their acid ischemic) in cytoplasm of and in of lysosomal intracellular into the the the hydrolases acidic cell. injured the cells necrosis. Activation digestion enzymatic by of cell die to leads and these of enzymes components,

Differentinitiatingeventscausecellinjuryanddeathbydiversemechanisms.

HypoxiaandischemialeadtoATPdepletionandfailureofmanyenergy-dependentfunctions,resultingfirstinreversibleinjuryand,ifnotcorrected,innecrosis.

Inischemia-reperfusioninjury,restorationofbloodflowtoanischemictissueexacerbatesdamagebyincreasingproductionofROSandbyinflammation.

OxidativestressreferstoaccumulationofROS,whichcandamagecellularlipids,proteins,andDNA,andisassociatedwithnumerousinitiatingcauses.

Proteinmisfoldingdepletesessentialproteinsand,ifthemis-foldedproteinsaccumulatewithincells,resultsinapoptosis.

DNAdamage(e.g.,byradiation)alsocaninduceapoptosisifitisnotrepaired.

Inflammationisassociatedwithcellinjurybecauseofthedamagingactionsoftheproductsofinflammatoryleukocytes.

injury and cell death. concluded have of We discussion now the cell cause many common diseases. we are the of processes these have root As seen, cell adaptations both which and of chapter of deposition intracellular of of with considerations various other substances accumulations processes: We aging. injury; cellular are end this stresses; three to calcium, brief associated and with often extracellular

changes or activity, size, cells are of the response in changes to in their in metabolic functions Adaptations environment. number, reversible phenotype, the case of mediators or to to of breast of muscles). stress the normal enlargement (in cells during or hormone-induced (e.g., endogenous chemical by usually adaptations pregnancy), the represent demands responses bones Physiologic and hormones mechanical of and uterus the stimulation of the their allow modulate that such metaplasia at to structure are function, stress adaptations squamous smokers. function and injury, as expense thus of normal responses Pathologic bronchial but and escape in cells to epithelium forms, distinct pathologic text. take several as can and Physiologic described in adaptations following the

of the increase organ. Hypertrophy in resulting the an is cells size in in an of size the increase an In in cell next) contrast, number. (discussed is increase hyperplasia Stated proteins amounts bigger containing and of are way, pure structural just increased hypertrophy cells, cells another no new in there organelles. of hypertrophy limited occurs response to cells is cells capable divide. when replication, a whereas in have Hyperplasia capacity an adaptive and and both also occur hyperplasia an result enlarged obviously together, Hypertrophy organ. can in

physiologic or functional be increased or caused demand or pathologic hormonal stimulation. by either factor by growth and is Hypertrophy can

consequence and pregnancy muscle hypertrophy ( muscle physiologic massive estrogen-stimulated uterus the hyperplasia smooth smooth of enlargement a of as The during occurs

Fig. 2.20 ). In to only contrast, and striated cells hypertrophy the in muscle the muscle the response heart have because in workload cells a undergo to muscle capacity adult skeletal limited divide. both increased Therefore, physique skeletal individual avid the weightlifter the of hypertrophy of solely muscles. stems chiseled the from

pathologic ( occurs is An valve that enlargement of hypertension aortic disease or example the hypertrophy with cardiac

Fig. ). 2.21 normal, cells the responses different of types and are by of differences The adapted, heart illustrated injured the to between irreversibly

Fig. Physiologichypertrophyoftheuterusduringpregnancy. 2.20 andagraviduterus(left) (A)Grossappearanceofanormaluterus(right) thatwasremovedforpostpartumbleeding.(B)Smallspindle-shapeduterinesmoothmusclecellsfromanormaluterus.(C)Large,plumphypertrophiedsmoothmusclecellsfromagraviduterus;comparewithB. (B Samemagnification.) andC, http://ebooksmedicine.net

Adaptation: Ischemia to cell death injured response myocyte Reversibly myocyte Adapted increased leading load (hypertrophy) Cell injury to

Fig. left),theleftventricularwallisthickerthan2cm(normal,1–1.5cm).Reversiblyinjuredmyocardiumshowsfunctionaleffectswithoutanygrossorlightmicroscopicchanges,orreversiblechangessuchascellularswellingandfattychange(shown thetransmurallightareaintheposterolateralleftventriclerepresentsanacutemyocardialinfarction.Allthreetransversesectionsofmyocardiumwerestainedwithtriphenyltetra-zoliumchloride,anenzymesubstratethatcolorsviablemyocardiummagenta.Failuretostainisduetoenzymelossaftercelldeath. Therelationshipamongnormal,adapted,reversiblyinjured,anddeadmyocardialcells.Thecellularadaptationdepictedhereishypertrophy,thecauseofreversibleinjuryisischemia,andtheirreversibleinjuryisischemiccoagulativenecrosis.Intheexampleofmyocardialhypertrophy(lower here).Inthespecimenshowingnecrosis(lower right) 2.21

stress. or Myocardium hypertrophy subjected force. narrowed a with the required undergoing valve, persistently adapts increased workload, a to higher hypertension in to contractile as by generate (stenotic) the subjected to artery, due may injury. blood muscle undergo flow If, myocardium on the is hand, occluded (ischemia) other coronary to reduced cells the an

two mediators cardiac adrenergic growth, factors driving hypertrophy involve mechanisms such as at and of least stimulate such mechanical that The and soluble as types stretch, signals: cell growth hormones. triggers, synthesis stimulate which that including lead induction stimuli genes, structural turn many growth of a of proteins, the pathways to number in transduction cellular proteins. on signal and of factors These turn to each the generated per demands. and force The proteins work which meet enabling synthesis with cell, myofilaments increases the the cell is of more result contraction, increased There from switch of proteins adult a may be fetal also to forms. neonatal or contractile replaced the β produces energetically chain which more muscle hypertrophy, the economical For fetal myosin example, is by heavy contraction. of slower, form α-myosin heavy the chain, during

can stress relieved. to injury An if not is the as hypertrophy progress to stress adaptation functionally cell such significant mass reached muscle burden. a can which compensate limit beyond Whatever increased enlargement the of cause the hypertrophy, of no for the is longer several myocardial contractile most fragmentation loss this happens degenerative which in of elements. heart, fibers, myofibrillar and are of the the in occur important the When changes progresses hypertrophy regressive these is to understood. changes Why incompletely supply the proteins elements. machinery biosynthetic vasculature mitochondria be limits cytoskeletal the finite of abilities contractile to or on supply or fibers, provide adequately the There sufficient the the enlarged may other ATP, to to dilation result of ultimately cardiac these failure. and degenerative The ventricular is changes net

differentiated increase Hyperplasia instances, organ the less progenitor cells of either number an in of is in increased cells. some differentiated from or, cells in proliferation, that stems an earlier, response the As discussed concurrently if takes in capable and with occur contains hyperplasia stimuli. may it the to same often place populations hypertrophy cell of replication; tissue

cellular of variety produced is proliferation are physiologic both be or in by types. growth a pathologic; cell stimulated that Hyperplasia situations, by factors can

proliferation are hyperplasia part or the loss in organ. two types after of hormonal compensatory female of of of (2) pregnancy, which during breast an the physiologic epithelium hyperplasia, hyperplasia, glandular (1) the and grows at exemplified residual by puberty • removal of tissue The and later, to its as mitotic begins the liver part 12 resected, remaining activity liver of early eventually when a restoring the in cells example, normal as hours is size. For 3). as liver as nonparenchymal in the growth setting are (Chapter hyperplasia hepatocytes in this well cells polypeptide The stimuli for factors uninjured by produced inhibitors of restoration off growth proliferation. liver turn After mass, cell the various

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 2.22 Atrophyasseeninthebrain.(A)Normalbrainofayoungadult. (B)Atrophyofthebraininan82-year-oldmanwithatheroscleroticdisease.Atrophyofthebrainiscausedbyagingandreducedbloodsupply.Notethatlossofbrainsubstancenarrowsthegyriandwidensthesulci.Themeningeshavebeenstrippedfromthebottomhalfofeachspecimentoshowthesurfaceofthebrain.

growth forms factor of stimulation. hormonal hyperplasia excessive caused by pathologic or are • Most is effects that progesterone. of a the is normally the epithelial For tightly and and hormones ovarian period regulated effects by stimulatory menstrual of of a pituitary estrogen normal proliferation there uterine burst inhibitory after example, common stimulation this causes abnormal to estrogenic is in increased bleeding. of menstrual hyperplasia, A a endometrial disturbance cause which balance leading androgens. hormonal Benign hyperplasia hyperplasia induced another prostatic responses example to of by in is stimulation pathologic common masses mucosal and for hyperplastic is warts of papillomaviruses composed by viral skin in that growth that epithelium. also cause Stimulation involved lesions example, are factors with associated of hyperplasia is the certain infections; the by infected cells. the or viral may genes Here factors genes the by host encoded growth be of

it hyperplasia An hyperplastic remains important if initiate controlled; abate, that of the the is that these process disappears. situations, point the in all signals from hyperplasias to growth mechanisms (Chapter this 6). in that pathologic ineffective or normal control mechanisms permanently is responsiveness become regulatory which dysregulated the cancer, It control distinguishes cancers eventually soil may a arise. many in pathologic fertile hyperplasia cases, constitutes which in Nevertheless, example, patients risk are cancer For at of endometrial hyperplasia increased of endometrium with 19). (Chapter developing the

size shrinkage substance. loss cell the in of the is by Atrophy of cells or the are a entire number cells organ size, of ( or involved, tissue is in atrophic reduced When sufficient

Fig. ). 2.22 diminished may dead. Although cells are not function, they atrophic have

atrophy). a of of stimulation, loss limb Causes of (senile and diminished workload a of innervation, of aging healing atrophy include nutrition, blood permit inadequate immobilization to a fracture), (e.g., endocrine supply, loss decreased physiologic Although stimulation in the fundamental are of others and the are cellular denervation), (e.g., loss hormone these of menopause) some are changes similar. pathologic (e.g., stimuli cell is size and achieved nutrition, still supply, a at which size between a is cell survival smaller to stimulation. equilibrium a blood trophic diminished or possible; retreat They new the by represent

from results atrophy synthesis a and increased decreased degradation. combination Cellular protein of protein

activity. metabolic synthesis Protein decreases because of reduced

proteins cellular of by The degradation occurs pathway. mainly the ubiquitin-proteasome in small the for disuse proteasomes. and activate target of peptide and Nutrient ligases, them to copies which degradation proteins may ubiquitin attach cellular multiple ubiquitin deficiency associated pathway thought is in the including for to proteolysis variety cachexia catabolic also seen conditions, responsible a with cancer. This the be of accelerated

many resulting with of atrophy increases with autophagic associated also the situations, autophagy, vacuoles. is in In number starved an cell which autophagy As process the to attempt its in in survive. the organelles is own eats previously, discussed

one is which type by Metaplasia (epithelial cell replaced or adult another adult change mesenchymal) cell type. is in a adaptation, stress is withstand type cell cell to environment. particular better In replaced adverse the another sensitive to a of type this a by able type cellular the of arise to by reprogramming Metaplasia http://ebooksmedicine.net thought is stem cells

Fig. 2.23 inabronchus,shownschematically(A)andhistologically(B). tosquamousepithelium(right) Metaplasiaofnormalcolumnar(left)

rather already new of a cells. to a (transdifferentiation) along pathway change phenotypic differentiate differentiated than

squamous is replaced exemplified change and smokers, cigarette that trachea in normal are epithelium the of the cells occurs fied bronchi whom (Fig. strati the respiratory of often habitual by epithelial in ciliated epithelial columnar metaplasia Epithelial by the cells 2.23 ). epithelium the stratified chemicals The fragile would may noxious be specialized rugged that able epithelium tolerate. not smoke more cigarette the survive squamous in to epithelium and survival as squamous Although matter. such secretion mechanisms advantages, important has particulate protective mucus of are the ciliary clearance metaplastic lost, therefore double-edged is Epithelial a metaplasia sword. may vitamin epithelium. epithelial essential induce also normal is respiratory A metaplasia for squamous its deficiency Because in differentiation, the

direction metaplastic lower squamous to the chronic always normal epithelium; intestinal-type gastric of the stratified epithelium the epithelium. columnar transformation columnar squamous gastric undergo or in esophagus of may Metaplasia to need occur reflux, not in in occur and also may to mesenchymal response in it to but pathologic Metaplasia a these reaction situations stress. generally cells, is alteration an not adaptive some example, bone in occasionally is soft injury. foci of formed particularly For in tissues,

malignant influences epithelium, if metaplastic to that in an change The persistent, induce transformation. predispose may composed with the lung squamous coexists respiratory metaplasia of of cells. squamous often cancers In epithelium malignant fact, and in initially cancers of squamous is foci. some cigarette later arise smoking causes that altered It thought metaplasia, these

Hypertrophy:increasedcellandorgansize,ofteninresponsetoincreasedworkload;inducedbygrowthfactorsproducedinresponsetomechanicalstressorotherstimuli;occursintissuesincapableofcelldivision

Hyperplasia:increasedcellnumbersinresponsetohormonesandothergrowthfactors;occursintissueswhosecellsareabletodivideorcontainabundanttissuestemcells

Atrophy:decreasedcellandorgansize,asaresultofdecreasednutrientsupplyordisuse;associatedwithdecreasedsynthesisofcellularbuildingblocksandincreasedbreakdownofcellularorganellesandautophagy

Metaplasia:changeinphenotypeofdifferentiatedcells,ofteninresponsetochronicirritation,thatmakescellsbetterabletowithstandthestress;usuallyinducedbyaltereddifferentiationpathwayoftissuestemcells;mayresultinreducedfunctionsorincreasedpropensityformalignanttransformation

injury. cause Under varying substances, or may circumstances, harmless cells accumulate various amounts may which of abnormal of degrees be some may the cells or lysosomes), within in by (typically organelles and substance may in be produced may be located it nucleus, may the it synthesized The or elsewhere. be cytoplasm, affected the

are The of accumulations inadequate abnormal production intracellular endogenous excessive of or or material deposition pathways ( removal substance, an of degradation an exogenous abnormal main and

Fig. 2.24 ). each examples are described Selected as follows. of

Change. Fatty called within parenchymal any Fatty cells. accumulation of change, refers steatosis, to triglycerides also liver, since organ also involved organs. in metabolism, and kidney, may is occur the in but is seen heart, fat muscle, skeletal this other major It often in most the protein toxins, may caused be obesity, malnutrition, mellitus, Steatosis or by diabetes anoxia. diabetes obesity the in most industrialized (fatty nations. causes fatty common the of in associated with and are abuse Alcohol liver) change liver in 16. in detail This more process is Chapter discussed

and Esters. Cholesterol Cholesteryl accumulation. a regulated component) Cellular to intracellular generation key without which of cell ensure normal membranes tightly metabolism is cholesterol cholesterol is significant (in cholesteryl with catabolism characterized phagocytic different decreased mostly intake cholesterol, processes, become overloaded pathologic or increased cells However, in of may (triglycerides, lipids. several lipid esters) and by important. these, atherosclerosis is most Of the of is role The of the lipid and 10. deposition in discussed atherosclerosis in Chapter cholesterol pathogenesis

Proteins. Cell Injury, may accumulations; Death, lipid protein http://ebooksmedicine.net than visible the less and to Morphologically common are 2 52CHAPTER the cells if Cell or when accumulations occur cells they excesses Adaptations are presented

in protein folding, Defect transport

of abnormal Accumulation proteins

Lack of enzyme

disease: Lysosomal materials endogenous accumulation storage of

materials Ingestion indigestible of

Accumulation materials of exogenous

Fig. lysosomal substrates Mutations molecules alterations deficiency enzymes in Mechanisms for protein accumulation: causing accumulate in (2) critical storage and intracellular diseases. breaking change causing that defective in accumulate so certain intracellularly. metabolism, in of 2.24 folding down lysosomes, A compounds, in (3) (1) the responsible to as Abnormal as liver. fatty of transport, pigment as phagocytosed particles, An accumulation. inability carbon to degrade in (4)

amounts. excessive synthesize In glomerulus of for tubules. the convoluted trace are proximal in example, kidney, reabsorbed albumin amounts through normally pinocytosis the by the filtered heavy glomerular histologic this protein However, hyaline in across the disorders protein cytoplasmic (e.g., nephrotic appearance vesicles of is the with droplets. syndrome), reabsorbed, accumulate, protein more pink, the much giving of containing and filter leakage The protein droplets if reversible: metabolized proteinuria abates, are process the the disappear. is and RER forming cells, accumulation plasma immunoglobulins Another occur that rounded, synthesized of example some newly eosinophilic in is of Russell the bodies. the marked may Other liver neurons “alcoholic in neurofibrillary discussed protein in hyaline” examples in Chapter elsewhere 23). 16; the of are book this Chapter tangles aggregation in (e.g., in

Glycogen. of associated intracellular abnormalities with glycogen. glycogen glucose are the deposits metabolism of Excessive in either or renal glucose prime example Langerhans. In and controlled cardiac abnormal of the accumulates metabolism, myocytes, glycogen diabetes tubular islets of epithelium, in mellitus, the cells poorly β of as 7). glycogenoses diseases, disorders in related within cells glycogen genetic of collectively (Chapter Glycogen storage also or to referred accumulates a group

Pigments. of itself, or Pigments such melanin, as are endogenous, that exogenous, lipofuscin, as either colored hemoglobin. body, derivatives certain body the are substances and outside coming the such within are carbon, from synthesized

of air pigment exogenous most ubiquitous pollutant The common urban carbon, is life. a regional lymph to it and by is When phagocytosed alveolar macrophages transported channels nodes. inhaled, the lymphatic tracheobronchial through Aggregates 13). and blacken the (Chapter pulmonary the of nodes (anthracosis) lymph parenchyma draining pigment

or variety brownish-yellow is pigment,” intracellular liver, that material insoluble and accumulates in with the Lipofuscin, heart, an brain) tissues (particularly atrophy. or a “wear-and-tear aging of granular of by polyunsaturated free lipids and of peroxidation that are subcellular Lipofuscin the membranes. produced lipid represents of protein complexes radical–catalyzed It injury. of cell to the free past injurious is marker a not is but radical The pigment brown (

Fig. large called brown the ), imparts appearance present when is in that amounts, tissue to an atrophy. 2.25

located UV brown-black radiation. against pigment is is and by as the an acts in endogenous, melanocytes screen a synthesized harmful epidermis Melanin that melanocytes accumulate skin melanin, the macrophages. in keratinocytes are only dermal (e.g., in source as freckles), pigment can basal of can Although the adjacent the

accumulates in brown tissues local that golden Hemosiderin systemic is to or a yellow there granular excess pigment hemoglobin-derived a iron. is is when of and stored forming within micelles. the normally protein ferritin Iron with in apoferritin, cells association is Hemosiderin these aggregates represents pigment large of

Fig. Lipofuscingranulesincardiacmyocytes(depositsindicatedbyarrows). 2.25

ferritin histochemical iron can Prussian reaction readily the electron micelles, and light by the unambiguously be by identified blue visualized ( microscopy;

Fig. ). 2.26 amounts normal pathologic, are liver, hemosiderin red this small of the where in normally bone spleen, aging marrow, usually degraded. and cells accumulation is are Although the of mononuclear phagocytes pigment more Excessive in seen deposition hemosiderin, in accumulations extensive of hemosiderosis, and of Chapter called 16. hereditary iron described are hemochromatosis

calcification, of deposition other with abnormal a of salts, calcium disease is of result together an common states, a magnesium, of the process in variety wide and iron, smaller amounts Pathologic minerals. in ways. It can occur two

Dystrophic calcification. • areas injured form, this is any type. normal In necrosis dead as tissue, of metabolism such it of calcium in or but deposits the is of advanced ubiquitous virtually arterial in 10). atherosclerosis lesions It (Chapter past it an be Although organ of dysfunction. also finding dystrophic cause be injury, a incidental may may cell calcification insignificant indicating example, damaged valve develop severely in heart For or motion. can aging calcification resulting in compromised valves, of elderly cause stenosis of 11). the valves (Chapter an aortic calcification important aortic persons Dystrophic is in

Dystrophic the may injured intracellular vesicles, the deposition deposition phosphate calcium in cells. mitochondria of of calcification by be crystalline dying in extracellular the or calcium which cells, membrane-bound of derived from is initiated It of extracellular the the whereas accumulate result of phospholipids, action as for thought that is membrane calcium a membrane-bound phosphatases. by phosphates its is vesicles in concentrated affinity crystals larger forming are propagated, deposits. The then

calcification. • Metastatic form hypercalcemia in with This can normal tissues. associated is and occur of failure, hypercalcemia tumors including turnover (in or The macrophages hormone, secretion due tumors; (increased (4) either leukemia, (e.g., myeloma, due disease), disorders metastases); primary retention production a with phosphate in and destruction causes or multiple vitamin are of vitamin malignant D–related intoxication parathyroid of parathyroid associated by which effects sarcoidosis hyperparathyroidism. Paget to vitamin D of catabolism to leads (1) skeletal (2) precursor); other secondary bone the immobilization, or of protein renal tumors D increased and to hormone–related diffuse major parathyroid bone which activate accelerated (3)

MORPHOLOGYRegardlessofthesite,calciumsaltsareseenongrossexaminationasfinewhitegranulesorclumps,oftenfeltasgrittydeposits.Dystrophiccalcificationiscommoninareasofcaseousnecrosisintuberculosis.Sometimesatuberculouslymphnodeisessentiallyconvertedtoradiopaquestone.Onhistologicexamination,calcificationappearsasintracellularand/orextracellularbasophilicdeposits.Withtime,heterotopicbonemayforminfociofcalcification.

Fig. Hemosideringranulesinlivercells.(A)Hematoxylin-eosin–stainedsectionshowinggolden-brown,finelygranularpigment. 2.26 (B)IrondepositsshownbyaspecialstainingprocesscalledthePrussianbluereaction.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Metastaticcalcificationcanoccurwidelythroughoutthebodybutprincipallyaffectstheinterstitialtissuesofthevasculature,kidneys,lungs,andgastricmucosa.Thecalciumdepositsmorphologicallyresemblethosedescribedindystrophiccalcification.Althoughtheygenerallydonotcauseclinicaldysfunction,extensivecalcificationsinthelungsmaybeevidentonradiographsandmayproducerespiratorydeficits,andmassivedepositsinthekidney(nephrocalcinosis)canleadtorenaldamage.

Abnormaldepositsofmaterialsincellsandtissuesaretheresultofexcessiveintakeordefectivetransportorcatabolism.

Fattychange:accumulationoffreetriglyceridesincells,resultingfromexcessiveintakeordefectivetransport(oftenbecauseofdefectsinsynthesisoftransportproteins);manifestationofreversiblecellinjury

Cholesteroldeposition:resultofdefectivecatabolismandexcessiveintake;seeninmacrophagesandsmoothmusclecellsofvesselwallsinatherosclerosis

Depositionofproteins:reabsorbedproteinsinkidneytubules;immunoglobulinsinplasmacells

Depositionofglycogen:inmacrophagesofpatientswithdefectsinlysosomalenzymesthatbreakdownglycogen(glycogenstoragediseases)

Depositionofpigments:typicallyindigestiblepigments,suchascarbon,lipofuscin(breakdownproductoflipidper-oxidation),oriron(usuallyresultingfromoverload,asinhemosiderosis)

Dystrophiccalcification:depositionofcalciumatsitesofcellinjuryandnecrosis

Metastaticcalcification:depositionofcalciuminnormaltissues,causedbyhypercalcemia(usuallyaconsequenceofparathyroidhormoneexcess)

Individuals cells their because age. age the aging because on for independent such and important as process health chronic age diseases, attention factors ischemic consequences, aging many one disease. on cancer, Alzheimer strongest public traditionally of risk has cosmetic focused heart is the its manifestations, Although disease, has of and about but steam,” conserved of cells’ evolutionarily not a are simply pathways number signaling out Perhaps a in of the cellular aging “running one is it yeast by from that mammals. is fact regulated discoveries most striking consequence genes of to is limited that

is result decline and the span cells. aging of activity Cellular of in a progressive the functional life ( aging Several abnormalities to the contribute of cells

Fig. DNA. in Accumulation of mutations • 2.27 metabolic DNA. damage may A result of to nuclear insults mitochondrial over in variety and time contribute exposure and associated toxins with by to DNA induced damage aging. radiation ROS inefficient repair enzymes, persists as Although some age, become most DNA especially repaired accumulates by damage if is time. DNA over mechanisms cells repair and survival Accumulation nuclear cells. ultimately compromise DNA in activities and the of mitochondrial and functional mutations of

replication. cellular • Decreased divisions, state, than known in cells) Normal become replication, arrested of number limited a have a replicative senescence. stem after fixed nondividing a for terminally they (other capacity cells and as progressive cells. with is replicative associated Aging of senescence capacity more of older from undergo to cells the replication from do rounds children Cells people. have than span. from reduced patients with in In a Werner have life syndrome, cells aging, disease premature a contrast, markedly by characterized vitro rare because senescence cell in of shortening progressive telomeres, arrest. aging Replicative occurs in ultimately cycle of which results cells the for degradation. and fusion of replication DNA chromosomes of repeated short ends protecting ends for present ends that Telomeres and of ensuring are the the complete from at important sequences chromosome are DNA of damage proteins a it, shield DNA that Telomeric also preventing binds activation response. and telomere is not the section somatic a progressively cells small replicate, telomeres duplicated, When become of shortened. be chromosomes broken are sensed and in arrest. signals cells shorten, protected cycle As of they ends cell cannot DNA, as which the addition maintained nucleotide by by is an called length telomerase. enzyme Telomere mediated of to that as for RNA template RNA-protein a complex ends specialized Telomerase its adding is chromosomes. nucleotides uses own a the cells, ( at expressed in low absent cells present Telomerase cells somatic and in most germ but is stem levels is in

Fig. ). 2.28 become Therefore, cycle, damaged exit inability telomeres ones. mature and they cells cell somatic to cells shorter an as generate replace resulting new in age, the to their usually length telomerase in stabilized, indefinitely. is and reactivated telomere is the allowing proliferate cells cancer immortalized Conversely, cells, to 6. This in discussed more is fully Chapter capacity to aging. may Telomere further contributing shortening cells, the also cellular regenerative stem of decrease such aging and activity be length of alluring established. Despite to telomere to however, relationship fully has observations, the telomerase yet nail of by maintenance as fibrosis, cells), have in failure cytopenias abnormalities, pulmonary and be anemia others. liver Abnormalities hair, and diseases, been other stem many to greying a telomere and of and in (thought implicated aplastic pigment premature hematopoietic skin such caused

http://ebooksmedicine.net

proteins signaling CELL replication Insulin/IGF CELL TOR Protein ROS? COUNTERACTS in homeostasis CELL DECREASED Altered mutations CELL DECREASED DNA damaged FUNCTIONS DNA LOSS of Proteins, Cellular LOSS FUNCTIONS, repair AGING transcription Accumulation AGING DNA repair Defective CELLULAR

Fig. Mechanismsthatcauseandcounteractcellularaging.DNAdamage,replicativesenescence,anddecreasedandmisfoldedproteinsareamongthebest-describedmechanismsofcellularaging.Someenvironmentalinfluences,suchascalorierestriction,counteractagingbyactivatingvarioussignalingpathwaysandtranscriptionfactors.IGF, targetofrapamycin. 2.27 reactiveoxygenspecies;TOR, Insulin-likegrowthfactor;ROS,

“telomeropathies.” Defective sometimes homeostasis. These disorders considered the • are protein prototypic destroy cells reduced caused (which (which normal passage unable promote and proteins of of homeostasis, by decreased normal activity translation because the With proteins). of to and protein turnover misfolded chaperones protein proteasomes synthesis are time, defective and maintain folding) of increased functions. resultant proteins and on intracellular survival, can The decrease have cell effects in many replication, deleterious concomitant of can trigger accumulation proteins apoptosis. proteins exacerbates loss misfolded functional the of and The

interest process, their pathways the been • has only therapeutic that because in great defining obvious biochemical There potential counteract of not aging signaling

cells Senescence progenitor of Depletion stem/ of cells mature

Fig. Theroleoftelomeresandtelomeraseinreplicativesenescenceofcells.(A)Mechanismsandconsequencesoftelomereattrition.Repeatedcelldivisionassociatedwithagingleadstoprogressiveshorteningoftelomeres,whichtriggerssenescenceandlossofstemcellpools. 2.28 (B)Telomereattritionischaracteristicofsomaticcells.Stemcellsmaintaintheirtelomeresandare,therefore,capableofmorecyclesofreplication.Cancercellsfrequentlyactivatetelomeraseandarethusabletomaintaintelomeres.

search that “elixir these for of about might us tell but the http://ebooksmedicine.net 2CellInjury,CellDeath,andAdaptations (the 56CHAPTER cause also aging. pathways the youth”) mechanisms because elucidating aging has to restriction to in flies mice. every down and species slow tested from prolong been found Calorie life signaling now aging alters that calorie pathways that restriction is influence ( thought It

Fig. ). 2.27 which aging restriction activation the network factor of signaling, calorie of described involves factors. as the transcription is in a insulin-like that have receptor counteracting role playing been reduced Among a and alterations downstream with kinases associated process growth biochemical to Reduced growth DNA and metabolism errors signaling homeostasis. in reduced and cell lower protein replication, repair IGF-1 improve better possibly DNA rates leads and of to immunity. also improve serves Calorie restriction inhibit these All of aging.

inflammation. • Persistent accumulation 5), (Chapter persistent pathway endogenous substances the individuals the of damaged inflammation. in low-level As inflammasome may activate age, other lipids, cells, resulting and induces and turn type chronic in atherosclerosis Inflammation diabetes. as diseases, 2 such themselves process. Cytokines aging that induce during aging, the cellular alterations produced metabolic exacerbate chronic accelerate may and may reactions inflammatory disorders

and, Clinical process, as calorie the that acting aging shown mentioned glucocorticoids, previously, studies aging. via activity increased and stresses, perhaps observations production slow restriction of whereas have physical accelerate epidemiologic of these effects defined, remain and be remain mechanisms we vulnerable to the all underlying now age. precise to the ravages Alas, for

Resultsfromacombinationofmultiple,progressivecellularalterations,including:

Replicativesenescence:reducedcapacityofcellstodividesecondarytoprogressiveshorteningofchromosomalends(telomeres)

Defectiveproteinhomeostasis:lossofnormalproteinsandaccumulationofmisfoldedproteins

Agingisexacerbatedbychronicdiseases,especiallythoseassociatedwithprolongedinflammation,andbystress,andissloweddownbycalorierestrictionandexercise.

in adaptations consequences wide cellular to unavoidable this a cover injury, It function, should size, acute and growth, to of largely in and spectrum, ranging reversible forms be of described various of cell that adaptations derangements the chapter from cell aging. forms irreversible and apparent and from alterations book, all all cases clinical ultimately made because throughout instances and of this many in to these organ Reference derangements injury different cell disease function. arise structure is of

J N Telomere RT, Calado NS: Engl 361:2353, diseases, 2009. Med Young and of of to [An review abnormalities and how other their the basic biology aging, excellent may cancer, contribute telomeres, diseases.]

family F, BCL-2 Cell Chipuk Mol 37:299, al: Moldoveanu JE, et reunion, The Llambl T, 2010. [A proteins.] of of of biology family the biochemistry the apoptosis-regulating review BCL-2 and

in human AMK, Med disease, Ryter N B: 2013. Levine health 368:7, S, and J Choi Engl Autophagy and [An mechanisms excellent the discussion significance of autophagy.] of

therapeutic Nat Drug disease Vandenabeele relevance necrosis: Rev 15:348, P, opportunities, 2016. Discov, Angeli al: and Regulated et Conrad M, JPF, death [A discovered pathways therapeutic cell newly possible of and interventions.] review of

Calcium in Rev Z, Ann et Pathol JM, 2006. Saikumar and death, cell 1:405, Dong injury Weinberg P, al: between review calcium injury.] of links and [A the cell

Physiol and Frey the 2003. 65:45, good, EN: the ugly, Annu Cardiac N, Olson the hypertrophy: Rev bad, [Excellent of paradigm.] mechanisms discussion using hypertrophy, the the as of heart muscle the

N Med JE, McDunn Cell al: Hotchkiss 361:1570, et 2009. RS, Engl Strasser A, death, J their cell of clinical targeting.] the death death), apoptosis, pathways implications therapeutic review [Excellent (necrosis, major and and autophagy-associated and of

464:504, genetics of 2010. ageing, CJ: Kenyon The Nature organisms.] genes [An that with the of human excellent aging, based and on review studies influence genetic model syndromes mutant

enzymes Pathol Dis reactive Ann a Rev new revisited, on oxygen: Neish double-edged AS: thinking Mech JD, Lambeth sword and 2014. Nox 9:47, species injury.] cell in their and physiology discussion roles of oxygen [A and reactive

2013. Lopez-Otin C, et hallmarks aging, The Blasco MA, Partridge of L, 153:1194, Cell al: for directions that landmark of aging hallmarks review and suggests future nine [A research.]

cellular Cohen 2015. late-onset roles of Volovik the of Marquez Dis E: organismal The FC, 10:1, and aging maladies, development Y, Mech Ann Pathol in Rev [A cellular contributes chronic the of the development many to diseases.] review aging ways by of which

atrophy, McKinnell mechanisms IW, 119:907, muscle Molecular Cell 2004. of Rudnicki MA: atrophy.] of mechanisms [Discussion of cellular the

2013. reactive oxygen an C, to Rev species, Immunol Nat guide immunologist’s Nathan 13:349, stress: oxidative Beyond A: Cunningham-Bussel species, roles reactive inflammation.] of and in catabolism, production, of their targets, and the modern [An oxygen excellent actions review

Clin and molecular age: NE: of 3:946, CB, of 2013. Sharpless therapeutic Invest drivers opportunities, aging Newgard Coming J pathways of key molecular aging.] in summary [A

in Ann reticulum FR: Dis SA, The role 2015. human endoplasmic pathology, Oakes of Mech 10:173, Papa Rev stress Pathol importance [An protein of injury unfolded by caused and cell the up-todate of response pathogenic misfolded the review proteins.]

How Mol 3:187, Slack 2002. JM: Nat phenotype, Cell cells D, Biol their change Rev Tosh and metaplasia genetic [Review the cells and stem of of reprogramming.] roles

15:135, Regulated Mol Vanden al: pathways, et Biol non-apoptotic Nat death network T, Cell expanding Rev necrosis: A, 2014. Berghe S, of Jouan-Lanhouet cell Linkermann the forms [A programmed non-apoptotic pathways cell of various of current review death.] of http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

Definitions General Overview of Features Inflammation: and

Inflammation of Causes

of Cells and Recognition Damaged Microbes

in of Vessels Acute Reactions Inflammation Blood

Leukocyte Recruitment of Sites Inflammation to

and of Phagocytosis the Agent Offending Clearance

of Activated Functional Leukocytes Responses Other

Response of Inflammatory Termination Acute the

of Mediators Inflammation

and Amines: Serotonin Histamine Vasoactive

Mediators of Inflammation Other

Inflammation Patterns Acute of Morphologic

(Suppurative) Inflammation, Abscess Purulent

Inflammation Outcomes Acute of

Causes Inflammation of Chronic

Cells Mediators Chronic of and

of Effects Inflammation Systemic

Repair Tissue Overview of

of Abnormal Healing Wound Clinical Examples

GENERAL OF OVERVIEW INFLAMMATION: AND FEATURES DEFINITIONS

where circulation and they tissue agents. that sites needed, brings cells offending the to to tissues infections host response Inflammation is molecules of eliminate from of to the a defense damage and vascularized the are

a protective reaction, common that harmful in lay Although actually it and is response inflammation essential medical survival. parlance, for is suggests a injury and the of cell microbes, of (e.g., initial injury the (e.g., necrotic cells and tissues). It cause serves rid consequences such the toxins) of host to both proteins ( The of antibodies, phagocytic mediators defense leukocytes, include complement and

Fig.

3.1 ). but in so normal tissues Most these be where body. damage they any cannot sequestered rapidly in they of are the normally the blood, site recruited to can circulate inflammatory the Some threats. of as tissues, lookout involved for function cells responses where also in in on sentinels the they reside substances. activates it and leukocytes cells delivers to invaders, process inflammation or the proteins to harmful and molecules, or The the eliminate foreign which and recruited unwanted and microbes, necrotic function as of such to tissues, then damaged Without go injured permanent sores. would remain would and tissues infections inflammation, wounds unchecked, never heal, might festering

reaction typical a through inflammatory of develops sequential The series steps:

host offending is extravascular which agent, located cells in The is tissues, and recognized molecules. by

located. are the the agent recruited proteins site from where circulation the to Leukocytes plasma is offending and

eliminate are substance. work leukocytes proteins destroy together to offending The and the and activated and

reaction is The terminated. controlled and

tissue is damaged The repaired.

types, two be acute ( chronic and of Inflammation may

Table ). 3.1 tissue infections called initial, and is The rapid to response acute inflammation. damage short It few of a and or duration, minutes several or lasting for typically hours within is hours develops days. neutrophils plasma (also are of and and leukocytes, exudation leukocytes). the (edema) characteristics called of polymorphonuclear the predominantly fluid main proteins Its emigration injury offenders, achieves desired reaction residual its eliminating repaired. subsides of inflammation acute goal and is When the the reaction progresses a to stimulus, the type the the if to clear fails initial response But http://ebooksmedicine.net protracted

PROTEINS PRODUCTION STIMULUSPLASMA LEUKOCYTES, INFLUX OF MEDIATORS OF

tissues sentinel other cells macrophages, in by Recognition

(amines, Mediators cytokines)

Recruitment leukocytes of

Vasodilation,

of EliminationEdema microbes,

Cytokines,

Fig. an events 3.1 reaction. in inflammatory of Sequence microbes damaged mediators, and and other and trigger Macrophages inflammation. and in the liberate recognize tissues cells cellular vascular of which reactions cells of shown. blood the Recruitment not plasma proteins from is

is called that inflammation. of chronic inflammation inflammation novo. may or in As chapter, discussed chronic follow this de arise acute inflammation later is with and the and associated duration the presence of destruction, proliferation vessels, fibrosis. blood lymphocytes longer macrophages, more of tissue It of and is

that are mediators stimuli. cells to induced injurious response by host Inflammation is by chemical produced in or tissue the tissue a a is enters When microbe

including Inflammation of infection the by and Chronic Acute the Table of presence is cell other injured, resident mast Features cells, or cells, and 3.1 cells, types. damage sensed dendritic macrophages, mediators) regulate the inflammatory response. that secrete subsequent cells other and and induce These (cytokines molecules to that proteins microbes mediators Inflammatory also are necrotic the or products cells. produced react to plasma from of the agent efflux and is promote the the site recruitment of of circulating plasma the offending leukocytes of mediators these Some to located. where recruited ability the the offending and their enhancing agent. remove also destroy activate to leukocytes, Mediators mediators. of because chemical role Understanding mediators drugs most is specific target the important anti-inflammatory in mediators detail inflammation reactions. in review we the of steps We after inflammatory later, discuss the shall main

(functio (calor cardinal function Latin), of (dolor), signs, external (tumor), pain called loss redness The swelling are often laesa). inflammation, in manifestations of heat its (rubor), and Celsus, fifth evident text years the wrote the were and was Rudolf and will first as described occur of 19th pathology.” a ago of leukocyte as the vascular follows. four be the then-famous De discussion century Medicina, than 2000 These manifestations activation, Virchow, in Roman by and named recruitment the encyclopedist The the changes from added known modern as more these of late consequences that who by “father

of Although disease, the the the in is some its feature. normally and protective, inflammatory reaction situations, becomes dominant it cause produces damage are impairment). accompanied local by inflammatory infections functional tissue signs (e.g., associated pain symptoms its to often and and For damage and example, reactions damage. or no as consequences self-limited the however, harmful abates, little and resolve inflammation permanent leaving are Typically, these occurs the In tissues (e.g., microbes in allergies), are which immune against diseases that (e.g., in environmental reaction contrast, diseases), excessively substances (e.g., harmless is prolonged response resist misdirected evoke in that inflammatory or many is autoimmune self in an against there normally infections by eradication).

arthritis, as as lung such (Table to bites, reactions diseases, insect common life-threatening rheumatoid fibrosis, atherosclerosis, ). drugs, and toxins hypersensitivity as reactions Inflammatory chronic underlie and 3.2 well with yet inflammation its effects. this would anti-inflammatory ideally pharmacies which not control our abound the interfere reason of For with beneficial sequelae drugs, harmful be to genetic degenerative, may fact, thought diabetes, primarily In are variety as and type of disorders, contribute or to 2 metabolic, disease, such diseases a cancer. inflammation Alzheimer that than drugs well broader have anti-inflammatory currently Hence, a role may indicated. to consequences of press the of recognition referred inflammation, harmful killer.” it has rather lay “the as wide-ranging silent In the melodramatically

for only is inflammation serious but responsible Not excessive inflammation defective illness. also and of of caused cancers which replacement manifested by is inflammation, susceptibility most by number resulting little from marrow bone the reduced of Too leukocytes suppression often infections, by is to the increased a typically

Arthritis antibodies? Lymphocytes, macrophages;

a selected response tissue injury. Listed inflammatory role significant the plays which diseases examples of in in are illness present exacerbation.These asthma, their in can of pathogenesis such repeated with with a chronic relevant acute discussed and inflammation Some, diseases chapters. or as bouts are acute

therapies for and rejection. cancer by marrow graft any response, from bone compromise arise hence Recall of the the that progenitors marrow, marrow in leukocytes. of function will generation mature leukocytes, diminish the of the cells inflammatory but the leukocyte of of abnormalities provide about are mechanisms leukocyte information genetic disorders they rare responses. valuable function Inherited Chapter of in in These described are 5, context the diseases. immunodeficiency conditions

terminated Inflammation the is eliminated. when is agent offending resolves are short The and dissipated, down have and because mediators broken tissues. spans life reaction in leukocytes it response anti-inflammatory causing the to activated, prevent from serving the damage addition, control to In and mechanisms excessive are host. inflammation its of motion agents, the eliminating sets process the into offending goal it After of achieved repair. tissue has tissue. that a of Repair series events heal damaged of consists (scarring). replaced filling injured through and connective defects residual process, this is regeneration with In surviving the of tissue of cells tissue

the acute the This for describes and events, of morphologic inflammation, stimuli of and then sequence chapter and inflammation. of mediators, patterns etiology then tissue followed is This of discussion and the repair. a by process chronic inflammation, of

the be fungal, (bacterial, reactions • parasitic) inflammation. of a Inflammatory and and viral, important variety are triggered among Infections may causes toxins most of stimuli: microbial common by medically distinct mild damage pathogens that cause causes and fatal, responses, inflammation Different can little reactions inflammatory to elicit successfully acute injury. be eradicates infection, no to from tissue extensive systemic infectious chronic that that or severe reactions lasting the prolonged chapter. identifying etiology, pattern in of as discussed response can in its be later useful the morphologic this The

chemical chemicals). blood to flow, which of infarction), and of cell necrosis ischemia physical injury, inflammation the burns as some (e.g., cause environmental (reduced irradiation; myocardial the include in frostbite; exposure and elicits injury or trauma, death, thermal may regardless Tissue of cause from released some to trigger known cells are inflammation; of molecules necrotic Several described later. are these

because elicit sutures) (splinters, tissue themselves injury Foreign carry microbes. bodies traumatic may by inflammation or or cause they dirt, if (in tissues; Even large potentially endogenous urate (in cholesterol such in amounts deposited inflammation harmful stimulate gout), crystals are and the substances some atherosclerosis). substances disease include crystals

hypersensitivity) which the Immune system immune protective individual’s in damages the (also are reactions called normally own tissues. reactions be against responses diseases, inappropriate in autoimmune against be against self reactions substances, The immune environmental as antigens, or directed microbes. causing allergies, may may or injurious (Chapter injury major diseases these a in 5). tissue of cause is Inflammation are to (self of antigens) persistent the and allergic cure, in these chronic the reactions to autoimmune eliminated, difficult inflammation, responses causes and stimuli and mortality. be and inflammatory and often are with morbidity important tend be for Because cannot diseases associated environmental

in cellular microbes responses and proteins. is cells the necrotic recognition first of by step inflammatory and circulating The receptors presence and that The in survival. are receptors responses critical the for microbes evolved of trigger of adaptations the environment, they and multicellular cells the invaders as organisms recognize to

Cellular for • microbes. receptors express to of capture pathogens. and in is other that all dendritic Phagocytes, the cells and function cells presence many whose epithelia detect receptors tissues infectious (cells microbes), for 5). of (TLRs), a The which the Toll, was gene in defined Toll-like to Drosophila receptors receptors founding that best member, these the (Chapter discovered are named belong of family endosomes, TLRs microbes. and are membranes detect in extracellular located able so they plasma ingested and to are the sensors Other cells. microbial in present of cytoplasm are patterns molecular (PAMPs). microbes, motifs many common called TLRs recognize pathogen-associated to often stimulates these of a of expression by of production and microbes secreted Recognition proteins. and membrane receptors the number cytokines proteins anti-viral inflammation, and potent and more that that and activation lymphocyte immune responses. cytokines induce even include promote These cytokines membrane (interferons), proteins early infections. will we the to discuss in detail when We against innate TLRs more Chapter return defense immunity, 5, in

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cell damage. of Sensors patterns of hence altered appropriately are cell All a that and called recognize consequence receptors as molecular cells (DAMPs). molecules damage-associated that cytosolic damage, have or liberated are intracellular reduced DNA because into cytoplasm plasma normally), in sequestered damaged membrane (a K+ injury), should it of DNA many uric and concentrations mitochondria), released ATP of (reflecting These nuclei, product from (when the molecules acid (released include loss is be ions and of others. breakdown), not as it interleukin-1 which The the called cytokine complex receptors the of the a inflammasome, cytosolic activate multiprotein (IL-1). induces production inflammation and recruits leukocytes thus induces later). IL-1 (discussed that cytosolic of diseases autoinflammatory are IL-1 disorders. antagonists receptors known as effective Gain-of-function for are spontaneous rare are these the in cause treatments syndromes the by mutations characterized inflammation; reactions atherosclerosis), to in The implicated cholesterol in deposits lipids disease). metabolic syndrome crystals obesity-associated inflammasome (in also the diabetes), amyloid of (the and gout), crystals (in inflammatory urate and brain has Alzheimer cause been (in relevant discussed These in disorders are chapters.

Circulating proteins. microbes plasma Several at function and and sites inflammation recognize blood-borne to microbes tissue of to destroy infection. stimulate proteins microbes of reacts inflammation against and produces The system complement (discussed mediators later). ingestion system. microbes promotes microbial the and lectin sugars mannose-binding activation recognizes and protein called of complement A circulating of phagocytosis. proteins called bind and to collectins Other promote microbes their also

is damage. Inflammation to necrotic host a may and but cause response tissue beneficial invaders foreign tissue, also

derived inflammation and proteins and main are activated both plasma response; of that a from are are components by a various reaction cellular vascular cells. The mediators

regulation the the leukocytes, the recruitment of inflammatory steps injurious can (5) resolution (3) (4) response, of response Rs:(1) The the and the recognition of agent, remembered removal of five as of (repair). (control) agent,(2) be

foreign necrosis, causes trauma, and infections, The tissue immune responses. of include bodies, inflammation

other receptors and and of Epithelial necrotic cells, cells. types cell cells, express leukocytes, and that dendritic tissue sense presence microbes macrophages the blood. that have the microbes Circulating entered recognize proteins

reaction by and injury damaged of inflammation. elimination outcome the repair resulting is in or followed the acute inflammation stimulus of either chronic of of The persistent tissue, decline noxious the

of leukocytes and leave (2) agent three in to of has from of the injury, Acute dilation (1) leukocytes components: inflammation increased their activation and of microcirculation, blood (3) in to and enabling the focus their accumulation the offending leading small microvasculature, increase vessels, to the flow, emigration proteins the eliminate circulation, plasma major the an ( permeability

Fig. ). 3.1 in agent, microbe reside encountered, these cells, phagocytes infectious dead that or agents. an to as all is tissues try such When injurious eliminate an presence phagocytes molecules mediate soluble the in by the and same liberating time, other or tissues At the of inflammation. that abnormal cells sentinel recognize substance and the foreign react offending on these the the of plasma promote agent efflux to Some mediators small where recruitment is located. of vessels site and the of the blood leukocytes and circulating vicinity act in the

Blood Inflammation in Acute of Reactions Vessels

and out consist reactions leukocytes vessels, both the changes maximize permeability blood the injury. the and of proteins or of of plasma of circulation the vascular into designed of in The infection of inflammation acute flow and of the site movement to exudation fluid, or escape and proteins, body known as is system interstitial blood ( into of vascular cells the cavities from tissues The

Fig. 3.2 ). cellular protein is concentration high extravascular contains and that fluid a An debris. has exudate an reaction. vessels, during typically of presence increase an blood Its is inflammatory small that the there in permeability an implies a is transudate little material, content, low with low fluid no a In gravity. specific cellular and protein contrast, or of 4). plasma or normal (Chapter imbalance an produced across essentially blood that ultrafiltrate with result a is of as is permeability hydrostatic osmotic vessels It vascular a of or transudate. fluid tissue can denotes it exudate serous an be an or excess interstitial either cavities; the in Edema inflammatory many in neutrophils), (mostly cells, dead in Pus, purulent cases, rich exudate, is and, debris of leukocytes the exudate a an microbes.

consist in of caliber the early vascular and Changes after flow and following: begin injury

histamine, is muscle. smooth on the notably Vasodilation of action induced mediators, vascular by several vasoconstriction. inflammation, It by the and earliest of may transient of be is manifestations acute one preceded new capillary of Vasodilation the the to area. then in involves leads arterioles and first the opening beds the of of heat the (erythema) redness flow, site is cause result is inflammation. at and The increased blood which

fluid quickly by the followed is protein-rich into extravascular tissues. outpouring the increased microvasculature, of exudate) the (an Vasodilation of permeability with

blood increased slower flow, to diameter vessel of concentration fluid red small cells loss and of The in lead http://ebooksmedicine.net

A. NORMAL

and content, and (high EXUDATE contain cells) may red protein white some B.

C. few (low protein cells) TRANSUDATE content,

outflow hydrostatic obstruction, Increased pressure (venous failure]) heart [e.g., congestive

synthesis Decreased [e.g., protein disease]; disease]; colloid [e.g., loss pressure malnutrition (decreased liver kwashiokor]) [e.g., osmotic protein kidney protein increased

Fig. of 3.2 Formation transudates. exudates and capillary mean a pressure Hg colloid which mm at of end about is arrow) pressure. mm arterial Hg the 25 is end; arrow), is the bed at capillary 32 hydrostatic the osmotic the Normal (green to mm mean pressure (blue equal 12 tissues venous and Hg (A) approximately of Therefore, flow across of bed fluid the is net the nil. almost vascular and through because exudate vascular is permeability spaces which pass. can increases of result cells, a in fluid proteins An of retraction (B) as endothelial creating inflammation formed because of increased leaks hydrostatic or when transudate pressure osmotic A (C) pressure. decreased fluid out formed is

and blood. viscosity of vessels, increased the changes as the small (erythema) flow, engorgement cells, stasis jammed of histologically vascular blood vessels involved with redness result seen in slowly of red localized of as tissue. externally moving and These congestion

blood along vascular neutrophils, endothelium. As principally develops, stasis the • leukocytes, accumulate mediators express tissue by endothelial damage, increased of infection the time sites At and same molecules. levels are at produced adhesion and activated of cells is endothelium, vascular then later. soon sequence to the a they that the wall and afterward in the through described tissue, interstitial into migrate Leukocytes adhere

for acute responsible permeability ( vascular mechanisms inflammation are in increased Several

Fig. ), which 3.3 include:

spaces of resulting mechanism endothelial is Retraction most cells inter-endothelial in of of the opening leakage. vascular common other bradykinin, is elicited leukotrienes, by histamine, It mediators. chemical and is the usually minutes) to occurs delayed 30 is mediator and it as next. endothelial after the rapidly 15 short-lived; to immediate described to the from to response follows hence, prolonged it It exposure (within that response, referred injury, transient distinguish rapid permeability venules. The postcapillary main in increase sites for vascular are this

in endothelial necrosis cell Endothelial resulting and injury, detachment. cells. toxins burns, damage for the endothelium to target microbes Direct in by example, or is encountered induced and of injuries, actions endothelial that severe in is microbial the reaction. that the amplify and inflammation cells during thus endothelium to the Neutrophils injure may endothelial adhere also the for damaged immediately sustained In leakage several until thrombosed repaired. injury hours is the are vessels after instances most or and starts

cell. transcytosis, called the • of endothelial through proteins, and Increased transport fluids to open This certain documentedinexperimentalmodels, growth vascular that factors, response as vascular promote such in intracellular that leakage. channels process, (VEGF), factor mayinvolve endothelial contribution humans the in to permeability unclear. is inflammation seen vascular in Its acute

are contribute in mechanisms to Although probably these increased most permeability of in all stimuli. degrees vascular varying separately, described responses leakage endothelial example, caused direct burn, endothelial and results different and retraction by inflammatory injury. a leukocyte-dependent thermal stages at from of mediators For

Vessels Nodes Lymph Lymphatic and Responses of

inflammation. acute vessels, vessels blood lymphatic addition In to participate in also and and lymphatics system The lymph of polices fluids. filters nodes the extravascular fluid normal of that under circumstances. the seeps of drain Lymphatics small extravascular out capillaries amount In of flow help drain inflammation, that lymph fluid to accumulates because permeability. increased vascular increased is edema into well as and lymph. their find microbes, may addition way as leukocytes fluid, debris, In cell to Lymphatic handle inflammatory blood the vessels, increased load. to proliferate during like vessels, reactions lymphatics become may draining (lymphangitis), nodes secondarily (lymphadenitis). may inflamed The lymph the as are often of enlarged because increased lymph cellularity. Inflamed nodes of pathologic This (Chapter lymphadenitis is reactive, constellation or 12). changes inflammatory, termed a the presence near streaks For red an skin the wound a clinicians of infection is sign of in telltale wound. by This follows painful indicates indicating the presence the enlargement lymph of course may accompanied lymphadenitis. lymphangitis; the channels draining lymphatic of it and the be nodes, streaking of

Sites Inflammation to Leukocyte of Recruitment

the of key that of the inflammation sites function to eliminating offending recruited Leukocytes are perform

Vasodilation is and the mediators erythema induced histamine inflammatory of of as such flow. blood and (described later), cause stasis by is

increased passage or permeability cells, induced kinins, by direct vascular histamine, Increased the endothelial fluids of injury, leukocyte-induced and by produce endothelium. other is that endothelial between through and by gaps mediators

plasma infection host Increased vascular damage. leukocytes, proteins to of defense, allows or of enter sites the permeability mediators tissue and vessels blood in Fluid results edema. (exudation) from leak

in and lymph vessels often redness swelling. and show involved nodes Lymphatic inflammation, also are and

agents. macrophages. typical capable are namely, phagocytosis, The most leukocytes neutrophils the of important reactions ones and inflammatory in inflammation. rapidly to the in bone of recruited Neutrophils and sites are produced marrow slower are responders. Macrophages often use cytoskeletal ways—neutrophils functions long-lived, to transient assembly that more of but but these and principal make being important gene whereas enzyme transcription subtle rearrangements in cell responses, types ( new differ responses The rely on mount prolonged slower rapid, macrophages,

Table 3.3 ). later, inflammation. in are Macrophages in chronic context detail of more the discussed microbes, ingest and leukocytes and tissue substances. as destroy foreign necrotic These as bacteria well other and Macrophages factors growth in that repair. produce aid also the help and defensive produce tissue is price tissues. “clean normal microbes that, products damage because induce may also “collateral activated, and of tissues prolong leukocyte strongly up” host paid that the A inflammation, leukocytes is can they necrotic damage” that for of destroy when potency may bloodstream When invasion there systemic when the of as the is by may activation bacteria, is inflammation, systemic lethal. inflammatory even there be resulting occur of response

the multistep controlled mediated The that a journey lumen adhesion and cytokines. is from by to the and vessel is of process tissue leukocytes molecules the or and normally have in to inflammation, blood, be the stopped rapidly vessels. then site Leukocytes tissue outside and of the to in the offending flow agent damage, brought they of to adhesion the This of process of cells toward the of divided site of can leukocytes phases, endothelium first and inflammation, vessel then through at the leukocytes offending into transmigration the consisting be movement agent. wall, the molecules of each these play steps Different ( important in roles

Fig. 3.4

Adhesion Leukocyte Endothelium to

wall. from postcapillary blood venules, circulating the flow swept vessel against by When laminar capillaries flows are into cells cells, move tend smaller, white faster Red larger cells. to than the being a to endothelium. attaching axial wall red cells prevents flow As but result, the the the pushed confined to the the column, of and toward from are central out vessel, leukocytes cells are the slows decreases), cells (stasis), white and flow early assume inflammation the change a more stress the along position endothelial (wall in blood shear peripheral hemodynamic conditions surface. As of is called process leukocyte margination. redistribution This to to By and are moving leukocytes wall, close in changes the react endothelium. to vessel the detect able cytokines to they the which express cells locally, the If molecules http://ebooksmedicine.net and are produced activated by adhesion mediators other endothelial

Macrophages sac 3.3 Many in cells Table of macrophages: Properties in Neutrophils liver yolk tissue-resident fetal and development) • or (early stem

Life days macrophages: span 1–2 in tissues Inflammatory years days Tissue-resident weeks macrophages: or

prolonged, and slower, activating mostly Rapid, enzymatic dependent activity new on degranulation often Responses gene stimuli More transcription to short-lived,

prominent oxygen by of assembly induced (respiratory phagocyte Reactive Less species burst) Rapidly oxidase

levels Induced transcriptional activation iNOS Nitric none following oxide Low or of

or none transcriptional activity, Cytokine cytokine activation of levels production requires Low functional genes Major

induced, contents NET No of extrusion nuclear by Rapidly formation

Prominent Secretion enzymes lysosomal Less of

HSC, iNOS, cells; Hematopoietic synthase; extracellular neutrophil NET, inducible traps. stem nitric oxide the summarized in reactions major neutrophils macrophages.The lists differences This the text. above described between are and table vessels and migrate share into through blood two chemotaxis. tissues, phagocytosis, many types that to features, as Note the cell such ability

leukocytes loosely. attach begin on a and and endothelial These tumble surface, to thus detach cells process rolling. the bind called pebbles some they at which point runs adhere a stream to them). firmly cells The without rest over come finally disturbing where (resembling

the whose cytokines. The adhesion is types two attachment complementary leukocytes of mediated endothelial by is cell molecules enhanced to on expression cells by injurious to secreted other stimuli microbes tissues by cells recruited that these are in are present. in to leukocytes are Cytokines thus where ensuring the response and tissues agents, involved two migration and molecules the are integrins The major families leukocyte in selectins of adhesion and (

). Table 3.4 are cells, expressed their endothelial and ligands. on as These are leukocytes molecules

interactions • Selectins and initial endothelium. between weak leukocytes the mediate extracellular (hence contain domain expressed that the binds are on Selectins sugars receptors leukocytes an and that of name). the lectin part endothelium three are of surface the platelets on present L-selectin The CD62E), E-selectin and called (also of (CD62P), most P-selectin members this endothelium; (CD62L), endothelial family on and cells; leukocytes. found expressed on acid-containing for ligands The backbones. to sialic are selectins oligosaccharides bound glycoprotein expressed are endothelium, at not after selectins endothelial mediators. or The are all other levels typically unactivated and upregulated and stimulation low at cytokines by on are binding tissue produced). to of the largely injury or the leukocytes is restricted endothelium at (where mediators sites infection Therefore, of cells, cell P-selectin P-selectin such or is exposure primarily the bodies; mediators to minutes For endothelial as however, distributed in Weibel-Palade thrombin, surface. found to histamine of in example, intracellular unactivated within is by L-selectin E-selectin macrophages, cells, necrosis and Similarly, that after only and cells ligand produced endothelial cytokines expressed tumor and the tissues. and encounters following microbes cells, (TNF), endothelium by IL-1 factor mast with dead stimulation on are themselves tissue dendritic are for described later.) in detail and (These more are other cytokines express also the express molecules endothelial at complementary P-selectins, ligands which for bind tips of and on L-selectin the Leukocytes microvilli all their cells. Eand the to of low-affinity easily and a by blood. flowing the off disrupted fast they rate, are are These interactions with to the As a and begin the roll along endothelial and thus bound detach, bind again, result, bind, surface. leukocytes These on to them selectin-mediated give weak the interactions leukocytes endothelium. opportunity slow the rolling adhesion down recognize additional and molecules the

integrins. family of adhesion to surface by Firm of leukocyte endothelium mediated • called leukocytes is a proteins mediate of adhesion two-chain extracellular are and endothelium cells glycoproteins that to various transmembrane Integrins matrix. the to the of leukocytes are expressed They membranes to specific are not do and by a the chemokines. ligands low-affinity their adhere normally activated in leukocytes leukocyte form until plasma on and bind secreted endothelial the concentrations many cell by Chemokines are at proteoglycans, endothelial cells of at chemoattractant are high that displayed on to inflammation, surface. are sites cytokines converting chemokines, cells integrins form. leukocytes high-affinity a thus their cluster undergo encounter When together, and rolling the to displayed the and activated, the are changes conformational cells for ligands and their the IL-1, to increase other same cytokines, TNF activate endothelial of notably expression time, At integrins. (also function–associated called integrins the CD11aCD18) ligands binds macrophage-1 adhesion and which include antigen-1 (LFA-1) leukocyte These molecule-1 inter-cellular (ICAM-1), to http://ebooksmedicine.net

ACTIVATION Proteoglycan matrix) (low-affinity X–modified ROLLING Microbes (TNF, STABLE MIGRATION CHEMOKINES Macrophage Integrin THROUGH IL-1) ENDOTHELIUM Fibrin E-selectin ADHESION fibronectin with INTEGRIN Integrin P-selectin Integrin (ICAM-1) BY (high-affinity Sialyl–Lewis Leukocyte state) glycoprotein Cytokines state) Chemokines PECAM-1 microbes and ligand (CD31) (extracellular

Fig. process for The here leukocyte blood shown through of neutrophils. migration 3.4 vessels, multistep then across activated membrane, leukocytes chemoattractants the endothelium, of pierce adhere toward source and the basement become The transmigrate emanating and the injury. move endothelium, to roll, first from then integrins; of molecules integrins in Different process: to selectins step each play to at neutrophils proteoglycans) (PECAM-1) and increase bound of rolling; roles chemokines displayed avidity transmigration. in this in activating the (usually CD31 predominant in firm adhesion; molecule-1; endothelial (CD31), platelet molecule-1; TNF, cell tumor adhesion factor. adhesion PECAM-1 Inter-cellular necrosis ICAM-1,

and 3.4 Leukocyte Endothelial Table Adhesion Molecules

leukocytes (homotypic Endothelial Ig CD31 interaction) CD31 cells,

immunoglobulin; adhesion antigen-1; molecule-1; venule; endothelial factor; mucosal cell TNF, intercellular interleukin-1; ICAM, Ig, lymphocyte MAdCAM-1, necrosis tumor adhesion adhesion PSGL-1, ligand-1; molecule-1; molecule. GlyCAM-1, cell glycan-bearing cell IL-1, molecule; glycoprotein CLA, adhesion high HEV, Cutaneous vascular adhesion P-selectin VCAM,

( the vascular (CD11bCD18), integrin and adhesion which http://ebooksmedicine.net very to (VLA-4) antigen (Mac-1) cell binds late antigen-4 molecule-1 (VCAM-1),

). Table 3.4 in leukocytes integrin-mediated of of ligands results endothelium the the integrin site of expression firm on The inflammation. of the and binding integrins at leukocytes cytokine-induced the the increased on to combination of affinity endothelium of endothelium. their to integrins leukocytes and rolling, stop leading the ligands them signals firmly engagement that and leukocytes to attach The changes the arrest by cytoskeletal delivers

as that telling these leukocyte defective deficiencies of in of a most of inflammation. molecules is existence result molecules and adhesion impaired of the leukocyte in consequence bacterial importance adhesion The recurrent infections the genetic proof These 5. described deficiencies leukocyte Chapter are in adhesion

through cells vessel between on being endothelial at squeezing After intercellular the surface, by the junctions. arrested wall leukocytes primarily migrate occurs the called post-capillary mainly retraction maximal there of in venules, This cells. transmigration, site is which extravasation of leukocytes, at endothelial driven (described Further is by chemokines produced in shortly). a along of which movement gradient travel tissues, chemical leukocytes to stimulate extravascular leukocytes cells, the adhesion CD31), endothelium. for adhesion the platelet of (also an addition, mediates molecule events on and endothelial the to leukocytes traverse leukocytes (Ig) binding molecule-1 called (PECAM-1) cell needed endothelial superfamily immunoglobulin expressed In secreting endothelium, basement by the the extravascular membrane, pierce tissue. they After enter traversing leukocytes the probably and collagenases, not transmigration. vessel the is injured during wall leukocyte Typically,

Chemotaxis Leukocytes of

along tissues toward called which the a by of the exiting as a chemotaxis, site locomotion leukocytes the circulation, process gradient. chemical defined in move After injury is and endogenous act substances the Both including as following: chemoattractants, can exogenous

products, particularly Bacterial with termini Nformylmethionine peptides

chemokine especially the of Cytokines, those family

C5a the of Components particularly complement system,

acid lipoxygenase of the of (LTB4) leukotriene arachidonic pathway (AA) particularly Products B4 metabolism,

response chemoattractants microbes These during host and by and to by damage reactions. immunologic and tissue cells are in infections produced binding surface protein-coupled leukocytes. All of seventransmembrane by receptors act to G the on localization amounts actin, resulting polymerization initiated of receptors these Signals of increased filaments the edge back. that messengers the second of from at at in activate and induce cell myosin the leading filopodia extension, the extending with the by automobile The an that cell the drive. front pull direction of back much wheels leukocyte moves like of front-wheel pull the in of inflammatory result net leukocytes the the toward that direction is migrate locally stimulus chemoattractants. the produced in The

the age inflammatory the the and of the varies response of nature with The infiltrate of leukocyte stimulus. type and 24 are endothelial induced phagesover24to48hours(Fig.3.5 to gradually In predominate inflammatory attach most the during rapidly acute molecules numerous in neutrophils: the preponderance rapidly are they infiltrate for first to may the adhesion other more neutrophils more replaced blood that the by than hours monocyte-derived forms early in the cells, E-selectins. such firmly as on of they of ).Thereareseveralreasons chemokines, more to P-and inflammation, and respond are leukocytes, 6 they macro After hours. apoptosis entering and disappear tissues, short-lived; 48 24 are they neutrophils undergo to within not the also in dominant prolonged in thus but the only may reactions. survive they longer and become tissues, Macrophages proliferate inflammatory population infiltration. exceptions cellular of this to There are, however, stereotypic pattern reactions the be viral response); macrophages, arrive; by first in by in infections, certain those some dominated eosinophils Pseudomonas is cell may bacteria—the infiltrate by be the to dominated prominent for and neutrophils and (reflecting days; reactions, immune type. lymphocytes, plasma are lymphocytes example, infections—for may In allergic activated several a cells cellular hypersensitivity cells produced

therapeutic migration recruitment understanding molecular for The large controlling of a potential harmful has and leukocyte targets inflammation. of number provided major clinical are of among in and diseases, are TNF, for leukocyte are most cytokines successful leukocyte of and antagonists integrins for the in one block developed trials. the inflammatory Agents recruitment, therapeutics being diseases that inflammatory ever tested chronic approved is the also of physiologic the of themselves ability can the microbes, but compromise Predictably, which, effect function patients response. inflammatory have antagonists of of course, the these controlling inflammation to defend not only the desired treated against

migrate from located, and Leukocytes their or the infection to tissue into of perform to infectious or activated extravascular recruited tissues blood damaged pathogens injury, site functions. are the tissue are where the be may

through is of migration process multistep endothelium a recruitment consisting by endothelium and loose gaps. Leukocyte by (mediated interendothelial to selectins); attachment attachment (mediated to integrins); on rolling firm and

ligands chemokines).Tissue of the (also of promote to increase cells of promote (TNF, or and Various their directional on integrins cytokines. damaged tissues expression for leukocytes and (chemokines), many IL-1), pathogens and other these produce cytokines of selectins responding endothelium the macrophages avidity integrin migration the ligands

inflammatory Neutrophils by later replaced monocytes and infiltrate in the predominate macrophages. early and are

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 3.5 inflammatory reactions. Nature of leukocyte infiltrates in The myocardium after an ischemic show necrosis inflammatory reaction the photomicrographs in (infarction). and vessels. Early (neutrophilic) (A) infiltrates blood congested cellular (mononuclear) (B) Later infiltrates. and infiltration. kinetics cellular edema approximate of (C) The shown simplicity, For edema acute edema response, infiltration is waves occur. delayed as neutrophil although also secondary transient can and an of

to perform of injury and infection of Phagocytosis be Clearance they must their functions. tissue or activated expending to are at would in collectively Agent we the they leuko-and body high cells that a be induces to called alert our of of makes required. responses wasteful patrol energy while several This it them microbes want before sense keep defenders dead Offending constantly, perfect because, Recognition our leukocytes level are or funccyte The activation (

Fig. 3.6 ). important that responses and recruited neutrophils of are to site microbes and destruction tional (particularly have and most for a After monocytes) phagocytosis are other offenders been leukocytes

A 1. phagocyte bind to Microbes AND receptors RECOGNITION ATTACHMENT

2. of Degradation microbes ENGULFMENT Phagocyte enzymes lysosomal in membrane phagolysosome by 3. AND KILLING DEGRADATION

Fig. destruction and microbes. intracellular 3.7 of Phagocytosis receptors phagocytic by Phagocytosis fusion the of bacterium) on and leukocyte within destruction nitrogen phagolysosomes membrane,engulfment,and of lysosomal species. by the and with vacuoles enzymes ingested the is followed reactive oxygen to lysosomes.This (e.g., particles (A) a involves particle of binding by a active components the ) catalyzes of the into enzyme, conversion to of ( phagosome form membrane of (B) O2 oxidase enzyme phagocyte cytoplasmic − In phagocytes, the superoxide the and oxygen activated assemble H2O2. which the in Myeloperoxidase, H2O2 neutrophils, to granules converts in present hypochlorite. the of (NO) oxide species and microbes. nitric oxygen ingested kill (C) (ROS) reactive Microbicidal (not phagocytosis, extracellular contents released shown). tissues into granule be may During myeloperoxidase; MPO, iNOS, ROS, oxygen Inducible NO reactive synthase; species.

intracellular killing. in consequences. defensive inflammation of its may to injurious Several other responses the functions and contribute aid

sequential the particle engulfment, ingested ingested or three subsequent (1) to of steps: involves Phagocytosis (3) leukocyte; formation the degradation the ( phagocytic (2) a material vacuole; by and and of killing of be attachment recognition with

Fig. 3.7 ). of by mediators. various steps triggered are and microbes, activation by debris, phagocytes necrotic These

by Receptors. Phagocytic Recognition receptors, for Mannose receptors scavenger receptors, and various and opsonins bind ingest microbes. of that and macrophage is binds mannose a lectin residues fucose receptor The glycoproteins terminal mannose glycolipids. and terminal typically mammalian part whereas microbial glycoproteins or N-acetylgalactosamine. These found sialic acid contain walls, of glycolipids cell on sugars and are molecules and not Therefore, microbes recognizes mannose receptor host the cells. receptors bind lipoprotein of as ingest microbes. and as (LDL) well particles low-density a Scavenger variety enhanced by for greatly (coated) specific is The efficiency high-affinity are of phagocytosis the (opsonins) proteins microbes opsonized which express receptors. when phagocytes plasma recognized antibodies, which C3b mannose-binding leukocytes. are of of by major notably activation, the product opsonins lectins, are and (Ig)G all The certain specific on complement receptors immunoglobulin breakdown lectin,

Engulfment. the receptors, cytoplasm particle. bound the pinches to After vesicle is it, to membrane the a (pseudopods) cytosolic particle flow around extensions and form a phagocyte encloses off plasma (phagosome) that of fuses then the the The phagosome into contents lysosomal in discharge phagolysosome of ( resulting with lysosomes,

Fig. 3.7 ). also During into the normal release extracellular the space, contents granule damaging bystander this cells. some process innocent thereby may phagocyte

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Microbes Intracellular Debris Destruction and of

and derived the reactive killing ingested also destruction lysosomal and reactive by species, ( accomplished nitric of species are intermediates), reactive The nitrogen oxygen of mainly (NO), from oxide materials microbes (ROS, enzymes oxygen called

Fig. 3.7 ). cells. necrotic step the of infectious and in final is the agents elimination This occur efficiently dead-cell within and their degradation killing of microbes elimination and most debris after activation. of neutrophils The and macrophages these lysosomes, which to sequestered brought. in All killing mechanisms phagocytosed are normally are materials phagocyte avoid it segregated to its substances potentially while nucleus cell’s harmful performing the function. is to and normal damage cytoplasm Thus, are from the

Species. Reactive Oxygen (O2 process, and phosphate) which oxidizes the ( called assembly enzyme, multicomponent to dinucleotide ROS rapid NADPH • oxidase), oxygen activation phagocyte of produced ) NADPH are (reduced (also oxidase by in superoxide nicotinamide-adenine a the anion and, the reduces

Fig. ). 3.7B this is called In oxidative respiratory neutrophils, is reaction and burst. to phagocytosis, the tightly linked an oxidase proteins. of consisting least at enzyme complex is Phagocyte seven In the different and are enzyme membrane in cytoplasm. located of plasma the components resting neutrophils, the In to complex. protein cytosolic they form where phagosomal assemble response activating enzyme the to and the membrane, translocate functional the stimuli, components within damaging ingested can act are produced ROS the particles the where they phagolysosome, on cell. host Thus, without the dis-mutation, a converted then is hydrogen of peroxide by • and simultaneous O2 mostly so spontaneous produced (H2O2), process into reduction. oxidation itself. not kill is microbes to efficiently by able H2O2 as ingredient granules active azurophilic in of bleach). contain neutrophils household However, (MPO), Cl−, to converts in the presence such myeloperoxidase which, the a , − H2O2 the enzyme halide (OCl2 hypochlorite of the halide oxidation cellular of constituents) bound is that and is the proteins lipids latter (lipid which by halogenation by peroxidation). destroys microbes or to a agent (in anti-microbial potent covalently The efficient is most H2O2-MPO-halide neutrophils. bactericidal system of the The system redundancy MPO Nevertheless, infection, susceptibility leukocytes. in causes to inherited microbicidal of in modest deficiency the only a of increase emphasizing mechanisms (OH•), radical hydroxyl to another is agent. destructive H2O2 also powerful converted discussed modify free and destroy bind Chapter nucleic these cellular in and cells such 2, proteins, and acids, microbes. as thus As radicals oxygen-derived to lipids,

exposure to leukocytes after following Oxygen-derived be from chemokines, and a extracellularly phagocytic may challenge. released complexes, microbes, antigen–antibody or radicals These are tissue accompanying damage implicated inflammation. ROS in

that these cells Serum, potentially protect harmful fluids, radicals. oxygen-derived anti-oxidant possess mechanisms host and against tissue is 2; detoxifies variety the in (3) they catalase, These of include in which and Chapter be can (1) powerful which detoxifier. H2O2; or a H2O2 dismutase, glutathione found types; anti-oxidants activated are superoxide in cell discussed enzyme peroxidase, (2) another the metabolites oxygen-derived The production these of tissues. inflammatory given and any depends reaction balance radicals by of inactivation role in free cells between and on

ROS in in generation the of disease, the chronic are described immunodeficiency cause granulomatous disease of 5. defects an called Genetic Chapter

Oxide. Nitric produced in synthase by participates killing. soluble arginine of (NOS), a gas the oxide nitric also from NO, microbial action (eNOS), different (nNOS), (iNOS). three endothelial neuronal of inducible There and are types NOS: neurotransmitter, to constitutively respectively. expressed low they a and tone are and the at levels, generate vascular maintain nNOS eNOS NO acts and as cytokines microbial killing, the in is activated is when macrophages products, microbial or IFN-γ) NO. induces the involved type iNOS, that production by are expressed and of (e.g., highly generate In macrophages, NO ( the (O2 ) • reacts free (ONOO•) superoxide with to peroxynitrite radical reactive

Fig. 3.7C ). lipids, and nucleic attack nitrogen-derived and acids the microbes proteins, similar cells. and damage radicals, free These of host ROS, to

produced and relaxes addition promotes as to NO endothelial vascular a microbicidal vasodilation. its muscle role by In substance, smooth cells of NO if an the role in of inflammation. vascular reactions this clear is important action not It plays acute

and Enzymes Granule Proteins. Other monocytes anti-microbial may tissues contribute dead packed contain Neutrophils tissue microbes granules and that and and with proteins to damage. and enzymes degrade and These lysosomes. are thus distinct granules secretory classical actively from granules. types two Neutrophils main have of (or granules phosphatase. collagenase, lactoferrin, lysozyme, alkaline secondary) gelatinase, plasminogen specific activator, and contain histaminase, The smaller azurophil defensins), MPO, bactericidal G, nonspecific and (such (or acid proteinase larger The as variety neutral granules hydrolases, of factors collagenases, a contain (elastase, proteases 3). cathepsin primary) ingested may material the materials and these fuse engulfed containing with vesicles described lysosomes, with granules Phagocytic earlier), are destroyed. (and as the granules types of extracellular of granule also addition, to undergo release both In exocytosis (degranulation), leading contents.

serve enzymes functions. Different granule different degrade proton within which pumps. membrane-bound phagolysosomes, proteases acidified are and Acid bacteria by debris accompanies collagen, tissue extracellular are proteases capable the various degrading destruction basement membrane, components, Neutral resulting cartilage, that of elastin, and fibrin, inflammatory in as processes. such Neutrophil bacteria. infections degrading combats by virulence factors elastase of hydrolases, activator. collagenase, contain also Macrophages phospholipase, acid elastase, plasminogen and

the can the further infiltration, damaging enzymes, inflammation effects by destructive initial if granule unchecked, of potentiate leukocytic of tissues. Because normally harmful tissue system These a proteases, in the and fluids. controlled by anti-proteases are of however, serum Foremost among α1-anti-trypsin, major inhibitor neutrophil these is is the elastase. which of proteases, may as inhibitors with action these case α1-anti-trypsin is lead 13). to of deficiency leukocyte deficiency A of sustained in (Chapter patients the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

extracellular them anti-microbial fibrils. sites (NETs) of are and fibrillar extracellular infection that Neutrophil traps microbes spread networks in of the trapping at the prevent by the substances concentrate (mainly (e.g., cytokines, chemokines, They mediators neutrophils are and in and inflammatory pathogens infectious to and response bacteria complement proteins). produced by fungi) chromatin viscous that meshwork traps extracellular consist peptides a anti-microbial enzymes concentrates nuclear binds The of ( and granule proteins of as and such

Fig. 3.8 ). phagocytosis. additional not killing does mechanism involve NETs microbes provide an that of process affecting sometimes to death the the representing In form of of lost, leading NET the called of formation, neutrophils. are death the NETosis, neutrophils nuclei the a cell cells, distinctive of sepsis. blood NETs in during the been detected also have nucleoproteins source a in the NETs, antigens DNA, may their and which DNA in systemic diseases, individuals includes be nuclear particularly against associated which chromatin lupus, in own of react (Chapter autoimmune nuclear histones 5). The and

to circumstances: are several tissues under important and of cells mediators injury normal Leukocytes

microbes, reaction or infection normal defense a against site As infectious suffer of tissues collateral the when part of damage. near at the some host certain to than response prolonged tuberculosis contributes and viral as the In diseases pathology microbe hepatitis, does such eradicate, the are more to that itself. as such difficult infections

is certain response diseases. autoimmune in host against as directed inappropriately the When inflammatory tissues,

diseases, in asthma, against host environmental drug as When usually some allergic harmless the and reactions. substances, “hyper-reacts” including

Leukocytes by tissues injurious releasing damage molecules. mechanisms. contents are granules potentially toxic several released milieu leukocytes The into by of the extracellular by Controlled activated is following degranulation leukocytes. of secretion granule a of contents response normal surfaces easily be of the on the environment. these as immune amounts to flat glomerular materials into leukocytes activation large granule enzymes complexes of phagocytes and basement of ingest If phagocytosis”) extracellular (“frustrated ingested, membrane), substances that and deposited immovable also release the encounter cannot the such triggers strong surround (e.g., inability damaging may and membrane of silica urate such release the phagolysosome as of crystals, substances, the lead also and Some to phagocytosed damage contents. the

Fig. (NETs). Neutrophil traps 3.8 extracellular cytoplasm (A) nuclei green. stained Healthy red neutrophils with and material (B) of Release extracellular nuclei), their from forming traps. nuclear (note neutrophils that two lost have of in electron micrograph An bacteria trapped (staphylococci) NETs. (C) Rev Beneficial Microbiol permission.) to neutrophils 2007, make Nat Brinkmann with 5:577, V, (From die Zychlinsky NETs, why suicide: A: http://ebooksmedicine.net

Leukocytes of Other Activated Responses Functional

leukocytes activated to and several addition microbes dead roles in In other cells, eliminating defense. host play inflammatory collagen, growth reactions, factors the the and that either of cells Importantly, remodel produce that of synthesis fibroblasts tissues. and that these endothelial or stimulate especially enzymes and cells, cytokines proliferation amplify macrophages, limit connective can chronic Because the in roles after has inflammation also macrophages tissue subsided. inflammation activities, centrial repair, of these have and orchestrating are later discussed chapter. functions These the in of macrophages

we neutrophils discussion the importance inflammation, of In this and of acute macrophages. emphasize contribute to which has cells are inflammation. of some that immunity, clear become also lymphocytes, adaptive However, it acute T of in which (so-called cells”), that are detail IL-17 cells most more those produce are these the Chapter discussed “TH17 The cytokine important in 5. of secretion that IL-17 chemokines induces recruit other leukocytes. the abscesses inflammation, susceptible the absence are responses, of lacking In TH17 that of fungal warmth individuals the to redness. “cold as and skin infections, the and bacterial effective abscesses,” and are such acute develop features classic

Termination Acute Inflammatory the of Response

damage. host a its minimize cause capacity needs of powerful injury, controls inherent system tissue Such defense, with to to tight of the degraded release. simply after bursts, agents stimulus are removed persists, inflammation short and as only offending part, because are declines half-lives, their as in mediators inflammation have the the rapid after produced are In long apoptosis the tissues or Neutrophils hours two die leaving in within after short half-lives also to a blood. have by day and variety actively terminate the addition, as that the triggers signals In stop develops, inflammation a reaction. process itself of type of a active anti-inflammatory arachidonic leukotrienes termination other IL-10, These and to later), liberation mechanisms transforming macrophages from proinflammatory the acid lipoxins from (described of produced, anti-inflammatory and switch the factor-β growth including metabolite (TGF-β) cytokines, and cells. in include impulses Other TNF macrophages. control that discharge), been the inhibit mechanisms (cholinergic production in demonstrated have which experimentally include of neural

followed Leukocytes by destruction phagocytosis, and microbes cells dead in can their by eliminate phagolysosomes.

in by caused granule by activated and radicals (ROS, enzymes. Destruction is leukocytes generated free NO)

and trap can nets their destroy to microbes. Neutrophils contents extrude form extracellular nuclear that

be may environment. the released extracellular enzymes into Granule

damaging and also cells capable normal are (the microbes inflammation). of of dead of The (the inflammation) function to role pathologic mechanisms that eliminate consequences tissues physiologic

mediators no longer terminate needed. inflammatory reaction it acute is when Anti-inflammatory the

the mediators initiate reactions. and inflammation The inflammatory of that regulate substances are mediators professors! student of may (as do the daunting the list harried find Although agents used many large acetaminophen. that worthy been every are armamentarium by knowledge note aspirin people it include anti-inflammatory such a design this of that and used is and ), to as of drugs which has day familiar most and mediators and activation products products chemokines), (prostaglandins lipid cytokines (including acute ( important vasoactive are leukotrienes), The complement amines, of of inflammation

3.5 Table ). We of by general summarizing the the begin properties

Table Mediators of Principal Inflammation 3.5

more molecules. cells, inflammation Prostaglandins leukocytes Mast fever then of some pain, Vasodilation, mediators and of http://ebooksmedicine.net important discuss the

inflammation. activated circulating from inactive produced the are or inflammation, be site of by of derived be Mediators precursors locally cells may at may at that site the stimulus. (e.g., Cell-derived de are to mediators are response leukotrienes, prostaglandins, released intracellular a (e.g., amines) rapidly in cytokines) granules synthesized from novo or mast most of cell epithelia mediators of major cells, cells, elaborate dendritic and cells, mediators. to neutrophils, and the inflammation tissue platelets, types produce The be that acute endothelial macrophages, can induced but also are some important offending Therefore, reactions against agents mediators most tissues. for are cell-derived in circulation properties. usually in are of activated, to proteolytic acquire by their must proteins) (e.g., be biologic series as complement present cleavages, inactive Plasma-derived that mediators a the precursors circulating microbes, and produced can against are are liver, tissues. in into recruited the effective be mainly also They

products in substances that including cells. response stimulate mediators only Active released from various to inflammation, produced microbial necrotic and are molecules pathways, trigger receptors of described well-defined signaling stimuli earlier. these and as Many when The stimulus that ensures usual as the tissues it or for normally microbes where needed. triggered initiating requirement is is only inflammation dead and

short-lived. of are the Most mediators enzymes, inactivated scavenged They they or inhibited. decay, otherwise or are are by quickly or is regulates thus There of system and mediator checks balances that a actions. discussed built-in mechanisms are control class These of mediator. with each

stimulate of release other the mediator can mediators. One complement For cytokine production instance, many IL-1, and histamine, TNF to of of on stimulate chemokines. endothelial the cytokine, stimulate cells release of acts and another activation the the products mediators secondary providing initial The actions have for different may of certain may action activities, the mediator. mediators and instances, even but thus amplifying—or, a have counteracting—the initial as mechanisms the also same in opposing

Histamine Vasoactive and Serotonin Amines:

on and major histamine important vasoactive serotonin. are have named amines, blood actions so two vessels, they because The be cells first and during as among released They mediators preformed molecules are are the in to inflammation. therefore stored of blood connective the to sources are vessels. histamine adjacent are in which The present mast cells, normally tissue richest found Histamine and blood basophils is also platelets. in called binding to including of mechanisms; (allergic) 5); complement unknown physical products mast stored mast in (2) or is variety described of heat, by antibodies degranulation anaphylatoxins cell reactions trauma, released cold, (1) and later. which (C3a a by stimuli, C5a), is (3) such as immediate underlies granules to in response hypersensitivity and (Chapter cells, of and It injury, pathways on and signaling specific Antibodies complement rapid receptors that degranulation. to trigger cells products mast and bind induce may (e.g., and of substance IL-8) release (IL-1, P) trigger also cytokines histamine. Neuropeptides

increases of arterioles and causes dilation of Histamine permeability venules. the vascular gaps producing venules, of of considered phase mediator postcapillary earlier. as principal immediate the the discussed increased interendothelial Histamine is in permeability, transient endothelial effects binding vasoactive called on via mediated receptors, to H1 microvascular Its are receptors, cells. mainly and bind inflammatory some are antihistamine to The that are commonly reactions, used such that receptor antagonists as receptor. treat allergies, block to H1 drugs the of in also for potent bronchial and more later, causing spasms for some of relevant described causes much muscles, muscles, example, asthma. contraction but Histamine smooth leukotrienes, are

neuroendocrine not in gastrointestinal mediator platelets present in (5-hydroxytryptamine) preformed tract, cells, and but vasoactive humans. Serotonin cells the certain is and in rodents in such a mast as tract. primary as a gastrointestinal function the is Its neurotransmitter in is is the of vasoconstrictor, a unclear. inflammation in It but also action importance this

from present mediators and prostaglandins acid membrane are phospholipids, lipid The inflammation. in reactions vascular in produced cellular stimulate they and and arachidonic acute leukotrienes the sources essential acid or from dietary Arachidonic a conversion linoleic acid that polyunsaturated is acid. fatty fatty is 20-carbon acid derived from by and Most esterified cellular phospholipids. is incorporated arachidonic into acid membrane (e.g., or by acid physical A2. stimuli of the phospholipase arachidonic mainly chemical, other trigger Mechanical, from release activating cellular C5a) phospholipases, mediators and membranes acid is arachidonic the to converted membrane, freed mediators. from bioactive rapidly Once generate These (which (which leukotrienes classes eicosanoids mediators, = Greek also enzymes: of (because 20-carbon produce prostaglandins) are lipoxins) acids; derived 20), synthesized two are and fatty eicosa cyclooxygenases called from they and by ( lipoxygenases major

Fig. ). 3.9 step G many types every to on virtually mediate and can of Eicosanoids inflammation ( receptors cell protein-coupled bind

3.6 Table

and the (PGs) Prostaglandins other cells, reactions endothelial inflammation. cell in macrophages, types, by involved cells, of many produced are mast systemic are and and vascular They and by actions called COX-1 of are COX-2. generated the two cyclooxygenases inflammatory (e.g., the inhibitors, it also gastrointestinal may Lipoxygenase tract). http://ebooksmedicine.net tissues, constitutively in stimuli and inhibitors response where aspirin, serve in a COX-1 expressed kidneys, produced most fluid is balance is in to homeostatic function and indomethacin in electrolyte the cytoprotection normal thus PGH) a is and letter is and features named and structural by tissues. in inflammatory the 2), generates (e.g., PGs most 1, (e.g., PGD, but based on the or In PGF, subscript reactions, contrast, PGG, it stimuli COX-2 numeral low are that a induced by coded PGE, which absent in inflammatory involved are indicates Prostaglandins the double bonds number in compound. of action 3.6 is in Principal of prostaglandins PGE2, which A2), Acid PGI2 (prostacyclin), Inflammation of Actions are and (thromboxane each Table in in of inflammation the enzyme a by The Metabolites pathway. an the PGD2, on TXA2 PGF2a, important intermediate derived specific most Arachidonic and Eicosanoid Some have restricted tissue functions. distribution Action of enzymes these

mast is made prostaglandin cells; the • by PGD2 major

and more Vasodilation of (which PGE1, increases the Prostaglandins PGE2, permeability (prostacyclin), with distributed), causes vasodilation PGI2 PGD2 along widely PGE2 it is

E4 Vasoconstriction thus leukotrienes and postcapillary edema. resultant venules, A2, exudation C4, D4, potentiating Thromboxane is chemoattractant for PGD2 a also

permeability C4, Increased neutrophils. D4, Leukotrienes E4 vascular

• B4 contain enzyme Platelets leukocyte the synthase, Chemotaxis, adhesion Leukotriene thromboxane

the contraction synthesizing PGC4, Smooth TXA2, is which eicosanoid. platelet PGD4, responsible Prostaglandins muscle major PGE4 for is platelet-aggregating potent agent promotes TXA2 and thrombosis. and vasoconstrictor, thus a

PGF1a. end of endothelium stable and prostacyclin its In vascular for which (PGI2) the responsible synthase, prostacyclin product formation contains contrast, is and normal on to prevent formation Prostacyclin vasodilator platelet serves aggregation, a thus endothelial thrombus a potent is inhibitor of cells. and in 4). thromboxane– A has coronary cerebral (Chapter been imbalance and prostacyclin implicated artery thrombosis

their common and local fever, two are to effects, inflammation. pathogenesis manifestations pain prostaglandins of In systemic of in addition involved the stimuli, hypersensitive during skin and PGE2 fever (described to causes the infections painful makes later).

recruitment. action muscle of and are Leukotrienes mast and reactions in lipoxygenase and involved produced leukocytes leukocyte smooth vascular are cells by the and in turn gives leukotrienes (LTA4), the or LTC4. multiple LTB4 leukotriene first A4 which to rise synthesis of in steps, generates of which involves The enzymes. release by and potent adhesion macrophages, lysosomal LTB4 and and neutrophils a produced endothelium, ROS, and of cells generation of chemotactic is to of and is agent aggregation neutrophils, venular the activator of causing some venules. in (important LTE4, of vasoconstriction, and its The and and mast leukotriene cysteinyl-containing metabolites, are cause increased bronchospasm permeability produced in mainly asthma), LTC4 LTD4 intense cells and

the acid leukotrienes, leukocytes. lipoxins inflammation the the by but are by Lipoxins arachidonic suppress from generated unlike prostaglandins and lipoxygenase of also pathway, recruitment inhibiting They to and chemotaxis adhesion endothelium. inhibit neutrophil biosynthesis the these required are in mediators. that They unusual two cell also populations for are transcellular of interacting leukocytes. lipoxins the particularly synthesis, these are produce platelets intermediates Leukocytes, in converted and by lipoxin neutrophils, to with

Inhibitors Prostaglandins and Pharmacologic of Leukotrienes

develop or inflammation. driven inhibit to drugs that actions production attempts in eicosanoids their inflammation thus suppress The of and has importance the as nonsteroidal include such other anti-inflammatory Cyclooxygenase ibuprofen. inhibitors following: (NSAIDs), drugs drugs and • aspirin These anti-inflammatory include thus their fever); and prostaglandin this aspirin cyclooxygenases. inactivating (hence irreversibly both synthesis by efficacy and all treating pain in inhibit COX-1 COX-2 block and does They COX-2 Selective COX-1. these 300-fold that in potent COX-2 inhibitors of newer drugs blocking than more 200to class are are a that interest both in acid-induced and prostaglandins COX-1 responsible There of generates epithelial are protecting physiologic in target is of gastric are injury, from has whereas great because in involved that COX-2 only as for a been that the cells functions involved possibility therapeutic prostaglandins the as such COX-2 inflammation inflammation. production anti-inflammatory COX-2 this should selective of inhibitors, such the the nonselective be If toxicities gastric ulceration. idea as without correct, the inhibitors having is these seems COX-2 distinctions homeostasis. some play as not also to normal are role However, in absolute, thrombosis, by platelet which cerebrovascular selective (PGI2), cell COX-2 impair inhibitors the production events, Furthermore, possibly of may of aggregation. cardiovascular leaving induces because COX-1-mediated prevents which platelets endothelial production they while intact of TXA2, prostacyclin increase risk and the vascular inhibition toward combination with the tilt other thrombosis, risk Thus, factors selective of especially may increase that thrombosis. the COX-2 in balance outweigh have do disease used individuals cardiovascular benefits when the Nevertheless, drugs’ drugs who these their risks. are factors in risk not and for

Lipoxygenase inhibitors. of developed. pathway not new NSAIDs, many this by have inhibitors and enzyme been affected is 5-lipoxygenase asthma. are Pharmacologic zileuton) inhibit that useful in of agents (e.g., leukotriene treatment the production

proinflammatory that transcription broad-spectrum encoding phospholipase are (e.g., and genes TNF), anti-inflammatory A2, of agents reduce iNOS. IL-1 Corticosteroids the cytokines and COX-2,

and receptor receptors block of leukotrienes. leukotriene Leukotriene actions antagonists the prevent the the Montelukast) of are drugs in useful treatment asthma. (e.g., These

but connective that reactions. secreted mediate cells) Cytokines activated types and many and and and cells, endothelial, proteins inflammatory also regulate lymphocytes, dendritic epithelial, cell macrophages, by tissue immune are (principally act and convention, factors growth on cytokines. not under epithelial mesenchymal grouped are cells By that properties functions cytokines and general Chapter are discussed of in 5. The in involved are cytokines acute Here the inflammation reviewed (

Table 3.7

endothelium leukocytes recruitment IL-1 and vessels. critical by of migration TNF their in leukocyte adhesion and promoting serve through to roles produced cells dendritic and lymphocytes cells, as is and cells IL-1 also produce macrophages Activated produce cytokines; by mast these T and mainly some epithelial well. TNF a of and other cells, of can secretion Microbial variety IL-1. products, and stimulate bodies, foreign the stimuli necrotic TNF inflammatory active cytokine microbial the and the biologically this is form IL-1 on TLRs induced synthesis by of stimulated and signals, generation of by earlier. through TNF but of is inflammasome, the described the is production other The signals sensors, same of the dependent

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Systemic Macrophages, phase cells other response) IL-6 effects (acute

IL-17 lymphocytes of neutrophils Recruitment monocytes and T

monocytes T neutrophils of Recruitment lymphocytes IL-17 and

are important cytokines most involved reactions in listed. inflammatory The lesser also and overlap inflammation. in is inflammation.There Many other acute involved roles in may between play chronic the cytokines cytokines considerable contribute inflammation listed the cytokines reactions. may also chronic to Specifically, inflammatory under all acute TNF, IFN-γ, interleukin-1; necrosis factor. NK, tumor natural IL-1, Interferon-γ; killer;

systemic and of to ( the The inflammation actions of contribute and TNF reactions IL-1 local

Fig. 3.10 ). the these of following: inflammation most important cytokines The roles in are

activation. Endothelial changes TNF spectrum a IL-1 endothelium Both induce of and referred to endothelial act on as to activation. of mostly and activity various including cytokines These molecules, integrins; procoagulant adhesion and endothelial and mediators, P-selectins leukocyte increased production of chemokines, ligands and the include endothelium. Eand other eicosanoids; expression increased of for increased changes

Activation other leukocytes and of cells. as to augments endotoxin stimulates TNF microbicidal such bacterial stimuli of and neutrophils activity macrophages. of other responses the mesenchymal fibroblasts other proliferation and synthesize activates cells. of and cells synovial collagen to stimulates IL-1 later also described cells generation the IL-6 T cells, of in 5. called Chapter subset of TH17 IL-1 and and helper stimulate CD4+ a

Systemic response. acute-phase acute-phase chapter). including systemic well responses injury, IL-1 the TNF in as IL-6) later with or (described (as infection the induce and associated fever conditions, later. resulting are and also systemic described response from pathogenesis They bacterial the of the syndrome other serious in infection inflammatory (SIRS), (sepsis) implicated disseminated

energy appetite. protein by regulates lipid TNF promoting • and balance catabolism and suppressing by loss, weight and and muscle contributes state cancers. TNF anorexia atrophy, accompanies of characterized pathologic some chronic to sustained cachexia, Therefore, by infections that production a

bowel earlier, have treatment chronic of TNF inflammatory inflammatory some and types diseases, As effective mentioned of in antagonists been the disease. psoriasis, arthritis, particularly rheumatoid remarkably macrophages to is complication microbes. resulting therapy susceptibility increased of infection, intracellular mycobacterial of to kill reduced ability this One from effective, and IL-1 of are of Although remain IL-1 TNF as not actions reasons that are obscure. for many antagonists the overlapping, on sepsis, either effect no the reaction. blocking contribute cytokine perhaps outcome Also, other has to because cytokines of systemic this serious inflammatory

of types (8–10 Chemokines chemoattractants kD) are of act leukocytes. specific for small family a that as proteins primarily identified. 20 for and different been have different 40 chemokines receptors About chemokines arrangement residues four cysteine major the to They groups, according in of are into the (C) proteins: classified

chemokines two of cysteines. first the separating have C-X-C acid conserved the four amino one residue These on chemokines primarily act neutrophils. of is this CXCL8) IL-8 called group. (now typical other limited activated It chemotaxis neutrophils, cells, and and is causes cell endothelial activation with by and monocytes macrophages, and eosinophils. secreted on activity types, of and inducers TNF. and most cytokines, important IL-1 microbial Its are products mainly

chemokines cysteine two have the conserved C-C residues first adjacent. for chemoattractants inflammatory CCL3), protein1α protein as The and serve include lymphocytes. chemokines, which eotaxin chemoattractant CCL2), basophils, eosinophils, monocytes, (MIP-1α, C-C mainly (CCL11), (MCP-1, macrophage and monocyte eosinophils. Although most class eotaxin chemokines overlapping the actions, in have of this recruits selectively

the first of chemokines C and cysteines. four conserved lack the third specific lymphocytes. relatively (e.g., C The for chemokines are XCL1) lymphotactin,

contain first the amino three chemokines cysteines. between CX3C two acids fractalkine only The this is known of called member class (CX3CL1). cells chemokine same membrane-bound protein, two the surface-bound a that cells, inflammatory monocytes in strong and potent cells. of a proteolysis has of T soluble the cell by form, and adhesion chemoattractant by This induced activity that derived for protein endothelial forms: cytokines exists on promotes

activities to their seven-transmembrane Chemokines G by binding protein–coupled receptors. mediate These http://ebooksmedicine.net

of 75 Mediators Inflammation

TNF,

molecules Increased expression of adhesion

Leukocytes IL-1, chemokines

leukocytes exhibit receptors. specificities, receptors overlapping ligand IL-6, express multiple usually IL-1, generally and glycoprotein of binding receptors are human CCR5) coreceptors viral cause thus as in of certain and (HIV), act cells. (CXCR4, into of in entry AIDS, involved virus virus and discussed envelope chemokine Chapter for 5, As a the immunodeficiency the

endothelial the on Chemokines displayed of in high cells proteoglycans are surface the and extracellular concentrations matrix. bind to at and two functions: have They main

inflammation. Acute chemokines the acting to affinity or endothelium thereby of leukocytes leukocyte tissue increase Most damage. as leukocytes attachment to chemoattractants, on and also stimulate guiding of sites by serve to integrins, infection are sometimes they Because the reaction, called of they inflammatory chemokines. mediate aspects inflammatory microbes is Their induced stimuli. other production by and

of tissue architecture. Maintenance tissues Some homeostatic chemokines. are and cells constitutively by are in produced chemokines stromal called sometimes nodes T lymph as of anatomic tissues, various discrete lymphocytes such in of areas organize regions B different (Chapter types and These in 5). the the spleen cell and

develop the because is functional difficult perhaps Although of these role suppress proved in inflammation, antagonists chemokines inflammation established, proteins. the has redundancy chemokine of it well that to of

The huge cytokines is list inflammation of implicated constantly in growing. and other described cells, IL-17, made local recruitment. reactions, the lymphocytes, two to considerable involved by In mainly produced are have macrophages ones promotes in which IL-6, systemic T received and neutrophil interest by is addition earlier, which and and that other antagonists IL-6 are treatment diseases. are receptor antagonists used of psoriasis the in and very effective inflammatory rheumatoid in arthritis, and IL-17 inflammation. Type function contribute of whose to inhibit systemic interferons, the replication, is I normal of viral some to manifestations also chapter. roles key described in in later play chronic the these Cytokines inflammation; are

that is and reactions. and in their inflammatory proteins defense membrane in The complement of function system pathologic against receptors collection microbes host mainly soluble a proteins, C9. There of than numbered some which more 20 are are complement through C1 They and microbial immunity function for against innate both in pathogens. defense adaptive the activation, of several elaborated of opsonization. increased In are proteins process vascular complement products cause permeability, complement and cleavage that chemotaxis, are The complement outlined in functions and of activation

Fig. 3.11

cascade degrade proteins enzymes in and complement activated Complement become forms are proteolytic in capable to of enzymatic amplification. them proteins, many forming thus tremendous an the plasma, present inactive that other of are (and critical of proteolysis is step most activation in complement the third The the

C3a: C5a, FUNCTIONS Inflammation EFFECTOR

by leukocytes Recruitment and microbes of leukocytes of Destruction activation

Fig. complement functions activation The system. of 3.11 and the complement C3. of different leads pathways cleavage to by of Activation functions complement other The the and by are by products complex (MAC). system complement of breakdown attack proteins, mediated membrane and the of C3

C3. component, abundant) of three one can by of C3 occur pathways: Cleavage

antigen by of triggered fixation (IgM is that to IgG) combined C1 pathway, which with The classical antibody has or

polysaccharides, which in by or (e.g., triggered absence The surface antibody of LPS), other alternative microbial substances, molecules endotoxin, pathway, and the complex can be

lectin pathway, which to The binds and directly plasma in activates mannose-binding on lectin carbohydrates C1 microbes

lead C3a splits into the C3 C3 to of formation fragments, enzyme distinct convertase, activation three complement C3b. which functionally called two an the All pathways and of and where attached complement is the being to released, the cell C3b C3a is molecule becomes or activated. covalently convertase, cell to to previously the and form then C5 C3b leave C5a which C5 generated More to binds the cleaves surface. attached fragments to release C5b culminating (C6–C9), attack composed the complex components multiple C9 C5b the late binds (MAC, in molecules). the of formation membrane of the complement tremendous minutes! surface proteins of deposit C3b activity on within 2 provides a or molecules such microbe 3 of of amplification enzymatic millions of that The can

main complement has ( functions system three The

Fig. and of and, C4a corresponding cells to and release 3.11 • cause increase permeability are vasodilation. products histamine cleavage C3a, thereby the a components from lesser and stimulate extent, that vascular Inflammation.C5a, complement mast called they the similar anaphylaxis of to effects (Chapter those anaphylatoxins because cell 5). called mast mediators They are have involved that are reaction in and also chemotactic eosinophils, a monocytes, basophils. neutrophils, agent C5a for is arachidonic in mediators. release C5a lipoxygenase of monocytes, the more activates of addition, acid causing neutrophils and In metabolism inflammatory pathway

Opsonization phagocytosis. and to neutrophils C3b iC3b fixed fragments. its promote as complement wall, opsonins when cell microbial cell C3b), receptors and cleavage macrophages, surface phagocytosis product these and act by (inactive for bear and which a

lysis. Cell permeable to membrane, MAC osmotic making resulting the the and (lysis). ions The water cells of the and deposition cell on in holes death in cells drills their walls, for important bacteria. mainly function with is of microbes thin the Neisseria complement cell as such killing of This deficiency by terminal complement components to Hence, the Neisseria species of and infections gonococci. meningococci the predisposes of disseminated patients with microbes serious complement these In cause deficiencies, can infections.

controlled is by proteins. circulating The tightly complement regulatory activation cell-associated and of deposit inhibit proteins fragments that or remove production active regulatory fragments on complement of Different cells. the normal on complement tissues injured being thus prevent and expressed regulators cells These healthy at of activation. host are from sites of diseases, against host tissue when and cells own produce antigens be individuals autoimmune proteins overwhelmed and in can amounts in as on Regulatory large in complement 5). (Chapter complement-fixing deposited cell their which antibodies tissues, happens are regulatory are the proteins of these important most The following:

protein activation inhibitor of complement the pathway. the blocks first C1, C1 the classical of inhibitor deficiency angioedema. of of the this cause hereditary is Inherited

anchor. a (DAF) to linked are Decay that CD59 two (GPI) are by and membranes plasma factor proteins glycophosphatidyl accelerating C3 formation convertases of CD59 inhibits and formation of DAF MAC. prevents the of of acquired to these sensitive leads of An are the and enzyme deficiency to anchors and cells complement-mediated excessive GPI cell that activation red deficiency lysis). complement creates (which lysis regulators hemoglobinuria called (Chapter paroxysmal (PNH) 12). disease rise This a to gives nocturnal

complement proteins proteolytically cleave components. regulatory Other active complement plasma cofactor For that a excessive H is C3 serves Factor convertase; the instance, of complement in as for results activation. deficiency proteolysis the its protein a the in Factor a wet with uremic vessels associated disease retinal (Chapter syndrome as 14), hemolytic of increased kidney Mutations called the of H eye. in degeneration as permeability macular well are

system ways. several contributes in to disease The complement host by (Chapter complexes cells antigen–antibody is and cell deposited tissue mechanism activation The important 5). or of complement tissues injury of on and antibodies an and, deficiencies proteins complement infections, of to deficiencies regulatory disorders. increased of susceptibility earlier, variety cause mentioned as cause Inherited a proteins of

Inflammation Mediators Other of

PAF a have discovered factor was is caused phospholipid-derived effects. mediator now as that is aggregation, inflammatory platelet a that it but to known multiple PAF. cells, elaborate including cell and variety endothelial of themselves, A can types, platelets neutrophils, basophils, mast cells, macrophages, addition low concentrations induces vasoconstriction it bronchoconstriction, and and vascular platelet PAF increased causes permeability. and aggregation, In at vasodilation to actions, trials in been various disappointing. conditions have documented PAF antagonists Despite inflammatory these of

of Coagulation Products

idea that leading processes. than reaction more the years suggested reduced to performed are inflammatory inflammation the inhibiting 50 and linked Studies to coagulation some ago microbes, that coagulation clot). fibrinogen protease was the thrombin produce protease-activated activated of to discovery concept which by a are that fibrin (PARs), receptors by cleaves This (the supported but clearest formation (Chapter role aggregation a in is 4). a a their platelets, trigger role leukocytes, known process receptor thrombin expressed PAR PARs thrombin during clot is as potent inflammation, are of in the of which activation in on of suggesting the platelet likelihood all virtually that and described In of also clotting to cells 4). endothelial (thrombosis, is to it causes lead and of in inflammation, inflammation that tissue Chapter inflammation, injury fact, induce because dissociate in the difficult increase forms changes abnormal clotting clotting role the of Whether coagulation, stimulating have se, established. not is per in significant still inflammation products a

the kininogens, from vasoactive proteases derived action peptides by called proteins, called Kinins kallikreins. of are plasma specific a high-molecular-weight cleaves to enzyme kininogen, glycoprotein plasma bradykinin. precursor, produce kallikrein The when vascular skin. the increases dilation contraction and of injected causes smooth blood and of permeability vessels, into muscle, pain Bradykinin effects histamine. of are These those similar to by it because quickly action is of The called an bradykinin enzyme short-lived, inactivated kininase. is such Bradykinin in been some has implicated forms as as mediator a anaphylaxis. reaction, of allergic

Neuropeptides role and a secreted responses. various sensory initiation in and are the nerves leukocytes, and may play inflammatory regulation by of central peptides, in neurokinin A, including These and nervous the peripheral systems. substance P are produced and small and in are substance fibers Nerve prominent containing tract. P lung the gastrointestinal vascular of pressure, hormone signals, of Substance in has stimulation the increasing and biologic including permeability. cells, secretion regulation pain many transmission P functions, blood by of endocrine

histamine of inflammation, was to one thought the enough. be When role Lewis mediator discovered in in wallowing Now, them! we are and vivo, are Yet, are likely this that few of most for reactions in compendium, acute in a these the important is it mediators summarized from large inflammation

3.8 Table . in This compiled is list part from the

Role of Reactions in of Table 3.8 Inflammation Mediators Different

Reaction Mediators Principal Inflammation of

(by Leukotrienes and vascular mast E4 cells, permeability vasoactive Increased cells) C5a D4, liberating other from C3a Histamine amines C4,

activation C3a, Chemokines TNF, recruitment leukocyte IL-1 Chemotaxis, and C5a

Prostaglandins Fever IL-1,TNF

basic practice the Lysosomal of the of of these molecules, antagonists highlighting thus medicine. species importance damage Tissue enzymes effects anti-inflammatory Reactive to observed oxygen http://ebooksmedicine.net biology leukocytes of to of ensures that remains is the this subverted. protective and mediators actions readily and their not response robust redundancy The

and vasodilation Vasoactive mainly vascular permeability amines, histamine: increased

and acid and reactions, lipoxins leukotrienes):several inflammation; of involved reactions are leukocyte Arachidonic metabolites vascular and in antagonized by chemotaxis, (prostaglandins other exist forms

mainly recruitment Cytokines: TNF, produced types; ones in act are leukocyte mediate multiple principal inflammation many and in migration; proteins cell acute range; by IL-1, short chemokines and usually at effects,

which or breakdown other microbes products, microbes by and opsonization to multiple generation complement phagocytosis antibodies system responsible proteins: of leads are cell for Activation leukocyte of killing the Complement of particles, chemotaxis, and and the

reaction, cleavage by vascular pain precursors;mediate proteolytic Kinins:produced of

reactions morphologic of of small accumulation The the inflammatory fluid are hallmarks blood dilation tissue. of vessels acute extravascular leukocytes and and in

account vascular The cellular the reactions inflammatory symptoms response. the signs and of for and the injured area rich plasma increased (edema) (rubor), blood that flow accompany fluid in acute the the swelling and extravascular warmth Increased accumulation (tumor) of to redness and to lead proteins (calor), for permeability vascular account and inflammation. and Leukocytes metabolites offending extracellularly, and that by function damage loss and (functio toxic mediators activated proteases of agent the laesa). recruited release by causing are tissue and may endogenous the During the symptoms a in of liberation cytokines, result prostaglandins, one of of local is and neuropeptides, part damage, pain (dolor). as and the

the general and reaction, site patterns features Although are often the severity characteristic most special depending them, morphologic cause, reactions, tissue on particular of its superimposed on and these specific inflammatory are of involved. the acute and often provide of of they distinct importance valuable is patterns The about cause. clues gross that the inflammation underlying microscopic recognizing

to spaces marked Serous created injury by of exudation fluid epithelia surface is the by inflammation into cell-poor

Fig. inflammation. Serous 3.12 by cross serous epidermis separated a view showing from of effusion. skin the collection section the blister of a of focal Low-power dermis a

the into or pericardium. body cavities peritoneum, pleura, or by lined in and destructive the not of produce not large described infected does numbers to (which inflammation, fluid organisms purulent serous inflammation is contain Typically, by leukocytes later). tend mesothelial fluid accumulation fluid vascular secretions (as of an the in permeability) result these may local of of is a effusion. result called the cavities plasma body or cells cavities from the from increased irritation); derived In be of (as a diseases.) some liver levels in in occur or plasma heart of reduced such transudates noninflammatory as also kidney blood outflow and reduced conditions, (Effusions protein failure, in consisting infection represents (Fig. the or burn damaged viral of resulting skin beneath accumulation of epidermis blister immediately the fluid skin a within or The serous from 3.12

procoagulant or the leaks a large fibrinous are when there local stimulus. develops A exudate vascular is higher-molecularweight With deposited fibrin the formed and extracellular the space. out pass increase proteins permeability, in fibrinogen is vascular of blood, in a large such as and of lining ( pericardium characteristic the cavities, of exudate meninges, as body A fibrinous is inflammation the such in

Fig. pleura. and 3.13A ), coagulum threads ( sometimes eosinophilic appears fibrin an as or meshwork of amorphous an as Histologically,

Fig. 3.13B ). and by cleared by exudates may be macrophages. fibrinolysis dissolved Fibrinous and the thus and is fibrin lead vessels the scarring. stimulate to time, If fibroblasts it of blood ingrowth with not removed, may the the area the opaque space. of fibrous the pericardial exudate to within fibrinous obliteration of the sac Conversion thickening in the tissue pericardium exudation of if to of pericardial fibrosis (organization) epicardium and is and, scar extensive, leads

Inflammation,Abscess Purulent (Suppurative)

necrotic neutrophils, by cells, consisting the fluid. and pus, edema inflammation the characterized an exudate production is of debris of of Purulent liquefied cause purulent (also suppurative) The of most called http://ebooksmedicine.net frequent

Fig. pericarditis. 3.13 Fibrinous on the pericardium. (A) Deposits fibrin of A fibrin (P). overlies meshwork pink exudate of (B) pericardial (F) surface the

inflammation staphylococci; (pus-producing) cause bacteria. necrosis, is pyogenic tissue bacteria to these that pathogens liquefactive with referred are as such as infection an inflammation common acute example acute suppurative of A is appendicitis. Abscesses an or in suppuration of are organ, caused tissue, by localized buried confined a a collections pus space. bacteria a ( by seeding produced They into pyogenic are tissue of

Fig. 3.14 ). as mass appears central Abscesses leukocytes cells. of tissue necrotic region have a a and that this around outside of chronic usually is region focus, proliferation, and and preserved dilation indicating repair. be zone and this necrotic and fibroblastic vascular may neutrophils There inflammation parenchymal a there In and walled connective by become the time off tissue. may abscess ultimately replaced locations or be drained have When as abscesses (such the may persistent brain), surgically. at critical to

produced the ( surface tissue is or sloughing necrotic of excavation, inflamed a of of is defect, An (shedding) the that or by organ ulcer tissue local an

Fig. 3.15 ). occur or can only exist when inflammation necrosis tissue near and surface. a resultant Ulceration on extensive have in It mouth, or (2) ischemic to most tract, disturbances and skin commonly and encountered subcutaneous who the lower in the mucosa of older persons predispose necrosis. the circulatory intestines, (1) stomach, the of that genitourinary tissue extremities is ulcers, Acute of legs. in and diabetic ulcers ulcers stomach often chronic coexist the of duodenum the such inflammation peptic or and as vascular stage in polymorphonuclear infiltration of dilation During and intense margins is defect. the acute the the there chronicity, of With the ulcer develop lymphocytes, proliferation, and fibroblast cells. accumulation margins of macrophages, the base plasma scarring, the and and

the Although, might modify as including of variables be may many inflammation, the process expected, basic

Fig. 3.14 inflammation. Purulent a the (arrows) bronchopneumonia. of Multiple (A) case in bacterial in abscesses lung cellular surrounded contains abscess debris, and by is vessels. and blood congested (B) neutrophils The

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. ulcer. an 3.15 of The morphology chronic duodenal (A) A ulcer. tory (B) cross-section in the acute a exudate an of with crater Low-power view duodenal inflamma ulcer base.

of the one host, the acute the of site intensity affected, of inflammatory outcomes injury, nature responsiveness typically reactions three tissue and and the and have

Fig. • Complete resolution. 3.16): eliminating world, normal. the to In all succeeded inflammation inflammatory with should of of reactions, restoration a end perfect the in agent, have after offending they acute site the short-lived regenerate. cells usual the or called when has and there damaged when resolution tissue is destruction is outcome or injury This been and can little parenchymal the is limited lymphatics. edema resorption cellular macrophages, debris and involves microbes by of of and removal by fluid Resolution

fibrosis). Healing by or tissue replacement (scarring, connective • that exudation be is of inflammatory incapable tissues substantial abundant regeneration, destruction, in injury the tissue or cavities that tissue cleared. are involves adequately peritoneum) cannot serous fibrin occurs when in after (pleura, when or This there all In

stimuli of injurious Clearance

Pus • function and cells of inflammatory acute Angiogenesis mediators • Clearance Healing cells • Loss • Healing cell INFLAMMATION • • injured of CHRONIC infiltrate FIBROSIS (scar) formation Healing of Replacement function Progression Fibrosis Mononuclear (abscess) Normal

Fig. reactions acute healing resolution, of inflammation.The 3.16 inflammation: chronic are listed. the various and components functional outcomes or by of their fibrosis, Outcomes

it damage grows exudate, area or the situations, connective of converting http://ebooksmedicine.net mass of into these a fibrous tissue into tissue.

Progression • response inflammation. chronic the to of healing. cannot occurs of with chronic result the when acute either a interference inflammatory persistence response agent of normal some the transition the the injurious process Acute resolved, or as to of be

prolonged in duration varying combinations. or injury, inflammation coexist, and at (weeks in is repair months) of which Chronic tissue response inflammation, a attempts reaction. acute any sometimes or of may begin smoldering, without inflammation, It a preceding signs follow as progressive, may insidiously, earlier, a acute process as described

Inflammation Causes of Chronic

in inflammation arises Chronic settings: following the

infections parasites. Persistent viruses, eradicate, are difficult mycobacteria to and by microorganisms that certain as and fungi, such called organisms hypersensitivity 5). These evoke delayed-type (Chapter often reaction immune an inflammatory called inflammation The (discussed takes sometimes response granulomatous a later). pattern specific infection chronic inflammation such a acute other cases, evolves chronic into the unresolved progresses acute as bacterial lung inflammation, In abscess. an to of when lung

diseases. Hypersensitivity Chronic 5). diseases of immune system activation by an and inappropriate excessive group in important that plays caused a of role the (Chapter are inflammation evoke antigens self in chronic sclerosis. and a reaction examples are autoimmune results diseases multiple of such (auto) rheumatoid damage; arthritis and In immune that tissue self-perpetuating diseases, inflammation bronchial excessive the substances, in diseases, responses result environmental inflammation of chronic against is In common immune asthma. as allergic only that reactions harmless, autoimmune no disease. these normally are against antigens serve triggered the and Because cause allergic useful and reactions are purpose by are because morphologic mixed characterized show Such of chronic they acute of inflammation. diseases may patterns inflammation repeated and bouts stages. Fibrosis dominate the may late

to Prolonged potentially either endogenous. exogenous agents, toxic exposure or lung results prolonged called is particulate inanimate of in that, an agent material silica, exogenous a disease inhaled periods, an 13). nondegradable An inflammatory silicosis for (Chapter when example tissue be least by (Chapter wall Atherosclerosis is process endogenous and affecting induced, 10) cholesterol and production lipids. excessive part, is at the to other that chronic deposition thought arterial of in a inflammatory

not as disorders. of inflammation of important that of chronic pathogenesis convention diseases are thought Some the in forms ally may inflammatory be metabolic cancers such tumor include diseases as and These inflammatory and promote type development. neurodegenerative Alzheimer reactions 2 disease, syndrome certain the which in diabetes, associated in the conditions in relevant of role is inflammation The discussed chapters. these

changes, to following: inflammation, is and chronic neutrophilic by characterized edema, is acute by contrast vascular inflammation which manifested In the infiltration, predominantly

cells, which and macrophages, include cells Infiltration ( mononuclear lymphocytes, with plasma

Fig. 3.17

destruction, inflammatory cells by offending Tissue by the or persistent induced agent the

blood replacement angiogenesis accomplished by Attempts tissue in healing vessels) at connective by and, particular, damaged small tissue, of of (proliferation

Fig. replacement 3.17 epithelium, three replaced spaces (A) cells lung, the (fibrosis, showing arrowheads), destruction (normal tissue connective by are features: inflammatory chronic (3) of in histologic lined characteristic parenchyma collection arrows). all alveoli cuboidal (2) Chronic (1) by inflammation of (*), and by alveolar acute inflammation lung bronchopneumonia), vessels and of fill neutrophils In contrast, (B) in (acute spaces the are blood congested. the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

are and of repair, and also healing later, tissue wound are components of repair. in they angiogenesis discussed context the Because fibrosis

and Mediators Cells Chronic Inflammation of

activation and of is tissue the inflammation chronic local result fibrosis the of characterize that cell The leukocyte mediators. of combination damage, the infiltration, and several types of production

Macrophages of Role

reaction to most dominant The cells, the act secreting various notably chronic which and by contribute tissues, cytokines activating on and lymphocytes. inflammatory growth and by that destroying by T cells, macrophages, are invaders in other foreign cells factors reactions Macrophages as cells. and microbes, particulate professional act that for senescent are matter, filters phagocytes responses (Chapter as They function effector cellular eliminate 5). also humoral immune that cells microbes in and other inflammation in and many they repair. But serve roles and functional the of development responses. basic their Here biology review including macrophages, we

and tissue embryonic derived the from during marrow development and bone yolk liver the Macrophages cells stem fetal sac in from progenitors in early hematopoietic ( cells are

Fig. 3.18 ). lineage cells of monocytes. this Circulating are as known connective tissues. normally scattered diffusely are in most Macrophages macrophages). In nervous (alveolar locations as specific (sinus called addition, Kupffer lymph (where in liver are organs cells), in lungs are found and histiocytes), cells), spleen and (microglial they system such nodes they the central system, known name cells older comprise these the of inaccurate) mononuclear system. reticuloendothelial also Together (and the phagocyte by

differentiate marrow progenitors tissues, reactions, blood, into in the which and various inflammatory to monocytes, migrate In into the bone macrophages. give rise enter are in into by Entry and such adhesion tissues monocytes blood governed the same factors chemokines. as emigration, neutrophil that involved is molecules of is span half-life tissue of whereas monocytes day, months life about years. macrophages of or blood 1 The is several the 48 hours macrophages cell often Thus, population become in reactions of within the dominant onset. inflammatory embryogenesis, as absence alveolar arise and The macrophages for or the populate tissue macrophages, sac tissues or and replenished injury the by that stay the from yolk steady Kupffer state liver of (in the reside of inflammation), the are proliferation in mainly in in very resident microglia, early periods, such cells. cells, long tissues, fetal

andalternative called macrophage activation, two classical of pathways ( are major There

Fig. 3.19 ). by these given a is depends nature signals. of Which the on two taken of pathways the macrophage activating

cell–derived be and TLRs may macrophage Classical and • engage activation such by microbial which induced products signals, sensors, other endotoxin, as by T

skin, Macrophages in inflammation in macrophages tract Activated intestinal

sac cells, tissue Yolk macrophages, etc.) macrophages alveolar Resident (Kupffer microglia,

yolk in Progenitor sac, fetal liver

Fig. phagocytes. Maturation of 3.18 mononuclear are the inflammatory majority derived from reactions, During of hematopoietic (A) precursors. macrophages tissue the populate precursors tissues derived tissue Some embryonic are development. macrophages early that from resident long-lived in activated of macrophage. morphology monocyte a (B) and The

TLR-ligands,

ROS, IL-10, TGF-° NO, enzymes lysosomal

chemokines IL-12, IL-1, TNF, IL-6,

effects, Anti-inflammatory wound fibrosis repair,

Fig. 3.19 and activation. Classical alternative macrophage functionally into monocytes/macrophages stimuli Different to distinct populations. activate develop induced macrophages products IFN-γ. are activated and particularly cytokines, Classically microbial by potentiate phagocytose microbes and inflammatory tissues and can They destroy reactions. and dead in tissue induced other inflammation. cytokines resolution and of and macrophages by are Alternatively activated are important repair the

the immune importantly cytokine responses. in IFN-γ, secrete lysosomal ingested enzymes, organisms, ROS enhance and and Classically produce and (also ability stimulate of which M1) cytokines to all activated that NO upregulate their called macrophages kill inflammation. These against inflammatory and important microbes host defense reactions. are many macrophages in in

other lymphocytes as • than and such by by cytokines activation other IL-4 IL-13, Alternative cells. produced T is induced macrophage and IFN-γ, repair. (M2) instead, principal activated is macrophages function of in actively are microbicidal; alternatively tissue macrophages These the not stimulate activate fibroblasts, secrete growth that and angiogenesis, They factors promote synthesis. collagen

first most followed initiates plausible classical one, injurious to stimuli, to and response destroy in is is which seems the that the pathway agents, activation, this offending designed alternative tissue activation repair. It by the in precise reactions. such documented is a not inflammatory well However, sequence most and the M1 other M2 useful are M1 numerous although M2 subsets In described and have heterogeneity, a and addition, for the understanding not of been framework concept macrophage fixed. subpopulations provides macrophages

initiate the process activated tissue of eliminate and injury are for The of in microbes macrophages products inflammation. chronic such as repair, the also injurious but much of responsible agents Several chronic functions of the development macrophages inflammation of injury. persistence central and to accompanying the tissue and are

mediators such and Macrophages IL-1, others) inflammation, as secrete (TNF, and eicosanoids. cytokines of chemokines, Thus, central to the inflammatory are of macrophages and propagation initiation reactions.

signals many respond by lymphocytes Macrophages microbes for against that loop T and thus immune to essential cell-mediated setting to a cells, up T from antigens display responses. is defense feedback lymphocytes in and are inflammation, in of where discussion further in the cell-mediated interactions the more described role 5 of These Chapter immunity later is chronic in considered. this in chapter, detail

also invaders, against body’s tissue makes considerable destruction excessively can unwanted but mediators the allies activated. the induce impressive macrophages macrophages are when defense Their weaponry arsenal powerful same in or of inappropriately that the tissue hallmarks one of chronic of these activities of is is It of macrophages because inflammation. destruction

off into lymph instances irritant is way via disappear making (either some In the their macrophages dying if or eliminated, lymphatics nodes). eventually of the result macrophage accumulation the local continuous and inflammation. proliferation others, of persists, at site recruitment circulation as a from In

Role of Lymphocytes

antigens Microbes T which and environmental and chronic B inflammation. propagate amplify other and activate lymphocytes, activated, defense these chronic the is mediators lymphocytes of and infectious pathogens to present tends of often the provides persistent they 5), adaptive be these and, which function major are when the (Chapter against inflammation Although severe. cells inflammation immunity, as in are chronic of reactions, inflammation, such lymphocyte inflammatory strongest Some as later, dependent the are on responses. described granulomatous Lymphocytes and hypersensitivity dominant inflammation other autoimmune the seen in the in population may be diseases. chronic

of inflammatory virtue of ability reaction. CD4+ By the promote influence to nature inflammation the cytokines, and their secrete T lymphocytes amplify induced the dead part immune as inflammatory of early cells recognition by that cells microbes the greatly and is T These of response. innate reaction There secrete different CD4+ different of and of subsets T elicit cytokines that cells types are three inflammation.

pathway. IFN-γ, cytokine produce which classical by activates the TH1 cells macrophages the

eosinophils and and TH2 for macrophage and IL-5, activation. activate of secrete alternative cells are the IL-4, which recruit responsible IL-13, pathway

reaction. into other recruiting secrete for secretion chemokines cells induce the IL-17 of the responsible cytokines, which neutrophils TH17 and

and involved Both in against diseases. defense bacteria many TH1 autoimmune TH17 types and of cells in and viruses are inflammation. cells helminthic important in and parasites TH2 allergic in against are defense T http://ebooksmedicine.net cell (e.g., IL-12, These

IL-6, IL-23)

lymphocyte ActivatedT macrophage(TH1, TH17) Activated

T Presents antigen cells to

IL-1,TNF are detail in more chemokines in their Chapter subsets and 5. functions described TNF,IL-17,

inflammation important interact ( these and an interactions role macrophages Lymphocytes bidirectional in play propagating and a chronic way, in

Fig. ). 3.20 membrane Macrophages that activate responses others) and display T (IL-12 cell cytokines (called (Chapter that and 5). antigens cells, to cells, also express produce molecules T T stimulate costimulators) promoting antigen cytokines, activate earlier, produce secretion. recruit lymphocytes, in and macrophages, T presentation cytokine which turn, and described Activated more fuel of that cellular chronic a and The sustain result reactions cycle is inflammation.

present sites B antibody-producing plasma Activated of chronic inflammation. at lymphocytes often and cells are for persistent The or antigens the foreign site tissue components. self in or inflammatory against be may altered specific antibodies unclear. of in importance are disorders inflammatory chronic the the most even specificity However, antibodies and

together accumulated inflammatory cluster resembling the reactions, antigen-presenting lymphocytes, the and some cells lymphoid structures nodes. to found cells, chronic In follicles form plasma in lymph lymphoid is Hashimoto of the often the in thyroid setting infection. organogenesis synovium type are in of in with the arthritis, in Helicobacter this in the pylori of called patients thyroiditis, organs; longstanding mucosa seen lymphoid tertiary rheumatoid These gastric and formation postulated local been perpetuate is these structures significance but lymphoid not established. the It has of organs that reaction, the immune may of the

stimuli. may particular Other prominent types by inflammation in be cell induced chronic

in Eosinophils and immune in ( mediated parasitic abundant IgE by • are reactions infections

Fig. 3.21 ). used adhesion similar by specific molecules by from chemokines Their epithelial to eotaxin) and (e.g., by recruitment cells. leukocytes neutrophils, those is driven and derived protein, but granules to Eosinophils have protein epithelial major basic host that cationic also toxic is that cells. highly contain a injures parasites allergies 5). is as parasitic controlling in infections, why immune contribute yet are benefit reactions in of tissue This such damage (Chapter to also eosinophils

distributed in connective tissues both • chronic are and and reactions. acute Mast inflammatory widely cells participate in bone the Mast marrow. arise in cells precursors from more they roles similarities in do. and have do reactions basophils in therefore circulating than not play with arise basophils, basophils, are significant inflammatory from but many tissue-resident, They tissues binds cells FcεRI, express Mast the Fc antibody. of surface basophils) (and receptor on portion which IgE their the In prostaglandins mediators, specifically such histamine 5). response IgE cells’ as mast and the and (Chapter Fc to reactions, antigen, release in recognizes and degranulate immediate hypersensitivity receptors bound the cells to insect venom, foods, allergic type This response during or shock). of occurs results reactions catastrophic anaphylactic drugs, with sometimes (e.g., and a inflammatory in cells because secrete also present they reactions, Mast are chronic

Fig. focus inflammation numerous of containing eosinophils. 3.21 A

promote inflammatory of cytokines, reactions. they plethora can

many or persistent Although chronic lasting by activated are and by to for • of lymphocytes. characteristic of macrophages either cytokines and numbers neutrophils, months, T inflammation, large show forms produced continue by induced inflammation, neutrophils other microbes acute mediators of months. can (osteomyelitis), neutrophilic persist infection many bacterial a for exudate In chronic bone of chronic 13). also the (Chapter smoking and lungs are stimuli damage induced important in in irritant Neutrophils other by has on called chronic. of been This pattern acute inflammation

with of inflammation associated activated macrophages, a chronic characterized lymphocytes, T and is often form inflammation sometimes necrosis. with central collections of Granulomatous by and develop to abundant begin called cells. cells, may activated The are epithelial cytoplasm resemble macrophages epithelioid and fuse, activated may Some multinucleate macrophages forming cells. giant to agent formation cellular attempt eradicate. is is Granuloma a difficult an to that offending contain is often to strong of leading can this injury activation In there lymphocytes cause which macrophage to normal activation, T attempt tissues.

their pathogenesis. in There which two differ are types of granulomas,

caused that a of persistent response. Immune T are variety by inducing granulomas immune capable a cell–mediated of are agents cannot inciting response of microbe as be usually a when readily such type the eliminated, agent granulomas immune or produces This a antigen. persistent self the activates such activates IL-2, cells T to which perpetuating In response, other cytokines, IFN-γ, activate macrophages produce which cells, such as T and the macrophages. responses,

Foreign body granulomas to absence are the responses. inert response foreign T seen of in cell– relatively in immune mediated bodies, are talc intravenous by to drug body that granulomas not Typically, phagocytosis abuse), foreign are sutures, with form fibers or a large around but preclude as enough immunogenic. such macrophage (associated materials other cells Epithelioid the foreign surface and of the to body. cells are apposed giant refractile. be it center if polarized the in appear can identified in usually the of light, granuloma, which particularly viewed may material foreign The with

In tissue MORPHOLOGY usual samples H&E stained ( the

Fig. are pink have epithelioid ), 3.22 indistinct granulomas and granular macrophages cytoplasm in with cell boundaries called the cells. activated of epithelioid of macrophages. aggregates the A surrounds collar lymphocytes tissue. granulomas of rim and connective have may a fibroblasts Older not mass multinucleated Langhans in Frequently, in µm and but invariably, a cells to consist called cells.They of giant are cytoplasm nuclei. large diameter granulomas; giant 50 these many 40 of found are contain with (classically tuberculosis) often infectious a Mycobacterium central necrosis. of certain organisms zone Granulomas associated appearance necrosis. and granular,cheesy Grossly, therefore a called caseous has this is as in this appears body to eosinophilic, granular details.The Microscopically, debris, centers disease, noncaseating. to are tend not cellular loss with reactions have of necrotic Crohn be structureless, sarcoidosis, and necrotic and said granulomas material amorphous, foreign may fibrosis by extensive. that accompanied is of be granulomas Healing

Fig. 3.22 tuberculous surrounded Typical showing lymphocytes. area central necrosis epithelioid cells, granuloma multinucleate giant an cells, by of multiple and

cause pathologic of important limited number that ( states; certain threatening) are specific conditions in Granulomas of life because (some is the it the encountered of recognition pattern granulomatous

). Table 3.9 persistent formation. activation T the and to are Treponema tuberculosis, or responsible derived responses macrophage cell M. for cell– fungi), (e.g., setting microbes of chronic In cytokines certain T granuloma pallidum, important disease, an unknown notably of type which in bowel inflammation United disease immune-mediated Crohn called inflammatory in etiology disease sarcoidosis. develop also may a in some granulomatous of States, of the Granulomas one cause and and diseases, is inflammatory caused prototype a is infection as disease should the by cause be always excluded when and identified. Tuberculosis granulomatous the granulomas of are to granuloma as the disease tubercle. referred this In is a to serologic by molecular be bacilli), syphilis). for to accurate (e.g., by in granulomatous polymerase 3.9 morphologic techniques tuberculosis), and ( in fungal identify agent necessary in culture always The reasonably stains reaction tubercle may diseases etiologic methods special for organisms the different by ), studies patterns chain sufficiently (e.g., in the specific acid-fast is diseases), diagnosis stains by the but and various tuberculosis (e.g., (e.g., a allow it

http://ebooksmedicine.net

3.9 of Inflammation Examples Diseases Table With Granulomatous

tuberculosis Tuberculosis acid-fast Mycobacterium occasional focus (tubercle): bacilli necrosis histiocytes, rimmed giant macrophages lymphocytes, by amorphous cells), debris; of central granuloma fibroblasts, cells; granular Langhans activated Caseating (epithelioid with

outline; grossly enclosing of to to cell macrophages; identify wall visible microscopic central tissue difficult of loss Syphilis Gumma: are Treponema in pallidum without lesion, infiltrate; plasma organisms cellular cells necrotic

with Noncaseating granulomas macrophages activated Sarcoidosis abundant Unknown etiology

be the is chronic outset. prolonged a inflammation stimuli from that persistent to Chronic acute follow may response unresolved host or inflammation

substances It medically responses silica); elimination, immune is microbes important and against self environmental diseases. some caused and many toxic antigens, (e.g., that underlies by resist

response. coexisting characterized attempted and by immune injury, is repair It scarring, inflammation, tissue by

infiltrate consists plasma leukocytes. cells, of macrophages, and The other cellular lymphocytes,

inflammatory mediated is lymphocytes the reaction. to It prolong bidirectional between (notably T by by and cells cytokines macrophages produced these and amplify lymphocytes); tend interactions

is inflammation an inflammation specific agent to Granulomatous in activation of response resistant and that T by is eradication. induced a chronic to pattern macrophage cell morphologically

it systemic if is associated cytokine-induced the localized, reactions acute-phase Inflammation, that with are response. even is collectively called suffered the Anyone bout a of has acute (e.g., severe viral a through systemic or experienced who of inflammation. pneumonia bacterial or has influenza) illness manifestations such changes as and products RNA LPS, double These inflammatory production other to by bacterial reactions is stimulated cytokines stranded stimuli. are viral whose by the mediators type of reaction. reaction; and to acute-phase notably I IL-1, also TNF, interferons, cytokines other important The cytokines, are contribute IL-6 the

pathologic The of and several consists response changes: clinical acute-phase

infection. characterized by elevation one when 4°C, to especially the body prominent is inflammation of manifestations an acute-phase temperature, most is with of response, of the by usually Fever, associated 1° are that called Substances induce fever pyrogens. prostaglandins caused perivascular of hypothalamus. that cells is in by The temperature increase the are the vascular body and produced in prostaglandins. and as pyrogens) IL-1 convert that the leukocytes endogenous (cyclooxygenases) exogenous TNF cytokines that release arachadonic acid as pyrogens), LPS (called to increase such stimulate enzymes such into Bacterial (called products, especially neurotransmitters at point a hypothalamus, stimulate the production that reset prostaglandins, of the level. the set temperature In PGE2, higher the NSAIDs, inhibiting synthesis. fever by reduce prostaglandin aspirin, including contributes even to protective host remains if, and response the fever How, unclear.

proteins synthesized to may part stimuli. the the are plasma in proteins, hundred-fold mostly as Acute-phase several concentrations whose increase plasma response liver, of inflammatory amyloid (SAA) the best-known A Three (CRP), these and serum protein. of proteins fibrinogen, protein of are C-reactive cytokines. is in these molecules of stimulated Synthesis by hepatocytes fix as and proteins, as acute-phase bind opsonins may SAA, and microbial such Many walls, CRP complement. to they and cell act Fibrinogen causes red cells gravity and to to form unit (rouleaux) stacks than them cells. binds that at rapidly red do more sediment individual for the by as sedimentation basis erythrocyte rate measuring an response any test inflammatory caused a the This stimulus. is for simple have prolonged acute cause production during 5). states effects in amyloidosis (especially cases, in inflammation of proteins but beneficial secondary chronic Acute-phase of (Chapter these inflammation, can, SAA) some proteins serum with in infarction for a of myocardial serve levels marker risk patients Elevated of as increased disease. CRP coronary artery infarction. postulated predisposes is It that atherosclerotic involving subsequent coronary in and to http://ebooksmedicine.net the plaques inflammation arteries thrombosis in response peptide iron-regulating production acute-phase is is hepcidin. increased the the whose peptide Another iron of reduce hepcidin availability are the associated (Chapter and anemia of responsible 12). inflammation for plasma elevated chronic the Chronically concentrations with

bacterial infections. by reactions, Leukocytosis of a inflammatory those induced common is especially feature may reach or climbs to sometimes usually count cells/mL. to cells/mL, high 40,000 but levels 20,000 leukocyte The 15,000 of it 100,000 extraordinarily leukemoid distinguished as leukemia. to be counts must the from) they are (and in observed These reactions, referred elevations to are extreme cell similar white because TNF accelerated in cells to neutrophils is pool of therefore rise (caused a the as a the of from referred IL-1) occurs the number shift bone initially The left. release immature leukocytosis marrow associated and with in the including cytokines, reserve postmitotic because more and of to by blood, also marrow, Prolonged (CSFs). by production induces increased proliferation factors colony-stimulating of in of caused precursors bone infection the is inflammatory sustained of for the than cells these an of loss in bone if more Thus, marrow that increases, reaction. usually the conpensates the leukocytes effect output inflammation discussion 12.) the of leukocytosis also Chapter in (See infections induce neutrophil in the an blood neutrophilia. bacterial called increase Most count, as mononucleosis, Viral and (lymphocytosis). an cause in mumps, German lymphocytes such number the of absolute increase infectious infections, measles, in creating an infestations, the of In increase an and there some allergies blood eosinophilia. eosinophils, number is parasitic infections viruses, by of a some circulating are rickettsiae, Certain and associated white decreased (typhoid and infections cells number with (leukopenia). certain caused fever protozoa)

Other through somnolence, and and cytokines heart the rigors sweating, anorexia, probably heat chills mainly loss for to cells. vascular include minimize because manifestations (search beds, brain the on actions deep blood acute-phase the warmth), flow blood to pressure; rate of decreased response (shivering), skin; of from of because of redirection cutaneous of malaise, increased

the products their large infections notably blood several In of bacteria amounts cytokines, production stimulate quantities the bacterial of IL-1. and of enormous in (sepsis), and TNF the severe intravascular as shock, insulin levels pathologic including disseminated and and coagulation, resistance abnormalities of metabolic such cytokines clinical blood disturbances cause widespread hyperglycemia. and hypotensive High more known is clinical it as shock; in is Chapter in septic 4. This triad discussed detail as shock a and pancreatitis, serious severe syndrome may disorders, other such trauma, A burns, of similar to as complication occur conditions. septic noninfectious these inflammatory syndrome reactions response Collectively called are (SIRS). systemic

causes. other or is next We from inflammation to of response repair, the tissue destruction consider process which resulting a healing

(TNF, IL-1) production Fever: hypothalamus Cytokines stimulate of PGs in

others) cells liver of cytokines by C-reactive acute-phase acting protein, proteins: on Production synthesis stimulated (IL-6, others;

in Cytokines production precursors leukocytes bone the (CSFs) Leukocytosis: from of stimulate marrow

induced TNF metabolic high by in intravascular disseminated some septic coagulation, other levels pressure, infections, severe Fall blood shock: cytokines In of abnormalities; and

Repair Tissue of Overview

of insults inflammation. an caused is and ability Critical damage toxic the survival by repair organism to the to the also tissues but the into serves motion to sets to these fact, dangers only injured response the microbes and repair. eliminate of process inflammatory In not

by of cells residual tissue damaged of of maturation stem a tissues of two connective ( (uninjured) tissue Repair and cells, and reactions: by occurs proliferation form the to types deposition scar of regeneration

Fig. Regeneration. 3.23 • essentially components damaged Some a to and tissues the normal able to replace are return

injury Severe superficial Mild, injury

Fig. 3.23 tissue repair: scar formation. and of regeneration Mechanisms occurs with by Following scar is after injury, which severe damage by the repair underlying the tissue, to injury regeneration, tissue, not formation. epithelium mild but connective but more resolution the damages

process called is regeneration. this state; Regeneration cells proliferate, of the for retain intestines, capacity to organs, and the parenchymal example, rapidly survive in in that dividing by proliferation notably injury epithelia the and some skin liver. of the the and occurs stem restoration In to cases, cells the of may damaged tissues. tissue other contribute limbs most capacity tissues are to tissues mammals some able only damaged as can regenerate of a fish components regenerate have animals restore to salamanders such entire organs, and or fully limited whereas themselves. appendages, However, and and lower

tissue deposition • (scar formation). Connective the complete If tissue connective the or incapable of the down if that laying (fibrous) the a of repair result restitution, in process scar. damaged, a are by occurs tissues formation may injured severely tissue, structures supporting of of are not is injured provides fibrous stability it usually normal, structural function. tissue able Although the is enough to the that scar chronic of lungs, occurs is deposition term that fibrosis organs and consequence collagen myocardium the describe The the in or extensive used necrosis a ischemic most in inflammation, as the kidney, other to liver, of extensive after (infarction). often tissue by a fibrosis organization is in it an affecting in exudate, (as the pneumonia lung). space organizing called inflammatory If develops occupied

and regeneration varying scar ultimate common many to in degrees contribute the of repair. types both formation injury, After interactions matrix cells, proliferation involve various extracellular (ECM). of close between cells and the Both the and processes of parenchymal (scarring) a and as by conclude features and of We scar cutaneous repair healing wound with of illustrations and formation, regeneration cellular of salient fibrosis proliferation the then and discuss healing the mechanisms description and first general process. regeneration, organs in the

is cells matrix, regeneration critically the the dependent by and the of and involves by driven development and of integrity tissues which cells The cell extracellular growth injured mature proliferation, cells. stem factors is on from of cell discuss we by the examples describing process. in repair proliferation regeneration, of control this Before of Chapter principles in of proliferation cell 1. were summarized The general

Proliferation: Signals Cell Control Mechanisms and

cell tissue proliferate Several during types repair. (which needed endothelial cannot the that the fill structure), include process), the to by vascular remnants restore of the provide cells create normal attempt repair These injured for fibrous the fibroblasts nutrients new (the corrected to of defects be vessels regeneration). tissue that scar and source forms (to that the tissue

proliferative intrinsic their to capacity. ability repair in of The themselves by is determined, tissues part, tissue cells that stem labile lost from by derived are be tissues and replaced must proliferating some continually new progenitors. cells (sometimes rapidly and constantly are called In tissues), immature cells being exocrine such epithelia basal epithelium include the salivary fallopian and of vagina, of urinary the cuboidal in tubes; These the as surface cells the tissues squamous gastrointestinal of types and ducts the draining the of transitional the skin, columnar and epithelia many uterus, organs marrow and tract); the glands, of the cavity, epithelia, hematopoietic biliary epithelium oral the tract. (e.g., of tract, bone cervix; layers pancreas, stem regenerate the cells after as readily can These tissues injury preserved. as is long of pool

stage made but cell mass. in up of proliferating, cells hence of are capable the that not of or to G0 cycle they in stable the injury normally response are are (called of Other tissues) dividing loss tissue tissues and as such and These pancreas. liver, solid kidney, the parenchyma of tissues organs, include most growth can is healing. wound but proliferate also muscle quiescent factors, Endothelial smooth important cells a cells, reaction to in fibroblasts, that in response and normally particularly are

the differentiated cells. of majority tissues Some permanent tissues) (called such as nonproliferative neurons muscle and consist terminally of cardiac cells, because cannot to Injury a is tissues the results in and cells regenerate. these scar, irreversible to nondividing, cells some provide satellite cells Skeletal but are muscle endomysial the sheath muscle. regenerative for usually capacity considered attached

signals extracellular is and the factors by matrix. proliferation driven growth Cell by from provided specific factors Many act growth which types, others multiple have on are while cell of been cell-type (Chapter 1). described, some different are produced site Growth factors typically by cells damage. of near the these cells the by important injury, that activated most tissue stromal macrophages epithelial sources some factors also but growth produce and of are are factors. The of these the bind are injury concentrations. growth Several high and tissue factors proteins to displayed at site at of ECM cell are activate and expression gene cycle the molecules division 1). induce in the factors drive of that changes for signaling needed cells biosynthesis organelles growth that support pathways cell ultimately All (Chapter through and that also addition cells proteins, factors, responding the integrins use integrins growth ECM stimulate In cell can bind and from to to proliferation. to to signals

In cells. cells of proliferation development process is mature regeneration, from of cells the of residual supplemented by stem stem major we cells. types of Chapter In introduced the 1 injury In tissue adults, the cells are stem stem most important after regeneration cells. for that to and tissue. it that repopulate stem injury into signals is cells differentiate cells triggers These believed stem proliferate activate injured specialized these and niches cells the in that in mature niches, live quiescent

Mechanisms Tissue Regeneration of

injured regeneration of with and importance varies in replacement the of injury. of in types severity different The of the tissues tissues

is tissue intestinal of the are and tract underlying In providing of the of and membrane epithelia residual by intact. stem proliferation cells replaced basement cells, from injured cells cells differentiation skin, rapidly derived • these processes. growth the factors cells in produce involved epithelial The residual to restored defect and the ( generated created the injury, is migrate integrity by cells newly tissue fill The

Fig. occur is exception http://ebooksmedicine.net are regeneration the process. proliferation, cells parenchymal Tissue usually capable a 3.23 of organs • liver, limited of this but can the whose in with have Pancreas, lung some regenerative thyroid, and adrenal, capacity. remaining in compensatory cells. and of duct kidney kidney removal response proximal of elicits hypertrophy that consists of the a surgical a The hyperplasia both not mechanisms of but they response interactions ECM. this of involve and local with likely underlying are factors The the understood, growth production cells regenerate has studying extraordinary described the valuable to this made for process, The as liver model below. capacity it a of

example only tissue surgical the intact, structurally residual Restoration architecture after is for if of can the normal of occur tissue resection liver. partial or scarring. infection is the damaged and is if inflammation, By contrast, incomplete entire by by regeneration tissue is accompanied to the of with framework, of the cells have a as remaining liver capacity reticulin abscess, collapse regenerate. formation occurs liver destruction in though liver the to extensive scar For even the leads example,

has human hepatic for tumor by or a The regenerate, growth capacity living-donor be performed demonstrated may to its after hepatectomy, which remarkable liver as transplantation. for partial resection of eaten Prometheus, was which image as every of for day secret an regrowth mythologic night. stealing and every punishment of The regrew is the liver the regeneration of by by sent the fire, eagle liver Zeus quite dramatic, reality, impressive. still is The although less

liver of two remaining mechanisms: Regeneration hepatocytes repopulation of from by occurs progenitor proliferation cells. major and the of injury. the the dominant role plays Which on nature depends the mechanism

hepatocytes partial of Proliferation following hepatectomy. to of In can the resection proliferation of hepatocytes. 90% the by residual liver humans, up be corrected of driven is hepatocyte growth as by factors factor IL-6 growth by Kupffer many (HGF) such as cytokines cell and produced by types. process produced This such cells, by

regeneration Liver progenitor cells. from in impaired, In which after as the injury hepatocytes capacity is or cells in liver proliferative situations inflammation, contribute repopulation. of the liver to progenitor chronic such these of rodents, oval their cells the been have shape nuclei. cells of progenitor called In because reside larger Hering, specialized connect canals bile progenitor of where cells canaliculi called ducts. of in with bile these niches Some and differentiation hepatocytes of are active cells topics proliferation The mature of drive their signals into investigation. that progenitor

quiescent proliferation muscle).The that and parenchymal capable organs), tissues), on of of continuously regenerative tissues cells hematopoietic cells non-dividing dividing constituent normally cells tissue (most and skeletal are consist (epithelia, a capacity Different the of of its cardiac (neurons, cells. proliferative depends potential

the growth cells is by matrix. controlled Cell the and by interactions extracellular cell is of proliferation stimulated factors cycle, and with

the is example of regeneration. by classic repair liver Regeneration of a It factors to and produced and mass triggered by cytokines inflammation. loss growth liver response is of in situations, In different or hepatocytes from by of regeneration occur cells. progenitor repopulation may surviving proliferation

to cells cells or the combination a with injured accomplished scar, a occurs connective it alone, of tissue, replacement of by of formation. the leading by by If some formation be residual regeneration repair cannot scar of and regeneration nondividing discussed as chronic to or in to severe injury the framework, results and As injured. and if tissue tissue is parenchymal cells the as epithelia damage if scarring are cells connective or well happen earlier, may In tissue. regeneration, involves scar restores the “patches” than formation restitution response to tissue that rather is components, contrast a which of the wound used also term healing in be connection but parenchymal may tissue to infarction. skin, replacement to of the used The any collagen, often is by in cells after in scar the in the myocardial heart as describe most

tissue of tissue series deposition connective ( follow consists Repair sequential that injury a steps by of

Fig. 3.24

infiltrating a stops platelets of injury, which cells. bleeding and 4) scaffold inflammatory comprised is formed, for (Chapter after provides minutes Within a hemostatic plug

Inflammation. inflammatory typical This chronic responses. is step of comprised acute and the from activated agents platelets, activation, next chemokines then the chemotactic function site 48 neutrophils complement produced to other during as of recruit products at mediators 6 hours. and the injury of to monocytes released and Breakdown debris. that through as microbes entered the eliminate these cells may have As described the agents, wound, the clear such earlier, offending and inflammatory repair macrophages tissue and inflammation in the M2 the are proliferation necrotic process—M1 of many growth a and Macrophages loop, that the in cellular types of clear repair. feedback stimulate next players positive microbes and stage central in cell the produce promote factors macrophages and cleared, the the are necrotic cells As http://ebooksmedicine.net agents injurious

Fig. skin. the large in 3.24 a repair wound Steps by healing of in formation: scar healing of example an second is intention. This by (A) inflammation. Hemostatic plug and and Proliferation granulation fibroblasts. proliferating of (B) by tissue epithelial cells; formation of vessel growth the fibrous (C) scar. to Remodeling produce

defined. injury how resolves; still inflammatory well in is flame extinguished most situations is inflammation not this of

Cell proliferation. several endothelial epithelial now-clean and other and up to close which and 10 cells, cell types, fibroblasts, next days, In the vascular the proliferate takes migrate including stage, to wound. cells, cell serves Each unique type functions.

it. to wound locally growth cells migrate over the and Epithelial respond produced to cover factors

known as to blood Endothelial proliferate other new process vessels, cells angiogenesis. vascular a form and and importance physiologic many is of more the Because responses host conditions, in later. process described this in pathologic detail it in of

injury the fibers and into proliferate of lay and migrate that form site scar. down the collagen Fibroblasts

a proliferating that tissue, and is loose called is granulation forms tissue. fibroblasts, inflammatory vessels connective combination of of chronic type healing unique wounds to scattered blood and new The cells, tissue as a its soft, appearance, seen term pink, wound. the that scab granular derives beneath skin gross of from such This

Remodeling. tissue produce fibroblasts connective is fibrous The that has reorganized stable by to been deposited scar. the This to continue for after and weeks 3 injury years. months 2 or may begins process

combination that regeneration and union), with by scarring. intention scarring, into wounds first as and surgical to second can (primary Healing to in by healing a well-apposed intention skin be heal classified of incisions, of by minimal healing (secondary referring regeneration larger wounds union), referring epithelial of not involved this the processes of repair. fundamental both our make scarring, continuum regeneration to discussion represent do Because in tissue from distinction healing in the wound we key a types events in

the from is blood new process vessels. of development Angiogenesis existing vessel their of increase size healing development in the of the to tumors of beyond at injury, is allowing at in sites ischemia, blood in supply. collateral It in critical constraints sites original and of circulations vessel heart the work developed growth wet Much done augment or of been to the coronary blood in degeneration flow to therapies inhibit it have angiogenesis, has growth, by macular eye). understand either process the improve to mechanisms atherosclerosis) as tumor to and been of (to pathologic ravaged to (e.g., a or block frustrate

new involves vessels ( Angiogenesis from sprouting ones, following and existing consists of steps of the

Fig. 3.25

Vasodilation increased permeability NO in induced response VEGF and by to

and to breakdown of of Separation allow surface of from basement vessel pericytes formation the membrane abluminal sprout the a

injury the Migration area of cells toward of tissue endothelial

cells (“tip”) the Proliferation just migrating of of leading cells endothelial behind front

for Recruitment capillaries for small cells larger of (pericytes smooth vessel vessels) periendothelial the muscle form cells and mature to

deposition endothelial of and of and Suppression membrane basement proliferation the migration

has can that recruited new suggested formation. promote bone marrow and It vessel in present been the are endothelial to progenitor cells be angiogenesis if However, play most a in any, minor, role wounds. the the of associated cells healing likely with these

cell (VEGF, (”tip”) Notch Leading

of Pericyte Formation vessel ECM of new recruitment Elongation stalk vascular

Fig. Angiogenesis. 3.25 repair, new by vessels. occurs In the angiogenesis tissue mainly sprouting of vascular shown) with illustrated.The to involved, major process, new newly signals (not the in form are joins and vessel other bed. the up formed vessels The the steps

interactions, ECM pathways, The process angiogenesis involves several proteins, cell–cell signaling of tissue and enzymes.

• Growth factors. both sprouting capillary process in cells, angiogenesis. VEGF-A stimulates mainly endothelial VEGFs, proliferation migration and initiating (Chapter the thus of of 1), It to formation of by and production lumen. contributes stimulating vascular promotes the of the NO the vasodilation FGF-2, of stimulate factors proliferation (FGFs), growth mainly Fibroblast the endothelial cells. stimulate the cell cover fibroblasts to wounds. damaged and also migration and epithelial macrophages area, to epidermal They the promote migration of and cells Newly muscle need to of connective formed by of recruitment be pericytes the stabilized vessels deposition the and smooth tissue. by and suppresses muscle of PDGF endothelial and stabilization smooth participate factors, cells production in proliferation Multiple growth and process: recruits proteins. the likely PDGF migration, including ECM TGF-β enhances TGF-β, and the

signaling. Notch are the vessels blood. with that of have supply branching signaling with sprouting new new pathway Through thus tissue “cross proper regulates healing the that and talk” effectively and vessels to VEGF, the Notch spacing the ensures the formed

vessel angiogenesis, sprouting in of providing for ECM process proteins of participate growth. scaffold with cells vessel receptors through largely interactions in integrin the by and the endothelial

metalloproteinases ECM, degrade Enzymes the of (MMPs), extension ECM in remodeling the notably the the and vascular tube. to permit matrix

factor and because increases permeability. vascular vessels leaky incomplete because interendothelial junctions VEGF, that of the angiogenesis, are drives growth Newly formed healing has persist leakiness the edema resolved. long part inflammatory may in that in response after wounds accounts This acute for the

of Deposition Activation Fibroblasts Connective and of Tissue

by steps: fibroblasts of ECM The in (1) occurs and two and migration injury of of these proliferation connective cells. site laying produced into of the tissue proteins (2) down deposition processes produced including FGF-2, PDGF, orchestrated TGF-β. are and and locally cytokines by growth factors, These are of of injury. these that macrophages alternatively inflammatory sites factors cells, activated (M2) sources The particularly major infiltrate

fibroblasts wound factors, In enter growth and cytokines from center. the the migrate and the response toward to edges center. muscle Some myofibroblasts, contain into pulling actin serve close may these wound cells of the margins which smooth to and contractile differentiate and toward its activity, cells called have increased the by and proteins, tissue produce synthetic fibroblasts their and fully also is major activity which mainly Activated of collagen, component increase myofibroblasts scar. the connective developed the

tissue synthesis and for proteins. the the is connective important TGF-β most of deposition cytokine by of the cells macrophages. alternatively in including tissue, It is produced activated granulation most diminish activation of of enhance transcription of by or factors gene secretion rate are the in primarily tissues of regulated but the TGF-β latent The the of levels by in molecule, notably post-transcriptional ECM, not integrins, activity. the the TGF-β that and TGF-β, active the the made also microfibrils 6). up TGF-β bioavailability (Chapter addition, regulate of of In fibrillin and increases degradation stimulates decreases and fibroblast the TGF-β ECM collagen proliferation, by migration and fibronectin, of the metalloproteinases. synthesis inhibiting of TGF-β only injury development not in and scar chronic also that kidneys fibrosis in lung, of follows is formation but involved liver, the inflammation. in after serve limit also terminate TGF-β has anti-inflammatory responses. that effects inflammatory to and does It of this inhibiting proliferation activity and lymphocyte other by the leukocytes.

vessels the progressively ECM. decreases, the a progresses, hence phenotype, fibroblasts fibroblasts and but there is and deposition more of synthetic of As increased number proliferating healing new assume synthesis, strong the for necessary is Collagen healing stable. to become mechanically particular, in wound and by (days weeks, the early fibroblasts for wound. in begins depending on wound Collagen the continues several of size 3–5) and synthesis healing collagen on on later). collagen but degradation depends not increased Net (discussed accumulation diminished only also synthesis transforms is vascularized which regression, the there pale, scar. largely eventually granulation highly a avascular the matures, progressive into As vascular scar tissue

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of Remodeling Connective Tissue

and to scar it. increase After is strength contract remodeled formed, the is it its collagen increased and of collagen cross-linking of increases because strength fibers. Wound size of type is collagen I a of shift early In in addition, collagen repair from of deposited, to more there the type III collagen. type resilient wounds, months. In well-sutured 70% strength 80% recover to by to normal 3 of skin skin may myofibroblasts Wound and initially caused cross-linking fibers. is later collagen contraction by by of

the the time, and degraded scar is With tissue connective shrinks. of is (MMPs), ions so degradation collagens a metalloproteinases matrix called enzymatic on they (e.g., ECM activity. for by other dependent metal are components zinc) their of and because accomplished family The agents. and cell are factors, growth and a other their by (fibroblasts, secretion cells, cells), and of cytokines, epithelial regulated synthesis by variety are produced and MMPs some types synovial neutrophils, macrophages, laminin, degrade (MMP-1, which and which fibronectin; (MMP-2 cleave fibronectin, -3); fibrillar stromelysins -10, amorphous and variety and collagen proteoglycans, and They -2, include a amorphous ECM constituents, degrade and including -11), of collagen. collagen which 9), and gelatinases collagenases, interstitial (MMP-3, also serine other plasmin, remodeling important less but proteinases and are degrade elastase, Neutrophil can wound MMPs. in the G, than ECM cathepsin inhibited (TIMPs), rapidly by be of activated collagenases cells. produced most addition, can metalloproteinases tissue by mesenchymal inhibitors specific In MMPs TIMPs the size scar. nature of and a balance and of regulates the Thus,

thin-walled, mainly fibroblasts with delicate inflammatory admixed proliferation in by Granulation cells, a loose is tissue capillaries ( macrophages matrix, new often extracellular characterized and of

amount wound that the tissue created is inflammation. the depends of ).This tissue injury; Fig.3.26A invades progressively the and of formed of the of size by intensity deficit site granulation tissue the the on

in ECM ( or fibroblasts, components fibrosis scar dense of composed elastic and collagen, tissue, is tissues largely fragments other spindle-shaped inactive, of

Fig. ). 3.26B fibers, stain which the trichrome elastin, to identify pliable fibers use often tissues.The major stains tissue. component collagen the identifies fibrotic Pathologists elastin of constituents of elastic detects is of special scars and protein and stain different delicate collagen trichrome and muscle red (The contains stains—hence blue.) actually orange, name—that cells three red, its stain tissue stain. up connective is is and and is III matrix special extracellular it in collagen, stroma type scars early organs present too of the composed a can be which normal of with that protein Another identified makes reticulin,

hence BY assume a is synthetic SCAR of there FORMATION progressively REPAIR and ECM. phenotype, more increased deposition assume deposition hence Collagen of and increased ECM. phenotype, synthetic there a more synprogressively is framework not if the regeneration if the • tissue or regeneration. deposition support by scar and Repair and damaged of cannot of formation syn is connective Collagen injured is tissue occurs capable structural

Fig. blood 3.26 occasional tissue numerous vessels, showing (A) matrix inflammatory a extracellular cells. containing and Granulation edema, loose stained is by collagen at the Collagen blue trichrome point. can be this mature seen stain; minimal blue) channels. vascular stain mature collagen (B) Trichrome (stained of showing scar, scattered and dense

http://ebooksmedicine.net

repair connective migration remodeling. angiogenesis formation, steps inflammation, tissue tissue, and are by collagen in fibroblasts, clot and synthesis, scarring of granulation proliferation and main The formation of

critical proliferation repair. eliminating agents factors the in types process, stimulate growth by offending the are cytokines producing and cell orchestrating involved and Macrophages the that of for repair

tissue MMPs of and matrix digest balance deposition (MMPs) metalloproteinases TGF-β is (TIMPs). fibrogenic agent; depends the agents, potent a among ECM, inhibitors ECM on the fibrogenic that

the be repair factors Tissue impaired reparative process. may quality or adequacy by that of of variety a the reduce or injured may that interfere local: Factors the systemic and with be (e.g., intrinsic or extrinsic infection) tissue, healing to

the the tissue delayed and healing; local most important one prolongs of is causes Infection inflammation injury. potentially it increases of

Diabetes a is for systemic abnormal is reasons 24), wound repair (Chapter an metabolic disease many cause of important compromises healing. and that tissue

malnutrition for has deficiency, status and and protein retard healing. vitamin profound example, collagen repair; Nutritional C on inhibit effects synthesis

result their they and inhibit fibrosis. diminish weak because Glucocorticoids have scars anti-inflammatory TGF-β effects, (steroids) production may well-documented administration in and anti-inflammatory however, are some instances, In the of glucocorticoids desirable. effects infections, (along the to antibiotics) may due collagen be corneal reduce of deposition. opacity prescribed in For glucocorticoids to likelihood example, with

pressure cause factors as Mechanical to pull torsion increased apart may or (dehisce). such wounds local

(e.g., resulting from Poor also and either impairs veins), venous diabetes drainage from in healing. varicose obstructed perfusion, or arteriosclerosis

of such or glass, impede even Foreign bone fragments steel, as bodies healing.

of affects injury repair. tissue subsequent and extent the The type only loss tissues in regeneration cells occur extensive injury least can probably then, composed and capable at in even Complete will function. of incomplete partial proliferating; restoration of result of tissue the composed to with tissues healing Injury infarct. must in nondividing of myocardial a is scarring; inevitably case cells such of result

The occurs are the the in the and injury of important. location which also injury character the tissue of arising tissue inflammation normal exudates in of small and synovial and leukocytes, by example, peritoneal, (e.g., the in resulting proteolytic resolution architecture. cavities), enzymes For digested inflammation pleural, of of resorbed tissue may the restoration in be spaces scar resorbed However, be granulation undergoes and a it organization, exudate process the too the into ultimately fully tissue large during fibrous to when forms. which grows a is exudate,

Scarring Healing Wound Abnormal Clinical of and Examples

basic arise deficient any process, formation repair components, contractures. formation, can excessive formation repair of in of components the including the of of abnormalities from and scar in the Complications tissue

Defects Healing: Wounds in Chronic

numerous systemic clinical factors. as situations, are of a result and in local These seen are The common following examples. some

Fig. often chronic severe people which of heart result varicose elderly caused or congestive veins 3.27A a ) failure. venous hypertension, by as most be may develop in may of pigment common, resulting red iron are from cell (hemosiderin) there Deposits inflammation. be accompanying chronic and breakdown, of fail ulcers to These delivery oxygen the poor because to site ulcer. of heal the of

Fig. in ) atherosclerosis 3.27B develop peripheral individuals arteries, with diabetes. of associated with especially and atrophy results ischemia then the skin underlying and in The of necrosis tissues. quite can painful. These be lesions

Fig. of elderly of 3.27C by tissues for prolonged a tissues numerous of example, compression against bedridden, individuals and bone, immobile ) caused in morbidities. necrosis underlying areas with ulceration skin are by caused pressure local mechanical and The are ischemia. lesions

Fig. 3.27D the affect extremities, lower feet. the ) particularly heal Tissue necrosis abnormalities, ischemia, the secondary metabolic neuropathy, and of are systemic failure infections. result disease to and causing small vessel ( by lesions characterized Histologically, epithelial these ulceration are

Fig. ) tissue extensive dermis in underlying and the granulation ( 3.27E

Fig. 3.27F

rupture). (wound dehiscence lead failure healing may to some In cases of is surgery most vomiting, this such coughing, and common, may frequently occur abdominal increased as result of Although ileus. with pressure, abdominal or occurs a not after

of the repair can give components the rise formation to Excessive and process scars of hypertrophic keloids.

a excessive of The result known as raised amounts a may accumulation hypertrophic scar. in collagen of scar These abundant often but and months they regress over several myofibroblasts, ( grow contain rapidly to tend

Fig. 3.28A ). injury that thermal the scars deep of Hypertrophic after layers develop or dermis. the generally traumatic involves boundaries tissue the http://ebooksmedicine.net the the scar of beyond grows If

Fig. illustrating Chronic healing. wounds in 3.27 defects wound (A–D) of ulcers. appearance External skin Sci translation, and repair and regeneration: Med signaling, Transl mechanisms, 6:265, 2014.) more (C) with Venous (B) ulcer, necrosis; diabetic leg and ulcer; sore. (D) ulcer; arterial extensive tissue (A) pressure of (E–F) diabetic a Histologic ulcer. appearance Tomic-Canic tissue. Margin (From granulation inflammation and Eming (F) (E) Wound SA, ulcer M: crater; P, chronic

( a keloid wound not regress, it does and called is original

Fig. ). 3.28B seem to formation, of keloid Certain African to those be particularly descent. predisposed individuals

blocks (this another literary called, Exuberant surrounding of skin wound of characterized by tissue, granulation proud the formation healing excessive flesh). with the above is of protrudes the level been has and more process amounts in fervor, reepithelialization granulation which deviation restoration or cautery removed epithelial by to surgical be excision permit of Excessive granulation must continuity. traumatic elements tissue or other excision. followed connective in may, recur fact, may of after by proliferation injuries that be Rarely, exuberant scars and fibroblasts incisional neoplasms gray desmoids, aggressive lie tumors. benign and low-grade at the fibromatoses, of or malignant Called zone these

normal part is important healing contraction the Wound an of process. wound surrounding results tissues. contracture this rise of and process An of and to the exaggeration the gives in deformities aspect palms, the particularly of the to develop thorax. Contractures and on prone soles, anterior are the the seen compromise can and burns serious after the joints. commonly of Contractures movement are

collagen The excessive a tissue. denote in and the ECM is deposition to components other fibrosis of term used

most interchangeably, of scar The fibrosis refers chronic but and may to abnormal organs terms in occurs diseases. internal often that used fibrosis in deposition collagen the be are scar those basic fibrosis The the mechanisms repair. of the of tissue during in formation same as skin associated by and infections loss Fibrosis and with reactions, process as stimuli such pathologic chronic tissue a induced is persistent typically immunologic is injurious ( of

Fig.

). 3.29 be even failure. organ responsible It and may for organ substantial dysfunction

earlier, the TGF-β. is major cytokine discussed fibrosis in As involved of tissue. increased are cell fibrosis regardless but seem in of ROS necrosis important The to precisely the the not lead death activity by apoptosis or TGF-β triggers, mechanisms and known, to that be production response TGF-β on vary collagen stimulation the that tissue. The produce depending to in cells may organs, such as stellate the In most major collagen cirrhosis. lung the myofibroblasts but the in main of and source cells are in liver producers collagen, are kidney,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. deposition. scarring examples and 3.28 of collagen excessive Clinical

(A) scar. Hypertrophic Keloid. (B) of (C) keloid. a Microscopic appearance deposition Note the tissue dermis. thick connective in the regeneration: Tomic-Canic from translation, M: 2014, Transl Eming repair signaling, Sci p. Med Margin SA, P, and Wound mechanisms, and (A–B 6:265, 2.)

of disease, include diseases pulmonary radiation-induced systemic (scleroderma), end-stage disorders such (idiopathic kidney Fibrotic pneumoconioses, and and liver fibrosis, as diverse chronic sclerosis fibrosing and pericarditis. drug-or cirrhosis, pulmonary diseases debilitating constrictive the lung fibrosis), These chapters the discussed are in in later conditions relevant the book. the death and there great development interest these anti-fibrotic drugs. is cause in morbidity in major conditions, of fibrosis of Because is the

The remodeling. wound tissue, inflammation, and are granulation phases healing formation cutaneous main of of ECM

(first can involves union healing extensive or by scarring wound intention); more union heal intention) secondary and (secondary contraction. Cutaneous primary secondary wounds

loss integrity injury, epithelial of Tissue

Fig. fibrosis. Mechanisms of 3.29 loss and leads of inflammation tissue tissue injury architecture. chronic to Persistent other and and stimulate and and matrix produced other leukocytes deposition migration the by of myofibroblasts the proteins. proliferation of and collagen macrophages extracellular Cytokines fibroblasts normal tissue replacement result of The fibrosis. by is net

the injury can influence by the volume, important location Wound diabetes; the that and type, and are be conditions, healing process. infection many particularly factors altered of healing

the keloids skin. in of cause production ECM can Excessive

functional and diseases stimulation extensive fibrosis, impairment. with inflammatory collagen tissue Persistent the to in chronic of of synthesis tissue loss often leads

Nat The lymphatic Alitalo 1380, Med 17:1371– disease, vasculature 2011. K: in and reactions, other immune roles review the biology their functions and of lymphatic and neoplastic, inflammatory, in excellent in their vessels, diseases.] [An of inflammatory cell

Nat Eicosanoid 15:511, EA, in PC: and Norris 2015. inflammation, Immunol Dennis storm Rev infection review the of antiinflammatory [A eicosanoids.] activities proand of

Dis Host Duffield Thannickal tissue Rev and al: responses fibrosis, Mech Ann repair Lupher VJ, 8:241, M, et 2013. in Pathol JS, of overview to mechanisms the chronic of infections.] system on fibrotic of immune emphasis [An fibrosis, reactions with an role the cellular in the

regeneration: Sci Transl Tomic-Canic mechanisms, translation, M: Med P, and Martin Eming 2014. signaling, Wound SA, repair 6:265r6, and repair.] contribute [A modern host to that tissue of review responses

V, 7:61–98, biology phagocytosis, The Ann Pathol Jaumouillé Grinstein RS, of Mech 2012. cell S: Dis Rev Flannagan the and in phagosomes.] phagocytosis, molecular functions receptors and of [A of of process, involved biology the discussion the the modern control

fibrotic line, JS, nearing 2013. Sheppard al: the D, for diseases: Transl Med Sci starting Friedman SL, Duffield et Therapy 5:167sr1, therapies.] of knowledge review translating the concepts and populations current development emphasizing basic the of of different the fibrosis, cell for new roles excellent [An the matrix, of pathogenesis of potential the extracellular and the to

pathways Lamacchia C, human Rev 6:232, and Gabay Palmer IL-1 diseases, C, inflammation G: Nat 2010. in Rheumatol of excellent targeting review in this cytokine and IL-1 biology therapeutic the [An inflammatory diseases.] the of of

matrix: of extracellular Hubmacher Curr novel Opin 2013. The D, SS: biology the Rheumatol 25:65–70, Apte insights, of the the of review [A biochemical properties brief ECM.] and structural

strategies, therapeutic TNF 12:49, LB: Nat Kalliolias 2016. Rev Ivashkiv mechanisms GD, emerging pathogenic Rheumatol biology, and TNF excellent review and and signaling inhibitors.] its and clinical pathways, the of development of [An efficacy TNF

Chem Eicosanoids Top inflammation: 2007. et Khanapure pharmacology, Garvey DR, and al: Curr 7:311, DS, Janero therapeutic biosynthesis, SP, Med in frontiers, inflammatory summary mediators.] important of the class this of [A properties of

Rev and 13:159–175, Immunol Neutrophil in inflammation, function Kolaczkowska and E, Kubes Nat P: health recruitment 2013. types reactions.] and excellent generation, recruitment, their of inflammatory different neutrophil in fates, of review and [An functions roles

Kopp Nat Stem in pancreas versus Sander and 18:238, M: cell 2016. JL, Cell liver M, Grompe Biol plasticity regeneration, of [An to excellent parenchymal contributions of cells review regeneration.] stem relative organ the cells and

Mech X, TN, The Dis Lowell multifaceted Pathol Rev 9:181, functions Mayadas Cullere neutrophils, CA: of 2014. Ann excellent biology.] of [An neutrophil review

Cell Biochem RJ: Biol and and McAnully 2007. Fibroblasts function, 39:666, in source, disease, myofibroblasts: Int role their J [A discussion of and major and fibrosis.] two in types their tissue of roles stroma cells the repair

Nonresolving A: Cell C, Ding 140:871, inflammation, Nathan 2010. that inflammation.] abnormalities of chronic the discussion [A to lead

diseases, 2012. of R: Evolution Medzhitov D, Biol Okin 22:R733–R740, Curr inflammatory for response association of and of and of the changes, of benefit high environmental this the the inflammatory discussion between modern interesting disturbed many cost be potential accounting balance between inflammation balance the the may and conceptual the world.] diseases how by [An

the of AJ, Page-McCaw remodelling, Biol Cell 2007. Werb Rev Mol Nat Z: A, tissue Ewald Matrix regulation 8:221, metalloproteinases and tissue modifying [A of the matrix review of in enzymes repair.] function

190:3831–3838, 3839–3847, disorders, JD: 2013. in J Lambris and immune inflammatory Complement D, Immunol Ricklin of of companion the disease.] articles [Two on biochemistry and complement agents activity in alter complement the and development therapeutic biology system, the to

KL, Rev Ontiveros response, Annu Rock 28:321–342, F, Latz inflammatory 2010. et sterile al: Immunol E, The the of immune cells system necrotic how other discussion agents.] noninfectious harmful [An and recognizes excellent

Romito current and understanding directions, cells: Pluripotent 2016. stem Cobellis G: A, Stem Cells Int future [A pluripotent 2015] [Epub of summary and endogenous stem cogent induced cells.]

Immunol Sperandio Moser 2013. of S, molecular Schmidt basis leukocyte deficiencies, its 55:49–58, and M: recruitment M, The Mol deficiencies.] the leukocyte leukocyte adhesion [A and of mechanisms review of recruitment

and Sica A, Mantovani Macrophage plasticity in 122:787–795, vivo Clin veritas, polarization: J A: 2012. Invest their infections, and metabolic and excellent [An review in disorders.] generation, roles macrophage cancer, inflammation, of their subpopulations,

tissue TS, repair, Stappenbeck and 324:1666, Miyoshi in role The cells stromal regeneration stem Science of 2009. H: wound role in tissue review of the of repair.] excellent [An stem cells

Dis al: pathogenesis 2011. Valentine Rev DJ, sepsis, of Mech et MF, Pathol Ann The Osuchowski C, 6:19, Stearns-Kurosawa shock.] [A of and sepsis current the of concepts in pathogenic discussion septic mechanisms

S, discoveries Invest J, and molecular Recent angiogenesis Clin al: 2013. J S, in Welti Loges cancer, antiangiogenic therapies et 123:3190, Dimmeler in advances the angiogenesis, of control of therapies elucidating the [A development process.] review and targeting of stimuli and new in the

A, Immunity Yoshie chemokine Zlotnik O: superfamily The revisited, 36:705–716, 2012. [An on and and clinical the excellent functions, their receptors.] classification, chemokines update relevance of http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

Hemodynamic Disorders, and Thromboembolism, Shock

of Pathogenesis Shock Septic

Stages of Shock

cellular removes depends generated and circulation and blood, metabolism. nutrients delivers of cells by tissues of and health the wastes The on oxygen which proteins into of electrolytes Under within beds, retained in passes through there capillary water are tissues. as the the vasculature conditions, and is normal net the blood movement and plasma little This which into function, endothelial increase often disturbed by pathologic net accumulation spaces. of hydrostatic content, all water balance plasma pressure, extravascular of is a or alter movement vascular from decrease resulting that promote fluid edema—the conditions of protein tissues in or on profound location, edema and Depending its effects. may minimal severity have snugger alveoli, fluid extremities, shoes a however, causing feel day; lungs, in after In one’s edema life-threatening it may the long make the only hypoxia. can fill lower sedentary

of frequently integrity vessels blood by structural trauma. compromised is The of that prevents blood-vessel excessive damage. blood is bleeding process the after clotting Hemostasis may if hemostasis to death. can result and, compromise shock, massive and which may tissue lead and regional in Inadequate hypotension, hemorrhage, rapid, perfusion death obstruct cell Conversely, clotting ischemic inappropriate vessels, causing (embolism) migration (infarction). clots blood or can (thrombosis) of potentially and (stroke). of thromboembolism countries: accident developed infarction, causes in myocardial death major embolism the at (PE), heart pulmonary three morbidity cerebrovascular lies of Indeed, and

this a as we with volumes. increase preface, discussion tissue disorders our hemodynamic blood that With conditions begin of

congestion refer different and underlying in but a to have within Hyperemia volume both an mechanisms. increase tissue, blood as an is exercising from or in resulting skeletal of muscle. Hyperemia at inflow, arteriolar dilation blood increased process sites inflammation and active occurs than because Hyperemic blood. tissues normal redder with of oxygenated are engorgement process tissue. blood is impaired a passive of from Congestion from outflow resulting a venous venous an or cardiac as failure, as occur a can in consequence systemically, obstruction. of locally isolated It tissues in an the blue-red Congested stems area. of color abnormal have affected hemoglobin the accumulation deoxygenated (cyanosis) that from intravascular persistent rupture tissue In hypoxia capillaries, or death chronic fibrosis, cause focal elevated cell edema sometimes and congestion, inadequate may pressures parenchymal hemorrhages. and the tissue lead secondary perfusion to producing may long-standing and

congestion theseptabecomethickenedandfibrotic,andthealveolarspacescontainnumerousmacrophagesladenwithhemosiderin(“heartfailurecells”)derivedfromphagocytosedredcells.Inacute pulmonary http://ebooksmedicine.net pulmonary congestion, ismarkedbyblood-engorgedalveolarcapillariesandvariabledegreesofalveolarseptaledemaandintraalveolarhemorrhage.Inchronic MORPHOLOGYCutsurfacesofhyperemicorcongestedtissuesfeelwetandtypicallyoozeblood.Onmicroscopicexamination,acute

Fig. 4.1 Liverwithchronicpassivecongestionandhemorrhagicnecrosis.

(A)Inthisautopsyspecimen,centralareasareredandslightlydepressedcomparedwiththesurroundingtanviableparenchyma,creating“nutmegliver”(socalledbecauseitresemblesthecutsurfaceofanutmeg).(B)Microscopicpreparationshowscentrilobularhepaticnecrosiswithhemorrhageandscatteredinflammatorycells. Dr. Crawford.) of James (Courtesy congestion passive ( of thecentralveinandsinusoidsaredistendedwithblood,andtheremayevenbenecrosisofcentrallylocatedhepatocytes.Theperiportalhepatocytes,betteroxygenatedbecauseoftheirproximitytohepaticarterioles,experiencelessseverehypoxiaandmaydeveloponlyreversiblefattychange.Inchronic hepatic the liver, liver) thecentralregionsofthehepaticlobules,viewedongrossexamination,arered-brownandslightlydepressed(owingtocellloss)andareaccentuatedagainstthesurroundingzonesofuncongestedtan,sometimesfatty,liver(nutmeg congestion,

Fig.4.1A ).Microscopicfindingsincludecentrilobularhepatocytenecrosis,hemorrhage,andhemosiderin-ladenmacrophages(

Fig.4.1B

which of is 60% of lean water, Approximately intracellular. body is weight two-thirds 5% Most water in plasma. in of is fluid; the the body’s compartments blood of is in water extracellular interstitial remaining only of the form found within edema tissues. noted As interstitial earlier, of accumulation is fluid an fluid as effusions. and are Extravascular cavities also accumulations can to collectively referred body collect such often in (hydroperitoneum, pleural peritoneal Examples effusions the or (hydrothorax), cavity include cavity or (hydropericardium), the ascites). pericardial the in cavity of by accumulation severe, body subcutaneous tissues generalized profound is edema of marked and in fluid cavities. swelling Anasarca

Table edema. 4.1 of causes major the lists Chapter discussed mechanisms vascular in following are permeability The the the largely causes related and are inflammatory increased are edema described of discussion. in noninflammatory 3; to

Fluid vascular vascular mainly and two opposing produced colloid plasma and by hydrostatic interstitial proteins. the pressure movement by osmotic forces—the governed between spaces pressure is the is hence owing at into fluid to pressure interstitial elevated by is the pressure; nearly outflow by small which there is of only of fluid slightly by produced net end arteriolar of microcirculation hydrostatic space, drained osmotic end Normally, a the the vessels. balanced the at outflow the lymphatic inflow venular increased the ( causes colloid pressure pressure of diminished into movement or Either increased interstitium osmotic hydrostatic water

Fig. 4.2 ). the and eventually achieved. pressure, turn is tissue’s hydrostatic new in equilibrium increases This a the Excess edema duct the way thoracic is lymphatic by returned and removed fluid of is by ( to bloodstream drainage

Fig. 4.2

setting of or fluid reduced pressure in The increased the edema hydrostatic intravascular that accumulates

4.1 Edema Table of Causes

CongestiveheartfailureConstrictivepericarditisAscites(livercirrhosis)VenousobstructionorcompressionThrombosisExternalpressure(e.g.,mass)Lowerextremityinactivitywithprolongeddependency

DatafromLeafA,CotranRS:Renal ed3,NewYork,1985,OxfordUniversityPress,p146. pathophysiology,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 4.2 Factorsinfluencingfluidmovementacrosscapillarywalls.Capillaryhydrostaticandosmoticforcesarenormallybalancedsothereislittlenetmovementoffluidintotheinterstitium.However,increasedhydrostaticpressureordiminishedplasmaosmoticpressureleadstoextravascularfluidaccumulation(edema).Tissuelymphaticsdrainmuchoftheexcessfluidbacktothecirculationbywayofthethoracicduct;however,ifthecapacityforlymphaticdrainageisexceeded,tissueedemaresults.

inflammatory a gravity. by contrast, a typically of because a vascular colloid protein-poor permeability, is is transudate; fluid protein-rich specific exudate edema increased with high >1.020 useful. the but illustrate gravity not are for clinically specific usual cutoffs point (<1.012 for for exudates) transudates The and the causes various now will edema. of discuss We

impair that Increases disorders return. are in venous hydrostatic by caused pressure mainly cause can in for edema distal thrombosis the example, of extremity the the venous by intravascular leg. in deep caused, restricted lower increases Local affected portion pressure to Generalized most in occur (Chapter resultant systemic failure edema, increases 11). pressure, in venous heart congestive commonly with

Fig. from cardiac, interlocking and failure. that the 4.3 illustrates underlie resulting generalized renal, hepatic mechanisms edema hydrostatic with pressure heart increase Several congestive factors failure ( venous in patients

Fig. 4.3 ). leads capillary systemic pressure. resultant cardiac congestion output venous The hydrostatic increase to reduced in and in and axis the hyperaldosteronism). hypoperfusion results the (secondary triggering kidneys, the same inducing cardiac output At in sodium retention reduction and renin-angiotensin-aldosterone time of water thereby with patients improving renal heart this normal increases and output, In perfusion. adaptation function, cardiac filling cardiac increases the to increase failing in compensatory response the However, its cannot output often volume. in blood cardiac heart and ensues. edema venous retention, vicious increased fluid worsening a pressures, hydrostatic cycle Instead, of is aldosterone retention or this antagonists), spiral (e.g., is salt output Unless by or water diuretics reduced or with cardiac continues. downward treatment restored restriction renal is edema, causes. value diuretics, generalized restriction, also a Because in salt of of management of the and hyperaldosteronism are non-cardiac feature from edema antagonists aldosterone common resulting secondary generalized

the from leads of colloid of osmotic decreased blood albumin loss and concentrations circulation. to of Reduction plasma the fluid pressure half circumstances, almost for the accounts Under normal protein. albumin total plasma of are conditions synthesized amounts circulation in of causes in either or the lost common albumin inadequate plasma which Therefore, osmotic is from reduced pressure. important cause blood. albumin the syndrome loss is Nephrotic most from of the leaky, in 14), diseases In (and that other of to albumin development plasma (Chapter capillaries by of characterized proteins) loss generalized edema. glomerular the leading are the syndrome nephrotic the and urine become the albumin cirrhosis) liver the Reduced 16) disease severe (e.g., (Chapter occurs of and synthesis 8). malnutrition in (Chapter protein setting low and renal a hyperaldosteronism. stepwise intravascular cause, to secondary edema, reduced volume, of lead hypo-perfusion, levels fashion Regardless albumin in Unfortunately, also salt retention by serum the primary increased deficit edema, kidney because water defect—low exacerbates only protein—persists. to fails but correct the not the volume plasma the and

result from lymphatic compromises fluid Edema from interstitial that resorption obstruction may of spaces.

by from drainage results and consequent caused localized condition. lymph-edema or Impaired a lymphatic obstruction usually an neoplastic inflammatory lymph infection node fibrosis. “elephantiasis”) massive extremity producing can inguinal cause lower genitalia the filariasis edema and parasitic external and For (so-called the by lymphatic of example, of called of of affected the skin; may cause edema and Infiltration the by lymphatics obstruction d’orange characteristic the pitted skin the superficial of peel). (orange is breast appearance overlying peau cancer finely breast therapy. a may of complication occur also as Lymphedema setting lymphatic which both undergo who can severe clinical common and/or drainage, lymphedema in axillary in of node the this breast irradiation, with resection obstruct entity arm. One cancer of relatively resulting is and women for lymph disrupt

renin-angiotensin-aldosterone MALNUTRITION, HEPATIC pressure SYNTHESIS, FAILURE RENAL the Renal FAILURE H2O Plasma blood pressure of Retention Blood hydrostatic and osmotic EDEMA NEPHROTIC of flow volume HEART Activation Na+ albumin SYNDROME system Plasma Capillary

Fig. Pathwaysleadingtosystemicedemaresultingfromheartfailure,renalfailure,orreducedplasmaosmoticpressure. 4.3

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of by edema volume) expansion increasing (because of water) intravascular and plasma pressure associated to of lead salt (and reducing its the obligate hydrostatic pressure. osmotic Excessive retention can function, salt acute are glomerulonephritis failure a diseases seen that wide of water renal Excessive retention compromise and poststreptococcal variety in renal 14). and (Chapter including

MORPHOLOGYEdemaiseasilyrecognizedongrossinspection;microscopicexaminationshowsclearingandseparationoftheextracellularmatrix(ECM)elements.Althoughanytissuecanbeinvolved,edemamostcommonlyisencounteredinsubcutaneoustissues,lungs,andbrain.

canbediffusebutusuallyaccumulatespreferentiallyinpartsofthebodypositionedthegreatestdistancebelowtheheart,wherehydrostaticpressuresarehighest.Thus,edematypicallyismostpronouncedinthelegswithstandingandthesacrumwithrecumbency,arelationshiptermeddependent Subcutaneous edema. edema edema. Fingerpressureoveredematoussubcutaneoustissuedisplacestheinterstitialfluid,leavingafinger-shapeddepression;thisappearanceiscalledpitting edema, oftenmanifestsfirstinlooseconnectivetissues(e.g.,theeyelids,causingperiorbitaledema).Withpulmonary thelungsoftenaretwotothreetimestheirnormalweight,andsectioningshowsfrothy,sometimesblood-tingedfluidconsistingofamixtureofair,edemafluid,andextravasatedredcells.Brain (Chapter23)canbelocalized(e.g.,becauseofabscessortumor)orgeneralized,dependingonthenatureandextentofthepathologicprocessorinjury.Withgeneralizededema,thesulciarenarrowedasthegyriswellandbecomeflattenedagainsttheskull. dysfunction syndrome ornephrotic edema Edemaresultingfromrenal

edema effects The to vary, of merely from fatal. ranging rapidly annoying infections. of it or can recognize is however, and it wound also signals Subcutaneous healing renal impair significant, potential underlying clearance edema primarily cardiac disease; to the because when important problem. clinical Pulmonary is a common edema distress inflammatory frequently but failure, left renal (Chapter also the in of most may 11), seen acute disorders of occur and infectious the ventricular is syndrome in It lung. respiratory and failure, setting environment edema oxygen fluid favorable impeding death ventilatory function; alveolar can cause normal by diffusion, besides interfering infections. a It for with also creates Brain (extrude) threatening; life foramen swelling the the brain through the is if is severe, edema can herniate magnum. With increased intracranial

Edemaresultsfromthemovementoffluidfromthevasculatureintotheinterstitialspaces;thefluidmaybeproteinpoor(transudate)orproteinrich(exudate).

Edemamaybecausedby:

Increasedhydrostaticpressure(e.g.,heartfailure)

Increasedvascularpermeability(e.g.,inflammation)

Decreasedsynthesis(e.g.,liverdisease,proteinmalnutrition)

Increasedloss(e.g.,nephroticsyndrome)

Lymphaticobstruction(e.g.,inflammationorneoplasia)

the respiration medullary controlling centers brain to to (Chapter supply the can vascular 23). Sodiumretention(e.g.,renalfailure) stem compressed, functions death other pressure, due to injury and leading be vital

Hemorrhage, formation. clot vessels, result most or extravasation the defective as blood often of the defined from of is vessels damage blood to As bleeding capillary chronically earlier, can occur described in tissues. congested or a is or wall if vessel vessel the vein Trauma, atherosclerosis, inflammatory or of to affected hemorrhage, neoplastic a may large extensive lead also erosion may be which artery.

a a variety of is clinical (often after insignificant disorders injury) diatheses. The called collectively hemorrhage wide seemingly in increased of hemorrhagic risk including in to function which or vessel properly causes, acquired coagulation all or factors, must homeostasis. of have These inherited walls, platelets, defects diverse ensure in section. These discussed the next are the Here hemorrhages, we on of regardless features focus cause. clinical of

and different clinical manifested appearances by be consequences. Hemorrhage may

rupture may a within a a a to fatal Hemorrhage a of or dissecting bruise) external massive as aortic (e.g., • ranges (e.g., hematoma, from significance from aneurysm) hematoma retroperitoneal accumulate resulting which in tissue trivial 10). (Chapter be variously hemopericardium, hemothorax, are according described to joints). or hemarthrosis(in cavities location— body bleeds hemoperitoneum, into Large Extensive breakdown hemoglobin. cells result red massive hemorrhages from can in and jaundice occasionally the of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 4.4 (A)Punctatepetechialhemorrhagesofthecolonicmucosa,aconsequenceofthrombocytopenia. (B)Fatalintracerebralhemorrhage.

minute Petechiae or to mm are skin, diameter) mucous hemorrhages in ( 2 serosal into surfaces membranes, (1

Fig. function, causes (Chapter 8). loss support, vitamin of ); low counts 4.4A in (thrombocytopenia), deficiency include vascular and wall defective platelet as platelet C

larger mm) hemorrhages. Purpura to slightly 5 (3 are as disorders fragility. can vascular as and petechiae, same cause the well (vasculitis), Purpura vascular trauma, inflammation increased result that from

2 Ecchymoses (colloquially larger called subcutaneous hematomas bruises). are (1 cm) to color) a and macrophages; characteristic degraded of are phagocytosed (golden-brown). cells bruise changes red eventually Extravasated from to color) by hemosiderin of enzymatic (red-blue conversion color the and result the bilirubin (blue-green hemoglobin

the The bleeding. on any lost blood depends of that rate and the significance particular volume clinical of of hemorrhage is amounts, (discussed may losses 20% impact to or healthy of cause hemorrhagic the losses, larger loss shock have greater of volume, (hypovolemic) later). little adults; of slow blood however, Rapid in up can even the hemorrhage bleeding the if in brain trivial The also can of site important; is be cause that ( tissues in located would death subcutaneous

Fig. ). 4.4B of in or iron loss Finally, in recurrent loss consequence due as peptic culminates iron bleeding) menstrual of ulcer frequently or to (e.g., anemia a chronic hemoglobin. deficiency external blood a not deficiency. to phagocytosed from a iron recycled so (e.g., By hematoma) lead red contrast, cells, iron internal does is bleeding efficiently

processes formation culminate clot the Normal limits hemostasis that in of injured regulated comprises an blood of a bleeding vessel. a from that series of within the non-traumatized, pathologic intact hemostasis thrombosis, (thrombus) The clot of formation is blood vessels. counterpart hemostasis followed of with causes its and consequences begins be regulation, to thrombosis. normal by discussion and This

in of blood serves site which limit is of endothelium injury or extent formation involving a the occurs the a orchestrated to that culminates prevent of the vascular platelets, bleeding. factors, and precisely Hemostasis clot, clotting at process and a of of vascular site shown injury general is events The sequence to in at hemostasis leading

Fig. 4.5

blood vasoconstriction the immediately occurs and injured reduces to markedly Arteriolar flow ( area

Fig. 4.5A ). secretion reflex and is by the endothelium-derived as mediated neurogenic potent by local such vasoconstrictor. of factors It a augmented mechanisms endothelin, would This for effect is not and resume transient, platelets of factors. however, activation if and coagulation bleeding

the hemostasis: the Primary platelet formation of plug. Willebrand factor promote Disruption and activation. and collagen, the exposes von adherence platelet subendothelial (vWF) endothelium of which in the small a change Activation of protrusions spiky increased area), secretory release results surface (from granules. as plates that with platelets rounded markedly discs shape well of as to flat dramatic hemostatic which Within recruit form the primary products minutes to a platelets, plug additional aggregation ( secreted undergo

Fig. 4.5B

of fibrin. Secondary deposition hemostasis: exposes tissue Vascular site the at of injury factor injury. as and procoagulant Tissue wall, cells fibroblasts. smooth glycoprotein the such expressed in a vessel that membrane-bound factor normally cells by muscle is is subendothelial and later), factor setting generation. VII reactions in of thrombin in Tissue factor (see activates that culiminates a motion binds cascade injury. cleaves at platelet fibrin, potent of fibrinogen creating leading to additional platelets, insoluble Thrombin is into also site a activator of aggregation fibrin the circulating a meshwork, and ( referred to the initial platelet This hemostasis, secondary plug as sequence, consolidates

Fig. 4.5C

stabilization resorption. Clot and hemorrhage. permanent plug to aggregates a form solid, Polymerized platelet further contraction prevents fibrin and that undergo by tissue counterregulatory t-PA this that motion made At mechanisms (e.g., limit endothelial site plasminogen into activator, clotting stage, cells) ( set the of are injury to

Fig. 4.5D repair. lead tissue clot eventually to and ) resorption and

Shock http://ebooksmedicine.net Thromboembolism, Hemodynamic and Disorders, 102CHAPTER 4

VASOCONSTRICTION A.

injury of Site

change 4 AGGREGATION AND Recruitment Shape (ADP, ACTIVATION TXA2) 3 Granule release B. PLATELET 2

C. FACTORS FORMATION AND FIBRIN ACTIVATION OF CLOTTING OF

Trapped RESORPTION CLOT neutrophilExpression of: D.

Fig. transient definitive neurohumoral and undergoing vascular the (C) in phospholipids) the GpIIb-IIIa granule (VWF) (involving Local hemostatic to results platelet ECM “cementing” platelet cascade After glycoprotein bind (B) Ib tissue and induce a factor secondary receptors and and are local (GpIb) fibrin A2 polymerization, of plug. change receptor shape (A) Normal fibrinogen, vasoconstriction. release. hemostatic induce and into exposed platelets factor 4.5 platelet injury, a coagulation factors hemostasis. additional Platelets to through aggregation binding a Released on Willebrand (TXA2) primary thromboxane plug. activated, form via von ADP activation the site a plasminogen (D) product) thrombomodulin, activator by confine hemostatic process tissue the (t-PA, of injury. mediated to fibrinolytic Counterregulatory and mechanisms, the

emphasized the anti-thrombic dissolution balance hemostasis; regulators the formation, of cells between that or occurs. endothelium and determines of are be central thrombus prothrombotic whether endothelial It should propagation, activities activities injury platelet or (activation coagulation however, fibrinolysis; above, activation, aggregation platelets numerous and promote express Normal acquire procoagulant this after that clotting anticoagulant and described inhibit a cells cells factor, endothelial see of variety shifts, and endothelial factors of also and balance

Fig. 4.11 ). of by a mediators. pro-inflammatory microbial number activated can be Besides endothelium forces, hemodynamic and pathogens, trauma, pro-coagulant anti-coagulant hemostasis functions role of of can of discussion and will since trigger endothelium a and modulates detailed the platelets endothelium We platelets in return after of and the coagulation. the factors roles coagulation to

in factors detail, The of following scheme in the in roles hemostasis greater and sections platelets, describe endothelium following illustrated coagulation

Fig. 4.5

in the hemostasis by surface Platelets vascular and primary by a activated role and factors. seals coagulation a binds initially that defects play concentrates plug critical forming providing that anucleate from fragments bone in bloodstream. into megakaryocytes the disc-shaped Platelets are shed that marrow cell are the two granules. types a cytoplasmic of cytoskeleton, on several glycoprotein function Their and depends receptors, contractile in coagulation contain (Chapter platelet-derived and molecule fibronectin, adhesion wound such well as V, the their transforming on have and factor-β. 4 protein in α-Granules factor coagulation, platelet (a membranes heparin-binding factor may be as fibrinogen, and 3) proteins P-selectin (PDGF), involved factors chemokine), involved healing, growth growth such as that vWF, factor as adenosine contain adenosine diphosphate calcium, triphosphate, and (or ionized epinephrine. serotonin, Dense (ADP) granules δ) and

and platelets After encounter constituents such subendothelial vWF tissue, collagen. as injury, connective the of a traumatic vascular these platelets a that with contact a undergo reactions ( On in formation of the sequence plug of platelet proteins, culminate

Fig. Platelet exposed adhesion ( interactions (GpIb) mediated is with bridge and collagen platelet largely a surface the • vWF, 4.5B which via between Ib acts as receptor glycoprotein

Fig. 4.6 ). (von Chapter to Willebrand of GpIb genetic 14) or disease, in attesting disorders, syndrome) these result deficiencies factors. the of Notably, vWF bleeding importance (Bernard-Soulier

Fig. 4.6 induces Subendothelium GpIb complex Deficiency: Deficiency: thrombasthenia Glanzmann von Plateletadhesionandaggregation.VWFfunctionsasanadhesionbridgebetweensubendothelialcollagenandtheglycoproteinIb(GpIb)plate-letreceptor.PlateletaggregationisaccomplishedbyfibrinogenbindingtoplateletGpIIb-IIIareceptorsondifferentplatelets.Congenitaldeficienciesinthevariousreceptorsorbridgingmoleculesleadtothediseasesindicatedinthecoloredboxes.ADP, Platelet von Willebrand GpIb factor Willebrand Adenosinediphosphate.Deficiency:Bernard-SouliersyndromeEndothelium ADP disease change GpIIb-IIIa Fibrinogen conformational

“sea urchins” shape rapidly with converted to adhesion, area. Platelets following change from increased discs smooth being spiky greatly surface charged its by phosphatidylserine) surface. and the increase fibrinogen (particularly (see that to glycoprotein phospholipids accompanied is later), by for affinity translocation IIb/IIIa in negatively platelet the change of This alterations for serve the phospholipids factor nucleation of calcium These assembly sites as coagulation complexes. and bind

in reaction) (release contents these along of referred activation. granule with to together are often changes as shape; platelet events two occurs Secretion he factor including coagulation ADP. number of activation by and is a factors, thrombin Platelet triggered activates receptor carried G-protein– receptor switched type by which a special Thrombin is of cleavage by protease-activated on (PAR), platelets a as to coupled through proteolytic a out thrombin. referred recruitment. phenomenon dense-body additional activation release a ADP activation, granules; ADP as rounds of platelet platelet of to begets thus, a is component referred and thromboxane platelet Activated potent produce aggregation. prostaglandin the of (TXA2), a platelets also inducer A2 bleeding defect by mild Aspirin synthesis. produces a that aggregation inhibiting and inhibits is TXA2 platelet required platelet enzyme a for cyclooxygenase, is to is the repair characterized, growth the contribute Although that vessel platelets following well of it also wall phenomenon factors released suspected the less injury. from

activation. their • follows Platelet aggregation change forms of fibrinogen, glycoprotein leading that platelet bivalent large plasma in bridges their a allows The platelets, polypeptide to with occurs between conformational aggregation. IIb/IIIa binding adjacent that activation a disorder called GpIIb-IIIa Predictably, results bleeding thrombasthenia. inherited Glanzmann in of deficiency by activation of irreversible wave stabilizes is but causing The the contraction. platelet platelet promoting thrombin aggregation reversible, by of and aggregation, and further initial platelet concurrent plug activation aggregated cytoskeleton Platelet and dependent consolidates the on the contraction is platelets. in into parallel, the converts In place platelets cementing the fibrinogen insoluble definitive fibrin, hemostatic also creating and secondary plug. thrombin of adherence platelets. and plugs, found part cells P-selectin activated on leukocytes expressed to hemostatic Entrapped in also to leukocytes in red due are

PLATELETADHESION,ACTIVATION,ANDAGGREGATION

EndothelialinjuryexposestheunderlyingbasementmembraneECM;plateletsadheretotheECMprimarilythroughthebindingofplateletGpIbreceptorstoVWF.

Adhesionleadstoplateletactivation,aneventassociatedwithsecretionofplateletgranulecontents,includingcalcium(acofactorforseveralcoagulationproteins)andADP(amediatoroffurtherplateletactivation);dramaticchangesinshapeandmembranecomposition;andactivationofGpIIb/IIIareceptors.

TheGpIIb/IIIareceptorsonactivatedplateletsformbridgingcrosslinkswithfibrinogen,leadingtoplateletaggregation.

Concomitantactivationofthrombinpromotesfibrindeposition,cementingtheplateletpluginplace.

coagulation reactions lead an to that clot. the The of fibrin insoluble cascade is of enzymatic amplifying a deposition series the various discussed vessels test of in tube As dependency clot the formation in factors on blood differs vivo later, ( and in laboratory

Fig. ). 4.7 principles, both in clotting the in follows. However, vivo vitro same and general follow as

( “dance,” from pathway of factors in which are a the the cascade to The next partner passed reactions to in can one likened coagulation be

Fig. 4.8 ). factor), coagulation inactive coagulation (an a cofactor proenzyme and a activated a an enzyme involves (an reaction factor), (a of form accelerator). Each step substrate reaction assembled on provided activated platelets. which surface, negatively a by components charged are is phospholipid These and that reaction II, complexes Assembly acid factors to γ-carboxylated glutamic calcium, IX, on residues of depends present which in binds also are X. VII, such anti-coagulant. use reactions produce K are widely as a antagonized that a and glutamic Coumadin, vitamin used enzymatic by drugs as The acid γ-carboxylated cofactor

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 4.7 Thecoagulationcascadeinthelaboratoryandinvivo.(A)Clottingisinitiatedinthelaboratorybyaddingphospholipids,calcium,andeitheranegative-chargedsubstancesuchasglassbeads(intrinsicpathway)orasourceoftissuefactor(extrinsicpathway). lines).Thered green (B)Invivo,tissuefactoristhemajorinitiatorofcoagulation,whichisamplifiedbyfeedbackloopsinvolvingthrombin(dotted polypeptidescorrespondtocofactors. polypeptidesareinactivefactors,thedark green polypeptides areactivefactors,whereasthelight

divided the ( traditionally on clinical and has intrinsic extrinsic pathways performed been coagulation laboratories, into cascade in the assays Based

Fig. 4.7A time (factors II proteins VII, assay (PT) • the in function the prothrombin The the V, (prothrombin), X, assesses and pathway fibrinogen). extrinsic of and and factor, a the time is fibrin calcium phospholipids, to recorded. plasma In clot are brief, added tissue form for to

proteins VIII, XI, the the time IX, screens thromboplastin function (PTT) fibrinogen). (factors assay pathway partial intrinsic XII, and II, • in V, The of the X, In of clot negative-charged phospholipids XII calcium, to recorded. of time the and factor) that together is plasma initiated the particles glass) ground formation assay, (e.g., is (Hageman by factor and activate with this addition fibrin clotting

Fig. SequentialconversionoffactorXtofactorXabywayoftheextrinsicpathway,followedbyconversionoffactorII(prothrombin)tofactorIIa(throm-bin).Theinitialreactioncomplexconsistsofaprotease(factorVIIa),asubstrate(factorX),andareactionaccelerator(tissuefactor)assembledonaplateletphospholipidsurface.Calciumionsholdtheassembledcomponentstogetherandareessentialforthereaction.ActivatedfactorXathenbecomestheproteasecomponentofthenextcomplexinthecascade,convertingprothrombintothrombin(factorIIa)inthepresenceofadifferentreactionaccelerator,factorVa. 4.8

http://ebooksmedicine.net

that Although in patients, PTT the the PT of events great and utility function are coagulation not in do assays factor lead recapitulate evaluating coagulation in they to vivo. This various deficiencies effects by point coagulation most of clinical is factors. of made the clearly considering V, severe likely associated with prothrombin IX, with and incompatible moderate disorders, to and of are is bleeding life. VIII, factors deficiency Deficiencies VII, X factor susceptible bleed be individuals in bleeding, thrombosis. factor not contrast, with deficiency only fact may In and to is and deficiency mild XI XII do with associated factor is that disease deficiency models the also of may there explained observations be be XII relevance effect paradoxical to involvement some certain thrombotic remains (discussed The although determined. XII XII by to factor suggesting of in human may later); circumstances, the fibrinolysis thrombosis evidence under pathway experimental of promote factor from these

(Fig. the VIIIa factor is IX effects vivo, humans, of important various deficiencies factor important Based believed factor is it that, complex complex IXa/factor on X of factor in the factor most activator of VIIa/tissue in activator factor the most is and that 4.7B ). feedback of cascade. to is XI (as thrombin factor seen VIII), coagulation XI deficiency by with mild V well amplifies that tendency in activate the as bleeding patients mechanism The likely and factor factors ability the a explained

clotting factors, to hemostasis coagulation its of inflammation and important, aspects most the because link the thrombin enzymatic various Among and is diverse repair. control activities thrombin’s are following: most important Among the activities

fibrinogen fibrin. Conversion into of crosslinked but polymerize amplifies fibrin and monomers fibrinogen that not factors Thrombin process, two into by factor by insoluble also V directly activating XI, an coagulation converts cofactors: VIII. only activating into the critical soluble fibril, also and secondary plug also stabilizes fibrin. covalently the by factor which XIII, activating hemostatic It crosslinks

Platelet activation. inducer a of to to its aggregation PARs, is through coagulation. and platelet function potent activate platelet ability thereby activation linking Thrombin

Proinflammatory effects. on PARs endothelium, and also types other ( are cell cells, expressed inflammatory

Fig. tissue to receptors these of contribute mediate thrombin activation is proinflammatory repair by ), and believed effects to and 4.9 angiogenesis. that

effects. Anti-coagulant of from beyond in a on Remarkably, mechanisms site vascular from anticoagulant; extending normal procoagulant the reversal thrombin injury. through the this to prevents clots later, encountering endothelium, described an function changes

Factors Coagulation. Limit That coagulation the be injury consequences. must vascular to initiated, deleterious site to Once prevent restricted of blood out by factor injury site washes removed of is One limiting factors, the rapidly dilution; simple activated are past which coagulation the liver. flowing platelets been for second is mentioned, charged by the provided phospholipids, that which, mainly negatively are requirement as have A

Fig. Roleofthrombininhemostasisandcellularactivation.Thrombingeneratesfibrinbycleavingfibrinogen,activatesfactorXIII(whichisresponsibleforcrosslinkingfibrinintoaninsolubleclot),andalsoactivatesseveralothercoagulationfactors,therebyamplifyingthecoagulationcascade( 4.9

Fig.

thromboxaneA2;t-PA,tissue-typeplasminogenactivator.See ).Throughprotease-activatedreceptors(PARs),thrombinactivates(1)plateletaggregationandTxA2secretion;(2)endothelium,whichrespondsbygeneratingleukocyteadhesionmoleculesandavarietyoffibrinolytic(t-PA),vasoactive(NO,PGI2),orcytokine(PDGF)mediators;and(3)leukocytes,increasingtheiradhesiontoactivatedendothelium.ECM, Extracellularmatrix;NO, 4.7 prostaglandinI2(prostacyclin);TXA2, nitricoxide;PDGF, platelet-derivedgrowthfactor;PGI2,

Fig.4.11 foranticoagulantactivitiesmediatedbythrombinviathrombomodulin. Francisco, University of San Institute, at San Francisco, Cardiovascular PhD, Coughlin, Shaun of MD, Research California.) California (Courtesy injury. contact sites activated by matrix of subendothelial vascular with at factors injury (described involve endothelium most mechanisms are counter-regulatory by adjacent site the to intact of the later). that important expressed However,

its Activation to the a contributes dissolution of fibrinolytic also of ( into clot and later size sets cascade the cascade motion limits that the coagulation

Fig. 4.10 ). breaks its interferes activity Fibrinolysis through is largely down and polymerization. the of which fibrin enzymatic with accomplished plasmin, a level An of later). thrombotic products fibrin of (described (often are most products), breakdown states D-dimers, elevated of split called notably clinical fibrinogen useful several fibrin-derived markers XII–dependent and thrombosis) deficiency by either of a factor generated the plasminogen, XII plasminogen association inactive the factor by (possibly of is explaining catabolism circulating enzymatic or Plasmin precursor activators. by pathway fibrin. activator is most to The most it and by endothelium is is when plasminogen principally t-PA; important active synthesized bound agent, since a thrombosis. useful largely of therapeutic is sites confined makes recent This to characteristic activity fibrinolytic its t-PA in Once binds inhibitor, and activated, such rapidly tightly as factors plasmin. that by is a free turn α2-plasmin protein inhibits plasma plasmin controlled counterregulatory

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 4.10 Thefibrinolyticsystem,illustratingvariousplasminogenactivatorsandinhibitors(seetext).

Coagulationoccursviathesequentialenzymaticconversionofacascadeofcirculatingandlocallysynthesizedproteins.

Tissuefactorelaboratedatsitesofinjuryisthemostimportantinitiatorofthecoagulationcascadeinvivo.

Atthefinalstageofcoagulation,thrombinconvertsfibrinogenintoinsolublefibrinthatcontributestoformationofthedefinitivehemostaticplug.

Coagulationnormallyisrestrictedtositesofvascularinjuryby: expressionofthrombomodulinonnormalendothelialcells,whichbindthrombinandconvertitintoananti-coagulant, activationoffibrinolyticpathways(e.g.,byassociationoftissueplasminogenactivatorwithfibrin). limitingenzymaticactivationtophospholipidsurfacesprovidedbyactivatedplateletsorendothelium, circulatinginhibitorsofcoagulationfactors,suchasantithrombinIII,whoseactivityisaugmentedbyheparin-likemoleculesexpressedonendothelialcells

endothelium whether often dissolution ( procoagulant balance or occurs of propagation, and activities between clot anticoagulant determines formation, the The

Fig. ). 4.11 endothelial factors fibrinolysis. express factors a Normal procoagulant that augment and of activities platelets the that multitude and cells inhibit coagulation of to in These prevent limit to and act of thrombosis to sites damage. clotting vascular concert factors proinflammatory to exposed endothelial lose if factors, However, their many of cells or properties. injured antithrombotic side” when the focusing we discussion activities the endothelium; later “dark endothelial antithrombotic return cells thrombosis. normal on the we hemostasis Here, to by of of of discussing complete

The coagulation of and antithrombotic divided properties into directed endothelium can platelets, activities at factors, be fibrinolysis.

Platelet effects. inhibitory and obvious endothelium platelets effect a collagen. is barrier that An as intact from of serve shields to subendothelial vWF of platelet and releases inhibit aggregation. number endothelium also activation that normal factors However, a and latter a important platelet Among prostacyclin already (NO), the most degrades ADP, activator diphosphatase; oxide aggregation. as potent are of the adenosine (PGI2), nitric discussed potent alter platelets. thrombin, the activity is one most which bind of of the of cells Finally, endothelial activators and

effects. Anticoagulant and molecules, factor tissue protein walls C factors endothelial oppose actively coagulation, vessel tissue expresses and from Normal notably multiple shields in heparin-like thrombomodulin, coagulation receptor, endothelium pathway factors most inhibitor. that factor in the and respectively, C C, cell endothelial bind on Thrombomodulin complex receptor endothelial and surface. protein protein a thrombin to protein protease and that factors S bound and cofactor, protein a instead a protein coagulation activate When platelets, and and vitamin K–dependent S. a of this VIIIa. potent coagulation ability Va in C, its cleaves requires is inhibitor loses complex, thrombin factors C/protein activates complex Activated III, XIa, bind activate thrombin then which and factors of and inhibits and the surface antithrombin XIIa. Xa, endothelium on Heparin-like IXa, molecules clinical III related on activity. to stimulate based of and is The antithrombin their utility drugs heparin ability inhibitor name factor tissue as protein (TFPI), S the complexes. VIIa inhibits pathway like implies, protein as factor/factor C, requires a binds and, cofactor Tissue and

Fibrinolytic effects. cells t-PA, endothelial of as fibrinolytic discussed, synthesize key already Normal the component a pathway.

the or lead ( of (3) hypercoagulability abnormalities injury, endothelial to so-called The (1) blood (the blood turbulent that intravascular flow, thrombosis stasis and (2) triad”) are “Virchow primary

Fig. ). 4.12 is http://ebooksmedicine.net Thrombosis

t-PA complexes Inactivates aggregation adenosine receptorpathway THROMBOSISInactivates C diphosphatase Endothelial molecule factors platelet fibrinolysis effects Va and Inactivates Thrombin Inhibits CProtein IXa (requires Thrombin PGI2, Anti-thrombin S) protein thrombin Activates factors protein factor-VIIa (also VIIIa inhibitor III Xa) Active and NO, tissue and

adhesion sequence together coagulation THROMBOSISVWF tissue Platelet membrane-bound by of fibrinogen) Exposure (held Extrinsic factor

Fig. vonWillebrandfactor.Thrombinreceptorsarealsocalledprotease-activatedreceptors(PARs). tissueplasminogenactivator;VWF, 4.11 prostaglandinI2(prostacyclin);t-PA, Nitricoxide;PGI2, Anti-coagulantpropertiesofnormalendothelium(top)andprocoagulantpropertiesofinjuredoractivatedendothelium(bottom).NO,

Fig. Virchow’striadinthrombosis.Endothelialintegrityisthemostimportantfactor.Abnormalitiesofprocoagulantsoranti-coagulantscantipthebalanceinfavorofthrombosis.Abnormalbloodflow(stasisorturbulence)canleadtohypercoagulabilitydirectlyandalsoindirectlythroughendothelialdysfunction. 4.12

underlies of scourges of man, it serious the disease. the forms cardiovascular of because modern most common and one and role Chapters and discussed disorders 11. causes in Here, cardiovascular on is detail in its the its focus in is 10 consequences;

injury thrombus heart impede formation. where flow Endothelial in leading blood and high arterial clot platelet the rates the of circulation, formation the activation to inevitably underlies almost are is thrombus in under shear and arteries. such necessary prerequisite as that platelet Notably, rich high platelets, adherence and exists stress, a cardiac formation believed for in clots it arterial and is typically activation provides of and reasoning myocardial other and part acute in platelet insight the inhibitors of use disease coronary aspirin the artery This infarction. behind

and endothelial may factor. severe tissue exposing thrombosis by injury VWF Obviously, trigger shifting produced activation or to and of stimuli This or homocystinemia, to and thrombosis endothelial other absorbed as abnormalities, metabolic exposures, dysfunction smoke. be infectious flow, blood from including by agents, the by in can inflammation injury, physical sometimes cigarette as expression mediators, also toxins that abnormal is noxious is change endothelium one and gene diverse However, pattern hypercholesterolemia promote inflammatory “prothrombotic.” referred such events. Endothelial triggering believed in thrombotic an important is role have to arterial activation

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cell 11. activation and discussed Chapters in The also role of endothelial dysfunction is and thrombosis 10 in arterial alterations: Here major to suffices several it mention pro-thrombotic of the

changes. Procoagulant of Endothelial a activated thrombomodulin, downregulate the modulator thrombin cytokines key of activity. expression described already cells by as which may and and can cells. on result expressed stimulate through inflammatory of sustained thrombin, platelets in PARs This turn inflammation activation augment platelets in the a In addition, changes downregulates and factor inhibitor, of state. anticoagulants, endothelium as further also such promote C protein procoagulant other protein tissue that inflamed expression

effects. Anti-fibrinolytic inhibitors and t-PA, development which endothelial downregulate thrombi. favor secrete expression alterations limit cells activator Plasminogen also the the (PAI), that fibrinolysis of of Activated

local and as endothelial contributes dysfunction, countercurrents or (chaotic injury forming Turbulence causing by as pockets to thrombosis cardiac and blood flow) of arterial stasis. well by major development a in venous factor thrombi. is Stasis of the found are vessel from lumen, the other center of of the a endothelium flow, blood normal mainly laminar layer conditions slower-moving in by the plasma. separated platelets blood of (and Under cells) By stasis deleterious following the have and contrast, effects: turbulence

endothelial endothelial activity, changes procoagulant expression. enhanced Both cell through promote gene part flow-induced and in in activation

to into Stasis with and platelets flow contact is when leukocytes come sluggish. allows endothelium the the

inhibitors. also factors of of and the activated clotting Stasis the inflow slows factor clotting washout impedes

a blood to contributes of clinical number Turbulent static settings. thrombosis in flow and atherosclerotic not plaques ECM only cause expose also but turbulence. subendothelial Ulcerated consequently local Abnormal thrombosis arterial and and aortic are for 9). fertile called create aneurysms sites stasis dilations (Chapter myocardium. infarction noncontractile Acute in results focally myocardial to aneurysm infarction formation. remote can Ventricular lead after remodeling more more cardiac cases, are blood the because In of local formed (Chapter both stasis easily thrombi mural 11). valve disease) (e.g., results dilation. after rheumatic Mitral atrial in heart stenosis left fibrillation, produces for In a atrial development location stasis the dilated of also conjunction thrombi. with a and atrium prime is cause flow in resistance cause the Chapter vessel and to 12) (such stasis also to increase red 12) syndromes polycythemia thrombosis. the stasis; cell vascular resultant sickle Hyperviscosity predisposes occlusions, vera, as and small cells deformed (Chapter anemia

in to abnormally typically high factors. blood tendency the Hypercoagulability caused to of is and alterations refers an coagulation clot, by intracardiac or an important to is It venous thrombosis. arterial factor contributes thrombosis but infrequently underlying risk for alterations be the that pathways secondary (acquired) persons divided into The ( to of disorders (genetic) coagulation predispose can and affected primary thrombosis

4.2 Table

the often carry the hypercoagulability (inherited) in first prothrombin the mutations (called Primary specific factor mutation, after V most factor it Leiden described). genes: by mutation a is V whites Approximately 2% to where and of was Dutch 15% • city caused deep approaches those 60%. venous Among the with mutation recurrent this thrombosis frequency of (DVT), The amino factor residue alters and renders V an mutation in it acid

4.2 Table Hypercoagulable States

FactorVmutation(G1691Amutation;factorVLeiden)Prothrombinmutation(G20210Avariant)IncreasedlevelsoffactorVIII,IX,orXIorfibrinogen

an Thus, protein by ProlongedbedrestorimmobilizationMyocardialinfarctionAtrialfibrillationTissueinjury(surgery,fracture,burn)CancerProstheticcardiacvalvesDisseminatedintravascularcoagulationHeparin-inducedthrombocytopeniaAnti-phospholipidantibodysyndrome counterregulatory to C. is proteolysis important anti-thrombotic resistant lost. http://ebooksmedicine.net mechanism risk. increased thrombosis, homozygotes with a Heterozygotes increased a risk having 50-fold fivefold venous carry for

gene allele in 3′-untranslated of A the prothrombin a single-nucleotide the population). substitution general common the A) (G to 1%–2% fairly (found is region of in risk nearly results for increased variant transcription This associated is prothrombin increased in and threefold with thromboses. venous a

10). to homocysteine as the as contribute well venous thrombosis, atherosclerosis (Chapter arterial to and development levels of Elevated of between proteins, fibrinogen. linkages The of formed to metabolites and including homocysteine variety prothrombotic may thioester of be a due effects homocysteine homocysteine by β-synthetase. Marked elevations of an may be cystathione of caused inherited deficiency

in thrombosis deficiencies S; adult present or antithrombin life. such typically III, affected C, or recurrent venous protein anti-coagulants protein early states hypercoagulable adolescence as of primary and thromboembolism in patients with include inherited Less common

the in Leiden risk factor gene significance added heterozygous variant, carry mildly increased factors is and Although the of prothrombin for thrombosis of these reasons. only V two genetic carriers that are compound not higher abnormal thrombosis. and these much at persons First, uncommon, individuals risk alleles sufficiently frequent are both heterozygous are and for homozygous higher bed of importantly, are and individuals factors, venous as flights. the airplane risk lengthy at heterozygous thrombosis prolonged acquired such risk More setting rest, other in pregnancy, for present. young inherited acquired considered (<50 be Consequently, even causes age), other factors years of patients hypercoagulability in of should risk when are

(acquired) many seen ( is in Secondary settings hypercoagulability

4.2 Table ). vascular be cardiac In trauma), failure may stasis or some most or factor. important the injury situations (e.g., synthesis factors of oral of hyperestrogenic be the The of and hypercoagulability may associated contraceptive use with related to anti-thrombin pregnancy hepatic state and synthesis reduced coagulation increased

III. cancers, disseminated adenocarcinoma) release procoagulant of In thrombosis. predisposes tumor (e.g., products to mucin from and attributed platelet release aggregation hypercoagulability of has advancing seen to age increased from with reduced PGI2 endothelium. been The obesity and mechanisms. unknown hypercoagulability by promote Smoking

particularly deserve problems and • are Heparin-induced acquired thrombocytopenia the clinical states, mention: syndrome. special thrombophilic two Among (HIT) important heparin This with treated unfractionated therapeutic of occurs in syndrome (for anti-coagulation). patients to 5% up of the development of and membrane autoantibodies 12). complexes It is (Chapter platelet factor-4) protein heparin that by (platelet bind marked antibodies it similar that thrombocytopenia), mechanism surfaces, resulting Although consumption as cell aggregation, the may injury. in well causing (hence endothelial appears unclear, as is also endothelial and activation, platelet bind platelet on and complexes these present state, of the in The a face even administration platelet result overall and prothrombotic is heparin low counts. antibodies induce thrombosis preparations have can but heparin low-molecular-weight formed. if less autoantibodies fractionated frequently Newer cause still already

antibody • syndrome. Anti-phospholipid repeated miscarriages, This vegetations, syndrome protean thrombocytopenia. thromboses, has recurrent (previously including manifestations, clinical syndrome) anti-coagulant called the valve and lupus cardiac can bowel emboli), presentations include or bed (following pulmonary recurrent Depending on extremity hypertension vascular pulmonary venous involved, (from clinical the the embolism pulmonary infarction, stroke, renovascular thrombosis), subclinical lower hypertension. the to to stem leading be seems does Fetal by appear but explained not rather to growth from a interference placentation. differentiation trophoblasts, with loss antibody-mediated and failure thrombosis, of of failure capillary syndrome (Chapter microangiopathy, antibody 14). a with renal in renal thromboses Anti-phospholipid resulting associated arterial is of cause multiple and also

patients syndrome detection antibody circulating to that The came anti-phospholipid from in name of the bind phospholipids. antibodies or through this most binding important believed misleading, by the that phospholipids. that are induced effects of pathologic mediated “unveiled” the name But proteins is on somehow epitopes it is as antibodies are to cells with the include β2-glycoprotein protein plasma and targets I, prothrombin. associates trophoblasts, and that a endothelial Suspected of antibody surfaces to inducing and hypercoagulable antibodies In vivo, suspected uncertain proteins, perhaps these bind it that mechanisms. thereby is a state other these through antibodies a (hence in also with lupus phospholipids thus coagulation name interfere However, inhibit and anticoagulant, vitro, misnomer). the the frequently false-positive in a serologic standard the for cardiolipin. The is the syphilis also syphilis in antigen assay for test provide antibodies because embedded

has forms. and Anti-phospholipid syndrome primary antibody secondary autoimmune as earlier systemic with (hence (Chapter syndrome). well-defined designated anticoagulant the such as lupus erythematosus syndrome Individuals term lupus are 5), a disease, antiphospholipid secondary having disorders; following infections. hypercoagulable lack drugs it primary In anti-phospholipid appears manifestations state of a to only the syndrome, and occasionally, patients of or exhibit other certain exposure autoimmune evidence immunosuppression. anticoagulation and Therapy involves have to are with of identified antiphospholipid apparently diatheses, full-blown sufficient that been also to but implying are not individuals, associated thrombotic antibodies clearly necessary syndrome. normal Although 5% the in 15% cause they they

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 4.13 Muralthrombi.(A)Thrombusintheleftandrightventricularapices,overlyingwhitefibrousscar. (B)Laminatedthrombusinadilatedabdominalaorticaneurysm.Numerousfriablemuralthrombiarealsosuperimposedonadvancedatheroscleroticlesionsofthemoreproximalaorta

Thrombicandevelopanywhereinthecardiovascularsystem.Arterialorcardiacthrombitypicallyariseatsitesofendothelialinjuryorturbulence;venousthrombicharacteristicallyoccuratsitesofstasis.Thrombiarefocallyattachedtotheunderlyingvascularsurfaceandtendtopropagatetowardtheheart;thus,arterialthrombigrowinaretrogradedirectionfromthepointofattachment,whereasvenousthrombiextendinthedirectionofbloodflow.Thepropagatingportionofathrombustendstobepoorlyattachedandthereforepronetofragmentationandmigrationthroughthebloodasanembolus.

Zahn; of theserepresentpaleplateletandfibrinlayersalternatingwithdarkerredcell–richlayers.Suchlinesaresignificantinthattheyareonlyfoundinthrombithatforminflowingblood;theirpresencecanthereforeusuallydistinguishantemortemthrombosisfromtheblandnonlaminatedclotsthatforminthepostmortemstate.Althoughthrombiformedinthe“low-flow”venoussystemsuperficiallyresemblepostmortemclots,carefulevaluationgenerallyshowsill-definedlaminations. Thrombicanhavegrossly(andmicroscopically)apparentlaminationscalledlines

thrombi. Thrombioccurringinheartchambersorintheaorticlumenaredesignatedasmural Abnormalmyocardialcontraction(arrhythmias,dilatedcardiomyopathy,ormyocardialinfarction)orendomyocardialinjury(myocarditis,cathetertrauma)promotecardiacmuralthrombi(

Fig.4.13A ),whereasulceratedatheroscleroticplaquesandaneurysmaldilationpromoteaorticthrombosis(

Fig.4.13B

thrombi arefrequentlyocclusive.Theyaretypicallyrichinplatelets,astheprocessesunderlyingtheirdevelopment(e.g.,endothelialinjury)leadtoplateletactivation.Althoughusuallysuperimposedonarupturedatheroscleroticplaque,othervascularinjuries(vasculitis,trauma)canalsobeunderlyingcauses.Venous Arterial or thrombi (phlebothrombosis) arealmostinvariablyocclusive;theyfrequentlypropagatesomedistancetowardtheheart,formingalongcastwithinthevessellumenthatispronetogiverisetoemboli.Becausethesethrombiforminthesluggishvenouscirculation,theytendtocontainmoreenmeshedredcells,leadingtothemonikerred, stasis, thrombi. Theveinsofthelowerextremitiesaremostcommonlyaffected(90%ofvenousthromboses);however,venousthrombialsocanoccurintheupperextremities,periprostaticplexus,orovarianandperiuterineveins,andunderspecialcircumstancestheymaybefoundintheduralsinuses,portalvein,orhepaticvein.

cansometimesbemistakenforvenousthrombi.However,theformeraregelatinousandbecauseofredcellsettlingtheyhaveadarkreddependentportionandayellow“chickenfat”upperportion;theyalsoareusuallynotattachedtotheunderlyingvesselwall.Bycontrast,redthrombitypicallyarefirm,focallyattachedtovesselwalls,andtheycontaingraystrandsofdepositedfibrin. clots Atautopsy,postmortem

Thrombionheartvalvesarecalledvegetations. (Libman-Sacks canoccurinthesettingofsystemiclupuserythematosus(Chapter5). endocarditis) (Chapter11).Lesscommonly,sterile,verrucous (Chapter11).Sterilevegetationsalsocandeveloponnoninfectedvalvesinhypercoagulablestates—thelesionsofso-called“nonbacterial endocarditis thrombotic endocarditis” Bacterialorfungalbloodborneinfectionscancausevalvedamage,leadingtothedevelopmentoflargethromboticmasses(infective endocarditis)

side photograph). of (left

Thrombus of the Fate

thrombus processes: evolves ensuing the an survives to days combination of four If during initial patient some thrombotic following the weeks the through event, a

Propagation. additional of platelets enlarges the through odds The of the or increasing vascular and occlusion embolization. fibrin, thrombus accretion

Embolization. Part or thrombus is the elsewhere in all vasculature. the and of dislodged transported

Dissolution. dissolution. a of may formed, is shrinkage factors fibrinolytic newly complete and to its If thrombus rapid lead activation is proteolysis, lysis ineffectual. polymerization thrombus older substantially more fibrin and thrombi, With plasmin-induced the resistant renders to extensive to t-PA the of acute resistance therapeutic in administered agents effective (e.g., setting fibrinolytic a thrombosis) lysis of coronary not significance, unless few within hours acquisition as of thrombus This administration formation. clinical of is generally has

and Organization recanalization. endothelial Older become cells, by fibroblasts cells, and ( of thrombi organized the muscle ingrowth smooth

Fig. ). 4.14 the the a channels reestablishing that—to In length continuity of capillary lumen. the original the thrombus, formed conduits are extent—create limited time, thereby along of can thrombus a a http://ebooksmedicine.net convert recanalization into Further sometimes

Fig. 4.14 Anorganizedthrombus.Low-powerviewofathrombosedarterystainedforelastictissue.Theoriginallumenisdelineatedbytheinter-nalelasticlamina(arrows)andiscompletelyfilledwithorganizedthrombus.

into of the wall the that vessel. incorporated mass of tissue vascularized remodeled connective is eventually undergoes organizing, the the leukocytes. because lysosomal entrapped enzymatic thrombus of instead center Occasionally, of enzymes of presumably of from digestion, a release an seeding as the serve occurs, 10). bacterial weaken (Chapter the degraded of the infection a If may vessel culture aneurysm of ideal wall, resulting and to formation medium, mycotic contents thrombi leading the

to because and of rise emboli. veins they Thrombi obstruction and are cause significant arteries may give importance depends The site of greatest that effect of on clinical is the thrombosis. the the Thus, they worrisome to death. and potential thrombi their cause venous an edema cause lungs in congestion obstruction, embolize although to vascular distal are and beds most because can to of arterial whereas cerebral cause and their Conversely, and more (e.g., to considerably vessels) tissue tendency can infarction, thrombi is vessels in obstruct embolize coronary important.

of occur the leg. thrombi in veins deep or the the venous Most superficial rarely in overlying varicosities; development in varicose of can congestion can outflow, saphenous the impaired from infections embolize they and venous the Superficial predisposing setting thrombi ulcers. be local swelling skin to painful of arise these usually cause the the and and but venous particularly system, thromboses above are veins femoral, at and because in to leg venous knee embolize. the the joint they popliteal, veins) more are iliac serious larger or (e.g., prone (DVTs) Deep local Although venous often such edema, may cause the and pain collateral circumvent channels obstruction. DVTs entirely to approximately DVTs embolized after only and the of are lungs. patients Consequently, have they in recognized asymptomatic are 50%

hypercoagulable as ( stasis states, and are earlier with described DVTs Lower-extremity associated

). 4.2 Table muscles include failure, return. bed of common latter heart venous the immobilization; Thus, action two the reduce leg factors slow and milking thus rest, predisposing and factors congestive production. also immobilize procoagulant a hepatic are factors, synthesis with t-PA not injury, coagulation release, but Trauma, and increased vascular burns associated patient and surgery, of only reduced in contribute diathesis of enlarging factors the with pressure legs, in the Many can and produced time the pregnancy; to produce of potential the amniotic to uterus and fluid associated at into addition and stasis hypercoagulability. fetus veins the late delivery, period of by postpartum circulation infusion are the the for the thrombotic pregnancy procoagulant is for phenomena increased the risk thromboembolic in of largely responsible release seen cancers. Tumor-associated disseminated different described referred transiently, disorder physician as from syndrome, to and or involve sometimes beds of to These tendency migratory the Trousseau for as suffered the several it. the thrombophlebitis, venous both are who because setting, Regardless the older persons of of the specific 50 DVT is clinical risk than increased in years.

cause Atherosclerosis flow integrity of the loss blood because thromboses is a with endothelial with major of abnormal is associated and arterial ( it

Fig. 4.13B ). injury by can dyskinetic cardiac myocardial thrombi contraction ( mural and Myocardial to infarction causing predispose endocardial

Fig. fibrillation. atrial and mural may disease engender and rheumatic thrombi ), heart atrial causing dilation by 4.13A thrombi mural embolization. prone to are cardiac aortic and Both particularly because can any blood tissue are spleen the be their kidneys, supply. affected, and Although brain, of targets likely rich

endothelialinjury(e.g.,bytoxins,hypertension,inflammation,ormetabolicproducts) hypercoagulability:eitherprimary(e.g.,factorVLeiden,increasedprothrombinsynthesis,anti-thrombinIIIdeficiency)orsecondary(e.g.,bedrest,tissuedamage,malignancy) abnormalbloodflow,stasis,orturbulence(e.g.,resultingfromaneurysms,atheroscleroticplaque) ThrombusdevelopmentisusuallyrelatedtooneormorecomponentsofVirchow’striad:

Thrombimaypropagate,resolve,becomeorganized,orembolize.

Thrombosiscausestissueinjurybylocalvascularocclusionorbydistalembolization.

of onset. thrombosis sudden be microcirculation that or is widespread may the insidious DIC within advanced malignancy. It may disorders complications from ranging be obstetric in to seen fibrinolytic same micro-vascular and widespread To synonym consumes consumptive coagulation the time, the at mechanisms and activated. platelets matters, (hence coagulopathy), complicate the thrombosis are proteins

http://ebooksmedicine.net

and excessive bleeding The result is may same patient. in the that co-exist net clotting other Chapter bleeding diatheses with It in in detail 12. along is discussed greater

solid, of is detached where often blood dysfunction intravascular to is or gaseous causes embolus a the from origin it liquid, or distant mass site, infarction. a An tissue its by that point carried of derive a term thromboembolism. The dislodged from vast emboli thrombus—hence majority the bubbles commonly, emboli fat amniotic (cholesterol of droplets, atherosclerotic bone Less air or fragments, marrow, or are bits nitrogen, emboli), tumor of composed fluid. debris of arrest too the vascular of partial emboli in tree. permit can emboli or resulting in Inevitably, depending to small site in anywhere origin, passage, further on complete occlusion; vascular the lodge vessels primary and right-sided necrosis (infarction) consequence to of downstream is the tissues, pulmonary The systemic embolization whereas hypotension, leads ischemic heart embolization in circulation of failure. hypoxia,

and venous emboli form Pulmonary thromboembolic originate common the of for disease. deep responsible from are most thromboses embolism (PE) patients. of per hospitalized pulmonary 1000 to The is incidence 2 4 since deaths per in 1990s, the has still year considerably the causes of declined United rate Although about 100,000 PE PE fatal early the States. cases, thrombi proximal In 95% from lower the originate emboli from uncommon. deep leg to fossa; veins embolization thrombi is venous more leg than of within popliteal

the vasculature. usually heart Fragmented from the in pulmonary side larger are channels arresting through carried of and DVTs progressively through before the thrombi pass right bifurcation smaller, can the arteries branching occlude (saddle or lodge arterioles into Depending at main size, PE and ( on artery, pass pulmonary embolus), a the pulmonary the right the left of

Fig. ). 4.15 thrombus; emboli emboli for of single increased a had patient risk one is sequentially occur, either or embolus who from smaller a more. multiple pulmonary shower as at a Frequently, large has having embolism). enters an (paradoxical or through defect and Rarely, the passes atrial systemic ventricular embolus an circulation pathologic PE features 13; in found of Chapter clinical the are the is discussion major more complete and following: A

silent. (60%–80%) emboli Most are small clinically pulmonary and the With thromboemboli and into webs. bridging undergo organization some incorporated leaves fibrous in they vascular become wall; organization time, of cases, behind

large cause embolus other the death. a major end can of spectrum, the a artery that blocks pulmonary At sudden

Embolic capillaries pulmonary can cause rendered hemorrhage. anoxic subsequent and rupture downstream of of arteries medium-sized obstruction not because Such do the pulmonary cause infarction usually emboli

Fig. Embolusderivedfromalower-extremitydeepvenousthrombuslodgedinapulmonaryarterybranch. 4.15

circulation bronchial (dual blood area also circulation). through an intact receives the failure lead perfusion) to a cardiac pulmonary setting can left-sided bronchial (and artery in infarct. similar a of embolus diminished However,

infarction. end-arteriolar Embolism small to causes pulmonary usually branches

ventricular time failure can emboli hypertension right (cor occurring through cause Multiple pulmonale). pulmonary and

two-thirds atria systemic thrombi; dilated infarcts with disease). ventricular these 25% valve left intracardiac to associated mural are another (80%) Most of secondary and arise from left mitral (e.g., with emboli 15% system aneurysms, aortic from are 11), unknown origin. or The emboli); of originate overlying vegetations (Chapter valvular 10% thrombi atherosclerotic (paradoxical fragmented to systemic the venous emboli of ulcerated remainder plaques,

understandably tissues. and which arterial the the emboli their final relative lung, point travel lodge depends of primarily origin emboli, contrast flow blood place can the on venous in rates their By virtually anywhere; to of resting with downstream targets. intestines, arteriolar the system less (10%); (75%) embolization are spleen Common kidneys, common and and nervous extremities central sites include lower lodge affected supply, to vulnerability caliber embolization emboli of occluded of the anoxia; in arteries collateral and depend end cause and often the vessel, the the consequences The tissue’s infarction. arterial on

injury fracture) the long due release Soft (eg, marrow fat sinusoids or a bone crush rupture microscopic globules tissue of to into vascular circulation. marrow after and resuscitation probably Fat of cardiopulmonary vigorous are emboli common clinical findings incidental but are little significance. fat although individuals severe ( some skeletal 90% of injuries with occurs marrow and Similarly, embolism in

Fig. 10% findings. 4.16A than show any less clinical ), develop However, a a http://ebooksmedicine.net minority of patients

Fig. 4.16 Unusualtypesofemboli. attachedtoathrombus.(B)Amnioticfluidemboli.Twosmallpulmonaryarteriolesarepackedwithlaminatedswirlsoffetalsquamouscells.Thesurroundinglungisedematousandcongested. spaces) (A)Bonemarrowembolus.Theembolusiscomposedofhematopoieticmarrowandmarrowfatcells(clear Schwartz, (Courtesy Dr. Beth of MD.) Baltimore, a by neurologic diffuse pulmonary anemia, of fatal petechial rash embolism symptoms, symptomatic cases. that syndrome 10% thrombocytopenia, characterized insufficiency, fat in is and rapidly 1 and after 3 days to sudden signs the of symptoms irritability, as can and coma. to dyspnea, Clinical which restlessness, delirium tachycardia, injury or tachypnea, appear onset progress from attributed and cell fat can result and/or to Thrombocytopenia subsequent similar red aggregation hemolysis. splenic platelet sequestration; globules anemia or adhesion to is aggregation can petechial of (seen in related onset feature. diagnostic rash of is thrombocytopenia useful a rapid 20%–50% and diffuse be cases) to A

mechanical The obstruction injury. fat emboli of biochemical and involves syndrome pathogenesis both cerebral triggering microemboli Fat microvasculature, by and pulmonary both occlude platelet aggregation. directly and release lipid fatty deleterious acid from endothelial exacerbated toxic is This injury. by which globules, local effect causes protease, the Platelet activation complete release) and 3) recruitment free (with (Chapter assault. radical, vascular and eicosanoid granulocyte marrow fat during microglobules used fat and the solvents tissue demonstration processing, sections (frozen stains). in microscopic techniques by of (i.e., of dissolved Because specialized requires elements) the are accompanying absence lipids

is complication fluid Amniotic occurring in labor period and postpartum of 1 grave deliveries. the immediate in an uncommon, embolism 40,000 in making of maternal common fifth some maternal and United of 85% most for in most cause neurologic country; deaths rate The 10% of States, the common developed deficit. accounting world death the suffer permanent form it survivors 80%, maternal this the mortality of in approaches cause of death the followed by sudden and severe by seizures Onset coma. dyspnea, is shock, characterized cyanosis, hypotensive and from the the survives If develops, pulmonary edema half with secondary initial intravascular patient coagulation thrombogenic fluid. about the disseminated of typically along to crisis, amniotic patients) (in release substances substances from system activation thought innate in obstruction vessels by biochemical it system mortality in not coagulation Indeed fluid. of of is caused but the and that results immune the and amniotic such from cases the morbidity mechanical pulmonary

maternal the underlying amniotic via fluid uterine cause of is placental its vein (and The rupture. into entry circulation in contents) membranes the and/or the tears caseosa, cells from fetal vernix squamous fat in derived mucin from maternal gastrointestinal Histologic or tracts analysis fetal skin, the ( from and respiratory shows pulmonary hair, shed microcirculation lanugo the

Fig. ). 4.16B systemic (Chapter edema, pulmonary generated damage fibrin marked intravascular disseminated coagulation. thrombi alveolar Other diffuse 13), by include findings and

flow injury. distal ischemic bubbles coalesce cause Gas can vascular obstruct within and the and circulation

air “sitting trapped introduced into flow, upright cerebral consequences. artery circulation in in small with surgery arterial or volume bypass Thus, neurosurgery can a coronary the occlude by position” dire an a performed of during hypoxia, sufficient a inadvertently or effects, no have to chest enter of emboli death. generally and or during the can procedures injury laproscopic arrest but cause as wall a obstetric emboli pulmonary venous circulation in Small large gas venous cause and the consequence air may heart very deleterious

atmospheric in sickness caused changes is pressure. of embolism particular by called decompression gas form sudden A underwater undergo who aircraft divers, risk. Scuba unpressurized rapid persons ascent are and in at construction workers, of the When pressure a become during in dive), (particularly nitrogen) gas dissolved tissues. breathed and amounts high sea increased at air (e.g., deep is blood ascends the rapidly, the cause (depressurizes) expands form then solution If bubbles nitrogen emboli, the which and to of tissue too blood gas tissues ischemia. diver in out in the about in back supporting in bubbles responsible then-popular Grecian reminiscent condition bend). named (so painful joints and muscles gas for pose is in bends a fashion called manner 1880s person the the arches of a of the skeletal because the the women’s afflicted called within the tissues and Rapid formation Gas leading hemorrhages, “chokes”. pulmonary cause focal so-called the emphysema, distress, edema, in and bubbles vasculature the atelectasis or to respiratory of central nervous mental onset even can sudden system cause in the impairment Bubbles coma. and which most for in gas heads lead A are more (named is chronic recurrent multifocal bridge sickness and vessels tibiae, affected. disease form in called the emboli persistent bones necrosis; of commonly underwater decompression pressurized to the or the caisson construction), humeri of during used femurs, ischemic

http://ebooksmedicine.net

force back the treats a persons solution, high-pressure decompression gas into Placing affected acute in chamber, to sickness. exhalation slow do not bubbles gas so that resorption and re-form. Subsequent permits gradual decompression obstructive

Anembolusisasolid,liquid,orgaseousmasscarriedbythebloodtoasitedistantfromitsorigin;mostaredislodgedthrombi.

Pulmonaryembolideriveprimarilyfromlower-extremitydeepveinthrombi.Theireffectsdependmainlyonthesizeoftheembolusandthelocationinwhichitlodges.Consequencesmayincluderight-sidedheartfailure,pulmonaryhemorrhage,pulmonaryinfarction,orsuddendeath.

Systemicembolideriveprimarilyfromcardiacmuralorvalvularthrombi,aorticaneurysms,oratheroscleroticplaques;whetheranemboluscausestissueinfarctiondependsonthesiteofembolizationandthepresenceorabsenceofcollateralcirculation.

Fatembolismcanoccuraftercrushinginjuriestothebones;symptomsincludepulmonaryinsufficiencyandneurologicaldamage.Amnioticfluidembolismmayfollowchildbirthandcangiverisetofatalpulmonaryandcerebralmanifestations.Airembolismcanoccuruponrapiddecompression,mostcommonlyindivers;itresultsfromsuddenbubblingofnitrogendissolvedinbloodathigherpressures.

necrosis the of area the vascular An infarct caused ischemic occlusion is tissue. supply by an of affected to primarily affecting brain Infarction extremely and illness. heart important common a is the cause clinical of the and or stemming are States of the a infarction. most with United of 40% of consequence from these myocardial Roughly all in cardiovascular deaths disease, deaths cerebral common causes clinical substantial ischemic Pulmonary of infarction (gangrene) the and is infarction necrosis diabetic complication, in often population. a distal fatal, morbidity is bowel extremities

underlies thrombosis embolism or of infarctions. arterial vast Arterial majority the include aneurysm, by tibial within as an of such causes (e.g., extrinsic of dissecting expansion confined a a compression tumor, atheroma space syndrome). to hemorrhage, in a common aortic compartment arterial secondary or of Less anterior and intraplaque vessel, vasospasm, obstruction edema causes volvulus), or bowel rupture, torsion include traumatic hernia vascular entrapment of uncommon sac. vessel twisting testicular and Other a (e.g., tissue in in infarction congestion; provide the infarction, Although to open simply inflow. the outflow thrombosis channels cause common can rapidly is arterial outcome restore more typically, bypass to venous sufficient Infarcts thrombosis in efferent testis caused ovary). vein (e.g., venous organs usually occur single thus only by with or a

(anemic) orbland. (hemorrhagic) andmaybeeitherseptic tion.Thus,infarctsmaybeeitherred orwhite

infarct). (Fig.4.17A )occur(1)asaresultofvenousocclusions(suchasinovariantorsion);(2)inloosetissues(e.g.,lung)wherebloodcancollectininfarctedzones;(3)intissueswithdualcirculationssuchaslungandsmallintestine,wherepartial,albeit (B)Sharplydemarcatedpaleinfarctinthespleen(white

Fig. Redandwhiteinfarcts. 4.17 infarct). (A)Hemorrhagic,roughlywedge-shapedpulmonaryinfarct(red

bend). a person afflicted 1880s (so the pose women’s because in Grecian bends arches named the painful ABthe fashion called then-popular a called manner the the back reminiscent in of condition the pulmo bubbles inadequateperfusionbycollateralarterialsuppliesistypical;(4)inpreviouslycongestedtissues(asaconsequenceofsluggishvenousoutflow);and(5)whenflowisreestablishedafterinfarctionhasoccurred(e.g.,afterangioplastyofanarterialobstruction). Gas in the

infarcts White occurwitharterialocclusionsinsolidorganswithend-arterialcirculations(e.g.,heart,spleen,andkidney),andwheretissuedensitylimitstheseepageofbloodfromadjoiningpatentvascularbeds(

Fig.4.17B ).Infarctstendtobewedge-shaped,withtheoccludedvesselattheapexandtheorganperipheryformingthebase(

Fig.4.17 );whenthebaseisaserosalsurface,thereisoftenanoverlyingfibrinousexudate.Lateralmarginsmaybeirregular,reflectingflowfromadjacentvessels.Themarginsofacuteinfarctstypicallyareindistinctandslightlyhemorrhagic;withtime,theedgesbecomebetterdefinedbyanarrowrimofhyperemiaattributabletoinflammation.

Fig.4.17B ).Bycomparison,hemorrhagicinfarctsaretheruleinthelungandotherspongyorgans(

Fig.4.17A ).Extravasatedredcellsinhemorrhagicinfarctsarephagocytosedbymacrophages,andthehemeironisconvertedtointracellularhemosiderin.Smallamountsdonotimpartanyappreciablecolortothetissue,butextensivehemorrhagesleaveafirm,brownresidue.

Inmosttissues,themainhistologicfindingassociatedwithinfarctsisischemic coagulative necrosis (Chapter2).Aninflammatoryresponsebeginstodevelopalongthemarginsofinfarctswithinafewhoursandusuallyiswelldefinedwithin1to2days.Eventually,inflammationisfollowedbyrepair,beginninginthepreservedmargins(Chapter3).Insometissues,parenchymalregenerationcanoccurattheperipheryoftheinfarct,wheretheunderlyingstromalarchitecturehasbeenspared.Mostinfarcts,however,areultimatelyreplacedbyscar(

).Thebrainisanexceptiontothesegeneralizations;ischemictissueinjuryinthecentralnervoussystemresultsinliquefactive (Chapter2). Fig.4.18 necrosis

Septic infarctis occurwheninfectedcardiacvalvevegetationsembolize,orwhenmicrobesseednecrotictissue. Inthesecasestheinfarctisconvertedintoanabscess,withacorrespondinglygreaterinflammatoryresponseandhealingbyorganizationandfibrosis(Chapter3).

Fig. Remotekidneyinfarct,nowreplacedbyalargefibroticscar. 4.18

and dysfunction death. vascular of inconsequential to to occlusion from effects necrosis organ sometimes The range leading tissue three the by of outcomes The variables: is influenced range following

Anatomy the supply. of vascular the most blood individual factor alternative damage. of an supply an in absence occlusion important whether vessel causes of determining is or presence The does lung arterioles pulmonary the of arteries is compromised. infarction the lung also not of cause supply that the unless bronchial dual bronchial by means pulmonary obstruction and circulation the The liver, Similarly, the hepatic supply, arterial vein, parallel and forearm, blood which are and receives artery with the resistant portal infarction. its and the from radial the hand to ulnar and circulations, contrast, the kidney obstruction have and arterial By these leads the both infarction and to generally tissues. spleen end-arterial in

occlusion. Rate of occlusions development collateral cause for Slowly the to infarction of allow less are developing likely blood because they supplies. time flow, small arteries. For three minimal blood interarteriolar major example, coronary normally the anastomoses, carry which interconnect to If artery atherosclerotic in slowly increase flow by the artery plaque), circulation coronary is sufficiently may (e.g., completely one prevent occluded. if infarction—even original occluded this encroaching becomes collateral

vulnerability Tissue hypoxia. to blood of damage minutes. undergo to deprived supply only Neurons irreversible their 4 3 when for neurons, although die still Myocardial ischemia. cells, than after minutes hardier only to of 30 20 By fibroblasts after ischemia. viable remain many hours of contrast, within myocardium

Infarctsareareasofischemicnecrosismostcommonlycausedbyarterialocclusion(typicallyresultingfromthrombosisorembolization);venousoutflowobstructionisalessfrequentcause.

Infarctscausedbyvenousocclusionoroccurringinspongytissuestypicallyarehemorrhagic(red);thosecausedbyarterialocclusionincompacttissuestypicallyarepale(white).

Whetherornotvascularocclusioncausestissueinfarctionisinfluencedbycollateralbloodsupplies,therateatwhichanobstructiondevelops,intrinsictissuesusceptibilitytoischemicinjury,andbloodoxygenation.

perfusion cellular impairs effective leads state reduced to tissue cardiac hypoxia. a circulating output in is diminished which blood or and Shock volume is prolonged and injury outset, eventually the cellular shock reversible; however, At the irreversible to tissue leads often fatal. is injury

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Table of Three Types Shock Major 4.3

Mechanisms Examples Type of Principal Shock Clinical Pathogenic

intrinsic pump myocardial resulting Failure obstruction or damage, to outfow Arrhythmia of myocardial extrinsic from pressure,

mortality complicate at pulmonary stagger- extensive severe improvements embolism, myocardial may trauma or burns, care, microbial infarction, sepsis. the Shock hemorrhage, in a and remains general three causes into fall categories ( Its

4.3 Table

Cardiogenic from of cardiac output low a shock failure. myocardial results pump as result compression pulmonary obstruction be (Chapter It outflow embolism). or arrhythmias, ventricular 12), caused (infarction), tamponade) may damage by (cardiac (e.g., myocardial extrinsic

output cardiac shock or burns). loss results hemorrhage low volume plasma fluid (e.g., to due or loss severe blood resulting Hypovolemic from from of from

Septic shock (SIRS). with syndrome microbial systemic by is severe inflammatory infections is and triggered associated response addition triggered be including burns, SIRS pancreatitis. trauma, and/or a variety In may to microbes, insults, of by immune is produce outpouring vasodilation, and leakage, massive vascular that a adaptive blood cells mediators venous The arterial of pathogenic mechanism inflammatory from and innate pooling. common result hypoxia, and derangements to if and cellular and, organ failure abnormalities dysfunction persistent, tissue that cardiovascular in lead metabolic death. organ These hypoperfusion, severe and discussed detail The is below. of pathogenesis shock in

cord of Less with a shock). to from vascular commonly, injury a associated shock secondary loss tone anesthesia or (neurogenic can spinal result results Anaphylactic 5). that hypersensitivity vasodilation permeability shock an systemic immunoglobulin is vascular E–mediated from (Chapter and by triggered increased reaction

shock the Septic of States. for United responsible all hospital admissions 2% in is in require units. 50% intensive treatment these, care Of rising, life in ranks hospital of incidence patients, of 750,000/year of chemotherapy, critically United the organisms ironically the The exceeds setting. ill for is is as age, the States cases of which growing human and hosts in virus increasing support well improvements immunosuppression, to the number or infection) prevalence as and the advanced immunocompromised immunodeficiency in multidrugresistant (because due to ing 30%. 20% Despite

frequently gram-positive fungi. most by is Septic bacterial and triggered shock by bacteria gram-negative infections, followed is an Hence, shock,” “endotoxic no synonym, longer older appropriate.

cause consistent the of microorganisms ability a process. to trigger with shock constituents is the that idea microbial septic The diverse variety can of system neutrophils, immune the 3, dendritic activated and innate are As (e.g., by Chapter in soluble endothelial macrophages, of components recognize several substances and cells, microorganisms. from derived cells, mentioned complement) to septic number incompletely in a factors ( of interact initiate After understood produce these cells activation, and shock a and dysfunction inflammatory complex, fashion that responses multiorgan

Fig. 4.19

of major Factors • septic pathophysiology to in responses. roles play counterinflammatory the believed following: and shock include Inflammatory the In innate constituents cell cells microbial of various wall immune proinflammatory receptors triggering the responses. sepsis, on system, engage Toll-like as (TLRs) which “pathogen-associated lie host peptides, patterns” inflammation signaling initiators bacterial downstream detect containing of of C-type sepsis so-called 5), as lectin such of microbe-derived (Chapter a that in Likely as well G-protein–coupled that pathways substances (PAMPs), molecular are receptors receptors receptors recognize Dectins. and box IL-12, immune such innate On inflammatory IL-18, produce cytokines, TNF, activation, mediators (HMGB1). protein IFNγ, cells as including other as as high-mobility 1 IL-1, group well and numerous such elevated. Markers acute are inflammation as and of also protein procalcitonin C-reactive septic latter of a shock. indicator The useful clinically is also as mediators and and species are lipid prostaglandins factor elaborated. Reactive oxygen (PAF) platelet-activating such effector These production. chemokine adhesion upregulate further induce other cytokine molecules endothelial stimulate and molecule to cells types) cell (and and expression anaphylotoxins (C3b), complement activity activated production C5a), all the the both of the contribute proteolytic plasmin is of (C3a, which through to chemotactic also cascade microbial by The (C5a), resulting of directly proinflammatory fragments opsonins (Chapter and 3), and components, state. in endothelial through microbial components directly indirectly XII factor In can (discussed function coagulation addition, later). altered and through activate further The on activation inflammation thrombin receptors triggering widespread augment protease inflammatory accompanying activated may cells. by of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Adrenal FAILURE IL-6, Anti-fibrinolytic IL-10, Secondary IL-8, species, insufficiency MULTIORGAN apoptosis, oxygen ISCHEMIA TISSUE NO, STNFR etc. PAF, Procoagulant anti-inflammatory mediators reactive C3a and metabolic SYSTEMIC Endothelial DECREASED PAI-1 activation products HMGB1 TFPI, and TNF, and TF thrombomodulin, Cytokines THROMBOSIS IMMUNOSUPPRESSION VASODILATION cytokine-like Neutrophil EFFECTS Fever, IL-1, C3 (DIC) PERMEABILITY PERFUSION mediators Microbial Direct protein activation monocyte MICROVASCULAR indirect XII abnormalities C diminished INCREASED myocardial contractility, Complement Factor (PAMPs) activation

Fig. platelet-activatingfactor;PAI-1, high-mobilitygroupbox1protein;NO, plasminogenactivatorinhibitor-1;PAMP, tissuefactor;TFPI, Majorpathogenicpathwaysinsepticshock.Microbialproductsactivateendothelialcellsandcellularandhumoralelementsoftheinnateimmunesystem,initiatingacascadeofeventsthatleadtoend-stagemultiorganfailure.Additionaldetailsareprovidedinthetext.DIC, nitricoxide;PAF, pathogen-associatedmolecularpattern;STNFR, solubletumornecrosisfactorreceptor;TF, tissuefactorpathwayinhibitor. 4.19 Disseminatedintravascularcoagulation;HMGB1,

immunosuppressive and adaptive sepsis, mechanisms, initiated innate cells. by involve hyperinflammatory both The counterregulatory state, may which immune triggers immunosuppressed between may result, hyperinflammatory As course. during states their septic clinical and oscillate a patients a the (TH2) immune induction receptor, (Chapter receptor suppression anti-inflammatory and cytokines from IL-1 cells, antagonist, of (e.g., mediators the 5), soluble Proposed of IL-10), anergy. apoptotic lymphocyte to immunosuppressive effects include apoptosis, mechanisms anti-inflammatory TNF cellular and proinflammatory shift of (TH1) the production for inflammatory In superinfections. some counterregulatory immune and overshoot the mechanisms the resultant renders such patients to the susceptible responses suppression patients

• activation and Endothelial injury. edema, endothelial with nutrient have associated removal. proinflammatory and effects activation deleterious state waste delivery and both The on cell which junctions, throughout leaky vessels and the tight the in accumulation One inflammatory is making edema cell effect body. protein-rich of endothelial to of fluid loosen resulting cytokines with fluids. This impedes support and attempts exacerbated tissue be by to intravenous patient the may alteration perfusion and muscle other mediators also (NO) relaxation and hypotension. endothelium contribute and C5a, to upregulates C3a, production vasoactive Activated of nitric may (e.g., vascular systemic PAF), oxide which smooth inflammatory

of a • state. Induction procoagulant patients. is of up complication The derangement half intravascular produce coagulation disseminated septic in coagulation in of sufficient to formidable to the of alters expression Sepsis factors as the to so many favor coagulation. Proinflammatory and production monocytes well, by such tissue as and (see tissue endothelial cytokines factors, C as factor protein cells anti-coagulant pathway thrombomodulin, endothelial factor possibly inhibitor, increase and of production decrease the

Fig. ). 4.11 dampen increasing expression (see They inhibitor-1 plasminogen activator fibrinolysis Fig. also by

). 4.10 at lead http://ebooksmedicine.net small and producing vascular tissue to tissue leakage widespread stasis and The washout and decrease diminishing of flow vessels, leak coagulation factors. activated edema of the blood level vascular the sepsis the compromising to lead in systemic of effects the fibrin-rich thrombi Acting these deposition and tissue often further concert, perfusion. in body, small vessels, activation of throughout thrombin is bleeding so the disseminated full-blown hemorrhage platelets deficiencies and leading 12). of concomitant of these consumption that appear, coagulation In factors factors (Chapter coagulation, to and intravascular great

Metabolic abnormalities. exhibit and patients insulin hyperglycemia. Septic resistance (such growth and stress-induced and as Cytokines glucagon, gluconeogenesis. as and such glucocorticoids), catecholamines all IL-1, hormones drive hormone, TNF the insulin liver likely other tissues, while the At simultaneously resistance transporter. insulin of in GLUT-4, proinflammatory expression impairing release and cytokines same by the the time, a suppress surface promoting glucose increased suppressing function—thereby adhesion expression decreases activity—and on bactericidal cells. neutrophil endothelial Hyperglycemia causes molecule by glucocorticoid surge is an associated with insufficiency followed acute in functional initially deficit be this and Although phase may glucocorticoids. production, adrenal of a sepsis adrenal from (Chapter of capacity syndrome) from glands frank or intravascular intact (Waterhouse-Friderichsen synthetic resulting adrenal of necrosis stem disseminated may This 20). dissemination the depression hypoxia phosphorylation and acidosis. increased lead lactic lactate oxidative cellular production diminished to and Finally,

dysfunction. Organ and that, the interstitial are decrease cellular fail hypoxia, of nutrients to of properly nutrients small those to all hypotension, delivered. delivery because thrombosis oxygen edema, vessel tissues Systemic and that the use resulting oxidative damage Mitochondrial use. from stress impairs oxygen respiratory cytokines and and cardiac of contractility acute permeability High output, can injury and levels the increased myocardial vascular syndrome and mediators 13). to (Chapter endothelial secondary lead distress diminish multiple these death. conspire kidneys, in liver, particularly the cause to organs, of the failure lungs, Ultimately, heart, and culminating may factors

are the severity The the conditions; extent outcome septic virulence of mediator production. of pattern presence shock the level and infection; comorbid of host; on other of immune the and dependent the and of and the likely status some cases. why had deleterious therapeutically may that with even and most antagonists of in factors have interactions the multiplicity explain effects of have the complexity effective specific been mediators The not intervene to underlie attempts of and sepsis hypoxia. and antibiotics The fluids, remains tissue treat intravenous limit standard of blood and oxygen underlying pressors, infection to supplemental the and pressure care maintain to of that clinical clinical Suffice the septic an challenge. even say in remains obstinate to centers, best it shock

septic shock a toxic shock also cause bacterial to syndrome group superantigens syndrome). (e.g., proteins additional An similar called secreted of release are to that from activators T-lymphocyte and levels induce high vasodilation, ranging that in of variety cytokines the of of shock, polyclonal hypotension, diffuse clinical manifestations, a result rash Superantigens death. a

a progressive Shock that is corrected. if the problems death leads are underlying not to disorder lymphocyte still aside is are of from cellular apoptosis, sepsis-related exact mechanisms minimal. enterocyte increased and necrosis unclear; The death follows failure no Death which offer morphological their organs, explain dysfunction. the to multiple of usually clues typically however, cardiogenic and a For well the to hypovolemic are reasonably pathways patient’s understood. leading shock, demise evolve stages. massive lethal (e.g., a aortic general is artificial) tends through and three insult shock ruptured rapidly (albeit Unless somewhat aneurysm), the from to exsanguination hypovolemic documented These well: been are common forms other stages but in shock as have clearly to most

activated reflex during vital initial is are and which mechanisms stage An nonprogressive compensatory maintained, organ perfusion

characterized worsening circulatory stage and derangement, A progressive hypo-perfusion by of tissue including onset and acidosis, metabolic

stage so defects tissue is that and if is in irreversible not cellular which possible. corrected, survival are severe hemodynamic An even injury the

pressure. phase of In early various mechanisms shock, blood help output nonprogressive neurohumoral and the cardiac maintain and hormone, activation of the anti-diuretic renin-angiotensin-aldersterone stimulation. include baroreceptor release of mechanisms axis, generalized and sympathetic reflexes, catecholamines These cutaneous characteristic “shocky” causes fluid vasodilation, (notably, coolness can warm, so skin may pallor skin). cause vasoconstriction cutaneous effect initially conservation; The flushed with is present septic vasoconstriction, renal and and the net tachycardia, peripheral shock the patient and signals and and less vessels oxygen flow, Coronary blood delivery. normal to sympathetic sensitive caliber, relatively are maintain cerebral from and to heart the blood the organs Thus, shunted brain. away the skin such as is vital the

not by are shock noted imperceptibly causes underlying corrected, is tissue to the which the If as progressive characterized passes hypoxia. widespread phase, with is acid. aerobic of setting of anaerobic the excessive respiration production In lactic replaced by intracellular persistent glycolysis deficit, oxygen pool lowers lactic acidosis to arterioles the tissue response; dilate, resultant the blunts blood microcirculation. The and the metabolic which vasomotor begins in pH, development the injury endothelial subsequent but output Peripheral cardiac puts risk cells not with anoxic of at only the also pooling for DIC. worsens tissue to organs fail. hypoxia, widespread With vital affected and begin are

in or an absence the process the appropriate In eventually of stage. enters severe intervention, irreversible cases, lysosomal enzyme state. injury Widespread the cell reflected in leakage, shock is aggravating further increased of Myocardial contractile NO because part in worsens, function synthesis. allow ischemic enter to the bowel be may shock and intestinal may The superimposed. flora bacteremic thus circulation, failure despite to renal Commonly, the and best the kidney death. progression ischemic injury therapeutic as further interventions, spiral frequently the culminates occurs consequence a of in 14), of (Chapter downward

http://ebooksmedicine.net

MORPHOLOGYThecellularandtissueeffectsofshockareessentiallythoseofhypoxicinjury(Chapter2)andarecausedbyacombinationofhypoperfusion thrombosis. andmicrovascular cortical canforminanytissuebuttypicallyaremostreadilyvisualizedinkidneyglomeruli.Adrenal lipid depletion Althoughanyorgancanbeaffected,thebrain,heart,kidneys,adrenals,andgastrointestinaltractaremostcommonlyinvolved.Fibrin Exceptforneuronalandcardiomyocyteloss,affectedtissuescanrecovercompletelyifthepatientsurvives. cell thrombi isakintothatseeninallformsofstressandreflectsincreaseduseofstoredlipidsforsteroidsynthesis.Whereasthelungsareresistanttohypoxicinjuryinhypovolemicshockoccurringafterhemorrhage,sepsisortraumacanprecipitatediffusealveolardamage(Chapter13),leadingtoso-called“shock lung.”

clinical shock the on manifestations The insult. depend of precipitating exhibit hypotension, and In clammy, cool, tachypnea, rapid weak cyanotic skin. shock, a hypovolemic and patients pulse, cardiogenic As be septic owing to flushed the shock, vasodilation. peripheral in and noted, warm may skin already underlying primary is threat initiating life (e.g., myocardial bacterial hemorrhage, severe infarction, infection). event to the The pulmonary the and changes situation. aggravate cardiac, However, the rapidly cerebral, oliguria, initial phase renal by If patients imbalances. worsening dominated survive and progressive acidosis, can provoke period, function electrolyte a the

its varies Prognosis and of shock with duration. the origin of septic or management; by 90% patients Thus, more than comparison, healthy with worse young, shock outcomes, associated substantially is survive cardiogenic with appropriate with even shock with hypovolemic otherwise state-of-the-art care.

•Shockisdefinedasastateofsystemictissuehypoperfusionresultingfromreducedcardiacoutputand/orreducedeffectivecirculatingbloodvolume.

Themajortypesofshockarecardiogenic(e.g.,myocardialinfarction),hypovolemic(e.g.,bloodloss),andseptic(e.g.,infections).

Shockofanyformcanleadtohypoxictissueinjuryifnotcorrected.

Septicshockiscausedbythehostresponsetobacterialorfungalinfections;itischaracterizedbyendothelialcellactivation,vasodilation,edema,disseminatedintravascularcoagulation,andmetabolicderangements.

Fat Akhtar Anesthesiol S: 2009. 27:533, embolism, Clin syndrome.] [Recent issues in embolism pathogenesis and the clinical fat overview of

receptors Functional MA, activated 2014. 62:72–81, Alberelli role Pharmacol protease Candia vascular Vascul in De of E: biology, in hemostasis.] review PARs played the role [An of exhaustive by

der and van Severe shock, Med DC, septic Poll T: Engl N 840:2013. Angus sepsis J shock.] of of pathogenesis, clinical [An excellent review outcome and septic features,

immunology Dev diagnosis fluid 2012. concepts of doi:10.1155/2012/946576: Immunol embolism, amniotic MD: and Clin Benson Current in fluid of embolism.] [Discussion of amniotic the pathophysiology

Severe on management, Mayo and 2014. Peters Proc update shock: SG: Cawcutt 89:1572, KA, and Clin clinical septic sepsis overview review sepsis.] clinical [A of brief

the 29:17, KA: blood JC, Fibrinolysis coagulation, Hajjar control and of Chapman Rev 2015. Blood regulation role discussion and of updated fibrinolysis the coagulation.] of in [An its

Hematol KR: antiphospholipid in S, syndrome, Curr the antibody 2014. Chaturvedi advances Recent McCrae 21:371, Opin discussion entity.] and complex important of of [A the this pathophysiology

in for patients, 52:233, Surg thromboembolism: Henke Curr Coleman 2015. surgical pathophysiology, PK: diagnosis, treatment Update venous Probl A, and DM, Obi condition.] [An common clinical of exhaustive this review

Ellery then Semin Adams 40:881, PE, inhibitor: and 2014. Thromb Tissue MJ: Hemost pathway factor now, in the factor tissue in of coagulation.] [Advances role understanding

NL: vascular Esmon 2011. Esmon and between link Annu Rev The CT, Physiol thrombosis, features hemostasis/thrombosis.] flow, blood and review the interactions excellent [An endothelium, of of

J induced A: Engl Med thrombocytopenia, 2015. 373:3, N Heparin Greinacher condition.] on nice and common this review enigmatic [A

Postgrad L, Osinbowale 122:54, O, Chi 2010. a review, thromboembolism: Venous Med Ali clinical YW: student/ a [Good medical house officer review at level.]

multiliganded Rao 2014. LVM, C protein receptor: UR: receptor, cell and Blood a 124:1553, Esom Pendurthi Endothelial multifunctional CT, novel of discussion this limiting [A coagulation.] receptor in

XII, al: T, roles et 2012. KF, Blood Nickel Schmaier Renne In factor of AH, vivo 120:4296–4303, still-uncertain thrombosis of insights review XII the and factor biology.] summarizing [A vivo into in vascular functions in new

in fundamentals hemostasis, Rev et New Physiol al: M, HH, Heemskerk Versteeg 2013. 93:327, Levi JWM, several hemostasis.] [An issues in in update studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

of the System Immune Diseases

Display Antigens of and Capture

Immunity: Activation Cell-Mediated of

of T Intracellular Lymphocytes and Elimination

Immunity: Humoral and of B Activation of Extracellular Elimination Lymphocytes Microbes

Responses Immune Decline Immunologic of and

Hypersensitivity:ImmunologicallyMediatedTissueInjury

of Reactions Hypersensitivity Causes

of Hypersensitivity Reactions Classification

Mechanisms General Autoimmunity: of

Recognition Rejection and Allografts of

Stem of Hematopoietic Cells Transplantation

Properties HIV of

and Infection AIDS of HIV Pathogenesis

Course Natural of and History HIV

Features Clinical AIDS of

Pathogenesis Deposition Amyloid of

Amyloid Classification Mechanisms and of Amyloidosis Formation of

Immunity to infections. protection refers against for is pathogens the molecules of defending countless and collection are The the individuals that responsible cells system immune that encounter. body the against are the diseases. cause immunodeficiency individuals and Defects easy infections system the immune prey render to in of are injury system disease, capable of immune often and is causing as itself the disorders. which tissue But to referred hypersensitivity

immunity or is This too little caused to by chapter devoted too much reactivity. diseases immunologic derived also chronic protein, inflammatory in We in tissues. of antibodies which amyloidosis, or from produced is abnormal disorders, usually an consider during fragments deposited a disease we normal abnormalities give of some immune First, responses, to to important immunologic diseases. a rise features provide review foundation that understanding for the

two types ( Defense of pathogens consists reactions of against

Fig. 5.1 ). Innate are to proteins innate), immunity called mediated native, present term the always cells (also infectious pathogens. is against poised that or immunity) by react and natural, (hence action response defense. called mechanisms are into in line thus of and the to These immediately first infection, provide mechanisms are of and damaged these Some clearing involved in also tissues. cells reaction is innate immunity inflammation (Chapter A major 3). of

of immunity, immunity). and Many pathogens to against these called (also resist have the and or specialized protection infections evolved mechanisms acquired, immunity innate more requires powerful specific, adaptive responds http://ebooksmedicine.net (or normally adapts) Adaptive immunity and silent is

Fig. 5.1 adaptive of kinetics of The principal immune and the systems. and components response innate Natural NK cells, cells. killer

agents infectious and generating mechanisms potent the presence by of for the to eliminating pathogens. neutralizing the generally adaptive convention, By immune response immune immunity. to refer system terms and

lymphoid cells, are of killer microbes, complement of the epithelial immunity the proteins system. of innate neutrophils innate (DCs), the block entry including phagocytic (NK) plasma major barriers cells (mainly cells and that dendritic proteins, other components cells and macrophages), and several The natural in are 3. later was The in system Chapter chapter; various discussed complement discussed this cells the

epithelial receptors presence and dendritic that such express many sense dead cells. infectious as from released the cells, Phagocytes, cells agents cells, of other and substances immune among The of the receptors evade microbes the infectivity and molecules). of structures recognized type, these pathogen-associated (so molecular called are they cannot are they survival for and microbes by microbes patterns; these are the microbial shared same recognition the by mutating innate essential substances from necrotic cells released molecular injured are and damage-associated The patterns. called recognition often recognize that molecules The called receptors. these receptors are cellular pattern patterns. receptors It estimated immunity is innate about 100 uses 1000 recognize to that different molecular

Receptors Innate Immunity of

in receptors cellular cytoplasm detect recognition pathogens, receptors detect detect and the located pathogens in Pattern membrane endosomal microbes compartments may all present: ingested where microbes, are receptors ( be extracellular plasma receptors cytosolic the

Fig. 5.2 ). been identified. Several receptors classes of these have

receptor of peptidoglycan; NOD-like TLR Nucleic damaged ingested microbes cells Bacterial acids products of

Fig. receptors and recognize for products products cellular the as cytoplasmic different membrane of compartments, Toll-like (TLRs) classes different Phagocytes, cell many dendritic 5.2 cells, of as epithelial of and sense microbes dead and in types of located that other of express receptors different cells microbes. Cellular cells. injury. receptors, presence well classes and receptors microbes of plasma the cytosolic founding major RIG-I, for the TLRs, receptors, RIG-like DNA receptors cytosol C-type of in member named sensors. receptors are receptors classes viral RNA, (NLRs), after NOD-like The innate lectin and immune

pattern of receptors known The the the best are Toll-like receptors (TLRs). recognition in a mammals are range that TLRs microbial wide There 10 recognize molecules. of bacterial lipopolysaccharide The and plasma recognize (see viral and products endosomal TLRs recognize DNA TLRs such as and membrane RNA (LPS), bacterial

Fig. ). 5.2 Recognition proteins that the stimulate by even activation and anti-viral of mediators receptors proteins, (interferons), adaptive potent of more of the including factors several cytokines promote immune inflammation, and responses. these that microbes transcription lymphocyte activates production membrane and secreted

are founding NOD-1 NOD-2. named (NLRs) receptors and after members cytosolic the receptors NOD-like acid of and released K+), wide some of including (e.g., ATP), products. recognize cells of and microbial substances, ion products necrotic (e.g., loss disturbances variety a uric They signs family many detects sensors so of diverse not of damage known. danger How is this or which the via form cytokine (caspase-1) the a activates inflammasome, active called cytosolic multiprotein of of a the signal form precursor enzyme (IL-1) Several biologically NLRs ( interleukin-1 the complex generate to that an cleaves

Fig. ). 5.3 induces mediator of and a discussed As Chapter 3, leukocytes inflammation recruits that IL-1 in fever. is the with of mutations periodic fever antagonists. to one treatment syndromes, in respond Gain-offunction result called syndromes,which IL-1 NLRs in very well autoinflammatory inflammation. by also marked in disorders play chronic NLR-inflammasome of The pathway number may a role a crystals associated a by of underlies inflammation recognition the gout. NLRs urate class with For of example, cholesterol resulting to deposited crystals atherosclerosis, diabetes These that type obesity-associated respectively. respond are tissues; abnormally the and lipids may inflammation contribute and to and amounts in detect may 2 in large receptors

detect macrophages (CLRs) membrane fungi. elicit the fungal on reactions lectin of glycans to inflammatory C-type and DCs expressed plasma receptors and production of the nucleic and that anti-viral the cytokines. replicate cytosolic acids in the Several cells, cytoplasm receptors of infected stimulate viruses detect of peptides and types other bacterial neutrophils, residues. leukocytes receptors protein–coupled most of G macrophages, containing N-formylmethionyl short on recognize by and responses. are neutrophils stimulates all receptor proteins (only mammalian those mitochondria) bacterial bacterial few within initiated N-formylmethionine, detect synthesized to chemotactic and this proteins proteins enables Because microbes. phagocytosis of residues, glycoproteins) sugars contain terminal the receptors microbial induce Mannose mannose (which often recognize and mammalian unlike RIG-I DNA cytosolic called recognize RNA sensors, founding one receptors, the In microbial cytosolic families and after two and member addition, respectively. other named of the DNA,

receptors Signals TLRs, from other

which an caspase-1, recognizesproductsofdeadcellsandsomemicrobesandinducesthesecretionofbiologicallyactiveinterleukin-1.Itisacomplexofmultiplecopiesof enzyme asensorprotein(aleucine-richproteincalledNLRP3),anadapter,andthe from Fig.5.3 converted form. Theinflammasome.Theinflammasomeisaproteincomplexthat is toanactive inactive is in simplified assembly a byaprion-likemechanismofpropagation,inwhichoneproteinalteredby inflammasome number large type.The crystal complex from induces the is of other inflammasome structure of conformational and formation shown of the proceeds changes result activation same identicalpolypeptides,formingfilament-likebundlesofadaptersandenzymes. known of the of the The as proteins net activation structures.The

Immunity Innate of Reactions

host The immune two following innate defense system reactions: the main provides by

Inflammation. immune mediators, vascular and inflammation. during trigger and reactions components of well products are activation, as cellular complement as and produced the of Cytokines other innate ingest recruited leukocytes damaged destroy pathogens The and eliminate and cells. reaction was in described 3. Chapter This

defense. Anti-viral activate and infected and viruses interferons degrade Type viral enzymes to on nucleic and produced act in inhibit that replication. acids response cells viral I uninfected

response. immune generates that subsequent, stimulate innate system more In powerful immune the functions, these the adaptive to signals addition defensive of described Some later. these signals are

antibodies. products, immune and The lymphocytes adaptive of consists including their system substances. of a system, the vast recognize repertoire can contrast to adaptive foreign array the immune system the In limited immune innate of

immunity, (or immunity, called called mediated T types that adaptive cells). cells), cellular) produced two (also by are antibodies T by cell-mediated and by immunity: B called of lymphocytes (also mediated B There proteins humoral lymphocytes soluble are extracellular in pathogens tissues. mucosal provide and protection against Antibodies the blood, surfaces, defense T are microbes. against lymphocytes important intracellular in They lymphocytes) to protein killing phagocytes cells). via T the cytotoxic by by called by ingested soluble T (accomplished cytokines cells by work directly or helper activating either of (made production kill microbes, mediators infected of system. the functions and cells the properties next of immune We the main turn to

APCs, adaptive is most to display and receptors lymphocytes, to specialized mount the cells, capture and consist specific lymphocytes; eliminate microbial which for the which effector antigens. system and microbes antigens function of have antigens and various and responses; immune immune whose of The other other cells of on immune needed antigen specific different them when perform B the to of and that and many and precise useful system the Some features cells, T of are mechanisms and receptors diverse that potentially of the functions, prevent that expression permit control the remarkable cells the specialization harmful highly of enable the responses ones.

and in organs. are in circulation lymphoid the Lymphocytes present various Although similar, are and several consist ( distinct they all of phenotypically morphologically lymphocytes populations actually functionally

Fig. 5.4 ). whereas mature in in from marrow. lymphocytes (primary) T the mature Lymphocytes organs; lymphoid develop the in lymphocytes the B precursors thymus, generative bone a a which can single (numbering 1012 hundreds its constitute Each progeny, B humans) tens receptor, lymphocyte millions the and total or recognize T of antigens. lymphocytes population express of or and antigen about in clone, of diversity T DNA receptors occurs a lymphocyte enormous of antigen by gene are that by different segments encoded to joining and B form cells. genes, is receptor variant that process The cells diversification functional maturation antigen created only the in of and sequences during marker genes receptor presence of rearranged the cells. reliable antigen is a of Hence these that are are in called antibodies, are T-cell antigen their called while As mentioned, the counterparts expressed cells already T-cell receptors B receptors.

(secondary) recirculate organs and tissues—and in these most lymph reside Mature T peripheral lymphocytes and and in mucosal organs—the lymphoid tissues. B through nodes, spleen clonal the bind as lymphocytes known organs, Foreign to these antigens a concentrated selection. clones process express receptors are those activate where in that for and of antigens, they effector and do subsequent responded receptors lives— activation, serve antigen All but the and during by functionally lymphocyte microbes; naïve not antigen. during through distinct and respond a functions; activation in memory go upon antigen and lymphocytes the that with antigens their lymphocytes, survive lymphocytes induced are perform express to rapidly eliminated lymphocytes encounters after mature not even is any eliminate functions state have silent induced phases the

cellular effector develop produce and immunity into lymphocytes antibodies of the cells Thymus-derived B cells to T protein “help” antigens. against to 70% cells lymph zones. lymphocytes 60% in T splenic constitute population are node blood the and lymphocyte and interfollicular of sheaths peripheral major the in periarteriolar histocompatibility majority more discussed T instead, in circulating displayed (>95%) major complex or only of T (MHC), sense fragments the antigens; molecules free recognize cannot proteins detail of later. peptide cells cells of vast by the recognize T receptors see other presented cells. MHC-bound antigen by cell only evolved surfaces, to on T antigens have cells Because cell peptides activation depending phagocytes and to T that the interacting type outcome protein ranging the of of the that lymphocytes The involved is killing of the or cells B from on virus-infected varies dramatically of ingested antigens. the have interaction identity cell, of cell this other

( presented MHC receptor T-cell antigens β a composed cells are protein disulfide-linked of molecules Peptide the is recognized most heterodimer and by chains α by T in (TCR), that

Fig. 5.5). in binding constant that a peptide a participates molecules. region antigen signaling Each a region variable that interacts particular has associated and with chain γ, are chains, ε ζ polypeptide two to of five the CD3 noncovalently and proteins molecular δ, cluster complex (see the invariant chains TCRs of a and linked

Fig.

5.5 ). to they after CD3 signals are chains of The instead, proteins and antigens; do bind biochemical ζ intracellular antigen. TCR TCR initiate and recognition attached the not

responses. cells in number functions also of molecules T a express that immune important other serve and act and T-cell expressed activation. on are as T-cell during coreceptors distinct subsets CD8 CD4 of MHC an (described recognition, I molecules binds During cells molecules. (APCs); portions on to CD4 later) antigen molecules II T class class invariant analogous bind selected in MHC CD8 to on cells fashion, antigen-presenting on 50% of is T cells, whereas CD4 CD8 expressed about cells. on 60% to 40% T expressed is of called CD8-expressing different T CD8+ respectively—perform functions. and CD4-and CD4+ The overlapping but cells, cells— because T cells soluble molecules T CD4+ helper cells they are secrete http://ebooksmedicine.net called

B B phagocytosis, lymphocyte of Neutralization microbe, activation complement +

macrophages Activation of

cells Microbial T B and Activation lymphocytes T (proliferation antigen B T of B antigen-presenting by presented and differentiation)

of T cell Killing infected (CTL)

immune T response of lymphocyte T Regulatory Suppression

of cell Killing cell infected

Fig. lymphocytes natural are adaptive cells killer functions. lymphocytes innate cells of 5.4 and of T The are immunity, B and and cells (NK) their immunity. classes lymphocytes of principal lymphocytes not including so-called established. functions have of “innate these more and classes are cells” the (ILCs); NK-T lymphoid been cells cells identified, of Several

help help antibodies cells produce (cytokines) to B microbes. to phagocytosed destroy also that macrophages and the in infection immunity immunodeficiency is (HIV) role of that The from CD4+ by of cells central results by these helper severe highlighted cells later). human virus compromise destruction (described cells to directly T is and tumor T virus-infected cells cytokines, called important secrete but CD8+ can most cytotoxic their lymphocytes also are role they (CTLs). cells; kill hence, APCs bond CD28, on that migration the are important of called induced proteins on and for the microbes, between T control molecules costimulators cells the cells Other functions receptor T and that and to different cells the as various adhesion APCs T tissues. invariant which the strengthen include molecules by

lymphocytes. immune T T regulatory cells responses function suppress are called that to type cell tolerance self is of This described antigens. later, context of the in

of associated express minority and which α composed T gastrointestinal cells and of While and TCRs identical are tract) many composed α β and blood chains. express surfaces a similar cells that are δ chains, T chains, γ TCRs to β (e.g., most lung, T cells with of peripheral but mucosal not functional cells, lipoglycans), roles which or recognize not CD4 T bacterial (e.g., γδ not nonprotein but understood. express molecules CD8, well Such do their are cells. T T markers small of cells population Another cells both and of NK expresses and in defense recognize NKT infections. so-called cells These microbial play may a against some glycolipids role molecules, are MHC T than antigen and γδ The NKT independently less and the recognize of and cells CD4+ receptors cells. receptors abundant of CD8+ T diverse of antigens more cells much the further. We lymphocyte populations rare will not these discuss

Fig. chainsinitiateactivatingsignals.CD4andCD28arealsoinvolvedinT-cellactivation.(NotethatsomeTcellsexpressCD8andnotCD4;thesemoleculesserveanalogousroles. chainandaβ chain,recognizesantigen(intheformofpeptide-MHCcomplexesexpressedonantigen-presentingcells),andthelinkedCD3complexandζ 5.5 TheT-cellreceptor(TCR)complexandothermoleculesinvolvedinT-cellactivation.TheTCRheterodimer,consistingofanα )Thesizesofthemoleculesarenotdrawntoscale.MHC, Majorhistocompatibilitycomplex.

Display of The Molecules: System Peptide Major Histocompatibility Adaptive Immunity Complex

immunologic molecules. of it associated are important genetic molecules many MHC molecules hence, these in and is diseases; MHC review of are and to the with fundamental structure variations to T-cell function antigens, recognition The of MHC was “histo,” rejection studies acceptance discovered graft compatibility). basis or (tissue, and on the of of is for the recognition CD8+ to now by and lymphocytes. normal function MHC It display known is that peptides CD4+ molecules T are normally molecules person, each of encounter. cells only MHC T recognize displayed T person’s the peptides course, that cells by In which, that the only MHC molecules, called This restriction. MHC phenomenon is

of The (HLA) chromosome as cluster on a known MHC, ( the of human complex, consists genes human antigen leukocyte 6

Fig. ). 5.6 fall loci, of categories: On three chemical and molecules basis by MHC closely their MHC are nucleated main linked two I on into products function, • distribution, expressed structure, HLA-C cells HLA-A, all and designated are encoded tissue and Class gene HLA-B, (see the

Fig. 5.6 ). gene these invariant chain associated with α (encoded consists a molecules an Each β2microglobulin of polymorphic noncovalently on polypeptide chromosome a of by 15). separate where the that polymorphic to region of bind are presentation a to cleft and MHC that foreign a cells respond displayed molecules. and CD8, The binds molecules where contains can T α only extracellular located CD8+ T by I to chain ensuring residues portion conserved peptides for the peptides class cells, molecules viral present I peptides (e.g., class derived of general, display and bind MHC cytosol and cell the in tumor In antigens from the protein antigens).

region, molecules are encoded are molecules heterodimers HLA-D three linked Class contains the α (see by DP, II subunits Class MHC which of subregions: DQ, and β DR. in and genes noncovalently II

Fig. ). 5.6 class APCs dendritic II Unlike class I molecules cells. a of types, macrophages, cells), which restricted few MHC mainly and is molecules, all expression B cell expressed nucleated (notably, MHC to on are cells, The binds II extracellular MHC peptides of that a class cleft region and antigenic a CD4. of binding portion the contains for molecules MHC to bind molecules down derived for cell, from ingested extracellular that the synthesized cell. II example, In from and then the inside general, peptides outside class are proteins broken microbes CD4+ pathogens. extracellular presence of the property to T allows cells This recognize

components in (C2, C3, encoded MHC and complement proteins are Factor the including locus, other Several

B) tumor and cytokines factor lymphotoxin. and the necrosis (TNF)

are for for are each HLA-B alleles genes is, over genes that all 3500 (alleles) gene and locus of (estimated HLA highly to HLA there forms at polymorphic; alone). 10,000 each over number alternative Each of HLA set individual only one genes. expresses in any that enable MHC is evolved microbial conceivable believed the peptide of to of It display encountered environment. and to polymorphism genes the response population. molecules combinations As infinite of exists a in of polymorphism, result number virtually of a HLA the the single en and from The are locus bloc chromosome closely linked HLA inheritance respect to genes are to parent a offspring their like 6, they patterns. on passed so with behave referred haplotype. to HLA genes Each and as maternal an of is set paternal HLA the same this that mode HLA probability of siblings two the of is share will haplotypes 25%. inheritance, Because is probability two By an populations the haplotypes most low. very will unrelated share donor that the HLA same contrast, in to be rejected. obvious; the extent has some each grafts of The donors transplantation because those unrelated differ individual, polymorphism elicit unrelated alleles immune person that responses recipient from HLA every of and other in from for are HLA will implications fear from can rejection. grafts twins Only another, one of identical accept without sibling chance. loci”, because same of donor HLA that haplotype from of by to in differ Even be a the sets may histocompatibility to other rejected polymorphic likely differences a genes are so-called “minor with grafts only course of rule, http://ebooksmedicine.net early in the molecules of to transplantation, fact, graft exception to graft In discovered of identical course, attempts tissue at responses molecules are immune the that lead (The evoke HLA eventually twins) this destruction because were HLA

molecules molecules Class others MHC proteins, MHC Complement II Class I Cytokines

Fig. complex. of HLA molecules. human (HLA) sizes, structure the in genes to the (A) The The leukocyte antigen are and not locations, genes location complex relative HLA 5.6 of The and distances between scale. II class Schematic HLA (B) encode of transporter, components II HLA-DM) region the antigen several of shown). TAP and are involved proteins that proteasome, (not I (the processing class diagrams located the and crystal in class molecules. in Genes and structures California.) Dr. of Technology, Institute are structures Bjorkman, P. Pasadena, California of courtesy (Crystal (discussed later). This of reason is to MHC molecules often these responses are trigger the immune molecules antigens. called ability

of influences alleles MHC immune both inheritance particular protective responses. and harmful The ability from a response a given specific The MHC will of that protective to determine the generated cells peptide whether to pathogen. bind recognize particular antigens a person’s and T allele mount can pathogen any is HLA some pollen an susceptible colloquial antigen make hay allergy. of Conversely, the genes if to reaction, name inheritance the for response fever, allergic individuals the ragweed and may ragweed is

autoimmune Finally, particular alleles. associated many are diseases HLA with when return autoimmunity. to we associations consider discussion a We these of

(bone marrow–derived) lymphocytes humoral produce cells the antibodies, immunity. mediators the of B that are cells the circulating make up to peripheral B lymphocyte of 20% population. 10% lymphoid present bone follicles in in and organs. of the (secondary) They marrow are also peripheral

form by the B-cell class, the to receptor antigen recognize M molecules means of cells signaling (IgM) antibody the B immunoglobulin on complex with of (BCR) together surface expressed membrane-bound (

Fig. ). 5.7 only chemicals, Whereas acids, or MHC-associated cells cell-associated soluble a to lipids, more recognize T the small recognize including structures, nucleic B without proteins, and peptides, requirement and chemical cells polysaccharides, respond for MHC. many TCRs, antibody As sequence. has each with a amino acid unique assembly a of immunoglobulin rearrangement (Ig) creates sequence This functional gene segments, of consequence genes. and a multitude is diversity process of the Ig a that molecules B express transduction for invariant several B-cell and responsible activation cells (see are that signal

Fig. ). 5.7 and the microbial deposited to recognizes frequently breakdown responses molecules antigens. attached another receptor, that signaling CD21 example B-cell as product type known Some complement or complement BCR; is which promotes microbes to on CR2), a 2 the (also is are Interestingly, a binding B and to ubiquitous use virus them. cells has CD21 evolved receptor for the as infecting Epstein-Barr cleverly to

into stimulation, large After which antibodies. cells of differentiate B amounts plasma cells, secrete or than isotypes, IgG, constitute immunoglobulins: IgA There classes, and more of 95% IgM, five circulating of are antibodies. secretions; major IgA in present IgE is in is the mucosal isotype

Fig. 5.7 StructureofantibodiesandtheB-cellantigenreceptor. (A)TheB-cellantigenreceptorcomplexiscomposedofmembraneimmunoglobulinM(IgM;orIgD,not shown),whichrecognizesantigens,andtheassociatedsignalingproteinsIgα andIgβ.CD21isareceptorforacomplementcomponentthatalsopromotesB-cellactivation.(B)CrystalstructureofasecretedIgGmolecule,showingthearrangementofthevariable(V)andconstant(C)regionsoftheheavy(H)andlight(L)chains. Dr. Irvine, California.) of (Courtesy University McPherson, of Alex California, concentrations expressed and mast attached of is also at of surfaces and IgD is cells; the low secreted the but tissue is on very at surfaces levels. to cells B circulation low very found the activate states. in their complement ability in defense differ thus and and roles recruit host inflammatory have and These isotypes different cells, to disease

the cells same lymphoid lymphocytes. B NK progenitor arise are that to from that rise and lymphocytes lymphocytes common gives T are express variable activation clonally as they innate are distributed do prior antigens. for cells, cells and receptors immune highly not and functional without However, NK have two receptors—inhibitory Instead, cells of activating. and types NK expressed cells, healthy class on activating infected all recognize stressed which on receptors expressed self that MHC I cells. or or are Inhibitory receptors upregulated are recognize molecules whereas molecules, activation spontaneous of activating inhibitory preventing receptors NK Normally, the of those cells. receptors, effects the of over dominate and associated MHC (especially of I infections) expression and of proteins molecules that Infections are engage activating increased reduced expression class viral stress with receptors. or are that killed cells The eliminated. result activated cells and are net the the and infected is stressed NK NK microbial and defense macrophages intracellular also activates microbes, such interferon-γ which NK cells (IFN-γ), against early to secrete cytokines infections. provide destroy thus ingested as cells

of populations but lymphoid that produce TCRs are T Innate lymphocytes lack made (ILCs) cells by cells. are to that similar those cytokines that cytokines TH2, TH17 classified IFN-γ, IL-5, They cells, subsets later). TH1, groups, T which three or characteristic respectively are produce into are IL-17, and of (described of cytokine their cells group TH1 of made based IFN-γ, on a to by are ILCs cells. also 1 production related NK and infections tissues. cells provide tissues, the mostly migrate against can into T are in are defense tissues, ILCs they before Because activated thought reside in early to diseases. early ILCs may participants inflammatory be in also

lymphocytes. capture types and these antigens immune cell specialized are to The display to several that contains system Foremost among to these T the protein are cells dendritic APCs cells. antigens displaying cells, major for naïve other immune antigens to at present types cell of Several responses. lymphocytes stages various

T-cell protein are (DCs) Dendritic for important the initiating cells antigen-presenting antigens. against cells most responses that cells processes derive These numerous name. fine have cytoplasmic they from dendrites, resemble which their key Several account in features antigen and role their for of DCs capture presentation.

to at all of antigens, tissues, where capture and These the interstitia common produced. entry cells the foreign site antigens—under may place antigens are microbes right and of epithelia, the of located be in the DCs called Langerhans are cells. within epidermis

C-type TLRs other and to capturing lectin responding many including receptors. express antigens), microbes for receptors (and DCs and

of recruited T to present antigens to where lymphoid DCs they T-cell are to ideally are cells. to organs, the response positioned zones microbes, In

DCs cells. presentation other for high and molecules and of MHC antigen express of activation needed levels T

DCs DCs is their to cells. resemblance called One plasmacytoid of plasma subset of because type present anti-viral interferon, the lymphoid many blood to and I organs, sources are cells and in major of in viruses. cytokine produced the These are response

is with dendritic cell nodes lymphoid the and cell called of present follicular type dendritic morphology second the of A the in follicles lymph (FDC). in centers spleen germinal and is for antigen and C3b IgG bound receptors http://ebooksmedicine.net trap These to Fc and cells receptors for or antibodies bear can

Table numbers of of adult. Lymphocytes Tissues a healthy in 5.1 *Approximate different lymphocytes tissues Distribution in in

complement proteins. but antigens involved are These in cells. cells display follicles B and to antigens responses, lymphoid capturing display not promote in T to for lymphocytes antibody

recognition particulate display other by 3) and peptides Macrophages for T ingest lymphocytes. (Chapter and microbes antigens turn reaction These of microbes, the central in macrophages kill immunity. activate cell-mediated to the cells T the peptides immune in present stimulate and steps to helper responses responses. to B T humoral protein critical receive signals cells antigens, that antibody cells

system respond mature of organs, primary, B are lymphoid and of immune lymphocytes lymphocytes lymphoid in which T to become to the responses (also or immune to in the competent and the antigens, called which tissues secondary) generative and organs, consist (or microbes adaptive initiated. central) peripheral The site the where mature. and production of the develop, the lymphoid cells where thymus, organs generative principal cells The and are bone marrow, B lymphocytes of blood all T sections. in the are following briefly described The peripheral organs major

antigens, lymphocytes that APCs, concentrate organized lymphoid among of and are to peripheral adaptive these and cells interactions the way in immune The a responses. optimizes organs development the in are these organs lymphocytes ( Most of located body’s

Table 5.1

innate ( encapsulated, immune are that are Lymph channels cells and nodes lymphoid located throughout highly lymphatic the collections of body organized along cells

Fig. ). 5.8A node through antigens that to able are sample to from are fluids APCs tissues. passes lymph nodes, in resident of the carried interstitial derived lymph As the lymph to surfaces from epithelial tissues vessels the by In nodes. through lymph nearby migrating transport addition, DCs antigens and lymphatic Thus, colonize tissues) microbes (e.g., lymph in enter that become or concentrated through of epithelia nodes. antigens draining

to bloodborne antigens. immune role spleen in important has The responses an the enables spleen of flows sinusoids, entering a through which network Blood the

Fig. medulla. follicles segregation cortex of outer of containing with node. and The cells schematically. (B) a illustrated of lymph and The regions the lymph B (A) inner node, of lymph an cells histology in 5.8 different T an Morphology node, a cells using in and (stained cells T red) The the technique) location (stained immunofluorescence of a node. green, lymph B (C) (Courtesy Drs. of Walter, Minneapolis, and Medicine, of Kathryn School Jennifer Pape University Minnesota of Minnesota.) bloodborne and macrophages. antigens of by resident DCs trapping

the systems the tracts, located are lymphoid of the respiratory gastrointestinal under skin The and mucosal epithelia and and respectively. cutaneous • enter through that antigens breaches respond epithelium. the to in They mucosal Pharyngeal tissues. two are the of patches Peyer’s lymphoid defined and anatomically tonsils intestine number of reflects in huge the of large organs. lymphocytes (second lymph nodes) organs mucosal these The to surface area only

organs, the are segregated lymphocytes ( T B lymphocytes peripheral lymphoid different into Within regions and

Fig. 5.8B, ). C are periphery, In cortex, the nodes, each structures, concentrated of called located in cells around B or the discrete follicles, lymph node. central have B follicle antigen, If recently called an responded the to a cells the germinal pale-staining develops center. in follicle region a a in The cortex. the are parafollicular lymphocytes concentrated T follicles lymphocytes. contains are the antigens contain present B paracortex to The the activation involved the of that T the DCs in cells, and FDCs that lymphoid the spleen, surrounding lymphocytes sheaths and in the follicles. In reside cells small concentrated periarteriolar B are arterioles, T in

between sites. Lymphocytes tissues and home particular constantly travel to lymphoid circulate lymphocytes to where concentrated sites are peripheral through Naive initiated, of and organs effector and responses are lymphocytes infection. immune antigens migrate “patrol” lymphocyte to for effector infection to and The have most important is home recirculation process lymphoid peripheral eliminate cells cells T widely T microbes. sites T have find because to of distributed organs to naïve to cells, of antigens, do secrete to not blood and antibodies In sites need they because to the tissues. infection cells migrate distant via plasma to contrast, lymph that of transported are

of Immune Messenger the System Cytokines: Molecules

inflammatory are Cytokines that immune reactions. proteins mediate and secreted are in name cytokines communication between role defined a implying a leukocytes. Molecularly interleukins, called produced spectrum and several effects, of are a types. some by cell Most have wide different cytokines majority have cytokines act on The or these IL-1) effects. produce some of that cells (like neighboring but systemic cells, them on the

types of to Different cytokines responses. contribute specific immune

stimuli to are are produced cytokines rapidly virus after encountered, induce innate responses, and inhibit and inflammation replication. immune microbes function In and other I IFNs, IFN-γ, IL-1, (Chapter type 3). include and chemokines These cytokines TNF, IL-12, can and macrophages, but and sources also DCs, NK epithelial endothelial major cells, are Their produce ILCs, cells them.

differentiation activated cells. function to T In immune and effector adaptive by lymphocytes CD4+ lymphocyte and and to activate proliferation responses, promote and signals, other produced cytokines are principally by antigen main are IFN-γ; group in IL-5, The ones this IL-2, later. immune their responses in are and described roles IL-4, IL-17, responses; TGF-β and terminate IL-10. mainly limit these serve Some include cytokines and immune to

progenitors 12). cell from factors stimulate stimulate bone formation colony-stimulating cytokines hematopoiesis colonies • are Some blood called (Chapter marrow of they and because that such during functions leukocytes during and to inflammatory leukocyte Their to responses, numbers responses. immune are and are consumed increase replace are stromal macrophages, produced cells. marrow cells, and T They by other lymphocytes, and GM-CSF include IL-7. Examples

The numerous knowledge gained has cytokines therapeutic about applications. practical of immune reactions. inflammation or tissue-damaging actions effects harmful cytokine can Inhibiting control and production the rheumatoid arthritis with Patients therapy. responses TNF targeted example and show often designed molecularly to rationally antagonists, of elegant dramatic an antagonists inflammatory the various for disorders. are now other of approved Many treatment cytokine proteins, and to used dependent normally that boost is cytokines hematopoiesis of against as defense these on are administration Conversely, viruses. reactions some such

immune Adaptive the effector the cells; elimination antigen response, of of: specific and develop antigen; in survivors. decline responses recognition; differentiation consisting into memory of the proliferation lymphocytes activation, long-lived being steps, with memory and cells and of to next; microbes against major events the protective step pathologic apply responses as The that are principles host. injure responses summarized general in as each well these

for foreign of every Microbes specificity impossible patrol to every it other obviously and enter portal and of is anywhere, body entry. lymphocytes virtually can antigen the antigens possible epithelia protein dendritic ( and recirculate which cells which To their this lymph problem, antigenic resident by through cargo draining other carry then are T nodes their cells, overcome to antigens captured tissues and in microbes constantly

Fig. 5.9 ). are processed by displayed molecules the recognized complexed and are cell antigens MHC the on surface, antigens Here where with cells. the T follicles soluble spleen, recognized lymph are antigens be their Similarly, cells receptors. and in B antigen concentrated via captured where they nodes the in may and by

are http://ebooksmedicine.net antigens B same time and the lymphocytes At T as recognized microbe lymphocytes, the by microbial

CELLS ACTIVATION, INGESTED MACROPHAGE INFECTED OF MICROBES KILLING KILLING OF

Fig. the to The CD4+ phagocytes DCs molecules phagocytes, responses. and infected peptide immunity. DCs. microbial this and antigens cells the 5.9 cells, kill process, in leukocyte to lymphocytes immune the recruitment cells transport antigens other (DCs) displayed to and on high CD8+ in lymph epithelia stimulate different microbes by subset and of the levels kill cell-mediated ingested During various microbes; sites express T the and cells Cell-mediated enhance memory of antigens of TH1 serve to and tissues recognize Naïve T activated costimulators. mature, types nodes. and the MHC cells of migrate and are which effector subsets cytotoxic effector functions of the activate (CTLs) T microbes MHC-associated proliferate cytoplasm. to T harboring and cells recognize capture antigens infection into immunity. effector of Dendritic differentiate cells from cells activated T and differentiate shown). the cells cells lymphoid some into Some antibodies, memory produce in long-lived and remain to help (not B cells organs T APC, Antigen-presenting cell.

immune innate activates cells recognition pattern receptors. expressing that antigen, is adjuvant with as the innate stimulates of a protein a with case given mimic antigen. microbial an immune a responses immunization vaccine, in called the In to to cytokines T microbe the called differentiation secrete APCs molecules adjuvant During innate express the or the and proliferation response, stimulate and costimulators lymphocytes. that of activates expressed for and naïve costimulators The (CD80 the are the B7 cells. cells APCs T by which on recognized and CD86), are T CD28 on are proteins principal receptor function molecules (“signal cooperatively to and produced activate costimulatory lymphocytes. 2”) to microbes antigen-specific Antigen 1”) (“signal responses immune during innate The microbes response substances. immune microbe-triggered the and induced harmless requirement not ensures signal by by for 2 that adaptive is substances necrotic tumors to may from provided (the mentioned damage-associated released In earlier). cells immune patterns transplants, molecular 2” be and by “signal responses

lymphocytes and important ways and reactions of are in best lymphocytes considered The differ B separately. T functions and

Elimination Lymphocytes Activation T and of of Microbes Immunity: Intracellular Cell-Mediated

organs, activated are present proliferate into and site in any (microbe) antigen that T to by and lymphocytes and cells effector differentiate is antigen (see peripheral costimulators where lymphoid the migrate Naïve

Fig. ). 5.9 responses One cells cytokine T helper of earliest and of CD4+ IL-2 of high-affinity is the expression of receptors IL-2. for the secretion growth and an their IL-2 these a acts proliferation, increase lymphocytes. in number antigen-specific stimulates is of to leading T the factor on lymphocytes that

cells of cytokines. (CD40L) and of by T are combined The actions CD40-ligand helper the functions mediated a to of homologous member TNF. is is CD40 and membrane the TNF-receptor protein family, CD40L a the macrophages recognize cells or B T CD4+ antigens B which cells CD40 displayed these by cells. activates macrophages on engages being CD40L, or helper T and the cells express lymphocytes, When

differentiate cytokines CD4+ and cells T functions ( of perform sets the that of into cells secrete activated different Some effector different

Fig. ). 5.10 cytokine the TH1 IFN-γ, activator. a potent of secrete Cells which macrophage subset the is (Chapter the 3), the and ingested in of microbicidal IFN-γ– macrophage of in destruction macrophages induction The activation CD40-and substances “classical” combination mediated microbes. results activation to of leading cells; cells which differentiate fibrosis “alternative” mucus, 3). activates induces and the produce of stimulates plasma is activates and epithelial IL-5, to tissue mucosal into eosinophils; activation, secrete IL-13, which pathway TH2 B (Chapter with IL-4, to IgE-secreting and cells macrophage cells which associated repair which IgE-coated pathogens to as such helminthic Eosinophils and parasites. bind kill fungi inflammatory in diseases. destroy the IL-17, monocytes, TH17 some recruit cells, extracellular and is called these cytokine signature involved and are cells which neutrophils so and because certain of bacteria

infection. harboring CD8+ lymphocytes that kill reservoirs eliminating microbes, otherwise T cells thereby of cytoplasmic Activated CTLs differentiate hidden into perforin–granzyme system. by on CTLs principal the The depends mechanism of killing the in I targets engage and MHC–bound bearing peptides). their are (cells released granules and stored appropriate rapidly when the are CTLs Perforin class CTLs of granzymes specifically caspases that granzymes, of promotes proteases cellular cleave and the target activate the the of binds thereby cells. and 2), induce the target apoptosis which Perforin of entry to membrane cells plasma (Chapter

are a cells and responses regulated between receptors. The by of inhibitory T balance costimulatory B7 antigen recognition. second receptor that with major molecule provides on earlier CD28, ligands the mentioned recognizes and signals costimulatory is APCs as work that together The two block receptors, and CD28 proteins the of the from “coinhibitory” signals cell from thus T and responses. which CTLA-4 TCR Other family CD28 PD-1, terminate include and be for to immune has (Chapter powerful 6). responses approach anti-tumor coinhibitors a these proved Blocking enhancing

Immunity: of Activation Microbes Elimination B Humoral Extracellular Lymphocytes and of

proliferate B functions different then distinct ( and of with differentiate secrete into cells activation, plasma antibodies Upon classes lymphocytes that

Fig. 5.11 ). activation. of are major two pathways There B-cell

Fig. time of capable immunologic to differentiate may target one recognition, and helper mediate are that The at from summarized. sets cells converting act and these diseases of distinct present of different produce These (mainly cytokines) in antigen cells 5.10 of CD4+ functions. response (indicated roles defense different to stimuli the cells) host T on of that another. as may populations In subsets cytokines cells. into be naive T cells (TH) Subsets effector populations of fall a cells activated cytokines distinct not produce T into and Some multiple subset. do

of Functions antibodies

toxins of microbe and Neutralization

cytosis Naive IgM+, phago-IgG and

High-affinityT stimuli cells, IgGother

Lysis activation microbes of Complement

Fig. 5.11 Humoral immunity. and undergo long-lived into Th (not antigens, B Some switching the and to antibody-secreting become stimuli and other maturation, affinity of the recognize differentiate shown), and heavy-chain lymphocytes are activated to under cells of memory cells. plasma cells cells B proliferate the class some activated Naive cells. B and influence effector of Antibodies different (isotypes) perform classes right. on shown functions, different the heavy-chain the antibodies IgE and that (mast not activation) cell IgM IgG; Note specialized activate complement; functions of the (mucosal and are immunity) these shown eosinophil and and shown. are IgA

cell–independent. T and lipid several cross-link have Many antigens identical that engage simultaneously polysaccharide B-cell antibody antigenic able the activation. of each (epitopes) cell B initiate and molecules multiple on to are determinants process and

T cell–dependent. globular are not bind cells the from of cells. receptors, to to protein and able antigens antigen requires multiple CD4+ help Typical protein T antigens B to response full APCs—they by peptides helper recognition T cells MHC also as class them, molecules display protein II for B antigens, to ingest and cells. act degrade bound The helper B T which work cells. CD40L cells and to cytokines, activate secrete the together express

the the expanded antibody-secreting Some of into clones B-cell plasma progeny of differentiate cells. cell with same antibodies antigen as recognized the antibodies receptors) (B-cell that the Each plasma surface specificity antigen. secretes first the cell of lipids and IgM mainly stimulate secretion antibody. Polysaccharides (IgG, cytokine-mediated classes of antigens, induce by actions, antibodies different Protein virtue of IgA, of CD40L-and the production helper T-cell IgE). with all functions relies (isotype) switching, the same specificity, class antibodies which different that increases serve. of Production range the of heavy-chain antibodies, on functionally of and Some IgG, binding opsonization include IgA functions antibodies of transfer IgE secretion isotype-specific mucosal cells. of lumens, mast into the to transplacental of and stimulate antigen. the production antibodies cells Helper affinity the for higher T with of also the This the called improves immune affinity humoral of quality maturation, response. process, the germinal maturation. major centers, migrate and which Some switching sites B activated cells and into follicles affinity are isotype of form migrate stimulate centers to helper follicular in are helper called B and reside germinal T (Tfh) and that The these processes the also in cells. T lymphocytes cells

response microbes humoral The numerous in (see immune combats ways

Fig. 5.11

thereby cells, neutralizing infecting Antibodies to microbes from them and the microbes. bind prevent

tails (opsonize) macrophages) microbes Fc receptors (neutrophils and target molecules. IgG for express IgG since and for phagocytes antibodies the coat phagocytosis, of them

and the destruction IgM complement of pathway, and activate system the IgG classical complement phagocytosis microbes. products promote by and

secreted tissues lumens tissues). mucosal tracts the in neutralizes microbes is of respiratory and other and (and gastrointestinal mucosal IgA the in

mature. becomes until newborn the is across and system immune protects placenta transported the the IgG actively passive This is a form of immunity.

to them. and with cells eosinophils parasites kill mast functions helminthic and coats IgE

and proteins, than longer is its mechanisms consequence half-lives special 3 for reducing IgG most much IgG Circulating have about weeks, a recycling of the catabolism. antibodies as half-lives of blood which of low continuing levels of and the migrate live to marrow antibody-secreting cells antibodies. years, to Some produce plasma for bone

immune die basal is resting effector pathogen eliminated, infectious its The induced lymphocytes by of the majority state. an thus apoptosis the to pathogen system returning by after initial may years The after lymphocytes infection. of memory which generates for cells, the long-lived activation survive an that cells any (more respond present numerous before encounter the they specific expanded effectively the and for lymphocytes of antigen), more antigen cells do antigen are than pool Memory are naïve reexposed cells. to and naïve than that with faster antigen-specific when an memory goal is vaccination. cells of is the This generation why of important

THENORMALIMMUNERESPONSE:OVERVIEWOFCELLS,TISSUES,RECEPTORS,ANDMEDIATORS

Theinnateimmunesystemusesseveralfamiliesofreceptors,suchastheToll-likereceptors,torecognizemoleculespresentinvarioustypesofmicrobesandproducedbydamagedcells.

Lymphocytesarethemediatorsofadaptiveimmunityandtheonlycellsthatproducespecificanddiversereceptorsforantigens.

(TCRs) receptors T(thymus-derived)lymphocytesexpressantigenreceptorscalledT-cell thatrecognizepeptidefragmentsofproteinantigensthataredisplayedbyMHCmoleculesonthesurfaceofantigen-presentingcells.

B(bonemarrow–derived)lymphocytesexpressmembrane-boundantibodiesthatrecognizeawidevarietyofantigens.Bcellsareactivatedtobecomeplasmacells,whichsecreteantibodies.

Naturalkiller(NK)cellskillcellsthatareinfectedbysomemicrobes,orarestressedanddamagedbeyondrepair.NKcellsexpressinhibitoryreceptorsthatrecognizeMHCmoleculesthatarenormallyexpressedonhealthycells,andarethuspreventedfromkillingnormalcells.

Antigen-presentingcells(APCs)capturemicrobesandotherantigens,transportthemtolymphoidorgans,anddisplaythemforrecognitionbylymphocytes.ThemostefficientAPCsareDCs,whichliveinepitheliaandmosttissues.

Thecellsoftheimmunesystemareorganizedintissues,someofwhicharethesitesofproductionofmaturelymphocytes(thegenerativelymphoidorgans,thebonemarrow,andthymus),andothersarethesitesofimmuneresponses(theperipherallymphoidorgans,includinglymphnodes,spleen,andmucosallymphoidtissues).

Theearlyreactiontomicrobesismediatedbytheinnateimmunesystem,whichisreadytorespondtomicrobes.Componentsoftheinnateimmunesystemincludeepithelialbarriers,phagocytes,NKcells,andplasmaproteins,forexample,ofthecomplementsystem.Innateimmunereactionsareoftenmanifestedasinflammation.Innateimmunity,unlikeadaptiveimmunity,doesnothavefineantigenspecificityormemory.

Thedefensereactionsofadaptiveimmunitydevelopslowly,butaremorepotentandspecialized.

MicrobesandotherforeignantigensarecapturedbyDCsandtransportedtolymphnodes,wheretheantigensarerecognizedbynaïvelymphocytes.Thelymphocytesareactivatedtoproliferateanddifferentiateintoeffectorandmemorycells.

Cell-mediatedimmunityisthereactionofTlymphocytes,designedtocombatcell-associatedmicrobes(e.g.,phagocytosedmicrobesandmicrobesinthecytoplasmofinfectedcells).Humoralimmunityismediatedbyantibodiesandiseffectiveagainstextracellularmicrobes(inthecirculationandmucosallumens).

CD4+ Tcellsaremediatedbysecretedproteinscalledcytokines. helperTcellshelpBcellstomakeantibodies,activatemacrophagestodestroyingestedmicrobes,stimulaterecruitmentofleukocytes,andregulateallimmuneresponsestoproteinantigens.ThefunctionsofCD4+

CD8+ cytotoxicTlymphocyteskillcellsthatexpressantigensinthecytoplasmthatareseenasforeign(e.g.,virus-infectedandtumorcells)andcanalsoproducecytokines.

Antibodiessecretedbyplasmacellsneutralizemicrobesandblocktheirinfectivity,andpromotethephagocytosisanddestructionofpathogens.Antibodiesalsoconferpassiveimmunitytoneonates.

presented of basic diseases here considering system. the for brief of The a immunology immune provides foundation the outline that immune tolerance antigens, rejection first reactions, reactions called disorders disorders, and failure to injury, called the the cause transplants. discuss of of by hypersensitivity caused and autoimmune then We self the by is This system, a immunodeficiency caused diseases. by diseases defective immune called followed disorder with a We of a inflammatory consideration close amyloidosis, is with diseases. and associated that immune often

HYPERSENSITIVITY:IMMUNOLOGICALLYMEDIATEDTISSUEINJURY

Immune capable responses are are protective injury. causing tissue also that normally of reactions grouped immune are called under resulting diseases diseases. are hypersensitivity hypersensitivity, and the Injurious of idea antigen, an reactions to immune who sensitized hypersensitive antigen from term responses This the that originated manifestations against pathologic excessive persons a represent mount are that or so state. system of checks and of infecting Normally, serious optimizes exquisite to an host injury tissues. without eradication balances the organisms situations, directed controlled inappropriately beneficial the the response such or harmless immune against to tissues, may inadequately targeted in normally However, host and disease. of is be antigens normally cause or responses for and is in specific this we the general section, which the of causes disease. response immune In describe hypersensitivity responsible and diseases situations mechanisms then discuss the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

types and antigens result may directed immune abnormalities. underlying responses of various against Pathologic different from be may

antigens. reactions Autoimmunity: against self one’s react does system immune antigens. not against own Normally, the own the called This “tolerates” that phenomenon self body implying antigens. tolerance, its is reactions and fails, cells against occasion, self-tolerance one’s in On tissues. resulting own autoimmune as and are autoimmunity such diseases. referred caused diseases by Collectively, reactions to autoimmunity, constitute of We autoimmunity will this in to return later the mechanisms self-tolerance chapter. and

Reactions microbes. against of that microbial types are reactions against antigens many cause disease. There may microbial is persistent. antigen the unusually some In cases, to the be reaction excessive or appears deposit trigger antigens, (Chapter are in antibodies immune microbial and antigens may complexes, of this the inflammation; such glomerulonephritis the to to produced post-streptococcal is tissues the antibodies against produce If mechanism bind underlying 14). which in may of severe against persistent this infections. the tuberculosis T-cell microbes the give of and granulomas rise responses with tissue other 3); (Chapter formation inflammation, sometimes injury cause is to disease be Rarely, heart host the a T tissue; for or basis microbe cross-react cross-reactivity cells (Chapter is with rheumatic a with 11). reactive antibodies believed such to the In the tissues may eradicating immune some but be process response injured. entirely of in the are disease-causing infection, instances, host normal, as cells virus viral In by foreign recognized the it is system. not immune but liver infects that hepatitis, the cytopathic, is Cytotoxic

of 5.2 Reactions Mechanisms Hypersensitivity Table

infected cells this eliminate normal to liver damages T try cells. immune cells, response and

• antigens. environmental against Reactions well Almost as mites), danders, therapeutic ions pollens, environmental and 20% some and as common animal population substances the to of allergic drugs. (e.g., dust metal is some which react. persons to are genetically Such unusual against predisposed typically to which noninfectious, individuals exposed all only make are to antigens responses immune but harmless

mediated all other is that same these T eliminate pathogens—namely, injury of various effector normally In to by lymphocytes, cells. the mechanisms conditions, function antibodies, tissue infectious and effector that and is problem in response diseases The is triggered immune the maintained fundamental inappropriately. these feedback is responses eliminate control (e.g., reaction immune it for these intrinsic many terminate self positive are a antigens), once immune the difficult to hypersensitivity system impossible immunity), the starts, to and it. antigens, stimuli abnormal or difficult microbes, Because or loops persistent promote normally or (which has environmental protective to Therefore, be therapeutic chronic are and and diseases challenges. debilitating, tend these Since inflammation of the they a are these sometimes under disorders, term of component the is immune-mediated grouped major diseases. pathology inflammatory

four fourth types principal reactions and variations mediated can mechanism be into based injury, ( are three the subdivided immune responsible the T-cell antibody-mediated on is Hypersensitivity on injury; for

Table 5.2 ). mechanism may guide classification rationale the to the the often help is manifestations and predictor injury that this http://ebooksmedicine.net is for of of clinical therapy. The immune good a perfect, this of in not several any because may diseases disease. coexist one reactions However, immune-mediated is classification immune

as hypersensitivity The follows: reactions types are main of

mast and the injury leukocytes. hypersensitivity, by IgE TH2 other antibodies, cells immediate cells, (type is caused and allergy, often I) called In that cytokines cells. and mediators and that as on as well recruit act Mast blood muscle smooth cells inflammatory activate vessels release

and bind cell to fixed IgG IgM caused disorders antigens. tissue antibodies (type are by Antibody-mediated II secreted or that hypersensitivity) surface cells their by injure inducing injure tissues promoting phagocytosis by inflammation. and or Antibodies lysis cause with also tissue disease cellular may without interfere or and cell functions Antibodies injury.

in form deposit circulation, inflammation. disorders complex–mediated bind and in vascular complexes usually antigens, hypersensitivity), that and IgG immune and III (type antibodies induce In beds the IgM antigen-antibody (neutrophils and recruited and radicals. tissue damage leukocytes are enzymes monocytes) toxic release by The produce free generation lysosomal of of that

subsets caused inflammation TH1 induce immune which (type and hypersensitivity which responsible macrophages, mainly responses by disorders injury. produce neutrophils in and that T of lymphocytes activate for are cytokines cell–mediated TH17 IV) tissue are T and the CD8+ by may CTLs to injury host cells. directly killing contribute also

mast IgE the of within tissue bound (typically antibody a after reaction cells. occurs Immediate surface interaction to of the rapidly is minutes) antigen hypersensitivity that with entry of by because antigen, allergen reaction triggers it allergy. is called an is The initiated an which allergens environmental are substances individuals predisposed against. reactions to developing are certain that Many allergic the reaction. TH2 for and clinical pathologic the and responsible are of IgE cells manifestations (e.g., Immediate hay debilitating or reaction even as occur hypersensitivity annoying local rhinitis, a merely (asthma), fever), is that (anaphylaxis). seasonal fatal may severely

of Sequence Events Reactions Hypersensitivity Immediate in

cellular stereotypic a of responses hypersensitivity sequence Most ( reactions follow

Fig. IgE • antibody. 5.12 production and Activation cells of of TH2 by be ingestion, or Allergens inhalation, introduced injection. may host. makeup entry, of the contribute strong that genetic the and the of chronicity of allergens responses exposure, route the Variables and to dose, TH2 to include probably antigen TH2 that ability elicit endow is substances have It the with also unique allergenic chemical to them if properties not or clear structural

Allergen lining Mucosal pollen) (e.g.,

of IgE IgE Production

of to Binding IgE

Repeat to allergen exposure

cell; mast mediators of of release Activation

amines, mediators Cytokineslipid Vasoactive

repeat after allergen) allergen) (2–24 hours exposure after exposure repeat Late (minutes to Immediate phase reaction reaction to hypersensitivity

Fig. hypersensitivity the binds receptors responses of by production the of an are mediators and mast introduction hypersensitivity. to responsible in the subsequent initiated I) (type secrete that and activates manifestations stimulates IgE IgE (FcεRI) are cells, events 5.12 allergen, immediate which Sequence for cells exposure genetically mast individuals. susceptible allergen pathologic of hypersensitivity. Fc the to the Immediate TH2 immediate on to in reactions See abbreviations. for text

responses. Immediate hypersensitivity prototypical reaction. is the TH2-mediated essentially responsible IL-5, IL-4, for all that and immediate are TH2 the induced secrete cells The cytokines, of several reactions hypersensitivity. are IL-13, including which this specific the for immunoglobulin switching cells and allergen IgE stimulates class to isotype. heavy-chain to secrete IL-4 undergo to B mucus and are stimulates acts activates that reaction, secretion. eosinophils and the recruited cells on to epithelial IL-5 IL-13 the the locally; also that recruits to allergic are of chemokines site reactions to of produced response to in eotaxin, same one often TH2 recruited site. cells are eosinophils chemokines, these

Sensitization IgE of mast by antibody. cells from vessels and often Mast cells locations. in the marrow precursors and derived subepithelial in bone residing blood distributed tissues, widely nerves and are in near for cells express portion called FcεRI. of heavy Fc a IgE, ε the chain of the receptor high-affinity Mast always IgE by high the cell FcεRI (in concentration 100 mast is of low is serum to the Even so very affinity occupied are range the the the IgE. 1 receptors though of µg/mL), receptor of that the (the the cells react specific antigen to mast if These molecules. to antibody antibody-bearing binds are sensitized allergen) cells cells. resemble circulating Basophils are mast that immediate reactions FcεRI, circulation). the (since in most occur these and tissues They is in are not in most their reactions role hypersensitivity basophils established express also but third present The often are FcεRI expresses which type cell is eosinophils, that these in reactions.

mediators. mast of of Activation release and cells the usually who allergen, to of site is near mast to or entry. cells, on to molecules the allergen a binds an exposure allergen When IgE at the allergen reexposed by person sensitized antigen-specific was signals in Cross-linking series cells. secretion mediators a the of triggers culminate the biochemical mast IgE from molecules various that of of these

hypersensitivity in reactions: immediate important mediators Three are groups different of

granule released amines Vasoactive stores. from released histamine, within minutes activation. contain granules seconds cells is which mast of The or of and of increased contraction, Histamine secretion mucus. increased permeability, smooth causes muscle vascular vasodilation, and may C5a) inflammatory chemotactic tissues kinins (e.g., mediators additional which produce to and rapidly factors chemotactic factors as 3). released Other (e.g., proteases neutrophils complement tryptase), for and include (Chapter as well damage also and neutral cleave eosinophils generate components amines. which for matrix proteoglycans (heparin, sulfate), granules the to main chondroitin as The contain be storage of seems a acidic function also the

lipid mediators. synthesized Newly 3). synthesize leukocytes the other and (Chapter by leukotrienes and do prostaglandins same cells secrete as Mast pathways in immediate lipid are hypersensitivity have important mediators that several These reactions. actions in (PGD2) pathway Prostaglandin the generated mediator D2 cyclooxygenase abundant cells. by mast the is most bronchospasm well increased It as as intense secretion. mucus causes and bronchial several vasoactive more and potent smooth on than contraction. vascular basis, active LTD4 known; histamine The muscle spasmogenic are a are they increasing times in the most thousand permeability molar LTC4 and causing in agents leukotrienes chemotactic monocytes. eosinophils, and LTB4 neutrophils, for highly is

• Cytokines. several Activation reaction. of are late-phase and for of synthesis the cells the mast important in cytokines results secretion that TNF amplify and IL-5, TH2-initiated activate include immune leukocytes and (Chapter recruit which These which reaction. and 3), the and chemokines, IL-4

disease. of not hypersensitivity and human discomfort clearly The did immediate to cause evolve reactions TH2 plays combating infections. parasitic in important role protective an response The antibodies for mast eosinophils and IgE target helminths cells. destruction by bacterial Mast are defense against also cells involved in infections. will that releasing aficionados the them that from their snake degrade be granule may mast venoms snake by relieved to proteases some hear And toxins. protect cells a remains to by antigens, these puzzle. are responses beneficial environmental activated Why harmless giving allergies, rise inappropriately

of Allergies Development

Susceptibility genetically to is hypersensitivity immediate determined. reactions An is increased reactions develop called atopy. hypersensitivity propensity immediate to than population. does more levels higher general individuals and cells have the TH2 IL-4–producing to Atopic serum IgE tend family found 50% in of A positive atopic individuals. history of is allergy may genes be responsiveness immune airways. implicated those may atopic remodeling in disorders confer a component in may (which to metalloproteinase the but tissue and control and in the HLA that susceptibility particular a (which familial are include of other encoding clear, not molecules that basis to The is responses), FcεRI, TH2 cytokines predisposition allergens), involved of ADAM33, asthma

also are diseases. important Environmental the of development in factors allergic allergy. industrialized Exposure all pollutants, societies, to environmental is predisposing in for factor important an common too living much the develop notable humans whereas cats is allergies, despite environment their as closer to wild genetic and not in humans. in the same that living chimps do similarity dogs It environmental disease than be suggests This simple in genetics. factors development observation that more allergic important of may the the infections airways affecting bronchial triggers for an lungs are (Chapter Viral disease the 13). asthma, allergic of important associated Bacterial atopic infections are dermatitis. skin with strongly

20% or stimuli immediate It of by involve TH2 is such extremes reactions triggered do IgE. as hypersensitivity estimated temperature cells are and 30% to nonantigenic not that and exercise, cells by mast various cases these that is to believed are nonimmune abnormally in activation It stimuli. sensitive

early countries many is to allergic during incidence be in of life. in increasing a diseases The developed decrease to and seems related infections http://ebooksmedicine.net have These observations

Fig. 5.13 Phasesofimmediatehypersensitivityreactions.(A)Kineticsoftheimmediateandlate-phasereactions.Theimmediatevascularandsmoothmusclereactiontoallergendevelopswithinminutesafterchallenge(allergenexposureinapreviouslysensitizedindividual),andthelate-phasereactiondevelops2to24hourslater.Theimmediatereaction(B)ischaracterizedbyvasodilation,congestion,andedema,andthelate-phasereaction(C)ischaracterizedbyaninflammatoryinfiltraterichineosinophils,neutrophils,andTcells. Brigham (Courtesy Dr. Boston, of Hospital, Pathology, Women’s and Department Daniel Friend, of

Massachusetts.) that led allergens the the prevented. common way microbial and even immune an such educates hygiene to against system childhood in exposure are hypothesis, sometimes idea, environmental that antigens a prenatal early called pathologic responses to subsequent Thus, in much childhood may too life. later increase hygiene allergies in received in of antigens demonstrating reduces that support to from life. those later peanut that allergy later allergies exposure to peanuts may reduce early infants idea trials The exposing has against clinical childhood the antigens incidence

well-defined Often, two IgE-triggered phases ( the reaction has

Fig. sets minutes by exposure to minutes; later, is (2) a damage. and well 60 mast cell 5.13 30 by and the and by second, an vasodilation, characterized spasm, vascular usually last leakage, which and ): as mediators cell is muscle in 8 which subsiding by evident stimulated mainly and such by tissue 2 epithelial several allergen lipid response, as may to hours inflammation days, contents mucosal as usually reaction to granule cytokines, within is immediate smooth for 5 characterized (1) after destruction, and late-phase stimulated neutrophils, dominant and lymphocytes, The are cells reaction inflammatory especially eosinophils, late-phase TH2 in cells. the 3. various their were described in roles Neutrophils are recruited in chemokines; by inflammation Chapter the Eosinophils and are effectors from of by tissue are recruited epithelium and chemokines important late-phase in released injury response. other eotaxin factor, platelet-activating which which cationic and protein, inflammation. major and toxic eosinophil produce and protein Eosinophils are LTC4 promote to basic cells, epithelial have that multiple cytokines actions, TH2 described produce earlier. as The cells can in allergen and recruited the inflammatory sustain exposure. leukocytes the continuous response, absence amplify even These of responsible of In inflammatory hypersensitivity. in addition, for are epithelial immediate injury leukocytes the cell much many such anti-inflammatory of atopic therapy as is drugs Because diseases, dermatitis, asthma and component inflammation notably a allergic corticosteroids. includes major

local as An hypersensitivity a ( systemic reaction or as occur a disorder reaction immediate may

5.3 ). Table the determines route the often of of The exposure antigen nature reaction. venom) exposure protein in antigens drugs systemic to may in result (e.g., penicillin) anaphylaxis. (e.g., bee or Systemic profound by erythema of sensitized pulmonary in urticaria (hives), minutes a the respiratory of by exposure and itching, hypersecretion mucus. by order caused and short difficulty host, appear, followed skin in accentuated Within bronchoconstriction may edema obstruction. matters exacerbate by causing Laryngeal upper airway the addition, musculature and vomiting, affected, diarrhea. with may tract be cramps, resultant In the abdominal of gastrointestinal entire intervention, vasodilation systemic immediate be may there a fall with Without

Caused by Table of Examples Disorders Hypersensitivity 5.3 Immediate

Allergicrhinitis,Increasedmucussecretion;inflammationofsinusitis(hayfever)upperairwaysandsinuses

may FoodallergiesIncreasedperistalsisduetocontractionofintestinalmuscles,resultinginvomitinganddiarrhea within pressure in circulatory to (anaphylactic the http://ebooksmedicine.net collapse blood and and progress shock), minutes. patient death

contact), when occur as tract skin antigen such a (following confined or the site, (following (following is ingestion), gastrointestinal lung inhalation). to the reactions particular generally Local the the forms allergies, localized hay asthma of and fever, Atopic are food dermatitis, examples allergic reactions. of certain can reactions. of ingestion However, allergens trigger inhalation or also systemic

orallergy. reaction, Immediate(typeI)sensitivityisalsocalledanallergic

TypeIhypersensitivityisinducedbyenvironmentalantigens(allergens)thatstimulatestrongTH2responsesandIgEproductioningeneticallysusceptibleindividuals.

IgEcoatsmastcellsbybindingtotheFcεRIreceptor;reexposuretotheallergenleadstocross-linkingoftheIgEandFcεRI,activationofmastcells,andreleaseofmediators.

Principalmediatorsarehistamine,proteases,andothergranulecontents;prostaglandinsandleukotrienes;andcytokines.

Mediatorsareresponsiblefortheimmediatevascularandsmoothmusclereactionsandthelate-phasereaction(inflammation).

Theclinicalmanifestationsmaybelocalorsystemic,andrangefrommildlyannoyingrhinitistofatalanaphylaxis.

surface (type other hypersensitivity disorders target directed on of or caused components. by the II) Antibody-mediated antigens against tissue cells antibodies are The or may (e.g., they the metabolite). normal antigens cell or intrinsic molecules extracellular exogenous to be may matrix, adsorbed drug a membranes in antigens be diseases of important the several cause reactions These ( are

Table 5.4

of Diseases Mechanisms Antibody-Mediated

functions complement targeting system, cellular with for the phagocytosis, cause normal or interfering activating disease Antibodies ( by cells

Fig. ). 5.14 of complement antibodies are capable and binding that activating receptors The Fc are of antibodies to high-affinity phagocytes. the typically responsible

• Opsonization and phagocytosis. When or complement are become (opsonized) macrophages for without proteins, circulating phagocytosis targets and ( with or with by red autoantibodies, cells, neutrophils the cells coated cells blood such as platelets,

Fig. ). 5.14A C3 for bind phagocytes of Fc of receptors These breakdown particles. these receptors protein, and and use tails express opsonized complement antibodies products for to IgG the and the ingest spleen, the some is cells Opsonized usually in why antibody-mediated clinical this is of splenectomy are diseases. eliminated benefit in and

reactions, cells an in clinical destruction which occur incompatible situations: Antibody-mediated (1) the phagocytosis transfusion and following from in cell

Hypersensitivity) (Type Diseases of II 5.4 Table Antibody-Mediated Examples

Manifestations of Disease Mechanisms Antigen Disease Target Clinicopathologic

AutoimmunehemolyticanemiaRedbloodcellmembraneproteinsOpsonizationandphagocytosisofredHemolysis,anemiabloodcells

AutoimmunethrombocytopenicPlateletmembraneproteinsOpsonizationandphagocytosisofBleedingpurpura(Gpllb:Illaintegrin)platelets

GoodpasturesyndromeProteininbasementmembranesofComplement-andFcreceptor–Nephritis,lunghemorrhagekidneyglomeruliandlungalveolimediatedinflammation

AcuterheumaticfeverStreptococcalcellwallantigen;Inflammation,macrophageactivationMyocarditis,arthritisantibodycross-reactswithmyocardialantigen

(C5a, MyastheniagravisAcetylcholinereceptorAntibodyinhibitsacetylcholinebinding,Muscleweakness,paralysisdown-modulatesreceptors enzymes, http://ebooksmedicine.net C3a)

TSH to receptor Antibody Thyroid

to neurotransmitter Antibody receptor binding of inhibits

Fig. Inflammation by to Mechanisms of antibodies disturb by induced antibody-mediated components and ingestion products. receptors. of breakdown Opsonization function by and (B) phagocytes. the leukocytes (C) 5.14 of injury. of Anti-receptor receptors by and Fc (A) antibodies binding antibody normal cells complement complement acetylcholine in antibodies Graves antibodies thyroid (ACh) examples, against the hormone in neuromuscular the In gravis, and these transmission (TSH) myasthenia receptor disease. cells impair activate receptor thyroid-stimulating to

(2) donor fetal destruction and placenta (Chapter individuals cross (Chapter preformed cells drug-protein cells react cause produced proteins which cell the autoimmune (erythroblastosis a the blood IgG attaches certain the 12); their to 12); red antibodies blood anemia, disease thrombocytopenia, newborn in cells are plasma of in against of drug antibodies own complex. antibody (Chapter fetalis), 7); (3) in and to the hemolytic (4) in blood produce antibodies which red and hemolytic from and reactions, anti–red host with drug mother membrane which agranulocytosis, the of blood

Inflammation. • pathway or the by activate classical system cellular Antibodies bound complement tissue to ( the antigens

Fig. ). 5.14B (see Fig. functions activation complement serve of Products several is recruit in to triggering one 3.11, Chapter which monocytes, tissues. and of 3), inflammation neutrophils also bound be antibodies. by recognize which engagement the activated of Leukocytes receptors, may Fc disorders. and vascular Antibody-mediated glomerulonephritis, forms of inflammation in for other grafts, rejection tissue injury is organ some in responsible

dysfunction. Antibody-mediated cellular • inflammation dysregulate protein against cell or injury some or impair without directly directed ( host antibodies causing In a functions cases, important

Fig. 5.14C ). gravis, neuromuscular against inhibit muscles motor In muscle receptors acetylcholine in myasthenia with weakness. skeletal antibodies resultant end of the plates transmission, Antibodies cellular stimulate also can responses excessively. thyroid secrete thyroid antibodies in against hyperthyroidism. hormones, hormone thyroid-stimulating to Graves In stimulate receptor epithelial disease, the resulting cells functional can other derangements. block molecules, of and these causing hormones and actions proteins essential against Antibodies neutralize the

circulation formed complexes in and Antigen–antibody vessels, activation acute the blood are to in (immune) leading deposit may complement inflammation. that Less

Diseases of Examples Table Complex–Mediated 5.5 Immune

SystemiclupuserythematosusNuclearantigens(circulatingor“planted”inkidney)Nephritis,skinlesions,arthritis,others

ReactivearthritisBacterialantigens(e.g.,Yersinia)Acutearthritis

“planted” complexes been where antigen be SerumsicknessVariousproteins(e.g.,foreignserumprotein)(horseArthritis,vasculitis,nephritisanti-thymocyteglobulin) immune has the previously complexes). sites situ in formed may (called at frequently, that or The complexes by is a injected microbe, may if as that (autoimmunity). immune an infectious or exogenous, self individual such antigens protein the against antibody antigens be produces foreign produced endogenous, form disorders listed antigens involved the in are Examples and complex of immune

Table 5.5 . but (arthritis), which of systemic, sites small (vasculitis), Immune of kidney deposition. and the involve are complex–mediated often (glomerulonephritis), immune be vessels diseases preferentially common all blood joints tend complex

serum administration horses disease; of immune diphtheria). to foreign systemic frequent immunized large sequela amounts complex the used sickness is once Acute a against of serum a of was from prototype protection the it for (e.g., serum receive other the individuals from e.g. In disease or antibodies seen usually infrequent is in times, modern and species, who individuals grafts. T globulin cells deplete antithymocyte to administered horse of organ or rabbit recipients in model complex Nevertheless, has taught an a deal that it informative about us is great immune disorders.

into be disease phases can of systemic pathogenesis The immune ( complex three divided

Fig. 5.15

Immune Formation of Complexes. week of the an response introduction typically that after protein. the the a of formation triggers in immune about antibodies, results 1 antigen of The protein injection antigen-antibody secreted the the the These complexes. react and they still with circulation in antigen present blood, antibodies into where form are

of Complexes. Immune Deposition in are deposited In antigen-antibody tissues. complexes the next circulating various phase, the of whether vascular local major complexes influences complex determine formation are to immune seem lead understood, the deposition to disease not tissue but the that and fully characteristics will be the factors and The alterations. is slight size medium general, In are are most antigen the formed excess in complexes of pathogenic. that when blood Organs where high is filtered at

Fig. 5.15 Immunecomplexdisease.Thesequentialphasesintheinductionofsystemicimmunecomplex–mediateddiseases(typeIIIhypersensitivity).

become and sites disease immune synovial glomeruli other and fluids, are complexes form complex often urine deposit; concentrated http://ebooksmedicine.net and immune like hence, where to fluid, joints. affects pressure

Injury. Inflammation Tissue and activation leukocyte in receptors. initiate an Fc via engagement inflammatory tissues, immune reaction of deposited and acute Once complexes complement IgM. Typically, or antibodies IgG the are Deposition at site of detected proteins can injury. complement be the of which the decreases of a disease during marker for active be of Consumption disease serum complement can C3, the of phase levels activity. used as this (arthralgia), phase (approximately appear. and 10 after antigen administration), joint proteinuria urticaria, as features node lymph clinical enlargement, pain such days fever, During deposit, complexes damage Wherever tissue is similar. the if and on. occurs if arthritis resultant it termed it is renal in glomeruli, if in joints, The inflammatory occurs the it blood so in vasculitis lesion occurs glomerulonephritis vessels,

associatedwithfibrinoidnecrosisofthevesselwallandintenseneutrophilicinfiltration(Fig.3.12,Chapter3).Whendepositedinthekidney,thecomplexescanbeseenonimmunofluorescencemicroscopyasgranulardepositsofimmunoglobulinandcomplementandonelectronmicroscopyaselectron-densedepositsalongtheglomerularbasementmembrane(see vasculitis, MORPHOLOGYTheprincipalmorphologicmanifestationofimmunecomplexinjuryisacute

Fig.5.24

of serum sickness acute antigen, In dose phagocytosis administration the as degradation large by single induced resolve lesions a of the result tend and immune of of a to complexes. A of repeated prolonged or results chronic antigen. an sickness to exposure serum from form responses persistent several antibody to which erythematosus autoantigens. systemic is associated as such in lupus diseases, occurs with (SLE), This but the many diseases, are deposition, antigens unknown. changes and morphologic immune findings inciting In complex other the suggest this are membranous several category glomerulonephritis vasculitides. Included and in

acute local an necrosis of appears result vasculitis. A complex is reaction, of tissue the area a in diseases of which model immune Arthus as immune complex The injecting antibody. the with an by skin previously a produced is reaction animal antigen immunized of experimentally preformed into the complex of immune into as the diffuses appearance disease. form triggering and the histologic complexes reaction Immune site antigen same wall systemic the injection, in as at inflammatory vascular to lesions ulceration. hemorrhage, when reach the 10 and after Arthus over a hours evolve 4 injection occasionally followed peak and hours injection, by few a develops edema site

Antibodiescancoat(opsonize)cells,withorwithoutcomplementproteins,andtargetthesecellsforphagocytosisbyphagocytes(macrophages),whichexpressreceptorsfortheFctailsoflgGandforcomplementproteins.Theresultisdepletionoftheopsonizedcells.

Antibodiesandimmunecomplexesmaydepositintissuesorbloodvessels,andelicitanacuteinflammatoryreactionbyactivatingcomplement,withreleaseofbreakdownproducts,orbyengagingFcreceptorsofleukocytes.Theinflammatoryreactioncausestissueinjury.

Antibodiescanbindtocellsurfacereceptorsorotheressentialmoleculesandcausefunctionalderangements(eitherinhibitionorunregulatedactivation)withoutcellinjury.

as well cells 5.6 Several disorders, to now pathologic ). and known environmental to are T reactions chemicals as be autoimmune caused by persistent ( microbes, reactions T are injury by T which and cytotoxicity, the cytokine-mediated of cell are mainly cell Two (2) in ( cytokines disease: inflammation, cells, CD4+ of and direct types produced capable causing mediated tissue by T cells CD8+ (1)

Fig. ). 5.16 designed diseases This rationally interest for recognized diseases, clinical and these the abnormal is cells target T of the diseases T chronic have inflammatory group the basis therapies developed been are great increasingly many reactions. of of cell to of as new because

hypersensitivity cells may the inflammation cell–mediated chronic be that T produced In T by induce and CD4+ destructive. reactions, cytokines The to tissue individuals. antigens prototype a hypersensitivity cell–mediated immune is (DTH), inflammation of T delayed-type to reaction given hypersensitivity). to a into 48 of in individual hours immunized antigen an reaction the this term In skin immediate results within in a reaction, to the delayed, 24 administered cutaneous contrast detectable previously (hence

As antigens in peptide activated of naïve displayed earlier, described lymphoid by secondary by cells. organs are T cells dendritic recognition differentiate the T effector into cells influence The cytokines various under (see of cells

Figs. 5.9 5.10 ). cells, the cell–mediated TH17 infiltrate. Classical especially cells neutrophils the is may of hypersensitivity to inflammatory a TH1 when are reaction in but effector contribute reaction, also prominent T hypersensitivity. are manifestations responsible secrete IFN-γ, cells of cytokines, TH1 mainly of for many delayed-type the which promote and (Chapter substances activated) inflammation tissues, and microbes macrophages IFNγ-activated that produce that destroy 3). damage mediators (classically

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Tissue Injury143 Immunologically Hypersensitivity: Mediated

Cell–Mediated Table 5.6 Diseases T

of Cells Pathogenic Specificity T

self Collagen?Citrullinated proteins?

myelin (e.g., basic Protein antigens in myelin protein)

of β acid cells others) islet decarboxylase, pancreatic (insulin, glutamic Antigens

bacteria; self Enteric antigens?

therapeutic oak, poison from urushiol environmental chemicals Various (e.g., drugs) ivy poison or

of Injury Mechanisms Tissue Principal

TH1?) (and Inflammation mediated TH17 by and immune of antibodies complexes? role cytokines;

cytokines, TH17 by mediated destruction myelin Inflammation and TH1 activated macrophages by

by cells T of CTLs inflammation, cell–mediated destruction islet

mediated (and by Inflammation TH17?) TH1 cytokines

Chronic destruction with inflammation, cartilage of arthritis articular

diabetes β (chronic in of cells; inflammation islets), Insulitis destruction

intestinal Chronic obstruction inflammation,

causing dermal necrosis, inflammation, blisters skin Epidermal and rash

human cell–mediated diseases of T listed. are Examples with experimental cells diseases. and based of the similarity of mechanisms inferred cases, are tissue T of models the the animal the injury In the specificity on many

TH17 monocytes. that and cells Activated cytokines recruit secrete neutrophils

(PPD, Mycobacterium called example protein is medicine the a also the is test), antigen tuberculin classic derivative of protein-containing injection of reaction which purified bacillus. tuberculosis in the DTH of clinical The as by the intracutaneous (known skin tuberculin), PPD produced exposed slowly peak a to thereafter previously 12 reach to 72 24 hours, of In hours, and a 8 and individual, site in subside. induration appear reddening the in Morphologically, is characterized by the hypersensitivity tion inflammation. delayed-type and Drug reactions manifest skin rashes. often as

inflammation disease multiple CD4+ of and organ-specific and to arthritis bowel inflammatory commensals, in as the reactions cell–mediated probably such caused well such autoimmune as (see injury as as tissue T basis many diseases, systemic is uncontrolled rheumatoid sclerosis, bacterial by diseases

Table 5.6

Fig. and (B) marks Immunoperoxidase hypersensitivity cellular a that anti-CD4 with positively infiltrate dermal Perivascular Delayed the antibodies. predominantly reaction 5.17 mononuclear reveals with skin. accumulation of associated staining macrophages), cells fibrin (A) (lymphocytes perivascular edema and deposition. in (“cuffing”) inflammatory Sciences Dr. Pathology, Health (Courtesy of Picker, Oregon.) of Department Portland, Oregon Louis University, mainly cells producing CD4+ mononuclear around of venules, perivascular macrophages, cells, T ( and accumulation “cuffing”

Fig. 5.17

may stimuli other a special reactions DTH or Prolonged called against reaction in of pattern persistent granulomatous result microbes inflammation. is The perivascular period to 2 CD4+ by macrophages over replaced of a T initial 3 progressively infiltrate weeks. cell of flat, exhibit eosinophilic, morphologic epithelioid These and that they is, typically and macrophages activation; are accumulated cells. called evidence become large, IFN-γ) under epithelioid (e.g., cytokines occasionally to influence the giant of cells. fuse cells The multinucleate form by granuloma surrounded of typically cells, ( An a epithelioid of collar aggregate a lymphocytes, called is

Fig. ). 5.18A is (see chronic The process TH1-mediated inflammation of essentially form activation a and macrophage

Fig. 5.18B ). rim an fibroblasts tissue. granulomas and of connective Older enclosing develop a cells schistosomes, helminths prominent also infection certain in such lesions. TH2 involved, situations, result eosinophils by are as In and as as are known the of of 3). of (Chapter they importance Recognition because number seen are is conditions diagnostic only granulomas limited a in

dermatitis tissue DTH reactions. common example from Contact a resulting of injury is contact and the component be or may It poison by urushiol, as of oak, with dermatitis. presents evoked vesicular antigenic ivy poison a in modifies self is recognized proteins, chemical and the these and from are modified to and peptides the by T elicit these It reactions, that structurally reaction. derived cells environmental binds proteins thought common among responsible reactions most drug many reactions, mechanism for the of hypersensitivity humans. The is same (often T recognized reactive proteins, cells, MHC drug alters produc- a neoantigens foreign as chemical) self including to and these cytokine molecules, are by The responsible leading

Fig. giant granuloma (e.g., that role formation (A) by the section disorders cells TH1 the cells. of IV granulomas also illustrating several of lymph contribute an up multinucleate a and not the in of type is of node each granulomatous The to in The granuloma of 5.18 hypersensitivity inflammation. The formation A shows cells lymphocytes. proven. aggregate of surrounded in schistosomiasis), TH2 give In (B) the cytokines. center several epithelioid some rise events shows Granulomatous granulomas, role made reactions, TH17 lesions. to cells Courtesy Dr. of (A, School, University of of Southwestern Worrell, Pathology, Department Medical Trace Dallas, Texas Texas.)

CD8+ target T In CTLs cell–mediated antigen-expressing kill type this cells. of reaction, as cell– T Tissue some by diabetes. such may important 1 diseases, an mediated CTLs destruction be component type of histocompatibility CTLs play directed against discussed important later. rejection, antigens surface role which in is graft an cell in They also viruses. play reactions role a against the is molecules MHC viral T peptides CD8+ by In displayed cell, by class TCR the and of virus-infected recognized lymphocytes. complex a I are infection, is infection the responsible accompanies of cell some killing the leads infected it (e.g., for elimination to cases, The that of but damage viral in hepatitis). in cells contact to exposure and virus sensitizing CD8+ following agents. some in and cytokines, reactions T infections DTH, resembling especially produce notably IFN-γ, cells involved are inflammatory also

inflammation: Cytokine-mediated TcellsareactivatedbyexposuretoaproteinantigenanddifferentiateintoTH1andTH17effectorcells.Subsequentexposuretotheantigenresultsinthesecretionofcytokines.IFN-γ activatesmacrophagestoproducesubstancesthatcausetissuedamageandpromotefibrosis,andIL-17andothercytokinesrecruitleukocytes,thuspromotinginflammation. CD4+

hypersensitivity. TheclassicalTcell–mediatedinflammatoryreactionisdelayed-type ChronicTH1reactionsassociatedwithmacrophageactivationoftenleadtogranulomaformation.

TcellsalsosecreteIFN-γ. cell–mediated cytotoxicTlymphocytes(CTLs)specificforanantigenrecognizecellsexpressingthetargetantigenandkillthesecells.CD8+ T cytotoxicity: CD8+

the fail. described tissue in to can system normal that immune we Now how cause diseases which damage, control turn mechanisms we have are autoimmune are such of of diseases disorders, antigens. of tolerance The self prototypes failure the which result to

Autoimmunity antigens. self to refers (“auto”) reactions immune against affect 2% population. estimated to of the at to are diseases U.S. 1% Autoimmune least for some for the more indeed than The evidence of these persuasive that reactions others. autoimmune diseases are result is are and instance, some high-affinity these abnormalities. these have For disorders, cases of identified, antibodies been cause in many known in pathologic to autoantibodies self-reactive growing some There of activation also in T of is these cells diseases. for pathogenic the evidence autoimmune have very an experimental In etiology. supporting evidence addition, providing informative, proved circumstantial models Nevertheless, many say for that fair is it to

Autoimmune Diseases Table 5.7

Inflammatoryboweldiseases(Crohndisease,ulcerativecolitis) *AroleforTcellshasbeendemonstratedinthesedisorders,butantibodiesmayalsobeinvolvedintissueinjury.

†Anautoimmunebasisofthesedisordersissuspected,butthesupportingevidenceisnotstrong.

‡Thesedisordersmayresultfromexcessiveimmuneresponsestocommensalentericmicrobes,autoimmunity,oracombinationofthetwo.

as not suspected but disorders traditionally is autoimmune, proved. etiology classified this

may organ-specific, one tissue directed result ( cell or by many responses against immune organs systemic, particular diseases be ). in or in characterized 5.7 and organ in localized damage, type lesions which are Autoimmune the affect connective the and In systemic autoantibodies, organs. lesions the involved vessels of complexes caused are tissues by immune diseases principally blood that and specifically referred not vessels. against these are though or immunologic diseases, diseases the diseases often of tissue or vascular blood tissue directed Therefore, constituents are collagen as even connective connective to reactions

antigens, of from are self-tolerance. a unresponsive Normal (self) and results autoimmunity persons failure own (tolerant) their to autoimmunity normal pathogenesis familiarity the the understanding requires mechanisms Therefore, of immunologic of with tolerance.

that state a of is induced unresponsiveness that to antigen. Immunologic to exposure specific of tolerance is an lymphocytes by antigen antigens. Self-tolerance of refers tissue lack responsiveness immune own to one’s to recognize B Billions developing antigen and that receptors self in is generated this T lymphocytes of that are produced lymphocytes, can surprising receptors different during randomly antigens. and process, not are it system, be be lymphocytes. all controlling these concealed the antigens means must there from a self-recognizing or eliminating immune cannot of Since work http://ebooksmedicine.net Several in mechanisms

cells regulatory T Thymus of Treg Development

to BB Anergy (failure Anergy respond) to (failure

Fig. antigens. of Mechanisms to 5.19 tolerance self immunologic illustrated. B mechanisms cells and peripheral T are principal of self-tolerance The in cells and central regulatory cells, Treg APC, T Antigen-presenting cell; cells.

the reactions against select against and concert own self-reactivity thus body’s to prevent immune to antigens. Two are ( tolerance peripheral broad central recognized: and mechanisms tolerance

Fig. 5.19

self-reactive (generative) their principal in and in lymphocytes central for organs deletion and for during of (death) cells). bone (i.e., B antigen-induced the thymus The T mechanism lymphocytes tolerance in cells central the B T of maturation the is marrow lymphoid thymus, autologous processed protein and presented antigens are thymic In the APCs. many (self) by the cells. encounters such self-reactive called immature depleted cell maturation undergoes that a Any deletion, thereby T apoptosis that or of (a self negative their complete T are cells and selection), antigen process immature advance for thymus for been of An exciting tissue-restricted is antigens and deletion expression cells specific peripheral protein critical has (autoimmune of antigens. AIRE in which a stimulates the regulator), called self the T of identification thus some these are polyendocrinopathy of the cause Mutations gene autoimmune 20). an AIRE (Chapter in the T see cells self antigens are in the immature all that Not deleted. thymus and (described T T later). cells CD4+ regulatory cells develop Some into survive

that may B apoptosis. antigens die in also cells Immature recognize self bone the high with by marrow affinity called (a that then deleted a but antigen process receptor new rearrangement editing). longer cells round instead not of no and B undergo receptor are of genes second receptors self-reactive self-reactive are Other express

however, tolerance, Central is imperfect. periphery. Not into lymphocytes for and all receptors bearing autoantigens marrow, the or bone antigens self are in present hence thymus escape such the that are can they in escape the peripheral selection Self-reactive tissue lymphocytes negative eliminated injury inflict unless muzzled or tissues.

for mechanisms B peripheral are tissues; cells silence Several in cells T potentially and these best defined T autoreactive cells. These Anergy. • following: the mechanisms include is functional refers antigens induced by that under than with This (rather term of encounter death) certain to inactivation conditions. lymphocytes provided signals: of molecules requires molecules) MHC As T of by second previously, through activation on cells recognition association with of APCs, (e.g., peptide two in costimulatory signals and B7 antigen APCs. the described set a the on not antigen. encounters delivered, or costimulatory respond costimulatory T are cell cell if If the cannot T the self is to engaged the becomes and inhibitory (rather cell than anergic receptor receptor) when signals antigen, an the the cells molecules presenting Because antigens, on result anergy. all self autoreactive antigens low in tissues the are costimulatory self or may at in between at expressed and encounter T levels APCs not

encounter antigen to tissues, B that mature if peripheral the is unable these of It believed B cells self especially become respond T cells cells, the absence to antigen. specific in helper in role express their a lymphocytes responses limiting self inhibitory also activation receptors to in that antigens. play and B preventing may

regulatory T cells. by Suppression regulatory functions of population antigens. cells called A T cells self to T against reactions prevent immune thymus, Regulatory lymphoid but also develop cells in peripheral in may be they the mainly T tissues. induced that a called forkhead family, CD4+ levels cells best-defined IL-2 The CD25, of cells and α transcription FOXP3. chain the the T factor regulatory the receptor, high are express of of regulatory the for CD4+ and Both functional IL-2 are cells. T required development FOXP3 maintenance and of IPEX acronym result called the dysregulation, in disease cause mice; in mutations a Mutations autoimmune in these the polyendocrinopathy, humans, FOXP3 gene immune severe X-linked). systemic of for and (an humans are in enteropathy, autoimmunity

inhibitory immune mediated by such responses which and lymphocyte and T defined, TGF-β, of as not their in are fully The be cells activity inhibit immunosuppressive activation cytokines but which secretion IL-10 the may functions. effector suppress by mechanisms part regulatory ability reduce which CTLA-4, cells to express T may APCs activate cells via their on and molecules CD28. Regulatory to T also B7 bind

by apoptosis. Deletion receive antigens may by apoptosis. self their recognize cells that T promote that death signals mechanisms T have cells of proposed, studies based in Two deletion on been of mice. mature mainly pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 called that apoptosis of by recognize member pathway which self postulated It triggers they a is T Bim, antigens, cells if 2). (Chapter family upregulate the the mitochondrial by which can same be cells. family), Another of its neighboring the on involves or death member the the engaged Fas apoptosis ligand (a mechanism coexpressed TNF receptor receptor of of an production of lymphadenopathy this called (ALPS), The characterized illustrated self-tolerance discovery that is autoimmune and pathway by responsible of by autoimmune importance the are disease FAS autoantibodies. lymphoproliferative syndrome for the mutations

communicate are which from (sequestered) antigens in the these immune lymph. system, antigens do blood the because are Some the and located not self hidden with tissues released these immune and to into by antigens ignored responses system. fail the immune unless circulation, are elicit As result, essentially the a these be to from in located sites eye, believed testis, called in This for shielded antigens of that because are the sites immune are system. is immune-privileged and brain, which the to be found antigens only tend the case all these as to example, are that tissue consequence and the trauma leads infection, released immune If for prolonged a result tissues, response or of an injury. the be inflammation antigens may from orchitis uveitis. and This for post-traumatic mechanism is postulated the

of Principles Autoimmunity: Mechanisms General

pathologic we self-tolerance, principal we to of ask rise down might autoimmunity. the to give have summarized these mechanisms how break mechanisms that Now can

Infections, inflammation, tissue injury

of APCs tissue Activationself-tolerance of Failure

into lymphocytes tissues self-reactive Influx of

of Activation lymphocytes self-reactive

injury: autoimmune Tissue disease

Fig. Pathogenesis 5.20 of autoimmunity. and tissues, that triggers multiple inflammation) including tissue injury, may of self-tolerance susceptibility genes with lymphocytes, and promote as infections, environmental results from activation that self-reactive damage. factors, interfere Autoimmunity and entry into tissue (such lymphocyte

are question, Unfortunately, of no there remain this human and autoimmune diseases determined. simple the be underlying answers most to to causes breakdown self-tolerance development influence display result alter effects and guess is tissue that of responses environmental of and such antigens best combined The genes, as factors, from that and susceptibility autoimmunity lymphocyte or the which self the of of infections injury, ( tolerance, to

Fig. 5.20

complex Most diseases multigenic disorders. are autoimmune of inherited evidence in diseases. genes that play There is abundant development the a role autoimmune

the of to families, there monozygotic a tendency have disease is run a twins. and diseases in incidence than greater dizygotic Autoimmune in in same

alleles to II are autoimmune Several HLA-DQ). HLA especially the (HLA-DR, diseases linked locus, class do relative those individuals ratio disease a is a odds the or ( particular risk with inherit frequency in with that who The called allele, HLA compared of not allele

5.8 ). Table relative 3 for from 4 risk The ranges or

Inflammatory of Association 5.8 Alleles Diseases and HLA Table

†TheoddsratioreflectsapproximatevaluesofincreasedriskforthediseaseassociatedwiththeinheritanceofparticularHLAalleles.ThedataarefromEuropean-derivedpopulations. SystemiclupusDRB1*03012erythematosusDRB1*15011.3

chainoftheHLADRmolecule.CourtesyofDr.MichelleFernando,ImperialCollegeLondon. epitope, socalledbecausethesusceptibilityallelesmaptooneregionoftheDRB1protein(positions70–74).TheDRB1proteinistheproductoftheβ referstoantibodiesdirectedagainstcycliccitrullinatedpeptides.Dataarefrompatientswhotestpositivefortheseantibodiesintheserum.¶SE ‡Anti-CCP Ab referstoshared

and to (RA) and more for 100 spondylitis HLA-B27. or arthritis ankylosing rheumatoid HLA-DR4 genes not still autoimmunity clear. development is influence MHC of However, how the allele develop relevant without individuals disease, gene get MHC MHC a individuals may and, with it. most the Notably, conversely, susceptibility-related never a autoimmunity. contributes MHC therefore variable that to is but of one particular Expression gene

are genetic polymorphisms revealing studies Genome-wide are ( autoimmune associated families that (GWAS) linkage with different and in many diseases • association studies

5.9 Table ). general seen are variants of Some are immune self-tolerance. of in and suggesting they mechanisms affect associations but regulation multiple that of the genetic many disorders, disease-specific, these by is these mechanism not contribute to most the variants However, of particular diseases genetic which autoimmune established.

Factors Injury, and Other of Infections,Tissue Role Environmental

of mycoplasmas, been as A autoimmunity. bacteria, variety triggers viruses, and for microbes, implicated have including autoimmune mechanisms Microbes by reactions may several induce (

Fig. 5.21

stimulate APCs can subsequent breakdown cell inflammation with in of a tissue, on T and resultant thus the necrosis tolerance favoring cell T molecules and Microbial infections expression of activation. tissue costimulatory

and may cross-reacting responses mimicry. other a molecular by a microbes to tissues, induced and Viruses epitopes share microbe antigens, called the with result may phenomenon extend as self self rheumatic of is immunologic response example which streptococci a an cardiac disease, pathogenic antibody against best The cross-reaction in antigens. heart cross-targets role mimicry It known not autoimmune more has common if is a diseases. in

microbes influenced and commensal collection diverse symbiotic the has is microbiome the skin us with that in a that Recently, autoimmunity there the development by interest been live in idea great of relationship). (the normal gut of that different commensal is microbes It possible

Selected Associated Non–HLA Variants Diseases Gene With Table Autoimmune 5.9

PTPN22 RA,T1D,IBDProteintyrosinephosphatase;mayaffectsignalinginlymphocytesandmayalternegativeselectionoractivationofself-reactiveTcells

IBD,PS,ASReceptorfortheTH17-inducingcytokineIL-23;mayalterdifferentiationofCD4+ IL23R TcellsintopathogenicTH17effectorcells

CTLA4 T1D,RAInhibitsT-cellresponsesbyterminatingactivationandpromotingactivityofregulatoryTcells;mayinterferewithself-tolerance

MS,T1Dα IL2RA chainofthereceptorforIL-2,whichisagrowthandsurvivalfactorforactivatedandregulatoryTcells;mayaffectdevelopmentofeffectorcellsand/orregulationofimmuneresponses

IRF5, SLERoleintypeIinterferonproduction;typeIIFNisinvolvedinthepathogenesisofSLE(seetext) IFIH1

systemiclupuserythematosus;TID,typeIdiabetes.Theprobablelinkageofthesegeneswithvariousautoimmunediseaseshasbeendefinedbygenome-wideassociationstudies(GWAS)andothermethodsforstudyingdisease-associatedpolymorphisms.AdaptedfromZenewiczLA,AbrahamC,FlavellRA,etal:Unravelingthegeneticsofautoimmunity,Cell interferon;MS, Ankylosingspondylitis;IBD, 140:791,2010. rheumatoidarthritis;SLE, inflammatoryboweldisease;IFN, AS, multiplesclerosis;PS, psoriasis;RA,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

APCs of on Induction costimulators A

Activation of APC

T Activation cells of

Fig. role autoimmunity. infections in Postulated 5.21 of may self-reactive cross-reaction microbial lymphocytes costimulators expression promote (A), self lymphocytes antigens (B). a the self-reactive of of and may or antigens mimic activation inducing activate by as Infections

the and away toward regulatory from aberrant proportions effector host cells, the shape and or affect relative of response activation. T these in to microbes the is contribute to still not which specific prevent disorders. manipulated humans, clear or if However, diseases or treat be it can microbiome

complexity of Adding the infections diseases, protect and paradoxically multiple individuals notably autoimmunity are sclerosis, microbes recent 1 between from and observations disease. the suggesting link that type some to autoimmune diabetes, Crohn are underlying not effect possible this The mechanisms understood.

also by the a tissue variety addition insults. be to infections, of environmental In altered antigens may of display of lead (UV) for As radiation proposed death the sunlight. discussed the to later, responses of causes flares and to the nuclear immune cell exposure antigens, elicit which in exposure this lupus; with is may pathologic lupus explanation mechanism ultraviolet association RA, Smoking of self a because perhaps chemical for leads modification risk it antigens. is factor to antigens for lead reason any injury self and release responses. the may autoimmune to of tissue Local

there Finally, common women in these strong gender men. than many a diseases bias of of being in is with more autoimmunity, The involve understood, and the hormones factors. other mechanisms of well underlying may are effects but not

An may autoimmune attack. response further promote itself autoimmune to response or an may form. are that cause other exposure now lead concealed autoimmune but by in caused any presented Tissue previously antigen self cells of were epitopes an injury T immunogenic to not the autoreactive The initially. because were spreading, T cells that response activation epitopes such immune spreads called to epitope of recognized is of one of autoimmune mechanisms chronicity the that to This may contribute the is diseases.

and autoimmune diseases. immune to of the antigens (unresponsiveness) system, of the a Tolerance self basis fundamentalproperty of breakdown toleranceis is

killed new tolerance: lymphocytes B-cell apoptosis; not theself-reactive self-reactive. antigens lymphocytes self in the lymphoid switch of that and recognize receptorsthat by the are lineage, immature some in central to T Central (generative) B organsare antigen

Peripheral tissues inactive selfantigens tolerance: peripheral lymphocytes recognize that in (anergic),aresuppressedbyregulatoryTlymphocytes,ordiebyapoptosis. become mature functionally

•Thefactorsthatleadtoafailureofself-toleranceandthedevelopmentofautoimmunityinclude(1)inheritanceofsusceptibilitygenesthatdisruptdifferenttolerancepathways,and (2)infectionsandtissueinjurythatexposeselfantigensandactivateAPCsandlymphocytesinthetissues.

proceed of important Having diseases. general common and a some to most the of discussion we the autoimmunity, discussed tolerance autoimmune of and principles in considerable apparent discussed overlap clinical and Although features separately, and is is pathogenesis. underlying disease each morphologic their cover that deal affect autoimmune in that diseases; single the chapters Here autoimmune with organ systemic discussed systems are organs. diseases the we relevant

which autoimmune a vast mainly cells SLE immune of and multiple to by disease (ANAs), autoantibodies, binding characterized caused organs, is an injury antibodies various is of deposition array antibodies antinuclear complexes by of involving in and particularly tissues. be the in affected. prominent, but organ is membranes Injury serosal may the body and skin, to kidney, joints, every virtually presentation and of criteria assessment disorder is have design help a for complex SLE that been this clinical proposed, clinicians for The of and so of the to ( set trials variable

Table 5.10 ). present However, and features. with any any very is disease of number the patient may these heterogeneous, disease, high be 400 that as certain a in populations. 100,000 is SLE may per as prevalence fairly common with a it age, manifest any often early SLE at thirties, twenties the even Although is a person in when may presents or in childhood. 17 autoimmune female-to-male to of group 9:1 Similar reproductive years. to many for a of ratio predominantly affects women, SLE diseases, age 55 the with or disease years comparison, only 2:1 developing By after is age. for of 65 childhood female-to-male during ratio the prevalence The in disease whites. higher 2to than in blacks and the is of Hispanics 3-fold

Autoantibodies Spectrum of SLE in

of of hallmark production autoantibodies. is The the SLE

nuclear of directed cell components, Some cytoplasmic others while antigens blood antibodies surface cells. and against are recognize their from value in diagnosis the Apart

5.10 for Criteria Revised Table

of Systemic Classification Erythematosus* Lupus

AcutecutaneouslupusMalarrash(fixederythema,flatorraised,overthemalareminences),photosensitivity

ChroniccutaneousDiscoidrash:erythematousraisedpatcheswithadherentkeratoticscalingandfollicularplugginglupus

OralornasalulcersOralornasopharyngealulceration,usuallypainless

JointdiseaseNonerosivesynovitisinvolvingtwoormoreperipheraljoints,characterizedbytenderness,swelling,oreffusion

SerositisPleuritis(pleuriticpainorruborevidenceofpleuraleffusion),pericarditis

RenaldisorderPersistentproteinuria>0.5g/24hours,orredcellcasts

NeurologicdisorderSeizures,psychosis,myelitis,orneuropathy,intheabsenceofoffendingdrugsorotherknowncauses

64:2677,2012. 109cells/L(4000cells/mm3)totalontwoormoreoccasions,or LeukopeniaorLeukopenia—<4.0× 109cells/L(1500cells/mm3)ontwoormoreoccasions Rheum *Thisclassificationwasinitiallyproposedin1997bytheAmericanCollegeofRheumatologyforthepurposeofidentifyingpatientsinclinicalstudies.Ithasbeenupdatedin2012bytheSystemicLupusInternationalCollaboratingClinics.ApatientisclassifiedashavingSLEiffouroftheclinicalandimmunologiccriteriaarepresentatanytime(notnecessarilyconcurrently),includingatleastoneclinicalandoneimmunologiccriterion.Somedetailshavebeenomittedfromthetable.ModifiedfromPetriM,OrbaiAM,AlarcónGS,etal:DerivationandvalidationoftheSystemicLupusInternationalCollaboratingClinicsclassificationcriteriaforsystemiclupuserythematosus.Arthritis lymphopeniaLymphopenia—<1.5×

“Generic”anti-nuclearantibodies(ANAs),whichmayreactagainstmanynuclearantigens,arepositiveinalargefractionofpatientswithSLEbutalsoarepositiveinotherautoimmunediseases.% positive http://ebooksmedicine.net referstotheapproximate%ofpatientswhotestpositiveforeachantibody.TablecompiledwiththeassistanceofDr.AntonyRosen,JohnsHopkinsUniversity,andDr.AndrewGross,UniversityofCaliforniaSanFrancisco.

management typical of of in major immune and SLE, with complex–mediated significance, the disease. example, glomerulonephritis are these pathogenic for patients as, so autoantibodies of this found autoimmune tend ( which be of also in to Autoantibodies other diseases, are specific types with autoantibodies many of associated

5.11 Table

be four proteins to antibodies histones, antibodies to grouped DNA, antibodies categories: to RNA, ANAs nucleolar (4) (1) to antibodies can to (3) and into bound (2) nonhistone antigens. variety used called RNA, most nuclear to (collectively The can ANAs including that generic which detecting for bind DNA, widely immunofluorescence, indirect is antigens, a proteins and of method ANAs). identify antibodies the pattern in the present antibody The suggests patient’s of type nuclear fluorescence of serum. basic ( recognized are patterns Several

Fig. presence to double-stranded diffuse homogeneous occasionally, of 5.22 chromatin, antibodies usually and, or the histones, pattern DNA. staining reflects

double-stranded sometimes proteins. often of and pattern staining rim to envelope nuclear to indicative peripheral or is DNA antibodies most

indicative centromeric pattern antibodies of is for specific centromeres. patients is sclerosis. This often systemic with in observed pattern

to uniform refers or of speckled the pattern speckles. presence variable-sized therefore is specific. of the observed of patterns fluorescence most one commonly This the and least antigens. constituents to reflects and SS-B antibodies ribonucleoprotein, non-DNA It such of presence Sm nuclear reactive antigen, as and SS-A the

to a fluorescence presence of discrete RNA. •A nucleus spots represents pattern antibodies and to the refers nucleolar few within of the is with often patients This in most reported systemic pattern sclerosis.

are combinations are for the autoantibodies not type many frequent. The because of be antibody, absolutely patterns may specific present, fluorescence and patterns of are replace antigens. to antibodies assays other for Attempts quantitative microscopic assays with nuclear and specific ongoing against to virtually by more and (Sm) be DNA quantitative are the antibodies antigen” of Indeed, diagnostic SLE. so-called and “Smith double-stranded assays detected can value, remains and diagnostic in use. has pattern test staining the the Nevertheless,

ANAs, have lupus addition host a In to autoantibodies. of patients other such directed platelets, are cells, Some lymphocytes. red against cells, as blood and present Anti-phospholipid to of are 30% patients. in 40% antibodies lupus actually complex They are are revealed that plasma epitopes of directed various phospholipids. proteins with are the proteins when in against result used for against therefore phospholipid– syphilis. bind also syphilis β2-glycoprotein a have Antibodies test complex may the patients antigen, serology, false-positive lupus in cardiolipin to and time, partial to phospholipids. in vitro that may thromboplastin an prolong they bind the antibodies phospholipids, test clotting requires these Because these antibodies anti-coagulant. as Therefore, to sometimes lupus referred are hypercoagulable related as patients with antibodies state), Despite have excessive delays in the (Chapter antiphospholipid clotting observed clotting vitro, complications 4). such (a thrombosis to

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 5.22 Stainingpatternsofanti-nuclearantibodies.(A)HomogeneousordiffusestainingofnucleiistypicalofantibodiesreactivewithdsDNA,nucleosomes,andhistones,andiscommoninSLE.(B)Aspeckledpatternisseenwithantibodiesagainstvariousnuclearantigens,includingSmandRNPs.(C)Thepatternofstainingofanti-centromereantibodiesisseeninsomecasesofsystemicsclerosis,Sjögrensyndrome,andotherdiseases.(D)Anucleolarpatternistypicalofantibodiesagainstnucleolarproteins. Antinuclear J, cells. AS, HEp-2 Høier-Madsen Wiik using al: a contemporary (From M, Forslid et antibodies: nomenclature J

2010.) Autoimm35:276,

defect self-tolerance. mechanisms that SLE a The is of the in fundamental failure maintain failure factors self-tolerance remains causes most play as true a of and is Although environmental what diseases, autoimmune this unknown, both genetic role. of

a of support SLE. lines to genetic Many predisposition evidence

association. Familial increased relatives of development and have Family members first-degree have risk an the unaffected 20% for to of autoantibodies. up SLE, a There dizygotic concordance (1%–3%). in rate (25%) monozygotic in higher of twins twins is than

association. HLA persons the for present, is odds (relative or HLA-DR2 2 3, both about if are risk) risk The ratio HLA-DR3 and to is with haplotypes 5.

Other • genes. classical of with 10% of deficiencies C2, about are seen proteins, C4, complement C1q, especially in SLE. or Genetic patients pathway and B-cell apoptotic The complement complexes cells, in may deficiencies of and result of defective immune failure tolerance. clearance been inhibitory of may has contribute some FcγRIIb, inadequate A control this activation. patients; described in in to receptor, B-cell the Fc polymorphism association the genes by of have implicated but contribution their to disease development studies, been the unclear. genome-wide Additional remains

that are environmental the There also in factors SLE. many pathogenesis are involved indications of

to • in the many light Exposure disease exacerbates individuals. UV enhancing may http://ebooksmedicine.net induce by recognition it by TLRs. also immunogenic, apoptosis and perhaps may DNA make irradiation UV alter and its that the immune for cytokine light may by to modulate example, UV IL-1, produce addition, response, keratinocytes stimulating a inflammation. promotes In

to partly partly attributable bias and of of hormone to hormones gender genes sex on of the independent related is actions effects. SLE X The chromosome,

and can an procainamide, induce SLE-like disorder. as such hydralazine, D-penicillamine Drugs

activation models studies immunologic result aberrations that revealed lymphocytes. in animal and have patients several the uncontrolled collectively and self-reactive Recent persistent in may of

B cells or the tolerance mechanisms. in self-reactive B Failure of in marrow elimination results of defective from self-tolerance in bone defects cells peripheral

T of contribute to escape and helper antigens high-affinity specific autoantibodies. production tolerance also nucleosomal CD4+ for pathogenic cells the increased centers, autoantibodies produced cells in helper follicular T T of of germinal been blood numbers antibodies in The of SLE have characteristics in patients. the show cell–dependent and detected SLE

interferons. I Type that Blood show plasmacytoid is by exposure type to a that produced (IFNα), interferon indicates DCs. signature striking molecular mainly interferon-α cells I a Some amounts cells of IFN-α. such have from SLE abnormally shown large patients produce that studies

TLR signals. activate models Studies the DNA for have self specific the in B TLR7, animal and shown notably nuclear RNA-recognizing and RNA, signals TLRs that recognize that produce TLR9 antigens. cells DNA-recognizing that

cytokines survival which B-cell promotes unregulated may the a TNF family Other of that include B cells. BAFF, role activation in member play SLE. of a production animal BAFF patients blocks been increased therapy models, of reported, and for an BAFF some led that In and has success to has this antibody as modest

It documented clear and in abnormalities SLE—both is and complex. varied postulated—are this the discussion from that immunologic from ( hypothetical be attempt synthesize pathogenesis animal a SLE of results into an made Nevertheless, human models model of and studies to can the

Fig. 5.23 ). irradiation cells. insults apoptosis the and of environmental UV lead other to antigens. these the cells of of nuclei of nuclear results large a burden Inadequate clearance in B abnormalities tolerance, self-reactive lymphocytes responsible lymphocytes functional. and remain which lymphocytes and T of are in Underlying survive for defective because and are self produced the antigens. antibodies antigens, are nuclear stimulated These lymphocytes against by and to antigens may and antibodies internalized. cells of on B cells, dendritic and Complexes the Fc be bind receptors and The auto-antibodies. nucleic produce to TLRs acid cells components engage B more stimulate stimuli activate dendritic TLR to cells also

SUSCEPTIBILITY EXTERNAL GENES UV (e.g., radiation) TRIGGERS

clearance of Defective apoptotic bodies

nuclear antigens of B specific antigens and nuclear cells self T for burden Increased

Fig. Toll-likereceptors. 5.23 Modelforthepathogenesisofsystemiclupuserythematosus.Inthishypotheticalmodel,susceptibilitygenesinterferewiththemaintenanceofself-tolerance,andexternaltriggersleadtopersistenceofnuclearantigens.Theresultisanantibodyresponseagainstselfnuclearantigens,whichisamplifiedbytheactionofnucleicacidsondendriticcells(DCs)andBcells,andtheproductionoftypeIinterferons.TLRs,

which interferons produce other the response enhance and and more further apoptosis. cause cytokines, immune net autoantibodies. high-affinity result immune The the a antigen resulting release is cycle and of in activation production of

of of autoantibodies SLE. Different are cause the lesions of the most

the of caused immune complexes Most (type by III lesions are • hypersensitivity). systemic detected the DNA-anti-DNA glomeruli blood be vessels. can in small complexes and complement immune serum to granular immunoglobulins support deposits proteins) complex glomeruli Low and of nature and complement further levels of the in of disease. (secondary complement of consumption the the cell in tissue also these seen of is frequently established. cells the not but are role in damage infiltrates the T kidneys,

to of different the clinical hypersensitivity). and specificities II pathology manifestations (type SLE contribute of Autoantibodies their cytopenias. cells, phagocytosis, these Autoantibodies white resulting platelets in and cells, and for blood cells blood promote specific opsonize red which can penetrate is formation, immune There ANAs, that intact in evidence involved no cells. complex are can the are cell them. If nuclei exposed, ANAs bind however, to chromatin react “LE tissues, of or bodies. nuclei In with lose bodies” cells their and hematoxylin pattern, ANAs, become producing damaged so-called homogeneous, which agitated Related are seen LE to vitro. in are phenomenon when is readily cells, blood this injured is phagocyte that cell LE (neutrophil nucleus cell. or an of a has the denatured macrophage) An engulfed vitro test used the for in a as The SLE. was demonstration past cells in LE of detection this of now techniques ANAs, test With new for only historic interest. however, of is pericardial are in or Sometimes, patients. LE cells pleural found effusions in

antibody syndrome. Anti-phospholipid or recurrent develop venous and antibodies cerebral thromboses, antiphospholipid which miscarriages ischemia. associated with focal be Patients with may arterial ocular and may spontaneous lupus, features, to This with constellation antiphospholipid clinical of is association antibody in the referred as secondary syndrome. The of defined, against been responsible for thrombosis and proposed all clotting mechanisms are (Chapter and thrombosis endothelial platelets, cells as factors, 4). antibodies being not have these SLE. syndrome and develop the patients without autoantibodies Some clinical associated (Chapter antibody have the primary to anti-phospholipid 4). They syndrome are said

of been various manifestations attributed to the and The cross react SLE with for or that receptors barrier antibodies neurotransmitters. neurons blood-brain have neuropsychiatric SLE. this with are the not cases, also CNS cognitive other and established such cytokines, factors, abnormalities is and mechanisms as However, immune other in dysfunction underlie that may involving associated all

MORPHOLOGYThemorphologicchangesinSLEareextremelyvariable.Thefrequencyofindividualorganinvolvementisshownin

.Themostcharacteristiclesionsresultfromimmunecomplexdepositioninbloodvessels,kidneys,connectivetissue,andskin. Table5.12

Vessels. Blood Anacutenecrotizingvasculitisinvolvingcapillaries,smallarteries,andarteriolesmaybepresentinanytissue.Thearteritisleadstofibrinoidnecrosisofthevesselwalls.Inchronicstages,vesselsundergofibrousthickeningwithluminalnarrowing.

Kidney. Upto50%ofSLEpatientshaveclinicallysignificantrenalinvolvement,andthekidneyvirtuallyalwaysshowsevidenceofabnormalityifexaminedbyelectronmicroscopyandimmunofluorescence.Renalinvolvementtakesanumberofforms,all

Erythematosus 5.12 Table of and Pathologic Clinical Lupus Manifestations Systemic

Arthritis,arthralgia,ormyalgia80–90 *Percentagesareapproximateandmayvarywithage,ethnicity,andotherfactors.TablecompiledwiththeassistanceofDr.MeenakshiJolly,RushMedicalCenter,Chicago.

ofwhichareassociatedwiththedepositionofimmunecomplexeswithintheglomeruli.Accordingtothecurrentlyacceptedclassification,sixpatternsofglomerulardiseasearerecognized.Itshouldbenotedthatthereisoverlapwithintheseclassesandthatlesionsmayevolvefromoneclasstoanotherovertime.Thus,theexactpercentageofpatientswitheachofthesixclassesoflesionsisdifficulttodetermine.SufficeittosaythatclassIistheleastcommonandclassIVisthemostcommonpattern.

nephritis mesangial lupus Minimal (classI)isveryuncommon,andischaracterizedbyimmunecomplexdepositioninthemesangium,identifiedbyimmunofluorescenceandbyelectronmicroscopy,butwithoutstructuralchangesbylightmicroscopy.

lupus Mesangial proliferative nephritis (classII)ischaracterizedbymesangialcellproliferation,oftenaccompaniedbyaccumulationofmesangialmatrix,andgranularmesangialdepositsofimmunoglobulinandcomplementwithoutinvolvementofglomerularcapillaries.

nephritis Focal (classIII)isdefinedbyinvolvementoffewerthan50%ofallglomeruli.Thelesionsmaybesegmental(affectingonlyaportionoftheglomerulus)orglobal(involvingtheentireglomerulus).Affectedglomerulimayexhibitswellingandproliferationofendothelialandmesangialcellsassociatedwithleukocyteaccumulation,capillarynecrosis,andhyalinethrombi.Often,therealsoisextracapillaryproliferationassociatedwithfocalnecrosisandcrescentformation( lupus

).Theclinicalpresentationrangesfrommildhematuriaandproteinuriatoacuterenalinsufficiency.Redbloodcellcastsintheurinearecommonwhenthediseaseisactive.Somepatientsprogresstodiffuseglomerulonephritis.Theactive(orproliferative)inflammatorylesionscanhealcompletelyorleadtochronicglobalorsegmentalglomerularscarring. Fig.5.24A

nephritis lupus (classIV)isthemostcommonandsevereformoflupusnephritis.ThelesionsareidenticaltothoseinclassIII,butdifferinextent;indiffuselupus Diffuse http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Lupusnephritis.(A)Focalproliferativeglomerulonephritis,withtwofocalnecrotizinglesionsatthe11o’clockand2o’clockpositions(H&Estain).Extracapillaryproliferationisnotprominentinthiscase.(B)Diffuseproliferativeglomerulonephritis.Notethemarkedincreaseincellularitythroughouttheglomerulus(H&Estain).(C)Lupusnephritisshowingaglomeruluswithseveral“wire-loop”lesionsrepresentingextensivesubendothelialdepositsofimmunecomplexes(periodicacid-Schiffstain). 5.24 onbasementmembrane(arrow)correspondto“wireloops”seenbylightmicroscopy.(E)DepositionofIgGantibodyinagranularpattern,detectedbyimmunofluorescence. (D)ElectronmicrographofarenalglomerularcapillaryloopfromapatientwithSLEnephritis.Subendothelialdensedeposits(arrowheads) (AtoC,Courtesy Pathology, Department Women’s and Rennke, Boston, of Dr. of Brigham Helmut Hospital, Massachusetts. of Edwin Department School, Dallas,Texas. Southwestern of University Pathology, of Medical D,Courtesy Eigenbrodt, Texas, Dr. of Francisco, University Department of Pathology, of San E,Courtesy California.) Olson, Dr. California, Jean http://ebooksmedicine.net nephritis,halformoreoftheglomeruliareaffected.Involvedglomerulishowproliferationofendothelial,mesangial,andepithelialcells(see

),withthelatterproducingcellularcrescentsthatfillBowman’sspace.Subendothelialimmunecomplexdepositsmaycreateacircumferentialthickeningofthecapillarywall,forming“wire-loop”structuresonlightmicroscopy(see Fig.5.24B

).Immunecomplexescanbereadilydetectedbyelectronmicroscopy(see Fig.5.24C

Fig.5.24D

).Lesionsmayprogresstoscarringofglomeruli.Patientswithdiffuseglomerulonephritisareusuallysymptomatic,showinghematuriaaswellasproteinuria.Hypertensionandmildtosevererenalinsufficiencyalsoarecommon. Fig.5.24E

nephritis Membranous (classV)ischaracterizedbydiffusethickeningofthecapillarywallsduetodepositionofsubepithelialimmunecomplexes,similartoidiopathicmembranousnephropathy,describedinChapter14.Theimmunecomplexesareusuallyaccompaniedbyincreasedproductionofbasementmembrane-likematerial,resultingin“holes”and“spikes”onsilverstain.Thislesionisusuallyaccompaniedbysevereproteinuriaornephroticsyndrome,andmayoccurconcurrentlywithfocalordiffuselupusnephritis. lupus

(classVI)ischaracterizedbysclerosisofmorethan90%oftheglomeruli,andrepresentsend-stagerenaldisease. sclerosing lupus nephritis Advanced

arefrequentlypresent.Rarely,tubulointerstitiallesionsmaybethedominantabnormality.Discreteimmunecomplexessimilartothoseinglomeruliarepresentinthetubularorperitubularcapillarybasementmembranesinmanylupusnephritispatients.Sometimes,therearewell-organizedB-cellfolliclesintheinterstitium,associatedwithplasmacellsthatmaybesourcesofautoantibodies. tubules and Changesintheinterstitium

Skin. Characteristicerythemaaffectsthefacealongthebridgeofthenoseandcheeks(thebutterfly rash)inapproximately50%ofpatients,butasimilarrashalsomaybeseenontheextremitiesandtrunk.Urticaria,bullae,maculopapularlesions,andulcerationsalsooccur.Exposuretosunlightincitesoraccentuatestheerythema.Histologicallytheinvolvedareasshowvacuolardegenerationofthebasallayeroftheepidermis(

Fig.5.25A ).Inthedermis,thereisvariableedemaandperivascularinflammation.Vasculitiswithfibrinoidnecrosismaybeprominent.Immunofluorescencemicroscopyshowsdepositsofimmunoglobulinandcomplementalongthedermoepidermaljunction(

Fig.5.25B );thesealsomaybepresentinuninvolvedskin.ThisfindingisnotdiagnosticofSLEandissometimesseeninsclerodermaanddermatomyositis.

Joints. Jointinvolvementistypicallyanonerosivesynovitiswithlittledeformity,whichcontrastswithrheumatoidarthritis.

Nervous Central System. AlthoughitwassuggestedinthepastthattheneuropsychiatricmanifestationsofSLEmaybeduetoacutevasculitis,inhistologicstudiesofthenervoussysteminsuchpatients,significantvasculitisisrarelypresent.Instead,noninflammatoryocclusionofsmallvesselsbyintimalproliferationissometimesnoted,whichmaybeduetoendothelialdamagecausedbyautoantibodiesorimmunecomplexes.

Serosal Other and Pericarditis Cavity Involvement.

Inflammationoftheserosalliningmembranesmaybeacute,subacute,orchronic.Duringtheacutephase,themesothelialsurfacesaresometimescoveredwithfibrinousexudate.Latertheybecomethickened,opaque,andcoatedwithshaggyfibrous

Fig. Systemiclupuserythematosusinvolvingtheskin.(A)AnH&E-stainedsectionshowsliquefactivedegenerationofthebasallayeroftheepidermisandedemaatthedermoepidermaljunction.(B)AnimmunofluorescencemicrographstainedforIgGrevealsdepositsofIgalongthedermoepidermaljunction. 5.25 Bhawan, (A,Courtesy School Boston of of Medicine, Boston, Dr. Massachusetts. University Jag Sontheimer, University Dr. School, of Dermatology, of Southwestern Texas B,Courtesy of Dallas, Richard Texas.) Department Medical tissuethatmayleadtopartialortotalobliterationoftheserosalcavity.Pleuralandpericardialeffusionsmaybepresent.

(so-called“Libman-Sacks”) involvementmaymanifestasdamagetoanylayeroftheheart.Symptomaticorasymptomaticpericardialinvolvementispresentinupto50%ofpatients.Myocarditisislesscommonandmaycauserestingtachycardiaandelectrocardiographicabnormalities.Valvular endocarditis wasmorecommonpriortothewidespreaduseofsteroids.Thissterileendocarditistakestheformofsingleormultiple1-to3-mmverrucousdeposits,whichmayformoneithersurfaceofanyheartvalve,distinctivelyoneithersurfaceoftheleaflets( system Cardiovascular

).Bycomparison,thevegetationsininfectiveendocarditisarelarger,whilethoseinrheumaticheartdisease(Chapter11)aresmallerandconfinedtothelinesofclosureofthevalveleaflets. Fig.5.26

Anincreasingnumberofpatientsareaffectedbycoronary manifestingasanginaormyocardialinfarction.Thiscomplicationmaybeseeninyoungpatientswithlongstandingdisease,andisespeciallyprevalentinthosewhohavebeentreatedwithcorticosteroids.Thepathogenesisofacceleratedcoronaryatherosclerosisisunclearbutisprobablymulti-factorial.Riskfactorsforatherosclerosis,includinghypertension,obesity,andhyperlipidemia,aremorecommonlypresentinSLEpatientsthaninthepopulationatlarge.Inaddition,immunecomplexesandanti-phospholipidantibodiesmaycauseendothelialdamageandpromoteatherosclerosis. artery disease

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Libman-Sacksendocarditisofthemitralvalveinlupuserythematosus.Thevegetationsattachedtothemarginofthethickenedvalveleafletareindicatedbyarrows. 5.26 Hospital, Schoen, Department of (Courtesy Women’s Fred Pathology, and of Massachusetts.) Brigham Boston, Dr.

Spleen. lesions. Splenomegaly,capsularthickening,andfollicularhyperplasiaarecommonfeatures.Centralpenicilliaryarteriesmayshowconcentricintimalandsmoothmusclecellhyperplasia,producingso-calledonion-skin

Lungs. fibrosisandsecondarypulmonaryhypertension. effusions,somecasesarecomplicatedbychronicinterstitial Inadditiontopleuritisandaccompanyingpleural

Tissues. Organs Other and LE,orhematoxylin,bodiesinthebonemarroworotherorgansarestronglyindicativeofSLE.LymphnodesmaybeenlargedduetohyperplasiaofBcellfolliclesorevendemonstratenecrotizinglymphadenitisduetovasculitis.

diagnosis (see disease, multisystem clinical, on its constellation and SLE and serologic, is of findings relies highly a morphologic variable a

Table ). 5.10 may or acute insidious be onset. It in its the patient woman pleuritic Often, joints; following some one is the without features: rash pain more a of or butterfly all in the on and fever; photosensitivity. chest or face; deformity a pain; young with however, origin, puzzling, rheumatic or as findings, and is as taking disease forms such rheumatoid In of urinary patients, or unknown fever. many abnormal joint fever arthritis the subtle masquerading presentation specific of immunofluorescence these detected virtually but are in patients, assays, are not found 100% Generic ANAs, by for SLE. and produce Renal findings, cell 14). casts, blood proteinuria, red a hematuria, nephrotic of including involvement syndrome may variety (Chapter dominant are and some Anemia thrombocytopenia in or may presenting problems. be manifestations clinical patients disease manifestations coronary psychosis convulsions, may artery others, be neuropsychiatric In prominent. or including or SLE presumably are immune with of immunosuppressive also common, treatment well dysfunction as as underlies Infections drugs. because the that

The and is variable SLE unpredictable. course of death weeks to acute result Rare in within months. cases therapy, More years decades. follows appropriate relapsing course remitting and period often, a SLE a with or of over results hypocomplementemia. complexes often leading to flares, formation in During complement of acute immune increased activation, drugs. are flares immunosuppressive or other usually Disease corticosteroids with treated the for and course as relatively changes some mild indolent runs manifestations, with an without patients hematuria. skin in such years Even mild therapy, disease overall The 80%, 90% respectively. and 10-year survivals 5-year and approximately are renal causes intercurrent failure common death most The infections. and are of important becoming is disease artery of death. an cause Coronary also the treated immunosuppressive and usual such incur steroids with therapy. drugs risks Patients associated with

with earlier, disease is of involvement As SLE. skin along in common fairly mentioned multisystem or syndromes The involvement following is two sections the which describe exclusive cutaneous in feature. prominent most the

in is lupus SLE, erythematosus which a Chronic mimic are systemic discoid rare. the manifestations skin manifestations disease may but erythematous It an border. on skin is erythema, of and of atrophy by degrees elevated face follicular edema, characterized often plaques, and surrounded varying skin scaliness, the showing by presence plugging, scalp, most the patients, It 5% many SLE usually in years. 10% to of after progresses to with skin. patients SLE have some the in may Conversely, discoid prominent lesions DNA but positive patients double-stranded to present. of antibodies a 35% generic Approximately rarely ANAs, have are test for junction deposition and skin that of show specimens to in at biopsy of immunoglobulin Immunofluorescence dermoepidermal SLE. the studies similar C3

subacute and only to localized cutaneous erythematosus group The term a lupus between intermediate skin. refers erythematosus SLE to lupus rash and widespread superficial. this to skin in be disease tends The those systemic mild to Most SLE. similar patients have in symptoms the is antibodies and genotype. There with association to strong with a HLA-DR3 SS-A antigen the

variety of D-penicillamine. An patients in and may procainamide, including isoniazid, receiving SLE-like develop drugs, syndrome a hydralazine, arthritis Surprisingly, which anti-TNF other can and rheumatoid lupus. therapy, autoimmune diseases, drug-induced cause effective also is in associated these with for of Many antibodies ANAs, specific of development are the especially his-tones. drugs disease withdrawal The of offending the remits drug. after

http://ebooksmedicine.net

SLEisasystemicautoimmunediseasecausedbyautoantibodiesproducedagainstnumerousselfantigensandtheformationofimmunecomplexes.

Themajorautoantibodies,andtheonesresponsiblefortheformationofcirculatingimmunecomplexes,aredirectedagainstnuclearantigens.Otherautoantibodiesreactwithredbloodcells,platelets,andvariousphospholipid-proteinscomplexes.

Diseasemanifestationsincludenephritis,skinlesions,andarthritis(causedbythedepositionofimmunecomplexes),hematologicabnormalities(causedbyantibodiesagainstredcells,whitecellsandplatelets)andneurologicabnormalities(causedbyobscuremechanisms).

Theunderlyingcauseofthebreakdowninself-toleranceinSLEisunknown;non-exclusivepossiblitiesincludeexcessivegenerationorpersistenceofnuclearantigens,inindividualswithinheritedsusceptibilitygenes,andenvironmentaltriggers(e.g.,UVirradiation,whichresultsincellularapoptosisandreleaseofnuclearantigens).

blood may affects as the such vessels, tissues Rheumatoid heart. extraarticular an lungs, also joints the and autoimmune involve disease primarily is that skin, arthritis but of 21. joints, manifestations principal is the it are the disease discussed Because in in Chapter the

mediated disease mouth by from resulting destruction and (keratoconjunctivitis syndrome Sjögren immunologically is sicca) and eyes a characterized glands. (xerostomia) the of dry lacrimal dry chronic salivary as disorder form). an known (primary with also more autoimmune the as association occurs often It or isolated syndrome, form), disease sicca another (secondary in tissue SLE, disease. have associated disease, mixed patients polymyositis, scleroderma, thyroid vasculitis, the or while other Rheumatoid is disorder, common most arthritis connective autoimmune

lymphocytic cells. plasma and cells, show cells The B mainly consisting helper dense infiltration CD4+ activated and glands including of lacrimal some characteristically salivary T studies autoantibodies. frequently reveal Serologic against ribonucleoprotein and SS-A SS-B (La) two antigens, (Ro) Antibodies (see

can many in as detected ), patients Table sensitive as by techniques. be 5.11 of 90% onset, cutaneous disease such to extraglandular nephritis. early antibodies High duration, of disease are with titers and as SS-A longer and manifestations, associated vasculitis present a also autoantibodies and Sjögren are of diagnostic smaller percentage patients These with of are SLE in hence syndrome. not (an have patients have with and rheumatoid factor antibody In about reactive ANAs. 50% self of 75% patients 80% to of IgG), addition,

cells. activation albeit of remains of The and pathogenesis pathology but well B with alleles, weak, T obscure, association, and to HLA the as an all autoreactive Sjögren as serology, cells syndrome point infection local trigger The be a may of the glands, initiating of death and salivary viral self which tissue causes cell release antigens. eventually, reactions damage these In T individuals, escape in and that cells CD4+ fibrosis. cells for immune to antigens participate tolerance self may and and, genetically B specific susceptible tissue lead cytokines the the of role remain nature lymphocytes, cell However, of recognized particular the autoantigens subsets, by these and mysterious. T or

tion.Eventuallythelymphocyticinfiltratebecomesextensive(Fig. MORPHOLOGYLacrimalandsalivaryglandsarethemajortargetsofthedisease,butotherexocrineglands,includingthoseliningtherespiratoryandgastrointestinaltractsandthevagina,alsomaybeinvolved.Theearliesthistologicfindinginboththemajorandtheminorsalivaryglandsisperiductalandperivascularlymphocyticinfiltra

),andinthelargersalivaryglands,lymphoidfollicleswithgerminalcentersmaybeseen.Theepithelialcellsliningtheductsmaybecomehyperplasticandobstructtheducts.Laterthereisatrophyoftheacini,fibrosis,andhyalinization;stilllaterinthecourse,theatrophicparenchymamaybereplacedwithfat.Insomecases,thelymphoidinfiltratemaybesointenseastogivetheappearanceofalymphoma.Indeed,thesepatientsareathighriskfordevelopmentofB-celllymphomasofthesalivaryglandandotherextranodalsites(Chapter12).Thehistologicfindingsarenotspecificordiagnosticandmaybemimickedbychronicsialdenitiscausedbyductalobstructionduetocalculi. 5.27

Thelackoftearsleadstodryingofthecornealepithelium,whichbecomesinflamed,eroded,andulcerated;theoralmucosamayatrophy,withinflammatoryfissuringandulceration;anddrynessandcrustingofthenosemayleadtoulcerationsandevenperforationofthenasalseptum.

in occurs 50 syndrome age. women between Sjögren years commonly of 60 and most from destruction be exocrine expected, glands. inflammatory result the of As might symptoms secretions blurred and itching, that conjunctival Keratoconjunctivitis accumulate the thick produces burning, sac. and in vision, foods, dryness difficulty in in decrease buccal solid of taste, Xerostomia and and swallowing the cracks fissures mouth, results mucosa. in in the a recurrent half other in epistaxis, patients; bronchitis, and pneumonitis gland dryness nasal enlargement the are symptoms. mucosa, Parotid the of present is seen one pulmonary include Manifestations patients of disease third in and extraglandular of synovitis, and peripheral are neuropathy. fibrosis, SLE, syndrome. are glomerular to contrast Sjögren lesions in rare In tubulointerstitial however, tubular uricosuria, function, often Defects (Chapter tubular associated with including renal seen are 14). of phosphaturia, and and nephritis are acidosis, rheumatoid About such 60% disorder, of have autoimmune patients another accompanying as arthritis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Sjögrensyndrome.(A)Enlargementofthesalivarygland.(B)Intenselymphocyticandplasmacellinfiltrationwithductalepithelialhyperplasiainasalivarygland. 5.27 Medical Southwestern Richard of Dr. Dallas,Texas. of University Department Sontheimer, Dermatology, School, Texas (A,Courtesy of of of Pathology,University Dr. B,Courtesy Burns,Department Texas of Dennis Southwestern School,Dallas,Texas.) Medical

Sjögrensyndromeisaninflammatorydiseasethatprimarilyaffectsthesalivaryandlacrimalglands,causingdrynessofthemouthandeyes.

ThediseaseisbelievedtobecausedbyanautoimmuneT-cellreactionagainstanunknownselfantigenexpressedintheseglands,orimmunereactionsagainsttheantigensofavirusthatinfectsthetissues.

multiple excessive fibrosis mainly by evidence multiple is autoimmunity, characterized production an the vascular immunologic of disease, obliterative in Systemic autoantibodies. disorder of tissues, sclerosis and ingrained clinical excessive in Although in fibrosis medicine, the name seen multiple because scleroderma the sclerosis preferred is systemic term is is organs. the involvement and eventually and skeletal the appears cases, tract, morbidity the 95% for approximately is manifestation Cutaneous of is it gastrointestinal lungs, in most visceral the is usual muscles—that responsible presenting of mortality. heart, but and kidneys, involvement—of the to also called Disease limited is localized scleroderma. skin

Systemic the is course: basis sclerosis two on classified into its groups of

with and widespread initial sclerosis, systemic visceral rapid progression by involvement early skin characterized involvement, Diffuse

confined relatively involvement, face. often skin fingers sclerosis, and Limited the systemic mild with to viscera late, of Involvement course. the so benign generally occurs the follows a fairly disease calcinosis, presentation and telangiectasia. also dysmotility, called phenomenon, This sclerodactyly, CREST of syndrome frequent because of esophageal its Raynaud is features

autoimmune sclerosis damage, known, vascular the not responses, three ( is The deposition from disease and processes— results interrelated of likely collagen but cause systemic

Fig. 5.28

Autoimmunity. and in the cells as accumulate to cells CD4+ fibroblasts. cytokines activate that It an inflammatory and skin T unidentified release proposed is responding antigen yet that are typically activated in sparse, skin the Although infiltrates cells. include CD4+ affected inflammatory they TH2 by Several extracellular other (e.g., types, collagen macrophages produced IL-13 in including and fibroblasts. TGF-β cytokines, fibronectin) TH2 cell cells synthesis of stimulate matrix and and proteins by produced Other the inflammation. chronic propagate leukocytes cytokines recruit and

prognostic autoantibodies, information. and diagnostic notably ANAs, The presence various of provides stimulate fibrosis, postulated evidence is of in been has this the these It support that idea but not convincing. antibodies

Vascular damage. sclerosis. is of the in course disease present consistently early systemic Microvascular platelet increased activation of and Telltale have noted. and endothelial been signs injury activation inflammatory injury not endothelium. on inflammation, of cause is damage initiating vascular mediators could the by microvascular result be known; the of it the the inflicting released However, with or event cells chronic perivascular aggregation release intimal fibrosis. endothelial and and endothelial trigger factors Repeated (e.g., and PDGF, injury by proliferation endothelial of lead that of platelet followed platelet cycles TGF-β) to microvasculature scarring. widespread Eventually, leads of ischemic the narrowing injury and to vasculature and the pulmonary involved, pulmonary disease. the serious of hypertension frequently The complication resulting is a is

Fibrosis. characteristic the accumulation progressive the alternatively be The of disease including multiple http://ebooksmedicine.net of of may culmination fibrosis the abnormalities,

EXTERNAL STIMULI? SUSCEPTIBILITY EXTERNAL GENETIC STIMULI?

Fig. the 5.28 damage to vasculopathy activated cytokines arterial of Ischemia, by Tand IL-13, of cytokines and (e.g., caused fibroblasts hypertension Synthesis parenchymal pro-fibrotic and Proliferative extracellular involving fibrogenic fibrosis infiltrating ischemic by Pulmonary Autoantibodies Amodelforthepathogenesisofsystemicsclerosis.Unknownexternalstimulicausevascularabnormalitiesandimmuneactivationingeneticallysusceptibleindividuals,andbothcontributetotheexcessivefibrosis.Endothelial scarring lesions. obliterative B-cell and of TGF-˜, matrix following produced cytokines, organs these injury actions T Production activation proteins: vascular skin PDGF) B macrophages, leukocytes, repair of hyperresponsiveness amounts to with fibroblasts an that produce from suggested the intrinsic of abnormality patients cultured have causes excessive collagen. cells Studies

MORPHOLOGYInsystemicsclerosis,themostprominentchangesoccurintheskin,alimentarytract,musculoskeletalsystem,andkidney,butlesionsalsoareoftenpresentinthebloodvessels,heart,lungs,andperipheralnerves.

Skin. Mostpatientshavediffusefibrosisoftheskinandassociatedatrophy,whichusuallybeginsinthefingersanddistalregionsoftheupperextremitiesandextendsproximallytoinvolvetheupperarms,shoulders,neck,andface.EdemaandperivascularinfiltratescontainingCD4+Tcellsareseen,togetherwithswellinganddegenerationofcollagenfibers,whichbecomeeosinophilic.Capillariesandsmallarteries(150–500µmindiameter)mayshowthickeningofthebasallamina,endothelialdamage,andpartialocclusion.Withdiseaseprogression,thereisincreasingfibrosisofthedermis,whichbecomestightlyboundtothesubcutaneousstructures.Fibrosisoftenisaccompaniedbythinningoftheepidermis,lossofretepegs,atrophyofthedermalappendages,andhyalinethickeningofthewallsofdermalarteriolesandcapillaries(

Fig.5.29B ).Subcutaneouscalcificationsmaydevelop,especiallyinpatientswithCRESTsyndrome.Inadvancedstagesthefingerstakeonatapered,clawlikeappearanceandhavelimitedjointmobility,andthefacebecomesadrawnmask.Lossofbloodsupplymayleadtocutaneousulcerationsandatrophicchanges(

)orevenautoamputationoftheterminalphalanges. Fig.5.29C

Tract. Alimentary Thealimentarytractisaffectedinapproximately90%ofpatients.Progressiveatrophyandfibrousreplacementofthemuscularismaydevelopatanylevelofthegutbutaremostsevereintheesophagus.Thelowertwothirdsoftheesophagusoftendevelopsarubber-hose–likeinflexibility.

Theassociateddysfunctionoftheloweresophagealsphinctergivesrisetogastroesophagealrefluxanditscomplications,includingBarrettmetaplasia(Chapter15)andstrictures.Themucosaisthinnedandmayulcerate,andthereisexcessivecollagenizationofthelaminapropriaandsubmucosa.Lossofvilliandmicrovilliinthesmallbowelistheanatomicbasisforamalabsorptionsyndromethatsometimesisencountered.

System. Musculoskeletal Inflammationofthesynovium,associatedwithsynoviocytehypertrophy,iscommonintheearlystages;fibrosislaterensues.Thesechangesarereminiscentofrheumatoidarthritis,butjointdestructionisnotcommoninsystemicsclerosis.Inasmallsubsetofpatients(approximately10%),inflammatorymyositisindistinguishablefrompolymyositismaydevelop.

Kidneys. Renalabnormalitiesoccurintwo-thirdsofpatients.Themostprominentarethevascularlesions.Interlobulararteriesshowintimalthickeningasaresultofdepositionofmucinousmaterialcontainingglycoproteinsandacidmucopolysaccharidesandconcentricproliferationofintimalcells.Thesechangesresemblethoseseeninmalignanthypertension,butinsystemicsclerosisthealterationsarerestrictedtovessels150to500µmindiameterandarenotalwaysassociatedwithhypertension.Hypertension,however,doesoccurin30%ofpatients,andin20%ittakesanominouslyrapid,downhillcourse(malignanthypertension).Inhypertensivepatients,vascularalterationsaremorepronouncedandareoftenassociatedwithfibrinoidnecrosisofarteriolesthatcanleadtothrombosisandinfarction.Suchpatientsoftendieofrenalfailure,whichaccountsforabout50%ofdeaths.Therearenospecificglomerularchanges.

Lungs.Thelungsareaffectedinmorethan50%ofcases.Thisinvolvementmaymanifestaspulmonaryhypertensionandinterstitialfibrosis.Pulmonaryvasospasmsecondarytoendothelialdysfunctionisconsideredimportantinthepathogenesisofpulmonaryhypertension.Pulmonaryfibrosis,whenpresent,isindistinguishablefromthatseeninidiopathicpulmonaryfibrosis(Chapter13).

Heart. Pericarditiswitheffusion,myocardialfibrosis,andthickeningofintramyocardialarteriolesoccurinonethirdofpatients.Becauseofthechangesinthelung,rightventricularhypertrophyandfailure(corpulmonale)arefrequent.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 5.29 Systemicsclerosis.(A)Normalskin.(B)Skinbiopsyfromapatientwithsystemicsclerosis.Notetheextensivedepositionofdensecollageninthedermis,thevirtualabsenceofappendages(e.g.,hairfollicles),andfociofinflammation(arrow). (C)Theextensivesubcutaneousfibrosishasvirtuallyimmobilizedthefingers,creatingaclawlikeflexiondeformity.Lossofbloodsupplyhasledtocutaneousulcerations. Medical of Dermatology,University of Southwestern (C,Courtesy Department Dr. School,Dallas,Texas.) of Sontheimer, Texas Richard

peak incidence 50to ratio and of the Systemic 60-year group. in has a sclerosis 3:1 age female-to-male a SLE, sclerosis it cutaneous systemic changes, features (Chapter 21), arthritis rheumatoid the 22), shares Although skin with is polymyositis and by thickening. distinguished (Chapter striking notably by seen caused and and the is all patients other arteries cases. phenomenon, precedes of symptoms the vasoconstriction virtually arterioles 70% Raynaud of episodic of extremities, in in the the deposition collagen hands, joints. with stiffness, of eventually of immobilization Progressive to complete in increasing skin leads the especially loops are early in the and later disappear. Nailfold capillary distorted disease, 50% fibrosis of resultant than more patients. Dysphagia hypomotility present esophageal its in to attributable are and of wall its esophageal lower end. leads to the especially and at destruction dilation, Eventually, atony syndrome the or Abdominal obstruction, of reflect malabsorption intestinal small pain, involvement intestine. cardiac Respiratory fibrosis and or cardiac in dysfunction, either by fibrosis caused may may result difficulties cause arrhythmias failure. pulmonary myocardial the right-sided cause as rarely proteinuria Mild many is patients, but nephrotic in as enough 30% to severe occurs of syndrome. may with the 14), is (Chapter renal in The manifestation disease development the its of malignant failure but absence of subsequent hypertension, progression ominous be slow. most fatal In life downhill with the the the span over complications. of course span most steady many treatment years, better is although improving a disease patients pursues of The women. black more severe to be in disease tends blacks, especially pulmonary the has As become cause have complications death. and of improved, major treatment cardiac the renal complications of

antigens have Virtually of nuclear all with react a variety patients (see ANAs that

Table 5.11 ). Two systemic ANAs associated strongly are with sclerosis. associated One DNA is highly greater is 70) against of vascular directed and (anti-Scl disease. a I and topoisomerase with fibrosis peripheral pulmonary specific likelihood of other, CREST is likelihood anticentromere higher with associated an The syndrome. antibody, a forearms Patients face, and have this with often confined to syndrome subcutaneous fingers, and skin disease, limited calcifications. relatively hypertension, including esophageal the of at or Involvement lesions, cirrhosis, may biliary not occur pulmonary late. and all viscera, occur live patients with diffuse than with In those involvement the systemic from general, longer visceral these sclerosis outset.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Systemicsclerosis(commonlycalledscleroderma)ischaracterizedbyprogressivefibrosisinvolvingtheskin,gastrointestinaltract,andothertissues.

FibrosismaybetheresultofactivationoffibroblastsbycytokinesproducedbyTcells,butwhattriggersTcellresponsesisunknown.

Endothelialinjuryandmicrovasculardiseasearecommonlypresentinthelesionsofsystemicsclerosis,perhapscausingchronicischemia,butthepathogenesisofvascularinjuryisnotknown.

of muscles uncommon, the injury probably disorders skeletal by and myopathies are comprise inflammation immunologically an group that mainly heterogeneous Inflammatory of characterized mediated. on features, disorders— inclusion and morphologic, body polymyositis, Based described. and dermatomyositis, myositis—have immunologic been three clinical, sclerosis. occur may particularly systemic alone immune-mediated diseases, Each with other or 22. These in diseases described Chapter are

SLE, that overlap systemic and of those clinical tissue is a disease with sclerosis, disorder polymyositis. Mixed features connective is serologically of to by high antibodies ribonucleoprotein. characterized disease titers The U1 with the myositis. it and Raynaud mild of fingers, synovitis phenomenon, Typically, presents response to corticosteroids, the short favorable term. and is modest, at in is involvement least Renal a there these diseases, classic may clinical may fact connective SLE Because time it a or distinct evolve into in are systemic disease not shared mixed and sclerosis. over with other features tissue be entity, autoimmune distinct of be may that diseases. not is disease other a mixed there to other from However, connective form is disorders tissue universal, progression autoimmune and pulmonary disease and hypertension, disease. disease, tissue complications of Serious mixed include renal interstitial connective lung

group a belongs blood of vessels of of Polyarteritis the necrotizing show characterized evidence an that immunologic by of basis. walls to strong disorders nodosa inflammation vessel arterioles, type involved—arteries, be veins, capillaries. of may Any or in discussed vasculitides 10. These are Chapter

constellation newly tissue in T and (IgG4-RD) by IgG4 cells with ( characterized fibrosis associated phlebitis infiltrates lymphocytes, cells, of rich fibro-inflammatory IgG4-related recognized particularly plasma disorders a disease antibody-producing is and obliterative

Fig. ). 5.30 IgG4 concentrations. serum disorder is always, with but associated elevated not often, The qua this IgG4-producing are sine of disorder. tissue in numbers cells Increased of a non plasma described virtually tissues, prostate, aorta, meninges, disease lymph pericardium, including biliary salivary system, glands, now IgG4-related breast, organ has in periorbital been thyroid, kidneys, lungs, every skin. tree, nodes, and the the now conditions disorders IgG4-RD are of of viewed Many part single spectrum. as organs long (enlargement of syndrome and fibrosis include Mikulicz These lacrimal salivary and glands),

to pancreatitis, a fibrosis, and and few. thyroiditis, the orbit, Riedel of retroperitoneal name autoimmune inflammatory pseudotumors idiopathic lungs, kidneys, The older most middle-aged affects often and men. disease

of is of is a it not hallmark type in this is production although pathology. and IgG4 contributes to this The if known disease, the condition understood, the not lesions pathogenesis antibody supported clinical B cells rituximab provided cells by clinical B trials such which by The role reagents key of is depletion as in benefit. of anti–B-cell

immune recipient’s the is in to graft it. recognizes major and attacks system of the foreign barrier as A which process rejection, transplantation the to prevent been successful therapies rejection. The key the transplantation has or that of development minimize Transplant rejection inflammatory immunologic immune-mediated it discussed is because reactions that involves underlie here diseases. several the of

antigens Rejection antibodies graft T produced destroy against a lymphocytes and react against which process is and in grafts. the this We how discuss next occurs.

Graft Recognition Alloantigens of

in transplants The alleles. a differences recipient in HLA and result major of that rejection differences are donor antigenic between individuals allografts. Grafts the same species exchanged are called of between twins). Because (except, genes polymorphic, identical some HLA of between individuals always differences there course, are highly are donor Following graft the the antigens allogeneic transplantation, recipient’s by (the cells alloantigens) antigens, pathways. or T from two recognize APCs, cells. up by presented to (like are or and are by graft any cells picked the to APCs, directly T graft presented other antigens host either host recipient The processed antigen), graft antigens T foreign are recognition These direct pathways called indirect and the of alloantigens. of into CTLs, Both TH1 mainly develop cells, activation lead T CD4+ CD8+ of cytokine-producing cells, and the effector to T which cells, which cells. become the rejection We in of allografts. do pathways importance of not know the these relative and may be play acute direct important most greater pathway rejection, a for indirect chronic later. in described pathway rejection, the CTL-mediated The role may

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cm D B C A 1.0

Fig. 5.30 IgG4-relateddisease:representativelesions.(A)Bileductshowingsclerosingcholangitis.(B)Scleroticareaofthebileductwithstoriformfibrosis.(C)Submandibularglandwithinfiltratesoflymphocytesandplasmacellsandwhorlsoffibrosis.(D)SectionofaninvolvedlacrimalglandstainedwithanantibodyagainstIgG4,showinglargenumbersofIgG4-producingplasmacells. Y,Pillai T,Zen Kamisawa (From al:IgG4-related S,et disease. Lancet385:1460, 2015.)

of much microbe. T in the for higher frequency The cells can than specific recognize graft that the frequency foreign of cells any antigens T a is stronger are this than responses immune responses to allografts For reason, to pathogens. can rapidly, and requires Predictably, reactions destroy immunosuppressive strong powerful their grafts control agents. these

Graft of Rejection Mechanisms

and into basis rejection clinical the and acute, chronic, Graft on pathologic classified hyperacute, of features. is based the remarkably and devised classification allografts, test This pathologists kidney of time stood nephrologists well. of rejection by on and was has response. a of Each rejection of particular mediated type kind immune by is In other description the to is kidney organ morphology rejection but of the limited discussion, in allografts, similar transplants. changes the following are of seen

mediated is preformed by on cells. Hyperacute graft antigens • antibodies for rejection endothelial specific may blood specific allogeneic transplantation. MHC antibodies be The for antibodies or IgM prior or pregnancy, by group antigens, molecules through may induced that blood organ be for specific preformed transfusions, were natural exposure antibodies graft the to Immediately after the graft implanted flow is and http://ebooksmedicine.net the bind restored, is on blood antibodies antigens

thrombosis alloantigen-specific blood vessel Blood group and Complement damage, Circulating Alloantigen antibody Endothelial (e.g., activation, inflammation endothelial antigen) cell

Fig. 5.31 Hyperacuterejection.(A)Depositionofantibodyonendotheliumandactivationofcomplementcausesthrombosis. (B)Hyperacuterejectionofakidneyallograftshowingplateletfibrinthrombiandsevereischemicinjuryinaglomerulus.

for endothelium (Fig. ischemic the activate leading to and and and of thrombus graft endothelial necrosis clotting injury, mation, systems, the complement ). 5.31A a blood matched a prospective rejection donor, tested type against are donor because problem, every not called a Hyperacute the antibodies and of cells for potential common for and cross-match. are recipient test is recipients the

MORPHOLOGYInhyperacuterejection,theaffectedkidneyrapidlybecomescyanotic,mottled,andanuric.Virtuallyallarteriolesandarteriesexhibitacutefibrinoidnecrosisoftheirwallsandnarrowingorcompleteocclusionoftheirlumensbythrombi(

).Neutrophilsrapidlyaccumulatewithinarterioles,glomeruli,andperitubularcapillaries.Asthesechangesintensifyandbecomediffuse,theglomerularcapillariesalsoundergothromboticocclusion,andeventuallythekidneycortexundergoesoutrightnecrosis(infarction).Affectedkidneysarenonfunctionalandhavetoberemoved. Fig.5.31B

in mediated the is antibodies Acute graft. by activated • rejection alloantigens that T cells by are and graft and occurs the of or cause weeks days within principal transplantation, It is failure. after early suddenly It also appear after is tapered even immunosuppression terminated. years later, or may months or rejecting acute although of present. types, are antibodies, cells is into patterns divided both role T on rejection the most or in Based two grafts,

inflammation, or graft cells, CD4+ which induce cells and CD8+ cellular rejection, the In CTLs may ( directly damages graft cytokines destroy acute secrete

Fig.

). 5.32A T damage. also against graft react vessels, cells to may leading vascular cells. immunosuppressive and is activation acute reduce designed by T rejection mainly of therapy the Current to blocking alloreactive prevent

MORPHOLOGYAcutecellular(Tcell-mediated)rejectionmayproducetwodifferentpatternsofinjury.

pattern Inthetubulointerstitial (sometimescalledtypeI),thereisextensiveinterstitialinflammationandtubularinflammation(tubulitis)associatedwithfocaltubularinjury(

Tlymphocytes. ).Asmightbeexpected,theinflammatoryinfiltratescontainactivatedCD4+ Fig.5.32B andCD8+

)andsometimesnecrosisofvesselwalls(typeIII).Theaffectedvesselshaveswollenendothelialcells,andatplaceslymphocytesareseenbetweentheendotheliumandthevesselwall,afindingtermedendotheliitis orintimal arteritis.Therecognitionofcellularrejectionisimportantbecause,intheabsenceofaccompanyinghumoralrejection,mostpatientsrespondwelltoimmunosuppressivetherapy. Fig.5.32C

classical humoral) and to activate the bind acute (vascular vascular rejection, or In pathway complement via antibodies antibody-mediated ( endothelium

Fig. ). 5.33A endothelial failure. cause resultant damage and inflammation graft The

MORPHOLOGYAcuteantibody-mediatedrejectionismanifestedmainlybydamagetoglomeruliandsmallbloodvessels.Typically,thereisinflammationofglomeruliandperitubularcapillaries(

)associatedwithdepositionofcomplementproducts,whichisduetoactivationofthecomplementsystembytheantibody-dependentclassicalpathway( Fig.5.33B

).Smallvesselsalsomayshowfocalthrombosis. Fig.5.33C

form loss graft leading damage an that of Chronic rejection • years, progressive months is indolent of graft over to function. or occurs rejection http://ebooksmedicine.net Chronic manifests

macrophages neutrophils and of Recruitment

Fig. rejection by of by T graft CD8+ inflammation a produced An the vasculitis by basement arteriole direct kidney cellular Acute (A) cell–mediated cells the tubules cells attacking endothelium epithelial CD4 caused T and is the by membranes. CTLs manifested and Destruction (endotheliitis) cells. cells graft. kidney (arrow). by cells are Rejection a of (tubulitis). rejection inflammatory cytokines cellular cells inflammatory graft, in in wavy (C) tubules between Collapsed graft of Acute with shown and 5.32 cells. killing interstitium (B) involves T rejection. Acute of by outlined undermining of Drs. (Courtesy Department California, and of University San Kuang-Yu Pathology, Zoltan California.) Laszik Francisco, Jen, of graft gradual blood of vessels narrowing and fibrosis (graft arteriosclerosis). interstitial as cytokines, secrete react to and activities graft lesions, against cells proliferation graft ( the alloantigens of in fibroblasts stimulate the believed which T and both smooth the are In cells that muscle and vascular culprits be

Fig. 5.34A ). also chronic rejection. Alloantibodies contribute to to chronic longer treatments curtail acute becoming leading or of survival to refractory to the rejection rejection than therapies cause failure. have 1-year of prevent is most principal improved, Although is steadily transplants, and graft

often ( rejection vascular dominated occlusion thickening with changes, vascular and is intimal Chronic by

Fig. ). 5.34B of injury basement duplication the secondary show likely ( with endothelial kidney to membrane, chronic grafts glomerulopathy, rejecting Chronically

Fig. capillaritis multilayering peritubular membranes. and capillary ) with of 5.34C peritubular basement lesions to secondary with the of occur parenchyma Interstitial tubular loss atrophy ( vascular renal fibrosis and may

Fig. ). 5.34D sparse. are Interstitial typically cell mononuclear infiltrates

Survival Methods Increasing of Graft

of matching transplant the rejection, better improves graft Because the recipient major the donor HLA in molecules survival. are and targets than other with of kidney transplants is related improves matched. living beneficial matching transplants, survival number and increasing HLA of kinds for for more loci immunosuppression instances, lung, done compatibility, such often is needs for longer transplant of considerations, a islet However, such for and heart, transplantation; are as the liver, no have greater drugs HLA anatomic other recipient as urgently importance. in improved, and matching

organ transplantation, Immunosuppression in all case the is recipient necessity identical of the twins. of a in except At anti-CD3) mycophenolate rapamycin, corticosteroids, mofetil such azathioprine, the are (MMF), and antibodies (e.g., as globulin, FK506, monoclonal anti-thymocyte cyclosporine, used. monoclonal drugs related present, the particular, and suppress immunity gene for IL-2. FK506 cytokine T inhibiting Cyclosporine by of cell–mediated in transcription genes, many problems. immunosuppression has its of Although transplantation made feasible, it organs has own of increased in system susceptibility other opportunistic viral, immune infections. Suppression results the fungal, to and complications. polyoma latent Reactivation (CMV) such virus, viruses, and frequent are as of cytomegalovirus patients Immunosuppressed increased human papillomavirus virus developing carcinomas. such (EBV)–induced are for virus-induced lymphomas squamous cell at also tumors, as (HPV)–induced risk Epstein-Barr and circumvent host to donor-specific the untoward being of induce in effort is much tolerance T cells. To devoted immunosuppression, effects prevent during of phase strategy from receiving donor signals is host from costimulatory cells sensitization. T DCs the to initial One by for accomplished the of the second by T be either the receptor cells, T the This DCs the apoptosis interaction on of which, that molecules anergy. and CD28 administration the on activation, B7 agents cell or can cell T block induces host interrupting signal of graft enriched T alloantigens; infancy. for into injecting Other recipients include donor regulatory are in their specific for cells these approaches cells trials

Fig. 5.33 Acuteantibody-mediated(humoral)rejection.(A)Graftdamagecausedbyantibodydepositioninvessels. inakidneygraft.(C)ImmunoperoxidasestainshowsC4ddepositioninperitubularcapillariesandaglomerulus. (B)Lightmicrographshowinginflammation(capillaritis)inperitubularcapillaries(arrows) Francisco, (Courtesy California.) of California, of University Pathology, Department of Zoltan Laszik, Dr. San

as cell marrow bone caused defects as (HSC) sickle hematopoietic Use by year. anemia, and hematologic (such transplants for aplastic disorders cell number (such of thalassemia, each syndromes is failure malignancies, immunodeficiency stem inherited increasing HSC states) and anemia), in immunodeficiency. patients useful cells treating affected be of genetically forms of “reengineered” hematopoietic Transplantation obtained in may inherited from stem are they harvested HSCs from but peripheral now they hematopoietic the obtained newborn marrow, Historically, or from a from factors, usually bone HSCs. after the blood were from of of marrow the are umbilical by of administration mobilized source cord infants, rich bone growth blood chemotherapy cancer most of nurture in micro-environment up” to allowing in the HSCs, treated transplanted marrow destroy In sometimes, that transplantation immune thus is the HSC to recipient niches conditions HSCs indicated, of irradiated cells) the the is system which the or with the to engraft. (and “open and complicate this immune solid and distinguish form transplants: and deficiency. major Two problems disease graft-versus-host transplantation it of organ from

crippled host are host transplanted in recognize transferred or immunologically occurs recipients, cells cells and competent precursors immunologically and attack alloantigens tissues. GVHD when their into the the the HSC commonly of may rich lymphoid transplantation in cells most solid transplantation seen setting It following liver). the is organs rarely, of occur in but, (e.g., http://ebooksmedicine.net the but allogeneic cells graft, compromised HSCs, host T an receiving reject present cannot On the immunologically in

Fig. Transplant manifestation in membrane. Graft of from atrophy, (glomerulitis), resulting and tubular capillary 5.34 kidney by and transplant. chronically caused and inflammatory characteristic kidney. a Graft antibody-mediated of capillary in duplication loops chronic cells antibody (B) within arteriosclerosis and rejection. glomerulus matrix, the of rejection (A) in allograft. (C) accumulation the glomerulopathy, arteriosclerosis (D) the cardiac rejecting of arterioles Interstitial deposition. mesangial The the arteriosclerosis arteries shows fibrosis Chronic T-cell cytokines a basement blue contrasted this fibrosis, normal with (asterisk) shows the (top area kidney right). the stain, In trichrome prominent right). is showing (bottom artery An shown arteriosclerosis Department and Women’s of Boston, Hospital, Brigham Richard Pathology, Mitchell, Courtesy Dr. (B, of Massachusetts. San University Pathology, of Francisco, D, Laszik, Department California, of C Courtesy and of California.) Zoltan Dr. and forms are donor GVHD. tissue graft host’s two react There the foreign perceive of as it. against and T Acute after causing to results inflammation of ultimately activation epithelial causes days necrosis the three cells, (occurring CD4+ cells. GVHD recipient cell donor and principal in weeks This transplanCD8+ in killing tation) • and GVHD, skin, minimize organs: To transplants to try liver, HSC gut. target jaundice, ation small DNA mucosal between done are using that and recipient are ducts to ulcerHLA-matched diarrhea. and results in sequencing–based gut carefully Destruction rise bile gives the of precise bloody of donor Cutanemethods. ( ous involvement

Fig. which ) 5.35 manifests rash, a as

Fig. dermal Acute (GVHD) cells cell skin. (A) (lymphocytes and macrophages). and death graft-versus-host 5.35 mononuclear of involving infiltrates the disease Patchy epithelial (B) (arrows). cells Focally epithelial dead

and feet the the hands palms generalized. neck, then the ears, of and appears soles first characteristically of and becomes on

• the may syndrome occur may or insidiously. Chronic acute follow GVHD disorders. other autoimmune Patients (discussed manifestations sclerosis of develop skin earlier) resembling and lesions systemic those mimicking

eliminates transplantation cells, before donor mediated T by is the T lymphocytes contained transplanted cells in disease. virtually of donor GVHD the depletion Because be graft the as has a is leukemic proven and patients mixed failures ameliorated, B-cell EBV-related lymphoma well of in but of increase. This approach, the incidence recurrence blessing: GVHD however, tumor as to EBV-infected the GVHD cells. also are the T of of but mediate and cells control multifaceted seems engraftment required B-cell It HSCs, only not for leukemia transplanted suppression clones, that of

are in transplants. of of prolonged often HSC These duration recipients the for from recipient’s to the of the graft system reasons Among adaptive reconstitution donor impairment slow after immune is system destroyed take. or the this (derived many is immune HSC), allow the suppressed to for susceptible During mostly are viruses, be CMV reconstitution, and the with to needed of months may infections, EBV. recipients as such that a many immune variety

RejectionofsolidorgantransplantsisinitiatedmainlybyhostTcellsthatrecognizetheforeignHLAantigensofthegraft,eitherdirectly(onAPCsinthegraft)orindirectly(afteruptakeandpresentationbyhostAPCs).

Typesandmechanismsofrejectionofsolidorgangraftsareasfollows:

rejection: Hyperacute Preformedanti-donorantibodiesbindtograftendotheliumimmediatelyaftertransplantation,leadingtothrombosis,ischemicdamage,andrapidgraftfailure.

Tcellsdestroygraftparenchyma(andvessels)bycytotoxicityandinflammatoryreactions. Acute rejection: cellular

(humoral) antibody-mediated rejection:Antibodiesdamagegraftvasculature. Acute

Dominatedbyarteriosclerosis,thistypeiscausedbyTcellactivationandantibodies.TheTcellsmaysecretecytokinesthatinduceproliferationofvascularsmoothmusclecells,andtheantibodiescauseendothelialinjury.ThevascularlesionsandTcellreactionscauseparenchymalfibrosis. Chronic rejection:

Treatmentofgraftrejectionreliesonimmunosuppressivedrugs,whichinhibitimmuneresponsesagainstthegraft.

Transplantationofhematopoieticstemcells(HSCs)requirescarefulmatchingofdonorandrecipientandisoftencomplicatedbygraft-vs-hostdisease(GVHD)andimmunedeficiency.

deficiencies (or congenital) malnutrition, divided may immunosuppression, primary are side of infections, other immunodeficiencies, can for arise immunodeficiency irradiation, or or (or diseases. disorders, determined, and acquired) Immune into of secondary which which as chemotherapy cancers, and genetically complications be cancer effects

infections. Immunodeficiencies by be infections, newly reactivation clinically latent which are manifested or acquired may increased of The primary system. of immune of development immunodeficiency some valuable the provide accidents molecules nature insights the that critical syndromes of in the into are because regulatory results of disorders, mechanisms the infections autoimmunity. associated immunodeficiencies several with persistence promote loss perhaps that Paradoxically, or are deficiency of autoimmune also in briefly Here to example and more acquired immunodeficiency the most devastating of we description be immunodeficiency. the immunodeficiencies, discuss syndrome secondary important primary a (AIDS), followed of detailed more best-defined by

and humoral cells, by of the B or arms respectively). impair NK and/or cellular are complement) of innate mechanisms diseases Primary lymphocytes, immunodeficiency immunity adaptive immunity or that lymphocytes (phagocytes, (mediated genetic inherited T disorders infections. signs usually age, 2 immunodeficiencies recurrent infancy, being These in detected susceptibility 6 are to months the telltale of between years and genetic ( responsible mutations analyses, known With these are of advances many for in the diseases now

Fig. 5.36). present selected of the T with the examples by of maturation beginning in Here lymphocytes, immunodeficiencies, and activation B we more and immunity. defects followed common of lymphocytes disorders innate

spans T lymphocytes and a mature having development defects of Severe in both and/or combined immunodeficiency B syndromes, distinct in constellation lymphocytes genetically immunity. and impaired of humoral all common (SCID) cell-mediated and thrive. diaper candidiasis), with infants (oral failure thrush Affected rash, present to severe the because Some cells a rash generalized shortly and causing maternal are infants after the placenta GVHD. transferred develop T across fetus, attack birth of Pneumocystis by and infections whole Candida bacteria. to varicella, a extremely cytomegalovirus, a range are jiroveci, host Children recurrent, Pseudomonas, severe pathogens, SCID of including wide with albicans, susceptible within first of life. HSC Without the occurs transplantation, year death The times 20 Native 1 in approximately 30 some but more 100,000, the populations. overall in it of is to prevalence 65,000 in 1 disease frequent is American to

common different the of defects manifestations, Despite underlying quite varied. SCID of clinical the are forms

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. parentheses in blocks are The some principal Shown pathways deficiency in immune the and for disorders. primary indicated immune development these the of 5.36 diseases. Primary lymphocyte selected affected in pathways deficiency of genes diseases. the are severe CD40 ADA, CD40L, CD154); Adenosine (also ligand combined variable known deaminase; as immunodeficiency; common immunodeficiency. CVID, SCID,

a with T-cell the in Often, compartment, the humoral of resides secondary immunity. defect impairment Two next. major forms are described

SCID. X-linked mutations in half cytokines encoding γ gene IL-2, (γc) the these IL-15. of shared for by are of chain by cases receptors SCID IL-9, IL-7, caused and the Approximately the IL-4, the X-linked; the common are important because the for and basis stimulating signaling the the in these immature and underlying defective lymphoid most cytokine generative this is T expansion organs. precursors SCID is cytokines, cell responsible Of B survival of of IL-7

recessive Autosomal SCID. with follow metabolism. inheritance, SCID deaminase approximately in caused cases autosomal these an adenosine recessive of half 40% of Another purine in involved of mutations 50% by enzyme pattern to (ADA), metabolites, which ADA results of to deficiency accumulation are lymphocytes. toxic synthesis inhibit DNA in deoxyadenosine adenosine and triphosphate and purine in metabolic primary for lymphocyte encoding result the expression, II in failure variously forms another of class defects from or recombinase rearrangement antigen-receptor pathway, genes mutations Other SCID MHC autosomal the of recessive of responsible genes.

ADA devoid lobules findings defect. be lymphoid of small SCID, resembling thymus ADA cells. in the two forms deficiency), SCID found. by epithelial most deficiency, undifferentiated remnants the in depend of caused histologic mutation fetal cells whereas common of X-linked thymus Hassall’s corpuscles can contains the is on the In The underlying and (γc SCID and In thymus, T marked areas other cell lymphoid of T in hypoplastic both tissues cell zones. diseases, are cell well, and cases as In some both with and B depletion

of treatment. transplantation is mainstay the Currently, HSC which is X-linked disease in gene has first SCID therapy the successful. been vector using and the cells back from γc expressed transplanted For a therapy, are the viral into patients. taken patients, a in then gene gene is normal HSCs clinical years of their is but The some patients reconstitution several therapy. have shown after small, immune systems for experience to (T-ALL), dangers gene highlighting about first-generation a lymphoblastic developed however, of cell patients therapy. viral approach T this Unfortunately, acute the receiving vector particular of 20% leukemia to virus the an the conferred growth proliferation of oncogene, the integrating introduced gene. oncogene, normal close the leading advantage The because γc to activation the also genome of result into T-cell the by likely the and is possibly of uncontrolled are vectors in. safety with new Current using trials features built involving or ADA a with normal administration therapy with the of treated been have recently, enzyme also gene deficiency Patients of and, more the HSC with transplantation introduction T-cell gene precursors. into ADA

cells B X-linked disease, to as into (gamma differentiate the is absence globulin) in mature resultant cells a (XLA), name of agammaglobulinemia Bruton and, blood. the by failure pre–B or characterized the antibodies implies, of

forms about of primary occurring in of 1 of infants. male the more immunodeficiency, is frequency at one common a It 100,000 (Ig) by B-cell chain light chain followed genes. first, heavy immunoglobulin genes normal are rearranged maturation, During produced. as of signals the act these to quality being stage; to received signals controls, the are components ensure receptor maturation stage, that each the are drive expressed the receptor that proteins antigen from correct At next pre-B-cell of tyrosine gene mutations B-cell initial rearrangement a in the with is kinase transduction. heavy receptor signal stops because the XLA, that associated after maturation chain in pre–B-cell involved In is and is Bruton kinase called This tyrosine (BTK). kinase the cells When receptor the B-cell proceed maturation is BTK along pathway. the nonfunctional, signal pre– to cannot chains transported can free the and although result, containing complete Ig light found to not membrane, a produced, chains be and As are cytoplasm. the cell in chains assembled light molecule and Ig heavy the cannot heavy be the BTK is Because only gene chromosome, is in seen the X males. the on disorder function been in that females, described the possibly have genes cases features other the in pathway. in Sporadic same mutations same with due to

disease an these germinal plasma characterized reduction in B a in absence by profound in lymphoid of and centers cells blood organs. the organs number is the of cells secondary Classically, and and the T-cell and normal. may responses be numbers

6 were depleted. about become are maternal as antibodies of until apparent does the not age, disease The months that transported placenta usually via to bronchitis, as pharyngitis, otitis and and sinusitis, In tract, respiratory most attention recurrent infections chronic cases, the such immune underlying acute defect. call pneumonia, the media, of bacterial antibodies pneumoniae, always, opsonized are causative that are by Almost by normally organisms and Staphylococcus phagocytosis. the Haemophilus cleared Streptococcus or influenzae, aureus, organisms viral caused for also important disease enteroviruses. some with this viruses, to certain infections, Because susceptible by neutralizing especially are infectious antibodies are those individuals blood. via and there from viruses they the to can nervous gastrointestinal the the tract, disseminate infect system These poliovirus immunization poliomyelitis, cause with risk echovirus for with the fatal infections Thus, carries and paralytic encephalitis. can live Giardia normally by an reasons, in individuals infections persistent similar For lamblia, intestinal secreted is that with resisted IgA, protozoan disorder. causes this handled well intracellular Many by protozoal are infections T fungal, the viral, immunity. intact cell–mediated quite and of occur disease. For patients as autoimmune as with arthritis unclear and (such diseases rheumatoid this many in reasons, 35% dermatomyositis) as

(IVIG) agammaglobulinemia The replacement treatment with X-linked of therapy human pooled serum. immunoglobulin intravenous is from

in development defect deficient caused congenital thymic in syndrome a is T-cell by resulting DiGeorge maturation. lymph and blood, T viral, infants to absent infections. and with protozoal defect nodes, and this spleen, peripheral fungal, in are extremely the vulnerable are cells bacteria, intracellular defective with Patients cell–mediated also of T are to infection susceptible because immunity. serum immunoglobulins are unaffected. B cells and generally

of fourth and the portions face malformation is The aortic the the affecting a structures developmental arch. and third glands, pouches, a give thymus, consequence and parathyroid of disorder that to pharyngeal rise gland parathyroid to tetany, may Thus, abnormalities. resulting be addition well the hypocalcemic hypoplasia, there as and as additional thymic developmental in defects, T-cell in midline there In discussed deletion is of chromosomal 90% of DiGeorge 22q11, affecting cases Chapter a in 7. region syndrome, infants. Transplantation treated affected has tissue of some thymic successfully In with immunity defects, with age. may patients partial improve spontaneously

even supranormal) the This IgM IgE underlying and of levels cells defect characterized (or is T of is the an IgA, of cells. to antibodies IgG, B levels normal activate the and of disease inability decreased production isotypes; by expressed CD40L functions T by discussed CD40 require of cells earlier, dendritic many called cells. and macrophages, (also on the B cells, As T of the helper of antigen-activated cells CD154) on CD4+ engagement switching maturation triggers of functions the cells, Ig in This stimulates the and class and microbicidal affinity B macrophages. interaction individuals disease, Approximately in gene syndrome by the have of mutations CD40L the on 70% form hyper-IgM located with the X-linked encoding of caused Xq26. in affinity recessive enzyme enzyme patients, caused an remaining an maturation. DNA-editing class the switching CD40 is mutations autosomal called required activation-induced Ig and (AID), disease inherited deaminase for by that the cytidine either pattern is loss-offunction or In involving a

IgG recurrent with antibodies. levels Patients of low infections present because pyogenic opsonizing of a jiroveci, intracellular of CD40L-mediated Those mutations are also because pneumonia by CD40L susceptible macrophage Pneumocystis activation, immunity, compromised. key to is with cell-mediated caused organism the reaction and anemia, with to hemolytic rise react the autoimmune Occasionally, IgM giving antibodies thrombocytopenia, cells, blood neutropenia. In IgM-producing may older of gastrointestinal of the patients, a that cells be the tract. there plasma proliferation infiltrate mucosa

http://ebooksmedicine.net

defined all a sometimes entity classes disorders encompasses antibody This heterogeneous frequent affecting feature common but which only hypogammaglobulinemia, generally poorly the is IgG. group but relatively of in the of of exclusion common The of immunodeficiency other variable decreased well-defined is on antibody causes diagnosis production. based disease is of the in about 1 50,000. estimated prevalence The

of are patients Although have differentiation. plasma numbers B a B-cell normal most suggesting mature cells, in block cells absent, lymphoid lymphoid the spleen, to keeping In hyperplastic. B nodes, this gut) with in tissues areas be of (i.e., and cell idea, follicles tend do not differentiate activation, B enlargement areas cell may The such into incomplete B plasma in of antibody-producing can cells reflect proliferate but response antigen cells. to that suppressive production B-cell antibody or T-cell has activity. attributed help, intrinsic deficient The to variably been defective T-cell excessive defects, Paradoxically, anemia) (hemolytic develop a autoimmune of tumors. are pernicious disorders well as variety these anemia, as lymphoid to patients prone variable immunodeficiency or be may genetic acquired. Common of Different homologue T a function molecule of costimulator), a in called survival to CD28 genetic a in cytokine the a contributes causes the helper including been of discovered, ICOS follicular and differentiation that that (inducible cells. cells, BAFF, promotes and for B have mutations receptor the of basis genetic unknown. cases, the However, in is majority

typically sinopulmonary bacterial recurrent infections. present Patients with of have occur. meningoencephalitis 20% also herpesvirus infections, and causing patients enterovirus may recurrent About infections serious lamblia. development this disorder are prone caused of persistent with the diarrhea G. by to also Individuals symptoms affects variable equally, childhood is adolescence. onset immunodeficiency and contrast agammaglobulinemia, in the of common In both to later, or X-linked sexes autoimmune 20%), of agammaglobulinemia, (approximately have arthritis. X-linked these frequency As a diseases including in patients high rheumatoid gastric increased, also reported. malignancy The been lymphoid and has in an is increase cancer for risk

primary about disease, This in deficiency affecting is 700 immune most common 1 whites. the previously, tract. is mucosal thus gastrointestinal is defending in involved the airways in immunoglobulin noted the secretions the major IgA As and and Weakened deficiency patients recurrent sinopulmonary defenses to predispose to diarrhea. IgA mucosal due and infections a association significant unexplained) with diseases. (but autoimmune There also is present subclasses differentiation to block a antibodies normal seems IgG cells supranormal of and in IgA-secreting to involve IgM terminal IgA the even The or in pathogenesis levels. deficiency of B cells; are of plasma basis for is not this The defect understood. molecular

described of receptor pathways. biochemical various affect rare cases and lymphocyte that antigen have activation been signaling Many defects as Defects the mucocutaneous cause with infections, bacterial of are called defective in responses and TH1 Job skin the candidiasis well as associated chronic are of (a mycobacterial syndrome). TH17 infections atypical disorder responses

In immune systemic a some is deficiency clinical prominent inherited disorders, problem. are representative such examples diseases described of next. Two

death. vulnerability eczema, infection to Wiskott-Aldrich is X-linked by disease results and recurrent marked that an a early thrombocytopenia, syndrome in characterized zones cell immunity. of blood early the there defects of is lymphocytes (paracortical variable from in normal, lymph T loss cellular in least thymus with course, progressive T nodes, disease but at areas) the the The is and is do antigens and to Patients the protein to polysaccharide make antigens, not poor. antibodies response IgA are the and, are and but often paradoxically, normal in are levels IgM levels of usually low, elevated. IgG serum IgE mutations an Wiskott-Aldrich caused in The gene syndrome is (WASP). by encoding protein syndrome X-linked a that receptors, belongs elements. such to cytoskeletal of link proteins WASP family membrane receptors, antigen as signaling to The cytoskeleton-dependent WASP signal and cell transduction, lymphocytes unclear. functions is migration responses, platelets including is this contributes in of but how involved to protein and the HSC is The transplantation. only treatment

deficits, gait tumors, incidence of and (ataxia), (telangiectases), autosomal-recessive Ataxia immunodeficiency. abnormal disorder increased is neurologic characterized vascular by an malformations telangiectasia may defects severity variable of both B affect and immunologic and The cells. cells are T are prominent immune antibodies, humoral abnormalities of isotype-switched most mainly The IgG2. and IgA production defective may be are hypoplasia. pronounced, with and associated thymic T-cell defects usually less The experience upper lower increasingly advancing with tumors, lymphoid and respiratory frequent infections, cancers, age. tract bacterial and Patients multiple particularly phenomena, autoimmune a damaged checkpoints of in for a cell apoptosis The called that encodes disorder cells sensor cycle and telangiectasia DNA with mutated), activates gene DNA. responsible (ataxia ATM protein damage this switching. antigen and also Lack leads in generation the to therefore in recombination abnormal gene of isotype defects antigen abnormalities (and antibody receptors) ATM of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

to vulnerability and or ( functions early lead affect 5.13 complement innate leukocyte response in infections typically the increased defects ). to system Inherited the immune molecular are summarized bases are defects defined next. Some whose

(LADs) recruitment defects adhesion stem infections. in to recurrent sites in molecules that Leukocyte leukocyte of infection, from bacterial deficiencies inherited resulting impair adhesion fucosyl synthesize transferase shared integrins in LAD2 a Eand is sialyl-Lewis ligand by for LAD1 the caused a to is defects while that is chain X, is defect by that β2 LFA-1 Mac-1, P-selectins. in functional required and caused the by the

defects components such that superoxide susceptibility infection. inherited in phagocyte from the in encoding to • as granulomatous the resulting genes killing (O2 and ROS recurrent Chronic defective of generates bacterial ), disease oxidase, enzyme bacterial results phagolysosomal chronic comes of The the macrophage-rich disease that this from reaction inflammatory name

Phagocytic the Common Deficiencies of and Table Leukocytes Complement Immune Inherited System 5.13

C2,C4deficiencyDefectiveclassicalpathwayactivation;resultsinreducedresistancetoinfectionandreducedclearanceofimmunecomplexes

correlates, and basic clinical ed2,NewYork,1992,RavenPress,pp860–861. ModifiedinpartfromGallinJI:Disordersofphagocyticcells.InGallinJI,etal,editors:Inflammation: principles

at is the inadequate. appears infection neutrophil of initial if defense sites in These of the granulomas to collections macrophages effort an wall off activated form microbes.

syndrome resulting and lysosomes, fusion by function defective defective of infections. characterized is and phagocyte phagosomes Chédiak-Higashi to in susceptibility degranulation, abnormalities main killing. are delayed microbial leukocyte and The defective neutropenia, The from aberrant readily peripheral granules, result leukocytes contain giant which are thought seen are phagolysosome smears fusion. and in blood affected to and disorders). bleeding the platelets albinism), with are melanocytes cells there addition, to nervous nerve (leading (associated in system In abnormalities of defects), (causing encodes lysosomal gene associated this a regulate protein called is with cytosolic The disorder trafficking. LYST, to large which believed

but rare TLR informative. are defects an RNA, simplex recurrent viral with mutations in are destructive bacterial Mutations for adaptor associated in needed for and downstream TLR3, pneumonias. receptor multiple result MYD88, signaling a encephalitis, herpes in TLRs, protein of

Complement System the Deficiencies Affecting

have of several C2 with been the components complement deficiency common. described, most being Deficiency however, are the to infections. are the viral presumably infections; many complement control or Deficiencies is early pathway patients bacterial most components C4, alternative or with able classical pathway, because of C2 increased associated of asymptomatic, possibly an in or are SLE-like clearance with deficiency, manifestation complexes. of C2, dominant some C1q these C4, patients autoimmune the is in disease, factors involved because Surprisingly, immune of is C3 rare. Deficiency as pyogenic is infections with as associated immune complex–mediated well glomerulonephritis. It severe have to neisserial are especially walls cell actions components of the the thin of susceptible results in C5 meningococcal) and susceptibility Neisseria to and infections, lytic Deficiency late complement. to recurrent as increased C9 (gonococcal bacteria

or in injury. complement cell Defects result proteins inflammation in excessive regulatory proteases, INH to production is INH) many factor involved an autosomal of which are C1 bradykinin. of in of deficiency XII, called inhibitor an as hereditary dominant rise both inhibitor including A gives (C1 and such peptides coagulation the of vasoactive disorder C1 angioedema, kallikrein of defective C1 vasodilator. Therefore, potent which is a activity to bradykinin, INH leads over-production and tract. gastrointestinal affecting Affected as the surfaces mucosal and the of edema patients skin have larynx episodes such of 14) complement while inherited regulatory proteins other (Chapter the syndrome regulatory deficiencies from are some uremic defects cause hemolytic hemoglobinuria stem proteins. of paroxysmal cases in (Chapter 12), complement Acquired of nocturnal

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Thesediseasesarecausedbyinheritedmutationsingenesinvolvedinlymphocytematurationorfunction,orininnateimmunity.

Someofthemorecommondisordersaffectinglymphocytesandtheadaptiveimmuneresponseare:

FailureofTcellandBcellmaturation;mutationinthecommonγ X-SCID: chainofacytokinereceptor,leadingtofailureofIL-7signalinganddefectivelymphopoiesis

SCID: FailureofTcelldevelopment;secondarydefectinantibodyresponses;approximately50%ofcasescausedbymutationinthegeneencodingADA,leadingtoaccumulationoftoxicmetabolitesduringlymphocytematurationandproliferation Autosomal recessive

agammaglobulinemia gene,whichencodesB-celltyrosinekinase,requiredformaturationsignalsfromthepre–B-cellandB-cellreceptors X-linked (XLA): FailureofB-cellmaturation,absenceofantibodies;causedbymutationsintheBTK

syndrome: Di Failureofdevelopmentofthymus,withTcelldeficiency George

X-linked Failuretoproduceisotypeswitchedhigh-affinityantibodies(IgG,IgA,IgE);mutationsingenesencodingCD40Loractivation-inducedcytosinedeaminase syndrome: hyper-IgM

Common variable Defectsinantibodyproduction;causeunknowninmostcases. immunodeficiency:

Selective deficiency: IgA FailureofIgAproduction;causeunknown

Deficienciesininnateimmunityincludedefectsofleukocytefunction,complement,andinnateimmunereceptors.

Thesediseasespresentclinicallywithincreasedsusceptibilitytoinfectionsinearlylife.

(acquired) malnutrition, and and in drugs autoimmune patients rejection in Secondary diabetes ( cancer, metabolic may diseases treat deficiencies or to radiation graft prevent encountered for infection, chronic other or be or with cancer, immune therapy immunosuppressive chemotherapy receiving individuals to diseases,

Table 5.14).

of more than common secondary deficiencies the are As immune genetic group, disorders primary origin. the a of of perhaps great important is the scourges most has immune Discussed next which deficiency humankind. disease, become the one AIDS, secondary

AIDS that retrovirus the to by characterized a immunodeficiency and by (HIV) opportunistic disease is caused profound immunosuppression leads human virus is

secondary infections, neoplasms, Table Causes manifestations. (Acquired) Immunodeficiencies of and Secondary neurologic 5.14 history. of AIDS 1980s, as the the recognized recently Although first afflictions a devastating one entity become has was as most it in as distinct million and Asia. 70% individuals 20% in worldwide, Of about the are estimated in Africa HIV-infected 36 are attributable to 25 than million 2 HIV/AIDS, with million to annually. More deaths 1 deaths is 30% widely countries, continues therapies more spread in and of where available, African the have but developed, infection some of world parts in than infected. the population anti-retroviral are to been Effective not drugs HIV the these Despite is goal. still a distant cure the progress AIDS, remarkable of therapy drug in advent because the are concern; HIV, of risk of drugs with The these will relaxed. more the own if infection spreading also vigilance individuals tragic is its raises living increase

research ability medical of plague and The enormous to and remarkable this explosion host its defenses. led an social burden modern AIDS to at has cripple understanding aimed of on AIDS vast. and is The literature HIV of on summarize the clinical the currently features epidemiology, Here HIV we infection. available pathogenesis, data and

at risk AIDS. groups studies adults States high in developing Epidemiologic for five the United have of identified

the 50% about men largest or Homosexual for constitute cases. the reported of group, bisexual accounting abusers. who This about intravenous also are 5% includes drug

high-risk constituted infections members of of Heterosexual of to groups 2004. 2001 from about other contacts 20% of new most infected largest infections, Asia, far this is In occur which and male group are patients by Africa partners. women by with in of the who

abusers and in homosexuality previous individuals with 9% Intravenous of of cases no history new drug about of represented infected 20% 2009.

all IX those VIII about especially make 0.5% who Surviving or amounts before factor cases. 1985, of hemophiliacs, concentrates factor up of received large

plasma) of about Other for platelets, (e.g., whole of 1% recipients or account HIV-infected blood components patients.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

the of infection newborn. HIV to this Close population. in cases 2% of AIDS all pediatric occur vast mother of the by transmission infection acquires to virus The from child (discussed majority the later).

cannot be of In cases, 5% approximately the factors determined. risk

transmission conditions be fluids occurs that facilitate the under blood body or should virus-infected or of exchange It preceding cells. virus of that apparent discussion the HIV from containing mothers and transmission newborns. parenteral to from infected major the sexual inoculation, of The passage are their of routes virus contact, three

of HIV worldwide, all 75% dominant Sexual of the transmission. cases for infection of accounting is than transmission mode more sex are in men. has infected most have the men mainly occurred Because men, who homosexual States individuals among United sexual transmission with mucosal in cells. or recipient’s abrasions virus mucosa it is rectal the contact or direct carried body enters oral by the and lining with semen, through The in of direct cells Viral infection breached (2) by ways: two trauma DCs blood the occurs CD4+ into vessels or in mucosa. and the (1) inoculation within spread of coexisting enhanced genital HIV sexually ulceration. diseases, transmitted associated by Sexual transmission with especially those is

factor contaminated blood abusers, contaminated of recipients received intravenous drug products. in Parenteral transmission HIV concentrates, hemophiliacs IX of other who and factor occurred has and VIII drug transmission intravenous the parenteral United common only In is present, at States among users. blood. paraphernalia of contaminated by HIV-containing needles, other with occurs syringes, and Transmission sharing or transfusion factor preparations, HIV virtually the of factor of health been stringent VIII such Transmission concentrates, and criteria antibody by screening factor eliminated measures, blood and lyophilized to IX donated purity and factor of including screening by for basis blood IX public of donors as for blood plasma on of products, HIV, history. has VIII and risk individual small of persists, extremely transfusion acquiring may for antibody-negative. infected through AIDS be seronegative because a blood recently An risk more transfused. estimated 2 be blood is in million this to 1 Currently, units than of

major AIDS. alluded transmission the is of earlier, mother-to-infant As pediatric cause to breast spread; birth and by infection during (3) offspring after transmit the canal; transplacental infected milk. by Infected by routes: to can in of utero their (1) three delivery mothers birth (2) an through ingestion the thereafter the common in during mode these, period and transmission is birth considered in States. most Of the (intrapartum) be United to (peripartum) immediate world. rates to 49% 7% parts the transmission in vary different The from reported of well counts cell and as CD4+ viral load associated chorioamnionitis. is T transmission of risk with maternal Higher low high as Fortunately, not therapy the where it States in infection virtually a United eliminated are anti-retroviral these available. to of has given treatments transmission, infected but women mother-to-child pregnant source remains in major areas

groups. infection public among high-risk HIV outside in workers the and concern Much healthcare lay has arisen about spread the the of infection HIV personal indicate workplace, be cannot in transmitted household, Extensive or casual contact studies the by school. that bites Spread by virtually impossible. is insect transmission Regarding workers, risk extremely an infection small of healthcare is to present. HIV but definite or documented been skin in injury nonintact to accidents. has exposure laboratory blood of accidental Seroconversion infected after needle-stick to be risk is for therapy seroconversion hours given of within of 0.3%, greatly 48 24 believed stick reduce risk the infection. After about and the accidents, to can needle a needle-stick antiretroviral those 30% to seropositive. By exposed blood comparison, become hepatitis of approximately accidentally B–infected

retrovirus family. the lentivirus human to HIV a belonging nontransforming is anemia simian this Included are equine immunodeficiency virus, virus. virus, sheep, immunodeficiency and bovine infectious immunodeficiency the in of group virus feline visna virus,

related from but called HIV-1 and isolated patients. Two different genetically HIV, of HIV-2, been have forms associated similar and West HIV-1 whereas AIDS Europe, most is United type the the a Central HIV-2 in causes Africa, principally and with States, common India. in disease Africa as relates to HIV-1, The to discussion ensuing primarily generally is well. HIV-2 but applicable

Structure of HIV

spherical membrane and retroviruses, cone-shaped by surrounded lipid the envelope the an host HIV-1 derived electron-dense, ( a from is contains core to Similar virion cell most

Fig. 5.37 ). (1) core (2) copies integrase). reverse genomic major transcriptase, viral (protease, p24; (3) virus p7/p9; nucleocapsid protein and (4) viral The three the enzymes protein capsid two RNA; contains and of the most diagnose viral and by widely antigen to abundant an assay the infection. detected antigen p24 is is the HIV used matrix is p17, virion underneath viral called a by the protein lies The which envelope. surrounded core viral for cells. glycoproteins, infection two viral gp41, gp120 critical are and HIV envelope are the which of Studding

which genome of RNA contains pol, HIV-1 genes, are gag, retroviruses. The the typical and env proteins. viral precursor yield protease proteins cleaved genes to by products the the The gag that mature and are of the pol large are the regulate to and of particles infectious pathogenicity vpu, assembly contains genes, retroviral which several and these vif, nef, In genes, standard and including the vpr, tat, virus. of rev, synthesis accessory HIV viral the addition three

particular revealed HIV-1 considerable in sequences the variability different encode mostly Molecular envelope that has of of the isolates certain within analysis of genome, regions glycoproteins. viral parts http://ebooksmedicine.net Because the

Fig. Thestructureofthehumanimmunodeficiencyvirus(HIV)-1virion.Theviralparticleiscoveredbyalipidbilayerderivedfromthehostcellandstuddedwithviralglycoproteinsgp41andgp120.gp120 Protease Integrase antibody RNA poses envelope, Reverse vaccine. problems transcriptase for single-antigen its against the against a HIV-1 bilayer response targeted development of variability such p24 capsid 5.37 is Lipid HIV-1 be variation, genetic O). (major), three can O nor into and (neither on divided N Based designated M (outlier), M subgroups, subtypes States, United further and subtypes, subtype in divided and E their most common K. M form several most Various example, western differ most common in Thailand. are form A is are through the is common the distribution; whereas in the they worldwide, or viruses designated for subtype into the clades, geographic clade Group B Europe fastest Africa. Southern present being worldwide, India, in C clade the Currently, is and clade spreading Ethiopia,

system. central HIV nervous While and targets system infect two major tissues, infection immune the HIV can of many the are the of infection discussed two on The these are separately. each systems effects of HIV

primarily is AIDS. Profound hallmark affecting immune the cell-mediated immunity, of deficiency, impaired cells. and This immune T surviving loss from as of cells function chiefly CD4+ results T of well helper cells and other subsequent as infection of cells. mechanisms first macrophages cycle the involved We T the describe and the cells into virus entry and in replicative viral within between its detailed and review is cellular This more interaction by followed HIV the targets. a of

of Life Cycle HIV

integration host ( replication, the life of and of the production of of release of cell provirus and virus infectious cells, cycle activation of consists HIV The viral infection genome, into

Fig. ). 5.38 mechanisms in of each steps detail. are molecules of understood and these The considerable

infects (see as using receptors the various a CD4 cells and HIV molecule coreceptors receptor chemokine as by

Fig.

5.38 ). and CD4+ CD4+ accounts tropism essential for and monocytes/macrophages of for the is infection Binding for T of gp120 virus for HIV DCs. and CD4 to cells the bind into cell surface entry molecules to gp120 the However, for (coreceptors) must binding to HIV also other CD4 as cell. is sufficient not for infection, role. this particularly receptors, serve CXCR4, CCR5 and Chemokine (R5X4) CCR5, strains CXCR4, are of by these HIV X4 R5 distinguished be some isolates use strains coreceptors: dual-tropic. use their can and strains use the absolute. X4 cells, T-tropic, M-tropic, whereas to preferentially monocyte/macrophage preferentially as R5 but infecting are infect not of referred lineage are and strains strains thus cells T distinctions are these

Polymorphisms to are HIV in CCR5 with associated encoding gene the susceptibility altered infection. gene of CCR5 to and two HIV isolates. inherit resistant R5 are copies mutated the of Americans About 1% white of are onset are from these the of but after their individuals individuals About protective delayed. for CCR5 disease heterozygous allele; AIDS, is not infection protected this 20% mutation found Only Asian and East been in homozygotes for rare populations. the have African

Molecular between HIV of the and elucidated. handshake their deadly cell have glycoproteins surface been details receptors surface transmembrane associated The the glycoproteins, contains gp120 two and envelope noncovalently gp41. HIV protein or initial glycoprotein site is gp120 to envelope coreceptors CCR5 a that the molecules, which on for creates infection a CD4 binding step the change to of The leads the gp120 in recognition new conformational CXCR4. in that the gp41. gp41 of tip hydrophobic called a induces at fusion changes the peptide coreceptors region to conformational the Binding exposes cell T macrophages), of peptide (e.g., or cells the fusion of leading the virus cells the with the target inserts to membrane into This cell. host the After containing the of virus fusion, enters the genome core HIV cell. the cytoplasm

virus double-stranded DNA) internalized, reverse the undergoes the transcription, genome of proviral to leading (cDNA; of complementary the RNA DNA synthesis (see Once

Fig. 5.38 ). HIV may a T episomal cDNA in linear cells, in In form. the quiescent remain cytoplasm circularizes, nucleus, cDNA the integrated into the In host then T enters genome. is cells, the and dividing the form silent months a of may After infection. for be integration, years, latent pro-virus or of complete are the proteins to viral transcribed, be that viral the formation of Alternatively, particles. for expression DNA may required proviral leading memory is infecting T (resting) productively naïve HIV cells cells. infects cells T inefficient but and activated at

infected in Completion death of activation, infected virus in cells of the life T in results CD4+ viral activation the cells. only of and most cycle cell case after occurs the latently cells, Activation of into transcription upregulates factors, from cytokines T several nucleus. or including cells NF-κB, the by cytosol antigens which the moves In http://ebooksmedicine.net

release virion of and Budding mature

Fig. the entry The of HIV from of steps production to life cycle 5.38 infectious viral showing virions. HIV. from S: (Adapted Wain-Hobson One two. on meets one 384:117, Nature 1996.) sequences immune including several binds within other mediators, for NF-κB the genes, and regulatory cytokines nucleus, their genes promoting to transcription. activates that transcription genome also so sequences of HIV gene expression. contain sites, factor viral The flank the the binding long-terminal-repeat NF-κB–binding that infected antigen. Imagine cell CD4+ encounters a environmental now an latently the (a and response) to cell (a DNA proviral such activates and production a Induction NF-κB of leads HIV pathologic ultimately death. of cell to outcome) the in physiologic of virions transcription Furthermore, cytokines and and by TNF NF-κB activity other RNA. of production HIV stimulate lead macrophages also thus to produced activated that described cells thrives host result are the that may by activated, T HIV Such as physiologically it or vivo within.” from infecting by Thus, antigenic be other microorganisms. can in and activation “subversion from stimulation a macrophages situation seems when HIV itself individuals increased and which production at proinflammatory for cytokines. activation HIV-positive leads recurrent of are increased to infections, risk lymphocyte HIV infections. CD4+ These, stimulate of turn, more in cells, production, and loss more additional T system. immune culminates up see to easy it that Thus, cycle is inexorable in a infection sets destruction of vicious how the HIV

Infection T-Cell in Mechanism Depletion HIV of

of direct cytopathic Loss cells mainly the CD4+ replicating is caused T virus. of by effects the infected produced In CD4+ 1 T and each billion to viral individuals, 2 approximately day. cells particles billion die 100 are new eventually and relentless, the is major these a Death cause T cells immunodeficiency. of profound, of cell renewal dying with to cannot immune of as the up CD4+ keep a disease cells progresses, the replace but Up point, T loss. can their the cells, system T of in proteins interference increased protein plasma defects virus membrane replication. and budding permeability virus associated directly infected by include viral the by from kills involved particles stemming which synthesis Possible mechanisms viral cells with in

cells. to of the virus, direct contribute killing by functional of the loss In mechanisms may other impairment or to T cells addition These include:

apoptosis to activation or leading responding uninfected in these cells, of Chronic AIDS, cells. that with to common of HIV itself to individuals infections are

lymph in architecture tonsils) nodes, of tissues. the (spleen, causing lymphoid lymphoid cells destruction HIV cellular organs composition of and progressive of infection

cells). leading of to of Fusion (giant formation infected cells, syncytia and uninfected In the to uninfected tissue followed infected cells productively on cells, binds T gp120 cell by fusion. on CD4 expressed culture molecules die a within usually Fused cells few hours.

cell defects in Qualitative function. T defects a responses signaling, reported, antigen-induced been more. a defects TH1-type many in asymptomatic reduction relative TH2 in and intracellular have individuals, to T type, in HIV-infected cell decrease in the Even including proliferation, a in loss TH1 responses of immunity. deficiency The results in cell-mediated profound loss antigens. also of selective is in T of a CD4+ of encountered disease, to recall There the memory responses cells previously which subset poor explains course helper the early

is Low-level latent or infection of feature cells chronic HIV of an infection. important T gene viral (latent or for infection), expression can years. without provirus, in persist Integrated cells months T CD4+ within the potent which and virus peripheral cells latent lurks nodes. antiviral with macrophages) (both Even blood, cells practically lymph sterilizes in therapy, in of estimates, 0.05% CD4+ cells T the some to lymph latently are According nodes infected. provide are a months persistent years, span long-lived, of and most life with CD4+ memory of they cells Because are thus virus. cells, reservoir a these T to of

Cells of Immune Non–T Infection HIV

and DCs to macrophages in infection and cells, HIV also of the infection. pathogenesis infection is addition of CD4+ In of important T loss

Macrophages. in most to are brain, as 10% the cells, infected. of by HIV 50% many are macrophages and in to found certain as Similar as such tissues, tissues, T macrophages and infected lungs terminally division can nuclear Although virus particles. for infect cell contain most numbers entry may replication and in retroviruses, multiply HIV-1 nondividing of large is of macrophages, required and differentiated which contrast T Even though effects in of cells. to the are quite to resistant macrophages cytopathic CD4+ viral HIV, allow they replication, may viral T-cell an infection, stages greatly, of macrophages when late may of macrophages be site and reservoirs replication. HIV in continued important infection, CD4+ Thus, numbers decline be of

Dendritic Cells. is Mucosal virus virus be nodes, may transport it lymph transmitted DCs by and cells. the to to CD4+ where the T regional infected also nodes of DCs centers potential are reservoirs germinal lymph Follicular of the in HIV. most infection, surface dendritic to their of the processes. virus HIV DCs susceptible may particles Although some found be are follicular on

Infection. HIV B Function in Cell HIV, cells show Although profound be infected by they abnormalities. B cannot may hypergammaglobulinemia activation antibody mount is B-cell to in spontaneous antigens. there encountered and with association inability responses Paradoxically, to newly an to due as T-cell in defects antibody cells. The as responses B may well help lack be defective of acquired

of System Nervous Involvement Central Pathogenesis

Like lymphoid is of nervous system system, a the target infection. HIV the cell types the macrophage CNS are brain the microglia, predominant that lineage, in the Macrophages and cells with are to HIV. the infected in belong that is into believed the brain monocytes. carried infected HIV It is by that with keeping are M-tropic. In isolates exclusively HIV from brain the this, almost the however, mechanism damage remains The the of brain, obscure. of HIV-induced be symptoms, and IL-6. such is most by TNF, from that the believe of neurons IL-1, neurologic the by cytokines produced and less is products viral Because indirectly microglia, factors infected the the extent are caused neuropathologic might changes often severity expected clinicians infected and of by as deficit than not soluble neurologic

Virus entry cells: RequiresCD4andcoreceptors,whicharereceptorsforchemokines;involvesbindingofviralgp120andfusionwiththecellmediatedbyviralgp41protein;maincellulartargets:CD4+ helperTcells,macrophages,DCs into

IntegrationofprovirusgenomeintohostcellDNA;triggeringofviralgeneexpressionbystimulithatactivateinfectedcells(e.g.,infectiousmicrobes,cytokinesproducedduringnormalimmuneresponses) Viral replication:

Tcells AcuteinfectionofmucosalTcellsandDCs;viremiawithdisseminationofvirus;latentinfectionofcellsinlymphoidtissue;continuingviralreplicationandprogressivelossofCD4+ infection: of Progression

Mechanisms immune deficiency: of

http://ebooksmedicine.net Tcells:Tcelldeathduringviralreplicationandbudding(similartoothercytopathicinfections);apoptosisoccurringasaresultofchronicstimulation;decreasedthymicoutput;functionaldefects LossofCD4+

host chronic advances partly which peripheral begins immune HIV the by to is lymphoid response, of and ( progressive controlled only with infection, infection acute disease tissues

Figs. phase. • 5.40 Acute 5.39 CD4+ express mucosal and acute (early) these of surfaces, the by CCR5) enters of cells many infected and death infection in characterized T memory (which infection lymphoid Virus tissues, mucosal cells. is of typically through cells, Because of depletion are T of residence memory lymphocytes. local this cells the tissues mucosal reservoir loss and results largest the of T considerable the body, in in major of site a tissues. infected blood At other are in few detectable this and the stage, cells

Mucosal of dissemination immune by responses. the virus development followed and host the of is infection sites virus nodes. entry the DCs epithelia of migrate virus in at and into capture lymph then the T tissues, through to direct pass contact. cell–cell CD4+ in on cells lymphoid HIV DCs Once can Within replication the in detected to exposure first viral after days nodes. lymph HIV, be of numbers viremia, HIV This to which particles are present replication patient’s leads high the blood. in during helper body virus DCs macrophages, The in disseminates peripheral lymphoid and tissues. throughout T infects and the cells,

acute the syndrome, of infection, 6 the after is host triggered initial develop individuals an HIV to 3 infected and virus spread to 40% of initial which Within the response. by 90% weeks flulike throat, a weight resembling illness including nonspecific syndrome. a phase fatigue, symptoms, associated fever, self-limited is acute loss, and with myalgias, This sore with lymphadenopathy, and vomiting diarrhea, occur. Rash, also may in resolves 2 weeks. to spontaneously typically This 4

cell-mediated antiviral the individual immune humoral mounts the responses. infection and spreads, As of and appearance 3 within exposure) evidenced cells. responses by seroconversion weeks 7 virus-specific T cytotoxic of by CD8+ are the These (usually presumed to HIV initial HIV-specific the blood are T begin titers viral likely to the responsible fall of time most and for in cells are detected infection. about containment at the CD8+ weeks and viremia immune exposure. after levels such by detectable control drop but in low viral infection about control to primary by the responses reflected is These partially and production, a the 12

Chronic phase. • disease, the nodes cell of sites phase next, lymph spleen and destruction. of the and continuous chronic HIV the are replication In infection During few or disease, period the of present. are HIV no the this manifestations of clinical the of latency phase is called Therefore, clinical disease period. HIV this tissues during steadily lymphoid Although peripheral T may T harbor virus, CD4+ which within cells CD4+ phase, of of the few (up blood of the declines. be blood cells T infected) number destruction to continues cells 10% this circulating and virus infection, T-cell the Eventually, over of continuous steady a a death, cycle of period of and new number years, the to leads decline in infection

Infection of tissues mucosal

e.g., lymphoid Infection tissues, established in node lymph

body the infection Viremiathroughout of Spread

Establishment in Clinical concentrated chronic lymphoid of tissues; production latency infection; low-level virus virus

T depletion lymphoid of tissues:AIDS of Destruction cells CD4+

Fig. is The Viral infection. response, patient replication host involving T tissues, dendritic 5.39 of cells, viremia to spreads to The clinical of nodes. and phase and HIV-1 latency. mainly lymphoid lymph mucosal cells viremia the a memory CD4+ and Pathogenesis controlled widespread seeding immune tissue. starts of the in by initial and infection then enters leads gradual of A (not the decline cells continues immune symptoms During viral clinical of phase, in some containment continues, of and T and, but virus macrophages unabated, develops patient replication both CD4+ there is and full-blown erosion T-cell CD4+ shown). numbers ultimately, cells AIDS. this Cytotoxic T CTL, lymphocyte.

Fig. ClinicalcourseofHIVinfection. 5.40 T-cellcountgraduallydecreases,untilitreachesacriticallevelbelowwhichthereisasubstantialriskforAIDS-associateddiseases. (A)Duringtheearlyperiodafterprimaryinfection,thereisdisseminationofvirus,developmentofanimmuneresponsetoHIV,andoftenanacuteviralsyndrome.Duringtheperiodofclinicallatency,viralreplicationcontinuesandtheCD4+ (B)ImmuneresponsetoHIVinfection.AcytotoxicT-lymphocyte(CTL)responsetoHIVisdetectableby2to3weeksaftertheinitialinfection,anditpeaksby9to12weeks.Markedexpansionofvirus-specificCD8+ T-cellclonesoccursduringthistime,andupto10%ofapatient’sCTLsmaybeHIVspecificat12weeks.ThehumoralimmuneresponsetoHIVpeaksatabout12weeks. conditions. AIDS HC: Fauci related Redrawn virus and (A, disease: from Lane Human immunodeficiency AS, editors: AS, 1791.) McGraw-Hill, Harrison’sprinciplesofinternalmedicine, ed al, 14, 1997, et In New Fauci p York,

cells the T the circulation. in and tissues lymphoid CD4+

• AIDS. a AIDS, of host virus, plasma final clinical and severe, characterized dramatic increase defense, phase breakdown The by disease. in life-threatening is progression to a and long-lasting Typically fever patient loss, diarrhea. weight fatigue, presents with (>1 month), the and patient diseases infections, illnesses, variable the AIDS. the is neoplasms, serious opportunistic clinical or to (grouped under developed rubric AIDS disease After neurologic said or later) emerge, AIDS-defining secondary a indicator discussed have period,

extent of marker a management the the value in is HIV individuals. RNA and measured HIV-1 as in progression levels useful disease blood, The of of HIV-infected of is viremia, it fairly the acute for viral equilibrium the of reflects the given virus response, the at remain patient the load end several and may in years. reached between stable and a phase The host of the of viral cells rate viremia, progression of the predictor is of point, steady-state therefore, called HIV a decline level disease. and, set T This CD4+ of

mL). plasma viral 10 T of low RNA (usually years and more, viremia with counts levels or CD4+ <500 stable cell copies/ infected virus (<50 been these about have Remarkably, RNA called elite plasma individuals to 75 have of undetectable controllers. 1% copies/mL); course that attention in with influence the host attracted progression. an shed have factors them great Individuals clinical hope that uncommon viral studying on disease light such and may the disease. variables with course Studies respect to is indicate this that group the that heterogeneous thus influence of far the viral suggesting that not course a do virus. be show qualitative most to isolates uneventful cannot attributed cases, the “wimpy” abnormalities, the In anti-HIV In is a cases, there evidence all of vigorous immune

HIV Table of Categories Classification 5.15 CDC Infection

T Centers for on counts, fewer 200 to Because 499 cell classification cells/µL the CD4+ immune the cell (CDC) three CD4+ 200 cells/µL, ( groups loss equal and of patients into and to counts: than is declining than stratifies Disease HIV with cells/µL, containment associated Prevention 500 Control based or of infection greater

5.15 Table

In HIV phase to a from chronic there 10 most AIDS to exceptions. the absence infection 7 years, are patients of lasting after treatment, with but progress to phase 2 years progressors, In primary chronic 3 telescoped is after infection. to middle, the rapid as are individuals who nonprogressors, asymptomatic individuals About remain 15% for to of HIV-1–infected infected long-term 5% defined untreated

A.Asymptomatic:acuteA1A2A3(primary)HIV,orpersistentgeneralizedlymphadenopathy

B.Symptomatic:noAorB1B2B3Cconditions

C.AIDSindicatorconditions:includingconstitutionaldisease,neurologicdisease,orneoplasm

DatafromCentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention:1993revisedclassificationsystemandexpandedsurveillancedefinitionforAIDSamongadolescentsandadults.MMWR 41(RR-17):1,1992.

still protection immune of but response, http://ebooksmedicine.net the correlates are unknown. are of and and of the over CD8+ levels HIV-specific maintained CD4+ T-cell Some of these responses, these course have high individuals levels infection. progression, cell to inheritance to anti-viral seems particular HLA The ability of alleles T correlate perhaps responses. with reflecting resistance disease the mount to

the summarize following of the manifestations AIDS. full-blown the disease, section, the of terminal clinical In we phase

neurologic presents the neoplasms. States, diarrhea, lymphadenopathy, adult secondary AIDS patient and, cases, in generalized In with disease, weight United opportunistic infections, typical the fever, many loss, multiple with

infections account with for AIDS. Opportunistic deaths majority in of patients the untreated immune which infections the a have Many kept are agents these but evolved represent completely of hosts. latent coexist with reactivation normally check are because of system eradicated by infections, to robust not their in infectious The active which a the been relies different varies drugs HAART frequency highly of block markedly has four of different (called reduced in and by or actual of combination therapy ART), on or that cycle. life the HIV of anti-retroviral infections advent the of three world, steps regions

pneumonia caused time of Pneumocystis individuals at of 30% jiroveci Approximately during some course HIV-infected disease. to develop 15% the untreated the by fungus the the advent the who but Before HAART. less incidence was feature of HAART, in in cases, about to presenting this of respond the infection 20% is patients much

and clinical with manifestations. are AIDS, infection most of in vagina, fungal cavity, esophagus common most the oral Candidiasis its common the is and infection patients of decompensation, a HIV-infected oral transition candidiasis to AIDS. heralds In is sign often and the individuals, immunologic Invasive usually AIDS, of candidiasis when is indwelling and catheters. use is infrequent drug-induced there or neutropenia in occurs patients with it

(CMV) affects disease, but eye commonly tract. more disseminated and Cytomegalovirus gastrointestinal the may cause to after decreased of be initiation Chorioretinitis of the HAART. in has dramatically but 25% patients, seen approximately used almost less cell 50 in retinitis patients with than CMV counts per T CD4+ occurs microliter. exclusively latter esophagitis associated multiple the cases, and manifests 10% mucosal seen of ulcerations. infection, 5% CMV to colitis, as Gastrointestinal in with

also occurs immunosuppression. atypical, nontuberculous, (mainly late, Mycobacterium or infection severe setting aviumintracellulare) the mycobacteria Disseminated in with bacterial of dramatically. Coincident AIDS tuberculosis of risen incidence the has with epidemic, the uncommon attributable tuberculosis, States. remains Worldwide, almost deaths in one to third patients all the AIDS in compli are this United but of cation and new Both to reactivation toll. pulmonary this of latent primary disease infection contribute or in other infection settings, As with may to multiple the organs. be lungs involve confined tuberculosis may are that a indicating resistant number reports of are multiple isolates worrisome growing anti-mycobacterial Most to drugs.

in of about patients. Cryptococcosis occurs AIDS 10% in with major the of immunosuppression, is manifestation clinical As settings meningitis cryptococcosis. other gondii, in invader 50% for the all in responsible of mass lesions Toxoplasma of AIDS, CNS is causes the and encephalitis frequent CNS. another

papovavirus, infections human in a CNS of JC another virus, important cause patients. HIV-infected is multifocal leukoencephalopathy progressive causes 23). It (Chapter is region. perianal external genitalia, infection ulcerations simplex by and involving virus manifested the mouth, mucocutaneous esophagus, Herpes caused bacteria. is common with AIDS, patients infections in Persistent which by untreated or often with is protozoans diarrhea, enteric advanced

high Patients B anal of with in a cancer cervical certain cancer lymphoma, women, incidence cell and have notably sarcoma, in men. tumors, AIDS Kaposi malignancies. often AIDS-defining considered These are tumors eventually 40% HIV-infected to untreated is individuals develop estimated of malignancy. a that will It 25% tumors (Kaposi sarcoma viruses, Many DNA Kaposi human and lymphoma), (cervical caused these EBV anal herpesvirus (B of by cell are and oncogenic including carcinoma). papillomavirus sarcoma), by in immune that check individuals a system. latent These are viruses kept healthy competent establish in infections following the of decreased increased virally of infection in viruses failure risk to cells cellular AIDS patients against exists The reactivation immunity for malignancy contain malignant mainly transformation. the because infected and undergoing immune The these has especially is improved Kaposi many sarcoma, incidence have patients compromise. of of and as less tumors, decreasing treatment more of remain general tumors population, cancers the occur certain HIV-infected Nevertheless, lung lymphoma. and and susceptible skin forms such as in that individuals to

Sarcoma. Kaposi an tumor sarcoma vascular that is malignancy. rare a Kaposi the AIDS-defining United in considered (KS), otherwise is States, its in patients 10. HIV morphology are occurrence in Chapter discussed with not The and KS of infected infected At up dramatic to onset had HAART in of but been or recent use with 30% bisexual in homosexual its epidemic, AIDS decline has the incidence a the of men years. of KS, there areas Africa where sarcoma infection the In and of of common tumors. in is sub-Saharan untreated, frequent most HIV is both one contrast, Kaposi largely

lesions are spindle-shaped smooth The endothelial (vascular proliferation both KS lymphatic) characterized muscle express markers cells cells. cells of or of that of by a and

http://ebooksmedicine.net

lesions contain infiltrates. addition, In chronic cell KS inflammatory (despite it name). features its KS malignant tumor of is of suggest Many the a that not ominous

KS called compelling herpesvirus evidence 8 that KS also human is by (HHV8). is (KSHV), the herpesvirus caused There leads infection how is KS to KSHV unclear. still Exactly proliferation infection, are apoptosis. establishes KSHV several and preventing proteins other during spindle in potential which cell herpesviruses, stimulating latent roles Like with produced D (a tumor the and (an been of gene), tumor have These cell which oncogene) implicated in regulator cyclin inhibitors include development (Chapter several 6). homologue key suppressor of cycle of a viral p53 both aid neovascular proinflammatory angiogenic which of The in spindle and factors, survival signals inflammatory components spindle the and that the and supply and produce the lesion, growth. recruit cells latter components cell not while development, needed. cofactors sufficient, is additional and for infection, are KSHV However, KS necessary clearly AIDS-related HIV. the is that In cofactor form, in suppression may HIV-mediated KSHV the immune in dissemination of widespread aid host.

the is form Clinically, (Chapter AIDS-associated sporadic quite 10). from KS different skin, gastrointestinal the individuals, widespread, lungs. lymph tract, mucous is affecting membranes, usually HIV-infected tumor and In nodes, the be tumors than aggressive KS. to sporadic also tend more These

Lymphomas. it a occurs tumor. another AIDS-defining AIDS, making at in rate markedly individuals Lymphoma with increased another approximately 5% present course. during their lymphoma lymphoma, 5% of develop and AIDS with subsequent patients Roughly incidence individuals is 10-fold population than greater era Even an at least occur therapy, at to that average. in HIV-infected continues of anti-retroviral the the in lymphoma at mechanisms considerations HIV-associated characterization lymphomas of the on and epidemiologic underlie for the Based two increased appear B-cell molecular least HIV-infected to individuals. in risk tumors above,

Tumors Viruses. Oncogenic by Induced proliferation infected cells oncogenic required restrain immunity KSHV. EBV of the with to viruses such is B and T-cell as latently to that With cells infected T-cell of the undergo the tumors. the HIV depletion appearance is B-cell infection, and mutations severe control development the and this predispose B proliferation of course of unchecked lost, in oncogenic for cells viruses, As AIDS result, are developing lymphomas high B-cell patients risk tumor infected a particularly EBV. of aggressive at by composed elsewhere. such lungs, the and orbit, occur often extranodal tumors as gut, and The CNS, in sites, AIDS viruses. that which coinfected EBV effusions the present malignant tumor both also example effusion two to unusual between cooperativity prone usually of oncogenic are cells lymphomas are patients (so-called are a “primary by and in that remarkable as lymphoma”), rare KSHV, highly

B-Cell Hyperplasia. Germinal Center CD4 associated of EBV the with KSHV. majority or T-cell patients The arise that not are counts with preserved in lymphomas lymphoma for hyperplasia germinal these cell related in HIV B risk occurs profound be that patients increased center infection. The the in may to The mutations of level tumor-causing mutations chromosomal somatic and and involving the stage high in translocations that set cells center occur B germinal genes. for proliferation cell with of diversification lymphoma molecular that B the aggressive that In associated lymphoma, BCL6 MYC and mutations as attempted outside B during B-cell of germinal in Burkitt HIV-infected diffuse genes severe setting tumors in oncogenes T depletion “mistakes” cells. hallmarks the immunoglobulin such center large the bear arise in are and such fact, cell the often of individuals, as

proliferations EBV-related Several also mention. other merit associated tissue increased pronounced B-cell Hodgkin frequency in (Chapter lymphoma, individuals. tumor 12), occurs HIV-infected a an response at inflammatory with unusual also (Reed-Sternberg characteristic instances cells tumor In Hodgkin all of HIV-associated with virtually EBV. cells) the are infected lymphoma, the (but not with HIV time all) CD4 patients presentation. disease counts have lymphoma of Hodgkin low Many at the projections which responsible proliferation squamous infection cell EBV for tongue), on hairy is (Chapter mucosa of EBV-driven oral oral results the leukoplakia also from 15). (white

Other Tumors. cervix KS have addition lymphomas, increased occurrence of also cancer. and anal uterine patients of to carcinoma an In AIDS of with and the human of papilloma which these Both the of setting immunosuppression. virus tumors is are infection, associated poorly in with controlled highly

of important Involvement is a the and CNS manifestation AIDS. of common of percent dysfunction. autopsy, 40% to Ninety apparent and demonstrate patients at some clinically neurologic of involvement have form neurologic 60% manifestations neurologic of may patients, sole earliest some Importantly, or presenting feature infection. the in be HIV Lesions neurocognitive progressive meningitis, a HIV-associated include aseptic meningoencephalitis called 23). a (Chapter presumed most myelopathy, and, or disorder encephalopathy vacuolar peripheral neuropathies, commonly, viral self-limited

Course HIV of Drug Therapy Infection Effect on Anti-Retroviral the of

the integrase advent face that AIDS. target transcriptase, The and the protease, enzymes of viral has changed reverse drugs clinical new of three used a to remains the (<50 at the reduced is replication least patient, motivated, combination copies/mL) below drugs is as patient therapy. When there of in to effective threshold HIV adheres detection a and compliant long RNA of as suppressed, CD4+ increases, progressive is often T slowly normal virus the level. returning is T-cell the cells a of peripheral CD4+ count halted, the Once loss and to 1995–1996 100,000 per decreased States per AIDS has 100,000. drugs, the in to from death the 16 in peak of of these individuals annual than from use 18 the With to United rate a 4 less disorders, as opportunistic http://ebooksmedicine.net such AIDS-associated Many infections with

uncommon. sarcoma, Kaposi are jiroveci now P. and also infected therapy the reduced transmission anti-retroviral Effective virus, of has mothers especially to newborns. the from

infection treatment and Despite emerged. several dramatic HIV have with improvements, associated complications its new these recovery immune therapy with of the counts are paradoxical viral disease decreasing CD4+ system who deterioration load. a period and patients advanced during despite increasing Some of develop anti-retroviral clinical T-cell the given syndrome, inflammatory to antigenic be This a high persistent reconstitution the microbes. burden is host poorly understood postulated immune to is called the disorder, not regulated of response but drugs. Perhaps important the more complication long-term to a pertains effects of therapy side anti-retroviral of adverse disease. These elevated lipoaccumulation kidney, liver resistance, premature cardiovascular, lipids, of and (excess fat deposition and fat), peripheral neuropathy, centrally), facial include (loss lipoatrophy insulin morbidity more AIDS-related morbidity is Finally, non-AIDS patients. HAART-treated than long-term classic in far common of cardiovascular morbidity causes accelerated disease. cancer are Major and for T-cell dysfunction these and complications but is not a inflammation may role. non-AIDS–related The have mechanism known, persistent

MORPHOLOGYChangesinthetissues(withtheexceptionofthebrain)areneitherspecificnordiagnostic.CommonpathologicfeaturesofAIDSincludeopportunisticinfections,Kaposisarcoma,andB-celllymphomas.Mostoftheselesionsarediscussedelsewhere,becausetheyalsooccurinindividualswhodonothaveHIVinfection.LesionsinthecentralnervoussystemaredescribedinChapter23.

BiopsyspecimensfromenlargedlymphnodesintheearlystagesofHIVinfectionrevealamarkedhyperplasiaofB-cellfollicles,whichoftentakeonunusual,serpiginousshapes.Themantlezonesthatsurroundthefolliclesareattenuated,andthegerminalcentersimpingeoninterfollicularTcellareas.ThishyperplasiaofBcellsisthemorphologicreflectionofthepolyclonalBcellactivationandhypergammaglobulinemiaseeninHIV-infectedindividuals.

Withdiseaseprogression,thefrenzyofBcellproliferationsubsidesandgiveswaytoapatternofseverelymphoidinvolution.Thelymphnodesaredepletedoflymphocytes,andtheorganizednetworkoffolliculardendriticcellsisdisrupted.Thegerminalcentersmayevenbecomehyalinized.Duringthisadvancedstage,viralburdeninthenodesisreduced,inpartbecauseofthedisruptionofthefolliculardendriticcells.These“burnt-out”lymphnodesareatrophicandsmallandmayharbornumerousopportunisticpathogens,oftenwithinmacrophages.Becauseofprofoundimmunosuppression,theinflammatoryresponsetoinfectionsbothinthelymphnodesandatextranodalsitesmaybesparseoratypical.Forexample,mycobacteriaoftenfailtoevokegranulomaformationbecauseCD4+ cellsaredeficient,andthepresenceoftheseandotherinfectiousagentsmaynotbeapparentwithoutspecialstains.Asmightbeexpected,lymphoidinvolutionisnotconfinedtothenodes;inlaterstagesofAIDS,thespleenandthymusalsoareconvertedto“wastelands”thatarevirtuallydevoidoflymphocytes.

with long-term and patients our Despite a infection, AIDS prognosis in understanding the treatment HIV remains advances of impressive of concern. tissues. the in drug their the Although United rate treated lymphoid has viral carry declined mortality effective still therapy DNA with patients the in States, therapy Truly remains curative elusive. to has reality. a effort many remain although this protective been hurdles develop before mounted a considerable Similarly, vaccine, becomes Molecular of renders variation have the in difficult. from a isolates extremely analyses revealed viral of degree alarming producing this patients; task vaccine an of focused proteins. efforts neutralizing broadly relatively against have portions invariant on HIV producing Recent antibodies therefore, present, against remain AIDS. the fight mainstays prevention, public in At the anti-retroviral and drugs measures, health

of disease. Progression HIVinfectionprogressesthroughphases.

infection. Acute HIV Manifestationsofacuteviralillness

phase. Chronic (latent) Disseminationofvirus,hostimmuneresponse,progressivedestructionofimmunecells.

AIDS. Severeimmunedeficiency.

Clinical features. Full-blownAIDSmanifestswithseveralcomplications,mostlyresultingfromimmunedeficiency.

Tumors,especiallytumorscausedbyoncogenicviruses

Antiretroviraltherapyhasgreatlydecreasedtheincidenceofopportunisticinfectionsandtumorsbutalsohasnumerouscomplications.

in of responsible are fibrillar number Amyloidosis a tissue with proteins damage is a compromise. and disorders functional for associated condition extracellular deposits of which folded their fibrils aggregation configuration). in normal are improperly soluble are folded These of the proteins produced (which abnormal by proteoglycans (amylose). charged deposits contain fibrillar that give of wide staining deposits starch The to glycosaminoglycans, those a characteristics variety sugar of and which the thought groups bind resemble are the deposits a to amyloid, called the that is deposits Therefore, realization despite that the unrelated starch. name were firmly entrenched

http://ebooksmedicine.net

occur of is composition the variety conditions, in in protein which Amyloid can deposits a of different. each has same the Although always heterogeneous. appearance, it is morphologic amyloid biochemically aggregate amyloid. with form In at different fact, 30 of fibrils least proteins appearance the to can composed amyloid β in their nonbranching fibrils, of all deposits conformation polypeptides ( are of formed derivation, Regardless each a pleated sheet intertwined of

Fig. ). 5.41 proteins, various fibril amyloid glycoproteins. of remaining the the 5% material being consists 95% Approximately of

following: forms the of are common The most three amyloid

is chain) AL light the light amyloid (amyloid light made of fragments both. up immunoglobulin chains, complete chains, amino-terminal of or

SAA is synthesized (amyloid-associated) a is composed blood of derived amyloid amyloidassociated) precursor the larger the (serum an 8500dalton proteolysis from in by which protein, called liver. in protein AA

derived that is β-amyloid called proteolysis larger much amyloid peptide a a protein transmembrane glycoprotein, from is (Aβ) protein. precursor by 4000-dalton

Fig. Structureofamyloid.(A)Aschematicdiagramofanamyloidfibershowingfourfibrils(therecanbeasmanyassixineachfiber)woundaroundoneanotherwithregularlyspacedbindingoftheCongoreddye.(B)Congoredstainingshowsapple-greenbirefringenceunderpolarizedlight,adiagnosticfeatureofamyloid.(C)Electronmicrographof7.5-to10-nmamyloidfibrils. 5.41 Molecular of (From amyloidosis. V: Merlini G, mechanisms Bellotti 2003.) NEnglJMed349:583–596,

deposit settings. clinical Many proteins other in can a variety of as also amyloid the examples following the Some mentioned of important most section. clinically are in

folding deposit from fibrils of conformation, pleated tissues. proteins, assume sheet results Amyloidosis and extracellular β in a as aggregate, abnormal which proteasomes taken degraded intracellular protein proteins aggregates are by extracellular misfolded up and in macrophages. Normally, degraded are and cells. outside and In these of proteins accumulate mechanisms fail amyloidosis, quality fibrillar control general that two categories into amyloid form ( proteins fall The

Fig. produced when prone are to and (2) have to mutant tendency fibrils, proteins proteins that associate in amounts; increased that aggregation. form particularly an (1) and 5.42 inherent ): normal mis-folding and classification. of amyloid The types of are mechanisms deposition different next along with of discussed

with be amyloid account we follow clinical diverse will clinical associated takes biochemical that given features ( (e.g., a a classification settings, AA) may into of Because form and

Table ). 5.16 systems, a to Amyloid several heart. organ may may single such systemic as involving organ, localized (generalized), be or be it the associated with is clinical grounds, complication an into of or when a it subclassified secondary the clonal amyloidosis tissue-destructive chronic a plasma as occurs it amyloidosis when is process. inflammatory or On pattern systemic underlying cell proliferation, primary patterns several or a amyloidosis organ Hereditary separate, of distinctive constitutes familial involvement. with group heterogeneous

Associated With Amyloidosis: Proliferations Primary Amyloidosis. Plasma Cell usually in AL category distribution. Amyloid the type is of and is in this systemic cases 3000 in United new is year each the States. most to amyloidosis, 2000 form with approximately of common the This by that molecules. clonal plasma synthesize Ig caused abnormal It proliferation of is a cells to myeloma, individuals The production type in of with (Chapter systemic chains free plasma-cell of by tumor AL 12). immunoglobulin a occurs 5% amyloidosis characterized light 15% multiple of excessive to and The aggregating to Bence protein) are κ λ as tissues amyloid. as in prone light (referred or chains Jones unpaired depositing free, of however, free likely clear not to the it is all not do patients produce equally that develop amyloid. light myeloma chains Since amyloidosis, are majority light reasons, more κ For than to are deposit chains. λ approximately unknown six amyloid times chains light as likely

amyloid cell formation primary cases myeloma tumor persons traditionally masses. effects overt features their have have classified AL with deposition B the such been not do as amyloidosis, from solely derive multiple Most any or amyloid neoplasm; clinical than because rather of other of urine. be in found or immunoglobulins free the chains, or blood all monoclonal light virtually In or both, cases, can however, such a of patients protein) Most have (e.g., these misfolded http://ebooksmedicine.net also

to structure ˜-sheet Monomers assemble form

NORMAL OF MUTANT (e.g., PRODUCTION transthyretin) OF AMOUNTS PROTEIN

Fig. Pathogenesisofamyloidosis.(A)Generalmechanismofformationofamyloidfibrils. 5.42 (B)Formationofamyloidfromexcessiveproductionofproteins pronetomisfolding. (C)Formationofamyloidfrommutantprotein.

the in AL increase which presumably secrete plasma the bone of marrow, precursors cells modest in of the number protein.

Reactive Amyloidosis. Systemic distribution AA in are deposits protein. amyloid this composed are systemic and The in pattern of it as was secondary previously is This referred to category secondary amyloidosis an to because

5.16 Table associated Amyloidosis condition. Classification inflammatory of but often to conditions currently, underlying the At antibiotic and amyloidosis. chronic these most were treatment bronchiectasis, lead conditions, and important osteomyelitis frequently less with time, one resolve tuberculosis, inflammatory rheumatoid tissue disorders now, commonly reactive More as such ankylosing other systemic bowel amyloidosis complicates connective disease, spondylitis, and particularly arthritis,

http://ebooksmedicine.net PlasmacellproliferationswithMultiplemyelomaandothermonoclonalALImmunoglobulinlightchains,amyloidosis(primaryamyloidosis)plasmacellproliferations

Crohn ulcerative and disease colitis. frequent arthritis. most is rheumatoid Among condition these, associated the is of affected. rheumatoid and one significant reported occur clinically approximately with arthritis half is patients of in 3% Amyloidosis those to in also a AA have inject occurrence subcutaneously abusers of Heroin drug the who amyloidosis. generalized high rate to of “skin-popping” amyloidosis. with injection the the responsible chronic skin be cause narcotics, infections, which associated seem for The with carcinoma Hodgkin being systemic and amyloidosis cancers, also most the occur renal Reactive lymphoma. association cell may common certain in

AA stimulated is thus, long-standing inflammation leads that to by liver such of SAA SAA synthesis by sustained levels. and amyloidosis, elevation In during are as a produced cytokines cells IL-1 inflammation; IL-6 only in cases all While are of amyloidosis. increased SAA small subset a inflammation, levels get patients seems SAA that prone that breakdown some forming produces in to fibrils. intermediates It are

Amyloidosis. Heredofamilial A familial have described. of forms variety been of amyloidosis and occur in limited rare geographic Most are areas. largely in fever, which called studied of origins. recessive encountered and Arabic autosomal individuals is Armenian, Sephardic common condition an Jewish, familial most is The and Mediterranean best to production excessive associated IL-1 with cytokine of the an syndrome “autoinflammatory” is in response stimuli. This inflammatory inflammation by attacks It that surfaces characterized of synovitis. fever pleuritis, by and is as of serosal peritonitis, accompanied manifests the neutrophils, mediators. to important in encodes cells, a for response inflammatory dampening called particularly familial is protein immune that fever of The gene pyrin innate Mediterranean amyloid of of the inflammation. to The related in type, AA disorder this seen recurrent the is is bouts that it suggesting

of to fibrils Mediterranean In deposition amyloid mutant disorders by of group up a is dominant fever, made contrast of familial autosomal characterized from (TTR). familial transthyretin derived the TTR of hormone a thyroxine. transporter is Remarkably, mutant to amyloidotic seen mainly in amyloid polyneuropathies), polypeptides nerves tend cardiac families, predominate. organs; thus, in in whereas peripheral TTR different in are deposits others some specific (familial form deposits approximately of both homozygous carried population cardiac leads 4% the been to United and identified that amyloidosis gene mutated by TTR the and has of is in The cardiomyopathy patients. heterozygous form the black States, in of who precise patients clinically prevalence known. with is this disease mutation The cardiac not develop manifest

Amyloidosis. Hemodialysis-Associated hemodialysis derived for develop can long-term failure β2-microglobulin. amyloid Patients renal deposits from on concentrations not it of with was the circulation in in membranes. in serum in is high This renal disease, and filtered past present protein the the individuals it because dialysis be through retained could incidence the has dialysis this With new filters, substantially. complication of decreased of of periarthritis, the form tenosynovitis features classical the are scapulohumeral of this triad tunnel syndrome, amyloidosis and hand. of carpal flexor The

Localized Amyloidosis. single of site a amyloid without involvement are the limited tissue body. Sometimes, other in or to deposits organ any The only may be on microscopic or detectable evident produce masses examination. nodular deposits grossly most often Nodular lung, deposits region and the encountered the larynx, eye. the are skin, amyloid tongue, about in urinary of bladder, with infiltrates and of cells Frequently, associated masses. are lymphocytes amyloid plasma there these a of represent cell–derived and protein At therefore amyloid least in amyloid. cases, the may localized AL of some consists plasma form

Endocrine Amyloid. in pancreas, Microscopic gland, diabetes the such be and carcinoma tumors 2 in with certain tumors, may thyroid type of Langerhans the medullary pheochromocytomas, found of localized amyloid the islets as and of islet mellitus. individuals deposits stomach, of in carcinomas endocrine undifferentiated the of polypeptide proteins polypeptide). (e.g., (e.g., amyloidogenic proteins medullary to hormones In these or from the unique seem derived islet be carcinoma) either from settings, amyloid

Amyloid of Aging. amyloid with deposition aging. forms Several well-documented of occur their deposition elderly systemic of in seventies and refers patients (usually the to eighties). Senile systemic in amyloidosis amyloid dominant heart, this senile form and Because cardiac of the dysfunction involvement the called of amyloidosis. previously was related (Chapter a 11). Those who arrhythmias are restrictive present and symptomatic with cardiomyopathy contrast The normal in to familial this derived in is form, amyloid from forms, TTR.

MORPHOLOGYTherearenoconsistentordistinctivepatternsoforganortissuedistributionofamyloiddepositsinanyofthecategoriescited,butafewgeneralizationscanbemade.InAAamyloidosissecondarytochronicinflammatorydisorders,kidneys,liver,spleen,lymphnodes,adrenalglands,thyroidglands,andmanyothertissuesaretypicallyaffected.AlthoughALamyloidosisassociatedwithplasmacellproliferationscannotreliablybedistinguishedfromtheAAformbyitsorgandistribution,itmoreofteninvolvestheheart,gastrointestinaltract,respiratorytract,peripheralnerves,skin,andtongue.Thelocalizationofamyloiddepositsinthehereditarysyndromesisvaried.InfamilialMediterraneanfever,theamyloidosisisoftheAAtypeandaccordinglymaybewidespread,involvingthekidneys,bloodvessels,spleen,respiratorytract,and(rarely)liver.

Amyloidmaybeappreciatedmacroscopicallywhenitaccumulatesinlargeamounts.Theorganisfrequentlyenlarged,andthetissueappearsgrayandhasawaxy,firmconsistency.Histologically,theamyloiddepositionisalwaysextracellularandbeginsbetweencells,oftencloselyadjacenttobasementmembranes(

Fig.5.43A ).Astheamyloidaccumulates,itencroachesonthecells,intimesurroundinganddestroyingthem.Intheformassociatedwithplasmacellproliferation,perivascularandvasculardepositsarecommon.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

histopathology.Withthelightmicroscopeandhematoxylinandeosinstains,amyloidappearsasanamorphous,eosinophilic,hyaline,extracellularsubstance.Todifferentiateamyloidfromotherhyalinematerials(e.g.,collagen,fibrin),avarietyofhistochemicalstainsareused.ThemostwidelyusedistheCongoredstain,whichunderordinarylightgivesapinkorredcolortotissuedeposits,butfarmorestrikingandspecificisthegreenbirefringenceofthestainedamyloidwhenobservedbypolarizingmicroscopy( The amyloidosis diagnosis is based on of

Fig.

5.43B ).Thisstainingreactionissharedbyallformsofamyloidandisimpartedbythecrossedβ-pleatedsheetconfigurationofamyloidfibrils.Confirmationcanbeobtainedbyelectronmicroscopy,whichrevealsamorphousnonorientedthinfibrils.Subtypingofamyloidismostreliablydonebymassspectroscopy,asimmunohistochemicalstainsarenotentirelysensitiveorspecific.

Thepatternoforganinvolvementindifferentformsofamyloidosisisvariable.

Kidney. Amyloidosisofthekidneyisthemostcommonandpotentiallythemostseriousformoforganinvolvement.Grossly,thekidneysmaybeofnormalsizeandcolor,orinadvancedcasestheymaybeshrunkenbecauseofischemiacausedbyvascularnarrowinginducedbythedepositionofamyloidwithinarterialandarteriolarwalls.Histologically,theamyloidisdepositedprimarilyintheglomeruli,buttheinterstitialperitubulartissue,arteries,andarteriolesarealsoaffected.Theglomerulardepositsfirstappearassubtlethickeningsofthemesangialmatrix,accompaniedusuallybyunevenwideningofthebasementmembranesoftheglomerularcapillaries.Intime,depositsinthemesangiumandalongthebasementmembranescausecapillarynarrowinganddistortionoftheglomerularvasculartuft.Withprogressionoftheglomerularamyloidosis,thecapillarylumensareobliteratedandtheobsolescentglomerulusisreplacedbyconfluentmassesorinterlacingbroadribbonsofamyloid.

Spleen. spleen. Amyloidosisofthespleenmaybeinapparentgrosslyormaycausemoderatetomarkedsplenomegaly(upto800g).Formysteriousreasons,twodistinctpatternsofdepositionareseen.Inone,thedepositsarelargelylimitedtothesplenicfollicles,producingtapioca-likegranulesongrossinspection,designatedsago spleen. Intheotherpattern,theamyloidinvolvesthewallsofthesplenicsinusesandconnectivetissueframeworkintheredpulp.Fusionoftheearlydepositsgivesrisetolarge,maplikeareasofamyloidosis,creatingwhathasbeendesignatedlardaceous

Liver. Thedepositsmaybeinapparentgrosslyormaycausemoderatetomarkedhepatomegaly.AmyloidappearsfirstinthespaceofDisseandthenprogressivelyencroachesonadjacenthepaticparenchymalcellsandsinusoids.Intime,deformity,pressureatrophy,anddisappearanceofhepatocytesoccur,causingtotalreplacementoflargeareasofliverparenchyma.VascularinvolvementanddepositsinKupffercellsarefrequent.Liverfunctionisusuallypreserveddespitesometimesquiteextensiveinvolvement.

Heart. Amyloidosisoftheheart(Chapter11)mayoccurinanyformofsystemicamyloidosis.Italsoisthemajororganinvolvedinsenilesystemicamyloidosis.Theheartmaybeenlargedandfirm,butmoreoftenitshowsnoappreciablechangeongrossinspection.Histologicallythedepositsbeginasfocalsubendocardialaccumulationsandwithinthemyocardiumbetweenthemusclefibers.Expansionofthesemyocardialdepositseventuallycausespressureatrophyofmyocardialfibers.Whentheamyloiddepositsaresubendocardial,theconductionsystemmaybedamaged,accountingfortheelectrocardiographicabnormalitiesnotedinsomepatients.

Other Organs. maybeinvolvedfocallyordiffuselyfromthelarynxdowntothesmallestbronchioles.Adistinctformofamyloidisfoundinthebrains Nodulardepositionsinthetongue maycausemacroglossia,givingrisetothedesignationtumor-formingamyloidofthetongue.Therespiratory tract isafeatureofseveralfamilialamyloidoticneuropathies. ofpatientswithAlzheimerdisease.Itmaybepresentinso-called“plaques”aswellasbloodvessels(Chapter23).Amyloidosisofperipheralandautonomicnerves

Fig. Amyloidosis. 5.43 (A)AsectionofliverstainedwithCongoredrevealspink-reddepositsofamyloidinthewallsofbloodvesselsandalongsinusoids.

(B)Notetheyellow-greenbirefringenceofthedepositswhenobservedbyapolarizingmicroscope. of Dr.Trace School,Dallas,Texas.) Department Medical Courtesy (B, and of of Southwestern Pathology,University Hinton, Worrell Sandy Texas http://ebooksmedicine.net

and even having manifestations, an found unsuspected anatomic problems be may or as clinical clinical serious change, may it produced cause no death. Amyloidosis affected. on symptoms magnitude sites depend organs The or of deposits and the on the the lightheadedness, first are weight weakness, at often such loss, entirely nonspecific, Clinical syncope. or as manifestations and appear findings and relate more most specific renal, to gastrointestinal Somewhat cardiac, often later involvement.

14). that Renal involvement syndrome severe to the be cause to gives proteinuria (Chapter nephrotic may rise enough advanced and ultimately of cases leads obliteration to in uremia. renal Progressive glomeruli failure failure is Renal common of cause a death. Cardiac amyloidosis congestive as insidiously present heart failure. may amyloidosis The of which and disturbances conduction most cardiac may prove arrhythmias, fatal. serious are aspects of pericarditis masquerades chronic constrictive and 11). produces amyloidosis cardiac cardiomyopathy (Chapter Occasionally, a restrictive pattern as it in variety Gastrointestinal of asymptomatic, present amyloidosis or ways. be may may a and cause sufficient enlargement hamper Amyloidosis the speech swallowing. to may of tongue inelasticity and intestine the in Depositions in diarrhea, and may lead to digestion. stomach and disturbances malabsorption, causes trauma. that trivial following lead amyloidosis can may spontaneously that seemingly vascular occur or to sometimes massive, Vascular fragility bleeding, Additionally, bleeding factor cases and a AL disorder. binds X, amyloid inactivates critical in coagulation leading factor, to some a life-threatening

deposits depends of of demonstration histologic tissues. in The the on diagnosis amyloid amyloidosis rectal biopsied in most systemic having present, patients manifestations when sites are renal kidney, the The of common are or amyloidosis. gingival or suspected tissues be used Examination Congo fat amyloidosis. stained with the systemic of also abdominal red can of for aspirates diagnosis sensitivity is is The low. its test but specific, quite be suspected of and amyloidosis, performed. immunoelectrophoresis In electrophoresis cases serum and protein urine should AL a even absence monoclonal the overt cells, population cases marrow show of Bone of myeloma. in often aspirates multiple in plasma such with is binds presence. and P amyloid serum since rapid to component and reveals radiolabeled SAP a specific Scintigraphy the deposits amyloid their test, (SAP) used the to amyloidosis extent of of a follow also measure can undergoing patients and treatment. be gives It useful amyloid. spectroscopy is identification Mass a of protein component for the tool of embedded be tissues. performed on paraffin It can

The amyloidosis generalized for prognosis is individuals with poor. median after years have myeloma) amyloidosis AL diagnosis. (not of multiple Those with survival a including 2 even an Individuals amyloidosis prognosis. with have poorer myeloma-associated outlook on depends for reactive somewhat of systemic is The some extent better control the and condition. to amyloidosis the individuals underlying with amyloid this treatment condition associated rare occurrence. after of reported, the has Resorption is but been a of protein and being are correcting New at inhibiting strategies aimed developed. misfolding fibrillogenesis therapeutic

Amyloidosisisadisordercharacterizedbytheextracellulardepositsofproteinsthatarepronetoaggregateandforminsolublefibrils.

Thedepositionoftheseproteinsmayresultfrom:excessiveproductionofproteinsthatarepronetoaggregation;mutationsthatproduceproteinsthatcannotfoldproperlyandtendtoaggregate;defectiveorincompleteproteolyticdegradationofextracellularproteins.

Amyloidosismaybelocalizedorsystemic.Itisseeninassociationwithavarietyofprimarydisorders,includingmonoclonalB-cellproliferations(inwhichtheamyloiddepositsconsistofimmunoglobulinlightchains);chronicinflammatorydiseasessuchasrheumatoidarthritis(depositsofamyloidAprotein,derivedfromanacute-phaseproteinproducedininflammation);Alzheimerdisease(amyloidβ protein);familialconditionsinwhichtheamyloiddepositsconsistofmutatedproteins(e.g.,transthyretininfamilialamyloidpolyneuropathies);andhemodialysis(depositsofβ2-microglobulin,whoseclearanceisdefective).

Amyloiddepositscausetissueinjuryandimpairnormalfunctionbycausingpressureoncellsandtissues.Theydonotevokeaninflammatoryresponse.

R, Opin et Sparks Genetics Immunol allergy variants, rare 36:115, sensitization: mutations, of common Waage 2015. and Curr al: K, allergic Bonnelykke J, associated the on genes diseases.] with update [An allergic

2015. Pathol et autoinflammatory Annu D, syndromes, inflammasomes BS, and Rev Nardo Broderick 10:395, al: L, De Franklin The in inflammasome discussion role [A of the diseases.] and inflammatory its

inflammation 123:939– environmental T 2013. 944, A, cells, of of AY: Control Rudensky by J Invest Chaudhry Clin by integration cues regulatory T and discussion [A in system.] the maintain thoughtful responses immune of homeostasis cells control regulatory how inflammatory

Rev MS: Monogenic Cheng 30:393–427, autoimmunity, Anderson Immunol 2012. Annu MH, review pathways about single-gene mutations, by they teach excellent immunologic what tolerance.] caused [An of and autoimmune syndromes of us

generation inborn of of by immunity ME, Discovery single-gene Conley 30:17, Curr JL: 2014. Immunol next sequencing, Opin Casanova errors approaches [A identifying review immunodeficiency of diseases.] for basis the modern of genetic

Craft Nat helper systemic autoimmunity, Rheumatol in immunity cells Rev and Follicular T JE: 2012. 8:337–347, generation cells the properties roles in discussion [A follicular of and production T and antibody of autoimmunity.] and their helper

RA: Roederer Douek Koup 2009. M, 60:471, Rev of the concepts in Med Annu Emerging DC, immunopathogenesis AIDS, unresolved discussion [A balanced pathogenesis issues.] the and of of still the AIDS,

of allergic Galli SJ: development inflammation, The 2008. 454:445, Nature diseases.] allergic mechanisms inflammation the review [An of excellent of in

Galli paradox: Pathol Am to 186:212, cell-IgE mast 2016. SJ: J The anaphylaxis, from homeostasis mast discussion cell of disease.] their and [A and host evolution fascinating in of defense responses the roles http://ebooksmedicine.net

of Multistep Cell autoimmune pathogenesis 130:25, disease, 2007. Goodnow CC: and that discussion might excellent why fail.] the autoimmunity checkpoints [An prevent these of

in 2012. and Holgate adaptive Nat immune 18:673–683, ST: responses Innate asthma, Med asthma.] roles the of of development of [A immune the the discussion and system TH2 and cells, cells other cytokines, resolution in of comprehensive

multistep Jancar 2005. Immune Crespo 26:48, Sanchez paradigm, Trends tissue injury: Immunol a M: S, complex–mediated summary complex–mediated of of immune injury.] the mechanisms [A tissue

cytoplasmic al: 8:139–160, vasculitis, Hu antineutrophil Annu et Falk Pathogenesis Jennette P, JC, small-vessel Rev autoantibody-associated of RJ, 2013. Pathol features the of comprehensive review and pathogenesis clinical pathologic [A of vasculitis.] small-vessel and

Microbial S, Cold acid sensors, Kawai sensing Perspect 7:a016246, intracellular by Pandey 2014. Spring nucleic Toll-like Harb T, Biol receptors S: and Akira to system sense immune the the review used receptors innate by of excellent [An microbes.]

et Immunol see), don’t Nat negative thymocytes T PM, what selection of 2014. Positive 14:377, Kyewski see Klein al: (and L, B, and repertoire: Allen Rev the cell of in the tolerance the T mechanisms central induced of [A thymus.] maturation and discussion cell

2014. 157:1013, Cell M, functions and inflammasomes, VM: Mechanisms of Dixit Lamkanfi and inflammation defense.] and excellent on inflammasome host in [An update its role the

of advances, Davidson 18:871–882, leading Nat Taming Z, lupus—a clinical new Liu A: Med is 2012. understanding to pathogenesis the immune lupus the the review therapies.] novel of the of recent disease, responses [An innate advances advances and excellent roles and understanding in and adaptive of in of development genetics are shaping these how

Mahajan Rev Pathol 2014. VS, 9:315, Deshpande al: IgG4-related H, disease, et Mattoo Annu V, recently likely comprehensive and features of this discussion of entity.] pathogenesis the [A recognized

disease: hosted self, 10:297–301, Microbiota autoimmune the Benoist D, Cell and 2011. Host Mathis C: Microbe microbiome and evidence and review that diseases.] relevance these the autoimmune of autoimmunity, to the influences immune activation the findings human of [A

syndrome, Annu Pathol Sjögren’s Mavragani CP, HM: 9:273, Moustsopoulos 2014. Rev of the Sjögren’s [A and features pathogenesis of clinical review syndrome.]

immune meets Rev wall, Graft 4:19, vascular the Annu vessel Mitchell Pathol RN: 2009. response disease: lead chronic vascular [A rejection.] disease the to of that graft in mechanisms review

Pathogenic 2011. mechanisms Fauci Chun disease, of Pathol Annu S, 6:223, TW, HIV Moir Rev AS: [A the mechanisms immunodeficiency.] discussion HIV by current causes of which of concepts

Nankivell Engl Rejection 2010. allograft, SI: BJ, 363:1451, kidney J N Med the of Alexander strategies the rejection of for of treating mechanisms [A the of rejection.] and good review new allografts of and development recognition

2010. O’Shea CD4+ Paul of Mechanisms cells, JJ, lineage underlying 327:1098, Science T commitment and plasticity helper WE: [An field.] cell excellent T uncertainties subsets, and of helper review and development functions in of the the the

cells, S: Development 2013. regulatory Y, Sakaguchi of N, Immunity Kitagawa T and maintenance Ohkura 38:414–423, [An excellent cells.] and molecular the of of generation, the review underlying regulatory mechanisms maintenance, stability T

Postlethwaite M, Brown of 2015. Pathogenesis 6:272, systemic D, Immunol al: Front et BC, sclerosis, Pattanaik of discussion current the [A systemic sclerosis.] concepts of of pathogenesis

2013. J et Immunol Clin Allergy story, 131:314–323, a Notarangelo Parvaneh immunodeficiencies: LD, N, JL, evolving Casanova al: Primary rapidly immunodeficiency [An excellent primary of review described newly syndromes.]

2012. Harb Cold tolerance, 4:a006908, RH: of Historical Spring overview immunological Schwartz Perspect Biol how may experimental disrupted mechanisms to [A behind of they rise mechanisms, of autoimmunity.] give thoughtful the tolerance, elucidation and be of to the summary studies these the

N Tsokos 2011. GC: Systemic J 365:2110, Med Engl erythematosus, lupus [An review lupus.] features of the and of excellent clinical pathogenesis

targeted P: and Westermark GT, therapies, Annu AA Westermark 2015. Fandrich Pathol M, 10:321, Rev pathogenesis amyloidosis: and pathogenesis amyloidosis.] of the excellent a form features [An review clinical major of of

Annu MC: centers, 30:429–457, Nussenzweig 2012. GD, Victora Germinal Immunol Rev formation centers [An responses in properties germinal their and excellent autoimmune and review antibody diseases.] the and roles of of

offers in Human Opin Immunol mechanisms an 24:552–557, emerging 2012. Curr and C: Cotsapas picture autoimmunity, common Voight genetics BF, of pathways with discussion the autoimmunity.] of [A understanding the for autoimmune pathways of implications and diseases genetic associations

and Fouser intestines, diseases al: Annu LA, pathway 8:477, of Elson et lungs, Rev Weaver TH17 inflammatory the Pathol CO, skin, CT, 2013. and The of inflammatory cells review in diseases.] of [An autoimmune relationships and and lineage their other the excellent roles and TH17 development

al: Cell C, Unraveling Zenewicz RA, L, et of 2010. 140:791, Flavell genetics the autoimmunity, Abraham significance.] their are diseases, identified, genes these [An update on autoimmune susceptibility for how and studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

Carcinogenesis:AMultistepProcess

Insensitivity Signals:Tumor Inhibitory to Growth

Evasion of Death Cell

Immune of Surveillance Evasion

as Tumor-Promoting Malignancy an of Inflammation Enabler

EtiologyofCancer:CarcinogenicAgents

on Host Effects of Tumor

Grading Staging and Cancer of

Cancer Diagnosis of Laboratory

is second cause death States; Cancer higher the toll. United diseases in cardiovascular the of exact a leading only than agonizing inflicted physical associated the is Even neoplasms. the mortality emotional suffering more and by to be question that public ask, simple The not one the there cancer?” Patients rather share and many a growth often difficult, disease cure “When a this disorders but because answer cancer is is dysregulation. profound will for curable, such cancer others, Hodgkin always the are of as highly fatal. Some lymphoma, are cancers, pancreas, virtually such whereas as in its of great been lies cancer. only made and have learning The strides cancer molecular the for in hope understanding about pathogenesis, controlling more basis This and deals of chapter nature and of transformation. biology benign neoplasms malignant molecular the neoplasia—the the basis with neoplastic basic of response also are and to of The host clinical the features neoplasia discussed. tumors

genetic features to is summarize we the carcinogenesis, discuss useful it is Before the mechanisms a the cancers: cancer disorder shared • cells of by characteristics and of mutations. Cancer and DNA of fundamental caused pathogenic are mutagens of spontaneously aging. Most exposure or either as occur to induced mutations part by and mutations epigenetic focal methylation increases frequently genes in which stem that such as histone alterations changes, such in addition, acquired show themselves In in DNA regulate cancers modifications. modifications, from may growth, or survival, key processes, expression and fundamental These function senescence. that regulate changes cellular as such alter epigenetic of genes the genetic and

in cells division. daughter upon to are passed cancer being cell heritable, cells alterations Genetic alterations (survival scientific a the result, harboring to important these subject the Darwinian are in cells As of fittest, concept arguably most selection biology). dominate population. mutations provide a or that Cells neighbors outcompete growth to survival thus advantage come their the and bearing one cell, (i.e., are the time selective tumor these initiation, of At advantages cell). progeny as clonal tumors the conferred all a a are of result single and on However, in detail and cancers of of the selection referred favoring discussed important aggressive emergence subclones evolution as with initiation, continues the genetically to the more to of progression concept chapter. shape this distinct by point beyond more characteristics, Darwinian in even an later

as to cancer epigenetic http://ebooksmedicine.net of are a and hallmarks. cells properties referred collectively that Mutations to impart alterations cancer set phenotypes properties of various the cancers well response that produce to their the as cellular natural therapies. history as dictate These are in hallmark each of underpinnings of sections. The later discussed cancer molecular

cancer elucidated cellular and many that rise its pernicious behavior. to the govern has Basic molecular research abnormalities and give of cancer, emerging triumph revolution These leading turn of biomedical are in and of diagnosis science. in the treatment insights to an a

to growth.” Neoplastic regulatory continue said control cells influences oblivious cells. apparently to because are that means be literally replicate, the they Neoplasia to transformed “new normal local size their of enjoy in regardless increase environment. degree and therefore of to tend autonomy Neoplasms a however. is Their by complete, autonomy means no for neoplasms the host blood nutrition their depend supply. on All and hormone exploited also require such derived and be dependencies responsive tissues support, often can Neoplasms from therapeutically. sometimes endocrine

called “study medical tumor, the oncos, is tumors logos, In referred of”). usage, as a study to a often “tumor,” is (from common of and and oncology neoplasm Among on into of and tumor’s clinical is potential a division of tumors, behavior. the benign a based neoplasms categories malignant judgment

to is to will relatively remain implying and are A innocent, its localized characteristics be and gross considered it be said is tumor amenable microscopic to that when removal. local surgical benign survive. Affected patients generally however, benign note, and than significant even or localized are Of tumors sometimes lethal. can lumps, they more morbidity produce produce

spread sites neoplasm, can that and death. the distant implies destroy cause invade applied to and to as adjacent lesion a structures (metastasize) to Malignant,

derived crab’s they Malignant from behavior. they seize adhere a referred to “crab”—that part similar collectively obstinate as for in to the manner, any are is, cancers, Latin word an tumors that to pursue course. all deadly Not cancers so a some flag. curable, red most also malignant the constitutes most a but The are aggressive of the designation

up tumors, parenchyma, two and neoplastic (1) (2) vessels, blood up host-derived, made tissue, All supporting, of non-neoplastic inflammatory or cells. malignant, made benign host-derived the of and basic and transformed have connective cells, the stroma, components: this of its it behavior, component derives biologic and tumor determines the its The from is parenchyma the name. which largely neoplasm the The cells. provides growth neoplasm, of of the supply to is for parenchymal since blood it and the crucial support the carries growth stroma carry reflects parenchymal largely conversation the realization growing there of behavior cells, influences the neoplastic stromal of been biologic tumors cells the and a the two-way that behavior that a of Although the growth tumor. on cells has

the are by from general, designated the attaching benign tumors In suffix to arises. which cell tumor type the -oma fibrous tumor benign fibroma; a arising a example, tissue benign a chondroma. a is tumor cartilaginous For in is tumors. nomenclature is varied applied benign complex to and More epithelial that not is glands The adenoma structures, from to benign glandular generally that to but also glandlike only neoplasms growth epithelial applied a derived but lack neoplasms are pattern. benign term produce epithelial arising pattern adrenal of glandlike epithelial mass growing but patterns that no an cells neoplasm as Thus, its produces has in benign from origin epithelial is renal benign the and cortex. adenoma, a glandular in cells is tubule termed a a that Papillomas or are epithelial surface, macroscopic fronds. on neoplasms, fingerlike microscopic any growing produce benign to ( A polyp visible surface, a in form macroscopically a gut, is structure that the a projects above mucosal mass as

Fig. ). 6.1 origin. may commonly grow but used this is benign whereas polyps malignant as (such also tumors, polyps, are Although term tumors nasal some not in inflammatory other neoplastic for as polyps) masses the are hollow that arise typically Cystadenomas ovary. cystic in

additions tumors, of certain of essentially exceptions. The malignant that nomenclature and tumors benign follows with

sarcomas, of in arising the mesenchymal neoplasms those “solid” cells lymphomas. whereas from called or the leukemias arising called mesenchymal are tissues its or Malignant derivatives blood are composition, which designated are based origin. their cell of cell-type presumably their reflects on Sarcomas a liposarcoma, neoplasm neoplasm malignant Thus, is composed a chondrosarcoma. is a cells malignant of of chondrocyte-like fat-like and comprised cells a

are epithelia from the all origin. of called tissue regardless of layers, the cell cells malignant of While of carcinomas germ derived the are three body neoplasms epithelial epithelium lining Thus, the (mesoderm), the considered renal carcinomas. are gut all the in (ectoderm), (endoderm) skin tubular epithelium neoplasms malignant arising and of Furthermore, (leukemias (epithelial), rise give and mesoderm lymphomas). and carcinomas hematolymphoid sarcomas may to (mesenchymal), tumors

are further. Carcinomas subdivided carcinomas. that called called a that Carcinomas grow pattern squamous in glandular and cell are are produce adenocarcinomas, cells squamous those it the http://ebooksmedicine.net but in is the not tissue tumors Sometimes renal for of can be organ or adenocarcinoma, identified, origin of cell designation as uncommon

Fig. 6.1 Colonicpolyp.Thisglandulartumorisseenprojectingintothecoloniclumen.Thepolypisattachedtothemucosabyadistinctstalk.

little to show differentiation. no or to carcinoma. undifferentiated differentiated referred poorly tumors are or Such as

or transformed cells single progenitor other, neoplasm, in malignant, each a their benign resemble whether with a usually cell. from origin transformed consistent The some the divergent however, In instances, unusual tumor undergo so-called creating tumors”. cells differentiation, “mixed such in down monoclonal capacity are to differentiate tumors tumors one has Mixed progenitor cell but than lineage. more the origin, the of still tumor The gland. is salivary best example mixed of have cartilage dispersed a islands tumors sometimes fibromyxoid components These or obvious ( of harboring epithelial bone stroma, throughout

Fig. ). 6.2 preferred and single pleomorphic progenitor for cell, these adenoma. these to a the is transformed neoplasms All designation are thought from derive elements diverse epithelial of another female mixed breast is common of the tumor. Fibroadenoma elements This fibrous tissue embedded ductal in a benign of (fibroma). mixture tumor contains proliferating (adenoma) loose is term fibroadenoma neoplastic, common only in the pleomorphic fibrous component remains Unlike but usage. adenoma, the

one of cell three. layer, mixed sometimes mature a or Teratoma and than derived all special contains from is recognizable that germ tissues or more cells immature tumor type sometimes the abnormally cells present and that are in midline germ testis as ovary totipotential Teratomas originate in and from such embryonic that rests. those normally reside in bone, the neoplasms not may any cell fashion. and nerve, together they differentiate other fat, thrown to give epithelium, found resembling the cells tissues, muscle, body; elements to all Germ of that therefore, into types surprisingly, contain adult the in a capacity rise helterskelter have

in The common are specific neoplasms presented names more of the

Table . 6.1 be noted. may glaring inconsistencies Some mesothelioma, terms malignant used for the neoplasms. lymphoma, For example, melanoma, and are seminoma exceptions these for in entrenched are Unfortunately terminology. students, medical firmly

of terminology: also There instances other confusing are

as a the particular or disorganized such liver. of indigenous the Hamartoma the to tissue lung is site, mass have neoplastic. acquired developmental hamartomas considered traditionally considered While on clonal malformations, somatic this are and chromosomal be aberrations now mutations through many are to basis that

cells. of anomaly heterotopic consisting nest of a a is Choristoma congenital organized the submucosa be and tissue well-developed in pancreatic may example, duodenum, of the small found of normally intestine. a small For nodule stomach, or usually connoting as designation they are to significance. imparts -oma, these an of undeserved lesions neoplasm, gravity, trivial a The

neoplasms physicians regrettably in because it care. which language is in the is is terminology tumor’s among nature the important an involved significance and by understanding communicated the is a different disciplines nomenclature of of complex, Although cancer

Fig. Mixedtumoroftheparotidgland.Smallnestsofepithelialcellsandmyxoidstromaformingcartilageandbone(anunusualfeature)arepresentinthisfield. 6.2 Brigham Women’s Boston, Department Jo, Hospital, of and Dr. Vicky of Massachusetts.) (Courtesy Pathology, http://ebooksmedicine.net

One Neoplastic One Layer Than Usually Germ Derived From Type—Mixed Cell More Tumors, Cell

TotipotentialcellsingonadsorinembryonicMatureteratoma,dermoidcystImmatureteratoma,teratocarcinomarests

and local can metastasis. features tumors distinguished: There invasion, anaplasia, and differentiation be malignant fundamental most benign and three are by which bad slowly malignant not a as actors. malignancy, In but and grow result signifies tumors between and a is good rapid discriminator growth many growth also reliable rate general, criteria. of tumor determination “It malignant Although important benign.” a with than anatomic and is the to most neoplasms clinical some benign made being long-established with in is the more Nothing characterization, patient using defy easy versus told: is instances remarkable accuracy

functionally; the and anaplasia. origin, of both of morphologically their is Differentiation to parenchymal to differentiation refers resemble extent lack called which neoplasms cells are In general, cells counterparts. their normal of closely benign composed neoplasms resemble well-differentiated that mature A of cartilage up synthesize with that cells mature of matrix—evidence lipoma and morphologic functional cells lipid is cartilaginous differentiation. usual made up laden of chondroma is cytoplasmic a made their vacuoles, and fat are rare of mitoses usually well-differentiated benign normal In configuration. tumors, and are

exhibit parenchymal range most By cell contrast, morphologic nature. neoplasms alterations betray their wide a malignant malignant differentiation, exhibit that while of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Well-differentiatedsquamouscellcarcinomaoftheskin.Thetumorcellsarestrikinglysimilartonormalsquamousepithelialcells,withintercellularbridgesandnestsofkeratin(arrow). 6.3 Pathology, Texas of Medical University Worrell,Department Southwestern School, of of (Courtesy Dr.Trace Dallas,Texas.)

may features In well-differentiated ( these be cancers, subtle quite

Fig. 6.3 ). of For the invasion being follicles, normal-appearing adenocarcinoma by or metastasis. tissues example, may gland contain into adjacent well-differentiated revealed only potential its thyroid malignant the not is benign to separation the blood in aid ones. but carrying growth of crucial malignant from The the does stroma of tumors supply however, amount The of determine consistency a does, stromal connective neoplasm. tissue the of fibrous cancers tumors”. them hard, “scirrhous a making Certain (desmoplasia), stroma induce so-called abundant dense,

a reliable of are cells that malignancy. a of indicator composed to be anaplastic, Tumors feature undifferentiated is said differentiation the formation”—implying or of functional means loss The “backward structural cells. and normal literally of term dedifferentiation, anaplasia differentiation appearance. of from accounts stem arise cancers these now that their at of some cells in of than tumors, dedifferentiation however, is known, in cells, specialized stem least anaplastic rather for It failure tissues; transformed cells, cases, indicate some apparently that occurs mature dedifferentiation carcinogenesis. also cells in during studies of Recent morphologic often display Anaplastic the cells features: following

Pleomorphism in shape) size variation (i.e., and (

Fig. 6.4

multiple Nuclear or in abnormalities, size and nuclear variation single of consisting extreme nucleoli. prominent unusually or (dark-staining), hyperchromatism shape, an 1:1 in approaches 1:4 that or normal the increased may of ratio instead nuclear-to-cytoplasmic result 1:6. of Enlargement nuclei attain sometimes Nucleoli may of the astounding sizes, diameter approaching normal lymphocytes.

cells Tumor formed. may giant be several than may neighboring cells either or nucleus and considerably These nuclei. possess are enormous one larger

Atypical may mitoses, which be numerous. spindles ( Anarchic figures multiple tripolar may quadripolar or produce mitotic

Fig. 6.5

lack another. Loss that of anaplastic patterns to of such polarity, cells recognizable one orientation with loss grow sheets, in of communal may total cells Such

Fig. Pleomorphicmalignanttumor(rhabdomyosarcoma).Notethemarkedvariationincellandnuclearsizes,thehyperchromaticnuclei,andthepresenceoftumorgiantcells. 6.4 (Courtesy of Dr. of School,Dallas,Texas.) Southwestern Pathology,University Medical Department of Texas Trace Worrell, squamous as or stratified structures, glands such architecture.

activities. cells tumor anaplastic Well-differentiated are specialized of to much retain capabilities to counterparts, likely functional whereas cells likely their have normal are the functional less tumor endocrine neoplasms benign of elaborate origin. For well-differentiated cancers of of example, cell hormones glands and the frequently their characteristic even squamous keratin cell (see produce carcinomas well-differentiated Similarly,

Fig. ), as just secrete 6.3 carcinomas hepatocellular well-differentiated bile. In functions other instances, emerge. unanticipated may cells the in proteins produced express Some fetal adult. not by cancers comparable “ectopic may adrenocorticotropic certain and of so-called parathyroid example, For origin others. like glucagon, hormone, Cancers produce hormones.” hormone nonendocrine carcinomas may lung (ACTH), insulin, produce hormone– is “paraneoplastic” More so-called these about later. said phenomena

anaplasia dysplasia, is in relevance of referring the to and discussion Also proliferation. of disorderly differentiation

Fig. High-powerdetailedviewofanaplastictumorcellsshowscellularandnuclearvariationinsizeandshape.Theprominentcellinthecenterfieldhasanabnormaltripolarspindle. 6.5

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 6.6 Carcinomainsitu.(A)Low-powerviewshowsthattheentirethicknessoftheepitheliumisreplacedbyatypicaldysplasticcells.Thereisnoorderlydifferentiationofsquamouscells.Thebasementmembraneisintact,andthereisnotumorinthesubepithelialstroma. (B)High-powerviewofanotherregionshowsfailureofnormaldifferentiation,markednuclearandcellularpleomorphism,andnumerousmitoticfiguresextendingtowardthesurface.Theintactbasementmembrane(below)isnotseeninthissection.

recognized in the epithelium individual of is their Dysplastic architectural orientation. and in by a loss uniformity cells pleomorphism often and exhibit Dysplastic large, hyperchromatic possess abnormally nuclei. cells considerable locations more abnormal within are and in the usual abundant Mitotic frequently than epithelium. figures appear occur, stratified are where to not basal In epithelium. the confined layers, epithelium, they normally but seen throughout may dysplastic mitoses the squamous be is architectural considerable anarchy. In addition, there replaced tall the of maturation disordered to lost cells. the by basal-appearing basal flattened be of progressive For a in example, squames may cells surface the hodgepodge on layer and dark usual are of dysplastic ( the stage the is severe lesion situ, cancer the a of thickness as When epithelium, changes involve carcinoma to preinvasive and in entire referred

Fig. 6.6

not It to dysplasia synonymous with is is cancer. that appreciate important Mild epithelium the particularly inciting causes completely, removed. dysplasias do of sometimes regress to the entire thickness that not if are moderate involve noted with as adjacent in However, smokers presence an marks and dysplasia increased malignant (e.g., cigarette at general neoplasms the to frankly cancer. lung a risk invasive developing is cancer), of tissue often for in being dysplasia

cohesive growth masses as destruction and tissues, of remain their progressive accompanied most grow to of cancers is sites tumors benign origin. localized invasion, by surrounding The of infiltration, expansile that whereas and tissue usually fibrous benign of Because slowly, rim expand develop grow tumors compressed a ( they

Figs. ). 6.8 6.7 compression consists of resulting tumor. by parenchymal from cells stromal deposited activated capsule matrix hypoxic is by are cells expanding such that fibroblasts, This by largely which extracellular the to as damage (non-fixed), and that plane readily Encapsulation moveable the creates tumor a by surgical tissue discrete, makes enucleation. excisable not recognize to it are neoplasms is encapsulated. all that important benign However, the attenuated compressed leiomyoma by discretely from the a myometrium, demarcated For a example, and capsule. zone but surrounding lacks uterus the normal of muscle is of smooth such as to difficult hemangiomas, demarcation few is which neither discretely likely tumors lack understandably neoplasms in are particularly vascular may excise. encapsulated of benign A benign defined; nor be is a rule benign capsule lack out tumors, are does of that although only to a mean encapsulation in malignant. the the tumor emphasize exceptions not is that These pointed do rules Sadly, humans. follow cells of not because their tumor uncivilized the by nature, sometimes set such many We times deviations see in chapter. will this

Fig. Fibroadenomaofthebreast.Thetan-colored,encapsulatedsmalltumorissharplydemarcatedfromthewhiterbreasttissue. 6.7

Fig. 6.8 Microscopicviewoffibroadenomaofthebreastseenin

Fig.6.7 .Thefibrouscapsule(right) sharplydelimitsthetumorfromthesurroundingtissue. of Department of Pathology, University School, of Southwestern Dallas,Texas.) Texas Dr.Trace Worrell, Medical (Courtesy http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Cutsectionofinvasiveductalcarcinomaofthebreast.Thelesionisretracted,infiltratingthesurroundingbreastsubstance,andwasstony-hardonpalpation. 6.9

Next most distinguishes reliably cancers the to feature that the metastases, invasiveness tumors from ( of development is benign

Figs. 6.9 6.10 ). capsules. Cancers lack well-defined malignant stroma growing deceptively by be a in to which slowly appears the tissue, instances the microscopic feet tiny crablike adjacent of surrounding infiltrating penetrating tumor margin but structures. There examination are reveals the encased host and normal a mode of of tumor to is wide growth infiltrative attempted. excision margin it of a remove tissue when malignant surrounding This necessary makes surgical are to carefully examine Surgical pathologists cells tumors of (clean margins). resected that the margins devoid they ensure cancer of

the not tumor defined metastasize. the by to as discontinuous physically neoplasms primary do unequivocally and tumor benign with sites a are a malignant, spread marks that Metastasis of definition as tumor by is body providing The and permits lymphatics, cancers vessels, of opportunities penetrate blood them invasiveness cavities, spread into to ( for

Fig. ). 6.11 with diagnosed melanomas) with Overall, of (excluding than skin present approximately cancers tumors other patients solid 30% newly

Fig. Microscopicviewofbreastcarcinomaseenin 6.10

Fig.6.9

).Notetheabsenceofawell-definedcapsule. Fig.6.8 Women’s Brigham and of Susan Dr. Massachusetts.) Boston, Hospital, (Courtesy Lester, clinically metastases. evident An diagnosis. additional (hidden) at 20% have metastases occult of the time

the spread, are as the rules with more the neoplasm, more and most general, exceptions. is the metastatic anaplastic likely but primary there In larger Extremely ominous-looking not. small and have been large lesions some known cancers to conversely, may metastasize; metastasize, some While tumors malignant very all can do infrequently. so tumors of the most carcinomas basal example, of the highly cell primary rarely nervous locally and skin system invasive For are metastasize. but central properties metastasis and is evident the It separable. invasion are sometimes of then that local

A cancers”, circumstance and so-called special involves the leukemias lymphomas. “blood travel be enter the disseminated and bloodstream capacity result, These malignant. and considered are a taken with that from to to lymphomas and blood-forming sites; diseases as diagnosis to have rare the leukemias derived be distant cells tumors always at are normally to are only exceptions,

within disseminate (1) Malignant cavities, (3) or three by body seeding pathways: lymphatic hematogenous of neoplasms spread, one spread. (2) Spread by seeding

Fig. Aliverstuddedwithmetastaticcancer. 6.11

a when http://ebooksmedicine.net cavity. natural occurs invade neoplasms body mode is often the particularly widely. peritoneal the cancers of characteristic surfaces cover dissemination of which This ovary, of implants the surfaces yet underlying invade peritoneal not The literally glaze and tissues. may all an the distant to be capacity the primary from ability Here grow invade. and separable the tumor sites at to where to instance from is reimplant seems the Neoplasms medulloblastoma to by carried a either in ventricles or cord. spinal of cerebral and within surfaces, the be cerebrospinal such nervous reimplant the central meningeal the may or brain the penetrate the ependymoma, fluid on system, as

whereas favored by is sarcomas. Lymphatic hematogenous spread carcinomas, more of typical is spread all lymphatic disseminate may interconnections, vascular numerous forms both systems. of through There cancer systems, however, so or and between are either the involvement local The natural pathways principally lymphatic the pattern neoplasm node the depends and drainage. on of of site of the primary lymph and the lymph carcinomas nodes. respiratory the to Lung metastasize and passages bronchial the tracheobronchial hilar arising then regional in to nodes first upper of usually nodes. first the spreads quadrant Carcinoma outer the in arises breast the axillary and to chest the lesions along drain breast to medial through However, internal the mammary wall the nodes artery. may seeded. the may instances, nodes infraclavicular be in Thereafter, and supraclavicular both of cases, duct. immediately in lymph all to some in seem “skip of thoracic the by nodes nodes to the nodes, cells cells In travel proximate subsequent ultimately the way compartment cancer may traverse to producing the be reach lymphatic so-called The lymph trapped vascular metastases.” channels the within

a lymph tumor. regional that flow primary node lymph the A receives “sentinel first node” lymph from is the of by near tracers or radiolabeled injection be blue identified tumor. dyes It can primary to used lymph of and of be can Biopsy treatment. the plan of of tumor determination sentinel extent allows spread nodes

should note, of involvement. enlargement does always a for arouse not Of spread, cancerous although concern nodes imply neoplasm metastatic primary near it nodes, subcapsular The proliferation in immunologic the hyperplasia necrotic (lymphadenitis) tumor the neoplasm of sinuses of the the such follicles responses of often and histiocytosis). as antigens evoke in (sinus products and macrophages required. is verification Thus, within of tumor histopathologic node an enlarged lymph

as spread for it hematogenous well. favored the pathway sarcomas, is use While carcinomas are than veins. As readily arteries expected, less might are penetrated be stopping they encounter. cells venous With bloodborne in venous with of invasion, the cells the the first site follow tumor neoplasm, flow draining bed the capillary the often flows in portal all the most and liver to the liver, to area caval involved secondary hematogenous blood Since sites and flows are lungs dissemination. frequently the lungs, drainage the all metastases probably is pathway often of and through Cancers the thyroid glands. vertebral prostate frequent of plexus; vertebral embolize near the the in paravertebral this carcinomas arising involved the column

have a veins. within carcinomas to Certain propensity grow heart. a in right snakelike the side invades cell vena the up often the renal inferior to cava, fashion sometimes grow carcinoma Renal vein the of reaching within main and of portal and the often radicles veins, channels. reaching grow Hepatocellular eventually hepatic carcinomas penetrate venous the be widespread Remarkably, dissemination. such not intravenous growth accompanied by may

a of venous the its metastases. suggest drainage the observations of Many anatomic neoplasm systemic wholly distributions explain and localization cannot that to carcinoma the example, the bones. and to glands preferentially adrenal and brain, carcinoma neuroblastoma liver bronchogenic prostatic For the spreads to and spreads tends bone, involve Conversely, muscles, although rich are capillaries, metastases. of tumor sites in rarely skeletal later. molecular is tissue-specific tumor discussed of cells such homing The basis of

( tumors of features numerous Thus,

Fig. ) differentiation neoplasms. and of the 6.12 usually benign permit malignant

Benignandmalignanttumorscanbedistinguishedfromoneanotherbasedonthedegreeofdifferentiation,rateofgrowth,localinvasiveness,anddistantspread.

Benigntumorsresemblethetissueoforiginandarewelldifferentiated;malignanttumorsarepoorlyorcompletelyundifferentiated(anaplastic).

Benigntumorstendtobeslowgrowing,whereasmalignanttumorsgenerallygrowfaster.

Benigntumorsarewellcircumscribedandhaveacapsule;malignanttumorsarepoorlycircumscribedandinvadethesurroundingnormaltissues.

Benigntumorsremainlocalizedtothesiteoforigin,whereasmalignanttumorsarelocallyinvasiveandmetastasizetodistantsites.

populations in about substantially Study to cancer its contributed occurrence has knowledge of origins. lung primarily that smoking from is epidemiologic studies. now arose associated The with well-established causally cigarette cancer concept recognition fiber in causation A importantly patterns dietary content that of the dietary incidence fat and Western world comparison may figure the the the and this in and Africa to rates cancer cancer. of colon for in led that hereditary), environmental, by racial epidemiologic into (possibly the to insights studies and Major specific neoplasms. obtained relate be of causes cancer of influences occurrence can particular the cultural Certain also associated cancer. an diseases pathogenesis provide risk the to developing cancer with of increased clues for of insight then relating of the cancer overall incidence following discussion provide into http://ebooksmedicine.net the the magnitude cancer to to factors The summarizes problem and reviews the first

Locally Poorly Rapidly Large with invasive demarcated Poorly growing differentiated Metastatic

Fig. 6.12 Comparisonbetweenabenigntumorofthemyometrium(leiomyoma)andamalignanttumorofsimilarorigin(leiomyosarcoma).

influence environment the that patient predisposition to the and cancer.

cases per Health were 8.2 million year World 22,500 million Organization new worldwide, the cancer estimated to day). (approximately the For there about (WHO) 14.1 leading deaths deaths that 2012, the cancer projects size, worldwide will WHO on due deaths cases the population by 2035 to and mortality to rates). Moreover, that year of current 14.6 million, increasing respectively million the (based and increase numbers 24 form developing Additional on specific and a perspective mortality the can be from of incidence national cancer likelihood data. of gained it will million States, approximately 1.69 cancer year cases cancer estimated the In the new marked 595,000 2016 be is United by deaths. that and of common most the forms killers for presented with the of identified, are major in data Incidence cancer,

Fig. 6.13

rates Over for many decades, of the death have changed. cancer several forms but men cancer men 10% roughly incidence the been in Since stable, death decreased in cancer and has has the and in 1995, 20% States of women. rate roughly by United in women the of to the due for and rates the for women, cancers. of death in breast accounted decrease among nearly 80% colon; cancers of and lung, lower from by Among prostate, is colorectal is the death decrease men, reductions 60% rates improved decrease colorectal, deaths, cancers. of while lung Decreased use responsible female and cancer breast, treatment the tobacco products rates death are for the is detection for responsible and in for in reduction prostate

States. The United gastric sharp seen in has cancer death in cervical and decline from rates also the half-century a cancer last test detection tumor of Papanicolaou to decrease lesions. attributable is widespread The for cancer precursor in smear directly this its of cervical and use (PAP) early the deployment coming papillomavirus this eliminate (HPV) human vaccine cancer nearly The years. may of the in related to stomach dietary unknown rates be The to cause obscure; may for in of carcinogens. death the decreasing is decline exposure cancers it the of

factors fraction the common cancers, cancers exposures Environmental of potentially suggesting risk that high for preventable. appear a many be to are dominant notion stem is forms This from of to is specific rates mainly cancer, in environmental which variation from by exposures. the death in supported geographic differences thought the United States For from about Europe instance, five higher rates to times in than cancer in death and Japan. four breast are carcinoma Japan Conversely, men than the in is in about times higher the and rate United for seven women States. death stomach in in African populations. the cell infrequent relatively carcinoma the among many lethal most cancer United States is is Liver but all origins. environmental evidence the than indicates have rather Nearly that differences genetic geographic these (secondgeneration intermediate between have those Japan certain States forms for who generations. the rates in mortality living and of Americans United have many the in Nisei of lived in natives cancer For that are for Japanese in United States) example, with closer rates come generation. passing The two each

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Men 281,400 314,290 Women

that of no for modestly many to developing con-with a environmental is There tribute risk paucity increased factors cancer. ambient They different the in cancers. environment, lurk in personal workplace, in the food, and practices. in • They can Smoking. cigarettes, of particular cancer of esophagus, ). and, settings particularly in to bladder, universal as largely most significantly, (e.g., implicated as larynx, has the be pharynx, or mouth, restricted sunlight asbestos) or occupations Smoking, ( pancreas, been be urban 6.2 linked deaths related cancer lung, exposures are as following: the most smoking. The 90% the important environmental of to lung cancer to include

Diet. • Alcohol been • as have consumption. of implicated diet features Certain an abuse predisposing Alcohol independent is influences. and (due cancers alcoholic United epidemic oropharynx, to broadly, esophrently is the agus, of cirrhosis) factor cur-risk associated More in for larynx, liver. the States, obesity, Moreover,

Table Cancers 6.2 Occupational

Cancers Which Agents Occurrence Agents Evidence Groups or Is or Reasonable Typical Human Available for Use of

ArsenicandarsenicLungcarcinoma,skincarcinomaBy-productofmetalsmelting;componentofalloys,electricalandsemiconductordevices,compounds medicationsandherbicides,fungicides,andanimaldips

BenzeneAcutemyeloidleukemiaPrincipalcomponentoflightoil;despiteknownrisk,manyapplicationsexistinprintingandlithography,paint,rubber,drycleaning,adhesivesandcoatings,anddetergents;formerlywidelyusedassolventandfumigant

BerylliumandberylliumLungcarcinomaMissilefuelandspacevehicles;hardenerforlightweightmetalalloys,particularlyincompounds

ChromiumcompoundsLungcarcinomaComponentofmetalalloys,paints,pigments,andpreservatives

NickelcompoundsLungandoropharyngealNickelplating;componentofferrousalloys,ceramics,andbatteries;by-productofcarcinomastainless-steelarcwelding

ModifiedfromStellmanJM,StellmanSD:Cancerandtheworkplace,CA Cancer J 46:70–92,1996,withpermissionfromLippincottWilliams&Wilkins. Clin

synergistically and airways increase the cancers risk digestive developing the tract. upper smoking alcohol upper tobacco for of and http://ebooksmedicine.net

history. Reproductive and are both risk for developing estrogen of breast, the tissues. is if evidence lifelong unopposed stimulation, cumulative exposure which to particularly endometrium estrogen-responsive strong by the increases progesterone, cancers There of that

Infectious agents. infectious approximately is cancers that estimated cause worldwide. 15% agents It of

no to subsist, out or it be or—most people disturbing— carcinogenic! or Thus, there that is life to to illegal, to possibly enjoy immoral, fattening, turns do a earn livelihood, seems everything escape:

cancer of general, increases frequency the age. In with of of base, years with cancer occur the the after 75 55 Most rate population along and deaths declines, age. age; between 75 years be somatic of of mutations may drive neoplasms malignant the by that the later). (discussed explained accumulation incidence The age emergence with rising immune may a in accompanies also that competence aging be The decline factor.

all Although than affects 10% for slightly also responsible older than deaths age of among children cancer younger 15 adults, 7). of it is years (Chapter preferentially more central children are lymphomas, in nervous and sarcomas. bone the leukemias, system, cancers tumors The of major lethal and soft-tissue insights malignant later, study such of the provided retinoblastoma, pathogenesis fundamental of transformation. several into childhood discussed as tumors, has As

predispose precursor include and with conditions to immunodeficiency chronic associated lesions. states, that Acquired inflammation, cancer disorders ( a inflammatory Many fertile for create malignant conditions of tumors the chronic development “soil”

Table 6.3 ). mesothelioma inflammation lymphoma. also Tumors context arising the several but in mostly include kinds of chronic are of and carcinomas, immunodeficiency virus-induced lymphoma including states sarcoma-like and of carcinoma proliferations. mainly By contrast, predispose specific some cancers, to and types

risk Precursor are elevated differentiation associated lesions an are carcinoma. developing disturbances with of that localized epithelial for secondary hormonal spontaneously. They chronic endocrine-sensitive or may disturbances arise or tissues), may occur to (in inflammation lesions lesions the (discussed Molecular some possess analyses shown genetic cancers later). found that often their precursor of in associated have to to or inevitable, reversal important risk. progression it recognize cancer and lowers is not because precursor removal cancer However, is lesions their

common been the following: lesions the different are Many described; have most among precursor

States Inflammatory Cancer and Table Chronic 6.3

PancreatitisPancreaticcarcinomaAlcoholism,germlinemutations(e.g.,inthetrypsinogengene)

ChroniccholecystitisGallbladdercancerBileacids,bacteria,gallbladderstones

Refluxesophagitis,EsophagealGastricacidBarrettesophaguscarcinoma

Sjögrensyndrome,MALTlymphomaHashimotothyroiditis

Gastritis/ulcersGastricHelicobacter adenocarcinoma,MALTlymphoma pylori

AdaptedfromTlstyTD,CoussensLM:Tumorstromaandregulationofcancerdevelopment,Ann Mech Rev Pathol 1:119,2006. Dis

metaplasia seen risk (Chapter mucosa, factor Squamous dysplasia of lung for bronchial 13) habitual smokers—a carcinoma and in in

Endometrial with carcinoma 19) stimulation—a risk in hyperplasia (Chapter endometrial women and unopposed estrogenic factor dysplasia, seen for

which 15, the (Chapters squamous oral to 19) vulva, progress may and cell Leukoplakia penis, and 18, of cavity, carcinoma

of colon, risk high carcinoma (Chapter associated with colorectal the a to Villous progression for adenoma 15)

perhaps general inevitably are also change tumor associated better context risk, and may benign In neoplasm?”—or, of it In a this the nonexistent. there say is malignant “Are stated level no, risk particular benign to exceptions, from type a benign but high to it with be answer is ranging for each tumors the that precancers?” of “What asked, virtually in is is differently, 50% leiomyomas in As as they undergo to of up the the cited cases; of in can extremely rare by earlier, colon uterus. is change malignant of contrast, enlarge transformation malignant adenomas

http://ebooksmedicine.net

that to usually a affect cancer function families, some (a an inherited trait mutations suppresses “tumor gene Cancer behaves later). the like so-called suppressor germ gene,” in due line of discussed that United then States? influence cancers said on What the in about heredity roughly of can neoplasms, 95% malignant constitute the the sporadic which of be

can While acquired to lack predisposing that history not an does environmental factors attributed of be inherited preclude component. the largely evidence sporadic or conditions, suggests cancers family fact factors these interact. difficult may be to because often tease and out It genetic hereditary in contributions may from tumor is when genes. interactions particularly by development contributions affected multiple be Such small complex developing risk alter the for Furthermore, environmentally cancers. factors induced genetic may in active to components often enzymes carcinogens. metabolize true cytochrome as procarcinogens variation this involve of Instances P-450 holds such where the system that inherited BRCA1 recent before inherit who after for because in who cancer, BRCA2 in influence later) more well-defined in genes.” 1940 breast (discussed “cancer times. than year, for perhaps in the or of for instance, tumor females risk women genes even inherit three-fold individuals suppressor in is risk changes increases born of environmental women reproductive behavior that mutated factors Conversely, copies or cancer born obesity the developing can For higher almost

Theincidenceofcancervarieswithage,geographicfactors,andgeneticbackground.Thegeographicvariationincancerincidenceresultsmostlyfromdifferentenvironmentalexposures.Cancercanoccuratanyage,butismostcommoninolderadults.

Environmentalfactorsimplicatedincarcinogenesisincludeinfectiousagents,smoking,alcohol,diet,obesity,reproductivehistory,andexposuretocarcinogens.

Cancerriskrisesincertaintissuesinthesettingofincreasedcellularproliferationcausedbychronicinflammationorhormonalstimulation.

Epithelialcellliningsmaydevelopmorphologicchangesthatsignifyanincreasedriskfordevelopingcancer;suchlesionsarereferredtoasprecursor lesions.

Theriskfordevelopingcancerismodifiedbyinteractionsbetweenenvironmentalexposuresandgeneticvariants.

outpaced cancer that even malignant has tumors. the be literature molecular the argued of It basis could the of most of growth on of proliferation the information. alike in forest and students easily can the lost of get Researchers growing caused subset alter of function has by 20,000 is a it so mutations become of genes. But human finite the cancer eminently disease of clear the that a that or refer genes. For will as to we these cancer genes simplicity, they defined the genes contribute behavior recurrently of in be malignant are aberrations directly affected cells. cancers, genetic can cancer that by genes to Cancer presumably as because in cancer genes acquired viruses, mutations or give of spontaneously, rise action by Causative be may may be radiation, to that chemicals, line. germ the or the inherited agents, occur as such environmental may tumor mutations cell in were the mutations in a transformation. drive share is such cell that that carcinogenesis, should time individual each the at If an present key of founding prediction has disease. at by hypothesis expectation a systematically been its providing sequencing, strong been tumors This that root have realized all the that analyzed for cancer genetic genomic support in is

discovered. still number genes and hundreds in are Cancer ones new being the the remember, names unpronounceable only many aficionado. are have for to but these that are acronyms Not genes even numerous, difficult for four genes try fall classes: this of functional consider way simplify that into to cancer is one One complexity to to major

increased are Oncogenes that phenotype when promoting in growth. expressed cells transformed by genes cell induce a proto-oncogenes. in of cellular which overexpressed mutated are that major oncogenes realization A discovery called genes, versions or cancer was are normal the enhance participate cell factors that Most factors oncogenes encode survival. pro-growth pathways, signaling that or transcription factors, in dominant a to sufficient considered single are a They allele genes a mutation produce involving because is effect. pro-oncogenic

normally are transformed from the mutated lost and, genes phenotype or growth genes when prevent cell, a Tumor that uncontrolled develop. to suppressor allow to of tumor normal damaged suppressor be both Often transformation genes for must alleles occur. genes “governors” groups, brakes and general can responsible “guardians” be as sensing into Tumor suppressor genomic placed for that act are proliferation, that important two cellular on damage. response” choreograph proliferation damage “damage great to complex cessation to control a of or initiate if the genes is Some apoptosis. guardian be leads induce the and or, too repaired, that

cell stimulating proliferation rather act that per regulate Genes than apoptosis survival, by primarily se. enhancing those of whereas to protect by functionally Understandably, or that in under-expressed apoptosis apoptosis genes are often cells, inactivated tend cancer against promote be mutations. overexpressed that class this

tumor cells also cancers. this added functionally host these genes that genes recurrently or are To interactions mutated regulate list may cells, certain altered now between as and be in that the host Particularly important of immune system. are or cells enhance by genes inhibit tumors recognition

rise that give life are cancer to confined the and are genes cancer cells. the most instances, to acquired during mutations In line germ are in inherited mutations http://ebooksmedicine.net present sometimes the However, causative and therefore in are

NF2 Neurofibromatosis1and2NF1,

BRCA2 BreastandovariantumorsBRCA1,

Multipleendocrineneoplasia1and2MEN1, RET

affected developing for in at cell individual placing the MLH1, HereditarynonpolyposiscoloncancerMSH2, risk body, cancer. high the every MSH6 like to behaves in trait these passed inherited Understandably, an mutations families ( from generation generation, which are germ in line cancer

6.4 Table ). later on touch cancer important genes and in and syndromes this chapter. familial We will cancers associated

genetic Presented cancer next is underlie a discussion of varied the that expression altered lesions gene function. and

nucleotides structure. in The enough single to in changes vary gross produce chromosome from changes to large cancers genetic found involving mutations point abnormalities In and highly abnormalities characteristic. genetic neoplasms, nonrandom are certain in tumors, mutations. most lymphomas other of number particular chromosomal point and characterized tumors identified Specific abnormalities leukemias while in by increasing have nonhematopoietic and been are an or changes genetic selective all cancer. to a genes that contributing more hallmarks presumably cells the alter of activity more cancer recurrent believed of the the advantage, that fashion or one affected of is It one by a gives in

of commonly sections, that found the cancers. types the briefly we mutations are in review In following doing first touch the must concept on so, mutations. we mutations passenger driver important Before and of however,

function to that directly contribute a thereby of or development given are genes progression the of alter cancer the cancer. and mutations mutations Driver usually mentioned They inherited. acquired, occasionally earlier, but as are of they affect ride. that fitness contrast, By neutral come for proverbial are in passenger the along are cellular acquired just terms and mutations mutations not behavior; do the genes. be clustered cancer throughout at Because genome, whereas driver tend mutations sprinkled random, passenger are within occur to they tightly mutations carcinogen greatly cancer, passenger cancers particularly mutations exposure, driver mutations. appreciated and by caused melanoma outnumber now lung in as such smoking-related It that is

innocuous their important proven have to ways: Despite apparently be mutations several in nature, nevertheless passenger

analysis most damage in In evidence cancers, caused by carcinogen-associated has carcinogen genomic definitive provided mutational is the directly that question. role For sequencing of sun genomes, example, exposure the before causative cancer this debated. of in melanoma was light. no by as ultraviolet longer is This to that linked of melanomas of mutations so, damage a most specifically caused have thousands type is

of of the with that, neutral, genetic provide create more therapy. passenger is second, setting effect A that while in cells initially selective mutations nefarious variants advantage a may tumor they time analyses that in DNA to most resistance cells. after therapy; are at comes instances, sequence mutations recurrence tumors tumor lead directly many the of drug this drug for found The evidence in from of small fraction resistance only therapy, can cells. before a mutations be but also the very Generally, of found same in appears tumor the of instances, benefit neutral selective In mutation, detriment patient. to the therapy a the driver such of it pressure mutation passenger “converts” and the into the of a that

activate genes can either inactivate protein precise the mutations position on of the affected their and consequence. products or depending Point produce into Point residues domain generally activity convert oncogenes mutations amino check. proto-oncogenes by that in a a the altering in acid normally that protein’s holds gain-of-function that cardinal is A example into cancers. comment gene most the RAS events human point one of gene, mutations cancer the in convert a or insertions deletions) well disable mutations contrast, point as tumor function such genes and of in (as aberrations, the larger suppressor encoded reduce protein. the as By (discussed most suppressor type is later). The tumor in that affected a prototypical gene commonly suppressor tumor gene mutations cancer TP53, by is “guardian” point

inversions. by may rearrangements translocations be chromosomal Gene or produced highly of hematopoietic derived chromosomal are from other kinds mesenchymal and neoplasms with Specific particularly malignancies, associated cells trans-locations certain inversions cells. and

http://ebooksmedicine.net

can These ways: proto-oncogenes two rearrangements in activate

them removing of or result inappropriate, from normal them under control rearrangements by in regulatory Some enhancer. promoter their active an proto-oncogenes placing of elements overexpression gene and highly examples illustrative different kinds lymphoma Two cell mechanism. this B of of provide and by translocation, usually cells 90% the more cases a In chromosome gene chain MYC on have juxtaposition of between lymphoma, chromosome of of that heavy with leads chromosomes 14 8 on to the Burkitt gene immunoglobulin than 8 ( overexpression regulatory elements 14,

Fig. ). 6.14 lymphoma, chromosomes of to on elements. chromosome gene 18, driven reciprocal overexpression leads translocation and also a between the immunoglobulin by gene, 18 14 In BCL2, regulatory anti-apoptotic follicular

rearrangements novel oncogenic gene create genes encoding chimeric Other proteins. fusion Most notable

factor signaling of pathways oncogene Activation genes Increased of growth expression pro-growth

Fig. 6.14 ThechromosomaltranslocationsandassociatedoncogenesinchronicmyelogenousleukemiaandBurkittlymphoma.

myeloid Philadelphia 9 22 (Ph) chromosomes consisting translocation reciprocal chromosome balanced the (see chronic in a is between and of leukemia,

Fig. ). 6.14 (the than Philadelphia 22 normal. appears consequence, chromosome) a smaller chromosome As derivative the leukemia of than cytogenetic on This seen and in chromosome of change gene 9. the 90% the in on ABL cases chronic myeloid fusion 22 results is chromosome gene the and portions more BCR of of presence The of (cytogenetically cases cryptic of the fusion non qua silent) chromosome–negative chronic Philadelphia is sine which a the gene, few myeloid BCR-ABL harbor leukemia. potent encodes BCR-ABL As activity. novel gene the tyrosine transforming a with discussed kinase fusion later,

gene rearrangements. most associated commonly recurrent with tumors are Lymphoid processes purposefully express that special because immunoglobulin lymphocytes recombination. the or normal T during DNA enzymes breaks This relationship gene receptor cell exists of introduce is sometimes activate resulting mistakes error-prone, Repair these that breaks proto-oncogenes. of and in gene the result rearrangements DNA types frequently myeloproliferative neoplasms also other and tumors, and gene mesenchymal myeloid myeloid (acute disorders) of sarcomas, leukemias Two rearrangements. possess and that sarcomas of myeloid the to neoplasms, gene rearrangements breaks lead cause Unlike neoplasms is the DNA lymphoid in unknown. kinases tyrosine (akin neoplasms BCRABL) myeloid are and that oncogenic or transcription create fusion factors. genes seen that either encode to In rearrangements the hyperactive novel in general, sarcomas latter (11;22)(q24;q12) is well-characterized A sarcoma. in the the translocation of Ewing example chimeric composed oncoprotein gene different EWS This and of called two fusion transcription factors creates portions a FLI1. of encoding a rearrangement

gene point carcinomas pathogenic because inversions Identification rare lagged karyotypically to of are (which location has the in evident oncogenes) and rearrangements of carcinomas. in important trans-locations as cryptic well. advances However, sequencing gene revealed in in carcinomas recurrent rearrangements DNA have pathogenic in an malignancies As rearrangements oncogene contribute generation gene to either of tumors by can fusion with by expression sarcomas, solid gene. a increasing or novel carcinogenesis hematologic and of will along other in discussed with be cancers chapters. specific Examples in fusion also with such a gene fusion Chapter targets lung EML-ALK solid of as tumors As (e.g., 13). BCR-ABL, some genes provide cancer; the drug in

in are another cells. prevalent abnormality Deletions tumor tumor regions loss of of genes. result may Deletion in specific chromosomes of particular the suppressor

carcinogenesis. for require to of in inactivation contribute generally suppressors them order to both alleles Tumor of the A followed this non-mutated an inactivating for common point other, one allele. mechanism deletion mutation is allele, by in of later, tumor and most associated associated the RB of are gene, important loss TP53, with suppressor the involving site 13q14, 17p deletions gene. is deletion retinoblastoma, the of discussed arguably with As

http://ebooksmedicine.net

and oncogenes be of consequent Proto-oncogenes with proteins. may normal hyperactivity by converted to amplification, otherwise gene overexpression that copy change several probes. with Such appropriate hybridization produce may hundred readily can number a detected the by amplification DNA gene, in copies of molecular be can that identified changes produce amplified be chromosomal the some cases, In microscopically. genes are regions. small, Two patterns multiple minutes; and double called exclusive structures staining mutually homogeneously seen: extrachromosomal genes; new involved locations, regions genes pattern, containing chromosomal the which the of homogeneous insertion normal the a location from of genes in the because G-banded The normal latter lack amplified into banding be may from they karyotype. appear a amplified distant derive clinically in examples of HER2 amplification involve and gene in the gene important cancers. neuroblastoma the breast NMYC Two is the 30% of associated NMYC prognosis in neuroblastomas, with ( poor 25% is to amplification and amplified

Fig. ). 6.15 the against this HER2 proved about in amplification receptor of encoded directed breast of effective HER2 20% cancers, has ERBB2) tumors. in by antibody subset the gene known and therapy as occurs (also

is Aneuploidy humans, a defined chromosomes a not multiple of for of that 23. number is multiple not state; is a the of haploid number that as chromosome a is that over Aneuploidy remarkably common is of carcinomas, years cancers, carcinogenesis was ago. particularly and as cause proposed in a 100 cell the checkpoint, from results frequently mechanism the prevent segregation. major that chromosome mitotic control in of cycle acts errors to mistakes Aneuploidy replicated have all chromosomes attachments The checkpoint to anaphase the microtubules. inhibiting by aneuploidy the prevents of spindle until made mitotic irreversible to transition productive death the abnormal of rapid checkpoint segregation. to mitotic a absence as chromosome Complete cell of consequence leads

of as to than a data rather aneuploidy Mechanistic generate. have consequence, cause establishing carcinogenesis, been a difficult aneuploidy tends the copy However, (as possible potent to of might be decrease cancer tumor and number analysis statistical of increase oncogenes number approaches of suggest made cells detailed the that suppressors. key expected) by copy example, MYC in increased tumor the For copies where and is located. chromosome which oncogene cells, is never present in is lost is almost often 8, gene chromosome are contrast, and TP53 17, often where By portions lost located, is infrequently of are the gained. molded tumor development of enhance activity numbers suppressor chromosome of restricting by genes. progression dosage that tumor the may while be and Thus, oncogenes changes the in

Fig. gene,presentnormallyonchromosome2p,becomesamplifiedandisseeneitherasextrachromosomaldoubleminutesorasachromosomallyintegratedhomogeneous-stainingregion(HSR).Theintegrationinvolvesotherautosomes,suchas4,9,or13. 6.15 AmplificationoftheNMYC geneinhumanneuroblastoma.TheNMYC al: Sather in oncogene H, RC, Clinical human from Seeger neuroblastomas. activation of GM, et Brodeur implications (Modified John Inc.) Cancer58:541,1986.Reprinted & of permission of Sons, Wiley-Liss,Inc,a subsidiary Wiley by

1, microRNAs are of Chapter nucleotides 22 single-stranded that (miRNAs) genes. As as function non-coding, approximately regulators in length, RNAs, discussed negative in or, by gene translation messenger They in some (mRNA) expression cleavage. RNA cases, inhibit by repressing posttranscriptionally differentiation, carcinogenesis. not survival, can of in cell is In growth, accumulating view to it also that that contribute functions indicates their surprising evidence and control miRNAs of important of suppressor the tumor can Specifically, tumor miRNA the suppressor the protein. reduce miRNA then a overactivity is a if target gene, of as sometimes miRNAs are referred oncomIRs. to Such overproduction translation will to the a function of miRNA Conversely, the product. lead or of quantity reduction miRNA an inhibits an oncogene, in of oncogene the that if several human have been by already of Such tumors. established profiling miRNA relationships in leukemias BCL2, some an example, gene. miRNAs in results of downregulation and of expression increased For anti-apoptotic deletion or lymphomas certain BCL2, tumor suppressor by Thus, as such behave regulating miRNAs genes. negatively other lung and certain the in expression the leukemias, RAS tumors control and B-cell of been also miRNAs has detected that oncogenes MYC in Dysregulation respectively. of

changes expression from to that gene in Chapter reversible, refers recall occur heritable You without 1 will mutation. epigenetics that posttranslational changes involve of methylation, histones affect of both modifications expression. Such which DNA gene and cells, portion expressed. differentiated is genome normal, not major the of the In of histone by methylation modifications. genome These silenced regions DNA are the and are the characterized hypermethylation. by On promoter-localized global a and selective other cancer hypomethylation cells DNA hand, silenced rather that sometimes by sequences, are tumor past genes than hypermethylation mutation. during by of years evident suppressor Indeed, promoter become has several the it has shown addition, can mice. induce genome-wide chromosomal been cause in to hypomethylation instability and In tumors may ways. carcinogenesis changes influence epigenetic in Thus, many deep wrinkle, genomes cancers. many has of added an that modifications cancer epigenetic mutations in sequencing regulate As genes in identified growth that favor may changes in to and survival. of they be cancers genetic selected cancer lead alterations certain the Thus, because “epigenome”

http://ebooksmedicine.net

epigenetic and particular differentiation. of to signals that as their described control The dictates types—a the state epigenetic growth context—also response feature cell a gene expression, completely appearances earlier, the modifications cells (e.g., genetic mentioned makeup and have a neuron to As epigenetic keratinocyte) functions. different allowing and regulate same with instances, dramatically signals. the otherwise some to In its state cell epigenetic of response affects identical a yet gene For cell a the leukemia, oncogenic as T-cell carcinomas. has in tumor example, in squamous NOTCH1 an role acts suppressor suppressor and genes genes this exists because in tumor on T-cell in activated As expected, keratinocytes. be NOTCH1 progenitors dichotomy turns would pro-growth

Mutationsincancercellsfallintotwomajorclasses,driver(pathogenic)mutationsandpassenger(neutral)mutations.

Passengermutationsmaybecomedrivermutationsifselectivepressureonthetumorchanges,forexample,inthesettingoftreatmentwithaneffectivetherapeuticdrug.

Tumorcellsmayacquiredrivermutationsthroughseveralmeans,includingpointmutationsandnonrandomchromosomalabnormalitiesthatcontributetomalignancy;theseincludegenerearrangements,deletions,andamplifications.

Generearrangements(usuallycausedbytranslocations,butsometimesbyinversionsofothermorecomplexevents)contributetocarcinogenesisbyoverexpressionofoncogenesorgenerationofnovelfusionproteinswithalteredsignalingcapacity.

Deletionsfrequentlyaffecttumorsuppressorgenes,whereasgeneamplificationincreasestheexpressionofoncogenes.

OverexpressionofmiRNAscancontributetocarcinogenesisbyreducingtheexpressionoftumorsuppressors,whiledeletionorlossofexpressionofmiRNAscanleadtooverexpressionofproto-oncogenes.

TumorsuppressorgenesandDNArepairgenesalsomaybesilencedbyepigeneticchanges,whichinvolvereversible,heritablechangesingeneexpressionthatoccurnotbymutationbutbymethylationofthepromoter.

CARCINOGENESIS:AMULTISTEPPROCESS

a instances, is cancer cell. mutation to most not sufficient in if no cell single a Fortunately, transform all into normal process thus from genetic of phenotype Carcinogenesis a give alterations that associated hallmarks, is multiple the resulting discussed and later. all of rise multistep its accumulation the transformed collectively to cancer the lesions need the transition earlier, suggest to support and As blown this of mutations a for mutations some model. for driver presence precursor mentioned full non-neoplastic additional in thus

to founding initiation from cell, important continue selection ( Beyond it to continue tumor is Darwinian and a recognize cancers single that therefore evolve to undergo

Fig. 6.16 ). course become tumor progression. as greater phenomenon well that It aggressive established referred and cancers is a generally more acquire their during potential, to malignant cells. tumor from independently level, At progression mutations different results in the accumulate most that molecular likely the evasion. metastasis, but at genes, or cells these survival, be may more adept the of others invasion, mutations lethal, affect Some cancer function may growth, making thereby of immune affected advantage, a these tumor, the at to subclones Due this mutations sites may dominate of at metastasis. selective acquire area one site either to or primary of come that Darwinian malignant time selection, continuing clinical tumors by even typically a their they the monoclonal genetically of result heterogeneous are of presentation. mutation origin and As in though are heterogeneity In genetic enormous. be instability, of advanced may exhibiting the extent tumors genetic

cancers: both to the and the darwinian tendency over explain pernicious shaped can aggressive responsive by less time of properties cancers to more become for selection Genetic most therapy. evolution two therapy. for genetic for implications has its cancer only not but heterogeneity response also Thus, to progression regimen tumor when recurrent is the if it recur tumors original the always after almost that drug Experience again. to given is has shown chemotherapy, resistant resistance acquired outgrowth by (or impart epigenetic the from chance, that alterations) have, this drug Experimental that subclones data mutations resistance. suggest stems that of

the background as overview for a of serves molecular more of detailed This cancer. pathogenesis consideration As earlier, cancer a number mentioned fide hundreds, genes the in minimum. at bona function has grasp time, gene fundamental cancer, the the of While genomes by genes to gene. at emerging a mutated and is trying blizzard the traditional landscape it one blanketed cancer of revealed gene from of the of describe cancer sequencing limitations to properties genes of the the http://ebooksmedicine.net tractable cancer more conceptually phenotypic to consider about way and think to A and satisfying common much the of is the biology

driver mutations passenger Accumulation of and

Additional mutations, driver Carcinogen-induced Additional mutation

subclones of Emergence Diagnosis

Normal with Founding Initiated precursor

Fig. Developmentofcancerthroughstepwiseaccumulationofcomplementarydrivermutations.Theorderinwhichvariousdrivermutationsoccurisusuallyunknownandmayvaryfromtumortotumor. 6.16

cells. biological properties cancer of changes all which cancer. cell appears cancers display of physiology, eight fundamental the hallmarks It in that considered are

changes in are illustrated These

Fig. of and consist 6.17 following: the

growth-inhibitory to Insensitivity signals

apoptosis of Evasion

of immune Evasion surveillance

and genomic by confer The genetic by instability. of accelerated may these acquisition alterations that and inflammation the epigenetic be hallmarks cancer-promoting tumor characteristics and transformation promote they These are because enabling subsequent progression. considered cellular

the of discussion following regulate of Mutations cancer; some basis in that or molecular origins cancer. these genes traits in of are traits the these seen form the cellular all of every accordingly, products convention, not MYC). and and symbols are MYC note, RB (e.g., Of are p53, gene by their protein, RB but TP53 gene italicized protein and

mutations stems cancer to oncogenes. characterizes in self-sufficiency The convert that proto-oncogenes from generally gain-of-function growth that cells the even of absence promote called in cell signals. normal proteins Oncogenes oncoproteins that growth, encode growth-promoting 1). appreciate to in of is sequence drive it To normal growth, review cell inappropriate cell how briefly oncogenes Chapter that events proliferation (introduced the helpful characterize the steps: Under resolved can readily be following 1. physiologic proliferation conditions, cell into

receptor factor of growth 2. specific to Binding on its a membrane the cell

3. Transient turn which activates growth and in the several receptor, the membrane inner leaflet signaltransducing plasma on factor limited of of the activation proteins

to signal cytosol 4. by Transmission nucleus second or of molecules the messengers across a transduced the of the transduction cascade signal

and components, and nuclear organelles, such other of DNA 5. regulate components that and Induction membrane biosynthesis ribosomes cellular that division, the factors cell regulatory initiate are needed activation and transcription of for as

and cycle, in resulting division cell of cell the cell ultimately into Entry the progression

Fig. Eightcancerhallmarksandtwoenablingfactors(genomicinstabilityandtumor-promotinginflammation).Mostcancercellsacquirethesepropertiesduringtheirdevelopment,typicallyduetomutationsincriticalgenes. 6.17 RA: cancer: Hanahan Hallmarks (From generation. next the D,Weinberg of Cell144:646, 2011.)

in mechanisms the can regulation. with role signal transduction proliferate and cells to The cell growth grouped endow cancer to cascade be factor–induced cycle according ability their the that in of one each susceptible cancer is Indeed, listed corruption steps cells. to the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

growth may tumor own Cancers in cells factors or induce growth secrete to microenvironment. produce factors the stromal their made proliferation and to soluble by (paracrine action). neighboring factors Most cell cell on type one a growth stimulate act are feedback preventing cell. Normally, the of cells formation growth that produce the receptor, the positive factor same cognate within do not the loops express This may cells be ways. by in “rule” several broken different cancer

the acquire to they which are to synthesize acquiring same growth factors growth by self-sufficiency the ability responsive. cancer Some cells both (TGF-α) sarcomas growth secrete receptor. factor PDGF glioblastomas express For and its many growth (PDGF) receptor, many and make platelet-derived factor-α transforming example, and the of many common Similar are cancer. loops autocrine in fairly types

by stroma. interaction acquire growth mechanism Another cancer which cells is with by self-sufficiency turn growth some which in in supporting signals the cells promote tumor factors activate stroma, to produce In cases, tumor normal send growth. cells that

sequence of in signal the group receptors. factor growth next is transduction The factor downstream intrinsic stimulating by growth receptors Some of others kinase is the tyrosine proteins. binding, signal while activity activity an factor activated by that have growth they overexpressed. function or receptors of when Many as are myriad factor growth mutated oncoproteins they if the family. overexpression examples factor involve the The growth receptor (EGF) best-documented epidermal of glioblastomas, 80% cell and squamous overexpressed 80% of the tumors of in lung, the and more EGF head ERBB1, the is of receptor, epithelial or to carcinomas of 50% neck. 100% of the 20% of approximately and in in amplified stomach, is cancers the ovary, a glands. of adenocarcinomas gene and salivary encoding of (ERBB2), mentioned HER2 breast lung, smaller related fraction receptor, a As earlier, sensitive tumors exquisitely These effects are of mitogenic the of growth small factors. to amounts extracellular domain significance receptor the this with is to dramatically antibodies, “bench blocking elegant derived pathogenesis The example the cancers illustrated in of of medicine. bedside” of from by clinical benefit anti-HER2 an the breast HER2 of functionally that by important create encoding point rearrangements indels or stimulated but or tyrosine to instances, other structure, receptors. in that mutations changes small genes chimeric gene lead protein kinase subtle fusion activity is In are constitutively delivering even signals the of to In cells growth cases, of factors. each mitogenic active, receptors mutated the in absence these of These mutations and forms lymphomas, in are leukemias, common of sarcoma. certain types most

receptors. acquire a often cells genes that growth of pathways result components in autonomy growth Cancer of encode downstream signaling of factor as mutations The factor proteins their receptors factor that to receptors. growth by targets activated ligand signaling are couple growth to binding nuclear various to the nucleus signals molecules. trasnmitted are The through transduction signal molecules of category RAS Two the are oncoproteins ABL. and important signaling in next. briefly Each is discussed of these

human commonly RAS oncogene mutated the in tumors. is most tumors mutated all frequency (e.g., in adenocarcinoma). contain human some specific cancers higher Approximately RAS 30% of is pancreatic and even the genes, nucleotides (guanosine bind RAS G family small [GDP]). member guanosine proteins a is and [GTP] of guanosine diphosphate a triphosphate of that and signal-transmitting • steps: state an sequential back Normally, flips between forth Signaling involves RAS excited a and quiescent RAS by state. the following by when changes and such bound PDGF to for EGF GTP cells of as exchange and is factors subsequent RAS leads to GDP of GDP; growth stimulation inactive conformational

Activation of transcription

Fig. factor state. for activated 6.18 GTP-bound action (GDP-bound) is a a through Model cell RAS. receptor, of RAS inactive growth stimulated to normal a is When kinase pathway. and Activated PI3 RAS the pathways: transduces proliferative kinase/AKT the “RAF/ERK/MAP the so-called signals pathway” along to nucleus two diphosphate; Guanosine phosphatidylinositol-3. guanosine mitogen-activated GTP, GDP, MAP, PI3, triphosphate; protein;

Fig. 6.18 ). This a the because to its hydrolyzes state. protein and short-lived, (GTPase) releasing GDP, excited is intrinsic guanosine the signal-emitting RAS quiescent group however, to GDP-bound phosphate triphosphatase activity of state GTP returning GTPase proteins GTP that GDP. brakes dramatically RAS which activation by hydrolysis RAS favoring by uncontrolled family GTPase-activating (GAPs), activated a of activity as act magnified is prevent to molecular of The of

converge regulators of growth, interconnected that on • that downstream RAS by MYC. the expression stimulates genes nucleus the as pathways regulate several of Activated such alter proliferation and of in details the of are illustrated which While cascades signaling (some

Fig. point 6.18 an not activated these intermediates of the signaling downstream promoting are that here, RAS. of mutational effects is discussed of activation mimics RAS growth important ) For “RAF/ERK/MAP in mutated unregulated so-called lies associated kinase is BRAF, than with example, 60% cell and in more of proliferation. which melanomas the pathway” is the kinase in phosphatidly similary frequency with Mutations tumor high kinase) also pathway PI3K/AKT of consequences. types, (PI3 inositol-3 with occur in some

acid the carries commonly by enzymatic GTP either pocket GTP-binding in is out mutations point or within in are region hydrolysis. the most activated RAS amino that residues that with interfere to RAS. is essential breakdown which GTP, inactivate mutations of kinds of Both cell the into proliferating forced a GTP-bound is RAS trapped activated, and is form, thus in continuously its state. activating of that GTP GAPs, lead RAS. follows to in hydrolysis to this mutations RAS It thereby from the failure in mimicked and loss-offunction which mutations scenario by simulate be a should would restrain consequences (NF1) disorder 1 cancer-prone neurofibromin-1 is GAP the Indeed, is in tumor mutated familial neurofibromatosis a fide (Chapter 22) type bona suppressor. the and inhibitor as kinase is PTEN other Similarly, of important suppressor another is and tumor frequently carcinomas, and cancers called certain mutated a PI3 leukemias, in well. negative

kinases non–receptor as signal molecules. Several tyrosine function transduction ABL In this with the best group, defined is carcinogenesis. to respect

has The internal by negative kinase tyrosine is that ABL dampened proto-oncoprotein activity domains. regulatory earlier (see As discussed

Fig. normal certain region 6.14 to gene. with fuses leukemias, ), where chromosome and abode the ABL gene its of acute it part chromosome 9 (BCR) of leukemia the chronic 22, a breakpoint on translocated in part myeloid from is cluster hybrid and as a domain event activity. tyrosine fusion a unleashes BCR gene BCR-ABL contains the that kinase domain constitutive ABL kinase that self-associates, an encodes tyrosine that protein This downstream potent of interest, are protein Of RAS, a making of activates that the signals of growth. it stimulator the cell BCR-ABL all

crucial response dramatic chronic with cancer role been the confirmed has BCR-ABL leukemia in kinase inhibitors. by to clinical The of of BCR-ABL patients myeloid in The galvanized that interest (Gleevec), prototype this therapy”). imatinib “targeted specific of lesions in design drug, molecular of (so-called drugs of various mesylate cancers found kind target is a BCR-ABL addiction, signaling dependent of the single is a oncogene wherein concept molecule. also profoundly tumor of example on an an perhaps initiating, event BCR-ABL fusion formation is gene drives early, that leukemogenesis. probably on survival. Development other for depend and BCR-ABL that to collaborating continues mediate growth but mutations, cell transformed leukemia signals the requires of which transformed “built”. state lodgepole the central around be as the can BCR-ABL is signaling seen of is the lodgepole by structure kinase, the removed BCR-ABL If collapses. the inhibition to view to to not due in a BCR-ABL is protein. of it In inhibitors of BCR-ABL that dependency, subclone a of BCR-ABL often outgrowth of resistance mutation of the prevents is surprising with the tumors this level drug that the acquired binding

drive of of oncoproteins ABL such continuous The stimulation expression factors of consequence inappropriate as growth-promoting that transcription RAS is and or nuclear signaling ultimate genes. through the thus genes consequence DNA of be autonomy transcription. may mutations affecting a that Growth regulate including transcription of cyclins. that products growth-promoting oncogenes, genes, function the of REL the A oncoproteins, regulate and expression factors FOS, MYC, MYB, host JUN, of as as such in Of commonly these, MYC is tumors. human most involved

cells promotes Dysregulation growth. of promoting through alterations cycle the by support that MYC cell the metabolism simultaneously of cell tumorigenesis and progression in enhancing of functions primarily transcription the other by activating genes. MYC acids, growth-promoting by blocks nucleotides) and that amino include kinases pathways (CDKs), division. Genes activated the cyclin-dependent and control for (discussed into building several drive are that (e.g., produce next), cell needed cell whose cycle products genes, that including MYC the cells growth lipids, genes As mentioned (see earlier

Fig. tumor. B-cell aggressive in MYC translocation ), a of dysregulation highly results a (8;14) from lymphoma, Burkitt 6.14 respectively. of is other breast, while amplified NMYC colon, also genes in cell related are lung, and amplified small LMYC and many cancers in and MYC cancers, the neuroblastomas lung,

for progression mentioned factors process their cells phases the that growth Chapter the cell cycle, in various which transduce the cell 1, division. signals of As the preparation cells replicate in DNA orderly of stimulate by through of of binding are of is cyclin-dependent recall which by through production You so cycle cell by their nature degradation. the progression will and that cyclic to called cells kinases (CDKs), because the activated orchestrated cyclins,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

forward the that cell proteins CDK-cyclin cycle. crucial The cells target phosphorylate drive complexes through which control of are cyclins CDKs, cycle. and there CDK CDKs arouse cell the While inhibitors over exert negative the many, (CDKIs), silence the inhibitors mitogenic of Expression thus the is downregulated these progression cell promoting by signaling cycle. pathways, of the

one two and is tightly of the a transition cell as G2/M the damage balance factors, DNA There transition, at of main sensors G1/S of the are other by checkpoints, each at growth-promoting regulated which growth-suppressing (Chapter and as cycle 1). by well initiate that repaired, arrest If be signals sensors cell and, damage apoptosis. these activated, progression cell cannot DNA-damage if cycle transmit division. the are through cells undergo Once cell checkpoint, to pass committed they G1/S checkpoint defects cancer, increased division. in the in to important lead then, are since G1/S cell particularly directly these Understandably, to genetic cancers lesions phase. have Indeed, checkpoint, to reenter that the appear cells the G1/S all continually disable S causing into widely major vary tumor For types, but frequency particular two across fall reasons, they unclear lesions in categories.

Gain-of-function D CDK4 or involving cyclins. mutations events cyclin in transformation. CDK4 neoplastic are common increasing D the expression of or Mishaps lymphomas including breast, subset overexpressed liver, cell and D tumors. many The genes esophagus, are in those a cyclin of plasma and the cancers, affecting glioblastomas. melanomas, occurs the of and in sarcomas, gene CDK4 Amplification B those CDK4. but cyclin and and CDKs D E occur, they much Mutations affecting are cyclins and other less than frequent affecting also

involving Loss-of-function CDKIs. mutations mutation frequently by gene human in disabled CDKIs malignancies. silencing are many or glioblastomas, encodes kindreds, of in and and or CDKN2A are certain lung soft-tissue inactivation example, seen 70% of of cancers pancreatic carcinomas, mutations 75% the melanoma-prone of gene to 40% esophageal bladder CDK and leukemias, of sarcomas, present is 50% cancers. CDKN2A, deletion 25% a p16, of For that inhibitor and of carcinomas, germline 20% in cell non–small acquired

a the discussion production does of is oncoproteins of to that in of not cancer lead of signals growth-promoting importance by consideration final cells. proliferation increased itself sustained A oncogene-mediated cell cell oppose growth. mechanisms, two apoptosis, and are senescence that There built-in allow two proceed action must later, oncogenes mechanisms these the disabled that discussed of be unopposed. to As braking genes to regulate

normalcellulargeneswhoseproductspromotecellproliferation Proto-oncogenes:

Oncogenes: mutantoroverexpressedversionsofprotooncogenesthatfunctionautonomouslywithoutarequirementfornormalgrowth-promotingsignals

Oncoproteinspromoteuncontrolledcellproliferationbyseveralmechanisms:

Stimulus-independentexpressionofgrowthfactoranditsreceptor,settingupanautocrineloopofcellproliferation(e.g.,PDGF–PDGFreceptorinbraintumors)

fusiongeneencodingaconstitutivelyactivetyrosinekinase,incertainleukemias tyrosinekinasegeneandtheBCR FusionofportionsoftheABL proteingene,creatingaBCR-ABL

RAScommonlyismutatedinhumancancersandnormallyflipsbetweenrestingGDP-boundstateandactiveGTP-boundstate;mutationsblockhydrolysisofGTPtoGDP,leadingtouncheckedsignaling

ComplexesofcyclinswithCDKsdrivethecellcyclebyphosphorylatingvarioussubstratesandnormallyarecontrolledbyCDKinhibitors.Mutationsingenesencodingcyclins,CDKs,andCDKinhibitorsresultinuncontrolledcellcycleprogressionandarefoundinawidevarietyofcancersincludingmelanomasandbrain,lung,andpancreaticcancers.

InsensitivitytoGrowthInhibitorySignals:TumorSuppressorGenes

every reaction. theorized that has equal Isaac opposite an action Newton and growth. true for holds a was not Newton Although cell cancer biologist, his formulation

products brakes growth, that to cell tumor proliferation. apply promote Whereas suppressor genes oncogenes of encode the cell proteins and growth of mimics Disruption effects refractory growth-promoting the oncogenes. to cells genes such inhibition renders of suppressor growth. their tumor possible loss genes, and following products, describes mechanisms unregulated by of their to discussion cell The contributes function which

cell principle, signals by mechanisms. prevent proliferation can anti-growth In several complementary prod cues dividing may G0 signal their reentry external cause to pool. enter the remain until cells they into (quiescence), where The proliferative lose potential. replicative may post-mitotic, and pool enter cells differentiated Alternatively, the a is senescence, from to of sustained mechanism growth. another earlier, alluded Nonreplicative cell escape effort, may as apoptosis. be the death by programmed a for And, last-ditch cells wayward suppressor “tricks” As from will malignant. cells tumor see, all toolbox these have to their we halt becoming genes in designed

the of Governor Cycle Cell RB:

RB, cancers. human negative cycle, most of regulator or inactivated key indirectly a cell in the is directly was of retinoblastoma of and The (RB) prototype suppressor cancer the this tumor now gene family the to genes. http://ebooksmedicine.net be discovered considered gene is first case, an childhood a uncommon the this with by retinoblastoma, disease—in of study discovery medicine, the accomplished tumor of tumor. many rare suppressor As was advances genes in an tumor ones the are develop predisposition Approximately retinoblastomas autosomal as are remaining the transmitted the trait. familial, while 60% to dominant sporadic, of being can in of occurrence famous molecular tumor, two-hit proposed be follows: now identical terms the his To as 1974, stated which familial sporadic for an account in Knudson, hypothesis, and

are required produce retinoblastoma. mutations to Two (hits) which locus gene, been RB 13q14. has the mapped to These chromosomal involve the two RB the inactivated normal locus retinoblastoma development for hits) must of Both the be alleles of the of (hence (

Fig. 6.19

the RB copy cases, in one copy children gene defective other normal. In germ of the line; familial the is inherit

gene the normal in mutation. RB retinoblasts when lost develops result a is as of somatic Retinoblastoma sufficient in mutation line Because retinoblastoma the has disease is transmit germ inheritance dominant risk, trait pattern. to autosomal an single a families

one mutation normal In in of are the • cases, both sporadic RB by retinoblasts. somatic lost alleles retinal has both that normal is RB of The the result end cancerous. gene copies cell of a the lost the same: becomes

needed cell, function. all one retinoblastoma From gene as it a the is for in that the risk families inherited of trait, at level intact the evident for is above, is that developing normal the retinoblastoma is although dominant RB

lung, biallelic normal genes several that loss the a it common of tumors, now RB gene cancer, in this discovered Although bladder loss fairly feature was evident is cell and is including small the cancer. retinoblastomas, cancer of of of breast initially familial Patients soft-tissue increased and greatly for sarcomas. with are risk some osteosarcomas developing at retinoblastoma also

cells child Germ Retinal Somatic cells Retinoblastoma Zygote cells of

Fig. 6.19 Pathogenesisofretinoblastoma.TwomutationsoftheRB genefromacarrierparent,andasaresultonlyoneadditionalRB mutationinaretinalcellisrequiredforcompletelossofRB function. mutationsinthetumor-foundingretinalcellareacquired.Inthefamilialform,allsomaticcellsinheritonemutantRB chromosomallocus,on13q14,leadtoneoplasticproliferationoftheretinalcells.Inthesporadicform,bothRB

http://ebooksmedicine.net

which function pass cells The DNA of through commences. the the protein before checkpoint, must RB regulate to G1/S the replication is portal extremely of through to is cell the cycle, exit In integrated are carefully, determine “clock.” differentiate. cycle is the checkpoint phase, cycle the in circuitry the should from or the diverse cell cell progress each Although the whether and phase cell S monitored cycle cell to G1 important signals an transition the G1 serves point gene altering product, RB. act state RB of integration The as signals, the RB, these ultimately diverse for by a protein phosphorylation is a of DNA-binding that which that those by progression an RB, cell and cell promote in the lead phosphorylation Specifically, hypophosphorylated signals progression state. block act of cycle RB maintaining active cycle to inactivation while that

mechanisms helpful this to crucial in the the it To enforce of is that cycle, RB cell G1/S appreciate role transition. review the

on is dependent complexes, activity and (S E2F factors. of transcription initiation phase) E the cyclin of replication The requires DNA cyclin of of the E/CDK2 family expression of active RB two is Hypophosphorylated blocks in ways family inhibits E2F RB ( hypophosphorylated its it transcription preventing factors, cyclin to in E. at of least Early binds transcription and in the and G1, form, E2F-mediated transcription

Fig. ). 6.20 sequesters with activators. it interacting First, preventing E2F, other from it transcriptional promoters chromatin These proteins, E. which chromatin as E2F-responsive genes deacetylases factors. at histone transcription the as RB methyltransferases, DNA recruits and to bind remodeling to the insensitive make Second, enzymes histone of to cyclin such promoters modify such

This on situation is mitogenic signaling. changed cyclin D–CDK4/6 of factor cyclin activation complexes. Growth expression D leads and to signaling is subject threshold TGFβ for serve that mitogenic The level a set to is D-CDK4/6 itself by responses. as by cyclin as of antagonists tempered p16, activity inhibitors which growth regulation such such to the the genes E/CDK and to E2F protein induce complexes cell RB, cyclin progression then through D-CDK4/6 cyclin releasing Cyclin such E. DNA phosphorylate If strong, sufficently replication is and as stimulus complexes cycle. stimulate inactivating target the stimulation. S When cells growth they enter are to the committed additional divide without factor phase, of by M phase, phosphate cellular are RB form During RB. regenerating the hypophosphorylated removed ensuing groups the from phosphatases, the

E2F the RB. sole is not target of that variety RB factors differentiation. regulate a binds versatile cell to of transcription other The protein For myocyte-, and factors. RB adipocyte-, example, transcription melanocyte-, stimulates macrophage-specific cell is with which Thus, cell pathway exit cycle from associated control couples differentiation, the RB the of with progression cycle. G1 how at differentiation may explain

control the the question an not of In cell cancer. cycle, of is to view RB interesting centrality the in every why of mutated is RB mutations other fact, genes that In in control

E/CDK2 methyl-transferase PDGF) Inactivate p53, Cyclin RB E/CDK2 RB GROWTH Cyclin Hypophosphorylated ActivateCDK site phase D/CDK4,6 PPPPPPPPPPE2F Histone deacetylase INHIBITORS Hyperphosphorylated E2F Cyclins (EGF, S Stimulate (TGF-˜, E2F phase Cyclins S p16 E2F Inhibitors FACTORS genes genes D/CDK4,6 site GROWTH others) Histone

Fig. and CDKN2A cyclin TheroleofRBinregulatingtheG1–Scheckpointofthecellcycle.HypophosphorylatedRBincomplexwiththeE2FtranscriptionfactorsbindstoDNA,recruitschromatinremodelingfactors(histonedeacetylasesandhistonemethyltransferases),andinhibitstranscriptionofgeneswhoseproductsarerequiredfortheSphaseofthecellcycle.WhenRBisphosphorylatedbythecyclinD–CDK4,cyclinD–CDK6,andcyclinE–CDK2complexes,itreleasesE2F.ThelatterthenactivatestranscriptionofS-phasegenes.ThephosphorylationofRBisinhibitedbyCDKIs,becausetheyinactivatecyclin-CDKcomplexes.VirtuallyallcancercellsshowdysregulationoftheG1–ScheckpointasaresultofmutationinoneoffourgenesthatregulatethephosphorylationofRB;thesegenesareRB, D, CDK4, 6.20 [p16]. Epidermalgrowthfactor;PDGF, EGF, platelet-derivedgrowthfactor.

many are effect RB mimic normal RB and of genes. found that have in can loss phosphorylation commonly RB the cancers cyclin favor facilitating activation and overexpression RB phosphorylation of For mutational of CDK4 inactivation. by example, and proliferation D cell in of is D gene. or the because tumors overexpressed of Indeed, cyclin amplification many D1 translocation cyclin by inactivation also CDKIs Mutational can CDK cell drive activity. cyclin/ cycle the on genes encoding removing brakes important of extremely p16, is As of which mutational or the encodes gene, CDKN2A in earlier, an common target CDK human mentioned inactivation inhibitor tumors. deletion the

RB) malignant mutated http://ebooksmedicine.net loss one four cell cyclin of cancers. control transformation is the cell cycle at key cycle most is that regulators the human normal and least is D, in accepted It that of (p16, now CDK4, of central to by RB oncogenic by of (discussed targeting viral Notably, viruses caused proteins. through cancers achieved is later), in certain direct this factors. transcription example, (HPV) binds inhibiting E2F RB, form to For human the papillomavirus the E7 it protein the preventing from hypophosphorylated of RB deleted, is leading uncontrolled to functionally growth. Thus,

mustbedysfunctionalfortumordevelopmenttooccur. Likeothertumorsuppressorgenes,bothcopiesofRB

geneispresentinthegermline,sothatonlyoneadditionalsomaticmutationisneededtocompletelyeliminateRBfunction. Incasesoffamilialretinoblastoma,onedefectivecopyoftheRB

RBexertsanti-proliferativeeffectsbycontrollingtheG1-to-Stransitionofthecellcycle.Initsactiveform,RBishypophosphorylatedandbindstoE2Ftranscriptionfactors.ThisinteractionpreventstranscriptionofgeneslikecyclinEthatareneededforDNAreplication,andsothecellsarearrestedinG1.

GrowthfactorsignalingleadstocyclinDexpression,activationofcyclinD–CDK4/6complexes,inactivationofRBbyphosphorylation,andthusreleaseofE2F.

Lossofcellcyclecontrolisfundamentaltomalignanttransfor-mation.AlmostallcancershaveadisabledG1checkpointduetomutationofeitherRB orgenesthataffectRBfunction,suchascyclinD,CDK4,andCDKIs.

ManyoncogenicDNAviruses,likeHPV,encodeproteins(e.g.,E7)thatbindRBandrenderitnonfunctional.

of TP53: Guardian Genome the

human suppressor The in most is p53-encoding gene tumor TP53, the mutated cancer. commonly gene, that cell transcription arrest activation cycle thwarts cell death of (termed apoptosis). of triggering (termed transformation induction quiescence), cycle is temporary arrest p53 neoplastic a or cell (termed The permanent factor by senescence), three protein interlocking of programmed mechanisms: toward stressed RB be If can p53 is as “sensor” viewed internal directing pathways. monitor these central the cells external signals, stress, a one a of of of

anoxia, p53 stimuli variety (e.g., unbridled MYC pro-growth RAS stresses damage. trigger inappropriate pathways, activity), and including of DNA response the A or the genome, the next. managing damage of central a as integrity response, discussed By maintaining p53 role the plays in DNA

MDM2, with for because of a a In healthy protein p53 minutes) (20 association that its p53 short cells, has half-life destruction. targets nonstressed, “sensors” as are include example, protein for ATM is on its by mutated) (ataxia cell stressed, telangiectasia that such kinases When activated. DNA, the assault an release target that in p53 activated half-life ability its genes. modifications to and sensors MDM2, the its increasing transcription of These enhancing catalyze posttranslational drive it from is Hundreds found. triggered have genes been whose transcription of p53 by cell genes damage the primordial considered response arrest transformation three cycle p53-mediated may be mechanisms: ( to neoplastic suppress DNA These by

Fig. ). 6.21 occurs by (p21). gene the and of G1 late caused CDKI transcription phase mainly in is the p53-dependent It CDKN1A prevents phase. the complexes p21 RB, cells of and cyclin–CDK phosphorylation in G1 thereby protein The arresting inhibits cycling welcome, pause damage. in Such repair gives time” “breathing a DNA cells the because it cell is to protein repair expression also The DNA genes. p53 of damage induces and to leading of its MDM2, is transcription cycle cell destruction of block. upregulates If DNA successfully, own the repaired damage p53 relief the undergo repaired, cannot may be the If p53induced or enter cell damage apoptosis. p53-directed senescence

gene cycle cell differentiate cycle of reversible that characterized arrest and senescence quiescence from morphology by is specific cell or it permanent in changes p53-induced arrest. form a expression activation and/or Senescence Rb such mediators, their as and requires of the CDKIs. expression of p53 to unclear changes, global mechanisms which chromatin are gene expression. senescence alter drastically permanently of but involve The seem and

of protective DNA irreversible the transformation. with ultimate damage is mechanism apoptosis cells neoplastic against p53-induced is mediated and later). genes, PUMA by It upregulation several of including (discussed proapoptotic BAX

damage the repair stresses and assists inducing and To of is activated in G1 arrest repair p53 DNA by such as DNA DNA expression by genes. causing summarize, is that be p53 DNA with apoptosis senescence enter by directed cell repaired A to (see damaged undergo cannot either or

Fig. ). 6.21 street function, the the of become loss With activities, p53 genome.” of one-way dividing a view normal these to fixed of has “guardian cells, leading called rightfully p53 mutations in damage and the goes onto unrepaired, cell DNA turns transformation. In been malignant

genes controlling human upstream a have in than the in the of TP53. carcinogenesis, defect importance in Confirming downstream TP53 gene, defects cancers remaining of often more 70% or of and neoplasms this have malignant breast—the type cancer leading three carcinomas Biallelic colon, including in of gene every are found the causes lung, deaths. of and TP53 virtually cancer, abnormalities of of the mutations most acquired In TP53 both affecting are alleles cells. cases, in somatic gene certain the MDM2 but p53. p53 function amplification of the because is of In as intact TP53 which tumors, over-expression gene, such inhibitor potent encodes lost of a is other and sarcomas, disorder the syndrome. allele; inherit a is mutant commonly, Li-Fraumeni resulting Less the called patients TP53 As inheritance affected allele in mutant one the predisposes retinoblastoma, familial http://ebooksmedicine.net TP53 of case with

genesbinds to DNA p53 mutations p53-dependent normal) loss Normal (p53 of Cell or cell with

targets No DNANo cell effects noTranscription arrest cycle repair, and senescenceindependent dependent on

Fig. p53 genes. normal p53 of Successful DNA DNA-damaging proceed GADD45 of and in of if repair triggers repair in The Activation inhibitor cells upregulation integrity apoptosis p53 hypoxia arrest by of CDKN1A genome. DNA senescence. or of (p21) G1 the or kinase either by induction maintaining by DNA the to cycle the to fails, cycle; and allows 6.21 cell transcriptional repair, cyclin-dependent the role agents of the leads cell with cells with to does and genetically In DNA cells or mutations cycle arrest neoplasms. DNA rise damaged eventually malignant loss TP53, induce not of giving cell or repair, proliferate, damage

one to tumors the second, hit only malignant normal needed additional inactivate because allele. is develop to individuals years a with general compared developing syndrome Li-Fraumeni 25-fold the age by have of of Patients tumor chance a greater 50 population. the with malignant the types of cancer, sarcomas, breast Li-Fraumeni of allele, cortex. RB leukemia, carcinomas brain tumors with most are develop in developing that is mutant inherit and much spectrum a common syndrome the more the adrenal contrast the to In patients tumors tumors, patients varied; who in develop primary may Compared patients a with individuals with sporadic tumors, and diagnosed multiple younger age Li-Fraumeni develop at with syndrome tumors tumors.

be certain with viruses. As oncogenic DNA p53 rendered by RB, also normal nonfunctional can its and polyoma Proteins nullify certain virus HPVs, p53 bind and viruses, to oncogenic protective encoded by B function. hepatitis two p53. of RB tumor best-understood suppressors, DNA the viruses transforming subvert and Thus,

OF TP53: GUARDIAN THE GENOME

by encodes anoxia, monitor p53, TP53 which can of be the or central cell, the activated damage. oncogenesignaling, stress DNA inappropriate in arrest, senescence, controls apoptosis. of cellular the cell expression cycle and genes in Activated DNArepair, involved activity and p53

damage DNA phosphorylation. by activation leads to of p53 thereby Activated of CDKN1A drives whichprevents p53 transcription (p21), thecellcycle.ThispauseallowsthecellstorepairDNAdamage. G1-S a block RB in causing phosphorylation,

IfDNAdamagecannotberepaired,p53inducescellularsenescenceorapoptosis.

Ofhumantumors,70%demonstratebiallelicmutationsinTP53.PatientswiththerareLi-FraumenisyndromeinheritonedefectivecopyofTP53 inthegermline,suchthatonlyoneadditionalmutationisrequiredtolosenormalp53function.Li-Fraumenisyndromepatientsarepronetodevelopawidevarietyoftumors.

AswithRB,p53canbeincapacitatedwhenboundbyproteinsencodedbyoncogenicDNAvirusessuchasHPV.

the molecules cell characterized. brakes much anti-proliferative circuitry that are the transmit well cycle, about the to applies to cells is less signals known that Although Best-known of dimeric a activins. a bone growth TGF-β, includes member and is factors proteins of family that morphogenetic most potent is inhibitor normal and a endothelial, of epithelial, In cells, TGF-β proliferation. hematopoietic of to processes and TGF-β cellular regulates complex receptors binding a by It II. I composed activation as a Dimerization upon of binding as MYC cascade repression well genes events and growth-suppressing of CDKIs result leads activity, growth-promoting such that of transcriptional CDK4. of receptor with to as in the the ligand

are impaired the TGF-β many forms of the TGF-β pathways growth-inhibiting In mutations signaling. of cancer, effects by affecting to II may molecules type TGF-β SMAD that from anti-proliferative or transduce the to nucleus. serve receptor mutations receptor the alter signals the These receptor are the and the Mutations cancers type in endometrium. colon, affecting of II stomach, seen SMAD4, proteins cancers. in common in the be 1 of is 10 signaling, Mutational pancreatic TGF-β to involved inactivation of known overexpression be core TGF-β MYC. of loss loss occurs at may expression control downstream pathway; by of example, there p21 contrast, of TGF-β–mediated cancers, signaling a level other growth and/or In for the of system angiogenesis, of progression. or to suppression tumor including of other tumor then program, the use promotion can TGF-β–induced cells elements These facilitate immune other can or depending cell. prevent TGF-β function tumor Thus, the on the of promote to in state growth, genes migration, tumors, that (EMT), transition process in late-stage activates later. a invasion, metastasis, and many TGF-β as promotes discussed Indeed, signaling epithelial-to-mesenchymal

Contact and APC Inhibition, NF2,

are cancer fails they laboratory, come be to in grown each cells contact When with inhibited proliferation when the their other. in confluent monolayers. is sharp proliferating contrast once they form nontransformed cells, This in to which stop contact inhibition govern mechanisms The now only discovered. are being that

are transmembrane between homodimeric proteins contacts many Cell–cell in mediated cadherins. called interactions tissues by in mediates (E contact cell–cell E-cadherin epithelial) layers. for epithelial One contact mechanism inhibition: have tumor E-cadherin mediated proposed the maintains by to been explain how mechanisms is gene NF2. Two suppressor • of inhibition. downstream pathway signling acts in neurofibromin-2, commonly merlin, maintain E-cadherin product, more a that Its helps fo contact called cause in certain known tumors, mutations hereditary type NF2 NF2 is loss 2. of Homozygous with and neural line germ called associated condition tumor-prone are neurofibromatosis a to

• mechanism bind to contact A involves may another inhibition signaling which E-cadherin second β-catenin, ability by protein. its regulate as (described pathway incompletely broad is below), epithelial has which morphology the cells signaling organization β-catenin regulating but the understood WNT of such the lining roles structures component of a key of yet and as gut. in

epithelial disease of rare is to adenomatous hereditary polyposis by clue important coli cancers the (APC). the E-cadherin and A β-catenin in further illustrated have development polyps the of of This incidence adenomatous cancers. high the by a colon numerous transformation characterized in into that is colonic very disorder the consistently polyps exerts of The anti-proliferative called loss in APC for manner. (named gene effects an unusual disease), show tumor which suppressor a cytoplasmic several functions. promote which degradation is whose protein to the encodes a β-catenin, APC has of function dominant signaling to E-cadherin, pathway binding WNT In component a in also is (illustrated addition key β-catenin the of

Fig. 6.22).

as that which a soluble of WNT receptors, bind β-catenin, turn in prevent it degradation to APC-mediated translocate signals acts to the are transmit where activator. WNTs allowing the transcriptional that nucleus, it factors degraded been exposed is cytoplasmic an by β-catenin that cells to complex, part. integral a of WNT, have not quiescent destruction APC In which is colon absence even factors. WNT is signaling With prevented, activated in (e.g., of and cancers), degradation of in loss WNT β-catenin the APC the is inappropriately response genes, cyclin Ecadherin colonic and such increased transcription inhibition. contact well epithelium growth-promoting to this reduce D1 TWIST as which such and as and regulators, SLUG, thus of transcriptional as In MYC, as repress leads expression

gene. APC tumor behaves suppressor as typical a APC are their mutated by or thousands found show in to these twenties; teens polyps loss with typically of other one polyps allele. the to hundreds born allele Individuals colon of adenomatous have the undergo one discussed as invariably, transformation, more polyps or later. Almost malignant mutations sporadic 70% APC seen colon 80% are cancers. of to in activating to cancers action the render of show sometimes normal with of degrading APC that β-catenin Colonic refractory them APC. mutations genes

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. TheroleofAPCinregulatingthestabilityandfunctionofβ-catenin.APCandβ-cateninarecomponentsoftheWNTsignalingpathway.(A)Inrestingcells(notexposedtoWNT),β-cateninformsamacromolecularcomplexcontainingtheAPCprotein.Thiscomplexleadstothedestructionofβ-catenin,andintracellularlevelsofβ-cateninarelow.(B)WhencellsarestimulatedbysecretedWNTmolecules,thedestructioncomplexisdeactivated,β-catenindegradationdoesnotoccur,andcytoplasmiclevelsincrease.β-Catenintranslocatestothenucleus,whereitbindstoTCF,atranscriptionfactorthatactivatesseveralgenesinvolvedinthecellcycle. 6.22 (C)WhenAPCismutatedorabsent,thedestructionofβ-catenincannotoccur.β-Catenintranslocatestothenucleusandcoactivatesgenesthatpromotethecellcycle,andcellsbehaveasiftheyareunderconstantstimulationbytheWNTpathway.

TUMOR WITH WNT RESTING TUMOR CELL CELL CELL CELL STIMULATION TGF-β,CONTACTINHIBITION,ANDAPC-βCATENINPATHWAYSRESTING WNT STIMULATION WITH

inhibitsproliferationofmanycelltypesbyactivationofgrowth-inhibitinggenessuchasCDKIs TGF-β andthoseencodingcyclins. andsuppressionofgrowth-promotinggenessuchasMYC

TGF-β genesthattransduceTGF-β functioniscompromisedinmanytumorsbymutationsinitsreceptors(colon,stomach,endometrium)orbymutationalinactivationofSMAD signaling(pancreas).

E-cadherinmaintainscontactinhibition,whichislostinmalignantcells.

geneexertsanti-proliferativeactionsbyregulatingthedestructionofthecytoplasmicproteinβ-catenin.WithalossofAPC,β-cateninisnotdestroyed,andittranslocatestothenucleus,whereitactsasagrowth-promotingtranscriptionfactor. TheAPC

geneisseeninapproximately70%ofsporadiccoloncancers. Infamilialadenomatouspolyposissyndrome,inheritanceofagermlinemutationintheAPC geneandsporadiclossofthesolenormalallelecausesthedevelopmentofhundredsofcolonicpolypsatayoungage.Inevitably,oneormoreofthesepolypsevolvesintoacoloniccancer.SomaticlossofbothallelesoftheAPC

metabolism by cancer uptake presence glycolytic lactose levels Even of conversion and pathway. a glucose cellular of form via high cells ample the oxygen, the demonstrate in characterized of to glucose (fermentation) increased of distinctive also for for Prize phenomenon, recognized the years Otto the its Warburg Nobel effect Warburg (indeed, discovery). glycolysis, received as called in been This aerobic has 1931 many and known dividing visualize tumors preferentially injected up well as into bone “glucose-hunger” is emission that Clinically, which tomography a are actively is positron via the used derivative 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose, tissues as to tumor of normal, cells marrow). with glucose patients taken in such tumors the (PET) (as scanning, rapidly ones PET-positive, Most and tumors growing so. are are markedly

but Warburg’s was years, research. most cancer areas of past neglected discovery over largely active the the become for metabolism decade, has many of one being it cells a of of ATP the oxidative glycolysis of normal molecules and details elucidated, (which per heart a at Warburg glucose) per to cancer but molecule molecules and of cancer pathways) cell molecule for pathways inefficient rely up lies complex, still is advantageous Metabolic why simple on generates (like are glucose)? ATP phosphorylation of (which to question: the of instead signaling the effect 36 in generates seemingly are two that it rely embryonic as in immune fermentation. proliferating recognize to and question, normal While on this during responses, lymphocytes cells, important pondering is such also tissues rapidly aerobic is cancer general cells. Thus, specific, “fixed” property metabolism” not instead that of a but cancer is “Warburg cells becomes in growing

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cellular dividing glycolysis rapidly riddle intermediates synthesis phosphorylation with simple: cells this does are for that mitochondrial tumor components, the answer is to provides not. oxidative Aerobic whereas metabolic of needed The glycolysis a readily and strict must its can cell two divide when has biosynthetic lipid, it that duplicate growing cells RNA, one becomes cells. reason cellular requirement; on and The daughter growing a apparent considers rely aerobic produce organelles—before components—DNA, of it proteins, all the components cellular lipids, build to nucleic oxidative and needed produce yields phosphorylation While growth fails acids). that for any to it used (proteins, moieties be ATP, can abundant carbon to must some not cells macromolecules Even in needed shunt oxidative metabolic intermediates cellular that actively order are phosphorylation are for that from growing away maintenance. synthesize

in produces such metabolized actively contrast, a of the average only shunted cellular phosphorylation ATP. is of four oxidative fraction molecule of growing approximately on through each molecules small that glucose By the cells glucose pathway, for hits phosphorylation) a growth. (heavily balance “sweet is that oxidative Presumably, this toward with optimal bit aerobic a spot” of biased metabolic fermentation, growing that metabolism. It mitochondrial cells on rely follows do not a be reactions off in of of mitochondria ATP, is as that carry However, synthesis blocks. precursors generate intermediates to but out that cellular used can growing major metabolic shunted generate the in function and rather cells building to biosynthesis mitochondria. citrate largely cells For such and is intermediates that acetyl-CoA, as from generated are in synthesized requires lipid in acetyl-CoA growing example,

the how of effect, cells? reprogramming So Warburg malignant metabolism, and triggered growing this is in normal profound in the As suppressor cancers. factor that pathways growth guessed, in be cascades produced receptors, reprogramming are same might very by genes is downstream tumors signaling mutations and by of deregulated oncogenes metabolic cancer the cells is ceases cells rapidly the to loss normal and tissue Thus, action aerobic due glycolysis in growing, no when dividing persists of suppressor gene oncogenes tumor function. in longer this of reprogramming whereas the shown are and pro–growth metabolism points cross-talk Some of signaling important in cellular between factors the of

Fig. signaling. and 6.23 receptor Growth • factor following: the include factor receptors growth signals metabolism signals nucleus, addition by to transmitting to from In the influence growth also

Fig. Metabolismandcellgrowth.QuiescentcellsrelymainlyontheKrebscycleforATPproduction;ifstarved,autophagy(self-eating)isinducedtoprovideasourceoffuel.Whenstimulatedbygrowthfactors,normalcellsmarkedlyupregulateglucoseandglutamineuptake,whichprovidecarbonsourcesforsynthesisofnucleotides,proteins,andlipids.Incancers,oncogenicmutationsinvolvinggrowthfactorsignalingpathwaysandotherkeyfactorssuchasMYCderegulatethesemetabolicpathways,analterationknownastheWarburg 6.23 effect. in conversion acid catabolism phosphoenolpyruvate pathway, of Growth Mitochondrial factor activity catalyzes RTK the amino inhibiting Lipogenesis uptake and Autophagy glucose CO2 glycolytic the the Akt pyruvate last transporter RTK MYC synthesis utilization of intermediates Increased acid ATP RTK metabolites synthesis amino Krebs upregulating and Lipids the LysosomeLipid Increased which Nucleotide, to PI3K glycolytic Glutamine step Protein kinase, GROWTHtransporter glutamine Lactate RTK http://ebooksmedicine.net pyruvate. cycle buildup to off siphoned damming protein. are for leads and effect that the This of synthesis RNA, intermediates, of a creates upstream glycolytic which DNA,

signaling. RAS intermediates the activity to lipid shunting biosynthesis; stimulate and upregulate pathways of glycolytic transporters multiple factors RAS required glycolysis; mitochondrial and of enzymes, glucose thus Signals for increasing are promote of leading to protein downstream synthesis. that

MYC. the drives transcription changes of expression cell gene in expression factor metabolism mentioned support As and that pathways pro-growth growth. MYC, upregulate earlier, anabolic which carbon glutamine, genes the for of is are Among needed cellular utilization moieties glycolytic key building required of mitochondrial which for biosynthesis several blocks. enzymes for and MYC-regulated of source glutaminase, a those

pathways metabolic that the tumor growth. flipside suppressors of The coin inhibit that often is support of receptors discussed allowing factor We PTEN oppose Warburg growth already NF1 them tumor suppressors effect signals to have the “braking” and downstream RAS, on effect. the of and the induce perhaps be arrest growth Warburg suppressors the (and many suppress Indeed, that all) that it effect. may tumor glycolysis, lipogenesis, inhibit target of NADPH genes suppressor, uptake, (a upregulates collectively that the for cofactor arguably the and tumor glucose For key example, most of the needed generation p53, biosynthesis macromolecules). important tumor increasingly it Thus, inextricably intertwined the is clear suppressors functions with oncoproteins of are that and many cellular metabolism.

mutations autophagy other unusual small sufficient are of state. oncogenic that Warburg transformed oncometabolites, two of to appear to there the brief set contribute links and between directly creation metabolism the importance mention, to and are to an that of Beyond molecules effect, merit lead the cancer that

Autophagy also for their cells of organelles, (Chapter energy sources only cannibalize proteins, state 2). as production growth, and own a nutrient severe is carbon their but in not which arrest deficiency membranes cells this If die. adaptation fails, the environmental able that marginal to seem to suggesting conditions under autophagy, often are be cells the deranged. induce autophagy grow without that Tumor pathways triggering promote with keeping are that autophagy suppressors. tumor In several genes this, vantage is from investigation Whether of active of and point the always bad however, the debate. matter autophagy remains tumor, a under to times long cells “dormant,” hibernation hard to for of survive use For may conditions a become deprivation, example, nutrient metabolic cells state severe that periods. of autophagy tumor allows therapies dividing could believed resistant and cells, cells to therefore for to therapeutic kill failures. actively responsible that are Such be be autophagy a given may foe tumor. on Thus, are how it regulate in tumor’s friend a that depending the pathways signaling “wired” be or

genome are genetic that in tumor the sequencing enzymes discovered cycle. of Krebs in surprising through group participate Another alterations mutations studies interest, new garnered most dehydrogenase have oncogenesis Of mutations ( have termed revealed oncometabolism of isocitrate mechanism they these, the as a in (IDH)

Fig. 6.24).

follows: IDH oncogenic The involving in are as steps pathway the proposed

the a to enzyme. active that substitution IDH residues acquires in specific mutation involving site the acid a amino leads of function enzymatic activity ability protein the result, as acquires As that it (2-HG). isocitrate a new the instead catalyzes loses and 2-hydroxglutarate to production an mutated of a dehydrogenase

members other TET of an 2-HG the several inhibitor acts are that family, of enzymes in TET2. including turn as

will methylation, goes which you regulate controls epigenetic cancer. often that of in expression an factors is modification DNA TET2 several that one and is recall gene awry normal abnormal methylation. to the According patterns activity TET2 to DNA leads loss model, of of

methylation oncogenesis. which drive genes, currently and Abnormal turn of DNA unknown cancer transformation in to cellular leads misexpression

is oncoprotein as a according this Thus, 2-HG, IDH considered by producing prototypical mutated oncometabolite. which an acts scenario, to Oncogenic IDH mutations

modification) changes methylation, (DNA histone Epigenetic

Fig. 6.24 Proposedactionoftheoncometabolite2-hydroxyglutarate(2-HG)incancercellswithmutatedisocitratedehydrogenase(mIDH).

myeloid gliomas, fraction described diverse http://ebooksmedicine.net cancers, sizable leukemias, in acute have cholangiocarcinomas, a sarcomas. of of a including collection and been now that drugs significance, been mutated it have the to because possible an normal develop altered structure, not Of IDH has and enzyme. IDH the mutated IDH clinical proteins inhibit and responses. These cancer drugs have in tested therapeutic patients produced are being encouraging now can new how of story kinds is anti-cancer understanding mechanisms drugs. entirely developing oncogenic of remarkable This yield a example detailed of

phosphorylation. oxidative over form metabolismfavoring Warburg a of is glycolysis metabolism pro-growth certain is and the by drivermutations. in It normal cancer to growth cells factors inducedin due becomesfixed action cells of exposure to

manytumor contribute metabolism, receptors) suppressors oppose (PTEN, it. MYC, Warburg to (RAS, Many growth oncoproteins factor NF1, induce or mutated p53) and

consume called components aprocess autophagy. induce their cells may in to Stress accumulate growth nutrients process autophagy, cells avoid Cancer may survival. corrupt may for or continued mutations to the toprovide and

“oncometabolites” thatare theepigenome, levels such mutated oncogenic. high by to act theformation Some expression leading in thereby changes gene of IDH causing of oncoproteins alter that as

genes cells frequently the making death. cells apoptosis, Tumor contain that regulate to mutations cell in resistant discussed death, inflammation. cells of apoptosis, without then dismantling cells component Chapter refers cell and regulated efficiently into professional are 2, in orderly by which neighboring phagocytes to As or consumed an pieces, stimulating known You and as extrinsic the by two there that lead damage. that pathway (also loss pathway, intrinsic the by mitochondrial the of FAS-ligand; DNA receptors FAS such triggered recall and perturbations apoptosis: as will growth the death are pathway), initiated and factors pathways to Cancer DNA intrinsic metabolic a as from disturbances initiate are stresses can apoptosis, hypoxia damage, as dysregulated number caused stemming growth but well also of subject that supply. blood cells by particularly to insufficient are of which intrinsic pathway the are therapy, apoptosis. cells tumors stresses radiation activating or These chemotherapy manyfold kill tumor with treated when by enhanced during stresses to develop that is induce Thus, there pressure, strong both intrinsic therapy, before resistance apoptosis. cells and may selective to for cancer mutations of and so disable reset survival in intrinsic stresses factors ( by cancer acquired cells changes or apoptosis of in key Accordingly, favor face the components expression that intrinsic evasion the occurs cell mainly as that pathway, balance way of to gene of by regulatory the of

Figure 6.25

Before to modes order. intrinsic review delving in into is the resistance of brief of pathway apoptosis, a cytochrome mitochondrial Activation pathway to of membrane apoptosis. as outer release this of such the leads and that permeabilization c, initiate of molecules, mitochondrial pro-apoptotic of members balancing the BCL2 a membrane family. of act the and The anti-apoptotic protein between delicate outer integrity by is determined and promote BAX apoptosis for BAK permeabilization. pro-apoptotic mitochondrial directly are and The required proteins anti-apoptotic MCL1. BCL-XL, is family, exemplified action Their the are members inhibited of which by BCL2, and this by like family thereby “BH3-only members and include apoptosis. the neutralizing set the pro-apoptotic A actions BCL-XL, proteins, shift of proteins and which PUMA, anti-apoptotic promoting and third the the so-called BID, proteins,” of BCL2 balance by BAD, between anti-apoptotic pores “overwhelms” all membrane. and the BAK BCL2/BCL-XL mitochondrial are the BAX proteins and activated the total protective form BH3-only sum When of factors, the in allow mitochondrial cytochrome to These c

of and growth ROS survival factors Chemicals Radiation signals Deficiency

Fig. of through of egress as of used apoptosis mitochondria p53, mechanisms 6.25 cell pathway to and factors MDM2. and through BCL2, Reduced BCL-XL, by a tumor death. cells mutation by c (2) either from evade of or result Loss cytochrome Intrinsic MCL-1. as antagonism of (1) major such anti-apoptotic upregulation IAP, Inhibitor of apoptosis.

cytosol, where leak in to caspases the and activates APAF-1 out cleaves caspase-3. and into which as turn caspase-9, such it executioner activates binds caspase-9 known as that inhibitor intrinsic apoptosis prevent bind proteins apoptosis. the pathway which group (IAPs), negative regulators of of as factors and function is Another of

by possible is mechanisms the major ( Within by to apoptosis framework, this cancer evaded illustrate is it which cells

Figure 6.25 ). steps the of loss of members expression BCL2 the the intrinsic anti-apoptotic family. component pathway, These and in of p53, increased mainly early key involve of

function. Loss of TP53 in at after commonly and frequency in the tumors TP53 mutated is that therapy. already mutations discussed, cancers relapse diagnosis, even As TP53 of is higher of to mutation of amplification function of notably In p53 p53. most MDM2, indirectly, addition cancers encodes other in which TP53, lesions an inhibitor impair a of the a prevents direct p53. pro-apoptotic of the member BCL2 family of Loss upregulation function that target of PUMA, is p53 BH3-only stress cells of DNA a and in survive would result, otherwise their death. As result damage that levels cell

of family. anti-apoptotic members BCL2 Overexpression of the mechanisms. leading and is tumor to event several apoptosis protection common through of Overexpression from occurs cells of BCL2 a the best understood translocation the tumor gene immunoglobulin (located at (Chapter that heavy BCL2 (q32;q21) the active 18q21) (14;18) to follicular fuses 12), characteristic 14q32). lymphoma transcriptionally B-cell carrying the chain (located of found examples a at a is One accumulation lymphadenopathy. survive them The steady resulting and allows overabundance long lymphocytes apoptosis to BCL2 of results producing in B protects that periods, for of a abnormally lymphocytes from cell BCL2overexpressing indolent they cell proliferation, rather explosive be tend arise part (slow-growing). in Because lymphomas to than large reduced follicular through death micro-RNAs BCL2 other that is tumors upregulated expression. In as appears it dampen (Chapter lymphocytic loss BCL2 normally leukemia of such specific chronic that 12), expression because of of leading of the described, particularly in chemotherapy. BCL2 members anti-apoptotic family other overexpression setting been to mechanisms have the Many resistance of to of seen amplification in lung the is For of of a subset gene breast and cancers. MCL1 example,

mechanisms evade has death lines several of targeted drug cancers by cell the development. stimulated which Recognition of (because which because is tumors possible function the overexpression of is MDM2. in p53 genes), “fixing” of in p53 a inactive tumors problem of Restoration of difficulty is inhibitor, but in TP53-mutated daunting defective of inherent its induce p53 that apoptosis types such are Indeed, amplification, sarcoma, as trials. reactivate in tested of of gene clinical in tumors and inhibitors MDM2 MDM2 certain being with Even more function antiapoptotic and drugs itself. BH3-only results generated members of being activities of the promising are particularly with the that mimic inhibit family, of proteins the BCL2 BCL2 activity treatment and potent a few These against leukemia) likely (such overexpression of cancer years. become the next the to standard by BCL2 over course chronic lymphocytic are characterized have of as drugs tumors part

Evasionofcelldeathbycancersmainlyinvolvesacquiredabnormalitiesthatinterferewiththeintrinsic(mitochondrial)pathwayofapoptosis.

mutationsoroverexpressionofthep53inhibitorMDM2. Themostcommonabnormalitiesinvolvelossofp53function,eitherbywayofTP53

Othercancersevadecelldeathbyoverexpressinganti-apoptoticmembersoftheBCL2family,suchasBCL2,BCL-XL,andMCL1,whichprotectcellsfromtheactionofBAXandBAK,thepro-apoptoticmembersoftheBCL2family.

genewithregulatoryelementsoftheimmunoglobulinheavychaingene. InalargemajorityoffollicularB-celllymphomas,BCL2levelsarehighbecauseofa(14;18)translocationthatfusestheBCL2

InhibitorsofMDM2(whichactivatep53)andinhibitorsofBCL2familymembersinducethedeathofcancercellsbystimulatingtheintrinsicpathwayofapoptosisandarebeingdevelopedastherapeuticagents.

capable of unlike limitless normal cells, Tumor replication. are cells, cellular 2), As most context at most of 70 human discussed the in have a normal aging cells previously capacity doublings. (Chapter of to senescence. the lose cells Thereafter, and divide the ability enter replicative chromosomes. been ends phenomenon of ascribed shortening the telomeres This has at to of progressive

and cell RB. senescence, cycle to are recognized repair telomeres as the by DNA leading machinery mediated double-stranded Markedly eroded arrest by DNA TP53 and breaks, chromosomes. in a are cell, by pathway RB last-ditch is the the disabled cells effort In mutations the activated in to save two or shortened ends which end-joining TP53 of joining mutations, nonhomologous

breaks. that an in new apart inappropriately system chromosomes resulting at in dicentric Such activated anaphase, repair pulled are DNA results double-stranded by The the apoptosis. repeated massive cycles bridge– resulting catastrophe, characterized from genomic eventually fusion–breakage mitotic produces instability

both not must be is avoided restraints senescence catastrophe loss for indefinitely, to also ( mitotic follows enough; and tumors the that cellular growth ability acquire of grow to It

Fig. 6.26 ). to cell If manages is the to cease, during crisis death. cell telomerase, reactivate avoid able and a bridge–fusion–breakage cycles the cell genomic that accumulate, this mutations malignancy. toward period precedes the of could activation, telomerase helping march numerous during instability However, absent Telomerase, cells. at levels present from cells, active or normal low stem most is in in somatic very all maintenance in is contrast, virtually telomere of cancers. By seen types upregulation In cancers, to this of of due is 85% enzyme the 95% to telomerase. recombination. DNA lengthening which telomeres, A use alternative mechanisms, few other on tumors of termed depend

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 6.26 Escapeofcellsfromreplicativesenescenceandmitoticcatastrophecausedbytelomereshortening.

adenoma a lesions telomerase karyotypes Of to high in cancer. genomic model lesions from expression, the a malignant degree high low complex interest, instability telomerase levels with early with had a activity, whereas colonic progression of of colonic of with adenocarcinoma, of telomere-driven tumorigenesis consistent human study in had of that mutations. proliferation shortening, instability to it incipient tumors by Thus, in unregulated telomere followed chromosomal leads accumulation and appears the these in and growth. to is cells, contributing If telomerase these become mutations reactivated are extended fixed, telomeres then tumor

•Innormalcells,whichlackexpressionoftelomerase,theshortenedtelomeresgeneratedbycelldivisioneventuallyactivatecellcyclecheckpoints,leadingtosenescenceandplacingalimitonthenumberofdivisionsacellmayundergo.

Incellsthathavedisabledcheckpoints,DNArepairpathwaysareinappropriatelyactivatedbyshortenedtelomeres,leadingtomassivechromosomalinstabilityandmitoticcrisis.

Tumorcellsreactivatetelomerase,thusstavingoffmitoticcatastropheandachievingimmortality.

to it that solid 1 aberrations capacity malignant possesses transformation, has cannot are tumor angiogenesis. to the beyond required unless genetic enlarge of 2 Even all induce diameter if it mm in for the a represents nutrients waste products; and Like which and diffuse and across nutrients, the 2-mm the normal delivery distance blood can require 1to oxygen of presumably zone vessels. oxygen, tissues, maximal and removal of waste from tumors to cancers during stimulate capillaries. sprout existing neoangiogenesis, previously vessels Growing from which needed as and perfusion a growth and adjacent and Neovascularization PDGF. cells growth effect such stimulate nutrients growth factors oxygen, on endothelial secreting supplies of (IGFs) the insulin-like by has factors, newly growth: formed tumor cells dual tumor the have angiograms. features normal; While removing not on of delivering pattern be effective haphazard tumor can the resulting a at that vasculature leaky are appreciated is nutrients and is dilated, vessels it and connection, entirely and wastes, abnormal to to tumor cells these contributes angiogenesis also permitting vessels, By metastasis. access malignancy. an is essential facet thus Angiogenesis of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

a growing do develop blood supply? How tumors tumors balance this current in is by between a and that in controlled angiogenesis is The balance paradigm of angiogenesis promoters. skewed inhibitors; angiogenic favor promoters is their human tumors do in Early development, most not angiogenesis. induce in Starved this remain switch years, of angiogenic small tumors terminates vascular for of an these quiescence. possibly until nutrients, situ, stage or or loss factors the The of production angiogenic involves basis of of switch angiogenic increased molecular and/ inhibitors. angiogenic or fibroblasts). or may factors inflammatory resident (e.g., be produced tumor themselves cells by cells cells These macrophages) by tumor-associated the (e.g., stromal in anti-angiogenic regulating elaborated cells and Proteases, the the stromal in the or factors. either by response tumor to tumor, cells between are balance involved also by angiogenic by are can the in proangiogenic are respectively. factors and angiostatin stored (bFGF) proteolytic endostatin ECM; that growth release and inhibitors basic cleavage plasminogen collagen, Many the fibroblast produced of proteases angiogenesis conversely,

several factors factors: angiogenic influenced anti-angiogenic by The is balance of and local

of stabilizes factor mentioned to VEGF. transcription activates due earlier, transcription proangiogenic the HIF1α, of which an Relative hypoxia oxygen such oxygen-sensitive as cytokines then lack toward gradient that proliferation an guides tumor. new the growth vessels of cells angiogenic create endothelial These the the of stimulates factors and

suppressors balance tumor in in tilt the involving and angiogenesis. favor also cancers of Mutations oncogenes of as stimulates molecules, proangiogenic molecules, VEGF. represses p53 example, expression such For thrombospondin-1, of expression as and such antiangiogenic angiogenesis. provides environment permissive for a tumor of in p53 Thus, loss cells more

also kinase gain-offunction and of transcription VEGF the RAS mutations upregulate production pathway, by from in of RAS-MAP MYC the signals is influenced VEGF. or The VEGF be and detected fraction elevated significant cancer of in Notably, patients. a of urine of levels can the serum

block agents is The a solid powerful if to for significant idea are that tumors provided sizes development of has impetus to angiogenesis. therapeutic that angiogenesis clinically the essential grow bevacizumab, in use are of a example for cancers. multiple oncologists the treatment and approved cancers; These that part monoclonal agents of antibody cardinal neutralizes the activity VEGF is now armamentarium a is against use that a was have as for financial at hoped; few high nearly they effective months inhibitors cost. only originally but However, been angiogenesis and as prolong a life, can usually not mechanisms of persistence not inhibitors in underlie cancers of face ultimate therapy that are the angiogenesis the yet with clear. The progression and anti-angiogenic modest of stromal therapy of pernicious elude The can which as highlights directed cells benefit the cancers, at even therapies advanced nature such support endothelium.

in angiogenesis which use. now through effects are the inhibitors possible that of only are “escape with understanding of greater the sidestep routes” the cells Improvements tumor

Vascularizationoftumorsisessentialfortheirgrowthandiscontrolledbythebalancebetweenangiogenicandantiangiogenicfactorsthatareproducedbytumorandstromalcells.

HypoxiatriggersangiogenesisthroughtheactionsofHIF-1α onthetranscriptionoftheproangiogenicfactorVEGF.

Manyotherfactorsregulateangiogenesis;forexample,p53inducessynthesisoftheangiogenesisinhibitorthombospondin-1,whileRAS,MYC,andMAPKsignalingallupregulateVEGFexpressionandstimulateangiogenesis.

VEGFinhibitorsareusedtotreatanumberofadvancedcancersandprolongtheclinicalcourse,butarenotcurative.

mortality, Invasion, major morbidity cells, (ECM). stromal causes of and and cells, involving cancer matrix and metastasis, the cancer-related the extracellular from complex result interactions lymph transit tumors These the ( consisting growth into a into micrometastases down formation of of of blood broken series be invasion, through macroscopic steps of interactions and micrometastases, intravasation extravasation the and vasculature, can vessels, local into from vessels,

Fig. ). 6.27 host-related stage Predictably, interrupted by be any tumor-related factors. of either sequence steps may this at or can invasion and two (2) homing dissemination For vascular and of cascade into discussion, of purpose subdivided (1) of tumor the ECM the cells. be phases: metastatic

Matrix Extracellular of Invasion

organized two series connective are 1). ECM: a by and Human from membranes tissue into separated tissues each (Chapter of compartments other interstitial types basement of of each Although proteoglycans. organized differently, of and type glycoproteins, ECM composed is collagens, the metastatic interact (see ECM must cascade several cells at the stages with Tumor in

Fig. ). 6.27 the then A breach membrane. interstitial circulation vascular must the to gain traverse basement tissue, underlying connective basement the and penetrating first membrane, the by carcinoma access ultimately reverse distant site. This emboli a tumor cell repeated in extravasate when is at process resolved that the initiates an ECM and is of steps several active metastatic into Invasion be ( sequential can process cascade the

Fig. • cells. 6.28 tumor of between Loosening connections intercellular as E-cadherins bind intercellular to their and β-catenin earlier, cytoplasmic portions mentioned As glues, (see act

Fig. 6.22 ). anti-growth by sequestering β-catenin. earlier, molecules can cells addition, E-cadherin discussed keep transmit Adjacent in as the signals together; E-cadherin E-cadherin is almost in lost http://ebooksmedicine.net all function

Fig. 6.27 Themetastaticcascade:Thesequentialstepsinvolvedinthehematogenousspreadofatumor.

growth, diversification, expansion, Clonal angiogenesis

to Adhesion invasion membrane and of basement

lymphoid cells host Interaction with

E-cadherin cancers, epithelial basement of genes, of activation of transcription expression mutational genes, membrane TWIST SNAIL by suppress either which inappropriate Adhesion to or inactivation E-cadherin β-catenin expression. and the factors,

and basement Local of the interstitial • degradation membrane connective tissue. elaborate secrete stromal proteases. and cells) cells cells enzymes themselves Tumor inflammatory may (e.g., proteolytic induce to fibroblasts either or and matrix tumor (MMPs), such proteases, metalloproteinases plasminogen have in D, activator, implicated Multiple invasion. been cathepsin as different cell urokinase chemotactic, also factors, regulate basement insoluble by matrix releasing effects. and tumor remodeling angiogenic, components of but and the membrane MMPs invasion growth interstitial which ECM-sequestered growth-promoting by not only have a vascular epithelial basement release stimulates IV of also of ECM-sequestered VEGF the pools. cleaves type that is from collagen For gelatinase MMP-9 and and membrane example, this enzyme. and malignant show the of their collagenase tumors counterparts whereas breast, overexpress type stomach Benign little colon, activity, IV metalloproteinase the toward are inhibitors the reduced balance greatly of tilted is Concurrently, tissue that so degradation. levels MMPs malignant proteases other of tumors. many Indeed, been has and for overexpression reported

Fig. IV IV membrane Plasminogen JUNCTIONS http://ebooksmedicine.net Type metalloproteaseB Sequenceofeventsintheinvasionofepithelialbasementmem-branesbytumorcells.Tumorcellsdetachfromeachotherbecauseofreducedadhesivenessandattractinflammatorycells.Proteasessecretedfromtumorcellsandinflammatorycellsdegradethebasementmembrane.Bindingoftumorcellstoproteolyticallygeneratedbindingsitesandtumorcellmigrationfollow.LamininType cleavage motility INTERCELLULAR receptor Cadherins collagenase OF Fibronectin ECM 6.28 collagen Autocrine Matrix INVASION LOOSENING AND activator Fibronectin IV C collagen Type Laminin DEGRADATION A MIGRATION OF Basement receptor factor

cells Changes to attachment ECM tumor proteins. of in receptors, at polarized in to basement their laminin state. that cells membrane for as these the such help and have resting, cells collagens surface; integrins, differentiated epithelial are receptors Normal maintain a basal form leads apoptosis, normal induction resistant of adhesion tumor Loss while, not cells surprisingly, in are of to cells this to death. cell of matrix is that promote modified in invasion metastasis. and the itself ways Additionally, the on For by cells collagen MMP-2 or example, to and membrane and sites IV, laminin tumor generates of bind receptors stimulate migration. cleavage that proteins, MMP-9 novel basement

propelling degraded of tumor proteolysis. Locomotion membranes through and the final cells of step matrix is basement invasion, the zones signaling involves complex, cytoskeleton. actin and that eventually proteins of impinge process that many receptors multistep is families a the on Migration Such movement cell–derived autocrine directed as such by motility to and potentiated factors. cytokines, be seems tumor In growth activity of I insulin-like have collagen, some matrix factors and (e.g., components for and tumor growth laminin) chemotactic cleavage addition, II) factors cells. products (e.g., on factor to factor/scatter Stromal cell paracrine which (HGF/ SCF), also effectors tumor produce cells. cells of growth receptors such hepatocyte motility, binds as supporting are Concentrations elevated of motility. multiforme, edges at glioblastoma highly invasive advancing brain the HGF/SCF the of tumor role their in

variable environment a fibroblasts are cells a cells the barrier but as rather also that enable tumor become in and cancer has and cells immune cells traverse cells multiple cells stromal merely such tumor later). clear surrounding for which not It signaling (discussed tumor to hallmarks constitute reciprocal between static stromal fibroblasts can protease that all expression and demonstrated growth variety altered have genes that exhibit a various tumor For example, ECM of of invasion tumor-associated and studies inhibitors, influence extravasation. encode molecules, factors, proteases, which of co-opt the of that successful own their purposes. those tumors be can may The activities stromal nefarious to most cells

Vascular Cells and Homing Tumor Dissemination of

of sites the and properties, frequently cells circulation. enter tumor of Because invasive their escape origin their tumor “liquid detected can daily tumors, is recognized It from cells patients cancers; tumor-derived are circulation. blood that biopsies,” be small of and in tumor both with DNA cells from taken hence samples shed millions even from now studies solid of platelets. tumor single elements, form cells, blood while cells circulating circulate particularly aggregating and emboli these adhering Most of as by others to

circulation, the ease is at the tumor circulation, patient) apparent ability is grow invade, access to the cells sizes with clinically of other sites the cells leave for significant highly that (fortunately the in and inefficient. body Given which to it cancers the

the seem cells. potential limit to of factors metastatic tumor Several circulating the tumor invasion process (discussed beds of more cells the the and than in be difficult and immune adhesion tumor escape distant host normal cells While cells later), may vascular are of vulnerable tissues destruction from to circulation, cancer. by normal the much to of in critical to that cells. recognition Even cells difficult the a have by originating growth selected for due second following immune of suppression tumor it may to grow stromal lack support find resident extravasation, site been or in and of tissue because breast in to progression, the described melanoma survival prostate carcinoma. dormancy, micrometastases without of and concept Indeed, prolonged in and referring the well of is tumor may significant cells at distant defense disease. metastatic be the well sites clinically Dormancy against tumor last of

neglected, virtually Despite will factors, metastases. malignant macroscopic these produce all if limiting eventually tumors tropism vascular and and tissues. factors: anatomic the tumors to the is drainage at for primary of which location appear metastases specific tumor, related site of two particular the The the most earlier, metastases to lung. first metastases capillary mentioned the available tumor, liver bed in occur hence and the frequency to As of distribution however, not natural the suggest do observations, Many of of wholly explain that drainage metastases. pathways to spread bones. neuroblastomas prostatic liver spreads and bone, the to to the carcinomas the glands tend For example, bronchogenic and involve carcinoma brain, adrenal and preferentially following may organ be to related the Such tropism mechanisms:

cells organ. the adhesion have target of cells ligands may endothelial the on Tumor molecules expressed preferentially whose are

tissues metastasis. for may role an target determining in Chemokines the important have been cancers from CXCR4, which many instance, in the extravasation circulating has receptor breast express tumors implicated chemokine For such originating as of cells the tumor cancer.

of seedlings. speak, for target the so the tissue cases, “unfavorable tumor a environment, soil,” growth may to nonpermissive In be some well of muscle metastasis. and skeletal rarely are sites For example, although vascularized, are they spleen

cannot metastatic patients “prefer” certain form with precise admitted, tumors however, localization although of in cancer. It must particular individual metastases predicted sites, be that be of any the of not students, pathology chapters read Evidently, relevant much to many the tumors the have medical textbooks! dismay of that molecular seems mechanisms secrete a turn growth stromal resident metastatic that act the habitable tumor site the consistent of cytokines, Although cell. make are the still theme on be for factors, unraveled, colonization cancer in being cells, proteases the cells to and which understanding of the will clinician’s therapeutically a molecular be of enhanced. ability to metastasis, them target mechanisms the With better greatly

http://ebooksmedicine.net

only metastasize? oncology is why some question, central in the importance do tumors Of realize lacking. that sobering to It satisfying answers are is still cell exception cell sites, clearly in such tumors; Some distant than inherent rather always example, for is in the lung variation as the some to metastasis the with basal rule. the behavior of carcinoma small particular whereas metastasizes tumors, carcinoma, differences to of virtually relates metastasis tumors, patient things for longer to occur. time, to likely because tumors large periods more are presumably being (all metastasize equal) large providing chances additional present metastasis of the tumors have other small in than will for In general, been explain tumor cell tumor individual and the metastatic tumor by and type number multiplied from probabilistic to However, still cancers, of potential to behavior tumor deterministic cannot inherent time) metastasis and size reflects matter or it (a question model). (a of is merely is chance open whether differences in adequately

is inevitable tumor cells with model certain The specific a that metastatic harbors proposes phenotype. deterministic metastasis because the tumors with combinations randomly tumor as subclones with grow distinct As accumulate mutations. earlier, discussed of creating mutations, they cells that rare the mutations accumulate for process. accounts cells metastasis, inefficiency One of the tumor is only that necessary the for of possibility all this and of and identification be mutations However, to of has metastasis-specific metastasis-specific patterns difficult. gene expression proven intrinsic view, alternative on their idea that that An development, all early fated actors.” the is during that mutations dependent of acquire is Metastasis, progression, to generation during subclones an this metastasis be these to of according tumor that needed carcinogenesis. develops of for stochastic is but tumors are some not the tumors early and on metastatic “bad the in property are the tumor it These expression could mutually early some mechanisms phenotype. additional to yet in pattern exclusive, not also tumorigenesis, acquire metastasis-permissive tumors the be require a mutations and that random metastatic are gene complete aggressive placed and earlier, the tumor be cells: is on Nor makeup infiltrating blame cells, can the angiogenesis influence evidence the stroma, of quality as of immune of the presence metastasis. also all and mentioned degree there that

promote is whose open expression are metastasis. whether programs principal is contribution of gene Another control or genes sole to there question that certain implications. than a have suppress interest, altered primary would if is This therapeutic the their academic of detection more phenotype, question because or forms genes both tumor in promote of prognostic metastatic and for promote (EMT). primary epithelial-to-mesenchymal such and transcription whose metastasis factors are Among transition oncogenes to is encoding candidates those TWIST, function SNAIL In EMT, certain (e.g., E-cadherin) epithelial smooth cells actin). upregulate markers vimentin, and certain carcinoma (e.g., muscle markers mesenchymal downregulate such to phenotypic of with promote that as morphologic shape change increased enzymes migration a cell invasion. are from mesenchymal accompanied proteolytic polygonal spindly changes alterations shape, and production by epithelioid molecular along These is the that to for metastasis. are essential phenotype changes a believed promigratory These of favor development key E-cadherin EMT, event and downregulate expression Loss SNAIL in E-cadherin TWIST and expression. to a transcriptional repressors are that of seems be cells factors models master for of tumors transcription with experimental suggest not stimulus is clear; stimulated these stromal interactions are of however, tumor change. cells key How in that is expression regulator a this interactions may from not Thus, be of the emergent phenotype tumor cells acquisition but a stroma. of and arising metastatic an property mutations require of may a set

Abilitytoinvadetissues,ahallmarkofmalignancy,occursinfoursteps:looseningofcell–cellcontacts,degradationofECM,attachmenttonovelECMcomponents,andmigrationoftumorcells.

Cell–cellcontactsarelostbytheinactivationofE-cadherinthroughavarietyofpathways.

Basementmembraneandinterstitialmatrixdegradationismediatedbyproteolyticenzymessecretedbytumorcellsandstromalcells,suchasMMPsandcathepsins.

ProteolyticenzymesalsoreleasegrowthfactorssequesteredintheECMandgeneratechemotacticandangiogenicfragmentsfromcleavageofECMglycoproteins.

Themetastaticsiteofmanytumorscanbepredictedbythelocationoftheprimarytumor.Manytumorsarrestinthefirstcapillarybedtheyencounter(lungandliver,mostcommonly).

Sometumorsshoworgantropism,probablyduetoactivationofadhesionorchemokinereceptorswhoseligandsareexpressedbyendothelialcellsatthemetastaticsite.

recognize of coming and largely is cells host that the mechanisms grails” system immune promise by oncology, cells enable the to Long due the one “holy of cancer fruition, the which to of the to evade cancer therapies a host finally of understanding response. clearer destroy idea first that Paul cells be system. immune and “foreign” eliminated as can tumor Ehrlich the conceived by the recognized on this “scan” for Macfarlane to Burnet concept body malignant surveillance, emerging premise system of is the Subsequently, the formalized cells coining term based them. that a normal the and immune Lewis by Thomas function destroy constantly the and immune by in This infiltrates and the immunotherapy and in the direct the cancers with dramatic of immunodeficient outcome; and patients; T incidence most directly, of mice; extent quality several has many of of cancers data increased treatment demonstration in been tumor-specific supported observations—the cancers. the that people and cells in often most certain and idea antibodies success recently showing immune of correlates

http://ebooksmedicine.net

are that the the system of interactions being defined. specific tumor factors The immune between cells are numerous and host outcome and still govern principles: consider few face is it this overarching complexity, In to helpful the of a

preventing role the variety cells immune have Cancer which emergence of express to appears antigens cancers. in stimulate an host that a system, the of important

acquired to cells anti-tumor promote ineffective, of some responses. evade to allow may immune changes and growth, responses is antigenicity tumors due instances foster the cancer pro-tumor cancer Despite response and established cells, the actually that cancer in to

new mechanisms and immune reactivating to work immunotherapies cells has by cancer Defining responses. latent effective by host immune of evasion led that “immunomanipulation”

Tumor Antigens. is disorder in tumor a that and cancer discussed, by we are than oncogenes genes, which instances suppressor rather in driver is inherited. mutations As caused have acquired most their cancers, instability, mutations. to In passenger accumulate inherent due also genetic mutations, pathogenic driver addition to smoking). particularly These are may cancers be in sunlight, mutagenic by that caused exposures abundant (e.g., immune and seen the tolerant to. and has sequences can of varied is protein these mutations that new (neoantigens) of generate All not system therefore react may not

response. can the some by tumor cells In proteins host unmutated also immune instances, expressed stimulate

and One involved an such is in expressed melanocytes enzyme only melanin tyrosinase, melanomas. biosynthesis that in is antigen normal this is normal that to respond surprising may immune be the It to able system self-antigen. not and explanation the fails is induce normally and in such system by small few immune is that in normal so recognized is produced tyrosinase probable to cells amounts that The tolerance. it

in their in silent that name. encoded all antigens, the are cancer-testis adult are antigens, germ tissues cells except the genes of Another tumor testis—hence by group form the in surface MHC not class Although is the is present by I in because CD8+ on sperm not do be molecules. recognized can protein a testis the express T it expressed cell cells, that capable and therefore practical of immune are anti-tumor all for stimulating specific tumor these are purposes Thus, responses. antigens

class important expressed consists viral tumor oncogenic in are antigens that of of additional by An cells viruses. proteins transformed cancer viruses, virus most most infected these with that DNA papilloma human The by virus are (EBV). are cells of are antigens latently potent and proteins which important Epstein-Barr produced (HPV) of the T lymphocytes viral There cytotoxic important evidence kill roles cells. that against is tumors in play their ability virus-induced and and (CTLs) virus-infected recognize abundant antigens recognize through to surveillance cell with higher in and immunity, patients as multiple cancers Most rates B defective viruses, EBV-related cell with oncogenic T HPV-associated with individuals including significantly cervical lymphomas, such infected occur associated notably, carcinoma at HIV.

Effective Antigens. Tumor to Immune Responses eliminating emerging immune system the effective that is an components what we are normally the host may Assuming of capable cancers, ask, immune of key response? are and by to reactions of at hypoxia some to to blood the cells, death cancer dysregulated supply. stresses, which growth, cancers occurs frequency immune initiated cancers that insufficient due in individual due likely It metabolic all appears presenting resident Chapter associated “danger tumor cells signals” die phagocytes including they release (damage and cells, When molecular cells. antigen immune see innate 5) stimulate that patterns, MHC cells, to I neoantigens a tumor migrate is and in class It phagocytosed cells by present the that context are lymph which dendritic process the of of believed nodes draining molecules, termed some dead cross-presentation. tumor become tumor, which recognized of neoantigens the into CTLs, CD8+ to antigens antigen-specific their displayed MHC active class presenting in ( by activated, differentiate they and are home I own The tumor where of T site the proliferate, recognize and the kill context cells, cells molecules

Fig. ). 6.29 IFN-γ-producing may by to Th1 of antigens, be tumors. which recognition destruction the subset, contribute macrophages induced of T can activate the cells and helper tumor of also

from stems the that acquired As from of for evidence be the prevent which feature cells importance “foreign”. shortly, often discussed immunosurveillance CTLs cancers, CTL responses characterization human in tumor recognizing the will strongest as established of mutations some of with also of has wide outcomes. correlate high tumors studies human a and CTLs in variety It better been levels Th1 of large noted cells clinical that infiltrating other anti-tumor implicated believed the responses importance. quality killer been such types of as are CTL in While be natural preeminent responses, strength and of have to cells cell also

Immune Cancers. by Evasion nascent that Since or suppress factors that cancers, that it eliminating invisible and system reach immune host host is express of follows tumors of that recognizing clinically are sizes capable that system must cells to the composed either immunity. the immune significant be actively The selection avoid describe the the cancer immune to are the manipulate subclones system tumor been that ability purposes. the able of host for used their most even system to immunity malignant promote term or the own immune to immunoediting of darwinian has has the responses host to appear as tumors, defense the it most come Since should against that be important http://ebooksmedicine.net CTL

CTL of tumor killing

vesselCTL Migration to lymphatictumor-specific of tumor Afferent

of tumor cell Activation CD8+ antigen-specific T

Fig. antitumor of CD8+ 6.29 tumor Cross-presentation and T antigens response. cytotoxic cell induction of Lichtman molecular AK, Cellular (Modified immunology, 9, AH, Pillai and from ed 2018, Elsevier.) Abbas S: Philadelphia, surprise that cells abrogate variety tumor CTL alterations of that a show no responses. increased CTL variety functional proteins of assembly I the acquired These mutations a function. class molecules, and that inhibit prevent β2-microglobulin MHC that include in expression of of tissue the inhibitory by duration activating what to crucial responses immune checkpoints, is self-tolerance maintaining that work minimize These controlling are for as immune damage. size referred and to pathways normally collateral so proteins as and of

(programmed which the best-characterized cells surface immune PD-L1 ligand a death on protein checkpoints called (Figure of involves ). of expressed often 1), cell tumor 6.30 the One is CTLs its the their PD-1, lose become tumor unresponsive receptor, cells. and kill on to PD-L1 engages ability CTLs, When other immunoevasion immune which studies have identified by several checkpoint ligands receptors, tumors. implicated in been also pathways, involving have and Experimental different best Of the expressed on cell that these, receptor inhibits cells involves another function. characterized T T CTLA4,

discovery to immune the checkpoints release on the and these shut the immunity anti-tumor of checkpoints off brakes led development has that of that block The antibodies response. cancer, (Chapter some checkpoint (melanoma, Hodgkin of lymphoma and malignancies even in tumors others), have rates a rates in such therapies Current lung of higher 12). and as variety cancer, response hematologic resulted solid blockade 10–30% bladder in is manifestations, therapy surprising 5), to not these develop of autoimmune with colitis systemic it Because inflammation. blockade self various and checkpoint such (Chapter as treated prevent checkpoints responses antigens evolved that patients other to types can these be controlled reactions of anti-inflammatory agents. with Most

has of system cancers energized immune cancer. other work checkpoint immune to to focused combat remarkable inhibitors on the The response advanced harnessing the new identified vaccines individual tumor develop patients, of immunotherapy. kinds using well personalized adoptive to efforts as include as in neoantigens tumors These of (CARs). antigen patient-derived receptors are that are the of advanced chimeric CTLs most engineered to latter The express of antigen consisting their domains of CTLs have antibodies that CARs antigens and intracellular surface bind with delivered that tumor engagement on cells. extracellular tumor activate that following signals the domains leukemias, are tumor have with certain acute leukemia of long-term and lymphoblastic (Chapter in cells remissions CAR cell killers such cells 12). as potent T patients B produced activated become are complications released they However, CAR routine remains cytokines related T a to cancer CTLs, treatment. to be cells the with and will from of serious seen if also associated it part

an unalloyed Beyond of tumors host response to be the blessing. immune is complications not should that recognized it also immunotherapy, associated fibrosis, of the of Th2 function suspected activated Chapter macrophages, release lymphocytes, factors immune that from alter during suppression the example, characterized and accumulation of and angiogenesis, wound alternatively For will that is incompletely 5 tissue cells, the response macrophages in with fashion as are (M2) you such a immune certain promoting tumors which healing. of recall expect of the promote would responses growth, anti-tumor of protective tumor These converse one from immune response. types a what may

remain future the be very bright appears cancer cleared. summarize, to hurdles for while important To immunotherapy, present, At patients. better biomarkers immune for are and new resistance needed are unpredictable, to checkpoint tailor therapies individual response and to inhibitors host cancers. new the the individual will gauge of means This immune both evasion immune likely the to in diagnostic response development entail of tests and that with conducted to directed against combination will in patient certain these is believe before be inhibitors chemotherapy is checkpoint reason need trials well-designed There immunosuppressive) may tumor cells, if receives therapies many given more or targeted be the questions (which answered. are before clinical to effective and immune effective others. some are cancers immunotherapies Currently available not in but for development is adaptive need there Thus, safe that of therapies a are

cells Primed killing peptide-MHC peptide-MHC CTL Tumor tumor capableCD28 Tumor of 9,Philadelphia,2018,Elsevier.) molecularimmunology,ed a in of variety wide cancers. effective on possible therapeutic all normal study that myriad and is With of seems its of advances, all field variations made oncology it transformative the of threshold immune of these the response caveats, the certain by careful in cancers.

Tumorcellscanberecognizedbytheimmunesystemasnon-selfanddestroyed.

Antitumoractivityismediatedbypredominantlycell-mediatedmechanisms.TumorantigensarepresentedonthecellsurfacebyMHCclassImoleculesandarerecognizedbyCD8+CTLs.

aberrantly classes expressed include The ofmutated tumor different proteins,andtumorantigensproducedbyoncogenicviruses. products antigens or overexpressed genes, of

Immunosuppressedpatientshaveanincreasedriskfordevelopmentofcancer,particularlytypescausedbyoncogenicDNAviruses.

variants, molecules, expression Inimmunocompetentpatients,tumorsmayavoidtheimmunesystembyseveralmechanisms,includingselectiveoutgrowthof loss reduced mediatedbyexpressionofcertainfactors(e.g.,TGF-β,PD-1ligands)bythetumorcells. or antigen-negative immunosuppression ofhistocompatibility and

overcome of ofimmuneevasionarenowapprovedfortreatmentofpatientswithadvancedformsofcancer. that these some •Antibodies mechanisms

an as Genomic Instability Enabler Malignancy of

all cancer features identified malignancy, alterations eight produced genetic section the by appear of genes. be to defining which The preceding involving of mutations do these How arise? in of are encounters. that outcomes cancers chemicals, Although mutagenic humans awash radiation, rare are relatively sunlight), (e.g., are environmental these agents This affairs from the ability damage. of state sense repair and cells results to DNA of normal

highlighted DNA are genes integrity inherited the disorders The involved in genome repair maintaining in the in by that of encode defective. DNA of repair proteins several is which importance repair, types presented systems—mismatch Individuals repair DNA born recombination are in of nucleotide repair DNA increased repair, greatly with development inherited for and defects in three at repair—are excision risk cancer.Defects genes the next. of accumulation in of incur genes worthy repair in emphasis enables mutations sporadic development cancers as contribute While cancer these on syndromes, of point the mutations of this that discussions directly inherited that often genes cancer. well; to a turn DNA is focus in

repair genes illustrates to of carcinoma (HNPCC) cancer. nonpolyposis dramatically predisposition in the DNA role Hereditary colon syndrome affecting 14), familial cecum carcinomas from results (Chapter in involved characterized predominantly the disorder, in and colon genes proximal of DNA by repair. This defects mismatch the colon a if the normal mismatch correct strand When checkers.” of repaired, “spell DNA of act of repair being erroneous mismatch pairing G For the as rather genes example, is is with T, the defect. than A an with repair products genes there T, the rate. an increased accumulate at these “proofreaders,” errors Without mismatch repair at 15). to least in have found been HNPCC Mutations genes four underlie (Chapter genes acquires mismatch and repair inherits DNA affected several defective second copy epithelial the “hit” individual one of Each cells. colonic in of one genes growth during mutations Thus, affect in normal cell indirectly—by the DNA division. only process genes other repair of allowing cell characteristic the repair of instability with mismatch genome is in microsatellite (MSI). defects A patients finding throughout tandem genome found Microsatellites six one to (Chapter 1). repeats the nucleotides of are the of remains these length constant. microsatellites In people, normal contrast, increase and in or decrease By with are in HNPCC, satellites these unstable patients length. the Although mutations cancers for of of to colonic accounts genes. 2% function in cancers, repair that MSI only disrupt all to 15% be of mismatch acquired due 4% detected can HNPCC about sporadic

autosomal increased DNA arising defect an recessive a repair pigmentosum caused disorder cancers that in risk greatly by associated is with a sun-exposed for in Xeroderma is skin. residues, cross-linking sunlight (UV) DNA preventing of Ultraviolet normal cause pyrimidine in rays replication. Such is the DNA repaired damage system. repair by excision nucleotide pigmentosum. to rise of these repair, any in can involved of are the xeroderma loss and proteins give nucleotide Several inherited one excision

anemia such A DNA-damaging by as hypersensitivity comprising (in recessive nitrogen Fanconi Fanconi disorders syndrome, cross-linking radiation to ataxia-telangiectasia), to ataxia-telangiectasia, mustard Bloom anemia). ionizing agents, Bloom agents, as autosomal characterized is of syndrome and or group and DNA (in such to (in as features predisposition and developmental complex defects anemia is includes, syndrome). addition Bloom symptoms in to ataxiatelangiectasia), (in cancer, and phenotype (in Their such Fanconi neural anemia), mutated in which that radiation important and damage ionizing “sensing” initiate DNA in damage kinase encodes a earlier. p53 then is the directing gene The protein response, described DNA ATM, by is ataxia-telangiectasia caused as to

origin also of of DNA the genes study role hereditary repair in comes Evidence cancer from of the cancer. for breast the for mutations cancer. of BRCA2, cases Germ account of two genes, in line familial BRCA1 50% and breast developing for for risk higher higher and men prostate risk slightly cancer, In substantially breast BRCA1 mutations ovarian women addition a to epithelial cancer. with have developing have a cancers, mutations stomach, developing originating pancreas, melanocytes, in well breast the and ovary, from Likewise, lymphocytes. risk as line for increase cancers germ cancer B bile and gene as prostate, the BRCA2 women, men in the ducts, both and defective functions have aneuploidy. version genes chromosomal develop Although a not fully, of BRCA1 severe been BRCA2 cells and these the breaks of with elucidated part, to at the pathway. recombination both DNA Indeed, in genes in least homologous seem repair function, a other the is complex forms homologous recombination to pathway. proteins BRCA1 kinase linked in the also ATM pathway example, with and For one recombination. in required has as genes Fanconi several a bind to BRCA2 homologous anemia, of the shown BRCA2 been to was for and protein mutated identified RAD51, protein both inactivated tumor develop. to other cancer be Similar copies to BRCA2 must and of for suppressor genes, BRCA1 BRCA1 inactivated rarely cancers of in genes familial BRCA2 breast cases are established, of to is breast linkage and these sporadic well cancer. Although TP53, as suppressor BRCA2 regard, tumor are are APC and BRCA1 this frequently in genes, other and such inactivated In cancers. which sporadic from different

Cancers Induced Genomic Neoplasms Regulated Instability: Mutations Resulting by From Lymphoid

cells plays B lymphocytes. of a of role type of damage central tumors in pathogenesis special T A the and DNA to receptor the As genes. relies on T B discussed antigen immunity cells adaptive earlier, of cells diversify and their ability both that and T-cell immunoglobulin progenitors assembly permitting segment gene pair the cells V(D)J receptor RAG2, express out Immature carry products, functional genes. of of and recombination, T RAG1 B and a and antigen, recombination immunoglobulin B a diversification called encountering catalyzes express cytosine immunoglobulin activation-induced In which switch deaminase (AID), somatic specialized both hypermutation. after enzyme cells class gene mature through addition, detail gene in Chapter switching cause in lymphoid gene the occur discussed antigen and that Errors of diversification and during neoplasms, class soil many fertile assembly mutations for 12. receptor that immunoglobulin provide

•IndividualswithinheritedmutationsofgenesinvolvedinDNArepairsystemsareatgreatlyincreasedriskforthedevelopmentofcancer.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

PatientswithHNPCCsyndromehavedefectsinthemismatchrepairsystem,leadingtodevelopmentofcarcinomasofthecolon.Thesepatients’genomesshowmicrosatelliteinstability(MSI),characterizedbychangesinlengthofshorttandemrepeatingsequencesthroughoutthegenome.

Patientswithxerodermapigmentosumhaveadefectinthenucleotideexcisionrepairpathway.TheyareatincreasedriskforthedevelopmentofskincancersinsitesexposedtosunlightbecauseofaninabilitytorepairpyrimidinedimersinducedbyUVlight.

andBRCA2, whicharemutatedinfamilialbreastcancers,alsoareinvolvedinhomologousDNArepair. SyndromesinvolvingdefectsinthehomologousrecombinationDNArepairsystemconstituteagroupofdisorders—Bloomsyndrome,ataxia-telangiectasia,andFanconianemia—thatarecharacterizedbyhypersensitivitytoDNA-damagingagents,suchasionizingradiation.BRCA1

Mutationsincurredinlymphocytesexpressinggeneproductsthatinducegenomicinstability(RAG1,RAG2,AID)areimportantinthepathogenesisoflymphoidneoplasms.

reaction. chronic inflammatory Infiltrating a provoke cancers chronic extensive disease”), advanced symptoms, of cause cancers, inflammatory so as cachexia. anemia signs In fatigue, this as systemic such and and reaction so-called patients (the to with can be “anemia tumor enable out to hallmarks modify many models on cells cancers suggest of the carried cancer. However, of animal the studies also that inflammatory in microenvironment resident direct from fibroblasts or indirect These cells cancer-associated and particularly stromal and effects effects through other stem endothelial tumor between cells, cells. may on interactions inflammatory cells inflammatory cells, of cells of inflammatory following: stromal include the resident effects cells Proposed and cancer-enabling

that proliferation. promote of Release factors that (ECM). have secrete from shown the to factors, matrix factors as wide such of been extracellular growth Infiltrating liberate growth leukocytes stromal EGF, and can cells a variety proteases and activated

growth suppressors. of Removal epithelial of cell–ECM cell–cell cells mentioned earlier, suppressed and interactions. the is As growth by mediate barrier to cells inflammatory adhesion that can these Proteases by removing growth. interactions, released degrade a molecules the

to Enhanced death. resistance cell from a Detachment interactions from death to can lead particular of called and of programmed form membranes cells cell–cell epithelial basement anoikis. cell promote that may as direct expressing prevent molecules with cells. tumor that interactions tumor-associated physical such macrophages suspected integrins by It adhesion anoikis is

Angiogenesis. including VEGF, release cells that angiogenesis. Inflammatory stimulate factors, numerous

metastasis. Invasion and EGF directly tumor foster tissue from cell may TNF stimulate the while as invasion factors remodeling such and by released motility. Proteases macrophages ECM, of a TGF-β earlier, (EMT), and promote be cells which stromal key may in invasion epithelial-mesenchymal other factors from transition the such released mentioned as metastasis. process As event may

of Evasion destruction. immune by stromal and to of immunosuppressive cells an contribute other released microenvironment. believed factors are tumor A soluble macrophages variety to The the cells. T leading CD8+ the cytotoxic recruitment favor T other that include TGF-β either of or suppress and of factors suspects regulatory immunosuppressive cells function disease alternatively evidence emerging advanced is macrophages Furthermore, that in abundant models cancers 3). contain mainly (Chapter and human evidence (M2) activated in there cancer rise which angiogenesis, notion do cancers collagen that and proliferation, observed cytokines heal.” like macrophages healing deposition, of all commonly wounds, fibroblast invasive M2 are cancers promote giving that the produce to are in “wounds that in and not

their cancers inflammatory survival to and understanding growth of support A cells remains “manipulate” elusive. how thorough However, animal are and the raise and studies downstream directed intriguing of possibility inflammation therapies consequences. the results tumor-induced from its at inhibitors, involves epidemiological studies. other COX-2 several An of cancer associated in is a use decreased such and risk one example of intervention aspirin which colorectal of with

These a in provide hallmarks of of development cancer for ( treatment the discussion emerge foregoing agents the Important cancer: the considerations for road of of the principles clinical the presented new from hallmarks therapeutic map

Fig. 6.31

ETIOLOGYOFCANCER:CARCINOGENICAGENTS

inflict genetic the carcinogenesis. heart at agents of lies damage, which Carcinogenic microbial and been carcinogenic (1) (2) classes energy, agents of products. have (3) identified: radiant Three chemicals, human the radiant oncogenic of pathogenesis of and energy involved in documented causes viruses cancer several are in in and models animal Chemicals tumors. tumors some and humans, are genetic neoplastic agents the of sequentially in several cells. produce or act In however, the multiple concert class is abnormalities separately; following characteristic discussion, considered of note, of may each to

chronic Sir to ago, Percival exposure the Pott correctly attributed than years cancer More scrotal sweeps London soot. to skin 200 surgeon chimney in daily. Guild this must Danish of its bathe Sweeps observation, Chimney ruled basis that members On the the of the No achieved in measure form cancer. that since time of has public a so control health much Subsequently, in hundreds of animals. carcinogenic be chemicals to been have shown

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Immune drugs MDM2 growth EGFR kinase death Deregulating inhibitors Cyclin-dependent Tumor-promoting replicative mutation inflammation Evading anti-inflammatory inhibitors inhibitors immune Proapoptotic signaling energetics cell HGF/c-Met Aerobic destruction BH3 inhibitors inhibitors cellular glycolysis Activating anti-CTLA4 mAb Selective mimetics invasion Resisting Sustaining Enabling signaling immortality Inducing Inhibitors of Genome VEGF activating of and suppressors Avoiding instability metastasis angiogenesis and Inhibitors proliferative Telomerase

Fig. Therapeutictargetingofthehallmarksofcancer. 6.31 (From next Hanahan the hallmarks of generation. D,Weiberg RA:The cancer: Cell144:646, 2011.)

of the Some presented agents major in are

6.5. Table

on next. these few handful offered comments of A a are

metabolic no carcinogenic. Direct-acting to become require conversion agents in but regimens some cancer evoke typically that of agents) weak of lymphoma), cure cancer second (e.g., (e.g., them types carcinogens certain form important because are alkylating are Hodgkin cancer, of are used usually subsequent, leukemia. drugs may a only They to chemotherapy agents the been disorders, This such tragic rheumatoid such use granulomatosis with of situation polyangiitis. or non-neoplastic arthritis even when as for is initial more has its dictates cancer low, risk induced The such of associated but judicious use is existence for agents.

indirect-acting chemicals conversion an to The require that refers ultimate designation metabolic carcinogen. to

and created of Some are animal that plant, polycyclic most burning with potent fuels, material. are fossil carcinogens of hydrocarbons the chemical indirect and responsible combustion during causation example, benzo[a]pyrene for in likely the created incidence carcinogens lung are the For chimney benzo[a]pyrene scrotal of of cancer in formed coal sweeps. cancer, burning was the implicated during days, tobacco of and in olden the other high of broiling the may and of meats be present hydrocarbons process fish. produced fats and smoked are Polycyclic also animal from in during meats is benzo[a]pyrene body, the In

Chemical 6.5 Carcinogens Major Table

Anti-cancerdrugs(cyclophosphamide,chlorambucil,nitrosoureas,andothers)

Benz(a)anthraceneBenzo(a)pyreneDibenz(a,h)anthracene3-Methylcholanthrene7,12-Dimethylbenz(a)anthracene

Aromatic Amines,Amides,Azo Dyes

in and but to DNA, products) which with adducts the form RNA http://ebooksmedicine.net with also proteins. (addition covalent NitrosamineandamidesVinylchloride,nickel,chromiumInsecticides,fungicidesPolychlorinatedbiphenyls molecules epoxides, metabolized cell, principally

azo dyes of The class indirect-acting constitute and amines aromatic carcinogens. another Before workers the exposed incidence a responsible was carcinogenicity 50-fold rubber in for industries. heavily of cancers β-naphthylamine in recognized, dye and aniline its bladder increased was are of carcinogens other listed occupational Examples in

. Table 6.5 focused monooxygenases. that DNA-damaging carcinogens the agents, activation is involved, conversion interest such to mediated are require for much that enzymatic Because on pathways cytochrome their by as indirect-acting metabolic P-450–dependent the varies enzymes The and polymorphic, these enzyme activity individuals. among that are genes encode It is carcinogenesis on part, enzyme to chemical the that in at that the depends widely susceptibility inherited. allelic believed specific of is least form the may of risk analysis enzyme given to polymorphisms. the it assess cancer possible a genetic individual be future in by Thus, in

brief few merit agents other A mention. a of strains stored by produced grains agent occurring is nuts. that mold a improperly Aspergillus, some and it naturally because is on interest Aflatoxin of grows B1 in the parts this correlation Africa contaminant A has Far strong the East. carcinoma found some incidence dietary between and the hepatocellular of level of and been food of the nickel, are carcinogens polychlorinated chloride, biphenyls Additionally, potential in the about arsenic, house. vinyl insecticides, and fungicides, workplace chromium, and preservatives nitrites amines they of food. nitrosylation Finally, in since used caused have food concern, contained as cause be are suspected formed to nitrosamines carcinogenic. The thus

Chemical of Mechanisms of Action Carcinogens

carcinogens mutations, Because mutagenic. transformation chemical should that surprise are most malignant it as results no from come reactive highly carcinogens electrophile direct ultimate adducts as contain and and with chemical that as DNA, with form proteins well Indeed, all groups RNA. is such cancer TP53, important the is for carcinogens, responsible carcinogenesis. of be as mutation genes, it the that and gene RAS understandably target chemical but of Any may particular as of aflatoxin strongly causative codons chemical Indeed, in agent. such that B1, TP53, aflatoxin as mutations carcinogens, such detection points the specific characteristic produce toward within mutations cancers proving caused carcinogens specific signatures” “mutational other by for Such environmental also tobacco tools UV light, exist to studies and are smoke, useful epidemiologic be in and carcinogenesis. of

is administration subsequent esters, nontumorigenic. drugs), hormones, of of themselves phenols, (e.g., phorbol chemicals promoters which certain augmented Carcinogenicity some are by by the sustained follow exposure or of the repeated to ( application mutagenic To must effective, initiator promoter or chemical, be the

Fig. 6.32 ). contribute to are do initiation-promotion Since chemical promoters of how carcinogenesis sequence question: an The important tumorigenesis? raises not mutagenic, they Although the promoters of effects pleiotropic, are tumor

DetoxificationINITIATIONDNA DNA Altered cell PRENEOPLASTIC CARCINOGEN Adduct PROMOTION intermediates Excretion Electrophilic Metabolic repair Normal Cell death MALIGNANT Initiated formation NEOPLASM mutationsProliferation Additional lesion: Permanent cell proliferation: differentiation activation Cell Detoxification CLONE Binding to DNA:

Fig. 6.32 Generalschemaofeventsinchemicalcarcinogenesis.Notethatpromoterscauseclonalexpansionoftheinitiatedcell,thusproducingapreneoplasticclone.Furtherproliferationinducedbythepromoterorotherfactorscausesaccumulationofadditionalmutationsandemergenceofamalignanttumor.

of promotion. sine tumor non a proliferation induction qua cell of is It clonal RAS, while the an promoters most the to leads such cells. as expansion activation initiator of of of oncogene cause an likely initiated (mutated) of application mutational application that subsequent may seems cells Forced the into of a developing tumor. additional eventually proliferate, accumulates malignant clone initiated to mutations, applicable increases sustained also neoplastic mutagenesis, is proliferation concept transformation, promotes the the to and human risk cell that carcinogenesis. for hence Indeed, cell with injury that are (Chapter chronic For activity liver the in increased associated hyperplasia cancer and 19) accompanies development organs. endometrial regenerative example, of these discussed in it all mechanisms repair for would the higher. much cancers likelihood of earlier, be not the Were chemically induced incidence DNA with greatly certain of for pigmentosum, xeroderma UV increased hereditary DNA rare As by associated risk disorders are cancers chemicals. induced including developing light mentioned previously, and the repair,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ChemicalcarcinogenshavehighlyreactiveelectrophilegroupsthatdirectlydamageDNA,leadingtomutationsandeventuallycancer.

Direct-actingagentsdonotrequiremetabolicconversiontobecomecarcinogenic,whileindirect-actingagentsarenotactiveuntilconvertedtoanultimatecarcinogenbyendogenousmetabolicpathways.Hence,polymorphismsofendogenousenzymessuchascytochromeP-450mayinfluencecarcinogenesisbyalteringtheconversionofindirect-actingagentstoactivecarcinogens.

Afterexposureofacelltoamutagenoraninitiator,tumorigenesiscanbeenhancedbyexposuretopromoters,whichstimulateproliferationofthemutatedcells.

Examplesofhumancarcinogensaredirect-actingagents(e.g.,alkylatingagentsusedforchemotherapy),indirect-actingagents(e.g.,benzo(a)pyrene,azodyes,aflatoxin),andtumorpromoters.

Tumorpromotersactbystimulatingcellproliferation.Increasedproliferationmayoccurthroughdirecteffectsoftumorpromotersontargetcellsormaybesecondarytotissueinjuryandregenerativerepair.

its radionuclides), radiographs, source fission, Radiation, is nuclear rays carcinogen. whatever established sunlight, an (UV of of have cancers. radioactive Unprotected increased 10-fold incidence lung miners a elements of 7 increased an colon, average atomic A increased Hiroshima after years, of and on leukemia of rates markedly and about period breast, of as study for thyroid, lung a the dropped latent follow-up disclosed of survivors incidence carcinomas. Nagasaki mortality as bombs well its The in continues the toll cancer exact former high areas. in the at incidence form power surrounding Soviet in Union the nuclear accident Chernobyl to of damaged surrounding in tsunami cancer incidence by power is it the earthquake areas. feared radiation plant increased massive that a and will nuclear More recently, release from a significantly in in result geographic Japan

neck later. can papillary head to irradiation give Therapeutic years and cancers of thyroid the rise inversions, oncogenic and of mutagenic properties causes as such mutations. its translocations and, breakage, rearrangements less chromosomal are chromosome it The effects; ionizing radiation frequently, to related point seem important DNA radiation. the breaks by be caused of form DNA damage double-stranded most Biologically, to

special mention The merits carcinogenesis. it DNA because in oncogenic highlights importance repair of the rays effect of UV sun derived Natural and can radiation (melanomas, basal cancers cause carcinomas, cell skin squamous UV from carcinomas). the cell a are sunlight. receive who greatest such Australia live in and great fair-skinned people risk deal that of as locales New At Zealand sunbathing. total exposure are melanomas cumulative occurs are with cancers intense associated radiation, to exposure—as with intermittent with associated UV whereas Nonmelanoma skin several on effects cells. biologic light UV has carcinogenesis the DNA by particular relevance to dimers. Of is forming pyrimidine damage to ability damage excision nucleotide type the This DNA repair is pathway. repaired by of be overwhelmed, systems to UV may and skin light, repair With results. cancer extensive the exposure disease As xeroderma earlier, the inherited with defect repair a nucleotide pathway. patients excision mentioned have pigmentosum in the there cancers a expected, predisposition to skin disorder. this greatly increased in As is

Ionizingradiationcauseschromosomebreakage,chromosomerearrangements,and,lessfrequently,pointmutations,anyofwhichmayaffectcancergenesandtherebydrivecarcinogenesis.

UVraysinsunlightinducetheformationofpyrimidinedimerswithinDNA,leadingtomutationsthatcangiverisetosquamouscellcarcinomasandmelanomasoftheskin.

in Many DNA proved disparate oncogenic and viruses primates. and animals as to RNA frogs as be have have few scrutiny, been cancer. intense only a however, with linked Despite human viruses oncogenic discussion focuses viruses. The on following human gastric of bacterium the in is discussed Helicobacter cancer. Also role pylori the

molecular into humans. has only one implicated leukemia (HTLV-1), in of of the Although type 1 pathogenesis T-cell retrovirus, in cancer, study retroviruses insights of human the firmly is spectacular basis cancer human animal provided virus the

basin, and States. elsewhere, Japan, T-cell leukemia/lymphoma found including South America, causes tumor the Africa, and parts (ATLL), that Caribbean in is endemic United sporadically a of HTLV-1 certain adult the 15 infected people that 20 are it HTLV-1. estimated to million Worldwide, with is of to tropism hence and major which cells for T the has target subset transformation. causes the is Similar virus, cells, neoplastic human for AIDS, immunodeficiency T CD4+ this HTLV-1 breastfeeding. Human intercourse, via products, requires or infected sexual blood of infection cells T transmission to of the individuals, typically in of 3% 40 after a 5% infected develops period 60 Leukemia long years. latent to only

HTLV-1 leukemogenesis, is transformation molecular that of doubt T lymphocytes not are infection certain. but There is little of necessary the mechanisms for proto-oncogene HTLV-1 to contain contrast next been murine In pattern proviral oncogene, has to of an no consistent and not discovered. does retroviruses, integration several a leukemic pattern. In cells, integration shows however, viral clonal a cancer. random given (the identical different in viral at of locations site words, other chromosomes all within found In a integration of the cancers), site although cells is host integration in DNA is different the of is viral of placing at would the have of infects been after merely the a present the if occur it were passenger that transformation; not “scene cells crime.” means This HTLV-1 must at rather, moment transformation, it that http://ebooksmedicine.net HTLV-1

it contains genome typical gag, to contains as env, viruses, pol, to but, in other contrast referred gene retroviruses, and the of all leukemia another long-terminal-repeat The regions HTLV-1 tax. HTLV-1’s attributable are tax protein Tax, of aspects the Several to transforming activity gene. the of product replication, viral long-terminal the is of RNA Tax 5′ stimulates transcription viral essential from because it repeat. for cell Tax with the several host cell host transcription genes proteins. However, alters and interacts certain also of signaling the so, following: contributes to cancer acquisition the doing several By of Tax including hallmarks,

of Increased growth infected survival cells. and appears cascade, cell enhance alterations metabolic PI3 signaling and with you downstream both promotes the Tax recall survival cell growth. to that kinase and which will interact thereby stimulate promote Tax changes expression inhibitors, cycle also D the expression upregulates of that the progression. and cyclin cell of multiple CDK represses which survival transcription the including can factor cell Tax promotes activate many NF-κB, lymphocytes. of types, Finally, the

instability. Increased genomic functions by cause inhibiting Tax with by also checkpoints interfering activated DNA instability and cell may cycle genomic DNA-repair damage. In be these line leukemias defects, to tend aneuploid. HTLV-1–associated with highly

precise plausible but not as to leukemia/lymphoma known, the still are steps adult lead The scenario a T-cell is of that development follows. polyclonal cell population proliferation. causes a through Infection by nonmalignant expansion on cell HTLV-1 of effects of stimulatory Tax the the and of possibly are The viral T mutations cells risk due and other increased as Tax factors to proliferating well. genomic instability at effects for neoplastic and emerges. monoclonal the T-cell mutations of allows accumulation instability a population oncogenic eventually This most thus far receptor mutations activation. cell T to and enhance are common NF-κB stimulate The driver signaling predicted identified

HTLV-1causesaTcellleukemiathatisendemicinJapanandtheCaribbean.

TheHTLV-1genomeencodesaviralproteincalledTax, whichstimulatesproliferation,enhancescellsurvival,andinterfereswithcellcyclecontrols.Althoughthisproliferationinitiallyispolyclonal,theproliferatingTcellsareatincreasedriskforsecondarymutationsthatmayleadtotheoutgrowthofamonoclonalleukemia.

Fig. TransformingeffectsofHPVE6andE7proteins.TheneteffectofHPVE6andE7proteinsistoimmortalizecellsandremovetherestraintsoncellproliferation. 6.33

several in tumors with oncogenic have been identified. cause viruses, DNA that animals As viruses RNA DNA human hepatitis polyoma Epstein-Barr with cancer. cell human also are virus Kaposi sarcoma virus virus, viruses—HPV, strongly herpesvirus associated (EBV), they (HBV)—are Five a interest virus called and special (KSHV, herpesvirus-8 because of Merkel [HHV-8]), B called sarcoma 5. and KSHV in are Chapter discussed Kaposi to cell Merkel is with further rare is Merkel particular a carcinoma, merit associated too cell cancer, virus that discussion. here. The others presented are association also on cancer. C share and briefly liver discussion an HBV, both RNA injury touch virus, an of during of since viruses the with hepatitis We our effects chronic virus, oncogenic liver

of types of genetically distinct been Scores have HPV identified. in (warts) Some 4, benign 18 cause types squamous humans and 7) (Chapters and 2, 24). papillomas (e.g., 1, malignant HPV-11. Genital have potential associated with warts HPVs, HPV-6 low are low-risk and predominantly also and cell carcinoma cancers, squamous cause particularly HPVs contrast, the 18) high-risk cervix several and of region. 16 anogenital and types By (e.g., at high-risk particularly with addition, HPVs. in tonsils, arising least the those 20% In oropharyngeal cancers, of are associated

two and genes, E7 be of can The related ( HPV oncogenic viral early of E6 potential products to

Fig. activities are pro-oncogenic. 6.33 each ), which has several of that

E6. Oncogenic activities of of to mediates stimulates you immortalization subunit expression and the the cells. the recall The of degradation which and also of contributes the telomerase, p53, of protein will binds E6 to TERT, catalytic E6 HPV is p53 from E6 higher for property a contribute a HPV oncogenesis. has low-risk affinity types likely to than that to from types, high-risk

of activities Oncogenic E7. cells those centered of cycle effects protein checkpoint. The on G1-S of which cell that http://ebooksmedicine.net the all complement E7 has through are speeding E6, normally displaces It transcription by cell RB, and through protein that progression sequestered E2F the to factors are binds RB the cycle. the promoting than types from low-risk from proteins HPV high-risk do RB HPV and E6 types. affinity proteins for proteins p53, have As higher E7 E7 with a inhibitors binds p27, and inactivates activates the and also E CDK p21 presumably and and A. E7 cyclins

HPVs to that contributes genome. into additional viral host potential oncogenic An the of is integration factor the HPV form, is In benign randomly episomal genome. the while host integrated warts, HPV genome the in genome the cancers, in a non-integrated into is maintained E7 interrupts and viral E6 a the region resulting in overexpression in Integration of the negative oncoproteins. regulatory DNA, instability, may host significantly which acquisition viral in genomic which of to genes. the Furthermore, integrated show pro-oncogenic cancer has cells contribute more in genome mutations

senescence. HPVs CDK cyclin/ complexes, that high-risk combat To encode and p53, oncogenic inactivate proteins RB cellular activate summarize, and of that HPV it of promote hallmarks cancer. Thus, is many proteins the evident of HPV preventing of the cervical cancer in is vaccines HPV infection confirmed the causation of effectiveness The in primacy by it. as for mutations host not and transformation genes, acquisition HPV such the infection of is carcinogenesis, cancer RAS. However, with itself in full-blown requires sufficient HPV not, acquired do mechanisms, A such some proportion women HIV clear result of high that because infection as from of others those immune immunologic abnormalities, by the with infection. infected but be types developing particularly HIV at coinfected As who risk with might high high-risk women expected, are cervical HPV and are cancer. for

herpesvirus human family, was lymphoma. to tumor, first the of the Burkitt a member EBV, linked virus a Africa certain in endemic sporadically parts of an aggressive is and lymphoma that is Burkitt tumor elsewhere. occurs cells tumor endemic genome. EBV In all patients carry areas, the in the virtually affected discovery of detected a the other Burkitt and T surprisingly diverse carcinomas, of of been and tumors, lymphoma cell EBV within lymphomas, sarcomas, in some rare nasopharyngeal in immunosuppressed. including a its years 50 cells most initial in carcinomas instances, the gastric subset has ago, Since NK lymphomas, cell even, mainly list

by considering cells. which normal but best tumors EBV as Burkitt incompletely on complex such lymphoma understood, its cell manner The and in B B causes effects appreciated is cells. uses complement EBV to attach to and CD21 the infect receptor B and immortal proliferation to leads infection lines. of B lymphoblastoid polyclonal In such generation vitro, cell B cell ability as B proven (latent LMP1 induce lymphomas its EBV-encoded cell an oncogene, transgenic mice. protein to gene, One acts membrane by in as 1), proliferation, B LMP1 cell promotes mimicking

as surface a of receptor Etiology Agents233 Cancer: the key known of Carcinogenic effects CD40. CD40 cells. by interaction with activated mainly is normally CD40 on expressed T ligands and which LMP1 survival. active stimulates promote both the JAK/STAT By signaling NF-κB and contrast, B constitutively through proliferation and cell is pathways, of cell activation B virus replication the pathway a of its the by promote infected Thus, to “borrows” own pool normal cells. expanding EBNA2, transactivates D the protein, of EBV-encoded cyclin host several and protooncogenes. family Another genes, SRC including the a from In addition, genome vIL-10, contains that the cytokine, viral EBV host was pirated genome. can killing cells and macrophages activating virally T cytokine viral cells. and from infected prevent This monocytes immunologically by affected mononucleosis. normal T is or patient cytotoxic B the proliferation asymptomatic readily polyclonal and self-limited experiences controlled persons, either cell a infectious of EBV-driven the remains cells, episode In LMP-1 of B throughout proteins immunogenic a life. EBNA2 expression persist and of EBV-infected cells viral a enter that cells such and pool memory number B as of long-lived However, small downregulate

the Given how contribute of these endemic lymphoma? EBV genesis does then to observations, Burkitt possibility is One shown in

Fig. 6.34 . In regions of world the where

CLONE: BURKITT OUTGROWTH NEOPLASTIC OF LYMPHOMA

Fig. EBV-induced Possible Burkitt 6.34 evolution lymphoma. of

immune is such infections proliferation. B-cell impair endemic, concomitant as Burkitt competence, allowing malaria lymphoma sustained number eliminate EBV-infected cells but Eventually, most small cells, survive. cytotoxic a the of B T MYC lymphoma residual oncogene. only appears specific emerge that this that with It acquisition translocations activate from notably of most mutations, population cells the the in of noted translocation and tumors EBV, sporadic MYC. or all to these endemic nonendemic other It that but dysregulate the be 80% tumors are that translocations should unrelated virtually t(8;14) areas possess Burkitt through they although infection, EBV oncogenic mechanisms than to appear lymphomas similar triggered pathways. develop sporadic Thus, by are other

by B-cell lymphomas more patients. EBV-positive The in EBV role oncogenic immunosuppressed in direct is played with multiple sites. tumors, often EBV-positive Some rejection develop immunosuppressive allograft individuals preventing who receive therapy AIDS or at for B-cell monoclonal outset neoplasms. evolve the into but polyclonal These can at proliferations are uniformly cells. MYC and which, can Burkitt usually in lymphoma, T the as express In antigenic LMP-1 be and cytotoxic to EBNA2, are tumors recognized by immunosuppressed translocations lack and contrast discussed, patients of These subdued with immunosuppressive cell if as T withdrawal recipients. proliferations in can drugs occur can potentially transplant be may lethal restored, be function

infection. also Nasopharyngeal with carcinoma associated is EBV the southern in Arctic. parts of of the Africa, some and This is Inuit in tumor endemic China, in population Burkitt EBV. contrast to of contain all parts nasopharyngeal In from the world obtained of 100% lymphoma, carcinomas genome development. EBV of (clonal) tumor after individual cells possibility The occurred infection identical tumors, site tumor within of viral the in all that integration is excluding the the carcinoma The Burkitt restricted contribute with distribution geographic that association cofactors, also the in the tumor, or of development. has with environmental both, EBV of indicates role that central a the or genetic suggests uniform tumor lymphoma) nasopharyngeal to but (as genesis EBV cells, LMP-1 in pathway. Burkitt B the and, Unlike NF-κB carcinoma in lymphoma, activates is cells nasopharyngeal expressed as may upregulates the oncogenesis. such expression to contribute metalloproteases as VEGF factors in matrix NF-κB, and turn, of that

tumor, is of Hodgkin EBV-associated discussed Chapter another EBV in relationship yet of pathogenesis 12. lymphoma, to the The

HPVisassociatedwithbenignwarts,aswellascervicalcancer.

TheoncogenicityofHPVisrelatedtotheexpressionoftwoviraloncoproteins,E6andE7,whichbindtothep53andRBtumorsuppressors,respectively,neutralizingtheirfunction.

E7fromlow-riskstrainsofHPV(whichgiverisetobenignwarts).

EBVisimplicatedinthepathogenesisofBurkittlymphomas,lymphomasinimmunosuppressedpatients,Hodgkinlymphoma,uncommonT-cellandNK-celltumors,nasopharyngealcarcinoma,asubsetofgastriccarcinoma,andrarelysarcomas.

CertainEBVgeneproductscontributetooncogenesisbystimulatingnormalB-cellproliferationpathways.ConcomitantcompromiseofimmunecompetenceallowssustainedB-cellproliferation,leadingeventuallytodevelopmentoflymphoma.

virus is strong C and hepatitis carcinoma with 16). linking chronic HBV (HCV) epidemiologic hepatocellular (Chapter evidence The infection of worldwide hepatocellular is caused or estimated HCV. HBV that are to by It 85% 70% carcinomas tumorigenesis of in fully of mode However, action viruses these not is elucidated. the is liver is consistent HBV in any human genome, and there pattern oncoproteins, the HCV viral and do the integrated within not encode although genomes of HBV DNA integration no The cells. to leading be are and effects regeneration Indeed, multifactorial, HBV and dominant the to of mediated oncogenic death, genomic with but hepatocyte damage. inflammation the immunologically effect HCV chronic seems maladaptive, caused the recent setting as to has the in promoting become immune generally chronic the later), chronic unresolved demonstrated thought is be that protective, viral tumorigenesis. work in hepatitis (see gastritis or may response by inflammation, pylori system immune Although occurs H. of

of proliferation of leads compensatory As hepatocytes. cause with hepatocellular the viral to injury, infection chronic any a tissue substances cytokines, plethora promote immune growth activated factors, that bioactive chemokines, and angiogenesis. and by survival, abetted aided remodeling, is cell cells by process and other produced of This regenerative immune are oxygen activated reactive genotoxic produce The also and mutagenic. cells species, mediators, that as other such to factor-κB the from mediators step (NF-κB) seems A activation be caused molecular pathway of in key activated derived the nuclear cells. hepatocytes immune by and to mutations. dividing apoptosis, genotoxic NF-κB accumulate incur hepatocytes Activation pathway the of to allowing the blocks stress within Although that virus-induced their the hepatocellular be in genomes contain the the pathogenesis of more HCV both also proteins seems directly to this promote and carcinoma, HBV may mechanism of development cancer. dominant HBx, develop mice The hepatocellular contains have transgenes. a cancers in to genome known HBV HBx gene as and engineered directly indirectly may of interfere with several and or pathways, can p53 function. signal and factors activate transduction HBx a variety transcription may suppressor rearrangements of tumor viral integration secondary deletions including genes. unknown multiple chromosomes, cause addition, harbor can that In

http://ebooksmedicine.net

strongly also pathogenesis liver linked of cancer. HCV, virus, the to is RNA an by used are well HBV. less mechanisms HCV even those The molecular defined than for on regeneration, direct may HCV pathways. compensatory possibly genome, to injury transduction growth-promoting protein, signal as a effect of of tumorigenesis, In by activating addition cell variety the chronic a HCV such the have and components liver core

Between70%and85%ofhepatocellularcarcinomasworldwideareduetoinfectionwithHBVorHCV.

TheoncogeniceffectsofHBVandHCVaremultifactorial,butthedominanteffectseemstobeimmunologicallymediatedchronicinflammation,withhepatocellularinjury,stimulationofhepatocyteproliferation,andproductionofreactiveoxygenspeciesthatcandamageDNA.

TheHBxproteinofHBVandtheHCVcoreproteincanactivateavarietyofsignaltransductionpathwaysthatalsomaycontributetocarcinogenesis.

the H. gastric of both is infection and pylori implicated in genesis adenocarcinomas gastric lymphomas. as bacterium has of First ulcers, dubious the a H. a acquired distinction classified first as now cause pylori being incriminated of the carcinogen. peptic

for of is gastric similar that scenario the The to cancer. HBVand development liver adenocarcinoma HCV-induced for background involves epithelial proliferation on It increased chronic of inflammation. a cell viral hepatitis, As such contains the agents, reactive oxygen as inflammatory numerous species. in milieu genotoxic development sequence metaplasia inflammation/gastritis, cells, by of consists atrophy, dysplasia, chronic of gastric changes lining the intestinal cancer. and histopathologic The followed of initial of complete This patients. decades in infected and of sequence to only occurs 3% takes pylori of genes the H. directly genome contains in Like also HBV and HCV, those implicated oncogenesis. “pathogenicity (CagA). Strains associated island” contains that shown with to gastric contain a gene cytotoxin-associated A adenocarcinoma have been H. is epithelial of into noninvasive, growth unregulated a Although where including a gastric pylori cascade has factor signaling the injected of CagA it variety stimulation. mimics initiation that cells, effects, is

increased lymphomas an associated with risk of earlier, As the pylori for H. as is mentioned development gastric well. (MALT), they because lymphomas the of 12). cells as grow normal origin, gastric resembling pattern that MALT and have lymphomas mucosa-associated tissue referred (Chapter to of The B-cell a lymphoid B are been in transformed factors, necrosis Their the is seems but and as as as (TNF). such of well incompletely strain-specific tumor promoters factors, factor molecular H. to inflammatory host pylori polymorphisms cytokines as such genetic pathogenesis understood in involve IL-1β It is thought that

in T which leads cause pylori infection activation proliferation. cell pylori–reactive of B H. cells, turn H. the polyclonal to genes. accumulation as result in cells, B tumor mutations a time, B In proliferating of the cell perhaps a emerges from monoclonal growth regulatory of keeping the the cells. the In of course pylori T with with of disease, stimulus antigenic for causes model, of by this antibiotics in early removing H. lymphoma regression eradication cells for on immune and with depends of tumor by its signals continued interactions is remarkable thus lymphoma growth example elicited that survival. MALT host a a

infectionhasbeenimplicatedinbothgastricadenocarcinomaandMALTlymphoma. H. pylori

ThemechanismofH. pylori–inducedgastriccancersismulti-factorial,includingimmunologicallymediatedchronicinflammation,stimulationofgastriccellproliferation,andproductionofreactiveoxygenspeciesthatdamageDNA.H. pathogenicitygenes,suchasCagA, pylori alsomaycontributebystimulatinggrowthfactorpathways.

ItisthoughtthatH. pylori infectionleadstopolyclonalB-cellproliferationsandthateventuallyamonoclonalB-celltumor(MALTlymphoma)emergesasaresultofaccumulationofmutations.

lies importance The effects of ultimately on neoplasms their in patients. benign morbidity one. any tumor, a and than Although mortality threatening may with tumors, benign malignant are tumors course even be more of associated both that the synthesis impingement or ulcerates rupture or hormone (3) infarction, activity tumor paraneoplastic symptoms adjacent of (1) such tumors result bleeding malignant functional structures, benign syndromes, because development (2) adjacent the (4) location surfaces, and and through may or problems as wasting. cause when and Indeed, infections and (5) of from on cachexia discussion of diagnosis neoplasms. the cancer, following of clinical grading effects on staging laboratory tumor the the host, considers of and a the The and

malignant in crucial and tumors. is both Location benign pituitary giving adenoma hypopituitarism. surrounding (1-cm) destroy rise and normal gland, can to A the small compress blood the the the and encroach renal renal artery hypertension. A on 0.5-cm of ischemia to wall leiomyoma may leading supply, in may within common induce A fatal biliary bile tract small comparably duct the carcinoma obstruction.

malignant often in endocrine hormone symptoms neoplasms patients and to arising in production are benign with related Signs seen glands. and produce of and carcinomas fatal. the arising cells pancreatic hyperinsulinism, of Langerhans Adenomas can in the islets beta sometimes which steroid induces aldosterone, Similarly, carcinomas adenomas (e.g., of the some homeostatic disrupt and hypertension, cortex retention, hypokalemia). mechanisms hormones elaborating adrenal and sodium by activity tumor is well-differentiated corresponding carcinoma. Such with than a likely more benign with a hormonal

http://ebooksmedicine.net

or consequent bleeding secondary ulcerate through infection. a surface, tumor may with A into infarction. and malignant (Chapter or protrude Benign the of 15) obstruction the or gut the gut, become pull intussusception lumen neoplasms caught in peristaltic may that causing intestinal

loss body cachexia. as and weakness, by referred condition profound cancer patients anorexia, fat anemia—a body to suffer progressive Many lean accompanied of mass, and There spread and between cachexia. is cancer correlation of of of severity the some the size the the and extent nutritional demands cachexia the tumor. of caused by However, the is not action by cachexia produced rather cancer tumor are factors food with as often cytokines the the and host, results current from indicates of soluble than anorexic, such reduced that Although intake. evidence patients the basal cancer, reduced despite is calorie expenditure high, food increased, intake. In and with remains patients metabolic rate starvation. the contrast an metabolic rate in as adaptive with occurs that This response lower is in fully is basis abnormalities metabolic The not understood. of these cachexia. cells tumor the and produced or tumor that TNF in macrophages cytokines It response suspected to by mediate by is cells themselves other suppresses appetite free from lipoproteins. inhibits lipase, the of the acids action and lipoprotein release fatty of TNF preventing for no cause, than other is of removal cachexia the satisfactory the cancer underlying treatment There tumor.

the to occur syndromes. as referred cannot paraneoplastic be that tumor or of of the local cancer complexes indigenous to that with distant readily the origin patients in tissue the of by Symptom or hormones and explained are elaboration of by tumor spread for is 15% to their clinical with cancer, important and patients of 10% appear recognition reasons: They several in

of syndromes may earliest neoplasm. the occult Such an manifestation represent

even with may affected In associated lethal. and illness be clinical significant changes be patients, may pathologic the

treatment. mimic The disease, may complex confounding thereby metastatic symptom

different The ( diverse paraneoplastic syndromes are with and many associated are tumors

6.6 ). Table associated are endocarditis, neoplasms hematologic often and and syndrome, syndromes breast most cancers nonbacterial are thrombotic Cushing with common The and syndromes most hypercalcemia, these malignancies. the other and and lung paraneoplastic parathyroid protein (PTHrP) of but cells. important hormone–related most multifactorial, the a mechanism is Hypercalcemia cancer in the synthesis is tumor by patients Also active form metastatic the hypercalcemia for and tumor-derived mechanism is are note, as factors, is vitamin bone; implicated Another metastases possible of skeletal disease resulting syndrome. from hypercalcemia paraneoplastic TGF-α other a widespread such however, D. of of osteolytic not arising small cells, ectopic production Cushing usually as is ACTH lung. cell of as carcinoma the phenomenon or related by ACTH-like a paraneoplastic syndrome occurs in polypeptides of to cancer

syndromes Paraneoplastic venous (Chapter leading and endocarditis 11). thrombosis thrombotic also may to as nonbacterial hypercoagulability, manifest Other manifestations hypertrophic are clubbing 13). the (Chapter patients lung carcinomas osteoarthropathy fingers with and in of organs are Still the cancers consideration of of body. others various in of discussed the the

end various apparent are given clinical probable for spread an protocols. individual at results and quantify comparing of Methods neoplasm and for patient and arriving a its aggressiveness in extent necessary of prognosis treatment to the the accurate treating gland average different localized to invaded that thyroid well-differentiated of anaplastic those have from thyroid highly the cancers the will thyroid very neck instance, adenocarcinomas from the obtained For results be on treating organs. the stage, the a clinical in grade, extent of or to semiquantitative of differentiation, of as disease. patient, gravity cancer of been the Systems within the or and level least terms, at developed express, of spread have parameters staging to grading, when greater compared Of be of proved value. has note, clinical with

Grading. certain cells of the tumor Grading presence some and, of degree of the architectural on and a is mitoses of the the cancer features. in number of cancers, based differentiation categories. each and to of categories Grading grade) malignancy, range and high generally type from (low have schemes two grade four evolved for judge resemble but vary to to to normal in in or for resemble essence, attempt, individual all types here, not Criteria detailed of so the and cells extent the the counterparts. their different are fail grades tumors tumor which appearance biologic between Although grading perfect. is the less and histologic useful, correlation histologic is behavior than spurious to differentiated to it particular or In problem a adenocarcinoma. of poorly practice characterize for well-differentiated, pancreatic quantification, this example, descriptive adenocarcinoma recognition and common in of neoplasm terms, the mucin-secreting stomach, avoid is

Staging. of of presence solid of nodes, primary is regional metastases. the lesion, to absence spread or staging The blood-borne its lymph the based cancers the of and size extent on the American on in currently staging The system Cancer is major Committee Joint Staging. use system uses regional for and node for tumor, involvement, primary system—T called M N classification a metastases. This TNM the for lymph there staging forms are of TNM varies but cancer, principles. for general specific size. on increasing T1 lesion to based characterized The T4 primary as is situ in to http://ebooksmedicine.net T0 an indicate used is

MyastheniaBronchogeniccarcinoma,thymomaImmunologic

DisordersofthecentralandperipheralBreastcarcinoma,teratomaImmunologicnervoussystems

Soft-Tissue and Articular, Changes Osseous,

NephroticsyndromeVariouscancersTumorantigens,immunecomplexes

Adrenocorticotropichormone;IL-1, tumornecrosisfactor. transforminggrowthfactor-α;TNF, interleukin-1;TGF-α, ACTH,

lesion. involvement, of would nodes. range involvement N1 an whereas nodal N3 to and increasing number mean of would denote no N0 presence M1 metastases, estimated no whereas and metastases. distant reflects signifies the number or M0 of sometimes M2

supplemented characterization, by are described staging tumors being later. and molecular In of modern practice, grading

definedasprogressivelossofbodyfatandleanbodymass,accompaniedbyprofoundweakness,anorexia,andanemia,iscausedbyreleaseofcytokinesbythetumororhost. Cachexia,

Paraneoplasticsyndromes,definedassystemicsymptomsthatcannotbeexplainedbytumorspreadorbyhormones appropriatetothetissue,arecausedbytheectopicproductionandsecretionofbioactivesubstancessuchasACTH,PTHrP,orTGF-α.

Gradingoftumorsisdeterminedbycytologicappearanceandisbasedontheideathatbehavioranddifferentiationarerelated,withpoorlydifferentiatedtumorshavingmoreaggressivebehavior.

Staging(extentoftumor),determinedbysurgicalexplorationorimaging,isbasedonsize,localandregionallymphnodespread,anddistantmetastases.Stagingisofgreaterclinicalvaluethangrading.

more and sophisticated, Every complex, of cancer specialized. diagnosis to more approach laboratory becomes the more year characterized walk, experts every For virtually several this before can however, in must we have neoplasm mentioned text, run. we subcategories; the present of avoiding details attempts technologies. art, the sections following to of the the state of Each

http://ebooksmedicine.net

instances, diagnosis the most is In laboratory of difficult. cancer not man’s where middle, the the tread a pose spectrum no “no the however, in benign–malignant ends two problems; The land” of cautiously. wise lies to of tend to underestimate a diagnosis neoplasm. contributions make the the they Clinicians and optimal data diagnosis. for Clinical invaluable are radiologic pathologic to of Radiation-induced cancer. skin those be similar mucosa in or the changes can a Sections taken an mimic can fracture from healing osteosarcoma. good The examination. be of specimen as the laboratory can evaluation submitted a lesion for as only adequate, representative, must and The specimen preserved. be properly

or available, biopsy, sampling excision Several are approaches cytologic and including smears. fine-needle aspiration, not biopsy awareness requires lesion center the a possible, is selection not that may be site may necrotic. appropriate large margins be the mass largely representative and for an of of a When excision of metastasis. nodes regional patient evaluating the a desirable, cancer section for nature a diagnosis in example, the for lesion determining lymph with in Requesting sometimes is frozen or in mass of as, minutes. and quick-frozen sectioned, a sample permits method, which histologic is This evaluation within in is accurate, instances needed. In section histologic detail methods particular the superior time-consuming which experienced, but routine provided by hands, there in more is are diagnosis competent frozen perform In than surgery. unnecessary better days, the drawbacks, is it to despite to a such or instances, few inadequate wait

used. of approach aspiration is that another is widely Fine-needle tumors followed aspiration slide. on out from a been by examination of after cells a cytologic have involves of mass, cells It spread the they gland, breast, procedure thyroid nodes, commonly used palpable lymph lesions glands. the and affecting This salivary most with readily is the techniques deeper pancreas, liver, the method pelvic of such Modern structures, and permit nodes. extension lymph imaging as to its modality of surgery Use obviates diagnostic this risks. and attendant sample be some and size difficulties, entails rapid, as Although errors, useful. it in it hands such small experienced reliable, and can sampling

Cytologic another method the for (Papanicolaou) detection cancer. smears provide of for forms but of used in tumor malignancy, neoplasia. evaluation at as fluids; in approach and, often carcinoma, of other is gastric less cervix, situ discovery widely for the the for pleural, such has forms joint, and tumors, commonly, and investigate it bronchogenic carcinoma carcinoma, this to identification other many been prostate of cerebrospinal bladder of used suspected of carcinomas; now abdominal, stage, and of an Historically, endometrial cells shed therefore are than cells are less into fluids or ( Neoplastic and cohesive secretions others

Fig. ). 6.35 of shed indicative tumor. cells are features The for of evaluated a their from anaplasia origin The

Fig. 6.35 (A)NormalPapanicolaousmearfromtheuterinecervix.Large,flatcellswithsmallnucleiaretypical.(B)Abnormalsmearcontainingasheetofmalignantcellswithlargehyperchromaticnuclei.Nuclearpleomorphismisevident,andonecellisinmitosis.Afewinterspersedneutrophils,muchsmallerinsizeandwithcompact,lobatenuclei,areseen. Chicago, Illinois.) M. DeMay, Dr. (Courtesy of of Department of Richard University Chicago, Pathology, gratifying cervical testament of value best control of is to method. cancer the cytologic the the

to histologic adjunct routine Immunohistochemistry offers powerful examination. a cytokeratin diagnosis rather of large specific than monoclonal a Detection undifferentiated lymphoma. performed by of carcinoma stains points to antibodies cell with (PSA) the by definitive staining in a antigen of detection Similarly, immunohistochemical diagnosis tumor of allows gland. deposits in prostate-specific metastatic prostate primary breast cancers. of detection estrogen intervention therapeutic allows prognostication Immunocytochemical receptors and directs in

leukemias Flow the is lymphomas. in routinely used of and classification cytometry antigens fluorescently phenotype (Chapter this obtain molecules method, of cells cell 12). the and are to surface antibodies labeled malignant differentiation In against used

the as hormones, screening with tumor monitoring markers cannot other definitive utility however, assays tests and have cancer; the in and enzymes, diagnosis to for detecting of be tumor-associated blood therapy varying disease they recurrence. used or for Biochemical utilized success response in are the in is here. considered suffice of assays many few examples with forms neoplasia these application The so other of discussed only a of chapters, specific screen frequently one of to prostatic used markers for clinical the adenocarcinoma, PSA, in used practice. tumor most is when can be found Prostatic in PSA blood. are carcinoma suspected of the levels elevated PSA However, with highlights problems of use virtually encountered screening tumor every also marker. prostatic levels elevated (Chapter be also in often PSA hyperplasia levels benign elevated in cancer, may PSA are Although 18). that not level Furthermore, a is prostate cancer. have patient PSA does ensures there that no from tool screening the as its specificity, and and suffers quite PSA Thus, a controversial. low use low test sensitivity both has become residual is extremely following recurrence or assay however, detecting disease treatment valuable, PSA The for for cancer. prostate stomach, clinical is is carcinomas tumor markers which (CEA), carcinomas. elaborated colon, occasionally and by and in in and and produced (AFP), teratocarcinomas which embryonal the practice used by carcinoembryonic alpha carcinomas, sac the remnants of cell pancreas, include hepatocellular Other yolk gonads, breast, antigen fetoprotein and variety also in can AFP of non-neoplastic useful diagnosis cancers, conditions specificity they required CEA a be is and elevated may be the and sensitivity PSA, the but the thus once detection of lack monitoring early disease in established. Like for these tumor, recurrence. resection With signifies the serum; of disappear successful from always almost reappearance their markers the is in 16. alpha further fetoprotein discussed in Chapter CEA 15 and Chapter

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of diagnosis predicting are behavior. for tumors the their of number used for being and techniques An increasing molecular

Diagnosis malignancy. of cell genes polyclonal of rearrangements, monoclonal each rearranged has detection (PCR)–based polymerase antigen or T and gene allows (reactive) chain Because receptor (neoplastic) to proliferations cell distinguished. be and receptor reaction B unique immunoglobulin T-cell of so well few diagnosis by neoplasms, the Many translocations. detection be particular can made a as by as solid are tumors, hematopoietic such translocations, defined be (FISH) or used leukemias to fluorescence and translocations several Ewing can example, PCR (Chapter characteristic and of analysis situ For 7) sarcoma detect lymphomas. hybridization in chronic detection confirm of PCR-based can of myeloid 12). diagnosis transcripts the (Chapter BCR-ABL leukemia certain Finally, now defined by particular hematologic oncogenes. in the presence are point of mutations malignancies neoplasm encodes specific vera mentioned diagnosis polycythemia For mutations myeloid earlier, gene requires another nonreceptor the tyrosine of kinase. in JAK2, identification the called that a example, as a of

Prognosis behavior. and alterations these associated Certain poor and determines prognosis, the the of with genetic thus are alterations therapy. subsequent a presence patient’s and PCR NMYC, amplification provide methods HER2 as respectively. breast can detect and prognostic for and therapeutic be which used such FISH information and neuroblastomas, oncogenes to of cancers of genes a predict of allowing of genomes many is identification now outcome for cancer. as poor TP53 such Sequencing in that types some cancer point centers, the mutations in in different cancer routine that cytotoxic develop to assess as immune quantifying too yet of cells, the to are host prognosis. response example, this tumors, for in ongoing T efforts Although standard gauging care, by helpful of not is infiltrating number tests the

residual of Detection minimal disease. molecular of techniques minimal emerging after use disease is treatment. residual for Another detection of BCR-ABL in treated myeloid detection transcripts by of a patients of assay residual chronic disease For measure leukemia. for example, gives PCR sensitive burden DNA) tumors blood Recognition and tumor through derived intact sequences. cell-free products tumor with led tumors in tumor has from interest cells identify are circulating all advanced associated tests that tumor-specific both nucleic acid designed (e.g., circulating to to virtually following

predisposition Diagnosis hereditary cancer. to of types mutation tumor BRCA1, as increases suppressor of certain line cancer. several such developing of a Germ risk patient’s genes, for an surgery. an mutated the screening of physician the devise detection as and aggressive as prophylactic to opportunity for Thus, these allow patient well protocol, may alleles counseling addition, who risk. In detection of allows genetic are relatives at such

Therapeutic decision-making. directly guide detection as being are of thus therapy, can discussed increasingly target development later. tumor mutations that Therapies such in developed, and a targeted specific of the mutations targetable categories. is transgress evident that morphologic It certain becoming now mutations for in valine kinase 600 lies recall substitution pathway. example of the (V600E) in involves will growth acid BRAF, a serine/threonine the you of RAS One factor downstream which glutamate amino signaling respond inhibitors, BRAF the Melanomas mutation with mutation to melanomas this BRAF without response. well V600E whereas show no ( V600E a many subset realized cell cell many of that and Subsequently, it hairy cases the thyroid is present other of of and cancers, Langerhans also leukemias, carcinomas histiocytosis diverse the colon same mutation in gland, was most including

Fig. 6.36 ). cells These in morphologically pathway. diverse of common but have oncogenic origin, tumors lesions and distinct identical they share a pro-growth are

Tumors:The Future Cancer of Molecular Diagnostics Profiling of

Until genes. tumors individual the of studies recently, involved of analysis molecular However, few the seen sequence introduction the past technologies entire rapidly years revolutionary http://ebooksmedicine.net that have can of genome; an assess

Fig. Diversetumortypesthatshareacommonmutation,BRAF(V600E),maybecandidatesfortreatmentwiththesameBRAFinhibitors. 6.36

take (the a of modifications expressed cell’s the all proteome); RNAs and simultaneously metabolites metabolome). in the (the (the many epigenome); population quantify cell genome-wide transcriptome); of of a measure (the proteins epigenetic all snapshot of of cancer age has the diagnosis, the management Thus, study “omics!” entered and

common involving method more newer microarrays, assessment in laboratories sequencing in large-scale methods. to comprehensive been a that of are DNA but RNA based for expression expression offer RNA on and older supplant research use methods quantitative analysis most beginning of RNA has The degradation work a However, prone practice. than and difficult to is in RNA DNA is analyte clinical more with to 7). permitting simpler specimen parallel of massively (so-called (Chapter “next-generation readily sequencing any sequencing, sequencing”) [NextGen] methods the can on performed than that rely virtually technically DNA be that on Furthermore, tissue sequencing is development RNA such enabled remarkable an have decade increases are over methods matched that decrease the sequencing and by speed in breathtaking, equally and been The past cost. DNA have capacity in The 12 took released the about human of reasonably of draft years complete 2003, sequence genome, of in cost and first $2,700,000,000. work the to has readily the the sequencing whole cost decreased test of less some The $5000 genome laboratories, now than affordable. in commercial making individual completed for assembling and extraordinarily few NextGen the of using little as process sequencing present, the be includes in data. time task the sequencing, At as required of weeks, whole-genome of tumors complex which the can a analyzing

enabled and genomic National the have by effort called alterations These sponsored various an cataloging Genome Cancer Institute cancers, The (TCGA). systematic the advances in sequencing of Atlas human Cancer that description area. the of impact of from cancers in genetic of heterogeneity research: the sequencing various cancers; greater that has cancers; of The cancer main identification to are panoply the of mutations date area found a been area and lesions new of that genetic underlie full individual individual exists in in to genome appreciation lesions realm genetic focused patients permit on sequencing whole-genome developing in methods the manage fashion While be cost. identification timely efforts in of clinical sequencing a most that a are performed, reasonable “actionable” can to therapeutically at tumors, are is particularly and therapy a lung “personalized” ( Such diverse applicable as such seem require genetically carcinomas, targeted approach to that succeed to if approaches

Fig. 6.37 ). genes the as detect of to that (fold of “depth” sequenced in be to reliably be in hundred as mutations exons of current cells. methods Thus, question) key at is simultaneously few develop diagnostic any coverage tumor permit to sequence trend several present molecular that in 5% sufficient the laboratories might changes moving in such into that method arrays clinical involves A use to identify of second and practice amplifications copy the deletions. number, DNA as DNA is number the at copy that aberrations, some DNA genome information obtained entire is span smallest probes complementary that focused Arrays providing from the that sequencing. spacing standard but to detect all containing can be follow. being the clinic, drugs clinical proteomics anticipated state directed predict that target but with such epigenomics, the many the as assessing tests at and to the moving are agents soon such the are “omics,” research, of can epigenome response it used that Other cancer currently mainly realm to in of that epigenome into

analysis tumors created of histopathology of led of global the excitement molecular end by development predict sight. scientists new in that for The to is some has the techniques the anaplasia, tumors gleaned information about and However, DNA histopathologic that cannot heterogeneity, of provides of invasiveness, as tumor from inspection characteristics be sequences. important cancers, such in situ biomarker with tests http://ebooksmedicine.net Histopathology coupled performed

anatomy... ...to target From molecular

Fig. mutations of targeted to that analysis Genetic 6.37 can being cancers be utilized by identify drugs. is

designed that the the tissue by guiding latter to such interventions stromal responses; evasion way important role remains immune cell increasingly as immune host therapeutic have tumors. : best to angiogenesis counteract sections tumor in on also assess interactions, are may and an the another. techniques what one by Thus, set of replacement not is lies of ahead of patients the On will molecular in be prognosis a future most cancer of arrived the by foreseeable diagnosis contrary, morphologic techniques. and at the accurate for assessment and combination

cusp the can we of the age With golden advances of predict targeted one tumor on therapies, diagnosis treatment. that all and are in analyses the genomic and safely of in medical for in expectations practice. will assume the you are therapy are still now safely advances Those cancer can in realized of school and while that rapid who be diagnosis you ready! Get

aspiration, and of exist fine-needle tumors, sampling Several the excision, biopsy, approaches diagnosis including cytologicsmears. for

thediagnosis help and studies because cytometry proteinexpression classification tumors, entities. different distinct of in patterns and Immunohistochemistry flow define

to cancer into such after as released tumors PSA, forrecurrence serum, to Proteins for monitor treatment. canbe populations by and screen used the

analyses diagnosis disease, determine predisposition cancer. with residual diagnosepatients Molecular to and prognosis, to to hereditary used detect a are and minimal to

for arrays inmolecular and Molecular distinct the expression profiling purposeof thoseof DNA tumors RNA of useful treatment that or stratification identical are histogenesis of otherwise sequencing, profiling, by share prognostication. and number DNA targeted mutation a tumors copy

DNA cells of and Assays of tumor sputum, development. blood, urine and under shed into circulating are stool,

Artandi RA: Carcinogenesis Telomeres SE, in 2010. and cancer, 31:9–18, DePinho telomerase review the discussing telomerase.] and telomeres of importance [A

Rev pathways 2014. apoptosis for new L, Targeting Med Annual Bai S: Wang therapeutics, 65:139–155, cancer apoptosis in cancer activate strategies of pathways therapeutic and [A them cells.] to review

Sage by tumour suppression of the retinoblastoma DL, 2008. 8:671–682, gene, Burkhart Rev mechanisms Nat Cellular Cancer J: Rb of review function.] [A

Molecular 2012. 18:930–937, Cilloni BCR-ABL, D, Clin pathways: Saglio G: Res Cancer aberrant the by of clinical leukemia activity kinase of mediated the in constitutive chronic of myeloid BCR-ABL.] activity discussion [A enzyme consequences significance functional tyrosine and

L, Palucka inflammation: magic 2013. bullet?, LM, Science Coussens tumor-promoting AK: Zitvogel a Neutralizing chronic 339:286–291, experimental describing studies for of immune inflammation.] discussion protumorigenic roles [A cells that and elicit clinical cancer-associated

tumor Coussens 20:309–322, of cell Cell the the D, to Hanahan crime: Accessories 2012. Cancer L: microenvironment, to functions recruited cancer.] discussing stroma role review [A the in of

cancer next of generation, RA: hallmarks D, the 2011. 144:646–674, (2011): Cell Hanahan The Weinberg reexamination [A of cancer.] the of hallmarks

AC, Rev AR: cancer, 2016. and p53 The inactivation pathway: Biochem therapeutic emerging approaches, 85:375–404, Origins, Annu Joerger Fersht in discussion an wide-ranging new eye of p53 dysfunction cancer cancer, therapies.] [A of towards in with development functions and

Rev C, Lord Nat BRCAness A: 2016. Ashworth 16:110–120, revisited, Cancer for informs tumor function BRCAs with dysfunction.] tumors and how this of discussion as evidence of therapy how BRCA [A suppressors

NJ: implications Cancer mitotic suppressor, Rev Dyson Manning 2012. tumour AL, Nat of a 12:220–226, RB: genomic control addition and to stability.] describes of other maintenance proliferation, the review roles functions, of cell of progression such as RB [In well-established suppressive emerging cycle this tumor in

Nat the and Rev roles Martinez 2011. extra-telomeric proteins, for 11:161–176, Telomeric Cancer telomerase telomere-binding P, Blasco MA: and also in to proteins contribute may cancer telomeric non-telomeric and emerging role discussing oncogenesis.] functions that review cells immortalization of of [A the other

by Metastatic Obenauf 529:298–306, Nature tumour cells, circulating Massagué colonization J, AC: 2016. discussion metastasis.] to [A of concepts explain

from Cell pathology, Cellular Nat D, 15:482–496, senescence: M: Mol Munoz-Espin 2014. Serrano Biol physiology to Rev therapeutic potential [A discussion of the and of senescence relevance.] mechanisms their

2016. MA, RA, et Jackson RY-J, 166:21–45, al: Cell Nieto 2016, EMT: Huang causes [A transition in consequences of far-ranging the and epithelial-mesenchymal cancer.] discussion of

M, Pickup the TGF-β S, Moses Nat Novitskly roles HL: The tumor microenvironment, Cancer in of 2013. Rev 13:788–799, review discussing effects the tumor-promoting of [A TGF-β.]

Stine metabolism, BJ, Discov 2015. 5:1024–1039, cancer, and Cancer MYC, ZE, Walton et al: ZE, Altman cancer connections the cell of metabolism.] [A MYC between and review

The Campbell cancer PJ, Nature Stratton genome, Futreal 458:719–724, MR, PA: 2009. of technologies application [An summary next-generation their to cancer.] excellent and sequencing other Cancer cadherin E-cadherin: cancer, Rev of 14:121–134, members Nat 2014. van in F: Beyond roles Roy superfamily of the cadherin cancer.] review [A discussing role members in the family of

Metabolic did cancer Thompson 2012. PS, Ward Cancer even hallmark not 21:297–308, C: Warburg a reprogramming: anticipate, Cell of [An “oncometabolites.”] the reprogramming pathways energy cancer of of in emergence and metabolism account molecular of the

al: therapies Welti S, Clin J, Invest Dimmeler 2013. anti-angiogenesis molecular Recent angiogenesis Loges J S, in cancer, 123:3190–3200, et discoveries and in and therapy of angiogenic discussion [A of successes and mechanisms anti-angiogenic cancer.] in challenges

of cancer, in 2016. White autophagy The Clin 125:42–46, Invest E: J role the to discussion contributions autophagy of of diverse possible cancer.] [A studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

MendelianDisorders:DiseasesCausedbySingle-GeneDefects

Disorders of Transmission Single-Gene Patterns

of Chromosomal Features General

Angelman and Alterations Caused Syndromes Diseases Regions: of by Imprinted Prader-Willi

Molecular Diagnosis Copy Number Abnormalities of

Direct Chain Detection Mutations Analysis of Polymerase by Reaction DNA (PCR)

project diseases. of completion The a genome landmark in study was human the the of human achievement have the established sativa)! plant lowly previously that estimated protein-coding in 25,000 about humans the number almost the fewer (Oryza far 100,000 only rice genes, than It half and of “genetic acquired this as architecture” as of to secrets The disease. well beginning unlock is human inherited unraveling the Powerful of sequences now allow diseases. to technologies the analysis human human applications of gene routinely can as exome of genes) technologies (the human high-throughput as compendium little the sequence sequencing $1000. for of coding a couple in Current days entire “next-generation” the of The with diseases genetic are known treatment DNA and of a and speed other reduced costs “personalized cancer the of facilitating application “precision medicine”) component. (also medicine” sequencing to as increasingly

are chapter. genetic Because in along diseases diseases with and of pediatric genetic discussed origin, this developmental childhood disorders of are of mind origin. borne infancy it pediatric all in childhood, However, and in not are and disorders that diseases genetic be genetic conversely, must many not manifest latter To resulting organ diseases category the of systems. from immaturity belong and hereditary, helpful In terms: this commonly is to it context used clarify three congenital. familial, generations, Hereditary are from one’s therefore gametes and parents, through in are by transmitted familial. are definition, the disorders, the derived are note, genetic (e.g., The congenital Of at congenital term implies diseases simply congenital “present not syphilis). birth.” some third begins only the hand, not diseases fourth after for decade genetic all expression other or On are the disease, of life. Huntington example, congenital; the of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

affect and disease. to disrupting proteins, cellular types function and are that of several homeostasis genetic abnormalities contributing of the structure There

The term changes mutation the to permanent DNA. refers in germ progeny may cells affect transmitted that inherited diseases. give rise Those to are to and the cancers are causation in in progeny congenital Mutations transmitted of important and somatic some are the not cells but the malformations. to

the are along specific throughout effects this and discussed Details relevant with of their mutations disorders book. examples Cited and here some mutations are of common effects: their gene

nucleotide another of Point by base a of substitution protein in the single amino product. result in replacement from the different by a mutations acid one base, resulting the excellent an of example sickle of giving that mutation point anemia to cell code. in The rise a hemoglobin alters is the the of chain β-globin the genetic mutation meaning are mutations. missense called sometimes Such mutations By chain an amino termination point contrast, may or codon, change codon mutations a stop codon. certain a acid to translation, most in degraded, are rapidly that RNAs decay, phenomenon no a cases is Such interrupt “nonsense” mutations little such nonsense and called protein mediated or formed.

one frame the mutations or strand. alters deletion of base Frameshift when two occur reading the DNA or pairs of the insertion

amplification category, a a sequence Trinucleotide belong to three characterized these mutations of by nucleotides. of special because repeat are mutations guanine undergoes varies disorders, sequences (G) share specific with sequence that and affected (C). amplification the the nucleotide nucleotides Although all cytosine different within prototypical a called this 4000 disorders, CGG For are sequence repeats syndrome, to fragile X FMR1. of the tandem of in 200 example, of there category gene normal In is repeats number populations, 29. small, the of averaging the expression of normal trinucleotide sequences gene, prevent thus the expansions giving of The to rise retardation. mental FMR1 degree feature of increases amplification mutations (i.e., dynamic repeat they gametogenesis). is of Another distinguishing are trinucleotide that the during later in phenotypic this mutations. class These features, the and discussed of the of caused pattern detail manifestations chapter, this inheritance influence the by in greater of diseases

number copy result that aberrant of In in addition coding in protein can or alterations also DNA variations, deletions—or gain to structural sequence, loss or changes—amplifications undergo translocations such genes as function. may occur As the acquired changes or be with in somatic in mutations, tissues. structural germline, a a rather pathogenic a many than discussed instances, gene, portion such single 22q In alterations syndrome, of microdeletion the involve germline contiguous chromosome as in later. number technology discovered wide, DNA genome variation have resolution With availability pathogenic for copy common autism. sequencing disorders alterations next-generation been widespread structural in very assessing high the now as at of such and often somatically translocations. structural acquired deletions, alterations, Cancers including contain amplifications, example. genes The leukemia “Philadelphia classic myeloid between chromosome”—translocation a 12)—is BCR chronic ABL and so-called t(9;22) the in (Chapter

been gene hunting major is proteins. worth until that of noting that discovery genes has focus the It encode of recently large of indicate, encode studies a proteins. very that however, number do genes not Recent the important these non-encoded products of functions. “non-coding (ncRNAs)”—play genes—so-called regulatory Instead, RNAs discussed ncRNAs (miRNAs) RNA the exist, Chapter long Although microRNAs two (lncRNAs)—are in 1. RNAs molecules important of and non-coding many distinct families most called examples,—small

the major to nature we the With genetic disorders: that abnormalities review of attention pathogenesis this turn of brief our human can contribute three diseases, categories of to the of

genes. disorders mutations single from in resulting Mendelian the effects. who inherit phenotypic penetrance, anomaly show meaning The high most individuals genetic abnormalities show that are diseases familial. hereditary These and conditions, storage as of metabolism. diseases such They include uncommon many inborn errors and

involving well disorders multiple genes Complex as as environmental influences. These are multi-factorial called diseases. sometimes They of mankind, autoimmune of include some hypertension, and allergic and diseases. common the most including diabetes, disorders

chromosomes. including structure from abnormalities, the number arising or in chromosomal changes Diseases of alterations. are rare developmental Several to abnormalities chromosomal attributable

of but genetic Other do gene diseases, which simple mendelian single involve mutations not follow inheritance. rules with single-gene include from mutations transmission those nonclassic and in in mitochondrial an resulting those These which patterns mutations or from triplet http://ebooksmedicine.net is phenomenon imprinting. epigenetic the called inheritance repeat influenced DNA, disorders by genomic separately. discussed these Each is four of categories

MENDELIANDISORDERS:DISEASESCAUSEDBYSINGLE-GENEDEFECTS

Single-gene (mutations) well-known patterns follow ( inheritance the mendelian of defects

7.2 ). 7.1 Tables all account to individually 6% about to hospital for 8% they hospitals all rare, approximately of of adult admissions and together admissions. Although 1% pediatric important and disorders: when few caveats are considering Listed mendelian a next tenets

single of X-linked. follow or autosomal dominant, inheritance: patterns three of recessive, Mutations involving genes autosomal one

same (pleiotropy) single-gene may effects at and, mutations produce conversely, genetic several A trait phenotypic may many the (genetic loci mutation have heterogeneity). encoding connective which system, involving associated of component all of stem syndrome, the mutation connective basic a tissues. which a in a defect For skeleton, tissue, Marfan is fibrillin, widespread gene with and from from eyes, example, the effects cardiovascular results in retinal with inherited On hand, and of pigmentosa, different impairment. mutations types other visual can retinitis abnormal the consequent associated several pigmentation disorder an cause

mellitus important (Chapter genetic is of such disorders common diabetes not of only 20). of genetic also facilitates counseling understanding heterogeneity Recognition the but as in pathogenesis

known the phenotypic is mutations single a increasingly • affecting that It manifestations of now recognized

Live-Born Mendelian Prevalence Infants Estimated Among Table Selected of 7.1 Disorders

Huntingtondisease1in10,000

Sicklecellanemia1in500(U.S.AfricanAmericans)

Cysticfibrosis1in3200(U.S.Caucasians)

Tay-Sachsdisease1in3500(U.S.AshkenaziJewish;FrenchCanadians)

Phenylketonuria1in10,000

MPSs—alltypes1in25,000

Glycogenstoragediseases—all1in50,000types

Galactosemia1in60,000

Duchennemusculardystrophy1in3500(U.S.males)

*Theprevalenceofheterozygoussicklecelltraitis1in12forU.S.AfricanAmericans.MPS, Hemophilia1in5000(U.S.males) Mucopolysaccharidosis.

Biochemical Selected Pattern Disorders Mendelian and 7.2 Table Inheritance Basis for

MarfansyndromeFibrillinStructuralsupport:extracellularmatrix

CollagenStructuralsupport:extracellularmatrix

HereditaryspherocytosisSpectrin,ankyrin,orprotein4.1Structuralsupport:redbloodcellmembrane

Neurofibromatosis,type1Neurofibromin-1(NF-1)Growthregulation

*SomevariantsofEhler-Danlossyndromehaveanautosomalrecessiveinheritancepattern. Duchenne/BeckermusculardystrophyDystrophinStructuralsupport:cellmembrane

†Althoughfull-blownsymptomsrequirebiallelicmutations,heterozygotesforthalassemiaandsicklecellanemiamaypresentwithmildclinicaldisease.Thus,thesedisorderssometimesarecategorizedas“autosomalcodominant”entities.

modifier called are by http://ebooksmedicine.net loci, which genetic gene are genes. influenced other or loci fibrosis on affect of severity modifier disease. discussed extent these section the in the the later cystic can As

the certain Jewish high-risk Tay-Sachs such populations as prenatal The ( significantly genetic 7.1 genetic of (e.g., screening of • ) use disorders reduced persons proactive in has of incidence descent) disease. Ashkenazi

Dominant Disorders of Autosomal Inheritance

autosomal manifested so dominant usually an the one least in case is index Disorders affected. in are at inheritance of state, parent heterozygous the condition. Both and transmit affected, sexes both and can can males be females one, affected has unaffected of an person two having disease. an in When child marries the chance each one diseases: The features autosomal following also dominant pertain to

affected disorder, have With not any autosomal parents. do patients some dominant their sperm which to involving the or disorder owe Such either from were they derived. mutations new egg patients the are at of development Their affected nor risk for the disease. neither increased siblings

can variable penetrance modified expressivity. Clinical by and features be reduced are persons reduced penetrance. gene Some phenomenon inherit a mutant the as phenotypically referred normal, but to are The understood. clearly variables penetrance not affect that with carrying variable persons if gene, the phenomenon a the expressed gene expressivity. among consistently is called is is a differently penetrance, contrast but mutant with associated trait In tumors skin range the from brownish For on manifestations multiple spots deformities. 1 example, skeletal neurofibromatosis and to of

and signs in In symptoms at (as is do Huntington appear delayed, and not until the many age adulthood disease). onset conditions,

the and signs gene 50% clinical In normal in autosomal is associated a product dominant symptoms. disorders, reduction with genes proteins, involved a usually not for, of in into instead disorders enzyme encode be Because two do other proteins: 50% loss but dominant categories fall can of enzyme compensated autosomal activity

complex proteins). subject (e.g., transport metabolic to Those often involved regulation of in membrane pathways, receptors, feedback control pathogenic in familial An results later). is mutation hypercholesterolemia, gene (discussed found in of from (LDL) the this which low-density lipoprotein example receptor mechanism

spherocytosis). (e.g., the of in structural which Key skeleton proteins, membrane as such result of hereditary cell red spectrin, and abnormalities collagen components

The an in levels 50% biochemical phenotype in which are by such results understood. the fully of abnormal reduction mechanisms proteins not a cases, with a assembly can interfere functionally protein, one gene multimeric mutant multimer. In the a product of allele normal encodes of subunit the the of some the when especially is three the collagen in arranged collagen in example, the trimer molecule helical configuration. are which For chains a a deficiency collagen a collagen. marked of chains producing mutated of normal of chains, the assembly presence reduces the remaining The dominant the a because of is allele negative, allele. instance In impairs mutant it this normal called function the forms (Chapter some is osteogenesis This imperfecta 21). in effect illustrated of

Inheritance Autosomal of Disorders Recessive

in homozygous of the are Disorders inheritance state. recessive manifested autosomal gene are locus a They occur the given of both mutants. at when alleles one birth); low have siblings if is consanguineous parents, in trait for usually 25% siblings is multiple (2) who the affected occurs following each is risk are the disease; chance carriers Therefore, gene the mutant the four product features: a a may the population, strong not in that there one but frequency of affected recurrence being show such with (1) (the does affect diseased (i.e., (3) a likelihood the by patient and marriage. of the proband) disorders are the characterized allele, of The make disorders. up mendelian largest the of group They

In to apply generally features features contrast diseases, the dominant of the autosomal autosomal recessive most following with disorders:

uniform than expression autosomal dominant more defect disorders. of in to be tends The the

penetrance common. is Complete

is life. frequently early Onset in

occur, detected new clinically. for they rarely recessive are disorders mutations Although do the is the and several may person generations asymptomatic produce before offspring. other person Because heterozygote, a affected heterozygotes pass descendants affected an such of with mate

cases, affected enzymes mutation. by In the are many enzyme amounts heterozygotes, defective of and synthesized. are normal In equal of safety” normally. their natural “margin Usually half the complement function of of cells ensures enzyme the with that

Y Y-linked reported. differentiation, sexual gene male The mendelian instances apart home directs been ever to but is which chromosome–linked disorders very chromosome no testes-determining rare of Y have SRY, the from familial deafness, part, for the sex-linked X Thus, disorders are most linked. X-linked features: are recessive by X-linked Most and disorders are characterized the following

the course of hemizygous for are transmit sons, only to them chromosome. X carriers who female Heterozygous

the normal the they phenotypic rarely Heterozygous females full allele. have change, paired because express to one (see of expressed in process typically inactivation the text), inactivated is females allows sufficient random, allele of emerge. of the this with which X further chromosomes cells is numbers Although normal

carriers. not are all • affected male daughters sons, the transmit does but disorder to http://ebooksmedicine.net An chance of receiving one have two of gene. heterozygous Sons in the mutant women

Autosomaldominantdisordersarecharacterizedbyexpressioninheterozygousstate;theyaffectmalesandfemalesequally,andbothsexescantransmitthedisorder.

Autosomaldominantdisordersofteninvovledysfunctionalreceptorsandstructuralproteins.

Autosomalrecessivediseasesoccurwhenbothcopiesofagenearemutatedandfrequentlyinvolveenzymes.Malesandfemalesareaffectedequally.

X-linkeddisordersaretransmittedbyheterozygousfemalestotheirsons,whomanifestthedisease.FemalecarriersusuallyareunaffectedbecauseofrandominactivationofoneXchromosome.

dominant connective the eyes, changes cardiovascular manifested tissues, is an and principally disorder skeleton, of system. by Marfan autosomal syndrome in glycoprotein caused is inherited in defect It an an by called extracellular fibrillin-1. is secreted the matrix. component in of the found This extracellular major glycoprotein, by fibroblasts, microfibrils fibers. deposition as for an of elastic scaffolding Microfibrils of integral the tropoelastin, serve component the are are prominently the tissues in precisely the abundant zonules body, lens, widely affected that support ligaments, aorta, ciliary syndrome. particularly distributed that in Marfan ocular in the they are microfibrils and Although the

15q21. to FBN1 locus gene, encoded chromosomal by the maps is Fibrillin which with syndrome. all Mutations found Marfan in in patients FBN1 are gene level complexity of mutations FBN1 diagnosis 1800 complicates a large DNA by in found, been distinct very causative that than sequencing. More have the result, clinical the findings. is based As a on mainly diagnosis have as may of is preventing negative, symptoms, that thought fibrillin dominant act heterozygotes the it assembly protein a the clinical normal microfibrils. mutant Because 5000. estimated is The Marfan in be 1 syndrome to prevalence of from cases are the to parents. Approximately novo arising of FBN1 the of mutations are in cells familial, 70% 85% rest sporadic, de and germ

abnormalities on be can simple tissues, syndrome the many Although in to bones, fibrillin. such basis overgrowth to relate the some, explained connective difficult as of failure loss of of of are structural Marfan of of to now of rise evident the because factor-β and activation cytokine. thereby is TGF-β, (TGF-β), loss gives normal this growth sequester bioavailability abnormal of It transforming that excessive microfibrils microfibrils controlling

has muscle deleterious the vascular extracellular matrix. signaling smooth Excessive on TGF-β effects development and integrity of syndrome a related type syndrome, mutations rise 2 TGF-β receptor of give called Marfan this in II In (MFS2). type to support the hypothesis, to manifestations “classic” found of to similar other an predisposition in Marfan one in called mutations TGF-β, germline TGF-β3, Furthermore, isoform patients inherited (see with present and patients cardiovascular aneurysm aortic those with later). receptor and Marfan blockers, aortic function the inhibit of angiotensin syndrome. mouse models cardiac TGF-β, which of in improve note, activity Of beta-aderenergic with cardiovascular Prevention which activity. blocking only of receptor blood of pressure, inhibitors, but agents, angiotensin use lower which lower not interfere also entails the as as disease blood TGF-β well pressure

abnormalities MORPHOLOGYSkeletal lentis). change arethemostobviousfeatureofMarfansyndrome.Patientshaveaslender,elongatedhabituswithabnormallylonglegs,arms,andfingers(arachnodactyly);ahigh-archedpalate;andhyperextensibilityofjoints.Avarietyofspinaldeformities,suchasseverekyphoscoliosis,maybepresent.Thechestisdeformed,exhibitingeitherpectusexcavatum(i.e.,deeplydepressedsternum)orapigeon-breastdeformity.Themostcharacteristicocular isbilateraldislocation,orsubluxation,ofthelenssecondarytoweaknessofitssuspensoryligaments(ectopia Ectopialentis,particularlyifbilateral,ishighlyspecificforMarfansyndromeandstronglysuggeststhediagnosis.Mostserious,however,istheinvolvementofthecardiovascular system. givingrisetomitralvalveprolapseandcongestivecardiacfailure(Chapter11).Aorticruptureisthemostcommoncauseofdeathandmayoccuratanyage.Lessfrequently,cardiacfailureistheterminalevent. medionecrosis, syndrome), arenotspecificforMarfansyndrome;similarlesionsoccurinhypertensionandwithaging.Lossofmedialsupportcausesdilationoftheaorticvalvering,givingrisetoaorticincompetence.Thecardiacvalves,especiallythemitralvalve,maybeexcessivelydistensibleandregurgitant(floppy valve Fragmentationoftheelasticfibersinthetunicamediaoftheaortapredisposesaffectedpatientstoaneurysmaldilationandaorticdissection(Chapter10).Thesechanges,calledcystic

gene. AlthoughthelesionsdescribedaretypicalofMarfansyndrome,theyarenotseeninallcases.Thereismuchvariationinclinicalexpression,andsomepatientsmayexhibitpredominantlycardiovascularlesionswithminimalskeletalandocularchanges.ItisbelievedthatthevariableexpressivityisrelatedtodifferentmutationsintheFBN1

geneencodingfibrillin,whichisrequiredforstructuralintegrityofconnectivetissuesandactivationofTGF-β. MarfansyndromeiscausedbyamutationintheFBN1

Themajortissuesaffectedaretheskeleton,eyes,andcardiovascularsystem.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Clinicalfeaturesmayincludetallstature,longfingers,bilateralsubluxationoflens,mitralvalveprolapse,aorticaneurysm,andaorticdissection.

PreventionofcardiovasculardisesaeinvolvestheuseofdrugsthatlowerbloodpressureandinhibitTGF-β signaling.

synthesis (EDSs) diseases or a defects Ehlers-Danlos structure. of group collagen in syndromes characterized by are but patterns. recessive both disorders, of mode dominant All encompasses and autosomal single-gene are inheritance the have the products 30 of all tissue different are characteristic distinct approximately There of are types genes. distributions collagen; and clinical of in explained different can EDS genes. heterogeneity the collagen mutations by To be extent, some

EDS six of variants genetic recognized. least and clinical At are features disorders, all collagen clinical Because basis variants. is the defective to are these common certain for

joints, frequently affected such in variants as Tissues most in and of skin, rich EDS. are ligaments, collagen, fibers hypermobile. joints collagen are strength, tensile lack Because the abnormal adequate the such bending features almost contortions, as These bending to upward right knee grotesque to a create the touch thumb and the permit backward angle. forearm have EDS; of believed this is for it is paid virtuosity. contortionists the most joint some prices Indeed, dislocation form of to that however, a predisposition one

Skin fragility. The stretchable, skin and to fragile, is vulnerable extremely trauma. extraordinarily repair is defects, produce with accomplished strength. because intervention normal of any lack surgical and only Minor surgical of great or difficulty tensile the gaping injuries

of tissues. Structural failure organ or (vascular colon hernias including EDS); and The the with of lead rupture others. arteries and diaphragmatic structural (kyphoscoliotic ocular the internal cornea to in may tissue large (classical among rupture detachment EDS), defect connective retinal of serious and complications, EDS); fragility,

of common three variants follows: bases molecular for The are more the as

mutations affecting the collagen type resulting Deficient III COL3A1 from of synthesis gene. inherited This of wall), bowel by III rupture. vascular predisposing collagen characterized them variant, vessels, in and EDS, weakness an blood dominant tissues to disorder type as (e.g., is is rich autosomal

enzyme lysyl the of hydroxylase. Deficiency collagen residues among and interferes lysyl molecules. in collagen with types crosslinks III Decreased of of the I hydroxylation formation enzyme as an deficiency, is resulting an As EDS), autosomal disorder. this expected, (kyphoscoliotic variant be might inherited recessive from typically congenital scoliosis ocular and fragility. with manifest Patients

from dominant collagen V • an as autosomal COL5A2 in disorder results and mutations synthesis of EDS. resulting in is Deficient type classical inherited and COL5A1

TherearesixvariantsofEDS,allcharacterizedbydefectsincollagensynthesisorassembly.Eachofthevariantsiscausedbyadistinctmutation.

Clinicalfeaturesmayincludefragile,hyperextensibleskinvulnerabletotrauma,hypermobilejoints,andrupturesinvolvingcolon,cornea,orlargearteries.Woundhealingispoor.

gene transport the Familial is is LDL mutations and the cholesterol. in metabolism involved disease” a receptor, in by loss-of-function “receptor caused which of hypercholesterolemia encoding the loss abnormalities of cholesterol of As feedback check. that normally in holds consequence control synthesis is a receptor a there of of cholesterol infarction. the premature and increase myocardial levels greatly The elevated induce atherosclerosis risk resulting Familial is disorders; most in mendelian is common 1 frequency of population. the of general the the 500 among in condition the hypercholesterolemia heterozygous plasma, of in LDL. circulates of predominantly the the cholesterol form in 7% Approximately the body’s catabolism, of cholesterol expected, and in influenced and plasma as liver the is crucial later. might its be described plays role by the synthesis these processes, both a As amount and follows. of transport brief A cholesterol review the synthesis of

Normal Cholesterol Metabolism. synthesis. diet may or endogenous the Cholesterol from derived be from intestinal blood. to triglycerides are of the incorporated chylomicrons the into by gut way Dietary and mucosa and lymphatics cholesterol the in travel and lipoprotein lipase capillaries These hydrolyzed fat. the are endothelial by an of chylomicrons muscle in in the liver. The chylomicron to cholesterol, remnants, delivered are then rich or as biliary cholesterol acids free the pool Some excreted enters into some described), and tract. bile is as metabolic (to cholesterol of be the the begins LDL and cholesterol synthesis of endogenous ( liver in The the

Fig. ). 7.1 lipoprotein (VLDL) triglyceride-rich is very-low-density by into step secretion The the synthesis first the the liver blood. the in of lipoprotein (IDL). the adipose particle is the intermediate-density of capillaries converted In undergoes and muscle, VLDL and to tissue lipolysis Further and is VLDL, apolipoproteins reduced with of and B-100 of occurs E. pathways: comparison IDL cholesteryl its enriched In retains the http://ebooksmedicine.net of on surface Most in content triglyceride IDL, esters metabolism two that the but VLDL-associated along is of IDL the

Fig. Low-densitylipoprotein(LDL)metabolismandtheroleoftheliverinitssynthesisandclearance.Lipolysisofvery-low-densitylipoprotein(VLDL)bylipoproteinlipaseinthecapillariesreleasestriglycerides,whicharethenstoredinfatcellsandusedasasourceofenergyinskeletalmuscles.IDL(intermediate-densitylipoprotein)remainsinthebloodandistakenupbytheliver. 7.1

converted of and cells, described a is E. particles through generate up liver by recycled the further are receptor loss are cholesterol-rich In liver directly the IDL triglycerides LDL of later; to apolipoprotein taken the loss to VLDL. IDL by the LDL others

later. metabolizes oxidized resultant LDL metabolized for is receptor LDL two-thirds receptor and (scavenger by a particles, to be LDL of the The the described rest pathway receptor), transport and both B-100 The the receptor and of binds E is and to IDL. apolipoproteins LDL in LDL thus involved so hepatocytes, the approximately an 75% widely are plays extremely the liver important in receptors Although LDL distributed, are metabolism. role on located LDL The (Fig. LDL receptor-mediated to pits step by surface clathrin-coated followed cell transport receptor, endocytotic inside so-called in internalization binding the of the first involves ). 7.2 cholesterol cytoplasm. the free lysosomes, molecule release cell, the the fuse and into Within with endocytic the vesicles in resulting ultimately the LDL of degraded, the enzymatically is requires the called of (described The NPC2 two later). lysosomes the and proteins, of exit NPC1 from action cholesterol by control: only a cholesterol The of is for but also cholesterol intracellular not in part the membrane by synthesis used feedback sophisticated cell homeostasis system takes

activity of reductase rate-limiting A the (HMG-CoA synthetic reductase), coenzyme inhibiting enzyme the in by 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl– the cholesterol It suppresses is synthesis the which pathway. enzyme

cholesterol It stimulates storage of excess the formation cholesterol. of for esters

It preventing cholesterol receptors, the downregulates accumulation of cell of LDL synthesis inside cells. thus excessive surface

of LDL scavenger to seems alluded in the occur possibly well. cells by cells as system earlier, the other of The transport mononuclear-phagocyte and receptors, in to macrophages for or have acetylated Monocytes (e.g., and modified LDLs. oxidized) receptors chemically cholesterol is directly scavenger receptor this plasma pathway catabolized level. by related to amount The the

of and receptor LDL in in familial intracellular plasma. cholesterol transport impair In protein LDL hypercholesterolemia, LDL, catabolism mutations resulting the the the of accumulation in is the liver impairs IDL LDL a of In plasma converted transport IDL so proportion of cells greater on receptors liver, LDL. addition, the the into into absence of and of excessive as cholesterol serum effects of reduced ( result patients hypercholesterolemia a with Thus, the familial develop of levels catabolism biosynthesis excessive combined

Fig. ). 7.1 by receptor. cholesterol a leads marked uptake of vascular the and the monocyte-macrophages increase scavenger This walls to through atherosclerosis. of appearance and xanthomas the premature for accounts skin This

an disease. Familial is dominant autosomal hypercholesterolemia of plasma levels, excess have whereas in threefold of elevation. fivefold homozygotes twofold-to cholesterol Heterozygotes may a have elevation a along heterozygotes adult atherosclerosis birth, until cholesterol they remain elevated asymptomatic life, are develop resulting coronary levels their in cholesterol disease. when tendon deposits premature and from artery (xanthomas) Although sheaths of Homozygotes age developing often affected, xanthomas and years. infarction of before 20 myocardial the severely in much cutaneous more are dying childhood

shown cloned receptor rise to hypercholesterolemia. more 900 LDL that gene the than has of Analysis mutations give familial different can divided These can be categories. into five complete loss are and they uncommon, Class synthesis. are receptor I associated mutations with of defects Golgi because receptor protein apparatus protein is endoplasmic folding. mutations, transport most from to type, reticulum With class the II synthesized, the is but prevalent its of the impaired the in LDL bind to Class cell to but mutations normally. transported the are that III fail produce receptors surface within rise internalized class V mutations to mutations LDL, to in binding because clathrin occur. IV receptors are that dissociation are and Class but whereas to after does can endosomes give not fail internalize bind of bound encode that and receptor receptors LDL pits LDL trapped

http://ebooksmedicine.net

membrane, Synthesis RibosomeReceptor esters Endosome HMG-CoA steroid pit Coated Lysosome Plasma of Cholesterol PCSK9 RNA acids membrane apparatus vesicle Recycling receptors protein cholesterol Oversupply Synthesis of cholesterol Receptor of LDL and StimulatesInhibitsInhibitsAmino Endoplasmic reductaseDNA cholesterol vesicle Golgi bile Coated reticulum acidsStorage Cell of Clathrin hormones,

Fig. showthreeregulatoryfunctionsoffreeintracellularcholesterol:(1)suppressionofcholesterolsynthesisbyinhibitionofHMG-CoAreductase,(2)stimulatingthestorageofexcesscholesterolasesters,and(3)inhibitionofsynthesisofLDLreceptors.PCSK9causesintracellulardegradationofLDLreceptorsinlivercells,reducingthelevelofLDLreceptorsonthecellmembrane.HMG-CoA 3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl–coenzymeAreductase;LDL, reductase, 7.2 proproteinconvertasesubtilisin/kexintype9. low-densitylipoprotein;PCSK9, TheLDLreceptorpathwayandregulationofcholesterolmetabolism.Theyellow arrows

posttranslational years, been a levels an new In surface. intracellular has reach of elucidated, cell referred they of PCSK9 in receptors the wherein regulation plasma recent degradation to of hepatocytes, enzyme LDL causes LDL before mechanism as to there plasma hypercholesterolemia. LDL, is reduced the With surface, LDL uptake fewer cell receptors on leading of the many classic features to enzyme, hypercholesterolemia. mutations gene codes the have which familial with similar activating for Families of PCSK9,

of statin that rational led are the role the cholesterol. The critical plasma discovery cholesterol the to family homeostasis receptors widely used lower in to has of now LDL drugs design of of thus HMG-CoA greater activity inhibit promote and LDL of of reductase ( They synthesis receptors the

Fig. ). 7.2 PCSK9 the of statins. increase a which upregulation of accompanied receptors LDL dampens compensatory in the by levels, is However, effects such antagonize large been in hypercholesterolemia. that shown agents the clinical Therefore, patients have developed, benefits refractory with using PCSK9 have function trials inhibitors and enzymatic

FamilialhypercholesterolemiaisanautosomaldominantdisordercausedbymutationsinthegeneencodingtheLDLreceptor.ActivatingmutationsofPCSK9(farlesscommon),whichdegradesLDLreceptors,alsocauseasimilarphenotype.

PatientsdevelophypercholesterolemiaasaconsequenceofimpairedtransportofLDLintothecells.

Inheterozygotes,elevatedserumcholesterolgreatlyincreasestheriskofatherosclerosisandresultantcoronaryarterydisease;homozygoteshaveanevengreaterincreaseinserumcholesterolandahigherfrequencyofischemicheartdisease.Cholesterolalsodepositsalongtendonsheathstoproducexanthomas.

and of the exocrine the linings respiratory, glands disorder reproductive fluid epithelial and epithelial in gastrointestinal, of ion fibrosis a is tracts. transport Cystic affecting (CF) secretion lead defects ion transport The http://ebooksmedicine.net to

abnormally the and by pancreatic for responsible turn secretions mucous Single-Gene Diseases Defects251 Mendelian pulmonary which that and two ducts insufficiency. airways most the pancreatic important viscid the clinical block in recurrent Caused and are infections chronic manifestations: Disorders: chloride course CF. exocrine sweat structurally consistent in sodium In and is are normal the in sweat a biochemical the remain of characteristic high so throughout this of addition, a abnormality disease), although level (and the glands set can a findings. bewilderingly remembered the clinical variable same time, At that present CF it must with of be from effects of tissue-specific This influence disease diverse CF the in the genes. of results in function, variation the and of gene, loss modifier CF-associated phenotype gene’s mutations

With the in United disease genetic births incidence white lethal 1 of populations. is 2500 in that CF affects most States, live the an common United frequency among among Asians, Caucasians 20 the and in Hispanics. lower significantly in 1 The is States but Americans, African carrier even transmission, a carriers recessive than although pulmonary the toward at CF predisposition general autosomal heterozygous rates have higher disease population. and follows pancreatic simple

The reduced gene. primary function encoded regulator the defect of abnormal conductance transmembrane is by or protein an CF CF chloride (CFTR) channel epithelial in production, render ( membranes impermeable relatively chloride epithelial Disruptive ions in CFTR mutations the to

Fig. ). 7.3 of the tissue defect However, specific. function impact is this on transport gland protein reabsorb in The reabsorption augment and is epithelial CFTR chloride (ENaC). the the ducts sweat function channel the sodium luminal to major sodium through of ions sodium ( of function the sweat of loss in of and leads (“salty”) to chloride ducts, reabsorption hyper-tonic sweat CFTR production Therefore, decreased

Fig. , top). 7.3 one secretion the respiratory intestinal of to epithelium important in active most contrast of avenues CFTR the sweat for is chloride. luminal and glands, In reduction loss chloride into of or lumen secretion result At these mutations sites, ( the CFTR in

Fig. , bottom). 7.3 through sodium fluid both lowering also ENaCs water cells. Active surface increase of absorption these water the and ion the of mucosal content coating layer passive lumen, increased, from the luminal is reabsorption changes there ducts, sweat unlike the Thus,

Fig. a in causes of and have leading action, with sweat (Top) coating and in the to increased the water and sweat. in the concentration plugging. epithelial and airways, reabsorption Patients decreased secretion layer (Bottom) CF sodium defective defect In 7.3 cells, CF, duct channel chloride chloride mucociliary mucous chloride increased sodium dehydration mucus conduction. regulator; for transmembrane responsible sodium channel conductance intracellular ENaC, sodium fibrosis Cystic CFTR, epithelial

the cells the is the CF. persons of coating salt normal in fluid no concentration respiratory intestinal mucosal surface with and those in in difference layer and of complications Instead, respiratory and dehydration CF from to stem surface in layer. fluid seem intestinal action the mucociliary accumulation dehydration obstruct recurrent defective secretions passages air the of to infections. the predispose leads In lungs, that and concentrated, pulmonary viscid to this and chloride, of bicarbonate In also CFTR ions. regulates addition secretion to while is abnormal only certain manifest variants CFTR ion largely bicarbonate fact, with transport In preserved. chloride transport conductance. mutations is classic insufficiency, CFTR virtually Pancreatic in with a always patients abnormal CF, who carry bicarbonate feature of present

than disease-causing in identified. more 1989, cloned CFTR Since 1800 gene the have was been mutations CF the on can basis or course underlying They the the clinical be of of of nature classified defect. quantity reduced of in or may result functional cell surface the reduced of that CFTR reaches function CFTR Mechanistically, they surface. that cell the reaches of As shall impact these strategies. differences treatment on development the see we severe depending They or the as can be also on clinical classified mild, phenotype. mutations protein with residual of complete mutations Severe some loss CFTR associated allow are function, whereas mild function. at a deletion mutation for CFTR three of severe is amino (ΔF508). 508 acid coding phenylalanine common nucleotides position The most total and causes the loss of misfolding This CFTR. mutation patients Worldwide, in 70% of CF. is ΔF508 approximately with found mutations recessive disease, harbor on persons autosomal affected Since is both CF an alleles. influences discussed later, nature overall As phenotype, the on as two well as mutations the alleles of the manifestations. organ-specific best-known manifestations. that and the remains gene–one evidence severity axiom, one is of modify organ-specific other of the “one increasing examples disease” of Although there the genes CF frequency include and growth 2 genes modifier mannose-binding (TGFβ1). factor-β1 Examples transforming of (MBL2) lectin CF. natural genes ability history It (see to the thus the polymorphisms virulent influence microbes modifying of the tolerate infections with later), postulated is that these in lungs of

Fig. 7.4 ). are patients. Pancreatic to in abnormalities 90% 85% present of the in ducts, there cases, of only accumulations may some exocrine the milder of In with glands. small mucus dilation the be more usually children the or seen causing ducts cases, In in totally adolescents, atrophy plugged, advanced the older of are

Fig. 7.5 ). to A vitamin lead loss deficiency. total The metaplasia tions. which to pancreatic of contribute of epithelium the squamous may the ducts, lining This be the plugs Thick found in also mucus may small viscid of

obstruction Infertility Bilateral deferens of vas Azoospermia

Fig. 7.4 with affected Tissues patients in CF. molecular from fibrosis from understanding (Adapted Cystic genetics: clinical to Cutting application. GR: Nat 16:45, Rev 2015.) Genet infants. intestine of known Sometimes bowel obstruction, meconium ileus. small as cause these

Fig. 7.6). viscous are marked of secretions glands and These mucus-secreting infections. passages submucosal of the mucus superimposed hypertrophy often from the hyperplasia changes and the The tion mucus, stem by with distended with thick of obstruc cells. air bronchioles associated chronic bronchitis Superimposed rise severe infections and to give

Fig. 7.5 in to pancreas. the of changes CF moderate Mild atrophic the fibrous and eosinophilic dilated glands by are The tissue. ducts and mucin, with parenchymal plugged and are replaced

Fig. 7.6 Lungsofapatientwhodiedofcysticfibrosis.Extensivemucousplugginganddilationofthetracheobronchialtreeareapparent.Thepulmonaryparenchymaisconsolidatedbyacombinationofbothsecretionsandpneumonia;thegreenishdiscolorationistheproductofPseudomonas infections. Pennsylvania.) of Pittsburgh, of Yunis: Dr. Hospital Eduardo Children’s Pittsburgh, (Courtesy (“fattyliver”)isacommonfindinginliverbiopsies.Withtime,cirrhosisdevelops,resultingindiffusehepaticnodularity.Suchseverehepaticinvolvementisencounteredinlessthan10%ofpatients.Azoospermia deferens arefoundin95%oftheaffectedmaleswhosurvivetoadulthood;bilateral aureus, absence isafrequentfindinginthesepatients.Insomemales,thismaybetheonlyfeaturesuggestinganunderlyingCFTRmutation. vas involvement aeruginosa followsthesamebasicpattern.Bilecanaliculiarepluggedbymucinousmaterial,accompaniedbyductularproliferationandportalinflammation.Hepaticsteatosis the influenzae, andinfertility cepacia.Thisopportunisticbacteriumisparticularlyhardy,andinfectionwiththisorganismhasbeenassociatedwithfulminantillness(“cepaciasyndrome”).Theliver of bronchiectasis.Developmentoflungabscessesiscommon.Staphylococcus andPseudomonas Haemophilus arethethreemostcommonorganismsresponsibleforlunginfections.Evenmoresinisteristheincreasingfrequencyofinfectionwithanotherpseudomonad,Burkholderia

clinical those In manifestations are as CF few protean childhood of diseases ( as

Fig. ). 7.4 attention or after clinical soon to attack at Approximately of of because ileus. the come to of 5% birth an 10% meconium cases with alleles associated mutations (e.g., both in a pancreatic to “severe” 90%) and Exocrine on of is CFTR majority insufficiency occurs ΔF508/ΔF508). (85% patients is By retain CFTR not and “mild” of have phenotype. “mild” “severe” exocrine enzyme contrast, one two function pancreatic one 15% mutations, CFTR mutation, required—the to 10% or sufficient who supplementation pancreas-sufficient that patients, fat and insufficiency increased malabsorption associated fecal Pancreatic is of and protein with loss. large, stools; distention; abdominal the first malabsorption weight Manifestations (e.g., gain) year of foul-smelling appear poor life. during of faulty severe induce manifestations of resulting enough deficiency The may the edema. vitamins, fat-soluble avitaminosis Hypoproteinemia be cause K. A, of generalized states to fat D, in absorption or may with children prolapse Persistent of diarrhea as as may result 10% CF. rectal in many in not growth excellent usually and associated development. and The pancreas-sufficient complications, these phenotype gastrointestinal in general, is other demonstrate with patients In the endocrine exocrine course improved (i.e., CF. disease CF of in diabetes) especially of contrast insufficiency, with is the occurs late patients insufficiency with uncommon survival in and to

infections, most of United approximately such death Cardiorespiratory in in most of 80% follow-up common pulmonale, the cough, care pulmonary as chronic constitute (accounting in patients persistent for the who fatalities) States. cause cor receive CF and lung complications, centers obstructive disease, P. harbor 80% aeruginosa, classic patients By age, of 3.5% and CF 18 B. years cepacia. of with harbor Pseudomonas antibiotic prophylaxis, there With of of been resurgence resistant use many of unfortunate strains has the in an indiscriminate patients. foreshadowed liver and and most (after of the of history third is is late transplant-related and patients natural with CF CF occurs by involvement; pulmonary disease death now complications). Significant cause in disease common liver cardiopulmonary expectancy, pancreatic the increasing with life in sequencing by heterozygous spectrum extensive that disease “classic” of earlier. or mutations multisystem the CFTR has in diseases than germline More broader caused is shown biallelic the carriers) DNA described (either were having variants For are seen as from and pain from classified example, chronic distinct CFTR previously recurrent pancreatitis patients in “classic” childhood now since harbor those who pancreatitis suffering are biallelic known some bouts CF. abdominal that “idiopathic” to of increased isolated pancreatitis absence recurrent an suggest CF bilateral Patients for polyps. sinonasal or under from disease carriers studies Similarly, vas resulting mutations umbrella of (see earlier) “CFTRopathies.” included be chronic lifetime bronchiectasis) the (especially initially that lung and have whereas asymptomatic, thought are of risk to CFTR they were deferens with characteristic family In her mother (sinopulmonary infant diagnosis the the cases, salty”), findings is clinical because the of CF a “tastes elevated sweat or diagnosis manifestations), history. makes electrolyte (often disease gastrointestinal based and concentrations persistently most on Sequencing of the gold gene the is for diagnosis CF. standard CFTR

There bilateral the major chronic have in management of complications been anti-microbial and transplantation. potent replacement, lung improvements acute pancreatic including CF, therapies, more enzyme of and been new approved. protein treatment have aimed Importantly, increasing two CFTR certain function CFTR forms in at variants of minority a patients For a a example, CF G155D the used of gene. are in (~3% in who CFTR of as group “potentiators” CFTR mutation harbor known to 5%) agents transport channel. defective this defective “potentiator” restores the In functions the membrane; variant, orally ion bioavailable CFTR functionally to critical CFTR the is cell present normal otherwise in amounts partially at the protein the transport combination drug Another to agents—one cell increases second CFTR aforementioned two drug that Δ508 potentiator the approved a a and membrane. the the the contains of of defective is of therapies the and emerging It determine survival. too molecular the on impact early prognosis of into have years lethal of the close and, extended steadily is to 40 management to expectancy changing chronic Overall, a life median disease a improved of adults. CF disease childhood

http://ebooksmedicine.net

geneencodingtheCFtransmembraneregulator. CFisanautosomalrecessivediseasecausedbymutationsintheCFTR

Theprincipaldefectisofchlorideiontransport,resultinginhighsaltconcentrationsinsweatandinviscousluminalsecretionsinrespiratoryandgastrointestinaltracts.

CFTRmutationscanbesevere(ΔF508),resultinginmultisystemdisease,ormild,withlimiteddiseaseextentandseverity.

orBurkholderia Cardiopulmonarycomplicationsconstitutethemostcommoncauseofdeath;pulmonaryinfections,especiallywithresistantPseudomonas species,arefrequent.Bronchiectasisandright-sidedheartfailurearelong-termsequelae.

Pancreaticinsufficiencyisextremelycommon;infertilitycausedbycongenitalbilateralabsenceofvasdeferensisacharacteristicfindinginadultpatientswithCF.

Liverdisease,includingcirrhosis,isincreasinginfrequencyaslifeexpectancyincreases.

MoleculartherapiesthatenhancethetransportorstabilityofmutantCFTRproteinareusefulinpatientswhoharborcertainCFTRalleles.

a phenylalanine enzyme lack PKU severe results cause that hydroxylase mutations of (PAH). from the of 10,000 affects in disease. several live-born variants there infants this white are and 1 It as descent Scandinavian to African-American classic common form, and and distinctly is Jewish common phenylketonuria, in populations. referred The uncommon persons of is most in

PKU. with disorder have this of PAH, severe classically hyperphenylalaninemia leading and autosomal a lack to recessive Homozygotes Affected are which few normal a infants exhibit level, phenylalanine development. weeks rising plasma at birth brain impairs within a but severe of life, becomes have of Usually, all phenylketonuric mental months by retardation evident; untreated (IQs) than 6 too 60. less intelligence greater than quotients children 4% children of are two-thirds these one-third cannot never walk, talk. to able and About accompany of children. abnormalities, skin, untreated in neurologic other and the retardation eczema hair Seizures, mental often pigmentation decreased and retardation avoided early be mental restricting intake phenylalanine in the life. Hyperphenylalaninemia and by resultant can screening Hence, in several period. performed to postnatal detect PKU the immediate procedures are routinely

patients are age reach and life Many treatment in childbearing who beginning PKU early normal. receive female with dietary clinically is them reach marked of dietary because treatment adulthood. after discontinued hyperphenylalaninemia, they Most have heart retarded of microcephalic, such and are and infants congenital even have are 75% women born 15% the themselves 90% and disease, children Between mentally to heterozygotes. though maternal cross during fetal termed metabolites syndrome, phenylalanine development. or from its of teratogenic the PKU, organs affect the placenta and effects specific results that This continued phenylalanine dietary it be maternal phenylalanine conception and initiated level, and before anomalies maternal throughout imperative The correlate of so the directly restriction presence with the fetal severity is that pregnancy. of

biochemical to The is an in abnormality convert inability tyrosine. into PKU phenylalanine 50% In of necessary for protein less phenylalanine than normal dietary of synthesis. intake is children, the hydroxylase system tyrosine to ( phenylalanine remainder the converted is The by

Fig.

7.7 ). that of because of phenylalanine yielding is blocked are in large lack urine the pathways intermediates a the and excreted amounts in come in metabolism When PAH into several enzyme, play, sweat. shunt a These odor strong mousy impart affected infants. or to musty brain excess is in phenylalanine that believed its It or to the metabolites PKU. damage contribute of Concomitant ( lack tyrosine

Fig. the for ), melanin, responsible skin. hair of 7.7 light precursor a of and color is

PAH some cause At gene 500 of molecular the only mutant been of have level, deficiency enzyme. which alleles a approximately the the severe identified, of the condition of to PAH in as be with milder of with benign residual Infants with present activity with lack a activity features or a disease whereas mutations present classic resulting referred some may severe PKU, hyperphenylalaninemia. asymptomatic, those the levels disease-causing times gene, hyperphenylalaninemia PAH Because the numerous phenylalanine in higher is typically the diagnosis, alleles disorder latter of benign to levels differentiate used measurement normal. are molecular the of than serum ≥5 from complicate PKU; After a PKU mutation diagnosis specific established, is be biochemical causing the can determined. information, testing carrier family be of With at-risk performed. can members this as patients PKU. method a reducing tried enzyme in replacement circulating classic therapy is phenylalanine with Currently, for being levels phenylalanine metabolites. ammonia other PAL), known replacement The (or and nontoxic lyase converts as excess enzyme, phenylalanine ammonia to

Although PAH, are of ( mutations to synthesis abnormalities from approximately in attributable of 98% cases recycling in tetrahydrobiopterin arise of the or cofactor hyperphenylalaninemia 2%

Fig. ). 7.7 important Clinical these tetrahydrobiopterin, forms cannot precursors, phenylalanine variant but dietary and neurotransmitter of supplementation acid. also require by restriction patients recognition certain folic because of be alone, with treated is these

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Thephenylalaninehydroxylasesystem.NADH, Nicotinamideadeninedinucleotide,reducedform. 7.7

PKUisanautosomalrecessivedisordercausedbyalackoftheenzymephenylalaninehydroxylaseandaconsequentinabilitytometabolizephenylalanine.

ClinicalfeaturesofuntreatedPKUmayincludeseverementalretardation,seizures,anddecreasedpigmentationofskin,whichcanbeavoidedbyrestrictingtheintakeofphenylalanineinthediet.

FemalepatientswithPKUwhodiscontinuedietarytreatmentcangivebirthtochildrenwithmalformationsandneurologicimpairmentresultingfromtransplacentalpassageofphenylalaninemetabolites.

of enzyme galactose-1-phosphate disorder a the uridyltransferase galactose the in an is recessive encoding Galactosemia mutation metabolism gene from (GALT). resulting autosomal in live-born It infants. affects 60,000 1 major lactose, microvilli. mammalian in lactase the carbohydrate into intestinal galactose glucose and of Normally, splits the milk, is Galactose the in several GALT one of glucose enzyme is which then required. converted in to steps, spleen, many other deficiency, metabolites, of and tissues, cortex. transferase and in lens result including the including As this galactitol, eye, kidney, accumulate galactose-1-phosphate of the liver, cerebral a

the brain the liver, bear eyes, of damage. and The brunt alcohol results time The hepatomegaly of fatty that 16). closely scarring widespread abuse resembles supervene largely in the may but cirrhosis from (Chapter early-onset change, swells the lens the produced metabolic as pathways, tonicity. and absorbs develops, alternative accumulates of and water by because probably increases Opacification lens (cataract) galactitol, its system and appear Nonspecific edema. alterations cells, gliosis, nerve including nervous loss (CNS), in the of central that this damage. injury brain, contribute tissues still the the There mechanism to is clear neuronal of although understanding suggests elevated the levels no may galactitol in to of

birth, to affected from thrive. Almost fail infants a of ingestion. few Vomiting days appear diarrhea and within milk and the usually evident week Jaundice first become during life. hepatomegaly of and galactose in Accumulation transport, acid aminoaciduria. resulting galactose-1-phosphate impairs in amino of the kidney frequency. increased coli occurs Fulminant Escherichia septicemia with States. utilized screening Newborn are the widely in tests United depend assay dried enzyme They blood activity spot. on fluorometric GALT of on a levels A RBC. screening GALT in be assay by test positive confirmed must of or in determination activity of by galactitol possible assay supernatant. cells fluid in amniotic level diagnosis cultured amniotic fluid is GALT of Antenatal

from life. or the prevented the Many ameliorated at years the of galactose diet first of morphologic for of 2 least can of changes by and galactosemia clinical removal be instituted birth, permits development. normal soon after prevents and If almost diet this damage cataracts liver and condition. by an a restrictions, and, Even less are older with ataxic disorder failure) frequently dietary affected ovarian and (especially speech commonly, by premature gonadal however, failure patients

GalactosemiaisanautosomalrecessivedisordercausedbylackoftheGALTenzyme,leadingtotheaccumulationofgalactose-1-phosphateanditsmetabolitesintissues.

Clinicalfeaturesmayincludejaundice,liverdamage,cataracts,neuraldamage,vomitinganddiarrhea,andE. sepsis.Dietaryrestrictionofgalactosecanpreventatleastsomeofthemoreseverecomplications. coli

of into of Lysosomes, involved contain mucopolysaccharides, the and are digestive of that cells, a complex end system sphingolipids in substrates, variety the soluble hydrolytic such as enzymes breakdown products. the be they molecules turnover phagocytosis. These or of enter be that by the acquired autophagy, the intracellular from large outside may by organelles the may from cell lysosomes derived inherited lysosomal an metabolites the enzyme, remains With a partially to lysosomes insoluble incomplete, its accumulation of catabolism lack ( of degraded the of leading substrate within

Fig. ). 7.8 called This primary storage. is normal lysosomes with numerous incompletely and to with digested Stuffed become interfere cell enough large functions. macromolecules, lysosomal also proteins Because autophagic and storage substrates for polyubiquinated such old effete and of as is function secondary rise autophagy gives essential mitochondria. impaired to autophagy, free causes generation mechanism dysfunctional of which and can apoptosis. the radicals trigger The mitochondria, absence this of of quality-control accumulation

http://ebooksmedicine.net

lysosomal Approximately diseases identified. have 60 been storage may result These from of abnormalities

Fig. Pathogenesisoflysosomalstoragediseases.Inthisexample,acomplexsubstrateisnormallydegradedbyaseriesoflysosomalenzymesintosolubleendproducts(A,BandC).Ifthereisadeficiencyormalfunctionofoneoftheenzymes(e.g.,B),catabolismisincomplete,andinsolubleintermediatesaccumulateinthelysosomes.Inadditiontothisprimarystorage,secondarystorageandtoxiceffectsresultfromdefectiveautophagy. 7.8

enzymes substrate involved membrane integrity. or sorting, lysosomal degradation, proteins or in endosomal lysosomal storage are Lysosomal and based the metabolites. biochemical divided the of the categories disorders substrates nature on accumulated into (

Table ). 7.3 each group deficiency each resulting from Within a are specific enzyme. the several entities, of

more-common may diseases. births, lysosomal of is live Although dysfunction disorders about storage lysosomal several in combined etiology of involved 5000 be (LSDs) the 1 in the frequency disease developing Gaucher disease risk Parkinson For factor for and important for an carrier develop patients the Gaucher virtually disease, Parkinson example, genetic is all disease. state C Alzheimer LSD is Niemann another risk to disease. Pick connected for the the Such the interconnectedness stems from lysosome. of multifunctionality the membrane the with immunity, phagosomes; play (iii) autophagosome; (ii) with they autophagy, from and example, as fusion plasma fuse membrane. in critical resulting through fusion lysosomes with (i) For repair, roles

displaying with typically LSDs begins fatal, profound are childhood. that many in impairment neurologic a are that of LSDs Studies immune associated several system. with also the dysregulation neurodegenerative show in disease occurs system the example, Pick Niemann seen. whereas Gaucher and of in disease-type-C1, VII, For immune mucopolysaccharidoses is hyperactivation immunosuppression immunologic basis mechanistic The remains deciphered. changes linkage to to of be

diseases this in complexity, are group: certain features Despite common this to most

infants young population and Patient of children consisting

Storage to system, mononuclear of giving rise in intermediates phagocyte hepatosplenomegaly the insoluble

involvement damage neuronal associated Frequent with CNS

by material, of release dysfunction macrophage activation storage example, not undigested and caused cytokines Cellular cascade only of events, by but secondary for of a also

are rare, of their reviews. is specialized description to relegated conditions these Most texts better and and very detailed Only a conditions considered more of common few here. are the

Tay-SachsDisease(GM2Gangliosidosis:DeficiencyinHexosaminidaseβ Subunit)

brain, lysosomal gangliosides, these accumulation by the the of result Gangliosidoses a in catabolize of of deficiency are one enzymes that glycolipids. principally of as a characterized on GM1 and into the GM2 are involved, categories. ganglioside Depending subclassified disorders these gangliosidoses, necessary mutations which for of is all the enzyme of caused of is Tay-Sachs disease, by the by degradation most subunit far A, hexosaminidase the β the common loss-of-function GM2. of most than or intracellular 100 have More been mutations disrupt transport. folding protein described; is disorders, lipid http://ebooksmedicine.net among most similar Tay-Sachs other storage disease, common to

carriers to 30. Ashkenazi whom frequency Jews, 1 among be estimated in is the heterozygous of be sequencing. by level detected Heterozygote carriers can hexosaminidase the in measuring serum the of by DNA or

liver, neurons systems A, the the retina hexosaminidase In in ganglioside involvement the dominates nervous and tissues GM2 central nervous autonomic spleen, heart, the of (e.g., clinical in picture. many of but accumulates system), absence and throughout The occurs of GM2 glial within cylinders cells accumulation and the of axon neurons, nerves, CNS. ( cells Affected foamy swollen and sometimes appear

Fig. 7.9A ). onionskin-like Electron of lysosomes membranes composed of microscopy layers ( configurations shows within whorled

Fig. 7.9B ). changes cord), peripheral system. CNS These pathologic nerves, throughout are the autonomic found nervous the spinal (including and peripheral ganglion central in spot results a unaffected well, produced the swollen is involved pallor macula. in usually where contrasting red” in the retina as relatively “cherry The by cells retina the

is injury not basis neuronal molecular understood. fully The for protein 2). Because induces mutant is in cases many (Chapter it response misfolded, the “unfolded protein” the so-called If and misfolded toxic by within degradation, neurons. stabilized proteasomal chaperones, accumulation not substrates are they undergo leading enzymes intermediates to such of selected trials variants spurred and later-onset therapy of lysosomal clinical diseases. molecular some Tay-Sachs chaperone have storage for These findings of other proper blood–brain use therapy barrier, synthetic of folding. the cross bind that its chaperones Such and protein, can enable to the mutated the involves ameliorate rescued effects then enzyme be of the to functional the can inborn Sufficient error.

appear onset birth, begins of In neurologic age, blindness, months to 6 infants disease, severe variant of dysfunctions. neurologic weakness by acute at impairment, the motor more normal 3 followed infantile but most of Tay-Sachs at and progressively common occurs years. 3 within Death to 2

entities Type diseases B characterized are and Niemann-Pick A by deficiency type a of related primary http://ebooksmedicine.net acid

Fig. 7.9 GanglioncellsinTay-Sachsdisease.(A)Underthelightmicroscope,alargeneuronhasobviouslipidvacuolation.(B)Aportionofaneuronundertheelectronmicroscopeshowsprominentlysosomeswithwhorledconfigurationsjustbelowpartofthenucleus. Department University Courtesy Center, of of Southwestern Medical Dr. Dallas, (A, Pathology, Arthur Texas. of Weinberg, Texas Seattle, Dr. Regional Rutledge, Courtesy B, of Washington.) Joe Medical Center, Children’s accumulation sphingomyelin. of sphingomyelinase the resultant and are with Ashkenazi Niemann-Pick Tay-Sachs common types disease, disease B A and As in Jews. gene acid preferentially later). the to (discussed genes of gene that as of a for The imprinted maps 11p15.4 of and sphingomyelinase result from the epigenetic the paternal chromosome one maternal chromosome is silencing is expressed

severe In is in A, by characterized accumulates and ceramide deficiency breakdown sphingomyelinase, phosphorylcholine into and in sphingomyelin excess neurons. and phagocytic the a impaired, type sphingomyelin of of cells droplets cytoplasm imparting ( particles lipid, stuffed vacuolation complex the of to a with Macrophages or become fine the or foaminess

Fig. ). 7.10 cytoplasmic resembling lysosomes membranous microscopy shows contain figures, “zebra” that lamellated sometimes called often bodies Electron concentric bodies. secondary engorged myelin liver, spleen, are nodes, lungs. affected lymph marrow, of severely and content organs phagocytic most bone of high the their cells, the Because may splenic be The striking. enlargement in is involved including addition, and spinal inexorable ganglia, the process. entire this CNS, cord the In as lipids. affected of enlarged result accumulation neurons of vacuolated a and are The the This and variant with manifests neurologic severe organomegaly in infancy deterioration. massive 3 the years within usually occurs life. first of Death with the type B By variant, which is associated activity, sphigomyelinase mutant patients residual but organomegaly neurologic with with some manifestations. no have comparison, as for diagnosis suspected the as be in of used sphingomyelinase cases, of detection leukocytes can for Estimation of well activity carriers. Molecular genetic available are centers. at also tests diagnosis for specialized

to and and A A types levels quite common related considered disease (NPC) combined. and the more molecular type C distinct previously type Niemann-Pick Although is B to is than type biochemical be at B and and a for NPC1 related disorder, majority Mutations in responsible two being with give of to NPC2, rise genes, cases. NPC1 this can most storage in defect other Unlike primary results lysosomal from diseases, lipid NPC transport. a as as such well as gangliosides and Affected accumulate GM1 GM2. cholesterol cells are NPC1 of lysosomes free cholesterol the NPC2 the in transport and involved cytoplasm. the from Both to heterogeneous. clinically is NPC form and supranuclear manifests regression. in vertical ataxia, is dystonia, and most The common gaze psychomotor marked palsy, by childhood dysarthria,

and disease results in metabolism, glucocerebroside, the cells. that phagocytic an accumulation Gaucher deficiency of gene enzyme from in mutation leads mononuclear an intermediate encodes the this glucocerebrosidase, glycolipid resultant to the of in There distinct resulting are mutations. recessive allelic from autosomal variants Gaucher disease three of ceramide. activity all Common the residue a of that from glucose glucocerebrosidase cleaves to deficient is the derived of Normally, marrow, particularly senescent and sequentially from blood cells. degrade in glycolipids the macrophages, spleen, liver, breakdown bone the level stops glucocerebrosides, accumulate which in disease, In of at degradation macrophages. Gaucher the presence as cells”—become they ( characterized paper” acquire cytoplasmic “wrinkled cells—the some the µm, because enlarged, diameter pathognomonic 100 tissue a These a of of “Gaucher with so-called and distended lysosomes, as great reaching as appearance

Fig. ). 7.11 just caused the but evident activation by is storage disease of Gaucher by material also of is It now that macrophages. the not burden (TNF), found IL-6) are and levels interleukins High as necrosis factor cytokines, macrophage-derived tumor of affected such (IL-1, in tissues.

Fig. Niemann-Pickdiseaseinliver.ThehepatocytesandKupffercellshaveafoamy,vacuolatedappearanceresultingfromdepositionoflipids. 7.10

of Department Dallas,Texas.) Arthur Southwestern University Texas Pathology, Center, of Weinberg, of Medical Dr. (Courtesy http://ebooksmedicine.net

cases also form, type disease. One 1, Gaucher the nonneuronopathic for of called variant, of accounts 99% chronic lytic 70% in radiographic cases. of (osteopenia, characterized involvement It or 100% lesions, bone osteonecrosis) focal by and to clinical is CNS Additional hepatosplenomegaly features are and involvement. absence the of entire filling massive abdomen. often spleen to the enlarges proportions, The lymph nodes, found the liver, bone in spleen, Gaucher marrow. and are cells skeletal radiographically blood produce erosion lesions, cortical visible replacement and and Marrow peripheral cytopenias. may believed macrophage-derived are changes aforementioned by bone caused cytokines. that the It is with Type Jews; 1 long variants, unlike is most is other in compatible Ashkenazi life. it common variants. signs characterize 3 2 symptoms Neurologic and types and and severe, neuronopathic they these are 3, appear In infancy and in whereas type form) form). emerge 2, later infantile manifestations (chronic neuronopathic more are type (acute milder during including 3 are spleen the Although disturbances, deterioration. dominated neurologic and and also types mental in involved, liver by and features the are 2 progressive clinical convulsions mentioned factor the of important As for is earlier a mutation Parkinson disease. very risk gene glucocerebroside and Patients (compared have mutations of with a with Parkinson Gaucher have of disease risk higher the encoding disease 5–10% Parkinson patients disease 20 to developing in fold controls) glucocerebrosidase. gene

level synuclein. relationship of between alpha enzyme There is and a the this reciprocal the pathogenesis (Chapter involved disease 24). latter of is The in Parkinson detection carriers. and of helpful in level cultured The in the heterozygote of leukocytes glucocerebrosides is fibroblasts in or diagnosis also testing in DNA available is populations. select

Currently, type Gaucher for are there I two disease. approved therapies of therapy infusion first enzyme replacement The recombinant glucocerebrosidase. is via lifelong inhibitor as the of substrate second, oral therapy, intake reduction of The glucosylceramide enzyme synthase. an involves known disease. the of in for defective leads enzyme substrate systemic levels to the Gaucher This reduced glucocerebroside, function. and have sizes, liver enhanced trials therapy reduced Clinical to improved spleen blood reduction substrate leads counts, skeletal and that confirmed hematopoietic emerging Other cells containing transplant treatments enzyme. the stem of gene through therapy include corrected

storage Mucopolysaccharidoses in excessive by and tissues. mucopolysaccharides degradation (MPSs) various of characterized defective are mucopolysaccharides matrix connective the part that synthesized Recall fibroblasts. by are and are tissue of extracellular enzymes. degraded multiple catabolic Most but is lysosome fraction pathway through secreted, certain a involving a within is mucopolysaccharide in resulting variants deficiency described, classified MPS, of this from from numerically pathway. MPS MPS clinical been VII, I to enzyme the have one Several each of specific (in accumulate cases) within mucopolysaccharides keratan chondroitin heparan The the some include dermatan tissues sulfate. sulfate, sulfate, that sulfate, and

and all of Hepatosplenomegaly, arteries, the the brain, features in are heart in deposits, are arterial the deformities, skeletal valves, MPSs. subendothelial that particularly seen lesions in coronary of lesions to lesions of subendothelial many myocardial syndromes, In coronary the ischemia. lead more protracted cardiac of are death. important decompensation Thus, myocardial and infarction causes cases Most are associated

Fig. Gaucherdiseaseinvolvingthebonemarrow.(A)Gauchercellswithabundantlipid-laden“wrinkled”cytoplasm.(B)ElectronmicrographofGauchercellswithelongateddistendedlysosomes. 7.11 Medical of Dr. Matthew of Center,Dallas,Texas.) Texas (Courtesy Southwestern Fries,Department Pathology,University of clouding joint stiffness, retardation. coarse of mental and cornea, features, with the facial of accumulated increased. is Urinary the often excretion mucopolysaccharides of of Hunter disorders mode disease. X-linked autosomal is an recessive is inheritance the the recessive; With these one, syndrome, except exception, all two seven here. recognized the well-characterized are Of only syndromes variants, discussed briefly

caused known type MPS also by as α-L-iduronidase. syndrome, deficiency is of I, a Hurler 6 Hurler often to children In death of is result syndrome, have life a years, cardiac complications. expectancy and a of affected 10 Accumulation heparan the is phagocyte the in sulfate cells system, wall. fibroblasts, endothelium of dermatan muscle cells in seen of and and mononuclear sulfate within of smooth and vascular engorged, within material cytoplasm, and periodic cells resulting have positive the from are accumulation The of lysosomes. affected staining acid–Schiff clear swollen vacuolated for the accounting are retardation. found neurons, for also inclusions in mental Lysosomal

clinical and type syndrome, its course. of or in Hurler syndrome MPS milder II of its corneal mode often from absence (X-linked), inheritance Hunter differs the clouding, accumulated in dermatan As Hunter a this the results in L-iduronate sulfatase. syndrome, from heparan sulfate of but deficiency are sulfate, Hurler syndrome mucopolysaccharides and accumulation an and the Despite degradation either occurs difference enzyme the dermatan both breakdown deficiency, if sulfate of heparan missing, further because identical requires blocked. substrates and α-L-iduronidase is one sulfatase; is of sulfate in is level the made of enzyme leukocytes. Diagnosis in measuring by of not is DNA employed the number mutations. diagnosis of because routinely alellic large

Tay-SachsdiseaseiscausedbyaninabilitytometabolizeGM2gangliosidesbecauseofalackoftheβ subunitoflysosomalhexosaminidase.GM2gangliosidesaccumulateintheCNSandcauseseverementalretardation,blindness,motorweakness,anddeathby2to3yearsofage.

Niemann-PickdiseasetypesAandBarecausedbyadeficiencyofsphingomyelinase.Inthemoresevere,typeAvariant,accumulationofsphingomyelininthenervoussystemresultsinneuronaldamage.Sphingomyelinalsoisstoredinphagocyteswithintheliver,spleen,bonemarrow,andlymphnodes,causingtheirenlargement.IntypeB,neuronaldamageisnotpresent.

Niemann-PickdiseasetypeCiscausedbyadefectincholesteroltransportandresultantaccumulationofcholesterolandgangliosidesinthenervoussystem.Affectedchildrenexhibitataxia,dysarthria,andpsychomotorregression.

Gaucherdiseaseresultsfromlackofthelysosomalenzymeglucocerebrosidaseandaccumulationofglucocerebrosideinmononuclearphagocyticcells.Inthemostcommon,type1variant,affectedphagocytesbecomeenlarged(Gauchercells)andaccumulateinliver,spleen,andbonemarrow,causing hepatosplenomegalyandboneerosion.Types2and3arecharacterizedbyvariableneuronalinvolvement.

•MPSsresultfromaccumulationofmucopolysaccharidesinmanytissuesincludingliver,spleen,heart,bloodvessels,brain,cornea,andjoints.Affectedpatientsinallformshavecoarsefacialfeatures.ManifestationsofHurlersyndromeincludecornealclouding,coronaryarterialandvalvulardeposits,anddeathinchildhood.Huntersyndromeisassociatedwithamilderclinicalcourse.

glycogen some synthesis in or deficiency result of inherited accumulation glycogen of tissues. any one abnormal enzymes involved in various of of the excessive degradation An glycogen form or can in of intracellular vary distribution location, the the The type glycogen deficiency. depending specific on stored, enzyme and tissue cells affected its the of glycogen within Regardless the affected, cells within cytoplasm, of the tissue or the most stored often nuclei. or is sometimes lysosomal is of variant, the localized form a missing is One to storage enzyme lysosomes. Pompe disease, disease, because glycogenoses with is autosomal syndromes. diseases, are as recessive inherited Most enzyme” common as “missing

a Approximately have been with enzyme deficiencies. association of specific glycogenoses dozen forms described in on three be grouped into they findings, categories ( can Based pathophysiologic

Table 7.4

type. Hepatic down free that for into synthesize enzymes break glycogen Liver glucose. storage it also contains and several glycogen to is and ( of to enzymes Hence, failure the of due glucose in storage of major two deficiency effects: associated a glycogen with involved liver enlargement of a production the due metabolism clinical hepatic hypoglycemia

Fig. ). 7.12 important the a resulting lack of from most ( of hepatic Von of the example Gierke I form glycogenosis), (type disease glycogenosis is glucose-6phosphatase,

7.4 Table

type. Myopathic energy. muscle, is striated an of glycogen important source In most forms affect disease of surprisingly, muscles. glycogen Not storage muscles impaired glycogen production. energy due and muscle involved enzymes When storage to is occurs in weakness are glycolysis an in there associated are deficient, that in of a the Typically, glycolysis. by after of cramps an forms to in of marked block glycogen myopathic storage exercise, induce diseases levels exercise are and blood elevation lactate muscle myoglobinuria, failure because myopathic prototype of of glycogenoses. muscle phosphorylase, from is disease a (type resulting V glycogenosis), the McArdle deficiency

and (Pompe a prominent. associated deposition acid is glycogenosis with disease) maltase most Type organ, lysosomal caused is glycogen of virtually deficiency II every is in of but cardiomegaly by cardiorespiratory failure. Most of 2 within affected of die years patients onset reverse longevity. cardiac modestly increase muscle Therapy and missing enzyme (glucosidase) the with damage can

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Inheriteddeficiencyofenzymesinvolvedinglycogenmetabolismcanresultinstorageofnormalorabnormalformsofglycogen,predominantlyinliverormusclesorinalltissues.

Inthehepaticform(vonGierkedisease),livercellsstoreglycogenbecauseofalackofhepaticglucose-6-phosphatase.

Thereareseveralmyopathicforms,includingMcArdledisease,inwhichlackofmusclephosphorylasegivesrisetostorageinskeletalmusclesandcrampsafterexercise.

InPompediseasethereislackoflysosomalacidmaltase,andallorgansareaffected,butheartinvolvementispredominant.

regulate 6, and Chapter genes, two of tumor in normal growth. genes, protooncogenes cell As detailed classes suppressor in the affecting somatic often tumors. these genes, most of pathogenesis in involved are cells, Mutations suppressor genes of in of can be all present body, certain affecting cells mutations approximately are hence the 5% transmitted In however, offspring. and the all to cancers, including germ tumor cells, 10% to topic Chapter These offspring 6. to discussed in detail the mutant a predispose genes greater in hereditary tumors, discussed children in chapter. examples A neoplasms this in of arising are later few familial salient

disorders—so-called environmental disorders”—are Complex by interactions caused “multifactorial polygenic variants and or multigenic genetic between factors. polymorphism. population A a is 1% least variant genetic that in called the of at occurs variant complex each are low multigenic a with when many polymorphisms, modest coinherited. common disorders disease–common penetrance, the and hypothesis, occur effect to According type such • from additional diabetes: 1 important Although of significance. in complex different as vary polymorphisms, collective of disorders emerged studies result complex the facts disorders from have many polymorphisms Two common inheritance few implicated example, 20 of contribute important, than For 6 genes the risk 7 HLA (Chapter to 30 a are alleles 1 type most diabetes, more of 20). in 50% the or and

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 7.12 Asimplifiedschemeofnormalglycogenmetabolismintheliverandskeletalmuscles. (Top) (Middle) Theeffectsofaninheriteddeficiencyofhepaticenzymesinvolvedinglycogenmetabolism. Theconsequencesofageneticdeficiencyintheenzymesthatmetabolizeglycogeninskeletalmuscles. (Bottom)

to are disease-specific. of the others multiple polymorphisms type, same are diseases whereas Some common in well (Chapter is 5). observation This immune-mediated illustrated diseases inflammatory

in expression. of they likely of epigenetic the Many regions noncoding regulation gene affect are disease-associated polymorphisms so

governed color, color, skin and normal intelligence. are inheritance, as phenotypic eye such multigenic color, height, by hair characteristics Several across, trait (also as all [QTLs]) population show groups. characteristics known as a These as variation continuous within, well quantitative loci phenotypic Environmental complex modify expression of traits. influences, the however, significantly complex has many disorder. For a of multigenic the mellitus of type diabetes 2 features example, weight recognized after exhibit gain. first affected that It disease this well clinically is often clinical persons manifestations of obesity, environmental Thus, as diabetic influences, well the trait. unmasks genetic other as to with must disease done this Assigning be inheritance of a caution. mode on on first transmission. familial attribution exclusion of depends many Such the factors mendelian and clustering but modes of and chromosomal reduced may suggestive expressivity disorder, of earlier, levels multigenic range variable single mutant of complex of a severity genes this also but, of account of and as is disease out phenomenon. for a A penetrance pointed mendelian disorders. to these of distinguish multifactorial sometimes is between and difficult Because issues, it

more appreciated. abnormalities generally occur is much frequently Chromosomal than chromosomal approximately in some of estimated is newborn that 200 has infants form It abnormality. 1 spontaneous may not chromosomal in abnormality. that 50% term; as the have fetuses is do first-trimester survive fetus of in many figure a as to much The higher abortions, may result chromosomes. the or chromosomes alterations affect in number sex structure Cytogenetic from or and autosomes of disorders

of review embarking on Before discussion it as aberrations, a appropriate tool of cytogeneticist. is chromosomal to basic the the karyotyping a length. spread order the which representation of is are chromosomes decreasing A photographic stained karyotype metaphase in in of a arranged A techniques chromosomes developed. been variety has staining for of distinctive ( to stain variable possess light of Giemsa can seen be a technique, dark (G set widely pattern the With and chromosome banding) of used widths bands alternating each

Fig. ). 7.13 of to each structural allows later). produce in banding and use banding of can localize The (described techniques enough chromosome, abnormalities large detect pattern identification changes and

= 2n 46). In normal 46 (i.e., is chromosome humans, count the multiple (n) is exact euploid. number the Any haploid of called as Chromosome are 3n 4n polyploid. called and such numbers results a Polyploidy generally spontaneous abortion. in is not of called n multiple is aneuploid. exact an Any number that of to separate sister of second during a meiotic of at chromosomes nondisjunction division. or division chief the chromatids cause homologous pair first the of failure is meiotic The aneuploidy a mitosis to the occur aneuploid somatic two latter The also cells. production in during may cells, leading of also to followed by aneuploidy. of chromosomes can Failure random homologous lag) (anaphase lead of assortment pairing occurs have (n gametes the nondisjunction formed 1) When of either extra (n less time − the chromosome + at chromosome 1). an meiosis, one or would 1). such zygotes: by trisomic, Fertilization extra + of in gametes − or types with result of chromosome gametes two 1), an (2n normal (2n monosomic compatible with with monosomy Monosomy autosome autosomes trisomies whereas involving incompatible life. an chromosomes of involving are certain and life, is sex see, as phenotypic we abnormality. These, of with associated degrees shall variable are describe or Mosaicism the with individual. two cells same of complements presence term is of chromosomes populations in of the more different used a to daughter of trisomic cells a would of then cell; chromosome a descendants and produce the numbers, mosaic. nondisjunction context of mitotic the in monosomic the production result In postzygotic a these would not. later, mosaicism is sex discussed chromosomes mosaicism is affecting As common, autosomal whereas

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 7.13 G-bandedkaryotypefromanormalmale(46,XY).AlsoshownisthebandingpatternoftheX-chromosomewithnomenclatureofarms,regions,bands,andsubbands. Dr. University of of Schwartz, (Karyotype Chicago, of courtesy Chicago, Stuart Illinois.) Department Pathology, 10 q 17 Arm 2 2 1 19 6 3 2 14 3 2 15 2 1 12 Band 20 2211112323456781 13 3 1 7 1 4 18 1 9 1 2 3 3 11 Sub-band X-CHROMOSOME 22 4 2 1 Y 2 5 Region 21 8 X 1 16 3 p

rearrangement in result the from breakage chromosomal material. Structural of chromosomes followed typically changes or loss by in the usually cytogenetic of arm designated long arm. are a short p and which chromosome, petit) q, using shorthand the changes (French, denotes Such a numerically 2, centromere numbered ( arm within then from (1, on) each so the bands 3, ordered and is into region regions divided and Each are outward,

Fig. 7.13 ). long 3, arm, band 2, Thus, chromosome region 4. indicates 2q34 patterns chromosomal after breakage rearrangement of ( The

Fig. transfer of of as part 7.14 another Translocation implies one ) a to are chromosome chromosome. • follows: fragments exchanged two process usually reciprocal are chromosomes). is (i.e., The between by 46,XX,t(2;5)(q31;p14). order—for t the In indicated followed involved genetic chromosomes are example, by numeric in shorthand, translocations and would long 3, notation band band involving chromosome 4. 2 1, This chromosome arm (q) the the reciprocal region of at indicate region 1, translocation a of 5, short arm fragments the resulting When broken balanced are entire the ( translocation reciprocal exchanged,

Fig. the not genetic has material. complement of of carrier, the chromosomes who ) and 7.14 to full normal is the number harmful However, abnormal in formed, gametes resulting gametogenesis, abnormal (unbalanced) during zygotes. are special is pattern two translocation fusion called type, acrocentric centric involving robertsonian, chromosomes A of translocation. or the typically chromosomes. close to breaks of centromere, both the occur The affecting short arms Transfer extremely one chromosome segments leads small ( one to one the and large very of

Fig. ). 7.14 carrier lost, are The chromosomes. and has 45 fragments short the RNA survival. loss compatible acrocentric all such the Because (e.g., redundant ribosomal carry arms genes is of with short genes), highly chromosomes that lead unbalanced during arise to offspring. formation the gametogenesis, could difficulties in resulting abnormal of gametes However,

than centromere horizontally • Isochromosomes vertically. when result rather the divides duplicated, then only resulting arm the chromosome is in of long the arms short two the and two two chromosome or remaining is One of a with lost, arms. arms X i(Xq). and arm births live designated of The present common most long is the the chromosome isochromosome involves in chromosome, occurs genes Xp result monosomy is genes contains for that trisomy on When gamete on X for Xq. and the by a normal fertilization a

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Typesofchromosomalrearrangements. 7.14

a portion of chromosome. of Deletion a loss involves A a may segment. single delete terminal break proximal breaks, segment. may an reunion internal distal Two loss result of of interstitial segments, in with the and and centromere, The genes isolated never survives, almost fragment, a many lacks lost. which thus are

Inversions complete interstitial reunites segment breaks after when and in turnaround. occur a a are two chromosome, the there

deletion. variant of a ring is a chromosome end unite the from segments After loss to the arms of of each form a ring. chromosome,

disorders chromosomes. be (translocations) with excess monosomy), abnormal associated may Chromosomal of absence rearrangements (trisomy), (deletion, or

loss than gain of of general, chromosomal material. a does defects chromosomal In a material produces more severe

part of in translocation). from Robertsonian a may from chromosomal material complete chromosome chromosome in (as (as Excess result or a trisomy)

tolerated of (excess or chromosomes than sex of Imbalances autosomes. loss) better are imbalances similar are much

abnormalities, disorders at sometimes Sex birth. detected subtle often chromosomal not produce Infertility, diagnosed a adolescence. common manifestation, be cannot until

most novo and changes are risk recurrence of (i.e., In normal, result de from chromosomal in is parents cases, disorders low). siblings important later) syndrome this Down exception form exhibits to (described principle. an The translocation of but uncommon

karyotype presented involving in next. of changes Some the examples specific are diseases

abnormalities identified. syndrome chromosome one Three arm 5, deletion results and from (21, 13) autosomal were short (cri which chat syndrome), of deletion and 18, partial the chromosomal first du the trisomies of have as 22q) described. several deletion those More recently, trisomies been affecting additional syndromes and (such features recognition these uncommon, but disorders their Most should clinical permit quite of ready are (

Fig. 7.15

merit 22q11.2 Only frequency sufficient and with trisomy further consideration. to occur deletions 21

most chromosome genes on the copy common Down of 21, is disorders. extra chromosomal characterized by syndrome, of the trisomy persons 21, 95% affected 47. count is About of their chromosome have so meiotic and nondisjunction. of cause of is trisomy, As common mentioned earlier, the therefore most Down syndrome, all such respects. children parents are of normal in The has strong of incidence on Maternal age Down the a influence syndrome. in in women live women with 1 45 contrast occurs years. in younger years, 1 births 20 than in in live 25 in 1550 It older births than http://ebooksmedicine.net correlation The maternal with age suggests

type: 13 TRISOMY Incidence: facial 700 Cleft 13: palate Cardiac Mental 21: Mosaic 46,XX/47,XX, type: defects type: profile 8000 mental Karyotypes: 1 Mosaic type: Renal +13 retardation toe neck heart in 21 Trisomy Renal SYNDROME and 18 Intestinal births and TRISOMY skin Gap TRISOMY defects defects heart 46,XX/47,XX, hernia Incidence: births hernia folds retardation leukemia SYNDROME Polydactyly 47,XX, Congenital +18 retardation Rocker-bottom between +13 and Short in Overlapping PATAU 47,XX, crease Trisomy Limited Mosaic to neck Umbilical occiput ears Translocation Mental EDWARDS abduction lip Karyotypes: DOWN 46,XX/47,XX, births Low and feet Abundant 46,XX,der(14;21)(q10;q10),+21 1 defects +18 47,XX, 15,000 Microcephaly Predisposition Micrognathia type: SYNDROME type: Incidence: Microphthalmia Congenital malformations hip in flat Umbilical type: +21 46,XX,+13,der(13;14)(q10;q10) +21 stenosis feet fingers Trisomy second type: Karyotypes: Prominent 18: 1 first Rocker-bottom Hypotonia Epicanthic set Translocation Simian

Fig. Clinicalfeaturesandkaryotypesofthethreemostcommonautosomaltrisomies. 7.15

cases 21 of most occurs http://ebooksmedicine.net in meiotic in the nondisjunction that ovum. the chromosome of is origin. maternal of 95% in cases extra Indeed, chromosome the of the ovum to susceptibility reason aging nondisjunction increased The the for fully understood. is with not effect age from those of derived has cases paternal in father. which is the found No the extra in chromosome been

of 21 chromosomal 14. or present as 4% chromosome 21, In is about to material all 22 chromosome long a of translocation trisomy arm the the patients with extra of cases not typically Robertsonian translocation. a familial, always) is of (but the of carrier one parents, are from is chromosome the frequently a translocated inherited who and Such usually of trisomy 1% cells. 21 46-and of patients a Approximately mosaics, 47-chromosome are mixture having with cases chromosome of nondisjunction of stage during embryogenesis. result from an mitotic 21 These early proportion cases cells. milder, of manifestations and the on such Clinical depending in abnormal variable are

condition—flat and palpebral diagnostic clinical fissures, profile, folds facial epicanthic The oblique ( this features of

Fig. at birth. evident, even 7.15 usually readily )—are 80% have those retardation; a afflicted an to IQ approximately 25 of syndrome severe of Down leading cause 50. mental is of and have with changes some or Down By phenotypic mosaics normal contrast, near-normal intelligence. mild syndrome addition phenotypic clinical to noted, are of features worthy the other mental already and retardation the mention: some abnormalities In

cushion, septal patients 40% of atrioventricular ventricular septal valve heart disease, defects, Approximately endocardial (Chapter atrial most defects of have and including malformations, defects commonly congenital 11). the the deaths are the childhood. early problems a in majority responsible for of Cardiac infancy and bowel, Several esophagus including also congenital malformations, of other are common. the atresias small and

Children have a leukemia. acute risk with tenfold-to 21 increased of trisomy developing twentyfold 12). and acute (Chapter Both leukemias leukemias occur lymphoblastic acute myeloid

Virtually develop trisomy 23). 40 characteristic disease, all brain neuropathologic (Chapter degenerative the disorder changes of a of patients 21 than age with Alzheimer older

to autoimmunity predispose Patients Down demonstrate with serious infections, lungs, abnormal that (Chapter syndrome thyroid responses immune and to them of the particularly 20). functions, reported, the have clear. is cell disturbances been immunologic for several basis T not affecting abnormalities, Although the mainly

21. care these of with all the improved increased trisomy medical Despite persons has of longevity problems, at (up death 60 from Currently is years median 1983). age in the 25 years this disease remains the karyotype elusive. syndrome the Down of known for Although been for molecular basis decades, has with of of partial is have pathogenesis. chromosome 21 Studies trisomy and trisomy chromosome identified region involved of the the models critical humans 21 that human mouse of in on Based of been is clusters, predicted which several biologic implicated. have gene each the pathway, same to participate in studies, these For in folate genes several are metabolism. likely involved CNS in one example, to 16 influence development, group energy the pathway, involved and mitochondrial is are related groups each It of genes Down syndrome. these of is to known how is not can that several elsewhere complexity that reside shut genome. the chromosome of Adding translation that on genes in 21 the miRNA fact down genes is map

syndrome Much diagnosis the being is made in of Down molecular prenatally. progress blood be the Approximately 5% fetus by identified cell total from maternal can polymorphic and genetic is the markers. to in derived of DNA 10% free chromosome dosage By fetal DNA with be genes determined next-generation 21-linked precision. sequencing, great the gene in of can using and of prenatal diagnosis trisomy 21 specific trisomies. (“liquid as as a emerged as well sensitive This method other for has biopsy”) noninvasive by of Currently, amniocentesis. are trisomy such all obtained 21 biopsies cells on cytogenetics by fetal liquid by conventional cases identified confirmed

Deletion Syndrome 22q11.2

interstitial syndrome band 22. long result of 11 that small from The chromosome 22q11.2 deletion of deletion encompasses arm disorders the a a spectrum of on 20). the palate, (Chapter in outflow syndrome abnormalities facial of congenital developmental cell parathyroid hypocalcemia clinical thymic affecting hypoplasia the heart with T 5), delay, impaired of The disease hypoplasia include dysmorphism, (Chapter tracts, this immunity features resulting and believed velocardiofacial Previously, two these to represent DiGeorge features disorders: different syndrome. and clinical syndrome were known is by both are now caused deletion. 22q11.2 that However, it the and in position Variations manifestations. for clinical thought are the be differing the responsible size of deletion to mild immunodeficiency syndrome have and patients said the dysmorphology and with DiGeorge to T pronounced the so-called the and whereas cell features, dominant are When hypocalcemia have syndrome, cardiac defects. velocardiofacial are immunodeficiency patients these 22q11.2 risk deletion at schizophrenia with for high addition are malformations, In and to bipolar patients disorder. that of In estimated approximately develops syndrome. it 25% is schizophrenia with fact, adults this in the 3% 2% to of region childhood-onset individuals with can found schizophrenia. deletions in Conversely, be of for syndrome fully is molecular understood. The basis this not encodes genes. affected 11 of many region The chromosome candidates, is transcription occurrence to TBX1 its DiGeorge the seems these, gene of of syndrome. correlate factor one be loss the a called responsible suspected Among with to because psychiatric to that genes the contribute remain that be other disorders there Clearly to and identified. behavioral are

fluorescence of can this by deletion, (FISH) by of suspected on situ detection be established the in (see typically only be The may diagnosis clinical but grounds condition hybridization

Fig. 7.38B http://ebooksmedicine.net

Downsyndromeisassociatedwithanextracopyofgenesonchromosome21,mostcommonlyduetotrisomy21andlessfrequentlyfromtranslocationofextrachromosomalmaterialfromchromosome21tootherchromosomesorfrommosaicism.

PatientswithDownsyndromehaveseverementalretardation,flatfacialprofile,epicanthicfolds,cardiacmalformations,higherriskofleukemiaandinfections,andprematuredevelopmentofAlzheimerdisease.

Deletionofgenesatchromosomallocus22q11.2givesrisetomalformationsaffectingtheface,heart,thymus,andparathyroids.Theresultingdisordersarerecognizedas(1)DiGeorgesyndrome(thymichypoplasiawithdiminishedT-cellimmunityandparathyroidhypoplasiawithhypocalcemia),and(2)velocardiofacialsyndrome(congenitalheartdiseaseinvolvingoutflowtracts,facialdysmorphism,anddevelopmentaldelay).

ranging chromosomes, to A the 49,XXXXY, compatible karyotypes involving from of are with life. 45,X number abnormal sex even Y and two have identified. with males chromosomes normal phenotypically three Indeed, been autosomes. Such are with karyotypic encountered extreme the deviations not to this relates In carried factors: chromosomes Y part, two X large latitude by chromosome. amount lyonization of and the small information the genetic of X that genetically only who in lyonization of one chromosome consideration 1962 females, The proposed must Mary with active. is in begin Lyon, X occurs in after conception. 16 about days fetal inactivation early life, or maternal the is X the randomly embryo. in each developing of paternal cell inactivated chromosome Either the progeny the in chromosome of all remains the these X Once inactive cells. inactivated, of same 48,XXXX a female so one X only but active and inactivated, X all one has Moreover, is chromosome chromosome. have explains phenomenon phenotypic with males) double why This (compared X chromosome. do on the encoded dose normal females a not attributes of reality The the also other normal an populations: hypothesis Lyon active with are cell X. paternal mosaics, two maternal an females one with explains in containing active X, why involves X encoded The molecular the by gene. basis that inactivation XIST non–coding long a of is RNA it where “coats” X that nucleus, it and the the This is genes non–coding that in chromosome. RNA the chromosome on transcribed retained from silences is is in other one X, the expressed. one be genes chromosome off to allowing allele encoded The X switched XIST active

accurate, hypothesis Lyon essentially been the subsequently Although modified. has somewhat off” X revised, initial “switched on important, are smaller presumption the been that has of as number inactive inactivation. the and 21% Xq, on the a on of Xp, X escape roughly Most (3%) genes genes all syndrome, or observation implications chromosome later. Turner has as monosomic disorders, X discussed for This

male to relate the readily differentiation. chromosomes to information seems only known Y on Y be carried because Extra are tolerated chromosome to the dictates presence X note, whatever of invariably a the male Of phenotype. Y of the the chromosomes, number on (SRY, is differentiation gene region male The Y. of for the the sex-determining chromosome) Y short of located arm

disorders, syndrome, are Turner next aberrations Klinefelter that result and two briefly syndrome of sex from Described chromosomes.

Y hypogonadism at one is there when X defined chromosomes. male more chromosomes two least Klinefelter as develops and or that are syndrome hypogonadism is It males. common cause of in the most karyotype. 47,XXY have a affected Most patients non-disjunction meiosis. sex of results chromosomes karyotype This from during of paternal may either X maternal or chromosome extra origin. The be meiotic parent contribute may the maternal error this to and condition. history either resulting in age irradiation a of in Advanced on 46,XY/47,XXY, including Approximately variations this 15% the 47,XXY/48,XXXY, of and show patients mosaic patterns, theme. clinical 46,XY is a milder line of associated with condition. The in usually a presence mosaics

a is manifestations. range syndrome wide Klinefelter associated of with clinical which the creates and hypogonadism, only have increase in it pubic but body. some elongated bone, an persons patients body habitus a appearance an with the be expressed of most as the In length between soles distinctive may habitus. Also eunuchoid characteristic body is gynecomastia facial, Reduced and body, pubic also hair and are seen. frequently greatest dimension. to cm testes size, in 2 The only in markedly reduced sometimes are are serum lower than elevated. In urinary testosterone normal, gonadotropin testicular the are levels with atrophy, the levels and keeping

rarely persons with syndrome and mosaics fertile, with proportion Only a such the of large presumably 46,XY Klinefelter are cells. are patients sterility sometimes impaired The of extent due the to is azoospermia. spermatogenesis, to total which appear as hyalinization tubules, section. examination tissue structures of Histologic ghostlike shows on related cells result or to either increase apparent hyperplasia contrast, a prominent, of as Leydig are loss By tubules. of an cases, and associated syndrome with deficit no some in impairment is is Klinefelter the mild, may intellectual retardation, be typically degree Although of mental detectable. The X intelligence extra in correlated number with reduction of the is chromosomes. males), Klinefelter times higher is including erythematosus. autoimmune tumors, more breast normal extragonadal as and (seen in diseases commonly systemic disorders, than frequency associated 20 such several a germ-cell with cancer syndrome lupus of

by females, results or primary hypogonadism Turner in X monosomy of http://ebooksmedicine.net chromosome. characterized complete partial of phenotypic from syndrome, short the arm the is in karyotype. in X 57% missing the entire cytogenetic to With patients, chromosome 45,X of methods, routine a be found resulting are diagnosis childhood. the or made early be severely the often birth can and affected, These at in most patients neck infancy) aortic the carrying such lymphedema Turner the clinical 45,X of because third seen valve, of the in lymphatic malformations of feet; channels growth valgus nape associated the stature that (an of distended include the bicuspid to percentile); leading as as webbing Typical of syndrome swelling arms); hands the in hairline; shieldlike horseshoe congenital cubitus neck posterior older and high-arched retardation, features with is abnormally chest children; ( palate; (below of with and the widely variety and spaced kidney, angle nipples; of coarctation a (in low short the increase of aorta

Fig. 7.16 ). in of childhood. death Cardiovascular cause are common most the abnormalities adolescence, affected fail girls In

aorta of Coarctation Broad chest

Streak amenorrhea infertility, ovaries,

Karyotypes: 45,X 3000 46,X,i(Xq) in 46,XXq– 46,XXp– Mosaic type: 1 45,X/46,XX Incidence: chromosome: second Classic: X female 46,X, r(X) Defective births

Fig. ClinicalfeaturesandkaryotypesofTurnersyndrome. 7.16

pubic remain is little the and minimal, hair to infantile, secondary develop development sex appears. characteristics; genitalia breast normal patients Most amenorrhea, into white ovaries shows the follicles. stroma have and transformation of morphologic devoid streaks primary examination of fibrous of subtle information normal, patients defects processing been visual–spatial have in noted. these is status of usually but mental The by Xp. isochromosome autoantibodies in occurs, women with Curiously, especially hypothyroidism caused these as of many clinical hypothyroidism. develop As 50% patients strong In short prompt for primary syndrome. should a combination patients, of Turner adult suspicion and stature amenorrhea diagnosis by karyotyping. established The is

the (one cell mosaics structural chromosome. abnormalities either or of X Turner patients of being 43% with have of Approximately 45,X) are the lines syndrome deletion arm, the The resulting is in short 46,X,i(X) (q10). of long formation the most of an of isochromosome common the arm, to abnormalities The monosomy partial structural produce effect X of is chromosome. of the net associated the of Combinations and mosaicism also deletions occur. responsible syndrome phenotype. heterogeneity karyotypic significant variations the Turner It the for appreciate important is in with is because to associated it almost have are with variants who In or monosomy may mosaics and contrast an may normal with the with appearance those amenorrhea. X, primary patients deletion have only present

of shed The have pathogenesis Turner molecular syndrome some but is begun completely light. to studies understood, not the are chromosomes development essential normal and active earlier, mentioned As X during oogenesis for are ovaries. both of 7 as contain many During normal oocytes. as ovaries million development, fetal The remain. when menarche disappear so 400,000, a numbers oocytes dwindled 10,000 to by menopause fewer occurs gradually mere their than and that have second an the leads by accelerated X to normally ovaries chromosome oocytes, in absence of is fetal syndrome, Turner early 2 embryogenesis, the develop age but In years. of which complete loss therefore, a ovaries). and atrophic sense, fibrous strands, are ovaries devoid “menopause of to the and In occurs follicles reduced menarche,” ova before (streak for must patients the with syndrome development follows on genes somatic Turner growth tissues other reside it chromosome. also of have and required also abnormalities, X Because that normal (nongonadal) stature is Turner the Xp22.33. (SHOX) the phenotype the short gene genes at homeobox in Among involved arm on homologue active of remain chromosomes chromosome. of the the Y This X active in unique the one genes in both short an and is having that is this active normal gene. have both males copies females and of Thus, two Loss rise copy stature. SHOX one to short of gives of the 2% noted otherwise short stature. Indeed, of children 5% are with deletions of normal in to SHOX gene syndrome, and other loss SHOX cannot features explain the deficit of clinical endocrine it such growth Turner as one copy in abnormalities. important of cardiac can Whereas explain malformations X located the Clearly, chromosome other involved. on are also genes several

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Infemales,oneXchromosome,maternalorpaternal,israndomlyinactivatedduringdevelopment(Lyonhypothesis).

InKlinefeltersyndrome,therearetwoormoreXchromosomeswithoneYchromosomeasaresultofnondisjunctionofsexchromosomes.Patientshavetesticularatrophy,sterility,reducedbodyhair,gynecomastia,andeunuchoidbodyhabitus.Itisthemostcommoncauseofmalesterility.

InTurnersyndrome,thereispartialorcompletemonosomyofgenesontheshortarmoftheXchromosome,mostcommonlycausedbytheabsenceofoneXchromosome(45,X)andlesscommonlybymosaicism,orbydeletionsinvolvingtheshortarmoftheXchromosome.Shortstature,webbingoftheneck,cubitusvalgus,cardiovascularmalformations,amenorrhea,lackofsecondarysexcharacteristics,andfibroticovariesaretypicalclinicalfeatures.

diseases single affecting from Three rules of the resulting of genes groups follow inheritance: mutations do not mendelian

Diseases genome the imprinted alteration of with regions associated of

causative three mutation is diseases which of the Fragile nucleotides. in repeating occurs a of long sequence in prototype the syndrome X dystrophy. of diseases examples Huntington trinucleotide myotonic associated disease repeat with are Other mutations and of associated cause are far all mutation This type 40 so discovered diseases, is with changes. known to neurodegenerative about and disorders now In disrupts these each specific its conditions, within three sets of function. of nucleotides gene the amplification of trinucleotide atypical for associated described are of later, features pattern diseases. of repeat responsible unique Certain mutations, of the the inheritance

of mutation Fragile X results syndrome. mental after to Down the and retardation, is the from in a common FMR1 maps gene, cause second Xq27.3 syndrome genetic which most in a 1550 males 1 in It frequency for of females. 8000 has and 1 for method from X syndrome the in karyotypic the of The derives appearance original name the diagnosis. chromosome of its the discontinuity cells chromosome. staining showed in arm constriction in of of a medium the Culturing folate-deficient patient typically or a long X triplet as This repeat discussed of later. has size, supplanted been DNA-based analysis by now method impairment mental of to affected the have retardation, extent Clinically moderate males highly severe variable. is although children It not be diagnosed to unusual symptoms. is initially autism-like with some for mandible, with and large everted large large typical (macroorchidism). a ears, physical phenotype face The includes a long testicles may fragile are abnormalities be always Although quite present these or characteristic not subtle. X syndrome, of distinctive males macroorchidism. in can of be least The abnormality syndrome detected is physical fragile X 90% with only at postpubertal that

X-linked predominantly affects X fragile syndrome males. with As all diseases, Analysis ( X-linked disorders not pedigrees, patterns typically of some several other associated of shows transmission however, recessive with

Fig. ). 7.17 include the These following:

Carrier males. or fragile analysis, a typical symptoms males 20% neurological of by fragile who, childhood. of are the known to manifest not X characteristics carry physical Approximately during pedigree mutation X do harbor but in full-fledged males”) the (also “transmitting males known As these not children. symptomatic detectable as abnormality the a discussed locus molecular below, carrier observed FMR1 mutation at

females. Affected of or impairment the 50% to carrier mild 30% might mutation chromosome women one of with fragile cognitive behavioral From X other on disturbances. features show (see premature failure develop of Approximately reproductive 20% below). features an The X-linked unusual females, in for carrier of recessive albeit is mild, disease. symptoms presence

Anticipation. is as generation, This great-grandsons. each becomes to if mutation fragile whereby transmitted from features worsen clinical with deleterious refers the to phenomenon of it grandsons term his the X successive and increasingly a syndrome as man

related dynamic These been nature the to have the of unusual features mutation. gene to have is in number repeats population, normal of FMR1 repeats. 200 4000 persons whereas In the averaging CGG the the the of around sequence 29, affected small, “full are 200 an repeats. arise of These premutations CGG so-called stage believed to by 52 to through mutations” characterized intermediate premutations. and Carrier have females males CGG both oogenesis female. converted then the the the can and to by of the not daughters spermatogenesis), During full can be be transmitted to of carrier (but premutations sons the further which mutations repeats, amplification affected observations premutations), carrier These are (they mutations). unaffected for provide males full why certain some an (they carrier and explanation females inherit have are

the understood protein mental The be the beginning and fragile (FMRP). basis FMR1 familial relates of product for to syndrome gene, silencing retardation is of X molecular to contains FMR1 The 5′ its CGG repeats untranslated gene region. normal in number 5′ repeats abnormally 230, DNA of trinucleotide exceeds region of gene the the approximately of becomes the methylated. the When entire Methylation FMR1. region the in also extends of the gene, into suppression promoter of upstream resulting transcriptional absence cause is http://ebooksmedicine.net believed of the The to resulting FMRP

Fig. FragileXpedigree.XandYchromosomesareshown.Notethatinthefirstgeneration,allsonsarenormalandallfemalesarecarriers(harborapremutation).Duringoogenesisinthecarrierfemale,premutationexpandstofullmutation;hence,inthenextgeneration,allmaleswhoinherittheXwithfullmutationareaffected.However,only50%offemaleswhoinheritthefullmutationareaffected,andoftenonlymildly. 7.17 on sketch School,Dallas,Texas.) Schneider,Department Pathology,University Medical Nancy (Based Dr. Southwestern original of Texas of courtesy of an phenotypic changes. in normal the the found brain expressed but FMRP are widely testis. tissues, is levels in higher and transported binds that RNA-binding ( to is them from an the is where mRNAs and the specific cytoplasm it transports protein dendrites It the to axons nucleus, and

Fig. ). 7.18 complexes of the of roles critical translation mRNAs It is FMRP–mRNA synaptic in in involved control that the synapses regulating in functions. specific perform X fragile of finely to function underlie The this the coordinated syndrome. “shuttle” absence seems

gene their “gain-offunction.” Although disease premature be a can sixth premutation the of decade. was starting from X age females) toxic cognitive initially premutations This years), that carrying the discovered mild neurodegenerative that different females to of in 50% cause progressive was exhibit 20% and a failure mechanism is (transmitting assumed premutation-carrying and a CGG through the more than disease of 40 have a when in it fragile phenotypically FMR1 approximately innocuous, noted syndrome syndrome ovarian males) males (before (carrier distinct impairment involving syndrome, This as to fragile is parkinsonism. to and by characterized ataxia tremors intention progress may referred and tremor/ataxia, X cerebellar

premutations disease? do cause How gene be continues and FMR1 patients, In instead the silenced being of methylated these to transcribed. in and so CGG-containing FMR1 formed the nucleus are mRNAs “toxic.” form They accumulate intranuclear inclusions. the aggregated In this RNA-binding recruits process proteins. mRNA

Fig. Amodelfortheactionoffamilialmentalretardationprotein(FMRP)inneurons.FMRPplaysacriticalroleinregulatingthetranslationofaxonalproteinsfromboundRNAs.Theselocallyproducedproteins,inturn,playdiverserolesinthemicroenvironmentofthesynapse. 7.18 molecules from insights TrendsBiochemSci28:152, Warren P, 2003.) syndrome: ST: fragile Hin New (Adapted neu-robehavior, X into from to Ribosomes Dendritic DENDRITE Axonal proteins http://ebooksmedicine.net proteins AXON FMRP FMRP-mRNA complex Ribosomes

the proteins leads are cell. Perhaps at toxic these to that sequestration to events of locations abnormal

recognized. As related repeat to trinucleotide noted, earlier are neurodegenerative other expansions many diseases follow: general principles Some

all but the are at are full an disorder. with differs precise mutations of In by the to functions cases, premutations altered gene each repeats, converted which expansion threshold

full X the disease, in such are during converted during spermatogenesis. premutations in expansion as Huntington to fragile occurs Whereas disorders oogenesis, syndrome mutations other

that possibilities be (as in regions divided and broad expansion ( those those any (as range affect the involve syndrome) of can part and into gene, affect Huntington X the fragile that two The regions of in may coding untranslated categories: disease)

Fig. ). 7.19 because of “loss is When suppressed affect noncoding protein function,” (e.g., FMRP). there is synthesis regions, mutations contrast, the rise give mutations misfolded By translated (e.g., to gene disease). proteins of Huntington parts involving CAG encode polyglutamine the involve to the as are primarily gain-offunction” of so-called system. repeats affecting diseases and these Many polyglutamine resultant “toxic tracts, referred that diseases, mutations sometimes nervous cytoplasm feature within of in is aggregates a mis-folded of proteins diseases. such the common Accumulation

Pathologicamplificationoftrinucleotiderepeatscausesloss-of-function(fragileXsyndrome)orgain-of-functionmutations(Huntingtondisease).Mostsuchmutationsproduceneurodegenerativedisorders.

genefunctionandischaracterizedbymentalretardation,macroorchidism,andabnormalfacialfeatures. FragileXsyndromeresultsfromlossofFMR1

gene.Thegenomesofcarriermalesandfemalescontainpremutationswith52to200CGGrepeatsthatcanexpandto4000repeats(fullmutations)duringoogenesis. Inthenormalpopulation,thereareabout29CGGrepeatsintheFMR1

Whenfullmutationsaretransmittedtoprogeny,fragileXsyndromeoccurs.

genebearingpremutationdevelopsinsomemalesandfemales.TheaccumulationofcorrespondingmRNAinthenucleusbindsandsequesterscertainproteinsthatareessentialfornormalneuronalfunctions •FragileXtremor/ataxiaresultingfromexpressionofaFMR1

phosphorylation. genes oxidative involved encode that enzymes several contain in Mitochondria from maternal DNA DNA associated mitochondrial is differs in that of Inheritance that with nuclear former of inheritance. the if this for contain contain reason complement ova mitochondria. within spermatozoa few, their abundant cytoplasm, any, is mitochondria peculiarity The the normal whereas that of of the from DNA ovum. therefore derived The the entirely mitochondrial is zygote and transmit both Thus, female. male mothers their genes only offspring, to mitochondrial

caused Diseases by are mutations mitochondrial rare. genes in cardiac liver, such skeletal oxidative oxidative kidney). phosphorylation genes phosphorylation, organs affect muscle, involved and in mitochondrial Because DNA in muscle, mutations encodes by most diseases caused (CNS, dependent on enzymes in group. the this prototypical optic is disorder Leber hereditary neuropathy bilateral blindness. loss in course This to due disease that manifests central leads vision as of progressive neurodegenerative

DiseasesCausedbyAlterationsofImprintedRegions:Prader-WilliandAngelmanSyndromes

on maternal humans chromosome of and paternal two sex in carried inherit males), the (except, gene each copies chromosomes. of genes course, homologous All between that genes homologous derived the and mother normal no It assumed long from was the there difference father. was genes. Indeed, is true most this for has however, It paternal some of maternal between copies functional established, been that the genes. the and differences exist arise paternal during imprinting, differentially epigenetic an and genes whereby “inactivated” called homologous The from differences maternal genomic process are certain

Fig. 7.19 Sitesofexpansionandtheaffectedsequenceinselecteddiseasescausedbynucleotiderepeatmutations.UTR, Untranslatedregion. *Althoughnotstrictlyatrinucleotide-repeatdisease,progressivemyoclonusepilepsyiscaused,likeothersinthisgroup,byaheritableDNAexpansion.Theexpandedsegmentisinthepromoterregionofthegene.

http://ebooksmedicine.net gametogenesis. paternal maternal implies paternal Thus, transcriptional of inactivated. that allele imprinting maternal refers the to is silencing allele, whereas the imprinting is imprinting molecular promoter, of related such as modification At the gene to gene. silence total associated effect proteins, events well as of with the sum of histone is the as level, the methylation DNA-binding which and all stably sperm ova is zygote. transmitted or occurs in derived then Imprinting somatic the to cells from

Prader-Willi considering Genomic syndrome best genetic by uncommon and illustrated disorders, imprinting syndrome. Angelman is two

retardation, Mental hypogonadism syndrome. obesity, small feet, hypotonia, stature, and and Prader-Willi short hands characterize be interstitial of of deletion cases, band chromosome In arm long an 15—del(15)(q11;q13)—can detected. 75% 60% q12 in of to the the patients same analysis many deletions without shows cytogenetic In within detectable FISH smaller region. abnormality, a is the that striking affects It 15. chromosome all derived in paternally deletion the cases, are of In a patients chromosomal with Prader-Willi Angelman syndrome, the mothers. to contrast region with from syndrome deletion phenotypically born the their distinct same derived they with with syndrome Angelman but also retarded, seizures, are and present in inappropriate mentally gait, addition ataxic Patients laughter. happy and the syndrome Because the laughter this has puppet been called of syndrome. ataxia, “parent-oforigin” syndromes effects function. clearly on the comparison A two of demonstrates gene these within of expressed the be were would resulting the and regardless to all clinical 15. maternal identical of in origin If from features fashion, these chromosome chromosome parental contained genes expected an 15 paternal deletions identical be

imprinting be two the The understood context of molecular these syndromes basis of can ( in

Fig. 7.20 ). so chromosome the functional silenced), maternal only hence provides imprinted A of chromosome 15q12 on genes set alleles. is paternal (and the at the syndrome. the deletion When result these (in chromosome), paternal of lost as Prader-Willi a are the patient develops a set RNA nucleolar are of deleted the culprit small in messenger a most syndrome, genes is in Among which encoding be gene involved the cluster believed processing. Prader-Willi to that multiple (snoRNAs), are RNAs likely distinct thepaternalchromosome. region 15 to same gene, chromosome a of isimprinted also Conversely, that UBE3A, the on maps distinct proteins ligase, targets degradation for other a proteasomal (Chapter UBE3A a family cellular through of encodes moieties. ubiquitin 1) that for ubiquitin addition of enzymes the of normally allele the Only the is gene active. derived maternally this chromosome of to rise Deletion syndrome. the 15 gives Angelman maternal on gene The of brain. expression Angelman manifestations a in of lack neurologic UBE3A principally regions of the of are specific because

the studies of mother. chromosome shown normal the of normal with have in of that copies some cases, are Molecular from cytogenetically structurally patients syndrome both derived 15 Prader-Willi both parent disomy. one uniparental called Inheritance of pair is from a of chromosomes patient the effect functional genes the (i.e., have 15). the paternal not of same chromosome does net is [nonimprinted] from The a set disomy result paternal Angelman chromosome as can be syndrome, uniparental of expected, also 15. from might

of deletion Site

deletion Site Angelman Imprinted Active Angelman gene of gene

Fig. 7.20 GeneticsofAngelmanandPrader-Willisyndromes.

http://ebooksmedicine.net •Imprintinginvolvestranscriptionalsilencingofthepaternalormaternalcopiesofcertaingenesduringgametogenesis.Forsuchgenesonlyonefunctionalcopyexistsintheindividual.Lossofthefunctionalallele(notimprinted)bydeletionsgivesrisetodiseases.

illustrated examples, As mentioned of childhood are and several of infancy and as diseases genetic many by earlier origin. the although either Others, pediatric merit not population children diseases. unique this distinctive take to forms in genetic, thus and or designation patient are of During to infants ( different prey development, a are somewhat diseases each and group stage children of

7.5 Table ). year the diseases pose of risk (i.e., highest life) of of in first death. Clearly, the infancy time. is life) the phase, unquestionably the most this weeks first (the of neonatal period During 4 hazardous

first the of the infant year considerably. the life, outlook survives After brightens 1 the is cause years accidents it of between of resulting to from injuries 14 sobering that and death. However, note are leading year age, in all Not listed conditions

only Table are 7.5 few this that in here. described chapter; considered a are are select common most of tumors few neoplasms. between differences children described, are disease are general Although of pediatric and to and discussed adult specific highlight principles elsewhere, neoplastic a tumors the

7.5 of Age Table Death by Causes

Prader-Willisyndromeresultsfromdeletionofpaternalchromosomalregion15q12andischaracterizedbymentalretardation,shortstature,hypotonia,obesity,andhypogonadism.

Angelmansyndromeresultsfromdeletionofmaternalchromosomalregion15q12andischaracterizedbymentalretardation,ataxia,seizures,andinappropriatelaughter.

that clinically not some, Congenital years anomalies and apparent although cardiac are are defects present anomalies, birth, may as later. defects at until renal such structural become will or congenital ensuing discussion, term does evident the imply As genetic be basis. not from the a exclude birth in 120,000 with 33. a estimated of 1 It born in babies is year are States, that United incidence about an the each defect indicated in As

Table infant important an anomalies 7.5 cause of , congenital mortality. are continue disability, of early to source a the significant and illness, life. throughout Moreover, they of be death years

terms define to it used anomalies, is the the etiology pathogenesis Before and errors essential in of some considering to congenital describe of morphogenesis.

morphogenesis. are Malformations errors of primary • words, is there an intrinsically abnormal In other developmental process. of a than chromosomal single result gene are multifactorial, the Malformations rather or usually defect.

*Causesarelistedindecreasingorderoffrequency.Allcausesandratesarebasedon2008(final)and2009(preliminary)data.

†Ratesareexpressedper100,000populationfromallcauseswithineachagegroup.

‡Excludescongenitalheartdisease.Datasource:CentersforDiseaseControlandPrevention/NCHS,NationalVitalStatisticsSystem:mortality,2014.

http://ebooksmedicine.net www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/dvs/lcwk1_2014.pdf

Fig. 7.21 Examplesofmalformations.Malformationscanrangeinseverityfromtheincidentaltothelethal.(A)Polydactyly(oneormoreextradigits)andsyndactyly(fusionofdigits)havelittlefunctionalconsequencewhentheyoccurinisolation.(B)Similarly,cleftlip,withorwithoutassociatedcleftpalate,iscompatiblewithlifewhenitoccursasanisolatedanomaly;inthiscase,however,thechildhadanunderlyingmalformationsyndrome(trisomy13)andexpiredbecauseofseverecardiacdefects.(C)Stillbirthassociatedwithalethalmalformation,inwhichthemidfacestructuresarefusedorill-formed;inalmostallcases,thisdegreeofexternaldysmorphogenesisisassociatedwithsevereinternalanomaliessuchasmaldevelopmentofthebrainandcardiacdefects. and Dr. Dallas,Texas. Texas of Courtesy (A of Quinton, University Department Pathology, C, Reade Medical Southwestern of Center, Rogers, Texas Southwestern of Department Beverly of of Pathology,University Medical Center,Dallas,Texas.) Courtesy Dr. B,

manifest of They any in patterns. several may may be whereas others, heart involving single ( malformations and may such multiple as diseases, body tissues many congenital coexist involved, organs systems in some presentations, In

Fig. was region extrinsic • in from Disruptions with morphogenesis. or contrast development; result normal disruptions an 7.21 malformations, disturbance body secondary an that arise organ of in thus, in previously destruction from fetus, with to from that of formation stemming or rupture classic “bands” a developing parts of of the compress, Amniotic resultant constitute attach the amnion example bands, disruption ( encircle, of

Fig. ). 7.22 agents later). cause environmental variety (see may disruptions of A subsequent Disruptions are course, not recurrence of heritable, in are of and with not risk associated pregnancies. thus

disruptions, extrinsic like rather also intrinsic represent an of an than morphogenesis. error Deformations, of development disturbance affecting infants 2% approximately to degrees. are various of Deformations newborn common, fetus generalized caused of a compression localized variety leading of biomechanical by abnormalities. or to structural the abnormal eventually They growing are forces, by most cause of constraint. is common uterine deformations The amniotic fetus also (which of uterus, increase decreases. of cushion) size in as of amount the normally a and fluid 35 gestation, acts and the outpaces of growth the weeks Between relative the rapid 38 the uterine fetus subjected degree of normal constraint. Thus, some the even to is of several fetus, small However, (bicornuate) variables the increase likelihood uterus, and of maternal pregnancy, including uterus, first leiomyomas. excessive conditions malformed such the compression as be as fetus, fetuses, also the of involved. abnormal and fetal oligohydramnios, presence relating to presentation, may multiple such Causes

single multiple of secondary that in aberration a organogenesis. localized refers anomalies from result to congenital effects Sequence The be a or initiating event malformation, deformation, disruption. may excellent oligohydramnios example the An (or sequence is Potter) (

Fig. ). 7.23A variety urine fluid). of uteroplacental by including of insufficiency constituent the maternal amniotic placental, amnion; caused Oligohydramnios in (decreased abnormalities, from fluid) a resulting of fluid fetal severe rupture or renal amniotic chronic a major fetal hypertension be is maternal, amniotic agenesis (because toxemia; of or leakage and fetus of may because the in ( oligohydramnios in consisting the abnormalities hands the compression The turn positional feet newborn and of infant faces flattened a fetal results associated classic with of in and phenotype

Fig. 7.23B ). be dislocated. The may hips wall that an the Growth sometimes is and compromised, lungs of such chest the to extent also

Fig. 7.22 Disruptionduetoamnioticbands.Inthespecimenshown,theplacentaisattheright,andthebandofamnionextendsfromthetopportionoftheamnioticsactoencirclethelegofthefetus. of Massachusetts.) (Courtesy Boston, Children’s Dr.Theonia Boyd, of Hospital Boston, http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. (A)Pathogenesisoftheoligohydramnios(Potter)sequence. 7.23

multifactorial can genetic, malformations of and three causes errors into major human environmental, ( grouped in categories: Known be

Table 7.6 ). identified almost cases. half of The has not the been for reported cause

mechanisms of previously the disease. all malformations discussed of Genetic of include causes genetic Virtually all with associated malformations. are syndromes chromosomal congenital trisomies, Klinefelter and syndrome Down syndrome. Turner syndrome, other are Examples and arise hence during and not familial. disorders Most chromosomal gametogenesis are Single-gene characterized underlie inheritance, major may malformations. by mutations, mendelian holoprosencephaly common most midface forebrain of 23). developmental the For defect in is the humans example, and (see Chapter pathway plays within are recurrent reported individual critical a the holoprosencephaly. and The with of Hedgehog of structures, families signaling these morphogenesis components a history pathway in in role this mutations of loss-of-function

this malformations may context, cause drugs, such viral and (the which of to was Environmental technically, influences, the these infections, used “malformation” radiation appellation is disruptions). anomalies pregnancy, fetal because represent as during loosely in exposed mother infections viral listed Among the in

major a was rubella , Table 7.6

Congenital Humans Table of 7.6 Malformations Causes (B)Infantwitholigohydramnios(Potter)sequence.Noteflattenedfacialfeaturesanddeformedfoot(talipesequinovarus). in

is possible. survival not syndrome. these may event and not for If a malformation connection between initiating be defects is the the mistaken a sequence embryologic recognized,

several Malformation the error syndrome the explained of of single localizing on morphogenesis. in cannot to defects initiating refers a presence basis that be Syndromes chromosomal (e.g., a condition single that viral specific abnormality) from causative simultaneously affects tissues. or infection most arise a several often

In malformations. to to general global definitions, applied addition some organ-specific terms these are its whereas respectively. incomplete underdevelopment, organ hypoplasia or complete and anlage, indicate to development Agenesis of the aplasia and absence an refers such visceral ducts. an organ as or of a hollow of duct and intestines bile absence usually opening, the describes Atresia

related *Livebirths.DatafromStevensonRE,HallJG,GoodmanRM,editors:Human malformations and anomalies, NewYork,1993,OxfordUniversityPress,p115.

and early http://ebooksmedicine.net centuries. 20th scourge of 19th the eliminated result rubella maternal developed embryopathy been a resultant virtually and the Fortunately, of vaccination. rubella countries in as have Virus Zika central with system. give nervous severe maternal to rise As malformations mentioned of the later, can infection suspected variety than these A are teratogenic, and of congenital but 1% perhaps agents. been drugs less have of be by chemicals malformations to caused and of alcohol, list treatment acne. in used The thalidomide, which anti-coagulant), includes the (oral anticonvulsants, warfarin 13-cisretinoic is severe acid, as thalidomide, to a incidence of currently of limb (50% 80%) used certain for high extremely formerly used treatment tranquilizer malformations. Europe For cancers, example, an in and causes an is used environmental perhaps important agent Alcohol, today, teratogen. most the widely (microcephaly, prenatal palpebral born who short hypoplasia), psychomotor Infants disturbances. fissures, postnatal and and growth alcohol of retardation, maxillary abuse show mothers facial anomalies fetal designated These syndrome. are in combination alcohol the features a and a incidence demonstrated and who often been a have spontaneous not be low teratogen, to sudden abortions, be has is smoke placental smokers, babies weight to among may of Although convincingly mothers and cigarette abnormalities infant high born death labor, the prone syndrome to there smoke–derived pregnant birth nicotine premature (SIDS). is pregnancy. In of it these nicotine altogether to findings, light best avoid exposure during in listed conditions maternal Among

the mothers reported stands and despite 10% incidence major most series. common antenatal 7.6, 6% diabetes glucose of is malformations in infants control, of entity, in monitoring Table advances and in between a obstetric and diabetic mellitus seen mass); fetal results CNS body some are in neural anomalies, (organomegaly fat cardiac muscle anomalies diabetic and hyperinsulinemia of macrosomia major defects, in embryopathy. Maternal the tube fetal malformations other and hyperglycemia–induced increased and

congenital environmental two malformations. genes of with interaction implies Multifactorial is small the genetic more or the which most common inheritance, of cause of effect, influences and category and relatively lip in such are some defects. palate tube as Included cleft malformations this common neural defects of incidence acid dramatic by contributions importance the of in underscored diet. is of inheritance the environmental neural tube multifactorial the by The to intake periconceptional folic in reduction multifactorial are mode described The disorders of chapter. risks of this recurrence transmission and in earlier

pathogenesis general poorly and etiologic but two relevant is of 1. anomalies regardless are the congenital of principles The complex agent: still understood, impact occurrence the timing and has teratogenic the of produced. important on anomaly type an insult the The of prenatal

can at pregnancy, divided terminating The (2) humans of and the be period, fetal (1) birth. the period, weeks embryonic of development phases: two occupying the intrauterine first 9 into

enough few the agent period cells, cells developing weeks a or the early to In to 3 allowing presumably and an (first after damages cause defects. only embryonic injurious embryo without recover fertilization), either abortion death weeks, the the the is with to the sensitivity fourth fifth between Between and third susceptible and the teratogenesis, peak embryo ninth occurring the extremely weeks. During period the germ-cell of being layers. are crafted organs this out

and marked chiefly by greatly that period the with agents. The reduced fetal susceptibility of organs, teratogenic organogenesis is follows further growth to maturation the susceptible Instead, injury the to or already formed retardation to organs. fetus growth is given to possible produce different occurs gestation. It agent anomalies at is of times a different for therefore exposure if

2. intrinsic that caused environmental complex The environmental be often recapitulated genetic dysmorphogenesis exemplified in defects these fact teratogens. the defects targeted features is pathways interplay by between teratogens insults by and genetic of by can the by Some examples representative follow:

a teratogen. Cyclopamine is plant of lambs (single to on the plants the abnormalities cyclopamine). sheep including craniofacial holoprosencephaly fused eye—hence moniker have origin feed that cyclopamine give birth that containing severe cyclopia and Pregnant the is in genes This Hedgehog subsets with in Hedgehog inhibitor stated mutations and, an signaling of present as compound are embryo, of previously, of holoprosencephaly. fetuses

teratogen. acid recognized anti-epileptic Valproic a is an and of known transcription a (HOX) factors conserved critical expression as family of Valproic homeobox proteins. disrupts highly acid developmentally In structures. have proteins vertebrates, of implicated HOX in vertebrae, limbs, and patterning the been craniofacial observed that the congenital surprisingly, gene responsible features acid mimic HOX embryopathy. for are in in Not valproic anomalies mutations family

(see constellation A systems, results deficiency its malformations during the essential system, system, development absence and in cardiovascular affecting 8 of period). for all-trans-retinoic differentiation, • genitourinary for vitamin vitamin embryogenesis The is derivative organ lungs and the multiple normal acid including (retinol) A postnatal a diaphragm, in eyes, and Chapter to excessive teratogenic. Conversely, is also acid exposure retinoic severe craniofacial palate. mothers a Infants (retinoic and embryopathy), for acid treated CNS, such phenotype cleft retinoic and lip to including acne predictable defects, have cardiac, with acid born cleft as which growth (TGF-β) entity acid–mediated transforming deregulation is palatogenesis. last signaling in from factor-β stem The components pathway, involved of of may retinoic the gene again cleft pathways develop illustrating once of Mice the with palate, TGFB3 causation relationship signaling functional between in anomalies. uniformly of exposure teratogenic knockout the and the congenital

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Congenitalanomaliesresultfromintrinsicabnormalities(malformations)aswellasextrinsicdisturbances(deformations,disruptions).

Congenitalanomaliescanresultfromgenetic(chromosomalabnormalities,genemutations),environmental(infections,drugs,alcohol),andmultifactorialcauses.

Thetimingoftheinuteroinsulthasprofoundinfluenceontheextentofcongenitalanomalies,withearliereventsusuallyhavinggreaterimpact.

Theinterplaybetweengeneticandenvironmentalcausesofanomaliesisemphasizedbythefactthatteratogensoftentargetsignalingpathwaysinwhichmutationshavebeenreportedasacauseforthesameanomalies.

transcervically acquired infections). may or the (ascending fetus (hematologic transplacentally infections) be and neonate Infections of

caused birth. ascending, microbes spread or canal infections during the utero of Transcervical, and are cervicovaginal by be may in from acquired or few viral acquired in and simplex) are a bacterial infections streptococcal Most this (e.g., (e.g., α-hemolytic infections manner. infection) herpes amniotic an the general, acquires birth into infected delivery. “inhaling” passing fetus the or canal during fluid lungs infection by In the infected by through inflammation associated placental inflammation membranes of with and (chorioamnionitis) Fetal the umbilical the cord is (funisitis). of usually infection sepsis This for cases, is meningitis. and, mode typical and severe in spread of pneumonia

infections any occasionally, delivery fetal or and as virus, be may with gestation during via transfusion. at via chorionic crossing the at gain the hepatitis the occur bloodstream to placenta villi, case may of the maternal-to-fetal the by human immunodeficiency Transplacental time time B and access and Listeria infections, a bacterial mode few this Most follow infections toxoplasma, and and Treponema), (e.g., transmission. (i.e., of viral parasitic hematogenous malaria) manifestations clinical these are of gestational the largely The infections depending involved. timing highly microorganism the and variable, on by TORCH. important acronym trans-placental conveniently remembered be the The most can infections microbes of a such as (H), elements virus The of Treponema (T), any rubella are (R), Toxoplasma cytomegalovirus herpesvirus (O) number complex (C), other and pallidum. of TORCH the they evoke may because and are manifestations. clinical similar These together agents pathologic grouped hepatosplenomegaly, the may mental cardiac early sequelae injury and whereas tissue pregnancy including congenital retardation, infections cause TORCH and occurring later inflammation in gestation by in primarily pneumonia, restriction, result child, in accompanied growth myocarditis). cataracts, chronic infections anomalies, (encephalitis, chorioretinitis, in can as with and their by pregnant Zika be microcephaly another devastating to brain More transmitted offspring that has damage. such as virus females recently, emerged agent consequences

less (second defined age common congenital is is than to a 37 only the of neonatal anomalies). and second Prematurity gestational most by cause weeks mortality before be might infants also than gestation born normal completion As of expected, (<2500 weigh gm). less major pregnancy). (chorioamnionitis); include preterm membranes the placental of to infection twin placenta; leading prematurity for of multiple cervix, structural abnormalities membranes; intrauterine and The factors risk premature gestation the (e.g., and rupture inflammation uterus, of of mortality and morbidity period full-term higher infants. have of the Children full born rates completion gestation than before systems The important vulnerable immaturity several to organ complications: makes them preterm in of especially infants

also membrane hyaline called syndrome, disease distress Respiratory

Long-term delay sequelae, including developmental

is weight appropriate it Although after for gestational infants, age. birth low in usually is adjustment preterm many than rather under-grown born of than who immature. 2500 and as weigh therefore less By as gm infants are one-third are at contrast, term (SGA) infants restriction. from small-for-gestationalage These suffer growth fetal many from maternal, the Fetal fetal, growth cause or result placental is abnormalities, may restriction although cases unknown. specific in

abnormalities: the reduce of from nutrients category intrinsically conditions of growth mother. supply of potential an consists Fetal adequate despite This the that fetus such conditions congenital disorders, chromosomal Prominent among and fetal congenital anomalies, infections. are ultrasonographic of detected may documented fetuses many of be as many in Chromosomal in fetal with 66% fetuses as 17% abnormalities and as for as evaluated restriction growth malformations. (see earlier) cause. a group the growth-restricted be should TORCH of infections with considered infection neonates, common all in being Fetal restriction intrinsic (i.e., affects is organ the symmetric to is growth all When the fetal equally). systems causation fetus,

Placental abnormalities: the Placental supply. compromises blood factor any that include uteroplacental causes placental from the placenta placenta or retroplacental previa of a (low the of infarction. include implantation placenta), clot), decidua (separation abruption placental Examples by the is spared growth as With (and is to brain maternal) restriction liver). (i.e., relative the organs such asymmetric placental http://ebooksmedicine.net abnormalities, fetal the visceral

• most category the causes growth by Maternal SGA in factors: common the This infants. comprises deficit of far such Important and (Chapter preeclampsia (“toxemia vascular diseases are chronic as 19) pregnancy”) of examples hypertension. Another the (Chapter 4). thrombophilias) diseases of growth of hypercoagulability in setting is inherited class acquired (i.e., maternal diseases recognized restriction increasingly fetal or of being of the restriction avoidable some (as are maternal smoking heavy involved abuse, pathogenesis the these previously, noted other intake, narcotic of maternal is in but alcohol influences anomalies). with long, are many associated of list growth same causes cigarette also and congenital The conditions fetal of restriction fashion agents. teratogens, the causing phenytoin Drugs as anti-convulsant include nonteratogenic growth (Dilantin), as fetal commonly similar as administered such well in Maternal (in growth. may also affect fetal prolonged particular, malnutrition hypoglycemia)

period, the infant life. the deficits into the Not in perinatal handicapped but growth-restricted adult is childhood and only persist likely and Affected more cerebral visual persons are and (i.e., have hearing) to disabilities, sensory dysfunction, thus impairment. learning

in is condition. newborn observed also of the in most succumb the respiratory distress as common formation air of “membranes” hyaline infants cause the (RDS), in distress this respiratory peripheral who of The syndrome spaces disease membrane because to know of in reported are States. estimated 24,000 the cases United annually An RDS 5000 condition from as Improvements this decreased in insufficiency ago cases management than to have year a yearly. as per many of due decade to fewer 900 respiratory sharply deaths is It primarily a infants. premature of disorder the about mother, Less during coiling blood of secondary sedation neck. head excessive injury umbilical causes common of fetal fluid, the of hypoxia delivery, from intrauterine amniotic compression include aspiration the or and to cord

weeks’ 34 at between gestation, 30% occurs 34 of RDS and 28 born born after about in than weeks’ gestation. weeks’ of 28 those born less gestation, infants to of less 5% than those 60% not section. by though are cesarean diabetes, strong associations maternal and delivery invariable also male gender, There with

of lung in defect sufficient RDS The surfactant. inability to the the is synthesize fundamental immature phospholipids, complex surfactant-associated Surfactant least dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine proteins. at is a two and (lecithin) of principally of groups surface-active gauged occurrence by of in The function of surfactant-associated corresponding of respiratory lung in normal proteins surfactant be by importance with failure the neonates can genes. deficiency severe mutations the caused congenital in keep the reducing synthesized surface type alveoli and coats decreasing surface of first required tension Surfactant thus open. and, pressure pneumocytes breath, the the II alveoli, with newborn’s rapidly the healthy by is to the and in relatively to alveoli a with breath collapse, open deficient tend effort a greater lung each is required surfactant, inspiratory alveoli. In to in. atelectasis tires and from generalized infant sets The rapidly breathing that into eventually membranes epithelial and to endothelial formation damage resulting hypoxia of motion and a The of sequence to the hyaline sets ( leads events

Fig. 7.24 ). modified of later, surfactant is by greatly treatment. deficiency discussed this surfactant picture classical As

regulate surfactant synthesis. Hormones stimulate and proteins. of lipids associated the Corticosteroids surfactant formation increase fetal risk corticosteroid growth RDS. developing the release, conditions which of restriction, stress associated intrauterine and Therefore, lower with the compensatory surfactant diabetic of blood the counteracting levels infants mothers of high can effects in steroids. of suppress synthesis, Conversely, insulin are may diabetic why of at explain, RDS. for risk in infants part, higher This developing mothers cesarean labor known for before Labor may increased risk with accordingly, synthesis; section to performed is associated surfactant be the also onset increase RDS. of

linetherespiratorybronchioles,alveolarducts,andrandomalveoli( membranes hyaline MORPHOLOGYThelungsininfantswithRDSareofnormalsizebutareheavyandrelativelyairless.Theyhaveamottledpurplecolor,andonmicroscopicexaminationthetissueappearssolid,withpoorlydeveloped,generallycollapsed(atelectatic)alveoli.Iftheinfantdieswithinthefirstseveralhoursoflife,onlynecroticcellulardebriswillbepresentintheterminalbronchiolesandalveolarducts.Laterinthecourse,characteristiceosinophilic

).These“membranes”containnecroticepithelialcellsadmixedwithextravasatedplasmaproteins.Thereisaremarkablepaucityofneutrophilicinflammatoryreactionassociatedwiththesemembranes.Thelesionsofhyalinemembranediseaseareneverseeninstillborninfantsorinlive-borninfantswhodiewithinafewhoursofbirth.IftheinfantwithRDSdiesafterseveraldays,evidenceofreparativechanges,includingproliferationoftypeIIpneumocytesandinterstitialfibrosis,isseen. Fig.7.25

clinical the exogenous treatment with was earlier. classic described era of The presentation surfactant before for promptness vary, weight clinical and actual and of RDS therapy. of infant prognosis the the and Currently, maturity the the birth course neonatal depending on maturation maturity of inducing delaying the control reaches lung or fetus. RDS the The by focuses of at-risk on the fetal until by labor prevention, lung either in maturity ability accurately. is to objectives these Critical the to lung assess fetal amniotic Because discharged into are secretions amniotic fluid phospholipids pulmonary of analysis the http://ebooksmedicine.net fluid,

storage, release synthesis, Reduced and surfactant

Fig. Pathophysiologyofrespiratorydistresssyndrome(seetext). 7.24

Fig. 7.25 Hyalinemembranedisease(hematoxylin-eosinstain).Alternatingatelectasisanddilationofthealveolicanbeseen.Notetheeosinophilicthickhyalinemembranesliningthedilatedalveoli.

of level surfactant the of in provides a estimate alveolar good lining. the very exogenous such that acute (born infants before it beneficial, infants has uncommon of birth now at surfactant of RDS. to is proven premature Prophylactic for die weeks’ administration to 28 gestational extremely age)

or begins occur 3 days. uncomplicated recovery to 4 In within cases, In required. affected infants, is oxygen eyes; (also retinopathy complications: dysplasia. bronchopulmonary for of with called however, Use high prolonged oxygen associated ventilator-administered the concentrations prematurity) fibroplasia of is in of and retrolental well-known two periods, ventilation both gentler a significantly result complications less of therapy, as antenatal and are techniques, Fortunately, common now prophylactic surfactant glucocorticoid treatments. are briefly: described Hence they

pathogenesis. of Retinopathy prematurity two-phase has a therapy During growth (VEGF) markedly causing phase (phase apoptosis. proangiogenic is decreased, vascular hyperoxic expression factor of of the the endothelial endothelial I), RDS cell (phase retinal rebound levels the II), hypoxic (neovascularization) relatively in vessel inducing of VEGF ventilation after characteristic air lesions to room the retina. return proliferation

striking (manifested alveolar major in configuration. and abnormality a capillary structures) large, dysmorphic alveolar in a decrease as is septation The dysplasia simplified bronchopulmonary inflammatory factors—hyperoxemia, dysplasia and prematurity, additively to maldevelopment—contribute and hyperventilation, bronchopulmonary Multiple vascular to act cytokines, probably or synergistically injury. promote

complications preterm and among ductus intraventricular most from necrotizing hemorrhage, increased important other recover developing Infants patent RDS also for variety of these with associated birth; arteriosus, are who are a enterocolitis. risk at immature save lives the exquisite of of to surface Thus, bring advances the fragility they with the many although infants neonate. help the RDS, also technologic

NeonatalRDS(hyalinemembranedisease)isadiseaseofprematurity;mostcasesoccurinneonatesbornbefore28weeks’gestationalage.

ThefundamentalabnormalityinRDSisinsufficientpulmonarysurfactant,whichresultsinfailureoflungstoinflateafterbirth.

ThecharacteristicmorphologicpatterninRDSisthepresenceofhyalinemembranes(consistingofnecroticepithelialcellsandplasmaproteins)liningtheairways.

RDScanbeamelioratedbyprophylacticadministrationofsteroids,surfactanttherapy,andbyimprovedventilationtechniques.

Long-termsequelaeassociatedwithRDStherapyincluderetinopathyofprematurityandbronchopulmonarydysplasia;theincidenceofbothcomplicationshasdecreasedwithimprovementsinmanagementofRDS.

most incidence infants, disease to Necrotizing commonly being inversely age. the with premature in occurs of the (NEC) gestational the enterocolitis proportional 10 gm). 1 (<1500 very-low-birth-weight occurs of infants http://ebooksmedicine.net in It approximately the feeding, motion most postnatal as associated tissue addition of In suggesting in insult (such cascade to culminating with are prematurity, introduction in bacteria) cases sets that enteral the destruction. some the in no role NEC likely bacterial single infectious Although pathogen pathogenesis, a linked agents has to play to disease. are been number inflammatory NEC. with of pathogenesis associated of mediators been large have A promoting fuel tight by to One mucosal has intercellular platelet-activating apoptosis mediator, compromising thereby implicated in junctions, “adding been enterocyte the permeability particular factor, increasing and fire.”

part colon, typically the and terminal ileum, intestine involved. or of right small large NEC cecum, may involves the be any although and involved ( friable, The segment distended, is typically congested

Fig. be or seen. 7.26 with accompanying peritonitis it be can intestinal may perforation frankly gangrenous; ), gas bubbles with colonization, all transmural bacterial submucosal are associated microscopic ulceration, coagulative mucosal features On NEC. examination, or and necrosis, tissue may seen as resolution fibrosis, be the after shortly changes, granulation of and such of acute episode. reparative Evidence

The abdominal distention, with clinical of collapse. and stools, onset course development circulatory is typical, the fairly bloody of the intestinal wall often gas demonstrate intestinalis). within radiographs (pneumatosis Abdominal segments 60%) conservatively, but (20% often many managed be bowel. early, operative When require detected the including cases of resection can NEC to necrotic intervention of perinatal often healing who with survive develop process. fibrosis mortality; associated high NEC infants by the is strictures caused from post-NEC

the “the sudden performance a to case of many an Institute of death SIDS It an is which as including under According 1 are of death biochemical of complete at year Human thorough have emphasize remains clinical the cases is or in to National sudden autopsy, basis of infant review autopsy to unexplained examination history.” age scene, after and Child defined a of Development, important of found death anatomic Health ( and infancy the investigation, that

); be not (SUID). as as labeled sudden these death infant Table rather SIDS, should 7.7 unexpected but for the cases approximately SUID half of SIDS Control in Centers estimates the and Disease States. United of Prevention The accounts for that aspect the not dies of the infant is stressed is and that cot asleep—hence terms lay usually definition An in crib death death. while the that SIDS death 1 and anomalies congenital the prematurity third cause 1 of of in SIDS low leading between weight. month the is after of and and ages cause year overall age of leading birth and this group, infants, in diseases U.S. the death 2 ages cases, the between months; the of infant 90% are most In than and 6 of is months. 4 younger with excluded associated in be is sibling traumatic circumstances. recurrence; child of under fivefold a relative risk SIDS these must earlier an abuse carefully

a is with case. condition, SIDS mixture contributing multifactorial given a causes of in or a one control, Three proposed: critical have stressors. (2) vulnerable (3) interacting a exogenous infant, period developmental variables (1) and more in been homeostatic factors the infant to this to vulnerable According sudden model, several make

Fig. Necrotizingenterocolitis.(A)Atpostmortemexaminationinaseverecase,theentiresmallbowelwasmarkedlydistendedandperilouslythin(usuallythisappearanceimpliesimpendingperforation). 7.26 (B)Thecongestedportionoftheileumcorrespondstoareasofhemorrhagicinfarctionandtransmuralnecrosis.Submucosalgasbubbles(pneumatosisintestinalis)canbeseeninseveralareas(arrows).

http://ebooksmedicine.net

With Associated (SIDS) Infant Death Syndrome Sudden Factors 7.7 Table

Drugabuseineither parent,specificallypaternalmarijuanaandmaternalopiate,cocaineuse

Brainstemabnormalities,associatedwithdelayeddevelopmentofarousalandcardiorespiratorycontrol

mutations) respiratory drive, and reflexes. Fattyacidoxidationdisorders(MCAD,LCHAD,SCHAD blood as pressure, upper airway the SIDS Abnormalities brain infants. serotonin-dependent signaling for in in be some underlying the in stem basis may

sleeping the most are important soft factors risk causes, thermal for the sleeping SIDS. surfaces, potential modifiable environmental stress position, prone Among and possibly on prone in in to healthy Many sleep. their of infants Pediatrics on position, risk American them who Academy have increased studies placing for SIDS clearly recommend backs a infants sleep prompting down laying shown to the when substantial in in Sleep” resulted since to SIDS-related This decreases deaths campaign in its 1994. “Back has inception the infant’s more The stress) or position thermal vulnerability sleep. (hypoxia, and recognized during stimuli hypercarbia, to prone increases one noxious In with arousal position. compared associated prone with supine the decreased addition, also responsiveness the is position

cause death in unexpected the is Of only sudden SIDS infancy. of not note, careful Therefore, a of is the death scene and requiring examination a of complete diagnosis SIDS examination. postmortem exclusion, cause show unsuspected babies 20% sudden ( death of latter an The many more SIDS to as can died as presumed of have or in of

). 7.7 Table the Infections bronchopneumonia) anomaly. viral myocarditis common (e.g., are causes or SUID, congenital followed a by of most a As SUID in have several molecular emerged. of genetic causes diagnostics, result advancements of 5% dehydrogenase characterized disorders, oxidation enzymes, most is a in medium-chain fatty many common. defects fatty responsible deficiency may in acid as the of these, example, for A in sudden mitochondrial deaths oxidative acid of infancy; For as acylcoenzyme be by more also in cardiac result sudden these for intervals; and QT Retrospective originally in infant a SUIDs. of no characterized account potassium form designated death by sodium have revealed SIDS cardiac 1% analyses than cases channels, mutations of of arrhythmia of prolonged cases which

short-chain3-hydroxyacylcoenzymeAdehydrogenase;MTCYB, long-chain3-hydroxyacylcoenzymeAdehydrogenase;SCHAD, complementcomponent4. exclusion.Therefore, of Sodiumchannel,voltage-gated,typeV,alphapolypeptide;KCNQ1, potassiumvoltage-gatedchannel,KQT-likesubfamily,member1;MCAD, C4b)*SIDSisnottheonlycauseofSUIDs,butratherisadiagnosis medium-chainacylcoenzymeAdehydrogenase;LCHAD, mitochondrialcytochromeb;C4, performanceofanautopsymayoftenshowfindingsthatwouldexplainthecauseofanSUID.Thesecasesshouldnot,strictlyspeaking,belabeledas“SIDS.”SCN5A,

period during month 1 to death developmental year). critical (i.e., the 1 the stressor infant, specific may exogenous the be the are to vulnerability factors the ( whereas or to attributable parents stressors or These environment

Table ). 7.7 reflects infant, proposed to cardiorespiratory arousal SIDS numerous delayed of is a compelling a for factors have development been hypothesis that account the Although control. vulnerable and most as encountered body’s brain hypercarbia, critical stress stimuli response the “arousal” and stem episodic medulla hypoxia, to and, role sleep. thermal particular, a during in The oblongata such play in the noxious regulation such as of system of medulla implicated the these responses well serotonergic as in critical The “arousal” homeostatic functions (5-HT) other is

of the petechiae nucleus arethemostcommonfindinginthetypicalSIDSautopsy(inapproximately80%ofcases);theseusuallyarepresentonthethymus,visceralandparietalpleura,andepicardium.Thelungsusuallyarecongested,andvascularengorgementwithorwithoutpulmonary arcuate orasubtledecreaseinbrainstemneuronalpopulationsinseveralcases;theseobservationsarenotuniform,however,andtheuseofsuchstudiesisnotfeasibleinmost“routine”autopsyprocedures. Anatomicstudiesofvictimshaveyieldedinconsistenthistologicfindings.Multiple edema ispresentinamajorityofcases.Sophisticatedmorphometricstudieshaveshownquantitativebrainstemabnormalitiessuchashypoplasia

•SIDSisadisorderofunknowncause,definedasthesuddendeathofaninfantyoungerthan1yearofagethatremainsunexplainedafterathoroughcaseinvestigationincludingperformanceofanautopsy.MostSIDSdeathsoccurbetweentheagesof2and4months.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ThemostlikelybasisforSIDSisadelayeddevelopmentofarousalreflexesandcardiorespiratorycontrol.

Numerousenvironmentalriskfactorshavebeenproposed,ofwhichthepronesleepingpositionisbestrecognized—hencethesuccessofthe“BacktoSleep”programinreducingtheincidenceofSIDS.

accumulation to fetus edema during fluid Fetal the refers growth. the of intrauterine in hydrops fetal hydrops important the most The are in listed manifold; of causes are

. Table 7.8 caused hydrops) In principal disorder past, the by prophylaxis of cause, incompatibility but the pregnancy, other was between during blood emerged culprits. most Rh common with (immune the hydrops as nonimmune and anemia the hemolytic group successful of mother fetus this causes have the compatible accumulation degree and condition, marked usually a isolated from hygroma), fluid quite postnuchal processes, are or fluid of to The generalized edematous can that often more variable, collections lethal ranging (hydrops life effusions peritoneal edema in be and fetalis), as progressive, ( pleural such (cystic localized with fetus less

Fig. 7.27 ). important hydrops. followed first, of other mechanism hydrops immune is causes The fetal discussed of by

Major Hydrops Fetal Table of Causes 7.8

pathology *Thecauseoffetalhydropsmaybeundetermined(“idiopathic”)inupto20%ofcases.DatafromMachinGA:Hydrops,cystichygroma,hydrothorax,pericardialeffusions,andfetalascites.InGilbert-BarnessE,etal,editors:Potter’s and the infant, TurnersyndromeTrisomy21,trisomy18 St.Louis,2007,Mosby,pp33. child, fetus, of

Fig. 7.27 Hydropsfetalis.(A)Generalizedaccumulationoffluidinthefetus. hygroma. (B)Fluidaccumulationparticularlyprominentinthesofttissuesoftheneck.Thisconditionhasbeentermedcystic Cystichygromasarecharacteristicallyseenwith,butnotlimitedto,constitutionalchromosomalanomaliessuchas45,Xkaryotypes. Medical of (Courtesy of Dr. Rogers,Department Center,Dallas,Texas.) of Beverly Texas Southwestern Pathology,University http://ebooksmedicine.net

an by incompatibility from between disease that fetus. is antibody-induced caused blood newborn the Immune results hemolytic mother hydrops and in group to Such that an the are the when foreign fetus occurs from mother. red incompatibility inherits father cell determinants antigenic the antigens significant Rh The and most common the antigens. in ABO blood group clinically to hemolysis result are antigen antigens the system, a incompatibility. cause Of D major included in only the the Rh Rh is numerous of childbirth red itself cells the bleed). when a the longer may during cytotrophoblast during pregnancy, circulation Fetal maternal as the reach of no or trimester is present (fetomaternal last barrier, to the red cause foreign The sensitized fetus, and that, then in placenta the mother antibodies the antigen becomes pregnancies, traverse produces destruction. to freely cell can future they which in peripheral immune failure, tissue and hemolysis, With ischemia, fetus leads pooling of to anemia cardiac the initiation fluid progressive intrauterine in (edema). of may later, final as As cases occurs be hydrops by the discussed cardiac which in well. edema many pathway failure of nonimmune

influence fetal response circulation: Rh-positive maternal factors to reach red the cells Several immune the that

because coated red cells are promptly fetal the against the antibodies) from (preformed mother removed protects circulation. ABO maternal Concurrent anti-B anti-A and by isohemagglutinins the incompatibility or immunization, Rh

has of only Rh-positive experienced 1 the dose antibody disease depends mother immunizing hemolytic The develops on (more the when red so of bleed response significant than antigen, a mL transplacental cells).

is (IgG) antibody immunoglobulin important, IgM) isotype G antibodies not because The cross placenta. (but of the can the Rh disease very so antibodies, pregnancy. evokes exposure initial to the IgM of antigen Rh uncommon The formation with first the is to IgG Subsequent generally brisk a pregnancy response. the antibody leads second exposure or third during

its Appreciation led role control. the pathogenesis of to in therapeutic sensitization of has newborn of of disease the previous Rh-hemolytic the hours weeks given of and Rh-positive 72 immune Currently, Rh-negative Rh mothers are globulin within after an at delivery baby. 28 (RhIg) preventing maternal the circulation to childbirth, the cells masks thus the RhIg that antigens. on during have sensitization antigenic sites leaked Rh fetal red into The long-lasting may

newborn. As most achieved hemolytic the disease success cause the fetomaternal of result hemolysis, prevention common of of Rh a is incompatibility of the currently immune in remarkable ABO than incompatibility. fraction a only the infants subsequently, 25% disease to pregnancies, ABO in approximately Rh incompatibility in much in hemolysis develops 20% of milder born general is occurs of small Although and on attributed severe act antigens cells be A sponge for B of less disease antibody. many like red course and other the expression which In the transferred than can to the of cells part ABO infants A in hemolytic blood are born occurs group of blood of to O. B mothers disease or group almost exclusively who isohemagglutinins and normal anti-B not the and are of the do type in O anti-A The group cross therefore usually IgM mothers placenta. However, A sensitization. group without understood, not group antibodies certain reasons for (or O previous against antigens B both) even directed possess well women IgG or firstborn affected. Therefore, may the be disease ABO resulting no There preventing effective of from hemolytic is incompatibility. method

those hydrops disorders nonimmune and cardiovascular with associated include major of anemia. anomalies, defects, chromosomal causes fetal The

result intrauterine defects in may Structural and arrhythmias) abnormalities failure (i.e., and cardiovascular cardiac functional hydrops. in is fluid and to hygromas). anomalies, cardiac fetal the are this be (resulting postnuchal Among neck cystic the 18 associated and from karyotype presence an 45,X leading in hydrops; trisomies abnormality for syndrome) syndrome although disorder underlying of 21 structural the usually the Turner may chromosomal anomalies, there of basis lymphatic with (Turner drainage accumulation

than may causes Fetal also result or hydrops. other Rh from in resulting anemias incompatibility ABO homozygous is hydrops. (e.g., common the of cause α-thalassemia the some probably severe anemia In fetal Asia), of fact, caused parts in most by Southeast world fetal

recognized is parvovirus as of important cause infection hydrops. Transplacental fetal B19 by increasingly an replicates. entry into virus where (normoblasts), gains erythroid it The precursors cellular death The to injury leads of and normoblasts the ensuing aplastic anemia. the seen within Parvoviral be marrow precursors can circulating erythroid intranuclear ( and inclusions

Fig. 7.28

Fig. BonemarrowfromaninfantinfectedwithparvovirusB19.Thearrows pointtotwoerythroidprecursorswithlargehomogeneousintra-nuclearinclusionsandasurroundingperipheralrimofresidualchromatin. 7.28

http://ebooksmedicine.net

is ischemia in immune for fetal myocardial of tissue and failure. hydrops secondary with nonimmune dysfunction and The causes basis anemia circulatory occur, to and pressure, of contributing hypoalbuminemia, with secondary synthetic loss Additionally, may reduced osmotic edema. plasma failure function liver

representsthemostsevereandgeneralizedmanifestation( MORPHOLOGYTheanatomicfindingsinfetuseswithintrauterinefluidaccumulationvarywithboththeseverityofthediseaseandtheunderlyingetiology.Aspreviouslynoted,hydrops fetalis

hematopoiesis failure Fig.7.27 andcongestion.Additionally,thebonemarrowshowscompensatoryhyperplasiaoferythroidprecursors(parvovirus-associatedaplasticanemiabeinganotableexception),andextramedullary ),andlesserdegreesofedemasuchasisolatedpleural,peritoneal,orpostnuchalfluidcollectionscanoccur.Accordingly,infantsmaybestillborn,diewithinthefirstfewdays,orrecovercompletely.Thepresenceofdysmorphicfeaturessuggestsunderlyingconstitutionalchromosomalabnormalities;postmortemexaminationmayshowacardiacanomaly.Inhydropsassociatedwithfetalanemia,bothfetusandplacentaarecharacteristicallypale;inmostcases,theliverandspleenareenlargedasaconsequenceofcardiac ispresentintheliver,thespleen,andpossiblyinothertissuessuchasthekidneys,thelungs,thelymphnodes,andeventheheart(

).Theincreasedhematopoieticactivityaccountsforthepresenceintheperipheralcirculationoflargenumbersofnormoblasts,andevenmoreimmatureerythroblasts(erythroblastosis Fig.7.29 fetalis).

ThepresenceofhemolysisinRhorABOincompatibilityisassociatedwiththeaddedcomplicationofincreasedcirculatingbilirubinfromtheredcellbreakdown.TheCNSmaybedamagedwhenhyperbilirubinemiaismarked(usuallygreaterthan20mg/dLinfull-terminfants,butoftenlessinprematureinfants).Thecirculatingunconjugatedbilirubinistakenupintothebrain,onwhichitapparentlyexertsatoxiceffect.Thebasalgangliaandbrainstemareparticularlypronetodepositionofbilirubinpigment,whichimpartsacharacteristicyellowhuetotheparenchyma(kernicterus) (

Fig.7.30

of is with severe hydrops cases even imperative, be salvaged can because timely fetal Early recognition sometimes therapy. with mother pregnancy. hydrops reasonable from Immune Rh certainty, with well during the rapidly results be severity in incompatibility predicted its that correlates titers can antibody rising because Rh and chorionic been advent management by fetus of of fetal the the Antenatal and and blood sampling. villus amniocentesis facilitated have at-risk identification 12) maternal if the (Chapter red anti-globulin positive test) antibody. a result been blood Coombs using direct cells cord coated yields by fetal The (direct have test determine sequencing free DNA efforts by addition, in to status fetal blood. in cloning gene In RHD maternal Rh of cell the resulted has transfusions of When via early identified, fetal by treated cord hemolysis intrauterine may be delivery. umbilical the cases severe and intravascular is to dipyrroles. converts readily bilirubin visible phototherapy helpful, Postnatally, because excreted light hydrops already to can in the an of cases, in occurrence overwhelming discussed, As the pregnancies. RhIg immune of of subsequent administration mother prevent majority and hemoglobin incompatibility mother vulnerable determinations and Group and disease predict to father newborn. is by difficult but awareness readily the anticipated bilirubin the of is in by blood ABO between hemolytic more imperative a thorough determine recurring fetal a to postmortem potentially cause cases cause such hydrops, exclude is the abnormality. to In fatal examination of as and chromosomal a

Fig. 7.29 cells) arescatteredamongmaturehepatocytesinthishistologicpreparationfromaninfantwithnonimmunehydropsfetalis. blue Numerousislandsofextramedullaryhematopoiesis(small

Fig. Kernicterus.Severehyperbilirubinemiaintheneonatalperiod—forexample,secondarytoimmunehydrolysis—resultsindepositionofbili-rubinpigment(arrows) inthebrainparenchyma.Thisoccursbecausetheblood–brainbarrierislessdevelopedintheneonatalperiodthanitisinadulthood.Infantswhosurvivedeveloplong-termneurologicsequelae. 7.30

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fetalhydropsreferstotheaccumulationofedemafluidinthefetusduringintrauterinegrowth.

Thedegreeoffluidaccumulationisvariable,fromgeneralizedhydropsfetalistolocalizedcystichygromas.

Themostcommoncausesoffetalhydropsarenonimmune(chromosomalabnormalities,cardiovasculardefects,andfetalanemia),whereasimmunehydropshasbecomelessfrequentasaresultofRhantibodyprophylaxis.

Erythroblastosisfetalis(circulatingimmatureerythroidprecursors)isacharacteristicfindingoffetalanemia-associatedhydrops.

Hemolysis-inducedhyperbilirubinemiacanresultinbilirubintoxicity(kernicterus)inthebasalgangliaandbrainstem,particularlyinprematureinfants.

most higher constitute toll. cause of death common children the of second 14 the only in 4 years; neoplasms a ages accidents and between Malignant exact even Benign more common tumors than are cancers.

lesions in segregate, tumorlike difficult child. tumors It sometimes from morphologic the true is infant to grounds, on and be special two should recognized: tumor-like this of context, lesions In categories

present locations. or are cells Heterotopia choristoma that to or tissues normal in microscopically refers abnormal elsewhere. are mass or and intestine kidney, the cells the small or a found pancreatic the small a tissue stomach found of adrenal in ovaries, of lungs, “rest” Examples in wall appearance on Heterotopic be of rests clinical confused but neoplasms. little they usually significance, basis with the their are can of

to of in which overgrowth organ excessive cells an tissues the to native refers occurs. but focal it and Hamartoma in identical remainder do Although of the organ, those the elements not cellular are tissue. surrounding architecture found reproduce mature and the to the they the of normal of demarcation frequently and The neoplasm variously benign between tenuous a interpreted. a line hamartoma is and is the to others of by heart, considered liver lymphangiomas, to Hemangiomas, neoplasms. be by rhabdomyomas researchers and the adenomas of hamartomas are some and true be

special Virtually mention lymphangiomas, group, any but three—hemangiomas, neoplasm pediatric may in the teratomas—deserve and age be encountered here.

the most neoplasms infancy. Hemangiomas of common are may adults often in cavernous although appear latter (Chapter 10), Both worrisome. than capillary deceptively the cellular may be and more are thus and encountered hemangiomas where the scalp, irregular, as elevated, children, larger hemangiomas to they in skin, on In flat, and red-blue produce are most are stains. located flat the lesions face particularly the masses; port-wine to referred may Hemangiomas ages, ( regress but many in spontaneously instances child the enlarge they as

Fig. ). 7.31 hereditary the a than as within rarely, no von cosmetic superficial may with 10). (Chapter more be significance; majority disorder organs, disease such of they internal vast a hemangiomas Hippel-Lindau syndrome of manifestation have associated the The of setting; genes. three (CCM) families subset in can malformation harbor one mutations CNS of cavernous cerebral A hemangiomas in affected cavernous the familial occur

hemangiomas. represent of counterpart the Lymphangiomas lymphatic examination spaces endothelial cells surrounded usually by cavernous lined and and shows contain lymphoid Microscopic by the pale fluid. aggregates; spaces cystic and also deeper but, the axilla, regions more They are neck, skin retroperitoneum. the of occur in mediastinum, importantly, on the encountered may they encroach histologically Although in in or and size mediastinal after tend may on increase axilla. trunks nerve structures to benign, they birth

Teratomas indeterminate as unequivocally lesions occur teratomas), potential as cystic or benign, well-differentiated (mature lesions teratomas), may (immature of as

Fig. Congenitalcapillaryhemangioma(A)atbirthand(B)at2yearsofageafterthelesionhadundergonespontaneousregression. 7.31 (Courtesy Pittsburgh, Eduardo Pittsburgh, of Pennsylvania.) Hospital Dr. of Yunis, Children’s with malignant sinus admixed as germ cell an teratomas endodermal tumor). such component tumor http://ebooksmedicine.net another (usually accounting of childhood, or are teratomas ( of Sacrococcygeal for 40% most the more cases teratomas common

Fig. ). 7.32 to of are the is cloacal defects oncogenesis, of and sacrococcygeal that In with of interesting the meningocele, associated other of malformations result from 10% congenital primarily mechanisms effects and hindgut the teratomas it anomalies, midline (e.g., the approximately congenital not region tumor. overlap underlying believed defects and in bifida) view local spina are and these malignant course, of teratomas 12% 75% 18). with and lethal a unmistakably benign tumors are (Chapter Approximately mature about elements malignant designated amount immature the and potential teratomas, correlates remainder with present. are The of immature tissue their are children lesions of with benign the infants teratomas age malignant to be younger), months somewhat or younger (4 of older. in Most encountered whereas tend

organ in neural and childhood ( tissues tissue, The infancy commonly systems most by malignant neoplasms involved soft hematopoietic are the and system,

Table ). 7.9 and lung, most of epithelial the forms. adults, that the heart, with tumors distribution contrast colon This common sharp are in in prostate, whom is in those childhood and and adults. infancy histologically biologically differ of Malignant neoplasms from in are follows: main as The differences

between a suggesting of Relatively (teratogenesis) relationship abnormal defect. and cell demonstration tumor frequent (oncogenesis), common induction stem close a development

of genetic or abnormalities syndromes predispose to that cancer familial Prevalence

regress undergo to of elements and mature neonatal “differentiation” into Tendency to fetal or malignancies spontaneously

Fig. 7.32 Sacrococcygealteratoma.Notethesizeofthelesioncomparedwiththatoftheinfant.

10–14 and Age Years development in of radiotherapy survivors, now • 0–4 minimizing of 7.9 adverse 5–9 tumors, and of many is cure the Years attention of Common malignancies paid effects chemotherapy that second Better of delayed or survival to Infancy including childhood Childhood Years so Age the Neoplasms much Table Age of Malignant of

malignant Many histologically are pediatric neoplasms unique. to tumor (embryonal) features they frequently origin. exhibit specific and microscopic appearance, the than site a primitive tend organogenesis of general, In pleomorphic-anaplastic rather they to of exhibit small, primitive of appearance, childhood round, referred have blue-cell collectively their to Because been tumors. many as histologic tumors tumors, of tumor), Sheets lymphoma, neuroectodermal nuclei tumor. sarcoma characterize (peripheral small, and Wilms with cases include which some Ewing rhabdomyosarcoma, of neuroblastoma, cells these round Sufficient alone, features for basis are becoming cancers. distinctive definitive but of of present examination on histologic usually the permit are and childhood diagnosis useful, to both diagnosis prognosis increasingly molecular studies to retinoblastoma, differences those in adults. and common Wilms highlight tumors—neuroblastoma, and the pediatric Three tumors between here described tumor—are

tumors crest member populating most The family. neuroblastoma important of and that the sites; neural derived from sympathetic includes is medulla ganglia primordial are these neuroblastic the this of adrenal term cells

as 50% as diagnosed common many 10% tumors, of the after of pediatric malignancies most 7% It all and is of neoplasms, in childhood for second brain malignancy infancy. solid accounting to Neuroblastomas history, natural spontaneous features or therapy-induced regression spontaneous maturation. their demonstrate unique several and in including transmission, involve the the with to occur but 2% adrenals familial, neoplasms dominant and cases in autonomic multiple sporadically, autosomal primary such both of may Most are or 1% sites. the Germline to the (ALK) gene been anaplastic neuroblastoma. predisposition in familial mutations have to lymphoma kinase linked in gain-of-function to sporadic prognosis. of are 8% and mutations also ALK 10% are Somatic markers neuroblastomas, adverse observed of target kinase are trials mutated using inhibitors ALK the Clinical underway. that tyrosine

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Inchildhood,about40%ofneuroblastomasariseintheadrenal medulla. Theremainderoccuranywherealongthesympatheticchain,withthemostcommonlocationsbeingtheparavertebralregionoftheabdomen(25%)andposteriormediastinum(15%).Macroscopically,neuroblastomasrangeinsizefromclinicallysilentminutenodules(insitulesions)tolargemassesweighingmorethan1kg.Insituneuroblastomasarereportedtobe40timesmorefrequentthantumorswithclinicalsymptoms.Thegreatmajorityofthesesilentlesionsspontaneouslyregress,leavingonlyafocusoffibrosisorcalcificationintheadult.Someneuroblastomasaresharplydemarcatedwithafibrouspseudo-capsule,butothersareinfiltrativeandinvadesurroundingstructures,includingthekidneys,renalvein,andvenacava,andenveloptheaorta.Ontransection,theyarecomposedofsoft,gray-tan,brainliketissue.Largertumorshaveareasofnecrosis,cysticsoftening,andhemorrhage.

Histologically,classicneuroblastomasarecomposedofsmall,primitive-appearingcellswithdarknuclei,scantcytoplasm,andpoorlydefinedcellbordersgrowinginsolidsheets(

).Mitoticactivity,nuclearbreakdown(“karyorrhexis”),andpleomorphismmaybeprominent.Thebackgroundoftendemonstratesafaintlyeosinophilicfibrillarymaterial(neuropil)thatcorrespondstoneuriticprocessesoftheprimitiveneuroblasts.Typically,so-calledHomer-Wright enolase,anddemonstrationonultra-structuralstudiesofsmall,membrane-bound,cytoplasmiccatecholamine-containingsecretorygranules. Fig.7.33A pseudorosettes canbefound,inwhichthetumorcellsareconcentricallyarrangedaboutacentralspacefilledwithneuropil(theabsenceofanactualcentrallumengarnersthedesignationpseudo-).Otherhelpfulfeaturesincludeimmunochemicaldetectionofnerualmarkers,suchasneuron-specific

cells invariousstagesofmaturation,maybefoundintumorsadmixedwithprimitiveneuroblasts(ganglioneuroblastoma). Someneoplasmsshowsignsofmaturation,eitherspontaneousortherapy-induced.Largercellshavingmoreabundantcytoplasmwithlargevesicularnucleiandaprominentnucleolus,representingganglion ( Lesionsthatareevenbetterdifferentiatedcontainmanymorelargecellsresemblingmatureganglioncellsintheabsenceofresidualneuroblasts;suchneoplasmsmeritthedesignationganglioneuroma

).MaturationofneuroblastsintoganglioncellsusuallyisaccompaniedbytheappearanceofSchwanncells. Fig.7.33B

of are prognosis, most patient. influence age factors the the Many the but stage the and tumor the important of

Staging of ( neuroblastomas •

great ) in establishing Table a 7.10 assumes importance prognosis. because patients the (S of disease. note means be the despite spread excellent, Special special), should stage for taken of is outlook 4S these As noted in

as classified 2 the , 1 involvement. marrow, primary presence of bone metastases, be Table to limited skin, stage but and liver, would which 7.10 bone tumor the or without are for 4S excellent to tumors minimal Infants or and it prognosis for an not therapy, uncommon undergo is with have the primary regression. tumors spontaneous metastatic with welcome basis for not this behavior is biologic clear. The 80%) to (60% most Unfortunately, children

Fig. (A)Neuroblastoma.Thistumoriscomposedofsmallcellsembeddedinafinelyfibrillarmatrix(neuropil).AHomer-Wrightpseudorosette(tumorcellsarrangedconcentricallyaroundacentralcoreofneuropil)isseenintheupperrightcorner. 7.33 (B)Ganglioneuromas,arisingfromspontaneousortherapy-inducedmaturationofneuroblastomas,arecharacterizedbyclustersoflargeganglioncellswithvesicularnucleiandabundanteosinophiliccytoplasm(arrow).Spindle-shapedSchwanncellsarepresentinthebackgroundstroma.

or tumors, 2A, 40% and stage 3 2B, present to stage with with 4S neuroblastomas. only 1, present 20% 4 or

Age determinant important the is other outcome. of children for comparable children 18 disease. than The favorable is stage much of at than for more younger older a outlook months Most are 1 months during diagnosed stage (“low” in risk 4S in or stage children or life of 2, 18 category first neoplasms the

7.10), category or older “intermediate” “high” in neoplasms into of children the fall whereas Table risk.

in a Histology schwannian prognostic prognosis. and independent is variable stroma gangliocytic evidence an of indicative of neuroblastic tumors; is favorable differentiation

has oncogene impact of prognosis. the profound Amplification MYCN on the is distal on of chromosome short located MYCN 2. arm the about prognosis. primary copies, number the of in worse disease; MYCN tumors, of amplification advanced-stage 30% present the the is 25% greater in most to Amplification the at double extrachromosomal resident or does 2p23p24 minute regions http://ebooksmedicine.net MYCN staining manifest karyotypically homogeneously chromosomes rather as of but not on site,

Stage4Anyprimarytumorwithdisseminationtodistantlymphnodes,bone,bonemarrow,liver,skin,and/orother0.9 organs(exceptasdefinedforstage4S)0.8

Stage4SLocalizedprimarytumor(asdefinedforstage1,2A,or 2B)withdisseminationlimitedtoskin,liver,and/orbonemarrow(<10%ofnucleatedcellsareconstitutedbyneoplasticcells;>10%involvementofbonemarrowis

S, Clin 11:1466,1993. Oncol internationalneuroblastomadiagnosis,staging,andresponsetotreatment,J Special.AdaptedfromBrodeurGM,PritchardJ,BertholdF,etal:Revisionsofthe

0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.7 0.6 0.1

Fig. ). 7.34 used neuroblastic automatically amplification risk, MYCN currently irrespective or the stratification is and important in tumors renders abnormality age. stage a tumor “high” as of of genetic most risk

near-diploid. whole (with prognostic with ploidy that gains) hyperdiploid favorable that is tumors another tumors are DNA chromosome than are more prognosis factor, having to result structural on subset, diploidy events, MYCN number, The between, to chromosomes have as such rearrangements molecular latter absolute in can closer adverse and that although amplification. multiple within, tends

candidates therapy. status, been potential and that assigning other also have Although “experimental” identified have targeted clinically might or prognostication, for stage, molecular used age, aberrations bearings, MYCN prognostic are ploidy for many be expression favorable with is associated ganglia toward lineage, differentiation for For prognosis. high-affinity TrkA, is a sympathetic that growth nerve of receptor factor of indicative example, de have ALK Overall, recurrent mutations. MYCN ~10%), and (latter besides in neuroblastomas few mutations novo “hotspot” amplification pathways. a high these in relapsed However, pathway, mutations against neuroblastomas might relapsed RAS-MAP with suggesting targeted frequency kinase signaling tumors be that very of oncogenic therapies (>75%) have the

protuberant generally with present neuroblastomas a with years resulting younger 2 Children abdomen than

Fig. cytoplasmicstaining. onatissuesectioncontainingneuroblastomaattachedtothekidney.Notetheneuroblastomacellsontheupperhalfofthephotowithlargeareasofstaining(yellow-green);thiscorrespondstoamplifiedN-MYC (A)FISHusingafluorescein-labeledcosmidprobeforN-myc 7.34 intheformofhomogeneouslystainingregions.Renaltubularepithelialcellsinthelowerhalfofthephotographshownonuclearstainingandbackground(green) amplificationwas93%,whereasthosewithtumorsthathadMYCN amplificationhadonlya10%event-freesurvival. (B)AKaplan-Meiersurvivalcurveofinfantsyoungerthan1yearofagewithmetastaticneuroblastoma.The3-yearevent-freesurvivalofinfantswhosetumorslackedMYCN Triche, (A, Dr. Angeles, Children’s California. Timothy Courtesy Hospital, Los clinical enigma, biological B, Neuroblastoma: GM: NatRevCancer3:203–216, insights with Brodeur into Reproduced permission a 2003.) from and mass, abdominal weight fever, loss. an from pain. In remain unnoticed children and ascites, metastases hepatomegaly, cause until older the neuroblastomas bone may particularly marrow. widely liver, systems, hematogenous bone lungs, to Neuroblastomas the bones, lymphatic may the metastasize and through and neonates, baby”). unfortunate may the metastases multiple manifest (earning cutaneous with disseminated the of with neuroblastomas rather discoloration “blueberry In associated blue to deep moniker skin muffin acid location, elevated About feature and pheochromocytomas), produce catecholamines of catecholamines of constitutes with important [VMA] which metabolites urine 90% associated (i.e., catecholamines catecholamine diagnostic of the levels (similar an such blood levels to homovanillic regardless and as [HVA]). neuroblastomas, of acid vanillylmandelic elevated 20). with than hypertension with (Chapter less pheochromocytomas Despite the frequent elaboration much of these neoplasms is catecholamines,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Neuroblastomasandrelatedtumorsarisefromneuralcrest–derivedcellsinthesympatheticgangliaandadrenalmedulla.

Neuroblastomasareundifferentiated,whereasganglioneuroblastomasandganglioneuromasdemonstrateevidenceofdifferentiation(schwannianstromaandganglioncells).Homer-Wrightpseudorosettesarecharacteristicofneuroblastomas.

Age,stage,andMYCN amplificationandploidyarethemostimportantprognosticfeatures;childrenyoungerthan18monthsusuallyhaveabetterprognosisthanolderchildren,whereaschildrenwithhigher-stagetumorsorMYCN amplificationfareworse.AhighfrequencyofrelapsedneuroblastomashavemutationsintheRAS-MAPkinasepathway.

Neuroblastomassecretecatecholamines,whosemetabolites(VMA/HVA)canbeusedforscreeningpatients.

malignancy children. common most primary Retinoblastoma intraocular of is the been discussed (Chapter has 6). genetics The of retinoblastoma molecular previously of mutation tumors with therefore a heritable. are the associated the 40% Approximately and in RB are germline gene RB these of The have tumors mutations. the 60% remaining and sporadically, gene develop somatic cases are although they with development and tumors are unilateral. unifocal of typically multiple be Familial that bilateral, may associated unifocal. of unilateral and All tumors the sporadic, nonheritable are for increased osteosarcoma at retinoblastoma are tumors. also tissue other and risk Patients of development familial with the soft

MORPHOLOGYRetinoblastomastendtobenodularmasses,usuallyintheposteriorretina,oftenwithsatelliteseedings(

).Onmicroscopicexamination,undifferentiatedareasofthesetumorsarefoundtobecomposedofsmall,roundcellswithlargehyper-chromaticnucleiandscantcytoplasm,resemblingundifferentiatedretinoblasts. Fig.7.35A

Differentiatedstructuresarefoundwithinmanyretinoblastomas,themostcharacteristicofthesebeingFlexner-Wintersteiner rosettes (

Fig.7.35B ).Thesestructuresconsistofclustersofcuboidalorshortcolumnarcellsarrangedaroundacentrallumen(incontrastwiththepseudorosettesofneuroblastoma,whichlackacentrallumen).Thenucleiaredisplacedawayfromthelumen,whichbylightmicroscopyappearstohavealimitingmembraneresemblingtheexternallimitingmembraneoftheretina.

Tumorcellsmaydisseminatebeyondtheeyethroughtheopticnerveorsubarachnoidspace.ThemostcommonsitesofdistantmetastasesaretheCNS,skull,distalbones,andlymphnodes.

pain in the to reflex”), include tenderness eye. vision, (“cat’s presenting poor a and eye whitish and pupil the hue strabismus, findings The be at present may the presentation although median age tumor The is 2 years, at birth. treated usually with locally the are tumors) and chemotherapy, (in but is radiotherapy, enucleation, advanced rule. tumors survival when Untreated, the fatal, tumors. soft spontaneously familial of retinoblastoma other at risk noted some development As are the with and regress, for osteosarcoma increased tissue and tumors patients earlier,

most cases of occurring in with 5 between common or nephroblastoma, of in is 2 most Wilms kidney the tumor, years children tumor and the primary children, age. childhood tumor the finally, the success developing tumors: remarkable between childhood organ; similarity several This of the of congenital treatment tumors; and increased malformation concepts important tumor illustrates of relationship tumors. the and in risk between histologic and concepts Each discussion. these following is presented of the in

are groups increased Three for malformations Wilms tumor. congenital associated of risk an with tumor, (DDS), WAGR abnormalities, and syndrome genital Denys-Drash aniridia, Wilms and retardation); (i.e., These syndrome mental (BWS). syndrome are Beckwith-Wiedemann on go one syndrome Of in patients to this approximately tumor. three will WAGR with develop Another of tumor. even 90%) an have group risk (approximately patients, (DDS), higher Wilms of with “Denys-Drash syndrome” those so-called have Patients with the the indicates, WAGR name tumor, aniridia, Wilms and abnormalities as mental genital syndrome, retardation. and failure. DD onset nephropathy syndrome dysgenesis renal early to characterized is gonadal by leading located these are the tumor (WT1) associated of abnormalities on 1 Both of 11p13. with Wilms conditions gene, (i.e., protein the interferes negative WAGR with loss of aberration inactivating function WT1 The WT1, WT1 normal DDS the WT1 the syndrome demonstrate allele. with material that Patients genetic a in dominant while differs, genetic made from persons of with other harbor deletions) nature mutation of however: of is is results in renal not that therefore, of in development; it gene WT1 this one of constitutional normal critical inactivation genitourinary abnormalities and to surprising, gonadal humans. copy

those Beckwith-Wiedemann of the group risk A for tumor. development patients, with at of are syndrome increased also third (BWS), Wilms of (hemihypertrophy); segments a exhibit cytomegaly) characteristic entire These kidneys, body patients cortical feature. is body enlargement liver) organs enlargement tongue, microscopic of individual cells (e.g., or adrenal or (adrenal earlier). disorder example an of a imprinting BWS (see is of genomic 11 that patients chromosome in in is WT1 of p15.5 these band locus The is distal the involved locus. genetic to the involved the this Wilms called identified. locus is Although second gene “WT2” has not been for locus, tumor the homologue of least at two the silencing from located alleles, with other the normally that start This of upstream of the transcription contains 10 transcriptional by one expressed are site. parental methylation region of only parental genes region promoter genes, relationship growth of BWS. Of in insulinlike strongest imprinting the tumor have persons all candidate with to abnormalities (IGF2) predisposition “WT2” factor-2 is expressed IGF2 maternal imprinted. allele, the is allele from normally paternal solely the whereas be loss which In is both can maternal enlargement some and result IGF2 organ allele) to protein, to of the leading demonstrated, reexpression Wilms tumors, of postulated in tumorigenesis. by overexpression the IGF2 (i.e., imprinting of and in lesions or linked gene congenital tumors a related genes. single closely some associations these cases, suggest represent manifestations genetic of affecting Thus, that malformations tumors, tumors. addition Wilms BWS development with the to patients hepatoblastoma, also for adrenocortical In risk increased are and of rhabdomyosarcomas, tumors, at pancreatic

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Retinoblastoma.(A)Poorlycohesivetumorinretinaisseenabuttingtheopticnerve. 7.35 andnumerousmitoticfigures. (B)Higher-powerviewshowingFlexner-Wintersteinerrosettes(arrow)

recently overall In 90% sporadic abnormalities which to children, nonsyndromic) Wilms contrast of only syndromic for are the (i.e., tumors, in underlying elucidated. tumors, molecular being cases account later. specific are them described associated of histologic features with Some sporadic (Chapter example, of For approximately 6) gene in of 10% have encoding the gain-of-function been β-catenin Wilms demonstrated tumors. mutations Wilms recurrent blastemal microRNA in 15% DGCR8, (DROSHA, 20% encoding to later). processing are mutations involved genes of and Other (see DICER1); in with occur tumors in these predominantly proteins seen histology transformation” of which is to morphogenesis. during aberrations family, renal epithelial microRNA reduced in mature is the in “mesenchymal particular levels It that many lead processing miR-200 to in microRNAs, involved postulated in the of likely which transformation into kidney to leads blastemal tumors. mesenchymal (see the “rests” following), epithelial Wilms persistent evolve lack The to in have histologic described an TP53 associated appearance, mutations later. anaplastic are a with often tumors and especially distinctive Finally, poor with prognosis

MORPHOLOGYWilmstumortypicallyisalarge,solitary,well-circumscribedmass,although10%areeitherbilateralormulticentricatthetimeofdiagnosis.Oncutsection,thetumorissoft,homogeneous,andtantogray,withoccasionalfociofhemorrhage,cysticdegeneration,andnecrosis(

Fig.7.36

Onmicroscopicexamination,Wilmstumorsarecharacterizedbyrecognizableattemptstorecapitulatedifferentstagesofnephrogenesis.Theclassictriphasic ofblastemal,stromal,andepithelialcelltypesisobservedinmostlesions,althoughthepercentageofeachcomponentisvariable( combination

Fig.

7.37A (cellswithlarge,hyperchromatic,pleomorphicnucleiandabnormalmitoses)( component.Epithelial“differentiation”usuallytakestheformofabortive ).Sheetsofsmallbluecells,withfewdistinctivefeatures,characterizetheblastemal tubules or glomeruli.Stromalcellsareusuallyfibrocyticormyxoidinnature,althoughskeletalmuscle“differentiation”isnotuncommon.Approximately5%oftumorscontainfociofanaplasia

Fig.

mutationsandtheemergenceofresistancetochemotherapy.Thepatternofdistributionofanaplasticcellswithintheprimarytumor(focalversusdiffuse)hasimportantimplicationsforprognosis(seefurthertext). 7.37B ).ThepresenceofanaplasiacorrelateswiththepresenceofacquiredTP53

areputativeprecursorlesionsofWilmstumorsandaresometimespresentintherenalparenchymaadjacenttothetumor.Nephrogenicrestshaveaspectrumofhistologicappearances,fromexpansilemassesthatresembleWilmstumors(hyperplasticrests)toscleroticrestsconsistingpredominantlyoffibroustissuewithoccasionaladmixedimmaturetubulesorglomeruli.Itisimportanttodocumentthepresenceofnephrogenicrestsintheresectedspecimen,becausethesepatientsareatanincreasedriskforthedevelopmentofWilmstumorsinthecontralateralkidney. Nephrogenic rests

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 7.36 Wilmstumorinthelowerpoleofthekidneywiththecharacteristictantograycolorandwell-circumscribedmargins.

across down mass, present Patients may pelvis. midline into typically a the palpable abdominal extend which the and with from often, pain, result hematuria the and presenting features Less abdominal as occasionally, are the tumor. fever obstruction or, a pressure of intestinal are and generally tumor and Wilms of for obtained The nephrectomy with very excellent results good, chemotherapy. combination prognosis is a a prognosis, but it only diffuse. is is adverse of Anaplasia harbinger if resected and focal within nephrectomy is the anaplasia If confined the

Wilmstumoristhemostcommonrenalneoplasmofchildhood.

PatientswiththreesyndromesareatincreasedriskforWilmstumors:Denys-Drash,Beckwith-Wiedemann,andWilmstumor,aniridia,genitalabnormalities,andmentalretardation(WGAR)syndrome.

gene. WAGRsyndromeandDDSareassociatedwithWT1inactivation,whereasBeckwith-WiedemannarisesthroughimprintingabnormalitiesattheWT2locus,principallyinvolvingtheIGF2

ThemorphologiccomponentsofWilmstumorincludeblastema(small,roundbluecells)andepithelialandstromalelements.

NephrogenicrestsareprecursorlesionsofWilmstumors.

for of evidence from is that no anaplasia. the outcome specimen, tumors without different

of (e.g., on the of genetic metabolites) such identification ready diagnostic rendering gene or effects, of (e.g., products assays, mutant in or hemoglobin mental disorder retardation era the their predating abnormal abnormal a the molecular diagnosis PKU). depended the as clinical In availability almost an laboratories. commercial realm factors research have Several academic diagnostics both presence pathology of of enabled expansion the rapid to in the molecular from and since ubiquitous and sequencing (2) of databases; the “off-the-shelf” polymerase the of genome of human the data in these the available include (1) numerous deposition These availability publicly chain

(A)Wilmstumorwithtightlypackedbluecellsconsistentwiththeblastemalcomponentandinterspersedprimitivetubules,representingtheepithelialcomponent. Fig.7.37 (B)FocalanaplasiawaspresentinotherareaswithinthisWilmstumor,characterizedbycellswithhyperchromatic,pleomorphicnuclei,andanabnormalmitosis(centeroffield).Predominanceofblastemalmorphologyanddiffuseanaplasiaareassociatedwithspecificmolecularlesions(seetext).

reaction DNA chips”) a specific the on microarrays both availability and, (PCR) high-throughput, automated, finally, the using can a that and RNA single (“NextGen”) sequencing technologies. tailor-made genetic of next-generation kits interrogate disorders; genomewide high-resolution of for identification scale (“gene http://ebooksmedicine.net of platform; (4) emergence the (3) context genetic The new both in elucidate for two been to the of disorders. research basis advances complex the have especially mendelian and useful last molecular of this detailed approaches the diagnostics Although are paragraphs. the of the in a better-known is some scope book, highlighted discussion beyond ensuing of present every and be being in (i.e., can with or MYCN (i.e., aberration person, queried the genetic mutation or CF) the in in somatic types technique with patient a lesions, affected the specific each of to with cells). germline of Irrespective used, tissue amplification cell CFTR the restricted a in either as as neuroblastoma peripheral the lymphocytes for [PBLs], assay. of the (e.g., used determines the This sample tumor saliva, nature blood consideration tissue)

be analysis genetic divided into indications In conditions for conditions. acquired general, inherited can and the conditions, testing stages. can offered genetic prenatal inherited either postnatal or be Within at these techniques. or of cytogenetics, may FISH, conventional involve a molecular It diagnostics, combination

be offered all cytogenetically patients analysis who are of having abnormal progeny. at genetic Prenatal should risk to villus by chorionic biopsies” in material, on be on performed biopsy “liquid next-generation sequencing. obtained paired or cells on It with maternal blood increasingly amniocentesis, can are indications following: the Some important

years), 34 maternal (beyond trisomies greater Advanced is risk associated of which age with

cases, for may a Confirmed disorders) (in for would or carrier trans-location, unbalanced, balanced be translocation, the so chromosomal be progeny status reciprocal gametes risk at inversion such robertsonian the

an observed on abnormalities maternal Fetal routine screening ultrasound, result or abnormal blood on

a X-linked of partner disorder when fetal carrier sex Determination an confirmed is or genetic patient the of

peripheral is genetic Postnatal usually lymphocytes. on performed analysis blood follows: as are Indications

Suspicion syndrome metabolic a of

syndromic aneuploidy or Suspected of (e.g., (e.g., features abnormality syndrome) chromosomal Down other inversions) deletions,

Suspected described previously whether disease, or unknown monogenic

genetic cancer, such advent mutations diagnostics therapies. molecular somatic large especially in are in area of laboratories, becoming as alterations, focus Acquired increasingly the a with targeted single BRAF, advent or of assay. Although gene decisions, used inform now (often the of of genes of the (mutations tests cost-effective treatment large well have numbers has HER2) next-generation coding as EGFR 100s), interrogations single cancer-relevant for a been while amplification as allowed sequencing of a translocations, in in to approaches receives typically The clinical report” the molecularly recommendations. a targeted on “genomic cancer, potential treatment including patient’s team major molecular such as has such DNA-based infectious diseases, as been rapid tuberculosis of approaches. or pathogens of diagnostics using Another the identification focus suspected virulent Ebola, diagnosis general, approaches matter the for required of a cut weeks from time down have these days. In to molecular assays in (e.g., influenza viruses the de the can of pathogens, monitoring identification to resistance that anti-virals), diagnostics Besides treatment “viral acquired in them treatment also using of mutations efficacy laboratories blood. to resistant of to load” contribute for the render and novo identification also emergence (measuring parameters of used are Similar resistance) patients. and efficacy of therapy in widely cancer

such rapid medicine” the as diagnostics, terms needs “personalized and of indicate to “precision in Because to therapy” used being the individual molecular tailored the of advances increasingly patient. are therapy is It be foreseeable will the in such expectations future. met hoped that discuss used We the diagnostics and inherited will acquired now for approaches assessment laboratories in common molecular of indications. of some

discussed result a the 21), this (22q11 deletion chromosomal occur as submicroscopic abnormalities, copy diseases intragenic deletions syndrome), syndrome). or (WAGR the As chapter, of level chromosome entire in segments (trisomy at already may number of various classic the Karyotype changes is of by the however, chromosomal expected, analysis the with G at chromosomes banding might this low. resolution be level; for technique as fairly remains approach identifying comparative commonly hybridization are by genomic of analysis genomic regions To identify (CGH) and chromosomal such global subchromosomal as alterations, FISH used. focused both approaches

chromosomal regions specific greater identifying DNA for which in of with that size, FISH probes the recognize than 100 resolution technique this changes. defines kilobases sequences uses limit of to chromosomal fluorescent are or dyes and spreads interphase meta-phase labeled with applied to are probes nuclei. Such probe be sequence a fluorescence under visualized labels to then thus hybridizes the complementary chromosomal microscope. chromosome that can specific its The the on and region is suspected for ill to warranted underlying is cells circumvent genetic in having (e.g., a disorder). diagnosis FISH critically an when dividing the The invaluable rapid ability of need infant a of tissue lymphocytes, chorionic be archival on Such umbilical sections. or prenatal cord biopsy, blood), can and obtained by analysis villus performed cells peripheral even blood samples amniocentesis, (e.g., the ( numeric used for chromosomes detection of FISH abnormalities of is (aneuploidy)

Fig. subtle ( ), microdeletions 7.38A

Fig. routine translocations and (e.g., amplification in gene amplification not ) neuroblastomas). karyotyping, and by 7.38B indentifiable complex MYCN

http://ebooksmedicine.net

specific suspected one altered knowledge or the sample. of being FISH chromosomal previous test in few requires the of regions global without also micro-array technology perform previous abnormalities a genomic be However, using knowledge survey. can to genomic by detected offering genomic were First-generation (CGH), whereas benefits. for approaches, nucleotide (SNP) platforms polymorphism hybridization multiple single genotyping comparative platforms incorporate designed newer

fluorescent DNA and different a (aCGH), and reference (normal) fluoresce array that labeled hybridization respectively. test DNA In comparative red the with genomic are green, two dyes the that cover with regularly are at differentially and an The autosomes cohybridized all samples spotted spaced intervals, to labeled genome sex probes human chromosomes. usually and the then 22 DNA array span two compared. the location, the probe the is chromosomal samples DNA from labeled each of At binding test then two diploid), equal (i.e., samples an the red yellow of If green array result and of equal will the the spots is fluoresce (the admixture sample are dyes). all on deletion duplication, there to loss the across probe contrast, even allowing will on of or or is show material), skewing it of highly variants spots corresponding red a genome. focal determinations gain number In copy accurate toward or green if the (depending

are but number are similar types on which “SNP advantages has genomewide, concept, a SNP Newer sites designed based identify over to the of chips” CGH. probes of a are DNA every throughout SNPs the in the discussed polymorphism, sequences). (e.g., common 1, in As nucleotides exons, genome most regulatory occurring type Chapter of introns, 1000 approximately and as transmission followed landmark within can well from a as serve parent be physical as the to genome child. genetic a whose both SNPs Thus, marker genomewide SNPs allow be There are several that platforms analyzed on arrays. to testing determine variations. to be number copy methods SNPs used Like CGH can probes, involving they provide ( data at also particular each discriminating SNP by alleles location, between zygosity addition, In

Fig. 7.39 ). region example, uniparental heterozygosity This having is content. identify seen loss diploid in disomy, within an which SNP that of for can chips DNA affected means, generation with The quite is arrays of SNP comprehensive, current the

Fig. 7.38 FISH. copies). (A)Interphasenucleusfromamalepatientwithsuspectedtrisomy18.Threedifferentfluorescentprobeshavebeenusedina“FISHcocktail”;thegreenprobehybridizestotheXchromosomecentromere(one copy),theredprobetotheYchromosomecentromere(one copy),andtheaquaprobetothechromosome18centromere(three (B)Ametaphasespreadinwhichtwofluorescentprobeshavebeenused,onehybridizingtochromosomeregion22q13(green) andtheotherhybridizingtochromosomeregion22q11.2(red).Therearetwo22q13signals.Oneofthetwochromosomesdoesnotstainwiththeprobefor22q11.2,indicatingamicrodeletioninthisregion.Thisabnormalitygivesrisetothe22q11.2deletionsyndrome(DiGeorgesyndrome).

Dr. Doolittle,Cytogenetics Nancy Southwestern of and (Courtesy Laboratory,University Texas of Jeff Medical R.Schneider Center,Dallas,Texas.) –2.00 –1.00 http://ebooksmedicine.net 2.00 p12.1 0.00 0.8 p12.3 number p13.31 1.00 1.0 AA

Fig. 7.39 showneutral(diploid)DNAcontentandthezygosityplotshowstheexpectedratioofAA,AB,andBBSNPgenotypes.Theanomalousarea(red) showsdecreasedoverallintensity,andthezygosityplotshowslossofheterozygosity(theABgenotype);together,thesefindingsindicatethepresenceofadeletionononecopyofchromosome12p. AnalysisofcopynumbervariationviaSNPcytogenomicarray.GenomicDNAislabeledandhybridizedtoanarraycontainingpotentiallymillionsofprobespots.Copynumberisdeterminedbyoverallintensityandgenotypeisdeterminedbyallelicratio.Theexampleshownistheparmofchromosome12inapediatricleukemia.Here,thenormalareas(green) high (Modified of Genetic PNAS107[50]:21719–21724, leukemia, 2010.) et from lymphoblastic childhood hyper-diploid K, Paulsson al: acute landscape million SNP largest than containing greater probes. 4 of one the nucleotides. terminator As of a association size capillary genomewide by studies of tion electrophoresis, this sequence After mainstay later). exact can described is the separaresult, technology (GWASs, the normal be the sequence detect of presence the compared to with mutations. “read” and applications Many of

other to is sequencing next-generation give later), required. sequencing (discussed particularly PCR-based approaches) large way genes multiple when genes the to starting (and analysis of Sanger or DirectDetectionofDNAMutationsbyare remains DNA, of Sanger the diagnosis. is in used PCR 2016, sequencing in exponential analysis, molecular which amplification widely even involves “gold Nonetheless, now standard” genotyping assays. RNA If many for cDNA and a Another is by mutations for specific PCR. at obtain substrate, is the it identifying amplified used as then • reverse-transcribed approach first to aspartic nucleotide KRAS mutation position method a to often 12 in This (say, abbreviated codon is RT-PCR. the glycine [GGT] that (RT) as reverse involving converts oncogene transcription to add 3′ labeled to PCR interest, and nucleotides of of amplify mixture, DNA be which the are a are the ends fluorescently bind segment sequence [GAT]) would acid normal that two to C To 5′ designed. T the and primers thermal merases (A) sequence, is mutant using the or either appropriate cycling, By to respectively. DNA wild-type and the DNA greatly poly-complementary (G) target producing these with two between millions primer the different fluosequence are copies DNA two fluorophores, the nucleoamplified, of the tides of labeled Because sites. the DNA C of ( Frederick analyzed the sion of process color, the product Nobel-becomes on one incorporated primer the emitted inventor, PCR rescence be by ways: a has be Sanger sequencing, resulting in in for or or of many years extenlaureate named then can sequence depending several can after PCR • another a T The product been Sanger, its whether

Fig. 7.40 ). Project. the including of genome orig-extension is is Human strategy sequencing, The allele-specific than Genome it “workhorse” of sensitive this advantage that inal more Sanger different a allowing in sequences DNA mixed with is the dead-end Here, (di-deoxy small primer, T, be amplified make the four patients identification tides labeled the harbor-tags. obtained mutated may if DNA nucleo-(~1%) a up DNA (as and polymerase, fraction from nucle-DNA specimens sequencing, a terminator) of C) DNA and suspected (A, total for case of even the G, they clinical with otides, fluorescent ensuing ing a series malignancy). DNA The of produces reaction a of assay, any up because DNA (or thousands of digital ultrasensitive separates as this An given of such the the molecules oil cDNA) a or corresponds to the which kilobase droplet at millions with tag the variant all labeled each lengths PCR, into to that base incorporation template “droplets,” reaction of literally so, that to a possible http://ebooksmedicine.net microscopic known stopped

Fig. Allele-specificpolymerasechainreaction(PCR)analysisformutationdetectioninaheterogeneoussamplecontaininganadmixtureofnormalandmutantDNA.Nucleotidescomplementarytothemutantandwild-typenucleotidesatthequeriedbasepositionarelabeledwithdifferentfluorophoressuchthatincorporationintotheresultingPCRproductyieldsfluorescentsignalsofvariableintensityinaccordancewiththeratioofmutanttowild-typeDNApresent. 7.40

DNA, along with contains one strand droplet more PCR of than template reagents. requisite no own can analyzed product, alleles. for mutant such “minireactor” then its digitally be generates presence integrated which the and Each of PCR By to being PCR sensitivity, reaction, detect in a droplet each assessing strand DNA able digital wild-type molecules. exquisite PCR as 10,000 1 more in in as parallel, single little individually template than has mutant rather or

DNA gigabase generation.” technology base all or of molecular alter named applications pairs because Increasingly, earlier so to volume 1 diagnostics “first Sanger (more the “next-generation day!) DNA has (NGS) NGS (or sheer than now the of pairs per sequencing” mentioned is by of supplanted being molecular nearly by potential the assessment radically, RNA) technologies, of diagnostics sequencing sequencing considered of availability are 1,000,000,000 so-called data requiring The costs. low at relatively in genome genome can than matter days. be a sequencing” human has performed entire several “whole gigabases, true times 3 a more of little The so can ( Sanger occur platforms sequencing contrast with fragments the in which of NGS parallel human (DNA genome enhancing (“massively its parallel sequencing, in cDNA) speed multiple technologies or significantly In use of sequencing”),

Fig. 7.41 ). that DNA labeled are a per per incorporated template cycle. are Fluorescently one solid which strands, to phase, immobilized complementary with nucleotides on nucleotide are the template added read end a each each to captured and image is bioinformatics. of are length repeated An cycles to sufficient the generated until of the “read” using sophisticated the at cycle, back map genome human is traditional In in to the former to scale, and ability difference contain NGS frequency key sequencing differences the and low time a of that variant addition heterogeneous of between another alleles detect at samples is Sanger that of occur cells. mixture germline of or as some Sanger for DNA) normal 20% lower With of variant contains from sequencing, allele the of samples limit as such biopsy (such cells tumor thus enrichment, frequency detection that form microdissection more, homogeneous either requiring tissue. is or a also when particularly NGS stroma nonneoplastic low cells. redundancy) of contain for 1%, allele the 1000-fold genome of to “read” useful NGS of searching frequencies biopsies tumor than (from The 100to more as the same detection mutations tissue in times multiple making as that ability allows region the

or of genome, the includes the a that to genome; and few research whole targeted can somatic of (which which either on RNAs. human regions include genome sequencing several a regions and noncoding or of NGS all sequencing 99% remaining be applications DNA, of Clinical coding which panel whole exome human hundred interrogates (WES), both) (WGS), performed express (typically sequencing genes); including the germline also for histones or In measuring sites genomewide immunoprecipitation DNA, addition the or binding sequencing, (chromatin can and factors transcriptome transcription NGS for to used be (RNA-Seq) ChIP-Seq). and

genetic is possible responsible known gene if identified. disorder a the diagnosis and is been its has only of sequence for Direct mutations In multifactorial because causal not direct either that involved. is and identified genetic or basis, not diseases been possible, common (polygenic) no have has is a single some including disease several diagnosis because genetic the disorders, gene gene is the GWASs. disease-associated be of for two unbiased of types linkage identification such analyses and can In analysis cases, gene(s): performed more instances, also regions markers as disease-causing localize on chromosomal to to genes. interest, known must linkage or their the both be putative of used loci, one marker in In based the genome, surrogate as previously. naturally polymorphisms, described marker used known occurring DNA SNPs, sequences are in variations as The typically loci

HapMap of SNP application the 1000 groups, technologic genomic breakthroughs projects the have and have to sequencing Two the (the SNPs based project genome completion disequilibrium mapping. linkage provided large patterns several project) genomewide of hunting.” First on is in multiple “gene ethnoracial that high-throughput enabled contiguous varying numbers known the that blocks disequilibrium The of into now divided genome as entire cluster. human contain chromosome as a are “haplotypes,” hence same which be in SNPs inherited linkage and together on can can be the querying shared rather genome, about than comparable DNA SNP simply human a in single every by http://ebooksmedicine.net result, As information obtained

C all GG four G T T G C A C T G G T wash AC C nucleotides, C AC T T A G Cleave G Add C Wash, T C four-color A G and T C terminating GG groups, Repeat B A C dyes A imaging dye C with labeled G different A

CATCGT CCCCCC Top: Bottom:

Fig. 7.41 Principleofnext-generationsequencing.Severalalternativeapproachescurrentlyareavailablefor“NextGen”sequencing,andoneofthemorecommonlyusedplatformsisillustrated.(A)ShortfragmentsofgenomicDNA(“template”)between100and500basepairsinlengthareimmobilizedonasolidphaseplatformsuchasaglassslide,usinguniversalcaptureprimersthatarecomplementarytoadaptersthathavepreviouslybeenaddedtoendsofthetemplatefragments.Theadditionoffluorescentlylabeledcomplementarynucleotides,onepertemplateDNApercycle,occursina“massivelyparallel”fashion,atmillionsoftemplatesimmobilizedonthesolidphaseatthesametime.Afour-colorimagingcameracapturesthefluorescenceemanatingfromeachtemplatelocation(correspondingtothespecificincorporatednucleotide),followingwhichthefluorescentdyeiscleavedandwashedaway,andtheentirecycleisrepeated.(B)PowerfulcomputationalprogramscandeciphertheimagestogeneratesequencescomplementarytothetemplateDNAattheendofone“run,”andthesesequencesarethenmappedbacktothereferencegenomicsequence,toidentifyalterations. (Reproduced © Group.) generation, Nature next technologies—the permission Metzker from NatRevGenet11:31–46, with Publishing 2010, M: Sequencing haplotype. a SNPs small number identify specific using of shared looking “tag” or haplotypes, that single a for or genotype earlier. cost-effective described Second, to now millions using of it simultaneously, possible SNP way, is SNPs as arrays, a in high-density

that or SNPs interest, in through disequilibrium loci exhibiting in (i.e., disease the Linkage with assessing members deals analysis the pedigrees. of transmitted linkage assumption trait marker family are allele disease the shared with with SNPs) time of allele. a cosegregate With on of all becomes based with haplotype” a “disease it SNPs, disease to possible the panel which putative define of allele. facilitates disease analysis the Eventually, cloning localization linkage and in related to and mendelian disorders Linkage profound that gene penetrance. useful high are one is analysis most with effects

independent now is some loci It common resulting human that diseases, asthma, basis, contributing established multiple the phenotype. polygenic hypertension, with as have a disease diabetes, of and such a in effects, genetic small most mental disorders, statistical linkage such genetic lack analyses the to detect variants. power Conventional variant with in persons cohorts overrepresented and across SNPs patients for GWASs, (rather the entire the that than without In of families) are examined a disease are genome disease. with large that that regions the genome variant This susceptibility. identifies a of or disease confer gene genes contain whether using selected a disease the on study. the provisionally “candidate seems approach, and based then biologic to region The how their causal with which are genes tightly in identified gene” be is disease associated function under the involved they within are variant likely in mass, humans, bone GWASs height, body common traits In polygenic color, such in eye diseases, also the genetic and of to addition led quantitative to as density. and loci modulate have that identification hair

genomic medicine. current the this era of to We reflect chapter end on of human techniques. diagnostic taking Advances molecular are pace, as basis the breathtaking place disease a in understanding molecular are at illustrate diseases changes the these the impacted certain we this in on book will how of Throughout clinic. have management the will examples time reader this the hope book commonplace. that reaches become such By we many more

et al: aneuploidy DW, screening, 370:799–808, RL, J, 2014. prenatal Engl sequencing Bianchi Med J Parker DNA Wentworth standard N versus next-generation the study [Seminal of maternal diagnosis prenatal fetus, in tests.] prenatal “liquid of superiority with sequencing compared demonstrated potential for to biopsies” conventional that trisomies when paired http://ebooksmedicine.net

neuroblastoma, DA, Weiser Cell SC, activation mutations oncogenic differential 2014. et to Cancer PJ, inhibition sensitivity al: in ALK therapy confer Huwe and Bresler 26(5):682–694, ALK study ALK potential harboring neuroblastomas therapy the important molecule small targeted ALK in for mutations, demonstrating [An using inhibitors.]

application, understanding fibrosis molecular 16:45–56, Cystic genetics: 2015. from Nat to GR: clinical Rev Cutting Genet the on [An a particular with and by of in doyens modifiers cystic the review one environmental fibrosis disease.] on genetic field, focus the of outstanding

al: mutations, Eleveld Nat Oldridge 47:864– Genet DA, 871, show RAS-MAPK TF, V, et pathway neuroblastomas Relapsed 2015. frequent Bernard lethal a the therapy treated of opportunity pathway demonstrating high for [A childhood.] a this in tumor of study in landmark RAS-MAPK in neuroblastomas, providing alterations targeted new frequency

Helgason Icelandic population, H, Large-scale whole-genome al: Genet 47:435–444, the Gudjonsson sequencing Nat of 2015. DF, SA, Gudbjartsson et sequenced as influence risk the identification variants well sequencing, whole were modern-day for power diseases.] of diversity as the genetic 2600 Icelandic [A genetic that of unique reiterates over multifactorial of study that wherein next-generation for might natives genomes

Ann X-associated N Sci 1338:58–70, 2015. (FTAS), Fragile syndrome Acad RJ: tremor/ataxia Hagerman Y Hagerman PJ, condition, in neurodegenerative review the FTAS.] causing authoritative the role FMR1 the premutations and X fragile [An symptomatic loci on protein, at of

Med problematic, JL, 2015. N medicine—personalized, J and promising, Engl 372:2229–2234, DL: Jameson Precision Longo also in sequencing.] of [An precision on known and modern throughput personalized opportunities genomics medicine, challenges high and era as insightful the of medicine, the review

Angelman, and 2015. Prader-Willi, Clin syndromes, Chamberlain 15q11-q13 duplication 62:587–606, Pediatr L, North Am Kalsner SJ: natural with these the disorders.] review and genetics, on history clinical two children up-to-date findings, imprinting of [An

MM, et and al: care significance subtilisin/kexin C, type of advances biology Recent convertase familial of the 2015. of and Page in 9, hypercholesterolemia: Clin Sniderman regulation Sci understanding the A, proprotein 129:63–79, therapeutic Stefanutti for statin regulation augmenting protein [A cholesterol PCSK9, the this in of is by leveraged clinic of mechanisms being inhibition effects.] on and state-of-the-art review how

M, and reducing Engl 372(16):1489–1499, Med safety Robinson in M, 2015. cardiovascular et N of lipids J events, and al: alirocumab Krempf Efficacy JG, Farnier PCSK9 study [Seminal in establishing of hyperlipidemia.] inhibitors the benefits

2015. Engl fibrosis Welsh DK, 372:351–362, Stoltz Origins DA, N of cystic J MJ: Med Meyerholz lung disease, on pathophysiological mechanisms that in exhaustive the diseases illustrations.] review to pulmonary numerous [An cystic contribute fibrosis, excellent with of panorama

2012. infant al: Back-to-Sleep death factor FL, changes EA, et for of Kinney sudden campaign, initiation 129:630–638, Risk Haas HC, Trachtenberg after Pediatrics syndrome and to have additional measures since on Sleep” the of that then.] emerged impact SIDS important risk study the [An “Back what mortality, campaign factors

patients TRAFFIC homozygous 2015. Phe508del Study Study 373:220–231, CE, Wainwright J for N Med cystic CFTR, Group: in TRANSPORT with Engl fibrosis Group, Lumacaftor-Ivacaftor in CFTR FDA variant alone fibrosis; Lumacaftor which to approved Ivacaftor enhance study another is mutant and function cystic of Phe508del the CFTR.] of for of led [Seminal that regimen Ivacaftor, approval combination

Wilms S, 27(2):286–297, Walz AL, Ooms Recurrent in 2015. homeodomain et DGCR8, histology and mutations Cancer favorable Cell A, al: tumors, DROSHA, Gadd SIX microRNA in in Wilms deregulation.] microRNA of [Seminal study genes tumors identifying sequencing and consequent processing involved mutations

unexplained children: in inherited death Behr conditions, of 16:1706–1713, Wong LC, ER: the infants undiagnosed 2014. and Europace cardiac role Sudden might infancy as on conditions, cardiac death how review unsuspected SIDS.] [An be in diagnosed erroneously specifically insightful sudden leading “channelopathies,” to

2014. F, DM, Y, referred Yang Xia exome al: for Muzny JAMA sequencing, clinical among whole patients et Molecular findings 312:1870–1879, of in leading exome elegant patients to highlighting mutations as the whole prowess study suspected consecutive the causal discovery pathogenic with 2000 as of of 25% sequencing, germline wherein disorders next-generation many [An techniques, patients.] genetic underwent studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

as Metals Environmental Pollutants

Reactions by Injury Drugs:Adverse Therapeutic Drug

by influenced are or caused factors. Many environmental diseases various and outdoor, occupational Broadly ambient work. term settings indoor, the which encompasses the in environment and humans defined, live agents each they the these and of health. to exposed toxic and breathe, major consume, the settings, people they are food In water of determinants are air the ingestion, to (“personal factors the environment”) the individual alcohol include pertain like. “recreational” and diet, therapeutic Other and and use, environmental tobacco drug consumption, the of larger that than (described It equation. environment generally threats personal environment, change factors that human have but the effect on in may later) ambient global warming related new to health this believed a is

or term to disorders nutritional and of diseases chemical disease the including refers exposure ambient, in environmental to agents by caused origin. workplace, The personal environments, physical Environmental diseases are surprisingly common. kill accidents per road International has wars Organization globally and work-related estimated injuries illnesses more Labor combined. people year do The than and that Most are illnesses than of these caused accidents. by rather work-related problems agents the toxic difficulties estimate, population more is created dose much exposures. The the of measuring the to exposures burden general and by the disease to because mostly of agents and of in in duration difficult nonoccupational diversity of precise Whatever countries. in diseases and developing major disability and financial burden, numbers, are suffering particularly causes a environmental of heavy the constitute

in following the the in of Environmental water contamination 1986, the in in resulting States city the of Chernobyl contaminated of poisoning accident major in India, drinking Flint the sometimes methyl 1960s, Bay meltdown as Bhopal, the in tsunami such isocyanate from disasters, United in the gas 2011, 2016. Minamata of mercury consequence leakage nuclear Fukushima in the the are methyl lead in and nuclear Japan 1984, diseases unusual and occurrences. these infrequent are Fortunately, much and but relatively low to common, more are levels contaminants. dramatic, exposure produced injury chronic diseases of Less by sensitivity. of sensitivities age, effects, exposed wide as complex variations of producing factors, It the a as in including well noted between be create pollutants individual and persons, different host that predisposition, interactions should genetic multiplicative tissue malnutrition Disease more related is pervasive. to even it in malnourished—one persons estimated seven people million were worldwide. In 2010, every that was 925 than which by more mortality for disproportionately worldwide. of Children undernutrition, 50% are accounts affected childhood

first emerging climate of this problem chapter, change. consider we effects the In the of health including environmental agents, nutritional specific disorders, then of the address of of toxicity and discuss those mechanisms We origin. physical chemical and

has warmed 20th the century, especially Global mid-1960s. since and the show early temperature significantly since the earth that measurements 2005, 2015 common, 2010, Record-breaking each have records. setting high-temperature temperatures 2014, and become global with successive 21st century. 15 the since 16 warmest note, have years Of occurred 1880 the of during During C warmer 0.9° temperature global land than 2015, the the was average. century 20th records set 0.74° 20th above Mean temperature annual C average. an 2015, also in average the temperatures new ocean century with global of this approach writing, just 2015. on exceed the 2016 in or As to records track is set

http://ebooksmedicine.net

have large-scale earth, losses temperatures of atmospheric as number majority as as ice. in flood, or that frequency, to ice other Greenland, the glaciated ocean Antarctica, include and in regions large well vast sea a storm led drought, of and thinning the ocean changes and on disappearance dramatic Arctic rising as The of effects well and glacial mm/year. a 80 land-based at the average sea of and global warming approximately ± the level produced currently average 3.5 of level the 0.4 mm The since is has ice of 1993, rate oceans rising rise thermal sea of global melting expansion

least is part, there scientists a is, Although at change climate that acceptance among in quibble, general man-made. politicians through dioxide the The ( fossil atmospheric greenhouse rising burning carbon the released gases, of fuels particularly of level (CO2) is culprit

Fig. as air methane. later), and ozone important (an well as pollutant, 8.1A discussed ), gases, effect” from radiated be into by vapor, otherwise with space. the that would absorbing so-called water These Earth’s “greenhouse along energy surface lost produce any than is expected atmospheric experienced by changes this century—levels of in 1200 average for in and, CO2 401 behavior, (about increase in at approximately The of end annual level tens 650,000 ppm) of 500 to point to ppm the was without millions human of 2015 higher years. to not years not increase also but from CO2 and This from attendant plants. the production increased carbon by in stems only decrease fixation deforestation global the model computer by by to to increased Depending year temperature 2100 greenhouse cause on levels to ( the gases 2°C are the used, rise of projected 5°C

Fig. 8.1B ). depend on change consequences, of and the the to and The health severity of mitigate climate ability effects. the damaging extent its ensuing humankind’s will rapidity, consequences a of on is in the increasing scenario, following: number human impact health including to serious a Even have however, the of best-case by incidence negative climate diseases, expected the change

and pollution. will and by air cerebrovascular, respiratory which waves of diseases, all be exacerbated Cardiovascular, heat

water heavy diseases, foodand by caused of a other as clean after consequence Gastroenteritis, supplies sewage disruption rains cholera, waterborne treatment, disasters. environmental and of contamination infectious and and floods other and

(e.g., severe infectious fever, diseases, distribution dengue failures, weather and frequent increased variation from number geographic Niño changes extreme and such in malaria resulting temperatures, more and Vector-borne to crop related more as events). and vector El

by production. changes Malnutrition, caused climate local that disrupt crop in anticipated are in 0.90947 to 1958-2015 temperature Global in 0.8 0.4 0.6 C) anomaly most Coefficient: –0.2 tropical changes severe 0.2 0 (° average which locations, be Correlation A Such –0.4

Fig. 8.1 Climatechange,pastandfuture. (A)CorrelationofCO2levelsmeasuredattheMaunaLoaObservatoryinHawaiiwithaverageglobaltemperaturetrendssincethemid-1960s.“Globaltemperature”inanygivenyearwasdeducedattheHadleyCenter(UnitedKingdom)frommeasurementstakenatmorethan3000weatherstationslocatedaroundtheglobe.

(B)Predictedtemperatureincreasesduringthe21stcentury.Differentcomputermodelsplotanticipatedrisesinglobaltemperaturesof2°Cto5°Cbytheyear2100. of Colorado.) Colorado Department State of Aster, (A, Collins, University, Courtesy Dr. Geosciences, Fort Richard may 10% temperatures above a or agricultural of productivity 25% in it near as tolerance that change. estimated by is some already to be countries developing decline levels; consequence by climate crop may 2080,

other with Greenland warming disease-specific of by of parts Northern will thermal it Beyond oceans, particularly levels estimated these the that combined in of the to 2 is by 2100. 6 Hemisphere, expansion and melting raise sea glacial feet ice, effects, the areas for million of these the in at of in that end ocean even rise at 600 levels flooding Approximately is are risk low-lying the population—roughly people—live if the low estimates. 10% world’s the example, by the a of inundate islands rise of will sea submerge of rise land by 2085. by will 70% feet level mass 3-foot 1.5 all For a in islands and 100% 2100 Maldive death. resulting creating of conditions ripe will http://ebooksmedicine.net poverty, “vectors” The and malnutrition, unrest, war, the disrupt lives of displacement people for commerce, political and and sickness, change 2015 the catastrophic of recognition to late objective: the in 196 following a Worldwide the France, participating led countries to which meeting countries effects agreed climate historic of at of in Paris,

global temperature to recognizing increase this risks that the below increase and to significantly the the climate the change. to above efforts well pursue Holding preindustrial reduce preindustrial impacts levels 1.5°C levels, in to would 2°C average temperature of and above limit

science as of poisons. Toxicology is defined the agents. distribution, of toxic of mechanisms It and effects, studies action the heat. also agents of as includes of and radiation the broadly, it study the physical effects More such each pounds in billion of toxic are produced of including States. known carcinogens, chemicals, the United year pounds Approximately 4 72 million the effects chemicals. is In potential little health of general, however, about known than been less effects. experimentally 1% United use States, for 100,000 the have in approximately in Of tested health chemicals the

exogenous principles and We now some chemicals basic toxicity of the consider drugs. regarding

of a is The straightforward. not definition poison quantitative concept a dosage. It is dependent strictly on drugs right are of remedy” century more a the differentiates from substances proliferation potentially Paracelsus today, in the a from 16th dosage effects. view even of the harmful in The valid therapeutic “all that quote is poison perhaps poisons; with

ingestion, that or in chemicals are skin the absorbed be ( inhalation, through by the contact body exogenous may Xenobiotics environment

Fig. 8.2

or other in feces bone, excreted be air, eliminated urine fat, may brain, they Chemicals in accumulate in or tissues. or or expired may

to site they act may Chemicals the sites. at of entry, or may transported other be not to most agents solvents on form to in body, are and the Some but modified metabolized (detoxification) activated drugs water-soluble products or metabolites. toxic form are entry are

through lipid are Most penetration their facilitates by solvents lipoproteins transport components which the drugs and lipophilic, membranes. cell in blood and of

to into products, that xenobiotics xenobiotics metabolize generate toxic compounds The or activate reactions nontoxic (

Fig. 8.3

Fig. 8.2), two in occur phases. I oxidation, reduction. can hydrolysis, chemicals undergo reactions, or In phase sulfation, glutathione and into glucuronidation, are water-soluble through of methylation, of metabolized reactions phase compounds conjugation Products with II reactions I (GSH). phase often excreted. readily are compounds Water-soluble

Toxicity Distribution Storage to tissues

Fig. In water, soil are body, tract, skin. at site metabolized. various the of lungs, are and they contained they gastrointestinal to absorbed may absorption, are where Human transported stored through air, 8.2 but (GI) organs, the and the exposure in pollutants. Pollutants bloodstream act or through to the they generally a agent, formation creating result of Metabolism compounds, activation xenobiotics the of in in of water-soluble are may excreted, the or which toxic metabolite.

cellular most reactions P-450 involved system system. is The • cytochrome important phase I the enzyme in endoplasmic in the of is but system P-450 The reticulum organs present in the is the body, throughout liver. (ER) it most active may into that system or active injury. xenobiotics catalyzes cause that convert either The xenobiotics detoxify reactions compounds cellular (ROS), can produce, byproduct, in as which of cellular Chapter cause a (discussed oxygen damage may Both reactions types species reactive 2). the system activation are free generation of conversion metabolic carbon chemicals and of of through trichloromethyl the the the DNA-binding tetrachloride to P-450 of Examples a toxic radical,

receptors, molecules Xenobiotic cellular membranes, Reactive Nontoxic metabolite Elimination Effects DNA) on metabolite (enzymes,

Fig. 8.3 Xenobioticmetabolism.Xenobioticscanbemetabolizedtonontoxicmetabolitesandeliminatedfromthebody(detoxification).However,theirmetabolismalsomayresultinformationofareactivemetabolitethatistoxictocellularcomponents.Ifrepairisnoteffective,short-andlong-termeffectsdevelop. Hodgson E: from Atextbookofmoderntoxicology,ed Fig. (Modified 3, 1–1. NJ, Hoboken, Wiley John & Sons.) 2004, benzo[a]pyrene, in carcinogen cigarette smoke. from a present metabolite metabolism participates therapeutic such and drugs of anti-convulsants, (discussed in barbiturates, of common later). the and alcohol metabolism acetaminophen, in system also P-450 The a cytochrome number as large

encoding • to among owing genes drugs the in widely that metabolized enzymes interactions both enzymes the through with vary people, activity system. and different in the polymorphisms are P-450 also or activity fasting enzymes alcohol The by and smoking. and be the may starvation, decreased of by increased consumption

worldwide, among significant a cardiac pulmonary at-risk preexisting with disease. mortality and is particularly pollution or cause Air of individuals morbidity often air disease. causes is that potential also with laden The of many we life-giving breathe Airborne death. have been long morbidity major causes microorganisms of and both countries. air, in the and widespread More are “underdeveloped” chemical in the pollutants and so-called “developed” particulate found Specific have indoor recognized for and both hazards air. been outdoor

cities proximity is gaseous industrialized of in in in so particulate more The air with pollutants, ambient contaminated to nations heavy and an mixture industry. unsavory and dioxide, monitors Environmental United dioxide, nitrogen the sets for allowable and matter. In (EPA) States, limits upper lead, Agency sulfur CO, pollutants: ozone, Protection particulate the and six smog major sometimes that Angeles, agents Paulo. Los Mexico some of stifles São Cairo, as these produce and the well-known such Houston, City, cities Together, phenomenon. modern is a pollution that may air It seem wrote emission. disposition of that types of control first “Whoever 61 is in in Seneca burning pollutants, the and felt straightforward shall the by their his of AD his coal suffer heavy that I times case; as and he was environmental-control has in is the changed air “pestilential soon air not of Rome.” The loss of What simplicity: of alteration sources proclaimed should and in the as head.” an found Edward modern he This nature guilty 1306 the soot, law regulations be its left vapors, and was It that drown lost man argued has himself modern head his to in could pollution! be

discussed with (as bear pollution, air air effects the lead pollutants brunt organ of systems many poisoning the lungs CO, the affect consequences later). of but The adverse and of is of 13. lung pollutant-caused detailed More discussion diseases Chapter in found consider particulates, the ozone, dioxide, sulfur ( and we Here major of CO effects health

Table 8.1

of 8.1 Table Outdoor Health Pollutants Effects Air

Crit Respir J DatafromHealthEffectsofOutdoorAirPollution,Part2.CommitteeoftheEnvironmentalandOccupationalHealthAssemblyoftheAmericanThoracicSociety,Am 153:477,1996. Care Med

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Ozone cities most one pervasive levels exceeding the air of in EPA pollutants, standards. is many with mostly are nitrogen formed involving is automobile a It which sunlight-driven released exhaust. oxides, gas by by reactions forms fine Together and the ozone words (from with oxides familiar the smog particulate fog). and smoke matter, the the injure generate Its participation alveoli. stems tract respiratory and chemical cells lining the its that reactions from in free toxicity which radicals, of may in when those of particulate Low especially be by tolerated present healthy detrimental lung function, and levels with ozone with to are but asthma or pollution. emphysema, persons along occur combine singly “witches’ a rarely brew.” veritable to pollutants Unfortunately, but create

processes dioxide, particles, emitted plants by aerosols power coaland oil-fired and these industrial burning Sulfur and acid fuels. are particles death. these, be appear cause morbidity to of main the and Of particularly Particles the all µm are diameter inhaled way airstream when because less harmful, than by they carried the alveoli. in are to the 10 inflammasomes, (possibly mediators reaction. Chapter they macrophages of Here, an inciting phagocytosed by and inflammatory activating and release neutrophils, causing are 2) by the dangerous. are the a are are larger and mucociliary result “escalator” trapped the as or contrast, by particles less in removed nose By

a is (CO) monoxide nonirritating, odorless gas. tasteless, colorless, Carbon of oxidation by produced incomplete is It materials. carbonaceous the fossil Its burners, include cigarette oil engines, industries using and home sources smoke. fuels, automotive respiratory low air levels life in not found may threatening. to but The are impaired often function usually ambient contribute chronic However, garage as underground exposure workers, confined fumes, develop high to environments such tunnel poisoning. with working in persons and may an an CO is important but air suicidal here cause as also included it and death. accidental pollutant, of is from minutes. a a In car coma closed exhaust 5 small, can garage, a engine induce running lethal within preventing transport. hemoglobin binding that is a systemic by to kills and asphyxiant oxygen CO Hemoglobin has CO than greater O2. 200-fold a for affinity for formed is of CO The carrying binding by is incapable that of carboxyhemoglobin, oxygen. their are insidiously central so to system depression, themselves. unaware nervous help unable are which often to of victims that (CNS) and plight Hypoxia develops leads are appears hypoxia saturated to with when Systemic and hemoglobin to CO, 30% and 70% 20% probable 60% death saturation. unconsciousness with the is poisoning of is of based of high blood. the levels in detection diagnosis CO carboxyhemoglobin The on

byCOdevelopsbecausecarboxyhemoglobin,onceformed,isremarkablystable.Asaresult,withlow-levelpersistentexposuretoCO,carboxyhemoglobinmayaccumulatetoalife-threateningconcentrationintheblood.Theslowlydevelopinghypoxiacanevokewidespreadischemicchangesinthebrain,particularlyinthebasalgangliaandlenticularnuclei.WithcessationofexposuretoCO,thepatientusuallyrecovers,buttheremaybepermanentneurologicdamage. MORPHOLOGYChronic poisoning

cherry-red acolorimpartedbycarboxyhemoglobin.Ifdeathoccursrapidly,morphologicchangesmaynotbepresent;withlongersurvival,thebrainmaybeslightlyedematousandexhibitpunctatehemorrhagesandhypoxia-inducedneuronalchanges.Thesechangesarenotspecific;theysimplyimplysystemichypoxia(Chapter23).InvictimswhosurviveCOpoisoning,completerecoveryispossible;however,impairmentsofmemory,vision,hearing,andspeechsometimesremain. and of byCOgenerallyisaconsequenceofaccidentalexposureorsuicideattempt.Inlight-skinnedpeople,itismarkedbyacharacteristicgeneralized color Acute mucous the poisoning skin membranes,

homes air are the increasingly the “buttoned up” of the environment, exclude for modern As potential pollution increases. indoor to 13). nitrogen asbestos is common pollutant most later), (already (discussed The are dioxide tobacco as Chapter outdoor in (discussed and offenders mentioned pollutants), smoke additional but CO, agents comments other about here. some are presented A few

an polycyclic hydrocarbons. contain and from persons of predisposes is infections nitrogen carbon and containing to organic may burning of exposed that oxides carcinogenic various lung particulates, irritant materials, Smoke homes charcoal that estimated in world, burn and cooking, for of carbon-containing dung, developing mainly as light. in It the material or their heating, is such one-third areas, wood,

is derived uranium, soil in from and widely homes. gas in Radon, present radioactive a the for smoke), cause (particularly does miners in can not least exposure uranium chronic at cancer home lung exposures in radon Although low-level increase in nonsmokers. who that appear those lung risk, it cancer

cause allergens and can even pet cold, and which as pathogenic asthma. cause and the as mites, irritation, can rhinitis, fungi such well microbiologic viral Legionnaires’ and pneumonia, Bioaerosols derived dust those from eye common may as that dander, disease, molds, contain agents,

Environmentaldiseasesareconditionscausedbyexposuretochemicalorphysicalagentsintheambient,workplace,andpersonalenvironments.

Exogenouschemicals,knownasxenobiotics,enterthebodythroughinhalation,ingestion,andskincontact,andcaneitherbeeliminatedoraccumulateinfat,bone,brain,andothertissues.

Xenobioticscanbeconvertedintonontoxicproductsortoxiccompoundsthroughatwo-phasereactionprocessthatinvolvesthecytochromeP-450system.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Themostcommonairpollutantsareozone(whichincombinationwithoxidesandparticulatematterformssmog),sulfurdioxide,acidaerosols,andparticleslessthan10µmindiameter.

COisanairpollutantandanimportantcauseofdeathfromaccidentsandsuicide;itbindshemoglobinwithhighaffinity,leadingtosystemicasphyxiationresultinginCNSdepression.

effects heavy most the harmful populations, are in Lead, considered arsenic, mercury, and cadmium, associated metals here. with human commonly

to with binds metabolism, neurologic, is in renal hematologic, skeletal, Lead and that groups GI, to interferes leading toxicities. and metal absorbed sulfhydryl a calcium readily proteins Lead water. air, occurs contaminated exposure food, through and the were For 20th paints of major of the sources and in environment most lead century the house gasoline. in paints the paints, such many has sources lead foundries, and of of batteries, gas and environment, leaded all hazards. diminished, mines, the as use spray constitute of occupational Although persist lead-based which greatly in for lead major flaking hazards and older contamination However, pose the paint soil houses youngsters. that Blood exposure. paint often homes which level exceed Control at in be 5 in µg/dL, (CDC) Disease recommends living levels limit children containing measures Centers further to lead-based the Prevention or lead older of the lead-contaminated taken for dust and in occurred A of Flint, of 2014–2016. city case water drinking U.S. in dramatic lead the of contamination Michigan, the Flint supply water source to of The Lake so-called “Flint the water changed occurred Huron crisis” the city from was when to River. century-old higher concentration chloride the pipes. Because water lead had a than from lead River waters, Flint from it the lake leached homes tap the the as in (ppb) about above of and billion an increase cases ppb. as 25% caused of This 15 levels in in water limit in parts some 13,200 high per lead acceptable developed blood. As residents lead 6000 levels their high a in to 12,000 very result particularly because they harmful more than absorb of lead lead children adults whereas 15%. is to absorb approximately 50% from Ingested food, high to a susceptibility barrier in permeable children A more damage. brain blood–brain creates The poisoning lead features clinical are of in shown

Fig. 8.4

absorbed up into where 20 of binds 30 developing into with lead years. to is and and a 85%) competes (80% taken to has teeth Most it bone, phosphates, calcium, half-life throughout distributed remainder 5% the lead of in and the is About to absorbed remains blood, the 10% tissues. soft predominate is lead are central whereas neuropathies Excess effects peripheral in more adults, to children; and toxic in tissues adults in common nervous children. and of in be lead or children may subtle, effects they The be producing chronic lethal. massive dysfunction, mild exposure may been and psychomotor children, disabilities, motor, impairments described, intellectual, reduced IQ, In sensory, young have psychologic learning retarded including

Fig. Pathologicfeaturesofleadpoisoning. 8.4

Adult: Headache, Encephalopathy, loss deterioration mental memory Child:

basophilic BLOOD stippling Anemia, red cell

Demyelination PERIPHERAL Adult: NERVES

deposits development, BONES and coma. psychoses, cases, in in blindness, more seizures, severe Child: epiphyses and, Radiodense in both in adults elimination irreversible. peripheral the CNS remit but children usually are peripheral and of exposure, abnormalities with generally neuropathies Lead-induced Other the of effects lead include following. exposure

lines” ( “lead density normal of Excess increased epiphyses with in calcified interferes and the detected primary bone lead bone in children, trabeculae as causing cartilage the radiodense remodeling

Fig. ). 8.5 excess may the hyperpigmentation. also where different Lead in lines occur gums, of lead a stimulates sort cartilage mineralization. and Lead delaying of the inhibits increasing chondrogenesis healing by fractures way of exposures Excretion by cause of may tubules. lead damage the kidneys, to occurs acute and proximal

affinity acid sulfhydryl enzymes delta with groups in synthesis: and a dehydratase interferes for has heme high and aminolevulinic two ferrochelatase. involved Lead heme leading is Iron to anemia. into impaired, incorporation Lead the an of increase may cells, cell potassium-dependent hemolysis. red inhibits fragility membranes, sodium-and also causing that ATPases in effect vigilance. of poisoning requires diagnosis The constant lead red basophilic It anemia adults the neurologic changes children in children. of unexplained or in on cells stippling and basis be with suspected in may diagnosis. than for 50 red cell lead or, Elevated are protoporphyrin free and alternatively, levels definitive levels, zinc-protoporphyrin (greater required µg/dL) blood exposure, the be In only lead of obvious milder anemia cases may abnormality.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. ofthewristhascausedamarkedincreaseintheirradiodensity,sothattheyareasradiopaqueasthecorticalbone. Leadpoisoning.Impairedremodelingofcalcifiedcartilageintheepiphyses(arrows) 8.5 University (Courtesy Dietz: Medical of Southwestern Dr. Department Radiology, Dallas,Texas.) of of Texas School, GW

MORPHOLOGYThemajoranatomictargetsofleadtoxicityaretheblood,bonemarrow,nervoussystem,GItract,andkidneys(

Fig.8.4

areoneoftheearliestsignsofleadaccumulationandarecharacteristic,consistingofamicrocytic,hypo-chromicanemiaassociatedwithadistinctivepunctatebasophilic Blood changes stippling ofredcells.Thesechangesinthebloodstemfromtheinhibitionofhemesynthesisinmarrowerythroidprogenitors.Anotherconsequenceofthisblockadeisthatzinc-protoporphyrinisformedinsteadofheme.Thus,elevatedbloodlevelsofzincprotoporphyrinoritsproduct,freeredcellprotoporphyrin,areimportantindicatorsofleadpoisoning.

andfootdrop). demyelinating appears,typicallyinvolvingmotorneuronsinnervatingthemostcommonlyusedmuscles.Thus,theextensormusclesofthewristandfingersareoftenthefirsttobeaffected,followedbyparalysisoftheperonealmuscles(wristdrop ispronetooccurinchildren.Theanatomicchangesunderlyingthemoresubtlefunctionaldeficitsareilldefined;atthemoresevereendofthespectrum,changesincludebrainedema,demyelinationofthecerebralandcerebellarwhitematter,andnecrosisofcorticalneuronsaccompaniedbydiffuseastrocyticproliferation.Inadults,theCNSisless-oftenaffected,butfrequentlyaperipheral damage Brain neuropathy

TheGI alsoisasiteofmajorclinicalmanifestations.Lead“colic”ischaracterizedbyextremelysevere,poorlylocalizedabdominalpain. tract

Thekidneys maydevelopproximaltubulardamagewithintranuclearleadinclusions.Chronicrenaldamageleadseventuallytointerstitialfibrosisandpossiblyrenalfailureandfindingssuggestiveofgout(“saturninegout”).Otherfeaturesofleadpoisoningareshownin

Fig.8.4

in to such like to proteins GI high binds the and Mercury, in as leading sulfhydryl affinity, lead, and damage other several organs tract kidneys. groups with CNS certain the the paintings, a of in a used in as cave pigment history, including cosmetic, diuretics. remedy ways syphilis, a for many mercury throughout component a Humans and have such bizarre Poisoning in Wonderland tremor, used (mercury inhalation is and from long Hatter” in of associated hat-making). of the gingivitis, Lewis Carroll’s has behavior, was mercury Alice “Mad and recognized in been as vapors that with formerly

of contaminated sources vapors. dental are exposure amalgams, to and release which main the Today, mercury mercury fish mining contaminated in rivers and world, streams. areas used In gold the mercury of has some mercury by from methyl organic mercury to the is degassing natural the industrial crust such contamination compounds from of Inorganic as earth’s or converted bacteria. food than 1 fish mercury be in such carnivorous mercury enters swordfish, levels shark, the may as the and chain, higher and million times Methyl water. surrounding bluefish, in ingested Almost mercury of GI 90% the the in is tract. absorbed release Minamata and mercury–based in of from mercury methyl and in containing deaths. consumption consumption a in Iraq, many River caused the Bay of with the widespread morbidity Japan, bread fungicide grain of fish Agano contaminated The treated the methyl and

cerebral defects in and children The exposed utero. blindness, known the medical Minamata major include associated disorders became and as palsy, “Minamata deafness, episode disease” CNS with in the of extremely that consumption for States fish sensitive mercury. brain women pregnant CDC The mercury; the United avoid contain developing to reason, methyl to known recommended in has is this the

and Ingested injure mercury bloody and ulcerations diarrhea. cause the gut can and necrosis tubular renal failure. cause In can mercury acute the kidneys,

system, several toxicities nervous in aspects most GI prominent interfere skin, of with salts the and leading Arsenic are heart. tract, cellular to that metabolism, in in poison of was Italy. practitioners and the Medici skilled Arsenic of families choice Renaissance http://ebooksmedicine.net Borgia exposure the world. important problem an Today, is of health many arsenic areas in and and water Arsenic and other found used naturally herbicides, preservatives, soil wood products. is in is in agricultural industries. released the It smelting and the may be by environment mining into a in and acute for herbal Indian and arsenic is 6). (Chapter is promyelocytic frontline Arsenic trioxide leukemia treatment Chinese present medicine, such in Bangladesh, water China. countries concentrations are arsenic as and in inorganic ground Large Chile, present of yet 35 million greatest one of Between contaminated people Bangladesh environmental uncovered. water the in constituting cancer risks and drink 77 arsenic, with

as syndrome; manifesting quantities, diarrhea; abdominal cardiac in distress and If acute encephalopathy. arrhythmias, acute causes toxicity arsenic respiratory shock pain, ingested and severe large toxicity severe may enough to CNS GI, cardiovascular be death. cause and be oxidative These effects mitochondrial phosphorylation. the to interference may with attributed cell not of and Chronic of to hyper-pigmentation basal be exposure may the melanomas). (but development causes the by and which skin, arsenic hyperkeratosis carcinomas followed squamous sensorimotor A develop. polyneuropathy symmetrical can also and multiple sunlight those Arsenic-induced and by induced occurring from tumors skin by palms differ by as on appearing soles, lesions. an is lung also risk increased Arsenic carcinoma. associated exposure of with are uncertain. lung mechanisms the arsenic skin The the in of and carcinogenesis

production preferentially may involve is mechanisms ROS. lungs that the to and increased Cadmium uncertain the kidneys through of toxic already modern cadmium metals contrast In with toxic is the relatively agent. a discussed, used generally of are disposed It as waste. batteries, nickel-cadmium household which mainly in is can fertilizers soil plants and irrigation through Cadmium contaminate directly and water. or important general population. the exposure of is for most Food the source damage progress lead disease end-stage Excessive cadmium intake as toxicity, disease. obstructive that renal tubular initially to may to renal can lung and also Cadmium associated calcium with cause abnormalities skeletal can exposure loss. in irrigate used known (ouch-ouch), osteomalacia a of rice in disease. Japan Cadmium-contaminated water combination women associated postmenopausal renal disease and “itai-itai” fields as with a osteoporosis to caused and and kidney data, to have aged survey 20 levels injury may population U.S. loss. that calcium 5% of showed older according the A that, research produce urinary in years persons subtle increased cadmium

Lead,mercury,arsenic,andcadmiumaretheheavymetalsmostcommonlyassociatedwithtoxiceffectsinhumans.

Childrenabsorbmoreingestedleadthanadults;themainsourceofexposureforchildrenislead-containingpaint.

ExcessleadcausesCNSdefectsinchildrenandperipheralneuropathyinadults.Excessleadcompeteswithcalciuminbonesandinterfereswiththeremodelingofcartilage;italsocausesanemia.

Themajorsourceofmercuryiscontaminatedfish.Thedevelopingbrainishighlysensitivetomethylmercury,whichaccumulatesinthebrainandblocksionchannels.

ExposureofthefetustohighlevelsofmercuryinuteromayleadtoMinamatadisease,characterizedbycerebralpalsy,deafness,andblindness.

Arsenicisnaturallyfoundinsoilandwaterandisacomponentofsomewoodpreservativesandherbicides.ExcessarsenicinterfereswithmitochondrialoxidativephosphorylationandcausestoxiceffectsintheGItract,CNS,andcardiovascularsystem;long-termexposurecausespolyneuropathy,skinlesionsandcarcinomas.

Cadmiumfromnickel-cadmiumbatteriesandchemicalfertilizerscancontaminatesoil.Excesscadmiumcausesobstructivelungdiseaseandkidneydamage.

people the injuries occupational a as occupational illnesses. approximately States, annually in 65,000 than United of and injuries 10 and occur consequence More die million toxic agents themselves. exposures industries the as Industrial to are varied as to by merely or arsenic, fumes, annoying from of ammonia respiratory They to cancers uranium. formaldehyde or irritations exposure from range airways asbestos, arising lung associated are diseases occupational listed with exposures Human in

Table . 8.2 that discussed), agents environmental important metals other addition include In following: (already diseases to contribute toxic the to

widely solvents used are Organic huge in worldwide. quantities chloroform carbon degreasing dry such cleaning are in and and found removers. as tetrachloride, agents and paint Some, even can and these exposure levels to to depression coma. cause confusion, of high CNS from and vapors leading Acute agents dizziness liver cause levels toxicity. Lower may kidney and rubber workers increases risk Occupational of 1,3-butadiene and leukemia. exposure benzene the of to CYP2E1, Benzene oxidized an the epoxide through system a enzyme P-450 hepatic mentioned. of is component already to differentiation leukemia. in epoxide disrupt to acute and other marrow aplasia The and progenitor metabolites may marrow, cell lead myeloid the bone and

released in foundries, temperatures and high of particularly soot. are combustion present Polycyclic at and during gas, coal the also in steel used tar are hydrocarbons the and soot (Pott as Chapter identified 6). in as in scrotal cancers the sweeps mentioned 1775, of in chimney cause the the potent Polycyclic among causation hydrocarbons and have implicated lung most of industrial been carcinogens, and exposures in cancer. bladder are

halogenated are that in are lipophilic. products compounds (and general) degradation and Organochlorines organic resist synthetic organochlorines used Important http://ebooksmedicine.net

Occupational Associated Table With Human Exposures 8.2 Diseases

CardiovascularsystemHeartdiseaseCO,lead,solvents,cobalt,cadmium

UrinarysystemToxicityMercury,lead,glycolethers,solventsBladdercancerNaphthylamines,4-aminobiphenyl,benzidine,rubberproducts

HematopoieticsystemLeukemiaBenzene,radon,uranium

SkinFolliculitisandacneiformdermatosisPolychlorinatedbiphenyls,dioxins,herbicidesCancerUltravioletradiation

Med Centralnervoussystem;CO, Intern and carbonmonoxide;DDT, modern toxicology, occupational ed2,Boston,1992,Little,Brown,pp1275;andLeviPE:Classesoftoxicchemicals.InHodgsonE,LeviPE,editors:A CNS, of textbook Stamford,CT,1997,Appleton&Lange,pp229. dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane;GI,gastrointestinal.DatafromLeighJP,MarkowitzSB,FahsM,etal:OccupationalinjuryandillnessintheUnitedStates:estimatesofcosts,morbidity,andmortality,Arch medicine, 157:1557,1997;MitchellFL:Hazardouswaste.InRomWN,editor:Environmental

lindane, pesticides and DDT are its metabolites, as and dieldrin. aldrin, such (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) and as agents biphenyls Nonpesticide polychlorinated include (TCDD dioxin and (PCBs) organochlorines [2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin]). levels on population 1973, those DDT in the was than banned after in more DDT the a including have of United metabolite, States serum but detectable ban the went DDT of p,p′DDE, into born half effect. long-lasting present the most the in blood TCDD of also population. are U.S. of and PCB neurologic in Acute DDT poisoning humans causes toxicity. have established. but and or been in are animals, humans have activity disruptors anti-estrogenic endocrine organochlorines anti-androgenic long-term firmly in health laboratory not Most effects

(PCBs) and biphenyls dioxin polychlorinated include organochlorines Nonpesticide [2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin]). (TCDD and Dioxins around formation, as skin acneiform and acne, dermatosis folliculitis the face can consists and generally the disorders known cyst hyperkeratosis, such and cause behind ears. of which as PCBs hyperpigmentation, chloracne, CNS. and be the in abnormalities accompanied can It by liver may induce system, the metabolism. PCBs exposed enzyme drug to altered these P-450 workers show Because substances contaminated consumption by Japan in late 1960s China the rice Environmental disasters oil and in of poisoned each people about the in episode. PCBs 2000 by caused yu-cheng chloracne and (yusho in and The nails. disease Japan, the primary manifestations the of hyperpigmentation in of China) were skin

a and cans; BPA humans. polycarbonate and bottles result, as ubiquitous synthesis almost all the in used A of is to resins in line virtually containers food that epoxy of and exposure food Bisphenol is (BPA) water as known disruptor. has BPA long a potential been endocrine urinary retrospective populations. studies BPA disease to levels linked elevated large adult heart have in Several BPA’s be effects. drink who from may susceptible BPA-containing endocrine addition, infants containers to particularly In largest a have substance, list using toxic first the In cups in country stopped and 2010, as and process. “sippy” the bottles the BPA of manufacturing Canada baby to was BPA makers The remains the of health study. and BPA however, further human with associated extent risks requires uncertain,

synthesis Vinyl resins, liver in polyvinyl of liver, tumor. cause the the can angiosarcoma rare a chloride, type used of of

pneumoconioses. of Inhalation chronic, diseases causes called dusts nonneoplastic lung mineral This includes by lung diseases. inorganic diseases group induced organic of vapor-induced nonneoplastic as particulates disorders and as chemical fume-and well mining, and cutting), (in and and coal), and The coal work), dust stone fabrication). by mining insulation mining are common (in most fabrication, exposures hard pneumoconioses to silica (in of (in asbestos beryllium sandblasting caused always nearly to Exposure the in agents workplace. occurs these asbestos members a workers exposure, The family of exposed to asbestos as of risk of persons cancer workplace. extends to other outside the increased however, result and Chapter and are pathogenesis 13. their in Pneumoconioses discussed

for of of cause responsible human Tobacco the exogenous cancers, cancers. is most common being 90% lung http://ebooksmedicine.net The

Fig. Theeffectsofsmokingonsurvival.Thestudycomparedage-specificdeathratesforcurrentcigarettesmokerswiththoseofindividualswhoneversmokedregularly(BritishDoctorsStudy).Thedifferenceinsurvival,measuredatage75betweensmokersandnonsmokersis7.5years. 8.6 editors: Worldcancerreport,Lyon, P, Press.) from IARC 2003, BW, Stewart Kleihues (Modified various forms in cigarette an but is is tobacco culprit (snuff, of also important cause tobacco) smoking, oral its to is cancer. health chewing harmful main smokeless and smoke”) inhalation lung cancer risk, (“second-hand tobacco but the nonsmokers. Not also in environment only use products passive tobacco can the of from personal cause does create smokers. of adults approximately of remain the incidence States, continue, to modestly, trend the failed this in declined smoking 20% but to and 1998 From United 2007 years, consumer has China producer cigarettes. recent In become the and world’s of largest of who 33% all smokers has in consume about cigarettes China worldwide. 350 approximately smoked aggregate million from Cigarette various chronic respiratory million cancers, cardiovascular problems. disease, of worldwide, 4 causes, mostly and smoking annually, deaths than types more expected countries. 2020, will in is major deaths million by occurring that developing the yearly It tobacco-related 8 there be increase from tobacco-related an 500 million alive die will people Of estimated illnesses. today, cancer. is responsible States attributable more of than lung In these alone, 400,000 to deaths the for per with year, one-third United tobacco

important Smoking most cause preventable the of human is death. dose-dependent reduces survival overall a It in fashion. Whereas smokers nonsmokers 70, only age alive 50% age about this survive to at ( 80% are of of

Fig. ). 8.6 on risk who greatly reduced, smoking lung it 60. death of age Cessation albeit smoking cancer, has an effect, the even of stop from at people reduces and Discussed

Fig. Cancer 8.7 cavity of pancreas Chronic Cancer Peptic esophagus Myocardial of atherosclerosis emphysema of oral Adverseeffectsofsmoking.Themorecommonareinboldface.Cancer ulcer lung infarction of Cancer Cancer of bronchitis, Systemic larynx

of are consumption. contained of bladder tobacco some with agents tobacco diseases the next associated Cancer and in of various systems smoking effects organ shown Adverse in are in

Fig. 8.7

vast; number The is smoke in potentially tobacco of chemicals noxious

these of and agents. produced only type Table the includes by injury list 8.3 partial a presents but Nicotine, alkaloid an in direct tobacco it addictive. cause tobacco-related not is diseases, of leaves, present a is highly binds Nicotine brain the and, to in the receptors through

Smoke of Table Effects Tobacco Constituents 8.3 Selected

http://ebooksmedicine.net NicotineGanglionicstimulationanddepression,tumorpromotion

in Table 8.4 Organ-Specific Smoke Carcinogens Tobacco

Lung,larynxPolycyclicaromatichydrocarbons4-(Methylnitrosoamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)1-butanone(NNK)210Polonium

PancreasNNK(?)

Bladder4-Aminobiphenyl,2-naphthylamine

Oralcavity:smokingPolycyclicaromatichydrocarbons,NNK,NNN

Oralcavity:snuffNNK,NNN,210polonium

medicine, DatafromSzczesnyLB,HolbrookJH:Cigarettesmoking.InRomWH,editor:Environmental ed2,Boston,1992,Little,Brown,pp1211. occupational and

cardiac increased heart the and smoking, pressure, responsible of such is catecholamines, release increased of output. blood and effects acute rate contractility for and as

all chronic by cigarette diseases emphysema, lung include common lung and in smoking and discussed bronchitis, involve 13. The the most Chapter caused cancer, include responsible mechanisms some The diseases the tobacco-induced following: for

mucus Direct on the production increased irritant inflammation mucosa, tracheobronchial producing and (bronchitis). effect lung, to local injury also leukocytes the of and leads that subsequent elastase the to causes lung emphysema. to Cigarette tissue increasing production recruitment smoke

Carcinogensis. ), are humans in Chapter carcinogens are of involved animals and carcinomas (see polycyclic and lung causation in particularly of probably smoke, cigarette hydrocarbons in 8.4 Components the ( nitrosamines 13). potent day years” The frequently in of developing the for or cigarettes of years) 20 lung (e.g., daily one expressed risk pack years 20 ( of smoked intensity cancer related in is pack to equals “pack exposure, per terms

Fig. ). 8.8 tobacco bladder. lung cancers, addition pancreas, contributes oral cancers In of cavity, esophagus, the and of smoke the to to development

tobacco Table 8.4 organ-specific contained in carcinogens lists smoke. asbestos associated lung carcinomas the in who well-recognized those do disease not. who are miners of risk examples carcinogens; smoking with workers incidence increased and the other 10-fold smoke in Moreover, than uranium multiplies of and the of alcohol smoked) has esophageal risks oral, combination and (chewed multiplicative of laryngeal, effects tobacco or The cancers. on consumption the carcinogenic for shown interaction vices all-too-common example laryngeal An of ( cancer is these of

Fig. 8.9

myocardial strongly linked major to are Atherosclerosis infarction, its cigarette smoking. and complication, myocardial with including fibrillation. threshold causal coupled oxygen and CO smoke) (because in to disease accompanied demand, of decreased probably factors, related for cigarette relate aggregation, increased The mechanisms increased decreased to supply hypoxia several platelet by lung a oxygen ventricular with heart all cigarette Almost associated smoking. of one-third attacks are and with on a when hypertension combined multiplicative risk Smoking effect has hypercholesterolemia.

who retardation weights 7); stopped growth to of born results the pregnancy increases and preterm Maternal smoking abortions birth intrauterine normal. are risk and in spontaneous infants however, (Chapter smoking mothers before births of

Fig. 8.8 Theriskoflungcancerisdeterminedbythenumberofcigarettessmoked. Kleihues P, editors: BW, 2003, IARC (Data Worldcancerreport,Lyon, Stewart from Press.)

Fig. Multiplicativeincreaseintheriskoflaryngealcancerfromtheinteractionbetweencigarettesmokingandalcoholconsumption. 8.9 editors: Press.) BW, Lyon, (Data Worldcancerreport, Stewart P, Kleihues 2003, IARC from 0–40 associated effects. Passive detrimental also • is inhalation with smoke http://ebooksmedicine.net to to lung relative estimated exposed are in about is in exposed nonsmokers It the not 1.3 times that of who that is risk nonsmokers smoke environmental smoke. cancer tobacco attributed nonsmokers each years environmental to 35 can 3000 older smoke. be in approximately year deaths States, United cancer the In than lung more risk and atherosclerosis the Even striking infarction. myocardial fatal increased coronary of is 60,000 to 30,000 are annually Studies cardiac passive smoke. to in exposure associated United deaths with report States the that smokes have respiratory in illnesses who frequency with and a an living increased Children of household adult asthma. an by nicotine. estimated can of a metabolite blood levels inhalation nonsmokers of in cotinine, smoke Passive be the measuring in public cotinine levels of because places. median since around adoption by nonsmokers 2000 United the than 60% decreased policies have of nonsmoking In in the more States, remains exposure concern, a tobacco children. smoke for home health major passive the particularly However, public to in clear comes with the pleasure a a that provide transient heavy is may long-term It price. puff

Smokingisthemostpreventablecauseofhumandeath.

Tobaccosmokecontainsmorethan2000compounds.Amongthesearenicotine,whichisresponsiblefortobaccoaddiction,andstrongcarcinogens—mainly,polycyclicaromatichydrocarbons,nitrosamines,andaromaticamines.

Approximately90%oflungcancersoccurinsmokers.Smokingisalsoassociatedwithanincreasedriskofcancersoftheoralcavity,larynx,esophagus,stomach,bladder,andkidney,aswellassomeformsofleukemia.Cessationofsmokingreducestheriskoflungcancer.

Smokelesstobaccouseisanimportantcauseoforalcancers.Tobaccointeractswithalcoholinmultiplyingtheriskoforal,laryngeal,andesophagealcancerandincreasestheriskoflungcancersfromoccupationalexposurestoasbestos,uranium,andotheragents.

Tobaccoconsumptionisanimportantriskfactorfordevelopmentofatherosclerosisandmyocardialinfarction,peripheralvasculardisease,andcerebrovasculardisease.Inthelungs,inadditiontocancer,itpredisposestoemphysema,chronicbronchitis,andchronicobstructivedisease.

Maternalsmokingincreasestheriskofabortion,prematurebirth,andintrauterinegrowthretardation.

is used in Ethanol and are not moderation its least mood-altering for but partly, its at acceptable consumed, when socially injurious. effects properties, psychologic cause marked can physical alcohol used, amounts excessive and damage. are When describe the the are of associated alcohol. directly lesions we that with abuse Here

all drugs, many more abuse more attention and to given a is lives. Despite illegal the claims widespread alcohol hazard adults Western have in alcohol, percent to the alcoholism. approximately 10% Fifty drink chronic of world and 5% are there that in than States is consumption chronic annually. alcohol for is more the more and that responsible deaths It than million alcoholics 100,000 United 10 estimated of about 15% accidents of alcohol-related liver. these of from caused cirrhosis and homicides deaths result by Almost are a driving drunken and the suicides, 50% consequence and

then unaltered the and ethanol is body stomach of all tissues small level. proportion intestine blood and the to and fluids direct in of After distributes to consumption, absorbed in the the breath. unchanged excreted sweat, urine, than 10% and in is Less the agencies. and the proportional by level test used to breath for amount the law the forms exhaled basis The is enforcement blood A concentration constitutes of blood states. of mg/dL legal in in most the definition 80 the driving drunk concentration after three three 4 15 ounces of average or individual, be For (12 an 5 wine, beer, drinks, may 80-proof distilled alcohol standard ounces bottles to ounce) this of reached spirits. about of consumption of higher possible at respiratory 300 at 200 Drowsiness occurs stupor and at levels. mg/dL, with coma, mg/dL, arrest, level. rate metabolism The of affects the blood alcohol develop alcoholics Chronic alcohol. tolerance to hence of than a metabolize than rate consumed. for higher same peak normal alcohol lower and show They at alcohol of the alcohol about levels average systems: and alcohol the the Most enzyme by three alcohol P-450 to in blood cytochrome isoenzymes; in ( acetaldehyde is liver the metabolized catalase of dehydrogenase;

Fig. 8.10 ). dehydrogenase, main Of alcohol involved located in is the enzyme hepatocytes. these, metabolism in cytosol of the alcohol high the levels, an also blood microsomal role. important system however, plays At alcohol ethanol-oxidizing CYP2E1 the isoform, This ER. the P-450 enzymes, cytochrome located involves particularly in system smooth to increased solvents. the metabolized industrial by carcinogens, system, include and the of Induction explains compounds enzymes which enzyme cocaine), other (acetaminophen, drugs anesthetics, by alcohol alcoholics of P-450 same susceptibility and at is substrates their other potentiating with alcohol of it in delay Of when the catabolism drugs, blood CYP2E1 the however, concentrations, other competes thereby note, high may effects. present for 5% about of responsible being Catalase metabolism. importance, is only minor of alcohol used acetaldehyde turn by these to converted produced respiratory by acetate, is Acetaldehyde which dehydrogenase in mitochondrial is the in chain. systems

metabolism. result effects from toxic Several ethanol these: form an most in alcohol are increase Alcohol here by NADH adenine of (NAD+) important (the of in only causes and nicotinamide Listed a • decrease oxidation reduced the dinucleotide dehydrogenase NAD+). required NAD+ is oxidation liver. acid for fatty in the Its of liver alcoholics. fat a the deficiency of accumulation main is cause in increase ratio acidosis. also The in lactic NADH/NAD+ in the causes alcoholics

http://ebooksmedicine.net

H O2 CH3C OH NAD+ H+ H2O O NADP+, H+ + + H2O NADH + roxisom CYP2E1ADHCATALASEMitochondriaMicrosom + acid CH3CH2OH NAD+ ALDH CH3CH sH2O2 CH3C OH O NADH Acetaldehyde Acetic sCytosolP NADPH OH Ethanol H2O H+

Fig. Metabolismofethanol:oxidationofethanoltoacetaldehydebythreedifferentroutes,andthegenerationofaceticacid.Notethatoxidationbyalcoholdehydrogenase(ADH)takesplaceinthecytosol;thecytochromeP-450systemanditsCYP2E1isoformarelocatedintheER(microsomes),andcatalaseislocatedinperoxisomes.Oxidationofacetaldehydebyaldehydedehydrogenase(ALDH)occursinmitochondria. 8.10 of Parkinson xenobiotics. from (Data Biotransformation A: editor: pp McGraw-Hill, York, 2001, Klassen 6, New CD, CasarettandDoull’stoxicology:Thebasicscienceofpoisons,ed In 133.)

toxicity responsible may the some acute of of Acetaldehyde effects alcohol. be for genetic Acetaldehyde populations because of metabolism between variation. differs a defective express notably, acetaldehyde dehydrogenase. 50% form of Most Asians about of experience owing tachycardia, accumulation persons flushing, such to alcohol, acetaldehyde. of hyperventilation and ingesting the After

ROS generation. in membranes. CYP2E1 the produces of liver lipid causes of by cell and peroxidation ethanol ROS Metabolism cellular injury Nevertheless, not have alcohol-induced well defined. account been that mechanisms for precise the

release. Endotoxin endotoxin a flora. Alcohol bacteria, gram-negative the product intestinal from of the cause of may release (lipopolysaccharide), from cell cytokines other factor of the and the injury. necrosis circulating stimulates Endotoxin (TNF) cells macrophages tumor and in from release causing liver, Kupffer

gastric CNS alcoholism also injuries. Acute but the induce on mainly its reversible and hepatic may effects exerts multiple with or accumulate in moderate fat intake cytoplasm of alcohol, (fatty droplets the steatosis). Even of hepatic hepatocytes change acute damage the form in Gastric ulceration. occurs gastritis of and a affecting CNS, depressant, activity. modulate alcohol is first cerebral In the structures cortical that subcortical disordered behavior. intellectual motor, and Consequently there and stimulation is cortical, lower including then blood At higher respiration. centers and cortical levels, are medullary regulate depressed, that progressively those neurons Respiratory follow. arrest may

affects other virtually tissues all well. organs alcoholism not Chronic but only stomach as liver the and and have suffer to life morbidity CNS, a damage shortened to Chronic tract, pancreas. principally related cardiovascular liver, significant GI and the span, and alcoholics system,

is injury. of main liver site The chronic the Chapter hepatitis fatty in (described In to chronic earlier, alcoholic change, alcoholism cirrhosis mentioned causes 16). and addition of portal is Cirrhosis an and increased hepatocellular carcinoma. associated risk with hypertension

gastritis, cause prove the alcoholism varices In massive with cirrhosis), tract, GI or esophageal may chronic from (associated can bleeding which ulcer, fatal. gastric

Neurologic effects. peripheral syndrome common lesions this alcoholics; deficiency the neuropathies (see in deficiency are resulting Wernicke-Korsakoff from is the Thiamine and principal chronic

Chapter 8.9 23). Table and optic degeneration, neuropathy and may Cerebral occur. cerebellar also atrophy,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

effects. Cardiovascular Alcohol has cardiovascular diverse the effects on system. discussed cardiomyopathy myocardium in the dilated to cardiomyopathy), congestive Chapter may 11. Injury (alcoholic produce aggregation, lipoproteins coronary to drink artery of (HDLs) alcohol and disease. inhibit amounts serum have high-density per reported increase of protecting been thus levels Moderate day) against platelet (one heart likelihood in injury, the HDL, of of increasing consumption, decreased results However, disease. with levels liver attendant heavy is hypertension. an associated also with Chronic increased incidence of alcoholism

Pancreatitis. acute and chronic 16). pancreatitis risk Excess of increases the alcohol (Chapter intake

Effects on fetus. of cause even during pregnancy— syndrome. reportedly The in fetal use low amounts—can ethanol alcohol facial the older and retardation abnormalities of microcephaly, It mental functions a growth in and of newborn, in consists children. reduction amount first during pregnancy alcohol alcohol It cause the can harmful. difficult establish of that consumption but to syndrome, fetal is of consumption is trimester particularly the

Carcinogenesis. cancers consumption incidence with esophagus, possibly, increased females. oral alcohol an cavity, associated and, of liver, Chronic of in is breast the uncertain. are mechanisms effect the carcinogenic The of

Malnutrition. is Ethanol of often of consumed food source at energy, expense but the is substantial calories). (empty a B of the deficiencies, is vitamins. associated Chronic particularly thus with malnutrition alcoholism and

Acutealcoholabusecausesdrowsinessatbloodlevelsofapproximately200mg/dL.Stuporandcomadevelopathigherlevels.

Alcoholisoxidizedtoacetaldehydeintheliverprimarilybyalcoholdehydrogenase,andtoalesserextentbythecytochromeP-450system,andbycatalase.Acetaldehydeisconvertedtoacetateinmitochondriaandisusedintherespiratorychain.

AlcoholoxidationbyalcoholdehydrogenasedepletesNAD,leadingtoaccumulationoffatintheliverandtometabolicacidosis.

Themaineffectsofchronicalcoholismarefattyliver,alcoholichepatitis,andcirrhosis,whichleadstoportalhypertensionandincreasestheriskfordevelopmentofhepatocellularcarcinoma.

Chronicalcoholismcancausebleedingfromgastritisandgastriculcers,peripheralneuropathyassociatedwiththiaminedeficiency,andalcoholiccardiomyopathy,anditincreasestheriskfordevelopmentofacuteandchronicpancreatitis.

Chronicalcoholismisamajorriskfactorforcancersoftheoralcavity,larynx,andesophagus.Theriskisgreatlyincreasedbyconcurrentsmokingortheuseofsmokelesstobacco.

InjurybyTherapeuticDrugs:AdverseDrugReactions

conventional settings. reactions are administered in that untoward drugs therapeutic drug of effects (ADRs) are Adverse the extremely of of to in 7% are a and to hospital. believed medicine common are patients reactions admitted affect 8% to These practice About reactions fatal. prove such of 10%

drugs involved. and ADRs lists most pathologic common findings frequently Table the 8.5 in agents, of ADRs, are highly the ADR anti-neoplastic assumed such the seen, achieve and for maximum to in a potent, can the many drugs as involved As risk therapeutic be is dosage the calculated the effect. are conditions, diverse localized used acne, used may produce ( systemic tetracyclines, which including long-acting as reactions such treat drugs Commonly or to

Fig. ). 8.11 oral contraceptives discussed and next Because more widely are detail. used, they in are (OCs) estrogens important and In drugs but acetaminophen addition, aspirin, are which nonprescription are

Fig. 8.11 Adversereactiontominocycline,along-actingtetracyclinederiva-tive.(A)Diffuseblue-graypigmentationoftheforearm,secondarytomino-cyclineadministration.(B)Depositionofdrugmetabolite/iron/melaninpigmentparticlesinthedermis. Washington,Seattle,Washington.) Depart-ment Zsolt B, Courtesy Argenyi, (A Dr. and of of Pathology,University of http://ebooksmedicine.net

Table Drug Some Common Their Adverse Agents and 8.5 Reactions

Granulocytopenia,aplasticanemia,pancytopeniaAnti-neoplasticagents,immunosuppressives,andchloramphenicol

Hemolyticanemia,thrombocytopeniaPenicillin,methyldopa,quinidine

Urticaria,macules,papules,vesicles,petechiae,exfoliativedermatitis,fixedAnti-neoplasticagents,sulfonamides,hydantoins,someantibiotics,anddrugeruptions,abnormalpigmentationmanyotheragents

ArrhythmiasTheophylline,hydantoins

CardiomyopathyDoxorubicin,daunorubicin

AcutetubularnecrosisAminoglycosideantibiotics,cyclosporine,amphotericinB

TubulointerstitialdiseasewithpapillarynecrosisPhenacetin,salicylates

InterstitialfibrosisBusulfan,nitrofurantoin,bleomycin

DiffusehepatocellulardamageHalothane,isoniazid,acetaminophen

CholestasisChlorpromazine,estrogens,contraceptiveagents

Lupuserythematosussyndrome(drug-inducedlupus)Hydralazine,procainamide *Featureinalmosthalfofalldrug-relateddeaths.

comment. intentional or causes special merit overdose, of accidental

the a HRT) estrogens administration common most replacement The consists as with therapy, of MHT to type progestogen. (previously together of referred or hormone of used in women. Because the is alone therapy estrogen of risk cancer, uterine only of hysterectomized of of that postmenopausal use Initially prevent the myocardial menopause, symptoms progression reduce clinical 21) the to and studies osteoporosis used (Chapter and could early of infarction. in counteract likelihood slow flashes” “hot women or MHT suggested other have clinical mixed subsequent randomized produced However, decidedly results. trials the years disease. treatment, combination increased coronary women According did on fractures venous MHT number incidence of of cancer heart of (Chapter it that although of and after to no breast the stroke, on effect and treatment, the was also 5 19), risk these, had MHT in thromboembolism reported reduce MHT. past during there years and the has few the of But risks benefits a reappraisal been of hormone the treatment, dose, of and factor type status of age the therapy formulation, on administration. possibly at route analyses alone), newer estrogen duration that start and the MHT versus effects regimen These treatment, the of of and of hormone the (combination risk depend estrogen-progestin the woman showed used the risk:benefit The be current as consensus summarized follows: can

of of breast 6 risk 5 time years. after median increases to the Combination cancer estrogen-progestin a of a women In with with breast cancer. is contrast, reduction risk hysterectomy borderline in estrogen in associated the alone

MHT women age. no at and an the of development protective coronary on have may older who 60 in effect protection atherosclerosis years age, started of there than in women is but MHT a disease younger be on effects may therapeutic These data MHT notion there the a window critical for cardiovascular system. support that the Protective in endothelium. in healthy younger part women effects of receptors response the on depend in vascular estrogen disease not diseases. of for chronic However, should be MHT cardiovascular used http://ebooksmedicine.net other or the prevention

thromboembolism embolism. • deep MHT the thrombosis including and and venous risk of vein increases (VTE), pulmonary stroke immobilization is more factor factors, in the as women who risk during by in (Chapter have Leiden such first and treatment 4). VTE V of hypercoagulable states 2 other The caused or years increase and mutations pronounced prothrombin lower and of oral of than Whether study. estrogen transdermal risks routes further administration warrants with are stroke VTE

As is risks complex. be appreciated benefits these women when the use associations, of from and considering MHT in of can assessment is be disease not should a of in role in feeling used these menopause agents chronic have current term that management early long symptoms The but menopausal for prevention. the

been effects. disagreement and safety adverse have decades, about for several their Although continues OCs used (“combination preparations estradiol progestin amount progestins. a only few a but They OCs”), of variable a a nearly synthetic and always contain contain for amount clearly than 50 formulations. estrogens those than fewer effects reported OCs have prescribed side a smaller earlier and contain of µg/day) Currently (less epidemiologic the dosage. the studies of Hence, in must the of be results interpreted context Nevertheless, support is reasonable conclusions: following evidence the to there

OCs carcinoma: breast do that risk. is cause an opinion Breast The cancer in not prevailing increase

cancer against these effect have OCs cancers: tumors. and a ovarian Endometrial protective

human may increase cervical infected OCs Cervical cancer: carcinomas papillomavirus. in the with of risk women

venous coagulation risk the resulting estrogen) low-dose including pulmonary with of increased (less are synthesis than factors. studies a increased threefold hepatic to 50 from Thromboembolism: associated newer indicate thrombosis of of sixfold Most preparations, and that thromboembolism OCs, µg in the contain of newer OCs This factor that who risk women be carriers are with Leiden V synthetic particularly “third-generation” higher even may mutation. progestins, associated To pregnancy. to complication with lower risk use of the the this thromboembolism of is two put six risk context, thromboembolism than associated OC times with into however,

risk in infarction and There disease: of considerable the is users atherosclerosis Cardiovascular about myocardial uncertainty of OCs. 30 It nonsmokers, are who women in the smoke. risk women OCs do 35 approximately than artery coronary risk younger who older doubles disease of years increase seems years in or in older not than that but the women

who a this women between benign well-defined especially OCs There the in 14). of adenoma: Hepatic is and tumor, OCs association use hepatic periods used older for have rare (Chapter prolonged

in of Obviously, applicability must protects a be of pros form as contraception OCs that and their viewed of acceptance the unwanted cons and the context wide pregnancies. against

in glucuronide At sulfate. used nonprescription analgesic conjugated with therapeutic liver and acetaminophen, is the anti-pyretic, a widely doses, or mostly less or to (N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine) hepatic NAPQI 5% P-450 is system. metabolized through About the large doses, very hepatic however, centriloblar leading accumulates, to necrosis. NAPQI With and include mechanisms (2) of of GSH. depletion reduced proteins injury by binding to hepatic covalent produced (1) The NAPQI to the depletion ROS. death GSH of makes cell susceptible more caused The by hepatocytes toxic g) g) usual and ordinarily the the and drug The to large, (0.5 the window very is is therapeutic (15 dose safe. between 25 dose using the suicide particularly not Kingdom. Nevertheless, are uncommon, in acetaminophen and in overdoses children, United occur accidental attempts the acute United liver In of toxicity causes is States, about 50% acetaminophen failure. followed few with in a begins vomiting, sometimes and diarrhea, shock, nausea, appearance days by jaundice. Toxicity the of early in by of N-acetylcysteine, of treated GSH. acetaminophen restores stages can the which administration be Overdoses may necrosis such to liver involve transplantation. often and require With failure overdoses, extend lobules; ensues, centrilobular entire patients liver serious renal also patients concurrent show Some of evidence damage.

ingestion attempts young overdose result children from or may suicide adults. in in accidental Aspirin metabolic, The changes. morphologic untoward few consequences with major are by first, At proves a acidosis respiratory alkalosis metabolic develops, often followed that fatal. little be 2 in but to in 4 may survival reported doses adults, children 30 g after and larger. 10 five times doses to as as been g has Fatal

may 3 persons in take conditions). (salicylism) to aspirin treat more used (the toxicity or daily who inflammatory develop Chronic chronic gm dose nausea, in ears dizziness, and by drowsiness, salicylism manifested ringing confusion, hearing, is headache, mental diarrhea. vomiting, (tinnitus), difficulty the Chronic in changes convulsions The progress may and coma. to CNS salicylism are varied. The chronic consequences morphologic of which covert to overt produce (Chapter may 15), there and an GI gastritis acute is lead or gastric bleeding ulceration. often, erosive Most of cyclooxygenase blocks platelet platelet ability inhibits with aspirin (Chapter bleeding aggregation irreversibly A concurrently 4). appear may make tendency A2, an because activator thromboxane and the chronic to toxicity bleeding may viscera, appear and in hemorrhages and skin the internal may gastric ulcerations be exaggerated. Petechial from

throughout when taken analgesic cause active acetaminophen, and mixtures several aspirin of years, http://ebooksmedicine.net or phenacetin metabolite, its Proprietary can tubulointerstitial

Drugs Table 8.6 of Abuse Common

OpioidnarcoticsMuopioidreceptor(agonist)Heroin,hydromorphone(Dilaudid)OxycodoneMethadone(Dolophine)

Phencyclidine-likedrugsNMDAglutamatereceptorchannel(antagonist)Phencyclidine(PCP)(i.e.,“angeldust”)Ketamine

Cannabinoidreceptortype1;GABA, CB1, N-methyl-D-aspartate;PCP, 5-hydroxytryptamine;NMDA, γ-aminobutyricacid;5-HT2, 1-(1-phenylcyclohexyl)piperidine.DatafromHymanSE:A28-year-oldmanaddictedtococaine,JAMA 286:2586,2001.

papillary renal necrosis. nephritis with 14). (Chapter to is referred entity as This clinical nephropathy analgesic

social abuse the or therapeutic beyond involves substances norms. use of generally mind-altering Drug and problems. are overdose public Drug addiction serious health are listed Common abuse drugs in of

Table . 8.6 brief Considered cocaine, few are and of with marijuana, a here a mention drugs. opiates, other

United which of were users the in estimated to was were cocaine In users 20% approximately “crack” there of States, 15% 2014, million that cocaine. 1.5 it of of within years is month. among the highest cocaine 18 past of 1.4% 25 reported whom Use adults age, to taking talcum plant, hydrochloride, coca leaves diluted the lactose, from a sold is water-soluble prepared powder, on liberally as look-alikes. the other usually Extracted cocaine but of the or is it cocaine powder, with when street the heated). hydrochloride (so cocaine nuggets when Crystallization pure called crack makes of it because sound popping yields of the from of alkaloid but The pharmacologic crack actions identical, are crack is cocaine far more of and potent. smoked after forms mixing be tobacco, injected snorted, intravenously. ingested, can subcutaneously with or Both or

sense alertness, making most a euphoria Cocaine of the drugs. addictive of it produces mental all one and of intense drink and obtain press forgo Experimental than 1000 animals and drug. a to food the will times will lever more the to dependence In not psychologic cocaine users, although occur, seems physical profound. is dependence and abstinence severe first Intense the years. can particularly after months cravings are recur in for several

Acute seizures, cardiac arrhythmias, produces respiratory arrest. overdose and important of following cocaine are toxicity: the manifestations The

Cardiovascular effects. physical of the its serious cardiovascular The cocaine action relate effects to acute system. most on a ( is agent Cocaine sympathomimetic

Fig. norepinephrine. epinephrine blocks both it in the the and 8.12 nerve while CNS, reuptake dopamine, of ), the reuptake both endings, stimulating of of blocks norepinephrine presynaptic release where the adrenergic it where at and these excessive hypertension, The of net effect by neurotransmitters tachycardia, manifested stimulation, vasoconstriction. is the peripheral and accumulation synapses and in the also basis myocardial induces for is Cocaine multifactorial. ischemia, which It causes coronary artery by and thrombus vasoconstriction formation promotes aggregation. platelet facilitating Cigarette vasospasm. coronary smoking cocaine-induced potentiates time, Thus, infarction. may cocaine same increasing blood oxygen lead myocardial triggers to often reducing and, which action its myocardial by sympathomimetic ischemia, at demand the by flow, myocardial coronary as Ca2+, ion as by Na+) myocardium. can normal (K+, precipitate lethal by sympathetic arrhythmias well activity in transport Cocaine also disrupting the enhanced with a toxic mood-altering and effects not is in a dose. what are a may related, fatal occur first-time necessarily These dose typical user event

effects. CNS caused hyperpyrexia aberrations (thought control and seizures. are common findings of CNS pathways dopaminergic by temperature) The that the body to most be

on Effects fetus. the fetal resulting cause cocaine may and In blood to abortion. decreased flow hypoxia in the placenta, spontaneous women, pregnant are of who users. fetuses impaired women chronic may Neurologic the drug development in pregnant be

http://ebooksmedicine.net

DopaminePresynaptic paranoia, hyperthermia axon Postsynaptic dendrite Euphoria,

Fig. infarct cardiac myocardial arrhythmia, 8.12 cocaine hemorrhage, cerebral use. • and Norepinephrine infarct, Theeffectofcocaineonneurotransmission.Thedruginhibitsreuptakeoftheneurotransmittersdopamineandnorepinephrineinthecentralandperipheralnervoussystems.Hypertension, Chronic decrease the diffusing of inhale (3) in in who capacity perforation (2) the Chronic users cause of dilated and lung septum nasal development smoke, use cardiomyopathy. snorters, the (1) may in

opioid is plant addictive is morphine. an the derived poppy from to closely related Heroin and effects cocaine. of Its those harmful than even more are in it some 4 used estimated the the in Nevertheless, and than that drug United have at during heroin is people people least that time 650,000 2012 the more once, year. almost at used million States it the sold is with but to only thus, on agent the (often size of also buyer. is the (diluted) not street, talc is or dose usually unknown the quinine); As an variable cut self-administered is contaminating substances, usually any subcutaneously. or intravenously Heroin, along with euphoria, hallucinations, and include and Effects somnolence, varied sedation. are through (1) range contracted contaminants, or sharing a to (2) drug reactions needles. can hypersensitivity effects of that cutting of the to or and the categorized Heroin agent, of agents has (3) (4) its pharmacologic the adverse physical the to action adulterants, the etiologically according wide reactions diseases be the effects of heroin following: the important are Some adverse most of

Sudden death. from usually risk, purity to range Sudden related may 90%. is death, an because drug ever-present to and is unknown generally 2% overdose, sudden is and yearly United incidence 3%. chronic be death estimated in to users of The the among States 1% between a is of such the incarceration. as loss for a sometimes death tolerance of Sudden due drug, period after to include respiratory arrest, and profound arrhythmia of cardiac death mechanisms and edema. depression, The pulmonary

disease. Pulmonary complications abscess, from talc septic and Pulmonary body opportunistic infections, other edema, lung and granulomas embolism, include foreign adulterants. principally granulomas extremities. the found the drain also liver, Although are lymph in they sometimes lung, nodes upper and the that in occur spleen, body polarized Examination under highlights often trapped within cells. foreign crystals, sometimes giant light enclosed talc

Infections. complications are Infectious common. skin lungs. are most heart valves, and The liver, the and sites tissue, commonly affected subcutaneous form the series particularly to addicted admitted a often 10% had heart a than In patients distinctive valves, takes right-sided more tricuspid. hospital, which involving of endocarditis, the been organisms Most other of a multitude by have are cases caused but Staphylococcus fungi aureus, also and implicated. hepatitis common of most dirty is among acquired infection Viral addicts the is sharing by needles. and the States, (HIV) this the abusers. also very has drug infection virus human in a incidence to intravenous immunodeficiency practice In of United led high

lesions. Skin frequent sign of Cutaneous the heroin telltale probably addiction. most are lesions cellulitis, include injections. changes subcutaneous resulting ulcerations abscesses, from and Acute inoculations. veins hyperpigmentation and commonly used thrombosed injection usual of at repeated sites, Scarring veins, over intravenous sequelae the are

problems. Renal hazard. Kidney common a is relatively disease and the nephrotic focal encountered both induce forms syndrome. and amyloidosis secondary two are most frequently (generally proteinuria The to infections) skin heavy glomerulosclerosis;

widespread more availability such that oxycodone, epidemic of with as of associated Tragically, surpasses fueled prescription heroin. opiates, an has opioid that and hydrocodone abuse was mainly 4.3 non-medical opioids, prescription led from that approximately failure. to overdoses it 2014, respiratory use Americans 19,000 deaths, In opioid estimated million and that engaged in prescription of habit. increasing switch it users a expensive Moreover, then prescription number start of an substantially opioids, heroin less because with is to heroin of States This and near use 2012. in trend the between underlies 2005 doubling a heroin United use to their available which has tightening of opioids on the making Current abuse. prevented potential and focused limit for prescription first to many efforts opioid antagonists responders, widely deaths, are

http://ebooksmedicine.net

widely used is most or the Marijuana, “pot,” drug. illegal the use million of States, population) United 2014 people the (7.0% admitted As the of month. 22.2 in previous during “recreational” marijuana, as the to states and legalized follow; have illicit of reevaluation. States drug Several in undergoing use the more United its thus, status an appear states poised is

which Cannabis Δ9tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). of psychoactive sativa substance plant, made contain the the leaves Marijuana from the is absorbed. of 10% When 5% is the is to smoked, content marijuana about THC unresolved. studies, remains persistent physical numerous includes and adverse effects Despite the whether functional drug of allergic preparations, than related anecdotal or reactions the may or rather marijuana’s to pharmacologic are possibly the contaminants effects. be Some effects idiosyncratic in to untoward decrease On of include and its hand, cancer intractable effects secondary beneficial to to other intraocular to in glaucoma combat the pressure nausea chemotherapy. capacity THC

scrutiny. and consequences received of great have The organic functional CNS marijuana perception but sensory distort impair these 4 acute in recognized use hours. motor and well Marijuana clear to 5 effects to coordination, generally is progress psychomotor judge and and distance. the inability With use, such cognitive to to speed, may impairments, changes continued time, these as leads adolescents, impairment Among to such automobile accidents. often may and pressure with person a cause and blood sometimes disease. the in coronary it rate artery heart angina Marijuana increases

cough, been pharyngitis, hoarseness, and lungs but symptoms along chronic bronchitis, affected with significant smoking; obstruction. all are laryngitis, marijuana have asthmalike described, The by mild airway retained lungs, tobacco as Smoking in and with deeper and cigarette, with holding. associated inhalation inhaled consequence the compared 3-fold the longer in of a a a a of marijuana is amount cigarette, tar increase breath

tried The been experiences” experiences”) seeking variety of (highs, belief. by have “out-of-body drugs “new lows, those that defies These various stimulants, and include drugs depressants, hallucinogens. analgesics, PCP ketamine most and to (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine [MDMA]); salts”, Africa. widely “ecstasy” synthetic phencyclidine, these East anesthetic khat, lysergic (related known; potent are are hallucinogen agents); “bath that related acid used (1-(1-phenylcyclohexyl) Among a the chemically and piperidine), or stimulant (LSD), cathinones in diethylamide the effects known about Not of any is agents. of long-term deleterious these much effects sometimes LSD on unpredictable has leading dangerous affect, and thought, behaviors. and mood, to bizarre Acutely, CNS the leading and behavior. to aggressive potentially ecstasy deplete may depression, of anxiety, of Chronic disorders, serotonin, use sleep

Therapeuticdrugs(ADRs)ornontherapeuticagents(drugabuse)mightcausedruginjury.

Anti-neoplasticagents,long-actingtetracyclines,andotherantibiotics,HRTpreparationsandOCs,acetaminophen,andaspirinarethedrugsmostfrequentlyinvolved.

HRTincreasestheriskofendometrialandbreastcancersandthromboembolismbutdoesnotappeartoprotectagainstischemicheartdisease.OCshaveaprotectiveeffectagainstendometrialandovariancancersbutincreasetheriskofthromboembolismandhepaticadenomas.

Overdoseofacetaminophenmaycausecentrilobularlivernecrosis,leadingtoliverfailure.EarlytreatmentwithagentsthatrestoreGSHlevelsmaylimittoxicity.AspirinblockstheproductionofthromboxaneA2,whichmayproducegastriculcerationandbleeding.

Thecommondrugsofabuseincludesedative-hypnotics(barbiturates,ethanol),psychomotorstimulants(cocaine,amphetamine,ecstasy),opioidnarcotics(heroin,methadone,oxycodone),hallucinogens(LSD,mescaline),andcannabinoids(marijuana,hashish).Theyhavediverseeffectsonvariousorgans.

injury, injury, divided the by ionizing injury by categories: radiation. trauma, into is agents following and induced physical Injury mechanical produced electrical thermal considered is separately. type Each

variety of Mechanical forces of may a damage. inflict forms that impact. injury The colliding discharged object, amount shape depends at the of energy on and the the the impact, tissues the bear or of of organs type Bone in unique discussed injuries 23). elsewhere result head (Chapter and damage are and wounds, lacerations, soft react of be injury the contusions, mechanical ( patterns incised wounds and can into All and abrasions, to similarly puncture forces, divided tissues

Fig. 8.13

istypicallycausedbyalong,narrowinstrumentandistermedpenetrating MORPHOLOGYAnabrasion isawoundproducedbyscrapingorrubbingtheskinsurface,whichdamagesthesuperficiallayer.Typicalskinabrasionsremoveonlytheepidermallayer.Acontusion, wound isoneinflictedbyasharpinstrument.Thebridgingbloodvesselsaresevered.Apuncture orbruise,isawoundusuallyproducedbyablunttraumaandischaracterizedbydamagetoavesselandextravasationofbloodintotissues.Alaceration whentheinstrumentpiercesthetissueandperforating whenittraversesatissuetoalsocreateanexitwound.Gunshotwoundsarespecialformsofpuncturewoundsthatdemonstratedistinctivefeaturesimportanttotheforensicpathologist.Forexample,awoundfromabulletfiredatcloserangeleavespowderburns,whereasonefiredfrommorethan4or5feetawaydoesnot. wound isatearordisruptivestretchingoftissuecausedbytheapplicationofforcebyabluntobject.Incontrastwithanincision,mostlacerationshaveintactbridgingbloodvesselsandjagged,irregularedges.Anincised

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 8.13 (A)Lacerationofthescalp:Thebridgingstrandsoffibroustissuesareevident.(B)Contusionresultingfromblunttrauma.Theskinisintact,buthemorrhageofsubcutaneousvesselshasproducedextensivediscoloration. From collection the B, University Texas Pathology, Medical (A the of teaching Dallas,Texas.) Department of School, and of Southwestern

accident. Oneofthemostcommoncausesofmechanicalinjuryisvehicular hittingapartoftheinteriorofthevehicleorbeinghitbyobjectsthatenterthepassengercompartmentduringthecrash,suchasengineparts;(2)beingthrownfromthevehicle;or beingtrappedinaburningvehicle.Thepatternofinjuryrelatestowhetheroneorallthreeofthesemechanismsareoperative.Forexample,inahead-oncollision,acommonpatternofinjurysustainedbyadriverwhoisnotwearingaseatbeltincludestraumatothehead(windshieldimpact),chest(steeringcolumnimpact),andknees(dashboardimpact).Commonchestinjuriesstemmingfromsuchaccidentsincludesternalandribfractures,heartcontusions,aorticlacerations,and(lesscommonly)lacerationsofthespleenandliver.Thus,incaringforanautomobileinjuryvictim,itisessentialtorecognizethatinternalwoundsoftenaccompanysuperficialabrasions,contusions,andlacerations.Indeed,inmanycases,externalevidenceofseriousinternaldamageiscompletelyabsent. Injuriestypicallysustainedresultfrom

are of excess Both injury. causes and cold important excess heat are Burns discussed and brief hyperthermia too and follows. are first; common all hypothermia of discussion a

than States, in that United and In per cause hospitalization burns the result times year the 10 more of deaths 3500 many persons. scalding cause is victims are by hot often injury in whom Many of children, the liquids. the been and seen 1970s both decreases mortality of in rates the marked length have since hospitalizations. Fortunately, skin ways healing surfaces. to of through burns of effects achieved of understanding better the discovery been and improvements the wound facilitate of to These systemic massive and the infection better prevent have

the on The severity depends of clinical variables: burns following important

Percentage body involved of surface

internal hot from of fumes are the present toxic injuries Whether inhalation and

electrolyte prevention of of and infections and therapy, efficacy and fluid management control wound especially or Promptness

dermis, and the needed regeneration. including A burn dermal cells epidermis that full-thickness harbor total appendages for epithelial destruction the of produces Both category. burns are this fourth-degree thirdand in spared. partial-thickness the In at dermal the least deeper of burns, appendages portions are first-degree burns and burns involvement second-degree and Partial-thickness only) both the superficial (involving (epithelial burns dermis). include the epidermis

dependingonthedepth,arepinkormottled,blistered,andpainful.Histologicexaminationofdevitalizedtissueshowscoagulativenecrosisadjacenttovitaltissue,whichquicklyaccumulatesinflammatorycellsandmarkedexudation. burns, MORPHOLOGYOngrossinspection,full-thickness burns arewhiteorcharred,dry,andanesthetic(asaresultofthedestructionofnerveendings),whereaspartial-thickness

(Chapter4).Becauseproteinfromthebloodislostintointerstitialtissue,generalizededema,includingpulmonary Despitecontinuousimprovementintherapy,anyburnexceeding50%ofthetotalbodysurface,whethersuperficialordeep,isgraveandpotentiallyfatal.Withburnsofmorethan20%ofthebodysurface,thereisarapidshiftofbodyfluidsintotheinterstitialcompartments,bothattheburnsiteandsystemically,whichcanresultinhypovolemic edema, maybecomesevere. shock

http://ebooksmedicine.net

injury Anotherimportantconsiderationisthedegreeofinjurytotheairwaysandlungs.Inhalation isfrequentinpersonstrappedinburningbuildingsandmayresultfromthedirecteffectofheatonthemouth,nose,andupperairwaysorfromtheinhalationofheatedairandgasesinthesmoke.Water-solublegases,suchaschlorine,sulfuroxides,andammonia,mayreactwithwatertoformacidsoralkalis,particularlyintheupperairways,resultingininflammationandswelling,whichmayleadtopartialorcompleteairwayobstruction.Lipid-solublegases,suchasnitrousoxideandproductsofburningplastics,aremorelikelytoreachdeeperairways,producingpneumonitis.Unlikeinshock,whichdevelopswithinhours,pulmonarymanifestationsmaynotdevelopfor24to48hours.

aeruginosa, system Organ failure resultingfromsepsis continuestobetheleadingcauseofdeathinburnedpatients.Theburnsiteisidealforthegrowthofmicroorganisms;theserumanddebrisprovidenutrients,andtheburninjurycompromisesbloodflow,blockingeffectiveinflammatoryresponses.ThemostcommonoffenderistheopportunistPseudomonas butantibiotic-resistantstrainsofothercommonhospital-acquiredbacteria,suchasS. aureus andfungi,particularlyCandida and/ortheacuterespiratorydistresssyndrome(ARDS)(Chapter13),arethemostcommonserioussequelae. spp.,alsomaybeinvolved.Furthermore,cellularandhumoraldefensesagainstinfectionsarecompromised,andbothlymphocyteandphagocytefunctionsareimpaired.Directbacteremicspreadandreleaseoftoxicsubstancessuchasendotoxinfromthelocalsitehavedireconsequences.Pneumonia failure accompaniedbyrenal orseptic shock,

Anotherveryimportantpathophysiologiceffectofburnsisthedevelopmentofahypermetabolicstate,withexcessheatlossandanincreasedneedfornutritionalsupport.Itisestimatedthatwhenmorethan40%ofthebodysurfaceisburned,therestingmetabolicratemayapproachtwicenormal.

temperatures exposure elevated exhaustion, or heat to in cramps, can heat result heat Prolonged ambient stroke.

through from of Heat sweating. electrolytes cramps result loss voluntary is usually of Cramping association vigorous the exercise, sign. in with muscles, hallmark temperature. to maintain able normal core body mechanisms Heat-dissipating are

exhaustion hyperthermic Heat common syndrome. probably most is the of secondary cardiovascular system sudden, and from compensate hypovolemia, depletion. failure it is to with the collapse, Its and results to prostration for onset a water which if victim rehydrate. reestablished is to is usually of spontaneously the a equilibrium After brief, is collapse, able period

humidity. ambient high associated temperatures stroke and with is Heat high fail, rises. ceases, sweating Thermoregulatory mechanisms temperature body and core setting, a higher rate exceeds the a grave patients 50%. sign, or mortality temperature 106°F is rectal and for considered of In prognostic clinical such the effective vasodilation The of pooling generalized volume. with underlying mechanism peripheral decreased is circulating peripheral a marked blood and blood Necrosis of may and the occur. muscles myocardium and effects other common. intravascular disseminated Arrhythmias, coagulation, systemic are recruits) physical (such military cardiovascular healthy as persons are candidates and for stroke. and otherwise heat stress prime people undergoing Elderly athletes disease, young people, with

by similar caused not temperatures. hyperthermia, • high Malignant exposure to is although sounding, a cells. mutations genetic It calcium levels in skeletal in that resulting genes condition as RYR1 from such control muscle is in which levels affected rapid and heat production. in trigger during rise muscle in surgery rigidity may increased exposure certain individuals, skeletal turn to to anesthetics muscle, In a leads calcium are if but approximately less recognized this untreated, hyperthermia and the is than has promptly. 5% falls administered if resulting relaxants of condition 80% rate mortality a muscle The to

Prolonged temperature ambient hypothermia. to to leads exposure low the body in clothing of ingestion blood frequently as vessels, inadequate superficial wet a seen temperature. occurring too lowering dilation alcohol, result of hasten homeless of is in alcoholics, all the or whom of and The condition lower temperatures. loss consciousness and bradycardia about 90°F, atrial by fibrillation core occurs, of At followed at

Chilling mechanisms: freezing tissues causes two injury cells or and by of

mediated and Direct are by incident high water. of crystallization to salt the cells within disruptions concentrations extracellular physical probably the intra-and effects

of duration rate which Indirect circulatory depending vary drop. on the result of the the changes, are and effects temperature the developing, increased may leading induce permeability, Slowly prolonged chilling and to edema. vasoconstriction necessitated long First changes spent amputation. of of (1914–1918), causing the soldiers typical “trench frequently developed This time waterlogged trenches in War gangrene are who in periods World foot.” condition Such during that sudden the vasoconstriction sharp cause viscosity the in in and temperature, degenerative area increased and in changes may of Alternatively, ischemic nerves. with the local drops peripheral blood injury exudation permeability this rewarming. increased evident In the with become vascular only with situation, and injury or prolonged, affected (e.g., is the may gangrene toes feet) the hypoxic infarction of ischemia tissues of changes and of period result. If

by or lines which workplace) may currents fatal, currents injuries, (i.e., or in in lightning. from high-voltage be from low-voltage Electrical and home arise power can the carried Injuries fibrillation center failure impulses. (1) (2) normal types: of disruption from ventricular burns resulting two electrical respiratory are of or cardiac and and of type within and The body. electric the on the its the burning amperage the and and of path injury extent severity of depend current

http://ebooksmedicine.net

injury, (as Voltage pass and the with serious enough ventricular (120 in V) cause through to body is current contact high sufficient low that site the resistance when or including fibrillation. is at household the workplace can wet), 220 skin the the of enough organs. as continues and current the in of internal burns entry as site at produce flow If generates heat long enough, exit it to well live that prolonging muscle spasm, is available current, tetanic so occur, current or to is when switch homes, of characteristic of grasped, important is induces it most in the that flow. An wire irreversible type the clutching period alternating a likely in some a and, of death from greater in of producing results muscles, chest wall spasm cases, This likelihood extensive the electrical asphyxia. burns paralysis damage; cause however, and centers flows more large produce sources are these generated medullary Currents injuries current of extensive to the of because burns. similar likely from high-voltage generated, classic Lightning injury. is high-voltage cause of electrical a

is the in that or Radiation energy travels particles. high-speed waves form of radiation. that wide span energies be the electromagnetic and of It a nonionizing has into ionizing it spectrum; divided range can waves, can and from of radiation, not displace them to is but (UV) or cause infrared sound nonionizing vibrate such move atoms. microwaves, molecule light, to a ultraviolet atoms sufficient energy electrons and in as The sufficient electrons. remove tightly ionizing has bound to contrast, energy radiation By referred these additional ionization. reaction in as with a cascade electrons, of other to Collision electrons releases free atoms very alpha main particles ionizing gamma (composed essentially of radiation and (1) and high-energy The which (2) and two are rays, neutrons, neutrons), are are two electromagnetic beta x-rays sources electrons. of high of and frequencies, particles, waves which protons and considerably of a a alpha particles produce gamma deeper tissue. and of dissipate area, At unit course, whereas heavy over equivalent less energy, induce energy per amounts damage damage rays x-rays restricted in longer, radioisotopes. population U.S. originating Some from medical human-made, devices received of and is dose of ionizing by radiation total the the mostly much widespread of use CT during the roughly radiation exposure doubled more of imaging 2006, fact, patients between tests of ionizing early and to radiologic the scans. mainly In because 1980s

sword. this is medical application constitutes indispensable two-edged Ionizing in practice, a radiation but therapeutic form radioisotopes. used in cancer, and is imaging, the this Radiation treatment as diagnostic or in of diagnostic in However, is also teratogenic. mutagenic, it carcinogenic, and

Curie used • second and following per The are of dose exposure, radionuclide represents disintegrations spontaneously absorption, (Ci) to terms the a radiation: ionizing of disintegrating express (radioisotope). second. 3.7 to 1010 × Ci One per disintegrations is equal

tissue. by expresses Gray that a energy the target a unit is (Gy) absorbed ergs of 104 of the tissue. gram per It corresponds absorption to tissue to the dose”). 100 (R) gram exposure of to centigray rads 100 absorption absorbed the tissue, which per A (cGy), is of is of ergs equivalent (“radiation The the replaced cGy parlance. in rad now nomenclature has medical

of (it depends the a rather a called (Sv) of on effects unit the dose the equivalent is radiation that Sievert unit than biologic physical replaced rem). produce. various the extent radiation types the of same damage For in differ dose, absorbed they of The uniform for and provides measuring controls a this variation dose equivalent unit. effectiveness multiplied in (expressed the dose by relative in of sieverts) grays) the biologic dose The equivalent to (expressed absorbed the corresponds radiation. well tissue, duration the effectiveness other The as exposed and of exposure, of factors and radiation, as biologic depends type the the the on next). of relative type (discussed volume biologic the procedures commonly are (mSv). and (CT), millisieverts tomography effective medicine imaging expressed computed dose x-rays, The in of nuclear other and mSv x-radiation, mGy. = 1 1 For

the Main of Radiation Ionizing Biologic Effects of Determinants

radiation, physical its the properties effects the variables: on of addition following In to biologic depend the heavily

Rate of delivery. biologic of significantly delivery modifies The rate effect. the to doses of effect Although repair divided delivery may cells allow radiant in of in the is intervals. energy some cumulative, damage the the extent energy fractional have repair the is to effect incomplete. doses that the only cumulative a Thus, of intervals radiant during to of recover cells than and Radiotherapy themselves rapidly normal cells. exploits more tumor capability repair of the tumors to

Field size. of field size a radiation has to exposed influence The great the on its consequences. fields lethal. shielded larger to whereas be carefully sustain to small, fields, doses they doses radiation may high can The smaller delivered delivered body relatively when of are

proliferation. Cell to ionizing quiescent than damages DNA, cells. are dividing vulnerable Because are radiation cells more injury rapidly damage cells. with such extremely nondividing DNA as DNA impair in neurons doses at transcription, that and survival high is compatible Except cells, muscle initially and, in “guardian in that dividing the genome.” to through of DNA genes upregulation by that detected discussed turn leading produce the cause to great cells apoptosis. p53, the damage that of lead if genes arrest the repair, DNA is too expression p53 in of upregulates the sensors cell-cycle is Chapter signals death as to cell damage However, 6, as of lymphoid tissues a tract, to after manifested with rate vulnerable such and radiation, and extremely Understandably, the bone high tissue, GI marrow, are the injury is gonads, early turnover, cell exposure. of mucosa the therefore,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Hypoxia. ROS the DNA water of production mechanism by is damage by the important radiation. ionizing of of radiolysis most The exist radiotherapy vascularized may may in such of against and the tumors. center the extent hypoxia, growing, Tissue damage of thus effectiveness rapidly directed tumors, reduce of as poorly the

damage. Vascular are occlusion radiation, cells, may atrophy. moderately blood vessels, endothelial to leading fibrosis, cause narrowing impaired sensitive ischemic to healing, chronic which Damage to and or of months years or may exposure. after These changes appear damage in radiation, Despite this manifestations injury late of lead vascular radiation to sensitivity cells the can low of after tissue. brain irradiation to

The important DNA ( cellular most is of ionizing target radiation

Fig. ). 8.14 as years that precisely repaired leads or manifest later cancer. Damage ionizing mutations, by decades which caused is to not radiation to can DNA Ionizing and crosslinks DNA can damage, double-strand singleand between single-base in breaks, of including damage and DNA, cause protein. radiation types many simple mammalian repair defects contained may 6). reparable be systems by surviving various (see Chapter enzyme In cells cells, in mutated) that repair These which are cycle transduction or cell signal and are through to after the repair to regulation the arrest of cell-cycle linked transiently proteins allow that to ATM damage, cells p53, trigger initiate as can such systems DNA for irreparable. (ataxia-telangiectasia apoptosis the imprecise without or may breaks of repair, be may prone), (error However, repair persist mutations. double-strand creating lesions genomes functioning TP53), are unstable with If cell-cycle mutations not abnormal instance, in (for survive because checkpoints of and cells

Additional of cell Failed transforming division Inhibition or repair aberrant

cells: germ or events death Cell teratogenesis Carcinogenesis Fetus

Fig. 8.14 EffectsofionizingradiationonDNAandtheirconsequences.TheeffectsonDNAcanbedirector,mostimportant,indirect,throughfreeradicalformation.

tumors as abnormal form clones to expand eventually. and may

the the consequence in fibrosis field ( cancer common of of radiotherapy A development is irradiated

Fig. 8.15 ). Chapter dead replacement of and and parenchymal formation scars occur cells irradiation, adhesions the weeks by months or connective may tissue after of (see leading Fibrosis to 3). the damage radiation ionizing As already and consequent mentioned, ischemia. causes vascular tissue radiation, the killing and promote the of stem release inflammatory damage, that of an and contribute tissue radiation-induced by cells and the Vascular all fibrosis. chemokines activation of to fibroblast reaction ionizing development cytokines

Fig. 8.15 Vascularchangesandfibrosisofsalivaryglandsproducedbyradiationtherapyoftheneckregion. (A)Normalsalivarygland;(B)fibrosiscausedbyradiation;(C)fibrosisandvascularchangesconsistingoffibrointimalthickeningandarteriolarsclerosis.V, thickenedintima. Vessellumen;I, Upton,Department of of Courtesy Pathology,University Dr. Melissa Washington,Seattle,Washington.) (A–C, of http://ebooksmedicine.net

• • Anemia • SKIN Granulocytopenia Lymphopenia Adult BRAIN • Atrophy, • – MARROW resistant cancerGONADS

Fig. 8.16 Acuterespiratorydistresssyndrome. Overviewofthemajormorphologicconsequencesofradiationinjury.Earlychangesoccurinhourstoweeks;latechangesoccurinmonthstoyears.ARDS,

swelling andcondensationandclumpingofchromatinmayappear;breaksinthenuclearmembranealsomaybenoted.Apoptosis chromosomes, includingdeletions,breaks,translocations,andfragmentation.Themitoticspindleoftenbecomesdisorderly,andpolyploidyandaneuploidymaybeencountered.Nuclear mayoccur.Cellswithabnormalnuclearmorphologymaybeproducedandpersistforyears,includinggiantcellswithpleomorphicnucleiormorethanonenucleus.Atextremelyhighdoselevelsofradiantenergy,featuresthatforetellimpendingcelldeath,suchasnuclearpyknosis,appearquickly. in MORPHOLOGYCellssurvivingradiantenergydamageshowawiderangeofstructuralchanges

changes, includingcytoplasmicswelling,mitochondrialdistortion,anddegenerationoftheER.Plasmamembranebreaksandfocaldefectsmayappear.Thehistologicconstellationofcellularpleomorphism,giantcellformation,changesinnuclei,andmitoticfigurescreatesamorethanpassingsimilaritybetweenradiation-injuredcellsandcancercells,aproblemthatplaguesthepathologistwhenevaluatingpost-irradiationtissuesforpersistenceorrecurrenceofcancer. InadditiontoaffectingDNAandnuclei,radiantenergymayinduceavarietyofcytoplasmic

Atthelightmicroscopiclevel,vascularchangesandinterstitialfibrosisareprominentinirradiatedtissues(

).Duringtheimmediatepostirradiationperiod,vesselsmayshowonlydilation.Later,orwithhigherdoses,avarietyofdegenerativechangesappear,includingendothelialcellswellingandvacuolation,orevennecrosisofthewallsofsmallvesselssuchascapillariesandvenules.Affectedvesselsmayruptureorundergothrombosis.Stilllater,endothelialcellproliferationandcollagenoushyalinizationwiththickeningofthemedialayerareseeninirradiatedvessels,resultinginmarkednarrowingorobliterationofthevascularlumina.Atthistime,anincreaseininterstitialcollagenintheirradiatedfield,leadingtoscarringandcontractions,usuallybecomesevident. Fig.8.15

Fig. main injury. consequences the 8.16 of depicts radiation lymphoid and the As tract. lining sensitive GI most organs the of hematopoietic already the systems, are mentioned, the tissues the and gonads, and doses of organs exposure the in various effects shown to radiation for are threshold acute in Estimated

Table 8.7 . lymphoid changes or systems, the are lymphoid by hematopoietic as follows: and in Hematopoietic and along ionizing environmental systems. to with summarized exposure induced • The radiation, cancers occupational lymphoid injury deserve are radiation to susceptible systems special hematopoietic and mention. and extremely The high With

Embryonic of to (weeks glial neurons – cells and months) destruction

(early) Erythema, edema

months) to (weeks Dyspigmentation to (months years)

years) to (months fibrosis Interstitial

wall of (late) Fibrosis

gonads and of (late) Atrophy fibrosis

Radiation Effects on 0.15 Acute Specific Organs Estimated 0.50 Table Doses 8.7 for Threshold

Reversibleskineffects(e.g.,Skin1.0–2.0erythema)

PermanentsterilityOvaries2.5–6.0

of and with spleen. TemporaryhairlossSkin3.0–5.0 and http://ebooksmedicine.net dose within irradiation, shrinkage fields, 3.5 hours severe exposure appear 5.0 the levels may large nodes lymphopenia of lymph along in circulating blood the lymphocytes, tissues destroys gut). and (nodes, both spleen, in directly Radiation thymus, prompt, lymphocyte doses leading of sublethal from radiation, to restoration progenitors is count. a of normal viable regeneration With marrow a the to marrow Hematopoietic in bone produces are which aplasia. sensitive radiant also energy, quite dose-dependent precursors formed the platelets, on cells, marrow 1 respectively. of red 10 peripheral days, of kinetics day, and counts days, and the granulocytes, reflects have blood of effects less turnover of 120 The which acute elements—the than half-lives irradiation neutropenia within After several in circulating count, brief appears neutrophil the a rise days. during at zero, often Neutrophil counts counts near reach week. their nadir, the second months. granulocytes If require to 2 patient the survives, full may 3 of recovery the week, count by occurring later Thrombocytopenia that of somewhat end than the nadir granulocytes; delayed. first the with platelet similarly recovery is of appears may and to after appears persist 2 3 months. weeks Anemia for more higher recovery. doses produce severe cytopenias of Understandably, of prolonged and periods more radiation blood (aplastic permanent Very marked lower failure high aplasia with aplasia by count doses cells transient. marrow induce whereas stem a recovery, doses is the and of kill anemia)

and exposure development. Environmental • cancer division Any become the of cell has capable sustained cancerous. potential mutations that has to after increased occur neoplasms an exposure of incidence Thus, may ionizing to any in radiation. organ there little is consequences, of required is that difficult but exposures risk of serious prolonged the in development that acute level cancer. radiation doubt determine, including result of cancer cause The or increase to 100 doses to mSv increase and syndrome, received of This and individuals “second cancers thyroid as (such tumors therapy in accident, Hiroshima as by Chernobyl lymphoma. sites thyroid, Nagasaki, of lung) acute leukemias who various in myeloid increased solid at is breast, in for and the the of radiation and such the survivors as such of Hodgkin cancers survivors incidence documented development leukemia, the cancers,” of bombings tumors, myelodysplastic and the atomic in risk believed is following in that cancers secondary greatest It children. the of irradiation is measurable two a but in children This have epidemiologic brain increased malignant based leukemia scans receive at for that is on part small least large-scale CT and study very showing risks who

8.8 when radiation to chest studies to breast Table produce adolescent likely showing tumors, the that to particularly on of is Whole-Body therapy and Effects Ionizing Radiation cancers administered older females.

• and cancer Occupational development. exposure ubiquitous of a uranium. is Radon product decay spontaneous the of decay agents and a particles radon The polonium-218, emit carcinogenic have which short are byproducts daughters”), “radon half-life. and or two alpha (polonium-214 are the miners and deposited may rise in lung, These carcinomas. give chronic lung to in uranium particulates exposure in present levels also those in comparable high, in radon of very to found the are mines. which Risks homes those are no suggest risk However, in little to cancer is lung contributes to average radon that there household. of the evidence the or

of Exposure doses have areas to radiation body may of even of effects. devastating small large the less symptoms. Sv produce or Dosages no than minimal 1 progressively doses involve CNS. hematopoietic and Greater radiation known exposures, as acute however, GI which the cause at effects system, syndromes, system, health higher The radiation to associated exposure summarized ionizing with syndromes in are total-body

Table 8.8

lymphope and large levels severe exposure lymphopedose fields, and fields, levels large severe RADIATIONINJURYdose exposure

Ionizingradiationmayinjurecellsdirectlyorindirectlybygeneratingfreeradicalsfromwaterormolecularoxygen.

IonizingradiationdamagesDNA;therefore,rapidlydividingcellssuchasgermcells,andthoseinthebonemarrowandGItractareverysensitivetoradiationinjury.

DNAdamagethatisnotadequatelyrepairedmayresultinmutationsthatpredisposeaffectedcellstoneoplastictransformation.

Ionizingradiationmaycausevasculardamageandsclerosis,resultinginischemicnecrosisofparenchymalcellsandtheirreplacementbyfibroustissue.

and whereas live in of starvation, eat calories the or developing and fear developing Millions and the nations the they or the cruel world, struggle atherosclerosis recently people starve to developed contribute may avoid in what in to world, on obesity those of more that attendant edge

hypertension. http://ebooksmedicine.net Mainsignsand—ModerateleukopeniaLeukopenia,hemorrhage,Diarrhea,fever,electrolyteAtaxia,coma,convulsions,symptoms epilation,vomitingimbalance,vomitingvomiting both are concerns. overnutrition So major lack of nutrition and the health

used fatty as and and as acids the (2) and needs; structural function lipids; as structural the and as building body’s case metabolic or as phosphate, co-enzymes nonessential) proteins minerals, daily for calcium the essential vitamins (3) and well A which and amino blocks components. and vital hormones sufficient form or, acids, fats, metabolic for in in proteins, energy, carbohydrates, (as functional (1) synthesis in important of of provides diet pathways healthy of these of diet. from primary In missing malnutrition, or are one all components the and malnutrition requirements. is nutrients use from malabsorption, storage, By results or in contrast, dietary losses, increased the impaired or intake conditional, adequate, secondary, excess of malnutrition, nutrient or acute and overlapping diseases, critical but wasting categories: general be causes illness. chronic diseases, into The grouped malnutrition three GI can of secondary

is widespread Malnutrition and be or gross may subtle. here. causes common listed insufficiencies Some dietary of are

Poverty. children of nutrient deficiencies. poor elderly the well people, as Homeless as severe malnutrition suffer often and from trace persons, of and livestock countries, with In together the deaths, droughts, malnourishment crop failure, poor adults. for and creates setting children poverty,

Ignorance. have pregnant Even to women infants, and fail nutritional needs. may that increased recognize affluent the adolescents, iodine supplementation malnutrition, about mainstay as iron lacking unless removed may content is diet fed often nutritional is in in and milk also Ignorance various amounts develops exclusively thiamine; contributes regions used of from the deficiency as of foods often polished the adequate the rice infants of lack to (3) oceans, artificial follows: diets; (2) in provided. and a water (1) food

Chronic alcoholism. may dietary utilization in persons as increased and and Alcoholic result a vitamin vitamins, of deficiency, needs, rate defective but absorption, are and A, loss. several lacking folate, suffer metabolic from more frequently GI malnutrition storage, thiamine, of an increased sometimes abnormal nutrient especially pyridoxine, to in Chapter in alcoholism psychosis, may patients brain 23). failure with Korsakoff A damage irreversible recognize (e.g., thiamine in deficiency discussed chronic result

and Acute illnesses. chronic patients in double), extensive requirements increased becomes The many metabolic illnesses all nutrients. daily burns, may for it with basal in (in rate resulting accelerated nutritional Failure to delay may needs recognize these recovery. AIDS. and advanced present is cancer in often with Malnutrition patients

dietary restriction. Self-imposed who population are fear discussed Anorexia chapter). about section in are a less disorders affect and large unreasonable overt concerned image cardiovascular in separate persons nervosa, (anorexia suffer and from a disease bulimia of body bulimia, of an this or eating

• Other causes. particular block of Additional syndromes, or therapies drug parenteral causes specific acquired uptake (which and and malabsorption of total malnutrition diseases, use GI nutrients), inherited nutrition. include

general section disorders. a this overview nutritional presents The remainder of of nervosa is cancer. malnutrition, of the and trace obesity, brief atherosclerosis Particular relationships a consideration of to and diet deficiencies anorexia bulimia, minerals, of and devoted to severe vitamins attention and acute with of diseases the context in nutrients the are Other throughout discussed specific issues nutritional and text.

The World is Organization greatly reduced by a WHO (SAM) acute weight state for standard as of deviation defines Health 3 height that standards. ratio characterized severe malnutrition a below affected it. by are children million the of under 5 Worldwide 16 years about age a It to countries, poor as affected young. be major where very rates among the the and is high as in common may 25% it of is many where children death contributor abject wars addition toll exact live in who life, In refugees heavy poverty. a on also loss to of moderately set refugees camps many as or Syria, from of malnourished. are children severely for In 20% as the up

that inadequate protein energy is as all resulting from the SAM body’s malnutrition manifests protein range to a called of meet needs. dietary (PEM) previously and clinical syndromes, of a intake calories of SAM of known spectrum ends the and are kwashiorkor. The as two marasmus protein stores protein organs, somatic body: proteins in by be that and compartment, by skeletal represented liver. the in the the in standpoint, the compartment, from the should visceral It functional a two represented compartments noted visceral are primarily there muscles, compartments differently, regulated detailed as are These subsequently. two more in compartment in visceral and depleted more The affected compartment kwashiorkor. somatic is the is severely severely marasmus next, Clinical followed of marasmus by descriptions kwashiorkor. and assessment of is discussed undernutrition

of most its is obvious diagnosis in severe SAM forms. The helpful muscle serum to are and against the of compare In moderate the body other for stores, a fat forms, tables; mild standard is certain proteins. height parameters levels to mass, weight approach given usual tissue) loss and is of includes With subcutaneous fat, (which skin reduced. a skinfold thickness measured protein is reflected of If the resultant midarm. reduced somatic reduction in compartment circumference muscle the is mass by the catabolized, Measurement of the transferrin, and of others) serum the (albumin, compartment. provides visceral proteins of protein adequacy estimate an gut microbiome in the the role suggest Recent for of studies a pathogenesis SAM. There a with with SAM flora is when microbial substantial the the gut in compared of of children. microbiome children difference normal not in the are in seems SAM merely the causation. role but of microbiome play alterations that the their It consequences a

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 8.17 Childhoodmalnutrition.(A)Marasmus.Notethelossofmusclemassandsubcutaneousfat;theheadappearstobetoolargefortheemaciatedbody.(B)Kwashiorkor.Theinfantshowsgeneralizededema,seenasascitesandpuffinessoftheface,hands,andlegs. Clinic (A, Reisebericht Kenya.) From Barak,

calories severely in develops lacking Marasmus the ( when is diet

Fig. ). 8.17A of A retardation loss catabolism somatic and of muscle the as of marasmic result compartment. protein mass and depletion growth child suffers a acids energy. This response with be adaptive source of an provides a body that the to as seems amino are so albumin the more either critical Of serum for which only levels slightly is marginally, normal interest, survival, or visceral protein depleted is reduced. presumably compartment, only

In fat to also muscle used fuel. subcutaneous and is proteins, addition as mobilized later that cortisol contribute to low, production lipolysis. which high to levels of under produce hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal the Leptin stimulate may axis (discussed “Obesity”) the is and of subcutaneous too appears muscle such comparison, are With head extremities large by fat, the the emaciated; the body. losses for present, T-cell–mediated Anemia there particularly multivitamin of of evidence manifestations immunity. of are is and deficiency, immune deficiencies and infections an on present, impose weakened concurrent usually additional an which stress already body. are Hence,

reduction than Kwashiorkor occurs protein in relatively calories ( deprivation when total is greater the

Fig.

8.17B ). appears early exclusively, the fed, baby describes most been child). Ga weaned form who the is after from and illness Ghana, common in This too the a carbohydrate diet that arrival a SAM of African children kwashiorkor, of in have subsequently language another in almost name the seen (the impoverished Asia. prevalence high also Southeast The of in countries kwashiorkor is of nephrotic syndrome, protein the forms or may extensive in occur protein-losing is not enteropathies, aftermath states, severe in in of chronic absorbed, the burns). diarrheal with loss persons those worldwide protein with or which chronic (e.g., Less cases replacement kwashiorkor beverages milk Rare reported resulting or of from of rice-based United in have diets the fad States. been by

is the to kwashiorkor, marasmus, and resultant the hypoalbuminemia protein with unlike ( associated protein loss rise of severe compartment, In in edema marked dependent visceral or generalized gives deprivation

Fig. 8.17 ). is The kwashiorkor normal. typically with children 80% of of severe 60% to weight by masked loss fluid of the is increased true weight However, retention the (edema). contrast muscle relative mass. marasmus, is subcutaneous fat further there In sparing with and of loss may these also of masked be by modest The edema. compartments

with and characteristic hypopigmentation, a hyperpigmentation, “flaky zones lesions with have paint” alternating skin Children kwashiorkor giving desquamation, of appearance. and color, to darker straightening, changes of of color bands firm loss Hair scalp. loss include alternating or attachment and texture, of fine pale the synthesis development lipoproteins) of protein listlessness, enlarged, of features (resulting kwashiorkor apathy, Other liver fatty component marasmus the carrier of the loss and distinguish from include from that of an appetite. reduced and vitamin are to be infections. immunity and in marasmus, defects in are As as present, secondary likely deficiencies that In by state the malnutrition. the catabolic inflammation kwashiorkor, caused infection aggravates produces a spectrum, exists. and considerable and ends two mentioned, marasmus represent kwashiorkor As already of a overlap

http://ebooksmedicine.net

and patients. develops ill, the in often malnutrition secondary In older, States, United bedridden chronically nursing residents are that more It is estimated in States in than the malnourished. of 50% homes United older malnutrition patients Weight home almost the mortality nursing risk from of 5-fold. 5% increases more loss by than of in resulting often cancer A malnutrition, particularly called cachexia, 6). of form advanced develops in with patients (Chapter secondary severe all too and often death. apparent The wasting is presages may loss appetite appetite before appear Although explain decreases. the of may partly cachexia it, part to tumor the TNF, are involve cytokines are appear The particularly underlying response host by to tumors. mechanisms cells, of released secreted but complex, which advanced as stimulate fat and mobilization lipid muscle of also skeletal from the stores. degradation stimulate proteins, factors These directly

ThehallmarkanatomicchangesinSAMare(1)growthfailure, inkwashiorkor,butnotinmarasmus,isenlargedandfatty;superimposedcirrhosisisrare. (2)peripheraledemainkwashiorkor,and(3)lossofbodyfatandatrophyofmuscle,moremarkedinmarasmus.Theliver

bowel showsadecreaseinthemitoticindexinthecryptsoftheglands,associatedwithmucosalatrophyandlossofvilliandmicrovilli.Insuchcasesconcurrentlossofsmallintestinalenzymesoccurs,mostoftenmanifestedasdisaccharidasedeficiency.Hence,infantswithkwashiorkorarelactateintolerantinitiallyandmaynotrespondwelltofull-strength,milk-baseddiets.Withtreatment,themucosalchangesarereversible. Inkwashiorkor(rarelyinmarasmus)thesmall

Thebone marrow inbothkwashiorkorandmarasmusmaybehypoplastic,mainlyasaresultofdecreasednumbersofredcellprecursors.Thus,anemiaisusuallypresent,mostoftenhypochromic,microcyticduetoirondeficiency,butaconcurrentdeficiencyoffolatemayleadtoamixedmicrocytic-macrocyticanemia.

Thebrain ininfantswhoareborntomalnourishedmothersandwhosufferfromSAMduringthefirst1or2yearsoflifehasbeenreportedbysomeinvestigatorstoshowcerebralatrophy,areducednumberofneurons,andimpairedmyelinationofwhitematter.

Manyotherchangesmaybepresent,including(1)thymicandlymphoidatrophy(moremarkedinkwashiorkorthaninmarasmus),(2)anatomicalterationsinducedbyintercurrentinfections,particularlywithendemichelminthsandotherparasites,and(3)deficienciesofotherrequirednutrientssuchasiodineandvitamins.

self-induced then vomiting. state resulting weight patient nervosa a Anorexia marked starvation bulimia is of in condition in binges the on which and a induces is loss; food nervosa than better prognosis. and more a anorexia carries is common Bulimia It onset an years. at occur men, of average 0.1% women 20 age and 2% to of in to of 1% is estimated with or women healthy previously have attaining who an acquired young primarily disorders with These occur thinness. maintaining in obsession

in anorexia nervosa to similar generally The those are SAM. findings in clinical effects addition, In system are on prominent. endocrine the from of secretion luteinizing a is decreased so diagnostic that common hormone of is resulting follicle-stimulating Amenorrhea, hormones), secretion its decreased (and feature. presence almost consequent gonadotropin-releasing and include in changes thyroid hormone bradycardia, related intolerance, and constipation, to Other release, cold skin decreased hair. the common and findings, In addition, are dehydration and findings. abnormalities frequent electrolyte hair but increased and pale may fine be is (lanugo). Body usually of levels, acceleration most the mimics of likely estrogen low is decreased, which Bone because postmenopausal density osteoporosis. malnutrition, and present. expected be may severe As anemia, hypoalbuminemia with lymphopenia, cardiac from susceptibility major sudden increased death, and A both anorexia arrhythmia nervosa of hypokalemia. resulting is complication an to

In norm. binge is the eating bulimia, principally ingested, only be Huge to amounts vomiting. by induced followed carbohydrates, food, are of less probably 50% and patients, in menstrual common, maintained weight normal. of are levels Although because near amenorrhea bulimic occurs irregularities are than gonadotropin use complications major The laxatives are chronic vomiting medical and induced to continual of diuretics. related and (2) predispose (1) which stomach the arrhythmias; include of pulmonary cardiac imbalances (3) gastric to electrolyte (hypokalemia), These esophageal rupture. aspiration and and patient contents; and must diagnosis for comprehensive a assessment no there of patient. this the specific Nevertheless, syndrome, psychologic on and are symptoms rely signs the

functions the individual order. of in summarize the comments their some vitamins consequence are Before and general deficiency, we of

four—A, Thirteen are and necessary for are the and K—are water-soluble. remainder fat-soluble vitamins D, E, health; functions is important; in body, digestive the distinction in be although are by disturbances Chapter caused stored fat former The of in more may the absorbed fatand vitamins (discussed between 15). they water-soluble malabsorption readily poorly disorders,

acid. vitamins be microflora, K tryptophan, synthesized precursor and from intestinal and essential by vitamin an amino endogenously—vitamin D biotin steroids, can from niacin the Certain of synthesis, endogenous supply essential all is for this vitamins a health. dietary Notwithstanding

singleor SAM. concurrent deficiencies vitamin single accompany may a uncommon, is multiple-vitamin of and Deficiency

and their A, of morphologic D, the following presented of wide-ranging and are vitamins states. sections, In in C changes functions because some the detail deficient and essential of in K, consequences some complex—and tabular is the the remaining the form minerals. followed This a vitamins—E, deficiencies of summary main B of by

http://ebooksmedicine.net

maintenance A vision, and The major lipid are growth of functions and of normal metabolism. regulation of of differentiation, vitamin regulation cell name a have biologic retinol, retinoic retinal, generic Vitamin group compounds a is A which similar include activities. related of fat-soluble for acid, and that vitamin Retinol the name A. for is chemical It is the and, retinol ester, form. storage form transport also as the activity. are synthetic natural term, vitamin to structurally may A A to vitamin A related both have not but and widely that chemicals necessarily refers retinoids, used as body. important such carrots, vitamin that amounts of active which carotenoids, eggs, the sources A in many to provitamins metabolized such vegetables green and preformed milk, Animal-derived spinach are large supply of liver, butter are leafy foods as and dietary of vitamin Yellow A. squash, and are fish, most of A A. β-carotene, efficiently diets; contribute 30% is converted these in the the vitamin is Carotenoids of vitamin important to approximately human which recommended A vitamin β-carotene. The for allowance both retinol take account is A and vitamin into to dietary equivalents, expressed preformed in

food. fat-soluble pancreatic Vitamin absorption of the vitamin, and some bile, requires and antioxidant in its activity A enzymes, level a is Retinol absorbed to β-carotene where through as is β-carotene converted (generally retinol ( ester) the wall, are ingested and intestinal retinol

Fig. 8.18 ). is in transported Retinol liver cells chylomicrons, into receptor. then apolipoprotein up where E through taken is it the the reserves vitamin stellate liver, predominantly A the (Ito) cells. in body’s the 90% More stored than perisinusoidal in are of persons support healthy reserves In needs body’s the are months. adequate sufficient these an who at to consume least diet, 6 for liver mobilized; can synthesized the protein in specific Retinol stored binds to a before in retinol-binding liver. be the esters release, retinol (RBP), and surface retinol dependent The in peripheral receptors. on uptake tissues cell of RBP is RBP RBP is back released, recycled into retinol cells, uptake the and is the by blood. After in to may be as acid. retinyl ester form tissues Retinol retinoic or peripheral may oxidized be stored

Function. of functions the In normal following: are humans, the best-defined A reduced light. vision in Maintaining • vitamin responsive bright cone forms in The and to process vitamin located rhodopsin, most specific iodopsins, in of each involves therefore pigment reduced visual A–containing pigments: light; the and cells, cells, light-sensitive located a rod in three in color important four light. oxidation to all-trans-retinal, synthesis of (3) rhodopsin 11-cis-retinal, The (1) and form retinol to from involves with rhodopsin. isomerization interaction to (2) opsin of A) light causes 11-cis-retinal configuration isomerization (preformed of pro-vitamin A of alltrans-retinal, and photon (carotenes, to sequence changes the A) vitamin a

Fig. 8.18 A Vitamin metabolism.

which in visual rhodopsin, a signal. produce the in generated to changes brain. neurons transmitted by is retina membrane the a In (by and process, nerve from potential) means of the impulse and need most of dark supply is reduced During adaptation, retinol. a to the the is of to continuous all-trans-retinal lost to for the explaining retinol 11-cis-retinal, some but reconverted retina,

• specialized Potentiating of epithelial the differentiation cells. metaplasia, epithelium epithelium; an role columnar into squamous retinoids in epithelium. the keratinizing of Vitamin important A deficiency orderly differentiating the mucus-secreting when a and state a exists, play undergoes differentiation retinoid known their retinoic as Activation heterodimers ligands by acid retinoic receptors with of the another X (RARs) the formation causes and release of the receptor obligatory corepressors receptor, of (RXR). α, RXR RAR have and Both β, and isoforms, γ. three The heterodimers regulatory tumor factors, that located elements of RAR/RXR proteins. genes, regions bind acid to and in suppressor secreted response encode for genes receptors retinoic the growth cell differentiation, responses. and growth cell-cycle effects, regulate biologic Through these and other control, retinoids acid, for compared derivative highest A, affinity vitamin has retinoids. All-trans-retinoic with other acid RARs the potent a of

effects of Metabolic retinoids. receptors, the receptors. and with believed drug D be retinoic such other peroxisome to proliferator-activated receptors can vitamin nuclear receptors The activated involved as metabolism, 9-cis by RXR, in heterodimers (PPARs), form acid, adipogenesis, fatty regulators are and acid fat key acid in oxidation including of muscle, lipoprotein fatty metabolism, metabolism. PPARs and retinoids for of the effects RXR provides metabolic PPARγ on an adipogenesis. explanation association between The and

to infections. Enhancing immunity and supplementation reduce mortality Vitamin of morbidity A for diarrhea. can forms rates some Similarly, reduce in including malnourished, of the supplementation mortality those disease, can blindness. who measles, preschool damage with particularly and are and eye children complications in ability mechanisms. of from derive to stimulate on The immune probably the through A infections system its vitamin part unclear effects RBP liver. the A, acute phase the Infections which synthesis the to inhibit appears inducing of response, bioavailability may vitamin by possibly in reduce of which drop circulating A. The decrease tissue vitamin a the reduces RBP availability in hepatic retinol, causes in effect related the A of diarrheal beneficial restoration of of and may the vitamin diseases of integrity epithelium maintenance to be the in The the gut.

agents. related In some antioxidant carotenoids function addition, retinoids, and and the can as β-carotene, photoprotective metabolism. effects, and broad and Retinoids lipid development, on biologic cellular proliferation, effects embryonic have differentiation including

treat such forms to clinically skin Retinoids are disorders and leukemia. acne promyelocytic treat severe psoriasis, to used of and acute as certain also induces and subsequent a of cancer. 6, discussed to this acute form apoptosis acid Chapter its the protein fusion PML-RARα ability characterizes in cells bind that differentiation promyelocytic through of As to all-trans-retinoic leukemia

States. Deficiency worldwide A consequence nutrition occurs Vitamin malabsorption. fat poor as deficiency either a of or the in is of vitamin by are infants. absorption poor In stores of newborn A depleted children, and the vitamin infections, of disease, celiac In A vitamin colitis. as Crohn deficiency, in develop conjunction such vitamins, and disease, with may with in syndromes, fat-soluble patients adults, depletion malabsorption other and deficiency. use continuous of also oil the to may laxatives mineral surgery Bariatric lead follows: vitamin The as are A deficiency effects multiple of

As is of was and vitamin discussed, component pigments. visual other rhodopsin already A a blindness). vitamin A in one the of (night earliest vision, particularly of reduced light Not is surprisingly, impaired manifestations deficiency

cells role A to effects vitamin differentiation maintaining related in ( the deficiency are of epithelial its of Other

Fig. ). 8.19 keratization. changes of and gives metaplasia epithelial series to rise deficiency involving Persistent a result xerophthalmia in the entity most The referred to eye). as occur clinical and the eyes (dry in devastating changes lachrymal conjunctivae) dryness conjunctiva the normal of and is First, there (xerosis as the

Advanced cancer? metaplasia Corneal Bitot Increased ulcer spots Keratomalacia

Fig. surfaces, keratinizing metaplasia. role epithelial in major the the production epithelial Vitamin of and deficiency: 8.19 eye possible in A metaplasia specialized its of consequences in and and night blindness deficiency. are Not immune depicted

by replaced keratinized mucus-secreting are epithelium. epithelium eventually, blindness. This of surface, corneal keratin opaque followed the plaques leading is destruction spots) buildup and of (Bitot roughened debris cornea total erosion a by (keratomalacia) and in small softening to of the and, the

(squamous epithelium tract Vitamin metaplasia). passage the the and keratinizing A deficiency squamous cells by respiratory lining of replacement also upper to leads urinary patients the renal pulmonary of epithelium bladder and of stones. in debris desquamation infections, affected airways of keratin predisposes tract the predisposes to urinary to and Loss the mucociliary and the ducts produce the or of plugging glands with epidermis hyperkeratinization follicular may dermatosis. of of the adnexal papular Hyperplasia

immune deficiency. of vitamin serious of the consequence lack A Another is and to measles, such as pneumonia, higher diarrhea. rates This immunity infections infectious from mortality common impairment of leads high prevalence infectious by rates for 30%. supplements deficiency, In vitamin 20% disorders reduce the of world with mortality A dietary parts a to of

Toxicity. Vitamin A Both of excesses of certain A produce the because concern megadoses vitamin of sellers toxic long-term supplements. by point being manifestations—a shortand may of touted crew bear of ship’s diary eating and Arctic, in polar the hypervitaminosis in by serious that first Veer, were he de a liver. Gerrit 1597 A recounted consequences his carpenter in symptoms other described stranded The who the developed after acute members should even that this acute tale has also livers With “hepatoaficionados” in cautionary toxicity sharks, feasted eater whales, the vitamin on described note mind, adventurous A and tuna! who of the in been

of The may those headache, confused toxicity of tumor. of stupor, brain and blurred with acute a include be symptoms which signs dizziness, vomiting, vision—all and with bone and associated Chronic is weight vomiting, toxicity anorexia, pain. and joint nausea, loss, consequent function osteoclasts, fractures. and acid production increased risk of and the resorption leading of stimulates a to Retinoic high bone be retinoids avoided treatment must for the in teratogenic acne of associated because the use pregnancy of complications, not with used retinoids. these well-established are Although effect of synthetic their

major of neuromuscular the function functions, and calcium The of to levels maintenance phosphorus support vitamin of bone transmission. D mineralization, and adequate the plasma is fat-soluble metabolic the closed), osteomalacia (in as whose (in epiphyses tetany. adults), of bone vitamin and required prevention diseases In not already this the capacity, known hypocalcemic for have is rickets children respect fluid tetany, of the extracellular compartment. in maintains With vitamin to correct ionized calcium D the concentration drop develops, deficiency fluid the in results extracellular When calcium of the excitation muscle (tetany). ionized in continuous in is any the of by in should rapidly serum excess calcium reduction parathyroid however, hormone. be It level corrected of noted, secretion that Hence uncommon. is quite tetany here levels. regulation attention Our vitamin D function in on is calcium focused the the of serum of

Metabolism. of by conversion is humans of D of major light. precursor, its artificial skin by energy source or the the The photochemical endogenous vitamin solar in 7-dehydrocholesterol, UV powered for a synthesis sake known this D refer to term following of is for forms as discussion, vitamin the vitamin D3; the Irradiation this to used of compound. simplicity, cholecalciferol, the in compound present Under sun needed from of D 7-dehydrocholesterol skin. conditions endogenously the is usual exposure, 90% derived of approximately the vitamin in (perhaps in vitamin D cancers). of UV-induced level a production skin the of to pay because However, for against lower may pigmentation a small protection melanin have blacks price sources, dietary such from and small grains. as comes The plants, deep-sea fish, remainder a in ergosterol, present plant vitamin vitamin In in converted precursor D sources, D the is form, which body. to is

( of outlined D vitamin be metabolism follows can as The

Fig. 8.20): 1.

2. gut in precursors with the D of vitamin skin Absorption fats from the synthesis or other along in

protein) liver (vitamin plasma and α1-globulin Binding to transport 3. D–binding to

Conversion in the 25-hydroxylase to 25-hydroxyvitamin 4. (25-OH-D) by liver D

active α1-hydroxylase most vitamin [1,25-(OH)2-D] D of in 25-OH-D kidney (biologically to D) form Conversion the the by of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin

regulated three of 1,25-(OH)2-D is by mechanisms: Renal production

secretion the (PTH), in turn α1-hydroxylase. by 1,25-(OH)2-D stimulates parathyroid conversion hormone activating Hypocalcemia of to which augments of 25-OH-D

the Hypophosphatemia directly 1,25(OH)2-D. formation of activates thereby α1-hydroxylase, increasing

loop, by inhibiting α1-hydroxylase metabolite opposite of effect). a feedback synthesis have 1,25(OH)2-D the increased levels the of In (decreases the in downregulate action 1,25-(OH)2-D of this

Functions. of by in target hormones, and that DNA nuclear binds sequences, a to steroid regulatory turn transcription high-affinity Like acts to binding thereby genes. specific retinoids 1,25(OH)2-D inducing receptor beyond biologic body, present various those most in in cells nucleated they and that are transduce involved phosphorus for of receptors 1,25-(OH)2-D and activities, calcium The the in result homeostasis. signals the vitamin and on kidneys the normal of Nevertheless, relate calcium phosphorus, D levels to the ( intestines, action and of bones, plasma of functions through best-understood maintenance

Fig. 8.20

Ca transport, http://ebooksmedicine.net enterocytes • Stimulates of through P vitamin active intestinal form calcium in (OH)2D of The P Ca absorption upregulation of 1,25 calcium D:

irradiation of in 7-dehydrocholesterol skin Ultraviolet

intestine in absorption of sources Vitamin bloodSmall dietary D

P A Normal and of levels serum (normocalcemia) Ca

x 4 product 2 P Ca 5 6a P absorption P P Mobilization and (OH)2D Poor CaP P 7 Serum Ca of 3 1,25 P P PTHPTH ˜-1-hydroxylase and Serum mineralization Ca 6b Ca and Ca bone

Fig. (A)NormalvitaminDmetabolism. 8.20 andcalciumretention.Consequently,theserumlevelsofcalciumarenormalornearlynormal,butthephosphateislow;hence,mineralizationisimpaired(7). (B)VitaminDdeficiency.Thereisinadequatesubstratefortherenalhydroxylase(1),yieldingadeficiencyof1,25-(OH)2D(2),anddeficientabsorptionofcalciumandphosphorusfromthegut(3),withconsequentdepressedserumlevelsofboth(4).Thehypocalcemiaactivatestheparathyroidglands(5),causingmobilizationofcalciumandphosphorusfrombone(6a).Simultaneously,parathyroidhormone(PTH)induceswastingofphosphateintheurine(6b)

tubules. renal Stimulates in calcium distal resorption

PTH to calcium. Collaborates blood with regulate RANK of through part on precursors. activates on which in osteoclast receptors This osteoblasts, turn RANK upregulation occurs ligand in osteoclast produces differentiation increase and (Chapter activation 21). that signals resorptive activities RANK bone

of Promotes mineralization the bone. long formation cartilage mineralization matrix and of bones. during needed osteoid Vitamin epiphyseal and flat for the is D the of to osteoblasts promotes which calcium osteocalcin, the deposition. protein calcium-binding synthesize It stimulates

states 1,25-(OH)2-D plasma calcium resorption levels Of bone from the effects on to vitamin depend support one note, phosphorus together D bone on On blood of increases with levels. in PTH of hand, calcium: and the hypocalcemic the of states, matrix. for calcium required epiphyseal normocalcemic is osteoid cartilage hand, On and vitamin in other deposition D the in

have skeletal growing deficiency causes D Vitamin adults; in in children diseases and distribution. rickets osteomalacia worldwide these with and sunlight followed from mothers to and is lactation, to vitamin probably instance, inhabitants frequent but deficient sunlight). veiled diets which vitamin women; in climates in exposure leads heavily calcium (for D, may of to children limited pregnancies more They have northern born D scant result important by who deficiency; malabsorption depletion, include common and osteomalacia or of causing synthesis of phosphate renal disorders. rickets 1,25-(OH)2-D less decreased Other, disorders and causes deficiency milder forms groups, rickets loss persons. rarely occur D hip are osteomalacia insufficiency) high-risk outside called and leading bone fractures Although and among vitamin vitamin (also D common of to elderly that D suggest bones. preventing important for of may demineralization be vitamin also Studies with are variants with bone familial certain (Chapter an forms and that aging It D accelerated of of 21). receptor certain the minerals genetically associated vitamin appears of loss determined osteoporosis

of a the deficiency tends cause basis, hypocalcemia. Whatever D to vitamin increases of (1) (2) α1-hydroxylase, and activates calcium calcium production, calcium PTH (3) renal renal turn mobilizes from excretion; This of renal decreases the active stimulates (4) phosphate. amount D in and which increasing absorption; excretion bone; vitamin high hypophosphatemia or persists, level is near but of is bone is there to mineralization so turnover. restored Thus, bone serum impaired the normal, of calcium

osteomalacia of understanding and changes facilitated rickets maintenance. and brief development a by in summary An morphologic bone normal is of the involves skeleton intramembranous the formation bones tubular the endochondral in of whereas long proceeds The ossification, of by bones flat development ossification. intra-membranous matrix cells differentiate synthesize which which is osteoblasts, directly on formation, into osteoid collagenous With deposited. the bone calcium mesenchymal progressively endochondral epiphyseal is at and contrast, undergoes with ossification, create and osteoid matrix, mineralization By cartilage mineralized ( plates resorbed by replaced provisionally the growing to then which bone

Fig. 8.21A

unmineralized is and in basic rickets both MORPHOLOGYThe excess bone an matrix. of derangement osteomalacia Thechangesthatoccurinthegrowingbonesofchildrenwithrickets,however,arecomplicatedbyinadequateprovisionalcalcification http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Rickets. 8.21 (A)Normalcostochondraljunctionofayoungchild.Notecartilagepalisadeformationandorderlytransitionfromcartilagetonewbone.

(B)Rachiticcostochondraljunctioninwhichthepalisadeofcartilageisabsent.Darkertrabeculaearewell-formedbone;palertrabeculaeconsistofuncalcifiedosteoid.(C)Notebowingoflegsasaconsequenceoftheformationofpoorlymineralizedboneinachildwithrickets. Dr. Massachusetts.) Rosenberg, General Boston, Courtesy Hospital, Massachusetts Andrew (B, of E. ofepiphysealcartilage,derangingendochondralbonegrowth.Thefollowingsequenceensuesinrickets:

Persistenceofdistorted,irregularmassesofcartilage,manyofwhichprojectintothemarrowcavity

Disruptionoftheorderlyreplacementofcartilagebyosteoidmatrix,withenlargementandlateralexpansionoftheosteochondraljunction(

Fig.8.21B

Abnormalovergrowthofcapillariesandfibroblastsinthedisorganizedzoneresultingfrommicrofracturesandstressesontheinadequatelymineralized,weak,poorlyformedbone

Thegrossskeletalchangesdependontheseverityoftherachiticprocess;itsduration;and,inparticular,thestressestowhichindividualbonesaresubjected.Duringthenonambulatorystageofinfancy,theheadandchestsustainthegreateststresses.Thesoftenedoccipitalbonesmaybecomeflattened,andtheparietalbonescanbebuckledinwardbypressure;withthereleaseofthepressure,elasticrecoilsnapsthebonesbackintotheiroriginalpositions(craniotabes). rosary.” Theweakenedmetaphysealareasoftheribsaresubjecttothepulloftherespiratorymuscles,causingthemtobendinwardcreatinganteriorprotrusionofthesternum(pigeon bossing Anexcessofosteoidproducesfrontal breast deformity). andasquaredappearancetothehead.Deformationofthechestresultsfromovergrowthofcartilageorosteoidtissueatthecostochondraljunction,producingthe“rachitic legs groove, girdlingthethoraciccavityatthelowermarginoftheribcage.Thepelvismaybecomedeformed.Whenanambulatingchilddevelopsrickets,deformitiesarelikelytoaffectthespine,pelvis,andlongbones(e.g.,tibia),causing,mostnotably,lumbar andbowing the of TheinwardpullatthemarginofthediaphragmcreatestheHarrison ( lordosis

Fig.8.21C

Inadultswithosteomalacia, thelackofvitaminDderangesthenormalboneremodelingthatoccursthroughoutlife.Thenewlyformedosteoidmatrixlaiddownbyosteoblastsisinadequatelymineralized,producingtheexcessofpersistentosteoidthatischaracteristicofosteomalacia.Althoughthecontoursofthebonearenotaffected,theboneisweakandvulnerabletogrossfracturesormicrofractures,whicharemostlikelytoaffectvertebralbodiesandfemoralnecks.Onhistologicexamination,theunmineralizedosteoidcanbevisualizedasathickenedlayerofmatrix(whichstainspinkinhematoxylinandeosinpreparations)arrangedaboutthemorebasophilic,normallymineralizedtrabeculae.

Nonskeletal D homeostasis. in tissues Vitamin calcium the and As present participate and mentioned receptor phosphorus not D. do vitamin in cells of is Effects that various earlier, of activation of expression other It receptor neighboring vitamin that in prostate, can colon and keratinocytes, as in expression breast, Toll-like causes D. increased activation increased cells. of as and immune macrophages, This causes In produce gene of receptors well addition, D 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin local macrophages vitamin-D-dependent as pathogen-induced and tissues synthesis such appears 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. macrophages of changes these determined. the be response The on to immune remains effect net appears the with Mycobacterium tuberculosis, supplements counts clearance lymphocyte of some tuberculosis. D and in It that enhance increase vitamin patients levels reported also that low http://ebooksmedicine.net been has It

Impaired of Inadequate healing synthesis and wound joints Periosteum osteoid

Fig. 8.22 caused C by consequences collagen of Major of vitamin impaired formation deficiency.

can the ng/mL) 30% breast 50% been incidence established. reduce whether increase of and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D in risk of cancer not or supplementation cancers, are (<20 but firmly prostate, with not associated vitamin D a to colon, has

Toxicity. to an sunburns excess it produce to vitamin but of may sunlight but not does lead exposure cause vitamin Prolonged orally can of administered D, megadoses hypervitaminosis. form as of hypercalcemia. metastatic take bone in may calcifications hypervitaminosis In adults, it kidney; pain soft of causes tissues the the D children, and such this As in large rodenticide! is sufficiently so a of interest, that toxic it great potential point the doses is of potent vitamin a some

deficiency in of healing defects leads the in and to adults. C and and growing both children bone vitamin by children disease A of by scurvy, development hemorrhages principally characterized water-soluble juice were to Navy sojourns lemon provide lime sea. long and began to of Royal end the 18th during century prevent Sailors British the the their to nicknamed because them “limeys” of scurvy at at Navy the 1932 until acid was that and identified synthesized. was ascorbic It not who this D, endogenously therefore in synthesized ascorbic the acid entirely Unlike for not vitamin dependent is diet humans, on are nutrient. abundant of is present products fish) fruits variety and animal a and is vegetables. Vitamin milk some in C (liver, and in C. the vitamin amounts but provide restricted diets most adequate of All

Function. of reactions. variety in by accelerating acid pathways hydroxylation Ascorbic biosynthetic acts amidation a and allowing of The established function hydroxylation C is prolyl and for of activation inactive from the procollagen. lysyl vitamin clearly precursors, of most hydroxy-lases acquire adequately so hydroxylated is poorly it configuration secreted Inadequately or be stable cannot a crosslinked, helical procollagen fibroblasts. the from strength, Those molecules lack soluble, more that to degradation. enzymatic are are more and are secreted vulnerable tensile vessels, most in which to of accounting for scurvy. in normally hydroxyproline, blood particularly predisposition has highest the Collagen, the hemorrhages content affected, is independent on synthesis a suppresses of collagen effects of addition, hydroxylation. polypeptides, the proline vitamin deficiency In of C also Vitamin anti-oxidant properties. C has include anti-oxidant directly vitamin to regenerate the in These E. and free reactions of radicals an ability metabolic scavenge form the participation that

States. Deficiency are Consequences illustrated in of C deficiency vitamin

Fig. . 8.22 a to global in of acid of abundance problem. ascorbic Fortunately, the ceased be because scurvy foods, has deficiency, is and eating characterized live often patterns. It alcoholics—groups and among elderly alone, particularly a chronic populations as by persons, erratic affluent in inadequate secondary sometimes encountered who people undergoing Occasionally, faddists. in and and among appears peritoneal food patients hemodialysis scurvy dialysis

Toxicity. least C controlled borne megadoses out that popular against not the clinical cold symptoms The has of protect at vitamin common studies. allay been by or notion the of acid. slight may probably result a ascorbic Such is action experienced mild antihistamine relief the be as of excess in with of uricosuria of is but potential cause large promptly the the urine vitamin iron, absorption increased for iron may overload. and C The excreted

vitamins briefly and in and some essential described minerals listed are Other

8.10 . and 8.9 Tables B12 Chapter acid and are discussed 12. in Folic vitamin

VitaminKCofactorinhepaticcarboxylationofprocoagulants—factorsIIBleedingdiathesis(prothrombin),VII,IX,andX;andproteinCandproteinS

VitaminB1(thiamine)Aspyrophosphate,iscoenzymeindecarboxylationreactionsDryandwetberiberi,Wernickesyndrome,Korsakoffsyndrome

VitaminB6(pyridoxine)DerivativesserveascoenzymesinmanyintermediaryCheilosis,glossitis,dermatitis,peripheralreactionsneuropathy

*SeealsoChapter12. Essentialfortransferanduseofone-carbonunitsinDNAMegaloblasticanemia,neuraltubedefectssynthesis

Selected Syndromes Trace Table 8.10 Deficiency and Elements http://ebooksmedicine.net

PrimarySAMisacommoncauseofchildhooddeathsinpoorcountries.ThetwomainprimarySAMsyndromesaremarasmusandkwashiorkor.SecondarySAMoccursinthechronicallyillandinpatientswithadvancedcancer(asaresultofcachexia).

Kwashiorkorischaracterizedbyhypoalbuminemia,generalizededema,fattyliver,skinchanges,anddefectsinimmunity.Itiscausedbydietslowinproteinbutnormalincalories.

Marasmusischaracterizedbyemaciationresultingfromlossofmusclemassandfatwithrelativepreservationofserumalbumin.Itiscausedbydietsseverelylackingincalories—bothproteinandnonprotein.

Anorexianervosaisself-inducedstarvation;itischaracterizedbyamenorrheaandmultiplemanifestationsoflowthyroidhormonelevels.Bulimiaisaconditioninwhichfoodbingesalternatewithinducedvomiting.

VitaminsAandDarefat-solublevitaminswithawiderangeofactivities.VitaminCandmembersofthevitaminBfamilyarewater-soluble(

listsvitaminfunctionsanddeficiencysyndromes). Table8.9

the with including of cancer. and disease, type incidence adiposity increased diseases diabetes, weight 2 Excess of dyslipidemias, (obesity) most cardiovascular and excess are important hypertension, of humans, associated several body nations, major India. emerging an developing is health and in problem in developed a such public countries It as problem health epidemic the obesity reached has In United proportions. States, of of between 2015, prevalence age children. of as of increased 20 obesity of and 75 from The 34% as 68.6% the 17% 1960 and years and were Americans 2008, to 13% between were overweight the 700 Globally, Organization million Health 2015, obese. that in estimates World were (WHO) adults in diet activity. undoubtedly related of complex this but to and societal are levels epidemic The are of causes changes physical Obesity adipose adverse magnitude body of accumulation, to that tissue is produce state sufficient defined as effects. increased caused is weight, health of by a How one accumulation? does measure fat used. commonly practical the mass for is (BMI) been most purposes but index high-tech methods have body Several devised, is BMI calculated or kilograms)/(height (weight as in meters)2, kg/m2. in

closely BMI is The with body fat. correlated BMIs BMIs 25 the identify 18.5 25 whereas are range the and kg/m2 greater BMIs than between in and considered 30 overweight, normal, the to kg/m2 30 obese. kg/m2, greater that agreed kg/m2 risk. 30 is a It generally imparts a health BMI than the sake truly applied of discussion, the In and obese. is the overweight following term obesity for the both the to simplicity,

of stored to The to the not untoward body weight effects are obesity only also fat. related distribution total but of the the a several risk the which of Central, (in distribution a for condition trunk excess and fat the subcutaneous fat is cavity in or in viscera), higher diseases in with associated much in a visceral, abdominal around and of in accumulates than mesentery accumulation tissue. is obesity, the diffuse

etiology The is and understood. incompletely of complex obesity psychologic Involved environmental, are factors. and genetic, is However, of simply energy disorder put, balance. a obesity The finely within the many that two by sides narrow equation, expenditure, are a mechanisms, neural regulated energy and years. intake weight hormonal range for of so is body maintained and point, the appropriately stores fine is of as (adipose that tissue) set this an senses expenditure. energy internal quantity energy regulates intake Apparently, “lipostat,” or as controlled food by balance well and “obesity been identified. genes” Several have system encode physiologic components they expected, might energy the that of molecular balance. be regulates the As homeostasis its LEP leptin. in and gene product, player key is energy A the of the regulates This secreted sides of adipocytes, by and energy member family, of both equation—intake cytokine food unique energy. the of expenditure to effect enhance net of the As to is the food leptin energy. discussed intake of later, reduce and expenditure

be may In components that balance regulate ( energy weight neurohumoral body a and the mechanisms into way, three simplified divided

Fig. 8.23

signals The various or system generates peripheral afferent from sites. YY insulin ileum peptide by colon. the from pancreas, stomach, fat and components main are from and leptin from produced ghrelin the the cells, Its and adiponectin discussed reduces food later. and further Leptin is intake in detail “meal-initiating” and stimulates may secretion a as function it appetite, signal. Ghrelin by released endocrine satiety Peptide the and signal. is YY, in cells postprandially colon, a which is ileum

processes are (proopiomelanocortin) (cocaine-and and CART the neurons; (2) new and (1) (agouti-related by hypothalamus, and peripheral transcript) that amphetamine-regulated arcuate NPY Y) The generates AgRP and POMC transmitted peptide) in signals integrates neurons. (neuropeptide nucleus the and signals

energy respectively. hypothalamic regulated catabolic, which efferent arcuate neurons the The anabolic along by control expenditure, and consists intake is food pathways, nucleus, and of which system, organized two

loss effect). as energy enhance food stimulating of α-melanocyte reduce (anorexigenic weight and intake activate efferent POMC/CART (MSH) neurons that expenditure the such production molecules that neurons hormone through (MC4R). melanocortin signals MSH through receptor gain. contrast NPY/AgRP food effect) efferent (orexigenic that activate neurons promote intake weight By neurons and midbrain also Signals forebrain control and transmitted that efferent system. communicate autonomic by centers neurons with the nervous

system the important hormones, are afferent that Discussed and and two leptin satiety: fat and regulates adiponectin next components of gut that consumption. regulate appetite

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of stores. the and fat fat by cells, by its is is regulated adequacy Leptin output secreted to secretion. directly leptin are body and related fat stores BMI inhibiting blood–brain food CART it and barrier stimulated, neurons the crosses reduces POMC/ With hypothalamus, is the and secretion neurons. travels abundant tissue, stimulating and the by NPY/AgRP to where intake leptin adipose hormone are of opposite occurs Leptin inadequate and events there when diminished is fat: The increased. sequence is food secretion body of intake stores activities of weight, stable pathways persons In the balanced. these are of by energy physical hypothalamus. most leptin important effects Leptin and expenditure catabolic may mediated activity, be energy expenditure, and the thermogenesis, by the these through stimulating also increases on levels and readily Although expenditure response despite mice humans, of leptin leptin. the in nonobese effects intake demonstrated of states obesity be food the can blunted of anorexigenic energy in leptin and circulating of is high be by bypassed leptin injection resistance of leptin. in intraventricular can Such mice obese observation, therapy intake with fail keeping for leptin In food this leptin expenditure, and to enthusiasm energy injections dashing initial of obese affect humans in obesity. of

massive obesity. humans, the components loss-of-function of pathway rodents give and affecting to mutations rise In leptin they receptor the are sense of undernourished, to ravenously. with disable gene fat mutations Mice adequacy the fail its or stores, they that if eating behave as so leptin As mutations in or although the cause massive rare, mice, receptor may humans, gene obesity. in of leptin massive found receptor-4 in common gene are patients obesity. mutations of with 5% the More in melanocortin 4% (MC4R), to signals As this to sends mentioned binding by satiety earlier, MSH receptor. discovered is possible control defects in leptin in traits more of will that pathway the underscore the the it types obese. pathway in body and monogenic common weight, be These importance of the of this leptin, closing anorexigenic it In insulin be also mentioned that, should responses. exerts like regulation of clear, this suggests the of of of However, of leptin the adiposity. less in mechanism and the primacy is evidence insulin most effect the

called the muscle in tissue, obesity.” the against “fat-burning to adipose angel a acids Adiponectin, molecule” their It directs produced fatty has “guardian been and oxidation. for It and fatty influx decreases triglyceride the the the content. total liver acids hepatic of to insulin against decreases It also liver, production the sensitivity metabolic glucose increase an and syndrome. the causing protecting in in metabolic cardioprotective In effects, anti-diabetic, anti-atherogenic, to has its addition anti-inflammatory, effects. anti-proliferative, adiponectin and lean are in than Its in serum obese individuals. levels lower obesity-associated and effects later. discussed type of 14), diabetes, 2 certain insulin cancers, disease resistance, to possibly risk nonalcoholic fatty These increased (Chapter liver contribute

such addition inflammatory mediators, adiponectin, and hormones, tissue adipose responses. leptin adipose and lipid allow tissue link a as steroid and In between produces other chemokines, which to metabolism, as to cytokines, function nutrition, obesity. about for obese providing The higher total is of childhood the time established people number reason and by concern children, were in is who of adolescence as another adipocytes adipocytes of approximately mass. number 10% of annually, constant, individual body over of adipocytes regardless turn adults Although the remains in the causes Diets energy levels fall, to loss because stimulating part diminishing of leptin adipocytes appetite fail and the expenditure. from fat in

of hormones acting and Gut volitional rapidly are eating. terminators initiators Prototypical and (PYY). YY peptide are ghrelin examples and stomach in is arcuate hypothalamus. produced the Ghrelin of nucleus the the stimulating intake, neurons acting in It increases most by likely the hypothalamus. NPY/AgRP food the levels is this to 2 but Ghrelin in normally 1 persons. hours and before fall obese rise drop meals afterward, attenuated in in to levels as are a individuals weight, with Ghrelin they increase lower compared those with obese reduction and normal obesity. is of surgery is surface in whom is treatment that of such individuals the exposed surgery reduced be beneficial in ghrelin in mucosa Interestingly, food. obesity, to due gastric that suggesting for gastric much to the levels in a effects bypass may part of rise performed reduced the

colon consumption secreted of and response PYY food. is in ileum in from to the the cells endocrine and decreases sense fullness It (satiety). augments appetite a of hypothalamus, neurons presumably, POMC/CART intake. decreasing It thereby in stimulating acts, food the by

rate the PYY and of which (“ilea intestinal contribute of all gastric reduces emptying to motility brake”), satiety. also and obese. obesity who are treatment of the are value of overweight levels with may in therapeutic those reduced PYY be or

Microbiome Gut The of Role

development of suggest observations involved may of in the gut series be microbiome obesity. interesting An that the littermates. of genetically notion is and the obese the mice support their this of that In gut lean differ profiles microbiota finding between genetically mice of from compared lean microbiome can The mice. much of as food to harvest energy obese that more microbiota mice) by increased obese of germfree associated mice body with mice gut weight. from from of microbiota Colonization lean not the (but is relevance proven. models remains The obesity is to to of tantalizing but these be human

Obesity of Clinical Consequences

a known a diabetes, including risk 2 is particularly for obesity, Obesity, factor cancer. of conditions, disease, cardiovascular central number type and syndrome, proinflammatory the and coupled known center evidence of of systemic hypertension at and of metabolic a obesity state. glucose Central metabolism abnormalities with a characterized lipid stands also as cluster alterations by the of acids to seems be by the levels in of caused free cells to tissue. and lipids fatty inflammasome This and excess response resistance. which IL-1, induces inflammasome The insulin stimulates of secretion are associations note: worthy of The following

20). (Chapter important with diabetes type of and features 2 associated insulin hyperinsulinemia, is Obesity resistance volume, production that sodium, of Excess excess retention the of insulin, smooth muscle role a play of norepinephrine, of in the hypertension. proliferation may hallmarks are and in expansion turn, blood persons developing risk Whatever the with previously hypertension normotensive of increases proportionately mechanism, among the weight.

the disease. HDL cholesterol hypertriglyceridemia Obese low of risk increase that levels, and persons generally artery coronary factors have is straightforward, not to linkage hypertension is diabetes associated se. to however, The and association and such between as there and obesity heart per the disease more than relates weight

http://ebooksmedicine.net

associated diabetes. obesity type and commonly Nonalcoholic with fatty liver 2 disease is and to (Chapter can progress 16). It cirrhosis fibrosis

in (gallstones) common more six obese subjects. in times lean Cholelithiasis than is the the persons increased total and cholesterol in affected of cholesterol, bile, cholesterol an augmented mainly mechanism to body gallstones which increase formation of turn is predisposes in biliary turnover, cholesterol-rich excretion in 16). (Chapter The

of constellation is very persons. syndrome abnormalities a Hypoventilation respiratory in obese the the Pickwick who It lad Charles The was been called syndrome, pickwickian falling after fat in asleep Papers. Dickens’ has constantly eventual (sleep day, and sleep both the often night and with is pauses heart and at is apneic apnea), polycythemia, right-sided failure. associated characteristic during during Hypersomnolence,

development a Marked factor predisposing adiposity for of disease is joint degenerative (osteoarthritis). the of to form in of and persons, attributed on effects the wear in cumulative typically large arthritis, appears This which is part older joints. tear the joints body the with passage time. to of greater The the the burden greater of trauma fat,

persons. obese Markers often protein elevated proinflammatory of C-reactive inflammation, and like cytokines in TNF, are as such (CRP) the have a both circulating uncertain; is lipids proinflammatory proposed. been direct increased of The release inflammation basis excess and adipocytes effect of for cytokines fat-laden from including the contribute Whatever metabolic may obesity, cause, that of disease, inflammation cardiovascular of thought many is abnormalities, the to cancer. insulin complications and chronic it thrombosis, resistance,

of cancers kidney overweight, colon, of There in an in cancers gallbladder, cancers and is esophagus, kidney women. and esophagus, the incidence and endometrium, men certain including thyroid, the the in increased of 20% of deaths in women associated in deaths men. of and obesity approximately 14% cancer Overall, is with underlying are The and multiple. unknown likely be mechanisms to are

Elevated insulin levels. directly leads includes may or Insulin effects resistance hyperinsulinemia, contribute to cancer. to that which indirectly multiple example, levels causes in free (IGF-1). a rise of insulin-like For factor-1 hyperinsulinemia growth receptor, and highly expressed is cancers. in mitogen, a its human many IGF-1 is IGFR-1, RAS growth IGFR-1 promote (Chapter 6). PI3K/AKT neoplastic the which both cells of and the pathways, activates and normal

breast, and tissues. other effects in Obesity steroid the cell that on growth uterus, regulate hormones differentiation and has availability increases and estrogen androgen Specifically, by increases obesity in liver. of the inhibiting in persons production in synthesis synthesis and enhances estrogen globulin androgen adrenals, of ovaries the sex-hormone–binding (SHBG) precursors, the obese from

As individuals. tissue secretion from adiponectin discussed reduced earlier, is obese in adipose Adiponectin suppresses cell promotes apoptosis. proliferation and p53 the counteracts of p21. also actions and It adiponectin compromised. of individuals actions obese anti-neoplastic In may be these

itself through with proinflammatory state • that 6. mechanisms associated discussed carcinogenic, Chapter is obesity may in The be

Obesityisadisorderofenergyregulation.Itincreasestheriskforanumberofimportantconditionssuchasinsulinresistance,type2diabetes,hypertension,andhypertriglyceridemia,whichareassociatedwiththedevelopmentofcoronaryarterydisease.

Theregulationofenergybalanceisverycomplex.Ithasthreemaincomponents:(1)afferentsignals,providedmostlybyinsulin,leptin,ghrelin,andpeptideYY;(2)thecentralhypothalamicsystem,whichintegratesafferentsignalsandtriggerstheefferentsignals;and(3)efferentsignals,whichcontrolenergybalance.

Leptinplaysakeyroleinenergybalance.Itsoutputfromadiposetissuesisregulatedbytheabundanceoffatstores.LeptinbindingtoitsreceptorsinthehypothalamusreducesfoodintakebystimulatingPOMC/CARTneuronsandinhibitingNPY/AgRPneurons.

Inadditiontodiabetesandcardiovasculardisease,obesityalsoisassociatedwithincreasedriskforcertaincancers,nonalcoholicfattyliverdisease,andgallstones.

a a however, the in overnutrition, deficiencies, specific of make absence and composition even the diet, any nutrient the to problems, the may as underand of problems of been discussed; these progression causation have as well of of number significant contribution The of diseases. few A here. suffice examples

atherogenesis. is Currently, the the and of one to diet issues contribution important of most controversial disease. beef)—can whether is of no the high prevent retard (of previous importance, central episode saturated of of butter, in foods animal fats or levels development atherosclerosis dietary cholesterol in specifically, disease) (e.g., heart The those consumption cholesterol and the modification— with question reduction serum cardiovascular eggs, reduce most and coronary in “primary is prevention”. called This answers. some know all but We the not and States consumes 3:1. The a amount of acids of large fatty the of fat about in to with daily, polyunsaturated adult acids United cholesterol average fatty ratio saturated a the polyunsaturates to of 15% 10% in weeks. a level cholesterol causes the saturates reduction within level serum Lowering to few the of a such oils fatty Vegetable are polyunsaturated contain acids and and cholesterol-lowering sources good and oils) of fish corn oils (e.g., lipids. safflower family in the oil bonds acids the vegetable double n-6, or belonging n-3, to more or have acids oils. Fish omega-6, fatty than do found fatty omega-3, protect oils idea of atherosclerosis. with might fish diet corollary of this supplementation that against is A death coronary showed g usual men One study that comparable contained heart frequency of Dutch fish than daily disease from of substantially subjects. a 30 of control among lower diet whose components shown have supplements omega-3 fatty unknown cardiovascular do the diseases, be yet risk fish cardioprotection. acid suggesting reduce of However, may for other studies that required that of not

http://ebooksmedicine.net

disease have diet specific of effects Other been on recognized:

reduces sodium intake Restricting hypertension.

increased resulting to by of against roughage, provide a is some diverticulosis fiber, preventive fecal bulk, in effect thought colon. Dietary the investigators or

been span animals, increase experimental including monkeys. to in life convincingly Caloric has restriction demonstrated for 2). clear is observation striking (Chapter basis this The not

has kisses—and yet prove effect against lowly (and against devil), touted Even although alas, also, the to protect has unequivocally. this to disease research heart garlic been

factors. carcinogens the of to content components, aspects are of the carcinogenesis, endogenous carcinogens, With of the synthesis of three (1) lack dietary (2) concern: exogenous of from diet the protective (3) and respect

the factor of of important is in an which and exogenous an Africa. carcinogen • aflatoxin, is Asia development An hepatocellular parts example in of carcinomas cells. in 249) (codon causes in gene aflatoxin specific mutation to Exposure a the tumor TP53 can studies. in as signature epidemiologic be mutation molecular The aflatoxin for a used exposure

to relates carcinogens synthesis of about components endogenous gastric concern The from the of principally promoters carcinomas. or diet animals. to in and they cancer generate are tumors suspected gastric in nitrosamides as Nitrosamines these induce humans, proteins. These derived or from are amides compounds nitrites and the in from formed amines body digested to Sources nitrites the in are in bacterial as of nitrates, and present added a preservative, common sodium foods which gut flora. include reduced by nitrite, vegetables, on endogenous components, agents an well There potential dietary effect then, from carcinogenic might which the for of is, stomach. production the have

colon has intake been High animal cancer. intake the combined with fat implicated low in of fiber causation intake turn which High of follows: is fat intestinal flora, growth acids favoring for microaerophilic association as in this most modifies the explanation bile increases level in the gut, The convincing of bacteria. the produced as or serve bacteria promoters. might bile acid metabolites bile by these acids The carcinogens or relate bulk and the diet decreases to of protective of decreased high-fiber (1) offenders, to putative the bind fibers exposure thereby mucosa. of time, the to The certain mucosa and which capacity and might a (2) increased transit protect stool carcinogens effect clinical studies contradictory to whole, Attempts theories led experimental to results. on have, the in these and document

properties. have anti-oxidant • anti-carcinogenic been have C and and assumed Vitamins effects β-carotenes, E, their of to because selenium chemopreventive agents. convincing antioxidants show emerged however, date, has To these that to act evidence no as differentiation reverse As believed to and squamous acid metaplasia. retinoic already mentioned, is promotes epithelial

protect Thus, “diet there and in against can to general by or diet tantalizing proclamations cancer. definite is cause date no that proof gurus,” trends despite many things as in pleasurable Nonetheless, rich juicy steak lurk concern a and that cream. persists as carcinogens ice

DC: 113:1016, Lead, Pediatrics Bellinger 2004. of [An subject.] the overview excellent

cancer, 9:667, et Oncol S, Gray and Boffetta Lancet 2009. al: N, P, Smokeless tobacco Hecht associated worldwide.] [A smokeless of cancer tobacco with risks review

Desvergne endocrine to metabolic disruption, Phys Casals-Casas C, disruptors: 73:135, Annu Endocrine Rev 2011. from B: scope consequences to of possible exposure this human class and [An update the of chemical.] discussing

Disease 2010: of 2012. December 13, epublished Burden Global Lancet, Study [An journal the project.] entire of of data global to from devoted disease summary detailed GBD latest the a issue this

Mullen A, and review gastrointestinal microbiota: 2016. a C, K: of 73:376, Whelan and associations Nutr Rev Obesity mechanisms, Graham data obesity.] in the [A the review of role on emerging the microbiome of

Gregor 2011. Hotamisligil Immunol obesity, mechanisms in Inflammatory Rev GS: Annu MF, 29:445, state of obesity.] of views associated proinflammatory with the current concise discussion [A

health J, of 2016. the lead risk water levels blood crisis: RC, LaChance Am analysis et J al: Hanna-Attisha with a drinking in Health M, response, associated Flint public 106:283, spatial children Elevated Sadler Public and article lead issues from health USA.] pollution public Flint, resulting [An discusses in that Michigan, with water

deficiency, Vitamin Hollick D J MF: N Med Engl 357:266, 2007. D review [A comprehensive deficiency.] of vitamin

357:2348, McCreanor MJ, with traffic Engl Respiratory in J, diesel Nieuwenhuijsen al: exposure 2007. P, to of Cullinan N persons effects Med J asthma, et diesel in patients paper with asthma.] discussing particulates the to exhaust of [A danger

Australians, Cancer 680,000 in study tomography JD, in million of scans Matthew exposed Forsythe to data computed AV, 346:f2360, adolescence: 2013. 11 Z, linkage childhood BMJ or Brady et al: people risk increased to of adding cancers undergone scans CT CT secondary have paper who have that a and risk [A children 24% evidence showing in cancer, that of increase adolescents.] accruing scans children the risk

al: J 2003. JE, progestin Estrogen coronary risk and Johnson 349:523, the et N J, Manson disease, Med KC, of Engl heart plus Hsia the Initiative.] Health study [A landmark from Women’s

role Nigro adiponectin 10.1155/2014/658913. insights diseases, obesity-related in Res 2014. et New 2014:658913, Biomed Int into obesity Monaco O, Scudiero E, and ML, doi: al: 7, 2014. July Epub [Role of other adiponectin utilization fat effects.] in and systemic

Ezzati Pope States, in N Engl life 360:376, the 2009. United and air pollution expectancy J CA, Dockery DW: Fine-particulate Med M, correlating in fine-particulate expectancy with major life increases pollution.] [A U.S. cities in http://ebooksmedicine.net decreases paper air in

in The KA, Med Cronin United 2003 decrease al: States, in N Howlader et PM, cancer J Ravdin Engl breast in the incidence 2007. N, 356:1670, breast menopausal hormone its cancer therapy.] that followed in to documenting the decrease linkage paper [A

EM Wu its toxic J Public mercury 47:74, and Health Prev al: Environmental KM, Med M, effects, 2014. et Jr, Rice Walker [Mercury toxicity review.]

2010. linking Med DL, 61:301, and obesity mechanisms risk: Dive C, Annu AG: Roberts new Renehan perspectives, Rev Biological cancer the and between obesity discussion cancer.] of [A possible interactions

Seitz 2007. alcohol-mediated Nat 7:599, mechanisms HK, Molecular Cancer carcinogenesis, Rev of Stickel F: multifactorial alcohol the effects of [A that to may contribute development.] cancer review of

Pathol X-H, Annu 6:345, LJ: 2011. Retinoids, Tang receptors, Gudas acid retinoic cancer, and Rev role [A tumors.] review the with cancer, of in on a of retinoids solid focus 2015. AA, Farooqi pathways to Klaauw The van Cell obesity, genes: hunger 161:119, der IS: afferent pathways [A the of obesity.] review succinct to

to Endocrinol PJ: Cell between J, brain fat Mol tissue, gut, weight, body Wilson A pancreas, 418:108, 2015. talk Enriori control and discussion the obesity.] [Excellent in afferent pathways of various studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

of Diseases Pathology Infectious General

Infectious Agents of Categories

Microbes of Routes of Entry

Dissemination Within of the and Microbes Spread Body

Microbes of Transmission

Mechanisms Injury of Viral

Mechanisms of Injury Bacterial

Effects Immune Host Responses Injurious of

to to ranging thousands meters from agents prey viruses worms. Humans submicroscopic are tape of several infectious long the caused reviews chapter principles pathogenesis by and of general the types characteristic disease different infectious of the This describes of microbes. histopathologic changes chapters of this are in involve specific other Infections discussed organs book. that

the infections. of of States availability are Infectious and the diseases types despite in vaccines problem for health worldwide effective an important and antibiotics many United cause combined of are Influenza death the leading in States. eighth and pneumonia United the access massive unsanitary low-income healthcare, and to limited contribute diseases. of conditions, malnutrition burden In countries, to infectious living a and top in tuberculosis developing infections, three top the malaria of are and causes HIV/AIDS, death diseases Lower-respiratory ten. the are among diarrheal and countries, particularly receiving immunosuppressive are acquired important states or death and Infectious inherited older diseases of drugs. with children, diseases in causes immunodeficiency chronic individuals AIDS), debilitating and patients (e.g., adults, among

of to in agents ranging prion vary a from ( to greatly tapeworms under classes of meters range protein in length nm belong wide Infectious 20 10 and aggregates size,

9.1 Table

a Prions host of prion protein abnormal protein termed composed of forms are (PrP). These human cattle). known spongiform mad as with disease through of transmitted (CJD), disease), variant and cannibalism), bovine to cow consumption spongiform encephalopathies, cause (better Creutzfeldt-Jakob (associated (probably humans disease meat including (BSE) kuru agents from BSE-infected Creutzfeldt-Jakob (vCJD) hereditary sporadic or encephalopathy transmissible normally PrP is in found neurons. confers proteases. PrP change Diseases to occur that conformational a resistance undergoes the when abnormal the transmissable of nature promotes these explaining normal of form, the the protease-resistant The to PrP conversion PrP diseases. protease-sensitive iatrogenically, CJD by surgery, from person or transmitted can be to transfusion. organ person transplantation, blood These discussed diseases detail are in in Chapter 23.

for the depend metabolic on that obligate are their replication. intracellular parasites Viruses machinery cell’s host protein a acid genome of in lipid a consist membrane. nucleic (called that coat capsid) a They encased surrounded by is sometimes a RNA, (called nucleic the genome or their of cell for of classified Viruses or both), (icosahedral capsid by acid http://ebooksmedicine.net absence a presence but their replication, envelope, are helical), mode the shape lipid preferred the not or the of replication type of type their (DNA tropism), or

of Pathogens Classes Human pathology Table 9.1 they cause. infected are the characteristic aggregate useful for and viral bodies, seen inclusion microscope particles may within Some ( diagnosis with which and cells form components light be and

Fig. 9.1 ). show and smaller are characteristic For enlarged basophilic and rabies and cells form halo; a cytoplasmic herpesviruses (CMV)-infected surrounded and by inclusion inclusions. cytoplasmic cytomegalovirus smallpox a clear large form nuclear a inclusions; eosinophilic inclusion viruses large nuclear both example, not viruses many However, inclusions. produce poliovirus) (e.g., do

a share infections, disease in human can for Accounting ( several viruses of cause large ways

). Table 9.2 influenza). Many cause viruses transient colds, illnesses (e.g., chronic the cells with potential body persist to form, years, eliminated continuing not nonreplicating later. and some or either latent of hepatitis within viruses be to Other host (e.g., in B from survive for the virus infection the multiply reactivated with are [HBV]) later skin ganglia periodic example, painful times shingles, at chickenpox, enter can cause site, herpes establish reactivation latency zoster virus, the root with For at condition. a and to of the cause dorsal a papillomavirus involved cervical warts benign of host (e.g., Some a tumor cell or human in [HPV]-induced viruses into transformation and carcinoma). benign are malignant rhinovirus in or the infection); (e.g., single immune species age status virus causing damage clinical can clinical gastroenteritis of depending cause conversely, host on same the the immunocompromised). manifestations respiratory of can adenovirus the causing and neurologic picture produce congenital a CMV upper viruses (e.g., different Different or

a membrane lack they are membrane-bound but nuclei meaning other cell Bacteria and have prokaryotes, organelles. that membrane-enclosed linked cell consisting wall a long cell of bridges of bacteria are by bounded chains sugar polymer membrane. surrounding peptide the peptidoglycan, by Most a bacteria) and cell retains (gram-negative forms surrounded two crystal-violet membrane structure: a (gram-positive that There bacteria) an by of wall thick thin wall outer stain common a are ( cell wall

Fig. 9.2 ). Gram negative), or by called are bacilli) or classified (spherical, Bacteria rod-shaped, staining called cocci, ( (positive shape

Fig. oxygen their 9.3 requirement (aerobic anaerobic). ), or and for and flagella, the helical the long have from rotate that cell filaments surface move Motile extending bacteria. bacteria kind of cells another can possess Some bacteria matrix. or to projection attach pili, that host extracellular surface bacteria conditions. RNA, their Bacteria proteins, host they synthesize depend the for on own growth and DNA, favorable but the in Many while when they remain bacteria host, grow extracellular

Fig. Examplesofviralinclusions. 9.1 arrow) andill-definedcytoplasmic(short arrows) inclusions. (A)Cytomegalovirusinfectioninthelung.Infectedcellsshowdistinctnuclear(long arrow). (B)Varicella-zostervirusinfectionintheskin.Herpessimplexvirusandvaricella-zostervirusbothcausecharacteristiccytopathologicchanges,includingfusionofepithelialcells,whichproducesmultinucleatecellswithmoldingofnucleitooneanother(long andeosinophilichaloednuclearinclusions(short arrow), (C)HepatitisBviralinfectioninliver.Inchronicinfections,infectedhepatocytesshowdiffusegranular(“ground-glass”)cytoplasm,reflectingaccumulatedhepatitisBsurfaceantigen(HBsAg).

http://ebooksmedicine.net

9.2 Diseases Human Selected Pathogens Table Their and Viral

Acquiredimmunodeficiencysyndrome;HIV, AIDS, humanimmunodeficiencyvirus.

and mycobacteria), bacteria, rickettsia). survive and bacteria of grow others as inside cells can host replicate some (obligate both only such inside and intracellular as outside host (facultative such cells intracellular

such of to leprosy diseases urinary common pharyngitis a from Bacteria rare range tract and as ( cause infections infections

Table 9.3 ). and and membrane-bound vacuoles Chlamydia respectively. epithelial endothelial intracellular obligate replicate that in bacteria inside cells, Rickettsia are host source, energy ATP, from get most of or the bacteria cell. their all These of narrowing cause of eventually scarring scarring infectious that the and of of cornea). is fallopian frequent trachomatis and a Chlamydia (by inflammation opacification sterility the (by conjunctiva blindness the tubes) chronic female causes and may central endothelial injure cells hemorrhagic which injure causing epidemic in (CNS), the system they grow, and as as Rickettsiae but visible with Mountain vasculitis, fever spotted Rocky typhus. the also fatal rash, a potentially often in they a outcome, nervous are (in Rickettsiae fever Rocky including (in typhus). and arthropod mites spotted Mountain and by scrub (in lice ticks transmitted ehrlichiosis), typhus), vectors, epidemic

bacterial pathogens are do Mycoplasma among that unique they extracellular in have not a and the related genus cell wall. Ureaplasma are (125 tiniest the 300 These to free-living known nm). organisms

as complex thick such chitin, and with Fungi carbohydrates mannosylated composed glycoproteins. are of cell eukaryotes beta-glucans, walls Calcofluor-white, a

protein) protein (e.g., Immune-evasion Teichoic protein (e.g., M F) acid

Fig. 9.2 Moleculesonthesurfaceofgram-negativeandgram-positivebacteriainvolvedinthepathogenesisofinfection.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

and Human Their Bacterial Selected Table 9.3 Diseases Pathogens

Pulmonarydisease,brainabscessActinomyces israelii asteroides Headandneckabscess ActinomycetalinfectionsNocardia complex

Fig. 9.3 Bacterialmorphologies.Thebacteriaareindicatedbyarrows. andaneutrophilareevident. (A)Gramstainpreparationofsputumfromapatientwithpneumonia.Gram-positive,elongatedcocciinpairsandshortchains(Streptococcus pneumoniae) coli. (B)Gramstainpreparationofabronchoalveolarlavagespecimenshowinggram-negativeintracellularrodstypicalofmembersofEnterobacteriaceae suchasKlebsiella pneumoniae Escherichia or areshown(arrows). (C)SilverstainpreparationofbraintissuefromapatientwithLymediseasemeningoencephalitis.Twohelicalspirochetes(Borrelia burgdorferi) (A),(B),and(C)areatdifferentmagnifications. Cypress, Van Kenneth C,Courtesy Diagnostics, Focus Dr. Horn, (Aand California. of B,Courtesy Karen Oregon.) Institute,Wilsonville, Clinical Microbiology Krisher, of Dr. specimens. chitin, http://ebooksmedicine.net identify to that patient stain fluorescent useful fungi way binds a provides in fungal in used infections. to disseminated are for diagnose betaglucans blood Assays as or as grow Fungi filamentous slender, cells hyphae. can yeast rounded either septate cell aseptate. walls important cells) distinguishing hyphae separating individual An whether or characteristic is (with are that important Some at of room the hyphal thermal temperature temperature. forms yeast is, as as most pathogenic forms dimorphism; exhibit body at fungi grow they but sexual may more called spores Fungi spores or, conidia. asexual commonly, produce filament. or fruiting The arising produced specialized along bodies are structures the on latter hyphal

Fungi superficial may deep infections. cause or

hair, and infections skin, involve the Superficial nails. are species that superficial infections dermatophytes. Fungal cause called the of Infection “athlete’s is and scalp foot” tinea; capitis pedis tinea skin thus, called is ringworm. is tinea causing abscesses or granulomas. fungi invade tissue, the subcutaneous Certain in often called foot, infections, mycetomas. the Chronic are

remain normal organs hosts, systemically in in and can fungal otherwise immunocompromised but invade usually resolve tissues, or spread destroying vital hosts. infections latent Deep

are and divided into Fungi opportunistic endemic species.

species Ohio River regions States, are Endemic fungi in geographic particular the Valley). the United are in southwestern limited Histoplasma that invasive Coccidioides (e.g., usually to

Opportunistic Candida, sources or contrast, environmental from that individuals. Cryptococcus), cause healthy do either in are not disease (e.g., encountered ubiquitous fungi but colonize by individuals are Mucor, Aspergillus, organisms severe opportunistic immunodeficient inflammatory and life-threatening hemorrhage, invasive characterized fungi little no response In vascular or individuals, tissue rise occlusion, give by infections with necrosis, ( to

Fig. 9.4 ). opportunistic to Patients Pneumocystis the are AIDS fungus called susceptible (previously very carinii). infection Pneumocystis with jiroveci with

developing are single-celled causes major in eukaryotes and are Protozoa countries. of disease that death Plasmodium intracellularly blood. intestine, replicate within Protozoa system, extracellularly cells, in of or can the in a cells Leishmania or in variety red urogenital macrophages) (e.g., organisms sexually that often flagellated vaginalis and parasites colonize the vagina Trichomonas transmitted protozoal are urethra. male become in attach cysts Entamoeba that are as and epithelial most and histolytica intestinal prevalent contaminated motile Giardia cells. nonmotile water trophozoites to intestinal protozoans, The pathogenic food ingested lamblia, or are in they being insect (e.g., which human Plasmodium, to before Trypanosoma, Leishmania) Bloodborne hosts. by replicate passed protozoa vectors, new transmitted is oocyst-shedding acquired either gondii eating or meat. with cyst-ridden, Toxoplasma cats through undercooked by contact

Fig. MeningealbloodvesselswithangioinvasiveMucor species.Notetheirregularwidthandnearright-anglebranchingofthehyphae(arrow). 9.4 Pathology, Women’s of and (Courtesy Dan Boston, Brigham Hospital, Massachusetts.) Dr. Milner, of Department

Parasitic highly worms organisms. multicellular differentiated are sexual vector. and in most host complex; Their multiplication in are host intermediate the cycles between an or definitive life asexual alternate reproduction spp.). on species, harbor canis), (e.g., immature lumbricoides), Ascaris or Thus, Echinococcus asexual the forms worms stages (e.g., depending (e.g., adult larval humans Toxocara may residence but up produce Once worms adult passed or in usually eggs not in that humans, are stool. multiply take larvae do they typically they Often, to of disease the number organisms. of infecting severity the is proportional 1000 consume is enough blood of to or example, hookworms disease, For a anemia. burden mild 10 associated hookworms whereas no with cause severe clinical or than inflammatory infections, caused schistosomiasis, In responses the some eggs to as the disease helminthic by adult such worms. is larvae rather

groups: Helminths comprise three

Roundworms are in and nonsegmented. circular cross-section (nematodes) and Strongyloides Intestinal A. hookworms. stercoralis, include lumbricoides, nematodes tissues Trichinella invade include filariae, Nematodes and that bancrofti such Wuchereria as the spiralis (

Fig. 9.5

a segments Tapeworms ribbon have flat head a and (scolex) of (proglottids). multiple (cestodes) nutrition tegument digestive a not adsorb tract. do and their through They have their home in fish, make include the intestine. human the that They pork and beef, tapeworms cysts; larvae tapeworm granulosus (Echinoccus disease develop after ingestion of many within cysts cause called cystic eggs pork The organs). cysticerci can cause that larvae larvae tissues tapeworms produce of certain in hydatid

Flukes attach are host. (trematodes) flatworms that suckers the to to used leaf-shaped prominent with are schistosomes. include lung and flukes and They liver

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. CoiledTrichinella 9.5 larvawithinaskeletalmusclecell. spiralis

by attaching or bedbugs, by or skin. fleas) biting mites, spiders) cause are in that to Ectoparasites living or arachnids ticks, on and disease the (e.g., insects (e.g., lice,

caused itching by the arthropods and scabies corneum. Infestation stratum attached burrowing excoriations, such pediculosis caused lice the hairs, or of by mites is to into characterized by skin by as with mouth lymphocytes, be a macrophages, associated found may and site of eosinophils. bites, infiltrate of parts the At mixed ticks. serve of Borrelia agent Arthropods is Lyme which disease, can deer also burgdorferi, as pathogens, by transmitted other as vectors for such the

bacteria, the and microbial The human airway, viruses or upper population fungi, the diverse in intestinal skin, body vagina). the microbiome and (e.g., is on in of tract, found pyogenes), tooth aureus harm the diseases (Streptococcus most organisms decay (Staphylococcus and mitus). such skin While and these acne acnes), Streptococcus infections of do not healthy (Propionibacterium few a soft-tissue host, and as cause in has important microbiome normal The roles and development. health foods, for intestinal digested competitively inhibiting functioning In tract, the normal system, microbes. of and of integrity the are the for for by pathogenic and flora invasion immune intestinal the the the normal maintaining colonization epithelium absorption responsible and of potentially as is gut nutritional regulator microbiome The a also status. of emerging

microbiome: of relying of identification techniques New on bacterial ribosomal improved understanding RNA have the dramatically our sequencing

microbiome is very individuals, healthy the diverse. In flora over of individual. species the in to there bacteria of For an estimated be 1000 intestinal are normal example, bacterial at stable a a diet part environment. person, sites and is altered by the of In healthy over but may various time, population relatively be body

in skin, bacteria oral is and The on cavity the intermediate of stool, diversity vagina. the and the least greatest the in

The individuals. are microbiomes bacterial in at different various body sites similar partially

changes the composition to microbiome Dysbiosis in associated with that disease. are refers of various following: pathophysiologic changes may These or conditions, from the including result therapies

intestinal an risk of caused Clostridium infections Use toxin-producing factor some is for important antibiotics by difficile. normal of difficile. bacteria, kill inhibit antibiotics These allowing commensal overgrowth or C. containing relapsed of difficile C. therapy. Restoration infection have antibiotic from healthy flora infusion by successfully of after the duodenal who treats many commensal stool donors in microbiome individuals

than of diverse proportions The that the the phyla bacterial of in well. and microbiome of less lean as is individuals, differ stool obese individuals shifts to their The lose individuals. that who proportions of of these individuals phyla weight obese and lean diet in change resemble associated colonized a with with more colonized than bacterial animals associated when Experimental bacterial diet. diet weight populations normal populations a when with gain high-fat with

disease. in the altered, compared to intestinal phyla, diversity in inflammatory reduced disease bacterial bacterial are bowel and without changes bowel of individuals with inflammatory individuals The proportions with populations stool. is also disease populations with the Interestingly, in in inflammatory bowel associated viral changes dysbiosis investigation. an active The area of specific gastrointestinal in and bacteria very viruses is different of roles

methods tissue for and in several fluids: microorganisms body There identifying are

Culture. with conjunction by great in additional for extent diagnostic cultures methods. fungal testing, remain culture viruses of to but has methods, alternative been replaced a and essential Bacterial

Histology. herpes all (e.g., in usually infectious bacterial and by protozoans; virus sections most and Candida fungi; Mucor can (HSV); and eosin among clumps, bodies inclusion the be Some which stain (H&E)–stained agents blue; seen formed helminths). the hematoxylin simplex CMV and visualized basis agents, acid-fast, of are Giemsa specific labeling by on silver, that coat—Gram, ( organisms wall the mucicarmine, stains particular stains—or of or however, their with cell antibodies identify after special better Many infectious characteristics

9.4 ). Table rather if is than usually are lesion necrosis. at Organisms advancing visualized center, a the its particularly edge there of at best

Serology. the pathogen-specific infections be antibodies serum. Acute in diagnosed can by serologically detecting M of presence is after specific often diagnostic. The antibody shortly the onset (IgM) immunoglobulin symptoms of antibody specific titers Alternatively, http://ebooksmedicine.net

Agents 9.4 Table Identifying for Infectious Techniques

Acid-faststainMycobacteria,nocardiae(modified)

SilverstainFungi,legionellae,Pneumocystis

Periodicacid–SchiffstainFungi,amebae

GiemsastainLeishmaniae,Plasmodium

to 4-fold 4 and measured titer at in 6 be can usually considered infection; a (“convalescent”) rise (“acute”) again early is weeks after diagnostic. Proteomicmethods/massBacteria,mycobacteria,fungispectrometry Assays the useful for antibodies serum viral of hepatitis. diagnosis are for very assays mononucleosis, and patients Antibodies by these pathogen-specific not or with antibodies syphilis are infectious in are are diagnosis. produced for that cross-reacting used

diagnostics. Molecular chain polymerase amplification, chlamydial as are Nucleic amplification encephalitis. such herpes reaction used and infection, transcription-mediated gonorrhea, diagnosis techniques, and (PCR) for tuberculosis, of acid some for testing assays Molecular conventional pathogens. much more are sensitive than a of for 80%, HSV has encephalitis a cerebrospinal culture 10%. sensitivity less has of than sensitivity testing fluid PCR viral CSF whereas of (CSF) of about conventional culture acid does. detect 30% Similarly, tests 10% cases more Chlamydia genital than for nucleic to Chlamydia sensitivity other of of acid testing gonorrhea, the similar is that to such as For nucleic infections, culture. (EBV) virus, Quantitative CMV, PCR assess viral is BK transplant virus to and loads recipients. used Epstein-Barr for in respiratory or routinely to of now bacterial, more Molecular well viral viral are panels for diagnose parasitic 20 pathogens infections. and and infections, used as bacterial detection as gastrointestinal and viral infected management acids to are hepatitis virus patients (HIV), assays nucleic immunodeficiency HBV, (HCV). C virus used of the medical with for guide Quantitative human or sequencing, PCR for epidemiologic without rare Next-generation for or detection with the initial and is being investigations. of novel amplification, pathogens, used

Proteomics. be been has clinical introduced microorganisms identify to on protein spectrometry routine into based content and used laboratories. can Mass It advantage sensitivity. is species the identification of antibiotic has the of useful not rapid but for bacterial requires That still culture.

were reasons agents have there infectious for due although to present this: to surprising of improved new methods continue A detection, several likely they • number for centuries. pathogens in Some of humans discovered are and been be discovered, was discovered only For which disease, peptic gastritis the Helicobacter example, in ulcer 1980s. causes pylori, and lepromatosis. cause Mycobacterium leprosy recently, More new a of discovered, was of died material This sequencing bacterial DNA of is known by the from a close agent, identified patients previously biopsy relative leprosy, of who

leprae. Mycobacterium

infect of humans. pathogens Animals are a that source new likely CoV) in animals (SARS) respiratory East 2003 respiratory Two first respiratory syndrome infections humans to and acute were and that 2012, the Middle from in severe respectively. tract detected and severe humans, spread coronavirus syndrome virus, cause (MERS coronaviruses pathogens examples Other emerged include that after in being burgdorferi. from animals HIV humans of and B. transmitted

virulence can defense. overcome genes acquire or Microorganisms enhance host that Germany strain that 2011, sprout in Escherichia infected individuals 4000 in producing highly In virulent new almost were spread of a coli with seeds. shiga-toxin was bacteriophage. from the new a E. acquired different from derived shiga-toxin a coli a type that gene strain The for of

or caused become transplant P. jirovecii). rejection prevent virus (e.g., pathogens more immunosuppression or to because by Mycobacterium avium therapy 8, Other common treat AIDS, human cancers of much herpes complex, have

been some due Additional possibly after for the time, has new recognized syndromes clinical be to pathogen may contributing factors. known in Although spread Africa, and the for through causing virus years, virus recognized expanding few the more Americas, the Uganda, 1947 was cases. reported recently countries, Zika clinical in newly human Asia, from were many range the additional until to Pacific very discovered cases sexual species contracted Aedes but also possibly is primarily mosquito virus and The via transmission the blood via transfusion. have associated no symptoms, to infected form weakness nonspecific Although mild the be of system. syndrome, may or infection damage Guillain-Barre rapid-onset muscle by a immune caused individuals with many nervous system virus including birth with during is defects, Zika associated Infection with microcephaly. pregnancy beginning in a Health International Concern. the Public cases of compared 2015 outbreak were diagnosed to more in Brazil Many congenital Emergency creating earlier outbreaks, immunity determine be be other contributing is to past as Further factors. or environmental ongoing the effects such yet may investigation from defined co-infections, to CNS to variables if genetics, infections,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

factors emergence the diseases: contribute of to infectious Several

affects the and demographics behavior spread infections. Human of homosexual first recognized abusers, as more and transmission is the AIDS common. now drug but in heterosexual of United disease was a predominantly States men cases, with sub-Saharan disease. area a is the predominantly it of world the heterosexual AIDS of In highest number Africa, the Ebola virus of well movement due burial to bodies the practices involved the that to countries across 2014 of The epidemic Ebola frequent outbreaks borders spread more with than as deceased. contact Africa, part in as the of in West previous people human SARS, due to mentioned earlier, before to quickly contained. travel countries was 24 very spread it air

Changes incidence the increase diseases. occasionally of the environment in infectious Lyme the farming transmit with increases Regrowth deer and of of that ehrlichiosis. in ticks babesiosis, States carry to which the has in massive disease, cessation led mice, and forests United eastern of on warming also an spread had impact has the infections. Global in which the used viruses, half border, to Dengue found states. mosquitoes more now fever For of Zika carry the the that are to confined be example, U.S.-Mexican and than been 2013, in for was recently fever viruses severe and transmitted reported joint some, Americas of and can in transmission pain Zika causes be virus and in first has which seen by the that Chikungunya mosquitoes, Florida. Dengue

common area of increased into in invertebrates, that are geographic animals, introduced be may or one to movement infected travel diseases new area birds. Infectious due or a the was first States example, Nile For in for has Africa by possibly in common and but transported 1999, bird. described years Europe, virus in Asia, or been West infected mosquito an United in which pathogenic bird viruses, H5 due migration their in spread have throughout patients the death some influenza and decades have of to birds. world to natural domestic during transport Asia, 2 the led populations, Highly last of

pressures rapidly selective adapt by widespread antibiotics. Pathogens to use of exerted Neisseria S. tuberculosis, resistance Mycobacterium has developed pneumoniae, is Antibiotic now gonorrhoeae, Klebsiella and and aureus. in common has falciparum parasites Plasmodium and morbidity increased the America. and dramatically Africa, infection associated drug-resistant Similarly, with mortality Latin development in Asia, of

threat the in theoretical Sadly, the the in bioterrorism United of transformed into 2001 anthrax States attacks reality. with efficiency against the what the microorganisms weapons them, The the are difficult which extent disease and Disease to basis to defend can distribute, are for as they pose likely transmitted, Centers on which how and has (CDC) can to and be microorganisms Prevention produce evaluated the of the done to danger be Control

9.5 of Agents Bioterrorism Table Potential

anthracis Anthrax:Bacillus

botulinum toxin Botulism:Clostridium

pestis Plague:Yersinia

virus Smallpox:Variola major

tularensis Tularemia:Francisella

Viralhemorrhagicfevers:Ebola,Marburg,Lassa,others

spp. Brucellosis:Brucella

coli Foodsafetythreats:Salmonella O157:H7,Shigella, others spp.,Escherichia

mallei Glanders:Burkholderia

pseudomallei Melioidosis:Burkholderia

psittaci Psittacosis:Chlamydia

Qfever:Coxiella burnetii

Typhusfever:Rickettsia prowazekii

Mosquito-borneencephalitisviruses:Venezuelanequineencephalitis,Easternequineencephalitis,Westernequineencephalitis,others

cholerae, others Cryptosporidium parvum, Watersafetythreats:Vibrio

fear. Emerginginfectiousdiseasethreats:Nipahvirus,hantavirus,others alarm widespread produce emergency.cdc.gov and the public http:// the designated CDC B, three A, ranked and has C bioweapons on these criteria, into Based ( categories,

Table 9.5

panic rate for potential from pandemics may diseases major A public person person, disruption, disseminated carry the impact, can cause to transmitted action special a health to category The mortality with and in readily for social typically or agents are to that high be require health highest-risk preparedness. and leading public cause widespread likely of because or smallpox category the A of therapy. agent 30% effective a example, high of greater, its the case For and rates virus is lack mortality transmissibility, skin through to contact direct by Smallpox virus respiratory mainly lesions. with spreads and secretions person, readily person in from susceptible. in smallpox vaccination the ended leaving population the Since highly States has in routine United waned, 1972, immunity led used be Concern for bioterrorism could vaccination that for to and some of smallpox medical has reinstitution military personnel.

cause associated morbidity but mortality, low agents B to are disseminate, with easy require specific surveillance. moderate disease less Category diagnostic and and disease water. can or spread food of Many be these agents in C health. dissemination; emerging and could dissemination morbidity because the mortality; for engineered impact great agents be that ease of mass on pathogens and Category availability, production, include and for potential high of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

the through disseminate surfaces Microbes can several routes. the in once body by can host and, different host, enter

breaches transmission. inhalation by the or skin, the enter in or host ingestion, sexual through can Microbes by which provide skin are anti-microbial surfaces, and and intact first defenses physical The barriers mucosal produce infection against substances. respiratory, In virulent by capable barriers. or healthy of genitourinary general, otherwise are that relatively caused occur microorganisms intact gastrointestinal, epithelial that individuals tract damaging are infections or penetrating in sites skin virulent less damaged breach ( that individuals most infections By in contrast, caused are by the through organisms healthy skin

9.6 Table

pH with skin of the than infection; low The than bacteria acids is keratinized (less of natural the of other normal layer barrier outer 5.5) the fatty combined presence dense, growth inhibit the and a furthermore, of to microorganisms skin fungi. opportunists, and S. are aureus these albicans. such flora Candida as potential normal Included among

breaks skin, acquired microbes are the by of entry typically infections including wounds through Cutaneous in

pressure-related aeruginosa), burns surgical diabetic (Pseudomonas sores Routes (multibacterial Infection and 9.6 and Microbial (Staphylococci), Table of foot infections). incisions or portals in Intravenous for or patients local provide hospitalized systemic infection. catheters and HCV, HBV, HIV. or blood to sticks Needle transmit recipient the can infected expose the animal insect skin bite. via penetrate pathogens Some an or fever), and of (filariasis). lice leishmaniasis), ticks, Rocky Lyme bacteria mosquitoes, (causes arboviruses mites, (malaria, fever disease, break Bites helminths Mountain spotted transmit and yellow protozoa (plague, skin fleas, and encephalitis), and by the infections or Pasteurella, as to viruses, as bites Animal can with rabies. bacteria, such lead such are able a directly. the skin cross to microorganisms barrier Only few example, the released skin. releasing penetrate from by Schistosoma skin matrix, For swimmers’ unbroken enzymes freshwater larvae dissolve extracellular snails traversing that infect and fungi intact nails. the Similarly, of hair, corneum can (dermatophytes) certain skin, stratum

Gastrointestinal are food transmitted with drink material. by fecal contaminated or pathogens disease as When as disasters floods with may occur fails, rampant. natural diarrheal becomes hygiene and earthquakes, such pathogens. Acidic important defenses many are lethal secretions gastrointestinal for and are gastric become cholerae reduces organisms, stomach neutralizing they dose Vibrio are infectious by do 1011 Healthy acid but 10,000-fold. fed volunteers the not by unless infected the By contrast, some

Local Failure such http://ebooksmedicine.net 100 than illness. organisms relatively Local cause Major are Site resistant ingested fewer agents, cysts, for to acid, Pathogen/Disease Shigella as Defense(s) gastric so and Giardia Basis of can Defense (Examples)

the defenses the layer and gastrointestinal (3) tract Other (5) defensins, (2) mucus detergents, include IgA epithelium, of enzymes viscous intestinal secreted lytic flora, called the (1) bile pancreatic normal mucosal anti-microbial within and antibodies. (4) covering peptides normal by plasma mucosa-associated cells in are (MALT). antibodies located made IgA tissue lymphoid called M cells epithelial cells, antigens which are to a are single These specialized by layer transport for aggregates lymphoid covered of MALT. important of gut lumen, the cells from Typhi, host V. flexneri. the intestinal to Salmonella enter E. cholerae, Shigella enteropathic enterica including and serotype Numerous coli, use poliovirus, M pathogens

via local develop or when defenses. the these Infection to are weakened overcome strategies the gastrointestinal tract organisms defenses occurs by defenses Host or alter pseudomembranous is normal stalled the there colitis to gastric due peristalsis low in that acidity, mechanical are (e.g., by weakened obstruction. when or bacterial difficile), antibiotics flora C. are (e.g., through envelopes, the inactivated enter bile hepatitis A, viruses digestive enveloped rotavirus) that are the those intestinal lack Viruses because tract enzymes. and body by that can

in cause Enteropathogenic ways: gastrointestinal several bacteria disease

in food. Toxin production S. food, release and enterotoxins they bacterial in where any cereus cause without food contaminate Bacillus can growth in gut. powerful poisoning and ingested, aureus the grow when that,

the proliferation, toxin host. production Adhesion, and in local diarrhea. cells enterotoxigenic the that overlying in large to release V. watery epithelium and E. layer, coli cause multiply of volumes and secrete intestinal to cholerae fluid, exotoxins where in resulting epithelial mucous bind they the

Invasion. propria, locally and as hemorrhage—changes clinically lamina causing mucosa and (dysentery). Shigella, manifested intestinal Campylobacter invade inflammation, the ulceration, and and bloody diarrhea Salmonella, damage damaged and the systemic passes mesenteric enterica and into Typhi nodes the lymph infection. through serotype patches in bloodstream, mucosa a Peyer S. from resulting

tract compromised in occur gastrointestinal infections individuals. the immunologically of Fungal squamous or gastrointestinal oral tract, gastrointestinal causing predilection may normal shows the but spread epithelium, flora, of stratified other thrush and to a membranous esophagitis, part lower Candida, organs. for stomach, also the

ingested the but Most as larvae, intestine. eggs, few cysts, their parasites enter by skin way penetrating body the a to enter the being meat-borne or by finding intestinal and pathogens into brush cause the in to or • several attaches lamblia but Once border, epithelial cells tissue. not invade G. intestine, in ways: does the damage these inflammation and of malabsorption, through understood. loss of blunting poorly chronic to brush that border, organisms of leads mechanisms the Attachment villi, are

damage, and taken replicate, Cryptosporidia extensive leading mucosal they to in inflammation. atrophy, which villous enterocytes, by up are

contact-mediated host invasion ulceration channel-forming the with mucosa. of pore cells E. kills colonic cytolysis through and by consequent protein, histolytica a

ectopic they are large disease cause to travel in numbers present Intestinal sites. helminths when or and Large organism gut, numbers can well. the can bile invade of ducts obstruct and the damage as lumbricoides A. this

disease also host by Helminths depriving cause the nutrients. of cause vitamin of anemia from Hookworms blood intestinal the iron-deficiency anemia the causes B12. by Diphyllobothrium, by villi; tapeworm, fish depriving sucking host

inhaled including large of number daily A are bacteria, and fungi, by every microorganisms, individual. viruses, the are or inhaled cases, particles. aerosol in many dust In microbes these size. is particles the proportional to their inversely The distance respiratory system into travel respiratory upper nose Large particles blanket the and trapped lines the that are mucociliary in the tract. are the goblet action Microorganisms are by coughed mucus the swallowed cells throat, in of or they secreted ciliary transported to back by the trapped out. where lung they smaller 5 neutrophils phagocytosed by are recruited cytokines. by alveolar travel by to to the than µm the directly Particles macrophages or where alveoli,

mechanisms developed specific that tract destruction mucociliary respiratory macrophages. to defenses invade Microorganisms normal healthy to have or overcome alveolar the by avoid these pharynx. viruses attaching epithelial respiratory tract and entering to cells the respiratory evade defenses and Some lower in successful by possess to and project viruses that influenza on surface hemagglutinin epithelial example, of acid cells. surface the virus sialic bind the the proteins from For of within viral engulf host to attachment host the leading cell This the induces cell. replication to entry virus, and the

respiratory cilia. bacterial paralyze toxins release Certain that pathogens Bordetella influenzae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, pertussis. Examples Haemophilus and include compromised in lack only and to of lung overcome the the the can infections healthy bacteria Some cause ability hosts. respiratory defenses the to infection S. subsequent because influenza leads the to can cause pneumoniae protective Streptococcus aureus and viral pneumonia ciliated the of loss epithelium. acid. in who fibrosis, individuals those aspirate occurs smokers and cystic to in with mechanisms patients in defense intubated while damage mucociliary gastric and injury Chronic acute occurs

respiratory after or avoid Some phagocytosis. destruction pathogens phagocytosis tuberculosis, phagolysosomes macrophages. for gains the killing escapes a example, of alveoli in M. it because within foothold Opportunistic number AIDS, (e.g., spp. fungi when the Aspergillus in lungs depressed with reduced in patients or is cellular immunity when are P. jiroveci leukocytes infect after chemotherapy).

http://ebooksmedicine.net

way is urinary of invaded by exterior almost the the tract always from The urethra. serves The defense urinary against a invading as tract of microorganisms. flushing the with urine regular of flushing. the Urine sterile defense fastidious host urinary adhere bacteria; contains gonorrhoeae, pathogens in however, normally numbers the (e.g., of is overcoming only successful N. or E. coli) the regular small to bladder epithelium, Anatomy infection. role in important plays an many men contrast bladder the distance men. 20 have in women, cm in (i.e., the skin 5 urinary the of urethra) urinary more than with infections length between Women tract is in because and the cm defenses tract of urinary to flow, can reflux prostatic increase benign hyperplasia, Obstruction susceptibility urinary normal or as in compromise infections. and acute and cause up further and from the infections tract Urinary to can the bladder pyelonephritis. spread kidney chronic

protected of From is by glycogen the normal by catabolism pH until menopause, low a the lactobacilli. puberty in pathogens resulting from epithelium from vagina vaginal Antibiotics the yeast, of with lactobacilli, resultant overgrowth allowing kill candidiasis. can

others by to the of blood, at or the initial way nerves locally, whereas site sites proliferate distant penetrate epithelial microorganisms Some spread barrier lymphatics, of infection, the and the (

Fig. 9.6 ). or interact cause the that In stay V. pathogens confined infections papillomaviruses, dermatophytes). to of that those epithelial hollow cells viscera lumen (e.g., with disseminate, superficial exclusively to (e.g., contrast cholerae)

within body the spread can Microbes several ways: in

and Lysis invasion. helminths bacteria, enzymes Some secrete and that destroy extracellular allow invasion. direct lytic fungi, and tissue For matrix example, the cells. degrades aureus between secretes S. which hyaluronidase, host extracellular microbes least drain of follow and regional initially to planes Invasive resistance lymphatics. tissue may to aureus the a travel draining localized from nodes. S. lymph abscess sometimes and to spread bone). bacteremia can This to lead deep organs (heart,

and Through blood lymph. extracellular Microorganisms in fluid or be spread may within either cells. host Some poliovirus, and helminths viruses some the most plasma. fungi, and bacteria (e.g., are trypanosomes), all HBV), in (e.g., protozoa transported African can mycobacteria, Toxoplasma. Leukocytes carry herpesviruses, Leishmania, HIV, and red Babesia and found The are Plasmodium cells. parasites within

Cell-to-cell transmission. of to cell or Most (as rabies by of propagate infectious and host from but by may release locally replication and cells, cell within viruses nerves fusion from causing virus virus). by cell cell virions, varicella-zoster with to spread transport others

on pathogens bloodborne The organism, consequences the of virulence of spread the depending vary of widely

Portal of respiratory, entry (skin, Infection gastrointestinal,

tuberculosis M. rabiesin macrophages Lymphatics virus,

Fig. are to enter also body, (either of Routes localized However, and the mucosal lymphatics penetrate (selected viruses shown) may of To and nerves. spread the barriers. sites bacterial or may Most through travel microbes entry through or or microbes in bloodstream or epithelial spread dissemination body. within the other the inflammatory Infection examples cells). site freely toxins 9.6 at certain entry of microbes. common remain Mims disease, San Academic of pathogenesis (Adapted infectious ed from Press.) The 4, CA: 1996, Diego, status. the such the factors as pattern infection, immune of host the and of magnitude seeding, Sporadic microbes (e.g., invasion controlled defenses. is but quickly host common low-virulence by bloodstream brushing or of normal teeth) during is by nonvirulent danger as virulent and a hypotension, or pathogens By by other sepsis. manifests bacteremia, systemic fungemia, fever, viremia, multiple and of poses contrast, parasitemia and disseminated serious symptoms signs by in can healthy even individuals. be rapidly fatal, bacteria invasion bloodstream Massive previously

manifestations of disease may major entry. from point microbe the sites distant of at infectious The appear enters intestine paralysis. in cause example, For airways measles varicella-zoster enter kills but rashes through cause and to polio-virus but skin; the neurons the the viruses motor through system liver mesentery, Schistosoma penetrate but parasites skin mansoni and the in localize vessels portal the of intestine. and eventually blood the damaging skin, the also hematobium urinary bladder causes and the to Schistosoma but penetrates cystitis. localizes a rabid rabies transport bite retrograde from sensory in virus The of neurons, travels site it death. by brain and the animal then by where to encephalitis the a causes

the of on Transmission depends the microbe. hardiness in can or microbes dust, water. survive Some food, extended periods for cool survive helminth protozoan in eggs thick-shelled and can Bacterial spores, cysts, and dry a environment. direct Less quickly person person, must from contact. be by passed to often microorganisms hardy

it. the a disease, For entry transmission the body of of from host’s of exit microorganism as as important is into mode leave shed to or transmission fluid to the secreted, that is or used excreted, microorganisms by tissue new victims. Every for is host normally

Skin. S. dermatophytes such (fungi), Skin the are aureus as shed flora, desquamated and skin. in as Some HSV genital sexually syphilis). transmitted transmitted lesions, pathogens such are and Treponema skin pallidum (causing from

Oral secretions. are that glands CMV, virus. and replicate in virus, and rabies spread Viruses the saliva include in salivary mumps

secretions. Respiratory be bacteria respiratory Viruses in secretions can during talking, sneezing. and coughing, shed and travel which than large respiratory pathogens, including in influenza spread droplets, 3 no viruses, more feet. Most respiratory respiratory or respiratory the few air. tuberculosis can dust in from virus, a spread droplets in organisms, and the M. that However, are tract including travel small varicella-zoster long distances particles within are to determine the used These isolation spread of prevent that type of infection. precautions the properties

Stool. include such the and Organisms replicate Shigella, pathogens gut, stool shed G. of in or rotavirus. that the many lamblia, epithelium as in lumen (hepatitis Pathogens (S. enter that are or stool. and Typhi) in A shed bile liver the the in replicate intestine serotype in virus) gallbladder enterica

Blood. transfusion, be abusers. equipment), of sharing vectors, by reuse needles spread by or of via practices medical intravenous blood (blood transmitted invertebrate may Pathogens drug Bloodborne including spp. parasites, Plasmodium by insects. arboviruses, and are transmitted biting

Urine. only the releases human from in urine. host that the for is of including eggs few mode exodus veins grows organisms, the usual which haematobium, the Urine bladder the and of S. reach a

tract. Genital infections Sexually the (STIs) or vagina, oral rectum, from transmitted pharynx. urethra, spread cervix, contact that because survive these cause Organisms person-to-person the pathogens STIs cannot on in environment. direct for spread depend do individuals is are Transmission they often realize who that asymptomatic by infected. STIs of not for increases same one factors STI because Infection for the STIs. the additional are all mainly risk the risk with STIs, STIs are 18 and described Chapters in 19.

Vertical transmission. some of infectious pathogens, common several mother and mode transmission a newborn for to through from or Transmission may is routes. fetus of agents different child occur is pathogen a during Placental-fetal mother is occur when pregnancy. most infected transmission likely to the with infection. time damage age degree infections the Some the of interfere and development, depend fetus fetal of the and with resulting at on the of type the of rubella during first cataracts, the infection example, can little trimester effect. third malformations, mental to heart trimester For infection lead while or the deafness, has retardation, rubella during complications Zika Congenital have and with been microcephaly CNS other associated infection pregnancy. virus during timing about pregnancy. unknown is trimester to Much infection the of relative still of infectious contact the birth during agents birth with Transmission during canal. caused is passage through by chlamydial conjunctivitis. include gonococcal and Examples maternal can milk transmission Postnatal HBV. HIV, in and CMV, transmit

animal transmitted indirectly products can through by resulting vector. or from to human or Microbes an animal with contact also infections, zoonotic in direct of either consumption be invertebrate

Transmissionofinfectionscanoccurvia:

Insect/arthropodvectors.

Apathogencanestablishinfectionifitpossessesvirulencefactorsthatovercomenormalhostdefensesorifthehostdefensesarecompromised.

Hostdefensesagainstinfectioninclude:

Skin:toughkeratinizedbarrier,lowpH,fattyacids,normalmicrobiota

Respiratorysystem:alveolarmacrophagesandmucociliaryclearancebybronchialepithelium,IgA

Gastrointestinalsystem:acidicgastricpH,viscousmucus,pancreaticenzymesandbile,defensins,IgA,andnormalflora

Urogenitaltract:repeatedflushingandacidicenvironmentcreatedbycommensalvaginalflora

of Infectious three establish tissues infection agents damage by and any mechanisms:

cells. infected enter death or contact They and host directly cells cause can of

They a vessels necrosis. blood distance, that release damage toxins release that and at components, cells or degrade cause kill enzymes ischemic tissue can

They cause responses immune can additional directed the although that, host http://ebooksmedicine.net against invader, tissue damage. • induce but the defensive helping mixed Thus, the to to overcome can responses blessing, damage. host of be also infection contributing tissue the a

Described are viruses bacteria damage host whereby tissues. of some the next mechanisms and

directly and cells replicating host’s them entering can expense. at damage host the by Viruses tropism are by tissues determined cell and of for viral virus largely types. the specific the of The infection manifestations a influenced of Tropism number is factors. by

receptors Host viruses. for coated particular cell are high Viruses with host bind to proteins that with specificity surface surface proteins. viruses binding with of host many Entry to into normal commences cells cell receptors. For on to cells 5). CXCR4 gp120 glycoprotein example, and and HIV T and binds CD4 CCR5 macrophages (Chapter binding of proteases may instance, and activates cleaves hemagglutinin. be cells; enable influenza virus Host the for to a protease host host needed to virus

transcription of factors. Specificity to elements. depends presence ability that cell on transcription inside particular and factors promoter enhancer the replicate recognize virus of of types lineage-specific the viral The DNA but the gene the causes not replicates cells, example, promoter in neurons only and which regulating or cells. 23), sequences endothelial oligodendroglia expression in virus, leukoencephalopathy because CNS are (Chapter For viral enhancer active JC the in glial in

Physical characteristics tissues. of tissue to and temperature contribute Host tropism. environment can bile, digestive and because inactivation in enteroviruses replicate enzymes. part they intestine For can resist by in acids, example, the temperatures only site. within of characteristic this replicate upper-respiratory the because tract cells lower the Rhinoviruses optimally at they infect

can kill cells Once damage host are of inside cells, by mechanisms a or viruses the they ( number

Fig. 9.7

Direct cytopathic effects. host by critical enzymes proteins, can or cells preventing of macromolecules, inducing Viruses synthesis by producing kill degradative apoptosis. toxic and by of cap-binding synthesis proteins protein. inactivating blocks host poliovirus by example, For and degrade DNA that DNA. other cellular of inhibit proteins synthesis HSV mRNA and proteins produces host that cells mediate activate apoptosis. the reticulum can apoptosis trigger cell-intrinsic which that can virus replication of host during as perturbations Viral of caspases by endoplasmic also such assembly, mechanisms,

immune Anti-viral responses. and cells. of virus-infected cells the may surface proteins be may host by Viral immune on recognized system, the attack lymphocytes infections, can lymphocytes for (CTLs) tissue be also defense Cytotoxic for important responsible viral CTLs injury. but T are against causes CTL- infection Hepatitis B

Fig. Viral infected synthesis replication, that hepatocytes, injury synthesis infection. Reduced Viral antigens Receptor uncoating assembly destruction mRNA cell–mediated of DNA, attempting Host or PROTEINS transformation RNA, protein to fusion derangements lysis Virus a the Mechanismsbywhichvirusescauseinjurytocells.Virus response 9.7 normal VIRAL cell genome is inclusions Viral synthesis Metabolic T Neoplastic host clear mediated Entry, protein Viral Cell

cells. of Transformation • infected of mechanisms, growth viruses cycle host the genome oncogenic HPV, hijacking and strategies, DNA can host insertional of viral genes). (e.g., Different EBV) machinery, insertion by the nearby the which of and survival of including anti-apoptotic expression variety a alters (in the cell mutagenesis cell into control stimulate transformation 6. are Chapter Mechanisms viral of in discussed

damage of the to the host depends to toxins. cells, on host to tissues adhere ability tissues, Bacterial cells deliver invade and bacteria or that have grouped Pathogenic are genes virulence found clusters frequently together in called pathogenicity islands. bacteria virulence harmful. a small bacterium number is A can genes of whether determine virulence or determine single closely a gastroenteritis. that few fever Salmonella that life-threatening Salmonella causes related species, so are they whether only infect self-limited but strains humans are a of isolate The an genes typhoid

and are between virulence including antibiotic circular spread Plasmids bacteria DNAs) or genetic enzymes confer resistance. factors, that elements (small bacteriophages and toxins replicating that (viruses) carry can independently can cause capacity with endow elements a of bacteria and/or survival the between to bacteria recipient the disease. advantage Exchange these difficult. can a convert transposons or making resistance one, resistant antibiotic Plasmids an bacterium therapy into effective antibiotic-susceptible encoding threat. resulting there have to urgent for in worldwide, available genes are Carbapenemase the effective on carried among spread which gram-negative antibiotics, these plasmids bacilli list strains as CDC organisms no causing an

http://ebooksmedicine.net

can in that also their bacteria Populations together ways virulence. alter act of

sensing. Quorum bacteria coordinately specific population Many a such large reach expression expressed which as genes, within virulence gene regulate of high after concentrations. in species are bacteria genes, discrete to sites, pneumonia, overcome host in bacteria in allow defenses. host an growing or This consolidated such as turn abscess may coordinately autoinducer secreting virulence peptides. factors regulates aureus S. by the stimulating exotoxin production. level the peptide As grow of concentrations, to increases, the increasing bacteria autoinducer

Biofilms. layer within a Communities to adhere live can such artificial catheters host intravascular polysaccharides and extracellular or of viscous of devices joints. bacteria as tissues that to increase mechanisms and anti-microbial immune inaccessible make Biofilms bacteria drugs. effector to their resistance of persistence individuals the with infections respiratory infections, relapse such formation Biofilm artificial endocarditis, seems to as fibrosis. important cystic in in and infections bacterial and joint be

Adherence to Cells Host Bacterial

are called matrix or that molecules host cells Bacterial bind extracellular adhesins. surface to (see structures various bacteria of in are Diverse adhesion surface involved

Fig.

9.2 ). the surface in cell cells from F and the that on of pyogenes has protein fibronectin acid extracellular to matrix. wall its S. teichoic and bind host projecting pili have bacteria filamentous on called proteins Other their surfaces. determine the of whereas acids amino structurally of pili bacteria. tips pili of and are specificity the vary binding Stalks on conserved, the the a of expressed cells. that coli urinary cause uniquely that E. moiety on binds P Strains specific express pilus a tract Gal(α1–4)Gal uroepithelial infections to gonorrhoeae the and bacteria mediate bacteria host response. on Pili host antibody of are cells of targets to also N. the adherence by variation antigens expressed Antigenic gonorrhoeae escapes the the is mechanism affecting important the immune which in an N. pili response.

be bacterial considered Any illness substance toxin. can to a that contributes components which that or Toxins the subclassified by are the bacterial secreted exotoxins, endotoxins, are proteins of as are which are bacterium. cell,

lipopolysaccharide that of gram-negative is outer component of (LPS) bacteria (see Bacterial a endotoxin membrane is the a

Fig. ). 9.2 a similar fatty connected bacteria. chain, gram-negative LPS which termed of is core very acid lipid both in all of to long-chain anchor, sugar a are composed A, diagnosis. Attached in to is chain strains (O variable bacteria which serotype to used the a core is to carbohydrate sugar of antigen), aid a CD14 of that receptor system host signals binds binds pattern immune inflammatory receptor recognition 4, the Lipid to transmits surface and of promote on responses. activation leukocytes, A Toll-like and to innate complex the to cell the then beneficial host. LPS and the can be Responses both harmful to to of of in enhance induction expression through beneficial activation. that costimulatory and is increased LPS protective well The as immunity response T-lymphocyte activates (chemokines), important which as molecules, chemoattractants cytokines in shock, respiratory factor septic of necrosis as intravascular excessive 4). induction and coagulation, (Chapter disseminated acute mainly tumor through an of distress syndrome, However, cytokines high LPS levels such important play role levels of

cellular proteins secreted disease. cause injury Exotoxins and that are into classified and be by categories action. their of site can They broad mechanism

Enzymes. act Bacteria in secrete that fibrinolysins) substrates but in hyaluronidases, vitro, is cases. understood their coagulases, few their respective disease a only in on (proteases, enzymes role the together, known the are toxins For detach skin. cleave that hold S. by aureus causing from to keratinocytes proteases produced exfoliative epidermis example, proteins to deeper

pathways. A-B regulatory Toxins that alter or signaling intracellular toxins: surface protein and have component two-component (A) cell delivers A and component into toxins activity with receptors a that (B) enzymatic the active cytoplasm. an binding binds cell the The domain effect cellular by A toxins domain. the the on these binding depends of specificity affected The the the of pathways B and diphtheriae. anthracis, and by cholerae, Bacillus Corynebacterium V. are including made many toxins bacteria A-B mechanism of of understood anthrax A-B ( is the The toxin action well

Fig. 9.8 ). effects. pathologic lethal components, which to A following component, factor alternate A toxin factor and B edema (LF), has component mediates and enter each the (EF) cells Anthrax specific two binding

leading binding cytokine lymphocytes T T massive portions cell stimulate of Superantigens receptor, to the lymphocyte very and numbers to large of T proliferation release. by conserved to response lead The levels leak (Chapter high inflammatory syndrome and systemic capillary cytokines of the 4). S. S. Superantigens syndrome. shock made by pyogenes toxic aureus and cause

of neurotransmitters, release Neurotoxins botulinum and Clostridium by in Clostridium resulting tetani paralysis. inhibit produced synaptic at of cleave instead, the A neurons; in secretion do toxins the kill domains proteins not neurotransmitters These involved junction. Tetanus chest death muscles. can paralysis failure botulism and of from result the due in to respiratory and diaphragm

diarrhea effects, including aureus), (V. bloody and gastrointestinal (C. tract diarrhea causing cholerae), varied watery Enterotoxins difficile). (S. the and affect vomiting nausea voluminous

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. anthrax action. of exotoxin 9.8 Mechanism protective that for binds B protease a mitogen-activated to that shown edema and EF increases edema. of host LF, Note leading destroys B binds enter (LF) adenylate water and that A cell-surface intracellular is cell, (MAPKKs), simplicity). efflux EF either forms (as called cyclase cyclic subunit a into are Three a cytoplasm. kinases receptor, or LF calcium subunits heptamer, which death. calmodulin kinase The cAMP, but bind B factor both the to released an (EF) heptamer. causes to binds by not and protein factor or also subunit, protease, lethal is cAMP, form interstitial adenosine each a cleaved of the and antigen, cell monophosphate. the toxin A (Adapted year Cunningham, M, anthrax advances DB, from al: research. et 2011: in K, of Lacy major Mourez 10:287, Microbiol 2002.) Trends

of cause As tissue injury. response to be sometimes mentioned the the microbes host can earlier, immune are mechanisms of types follows: A of few as examples injury and

inflammation. Granulomatous M. a and with (caseous response hypersensitivity granulomas, produce delayed bacilli in tissue the formation and fibrosis. sequester of tuberculosis Infection damage prevent and the spread, but which necrosis) results its also

inflammation. T-cell–mediated response of of and Damage not effects infection mainly the cytopathic to liver cells the infected virus. HCV from and due is to to hepatocytes immune the HBV

Innate inflammation. immune and pathogen-associated recognition immune molecular leading damaged (discussed from in (DAMPS) patterns damage-associated (PAMPS) to patterns 5). to system cells, host activating inflammation the and molecular released bind Chapter Pattern to receptors

Humoral immunity. infection S. can with after glomerulonephritis develop pyogenes. Poststreptococcal form and in that by complexes, antigens nephritis. antibodies caused which glomeruli is bind deposit immune and It renal to streptococcal produce

diseases. Chronic inflammatory early intestinal microbes of inflammation. inflammatory resulting in disease interactions immune their local (Chapter of may the be which an barrier, 15), enables and pathogenic development important cells, bowel and the In the of compromise both epithelial entry with event commensal and of role. epithelial cycle may be injury important playing The component disease, inflammation of the the with an central microbes

Cancer. or of as cancers, pylori, carry ground and (Chapter oncogenes development bacteria, are chronic the that trigger cancer presumably such for with 6). inflammation Viruses, these fertile which and tissue microbes associated because HCV, to with HBV such not to H. as known provides regeneration, subsequent are activate

involve responses. microbes by Diseases caused interplay host of and an microbialvirulence

directlyinteracting dysfunction agents or can Infectious cause cell. the cell death with by

bacterialproducts, may local the be or due (LPS), including immune superantigens, release with endotoxins or to systemic exotoxins, combined Injury response. of

immune some of directly infections; may of injury. the Absence expansion can immunocompromisecan response an opportunistic allow infectionsthat by cause conversely, reduce damageinduced uncontrolled

diseases microorgansims. immunological cancerhave been and associated inflammatory and Chronic specific with

host protect 5. discussed and immune responses are Humoral infections cellular most Chapter the that from in Not ( to microorganisms resist have system and surprisingly, evade developed immune the many means

Fig. 9.9 ). immune escaping important virulence microbial These determinants the are and of of response pathogenicity. mechanisms

Antigenic variation. to infect to immune ability cells Neutralizing against pathogens. microbes of block and antibodies the cells microbial antigens recruit kill To involve for many genetic recognition, use microbes variation. strategies antigenic escape that mechanisms generating low and The variation genomes reassortment and polymerases viruses) viral viral antigenic of influenza fidelity of create viral (influenza virus) (HIV RNA (

). Table 9.7 gene antigens via species surface Borrelia their switch rearrangement. and this the for expression their protein. major of species many surface vary antigen, have Trypanosoma VSG, genes surface serotypes There with more a of each than are 90 pneumoniae, different S. different polysaccharide. capsular

of proteins. Modification surface antimicrobial peptides, including defensins, cationic Host cathelicidins,

phagocytosis Inhibition to recognition of (e.g., Modulation structure avoid surface antigenic of variability)

Inhibition phagosome of

Signal thrombocidins, Modulate: provide Gene and death against Cell expression invading initial important microbes. defenses transduction osmotic These bacterial peptides by lysis. the and form killing bind bacterium membrane pores, the inactivate of anti-microbial Bacterial spp., binding anti-microbial downregulate surface that by resist killing peptides. making aureus) avoid pathogens that S. (Shigella peptides, or or molecules

complement. • antibodies and Overcoming bacteria phagocytosis coating the to of (opsonization) with Host protein or defense by facilitate C3b antibodies macrophages. complement includes However, the activating the by the pathogen complement response intracellular subverts M. alternative facultative tuberculosis

of Mechanisms Table Variation Anti-genic 9.7

Gonorrheagene spp. burgdorferi Borrelia gonorrhoeae gene Genetic disease(e.g., Lyme conversion, rearrangement Trypanosoma recombination, Neisseria site-specific African sleeping inversion)sickness

spp. Plasmodium Malaria

uptake diversity of this Large Pneumonia, bacteria, the its of reaches extracellular organism by pathway site and serotypesRhinovirusesColdsStreptococcus in complement the resulting complement means, the pneumoniae organism replication. monocytes; environment, meningitis products of by in coat the enteroinvasive the complement. from as of allows a S. to leprae, use coli, them “hideout” Typhi) Many that cells tuberculosis, M. as (such antibodies M. enterica bacteria escape inside Shigella, and E. serotype evade the allowing to cell, immune defenses. monocytogenes spread cell directly cell manipulate can the cytoskeleton Listeria to to bacteria from thus

Resisting phagosomes. killing in phagocytosis and bacterial and defense and Phagocytosis critical bacteria. by extracellular killing neutrophils against constitute host of a macrophages bacteria virulent The capsule or Neisseria surface neutrophils. organisms meningitidis, by carbohydrate pneumonia them bacteria of the many more by phagocytosis makes that pneumoniae, H. the preventing of influenzae) (S. cause meningitis on (S. proteins aureus) proteins pyogenes). inhibit phagocytosis Surface that include (S. M and A a of bacteria fusion by the phagosome form the usually lysosome to kill Macrophages phagolysosome. with the the macrophage. the bacteria M. phagosome, unchecked with the lysosome fusion allowing proliferate of to blocks tuberculosis within cytoplasm membrane, allowing a and escape produces the in macrophage. listeriolysin to the and called avoid the two phagosome into destruction protein that O phospholipases degrade Legionella the bacteria pore-forming signaling that to Legionella trafficking. modify master GTPases, intracellular also secretes small proteins modulate regulators of prevent phagocytes, Also, make burst. bacteria their their many that kill or oxidative migration, diminish proteins

Escaping inflammasome. the pathway one cytosolic is innate inflammasome of immune microbes. activation The to responses of the and of caspases, cytokines death (Chapter by and is IL-1 microbial It form the 5). pro-inflammatory activation induce the which induce a pyroptosis culminates the products of in cell and secretion of IL-18 stimulated called death cell and Both and virulence inflammation replication. microbial limit that the for Some activation, to Salmonella, activation, signaling the proteins suppress formation inflammasome. express bacterial required block the limit virulence access or pathways proteins the as inflammasome, mature of other are such inhibit that bacteria, of and Yersinia caspase inflammasome defense components these disable to various of this All reaction. host antimicrobial mechanisms serve

pathways. of Disruption interferon large developed interferons strategies have combat a to (IFNs), are mediators early of which of number antiviral Viruses defense. actions receptors of the IFNs, that to produce that soluble produce IFN secreted viruses signaling intracellular receptors. downstream JAK/STAT Some or block IFN proteins of inhibit of bind homologues and pattern for inducible receptor acid a cytoplasmic RNA (RNA viruses. RIG-I double-stranded retinoic is intracellular I recognition gene host helicase protein) this pathway RIG-I the thus receptor, blocking signaling IFN by downstream inhibits overcoming defense. this host and responses. within competitive or that their genomes antagonists cytokines, their inhibit viruses of receptors to encode act immune homologs as Some chemokines, replicate, which apoptosis, cell. infected host persist, to the time have block give or Finally, transform the viruses strategies developed may to viruses

• proteins, HSV, presentation (e.g., histocompatibility viruses localization recognition: cells. can cytotoxic Decreased impairing I and CMV, class of the (MHC) T-cell EBV) DNA major alter CD8+ peptide to bind complex T to or I for inhibitory Although receptors as targets to downregulation class act NK NK express decoys molecules cells. might homologuess cells, cause of MHC that class be MHC I virus-infected also herpesviruses of cells engage that class presentation degradation, to CD4+ antigen molecules impairing MHC helper T for Herpesviruses cells. target can II function Viruses cells, macrophages, to also HIV directly CD4+ T and (e.g., infects dendritic cells). can leukocytes compromise their infect

Afterbypassinghosttissuebarriers,infectiousmicroorganismsmustalsoevadehostinnateandadaptiveimmunitymechanismstosuccessfullyproliferateandbetransmittedtothenexthost.Strategiesincludethefollowing:

Resistingphagocytosis(e.g.,byproducingacapsule)

Suppressingthehostadaptiveimmuneresponse(e.g.,byinhibitingantigenpresentationanddisruptinginterferonpathways)

as these responses. with In mechanisms diversity microbes contrast of the to patterns vast tissue responses microbes, the limited, are of the morphologic are directing molecular diagnosis. for and histopathologic unique produce to patterns, features reaction pathognomonic the adding similar are few a Therefore, in challenge to many or particular pathogens microorganism,

host the determines of the microbes. interaction microbe to features the between response and the the The histologic histologic and in chronic of mononuclear/ tissue cytopathic-cytoproliferative, five suppurative, are reaction There infections: major inflammation/scarring. granulomatous, patterns necrosis, Chapter in Suppurative discussed 3. is inflammation

of interstitial inflammatory mononuclear, intracellular a feature predominantly common viruses, or bacteria, chronic appear all sometimes acutely in are but infiltrates parasites. they intracellular processes, Diffuse, response to inflammation. spirochetes also provoke and helminths some chronic In addition, with can helminthic infections. Eosinophilia be some prominent

(Fig. MORPHOLOGYWhichmononuclearcellpredominateswithintheinflammatorylesiondependsonthehostimmuneresponsetotheorganism.Thus,lymphocytespredominateinHBVinfection

),whereasplasmacellsarecommonintheprimaryandsecondarylesionsofsyphilis(see 9.10A

Fig.9.10B).The presenceoftheselymphoidcellsreflectscell-mediatedimmuneresponsesagainstthepathogenorpathogen-infectedcells.Granulomatousinflammationisadistinctiveformofmononuclearinflammationusuallyevokedbyinfectiousagentsthatresisteradication,butneverthelessarecapableofstimulatingstrongT-cell–mediatedimmunity(e.g.,M. schistosomeeggs).Granulomatousinflammation(Chapter3)ischaracterizedbyaccumulationofactivatedmacrophagescalledepithelioidcells,whichmayfusetoformgiantcells.Insomecases,thereisacentralareaofcaseousnecrosis(see Histoplasma capsulatum, tuberculosis,

Fig.9.10C

are produced Cytopathic-cytoproliferative viruses. usually by reactions cell lesions sparse necrosis cells. with by The cellular are or proliferation, characterized usually inflammatory

Fig. 9.10 Mononuclearandgranulomatousinflammation.(A)Acuteviralhepatitischaracterizedbyapredominantlylymphocyticinfiltrate.(B)Secondarysyphilisinthedermiswithperivascularlymphoplasmacyticinfiltrateandendothelialproliferation. (C)Granulomatousinflammationinresponsetotuberculosis.Notethezoneofcaseation(asterisk), thisinturnissurroundedbyazoneofactivatedTlymphocytes.Thishigh-magnificationviewhighlightsthehistologicfeatures;thegranulomatousresponsetypicallytakestheformofathree-dimensionalspherewiththeoffendingorganisminthecentralarea. whichnormallyformsthecenterofthegranuloma,withasurroundingrimofactivatedepithelioidmacrophages,someofwhichhavefusedtoformgiantcells(arrows);

http://ebooksmedicine.net

(e.g.,measlesvirusorherpesviruses)(see MORPHOLOGYSomevirusesreplicatewithincellsandmakeviralaggregatesthatarevisibleasinclusionbodies(e.g.,herpesvirusesoradenovirus)orinducecellstofuseandformmultinucleatedcellscalledpolykaryons

Fig.9.1 ).Focalcelldamageintheskinmaycauseepithelialcellstobecomedetached,formingblisters.Somevirusescancauseepithelialcellstoproliferate(e.g.,venerealwartscausedbyHPVortheumbilicatedpapulesofmolluscumcontagiosumcausedbypoxviruses).Finally,virusescancontributetothedevelopmentofmalignantneoplasms(Chapter6).

dominant can rapid severe Clostridium that other cause feature. is the necrosis such damage perfringens and secrete that toxins organisms and tissue powerful

oftenareopportunisticpathogensthatareintroducedintomuscletissuebypenetratingtraumaorinfectionofthebowelinaneutropenichost.Similarly,theparasiteE. MORPHOLOGYBecausefewinflammatorycellsarepresent,necroticlesionsresembleinfarctswithdisruptionorlossofbasophilicnuclearstainingandpreservationofcellularoutlines.Clostridia histolytica causescoloniculcersandliverabscessescharacterizedbyextensivetissuedestructionandliquefactivenecrosiswithoutaprominentinflammatoryinfiltrate.Byentirelydifferentmechanisms,virusescancausewidespreadnecrosisofhostcellsassociatedwithinflammation,asexemplifiedbydestructionofthetemporallobesofthebrainbyHSVortheliverbyHBV.ThepowerfulexotoxinsofC. diphtheriae causenecrosisoflaryngealepitheliumgivingrisetoapseudo-membranecomprisedofnecroticcellsenmeshedinafibrinousexudate.Thiscancauseasphyxia.

infections scarring. Many can inflammation, complete extensive elicit lead or healing with chronic which to resolve either

Fig. infectionofthebladderwithnumerouscalcifiedeggsandextensivescarring. Schistosoma 9.11 haematobium

MORPHOLOGYSometimesanexuberantscarringresponseisthemajorcauseofdysfunction.Forexample,schistosomeeggscause“pipestem”fibrosisoftheliverorfibrosisofthebladderwall(

).M. Fig.9.11 causesconstrictivefibrouspericarditis.ChronicHBVinfectionmaycausecirrhosisoftheliver,inwhichdensefibrousseptasurroundnodulesofregeneratinghepatocytes. tuberculosis

guidelines but often different the The reactions same of host be practice of above of tissue time. must features it remembered types microscopic useful processes, infectious reactions are in at described analyzing for occur patterns that AIDS lung time, interstitial Pneumocystis, cytolytic changes, with causes causes CMV, same which and, at inflammation. by the of example, infected For the may be a which patient with responses physical conditions of inflammatory chemical of Similar can seen inflammation cause. to patterns or in and unknown tissue other be agents also in in eliminates a the nature the response Finally, the some microorganism(s). about immunocompromised frequently absence individuals, of potential histologic of inflammatory infecting host of clues infections infection for examination in other and/or make diagnosis. this lack response, definitive pathologic essential potential for Because tests mixed host to addition a to of of are diagnostic

specific part acquired susceptible impair the types 5) Inherited often system, immunity (Chapter or only the in rendering of of to affected infections. defects individuals immune

Patients deficiency, enteroviruses). in infections a by X-linked severe infections (rotavirus with and and agammaglobulinemia, extracellular bacteria few bacterial antibody contract as viral

intracellular and T-cell with susceptible parasites. to Patients notably are viruses with infections defects pathogens, some

particularly with complement susceptible infections associated are the S. Neisseria deficiencies early infections. deficiencies whereas such encapsulated late Patients to are of pneumoniae, components in as with complement of components bacteria, by

in neutrophil infections fungi. lead S. bacteria, increased Deficiencies with some and function to gram-negative aureus,

inherited with sometimes susceptibility particular immunity to of deficiencies components innate infections. Individuals and adaptive specific show selective in in patterns roles the essential protective reveal immunity of These mediating specific to microorganisms. different molecules of bacterial mutations are molecules S. prone example, patients several with diseases, downstream For pneumoniae signaling infections. with to particularly in pyogenic TLRs responses encephalitis. associated childhood Impaired HSV are with TLR3 candidiasis. for associated a IL-17 in defects factor mucocutaneous (such needed STAT3, Inherited generation) are transcription cell Th17 in as mutations immunity with chronic

http://ebooksmedicine.net

which most a widely AIDS 5). being causes, of with have causes (Chapter HIV, the known Acquired variety infection immunodeficiencies leading a profound and to immunosuppression and of helper lymphocytes, HIV kills infects multitude CD4+ T infections. immunodeficiency that causes cell used infiltrative those autoimmune of include and (such certain treat (e.g., function marrow to transplantation. as Other leukemia), diseases), drugs hemopoietic stem immunosuppressive suppress acquired processes bone organ make can patients specific than susceptible to also other to disease the systems system due microorganisms. of Diseases immune dominated and clearance Pseudomonas fibrosis Individuals aeruginosa. commonly infections get impaired with by respiratory cystic bacteria disease in pneumoniae. makes infection with encapsulated individuals of with susceptible S. function as to such them Lack cell sickle splenic removing barrier pathogens destroy as infection such microbes, skin, Burns to P. this with aeruginosa. allowing Finally, defenses. malnutrition immune impairs

MORPHOLOGYPatientswithantibody,complement,orneutrophildefectsmayacquireseverelocalbacterialinfectionsthatdonotelicitanysignificantneutrophilicinfiltrate.Inthesepatients,theidentityofthecausativeorganismdeterminedbycultureorspecialstainsmaynothavebeenpredictedfromhistology.Althoughmanyviralcytopathiceffects(e.g.,cellfusionorinclusions)(see

Fig.

9.1 )maystillbepresent,viralinfectionsinimmunocompromisedhostsmaynotengendertheanticipatedmononuclearinflammatoryresponse.InpatientswithAIDSwhohavenohelperTcellsandcannotmountnormalcellularresponses,organismsthatwouldotherwisecausegranulomatousinflammation(e.g.,M. complex)failtodoso( avium

Fig.9.12

Fig. infectioninaduodenalbiopsyfromapatientwithAIDS,showingmassiveintracellularmacrophageinfectionwithacid-fastorganisms(filamentousandpinkinthisacid-faststainpreparation).Theintracellularbacteriapersistandevenproliferatewithinmacrophages,becausethereareinadequateTcellstomountagranulomatousresponse.AIDS,acquiredimmunodeficiencysyndrome. avium 9.12 IntheabsenceofappropriateT-cell–mediatedimmunity,granulomatoushostresponsedoesnotoccur.Mycobacterium

Immunology, Department Boston, Microbiology and School, of Arlene Sharpe, Massachusetts.) of Medical (Courtesy Harvard Dr.

Innormal(immunocompetent)individuals,thepatternsofhostresponsesarefairlystereotypicalfordifferentclassesofmicrobes;theseresponsepatternscanbeusedtoinferpossiblecausalorganisms.

Neutrophil-richacutesuppurativeinflammationistypicalofinfectionswithmanybacteria(“pyogenic”bacteria)andsomefungi.

Mononuclearcellinfiltratesarecommoninmanychronicinfectionsandsomeacuteviralinfections.

M.

andcertainfungi. tuberculosis

Cytopathicandproliferativelesionsarecausedbysomeviruses.

Necrosisresultsfromtissue-damagingtoxinsproducedbymicrobessuchasC. perfringens.

Chronicinflammationandscarringrepresentthefinalcommonpathwayofmanyinfections.

for Rev T, fungal invasive al: Arvanitis nonmolecular Clin 2014. BB, methods diagnostic Anagnostou Fuchs et infections, Microbiol M, Molecular 27:490, and detection of laboratory many available infections.] very of methods for useful [A fungal the review

Segre microbiota Belkaid Science immunity, JA: and between Dialogue skin 346:954, 2014. Y, interactions review immune excellent between of [An and the the skin system.] microbiome of the

Bennett Blaser practice and Saunders. Elsevier Mandell, R, principles MJ: 8, 2014, of Douglas, Philadelphia, and E, ed Dolan Bennett’s diseases, infectious diseases, sections very including infectious for reference pathogenesis.] microbial [A comprehensive good on

Pyroptosis: inflammation, death BT: Rev Nat Bergsbaken Microbiol and SL, 2010. T, Fink 7:99, host cell Cookson and to [A response pyroptosis, including good introduction infections.] the inflammasome to in the their role

Baylay 2015. resistance, Webber Microbiol antibiotic MA, Blair AJ, al: mechanisms Rev Nat JM, 13:42, et Molecular of well-written level.] the review accessible, [An at introductory

technologies the Buchan microbiology laboratory, Ledeboer clinical Rev Microbiol 2014. NA: Clin 27:783, Emerging BW, for [A clinical in timely emerging of review technologies microbiology.]

K: virome and The host Immunity in 42:805, 2015. disease, Cadwell health discussion microbiome.] good of the between including the interactions the introduction [A virome a of emerging other this area, components and to

approaches in the G, MO, Degnan 67:459, al: of human for functional PH, defining microbes Rev et roles 2013. Experimental Annu Microbiol gut, Sommer Dantas and of research.] thoughtful [A for experimental methods microbiology review short

type delivery systems: Rev Annu TC, M, specialized Galán III et cells, for 68:415, al: nanomachines 2014. Microbiol protein secretion into target Bacterial Marlovits Lara-Tejero JE, review [A the systems.] and of III type structure of secretion mechanism

JY, KA, Geno their GL, et capsules present, Rev and al: past, 2015. future, Song types: Pneumococcal Gilbert and Clin Microbiol 28:871, capsule the pathogenesis in for as capsule as and [Includes vaccines, significance typing.] well of methods

An JH, Y, 2015. E, Kang quorum et Control Microbiol 23:567, sensing, bacterial by al: Trends of Goo metabolism emerging of review bacilli.] [A focus on this non-enteric study, of area gram-negative with http://ebooksmedicine.net

of matrix: et common strategies Rev an Microbiol C, al: Harkins Hobley themes, Giving to biofilm the and 39:649, MacPhee FEMS overview individual 2015. emerging CE, structure L, review of [An biofilm exhaustive structure.]

Washington, clinical JH, Pfaller MA: Jorgensen ASM DC, 2015, ed Manual of 11, Press. microbiology, textbook [A comprehensive at an of level.] advanced microbiology clinical

Self-propagation neurodegenerative of Walker in Jucker protein Nature aggregates diseases, pathogenic 2013. 501:45, M, LC: other of and self-propagating [A short prions proteins.] review

Arrieta and disease, Effects Keeney antibiotics S, Yurist-Doutsch of human et 68:217, Annu on Rev microbiota 2014. Microbiol al: subsequent MC, KM, some of timely increase to how antibiotics review vulnerability diseases.] [A can

Khabbaz RF, Moseley of infectious al: RJ, et in the Challenges 2014. Steiner Lancet USA, diseases 384:53, RR, in review States.] the challenges current infectious [A but comprehensive United short of disease

Current for Edouard clinical JC, I, Pagnier Clin in Lagier et 28:208, past strategies Microbiol S, 2015. al: Rev microbiology, bacterial and culture of exhaustive culture.] bacterial review of the [An utility

Liang reemerging BA, 2014. and al: review Clin neglected Rev key a tropical environment, R, factors, risk characteristics, TK, of Mackey Cuomo et diseases: innovation Microbiol Emerging and policy 27:949, the and diseases in [A nations.] developing of emerging of challenges neglected review and current

6, Diego, ed Nash Press. Fitzgerald Mims’ Dalziel JR: of infectious San RG, pathogenesis Academic 2015, AA, disease, classic written beautifully comprehensive [A and timely text.]

Subterfuge 2014. Okumura evasion invasive Microbiol Rev Nizet by gram-positive sabotage: bacterial host V: Annu of pathogens, CY, innate and defenses 68:439, complex review of good very [A area.] this

v neonatal and Zika irus adverse Stojanov A, Panchaud Rev 29:659, Microbiol M, Ammerdorffer al: in role of outcomes, Clin Emerging fetal 2016. et A, role [Review of virus of emerging in congenital brain defects.] Zika

and of H, Pathol Feldmann Annu 10:449, respiratory D, Safronetz Wit viruses, E: 2015. de Birth rogue pathogenesis Rev good a respiratory review, zoonotic emphasis pathogenesis.] [Introduces on with

microbiota—masters Microbiol Rev gut F, F: 11:227, Nat 2013. of and Sommer host The Backhed development physiology, of introduction the role in and the [An response.] development to immune microbiome intestinal plays excellent it

et an al: the improving Gardy Johnston of revolution ancient JL, tuberculosis disease: Clin management microbiological with Wlodarska 28:523, M, Rev A genomics, 2015. meets Microbiol JC, sequencing the example genome good important toward [A of diagnostics.] whole-bacterial trend clinical in http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

Epidemiology Hypertension of

Hypertension Essential of Mechanisms

Vascular Response to Stereotypical Thickening: Intimal A Injury

Epidemiology of Atherosclerosis

of Consequences Clinicopathologic

Veins the of Varicose Extremities

Varicosities of Other Sites

responsible lethal afflicting mankind. conditions most Vascular and of some are for the common diseases pathologies lesions, significant disorders involve most wreak also can venous arterial Although havoc. clinically disease develops mechanisms: principal Vascular two through

by Narrowing (e.g., acutely vessel or (e.g., of or embolism) either thrombosis atherosclerosis) by obstruction progressively lumina, occurring complete or

rupture causing of and/or walls, vessel dilation Weakening

We with of the vessels overview the start as of blood background and an in structure discussed vascular function, chapter. diseases for

tubes inner and all cells Blood a cells vessels with covered (ECM), (ECs). extracellular endothelial face continuous (SMCs) of smooth an lining composed fundamentally of matrix by are muscle luminal the depending of on ( ECs, the However, the of throughout ECM, functional properties unique relative and vary SMCs needs and vasculature the amounts

Fig. ). 10.1 than arterial SMCs. flow To and with veins pulsatile higher thicker pressures, several walls of and accommodate invested blood layers are reinforcing to allow more narrow lumen intravascular diameter arterioles, to of to pressure. arteries regulation precise wall of thickness As ratio increases the are capacitance. high Veins, hand, distensible thin-walled vessels the other with on basement are To single-cell capillaries on maximal facilitate lying linings diffusion, essentially a of membrane. ECs

structural that vessels have unique involve only is it various features, characteristically certain surprising of Since regions specific vasculature. the not lesions of caliber. vasculitis a vessels and small of certain example, affects specific involve arteries, selectively larger, in forms arterioles, only hypertension mainly muscular atherosclerosis For occurs while

media, layers: organized walls are intima, (see Vessel adventitia into three and concentric

Fig. 10.1 ). arteries. particularly and larger are in layers vessels apparent These all present in but are most vessels consists underlying separated basement a of elastic dense the elastic a an ECM; the by is intima membrane media from membrane monolayer The internal with EC on minimal it lamina. called of surrounded composed is adventitia. nerve The predominantly media and of fibers, and the loose connective by tissue, SMCs smaller vessels ECM, transition some present defines arteries elastic media between and adventitia. An is in and lamina the external to of and of from is vessels nutrients Diffusion thin-walled SMCs and vessels. oxygen lumen all the innermost adequate sustain the vessels, In medium-sized of (called vasorum and to literally, two-thirds perfuse the however, large the “vessels vasa media. within of arterioles outer half the small adventitia the vessels”) —

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Regionalvascularspecializations.Althoughallvesselssharethesamegeneralconstituents,thethicknessandcompositionofthevariouslayersdifferasafunctionofhemodynamicforcesandtissuerequirements. 10.1

on based size three are and divided Arteries types into structure: their

iliac and pulmonary aorta, (e.g., arteries vessels, arch arteries). elastic Large blood fibers propel In these each elastic SMCs energy (storing of expands alternate the of cardiac during with and systole media, diastole to throughout recoils some the vessels, contraction), which distally. during age to high pipes” pressures (ectatic) vessels diseases, such prone organs, diabetes and/or or the With the and hypertension, and and become distal tortuous transmit “stiff as rupture. lost; become is dilated elasticity that to arterial

and renal muscular Medium-sized (e.g., arteries). coronary arteries internal lamina. and is the composed external Here, with of primarily media the limited to elastin elastic SMCs, metabolic is nervous circularly and around and SMC flow local autonomic system The blood regulated (e.g., or by the (vasodilation) acidosis). contraction SMCs controlled by regional and arranged lumen, are spirally medial the factors (vasoconstriction) relaxation example, vasoconstriction). endothelin ECs (NO, arterial by SMC releasing oxide modulate for or also nitric (causing causing tone, vasodilation)

tissue (20 the • in to arterioles diameter) µm of 100 Small in and within organs. mm lie diameter) or (2 less arteries connective media in vessels these of mostly SMCs. The composed is blood where regulated. is flow Arterioles are resistance of passage becomes rather arterioles, than blood through pressures velocity steady the flow is flow during pulsatile. drop reduced, and As sharply is of flow resistance profound the resistance power size blood to diameter increases in pressure. fourth changes small halving arteriolar fluid to the proportional diameter (i.e., on effects have the Because inversely lumen 16-fold), the

cells smaller Capillaries 8 to have blood µm). diameters lumen of those than slightly red (7 ECs cells vessels are These called and by pericytes. SMC-like lined by partially surrounded and total capillary rate Collectively, beds area large have flow. blood of cross-sectional low a a very the and suited flow, With diffusible tissue. walls blood exchange thin slow ideally between and their rapid to of are capillaries substances most necessarily tissues capillary is nutrients efficient metabolically tissues the active of rich, oxygen and is capillary heart) The have highest beyond 100 diffusion density. very µm; not network (e.g., because of

from Veins venules, anastomose larger and form blood veins. postcapillary venules receive the collecting progressively capillary beds as which to 3). venules characteristic inflammation and postcapillary in occurs emigration leukocyte (Chapter vascular leakage preferentially The (edema) of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

same Compared larger venous arteries with of low have diameters, the the level at of veins thinner lumina, side on larger circulation pressures walls less layers, found branching, the and adaptations (see all to with distinct the

Fig. ). 10.1 and or prone processes. more to Thus, dilation, penetration by compression, veins external are tumors inflammatory against in where flows extremities), In lower backflow prevented valves. blood veins is by the (e.g., gravity capacitance and has of contains huge blood. approximately Collectively, venous system thirds normally a the the two

drain via the glucose, the channels cells) inflammatory endothelium-lined reconnecting eventually (water, the electrolytes, fat, tissues, stream thin-walled, duct. and are from with interstitium Lymphatics blood lymph proteins, thoracic of that inflammatory and of continuous fluid nodal and cell tissues lymph periphery activation for the transport cells interstitial in Lymphatics thereby presentation facilitating monitoring nodes, to enabling antigen infection. from tissues—and the peripheral cells or This a also tumor microbes distant to sites. disseminate transporting can be channels double-edged sword, disease by these however, as can

blood entire of the tree aspects sheet regulates blood ( is of Endothelium lining vessel continuous function cells that and a many vascular

Table 10.1 ). the blood-tissue 4), maintain a other Resting (Chapter modulate of (Chapter inflammation SMCs. growth ECs and cell and influence behavior interface particularly non-thrombogenic types, 3),

Table Endothelial Functions Cell and 10.1 Properties

ProductionofextracellularmatrixCollagen,proteoglycans

ModulationofbloodflowandVasoconstrictors: NO,prostacyclin endothelin,ACEvascularreactivityVasodilators:

RegulationofinflammationandIL-1,IL-6,chemokinesimmunityAdhesionmolecules:VCAM-1,ICAM,E-selectin,P-selectinHistocompatibilityantigens

transforminggrowthfactor-β;VCAM, colony-stimulatingfactor;FGF, vascularcelladhesionmolecule. ACE, nitricoxide;PDGF, interleukin;LDL, Angiotensin-convertingenzyme;CSF, fibroblastgrowthfactor;ICAM, low-densitylipoprotein;NO, intercellularadhesionmolecule;IL, platelet-derivedgrowthfactor;TGF-β,

VEGF) Laminar thrombogenic non-Growth flow factors Normotension surface Non-adhesive, (e.g.,

expression products ofAdvanced adhesionComplement procoagulants, chemokines, products Increased molecules, Hypertension growth factorsLipid andBacterial ofCytokines acidosis proinflammatory factorsHypoxia, and glycation Altered cytokines,end-products expression

Fig. Basalandactivatedendothelialcellstates.Normalbloodpressure,laminarflow,andstablegrowthfactorlevelspromoteabasalendothelialcellstatethatmaintainsanonthromboticsurfaceandappropriatevascularwallsmoothmuscletone.Injuryorexposuretocertainmediatorsresultsinendothelialactivation,astateinwhichendothelialcellsdevelopadhesive,procoagulantsurfacesandreleasefactorsthatleadtosmoothmusclecontractionand/orproliferationandmatrixsynthesis. 10.2

the are regions, normally junctions impermeable. most interendothelial In the (e.g., pressure) (e.g., these vasoactive inflammation), tissues and/or and stress with junctions open electrolytes agents histamine protein. flooding the high blood hemodynamic under influence in adjacent However, of permits across intact Vacuolar transcytosis also the amounts solutes movement of large endothelium. of in atherosclerosis ECs (Chapter EC pathologic dysfunction egress active underlies of recruitment of leukocytes the are inflammatory (discussed later). development also cell and processes, to participants Relevant during 3),

and local phenotypic share anatomic the depending show site cues. vasculature ECs environmental many adaptations on and the throughout they Although also variability attributes, versus of have populations or EC veins) transcriptional behaviors. vasculature and (e.g., versus capillaries, different distinct large parts vessels Thus, the programs arteries from and (holes) plexus are hepatocyte that specializations renal facilitate lining glomeruli, in cords, choroid Fenestrations filtration. ECs barrier. nervous to blood-brain in the Conversely, central an system, astrocytes— ECs—in with conjunction generate impermeable collaborate

the of growth a flow, membrane “normal,” lining EC [VEGF]), underlying and (e.g., factors vascular factor laminar nonthrombogenic to adhesion certain requires basement firm endothelial Maintenance growth (

Fig. 10.2 ). toward and Trauma injuries thrombosis ECs or walls the scales that other vasoconstriction. vessel of denude tip their and ECs (inducible) respond properties—a endothelial by to process activation. (constitutive) called pathologic functions by various However, modulating usual physiologic expressing new stimuli also and

http://ebooksmedicine.net

(see end products discussed later), include glycation injury), cytokines, and stresses hemodynamic activation diabetic to lipid products complement, various products, hypoxia) viruses, of Inducers (relevant bacterial vascular in atherosclerosis, advanced and inflammatory metabolic (e.g., (important insults endothelial

Fig. 10.2 ). original chemokines, active intended to factors, the products—all to host and molecules, and adhesion a biologically respond of ECs pro-coagulant produce shape changes, anti-coagulant factors, Activated other growth undergo presumably and express stimulus. cytokines,

these or abate. minutes), of are may reversible, responses rapid by histamine); days contraction within gene others involve endothelial Some and protein new independent to and protein take and in expression, (occurring of alterations synthesis induced develop (e.g., radical states, ECs by for Exposure sustained hypercoagulable stimuli periods endothelium-dependent high impaired endothelial and levels can dysfunction, in free of oxygen increased characterized vasodilation, to production. of result atherosclerosis, formation contribute to of can hypertension diabetes. and endothelium thrombosis, initiate lesions Dysfunctional or the promote of vascular

atherosclerosis. as processes repair normal in participate and such vascular SMCs pathologic both various following: do SMCs can by factors, When stimulated the

elastin, ECM production proteoglycan and Upregulate collagen,

the that pharmacologic stimuli. mediate or to vasodilation response also physiologic vasoconstriction SMCs occurs or in

activities proliferative factors. by migratory of numerous SMCs The and regulated are interferon-γ factors, factor the growth inflammatory as pro–growth and and fibroblast endothelin, (IFN-γ) (IL-1). factors are mediators Among platelet-derived growth thrombin, most interleukin-1 (PDGF), such important transforming Factors sulfate, state maintain NO, growth that quiescent in include (TGF-α). heparan and SMCs a factor-α

Allvesselsarelinedbyendothelium;althoughallECssharecertainhomeostaticproperties,ECsinspecificvascularbedshavespecialfeaturesthatallowfortissue-specificfunctions(e.g.,fenestratedECsinrenalglomeruli).

TherelativeSMCandECMcontentofvesselwalls(e.g.,inarteries,veins,andcapillaries)variesaccordingtohemodynamicdemands(e.g.,pressure,pulsatility)andfunctionalrequirements.

ECfunctionistightlyregulatedinboththebasalandactivatedstates.VariousphysiologicandpathophysiologicstimuliinduceendothelialactivationanddysfunctionthataltertheECphenotype(e.g.,procoagulativeversusanti-coagulative,proinflammatoryversusanti-inflammatory,nonadhesiveversusadhesive).

unusual can when vessels rarely injured. is a symptomatic, in occur anatomic cause Although location as of during variants complications blood vessel unexpected surgery, an may cardiologists that 1% in patients. to occur surgeons Cardiac also coronary must be interventional of up familiar to with can variants and artery 5% vascular three deserve other further Among mention: anomalies, congenital the

can circle arterial 23). the rupture Willis; and classically media cerebral fatal congenitally arterial at attenuated in hemorrhage aneurysms where are is outpouchings intracerebral the Berry around spontaneously (Chapter vessels, points occur causing thin-walled they branch of

fistulas Arteriovenous are without an intervening between abnormal capillary arteries veins (AV) bed. and connections pierce They from commonly of result can of or aneurysms and rupture vessels. defects occur adjacent into from most arterial necrosis veins, as injuries veins, also arteries that but from developmental adjacent inflammatory penetrating hemodialysis. fistulas AV created provide to be access for surgically vascular can circulation. by of high-output failure the venous Extensive volumes fistulas blood shunting cardiac to from AV can cause the large arterial

of mediumand a focal is walls dysplasia due muscular hyperplasia and irregular large-sized the combination and to of medial intimal arteries a of Fibromuscular fibrosis. thickening It most women. frequently age but occurs can at any young in manifest that in arteries, luminal lead spasm renovascular stenosis results flow; or focal The hypertension. to the can it wall vascular reduces in vessel renal be with can associated thickening segments vascular thickened of the of artery exhibits rupture. medial attenuation; outpouchings can sometimes the the often these vessel Between portions focal wall, and develop in

Systemic blood pressure narrow a and range health. to be maintain within maintained must local results organ blood inadequate tissue organ dysfunction, pressure (hypotension) sometimes and Low death. in perfusion, major factors blood causes risk Conversely, and (hypertension) later). atherosclerosis end-organ for high is (see pressure and one the vessel damage of

of function multiple is factors both vascular pressure a (Fig. and which are by cardiac influenced genetic resistance, and peripheral environmental output of Blood 10.3 ). differences. demand inputs The the of perfusion, various regional ensures integration despite systemic adequate

heart is a function volume rate. of stroke output and • Cardiac determinant is regulated the homeostasis filling which blood is pressure, and its volume through stroke The on important sodium volume. most effect of (a regulated the αand to contractility stroke Heart vascular addition rate both systems on their volume) myocardial affecting effects are tone). β-adrenergic by (in second and factor

http://ebooksmedicine.net

FACTORS Autoregulation hypoxia pH, LOCAL

Fig. 10.3 Bloodpressureregulation.

and of • by inputs. the the is at regulated Peripheral neural resistance predominantly level arterioles humoral prostaglandins, (including angiotensin actions the NO). kinins, of vasodilators catecholamines, II, tone between a Vascular and balance vasoconstrictors reflects (including endothelin) and and exhibit increased vasoconstriction blood induces autoregulation, Resistance tissues flow vessels to protect whereby also against hyperperfusion. hypoxia to tissue accommodate demands. metabolic by pH blood local is fine-tuned Finally, pressure and

regulate adrenal released vascular tone myocardium to influence sodium and from and Factors kidneys, adjusting interact glands, balance volume to blood ( by the

Fig.

). 10.4 Each salt. the of liters day, moles containing 23 on plasma 170 of average filter kidneys containing diet filtered maintain mEq be 100 total Thus, sodium, 99.5% the typical of levels. a with must of to reabsorbed salt body sodium by active 98% transporters. constitutively several of reabsorbed filtered is sodium the About tightly a aldosterone, is Recovery the pathway system; sodium by channel effector balance. regulated (ENaC), net that renin-angiotensin downstream of of sodium determines of epithelial it this is by the occurs remaining the 2% which way of sodium

influence sodium resistance peripheral system. and reninangiotensin Kidneys primarily excretion/retention through the pressure sense changes contain volume. that cells blood and The blood in kidneys and/or heart response, to several important normal regulators cells that in In pressure: act blood maintain concert these release

by that arterioles. surround Renin cells—myoepithelial enzyme glomerular cells produced the is afferent a renal juxtaglomerular proteolytic low the in distal sodium is blood tubules. to levels of renal afferent convoluted or pressure released arterioles, in circulating elevated response It low levels in catecholamines, the falls The glomerular output tubules. rate when latter higher the occurs resorbed the low) filtered proximal of when is in a (e.g., the cardiac is sodium fraction filtration because

Angiotensin. cleaves in angiotensin turn is Renin I, to converted angiotensin to plasma angiotensinogen which

(ACE) periphery. in angiotensin-converting the by enzyme II contraction, (3) increasing tubular blood (2) stimulating aldosterone and pressure (1) vascular by sodium raises resorption. by gland, inducing the SMC Angiotensin II secretion adrenal

Vasodilators. angiotensin. (including prostaglandins also the NO) counterbalance relaxing a effects substances kidney vascular variety of vasopressor of produces presumably that and The

Aldosterone. blood the aldosterone water) pressure into its potassium resorption volume; Adrenal sodium and by collecting effect while aldosterone (and distal increases increases convoluted also excretion driving in urine. blood on thus the tubules

Natriuretic peptides. leading thus to Myocardial inhibit expansion; are renal atrial distal sodium in sodium diuresis. and from in natriuretic to released peptides and the excretion ventricular tubules, volume these resorption response myocardium They also systemic vasodilation. induce

Bloodpressureisdeterminedbyvascularresistanceandcardiacoutput.

Vascularresistanceisregulatedatthelevelofthearterioles,influencedbyneuralandhormonalinputs.

Cardiacoutputisdeterminedbyheartrateandstrokevolume,thelatterofwhichisstronglyinfluencedbybloodvolume.Bloodvolumeinturnisregulatedmainlybyrenalsodiumexcretionorresorption.

Renin,amajorregulatorofbloodpressure,issecretedbythekidneysinresponsetodecreasedbloodpressureinafferentarterioles.Inturn,renincleavesangiotensinogentoangiotensinI;subsequentperipheralcatabolismproducesangiotensinII,whichregulatesbloodpressurebyincreasingvascularSMCtoneandbyincreasingadrenalaldosteronesecretion,whichconsequentlyincreasesrenalsodiumresorption.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Interplayofrenin,angiotensin,aldosterone,andatrialnatriureticpeptideinbloodpressureregulation(seetext). 10.4

developed problem health Hypertension is a in major world. the it an aggressive manifests is Although acute high occasionally form, years. asymptomatic typically many in for pressure blood hypertension, the considered such for of because This the pressure age-associated dubbed condition normal gradual in blood “essential” so called was as rise been brain. has perfusion essential endorgans insidious benign; are essential coronary (hypertensive and cardiac disease; atherosclerotic increasing heart dissection, such stroke risk neither aortic disease, besides and lead the multi-infarct heart heart failure. However, renal dementia, failure hypertension Chapter for hypertrophy and can see to nor increases 11), molecular of are reasonably pressure leading the vast the understood, to affected unknown. well remain regulation While hypertension of the blood pathways individuals mechanisms in majority to peripheral polymorphisms and from be resistance. environmental genetic which “essential might conspire individually that is increase (which factors, of volume The inconsequential) the and/or interplay blood accepted several wisdom hypertension” results

with increase height continuously variable; moreover, as continuously consequences no rises, predicting threshold safety. the detrimental distributed blood total weight, pressure Like rigidly pressure is and dependably defined a than are 90 for therefore Nevertheless, in excess risk associated systolic Hg clinical mm in are greater an of pressures practice. mm cutoffs 140 reliably atherosclerosis diastolic Hg used increased hypertension with or in diagnosing as pressures sustained and sustained hypertensive. of individuals 25% population general in these By criteria, over are the (e.g., are risk and patients arbitrary, noted however, factors these may lower other in cardiovascular diabetes), values As with thresholds be applicable. somewhat

prevalence higher high also Americans. pathologic pressure age of increases of The effects African in blood is with and disease ischemic hypertensive to some failure, stroke. or Without of and congestive (IHD) treatment, heart another 50% succumb of die third heart patients appropriate pressure and incidence reduces dramatically of Reduction of of forms the disease. sequelae (including hypertension-related clinical all death) blood asymptomatic major instances demonstrated of health Indeed, one the “preventive hypertension of in has few a benefit. treatment constitutes which medicine”

http://ebooksmedicine.net

5%) that, rapidly to small pressure rising of untreated, death to 2 A in years. present hypertensive patients within blood 1 with (approximately leads a if percentage diastolic mm retinal malignant failure and is and Hg severe 200 without systolic hemorrhages, is Such mm renal with or hypertension (i.e., papilledema. usually with frequently pressures 120 over or over Hg) associated pressures benign arise but is commonly on can It preexisting superimposed de novo most hypertension.

commonly secondary less identifiable primary be condition. (idiopathic) to may an or Hypertension underlying is hypertension close cases or In 95% to of idiopathic “essential”. renal narrowing of (renovascular disease, to (secondary primary renal disorders ( adrenal remaining artery due the are cases hypertension) Most hypertension), or

10.2 ). Table infarction, or compatible stroke, a unless is with hypertension life other myocardial Essential supervenes. long complication the cause. treatment of underlying hypertension on Prognosis adequate of depends secondary (and affecting sodium single-gene relatively Several resorption. hypertension renal rare cause hypotension) by disorders in (e.g., 17α synthase, Such include aldosterone involved aldosterone disorders the following: Gene metabolism enzymes 11β-hydroxylase, • defects in

and 10.2 Types of Diastolic) Hypertension Table and (Systolic Causes

Adrenocorticalhyperfunction(Cushingsyndrome,primaryaldosteronism,congenitaladrenalhyperplasia,licoriceingestion)

Exogenoushormones(glucocorticoids,estrogen[includingpregnancy-inducedandoralcontraceptives],sympathomimeticsandtyraminecontainingfoods,monoamineoxidaseinhibitors)

the plasma channel, proteins ENaC expansion that is hydroxylase), mutations PsychogenicIncreasedintracranialpressureSleepapneaAcutestress,includingsurgery aldosterone to prevent tubular caused syndrome, the Liddle resorption increased increased sodium) • and increased affect in distal normal in leading resorption water that by to which sodium salt volume Mutations degradation secretion, (as leading and sodium of of resorption,

appears resistance essential renal vascular that contribute the hypertension. triggers sodium and increased altered both Although handling unknown, are it specific to

forms pathogenic sodium presence hypertension. etiologic is a probably key most normal this feature; pressure excretion renal common in is of the arterial of factor indeed, in a Reduced Decreased volume blood sodium thereby obligatory and causes fluid pressure increased (see cardiac an increase in elevating excretion output,

Fig. 10.3 ). the sodium. excrete higher new At additional kidneys pressure, the blood excretion new but pressure. at blood expense state achieved, is of Thus, of steady sodium the an elevated a

or changes vessel vasoconstriction may structural walls. from stem Increased resistance vascular in not result of vessels. These walls in the thickening necessarily affected of factors, may as are permanent independent vasoconstriction chronic

play an by pressure, important as studies and of in and by blood determining role monozygotic of factors twins. hypertension dizygotic Genetic familial shown clustering there a and also hypertension of blood essential may cases polymorphisms linkage variants; known angiotensinogen racial of is contribute regulation. to the in system angiotensin receptor differences proportion to specific small renin-angiotensin pressure the II polymorphisms of In the growth. currently Susceptibility majority vast of production resorption, unknown those pressors, endogenous the in genes hypertension influence include SMC that essential of renal but are for and cases probably sodium

as levels impact physical determinants. the high smoking, modify and stress, of of obesity, salt such consumption, Environmental factors, inactivity, genetic linking of the dietary with sodium Evidence strong. intake is hypertension particularly prevalence

MORPHOLOGYHypertensionnotonlyacceleratesatherogenesisbutalsocausesdegenerativechangesinthewallsoflarge-andmedium-sizedarteriesthatcanleadtoaorticdissectionandcerebrovascularhemorrhage.Threeformsofsmallbloodvesseldiseasearehypertension-related(

isassociatedwithbenignhypertension.Itismarkedbyhomogeneous,pinkhyalinethickeningofthearteriolarwalls,withlossofunderlyingstructuraldetail,andluminalnarrowing(see Fig.10.5 arteriolosclerosis •Hyaline

).ThelesionsstemfromleakageofplasmacomponentsacrossinjuredECsintovesselwalls,andincreasedECMproductionbySMCsinresponsetochronichemodynamicstress.Inthekidneys,thearteriolarnarrowingcausedbyhyalinearteriosclerosisleadstodiffusevascularcompromiseandnephrosclerosis Fig.10.5A (glomerularscarring).Althoughthevesselsofolderadultpatients(normotensiveorhypertensive)showthesamechanges,hyalinearteriolosclerosisismoregeneralizedandsevereinpatientswithhypertension.Thesamelesionsalsoarecommonindiabeticmicroangiopathy;inthisdisorder,theunderlyingetiologyishyperglycemia-associatedECdysfunction.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 10.5 Hypertensivevasculardisease.(A)Hyalinearteriolosclerosis.Thearteriolarwallisthickenedwiththedepositionofamorphousproteinaceousmaterial(hyalinized),andthelumenismarkedlynarrowed. causingluminalobliteration(periodicacid–Schiffstain). (B)Hyperplasticarteriolosclerosis(“onion-skinning”)(arrow) of Massachusetts.) Courtesy Women’s Brigham Helmut Boston, Hospital, and MD, Rennke, (B, •Hyperplastic ismoretypicalofseverehypertension.Vesselsexhibit“onionskin,”concentric,laminatedthickeningofarteriolarwallsandluminalnarrowing(see arteriolosclerosis

whichareparticularlyprominentinthekidney. Fig.10.5B arteriolitis), ).ThelaminationsconsistofSMCsandthickened,reduplicatedbasementmembrane.Inmalignanthypertension,thesechangesareaccompaniedbyfibrinoiddepositsandvesselwallnecrosis(necrotizing

Hypertensionisacommondisorderaffecting25%ofthepopulation;itisamajorriskfactorforatherosclerosis,congestiveheartfailure,andrenalfailure.

Hypertensionmaybeprimary(idiopathic)orlesscommonlysecondarytoanidentifiableunderlyingcondition.Incloseto95%ofcaseshypertensionisidiopathicor“essential.”Theremainingcases(secondaryhypertension)areduetoprimaryrenaldisease,renalarterynarrowing(renovascularhypertension),oradrenaldisorders.

Essentialhypertensionrepresents95%ofcasesandisacomplex,multifactorialdisorder,involvingbothenvironmentalinfluencesandgeneticpolymorphismsthatmayinfluencesodiumresorption,aldosteronepathways,theadrenergicnervoussystem,andtherenin-angiotensinsystem.

Hypertensionoccasionallyiscausedbysingle-genedisordersorissecondarytodiseasesoftherenalarteries,kidneys,adrenalglands,orotherendocrineorgans.

of to vessel vascular Injury basis vast in for the wall—and majority disorders. ECs—is the particular the fundamental to stimuli may or injurious Such be immunologic, biochemical, hemodynamic. respond the various critical to lead function lesions. responses can such adaptive ECs—and to the vasculature The SMCs—is of underlying for pathologic integrated to stimuli; may be or a lesions. pathologic earlier) contributes dysfunction EC or Thus, hypertensive thrombosis, injury vascular processes atherosclerosis, including (as to of and host discussed luminal vessel matrix synthesis damaged Ensuing repair SMC also a eventually help can to proliferation wall, occlusion. can but to and lead

IntimalThickening:AStereotypicalResponsetoVascularInjury

synthesis, to and vascular growth, Vascular the leading dysfunction EC thickening injury ECM stimulates loss or wall. SMC of SMC involves the precursor the vessels Healing injured intima. into SMCs or cells of of migration in the much that a way same fibroblasts the ( cells then synthesize proliferate in elsewhere fill wound and body These ECM in

Fig. intact by neointima typically is forming covered EC an layer. a 10.6), that hypertension), occurs This of (e.g., toxic injury, or damage any vascular or physical dysfunction, immune infection, response inflammation, a including or (e.g. catheter trauma balloon exposure neointimal form with from or oxidized smoke). cigarette lipids is any intimal stereotypical response the to vessel thickening wall insult. Thus, of a

phenotype Of the from note, is medial of SMCs SMCs. neointimal distinct and medial considerably Thus, capacity not 1. are synthetic the to greater divide contractile have do capacity a have neointimal but SMCs, like http://ebooksmedicine.net SMCs 2. smooth muscle of Recruitment 3. Smooth muscle cell cells of mitosis smooth or muscle precursor extracellular matrix Elaboration

to intima the Endothelium cells

Fig. 10.6 Stereotypicalresponsetovascularinjury.Schematicdiagramofintimalthickening,emphasizingintimalsmoothmusclecellmigrationandprolifera-tionassociatedwithextracellularmatrixsynthesis.Intimalsmoothmusclecellsmayderivefromtheunderlyingmediaormayberecruitedfromcirculatingprecursors;theyaredepictedinacolordifferentfromthatofthemedialsmoothmusclecells,toemphasizetheirdistinctphenotype.

colleagues their sleepy than media. in the least previously subset at a from dedifferentiated Although neointimal arise thought from were precursor cells. cells is medial exclusively circulating to SMCs, derived activated and and factors complement as of macrophages, well and migratory, and SMCs synthetic regulated cytokines proliferative, as The factors platelets, produced ECs, by by the discussed (as are coagulation earlier). intimal growth activities by

layer, nonproliferative can return but SMCs produced EC the restoration of to thickening. not healing intimal before has state, normalization and/or response intimal With the a the smalland occur that in (e.g., as or of stenosis further blood vessels recurrent insults, thickening With persistent discussed can medium-sized atherosclerosis, to leads later). Fortunately, the of intimal such remodeling in results in compensatory be because outward little a of part important of no the change intimal is luminal final gradual “normal is recognize to consequence, age-related vessel diameter. As net a wall note, also to part change in aging.” that typically thickening appears it ongoing

a wall the is means and generic it literally term of arteries”; elasticity. loss thickening “hardening Arteriosclerosis reflecting arterial of are distinct causes types each Four consequences: with clinical pathologic and different and recognized,

small arterioles and arteries affects cause downstream and Arteriolosclerosis injury. ischemic may in were The arteriolosclerosis, two discussed variants, hyperplastic and to relation hypertension. hyaline earlier

lamina, on age. in typically of of years presence Mönckeberg in than arteries, the 50 calcific medial elastic internal older and the individuals characterized deposits usually centered sclerosis is muscular by on usually clinically not significant. lumen encroach and lesions the are vessel The do not

non-atherosclerotic than muscular arterioles. in intimal hyperplasia that is larger Fibromuscular occurs a arteries process see stents mechanical later). Chapter with transplant-associated 11), angioplasty, arteriopathy; inflammation SMCand injury ECM-rich associated an driven (e.g., or lesion by (as see is a in or or predominantly This arteritis by healed balloon restenosis transplants. long-term of is stenosis the a underlies indeed can intimal cause response hyperplasia in-stent the solid and limitation major vessel; Such of such substantial organ healing

the clinically is pattern Greek and root is “hardening,” the and from next the words subject frequent “gruel” • Atherosclerosis, section. important of most for and

the rupture or can lesions called (or and vascular atherosclerotic to that sudden atheromas occlusion. is cause Atherosclerosis characterized impinge atheromatous plaques) on by intimal lumen of the disease, and deaths) peripheral morbidity (roughly coronary, world and and mortality cerebral, the disorder. other all more pathogenesis underlies vascular in It of Western half than any causes are cholesterol debris) cores raised (grumous) composed by of Atheromatous soft necrotic esters, and plaques (mainly friable ( cholesterol covered lipid with fibrous lesions caps

Fig. 10.7 ). enlarged, leading lumina, they may As mechanically to obstruct vascular plaques atherosclerotic stenosis. also to plaques of result the that in occlusion concern, however, greater may vessel. atherosclerotic prone and an sudden thrombosis rupture, are Of event The to perfusion ECM lesions inflammation. impede by intimal which thickness sufficient the caused may may by the ischemia be weakened of underlying of the by the media, in subsequent also changes and be setting weaken for the media, aneurysms. of stage two these Together, formation the factors the

countries. better dietary access With increased disorders increasingly also behaviors, of to treatment Western developing and becoming is infectious atherosclerosis prevalent in coronary important Because artery related disease epidemiologic an http://ebooksmedicine.net of atherosclerosis, manifestation is data

Fig. Thebasicstructureofanatheromatousplaque. 10.7

FIBROUS muscle foam cells, proteoglycans, macrophages, lymphocytes, collagen, (smooth neovascularization) CAP cells, elastin,

debris, United crystals, by roughly deaths (Chapter NECROTIC cells, disease myocardial (IHD) deaths 11); atherosclerosis-related quarter for calcium) in the reflect caused is heart of responsible mortality foam all one (cell to infarction CENTER States. ischemic cholesterol typically indeed,

is with virtually alarming at in among pace developing prevalence most countries. increasing ubiquitous Atherosclerosis nations, an developed among is IHD in that approximately Japan. States for world, times The the highest mortality than rate in in five higher the the United is leading where However, is now second in the of cause Japan, IHD death. it increasing Furthermore, important as acquire of U.S.-born same etiologic lifestyles Japanese environmental the American atherosclerosis customs role adopt United come factors. and dietary to the who risk individuals, and emigrants the States emphasizing

analyses (and severity less therefore and risk in of IHD atherosclerosis factors of behaviors The others but these number a prospective modifiable risk acquired ( constitutional and some related Framingham Study; correlated ). to been are 10.3 factors Heart are or with have prevalence the controllable), several including of landmark roughly factors multiplicative These risk have effects. for ( the rate approximately Thus, factors (i.e., factor and 7 risk smoking) and hypertension, 4-fold, two myocardial infarction increase increase a hyperlipidemia, three of the by

Fig. 10.8 Genetics. • the risk important atherosclerosis. Family is most history factor for independent atherosclerosis with mendelian associated (e.g., familial for a account but cases. small 7), strongly Certain disorders of only hypercholesterolemia) these are percentage (Chapter Most

16.5 28.827.7 17 Women 8.7 5.5 11.3 Men 57.556.4 3836.8 9.2 23.4 13.7

Fig. Estimated10-yearriskforcoronaryarterydiseasein55-year-oldmenandwomenasafunctionofestablishedriskfactors—hyperlipidemia,hypertension,smoking,anddiabetes.BP,bloodpressure;ECG,electrocardiogram;HDL-C,high-densitylipoproteincholesterol;LVH,leftventricularhypertrophy. 10.8 from hypertension: 6]:3, observational CJ, JHypertension16[Suppl of (Data studies, WB: Kannel risks lessons from O’Donnell Cardiovascular 1998.) http://ebooksmedicine.net

related Atherosclerosis diabetes. is multifactorial to go 10.3 Major familial Table traits Factors hand-in-hand hypertension, with and, including Risk atherosclerosis, for that risk

Age. until clinically middle a in age critical remains threshold lesions silent later. Atherosclerosis or reach usually Thus, the 5-fold years and 40 of increases of infarction 60 incidence myocardial between age. continue from rates decade. each IHD successive Death rise to with

Gender. against are relatively with protected All equal, premenopausal its being compared other (and age-matched atherosclerosis factors consequences) men. women infarction as absence of premenopausal such women the or of are complications uncommon diabetes, hypertension. in Thus, factors hyperlipidemia, in severe myocardial and other other atherosclerosis predisposing exceed of even atherosclerosis-related in can disease After that and menopause, however, the increases men. incidence of salutary hormonal for a been effect estrogen has difference, this of Although therapy shown trials benefit prevention clinical to of gender no long disease. proposed have explain vascular 65 estrogen actually replacement years to after cardiovascular Indeed, age risk. appears of increase healing, with can influences such IHD, factors patients addition In gender that affect as hemostasis, to infarct atherosclerosis, other outcome also in and myocardial remodeling.

Hyperlipidemia—and, sufficient in a to absence induce and is the for hypercholesterolemia—is factors. risk development factor other risk of lesions atherosclerosis of specifically, major more cholesterol”); associated distributes increased cholesterol cholesterol risk peripheral main component low-density to The LDL is (LDL) (“bad cholesterol tissues. lipoprotein with cholesterol the cholesterol”) transports By developing (“good vascular excretion. cholesterol and plaques existing (HDL) for biliary contrast, and high-density it mobilizes lipoprotein liver from to levels risk. correlate with HDL higher reduced of Consequently, relationships spurred development these raise lower Recognition of serum follows: total dietary HDL, that LDL as interventions and/or has serum and the of pharmacologic or cholesterol

plasma butter) fats, High fats of intake in and animal cholesterol yolks, (e.g., dietary raises saturated cholesterol present egg levels. and and/or containing Conversely, cholesterol low diets in levels. plasma ratios polyunsaturated lower of cholesterol fats, higher

baked profiles. and hydrogenation adversely oils) Omega-3 goods in produced affect oils acids (abundant of fish are fats margarine) whereas artificial in polyunsaturated (used fatty beneficial, (trans)-unsaturated cholesterol by

moderate Exercise obesity them. lower and levels, raise HDL and smoking ethanol consumption whereas of

(Chapter of cholesterol lower circulating by reductase, a coenzyme drugs widely enzyme class hydroxymethylglutaryl in cholesterol that biosynthesis inhibiting are levels used hepatic the rate-limiting Statins A (HMG-CoA) 7).

development factor earlier (see Hypertension for of another atherosclerosis. major is discussion) risk (see On IHD 60% approximately hypertension for by its increase the own, risk can

Fig. ). 10.8 is contribute Hypertension the of also ischemia (LVH), left (see can myocardial major to which cause ventricular also hypertrophy

Fig. 10.8

a and for and factor risk severity Cigarette atherosclerosis accounts women. is well-established incidence in men in probably the increasing of smoking smoking more one IHD-related cessation packs the the per risk. reduces while of Prolonged smoking or rate mortality, doubles (years) of of cigarettes day

with for raised the and atherosclerosis. risk levels markedly increases is Diabetes associated cholesterol circulating mellitus high in of as factors twice diabetics equal, myocardial as being the Other infarction non-diabetics. in incidence is disorder and stroke increase an in 100-fold of lower is for with risk this gangrene increased addition, In associated the a extremities. atherosclerosis-induced

identifiable the absence occur in factors. of risk events of Roughly cardiovascular 20% to cutoff value For 75% healthy than borderline of connote considered previously 130 with below levels (a risk). only events cardiovascular in mg/dL women, LDL example, occur in more cholesterol those include contribute • following: Other risk factors that the to Inflammation. stages present linked and plaque and following (see are rupture with discussion). all formation progression intimately plaque of cells atheromatous during Inflammatory the are There associated stratification. systemic a inflammation is of that systemic of used have hence in with development atherosclerosis state measures is some risk evidence and been pro-inflammatory the of protein markers (CRP) the of sensitive. systemic has of and one various emerged inflammation, most as determination simplest C-reactive Of to reactant is an primarily response of CRP cytokines. variety in the liver a synthesized inflammatory by acute-phase some studies, In

cardiac risk arterial among independently apparently and healthy myocardial CRP disease, even infarction, levels the stroke, peripheral for death, predict individuals sudden

Fig. ). 10.9 by lack are confounded precise asymptomatic may studies because definition “healthy harbor individuals http://ebooksmedicine.net clinically individuals” of such However, of

protein (mg/L) C-Reactive 1.0–3.0<1.0 >3.0

(%) estimate 10-year risk of Framingham

Fig. PrognosticvalueofC-reactiveprotein(CRP)incoronaryarterydisease.Relativerisk(y-axis)reflectstheriskforacardiovascularevent(e.g.,myocardialinfarction).Thex-axisshowsthe10-yearriskforacardiovasculareventcalculatedfromthetraditionalriskfactorsidentifiedintheFraminghamStudy.Ineachriskgroup,CRPlevelsfurtherstratifythepatients. 10.9 the al: of levels from Comparison prediction Ridker PM, and (Data lipoprotein cholesterol C-reactive et first events. low-density in cardiovascular protein of NEnglJMed347:1557, 2002.) with significant atherosclerotic inflammation. associated lesions CRP atherosclerosis. elevated of asymptomatic marker underlying be levels a Thus may that Furthermore, evidence of or there the involved is diminishes CRP is atheromas. lowering CRP direct that in no risk cardiovascular formation the interest of which reduce and that exercise, smoking atherosclerosis could CRP It by of is of reduced risk loss, cessation, all is weight independently. plaque of of or resolved. consequence a marker whether elevated be is inflammation remains Thus, a to CRP

Hyperhomocysteinemia. atherosclerosis, venous thrombosis. stroke, and correlate disease, with peripheral levels coronary Serum homocysteine vascular homocysteine inborn Homocystinuria, early-onset circulating metabolism, vascular with disease. rare 100 associated errors elevated to and due µmol/L) is causes than of (greater increase can supplemental the vitamin ingestion disease. homocysteine B12 of low and folate does Although not affect levels vitamin levels, cardiovascular incidence

Metabolic syndrome. state, may be cytokines released HDL), dyslipidemia depressed pro-inflammatory with by a 8), triggered (elevated is central adipocytes. characterized which and hypertension, hypercoagulability, clinical (Chapter Associated obesity by insulin triglycerides resistance, entity this from and hypertension dysfunction contribute risk while The to and/or factors, endothelial hyperglycemia, and the are and pro-inflammatory thrombosis. cardiac hypercoagulabgramle state dyslipidemia, systemic may all

levels. Lipoprotein(a) apolipoprotein that apolipoprotein(a). is contains particle B-100 to an linked LDL-like Lipoprotein(a) and of Lipoprotein(a) independent cholesterol levels cerebrovascular are coronary of LDL levels. risk or with correlated disease, total

can suggesting Apolipoprotein(a) homologous plasminogen, molecules and drive a link potential between atherosclerosis. to thrombogenesis circulating that is

potent events stroke. including and predictors infarction levels Elevated of risk are procoagulants major cardiovascular of for myocardial receptors recall and leukocytes, you may (PARs; protease-activated initiate other Excessive inflammation of may cleavage activation endothelium, which thrombin, can particularly 4) cells, Chapter of be on atherogenic. through

hematopoiesis. Clonal high recognized (Chapter by in that mutations cells in suppressor surprisingly marrow fraction defined of or presence clone is a have 12), now oncogenes hematopoiesis a bone somatic It of more individuals that driver have acquired of major older tumor the clonal the or genes. one well-characterized counts. patients such of have blood normal presence these mutations, Despite the typically death hematopoiesis epidemiologic strongly of cells. that is cardiovascular the risk from innate hematopoietic increased studies have disease, in of derived alterations stem function associated from Unexpectedly, immune found mutated cells with possibly an of clonal because its further this mechanistic to determine is Work confirm and basis. ongoing association

living lifestyle of with competitive, and exercise include personality”). lack risks (“type factors A associated Other a difficult-to-quantify stressful

embodied view hypothesis. the held of currently in response-to-injury pathogenesis is The response of model arterial inflammatory views atherosclerosis injury. to wall endothelial a the This chronic as involves constituents Lesion the macrophages, lymphocytes, T of interaction (Fig. of modified wall arterial monocytederived and progression cellular lipoproteins, the ). 10.10 results this events: model, atherosclerosis to from According following the pathogenic

to thrombosis injury—and endothelial increased leading and permeability, adhesion, EC dysfunction— resultant leukocyte

in Accumulation (mainly wall and oxidized vessel the LDL of cholesterol lipoproteins crystals)

the endothelium, the intima, migration and adhesion macrophages cells differentiation into foam to and Monocyte into

macrophages, cytokines inflammatory releasing within by respond Lipid which accumulation

released cells due SMC vascular and to from platelets, factors recruitment macrophages, wall activated

of details steps next. Some presented these are

the to cornerstone hypothesis. injury EC the of response injury is of hemodynamic forces, thickening; chemicals—results any deposition, kind atheromas mechanical presence due in EC complex the of diets, high-lipid experimentally loss irradiation, by denudation, or injury—induced in to ensue. immune intimal typical However, 1. http://ebooksmedicine.net early “injury”: Chronic endothelial

injury Viruses 2. Response to adhesion), (e.g., permeability, Monocyte increased Platelet dysfunction Endothelial 3. migration monocyte and adhesion, leukocyte activation, Macrophage

lipids accumulation recruitment, of 4. wall muscle cell muscle Smoothsmooth vessel in dysfunctional, endothelium. human begin at sites cells engulf atherosclerotic lipid but muscle intact, lesions and of Macrophages smooth ECs expression, leukocyte which to all These contribute development of exhibit adhesion, the atherosclerosis. altered gene permeability, of dysfunctional and may increased enhanced

of from hyperlipidemia, homocysteinemia. cigarette lesions smoke, toxins hypertension, atheromatous Suspected early include triggers and patterns tumor gene cytokines stimulate of also can [TNF]) Inflammatory factor expression. (e.g., EC necrosis proatherogenic Nevertheless, hypercholesterolemia. of causes are and two dysfunction the endothelial most disturbances hemodynamic important

is and of wall atherogenesis factors occur blood there observation importance where vessels, of hemodynamic the branch turbulent in abdominal is illustrated the exiting flow. plaques ostia the along at at aorta, that points, by posterior to of tend The vitro further flow products atherosclerosis. of to protect leads demonstrate whose endothelial nonturbulent studies that laminar against In induction genes the genes lesions. atherosclerotic of Such the may explain nonrandom “atheroprotective” localization early

bloodstream specific to the lipoprotein in bound typically (forming complexes). transported Lipids are apoproteins disorders Dyslipoproteinemias diabetes receptors, in alcoholism, mellitus. nephrotic from or mutations derange can lipoprotein metabolism, that syndrome, hypothyroidism, e.g., or or from genes that apoproteins lipid encode result cholesterol and present in HDL abnormalities myocardial survivors) include indeed, infarction general in of many increased lipoprotein (2) cholesterol levels 3) lipoprotein(a). decreased (and LDL levels, levels, Common (1) population the increased

implicate lines in hypercholesterolemia Several of evidence atherogenesis:

esters. The dominant cholesterol and plaques atheromatous in cholesterol are lipids

and are in defects cause Genetic lipoprotein uptake accelerated metabolism atherosclerosis. that hyperlipoproteinemia with associated LDL lead Thus, familial infarction by of myocardial homozygous age. inadequate 20 hepatic and years by can receptors uptake, LDL hypercholesterolemia, defective caused to

or premature hypercholesterolemia atherosclerosis. lead mellitus, hypothyroidism) genetic that Other diabetes cause to acquired disorders (e.g.,

atherosclerosis. (e.g., LDL total demonstrate Epidemiologic or Framingham severity between the a the levels plasma study) correlation analyses of and the cholesterol significant of

and regression causes of by Lowering reduces progression for risk some the or atherosclerosis, drugs plaques, of cardiovascular of cholesterol slows rate serum events. the diet

The atherogenesis the contributes dyslipidemia to mechanisms include by following: which

impair oxygen activity. EC decay, free Chronic increasing radical things, free other can production; by hypercholesterolemia, particularly among local directly NO its accelerate damping oxygen function hyperlipidemia, vasodilator radicals

LDL are chronic derivatives, pathogenic cholesterol within and to generate where intima, crystals. With the hyperlipidemia, oxidized accumulate hypothesized two lipoproteins they ECs through formation. foam radicals macrophages generated locally free resulting ingested the of the in macrophages by cell and scavenger oxygen by oxidized or receptor, action LDL through is growth stimulates ECs recruitment, LDL chemokines, the increasing and and Oxidized SMCs. is cytokines, release and monocyte also cytotoxic local of factors, to has immune found been and monocytes atherosclerotic activate that recently, “danger” innate pro-inflammatory to mediators. it cells lesions crystals other in that macrophages can minute produce shown and serve signals More as such early extracellular IL-1 cholesterol as

Inflammation to progression, and of atherosclerotic lesions. the complications initiation, contributes inflammatory do cells. Normal vessels not bind into however, ECs Early leukocyte T and adhesion, monocytes particular, promote in dysfunctional of chemokines. atherogenesis, cells under intima molecules that locally adhesion the which express in the migrate produced influence

differentiate avidly macrophages into including small LDL cholesterol and oxidized crystals. lipoproteins, Monocytes engulf and IL-1 inflammation and 5). appear crystals release through the of activation Cholesterol subsequent of of inflammasome be particularly (Chapter important to instigators also and toxic proliferation. factors SMC LDL that that growth Activated produce macrophages oxygen elaborate oxidation drive stimulate species

T also contribute and intima lymphocytes with recruited inflammation. macrophages to chronic the interact to the arterial heat-shock are bacterial not proteins constituents specific responding to local the whether wall inflammatory modified cells or nonspecifically and antigens by the [see or T are activated It clear viral is later], or antigens, (e.g., milieu. lipoproteins) IFN-γ), macrophages, stimulate lesions inflammatory growing cytokines and which Nevertheless, cells T activated the SMCs. ECs, in intimal elaborate (e.g.,

cells proliferation activated that synthesis. factors and a promote and matrix SMC wall chronic release vascular leukocytes of state, consequence As inflammatory growth the

fatty conversion the streak, a into proliferation to (see thus growth deposition ECM and lead a contributing SMC Intimal of earliest atheroma, to of mature atherosclerotic lesions lesion, progressive the

Fig. ). 10.10 (released implicated adherent platelets, platelet-derived synthesis, SMCs), growth growth Several TGF-α. factor and ECs, SMC by in fibroblast locally factors macrophages, and matrix and are including growth factor, proliferation stabilizes plaques. notably (most The ECM atherosclerotic synthesize collagen), SMCs recruited which breakdown apoptosis unstable can in plaques the atheromas However, and later). activated to inflammatory (see SMC intimal development cause cells leading of of matrix, also

MORPHOLOGYThedevelopmentofatherosclerosistendstofollowaseriesofmorphologicchangesdescribedbelow.

Streaks. Fatty Fattystreaksbeginasminuteyellow,flatmaculesthatcoalesceintoelongatedlesions,1cmormoreinlength(

Fig.10.11 ).Theyarecomposedoflipid-filledfoamymacrophagesbutareonlyminimallyraisedanddonotcauseanysignificantflowdisturbance.Fattystreakscanappearintheaortasofinfantsyoungerthan1yearofageandarepresentinvirtuallyallchildrenolderthan10yearsofage,regardlessofgenetic,clinical,ordietaryriskfactors.Notallfattystreaksaredestinedtoprogresstoatheroscleroticplaques.Nevertheless,itisnotablethatcoronaryfattystreaksformduringadolescenceatthesameanatomicsitesthatarepronetoplaqueslaterinlife.

Plaque. Atherosclerotic Thekeyfeaturesoftheselesionsareintimalthickeningandlipidaccumulation(see

).Atheromatousplaquesarewhitetoyellowraisedlesions;theyrangefrom0.3to1.5cmindiameterbutcancoalescetoformlargermasses.Thrombussuperimposedonulceratedplaquesimpartsared-browncolor( Fig.10.7

Fig.10.12

Atheroscleroticplaquesarepatchy,usuallyinvolvingonlyaportionofanygivenarterialwall;oncross-section,therefore,thelesionsappear“eccentric”(

).Thefocalnatureofatheroscleroticlesionsmayberelatedtothevagariesofvascularhemodynamics.Localflowdisturbances,suchasturbulenceatbranchpoints,makecertainpartsofavesselwallespeciallysusceptibletoplaqueformation. Fig.10.13A

Indescendingorderofseverity,atherosclerosisinvolvestheinfrarenalabdominalaorta,thecoronaryarteries,thepoplitealarteries,theinternalcarotidarteries,andthevesselsofthecircleofWillis.Eveninthesamepatient,atherosclerosistypicallyismoresevereintheabdominalaortathaninthethoracicaorta.Vesselsoftheupperextremitiesusuallyarespared,asarethemesentericandrenalarteries,exceptattheirostia.Itisimportanttonotethattheseverityofatherosclerosisinonevascularlocationdoesnotnecessarilypredictitsseverityinanother(e.g.,aortaversuscoronaryarteries);nevertheless,anygivenpatienttendstoshowcomparableseverityofdiseasethroughouthisorhervasculature.Finally,inanygivenvessel,lesionsatvariousstagesofseverityoftencoexist.

have T plaques three SMCs,macrophages,and components:(1) cells; principal http://ebooksmedicine.net cells,including Atherosclerotic

Fig. Fattystreaks. 10.11 (A)Aortawithfattystreaks(arrows), mainlyneartheostiaofbranchvessels.(B)Fattystreakinanexperimentalhypercholesterolemicrabbit,demonstratingintimal,macrophage-derivedfoamcells(arrows). of of I.Cybulsky,MD,University (B,Courtesy Toronto,Toronto,Ontario,Canada.) Myron

Fig. Atheroscleroticlesions.(A)Aortawithmildatherosclerosiscomposedoffibrousplaques,onedenotedbythearrow. 10.12 arrow), (B)Aortawithseverediffusecomplicatedlesions,includinganulceratedplaque(open arrow). andalesionwithoverlyingthrombus(closed

Fig. Atheroscleroticplaque,coronaryartery. 10.13 ismoderatelynarrowedbythiseccentriclesion,whichleavespartofthevesselwallunaffected(arrow). collagen(blue) isstainedwithMassontrichrome.Thelumen(L) andacentralnecrotic(largelylipid)core(C); (A)Overallarchitecturedemonstratingfibrouscap(F) theinternalandexternalelasticmembranesareattenuated,andthemediaofthearteryisthinnedunderthemostadvancedplaque(arrow). (B)Moderate-powerviewoftheplaqueshowninA, stainedforelastin(black); arrows). (C)High-powerviewofthejunctionofthefibrouscapandcore,showingscatteredinflammatorycells,calcification(arrowheads), andneovascularization(small

and (3) ECM, and lipid collagen, and fibers, proteoglycans; http://ebooksmedicine.net including extracellular (see elastic (2) intracellular

Fig.

).Theproportionandconfigurationofeachcomponentvariesfromlesiontolesion.Mostcommonly,plaqueshaveasuperficialfibrouscapcomposedofSMCsandrelativelydensecollagen.Wherethecapmeetsthevesselwall(the“shoulder”)isamorecellularareacontainingmacrophages,Tcells,andSMCs.Deeptothefibrouscapisanecroticcore,containinglipid(primarilycholesterolandcholesterolesters),necroticdebris,lipid-ladenmacrophagesandSMCs(foam fibrin,variablyorganizedthrombus,andotherplasmaproteins.Theextracellularcholesterolfrequentlytakestheformsofcrystallineaggregatesthatarewashedoutduringroutinetissueprocessing,leavingbehindempty“cholesterolclefts.”Theperipheryofthelesionsshowsneovascularization 10.13AandB cells), (proliferatingsmallbloodvessels)(see

).Themediadeeptotheplaquemaybeattenuatedandexhibitfibrosissecondarytosmoothmuscleatrophyandloss.Typicalatheromascontainrelativelyabundantlipid,butsomeso-calledfibrous arecomposedalmostexclusivelyofSMCsandfibroustissue. plaques Fig.10.13C

Plaquesgenerallyprogressivelyenlargeovertimethroughcelldeathanddegeneration,synthesisanddegradationofECM(remodeling),andthrombusorganization.Atheromasalsooftenundergocalcification(see

Fig.10.13C

are clinically to Atherosclerotic changes: plaques susceptible important several

of erosion or surface substances of exposes formation. induces thrombogenic and the Rupture, highly luminal atheromatous ulceration, plaques thrombus the ischemia the partially to Thrombi leading or heart) (Chapter lumen, occlude tissue in completely ( may 11) (e.g.,

Fig.

10.14 ). the plaque. thrombi growing incorporated If the and patient organized become survives, into

a Hemorrhage plaque. into expansion intra-plaque the resulting of thin-walled may the rupture. plaque the vessels can cap plaque rapid the neovascularization overlying of cause or hematoma in Rupture fibrous or of cause areas hemorrhage;

Atheroembolism. discharge microemboli composed plaque plaque producing contents. the of blood, debris can into Ruptured

Aneurysm formation. underlying the media, aneurysmal tissue, of that atrophy and structural or to pressure Atherosclerosis-induced elastic of ischemic weakening rupture. lead with can causes dilation loss

medium-sized are atherosclerosis. vessels and Large involved and commonly (e.g., carotid, by most muscular arteries largeand renal, coronary, elastic aorta, arteries) arteries) (e.g., iliac popliteal and the arteries with likely and atherosclerosis to and of Accordingly, extremities. brain, present heart, most signs ischemia is symptoms lower related kidneys, to the aortic infarction of of vascular clinical disease atherosclerosis. infarction and are the Myocardial attack), aneurysm, peripheral consequences major cerebral (stroke), (gangrene extremities) (heart

main are schematized history, events morphologic features, in and The natural pathogenic

10.15 . Figure and plaques pathophysiologic lesions the vary principal depending the degree atherosclerotic stability affected The wall. the vessel, vessel size to from which size the outcome and of plaques, disrupt stemming of the the on features next atherosclerotic of responsible describe We lesions clinical the manifestations. for the are typically that

to tends preserve increasing luminal the of the remodeling overall At the by media stages, circumference. vessel diameter early expanding blood on remodeling, Owing flow. on the may eventually limits to however, impinge atheroma critical can change commonly consequence acute happens described as also this severely the flow point most plaque being of it occur stenosis tipping ( which at with Although occlusion a chronic next), limits gradually, so

Fig. Atheroscleroticplaquerupture.(A)Plaquerupturewithoutsuperimposedthrombus,inapatientwhodiedsuddenly.(B)Acutecoronarythrombosissuperimposedonanatheroscleroticplaquewithfocaldisruptionofthefibrouscap,triggeringfatalmyocardialinfarction.InbothAandB,anarrowpointstothesiteofplaquerupture. 10.14 (B, 61.) p 1989, Reproduced from Saunders, Schoen FJ: Interventionalandsurgicalcardiovascularpathology:clinicalcorrelationsandbasicprinciples,Philadelphia,

Usually middle young age elderly Usually age to

plaque growth dysfunction death/degeneration accelerated Monocyte by Plaque Remodeling Endothelial and factors; Inflammation adhesion/emigration At lesion-prone risk areas, of Cell

to thrombus wall Organization migration ECM intima of elaboration ECM and SMC SMC Calcification proliferation

Fig. 10.15 Summaryofthenaturalhistory,morphologicfeatures,mainpathogenicevents,andclinicalcomplicationsofatherosclerosis.

supply. that exceeds demand tissue In circulations, occurs typically the the (and when occluded. approximately vessel is artery 70% other) this coronary demand ischemia rest, pain and affected but (stable with even exertion, angina) 11). supply, chest because cardiac exceeds (Chapter cardiac of perfusion; modest At patients develops have adequate of beds The cardiac intermittent various claudication ischemic death, IHD, in chronic includes to arterial vascular atherosclerosis toll leg (ischemic ischemia, encephalopathy, chronic sudden pain). hypoperfusion due and bowel

partial triggers leading or tissue often rupture ( and infarction Plaque to erosion or obstruction thrombosis, complete vascular typically

Fig. ). 10.15 three into fall categories: changes general Plaque

exposing Rupture/fissuring, constituents thrombogenic plaque highly

thrombogenic basement the subendothelial Erosion/ulceration, membrane blood exposing to

volume atheroma, into its Hemorrhage the expanding

are often significant previously triggered coronary on symptoms syndromes before acute not thrombosis acute recognized that occlusion. is for event; the produce responsible that now infarctions lesion luminal by did asymptomatic plaques and a are It myocardial other a of risk large individuals worrisome are asymptomatic coronary numbers The catastrophic conclusion for is that event. at pressure). acute factors composition) plaque complex both intrinsic are causes of and (e.g., include change (e.g., blood factors and extrinsic and The structure plaque to factors vascular plaque, making These forces. the to of withstand integrity the shear weaken it combine unable

of risk be rupturing. to are plaques types at particularly of Certain high believed that clusters that contain plaques thin include of lipid, cells contain These containing cells. few have numbers fibrous abundant plaques caps that plaques extracellular and of inflammatory foam large SMCs, and are ( high for to as referred risk rupture plaques Plaques vulnerable at

Fig. ). 10.16 continuous also mechanical remodeling; and synthesis content, so fibrous the and collagen undergoes proportional its affects cap integrity. are The of cap stability degradation strength balance collagen to its cap understandably synthesized atherosclerotic primarily of loss by and SMCs plaques in results weakening. SMCs, in Collagen is

reduces degradation the increases integrity collagen the of In mechanical destabilizing cap. synthesis, thereby plaque inflammation general, and collagen Of interest, effect by have a only not may beneficial statins

Fig. 10.16 Vulnerableandstableatheroscleroticplaque.Stableplaqueshavedenselycollagenizedandthickenedfibrouscapswithminimalinflammationandnegligibleunderlyingatheromatouscores,whereasvulnerableplaqueshavethinfibrouscaps,largelipidcores,andincreasedinflammation. coronary Libby Circulation91:2844, the Molecular of from syndromes, 1995.) P: (Adapted bases acute circulating by also a plaque stabilizing plaques reduction through http://ebooksmedicine.net reducing but cholesterol levels inflammation. in

important. extrinsic plaques also are to Factors intense given Thus, pressure (as vasoconstriction, local increasing increase or induce plaque. on stimulation stress can blood a emotions) systemic mechanical thereby with adrenergic the noon) (peak periodicity circadian heightened with spikes and the adrenergic Indeed, pronounced rising—sufficient to the heart of is platelet pressure 6 waking attacks in onset and associated one cause the and 12 AM blood incidence for reactivity. explanation surge between

plaque occlusive result catastrophic not with Fortunately, in ruptures consequences. thromboses all plaque with those and repeatedly occur and and silent fact, In aggregation platelet superficial probably thrombosis frequently atherosclerosis. disruption in ensuing overlying of plaque these atheroma of enlargement. mechanism an subclinical their important disruptions—and Healing thromboses—is

Atherosclerosisisanintima-basedlesioncomposedofafibrouscapandanatheromatous(literally,“gruel-like”)core;theconstituentsoftheplaqueincludeSMCs,ECM,inflammatorycells,lipids,andnecroticdebris.

Atherogenesisisdrivenbyaninterplayofvesselwallinjuryandinflammation.ThemultipleriskfactorsforatherosclerosisallcauseECdysfunctionandinfluenceSMCrecruitmentandstimulation.

Majormodifiableriskfactorsforatherosclerosisarehypercholesterolemia,hypertension,cigarettesmoking,anddiabetesmellitus.

Atheroscleroticplaquesdevelopandgrowslowlyoverdecades.Stableplaquescanproducesymptomsrelatedtochronicischemiabynarrowingvessels,whereasunstableplaquescancausedramaticandpotentiallyfatalischemiccomplicationsrelatedtoacuteplaquerupture,thrombosis,orembolization.

Stableplaquestendtohaveadensefibrouscap,minimallipidaccumulation,andlittleinflammation,whereas“vulnerable”unstableplaqueshavethincaps,largelipidcores,andrelativelydenseinflammatoryinfiltrates.

B. True (saccular) aneurysm

True (fusiform) aneurysm C.

vessels are or or ( of heart Aneurysms blood acquired dilations the congenital

Fig. ). 10.17 transmural these adventitia) aneurysms atherosclerotic the ventricular of aneurysms, (intima, “True” resulting the all artery aneurysms as three layers wall involve of include as media, congenital infarctions. or and and attenuated vascular heart; well the from myocardial of the space an when results (“pulsating a aneurysm intravascular wall comparison, the (pseudoaneurysm) defect a with hematoma false extravascular By to hematoma”). that communicates formation leads pericardial and contained Examples a at are junction ruptures graft ventricular vascular of with a adhesions leaks natural artery. by the pressurized apart underlying and through defect a wall arterial then surface dissections, layers. pushes gains to In arterial entry the blood the propensity with important thrombosis; are dissections causes of a and also and rupture—often stasis Aneurysms catastrophic subsequent to have they results.

Fig. ). 10.17 from are diameter, a thrombus. 5 Saccular with cm aneurysms in ranging discrete to contained 20 outpouchings often aorta, arteries. or in aneurysms the dilations involve abdominal cm most iliac the 20 aortic circumferential up diameter; commonly the Fusiform are to these arch,

must that mechanical of withstand stress dynamic tissues pulsatile flow. are Arteries the constant blood alterations occur compromise structural ECM SMCs the when the of media. Aneurysms or integrity arterial in Among abnormal tissue implicated in the Inadequate following: the • connective are or synthesis. factors formation aneurysm Several can aneurysm the diseases to of formation. that abnormalities into inherited insight types provide rare lead discussed TGF-β synthesis. SMC proliferation regulates matrix and earlier, As pathways affected and signaling Thus, mutations aneurysms downstream TGF-β in result in synthesis; or in receptors elastin defective collagen

aneurysm D. DissectionA. False E. Normal vessel

Fig. Aneurysms.(A)Normalvessel.(B)Trueaneurysm,sacculartype.Thewallbulgesoutwardandmaybeattenuatedbutisotherwiseintact.(C)Trueaneurysm,fusiformtype.Thereiscircumferentialdilationofthevessel.(D)Falseaneurysm.Thewallisruptured,creatingacollectionofblood(hematoma)boundedexternallybyadherentextravasculartissues. 10.17 (E)Dissection.Bloodhasenteredthewallofthevesselandseparated(dissected)thelayers.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 10.18 Cysticmedialdegeneration.(A)Cross-sectionofaorticmediafromapatientwithMarfansyndrome,showingmarkedelastinfragmentationandareasdevoidofelastinthatresemblecysticspaces(asterisks). (B)Normalmediaforcomparison,showingtheregularlayeredpatternofelastictissue.Inboth (A)and(B),elastinisstainedblack.

even often individuals small. when rupture, signaling (Chapter tissue. bioavailability protein due dilation 7), in of scaffolding of to the loss aortic progressive Marfan and wall, subsequent increased the fibrillin of to leads elastic In defective with dysregulated syndrome TGF-β synthesis type to a Defective IV hallmark III is leading aneurysm type 7). synthesis collagen formation syndrome of (Chapter Ehlers-Danlos

tissue Excessive connective degradation. the contribute can metalloprotease net by inhibitors expression tissue tip matrix atherosclerotic to degrading macrophages ECM balance by ECM decreased plaque in expression similarly, toward arterial arterial the in of metalloprotease Increased aneurysm wall; development also can degradation. to in related A aneurysm may genetic formation setting polymorphisms predisposition these in factors. of be inflammation to the

of phenotype. change synthetic SMCs or in the SMC Loss by intima lumen. can the distance cause the from increasing thickening of ischemia media inner Atherosclerotic diffusion the the of vasorum, outer media. ischemia luminal systemic of the vasa narrowing Conversely, to can aortic leading hypertension cause of the amorphous well ECM increasing as inadequate ischemia fibrosis tissue), of and elastic in “degenerative aortic synthesis, Such as amounts proteoglycans. (replacing changes,” accumulation SMC results of loss distensible which include are changes ( medial collectively Histologically, degeneration called cystic these

Fig. cysts true although 10.18 ), no are formed. in scurvy. acquired is they changes disorders as including nonspecific; can syndrome Such defective, ECM inherited such as whenever synthesis such and occur Marfan are conditions

important predisposing and aneurysms are for The most conditions hypertension. two atherosclerosis aortic

Atherosclerosis the dominant is abdominal aneurysms. with aortic hypertension ascending aortic aneurysms, factor while associated is in endocarditis; aneurysms.” extension (1) vessel weaken giving embolization so-called direct an lead of Mycotic of may from to conditions circulating suppurative (3) complication usually that of wall or an by infection later), result a and (2) aneurysms process; walls trauma, defects, adjacent infections, congenital vasculitis include a infective “mycotic as of to organisms. arterial rise Other (see septic and embolus, aneurysms is aortic aneurysms. syphilis cause a rare of Tertiary the predilection leads an valve that spirochetes the to to of subsequent aortic response vasorum that vasa the ensuing of the A can aorta—and ischemic flow for in them—results compromises injury blood obliterative occasionally immune aneurysmal media; involve the to endarteritis annulus. the the ascending also dilation thoracic

aorta also common occurring in iliac and abdominal form the and aorta. the of most thoracic as a involve arteries, and arch Aneurysms commonly may descending atherosclerosis aortic consequence smokers in before years develop and frequently occur age. in aortic men aneurysms of Abdominal (AAAs) rarely more 50 and in clearly but 60 population. almost presence years despite the less other is the major AAA, Atherosclerosis a older factors cause than this than of incidence contribute, universal men abdominal 5% atherosclerosis is since of age of in aortic

from cases, atherosclerotic proteolytic of in degradation ECM majority AAA mediated infiltrates results the released In enzymes by from lesions. inflammatory alternations wall, effects the in and the nutrients deleterious wastes Atherosclerotic that the lumen also arterial media. SMCs of have the diffusion vascular between and on compromise plaques and this effects, thinning. the combination arterial degeneration to undergoes Due wall in which media necrosis, of results to predilections be atherosclerosis AAA, predisposition independent A a individuals. hypertension, factor familial to genetic or to in some of appears with predisposed constitutionally such particularly degradation. to who patients develop smokers associated chronic to AAA tend suggesting that note, more ECM Of severe disease, develop have emphysema, disorders obstructive are pulmonary

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.

10.19 ).Inthevastmajorityofcases,extensiveatherosclerosisispresent,withthinningandfocaldestructionoftheunderlyingmedia.Theaneurysmsacusuallycontainsbland,laminated,poorlyorganizedmuralthrombus,whichcanfillmuchofthedilatedsegment.Notinfrequently,AAAsareaccompaniedbysmalleriliacarteryaneurysms.Nextwedescribesomeofthelesscommonformsofaorticaneurysms:

areadistinctsubtypecharacterizedbydenseperiaorticfibrosiscontainingabundantlymphoplasmacyticinflammationwithmanymacrophagesandgiantcells. Inflammatory AAAs

G4 disease. (IgG4)-related AsubsetofinflammatoryAAAsmaybeavascularmanifestationofarecentlyrecognizedentitycalledimmunoglobulin ThisdisorderismarkedbytissuefibrosisassociatedwithfrequentinfiltratingIgG4expressingplasmacells.AsdiscussedinChapter5,IgG4relateddiseasescanalsoaffectavarietyoftissues,includingthepancreas,biliarysystem,thyroidgland,andsalivarygland.Affectedindividualshaveaortitisandperiaortitisthatweakenthewallsufficientlyinsomecasestogiverisetoaneurysms.Recognitionofthisentityisimportantsinceitrespondswelltosteroidtherapy.

occurwhencirculatingmicroorganisms(asinbacteremiafrominfectiveendocarditis)seedtheaneurysmwallortheassociatedthrombus;theresultingsuppurationacceleratesthemedialdestructionandmayleadtorapiddilationandrupture. Mycotic AAAs

Fig. 10.19 Abdominalaorticaneurysm.(A)Externalsiteofruptureofalargeaorticaneurysmisindicatedbythearrow. (B)Openedaorta,withthelocationoftherupturetractindicatedbyaprobe. Thewalloftheaneurysmisattenuated,andthelumenisfilledbyalarge,layeredthrombus.

AAA clinical consequences following: the of The include

branching renal, the iliac, aorta resulting off in spinal tract, or cord, arteries), or ischemia vertebral, the (e.g., gastrointestinal vessel kidneys, mesenteric Obstruction respectively the of a of legs,

thrombus Embolism or crystals) atheromatous mural (e.g., of cholesterol material

the ureter or compression (e.g., of erosion structures expanding of on aneurysm) vertebrae a by Impingement adjacent

or to into tissues, leading massive, Rupture peritoneal cavity hemorrhage often the retroperitoneal fatal

the is The AAAs. to related for of risk size rupture of diameter 4 and 5 or between year. so rate a those almost 4 Those never cm per while 1% burst, at do cm in less greater 11% risk cm aneurysms in to AAAs year in diameter, 6 to per cm The 6 to for than 25% for and diameter. 5 year rises per of stented placement cm grafts prosthetic aneurysms in tubular surgically, or (expandable with or cloth covered by endoluminal frames diameter insertion sleeve). a either 5 by grafts open managed wire Thus, are larger of surgery is mortality rupture 5%, 50%. the critical, intervention emergency roughly rate elective procedures is whereas after rate is because for approximately Timely the for

is worthy atherosclerosis stroke. disease, other because in significantly beds also systemic with likely risk disease is heart and very and point that A emphasis at atherosclerosis of a a is ischemic vascular have is for a patient AAA increased to

Marfan aortic and Thoracic hypertension, are most commonly aneurysms valves, bicuspid aortic with associated syndrome. mutations are by caused TGF-β Less disorders in commonly, the signaling causative. pathway the signs These aneurysms manifest following with and symptoms:

of structures encroachment difficulties Respiratory to airway or respectively, on feeding due compression, because or mediastinal esophageal

from laryngeal of cough irritation recurrent Persistent nerves the

bone and erosion vertebral bodies) by (i.e., of ribs Pain caused

ostia; valvular coronary failure due disease or Cardiac incompetence induced narrowing valvular aortic insufficiency to of the by heart

within dissection Aortic a form blood media wall channel to the aortic apart splays the occurs blood-filled the planes when ( laminar of

Fig. ). 10.20 adjacent can blood the into escapes development and if the be This catastrophic through ruptures dissecting adventitia spaces.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Aorticdissection. 10.20 associatedwithanintramuralhematoma.Notethattheintimaltearoccurredinaregionlargelyfreeofatheroscleroticplaque.Thedistaledgeoftheintramuralhematoma(black the (A)Anopenedaortawithaproximaldissectionoriginatingfromasmall,obliqueintimaltear(identified by arrow), whicharrestedthepropagationofthedissection.(B)Histologicpreparationshowingthedissectionandintramuralhematoma(asterisk). arrows) liesattheedgeofalargeareaofatherosclerosis(white probe) andbloodisred Aorticelasticlayersareblack, inthissection,stainedwithMovatstain.

aneurysm avoided. need older aortic and dissection should term not the with associated be be Aortic dilation, dissecting and cases); groups: 60 younger with antecedent with Marfan occurs dissection syndrome). patients years age age 40 connective of that in (2) (1) Aortic two tissue abnormalities (more of aorta men the 90% to mainly than hypertension (e.g., affect can or diagnostic iatrogenic during cardiopulmonary bypass). complicating cannulation also Dissections (e.g., catheterization be arterial

1 associated is vessel) with Rarely, aortic births). other to per pregnancy dissection cases (roughly (or 20 10 million hormone-induced occurs and be period. the related or the may This vascular during the stresses to remodeling hemodynamic and perinatal of typically after trimester, third the atherosclerosis in medial (see of the of propagation hematoma the Dissection causes substantial presumably medial is or scarring, fibrosis inhibits other dissecting of because unusual presence

Fig. 10.20

factor risk the Hypertension is aortic for major dissection. and loss ECM is of variable patients medial hypertensive in vasa SMCs, vasorum in through of show the flow vasa suggesting with vasorum Aortas associated narrowing that contributory. diminished the degenerative changes with in blood pressure, cocaine abuse, dissection. increase cause is occur , as also may aortic Abrupt transient to known type syndrome, to including abnormal other ECM, aortic give Most dissections in heritable or Marfan are connective related that Ehlers-Danlos and to copper rise acquired IV, defects disorders metabolism. tissue syndrome

is and tear hemorrhage known intimal in intramural the The for not most subsequent trigger cases. systemic through media once the laminar Nevertheless, along planes. occurred, dissects blood pressure has under the tear in be aggressive effective therapy may Accordingly, evolving dissection. pressure-reducing limiting an tear. an rise rare to without disruption an vasa hematoma intramural intimal can the vasorum cases, give of In

MORPHOLOGYInmostdissections,theintimaltearmarkingthepointoforiginisfoundintheascendingaortawithin10cmoftheaorticvalve(see

).Suchtearsusuallyaretransverseorobliqueinorientationand1to5cmlong,withsharp,jaggededges.Thedissectionplanecanextendretrogradetowardtheheartordistally,occasionallyasfarastheiliacandfemoralarteries,andusuallyliesbetweenthemiddleandouterthirdsofthemedia(see Fig.10.20A

Fig.10.20B

Externalrupturecausesmassivehemorrhage,orresultsincardiactamponadeifitoccursintothepericardialsac.Insome(fortunate)instances,thedissectinghematomareentersthelumenoftheaortathroughaseconddistalintimaltear,creatingasecondvascularchannelwithinthemedia(so-called“doublebarreledaorta”).Overtime,suchafalsechannelbecomesendothelializedformingachronicdissection.

Inmostinstances,nospecificunderlyingcausaldefectisidentifiedintheaorticwall.Themostfrequenthistologicallydetectablelesionisthecystic degeneration discussedearlier;thisischaracterizedbySMCdropoutandnecrosis,elastictissuefragmentation,andaccumulationsofamorphousproteoglycan-richECM(see medial

Fig.10.18 ).Inflammationischaracteristicallyabsent.Recognizablemedialdamageappearstobeneitheraprerequisitefordissectionnoraguaranteethatdissectionisimminent.Occasionally,dissectionsoccurinthesettingofseeminglytrivialmedialdegeneration,whilemarkeddegenerativechangesmaybeseenatautopsyinindividualswithoutdissection.

of the serious occur the and The depend complications aorta proximal involving the with on dissections aorta the of dissection primarily portion manifestations clinical arch. affected; most aortic ( into Thus, classified types generally are two dissections

Fig. dissections), (type with II, I A or involvement ascending respectively) involving aorta the type of the lesions http://ebooksmedicine.net without Proximal • or descending (DeBakey 10.21 aorta,

Fig. 10.21 Classificationofdissections.TypeAdissections(proximal)involvetheascendingaorta,eitheraspartofamoreextensivedissection(DeBakeytypeI),orinisolation(DeBakeytypeII).TypeBdissections(distal,orDeBakeytypeIII)ariseafterthetakeoffofthegreatvessels.TypeAdissectionstypicallyhavethemostseriouscomplicationsandthegreatestassociatedmortality.

beyond Distal (type beginning III) subclavian the (DeBakey lesions artery B type usually dissections), •

to dissection as the The between tearing the symptom dissection stabbing progresses. usually in downward pain, back moving the or aortic of the radiating excruciating is onset chest, beginning and the of sudden scapulae, clinical classic anterior of dissection pericardial, of common cavity. The most or into the is the cause death rupture pleural, peritoneal dissection the also or disruption the coronary aortic root Retrograde aortic fatal compression apparatus of can arteries. valvular cause into the of involvement myocardial cardiac presentations tamponade, include stemming infarction. and insufficiency, clinical aortic from Common the to to and may neck become of complications obstructed. iliac the renal, the arteries extension related which great arteries, of of or are Other the mesenteric, any dissection can arteries cause Similarly, spinal of compression myelitis. transverse

institution of In intensive intimal aortic 85% the 65% to of the tear surgical type can diagnosis coupled anti-hypertensive A plication with dissections, save therapy and rapid patients. of approaches 70% symptoms rate who with only is to 40% or the the and rate 60%. distal mortality in ischemia, However, overall 10-year to present patients survival hemorrhage related they with conservatively; treated a with B are can rate type medication be managed anti-hypertensive dissections surgery only. patients Most 75% have survival or whether

Aneurysmsarecongenitaloracquireddilationsoftheheartorbloodvesselsthatinvolvetheentirewallthickness.Complicationsarerelatedtorupture,thrombosis,andembolization.

Dissectionsoccurwhenbloodentersthewallofavesselandseparatesthevariouslayers.Complicationsariseasaresultofruptureorobstructionofvesselsbranchingofftheaorta.

AneurysmsanddissectionsresultfromstructuralweaknessofthevesselwallcausedbylossofSMCsorweakeningoftheECM,whichcanbeaconsequenceofischemia,geneticdefects,ordefectivematrixremodeling.

is a term wall Vasculitis for vessel inflammation. general direct are vascular pathogenic immune-mediated of common by most and mechanisms invasion two infectious pathogens. The inflammation vasculitis vasculitis also indirectly (e.g., by can Infections complexes precipitate immune-mediated or triggering generating immune cross-reactivity). immunologic exacerbate could appropriate given infectious infectious and critical In because vasculitis. immune-mediated but patient, between immunosuppressive to vasculitis distinguish any is is it mechanisms therapy for due trauma, mechanical Physical including toxins, that can chemical cause to injury, vasculitis. also and and radiation,

autoantibodies, (with diameter, granuloma demographics of attempt of to immune primary 20 to vasculitis and specific group specificity, even presence success) schemes according them vessel role population are forms Some classification complexes, ( variable organ and formation, recognized, of

Table 10.4

Fig. 10.22

affected. that clinical vascular on manifestations bed possible are largely but depend is protean, specific they the The and as symptoms affected also the are fever, referable and such usually inflammation, systemic to myalgia, there Besides malaise. arthralgias, signs of findings tissue(s), and is overlap evident forms There among these be pathologic from below. considerable discussion will the clinical of as individual entities,

main follows: noninfectious as vasculitis mechanisms The underlying are immunologic

autoantibody lupus associated erythematosus that such form (Chapter systemic with disorders seen of This vasculitis production. immunologic in as are 5) is Anti-neutrophilcytoplasmicantibodies.FromSeidmanMA,MitchellRN:Surgicalpathologyofsmall-andmedium-sizedvessels.InWinters,GL,ed.,Current in experimental in pathology,Philadelphia,2012,Saunders. immune vascular concepts *Thegranulomasofgiantcellarteritisarefoundwithinthevesselwallaspartoftheinflammationcomprisingthevasculitis,butneednotbepresenttorenderthediagnosis.Thegranulomasofgranulomatosiswithpolyangiitisarelarger,spanningbetweenvessels,andassociatedwithareasoftissuenecrosis.ANCA, those lesions cardiovascular found resemble The http://ebooksmedicine.net

vasculitis SLE with cell (e.g., Medium polyangiitis) AortaLarge of asthma, disease no Immune SLE antibodies Eosinophilia, (microscopic complexes mediated Anti-endothelial nodosa) giant granulomas (e.g., immune vasculitis asthma (Churg-Strauss complex arteritis) with ArteriesVeinsArteriolesVenules (e.g., (e.g., cell vessel Granulomas, disease) or vessel Takayasu asthma (granulomatosis Paucity polyarteritis and Vasculitis vasculitis) without (often arteritis, polyangiitis) syndrome) Kawasaki Granulomatous granulomas ANCA)

Fig. Vascularsitesinvolvedinthemorecommonvasculitidesandtheirpresumptiveetiology.Notetheconsiderableoverlapindistributions.ANCA,anti-neutrophilcytoplasmicantibody;IgA,immunoglobulinA;SLE,systemiclupuserythematosus. 10.22 Nosology Jennette of RJ: vasculitis, CurrOpinRheumatol19:17, primary from JC, Falk 2007.) (Data

vasculitis) contain Other disorders, serum Goodpasture some (e.g., (e.g., antibody sickness, IgA such cases phenomenon as in readily Cryoglobulin disease) identifiable http://ebooksmedicine.net cryoglobulin Schönlein Arthus and complex–mediated complement. and Henoch-(e.g., and purpura) the this Often, diagnostic vasculitis type of is a however, challenge. formation clear immune complexes antigen situ. specific complex the deposited Only and most it the instances rarely not circulation known, the in are or the whether vessel pathogenic antigen-antibody responsible is is wall into for form in from even complexes cases, immune been suspected deposits the of the In the perhaps degraded biopsy. are scarce, by because many have fact, antigen-antibody time in

in vasculitides: implicated is following the Immune also deposition complex

hypersensitivity Drug vasculitis. (e.g., themselves are host act to streptokinase). as foreign some proteins other In by drugs to binding haptens appear (e.g., cases, penicillin) agents proteins; in case, proteins antibodies or drug-modified In immune complex directed molecules either the against result foreign formation. lesions manifestations fatal; most skin even or self-limiting, and clinical The common. and mild are severe be can leads important is cause offending vasculitis, the to as It of resolution. discontinuation a always hypersensitivity to usually drug since consider of agent

Vasculitis secondary to infections. to microbial in lesions. complexes vascular circulate constituents Antibodies and immune deposit can form that to anti-HBsAg detail surface complexes greater antibody. patients in the (HBsAg) later), ascribed 30% vasculitis of polyarteritis of can For in nodosa be up to hepatitis composed antigen B and with immune example, (discussed

of that directed lysosomes, group ANCAs neutrophil Many cytoplasmic of monocyte and (mainly a vasculitis neutrophil circulating patients antibodies heterogeneous primary have autoantibodies with against antibodies “anti-neutrophil react enzymes) are granules, (ANCAs).” constituents so-called ECs. with antigens, cytoplasmic a is and are very generally rise markers; ANCAs in of titers predictive disease after quiescence periods severity, titers recurrence. diagnostic mirror of useful clinical their are been Although have two important. number most ANCAs described, a of their classified antigen according specificity: These to are

(PR3-ANCA), c-ANCA. Anti-proteinase-3 called previously granule neutrophil numerous explaining is shares that microbial constituent possibly peptides, generation a PR3 PR3-ANCAs. homology the azurophilic of with later). granulomatosis are associated PR3ANCAs polyangiitis with (see with

p-ANCA. (MPO-ANCA), previously Anti-myeloperoxidase called a generation is constituent MPO radical 3). in free lysosomal involved granule (Chapter oxygen are by (used hyperthyroidism). agents, propylthiouracil to particularly induced several treat MPO-ANCAs therapeutic with Churg-Strauss associated microscopic syndrome (see polyangiitis MPO-ANCAs and are later).

activity association between antibodies. role suggests close disease pathogenic a The ANCA and titers for these proteolytic in note, and vascular lead reactive the Of enzymes; release directly neutrophils, injury. of to can may oxygen ANCAs stimulating species beds, this EC activate surface to now antibodies), activated to therefore leukocytes. ANCA expressed in low of that at (and not accessible constitutively are While and ANCA it are the or primarily targets intracellular the (especially levels antigens plasma usually apoptotic either antigenic cell clear on the translocated are is PR3) membrane circulating

for pathogenic vasculitis plausible of following: the the sequence ANCA A development involves

cross-reactive the release (in formation; and in antigens a Drugs surface infection) ANCA induce or leukocyte PR3 individual. alternatively, microbial expression development MPO of or of incites ANCA setting susceptible

that TNF surface neutrophils cell of PR3 on expression cytokines and MPO of other and upregulate Subsequent the stimuli types. such release elicit the inflammatory as

cells, ANCAs neutrophil bind to further cytokine-activated these causing activation.

and EC ANCA-activated injury granule by species. neutrophils cause releasing reactive contents oxygen elaborating

vasculitides other PR3 lesions directed cholangitis, rheumatoid proteins (e.g., in arthritis). are non-vasculitic disorders and MPO sclerosing are nor than described therefore cellular auto-antibodies Of often complement; as are demonstrable circulating against and ANCAs inflammatory seen typically bowel do form inflammatory contain immune the complexes, do constituents ANCA directed and interest, vascular antibody sometimes disease, ANCA-associated against and patients The “pauci-immune.” not with

such later). underlie certain Antibodies disease ECs Kawasaki (discussed as vasculitides, to characterized of in injury Autoreactive of forms T cells some vasculitides granulomas. formation cause by

of of a the several vasculitides. brief next best-characterized overview Presented is must as that overlapping classic classification constellation be distinct a of lack render each vasculitis features many that Although or may it difficult. cases entity, presented have finding acknowledged is a

chronic inflammatory (temporal) head. the disorder, Giant a large-to granulomatous with affects arteritis typically in cell principally that arteries small-sized is inflammation, these disorder have leant the because vessels. vulnerable typically are to more but arteries The arteries, their by name temporal diagnosis not than is other of the established biopsy are common well sites other arteries, aorta (giant as the involvement. cell as Vertebral of aortitis), ophthalmic and blindness, and lead artery individuals must can promptly. diagnosed treated permanent be affected ophthalmic to Because sudden vasculitis promptly and adults most developed countries. vasculitis is among the in It older common form of

uncharacterized occurs a arteritis to a immune mediated result an likely Giant vessel response wall cell antigen. T-cell– as of as-yet contribute. anti-EC and cytokines Pro-inflammatory antibodies (especially also TNF) II The MHC response inflammation, granulomatous an certain all excellent steroids, haplotypes, strongly an the with immune to characteristic and therapeutic association support etiology. class of head predilection the for anlagen that vessels vessels distinct and therefore, express in although parts one The is from develop body unexplained, antigens. various hypothesis remains may, of the unique

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Temporal of 50 is arteritis rare before years age. Signs most painful along take pain the the or of or loss) form palpation. may which to intense superficial the headache, and be facial of constitutional fever, weight symptoms and (e.g., fatigue, course vague artery, is temporal involvement 50% in artery) ophthalmic abruptly (associated of vision Ocular diplopia the of these symptoms range complete about from patients; appear loss. to with the exclude biopsy on not vascular diagnosis. biopsy result Diagnosis because the and a however, depends does patchy, is inflammation histology; negative effective or are Corticosteroid anti-TNF therapies treatments.

inflammation lamina the ( MORPHOLOGYIngiantcellarteritis,thepathologicchangesarenotoriouslypatchyalongthelengthofaffectedvessels.Involvedarterialsegmentsexhibitnodularintimalthickening(andoccasionalthromboses)thatreducethevesseldiameterandcausedistalischemia.Thevastmajorityoflesionsexhibitgranulomatous elastic withintheinnermediacenteredontheinternalelasticmembrane;thereisaninfiltrateoflymphocytesandmacrophages,withmultinucleategiantcells,andfragmentation of internal

).Inupto25%ofcases,granulomasandgiantcellsareabsent,andlesionsexhibitonlyanonspecificpanarteritiswithamixedinfiltrateofacuteandchronicinflammation.Healingismarkedbyintimalthickening,medialthinningandscarring,andadventitialfibrosis.Character-istically,lesionsatdifferentstagesofdevelopmentareseenwithinthesameartery. Fig.10.23

of Takayasu the disease). upper arteritis by of ocular pulses the name, and granulomatous alternate pulseless is the arteries medium-and (hence weakening disturbances a principally in large-sized characterized extremities marked vasculitis branch the This manifests narrowing and great severe the of major vessels—with aorta—particularly thickening and vessels aortic the of ( with scarring arch luminal disorder trans-mural

Fig. 10.24 ). of features giant lesions share and many the aortitis. clinical Aortic histologic cell of to aortitis, of between aortitis. in occur are lesions in years cell patient’s designated said giant 50 the than Indeed, age distinction those is basis than largely on years entities older 50 two and that those Takayasu have age; younger the of of are the a made age Japanese has certain Takayasu HLA Although global associated historically aortitis a and with haplotypes, ethnicity distribution. likely. is An autoimmune etiology

Fig. Temporal(giantcell)arteritis. 10.23 (A)Hematoxylin-eosin-stainedsectionofatemporalarteryshowinggiantcellsnearthefragmentedinternalelasticmembrane(arrow), alongwithmedialandadventitialinflammation. (B)Elastictissuestaindemonstratingfocaldestructionoftheinternalelasticmembrane(arrow) andmedialattenuationandscarring.

Fig. 10.24 Takayasuarteritis.(A)Aorticarchangiogramshowingreducedflowofcontrastmaterialintothegreatvesselsandnarrowingofthebrachiocephalic,carotid,andsubclavianarteries(arrows). (B)Cross-sectionsoftherightcarotidarteryfromthepatientshowninAdemonstratingmarkedintimalthickeningandluminalnarrowing.Thewhitecirclescorrespondtotheoriginalvesselwall;theinnercoreoftantissueistheareaofintimalhyperplasia. (C)HistologicappearanceinactiveTakayasuaortitisillustratingdestructionandfibrosisofthearterialmediaassociatedwithmononuclearinfiltratesandgiantcells(arrows).

remainder and branches. the classically aortic arch arteritis its aorta the and vessels; affects arch third cases of also of MORPHOLOGYTakayasu involve the one Occasionally,aorticrootinvolvementcausesdilationandaorticvalveinsufficiency.Pulmonaryarteriesareinvolvedin50%ofpatients,andrenalandcoronaryarteriesalsocanbeaffected.Thetakeoffsofthegreatvesselscanbemarkedlynarrowedandevenobliterated(see

Fig.

10.24AandB ),explainingtheupper-extremityweaknessandfaintcarotidpulses.Thehistologicpicture(see

Fig.10.24C )encompassesaspectrumrangingfromadventitialmononuclearinfiltratesandperivascularcuffingofthevasavasorum,tointensetransmuralmononuclearinflammation,togranulomatousinflammation,repletewithgiantcellsandpatchymedialnecrosis.Theinflammationisassociatedwithirregularthickeningofthevesselwall,intimalhyperplasia,andadventitialfibrosis.

and are fever. Initial loss, signs fatigue, symptoms nonspecific, including and usually weight clinical appear picture. symptoms and the progression, With signs and dominate vascular disturbances, These and and ocular pressure neurologic blindness. include pulse strength; total hemorrhages, defects, and reduced retinal field including blood upper-extremity visual deficits; disease Distal can aorta as and can manifest hypertension. pulmonary involvement artery pulmonary claudication, cause leg half Narrowing renal in myocardial involvement patients. lead of arteries ostia systemic to and coronary one of roughly of infarction, can causes the the hypertension of is variable. evolution the disease The Some quiescent years. rapidly cases 2 become to progress, while after others 1 with is latter long-term albeit scenario, the visual possible. neurologic survival, or deficits, In

visceral vasculitis it (PAN) renal vessels of nodosa spares the Polyarteritis and and pulmonary involves is small-or muscular medium-sized a arteries; systemic circulation. typically the deposit vessels. is but to infection, that antigens B third immune containing in ANCAs, of chronic association have hepatitis There affected formation which B with leads one the no patients complexes hepatitis of the unknown remaining in cases. The is cause

necrotizing inflammation perfusion ofsmall-tomedium-sizedarteries,oftenwithsuperimposedthrombosis.Kidney,heart,liver,andgastrointestinaltractvesselsareaffectedindescendingorderoffrequency.Lesionsusuallyinvolveonlypartofthevesselcircumferenceandhaveapredilectionforbranchpoints.Impaired wall, arterial mayleadtoulcerations,infarcts,ischemicatrophy,orhemorrhagesinthedistributionofaffectedvessels.Theinflammatoryprocessalsoweakens leadingtoaneurysmsandrupture. transmural MORPHOLOGYClassicPANisasegmental the

Intheacutephase,thereistransmuralmixedinflammatoryinfiltratecomposedofneutrophilsandmononuclearcells,frequentlyaccompaniedbyfibrinoid necrosis andluminalthrombosis(

).Olderlesionsshowfibrousthickeningofthevesselwallextendingintotheadventitia.Characteristically,allstagesofactivity(fromearlytolate)coexistindifferentvesselsorevenwithinthesamevessel,suggestingongoingandrecurrentpathogenicinsults. Fig.10.25

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. isuninvolved. Polyarteritisnodosa,associatedwithsegmentalfibrinoidnecrosisandthromboticocclusionofasmallartery.Notethatpartofthevessel(upper-right, arrow) 10.25 of of Southwestern (Courtesy Department Sidney MD, Texas Pathology,University of School,Dallas,Texas.) Medical Murphree,

can PAN but young is adults occur disease primarily in age all groups. a of The with symptom-free clinical episodic, long intervals. is course typically and involvement the widely the can weight loss—are clinical is scattered, systemic so The and that manifestations fever, puzzling. varied vascular nonspecific, findings—malaise, and be of to “classic” and stools peripheral pains; due motor involvement; lesions; aches by caused affecting some and presentation pain combination involve muscular and accelerating hypertension renal predominantly artery A abdominal rapidly neuritis, diffuse involves gastrointestinal nerves. bloody cause is and is death. Renal often involvement a major of prominent fatal; however, typically 80%. is is 5-year Untreated, close survival PAN immunosuppression, with to up to non–HBV-associated more infection. Relapse cases follow in of that HBV in occurs than 25% often those cases, the long-term better have prognosis. The latter a

medium-sized childhood of an infancy vessels. febrile, usually of illness associated an largeto mainly is self-limited arteritis Kawasaki and disease with acute, 4 than age. of are of 80% younger years patients Approximately involvement significance arteries. the stems coronary clinical from Its of result thrombose, in rupture Coronary causing arteritis infarction. aneurysms or can myocardial that in in elsewhere. United is States disease and the Originally now the Japan, recognized described

individuals, infectious In (mostly viral) genetically of trigger posited the to susceptible variety agents disease. a have been or cross-reactive may against The uncovered hypersensitivity a antigen(s). delayed-type vascular result response newly vasculitis from directed in the auto-antibodies and B cell activation to cytokine result vasculitis. SMCs and Subsequent production that polyclonal precipitate ECs

MORPHOLOGYThevasculitisresemblesthatseeninpolyarteritisnodosa.Thereisadensetransmuralinflammatoryinfiltrate,althoughfibrinoidnecrosisusuallyislessprominentthaninpolyarteritisnodosa.Thevasculitistypicallysubsidesspontaneouslyorinresponsetotreatment,butaneurysmformationduetowalldamagemaysupervene.Aswithotherarteritides,healingmaybeaccompaniedbythedevelopmentofobstructiveintimalthickening.Pathologicchangesoutsidethecardiovascularsystemarerarelysignificant.

disease and hands and blistering, typically conjunctival edema of soles, node rash, mucocutaneous cervical syndrome). the Kawasaki manifests other node erythema (hence oral feet, palms desquamative and its enlargement and a lymph the of with and name, lymph erythema sequelae, develop associated to and/or to coronary rupture, 8 may diameter); arteritis, patients aneurysms infarction, (7 untreated of death. to cardiovascular 20% sudden mm the myocardial Approximately ranging coronary in artery ectasia, from coronary with large artery latter be thrombosis, asymptomatic inflammation together immunoglobulin intravenous artery mechanisms) through and of of markedly suppress Treatment consists the unclear decrease (which aspirin, incidence given which disease. when coronary symptomatic infusions

affects as Microscopic capillaries, a is arterioles small polyangiitis vasculitis that venules. well and necrotizing generally as called leukocytoclastic is hypersensitivity or vasculitis. also vasculitis It Unlike of any polyangiitis age of microscopic given in PAN, the to tend lesions same patient. in be all all necrotizing skin, muscle heart, be involved; gastrointestinal common. 90% glomerulonephritis (seen brain, and in The kidneys, lungs, of and pulmonary mucous capillaritis patients) membranes, particularly tract, can are of cryoglobulinemia, essential Henoch-Schönlein tissue be with disorders, angiitis disorders. can number purpura, such Microscopic or immune vasculitis the mixed associated a a as of feature connective

heterologous or (e.g., microorganisms cases, responses tumor antibody to some proteins, been penicillin), drugs (e.g., antigens implicated. proteins have streptococci), as such In responses immune can secondary trigger pathogenic. or complex reactions the ANCAs) to immune lead deposition These (e.g., either development that of are microscopic of cases associated polyangiitis Indeed, with most are MPO-ANCA. within the activation disease affected of manifestations. beds is for neutrophils probably and Recruitment vascular responsible

Depending cutaneous or involved, purpura. proteinuria, muscle on hematuria, vascular major bleeding, pain hemoptysis, features the bed abdominal pain or and include weakness, palpable and the removal widespread immunosuppression involvement, durable agent renal of CNS or remissions. exception offending patients induce with of the With

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. ANCA-associatedsmallvesselvasculitis.(A)Microscopicpolyangiitis(leukocytoclasticvasculitis)withfragmentedneutrophilsinthethickenedvesselwall.(BandC)Granulomatosiswithpolyangiitis.(B)Vasculitisofasmallarterywithadjacentgranulomatousinflammationincludinggiantcells(arrows). 10.26 (C)Lungfromapatientwithgranulomatosiswithpolyangiitis,demonstratinglargenodularcavitatinglesions. MD, Scott Women’s Hospital, Brigham Massachusetts. and Granter, Boston, of Courtesy (A, Department of School, MD, Courtesy Sidney Pathology, Medical University Dallas,Texas.) Murphree, C, Southwestern of of Texas

( MORPHOLOGYMicroscopicpolyangiitisischaracterizedbysegmentalfibrinoidnecrosisofthemediawithfocaltransmuralnecrotizinglesions;granulomatousinflammationisabsent.Theselesionsresemblethoseofpolyarteritisnodosabutsparemedium-andlarge-sizedarteries,sothatmacroscopicinfarctsareuncommon.Insomeareas(typicallypostcapillaryvenules),onlyinfiltratingneutrophilsundergoingfragmentationareseen,givingrisetothetermleukocytoclastic vasculitis

Fig.10.26A ).Althoughimmunoglobulinsandcomplementcomponentscanbedemonstratedinearlyskinlesions,mostlesionsare“pauci-immune”(i.e.,showlittleornoantibody).

(GPA) following: called triad the granulomatosis, necrotizing Previously polyangiitis a by granulomatosis with is vasculitis characterized a Wegener of

Necrotizing or the (lung) lower-respiratory nose, sinuses, or both granulomas upper-respiratory (ear, tract tract throat) of the

as vasculitis granulomatous vessels arteries), (e.g., venules, smallto arterioles, most the Necrotizing affecting sites prominently other airways and but or lungs capillaries, well and upper medium-sized

respiratory crescentic, restricted often necrotizing, Focal disease the be can forms tract. to glomerulonephritis “Limited” of GPA when the disease may the and of widespread organs, involvement. additional feature eyes, with most PAN heart; notably respiratory widespread the the resembles clinically, other Conversely, affect skin,

GPA antigens. a inhaled cell-mediated likely as hypersensitivity environmental initiated to response infectious or is tissue of and cases present drive PR3-ANCAs injury. 95% in almost probably the are level also therapy with marker fall disease ANCA as and The useful to activity, immunosuppressive disease prior antibody is dramatically relapse. effective rise a of titers

to sinusitis ulcerative vasculitis MORPHOLOGYUpperrespiratorytractlesionsrangefromgranulomatous withasurroundingfibroblasticproliferation( ofthenose,palate,orpharynx;lungfindingsalsovary,rangingfromdiffuseparenchymalinfiltratestogranulomatousnodules.Thereismultifocalnecrotizinggranulomatous lesions

).Multiplegranulomatacancoalescetoproduceradiographicallyvisiblenoduleswithcentralcavitation( Fig.10.26B

).Destructionofvesselscanleadtohemorrhageandhemoptysis.Lesionscanultimatelyundergoprogressivefibrosisandorganization. Fig.10.26BC

lesions (Chapter14). glomerulonephritis) and necrotizing glomerulonephritis) Therenal segmental tomoreadvancedglomerularlesionswithdiffusenecrosisandparietalcellproliferationformingepithelialcrescents(crescen-tic rangefrommild,focalglomerularnecrosisassociatedwiththrombosisofisolatedglomerularcapillaryloops(focal

ages of aged women other and man, can individuals is affected. a The patient middle be typical although (75%), include ulcerations with nasopharynx the of cavitary (80%). lesions and (90%), sinusitis presentations bilateral pneumonitis chronic nodules mucosal (95%), and disease renal Classic with more failure. hematuria proteinuria, renal rapidly and mild portend demonstrate only progressive involvement may severe may disease whereas renal Patients neuritis, Rash, and may also articular fever myalgias, occur. involvement, rate the year mortality If 80%. is untreated, 1 at Treatment antibodies steroids, this cyclophosphamide, TNF inhibitors, with and anti–B-cell (rituximab) improved considerably. has picture but survive, renal remain ultimately lead risk may for to Most GPA at patients failure. high relapses that with now

http://ebooksmedicine.net

vasculitis extravascular with eosinophilia, classically necrotizing necrotizing of is a small-vessel rhinitis, angiitis) (also by eosinophils. granulomatosis and Churg-Strauss infiltrates, syndrome vessels tissues associated infiltration striking perivascular a allergic peripheral and lung called allergic granulomas, asthma, and a 1 disorder, individuals. affecting rare million in It 1 is bleeding, and associations. (primarily as involvement (with the disease purpura), gastrointestinal renal glomerulosclerosis) segmental are Cutaneous major palpable and focal myocardial often the by leads Cytotoxicity infiltrates cardiomyopathy. to produced eosinophilic Cardiac cause 60% of patients involvement of death. major and in and is is a morbidity seen

some allergic normally stem syndrome innocuous “hyperresponsiveness” to may from stimulus. Churg-Strauss cases, the is in that disorder of are a MPO-ANCAs heterogeneous. present minority suggesting pathogenically lesions of polyangiitis of virtue eosinophils. PAN presence The vascular those by from and granulomas of microscopic the or differ

extremities. with of and and segmental, secondary the characterized arteries, obliterans thrombosing, (Buerger small-sized acute into the by chronic the mediumand is disease) nerves tibial principally extension inflammation occasional Thromboangiitis veins arteries, radial of and 35 almost usually years and heavy tobacco exclusively occurs in smokers Buerger disease before develops age. of of induce modify tobacco and is Direct immune components component EC alternatively, vessel suspected; by reactive tobacco caused a wall toxicity compound in response. may an some extracts. to Indeed, patients hypersensitive most disease Buerger with tobacco are (Israeli, Indian haplotypes. certain groups is association predilection A subcontinent, ethnic Japanese) prevalence an suggested in and with increased genetic certain an by HLA

vasculitis segmental and MORPHOLOGYInthromboangiitisobliterans,thereisasharply acute of mediumand arteries, small-sized chronic transmural predominantlythoseoftheextremities.Intheearlystages,mixedinflammatoryinfiltratesareaccompaniedbyluminalthrombosis;smallmicroabscesses,occasionallyrimmedbygranulomatousinflammation,alsomaybepresent(

Fig.

10.27 ).Theinflammationoftenextendsintocontiguousveinsandnerves(afeaturethatisrareinotherformsofvasculitis).Withtime,thrombicanorganizeandrecanalize,andeventuallythearteryandadjacentstructuresbecomeencasedinfibroustissue.

Fig. Thromboangiitisobliterans(Buergerdisease).Thelumenisoccludedbythrombuscontainingasterileabscess(arrow), 10.27 andthevesselwallisinfiltratedwithleukocytes.

claudication), from include instep the phenomenon pain to (venousinflammation).ThevascularinsufficiencyofBuerger manifestations superficial disease neural Raynaud by Early later), (see be pain—even (instep accompanied rest—undoubtedly by at and phlebitis cold-induced induced tends nodular foot involvement. severe exercise ulcerations gangrene. frank extremity Chronic to over time (occasionally precipitously) progressing develop, may lesions vascular established, stages of ameliorates respond the attacks; further once abstinence. not disease early to smoking abstinence in Smoking often the the do however,

immunologic in as angiitis many antibody and malignancies lupus or systemic syndrome, resembling be including diseases, and disorders with arthritis, seen classic association other such rheumatoid PAN may hypersensitivity Vasculitis anti-phospholipid purpura. erythematosus, Henoch-Schönlein may patients in small-and significant vasculitis aortitis occur visceral affects more typically Rheumatoid clinically a infarction. long-standing leading can medium-sized arthritis; with but arteries, rheumatoid cause to severe, it Linking vasculitis specific disorders therapeutic important to have implications. may the indicated antiphospholipid certain latter. morphologic immune example, anticoagulation the is while anti-inflammatory former although antibody syndrome and requires features, therapy complex share classic vasculitis lupus in For

be spp. Aspergillus and by by Localized or the in agents, bacteria caused infectious direct fungi, usually of may particular and Mucor arteritis arteries invasion part embolization abscesses), be may or or local an from a or—less endocarditis. adjacent of commonly— bacterial from Vascular (e.g., of infection pneumonia arise bacteria hematogenous may nearby infective spread invasion tissue

arterial described earlier, or and in weaken walls may Vascular mycotic infections culminate may induce aneurysms infarction. thrombosis and Thus, inflammation of can parenchyma. cause thrombosis to into and leading bacterial vessels infarction, extension brain ultimately subarachnoid meningitis the a of in infection

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Vasculitisisdefinedasinflammationofvesselwalls;itfrequentlyisassociatedwithsystemicmanifestations(includingfever,malaise,myalgias,andarthralgias)andorgandysfunctionthatdependsonthepatternofvascularinvolvement.

Vasculitiscanresultfrominfectionsbutmorecommonlyhasanimmunologicbasissuchasimmunecomplexdeposition,anti-neutrophilantibodies(ANCAs),oranti-ECantibodies.

Fig.10.22

Table10.4

vessels. or blood inappropriate of exaggerated Several characterized by disorders are vasoconstriction

and the fingers particularly but and nose, arteries lips. the vasoconstriction also from phenomenon Raynaud sometimes results or in the of toes, arterioles earlobes, extremities, digits show distal most from blood The or reflecting and paroxysmal most induces involved pallor flow color proximal restricted respectively. cyanosis, distal, “red-white-andblue” vasodilation, changes central vasoconstriction, more cyanosis; proximal characteristically to be phenomenon other may secondary Raynaud or disorders. can entity be primary a to

5% to for to Raynaud predilection cold is (previously local caused and affects of called disease) the a young or central phenomenon population Raynaud has general 3% responses exaggerated emotion; by and Primary vasomotor women. it the except walls thickening late changes are may course, arterial in intimal in appear. the absent Structural when atrophy skin, chronic subcutaneous occur. but usually cases, course The and is in the tissues, muscles may benign, of are Ulceration gangrene and rare. ischemic

even refers Secondary disease, insufficiency erythematosus, arterial caused to phenomenon Raynaud atherosclerosis. to disease other scleroderma, vascular systemic due lupus including or entities Buerger by may such patient Raynaud secondary first every of phenomenon for conditions, causes. Raynaud these with since the manifestation be should be Indeed, phenomenon evaluated

of or arteriolar Prinzmetal due Vasospasm cardiac vasospasm). cases subset cardiac called angina beds (angina in Raynaud to a to been and leads arterial of has spasm sufficient 30 myocardial infarction minutes), duration to can such (20 If of result. is Elevated the increase caused contractility, myocardial of also vasospasm. and rate exacerbating heart ischemia catechols levels by emotional “broken dilated called (caused an can a arrhythmia) with The association cardiomyopathy” duress). the syndrome,” or by be ischemic cardiac of because cardiomyopathy—so-called death outcome heart fatal sudden (also “Takotsubo and microscopic be chronic necrosis) acute hypercontraction present. necrosis in myocyte of may 11); cases by cases, granulation may foci (contraction microscopic characterized (Chapter band of areas subacute include findings and/or tissue scar in Histologic

account for least at venous relevant disease. Varicose phlebothrombosis/thrombophlebitis clinically veins and of of 90% cases

weakened and vessel dilated pressures Varicose veins intraluminal are by abnormally veins increased support. chronically tortuous produced wall the of lower are superficial typically leg and upper involved. The veins veins. one varicose of develop one and lower-extremity to third men Up fifth of women compression the of caused the cava during and uterus higher incidence pressure gravid in prolonged the the the by vena Obesity by increases pregnancy. elevation probably venous risk, in inferior women reflects also tendency toward is There varicosities. familial premature a

the and congestion, venous renders Varicose dilation to valves lower-extremity and incompetent stasis, pain, thrombosis. edema, leads edema the and including persistent extremity include dermatitis skin in changes, secondary disabling The and stasis most ischemic sequelae ulcerations. become varicose consequence a and of poor The as healing latter can infections. chronic wound ulcers superimposed that frequent Of thrombosed veins very rare, in superficial is arise from (Chapter emboli the note, embolism with these relatively from 4). contrast veins deep

merit varices. • two attention: in dilations Esophageal special Venous sites other obstruction frequently, vein (and 16). hypertension or vein causes cirrhosis portal venous portal (Chapter hepatic Liver thrombosis) less a esophageal varices); opening (1) periumbilical porto-systemic shunts in flow This, and abdominal caput hemorrhoids); the into and at wall to (forming veins leads (forming blood (3) rectum medusae). (forming the of increased the junction veins of (2) gastroesophageal turn, upper massive varices that Esophageal lead gastrointestinal hemorrhage. to are since (even prone important can most ruptures fatal) they to are

with or prolonged congestion the varicose are • plexus that associated of pelvic vascular http://ebooksmedicine.net defecate. from the to Hemorrhoids straining dilations anorectal at venous junction result pregnancy are source painful and are a to bleeding thrombosis Hemorrhoids ulceration. of prone and

deep of and leg phlebothrombosis. for of 90% Thrombosis thrombophlebitis cases veins than accounts more of

accompanied designations thrombosis by for venous inflammation. are These two terms largely interchangeable the as and setting as plexus inflammation). infection in sites are skull may venous where Other the the the sinuses venous the in thrombi or of dural and periprostatic plexus (especially veins in in venous large form females, pelvic the males well vein appendicitis, pelvic Peritoneal portal with can as salpingitis, hypercoagulability well thrombosis. 12) certain as (e.g., polycythemia associated peritonitis, abscesses, (Chapter lead to including conditions vera) and infections,

thrombosis important the (DVT) prolonged stasis risk In most deep the venous factor. legs, venous of immobilization resulting in is even with automobile occur sitting plane or or trips. long just extended rest during can This bed malignancy, years. another as for male DVT, are risk is failure, oral state congestive postoperative independent and heart use, pregnancy, contraceptive over obesity, 50 factor sex, age The of development often to (Chapter predispose individuals in thrombophlebitis. factors affected coagulation defects Inherited 4) different or (Chapter can at factors 6); manifest thrombi from of resulting hypercoagulable “Trousseau evanescent as elaboration different result also thromboses Venous procoagulant syndrome.” beds times, cancers vascular so-called the state thrombophlebitis” from in can “migratory

produce symptoms. or in Thrombi legs if to any, reliable signs few, tend swelling, present, heat, dilation, distal pain. and manifestations superficial redness, vein edema, When include cyanosis, local tenderness, is pressure elicited the In forced squeezing of foot pain veins, some dorsiflexion calf cases, or the (Homan by sign). over muscles, affected are the many exclude However, presence. does of in their DVTs not patients, bedridden absence especially asymptomatic, and findings

common detachment from thrombus. is clinical and fragmentation DVT, Pulmonary complication of the venous or serious embolism of resulting a first a of embolus. In pulmonary the many manifestation cases, thrombophlebitis is from range resolution can on the the number of size with Depending outcome no death. emboli, and symptoms to

that caused usually or bronchogenic mediastinal superior The carcinoma neoplasms vena compress vena cava, is or cava such invade superior syndrome by lymphoma. the as a arms marked cyanosis. the head, dilation with complex The of resulting clinical of consisting veins the characteristic associated produces obstruction neck, and of distress. respiratory Pulmonary be vessels compressed, also can causing

cephalad. propagates inferior the The lower-extremity by vena cava that by neoplasms thrombus a from invade vena renal, be hepatic, or compress caused can that syndrome inferior or or cava the veins and tendency carcinoma Certain ultimately neoplasms— particularly to tumors these striking vena hepatocellular grow cava. carcinoma—show occlude cell may the and within renal inferior a veins, vena lower Obstruction marked proteinuria. lower-extremity renal of superficial distention induces the of the with veins collateral and— edema, cava the abdomen, inferior of involvement—marked vein

lymphatic of disorders are extremely uncommon. vessels Primary commonly, infectious, more lymphatic vessels Much secondarily inflammatory, or are processes. involved by malignant

acute to the 3). vessels inflammation (Chapter an caused seeding bacterial by of lymphatic Lymphangitis refers as usually enlargement subcutaneous tender streaks, red, inflamed Clinically, nodes (acute lymphadenitis). of the appear draining painful with lymphatics lymph associated bacteria cause sepsis. the and not venous within they can pass circulation If into or lymph contained nodes, the bacteremia are

(heredofamilial or lymphedema) (simple resulting may congenital Primary hypoplasia lymphedema), familial an lymphatics. or congenital isolated occur Milroy from lymphedema disease congenital as the defect of as agenesis an obstructive result can lymphatic; lymphedema previously or accumulation Secondary following such from or of the obstructed, the conditions: stems normal obstruction fluid from behind interstitial disorders

involving channels lymphatic or regional the lymph nodes Tumors the either

sever lymph (e.g., connections axillary Surgical procedures nodes in radical lymphatic that mastectomy)

increases obstruction Regardless edema. of the distal cause, causes lymphedema lymphatics the pressure and hydrostatic to in the the in overlying deposition ECM to breast d’orange appearance overlying a may or producing of (as a may and of brawny the in the induration carcinoma). occur lead skin turn Chronic peau skin fibrosis, edema may lead ulceration. tissue perfusion skin to Eventually, inadequate lead in of to chylous and tumor lymphatics, Rupture milky of dilated following chylothorax, by typically various chylopericardium. (abdomen), spaces infiltrating obstruction designated accumulations mass, an can ascites lymph

aggressive common), locally benign Tumors vessels (extremely hemangiomas blood and include http://ebooksmedicine.net of lymphatics

Tumors Classification malignant Table and Conditions highly that of ( metastasize angiosarcomas Tumor-Like infrequently, and Vascular rare, neoplasms 10.5

10.5 Table

neoplasms glomus that (e.g., Vascular or arise tumor). (e.g., endothelium cells vessels support lymphangioma, from either angiosarcoma) surround blood or hemangioma, tumors are vena (aorta, of sarcomas. and pulmonary Primary and large vessels artery, occur mostly cava) infrequently observed. confused sometimes hemangioma malignancy an Although of anaplastic with benign are lesions a angiosarcoma, by cannot “gray-zone” uncertain also or that non-neoplastic challenges. developmental diagnostic and angiomatosis) (e.g., lesions vascular tumor-like manifest reactive as bacillary can present may malformations proliferations Congenital following In are neoplasms features: the distinguished benign malignant general, by vascular and

with channels filled of blood of ECs. lined are tumors are that lymph vascular or a by monolayer Benign cells usually composed normal-appearing

endothelial cellular, require do are vessels; Malignant form the usually confirmation atypia, of of proliferative, markers. are proliferations and detection cytologic immunohistochemical tumors more well-organized may show EC-specific such of not derivation

is red term (capillaries, discrete a local usually forms skin arterioles, vessels permanent small to for of mucous while a telangiectasia any venules, generic that is a of the describe membranes) dilation in and structure, lesion. used preexisting or dilation Ectasia a congenital lesions acquired be These or can and not neoplasms. true are

neck deep most light ectasia, composed head “birthmark”), on • lesion or the purple to of (a common vascular pink form flat Nevus of the is vessels. flammeus a dilated Most spontaneously. regress ultimately

a The is “port so-called of wine form flammeus. nevus stain” special These and fade do time. the surface, lesions tend during childhood, not thicken to with grow skin associated called of distribution Such trigeminal nerve angiomatosis). the are syndrome Sturge-Weber (also encephalotrigeminal occurring with lesions in the the associated skull. the facial with leptomeninges, opacities nevi, of cortical disorder in seizures, angiomas the and mental wine hemiplegia, ipsilateral congenital uncommon venous This is radiologic retardation, port mental a may with telangiectasia large the additional child facial vascular deficiencies malformations. of indicate presence in Thus, a

lesions. non-neoplastic Spider vascular telangiectasias are with These the arrays about arterioles arteries that often core pulsatile (the as of pressure. of dilated manifest central (the blanch a “legs” lesions “body”) radial, subcutaneous or spider) spider’s (e.g., or pregnant hyperestrogenic upper most women or states patients cirrhosis). Spider occur telangiectasias associated face, commonly the on neck, chest and frequently in with are with

encode telangiectasia Hereditary (Osler-Weber-Rendu is of signaling that components autosomal mutations hemorrhagic genes ECs. caused in an dominant by pathway TGF-β disease) in the disorder veins telangiectasias birth. capillaries malformations that composed at are and dilated The present are of respiratory, and well over and the as tracts. membranes, as mucous are widely in They gastrointestinal, distributed the skin urinary oral hematuria. can (nosebleed), epistaxis The serious spontaneously lesions bleeding, rupture, or causing gastrointestinal

tumors very and 7% but vessels tumors ( present of constitute birth Hemangiomas from eventually lesions are These of spontaneously all of size, most and childhood; in infancy blood-filled common composed many initially increase are benign regress

Fig. 10.28 ). While localized more can may (angiomatosis) arise and they lesions the internally. are confined head and hemangiomas to extensive be neck, typically occasionally these internal liver. lesions found the one are of third Nearly in Malignant is rare. transformation Several been clinical have variants histologic described: and

skin, membranes type; mucous as and hemangiomas occur tissues, most oral and Capillary cavities spleen, of are as the common ( and these lips, the kidneys in the well the subcutaneous in liver,

Fig. 10.28A). Histologically, they are ( composed with capillaries stroma of thin-walled scant

Fig. 10.28B

common newborn of skin and are births) “strawberry the can in hemangiomas Juvenile be (so-called extremely 200 (1 hemangiomas”) multiple. years rapidly a regression the fade These complete months cases. 1 of by age, to in of of vast with by 7 then but 3 age grow majority for few years

gingival, oral Pyogenic on manifest are hemangiomas skin, growing that mucosa. capillary lesions or granulomas the as red pedunculated rapidly tissue. granulation exuberant resemble they Microscopically http://ebooksmedicine.net bleed They

Fig. Hemangiomas.(A)Hemangiomaofthetongue.(B)Histologicappearanceinjuvenilecapillaryhemangioma. 10.28 (C)Pyogenicgranulomaofthelip.

(D)Histologicappearanceincavernoushemangioma. D, Israel Sexton, Hospital, Massachusetts. (A John Beth MD, and Courtesy of Boston, Courtesy of Christopher B,

D.M. MD, Women’s Boston, and Fletcher, Hospital, Brigham Massachusetts. Southwestern Dallas, Rogers, University Texas Courtesy of Medical School, Thomas MD, of C,

Texas.)

Fig. ). 10.28C the within weeks. after of few 1 one cm size lesions Roughly trauma, reaching of develop 2 a fourth a to Curettage are cautery curative. and usually is of gingiva the infrequently granuloma pregnant tumor occurs women. in gravidarum) (granuloma Pregnancy pyogenic a that undergo regress surgical These after or lesions (especially fibrosis, require occasionally may spontaneously excision. pregnancy) but

large, Cavernous • of channels. dilated hemangiomas composed are vascular do spontaneously hemangiomas, involve capillary regress. and not frequently cavernous more with Compared infiltrative, structures, deep are hemangiomas defined tissue vascular ( On spaces mass is examination, but sharply separated by blood-filled the composed unencapsulated large stroma histologic connective and of is

Fig. ). 10.28D and Intravascular thrombosis dystrophic are calcification common. some cases. in lesions be is These excision surgical may and locally required destructive, vulnerable significance, can the cosmetically traumatic are little tumors they to of and be often bleeding. but ulceration are and More clinical troublesome Brain may symptoms hemangiomas problematic, adjacent tissue or related cause compression are because they of to rupture. may 23), (Chapter liver. von disease Hippel-Lindau in are cerebellum, commonly stem, vascular one which the brain component retina, pancreas, lesions and of constitute in found Cavernous hemangiomas cerebral one CCM3 mutations hemangiomas some three In cavernous tumor or suppressor genes CCM2, of in by familial, are called CCM1, cases caused

of hemangiomas. the are Lymphangiomas benign counterpart lymphatic

slightly neck, or axillary are head, subcutaneous 2 occur in to diameter that the lesions lymphangiomas to cm Simple (capillary) and tissues. elevated in up 1 predominantly sometimes pedunculated networks blood channels of capillary from cells. distinguished lymphangiomas are endothelium-lined of composed only that spaces absence the Histologically, by of are

or lymphangiomas neck in and children, more axilla hygromas) the are in found retroperitoneum. (cystic rarely typically Cavernous the of the axilla Cavernous or be to of can cm), deformities lymphangiomas (up producing filling 15 the large gross neck. stroma aggregates. separated lined lymphoid ECs lymphatic These and spaces lesions intervening massively by of are connective dilated composed tissue containing by unencapsulated, margins The definitive and resection are indistinct difficult. making tumor in note, neck Turner cavernous lymphangiomas of the Of syndrome. common are

http://ebooksmedicine.net

arteriovenous of Glomus specialized painful are glomus in tumors thermoregulation. structures involved SMCs benign, from exquisitely bodies, arising tumors for from cavernous and smooth hemangiomas immunohistochemical muscle is markers. staining features clinical on based Distinction the in the the distal digits, under portion found commonly most are especially fingernails. They of is Excision curative.

angiomatosis (e.g., is opportunistic with Bacillary gram-negative caused proliferation hosts bacilli by AIDS) a of immunocompromised in patients the vascular family. Bartonella and The brain, skin, other bone, the involve lesions organs. can been species implicated: Two have

principal causes this hosts. granulomatous the in of henselae, reservoir Bartonella (a necrotizing cat-scratch disease organism is inflammation domestic nodes) lymph cat; whose immunocompetent

this the Bartonella in is body quintana, cause of War microbe I. human by lice; World transmitted which was fever” “trench

lesions take masses. form and papules subcutaneous or the of nodules, red rounded Skin of is ( a mitoses atypia there lined and which proliferation epithelioid exhibit ECs, prominent nuclear Histologically, capillaries by

Fig. ). 10.29 granular causative debris, nuclear include of bacteria. collections neutrophils, and the Other features infiltrating purplish

vascular VEGF host hypoxia-inducible production (HIF-1α), The induce proliferation. to tissues which factor-1α produce drives bacteria and cured treatment. (and antibiotic The infections by lesions) are

Kaposi (KSHV, is sarcoma herpesvirus-8, sarcoma neoplasm known (KS) also or Kaposi vascular herpesvirus by caused human as a HHV-8). of criterion a presence Although is diagnosis. used AIDS; common it in as the its is a occurs most with it in number indeed, patients for contexts, of population based forms demographics on recognized: KS, Four and are risks,

European men descent States. Mediterranean, is Eastern, (especially of Eastern it the a uncommon Middle of Ashkenazi United in older Jews); is or KS disorder Classic It associated not HIV can malignancy with with is be associated but altered or immunity infection. multiple as size the extremities; progressively red-purple spread manifests in increase skin and or nodules, plaques usually these proximally. number lower and KS on distal Classic subcutaneous the persistent, tissue. remain and Although the and skin asymptomatic are to typically localized tumors

years HIV-seronegative age) frequently typically it nodes lymph indolent 40 or in than the involves of younger can an follow more course; (under KS variant. occurs classic Endemic aggressive African and in individuals much common combination Africa. AIDS-associated tumor KS KS most now with (see in In the later), central is children; almost severe A is within prepubertal involvement, occurs the form, years. 100% an node prognosis in visceral 3 with lymph and prominent with particularly poor, mortality

KS the setting recipients Transplantation-associated T-cell immunosuppression. solid occurs in organ of in transplant 100-fold. is increased these KS risk patients, the for In an aggressive often be viscera; pursues lymph nodes, absent. involves lesions course and and may mucosa, cutaneous It organ for but the of Lesions with rejection. often attenuation risk at regress immunosuppression,

5). most (epidemic) illness; KS common AIDS-defining represents the malignancy is HIV-related it an AIDS-associated (Chapter worldwide of than more than incidence HIV-infected KS the to 3% with HIV-infected Although 2% and in with of antiretroviral general fallen incidence higher afflicts a it the therapy, occurs population, 1000-fold advent has individuals the still the of in 80%

U.S. population. lymph involves viscera and AIDS-associated disseminates often early widely to nodes KS

Fig. 10.29 Bacillaryangiomatosis.(A)Characteristiccutaneouslesion. (B)Histologicfeaturesarethoseofacuteinflammationandcapillaryproliferation.Inset, Modifiedsilver(Warthin-Starry)staindemonstratesclustersoftangledbacilli(black). Courtesy Israel Deaconess Beth Medical of (A, Boston, Johnson, MD, Richard Massachusetts. Center, Massachusetts.) of MD, Brigham courtesy and Boston, Hospital, inset, and Granter, Scott Women’s B course. inflammatorycells,sometimescontaininghemosiderin.These its http://ebooksmedicine.net in Most of patients lesionscanbedifficulttodistinguishfromgranulationtissue. eventually opportu die

rather nistic KS. from than infections

•Withtime,lesionsspreadproximallyandbecomelarger,vio-

are infected (HHV-8). by Virtually all KSHV KS lesions is KSHV virus, a Epstein-Barr γ-herpesvirus. Like via is the contact secretions KS both shoes). It cutaneous and African related (of endemic note, is through wearing transmitted prevalence potentially and of the of inversely sexual to oral exposures adults, aging. development; KS immunity be T-cell altered required immunity to may are for older in probably diminished T-cell KSHV related and development somatic also of contribute to acquired probable cells tumor the origin progression. in It and that is mutations

lytic latent in and KS which of important pathogenesis. probably both ECs, are in KSHV infections causes stimulating infection to A milieu. cells local induces production, of G by inflammatory recruited lytic proliferative sites produced growth, create a cytokines encoded VEGF and also protein endothelial virally proteins KSHV-encoded cells, controls In disrupt homologue proliferation of cellular viral normal infected latently synthesis through cyclin (e.g., of a

apoptosis by D) p53. prevent inhibiting and local the inflammatory a infected Thus, and environment growth advantage. favors proliferation, latently have cells cellular time, early with the In of carry cells virtually all the are only proliferating KSHV-infected, stages, cells virus. its a few but of lesions As polyclonal the with mutations with EBV tumors early accumulation are become infection, but monoclonal.

andnodule. cutaneouslesionsprogressthroughthreestages:patch,plaque, MORPHOLOGYInclassicKaposisarcoma(andsometimesinothervariants),the

•Patches arepink,red,orpurplemacules,typicallyconfinedtothedistallowerextremities(

plaques raised ( ).Microscopicexaminationrevealsdilated,irregular,andangulatedbloodvesselslinedbyECsandaninterspersedinfiltrateofchroniclaceous, Fig.10.30A

)composedofdilated,jaggeddermalvascularchannelslinedandsurroundedbyplumpspindlecells.Otherprominentfeaturesincludeextravasatedredcells,hemosiderin-ladenmacrophages,andothermononuclearcells. Fig.10.30A

•Eventuallynodular, moreovertlyneoplastic,lesionsappear.Thesearecomposedofplump,proliferatingspindlecells,mostlylocatedinthedermisorsubcutaneoustissues(

Fig.

),oftenwithinterspersedslitlikespaces.ThespindlecellsexpressbothECandSMCmarkers.Hemorrhageandhemosiderindepositionaremorepronounced,andmitoticfiguresarecommon.Thenodularstageoftenisaccompaniedbynodalandvisceralinvolvement,particularlyintheAfricanandAIDS-associatedvariants. 10.30B

The varies course according clinical disease setting. to of the widely Most are asymptomatic. infections primary KSHV KS restricted the least usually of Classic prognosis. and excellent initially—largely surface is—at an is surgical for to the adequate resection body, including results in for area, be disseminated disease, used more lesions chemotherapy multiple nodal therapy a restricted yields can for Radiation involvement. and satisfactory is radiotherapy) without of associated or or immunosuppression, In withdrawal chemotherapy effective. with therapy often KS (with adjunct KS, HIV anti-retroviral with without or is beneficial, AIDS-associated additional therapy For therapy. generally have inhibitors variably IFN-γ also effective. proved and angiogenesis

well-differentiated benign, with neoplasms spectrum malignant borderline and intermediate angiosarcomas wide aggressively behaviors Hemangioendotheliomas of hemangiomas clinical of between comprise a vascular those

Fig. 10.30 Kaposisarcoma.(A)Characteristiccoalescentcutaneousred-purplemaculesandplaques.(B)Histologicviewofthenodularstage,demonstratingsheetsofplump,proliferatingspindlecellsandslitlikevascularspaces. (Courtesy Christopher of D.M. Massachusetts.) Fletcher, Boston, Women’s Hospital, and MD, Brigham http://ebooksmedicine.net

hemangioendothelioma in is association adults veins. mediumto a large-sized Epithelioid arising of tumor with highly is clinical course variable. The to patients of majority 30% a excision the to the tumors. is While cases, recur; eventually 15% die up of of their tumors metastasize, in and 40% curative of 20%

highly tumors to neoplasms Angiosarcomas endothelial wildly differentiated are from hemangiomas resembling malignant lesions. anaplastic ranging soft liver. most gender occur any more affected, the often adults without lesions commonly are site, Older breast, involve skin, tissue, predilection; at and can but are Clinically, invade tumors that angiosarcomas aggressive metastasize. locally and are survival 30%. rates about 5-year Current only

with of ipsilateral upper lymphedema, breast the mastectomy setting classically after years extremity lymph for arise resection) can Angiosarcomas several the cancer. radical node in (i.e., in lymphatic presumably vessels from the such tumor In instances, (lymphangiosarcoma). arises (e.g., rarely and Angiosarcomas induced catheters). associated by radiation be bodies are can foreign (years) with also long-term indwelling

examples and angiosarcomas best certain with pesticides of are chemical chloride human carcinogens, known carcinogenesis). the of arsenical Hepatic including polyvinyl (one associated exposure transpire between and development. typically Multiple years subsequent tumor

MORPHOLOGYIntheskin,angiosarcomasbeginassmall,sharplydemarcated,asymptomaticrednodules.Moreadvancedlesionsarelarge,fleshyred-tantogray-whitemasses(

Fig.10.31A )withmarginsthatblendimperceptiblywithsurroundingstructures.Necrosisandhemorrhagearecommon.

Onmicroscopicexamination,theextentofdifferentiationisextremelyvariable,rangingfromplumpatypicalECsthatformvascularchannels(

)toundifferentiatedspindlecelltumorswithoutdiscerniblebloodvessels.TheECorigincanbedemonstratedinthepoorlydifferentiatedtumorsbystainingfortheECmarkersCD31andvonWillebrandfactor( Fig.10.31B

Fig.10.31C

Vascularectasiasarenotneoplasms,butratherdilationsofexistingvessels.

Vascularneoplasmscanderivefromeitherbloodvesselsorlymphatics,andcanbecomposedofECs(e.g.,hemangioma,lymphangioma,angiosarcoma)orothercellsofthevascularwall(e.g.,glomustumor).

Mostvasculartumorsarebenign(e.g.,hemangioma);somehaveanintermediate,locallyaggressivebehavior(e.g.,Kaposisarcoma);andothersarehighlymalignant(e.g.,angiosarcoma).

Benigntumorstypicallyformobviousvascularchannelslinedbynormal-appearingECs.Malignanttumorsmoreoftenaresolidandcellular,exhibitcytologicatypia,andlackwell-definedvessels.

Fig. 10.31 Angiosarcoma.(A)Angiosarcomaoftherightventricle.(B)Moderatelydifferentiatedangiosarcomawithdenseclumpsofatypicalcellsliningdistinctvascularlumina. (C)ImmunohistochemicalstainingofangiosarcomafortheendothelialcellmarkerCD31.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

surgery—recapitulate the The of many vessels occur angioplasty, changes changes injury. stenting, of that of forms occur intervention—balloon bypass setting or in vascular in that therapeutic following the other morphologic forces SMCs bypass of responses—fibromuscular artery and all and hyperplastic inserted thrombosis mechanical saphenous graft) vascular (due to the ECM. composed (after intimal induce (e.g., Local a into abnormal stenting), a stereotypical arterial vein angioplasty), coronary healing same lesions trauma as circulation the recruiting and that induce ECM tend to intimal deposition. just also with endothelium atherosclerosis, the Thus, by injure SMCs as interventions thickening promoting

to can to a arteries) the catheter plaque inflating also induced. doing by in so, dilated be a dissection coronary limited stenoses balloon those (especially in angioplasty); Arterial pressures occluding carotid (balloon is rupture arterial and transiently sufficient abrupt by circumferential by dissection, of be Angioplasty the compression reclosure from can extensive by resulting an thrombosis. or lumen or complicated longitudinal of and placement. In over coronary 90% procedures involve stent both concurrent coronary angioplasty of well view endovascular this

mesh. of are expandable stents metallic Coronary tubes flaps spasm. regular down” “tack more occur a the intimal vascular They that provide dissections lumen, angioplasty, and larger and during limit mechanically and is agents prevent region endothelialized. immediate thrombotic to endothelial anti-thrombotic Nevertheless, post-stenting an until complication; as antagonists) must becomes stented the receive potent acute patients a platelet occlusions injury, important catastrophic of (primarily thrombosis consequence is of success the long-term restenosis. angioplasty by limited The development of proliferative in-stent within intimal in 12 stenting up clinically occlusion patients significant one in third (Fig. luminal 6 of to results thickening months of to Such 10.32 ). of the releasing adjacent The block SMC complication newest drugs is designed to that by activation. drug-eluting generation this vessel stents paclitaxel, anti-proliferative avoid (e.g., sirolimus) wall into 1 such incidence year of stents reduces 80%. Use at of to the restenosis 50% by

Synthetic arteries. to are diseased or grafts used commonly bypass damaged or autologous vessels vascular replace acute (8 locations mm and grafts, in graft high-flow Of or small-bore native generally 18-mm–diameter) a fail or junction vasculature. as the conduits as aorta, large-bore (12to intimal at primarily diameter) late the thrombosis the the hyperplasia, grafts function artificial of in less while such well result synthetic the of

surgeries), autologous when left from (taken the vein bypass for coronary small-bore are patient’s or Consequently, own the grafts is internal replacement artery mammary vessel from saphenous either artery. fashioned (e.g., leg) needed of through vein The intimal early), occlude patency years at years; only (typically saphenous long-term 50% vein atherosclerosis. grafts to thrombosis and these is postoperatively), 10 grafts thickening graft (months years. internal patent after 90% more By 10 are artery mammary of grafts contrast, than

BA*.

Fig. 10.32 Restenosisafterangioplastyandstenting. andanew,glisteningintimalproliferativelesion. (A)Grossviewdemonstratingresidualatheroscleroticplaque(arrows) (B)Histologicviewshowsathickenedneointimaoverlyingthestentwires(black the arrow), whichencroachesonthelumen(asterisk). indicated diamond by and disease. therapies, (B, assist/replacement, from Reproduced arrhythmia FJ, replacement, including control, cardiovascular vascular cardiac heart repaired Edwards congenital WD: endovascular of revascularization, interventions, Pathology Schoen 3, Philadelphia, Cardiovascularpathology, MD, Livingstone.) ed Churchill et In 2001, Silver editors: al.,

et Polizzotto in Uldrick malignancies: pathogenesis, al: M, MN, and epidemiology, Oncol herpesvirus-associated advances Semin 42:247, Kaposi TS, 2015. sarcoma-associated Bhutani treatment, and review.] [A solid thorough

Nat of Med Coffman TM: pressure: search mechanisms the for hypertension, 17:1402, Under the 2011. essential translational review the recent the advances.] current state of of field [A including well-written

MC, and facts GA: Pathol Fishbein 2015. 24:335, Fishbein fancy, Arteriosclerosis: Cardiovasc “conventional fun thought-provoking and [A of to cardiovascular topics revisit wisdom.”]

BL: aortic Gillis and signaling contractility, aneurysm: Circ the of Laer cell vascular muscle 113:327, E, at Loeys Genetics thoracic of growth 2013. transforming Res factor-β Van crossroad L, smooth cellular molecular basis thoracic and up-to-date for dissections.] aneurysms [An the and discussion of

Gimbrone Vascular and Garcia-Cardeña Pathol Jr, atherosclerosis, Cardiovasc the hemodynamics, of endothelium, pathobiology 2013. G: MA 22:9, of in responses to groups one forces well-written [A the mechanical leading the from endothelial review on field.]

Grebe Rep 2013. E: Cholesterol A, 15:313, crystals Rheumatol Latz inflammation, Curr and cholesterol in by role activation the crystals, inflammasome atherosclerosis.] of of [A the review and its

plaque 2015. I: 278:483, Inflammation Hansson Intern P, vulnerability, Tabas and Med J Libby GK, and [An plaque current review linking concepts up-to-date the inflammation vulnerability.] of

JACC 4:1057, T, thrombosis, et Croce inflammation Inoue restenosis, implications Vascular stent Cardiovasc and for and Morooka K, repair: re-endothelialization, al: 2011. T, Interv that of [An the interventions.] overview inflammatory percutaneous influence pathways the vessel excellent outcomes of

of thrombosis Strauss R, late concepts perspectives, and Late J drug-eluting Am Cardiol evolving 50:119, very and Coll B: 2007. stents: Jaffe complications stent [An following coronary the placement.] of discussion even-handed artery

2007. Jennette J, of vasculitis, R: Nosology 19:10, Rheumatol Curr Opin primary Falk vascular pathways good the and a complex potentially of organization provides of based a pathogenic on and classification involved; to vasculitis aspect pathology.] confusing vessels [A

disease, JC, Rev Rheumatol 2014. cytoplasmic autoantibody-mediated RJ: Nat Falk Pathogenesis Jennette antineutrophil of 10:463, overview well-written and ANCA picture vasculitis.] in big well-organized the of [A

review 2013. disease: 21:101, Rev Saphenous Marhefka Kim pathophysiology, of FY, prevention, G, and al: Ruggiero NJ, et treatment, Cardiol graft vein graft pathogenesis occlusion acute the [A good of and overview clinical and chronic saphenous of stenosis.] issues vein

to humans, mechanisms 38:1092, in from Lichtman effector mice Immunity GK: Immune 2013. atherosclerosis: P, AH, Hansson Libby implicated clinical specific role immunity review and of [A describing adaptive experimental the pathogenesis.] atherosclerosis the literature of in superb and

Cardiol MacAlpin arterial coronary Some about RN: on observations 181:389, Int J controversies 2015. spasm, and of good [A clinical overview sequelae.] coronary and its spasm

Michel JL, Novel of J, of Egido et pathogenesis 2011. the humans, in 90:18, aorta aspects Res Cardiovasc of aneurysms JB, the Martin-Ventura abdominal al: molecular formation.] pathways of [A human abdominal aortic underlying good aneurysm the discussion

Monahan-Earley Haemost Aird WC: of system AM, vascular R, Evolutionary Dvorak 1):46, J the origins 2013. endothelium, 11(Suppl Thromb and blood for the of including endothelial for explanations basis cogent evolutionary development, vascular heterogeneity.] interesting discussion [An

perspectives, and N, of Rev et 22:1266, Penel the art Angiosarcoma: Oncol YM, Marréaud Crit Hematol 2011. al: S, Robin state this summary malignant vascular extensive tumor.] of aggressively clinical [An

moving identify Ridker atheroprotection, to 118:145, Res interleukin-1: targets to C-reactive novel Circ 2016. P: for to interleukin-6 upstream protein From links piece CRP therapeutic identifies regarding inflammatory other potentially mediators, opinion [A and to how well-written targets.] studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

of Other Myocardial Causes Disease

Neoplasms Cardiac Noncardiac of Effects

supertankers. of pumping its day; times is truly output over three blood and typical The in lifespan, than heart would 40 cumulative per remarkable fill liters million more 7500 organ, a a year beating a and approximately organ cannot functional vascular development the embryo without 8 the proceed, system weeks and dies. supply, to utero first (at a become of gestation); cardiovascular heart is in The system beating results during When heart fails equally the are catastrophic. the life, postnatal for States—approximately year accounts one cancer is worldwide greater minute, the disease four 610,000 cause all deaths mortality deaths in (a in Indeed, each every of cardiovascular death or leading of all and than combined). the rate forms United of for mortality 1 annual disease well of The cardiac with heart ischemic billion, contributing exceeds economic disease $200 impact half. over are 75 lost these additional productivity. Moreover, is thus, burden through “premature,” in years one third an of individuals of imposed roughly deaths than of age; years economic younger occurring

in down to of the mechanisms: pathophysiologic diseases can principal range affect system, distill cardiovascular a Although heart wide a “broken” the that result six pathways

Failure pump. of the empty filling, the cardiac relax In permit chambers to the in contracts the muscle properly—so-called In and common “systolic some muscle sufficiently situation, the dysfunction. diastolic dysfunction.” cases, cannot weakly resulting ventricular most cannot

Obstruction flow. to cause the that pump or ventricular overwork myocardium, pressures which obstruction. systemic has or to the Lesions coarctation) increased prevent can stenosis) aortic hypertension (e.g., valve chamber valve aortic against opening (e.g., calcific

Regurgitant flow. capacity flow of the affected may Valve of chambers. blood increased and results the in allows pathology volume pumping that overwhelm backward workload

flow. Shunted vessel another, pressure to to to one or one another, divert Defects lead overloads. (congenital chamber or volume blood from that inappropriately from acquired) and

conduction. cardiac of Disorders pathways pumping arrhythmias or blocked altogether. that contractions effective can conduction cardiac slow cause prevent impulses Uncoordinated or

vessel. Rupture of major the heart or (e.g., circulatory loss, and the massive continuity Loss thoracic gunshot hypotensive may a death. shock, through wound blood lead to of aorta)

http://ebooksmedicine.net

disease progressive end poor a often condition referred prognosis. with point many a (CHF), of as and is cardiac congestive is to for forms failure, heart the failure common typically Heart United over are and In financial affected, over States million well 1 resulting alone, in a $32 the 5 hospitalizations billion. annually, burden in million excess individuals of cause. the one CHF, 5 heart 9 in include receiving Roughly and years deaths diagnosis within of 1 contributory of die half States as failure United of patients in a a

or oxygen do metabolic at tissues, as output the demands, of greatly the when is in decreased demands can consequence in a the a pressures; minority cannot capacity, CHF higher-than-normal in of sufficient occurs meet increased tissue heart failure generate only hyperthyroidism, or failure). anemia filling heart to of so (highoutput as cases, carrying in sometimes large the of valve of a or setting infarct abrupt, myocardial is acute dysfunction. onset as CHF The or cases, however, of overload and effects work owing loss progressive insidiously chronic most CHF of cumulative the gradually develops In to myocardium.

Heart systolic from failure dysfunction. or diastolic may result myocardial from of disease ischemic Systolic function, hypertension. inadequate consequence contractile dysfunction results usually as or a heart to and an hypertrophy, adequately of may to massive which dysfunction left consequence fibrosis, heart inability the or of be refers relax a amyloid fill, Diastolic constrictive deposition, myocardial pericarditis. ventricular seen one patients, frequency half adults, dysfunction, in attributable diabetic diastolic of a women. older are Approximately greater cases to CHF and with Heart (e.g., by also be following rapid may failure the valve or occur blood increases to even normal. pressure, caused or volume in dysfunction endocarditis), is if due heart may blood

and elevated blood, pump no pressures. ventricular is pressures, can end-diastolic in longer volumes, there heart When, increase efficiently the end-diastolic an increased venous failing accompanied increased failure—is inadequate always called failure. forward output— of is, cardiac the by Thus, backward almost congestion circulation—that venous eventually and virtually backward cardiac some is root deficient in every affected Although of organ the problem combination other function, CHF is by failure. forward typically

system through The for mechanism. • cardiovascular or attempts hemodynamic mechanisms: contractility The reduced compensate increased burden myocardial homeostatic to Frank-Starling several and end-diastolic filling cardiac more heart forcibly, cardiac the myofiber contract cause increased these fibers increasing lengthened dilate thereby output. Increased stretching; volumes means, is dilated the ventricle patient able heart If is said be output failure. cardiac the maintain to to compensated by in this at the comes an and already-compromised oxygen expense increased tension of magnifies wall ventricular dilation the myocardium. of requirements However, the the to muscle With needs sufficient of longer time, failing develops no the patient is failure. decompensated propel meet heart body, able to blood the and

systems: neurohumoral Activation of

contractility neurotransmitter of and vascular system increases rate augments norepinephrine Release autonomic by nervous and the resistance. the myocardial heart

and the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone retention tone. increases and (augmenting of circulatory salt water spurs vascular system Activation volume)

vascular of atrial relaxation. Release system diuresis through renin-angiotensin-aldosterone muscle balance smooth acts peptide the natriuretic and to

Myocardial changes, muscle structural augmented including mass. adapt Cardiac myocyte workload sarcomeres, that new enlargement assembling by myocytes to change increased is a (hypertrophy) accompanied by (

Fig. 11.1

or new myocytes, of In to overload adjacent stenosis), hypertension sarcomeres long sarcomeres. parallel existing pressure added to tend to (e.g., states the the be axis valvular chamber. The the size in hypertrophy—the thickness the ventricular fiber without thus an of increase in results concentric diameter wall growing increases muscle

the so with added length muscle in existing overload increases. shunts), (e.g., that series new the fiber volume states regurgitation sarcomeres or sarcomeres, In valvular are or wall tends resulting normal, be measure to thus, ventricle of wall weight—rather in dilate, than the hypertrophy volume-overloaded hearts. thickness the best decreased; thickness—is can Consequently, heart and increased, the

Compensatory at comes cost. a hypertrophy cell increased myocardial are The to hypertrophic owing requirements myocardium of amplified mass. oxygen capillary step to ischemic vulnerable not expand bed oxygen does myocardial in myocardium demands, the Because increased with the injury. the becomes myocardial dominant myosin of myocytes, produced. changes as of Hypertrophy fetal is with gene heavy expression of form chain in patterns associated typically altered the reminiscent also such function rate of oxygen of output, increases to cardiac improve consumption. lead both and myocyte expression to but may that contraction, contribute Altered changes cardiac which heart to force lead gene which higher also in in the alterations, including of eventually and myocyte workload, apoptosis, other (ECM) extracellular in supervene, changes deposition. face and pathologic increased matrix chronic In cytoskeletal ischemia increases

indeed, sudden risk with is cardiac Pathologic for increased independent an death. correlated cardiac hypertrophy hypertrophy compensatory mortality; factor cardiac is resting an By contrast, decreased typically blood accompanied heart density, volume-loaded and is hypertrophy capillary http://ebooksmedicine.net by induced (physiologic in hypertrophy) the regular increase aerobic with rate exercise by

Fig. Leftventricularhypertrophy. 11.1 (A)Pressurehypertrophyduetoleftventricularoutflowobstruction.Theleftventricleisonthelower inthisapicalfour-chamberviewoftheheart. right (B)Leftventricularhypertrophywithandwithoutdilation,viewedintransverseheartsections.Comparedwithanormalheart(center), and hasincreasedmassandanormalwallthickness.(C)Normalmyocardium. haveincreasedmassandathickleftventricularwall,whilethehypertrophied,dilatedheart(right) thepressure-hypertrophiedhearts(left in A) (D)Hypertrophiedmyocardium(panelsC andD arephotomicrographsatthesamemagnification).Notetheincreasesinbothcellsizeandnuclearsizeinthehypertrophiedmyocytes. from Reproduced of anatomy permission cardiac specimens. WD: and B, Edwards with Cardiac examination and (A Wilkins,p 86.) & 5,Philadelphia,1995,Williams et editors: Emmanouilides MossandAdamsheartdiseaseininfants,children,andadolescents:includingthefetusandyoungadults,ed GC, In al, pressure. adaptations reduce overall These physiologic

morbidity and MORPHOLOGYcardiovascular mortality. associated (e.g., effects. the is same weight have may not hypertrophy In with pressure beneficial exercise comparison, lifting) and static

predominantly affect Heart or right left involve may or failure both heart of can sides. the the side the of diseases The (IHD), myocardium ischemic disease cardiac most causes failure or systemic hypertension, disease, and aortic of primary heart left-sided common valve amyloidosis). the are mitral (e.g., perfusion from CHF systemic pulmonary clinical the within diminished The back-pressures effects and elevated circulation. stem morphologic and left-sided of

Heart. Thegross cardiacfindingsdependontheunderlyingdiseaseprocess,forexample,myocardialinfarctionorvalvulardeformitiesmaybepresent.Withtheexceptionoffailureduetomitralvalvestenosisorrestrictivecardiomyopathies(describedlater),theleftventricleusuallyishypertrophiedandcanbedilated,sometimesmassively.Leftventriculardilationcanresultinmitralinsufficiencyandleftatrialenlargement,whichisassociatedwithanincreasedincidenceofatrialfibrillation.Themicroscopic changesinheartfailurearenonspecific,consistingprimarilyofmyocytehypertrophywithinterstitialfibrosisofvariableseverity.Superimposedonthisbackgroundmaybeotherlesionsthatcontributetothedevelopmentofheartfailure(e.g.,recentoroldmyocardialinfarction).

Lungs. fluid alveolar edema Inacuteleft-sidedheartfailure,risingpressureinthepulmonaryveinsisultimatelytransmittedbacktothecapillariesandarteriesofthelungs,resultingincongestionandedemaaswellaspleuraleffusionduetoanincreaseinhydrostaticpressureinthevenulesofthevisceralpleura.Thelungsareheavyandboggy,andmicroscopicallyshowperivascularandinterstitialtransudates,alveolarseptaledema,andaccumulation spaces.Inchronicheartfailure,variablenumbersofredcellsextravasatefromtheleakycapillariesintoalveolarspaces,wheretheyarephagocytosedbymacrophages.Thesubsequentbreakdownofredcellsandhemoglobinleadstotheappearanceofhemosiderin-ladenalveolarmacrophages—so-calledheart of failure the cells—thatreflectpreviousepisodesofpulmonaryedema. in

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of and failure; of also Dyspnea significant air (shortness transudation a spaces. most breath) the is usually consequence earliest is into of symptom cough exertion on fluid heart as left-sided common also occurs and dyspnea As when this position progresses, patients from return lower diaphragm. venous the (orthopnea); supine elevates the the recumbent experience because extremities increases failure so sleep in semi-seated patients typically standing, is a position. or relieved Orthopnea by usually sitting particularly breathlessness, on dyspnea with feelings a awakening dramatic sleep Paroxysmal extreme is dyspnea from of suffocation. of nocturnal bordering patients form

a of at the edematous caused enlarged and an alveoli. Other opening ventricular pulmonary lung the fine sound heart by failure bases, include of manifestations (cardiomegaly), ráles third left tachycardia, heart (S3), are regurgitation dilation, ventricular outward, murmur. causing muscles papillary the systolic a With and mitral displaced progressive atrial manifested chronic Subsequent an atrium heartbeat. cause irregular” can the left of by “irregularly dilation fibrillation, volume. to the Such reduce reducing atrial filling, chaotic contribution uncoordinated, atrial thus stroke ventricular the ventricular contractions leading organs. frequently stasis also shed of and cause that other emboli infarction formation blood strokes thrombi can manifestations causes Atrial in the the and fibrillation (particularly the of to atrial in appendage), of

turn cardiac leads renin-angiotensin-aldosterone pressures renal Diminished increasing volume 4 10). in triggers (Chapters that the perfusion axis, and output intravascular and decreased to the failing exacerbate compensatory a edema. effects pulmonary heart, Unfortunately, with these impaired may metabolic increasing of CHF, azotemia further with supervene, prerenal of and With progression wastes nitrogenous excretion derangement. In as diminished marked may perfusion CHF, cerebral stupor and to by severe manifest and irritability, diminished coma. hypoxic restlessness encephalopathy can cognition, progress that

underlying typically inadequate a perfusion. cause, defect correcting valvular cardiac the for example Treatment focused—at or is CHF least initially—on for inhibitors “positive options, variously overload salt contractility includes of lieu (adrenergic approach myocardial afterload inotropes”), agents increase the that reduce or or (e.g., such pharmacologic angiotensin-converting In restriction reduce volume diuretics), enzymes). clinical blockade or of (so-called not retention, by remodeling hypertrophy limiting patients to water salt and only but inhibitors also benefit enzyme uncertain and cardiomyocyte Angiotensin-converting aldosteronemediated opposing appear through mechanisms. by a pacing armamentarium, both the cardiac (exogenous recently stimulation cardiac therapy have modulation muscle) the of cause of cardiac CHF mortality. of human contractility cardiologist’s remains resynchronization (exogenous and right left morbidity ventricles) and augmented Although and serious

of left-sided burden the failure, increase the pulmonary inevitably right Right-sided since of heart. consequence produces the pressure on the an circulation in any heart increased heart side usually is failure left-sided that right-sided Consequently, heart failure of heart the those induce failure. of include causes all is affecting right-sided one cor patients as it in Isolated variety disorders pulmonale. is lungs; and referred often failure occurs typically of of hence to the a heart with infrequent example, vasoconstriction pulmonary also for pulmonale apnea). (Chapter hypertension thromboembolism, pulmonary 13), lung sleep diseases, primary recurrent disorders secondary or pulmonary the that to may (obstructive pulmonary Besides conditions affect vasculature, cause cor parenchymal that arise (discussed hypertrophy the and is later), of of right side disorders the pulmonary these feature results dilation hypertension in heart. of The common which obstruction. ventricle the bulging and atrium, by output the confined reduce septum In are outflow to to right tract dilation causing can cor although left generally pulmonale, of ventricular hypertrophy cardiac myocardial and the

of differ morphologic in is engorgement and major minimal. typically failure pronounced that clinical those portal The failure from heart left-sided and heart systemic congestion the and pure pulmonary effects of right-sided systems of is venous

and MORPHOLOGYLiver Portal System. hepatomegaly). Theliverusuallyisincreasedinsizeandweight(congestive inadditiontothesinusoidalcongestion.Withlong-standingsevereright-sidedheartfailure,thecentralareascanbecomefibrotic,creatingso-calledcardiac congestion, apatternreferredtoasnutmeg cirrhosis. (Chapter4);congestedcentrilobularareasaresurroundedbyperipheralpaler,noncongestedparenchyma.Whenleft-sidedheartfailureisalsopresent,severecentralhypoxiaproducescentrilobular Acutsectiondisplaysprominentpassive liver necrosis

splenomegaly). withvascularcongestionproducingatense,enlargedspleen(congestive hypertension), Right-sidedheartfailurecanalsoleadtoelevatedpressureintheportalveinanditstributaries(portal Ifsevere,chronicpassivecongestionandattendantedemaofthebowelwallmayinterferewithabsorptionofnutrientsandmedications.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

and Peritoneal Pericardial, Spaces. Pleural, inthepleuralandpericardialspaces,butusuallydoesnotcausepulmonaryparenchymaledema.Pleuraleffusionsaremostpronouncedwhenthereiscombinedright-sidedandleft-sidedheartfailureleadingtoelevatedpulmonaryandsystemicvenouspressures.Acombinationofhepaticcongestion(withorwithoutdiminishedalbuminsynthesis)andportalhypertensioncanleadtoperitonealtransudates(ascites). (effusions) Systemicvenouscongestionduetoright-sidedheartfailurecanleadtotransudates Ifuncomplicated,effusionsassociatedwithright-sidedCHFaretrasudateswithalowproteincontentandlackofinflammatorycells.

Tissues. Subcutaneous Edemaofdependentportionsofthebody,especiallythefeetandlowerlegs,isahallmarkofright-sidedCHF.Inchronicallybedriddenpatients,theedemamaybeprimarilypresacral.

right-sided Unlike symptoms. left-sided is heart associated with heart failure failure, respiratory not pure typically include and venous and and portal Instead, edema, are pleural and congestion related splenic clinical enlargement, systemic hepatic manifestations to ascites. peripheral the effusion, failure. congestion brain and of deficits those hypo-perfusion the the left-sided of produce by heart heart comparable failure right-sided and to due Venous caused kidneys hypoxia to can

failure. features of appearance often encompassing right-sided note, decompensation of heart CHF, by cardiac is left-sided both Of marked biventricular the and increasing progresses, a cardiac As acidotic, CHF tissue congestion. and as patients diminished perfusion both frankly consequence cyanotic and output decreased may become of resulting from

CHFoccurswhentheheartisunabletoprovideadequateperfusiontomeetthemetabolicdemandsofperipheraltissues;inadequatecardiacoutputusuallyisaccompaniedbycongestionofthevenouscirculation.

Left-sidedheartfailureismostcommonlysecondarytoischemicheartdisease,systemichypertension,mitraloraorticvalvedisease,orprimarydiseasesofthemyocardium;symptomsaremainlyaconsequenceofpulmonarycongestionandedema,althoughsystemichypoperfusioncancauserenalandcerebraldysfunction.

Right-sidedheartfailureisduemostoftentoleft-sidedheartfailureand,lesscommonly,toprimarypulmonarydisorders;signsandsymptomsarerelatedchieflytoperipheraledemaandvisceralcongestion.

birth. Congenital the or great are present heart at are vessels heart diseases abnormalities that of and birth account defects 20% 30% to for of include They a all broad

11.1 Table

Congenital Cardiol Malformations* of Coll Cardiac Am 39:1890,2002. *Summaryof44publishedstudies.Percentagesdonotaddto100%becauseofrounding.DatafromHoffmanJI,KaplanS:Theincidenceofcongenitalheartdisease,J Frequency

anomalies to produce of from survival, severe symptoms, perinatal which few that some spectrum malformations, ranging during of incompatible intrauterine with go or life. unrecognized no completely lesions or per 40,000 infants in United of affects disease Congenital the heart year roughly 1% nearly States). newborns (or malformations. is stillborns, significant in have approximately which infants cardiac premature higher incidence of The one fourth in and that involve the or heart. usually single Defects of live permit regions only birth chambers for disease; 85% are in congenital heart of Twelve shown account frequencies their entities

11.1 Table

patients with the at Thanks of million is alone. surviving is to number in disease over the estimated increasing 2 United advances, and surgical rapidly States congenital currently heart individuals brought Although virtually myocardial in of irreversible; since all may scarring. surgery degree normal, defect about may surgery hypertrophy be the the completely correct cardiac not myocardial addition, be the the in cardiac may some and by remodeling hemodynamic results heart congenital repaired abnormalities, secondarily appear Such and changes arrhythmias years after correction. many dysfunction, to can surgical myocardial occasionally lead which

3 from most weeks disease develop. embryogenesis Congenital arises commonly heart faulty major structures cardiovascular gestational 8, during through when 90% is The cases. cause unknown almost in of factors, environmental infection, congenital accepted diabetes, and including characterized. maternal teratogens, and exposures, Of factors the best genetic rubella are etiologic in disease certain familial 15, heart factors Turner and implicated forms include and congenital chromosomal 13, loci specific 18, trisomies syndrome). 21, (e.g., abnormalities of Genetic and

http://ebooksmedicine.net

events. work Cardiac of that involves multiple to genes together a series choreograph tightly regulated complex morphogenesis connection segmentation and valve the cardiac growth vessels of the commitment heart. progenitor to formation, of heart looping of and cells tube, chambers, cardiac to steps lineage, great the myocardial the formation include the and Key of transcription growth (BMP), and transformations fibroblast and vascular morphogenetic orchestration factor-β Proper of remarkable including the (VEGF), and signaling factor, on molecules, depends several pathways factors protein Notch growth endothelial factor networks bone these of transforming (TGF-β), pathways. Wnt, growth the mechanical which essential by by developing is Also force flowing the cells of the is imparted cardiac morphogenesis for pulsatile sensed vessels. heart and blood,

outcome. involves can many crafting adversely steps, a normal Since influence the heart even perturbations subtle particular the Most sometimes loss gain) genetic are dominant causing autosomal mutations of defects known of factor. (or a of function mutations transcription Several involve factors. and/or in (VSDs) defects syndrome. be mutations by and the factor TBX5 Holt-Oram defects septal (ASDs) transcription may defects as caused such atrial example, conduction For ventricular mutations, septal cause Noonan (e.g., cascades constitutive with associated signaling that intracellular disorders syndrome) mutations are in activation. Other (e.g., MicroRNAs, as well contributors. DNA important are recognized as also epigenetic methylation), as increasingly changes is subtle junctures by defects changes likely that critical even heritable early that environmental produced can cause transient factor It recapitulate activity may stresses in transcription in at pregnancy mutations.

anomalies diseases); a congenital a heart various shunt; (3) (cyanotic structural their clinical can be malformations three shunt disease (1) based malformations obstruction. right-to-left congenital and causing consequences: causing left-to-right causing major heart The (2) hemodynamic on to in assigned groups malformations and

A or is an chambers between abnormal shunt blood communication vessels. of pressure flow the (or heart side on relationships, versa). of vice to permit from right the the Depending blood the left shunts

blood systemic enters a circulation is the results the poorly With (cyanosis) skin system and the collected the dusky from bypassed venous arterial right-to-left circulation. oxygenated pulmonary of shunt, blueness because

with (at into flow are pulmonary contrast, associated least By cyanosis. circulation blood not shunts left-to-right increase and the initially) high low-resistance to increased lead low-pressure, protect pulmonary resulting increase resistance bed, and—eventually and However, the expose these to pulmonary pressures to adaptive ventricular hypertrophy vascular right the volumes; lung circulation changes rightsided—failure. that alterations they in reversal (right cause With shunt also left) to cyanosis. pulmonary increased and time, resistance late-onset can

narrowing chambers, by vessels. vascular Some blood valves, obstruct anomalies flow or major the • congenital an is A obstruction complete malformation called characterized by atresia. VSD). an In obstruction through some is a associated also (right-to-left, (e.g., a (pulmonary of shunt disorders with Fallot), tetralogy stenosis)

chamber wall lead of hemodynamics disease congenital heart hypertrophy. to The usually altered or dilation defects However, result birth in size; atrophy before mass a muscle is if this occurs it reduced called it and chamber postnatally. if some hypoplasia or develops

types malformations. Disorders associated Left-to-right common most with cardiac shunts congenital are the of (ASDs), and arteriosus ductus They septal defects septal ( ventricular defects patent atrial (PDA) include (VSDs),

Fig.

11.2 ). VSDs blood ASDs pressure. increased and and both cause ventricular outflow increase volumes, only while and flow pulmonary PDAs pulmonary right typically range shunts asymptomatic these from to of fulminant completely heart failure. Manifestations

these early feature defects. of an not is Cyanosis pulmonary syndrome). right-to-left and (Eisenmenger as marked earlier, to eventually discussed of the of blood shunting circulation, the However, left-to-right shunting give prolonged unoxygenated hypertension into by systemic cyanosis appearance a change rise may significant considered pulmonary disease heart develops, congenital structural Once hypertension are defects irreversible. the of is the This rationale in for early surgically. most cases intervention,

Fig. indicatedirectionofbloodflow).(A)Atrialseptaldefect(ASD).(B)Ventricularseptaldefect(VSD). Commoncongenitalcausesofleft-to-rightshunts(arrows 11.2 rightventricle. leftventricle;PT, leftatrium;LV, (C)Patentductusarteriosus(PDA).Ao, Aorta;LA, pulmonarytrunk;RA, rightatrium;RV,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

between development, left and ostium and is become by a secundum) normal the cardiac patency right eventually ovale. atria foramen (ostium During series the that of primum fenestrations maintained This the from blood the atrium, flow circulation sustaining right from to allows fetal the left oxygenated thereby to arrangement development. maternal septum the later to grow the primum intrauterine occlude in (septum the heart of occur 80% and cases, pressures and foramen the fuse tissue at ovale. that ovale, against of left-sided permanently flaps in development, septa secundum) stages the At higher birth foramen to 20% during maneuver foramen of septa sneezing transient cover the bowel movements. adequate is can right-to-left flow, the as straining although ovale unsealed In or such a blood remaining a Valsalva of the with results; allow during cases, the foramen, patent size flap (e.g., that venous ovale veins) paradoxical significance, has it as defect. manifests enter leg as arterial systemic embolism, this Although little occasionally circulation deep typically foramen the from via emboli a defined

abnormal an opening in atrial the ASD allows to ovale, is patent an chambers. contrast that flow blood between septum foramen unrestricted In atrial the fixed the majority of which to insufficient defects growth is occlude A ASDs so-called are ostium. septum (90%) of secundum second secundum” the in “ostium

secundum MORPHOLOGYOstium ASDs(90%ofASDs)aresmooth-walleddefectsneartheforamenovale,typicallywithoutotherassociatedcardiacabnormalities.Hemodynamicallysignificantlesionsareaccompaniedbyrightatrialandventriculardilation,rightventricularhypertrophy,anddilationofthepulmonaryartery,reflectingtheeffectsofachronicallyincreasedvolumeload.

canal. Ostium primum atrioventricular ASDs(accountingfor5%ofthesedefects)occuratthelowestpartoftheatrialseptumandcanbeassociatedwithmitralandtricuspidvalveabnormalities,reflectingthecloserelationshipbetweendevelopmentoftheseptumprimumandtheendocardialcushions.Inmoreseverecases,additionaldefectsmayincludeaVSDandacommon

ASDs Sinus (accountingforanother5%ofthecases)arelocatedhighintheatrialseptumandoftenareaccompaniedbyanomalousdrainageofthepulmonaryveinsintotherightatriumorsuperiorvenacava. venosus

usually are adulthood. until asymptomatic ASDs many close more are spontaneously. Although common, VSDs close—are the less ASDs—which be first common in spontaneously defects diagnosed to likely Consequently, most to are adults. circulation side pulmonary due ASDs shunts, pressures the the in lower heart. left-to-right to right initially cause the and of in are general, usually especially these produce than not tolerated, cm lesions even childhood. diameter; 1 any if well are defects larger in they In less symptoms do time, and overloads however, pressure chronic Over volume pulmonary can cause hypertension. failure, intravascular closure disease. pulmonary performed embolization, preempt ASD to irreversible vascular is heart of the thus paradoxical development Surgical and or survival that population. for unaffected is to postoperative is low, an comparable Mortality and

left-to-right (see septum constitute and congenital anomaly most ventricular common Defects the at cardiac shunting birth in the allow

Table 11.1

Fig. 11.3 ). by grows muscular that thinner heart ridge fusing with cushions. formed apex endocardial partition the normally grows membranous is a the from The downward a ventricular upward from that septum and site region part (membranous) septum of to the of last the The basal the VSDs. develop approximately is of 90% is with only in remainder the associated occur to 20% isolation; childhood, close spontaneously but cardiac in VSDs malformations. 30% other VSDs are Most of

),rangingfromminutedefectsinthemembranousseptumtolargedefectsinvolvingvirtuallytheentireinterventricularwall.Indefectsassociatedwithasignificantleft-to-rightshunt,therightventricleishypertrophiedandoftendilated.Thediameterofthepulmonaryarteryisincreased,owingtotheincreasedrightventricularoutputandhigherrightsidedpressures.Vascularchangestypicalofpulmonaryhypertensionarecommon(Chapter13). Fig.11.3

Fig. Ventricularseptaldefectofthemembranoustype(arrow). 11.3 William of Rochester, Clinic, Edwards, (Cour-tesy D. Minnesota.) Mayo MD, http://ebooksmedicine.net

close may of infancy half in septum VSDs the of be asymptomatic; childhood. muscular during Small those spontaneously portion or the result and hypertension CHF. left-to-right however, complicated shunting, by defects, pulmonary Larger chronic in often shunt occurs frequently with resultant with of ASDs. earlier VSDs and reversal than hypertension, Progressive more cyanosis, pulmonary the with and lesions. surgical therefore such Early for correction indicated is Small-or the risk the jet increase produce damage lesions in medium-sized ventricle and infective defects for cause endocarditis. that right endothelial

left artery. distal the and from just left arteriosus artery of the The pulmonary arises joins ductus subclavian the aorta the origin to the intrauterine pulmonary During life, the the blood artery to from bypassing aorta, flow it unoxygenated to permits lungs. occur levels in oxygenation, local and in days and the healthy vascular E2. changes constricts prostaglandin decreased ductus Within pulmonary these to 1 2 term arterial of declining increased resistance, birth response infants, closes; to of only strand first residual fibrous tissue obliteration of ligamentum Complete known months arteriosum. of the leaving extrauterine a occurs life, few within the as infants distress delayed to (or with disease). respiratory heart in can be or hypoxia (related even Ductal absent) closure 7% lesions PDAs congenital heart (see of account for about

11.1 Table

Fig. defects. of isolated (90%) 11.2 majority are the ); great these

murmurs. harsh, that PDAs shunts left-to-right are produce “machinery-like” high-pressure to congestive no failure. Eisenmenger small can eventually heart A larger and although with generally cyanosis syndrome symptoms, defects causes PDA lead infective also High-pressure patients shunts endocarditis. predispose to developing to prostaglandin in flow blood closed with or a patency as be pulmonary can be atresia). means systemic administering pulmonic sustain infants in (by the lifesaving ductal life when or early While (e.g., only PDAs E) is aortic should preservation as isolated of feasible, PDA is

right-to-left early associated cyanosis. malformations are with Cardiac by distinguished shunts poorly side occurs the the of directly from because arterial oxygenated blood flows This right circulation. heart into the most tetralogy the are ( of Two Fallot important great associated transposition conditions congenital the of of cyanotic heart with disease and vessels

Fig. 11.4 ). clubbing toes of cyanosis fingers and include and of tips paradoxical embolization. consequences polycythemia, severe, systemic of the Clinical the (hypertrophic osteoarthropathy),

Fallot of Tetralogy

the of cyanotic cause is heart Tetralogy congenital most Fallot of common disease. of all accounts It 5% about for

Commoncongenitalright-to-leftshunts(cyanoticcongenitalheartdisease). Fig.11.4 indicatesdirectionofbloodflow). (A)TetralogyofFallot(arrow

Aorta;LA, rightatrium;RV, leftatrium;LV, pulmonarytrunk;RA, leftventricle;PT, (B)TranspositionofthegreatvesselswithandwithoutVSD.Ao, rightventricle.

11.1 Table ). are The cardinal ( four features

Fig. 11.4A

VSD the of by the Overriding aorta

of between Fallot All the features leading the anterosuperior of the trunk septation and aortic of root. abnormal pulmonary the from of infundibular to displacement septum tetralogy result

andisthemajorsiteofegressforbloodflowfrombothventricles.Theobstructionoftherightventricularoutflowmostoftenisduetonarrowingoftheinfundibulum(subpulmonic butalsocanbecausedbypulmonaryvalvestenosisorcompleteatresiaofthevalveandtheproximalpulmonaryarteries.Insuchcases,apersistentPDAordilatedbronchialarteriesaretheonlyrouteforbloodtoreachthelungs. aorta) ventricular stenosis) theproximalaortaisdilated,whilethepulmonarytrunkishypoplastic.Theleft-sidedcardiacchambersareofnormalsize,whiletherightventricularwallismarkedlyhypertrophied,sometimesevenexceedingthethicknessoftheleftventricle.TheVSD hypertrophy; usuallyislargeandliesinthevicinityofthemembranousportionoftheinterventricularseptum;theaorticvalveliesimmediatelyovertheVSD(overriding MORPHOLOGYTheheartisenlargedand“boot-shaped”asaconsequenceofright

http://ebooksmedicine.net

hemodynamic of aortic The right-to-left and of consequences shunting, increased volumes. tetralogy blood Fallot decreased flow, are pulmonary degree adult untreated, outflow of on clinical can severity some patients even survive The life. largely obstruction; depends into the pulmonary the only condition no with isolated the an is pulmonic left-sided left-to-right resembles shunt pressure if the because cyanosis. Thus, high a VSD obstruction causes the mild, More cause stenosis more degrees early pulmonic of severe cyanosis. commonly, as progressive expand orifice worsening child grows the not heart stenosis. the Moreover, size, to in leading the pulmonic and of proportionately, does the increases that the pressure overloads, is right from protects vasculature rare. ventricular stenosis so does pulmonic not pulmonary outflow Fortuitously, and the and volume hypertension failure pulmonary develop, also risk cyanotic osteoarthropathy polycythemia typical the Nevertheless, endocarditis shunting increases and as attendant of hypertrophic such embolization. to infective the heart for patients sequelae hypoxia) and with right-to-left (due develop systemic disease, hyperviscosity; in more possible setting atresia. with but is Fallot complicated of classic the of tetralogy pulmonary is Complete surgical repair

the Great of Arteries Transposition

outflow. ventricles their great of of Transposition to the discordant the is arteries connection a vascular emanates aortopulmonary is of pulmonary the abnormal septa ( from an arises artery truncal right that and the so ventricle aorta from formation ventricle embryologic the the and defect left the The

Fig. ). 11.4B the atrium the left atrium-to-ventricle right connections, the with are into joining left and atrium emptying (concordant), The the right normal ventricle ventricle. however,

pulmonary (such of as aorta. is outcome unless The blood shunt to with incompatible and life allows a oxygenated functional the separation postnatal condition VSD) of delivery the a circulations, systemic a Indeed, of VSDs cases in occur one (see third

Fig. B ). 11.4, hypoplastic, to ventricle ventricle; marked is since systemic functions pumps left pulmonary that the right is hypertrophy, as since low-resistance circulation. ventricular chamber it the There only the close; aorta, ovale life. within blood newborns have tend emergent of reach first intervention patent days foramen typically transposition oxygenated Some but the with such of a or surgical allows the the that require few these great arteries to infants PDA to

the prognosis of of The is ventricle manifestation pressures. the the magnitude the maintain to right depending shunting, and hypoxia, on ability tissue with dominant systemic degree cyanosis, the of Without the the arteries shunting), most of first life. transposition (even with great with uncorrected stable surgery within patients die months of now definitive However, survive improved patients techniques into permit such often surgical repair, and adulthood.

at obstruction Congenital great vessel. within the the level distally heart flow more valves of can blood occur of or a also tetralogy proximal of valve, as with in to Fallot. Obstruction occur subpulmonic can the stenosis of obstructions aortic are examples and stenosis, or aorta. Relatively congenital pulmonic atresia, common valve coarctation valve the stenosis of

common aorta the Coarctation a obstructive of constriction) of is congenital heart disease (narrowing, or (see form

Table ). 11.1 twice with Turner syndrome often as have as females frequently Males are coarctation. females, affected although two are (Fig. There classic forms 11.5

the PDA proximal of preductal aortic hypoplasia An arch form a “infantile” featuring to

of of the ligamentum discrete aorta, form postductal An the to “adult” adjacent a arteriosum infolding ridgelike consisting

solitary valve. a than of half but occur is the aortic defect, bicuspid can accompanied as cases a Coarctation by in more ASD, also can stenosis, valve regurgitation VSD, mitral or Aortic be present.

aorta of Coarctation

Fig. Coarctationoftheaortawith(“infantile”orpreductalform)andwithoutapatentductusarteriosus(PDA)(“adult”orpostductalform);arrow indicatesdirectionofbloodflow.Ao, leftventricle;PT, pulmonarytrunk;RA, 11.5 rightatrium;RV, leftatrium;LV, rightventricle. Aorta;LA,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 11.6 Coarctationoftheaorta,postductaltype.Thecoarctationisasegmentalnarrowingoftheaorta(arrow).Suchlesionstypicallymanifestlaterinlifethanpreductalcoarctations.Thedilatedascendingaortaandmajorbranchvesselsaretotheleftofthecoarctation.Thelowerextremitiesareperfusedpredominantlybywayofdilated,tortuouscollateralchannels. School, of Dallas,Texas.) Southwestern Pathology, University (Courtesy Texas Medical Sid of Department MD, Murphree, of

ischaracterizedbycircumferentialnarrowingoftheaorticsegmentbetweentheleftsubclavianarteryandtheductusarteriosus;theductustypicallyispatentandisthemainsourceof(unoxygenated)blooddeliveredtothedistalaorta.Thepulmonarytrunkisdilatedtoaccommodatetheincreasedbloodflow;becausetherightsideoftheheartnowperfusesthebodydistaltothenarrowedsegment(“coarct”),therightventricletypicallyishypertrophied. MORPHOLOGYPreductal coarctation

postductal theaortaissharplyconstrictedbyatissueridgeadjacenttothenonpatentligamentumarteriosum( coarctation, Inthemorecommon“adult”

).Theconstrictedsegmentismadeupofsmoothmuscleandelasticfibersderivedfromtheaorticmedia.Proximaltothecoarctation,theaorticarchanditsbranchvesselsaredilatedandtheleftventricleishypertrophied. Fig.11.6

of of ductus severity narrowing patency manifestations arteriosus. on the the the Clinical and depend the

in neonatal as the presents cyanosis a period. without the with PDA of early die lower life, half localized the classically usually to body; infants intervention, Preductal affected most coarctation in

coarctation Postductal a and well usually asymptomatic, is adult may the PDA life. without remain disease unrecognized into claudication relative associated there pulses weak hypertension the is and paired symptoms in with of lower hypotension and extremities, upper-extremity Classically, with coldness. expansion the lead of collateral visible develops through of coarctation and markedly arteries; the these intercostal “around” through circulation internal Exuberant can “notching” enlarged vessels the ribs. mammary to often radiographically flow

systolic coarctations thrills. palpable significant with cases, occasionally most and In associated are murmurs stent surgical (or prosthetic of excellent results. with segment and dilation aortic by or Balloon a placement affected replacement anastomosis graft) end-to-end the yields resection

Congenitalheartdiseaserepresentsdefectsofcardiacchambersorthegreatvessels;theseeitherresultinshuntingofbloodbetweentheright-andleft-sidedcirculationorcauseoutflowobstructions.Lesionsrangefromrelativelyasymptomatictorapidlyfatal.Environmental(toxicorinfectious)andgeneticcausesbothcontribute.

MalformationsassociatedwithLeft-to-rightshuntsarethemostcommonandincludeASDs,VSDs,andPDA.Shuntingresultsinright-sidedvolumeoverloadthateventuallycausespulmonaryhypertensionand,withreversalofflowandright-to-leftshunting,cyanosis(Eisenmenger syndrome).

MalformationsassociatedwithRight-to-leftshuntsincludetetralogyofFallotandtranspositionofthegreatarteries.Theselesionscauseearly-onsetcyanosisandareassociatedwithpolycythemia,hypertrophicosteoarthropathy,andparadoxicalembolization.

Obstructivelesionsincludeformsofaorticcoarctation;theclinicalseverityoftheselesionsdependsonthedegreeofstenosisandthepatencyoftheductusarteriosus.

blood closely requirements. myocardial caused imbalance ischemia—an heart several encompassing Ischemic cardiac myocardial and nutritional supply broad by syndromes disease between (perfusion) term a oxygen (IHD) and related is through of oxidative generate arteries. upon myocytes almost oxygenated Since through the flow dependent mitochondrial continuous phosphorylation, is function cardiac blood strictly coronary cardiac exclusively the energy cause worldwide its accounting developed the forms therapy quarter year. nations, the improvements million the of in for IHD in century, in Despite and leading deaths remains each other various 7.5 dramatic in past States mortality United

of more coronary cases, secondary flow is consequence a (Chapter atherosclerotic reduced In blood disease IHD than 10). of 90% vascular to obstructive coronary synonymous usually Thus, specified, artery disease with (CAD). unless otherwise is IHD IHD that in of atherosclerosis for In the of consequences are syndromes been cases, has most decades (beginning progressing even coronary gradually or adolescence). childhood various In blood remaining (e.g., cases, anemia or oxygenation or the CHF); volume rate demand or hypotension cardiac diminished with the due to heart capacity due pneumonia carbon shock); of increased (e.g., ischemia be increased result poisoning). (e.g., diminished or hypertension); diminished monoxide oxygen-carrying or to may with (e.g.,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of supply manifestations the heart. the a of blood direct insufficient consequence The IHD to are one of the clinical more may presentation include The following syndromes: or cardiac

pectoris pain”). “chest (literally, Angina insufficient is induces cause death. pain but Ischemia myocyte to less be caused vessel (Prinzmetal of even or spasm unstable certain (occurring be exertion be or stable can can Angina predictably by rest). exertion), at at angina), progressively can levels with (occurring

(MI). infarction Myocardial duration severity the ischemia to cause when cardiomyocyte of occurs sufficient or This death. is

IHD with Chronic CHF. mechanical small decompensation, or after accumulated This cardiac which secondary insults, acute eventually to progressive pump ischemic MI occurs failure. precipitates

death (SCD). cardiac Sudden chapter). commonly MI, consequence arrhythmia without ” as tissue from “ necrosis later (see This a from a but occur in damage the of lethal results myocyte most can

coronary the any The to and of manifestations is term of SCD. IHD—unstable acute catastrophic MI, applied syndrome angina, three

and a 700,000 experience Americans roughly year, MI affected die. those More half of each than by to has troubling a it related toll advance; in 1963, as this the represents 50%. spectacular peaking the is, declined in mortality States As since United IHD factors to interventions particular agents. cholesterol-lowering promote diminished of diabetes that use conditions that hypertension cardiac in cessation smoking The have or treatment, largely (Chapter risk improvement is 10), and programs, atherosclerosis; (behaviors attributed and bypass also and these establishment units, diagnostic include for stenting, artery have therapeutic contributed; advances surgery. prophylaxis, and graft endovascular better of a MI, control, To coronary aspirin extent, angioplasty care and lesser arrhythmia thrombolysis coronary the of boomers,” downward of predicted United States parts will Maintaining longevity the as “baby sweeping other world. the be this that the is trend mortality as well obesity in challenging and particularly given epidemic of

usually of relative is preexisting of consequence (“fixed”) perfusion of vasospasm. and a as thrombosis inadequate IHD consequence the new, myocardial superimposed arteries coronary occlusion a and/ or to a demand, atherosclerotic coronary combination. the arteries—left circumflex left narrowing or singly coronary (RCA)— descending right any and in (LCX), can coronary of (LAD), anterior Atherosclerotic affect artery the occur aorta, centimeters to tend takeoff plaques RCA. LAD the of of within entire Clinically several and the the from and significant LCX first length along the RCA). diagonal of the branches secondary of are obtuse the (i.e., also posterior LAD, branches branch Sometimes, LCX, marginal the of branches or descending involved

less than asymptomatic, of obstructions coronary occlude with exertion. a typically vessel lumen that are even 70% Fixed 70% a of have of certain increased in patient comparison, chest cause lesions stenosis”—generally exertion with occlude that more stenosis, pain, to levels cause the stable symptoms setting In said lumen—resulting “critical is than demand; in so-called the of and critical predictably vessel angina. fixed symptoms inadequate forms or the lead in blood a at even can more the 90% to that flow of “ (see angina ” occludes lumen vascular coronary with rest—one of A ofunstable later stenosis chapter).

collateral the compensatory progressively atherosclerotic a slow if sufficiently and original to other perfusion coronary subsequently flow a lesion undergo such artery an can at coronary MI, years, vessels becomes protect Of remodeling may risk; at completely blood occluded. rate if the against provide occludes even importance, area over vessel results. is develop with flow collateral no blockage, Unfortunately, infarction to for there and acute time coronary

atherosclerosis: contribute and of elements the coronary following development to consequences The

essential plays an atherosclerosis, to at all (Chapter from rupture inception stages 10). Inflammation plaque role of recruitment T-cell macrophage endothelial interaction and of and circulating leukocytes, begins with It the cells resulting in activation. and associated superimposed cell smooth necrotic and calcification, an production, on muscle of drive core lipid, cells debris. proliferation, matrix with cholesterol, and These subsequent accumulation atheromatous destabilization occur At macrophage stages, atherosclerotic secretion. through later metalloproteinase of can plaque

triggers the with coronary associated plaque syndromes. or an acute ruptured eroded Thrombosis death; wane can by atherosclerotic partial alternatively, lead unstable thrombus a of to vascular with a thrombus Partial innermost plaque the on the disrupted blood of cause or zone infarct). sudden can by to formed (subendocardial occlusion even luminal and occlusion flow time compromise myocardium wax infarction a sufficiently a newly and angina growth can atherosclerotic which proliferation, lesions. of activators to of produce potent smooth the contribute Organizing thrombi muscle patients a found in intramyocardial unstable associated the Mural can of angina. with embolize; circulation with be thrombi autopsy indeed, in small microinfarcts) at coronary also can (along emboli artery distal disrupted most can cause MI. over In plaque massive a case, serious obstructive the completely thrombus

mechanical moreover, forces, disruption. by vessel increasing directly lumen Vasoconstriction local compromises plaque spasm shear can diameter; potentiate in following: be Vasoconstriction can stimulated atherosclerotic plaques by the

nitric (e.g., endothelin) oxide) due cell–relaxing Imbalance factors –contracting endothelial endothelial factors dysfunction (e.g., between to and http://ebooksmedicine.net

of changes and fixed morphology. depends myocardial not Onset ischemia of the plaque in atherosclerotic also on but disease on coronary severity extent dynamic only unstable most infarction, patients, term syndrome because In of coronary occur the abrupt cardiac ( angina, by followed sudden thrombosis—hence plaque death and change acute

Fig. 11.7

event of to sudden disruption partially a erosion rupture) is a typically (ranging plaque. from The occlusive initiating fissuring, one than injury rupture, plaques be mechanism expose may of More involved: or of ulceration

OBSTRUCTION/? transmural myocardial myocardial or or death) (Unstable or (Acute sudden angina, acute death) EMBOLI infarction subendocardial sudden infarction

Fig. Diagramofsequentialprogressionofcoronaryarterylesionsleadingtovariousacutecoronarysyndromes. 11.7 (Modified FJ: Saunders, p Interventionalandsurgicalcardiovascularpathology:clinicalcorrelationsandbasicprinciples,Philadelphia, from 63.) 1989, redrawn Schoen and underlying basement membrane, to subendothelial leading or thrombogenic highly constituents rapid thrombosis. luminal plaques expand core can of hemorrhage the occlusion. volume, thereby exacerbating acutely plaque addition, of into degree the In

apoptosis, and exposures. endothelial plaque attributable combination likely of trigger that toxic inflammatory injury erosion and Factors include some to mechanical influence on other that susceptibility plaque Acute plaque rupture, hand, stress. the to disruption factors involves by 10) platelet include aspects extrinsic (Chapter structure intrinsic such and and factors, reactivity: composition of pressure and blood plaque as These

caps contain to therefore are cores large and are have that Plaques termed more atheromatous fibrous rupture overlying or vulnerable. thin likely highest Fissures arterial where junction the normal the segment, the cap fibrous are mechanical and the and at occur thinnest. the plaque-free cap stresses of is frequently adjacent fibrous and their continuously mechanical collagen versus synthesis strength of overall caps degradation are Fibrous plaque also stability. remodeling; determines balance is macrophages. by smooth by of cells and by degraded metalloproteases elaborated produced Collagen action the muscle paucity large smooth cells of are lesions to with cells of a or atherosclerotic Consequently, vulnerable numbers muscle rupture. inflammatory and cholesterol key plaque can effects enzyme plaque provide in statins distinct of Of additional IHD reductase, cholesterol-lowering a stability, Co-A by (inhibitors hydroxymethylglutaryl their synthesis) reducing from interest, inflammation benefit in activity. increasing primary and CAD and

to extrinsic Influences are plaque the important. also the Adrenergic local on vasospasm. hypertension put can causing by or physical plaque stress stimulation awakening of AM may highest between Indeed, incidence that underlie 6 acute noon. the and surge rising the and adrenergic stimulation 12 the in MI is associated observation with the catastrophes secondary MIs susceptible association in Intense leads adrenergic stress of such explaining emotional waves and earthquakes of natural individuals. stimulation, as with floods also to

MI symptomatic before In suffer an majority critically “culprit even its stenotic cases, a not rupture. who in of lesion” was patients the or chronic 70% lesions greater symptoms noted occur than exhibiting anginal typically occlusion. fixed As with previously, less and plaques occlusion less plaque show two of rupture, are 50% that of exhibit 70%. or equal before initial stenotic equal 85% than or stenotic to clinical thirds Pathologic studies ruptured than to and worrisome are at event. a coronary significant conclusion that for a adults catastrophic the of number Thus, risk asymptomatic is large impossible to patient. plaque in given is rupture present, any At predict it

also clinically ensuing atheromas. and silent of Plaque repetitive, disruption often common, are non-occlusive complications thrombosis and healing ( mechanism is overlying enlarge such plaque and The thrombosis disruption by subclinical progressively important which lesions an atherosclerotic of

Fig. http://ebooksmedicine.net 11.7

is pain Angina transient, chest an ischemia. by intermittent caused reversible myocardial pectoris adenosine, and bradykinin, of that of molecules consequence ischemia-induced stimulate other The is release nerves. a autonomic pain the recognized: The three following are variants

other pain (e.g., Typical chest some demand of increased with or levels or angina associated tachycardia). is exertion predictable particular episodic stable to often pain). left pain jaw as radiates left crushing or is sensation arm The described or that the a the down substernal squeezing (referred coronary increases that The by or a vasodilator relieved is pain by drugs nitroglycerin, usually such rest as demand) (reducing perfusion.

rest or coronary Prinzmetal occurs by caused spasm. artery is variant angina at and be or plaques, vessel typically existing can Although spasms atherosclerotic normal near completely such a affected. on occur blockers. to as angina promptly responds such nitroglycerin typically Prinzmetal channel vasodilators and calcium

crescendo angina) frequent Unstable rest. progressively or even by less (also characterized called exertion precipitated angina at by occurring is pain, increasingly and of distal it thrombus, vascular thrombosis, harbinger disruption the of and/or can associated is embolization vasospasm; portending be with complete angina a Unstable superimposed plaque MI, occlusion.

is to referred resulting from commonly (MI), of ischemia. necrosis heart as attack,” also the muscle “heart Myocardial infarction can frequency atherosclerosis; is for underlying of with and (Chapter atherosclerosis age, major while with any increasing aging virtually at risk The the rises IHD factors cause MIs occur 10). progressively of 10% occur 40 and years age. of years occur before approximately of before Nevertheless, 65 45% MIs age, whites equally affected. are and Blacks age. the risk at with although than narrows gap progressively women, Men greater are tend during to MI reproductive protected be In their women general, against years. artery common menopause—with older associated of declining adult with IHD is most and However, women. death disease, estrogen production—is coronary in cause exacerbation of the

thrombosis by arteries acute within vast coronary of MIs are majority ( caused The

Fig. ). 11.7 vascular of as preexisting serves instances, myocardium. nidus subsequent atherosclerotic for most of occlusion, infarction or disruption the thrombus plaque generation, and erosion In perfused the mural vegetations. absence (e.g., or are mostly of of atherosclerotic infarcts the to from MIs, thrombi valve In coronary in to disease; the setting fibrillation) occlusive however, occurs artery of transmural such or ascribed in embolization vasospasm 10% infarction atrial from vascular to especially innermost limited with or myocardium, the emboli infarcts Occasionally, absent. are thrombi (subendocardial) to In atherosclerosis fixed perfusion marginal such cases, of coronary leads heart. the severe most lead setting, hypertension) In to tachycardia to endomyocardium, is can heart ischemic the vessels. the necrosis epicardial a demand of due distal period of of (e.g., the this increased that or portion prolonged to stasis, vasculitis, intramyocardial or caused without disease. detectable arterioles, sickle thromboembolic of be by amyloid small atherosclerosis or in deposition, including can disease Finally, disorders ischemia as cell

takes sequence a typical following place: MI, of the In events

to or plaque necrotic plaque contents subendothelial hemorrhage, intraplaque the or forces, eroded An suddenly disrupted is exposing blood. and injury, atheromatous by mechanical endothelial collagen

Platelets and vasospasm (Chapter are and A2, platelet (ADP), adhere, aggregate, serotonin—causing and activated, further thromboxane adenosine aggregation releasing 4). diphosphate

other the of by to and thrombus. exposure factor tissue Activation of adds coagulation growing mechanisms

artery can Within the evolve the coronary minutes, completely to thrombus lumen. occlude

dying of demonstrating derives of this frequency scenario as a thrombotic from evidence as MI, patients well after for MI. occlusion studies of acute autopsy early The studies imaging high of the demonstrates 90% of of 4 performed hours in Angiography coronary within almost cases. thrombosis MI onset of 24 in to angiography symptoms, hours 60% patients, even is evidence is without intervention. however, When after onset thrombosis of of seen performed 12 only clear at through Thus, or of lysis thrombus of relaxation least occlusions the spontaneously some spasm. the in be typical of has limiting This angioplasty can successful MI in thrombolysis extent implications: therapeutic myocardial a highly necrosis. also events early and/or of sequence

has for supply functional, biochemical, Loss myocardium. and blood profound consequences the morphologic of of and lactic triphosphate (e.g., drop in ceases, myocytes. obstruction, the vascular seconds a accumulation aerobic adenosine leading noxious Within acid) to in (ATP) potentially cardiac metabolites metabolism of rapid of occurring of onset is or functional The a a so the minute within consequence loss contractility, ischemia. of glycogen and also Ultrastructural are cellular seen. relaxation, depletion, swelling) mitochondrial changes myofibrillar (including are reversible. early changes These ischemia coagulative 2). 40 myocytes least to and Only (Chapter prolonged causes of minutes damage necrosis lasting at 20 irreversible injury thrombosis. leading vessel periods microvascular of ensues, superimposed to ischemia, With longer

injury preserved; the restored Thus, before thrombolysis blood early diagnosis angioplasty. intervention is be or myocardium can if flow this occurs, and by of prompt irreversible is goal However, reperfusion have can discussed effects. deleterious later, as reperfusion Even to biochemistry is profoundly a myocardium noncontractile state timely, due number abnormalities can cellular for persistent in result if in myocardium). days dysfunctional of that (stunned be postischemic a Such severe be but cardiac to can failure. reversible enough produce transient stunning

http://ebooksmedicine.net

at coronary anterior 0 area 24 of Obstructed risk) Left Zone Cross-section artery coronary Zone 2 nearly descending Acute Endocardium arterial of hr (area Completed necrosis hr coronary the circumflex risk) coronary hr PulmonaryarteryAortaLeft involving Zone myocardium (area artery Zone of at necrosis artery perfusion of occlusion Right infarct perfusion at artery coronary entire risk of

Fig. 11.8 Progressionofmyocardialnecrosisaftercoronaryarteryocclusion.Atransmuralsegmentofmyocardiumthatisdependentontheoccludedvesselforperfusionconstitutestheareaatrisk(outlined). Necrosisbeginsinthesubendocardialregioninthecenteroftheischemiczoneandwithtimeexpandstoinvolvetheentirewallthickness.Notethataverynarrowzoneofmyocardiumimmediatelybeneaththeendocardiumissparedfromnecrosisbecauseitcanbeoxygenatedbydiffusionfromtheventricle.

the to instability of by heart. contributes also ischemic arrhythmias, of ischemia causing regions electrical probably Myocardial (irritability) caused ischemia to cardiac cases) (in the fatal to cause of irritability. sudden in death a of 80% myocardial ventricular damage setting often myocardial myocardial massive 90% is by mechanical can fibrillation Although due failure, most

occurs ( the ischemic myocytes first of subendocardial zone in injury Irreversible

Fig. ). 11.8 already this exposed mentioned, susceptible impede blood. to receive relatively because intramural is ischemia it to which blood delivered is by it act last is high epicardial area because the As to of also to pressures, the inflow especially and region the vessels, through and driven progressive of other tissue a cell regions mediators. species the moves With reactive inflammatory wavefront ischemia, of more and oxygen by myocardial-derived prolonged death myocardium, edema in vessel to entire within infarct occlusion infarct intervention, an its the can infarct). hours; the extent usually involve of achieves wall epicardial An thickness an of by 6 absence caused (transmural 3 full within “territory of intervention Clinical the lessen size this infarct of can the time window the within at risk.” critical

morphologic on size, factors: The and infarct multiple acute depend myocardial an location, of features

of the and involved ( Size vessel distribution

Fig. 11.9

of occlusion of and duration development the Rate

Metabolic rate) for of (affected, example, demands myocardium heart pressure blood by and the

supply of Extent collateral

http://ebooksmedicine.net of left descending cause 40% the anterior (LAD) is to of MIs and occlusion all the artery of Acute proximal 50%

Fig. Dependenceofmyocardialinfarctiononthelocationandnatureofthediminishedperfusion.Left, depicted). Patternsoftransmuralinfarctionresultingfrommajorcoronaryarteryocclusion.Therightventriclemaybeinvolvedwithocclusionoftherightmaincoronaryartery(not 11.9 Right, orocclusionofsmallintra-myocardialvessels(bottom). globalhypotensionsuperimposedonfixedthree-vesseldisease(middle), Patternsofinfarc-tionresultingfrompartialortransientocclusion(top), intramural the of flow circumflex distal vessel infarction in affect the occlusions (reperfusion) circumferentialsubendocardial Posterior only descending apex. branch Permanent right the and left septum, of the most may microinfarcts infarct of regionalsubendocardial posterior of thirds more anterior two left left occlusion Permanent branch occlusion of anterior artery coronary the descending the the of infarct Transient/partial of ventricle, the branch anterior Global of occlusion of of typically wall hypotension Restoration LVRV obstruction the ventricular heart occlusion Permanent vessel Anterior same apex; results Small coronary ventricle. artery causes 40% to MIs) the proximal circumflex of lateral occlusion 15% (seen 20% left the ventricle, necrosis left right Similarly, and in artery the of (30% MIs) occlusion acute much (RCA) of proximal to affects of (LCX) right of vessel, territory fatal. Coronary so proximal by much anterior that and “widow often the has in dubbed maker” been is perfused obstructions occlusion because acute the descending are artery myocardial left

perfused of the the and ventricle descending posterior by third left posterior are posterior the artery. The septum can from posterior individuals) of the artery the The either descending (in LCX. arise RCA 90% or artery gives considered to posterior septum the third is and coronary and the the thereby inferior/posterior descending the left or the RCA portions of the rise perfuses vessel. dominant LCX—that artery—either of ventricle posterior By convention, to injury. Thus, can posterior the occlusion septal a posterior dominant ischemic and right in lead of RCA heart, wall the of posterior well a from the dominant the lateral left artery third as posterior in septum, artery, and generally descending ventricle. arises where wall and inferior heart, In the of the comparison, the the as of left left LCX posterior circumflex wall occlusion affects the

the of diagonal artery. secondary as branches, marginal of the the within LCX branches also occur Occlusions or branches artery LAD such can of vessels; by branches is rare—although atherosclerosis atherosclerosis can embolization. of can these thrombosis affected primarily Interestingly, a coronary or disease be penetrating intramyocardial vasospasm, or occluded significant arteries vasculitis be is of and epicardial by

arteries are major intercoronary interconnected epicardial the arteries, though are end vessels by Even (collateral circulation). anastomoses coronary these numerous three of are low-pressure gradual the closed, areas one normally channels to these from channels. Although blood artery allows flow highto narrowing collateral through dilation perfusion vessel. gradual myocardium despite this epicardial occlusion areas collateral adequate In provide the to manner, of can an of patterns: size one take infarcts degree of on involved of the may and the the of following circulation, collateral vessel the Based myocardial

by loss elevations and R chronic atherosclerosis segment combination involve vessel yield a full through thickness of infarctions and ventricle Transmural amplitude. acute wave of the transmural such typically (ECG) can epicardial Q MIs of negative ST and electrocardiogram on the are have with thrombosis; caused waves occlusion the called also infarcts These elevated (STEMIs). MIs ST-segment are

waves “NSTEMIs”), the infarctions are Q elevations of elevated depressions MIs” third these infarcts although do or abnormalities. the limited to or “non–ST-segment typically can ST-segment T not inner or wave MIs Subendocardial have the segment tracing exhibit myocardium; ECG ST on (so-called they vulnerable hypoperfusion subendocardial is region earlier, the and mentioned hypoxia. to As most pneumonia) delivery severe oxygen transient injury. anemia, http://ebooksmedicine.net hypotension, cause in setting (as or or from or in subendocardial ischemic of increases artery decreases demand oxygen can the disease, (as coronary in hypertension) with Thus, tachycardia infarction occur occlusive can full-thickness thrombus This can develop. also before a lyses pattern when an

Microscopic changes. • the in infarcts occur show may and not occlusions ECG small-vessel setting of any diagnostic or tumors or consequence occur emotional due or stress, pheochromocytoma), in (e.g., vessel extreme catecholamines, use. setting elevated mural spasm a in vasculitis, cocaine certain of vegetations of of These can as with to the as thrombi, may embolization valve occur

MORPHOLOGYNearlyalltransmuralinfarcts(involving50%ormoreoftheventriclethickness)affectatleastaportionoftheleftventricleand/orinterventricularseptum.Roughly15%to30%ofMIsthatinvolvetheposteriororposteroseptalwallalsoextendintotherightventricle.Isolatedrightventricleinfarctsoccurinonly1%to3%ofcases.Evenintransmuralinfarcts,anarrowrim(approximately0.1mm)ofviablesubendocardialmyocardiumispreservedbydiffusionofoxygenandnutrientsfromtheventricularlumen.

ThegrossandmicroscopicappearanceofanMIdependsontheageoftheinjury.Areasofdamageprogressthroughahighlycharacteristicsequenceofmorphologicchangesfromcoagulativenecrosis,toacuteandthenchronicinflammation,tofibrosis(

Table11.2 ).Myocardialnecrosisproceedsinvariablytoscarformationwithoutanysignificantregeneration;studieslookingatwhethertissuestemcellscanbeusedtoregeneratefunctionalmyocardiumareongoingbuthaveyettobearfruit.

Grossand/ormicroscopicrecognitionofveryrecentmyocardialinfarctscanbechallenging,particularlywhendeathoccurswithinafewhours.Myocardial old not usually apparent. are hours infarcts less 12 than grossly However,infarctsmorethan3hoursoldcanbevisualizedbyexposingmyocardiumtovitalstains,suchastriphenyltetrazoliumchloride,asubstrateforlactatedehydrogenase.Becausethisenzymeisdepletedintheareaofischemicnecrosis(itleaksoutofthedamagedcells),theinfarctedareaisunstained(pale),whileoldscarsappearwhiteandglistening(

24 MI, trapped an stagnated, caused hours can 12 grossly identified ).By usually after blood. be discoloration to a by red-blue Fig.11.10 by infarct Thereafter,infarctsbecomeprogressivelybetterdelineatedassoft,yellow-tanareas;by10to14days,infarctsarerimmedbyhyperemic(highlyvascularized)granulationtissue.Overthesucceedingweeks,theinfarctedtissueevolvestoafibrousscar.

Table11.2

suchmyocytesareviablebutfrequentlycontractpoorly. ).Typicalfeaturesofcoagulativenecrosis(Chapter2)becomedetectablewithin4to12hoursofinfarction.“Wavyfibers”alsocanbepresentattheedgesofaninfarct;thesereflectthestretchingandbucklingofnoncontractiledeadfibers.Sublethalischemiacanalsoinduceintracellularmyocyte Fig.11.11 vacuolization;

Necroticmyocardiumelicitsacuteinflammation(typicallymostprominent1to3daysafterMI),followedbyawaveofmacrophagesthatremovenecroticmyocytesandneutrophil

Morphologic Evolution 2–8weeksGray-whitescar,progressivefromIncreasedcollagendeposition,withdecreasedbordertowardcoreofinfarctcellularity Table Myocardial http://ebooksmedicine.net in of 11.2 Infarction Changes

Fig. theabsenceofstainingisduetoenzymeleakageaftercelldeath.Notetheanteriorscar(arrowhead), Acutemyocardialinfarctoftheposterolateralleftventricledemonstratedbyalackoftriphenyltetrazoliumchloridestaininginareasofnecrosis(arrow); isduetoventricularrupture,andwastheacutecauseofdeathinthispatient(specimenisorientedwiththeposteriorwallatthetop). 11.10 indicativeofremoteinfarction.Themyocardialhemorrhageattherightedgeoftheinfarct(asterisk)

fragments(mostpronounced5to10daysafterMI).Theinfarctedzoneisprogressivelyreplacedbygranulationtissue(mostprominent1to2weeksafterMI),whichinturnformstheprovisionalscaffoldinguponwhichdensecollagenousscarforms.Inmostinstances,scarringiswelladvancedbytheendofthesixthweek,buttheefficiencyofrepairdependsonthesizeoftheoriginallesionandtheabilityofthehosttissuestoheal.Healingrequiresthemigrationofinflammatorycellsandingrowthofnewvesselsfromtheinfarctmargins.Thus,anMIhealsfromitsborderstowardthecenter,andalargeinfarctmaynothealasfastorascompletelyasasmallone.Moreover,malnutrition,poorvasculature,orexogenousanti-inflammatorysteroidscanimpedeinfarctscarring(Chapter3).OnceanMIiscompletelyhealed,itisimpossibletodistinguishitsage:whetherpresentfor8weeksor10years,fibrousscarslookthesame.

of tissue quickly possible adage is (hence The restoration the is “time perfusion as goal acute as MI in myocardium”). therapeutic is plasminogen reperfusion bypass Such achieved or coronary by of activator), graft. arterial angioplasty, (dissolution tissue thrombus thrombolysis by

Fig. 11.11 Microscopicfeaturesofmyocardialinfarctionanditsrepair.(A)One-day-oldinfarctshowingcoagulativenecrosisandwavyfibers,comparedwithadjacentnormalfibers(right). Necroticcellsareseparatedbyedemafluid.(B)Denseneutrophilicinfiltrateintheareaofa2-to3-day-oldinfarct.(C)Nearlycompleteremovalofnecroticmyocytesbyphagocyticmacrophages(7to10days).(D)Granulationtissuecharacterizedbylooseconnectivetissueandabundantcapillaries.(E)Healedmyocardialinfarctconsistingofadensecollagenousscar.Afewresidualcardiacmusclecellsarepresent. (D)and(E)areMasson’strichromestain,whichstainscollagenblue.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

a both blessing. at-risk) short-and can is heart improve Unfortunately, of not outcomes, viable long-term reperfusion preservation while an (but unalloyed can into have than “reperfusion late local damage so-called tissues otherwise ischemic restoration greater of occurred— flow injury”. Indeed, might blood incite

the that to The injury following: include contribute reperfusion factors

Mitochondrial dysfunction. the allows to membrane proteins permeability, Ischemia move the which into alters mitochondria. mitochondrial This and rupture promote swelling of to outer membrane, the leads contents releasing apoptosis. mitochondrial that

Myocyte hypercontracture. intracellular the of of increased periods result as impaired ischemia, levels a cycling During damage. of calcium and sarcolemmal are calcium the augmented death. and is cell causing damage myofibrils reperfusion, of contraction After cytoskeletal and uncontrolled,

radicals including acid peroxide hypochlorous ), anion and hydrogen (•OH). superoxide (HOCl), peroxynitrite, oxide–derived Free radicals, (•O− hydroxyl (H2O2), 2 nitric altering by of myocytes and phospholipids. within These proteins damage and reperfusion cause minutes produced membrane are to the

microvasculature phenomenon. to contribute “no-reflow” the the aggregation occlude may and Leukocyte elaborate Further, and proteases cell cause death. elastases leukocytes that

Platelet injury. to contribute microvascular complement also activation and by is phenomenon no-reflow thought the a the injuring in activation endothelium. role Complement play to

appearance in MI is of an reperfused setting The in acute typical the of myocardium shown

. Figure 11.12 a and injury infarcts Such leakiness. hemorrhagic vascular of consequence as are across interactions. that of necrosis; develop reperfusion Microscopically, intense irreversibly damaged pathologic after created process, calcium this hypercontracted band in plasma by myocytes influx sarcomeres contraction actin-myosin are eosinophilic of an heightens membranes bands stuck In state. absence the tetanic in ATP, the get relax of an cannot and agonal sarcomeres of Thus, while cells, injured injured it can the reversibly alters morphology reperfusion cells. also salvage irreversibly

neck, radiate jaw, by heralded The (or pain substernal arm. is can severe, pressure) classic chest or that the crushing left MI to epigastrium, is not relieved typically several associated pain or In nitroglycerin minutes contrast by rest. and to the lasts angina to hours, pectoris, be in symptoms, asymptomatic. and signs entirely However, substantialminorityofpatients(10%to15%),MIspresentwith and a atypical even the may perception particularly Such pain) prevent autonomic are may patients neuropathy (in common which in of mellitus infarcts underlying diabetes “silent” older and adults. with in

and are nauseous patients and MIs). generally is The pulse (sweating) weak, posterior (particularly wall and with often rapid diaphoretic of with resulting valve impaired and is contractility and the pulmonary resultant Dyspnea myocardial common, apparatus, edema. from mitral acute congestion dysfunction develops. the ventricle), left more than 40% massive (involving With MIs shock cardiogenic of

myocardial segment T repolarization). ST wave waves, abnormalities and include diagnosis abnormalities these representing inversions Q two (the in the latter of for important MI; are Electrocardiographic changes, caused indeed, accounts hospitalization. are abnormalities of and system ischemic deaths electrical occurring Arrhythmias death the from common; cardiac before sudden in lethal by the arrhythmia conduction MI-related a majority myocardium vast for

myocardial blood membranes evaluation ( on laboratory cell damaged based that leak is of macromolecules cells out measuring through of injured The of MI levels

Fig. ). 11.13 kinase and I molecules creatine (CK; include troponins These TnI), T cardiac (TnT, myoglobin,

Fig. Reperfusedmyocardialinfarction.(A)Thetransverseheartslice(stainedwithtriphenyltetrazoliumchloride)exhibitsalargeanteriorwallmyocardialinfarctionthatishemorrhagicbecauseofbleedingfromdamagedvessels.Theposteriorwallisatthetop. 11.12 areseenmicroscopically. (B)Hemorrhageandcontractionbands,visibleasprominenthypereosinophiliccross-striationsspanningmyofibers(arrow),

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Relative concentration(=multiples reference of upper limit)

after onset chest Hours pain of

Fig. Acuteincreasesinmyocardium-derivedtroponinI,myocardialcreatinekinase(CK-MB),andmyoglobinfollowlingmyocardialinfarction.ThekineticsofenzymeelevationscanbeusedtoestimatethetimingoftheMI.Myoglobincanalsobemeasured,butissubstantiallylesssensitiveandspecificformyocardialinjury. 11.13

specifically myocardial lactate dehydrogenase. the isoform, and CK-MB), to myocardial and damage. sensitivity have specificity for high a extent (and CK-MB) lesser Troponins

in now is sensitive has more troponins. but of of CK-MB long the less cardiac-specific the favor frequently been biomarker injury, myocardial tested for since injury various marker CK of in is are cardiac of CK found reliable Total not isoforms a tissues. activity non-cardiac at levels also the skeletal low specific indicator from more isoform—principally of present muscle—is CK-MB myocardium, but derived heart a damage. However, in begins and within to at rise MI, hours. to peaks 72 normal within to approximately to hours, of 4 CK-MB 48 returns 2 24 activity hours

in 7 to acute MI, TnI and with not TnT 10 days. 48 both at circulation; the to within peaking 4 are for detectable after remaining levels hours elevated normally 2 hours, and however, found are levels levels to of allows long returned diagnosis CK-MB the be to of MI Persistence troponin an normal. after acute have made elevated to owing and With more levels CK-MB rapid the both necrotic tissue. from earlier reperfusion, washout the peak troponin of may enzyme

of and Complications Consequences Myocardial Infarction

mortality rates patient with approximately rate without (approximately in ST the overall elevations 10% 8%, MI 7% those higher MI outcomes acute than Extraordinary for to in-hospital mortality) has with (approximately death been MI; 6%). made associated segment after is improving experiencing progress die, is an Unfortunately, symptom within usually mortality hour appropriate out-ofhospital STEMIs receive arrhythmia of third they 1 before substantially with of medical poorer: one onset, of attention. individuals make statistics of Such all worrisome. more in facilities developing rising the countries coronary disease the artery with scarce hospital rate

of an the Nearly of fourths patients MI following after one ( complications or acute more experience three

Fig. 11.14

dysfunction. Contractile the affect MIs damage. pump proportion to of function In volume general, left ventricular in In of left cases, as some congestion, most degree pulmonary pulmonary failure is and ventricular edema. hypotension, there manifested and with damage patients typically that 40% in “pump associated is (cardiogenic left ventricle. or more shock) transmural MIs Severe of failure” roughly of occurs infarcts 10% with the

muscle dysfunction. Papillary often after dysfunctional leading be to Although contractile and they rupture regurgitation. result infrequently papillary of muscles are postinfarct poorly a ischemia, as mitral can MI, ventricular cause valve muscle insufficiency. or also mitral later, global can papillary dilation and fibrosis shortening Much

infarction. Right ventricular ventricular isolated affected right infarction RCA occurs right is Although infarction. 1% MIs, the 3% ventricular to of by in leading ventricle septal posterior only occlusions or left to circulation is case, systemic common pooling and to either a venous hypotension. the of In in leading outcome, blood heart right-sided failure

rupture. Myocardial to MIs occurs. Rupture fatal but is of frequently 1% only complicates 5% it when usually and is free ( cardiac hemopericardium resulting ventricular fatal wall rapidly in rupture common, tamponade Left most

Fig. 11.14A ). shunting rupture with Ventricular creates ( VSD septal a left-to-right

Fig. rupture ), severe papillary regurgitation mitral to muscle ( leads and 11.14B

Fig. ). 11.14C friable the granulation when after process days necrotic when of healing 3 7 has in is occurs myocardium much infarct to commonly time of lysis most converted Rupture maximal soft, tissue. to been infarction—the and within the infarctions, tends lateral 60 risk gender, or free associated for first MIs anterior and limit older age female factors MI scarring wall of lack tearing). hypertrophy, rupture (since prior years, Risk ventricular left the wall to with for include than myocardial

Arrhythmias. irritability death. can sudden MIs that conduction disturbances cause myocardial and lead to of incidence Approximately develop in form the NSTEMIs. being versus disturbance, 90% rhythm higher some STEMIs of patients with of include heart or asystole), ventricular (including and MI-associated tachyarrhythmias, ventricular contractions tachycardia, fibrillation. block supraventricular arrhythmias premature degree bradycardia, ventricular variable fibrillation) the ventricular The is first risk (e.g., hour and greatest thereafter. serious for declines in arrhythmias

Pericarditis. an inflammation a MIs the of elicit this Transmural epicardial ( is can underlying manifestation pericarditis; fibrinohemorrhagic myocardial

Fig. ). 11.14D Heralded by anterior http://ebooksmedicine.net pain a pericardial chest and

Fig. Complicationsofmyocardialinfarction.(AtoC)Cardiacrupture.(A)Anteriorfreewallmyocardialrupture(arrow).(B)Ventricularseptalrupture(arrow).(C)Papillarymusclerupture.(D)Fibrinouspericarditis,withahemorrhagic,roughenedepicardialsurfaceoverlyinganacuteinfarct. 11.14 (E)Recentexpan-sionofananteroapicalinfarctwithwallstretchingandthinning(arrow) andmuralthrombus.(F)Largeapicalleftventricularaneurysm(arrow). Mayo Interventionalandsurgicalcardiovascularpathology:clinicalcorrelationsandbasicprinciples,Philadelphia, Minnesota.) William Courtesy FJ: F, to E, Reproduced Saunders; of from MD, Edwards, permission by Schoen D. (A Rochester, Clinic, 1989, appears 3 and next few resolves days. after pericarditis days gradually to the friction over rub, infarction typically then 2 as to Extensive pericardial infarcts eventually organize occasionally effusions inflammation can lesion. or or constrictive large dense severe can that to a manifest lead form adhesions

Chamber dilation. disproportionate the muscle, may region thinning, and with infarcted (especially of of anteroseptal necrotic weakening Because the be stretching, there dilation infarcts). of

Mural thrombus. infarct, stasis), contractility chamber a dilation, endocardial (causing damage mural With ( any surface) attenuated myocardial of foster thrombosis thrombogenic the can combination (causing and

Fig.

left-sided eventually to 11.14E ), leading thromboembolism.

Ventricular aneurysm. anteroseptal a with complication, of infarct formation wall tissue heals ( result most a that aneurysms large the commonly the A ventricle scar thinned late from of of trans-mural

Fig. 11.14F ). formation of aneurysms thrombi, arrhythmias, rupture. give ventricular rise frequently mural not failure, they Although and heart to do

failure. heart Progressive next. ” discussed under This “ is

prognosis and type versus on site, the for risk complications depends size, infarct The overall infarct). and (subendocardial transmural are shock, expansion, cardiogenic with formation, for and transmural thrombi. anterior probability late wall formation a of at risk with infarcts MIs free aneurysm are Thus, transmural and mural associated of rupture, arrhythmias, CHF, higher greatest large patients and contrast, ruptures infarcts are conduction manage. right area, more ventricular septal in difficult by likely are or transmural By both; when complicated involvement, more posterior blocks, this to to be they ventricular occur much guarded Overall, posterior patients infarcts prognosis than have those anterior a with more infarcts. with infarcts, and pericarditis, rupture, surface, subendocardial aneurysms endocardial but occur. thrombi rarely the With may on form

to the attempts mass. of In the loss addition aforementioned compensate viable the remaining to contractile scarring, myocardium for zones, changes the undergo of ventricular the combination infarcted hypertrophy the remodeling. dilation; are termed scarring with collectively regions and thinning and in Noninfarcted of initial compensatory is The noninfarcted myocardium hypertrophy beneficial. hemodynamically be function decline of adaptive overwhelmed, ventricular in remodeling effect can the setting may The aneurysm of ventricular formation. and however,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

on vessels ventricular perfusing atherosclerotic viable the after narrowing most depends The remaining quality of factors, function of which are of important the and the many prognosis the of long-term left myocardium. severity MI occurring including first The reaches patient overall before hospital. rate mortality 30%, within the about is deaths the year the 3% patients to suffered for annual is an Thereafter, who MI have rate the mortality 4%.

is myocardial to heart cardiomyopathy, damage. failure called Chronic secondary progressive ischemic ischemic also IHD, clinical of is previous most In instances, known MI. a there history IHD hypertrophy) begin infarction(s), of to fail. appears when compensatory the mechanisms chronic myocardium (e.g., residual prior After without and and cases, micro-infarction replacement CAD evident In myocardial even diffuse cause frank fibrosis, infarction. dysfunction, episode other clinically any of severe can

infarction. and of punctuated is occasionally failure of angina typically episodes IHD chronic by The new severe is or heart account for and mortality. MI CHF, Arrhythmias, the and morbidity intercurrent most of associated

MORPHOLOGYPatientswithchronicIHDtypicallyexhibitleftventriculardilationandhypertrophy,oftenwithdiscreteareasofgray-whitescarringfromprevioushealedinfarcts.Invariably,thereismoderatetosevereatherosclerosisofthecoronaryarteries,sometimeswithtotalocclusion.Theendocardiumgenerallyshowspatchy,fibrousthickening,andmuralthrombimaybepresent.Microscopicfindingsincludemyocardialhypertrophy,diffusesubendocardialmyocytevacuolization,andfibrosisfrompreviousinfarction.

morbidity IHD, with exploring the much of using replace the to cells there associated of myocardium. cardiac possibility Because serious in interest is stem damaged without newts higher-order classically cardiac (such Although replicative potential. post-mitotic animals are myocytes of regeneration is a population as cell described, well cardiac in considered metazoans zebrafish) and a cell mammalian as the of presence marrow–derived precursors—as of repopulating well bone to the small within myocardium—capable population Increasing heart. the points stem evidence, resident however, a express all allow like low and they of tissue isolation in surface markers that stem occur cluster other cells, These very and cells cell their frequency. purification,

lineages within the can generate cell myocardium. seen these stem all self-renewal, Besides cells cardiac rate and is with neonates in of decreases proliferation, which have intrinsic They greatest age. a slow the since in extent, limited numbers cell suffer albeit necrotic MI to zone. significant after clearly or stem injury recover hypertrophy, myocardial an progeny that function interest, hearts also not any do and Of increase a function after of is facilitate could proliferation potential for acute Nevertheless, MI cells the it stimulating recovery vivo or myocardial IHD. in tantalizing because the chronic these of administration of subsequent MI such another area cells of and Ex after is vivo an expansion vigorous investigation. been far Unfortunately, thus less exciting. results than have

Inthevastmajorityofcases,cardiacischemiaisduetocoronaryarteryatherosclerosis;vasospasm,vasculitis,andembolismarelesscommoncauses.

Cardiacischemiaresultsfromamismatchbetweencoronarysupplyandmyocardialdemandandmanifestsasdifferent,albeitoverlappingsyndromes:

pectoris isexertionalchestpainduetoinadequateperfusion,andistypicallyduetoatheroscleroticdiseasecausinggreaterthan70%fixedstenosis(so-called“criticalstenosis”). Angina

Unstable ischaracterizedbyincreasinglyfrequentpain,precipitatedbyprogressivelylessexertionorevenoccurringatrest.Itresultsfromanerosionorruptureofatheroscleroticplaquetriggeringplateletaggregation,vasoconstriction,andformationofamuralthrombusthatneednotnecessarilybeocclusive. angina

Acute myocardial infarction typicallyresultsfromacutethrombosisafterplaquedisruption;amajorityoccurinplaquesthatdidnotpreviouslyexhibitcriticalstenosis.

death Sudden cardiac usuallyresultsfromafatalarrhythmia,typicallywithoutsignificantacutemyocardialdamage.

isprogressiveheartfailureduetoischemicinjury,eitherfrompreviousinfarction(s)orchronicischemia. cardiomyopathy Ischemic

Myocardialischemialeadstolossofmyocytefunctionwithin1to2minutesbutcausesdeathafteronly30to40minutes.Myocardialinfarctionisdiagnosedonthebasisofsymptoms,electrocardiographicchanges,andmeasurementofserumbiomarkerssuchascardiac-specifictroponins.Grossandhistologicchangesofinfarctionrequirehourstodaystodevelop.

Infarctioncanbemodifiedbytherapeuticintervention(e.g.,thrombolysisorstenting),whichsalvagesmyocardiumatriskbutmayalsoinducereperfusion-relatedinjury.

Complicationsofinfarctionincludeventricularrupture,papillarymusclerupture,aneurysmformation,muralthrombus,arrhythmia,pericarditis,andCHF.

within node are can anywhere system, myocardium. conduction the ventricular originating individual from of the the an Aberrant they (supraventricular) from typically initiated (SA) sinoatrial designated rhythms level as be the down in myocyte; atrium to or the sporadic conduction myocardial sustained (paroxysmal). be can http://ebooksmedicine.net or in Abnormalities manifest contraction ventricular bradycardia with They rate), electrical contraction, heart (ventricular ventricular tachycardia no (slow rhythm at without functional (asystole). (fast normal activity as an all depolarization rate), chaotic fibrillation), irregular or heart can cardiac palpitations output sustained or later). or or arrhythmia can rhythm Patients due of adequate rhythm); death sudden lightheadedness of disorder, (near of may heart” loss (see to consciousness note (irregular may cardiac a syncope), produce loss (syncope), a unaware be “racing

dilation disorders, Ischemic heart chambers cause conduction. is through damage rhythm injury of the most alters either of the that direct or signal common through

(e.g., If the damaged albeit slower (AV) rate even pacemaker or function, the take fibers node node a intrinsic sick is much other can sinus SA at (causing bradycardia). over atrioventricular syndrome),

are AV the become to and sporadically the variably rate atrial node (as with the “irregularly atrial dilation), If occurs through irregular” random independently transmitted “irritable” of leading signals and fibrillation. heart the atrial depolarize myocytes

to simple the varying block), of (first-degree is failure the block), AV prolongation ECG occur, (second-degree complete signal P-R block from the on heart interval degrees heart heart (third-degree heart of to transmission dysfunctional, node If the block). ranging intermittent of

arrhythmias. (fortunately conditions can Certain heritable cause rare) also in need (discussed sudden prevent later) the family and death recognize alert intervention to are may to proband They for members. to their physicians the important they because cardiac cardiomyopathy, anatomic these with mitral anomalies, prolapse). associated congenital Some recognizable of valve (e.g., hypertrophic disorders abnormalities are heritable electrical precipitate arrythmias sudden disorders other (so-called the structural However, cardiac in absence and disorders”). of “primary death pathology in family diagnosed arrhythmia. syndromes can or genetic with an those be only These a positive is which history by unexplained nonlethal performed testing, mutations these channels. required most important are The the normal are caused by that Ca+ function of and are for K+, in Na+, channelopathies, genes of which are these in contraction electrical surprising for that not Since is mediate currents that responsible of channels may channels defects heart, conducting it provoke the the ion arrythmias. QT malignant of prolongation The segment arrhythmias. QT and ECGs to by susceptibility characterized the the in syndrome, long prototype is ventricular cases account decreased common; in several with potassium different long Mutations the of it QT being results currents. genes syndrome, most KCNQ1 in for the

(SCD) fibrillation. to ventricular death or as as is death cardiac a asystole Sudden due arrhythmia such defined sustained unexpected lethal 400,000 of victims States. year Roughly the SCD United in individuals each are artery to 80% leading of responsible SCD, disease the cause is 90% being of cases. for Coronary the SCD IHD. may of be first manifestation Unfortunately, disease without of shows autopsy plaque atherosclerotic acute Of severe interest, typically disruption. evidence to show enzymatic of Thus, myocardial suffer 80% is patients in but who evidence resuscitated is necrosis—even are myocardial of not vast SCD cases, of no infarction; associated successfully if cause 90% the do majority IHD! or any there the ECG in Healed are present MIs remote of about cases. 40%

the including of younger are nonatherosclerotic following: causes more common, SCD, victims In

the (channelopathies) abnormalities of cardiac Hereditary conduction or acquired system

Myocardial hypertrophy. including or increased in SCD; cardiac independent risk is mass young thus, the suddenly, die unexplained hypertrophy Increased only pathologic cardiac who hypertensive some individuals mass for is athletes, an finding. factor

system. major of system, conduction cases myocardium arrhythmia can directly ischemic the Although by are electrical other the the most from injury fatal of conditions) irritability distant triggered of (and components pathologic conduction affect

by or risk with for senses defibrillator, pacemaker is The implantation markedly an electrically cardioverter fibrillation. SCD, a IHD, of episode those an including improved ventricular many of prognosis of chronic counteracts patients which automatic at and

disease depicted end discussed points to of relationship coronary various earlier artery the in is clinical The

Fig. 11.15

Arrhythmiascanbecausedbyischemicorstructuralchangesintheconductionsystemorbymyocyteelectricalinstability.Instructurallynormalhearts,arrhythmiasmoreoftenareduetomutationsinionchannelsthatcauseaberrantrepolarizationordepolarization.

SCDmostfrequentlyisduetocoronaryarterydiseaseleadingtoischemia.Myocardialirritabilitytypicallyresultsfromnonlethalischemiaorfrompreexistingfibrosisfrompreviousmyocardialinjury.SCDlessoftenisduetoacuteplaquerupturewiththrombosisthatinducesarapidlyfatalarrhythmia.

causing is the placed hypertension, ventricular increased of and the on demands pressure by consequence disease Hypertensive heart heart overload hypertrophy. a (HHD) in 10, brain, many organs, a hypertension disorder and morbidity affecting considerable with As including is discussed heart, and the Chapter associated kidneys. common will overload The the ventricular on hypertension, from specifically cardiac of hypertrophy. pressure result which focus here and complications major comments overload; CHF, hypertrophy even however, is myocardial dysfunction, adaptive and in there an capacity, dilation, cardiac limits response to to Myocyte sudden pressure death. persistent eventually and hypertension can are culminate adaptive the hypertensive systemic most commonly secondary heart cause right-sided hypertension the to affects pulmonale.” can also hypertension, pulmonary changes—so-called hypertensive left “cor heart of Although http://ebooksmedicine.net disease side

Fig. viable DISEASE increased arrhythmias artery duration thrombosis Acute of ischemic SUDDEN ARTERY healing Myocardial heart Chronic heart plaque muscle Ventricular ischemia MYOCARDIAL Pathwaysintheprogressionofischemicheartdiseaseshowingtherelationshipsamongcoronaryarterydiseaseanditsmajorsequelae.CORONARY disease CARDIAC and INFARCTION remodeling muscle of loss ischemia and Infarct 11.15 failure Congestive severity coronary dilation DEATH Myocardial change; with Hypertrophy,

ventricular The pathologic systemic a (1) or for the of absence in of valvular left heart history stenosis), other disease hypertrophy are evidence (2) diagnosis (e.g., hypertensive the hypertension. pathology of and cardiovascular criteria sufficiently prolonged, if that left Heart hypertrophy. mm ventricular 140/90 Study mild established Hg), The induces hypertension unequivocally (above Framingham even 25% the hypertension. this degree U.S. of population least at of Roughly from suffers

Asdiscussedearlier,systemichypertensionimposespressureoverloadontheheartandisassociatedwithgrossandmicroscopicchangessomewhatdistinctfromthosecausedbyvolumeoverload.Theessentialfeatureofhypertensiveheartdiseaseisleftventricularhypertrophy,typicallywithoutventriculardilationuntilverylateintheprocess(

).Theheartweightcanexceed500g(normalfora60-to70-kgindividualis320to360g),andtheleftventricularwallthicknesscanexceed2.0cm(normalis1.2to1.4cm).Withtime,theincreasedleftventricularwallthicknessimpartsastiffnessthatimpairsdiastolicfillingandcanresultinleftatrialdilation.Inlong-standingsystemichypertensiveheartdiseaseleadingtocongestivefailure,thehypertrophicleftventricletypicallyisdilated. Fig.11.16A

Microscopically,thetransversediameterofmyocytesisincreasedandthereisprominentnuclearenlargementandhyperchromasia(“boxcarnuclei”),aswellasintercellularfibrosis(seealso

Fig.11.1D

Fig. Hypertensiveheartdisease. 11.16 inthisfour-chamberviewoftheheart.Apacemakerispresentincidentallyintherightventricle(arrow).Notealsotheleftatrialdilation(asterisk) (A)Systemic(left-sided)hypertensiveheartdisease.Thereismarkedconcentricthickeningoftheleftventricularwallcausingreductioninlumensize.Theleftventricleandleftatriumareshownontheright duetostiffeningoftheleftventricleandimpaireddiastolicrelaxation,leadingtoatrialvolumeoverload. left) the (B)Chroniccorpulmonale.Therightventricle(shown on ismarkedlydilatedandhypertrophiedwithathickenedfreewallandhypertrophiedtrabeculae.Theshapeandvolumeoftheleftventriclehavebeendistortedbytheenlargedrightventricle.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ventricular blood suspected echocardiographic of and findings physical or HHD examination, routine is on from hypertrophy. from discovery ECG left only typically asymptomatic or elevated pressure is of Compensated of (secondary atrial fibrillation with the patients, onset to attention enlargement) atrial to some disease and/or CHF. the left comes In are meet The mechanisms understood; heart the increased to myocytes demands presumably which because of possibly by due muscle sarcomeres contract failure in and efficiently, structural the to the leads newly vascular is inadequate supply hypertension incompletely mass. abnormalities to hypertrophic the to assembled fail cause cerebrovascular (2) patients heart normal duration the causes, in damage on therapeutic effects die (1) unrelated coronary atherosclerosis, of enjoy stroke, severity hypertension the Depending the and experience the and of of (4) condition, or the congestive of longevity owing hypertension, of control, renal or (3) and failure. can adequacy to develop potentiating IHD suffer underlying SCD risk also The increased. is for to prevent control the of regression hypertrophy cardiac can attendant hypertension its Effective and lead risks. or

and hypertension ( failure—caused Cor of the or consists pulmonary lung right-sided pulmonary by parenchyma primary accompanied vasculature ventricular disorders heart by right dilation—frequently attributable of hypertrophy pulmonale to

Table 11.3 ). heart by left disease) by is (or by caused congenital is more and hypertrophy definition. failure but ventricular ventricular excluded common this Right dilation substantially

chronic with insidious (see and pulmonary pulmonary in pressure in setting and a slow embolism, prolonged have vascular onset, or of due can when the overload be acute pulmonale lung disease Cor as to can onset

11.3 Table

pulmonale therightventricleusuallyshowsonlydilation;ifanembolismcausessuddendeath,theheartmayevenbeofnormalsize.Chronic cor pulmonale, ischaracterizedbyrightventricular(andoftenrightatrial)hypertrophy.Inextremecases,thethicknessoftherightventricularwallmaybecomparabletoorevenexceedthatoftheleftventricle( cor MORPHOLOGYInacute

).Whenventricularfailuredevelops,therightventricleandatriumoftenaredilated.Becausechroniccorpulmonaleoccursinthesettingofpulmonaryhypertension,thepulmonaryarteriesoftencontainatheromatousplaquesandotherlesions,reflectinglongstandingpressureelevations. Fig.11.16B

Valvular may or result insufficiency stenosis, in or disease both. (regurgitation incompetence),

the open is flow. failure valve to a forward of Stenosis • obstructing completely, stenosis almost Valvular is

11.3 Pulmonale Cor Table to Disorders Predisposing

Extensivepulmonaryarteritis(e.g.,Granulomatosiswithpolyangiitis)

Drug-,toxin-,orradiation-inducedvascularobstruction

Hypertensiveheartdiseasecanaffecteithertheleftventricleortherightventricle;inthelattercase,thedisorderismostoftenduetoprimarypulmonarydiseaseandiscalledcor pulmonale. Elevatedpressuresinducemyocytehypertrophyandinterstitialfibrosisthatincreaseswallthicknessandstiffness.

Thechronicpressureoverloadofsystemichypertensioncausesleftventricularconcentrichypertrophy,oftenassociatedwithleftatrialdilationduetoimpaireddiastolicfillingoftheventricle.Persistentlyelevatedpressureoverloadcancauseventricularfailurewithdilation.

Corpulmonaleresultsfrompulmonaryhypertensionduetoprimarylungparenchymalorvasculardisorders.Hypertrophyofboththerightventricleandtherightatriumischaracteristic;dilationalsomaybeseenwhenfailuresupervenes.

valve stemming from chronic a calcification a process primary due always abnormality cuspal to scarring). or (e.g.,

valve completely, failure to regurgitation allowing thereby (backflow) of close results a of blood. • Insufficiency from or tendinous cusps intrinsic the result free or disease valve aorta, the insufficiency disruption cords, muscles, wall) primary either from (e.g., annulus, (e.g., endocarditis) structures the injury. papillary can of without supporting mitral Valvular cuspal of ventricular or rupture, scarring with of and as consequence insidiously leaflet a appear chordal retraction. as abruptly, It can

may valve. same together in the or regurgitation Stenosis occur alone or one Valvular target), valve or more valve common being (the most valve. only can disease involve the mitral than one thrills. abnormal valves murmurs; Turbulent sounds externally diseased can lesions produces flow typically called heart as palpated severe through be even stenosis) of heard valve the nature best the the timing on locations murmurs and or disease (regurgitation severity involved, versus (e.g., murmur are murmurs). valvular harsh moreover, chest the soft different diastolic on wall; and Depending the of quality the systolic determines at

http://ebooksmedicine.net

the depends mechanisms. of on valve of valvular effectiveness development, outcome of the disease involved, of and its the The degree tempo the compensatory impairment, by an aortic can For valve cardiac and of infection example, massive onset abrupt of failure. cusp the rapid cause regurgitation destruction progresses the clinical stenosis and usually well rheumatic By its until course. effects mitral tolerated over late contrast, years, are in

congenital Valvular can abnormalities be acquired. or those the has associated all valvular far frequency functional the instead cusps a of a congenital containing valve, 1% of most births, aortic mutations, normal signaling this lesion to is three; of malformation pathway. of two occurs 2% a the and bicuspid of By affecting Notch with only number been with live including proteins common incomplete cusps from resulting size, cuspal exhibiting ( separation a larger cusp The raphe of midline with are two the unequal

Fig. 11.17B ). to rise gives neither later). generally prone (see more progressive are stenotic life; stenosis valves incompetent nor early early however, are calcification Bicuspid they aortic and to through degenerative that

The acquired valvular most in are of important summarized diseases causes

of of and for approximately mitral aortic thirds account valve 11.4 ; acquired all stenoses disease. two Table valves the

a that is disease describe valvular used valve changes term ECM. the of Degenerative affect to integrity the include changes Degenerative following:

Calcifications, valve) be in cuspal (typically can ( aortic the which

Fig. and 11.17A annular or the B valve) ( mitral (in )

Fig. ). D 11.17C and adjacent encroaches unless the on usually system. it is conduction annular asymptomatic Mitral calcification

the in Alterations ECM. the In elastin of scarred. becomes in (myxomatous fibrotic and and diminished cases, other fibrillar cases, collagen changes consist some valve proteoglycan degeneration); and increased

or of metalloproteinases production inhibitors the Changes in matrix their

related an to mechanical cardiac are requiring closing in subjected—40 substantial valves repetitive the Degenerative of aspect normal changes beats valves opening and which with each aging probably deformation. million inevitable the to are year, stresses per valve

degeneration most the stenosis. of aortic cause aortic Calcific common is is discovered cases, is viewing calcific asymptomatic In incidentally by only degeneration most and

of Table Disease Acquired Heart Valve Etiology (myocarditis,dilatedcardiomyopathy)Calcificationofmitralring 11.4

18:558,1987. Fen-phen, Pathol Fenfluramine-phentermine.DatafromSchoenFJ:Surgicalpathologyofremovednaturalandprostheticvalves,Hum

Fig. 11.17 Calcificvalvulardegeneration. (A)Calcificaorticstenosisofapreviouslynormalvalve(viewedfromabovethevalve).NodularmassesofcalciumareheapedupwithinthesinusesofValsalva(arrow).Notethatthecommissuresarenotfused,asinrheumaticaorticvalvestenosis(see

Fig.

11.19C ).(B)Calcificaorticstenosisoccurringonacongenitallybicuspidvalve.Onecusphasapartialfusionatitscenter,calledaraphe(arrow).(CandD)Mitralcalcification,withcalcificnoduleswithintheannulus(attachmentmargin)ofthemitralleaflets(arrows). (C)Leftatrialview. (D)Sectiondemonstratingtheextensionofcalcificationintotheunderlyingmyocardium.Suchinvolvementofadjacentstructuresneartheinterventricularseptumcanimpingeontheconductionsystem.

autopsy. or radiograph http://ebooksmedicine.net on a at routine calcifications chest cause and/or necessitating patients, calcification other can sclerosis to In severe intervention. enough be surgical stenosis, valvular of The pace in is longevity. increasing calcific incidence aortic stenosis with 80s; their 50 reach much aortic to with In (often normal 70s anatomically begins a onset is age of age). bicuspid 40 earlier years it patients when to and valves, at typically valves manifest

process, counterparts calcification the can to the and cuspal explain valvular fibrosis be viewed age-related invoked as to “wear often also tear” arteriosclerosis. and simple is Although progressive age-associated inflammation, hypertension, degenerative chronic Thus, evidence to as hyperlipidemia, lacking. injury to changes, but have atherosclerosis valvular implicated in firm other proposed factors due and is contributors been

opening(Fig.

11.17AandB );commissuralfusion(usuallyasignofpreviousinflammation)isnotatypicalfeatureofdegenerativeaorticstenosis,althoughthecuspsmaybecomesecondarilyfibrosedandthickened.Anearlier,hemodynamicallyinconsequentialstageofthecalcificationprocessiscalledaortic sclerosis. valve

severe 70% as disease, valve much a In be area cm2). of to 80% 4 normal approximately (from as by orifices can compromised pressures 200 is virtue chronic obstruction of Cardiac left maintained the mm ventricular ventricular by left to can outflow hypertrophy; output more. Hg concentric drive or only and may to prone angina myocardium is ischemia, hypertrophied develop. The Systolic cardiac ensues. dysfunction cause CHF, diastolic eventually to and and collude decompensation compensatory syncope development and of exhaustion to hyperfunction in surgical of poor to 3 angina, a 80% die 2 The 50% carries or aortic CHF, patients cardiac of stenosis intervention, years. heralds the without within prognosis;

mitral myxomatous leaflets and mitral during left of back one valve, atrium are the prolapse—they into “floppy” balloon In systole. degeneration both the or of form men. to mitral almost heart Primary women of mitral most adults; it valvular valve 0.5% common than of is degeneration with is the 7-fold a one more prolapse myxomatous 2.4% affecting some disease, of thus, affected forms often secondary a and of equally, underlying other (e.g., occur any Conversely, some men in and settings affects in women is degeneration of myxomatous by can one IHD). regurgitation which cause caused number mitral mitral

basis myxomatous valve The mitral unknown. of is for the primary degeneration likely. systemic) Nevertheless, synthesis underlying remodeling (possibly connective an intrinsic tissue defect of is or occurs Thus, to fibrillin-1 mitral feature disorders. in of the tissue and a Marfan connective common 7) occasionally Chapter valve mutations, (due of degeneration is other myxomatous syndrome hints may additional some including abnormalities scoliosis primary of patients disease, and tissue, In palate, found. with be connective structural systemic in high-arched elastin that cells connective structural in to elaborate (e.g., valves) defective defects rich tissues cause (or make hemodynamically microfibrils ECM. may cardiac them) the and in proteins stressed Subtle aberrant results forces. to chronically the hemodynamic imposed from myofibroblasts, by Secondary presumably change valve injury myxomatous

layerowingtoincreaseddepositionofmyxomatous(mucoid)material.ThesamechangesoccurwhetherthemyxomatousdegenerationisduetoanintrinsicECMdefect(primary),oriscausedbyregurgitationsecondarytoanotheretiologicprocess(e.g.,ischemicdysfunction). ).Theaffectedleafletsareenlarged,redundant,thick,andrubbery;thetendinouscordsalsotendtobeelongated,thinned,andoccasionallyrupture.Inthosewithprimarymitraldisease,concomitanttricuspidvalveinvolvementisfrequent(20%to40%ofcases);lesscommonly,aorticandpulmonicvalvesalsomaybeaffected.Onhistologicexamination,theessentialchangeisthinningofthevalvelayerknownasthefibrosa layerofthevalve,onwhichthestructuralintegrityoftheleafletdepends,accompaniedbyexpansionofthemiddlespongiosa Fig.11.18

Fig. Myxomatousdegenerationofthemitralvalve.Thereisprominenthoodingwithprolapseoftheposteriormitralleaflet(arrow) 11.18 intotheleftatrium;theatriumalsoisdilated,reflectinglong-standingvalvularinsufficiencyandvolumeoverload.Theleftventricleisshownontheright inthisfour-chamberview. (Courtesy Mayo Minnesota.) William MD, Rochester, Edwards, Clinic, of D. http://ebooksmedicine.net

are Most patients abnormality is asymptomatic, discovered and incidentally. the valvular of pain. chest complain cases, In a patients dyspnea, palpitations, atypical of or minority attempts midsystolic the abrupt on Auscultation by there close; valve the tendineae caused is as click, valve associated and leaflets sometimes murmur. regurgitant tension chordae to discloses an a redundant in history the course benign, mitral regurgitation patients particularly chordae as if and develop natural rupture. of are CHF, the complications such most significant leaflets Although valve approximately or and 3% instances clinical hemodynamically degeneration later), are primary with ventricular development due well also the at as as Patients risk for (see increased SCD endocarditis of to infective myxomatous arrhythmias. other left rarely systemic the in of formed may infarctions thrombi or from embolism atrium. occur Stroke

acute, sites, but is A multisystem disease infections at other streptococcal infections inflammatory (usually that also immunologically skin). as occasionally after β-hemolytic pharyngitis, Rheumatic mediated, occurs fever such an group manifestation cardiac of fever. rheumatic Rheumatic heart disease the is scarring but parts all It with the of the most heart, of is important clinical and produce associated inflammation features. inflammation valvular

stenosis; deforming disease only The fibrotic mitral the principally the of stenosis. is cause essentially rheumatic heart disease indeed of acquired valvular form mitral takes of socioeconomic Western decades disease) a the of has fever a pharyngitis, diagnosis heart the several the of A world treatment in many and rheumatic (and many of streptococcal rapid unexplained) and combination over due fortuitous strains thus declined group decline of conditions, improved past (and in of parts to rheumatic incidence The virulence streptococci. remarkably health areas depressed States, important disease United problems. heart and countries rheumatic in urban fever and Nevertheless, economically developing rheumatic in public remain the

antigens with against a is fever attributed that rheumatic cross-react to classically (see myocardial streptococcal antibodies Chapter directed A also molecules group host reaction Acute 5). hypersensitivity Fc macrophages). and and against in injury particular, complement certain M strains myocardium the cause of to receptor–bearing valves through cardiac the In bind of and proteins antibodies activation proteins (including cells streptococcal peptides antigens can elicit cross-react CD4+ recognize responses. cytokine-mediated with inflammatory cells and streptococcal host T that the characteristic streptococci needed after onset 3-week generate absent the time an explained immune symptom by lesions. are response; 2-to from delay is infection completely The to in only cross-reactive to Since likely in small the 3%), fever those susceptibility at infected (estimated develop a rheumatic responses patients affected. of is of development the immune minority genetic the of consequence resolution The scarring and with fibrotic inflammation. are predictable acute the associated healing the of deforming lesions

ischaracterizedbydiscreteinflammatoryfociwithinavarietyoftissues.Themyocardialinflammatorylesions—calledAschoff bodies—arepathognomonicforrheumaticfever( MORPHOLOGYAcute fever rheumatic

);thesearecollectionsoflymphocytes(primarilyTcells),scatteredplasmacells,andplumpactivatedmacrophagescalledAnitschkow associatedwithzonesoffibrinoidnecrosis.TheAnitschkowcellshaveabundantcytoplasmandnucleiwithchromatinthatiscentrallycondensedintoaslender,wavyribbon(so-called“caterpillarcells”).Duringacuterheumaticfever,Aschoffbodiescanbefoundinanyofthethreelayersoftheheart—pericardium,myocardium,orendocardium(includingvalves).Hence,rheumaticfeverissaidtocausepancarditis,withthefollowingsalientfeatures: Fig.11.19B cells

Thepericardiummayexhibitafibrinousexudate,whichgenerallyresolveswithoutsequelae.

Themyocardialinvolvement—myocarditis—takestheformofscatteredAschoffbodieswithintheinterstitialconnectivetissue.

Fig.11.19A )forming1-to2-mmvegetations—verrucae—thatcauselittledisturbanceincardiacfunction.

chordae rheumatic heart fusion fusion shortening,and thickening, Chronic commissural and ischaracterizedbyorganizationofacuteinflammationandsubsequentscarring.Aschoffbodiesarereplacedbyfibrousscarsothattheselesionsarerarelyseeninchronicdisease.Mostcharacteristically,valvecuspsandleafletsbecomepermanentlythickenedandretracted.Classically,themitralvalvesexhibitleaflet disease of thickening and ( tendineae the

Fig.11.19CtoE ).Fibrousbridgingacrossthevalvularcommissuresandcalcificationcreate“fishmouth”or“buttonhole”stenoses(

).Microscopicexaminationshowsneovascularization(visiblyevidentin Fig.11.19C

Fig.

11.19D )anddiffusefibrosisthatobliteratesthenormalleafletarchitecture.

regurgitation; stenosistendstopredominate.Themitralvalvealoneisinvolvedin70%ofcases,andcombinedmitralandaorticdiseaseinseeninanother25%;thetricuspidvalveislessfrequently(andlessseverely)involved;andthepulmonicvalvealmostalwaysescapesinjury.Withtightmitralstenosis,theleftatriumprogressivelydilatesowingtopressureoverload,precipitatingatrialfibrillation.Thecombinationofdilationandfibrillationisafertilesubstrateforthrombosis,andformationoflargemuralthrombiiscommon.Long-standingpassivevenouscongestiongivesrisetopulmonaryvascularandparenchymalchangestypicalofleft-sidedheartfailure.Intime,thisleadstorightventricularhypertrophyandfailure.Withpuremitralstenosis,theleftventriclegenerallyisnormal. and stenosis Themostimportantfunctionalconsequenceofrheumaticheartdiseaseisvalvular

often is children; occurs manifestation most the principal rheumatic in fever carditis. Acute clinical http://ebooksmedicine.net Nevertheless,

Fig. Rheumaticheartdisease.(A)Acuterheumaticmitralvalvulitissuperimposedonchronicrheumaticheartdisease.Smallvegetations(verrucae)arevisiblealongthelineofclosureofthemitralvalveleaflet(arrows). 11.19 Previousepisodesofrheumaticvalvulitishavecausedfibrousthickeningandfusionofthechordaetendineae.(B)MicroscopicappearanceofanAschoffbodyinacuterheumaticcarditis;thereiscentralnecrosisassociatedwithacircumscribedcollectionofmononuclearinflammatorycells,includingsomeactivatedmacrophageswithprominentnucleoliandcentralwavy(caterpillar)chromatin(arrows). (CandD)Mitralstenosiswithdiffusefibrousthickeninganddistortionofthevalveleaflets,commissuralfusion(arrows), andthickeningandshorteningofthechordaetendineae.Thereismarkedleftatrialdilationasseenfromabovethevalve(C).(D)Anteriorleafletofanopenedrheumaticmitralvalve;notetheneovascularization(arrow).(E)Surgicallyremovedspecimenofrheumaticaorticstenosis,demonstratingthickeninganddistortionofthecuspswithcommissuralfusion. in the M: (E, valvular From Schoen disease, 1967.) heart St HumPathol18:568, FJ, John-Sutton pathology issues Contemporary of first of occur feature. about predominant being the in with adults, attacks 20% arthritis painful Symptoms in weeks disability. spontaneous heralded groups becomes and another age days, by infection followed typically resolution a streptococcal of begin are period and no and fever residual large swollen migratory polyarthritis— after with 3 all 2 after joint one by to for against cultures are are streptolysin one of the onset, at Although antigens O negative titers antibodies more symptom usually streptococcal serum or elevated. for (e.g., streptococci time or of DNAase) severe cardiac friction carditis be dilation and and CHF. clinical to pericardial cause myocarditis mitral may signs arrhythmias; The of functional include resultant rubs sufficiently and insufficiency die patients Nevertheless, than of of fever. rheumatic acute 1% less

large migratory marginatum) and called in (2) two neurologic of disorder (also a more rapid rheumatic or conjunction nodules; the skin; movements in rash erythematous serologic purposeless, fever the of Sydenham diagnosis joints; carditis; by characterized (erythema annular streptococcal Jones (5) of polyarthritis St. evidence infection with (1) Vitus of on is made based criteria: dance). subcutaneous The acute (4) previous (3) chorea, involuntary fever, also criteria diagnosis. the help reactants can elevated arthralgias, phase as such changes, or support EKG Minor acute

patients and generation subsequent After memory, the any with streptococcal infections. immunologic an to disease initial are attack of increasingly vulnerable reactivation damage Carditis recurrence, to likely cumulative. each worsen with and the is is initial or the evident after episode rheumatic usually of However, not is rheumatic clinically chronic even until fever. years carditis decades cardiac valve(s) that which time, symptoms signs At the on involved. valvular of depend and disease is mitral to In have due various thromboembolic heart disease setting fibrillation patients mural and CHF, hypertrophy dilation, of rheumatic (particularly cardiac chronic arrhythmias complications and thrombi. cardiac and the atrial to often murmurs, in atrial stenosis), with addition endocarditis. infective valves In susceptible are scarred addition, deformed more to and is highly The long-term variable. prognosis some deforming further a relentless valvular hemodynamic which ensues, In cycle of begets fibrosis. deformity abnormality, yielding cases, greatly valvuloplasty—has diseased with replacement Surgical improved the outlook of for disease. or rheumatic valves—mitral patients heart repair

http://ebooksmedicine.net

formation underlying composed destruction the associated endocarditis Infective endocardium often infection of of that debris organisms, tissues. with is (IE) of of mural and thrombotic cardiac or heart a microbial leads the the vegetations the to valves become The blood aorta, infected. other prosthetic vessels, also aneurysmal may sacs, devices and Q bacteria. vast can cases species of caused the of by extracellular fungi, Although fever), majority rickettsiae chlamydial are cause (agents endocarditis, and

the Infective endocarditis and of the microbe clinical distinctions disease subacute virulence the acute on severity related based tempo into course; classified and the present. is of responsible are and whether to cardiac forms is underlying the subacute clear the possible, delineation Of somewhere two acute along and between spectrum always is a forms. endocarditis and the note, cases not fall between many

normal involving organism destructive virulent to endocarditis a frequently attacking a infections, refers Acute highly previously tumultuous, valve. therapy surgery. substantial even of associated It is with and with antibiotic appropriate morbidity and/or mortality,

Subacute to valves. heart, organisms abnormal scarred affecting virulence or a endocarditis infections by refers of low deformed especially previously appears recover untreated— after protracted course The if and—even follows a appropriate most typically therapy. months; insidiously to antibiotic patients weeks of disease

predispose heart common Infective aortic mitral substrates. such develop previously stenosis normal valves, can but bicuspid prolapse, all to abnormalities valves, disease, and infections; calcific are valvular cardiac rheumatic on endocarditis valve valves 20% of cases of now IE. (discussed for to 10% all later) Prosthetic account heart foci seeding endocardium indwelling Sterile cardiac vascular of disease flow at “jets” sites or of can endocarditis. pacemaker for platelet-fibrin preexisting from all by development lines, damage catheters, stemming bacterial deposits be and as the and alcohol IE immunodeficiency, also intravenous Host abuse drug or for malignancy, mellitus, affect such increase diabetes factors and neutropenia, adversely outcomes. risk

oral on viridans, cases organisms the of The valves occurring deformed 50% banal on are group 60% by factors; Streptococcus causative underlying depending risk relatively of differ a normal caused flora. damaged or to to responsible valves for can as healthy the as infections attack cases more occurring in is and major virulent the also of is abusers. overall; (common in contrast, it drug S. deformed 20% offender aureus 10% skin) By to well intravenous enterococci the include in Additional the and Kingella), bacterial Cardiobacterium, agents Eikenella, commensal “HACEK group” all so-called and Actinobacillus, oral cavity. (Haemophilus, fungi bacilli and More involved. gram-negative are rarely, of within cases In of endocarditis) is because are deeply agent, 10% about released the no the antibiotic isolating the isolated organism embedded from blood. blood in or offending vegetation all the of readily (“culture-negative” previous therapy, enlarging endocarditis, into not difficulty because organisms

predisposing endocarditis microbes. among with seeding blood of the is Foremost factors to the the bloodstream elsewhere, into of of occult directly may the a or an procedure the bacteremia, injection obvious causes material injuries. source mechanism portal transient contaminated a or intravenous an entry agent from of infection abusers, trivial cavity, by into or gut, surgical The bloodstream or that oral be drug the dental anatomic antibiotic clinical and causing prophylaxis. predisposing bacteremia substrates conditions Recognition allows of appropriate

MORPHOLOGYInbothacuteandsubacuteformsofthedisease,friable,bulky,andpotentiallydestructivevegetationscontainingfibrin,inflammatorycells,andmicroorganismsarepresentontheheartvalves(

are abuse. target sites drug ).The valve tricuspid a valves aortic is of of the in 11.21 most setting common frequent the intravenous although and the mitral infection, Figs.11.20 Vegetationsmaybesingleormultipleandmayinvolvemorethanonevalve;theycansometimeserodeintotheunderlyingmyocardiumtoproduceanabscesscavity(ring abscess) (

infarcts Fig.11.21B aneurysms). andaneurysmsresultingfrombacterialinfectionofthearterialwall(mycotic ).Sheddingofemboli iscommonbecauseofthefriablenatureofthevegetations.Sincethefragmentedvegetationscontainlargenumbersoforganisms,abscessesoftendevelopatthesiteswhereembolilodge,leadingtodevelopmentofseptic

Subacuteendocarditistypicallycauseslessvalvulardestructionthanacuteendocarditis.Onmicroscopicexamination,thevegetationsofsubacuteendocarditisoftenhavegranulationtissueattheirbases(suggestingchronicity),promotingdevelopmentofchronicinflammatoryinfiltrates,fibrosis,andcalcificationovertime.

endocarditis. the is infective most Fever consistent sign of

syndrome; adults), common may in absent, splenomegaly weight be cases. loss, be subacute in the disease However, and subacute also a nonspecific is (particularly in older only manifestations may flulike fever and fatigue, with acute By manifests contrast, chills, fever, developing weakness, rapidly often endocarditis lassitude. and 90% present Murmurs of are left-sided in with lesions. patients bed those who (Janeway confirmed is which (splinter) not by petechia, painless fingertip erythematous cultures treated painful microemboli In findings. or give sole nail (Roth positive or rise and diagnosis spots), nodules blood promptly, (Osler echocardiographic can lesions), lesions retinal hemorrhages are hemorrhages, nodes); are formed, to palm

and depends on infecting of Prognosis complications. organism the development the antigen-antibody weeks complexes, after of and sequelae process the of glomerular begin glomerulonephritis generally http://ebooksmedicine.net within to onset the first include infectious due trapping can with Adverse

Fig. 11.20 Majorformsofvegetativeendocarditis.Theacuterheumaticfeverphaseofrheumaticheartdisease(RHD)ismarkedbytheappearanceofsmall,warty,inflammatoryvegetationsalongthelinesofvalveclosure;astheinflammationresolves,substantialscarringcanresult.Infectiveendocarditis(IE)ischaracterizedbylarge,irregular,oftendestructivemassesthatcanextendfromvalveleafletsontoadjacentstructures(e.g.,chordaeormyocardium).Non-bacterialthromboticendocarditis(NBTE)typicallymanifestswithsmall-tomedium-sized,bland,nondestructivevegetationsatthelineofvalveclosure.Libman-Sacksendocarditis(LSE)ischaracterizedbysmall-tomedium-sizedinflammatoryvegetationsthatcanbeattachedoneithersideofthevalveleaflets;thesehealwithscarring.

albuminuria, hematuria, renal 14). failure (Chapter or system), Clinical conduction systemic (suggesting bode for embolization and underlying ill myocardium features septicemia, the patient. to arrhythmias of extension and Left generally fatal. is untreated, IE and/or However, (6 valve long-term weeks is reduced. or with replacement, therapy mortality more) appropriate antibiotic infections (e.g., of rate enterococci viridans Staphylococcus with fatality 60% to from or 98%, fungi infections, however, with is 90%; range For and with 50%. aerobic cure aureus for and or bovis), rates rate organisms are Streptococcus approximately cure Streptococcus bacilli infections low-virulence gram-negative associated the

endocarditis on by state. thrombotic hypercoagulable in the with those Nonbacterial typically cardiac thrombi valves, of (NBTE) underlying an sterile deposition characterized is wasting for increased or a NBTE—hence term associated debility with occur associated NBTE risk alternate can wide individuals, healthy are an the endocarditis. of with general variety otherwise in diseases marantic Although to lesions In the contrast endocarditis, infective are sterile nondestructive ( of valvular NBTE

Fig. 11.22

vegetations valvular a is (1 NBTE prerequisite. mm diameter) in small damage 5 The to typically not and are in usually normal Indeed, condition the previously on valves. occurs to usual mucinous disseminated chronic include with particularly those malignancy, hyperestrogenic states and such Rather, intravascular adenocarcinomas. hypercoagulable precursor states, NBTE; associated conditions underlying are the coagulation, procoagulant effect and/or elaborated circulating these to tissue This mucin the association probably by factor relates tumors. last of an indwelling from catheter, trauma, predisposing well-recognized Endocardial as also is condition. such a

NBTE brain, the can trivial, giving the can infarcts effect usually that in clinically cause significant organs. by emboli to become heart, and the local lesions valve on Although rise is other consequent the NBTE serve for bacterial nidus colonization development and potential endocarditis. also of a as can infective

Fig. Infectiveendocarditis. 11.21 viridans onapreviouslymyxomatousmitralvalve.Thelarge,friablevegetationsaredenotedbyarrows. (A)SubacuteendocarditiscausedbyStreptococcus (B)AcuteendocarditiscausedbyStaphylococcus onacongenitallybicuspidaorticvalvewithextensivecuspaldestructionandringabscess(arrow). aureus

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 11.22 Nonbacterialthromboticendocarditis(NBTE). (A)Smallthromboticvegetationsalongthelineofclosureofthemitralvalveleaflets(arrows).

(B)PhotomicrographofNBTElesion,showingblandthrombus,withvirtuallynoinflammationinthevalvecusp(C) orthethromboticdeposit(t).Thethrombusisonlylooselyattachedtothecusp(arrow).

Lupus Systemic Endocarditis Libman-Sacks Erythematosus: Endocarditis in

valves vegetations endocarditis lupus with erythematosus. of sterile the on presence characterized of systemic is Libman-Sacks patients the by 10% occurs It in patients SLE. of about with thus rheumatic as of chronic exhibit deposition often adjacent in and probably develop with to serious inflammation, valve fibrinoid The heart necrosis resemble of lesions fibrosis disease. the associated consequence the result that complex immune lesions and deformity vegetation; can subsequent a These anywhere occur on endocardium (see cords, valve even surface, or the can on ventricular atrial on or the the

Fig. ). 11.20 anti-phospholipid setting occur Similar the in (Chapter of syndrome 4). lesions can antibody

•Valvepathologycanleadtoocclusion(stenosis) acquiredaorticormitralvalvestenosisaccountsforapproximatelytwothirdsofallvalvedisease. and/orregurgitation(insufficiency);

Valvecalcificationtypicallyresultsinstenosis;abnormalmatrixsynthesisandturnoverleadstomyxomatousdegenerationandinsufficiency.

Inflammatoryvalvediseasescausepostinflammatoryneovascularizationandscarring.Rheumaticheartdiseaseresultsfromanti-streptococcalantibodiesthatcross-reactwithcardiactissues;itmostcommonlyaffectsthemitralvalveandisresponsibleforalmostallcasesofacquiredmitralstenosis.

Infectiveendocarditiscanrapidlydestroynormalvalves,orcanbeindolentandminimallydestructiveofpreviouslyabnormalvalves.Systemicembolizationcanproducesepticinfarcts.

Nonbacterialthromboticendocarditisoccursonpreviouslynormalvalvesasaresultofhypercoagulablestates;embolizationisanimportantcomplication.

are “heart diseases”); be principally of as disorder. to the primary—that cardiac to myocardium—or these a confined cardiomyopathies myocardial diseases presenting can due manifestation is, (literally, Cardiac muscle intrinsic secondary dysfunction the systemic termed (e.g., diverse metabolic myocarditis), (e.g., systemic includes Cardiomyopathies disorders dystrophies, fibers. inflammatory thus a (e.g., immunologic disorders disorders group diseases sarcoidosis), that and are myocardial of muscular hemochromatosis), genetic and cardiomyopathy of be is have contractile metabolism energy unknown termed specific etiology shown or of proteins. and in to the number cases, structural cardiac thus idiopathic; however, cardiomyopathies “idiopathic” abnormalities consequence a many In previously genetic been is of the in

the can criteria, arrhythmia-inducing earlier. are dysfunction; according cardiomyopathy channelopathies be the alluded included of to a including classifications genetic that classified were underlying of of to in some variety some indeed, basis of Cardiomyopathies pathologic time-honored patterns however, are For recognized diagnosis clinical, three ( functional, therapy, and purposes and general of

Fig. 11.23

11.5 Table

is Of most is patterns, the three cardiomyopathy common the major least and frequent. DCM cases), of restrictive (90% each is overlap cases clinical a in clinical pattern, among and some there Within of features the spectrum severity, groups. cause, be each caused by can a or of these specific addition, idiopathic can be In patterns (see identifiable

11.5 Table

is usually cause, the similar. (DCM) by clinicopathologic Dilated patterns with cardiac cardiomyopathy characterized are the and concurrent regardless (systolic) progressive of dysfunction, contractile hypertrophy; dilation

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Aorta;LA, leftventricle. leftatrium;LV, 11.23 Thethreemajorformsofcardiomyopathy.Dilatedcardiomyopathyleadsprimarilytosystolicdysfunction,whereasrestrictiveandhypertrophiccardiomyopathiesresultindiastolicdysfunction.Notethechangesinatrialand/orventriculardilationandinventricularwallthickness.Ao,

have DCM (genetic) Although various from acquired DCM individuals form, also many result with a familial can myocardial insults. that the some by development cases, in infections) disorder viral of inflammatory precedes least the (an These • caused following: Myocarditis at include is and sometimes cardiomyopathy

Cardiomyopathies: Causes Table Patterns, 11.5 Functional

10% which history patients Toxicities, of agents chemotherapeutic chronic and to of alcoholism, 20% elicited of can effects a adverse in be including

so-called Pregnancy, cardiomyopathy” “peripartum

already poorly transplant, contractile, cardiac frequently at progressed time and autopsy any pathologic to fails end-stage it or disease; dilated and By diagnosed, DCM heart specific is is to the reveal features. the has at and pathways that general least Nevertheless, suggest can genetic epidemiologic to studies five end-stage ( lead DCM

Fig. 11.24

Genetic causes. 20% in DCM hereditary 50% has to a of cases. basis known cardiomyopathy, sarcomere cytoskeletal to proteins pattern; involved. (e.g., actin) the of are Over in mutated or being cytoskeleton autosomal commonly this proteins with the 50 affecting α-cardiac most that dominant inheritance genes mutations link predominant are to the be form protein associated is mutatons physically cell a dystrophin, DCM cytoskeleton (Chapter intracellular ECM with 22). the the in frequently membrane that to most X-linked couples phosphorylation by caused Uncommon forms are mutations involved or ATP defective β-oxidation, proteins generation. DCM in presumably fatty mitochondrial leading of acid of to oxidative contractile and the also filament cytoskeletal and common a conduction of conduction C. myocytes protein forms a (the genetic myocytes), DCM. in desmin abnormalities developmental in and fibers forms Since feature nuclear with lamins be can such of Other share mutations intermediate proteins of DCM those cardiac pathway, include inherited principal as A congenital

Infection. of myocardium enteroviruses coxsackievirus other occasionally in patients. the acid The “footprints” from DCM detected and nucleic can B late-stage be biopsies in sequential which progressed instances DCM. Moreover, myocarditis endomyocardial have documented infectious to a titers “missed” Simply that was early stages. elevated viral sufficient antibody its finding myocarditis or to in anti-viral transcripts invoke be demonstrating may to though absent viral cases even Consequently, many is attributed heart. inflammation end-stage are DCM the from of infections,

other exposure. or Alcohol toxic is abuse Alcohol associated of with development the strongly DCM. Alcohol http://ebooksmedicine.net and

proteins envelope, 20-50% causes (e.g., Various (cell or alcohol) membrane, mitochondrial) sarcomere, nuclear Toxic genetic cytoskeleton,

force force myocyte and/or signaling Defect in generation, transmission,

mitochondria in to Defect dysfunction energy and/or from sarcomeric sarcomere direct transfer

marked Hypertrophy,

Hypertrophy Heart • • • fibrillation • replacement Fibrosis, Intracardiac and • Clinical thrombi • Atrial cardiomyopathy interstitial interstitial failure • Stroke Dilation Fibrosis, • Sudden death phenotype Dilated

Fig. Leftventricle. Causesandconsequencesofdilatedandhypertrophiccardiomyopathy.Asignificantfractionofdilatedcardiomyopathies—andvirtuallyallhyper-trophiccardiomyopathies—haveageneticorigin.Dilatedcardiomyopathiescanbecausedbymutationsincytoskeletal,sarcomeric,nuclearenvelope,ormitochondrialproteins;hypertrophiccardiomyopathiestypicallyarecausedbysarcomericproteinmutations.Althoughthetwoformsofcardiomyopathydifferincauseandmorphology,theyhavecommonclinicalendpoints.LV, 11.24

direct metabolites on toxic myocardium. (especially its effect the acetaldehyde) have a thiamine associated Moreover, deficiency, 8). heart can alcoholism chronic with element disease an (Chapter be beriberi introducing of can and drug. other exposure a after to cobalt, toxic such DCM (Adriamycin), doxorubicin as particularly agents, chemotherapeutic also develop

cardiomyopathy several occurs late in Peripartum to gestation or weeks months postpartum. nutritional etiology derangements is The responses. deficiency, immunologic multifactorial, diabetes), hypertension, and/or pregnancy-associated overload, volume gestational including (e.g., metabolic impaired angiogenesis ischemic the that the injury. suggests leading Recent to work myocardium primary defect is within implicated. antagonists the to VEGF cleavage the late products placental-derived Antiangiogenic hormone in have and rises pregnancy) been (which prolactin of function. normal Fortunately, recover spontaneously these half approximately one patients of

multiple hereditary transfusions. can or from 16) (Chapter hemochromatosis either Iron in heart overload result from the systems cardiomyopathy by but cause most the to production caused due with or interference oxygen reactive overload attributed manifestation; DCM to can fibrosis, Iron to been restrictive metal-dependent enzyme of interstitial species. is it also injury common has iron-mediated

MORPHOLOGYTheheartinDCMcharacteristicallyisenlarged(uptotwotothreetimesthenormalweight)andflabby, withdilationofallchambers(

areoftenpresentandmaybeasourceofthromboemboli.Bydefinition,valvularandvascularlesions(e.g.,atheroscleroticcoronaryarterydisease)thatcancausecardiacdilationsecondarilyareabsent. Fig.11.25 ).Becauseofthewallthinningthataccompaniesdilation,theventricularthicknessmaybelessthan,equalto,orgreaterthannormal.Mural thrombi

withenlargednuclei,butmanyareattenuated,stretched,andirregular.Thereisalsovariableinterstitialandendocardialfibrosis,withscatteredareasofreplacementfibrosis;thelattermarkpreviousmyocyteischemicnecrosiscausedbyhypoperfusion,ortheymaybethefootprintsofaprevious“missed”myocarditis. ThecharacteristichistologicabnormalitiesinDCMarenonspecific.Mostmyocytesexhibithypertrophy

InDCMsecondarytoironoverload,thereisamarkedaccumulationofintramyocardialhemosiderin,whichisdemonstrablebystainingwithPrussianblue.

DCM fundamental defect contraction. The ineffective in is than in less 65%). (normal Thus, is DCM, ejection fraction is the 25% end-stage typically 50% cardiac to are from (mural) can and occur. cardiac intracardiac Secondary thrombi common, and regurgitation embolism mitral rhythms abnormal DCM years diagnosed most is 50 age. 20 of commonly and between It poor progressive signs dyspnea, exertional with CHF, of typically capacity. fatigability, including slowly manifests and easy progressive die half years cardiac 25% due death failure 5 of is within arrhythmia. years; only than usually 2 and One patients longer or to survive the devices patients, assist regression utilized; in produce definitive although implantation of is is long-term Cardiac increasingly transplantation of mechanical only durable cardiac a can of ventricular some course treatment, dysfunction. assistance

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 11.25 Dilatedcardiomyopathy(DCM).(A)Four-chamberdilationandhypertrophyareevident.Asmallmuralthrombuscanbeseenattheapexoftheleftventricle(arrow).(B)ThenonspecifichistologicpictureintypicalDCM,withmyocytehypertrophyandinterstitialfibrosis. inthisMassontrichrome–stainedpreparation.) (Collagenisblue

is cause that cardiomyopathy right-sided dominant ventricular manifests and disturbances, heart Arrhythmogenic sudden disorder can right which death. cardiac failure with an classically rhythm autosomal is 1 general 5000 a study Italy. prevalence the from close in in in population adult to Its Similar under likely in prevalence it to is where seems reported. US be the 10% deaths been sudden Almost cases in of ascribed entity. this athletes of to have the lesser is of Morphologically, infiltration right ventricular severely fibrosis fatty ( myocyte to and by amounts thinned owing replacement wall

Fig. 11.26 ). involve the intercalated the (e.g., genes Many with at desmosomal proteins desmosome as plakoglobin), proteins disk intermediate of causative as (e.g., junctional interact desmin). that encoding the well the mutations filament by detachment, strenuous that It’s thought is particularly myocyte exercise. death caused during desmosomal

filling, obstruction. outflow characterized (HCM) third in hypertrophy, cardiomyopathy one of diastolic and— myocardial defective Hypertrophic by cases—ventricular is poorly The flabby, in and to heavy, contractile in heart striking contrast is hypercontractile, the thick-walled, DCM. heart function relax usually myocardium the is exhibits HCM, therefore and not dysfunction. does preserved in diastolic but Systolic primary aortic (e.g., from HCM to hypertension). (e.g., stenosis stiffness needs clinically causing ventricular be amyloid disorders and hypertrophy ventricular distinguished deposition) and

one contractile missense HCM caused of Most cases mutations are by that several encoding genes of form proteins the apparatus. in is dominant, expression. The pattern autosomal of usual transmission with variable function. sarcomeric they different in increase affect causative 400 feature: nine one all identified, been all Although myofilament genes than proteins and have have mutations unifying more hypercontractility, a results energy use, This and myocyte negative net increased energy balance. in Mutations most and Of three β-myosin to all in chain sarcomeric troponin C account 80% cases protein involved, followed T. genes by various heavy these myosin-binding frequently for is HCM. of 70% proteins, the of

in DCM function in DCM mutations the opposed in of gain genes the but Some mutated function seen beta-myosin), the HCM to (e.g., depress of are HCM. in mutated as motor also

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Arrhythmogenicrightventricularcardiomyopathy.(A)Therightventricleismarkedlydilatedwithfocal,almosttransmuralreplacementofthefreewallbyadiposetissueandfibrosis.Theleftventriclehasagrosslynormalappearanceinthisheart;itcanbeinvolved(albeittoalesserextent)insomeinstances. 11.26 andfat(Massontrichromestain). (B)Therightventricularmyocardium(red) arrow) isfocallyreplacedbyfibrousconnectivetissue(blue,

septal hypertrophy);nevertheless,inabout10%ofcasesofHCM,concentrichypertrophyisseen.Onlongitudinalsectioning,theventricularcavitylosesitsusualround-to-ovoidshapeandiscompressedintoa“banana-like”configuration.Theanteriormitralleafletcontactstheseptumduringventricularsystole,producingaplaqueintheleftventricularoutflowtractandthickeningofthemitralleaflet;thesechangescorrelatewithfunctionalleftventricularoutflowtractobstructionduetosystolicanteriormotionofthemitralvalve. thereisdisproportionatethickeningoftheventricularseptumrelativetotheleftventriclefreewall(so-calledasymmetric Fig.11.27A).Classically,

ThecharacteristichistologicfeaturesinHCMaremarkedmyocytehypertrophy,haphazardmyocyte (andmyofiber)disarray, andinterstitialfibrosis(

Fig.11.27B

growth the HCM it spurt. Although typically age, manifests during at can any postpubertal present clinical functional symptoms can the understood abnormalities. of in context The the best be massive with stroke markedly characterized (paradoxically) a volume. left hypertorphy reduced It ventricular is by associated chamber occurs as of diastolic latter overall size. This a filling impaired consequence and smaller leaflet valve. dynamic ventricular the have patients mitral outflow addition, left the the by of In roughly anterior of to 25% obstruction secondary with pressure exertional increase murmur. venous a and harsh cause ejection cardiac systolic a Reduced pulmonary in dyspnea, output intramural left arteries the in to even concomitant of pressures, combination high compromised CAD. leads ischemia (with and angina), A hypertrophy, frequently myocardial absence ventricular massive of mitral ventricular death, mural fibrillation and endocarditis leading include Major fibrillation infectious the problems valve, sudden with CHF. to atrial clinical of cardiac formation, thrombus infarction relaxation; of also patients’ improved septal obstruction. ventricular surgical outflow or by that symptoms Most muscle promotes are the relieve partial tract can controlled therapy alcohol-induced excision mentioned As death. is cardiac earlier, cause of HCM sudden an important 35 death is underlying In cases HCM. of than one of in of years third almost athletes the cardiac younger sudden age, cause

primary in (simply ventricular during cardiomyopathy is is impaired Restrictive stiffer). decrease filling the resulting in diastole characterized compliance, by a ventricular wall put, of metabolism. that or amyloidosis, may errors of inborn for cardiomyopathy fibrosis, be diseases form idiopathic systemic radiation myocardium, affect may products sarcoidosis, of the or example, be with associated This

merit forms restrictive mention: of Three cardiomyopathy brief

β-pleated by of (Chapter is Amyloidosis insoluble a with the caused 5). deposition sheets extracellular forming predilection for proteins the myeloma) multiple amyloidosis). predominantly amyloidosis can can setting amyloidosis (e.g., to heart be in systemic the or Cardiac occur restricted senile of cardiac (e.g., thyroxine and hearts restrictive transthyretin liver-synthesized protein deposition circulating (or In mutant) of the case, in the adult a older forms normal retinol) of in transports patients (a latter of results cardiomyopathy. that fourfold. that of increases cardiac of transthyretin of the mutation that African percent amyloidosis a population Four in specific Americans over risk carry as also are dysfunction. AL-type induce cardiotoxic directly myocardial in amyloid, light-chains amyloid can Besides depositing immunoglobulin and

and in a tropical is areas. adults principally fibrosis of disease young Africa and children Endomyocardial other is It http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Hypertrophiccardiomyopathywithasymmetricseptalhypertrophy. 11.27 (A)Theseptalmusclebulgesintotheleftventricularoutflowtract,givingrisetoa“banana-shaped”ventricularlumen,andtheleftatriumisenlarged.Theanteriormitralleaflethasbeenmovedawayfromtheseptumtorevealafibrousendocardialplaque(arrow) (seetext). (B)Histologicappearancedemonstratingdisarray,extremehypertrophy,andcharacteristicbranchingofmyocytes,as wellasinterstitialfibrosis.

and fibrosis the often mitral diffuse by subendocardium, tricuspid characterized endocardium valves. and dense the ventricular involving of the tissue fibrous The markedly diminishes a affected physiology. compliance in volume and of chambers, resulting restrictive deficiencies cardiomyopathy. fibrosis it worldwide, hypereosinophilia); form helminthic the of linked to been and/or infections restrictive (e.g., common Endomyocardial inflammation most to nutritional related has is

of endomyocarditis associated also formation large typically with mural endocardial thrombi. exhibits Loeffler fibrosis, • geographic or has It predilection. no population endocardium protein, characterized basic probably and finally eosinophilic infiltrates; myocardial scarring, of tissue endocardial and the thrombus, granule It necrosis, of major is eosinophil hypereosinophilia contents, release by and organization. by layering especially thrombus followed peripheral by engenders tyrosine myeloproliferative patients to gene active of rearrangements underlying Of constitutively lead neoplasm have that interest, some by hypereosinophilic kinases an (Chapter driven 12). expression the of kinase result tyrosine lesions. with such can endomyocardial reversal and remission patients hematologic of Treatment inhibitors in

MORPHOLOGYInrestrictivecardiomyopathy,theventriclesareofapproximatelynormalsizeoronlyslightlyenlarged,thecavitiesarenotdilated,andthemyocardiumisfirm.However,bothatriaaretypicallydilatedasaconsequenceofrestrictedventricularfillingandpressureoverloads.Microscopicexaminationrevealsvariabledegreesofinterstitialfibrosis.Althoughgrossmorphologicfindingsaresimilarforrestrictivecardiomyopathyofdisparatecauses,endomyocardialbiopsyoftencanrevealaspecificetiology.

processes and/or in inflammatory the infectious a of target diverse group encompasses Myocarditis which myocardium. agents clinical entities some IHD, inflammatory injury. the It such where from conditions is is process to distinguish cause secondary to of other myocarditis as myocardial important

of are a the coxsackieviruses for the cause majority cases. the and of In infections most viral accounting myocarditis, other enteroviruses States, A common with United and B

common human (CMV), Cytomegalovirus pathogens. others influenza virus less are (HIV), virus, immunodeficiency and serologic using antibody can infected that Offending rising by show or be agents through tissues. studies identified molecular diagnostic techniques titers liver the hepatitis cause the virus–infected T death, most on in (Chapter injury response by virally immune cases cells results against to inflicted virus-specific 16). direct this cell damage is directed cells some While from cells; viruses infected analogous an proteins reaction viruses cases, against chain. In trigger a as cross-reacting myosin some heavy such

the The run gamut infectious world. myocarditis of causes nonviral entire microbial the of Trypanosoma the protozoan of The is Chagas cruzi agent disease. endemic myocardial America, Although of vast in in the half northern affects the the areas of Chagas involvement up in to South hemisphere, one disease majority. population uncommon with years others signs 20 of die of and later. with can of chronic phase progressive enter About 10 immune-mediated development CHF during a to an the patients attack; arrhythmia acute 10% are gondii individuals. vector) Toxoplasma most cause myocarditis, particularly in (household common immunocompromised cats the also can

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cardiac is common disease involvement. with helminthic associated most the Trichinosis

Borrelia of 9). by a Lyme approximately with (Chapter in burgdorferi bacterial disease, occurs spirochete illness caused 5% systemic the Myocarditis patients manifests temporary self-limited requiring myocarditis system frequently conduction as disease, primarily Lyme insertion. pacemaker

lupus Noninfectious of include myocarditis causes and polymyositis. such erythematosus of diseases systemic systemic as origin, immune (hypersensitivity benign exposure wide of affecting CHF a heart Drug rare only to death. typically occur circumstances agents; may to range the myocarditis) and are with lead or sudden reactions such reactions in hypersensitivity

MORPHOLOGYInacutemyocarditis,theheartmayappearnormalordilated;inadvancedstages,themyocardiumtypicallyisflabbyandoftenmottledwithpaleandhemorrhagicareas.Muralthrombimaybepresent.

Microscopically,myocarditisischaracterizedbyedema,interstitialinflammatoryinfiltrates,andmyocyteinjury(

).Adiffuselymphocyticinfiltrateismostcommon(see Fig.11.28

Fig.11.28A ),althoughtheinflammatoryinvolvementisoftenpatchyandcanbe“missed”onendomyocardialbiopsy.Ifthepatientsurvivestheacutephaseofmyocarditis,lesionsmayresolvewithoutsignificantsequelaeorhealbyprogressivefibrosis.

myocarditis, interstitialandperivascularinfiltratesarecomposedoflymphocytes,macrophages,andahighproportionofeosinophils( Inhypersensitivity

myocarditis (Fig.11.28C ).Thisvariantcarriesapoorprognosis. isamorphologicallydistinctiveentitycharacterizedbywidespreadinflammatorycellinfiltratescontainingmultinucleategiantcells(formedbymacrophagefusion).Giantcellmyocarditisprobablyrepresentstheaggressiveendofthespectrumoflymphocyticmyocarditis,andthereisatleastfocal—andfrequentlyextensive—necrosis ).Giant Fig.11.28B cell

ischaracterizedbytheparasitizationofscatteredmyofibersbytrypanosomesaccompaniedbyaninflammatoryinfiltrateofneutrophils,lymphocytes,macrophages,andoccasionaleosinophils( Chagas myocarditis

Fig.11.28D

and is one sequelae. patients spectrum The the is end, asymptomatic, at recover disease clinical without broad; myocarditis of extreme failure occasionally the heart or onset other At arrhythmias, precipitous is with death. of sudden the and of pain, signs fatigue, these with symptoms, and including associated of extremes palpitations, a dyspnea, involvement many levels are variety Between fever. acute of clinical those mimic myocarditis The MI. features of can is from seen. occasionally progression Clinical myocarditis to DCM

Cardiac complications clinical therapy are of cancer an important problem. chemotherapeutic blockade certain checkpoint drugs with kinase cancer). and immune for (e.g., be of such conventional tyrosine agents, immunotherapy can associated forms inhibitors, targeted Cardiotoxicity as heart most often toxic form the anthracyclines failure. chemotherapeutic of doxorubicin and dilated a the cardiomyopathy are agents are with that frequently which daunorubicin associated takes The and myocardial injury, progressively lipids to primarily dose becomes in toxicity total attributed mg/m2) a and of more is Anthracycline peroxidation membranes. frequent (cardiotoxicity 500 above of dose-dependent myocyte is

myocardial phenothiazines, have in such and chloroquine, implicated lithium, sudden agents, and been other Many death. as sometimes injury by many injured cytoplasmic these drugs swelling, exotoxin and (including hearts change. chemicals fatty are findings and vacuolization, in Common doxorubicin) and diphtheria of myofiber complete with sequelae. apparent lead Discontinuing such agents no resolution, to can more myocyte and dilated cardiomyopathy. however, produces necrosis a damage Sometimes, to extensive leads

associated sparse occur can catecholamines a mononuclear that (Chapter often Foci with myocardial contraction individuals tumor necrosis with infiltrate with of a inflammatory (mostly pheochromocytoma, bands, 20). elaborates macrophages), in or in cocaine, the intracranial effect.” stimulation such adrenergic or These include a cold exogenous—under lesions, agents Similar can dopamine. secondary allergy formulations), of autonomic variety agents—endogenous vasopressor occur many “catecholamine agent intense changes ephedrine as doses and of high (an of rubric to with is seems rate. via cardiotoxicity to of direct of calcium catecholamines myocytes an in catecholamine overload cardiac increased to on or the of vasoconstriction uncertain, a either to but heart relate toxicity The mechanism face mononuclear cell cell of to reaction is probably infiltrate death. myocyte a microscopic foci The

Cardiomyopathy referstointrinsiccardiacmuscledisease;theremaybespecificcauses,oritmaybeidiopathic.

(leastcommon). andrestrictive (accountingfor90%ofthecases),hypertrophic, Thethreegeneralpathophysiologiccategoriesofcardiomyopathyaredilated

DCMresultsinsystolic(contractile)dysfunction.Causesincludemyocarditis,toxicexposures(e.g.,alcohol),andpregnancy.In20%to50%ofcases,mutationsaffectingcytoskeletalproteinsareresponsible.

HCMresultsindiastolic(relaxation)dysfunction.Virtuallyallcasesareduetoautosomaldominantmutationsintheproteinsthatmakeupthecontractileapparatus,inparticularβ-myosinheavychain.

Restrictivecardiomyopathyresultsinastiff,noncompliantmyocardiumandcanbeduetodepositions(e.g.,amyloid),increasedinterstitialfibrosis(e.g.,duetoradiation),orendomyocardialscarring.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Myocarditis.(A)Lymphocyticmyocarditis,withedemaandassociatedmyocyteinjury.(B)Hypersensitivitymyocarditis,characterizedbyperivasculareosinophil-richinflammatoryinfiltrates.(C)Giantcellmyocarditis,withlymphocyteandmacrophageinfiltrates,extensivemyocytedamage,andmultinucleategiantcells. 11.28 (D)Chagasmyocarditis.Amyofiberdistendedwithtrypanosomes(arrow) ispresent,alongwithmononuclearinflammationandmyofibernecrosis.

Arrhythmogenicrightventricularcardiomyopathyisanautosomaldominantdisorderofcardiacmusclethatmanifestswithright-sidedheartfailureandrhythmdisturbancesthatcancausesuddencardiacdeathinathletes.

Myocarditisisaninflammatorydisordercausedbyinfectionsorimmunereactions.CoxsackievirusesAandBarethemostcommonpathogensintheUnitedStates.Clinically,myocarditismaybeasymptomatic,giverisetoacuteheartfailure,orevolvetoDCM.

with surrounding typically or a Pericardial lesions disorder. are or are the a structures, to elsewhere secondary heart process associated systemic in pathologic include Pericardial and constriction. inflammatory conditions, sometimes fibrous resulting disorders in effusions

Normally, clear, 50 cc sac contains than straw-colored less the thin, fluid. of pericardial pus circumstances, various (purulent (hemopericardium), of blood be accumulations distended sac pericardial by the may effusion), serous pericarditis). or fluid (pericardial Under

their include and effusions Pericardial following: the causes

heart any hypoalbuminemia failure, cause Serous: Congestive of

aortic malignancy, ruptured or chest dissection MI, Serosanguineous: Blunt trauma,

lymphatic Chylous: Mediastinal obstruction

slowly pericardium long-standing has with to With or enlargement the accumulating time fluid, cardiac dilate. quite become permits to function. cardiac chronic large effusions interfering without pericardial This with the characteristic shadow globular of only than Thus, clinical is the effusions less of enlargement significance volume, cc 500 with a radiograph. chest in on heart chronic of thin-walled clinically contrast, rapidly themselves; In to hemopericardium developing little of aortic a is (e.g., compression by cardiac cardiac devastating MI can 300 collections cc the caused to as venae as cavae, ventricles 200 fatal ruptured restricted, fluid tamponade. dissection) producing filling produce potentially atria or thereby due and the or

uncommon. Primary pericarditis is involved. fungi, (often http://ebooksmedicine.net It viral to typically although due be concurrent is infection or also myocarditis), parasites may with bacteria, or pneumonia acute structures to In to radiation other cases, most (so-called involving mediastinum, the “Dressler’s pleuritis). or MI is thoracic surgery cardiac secondary processes pericarditis (e.g., syndrome”), or systemic is disorder pericarditis. associated with most common Uremia the secondary fever, lupus systemic malignancies. include common rheumatic causes Less and erythematosus, metastatic in immediate can chronic effusion large a or cardiac elicits without significant to fibrosing complications Pericarditis 3) it sequelae, a (resulting process. (1) (2) hemodynamic resolve if progress tamponade), cause

theexudatetypicallyisfibrinous,impartinganirregular,shaggyappearancetothepericardialsurface(so-called“breadandbutter”pericarditis).Inacutebacterialpericarditis, theexudateisfibrinopurulent(suppurative),oftenwithareasoffrankpus( MORPHOLOGYInpatientswithacuteviralpericarditisoruremia,

);tuberculouspericarditiscanexhibitareasofcaseation.Pericarditisduetomalignancyoftenisassociatedwithanexuberant,shaggyfibrinousexudateandabloodyeffusion;metastasescanbegrosslyevidentasirregularexcrescencesormaybegrosslyinapparent,especiallyinthecaseofleukemia.Inmostcases,acutefibrinousorfibrinopurulentpericarditisresolveswithoutanysequelae.Withextensivesuppurationorcaseation,however,healingcanresultinfibrosis(chronicpericarditis). Fig.11.29

pericarditis. maybeassociatedwithdelicateadhesionsordense,fibroticscarsthatobliteratethepericardialspace.Inextremecases,theheartissocompletelyencasedbydensefibrosisthatitcannotexpandnormallyduringdiastole—resultingintheconditionknownasconstrictive pericarditis Chronic

atypical with a recumbency), Pericarditis manifests exertion in worse and friction (not and pain chest rub. to related prominent classically significant acute tamponade, to consequent cardiac cause declining cardiac associated can leads which and shock. pericarditis When fluid with output accumulation, clinical to restrictive and output, the picture produces pericarditis a low Chronic similar right-sided constrictive cardiac venous distention in cardiomyopathy. combination of

tumors cardiac most also benign. uncommon; moreover, (fortunately) Primary are are to no five common have potential 90% tumors. The heart all 80% of primary malignant for account and most myxomas, fibromas, these papillary In are descending fibroelastomas, lipomas, and order frequency, of rhabdomyomas. Angiosarcomas most primary the constitute of the malignant tumor heart. common merit mention here. Only myxomas further the rhabdomyomas and

Fig. Acutesuppurative(purulent,exudative)pericarditis,causedbyextensionfromapneumonia. 11.29

heart Myxomas the ( adult most primary are the of tumors common

Fig. 11.30 ). accounting those. 80% for with 90% left the atrial, atrium are of Roughly

the obstruction. are to Rhabdomyomas owing frequently are infants outflow frequent and discovered most heart in tumors or valvular the primary of they children; genes; leads in to patients tuberous frequency TSC2 occur by of mutations loss TSC-1 the in sclerosis overgrowth. or tumor TSC-2 and myocyte TSC1 high activity rhabdomyomas with suppressor caused Cardiac with spontaneously be rhabdomyomas often to rather hamartomas true are considered they Because (for reasons), unknown neoplasms. sometimes than regress with clonal. in keeping not cardiac patients that tuberous sclerosis this with all In rhabdomyomas occur are

MORPHOLOGYMyxomas arealmostalwayssingle,classicallyarisingintheregionofthefossaovalis(atrialseptum).Theycanbesmall(lessthan1cmindiameter)ormassive(upto10cmacross),sessileorpedunculatedmasses(

Fig.11.30A ),mostoftenmanifestingassoft,translucent,villouslesionswithagelatinousappearance.Pedunculatedformsoftenaresufficientlymobiletoswingintothemitralortricuspidvalveduringsystole,causingintermittentobstructionorexertinga“wreckingball”effectthatdamagesthevalveleaflets.

Histologically,myxomasarecomposedofstellate,frequentlymultinucleatedmyxomacells(typicallywithhyperchromaticnuclei),admixedwithcellsshowingendothelial,smoothmuscle,and/orfibroblasticdifferentiation;allofthecelltypesarisefromdifferentiationofmultipotentialmesenchymaltumorcells.Thecellsareembeddedinanabundantacidmucopolysaccharidegroundsubstance(

).Hemorrhage,poorlyorganizingthrombus,andmononuclearinflammationalsoareusuallypresent. Fig.11.30B

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 11.30 Atrialmyxoma.(A)Alargepedunculatedlesionarisesfromtheregionofthefossaovalisandextendsintothemitralvalveorifice. invariousgroupings,includingabnormalvascularformations(arrow). (B)Abundantamorphousextracellularmatrixcontainsscatteredmultinucleatemyxomacells(arrowheads)

Rhabdomyomas aregray-whitemassesuptoseveralcentimetersindiameterthatprotrudeintotheventricularchambers.Histologicexaminationshowsamixedpopulationofcells;mostcharacteristic,however,arelarge,rounded,orpolygonalcellscontainingnumerousglycogen-ladenvacuolesseparatedbystrandsofcytoplasmrunningfromtheplasmamembranetothecentrallylocatednucleus,so-called“spidercells”.

constitutional myxomas of manifestations and or obstruction, clinical symptoms and The valvular fever due a “ball-valve” are signs including malaise. to of embolization, major syndrome a the acute-phase elaboration the caused of interleukin-6 is mediator cytokine the major syndrome This tumor by cells, by response. of is uniformly modality of almost and surgical Echocardiography curative. the choice, is diagnostic resection

With non-cardiac therapy enhanced their increasingly are therapeutic of patient neoplasms diagnostic effects cardiovascular to survival ( significant due advances, and and encountered

11.6 Table ). and include The metastasis mediators, circulating direct therapeutic or effects tumor complications. infiltration, pathologic of consequences

breast, most and The heart lymphomas. melanomas, lung involving of and the are the leukemias, carcinomas tumors frequent metastatic retrograde contiguous by extension esophagus), venous of direct tumors), (carcinomas), kidney carcinoma by hematogenous by or extension breast, the and lung, the heart (primary (many pericardium or Metastases of or extension by liver). reach (tumors seeding lymphatic the can mass-effect to filling. or symptomatic most cause spread, is symptoms often sufficient with restrict Clinical associated pericardial pericardial that which effusions a are can cardiac lymphoma mediastinum infiltrate to upper compression, syndrome). obstruction flow causing (superior from Bronchogenic malignant vena encasement, the the or of or and vena the cava cava extensively, blood head and extremities invasion may carcinoma superior carcinoma heart. into vena up cell blocking atrium, renal as grow inferior the return tumor right to of often and the invades vein the and column continuous Renal a cava may venous the

indirectly, circulating cardiac tumor-derived affect substances. Noncardiac sometimes also function may tumors via endocarditis, disease, AL-type carcinoid thrombotic The myocardial pheochromocytomaassociated damage, heart myeloma-associated consequences include and nonbacterial amyloidosis.

discussed were earlier in of chemotherapy chapter. Complications this can fibrosis, mediastinal chronic used myocardial lung, disorders. or pericarditis, cause pericardial and effusion, treat breast, Radiation pericardial neoplasms to therapy cardiac Other and of effects accelerated and fibrosis. endocardial mural include artery disease valvular radiation coronary

syndrome tumors by bioactive carcinoid dermatitis, serotonin The 15); manifestations include released (Chapter diarrhea, carcinoid systemic and as flushing, results bronchoconstriction. such compounds from manifestation whom disease in compounds syndrome cardiac occurs heart the in one to the and Carcinoid develops. caused the refers by of half bioactive systemic patients liver there burden, is inactivates affect the before since heart. a Cardiac typically do the metastatic normally lesions can they occur circulating mediators not hepatic until massive they since endocardium first of tissues cardiac right tumors. heart released and valves affected are primarily the carcinoid gastrointestinal the bathed are Classically, mediators the by by pulmonary afforded bed mediators. the is measure because of side left vascular the heart protection some degrades of the The occur heart the lesions ventricular carcinoid they association flow, or tumors. arise defects can in with or and left-sided atrial carcinoid pulmonary right-to-left septal However, primary of setting can in

11.6 Cardiovascular Effects Table of Neoplasms Noncardiac

ModifiedfromSchoenFJ,etal:Cardiaceffectsofnon-cardiacneoplasms,Cardiol 2:657,1984. Clin

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 11.31 Carcinoidheartdisease. lesion“coating”therightventricleandtricuspidvalve,andextendingontothechordaetendineae. (A)Characteristicendocardialfibrotic(light gray) (B)Microscopicappearanceofthethickenedendocardium,whichcontainssmoothmusclecellsandabundantacidmucopolysaccharides(blue-greeninthisMovatstain,whichcolorstheunderlyingendocardialelastictissueblack).

The carcinoid histamine, serotonin kallikrein, tachykinins. and elaborated prostaglandins, bradykinin, mediators (5-hydroxytryptamine), tumors include by the correlate excretion severity metabolite Although these with 5-hydroxyindoleacetic the causative, lesions. acid clear serotonin of and of urinary is levels it which of heart of right-sided serotonin plasma is not alkaloids ergot similar or either valves. appetite plaques The hydroxytryptamine to also heart with valvular affect these receptors on or (an occur interest, of that the are to lesions headaches); serotonin syndrome systemic agents fenfluramine carcinoid directly suppressant) (for migraine bind metabolism administration in of

MORPHOLOGYThecardiovascularlesionsassociatedwiththecarcinoidsyndromearedistinctive,glisteningwhite,intimal,plaquelikethickeningsontheendocardialsurfacesofthecardiacchambersandvalveleaflets(

).Thelesionsarecomposedofsmoothmusclecellsandsparsecollagenfibersembeddedinanacidmucopolysaccharide–richmatrix.Underlyingstructuresareintact.Withright-sidedinvolvement,typicalfindingsaretricuspidinsufficiencyandpulmonicstenosis. Fig.11.31

device management failure. Although of for is end-stage heart with heart permanent choice disease, patients assist intractable for implantation transplantation remains increasingly cardiac option ventricular an of the treatment years. Without failure mortality 10% 1-year managed survive patients than 5 and a transplantation, rate, heart less medically of end-stage carries 50% 5000 for DCM Over and transplantation annually performed IHD. heart worldwide, procedures mostly are

of The arteriopathy. and complications allograft transplantation major cardiac are rejection acute cardiac

infections lymphoma). immunosuppression survival The opportunistic Epstein-Barr also required for and allograft risk certain (e.g., malignancies virus–associated increases for the

damage a interstitial histologic inflammation, and viral similar seen is characterized myocyte that pattern to in myocarditis. lymphocytic by Rejection antibody the to T celland in involved reaction. responses rejection Both allograft are the

important is the for longterm transplantation. limitation cardiac most Allograft single arteriopathy to marked injury. leading progressive, proliferation ischemic late, intimal is stenosing the It arteries, diffusely coronary in by

of these generally with the good, more a survival a 1-year outlook problems, Despite and than 70%. transplant survival 5-year of is recipients 90% rate for rate

T, and right update, Arrhythmogenic 2011. Konorza 100:383, cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: S, A, Cardiol review Clin ventricular al: a Churzidse Azaouagh Res et causes.] and its at genetic this [An entity excellent look

developmental BG: of Nature 2008. genetics 451:943, The congenital heart Bruneau disease, and [A disease.] development heart congenital overview succinct relationships the of between cardiac

Cerrone J focus 2011. Genetics SG: Eur Priori death: M, inherited channelopathies, on of Heart 32:2109, sudden cardiac the disorders sudden known well-organized of channel cause description that death.] ion [A

LT 2009. 360:1526, N Med Myocarditis, J Engl Cooper Jr: [A of features.] nice review and etiology, pathogenesis, clinical

DJ: Grossman in from treatment—“something pathophysiology Carcinoid moves” it 2015. Neuroendocrinology Gross S, 101:263, disease: the AB, heart to Grozinsky-Glasberg way [A of pathophysiology, review and of good treatment entity.] diagnosis, this the

complex 2011. events, heart immune disease: Chem mediation J: Guilherme L, Adv Rheumatic Köhler Clin 53:31, Kalil KF, by pathogenic scholarly discussion rheumatic disease.] heart and [A well-written the regarding mechanisms of

target, therapeutic a Clin neglected 123:92, J DJ, ischemia-reperfusion Invest DM: injury: 2013. Yellon Hausenloy Myocardial injury.] in approaches discussion possible http://ebooksmedicine.net [A nice the ischemia-reperfusion mechanisms therapeutic and of

Heusch Cardiovascular B, in et artery remodelling failure, G, Lancet and al: disease heart Libby 2014. Gersh coronary 383:1933, P, of occur that ischemic the develop [An pathophysiologic hearts excellent as CHF.] review changes

Herijgers al: Infect Microbiol trends 12:5, Clin Evolving et 2006. in infective EE, endocarditis, Herregods Hill P, MC, oriented clinically infective overview microorganisms, endocarditis.] [A and developments of for in the therapies good, diagnosis,

mechanisms JB, PW, YL, Sun heart al: Huang Molecular 19:e183, disease, Cardiovasc congenital et 2010. Liu Pathol of and congenital genes review pathways underlying the comprehensive disease.] heart of [A

injury. Xu Li Gotlieb S, AI: C, valve to response The Cardiovasc to heart 2011. pathogenesis understand the paradigm Pathol disease, valve 20:183, of A valvular [A of disease.] nice in pathologic overview concepts

textbook a 10, cardiovascular et Else-vier. editors: Libby heart DP, ed Philadelphia, disease: Mann Zipes 2015, of DL, medicine, P, Braunwald’s al, failure heart and with outstanding cardiovascular text, disease.] and sections authoritative [An excellent on atherosclerotic

Outcomes Committee; cardiomyopathies: Genomics Heart Circulation an Thiene the 113:1807, American Towbin and Heart definitions Failure Epidemiology on Care al: Association Contemporary BJ, Functional and Research Working Council of Cardiology, Prevention, on Groups; from Translational Scientific Transplantation and Maron and and Quality 2006. Statement classification of and and the et Clinical JA, G, Biology Interdisciplinary Council to heavily pathophysiologic weighted regarding than cardiomyopathies, an etiologies manifestations.] of genetic updated document consensus [A rather classification

2009. Mitchell disease: Rev response immune Pathol Annu vessel RN: vascular wall, the Graft meets 4:19, pathogenic clinical mechanisms, animal diagnosis, including allograft [A and arteriopathy, overview comprehensive models, therapy.] of

stages SE, imaging 2011. Molecular valve and early Aikawa arterial Circ E: 108:1381, New insights of Res aortic into calcification, inflammatory vessels.] overview on and valves calcification leading of degenerative mechanisms [A to good the

reperfusion al: F, and et M, GF, do Di Ovize Postconditioning we injury: protection Lisa stand? from where Baxter Position European Biology paper the 87:406, 2010. Group the Society Cardiology, of Cardiovasc Working of Res Cellular Heart of the from of potential the overview and for for size.] mechanisms injury in good [A limiting interventions ischemic therapeutic ischemiareperfusion and infarct pre-conditioning of

Nature Shahul 2012. Rana cardiomyopathy, IS, Patten angiogenic Cardiac peripartum 485:333, leads S, imbalance S, al: et to perspective underlying new the mechanisms pregnancy-associated [A cardiomyopathy.] on

the Raveendran TL, Zhang cells therapy, G, al: and Rasmussen et of Getting myocardial to cell 123:1771, heart stem 2011. Circulation J, the regarding of art overview cell in of state the stem [A well-written disease.] current heart challenges therapies and

Identifying Res Seidman in history, hypertrophic mutations a Seidman cardiomyopathy: CE, 108:743, personal sarcomere gene 2011. Circ JG: pathophysiology of cardiomyopathy world.] of [A the and authoritative overview from and genetics groups the in leading well-written of hypertrophic one the

Watkins Engl Houman Redwood cardiomyopathies, Med A, 364:1643, J N C: Inherited H, 2011. of cardiomyopathies.] [An the excellent molecular of basis review

2004. heart Curr Common disorders Probl Child JC, Cardiol Wu adults, JS: congenital in 29:641, improved pediatric consequence disorders seen the of adult heart as congenital the [A therapies.] population, in a of often overview thorough studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

AnemiaofBloodLoss:Hemorrhage

Cells Trauma to Red

of Inflammation Chronic Anemia

Hemolytic Thrombotic Uremic Purpura Microangiopathies:Thrombotic Syndrome Thrombocytopenic and

Deficiencies Willebrand Factor VIII–von of Factor Complex

Transfusion Complications of

Disorders Thymus Spleen of and the

wide lymphoid The systems and hematopoietic are a affected diseases. by of spectrum primarily white One to red platelets cells, cells, whether based or the way which affect disorders factors. is system, includes these on organize they coagulation and useful clotting cell anemia, cell that red those disorders state to are a of deficiency. lead The most common red with proliferation cell resulting from excessive contrast, White are transformation. associated most by disorders, malignant often diatheses coagulation blood result hemorrhagic in disorders). (bleeding in Derangements may are as end thymus. chapter, numerous the of is the of diseases, a tumors feature at the of Finally, discussed splenomegaly,

the type or white alterations Although and the of in divisions lead are of primarily production, cells, cell are affecting component the and linked, others. these function, derangements often destruction system hemostatic reality red of useful, cells, closely to one components system and in autoantibodies For B certain components cells red cell membrane. conditions the example, make against of in the enlarged. in recognized are phagocytes red destroyed opsonized spleen, The by becomes cells which and a The turn increased drives destruction of in in cell red causes progenitors compensatory hyperplasia red bone anemia, the marrow. which cell

Other “traffic” stem interplay to between various and normal of the complexity from the and the and of of white dispersed both nature anatomically system capacity cells hematolymphoid compartments. levels malignant in have is lymph diagnosed Hence, a also lymphoid who by patient found and to may lymphoma node the bone blood. marrow be neoplastic biopsy with cells cells marrow hematopoiesis, in giving of tumor of (cytopenias), the cell The to cells lead rise clone liver the counts may and suppress dissemination and to organomegaly. low to lymphoid may spleen blood the malignant diverse in Thus, result disorders, both in underlying abnormality benign can and systemic a hematolymphoid manifestations. malignant single of based time-honored involvement and on hemostatic cells, of Keeping we classification mind, cells, the the in white red disorders hematolymphoid these use system. complexities predominant will

http://ebooksmedicine.net

in erythrocytosis). increase red (an as Disorders cells known can cells or, commonly, in also polycythemia red less result of anemia red from mass capacity to as the Anemia is oxygen-transporting defined blood, reduction of levels. decrease resulting in the subnormal a cell in a

decreased red from bleeding, cell production. increased or Anemia stem can destruction, red cell These ). basis as 12.1 anemia anisms one classifying (Table for mech serve occurs, anemia. In for in to example contribute wherebothreducedredcellproductionandearlydestruction thalassemia, some overlap entities chronic by of inflammation (described anemia or exception caused With renal chronic the failure

to of Classification Mechanism Underlying According Table 12.1 Anemia

Acute:traumaChronic:gastrointestinaltractlesions,gynecologicdisturbances

MembraneabnormalitiesMembraneskeletonproteins:spherocytosis,elliptocytosisMembranelipids:abetalipoproteinemia

EnzymedeficienciesEnzymesofhexosemonophosphateshunt:glucose-6-phosphatedehydrogenase,glutathionesynthetaseGlycolyticenzymes:pyruvatekinase,hexokinaseDisordersofhemoglobinsynthesisStructurallyabnormalglobinsynthesis(hemoglobinopathies):sicklecellanemia,unstablehemoglobinsDeficientglobinsynthesis:thalassemiasyndromes

Membranedefect:paroxysmalnocturnalhemoglobinuria

Antibody-mediatedIsohemagglutinins:transfusionreactions,immunehydrops(Rhdiseaseofthenewborn)Autoantibodies:idiopathic(primary),drug-associated,systemiclupuserythematosusMechanicaltraumatoredcellsMicroangiopathichemolyticanemias:thromboticthrombocytopenicpurpura,disseminatedintravascularcoagulationDefectivecardiacvalvesInfections:malaria

Disturbedproliferationanddifferentiationofstemcells:aplasticanemia,pureredcellaplasia

DisturbedproliferationandmaturationoferythroblastsDefectiveDNAsynthesis:deficiencyorimpaireduseofvitaminB12andfolicacid(megaloblasticanemias)Anemiaofrenalfailure(erythropoietindeficiency)Anemiaofchronicdisease(ironsequestration,relativeerythropoietindeficiency)AnemiaofendocrinedisordersDefectivehemoglobinsynthesis

in anemia later), the triggers kidney. specialized of Deficienthemesynthesis:irondeficiency,sideroblasticanemiasDeficientglobinsynthesis:thalassemiasMarrowreplacement:primaryhematopoieticneoplasms(acuteleukemia,myelodysplasticsyndromes)Marrowinfiltration(myelophthisicanemia):metastaticneoplasms,granulomatousdisease tension cells factor the tissue accompanies decrease production in from that increased erythropoietin the growth oxygen turn in of erythroid (the secondary precursors anemia, This marrow in the appearance hematopoietic the extramedullary compensatory hematopoiesis organs of the liver, and in spleen, within nodes). lymph a drives hyperplasia severe bone and, the or In because compensatory cell response increased bleeding increase fivefold can acute destruction red (hemolysis), become the of red persons eightfold. production anemic to cells who of well-nourished formed of signaled (reticulocytes) increased blood. output appearance The rise the peripheral red in cells of by in newly is marrow numbers the with is contrast, subnormal cell associated By by decreased (reticulocytopenia). caused anemia reticulocyte production (aregenerative counts red anemia)

the also can to points often cell Anemia red on basis particular be of which causes. morphology, classified the the etiologic that clues and color, cells. provide red of size, include Features shape inspection peripheral smears quantitatively expressed judged also are the and indices: of using following subjectively are visual These by

cell, microns) volume volume in femtoliters average the per red (cubic cell (MCV): expressed Mean

hemoglobin (MCH): hemoglobin cell expressed Mean in of per red average the cell, mass picograms

(MCHC): expressed the in cell packed concentration given grams hemoglobin average volume deciliter concentration hemoglobin cells, per a in Mean of red of

(RDW): cell coefficient distribution cell variation Red red of of width volume the

directly laboratories. indices or by measured in are Red cell automatically clinical instruments calculated specialized determine instruments and also count, the a reticulocyte that between The hemolytic measure same anemia. simple distinguishes aregenerative tests shown for are in Adult reference these ranges

Table 12.2 . other haptoglobin, differential is cells detect vitamin folate blood performed to and may to and indices unconjugated anemia help and the lactate suspected transferrin saturation, complement also which red in microcytic distinguish abnormal to to evaluate dehydrogenase serum (3) cases hemolytic low (1) (4) by including cell serum levels, hemoglobin; of ferritin be antibodies which bound the which anemia; plasma of bilirubin, iron concentrations, and is iron-binding electrophoresis, tests which concentrations), among in red (2) and anemia; chronic abnormal (5) megaloblastic antibody-mediated thalassemia; anemia, diagnosis, are a used levels, deficiency, (iron Depending on detect hemolytic number are used inflammation, anemia. hemoglobin test, iron capacity, or and which caused Coombs in B12 anemia, tests In the on isolated usually peripheral establish to suffice the blood performed cause. much occurs anemia to usually or examination likely more be marrow is associated instances and/or such along with By thrombocytopenia is it with warranted. granulocytopenia, marrow aplasia a in infiltration; when contrast,

the As rapidity and underlying severity, its are by onset, clinical of anemia later, determined of consequences discussed http://ebooksmedicine.net

for Blood Ranges 12.2 Table Cells Reference Adult Red

11.5–14.8 Hemoglobin(Hb)g/dL13.2–16.711.9–15.0 aReferencerangesvaryamonglaboratories.Thereferencerangesforthelaboratoryprovidingtheresultshouldalwaysbeusedininterpretingalaboratorytest.

pathogenic mechanism. compensated is is cardiac and intermediate onset the glycolytic O2carrying of hemoglobin. enhances slow, pathway 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (DPG), in release that O2 the in from cell red rate, for If deficit increases output, by a capacity respiratory the These adaptive cardiac in otherwise but anemia changes the mitigate function. in those or moderate effects healthy effective with mild of pulmonary less are compromised to persons Pallor, of lassitude common anemia. fatigue, and are to all forms anemia) and (if red hemolysis hyperbilirubinemia, hemoglobin. of is in is increases the destruction jaundice, turnover associated caused to (hemolytic with gallstones all by Anemia of related the premature chronic), pigment cells from of (the stems that associated to marrow overload hematopoiesis can to heart. premature death iron from which with erythroid gut, iron lead with organs the and (secondary absorption in endocrine inappropriate consequent progenitors) damage is increases ineffective the Anemia hemochromatosis) as major such results untreated, severe left congenital abnormalities, inevitably If skeletal retardation, β-thalassemia anemia growth a cachexia. in and

Microcytic(irondeficiency,thalassemia)

Normocyticbutwithabnormalshapes(hereditaryspherocytosis,sicklecelldisease)

shortnessofbreath,organfailure,shock Acute:

Pallor,fatigue,lassitude

Withhemolysis:jaundiceandgallstones

Withineffectiveerythropoiesis:ironoverload,heartandendocrinefailure

Ifsevereandcongenital:growthretardation,bonedeformitiesduetoreactivemarrowhyperplasia

ANEMIAOFBLOODLOSS:HEMORRHAGE

anemia (hemorrhage) bleeding caused by of into acute loss by can divided anemia and later). loss Anemia (described chronic be caused blood blood lead to acute can to mainly loss massive which are and collapse, due shock, volume, death. of if bleeding The intravascular cardiovascular effects the of 20% hypovolemic If immediate rather loss of blood blood is shock exceeds the volume, than threat anemia. full 3 2 the only full once loss is the hemodilution begins survives, and then achieves red If days; within effect extent its at of the to patient revealed. cell The anemia normochromic. is normocytic and cell erythropoietin anemia and in days. stimulates enhanced is from the 7 a red a within blood rise which loss compensatory Recovery 5 increased of by level, to reticulocytosis production period

iron stores With chronic blood loss, gradually depleted. are and chronic underproduction. deficiency and for erythropoiesis, synthesis anemia leads a to essential of Iron its hemoglobin is in occur Iron caused with other along forms it red by anemia production. later clinical decreased other as anemia deficiency settings is well; can described cell of

(hemolysis). as are common red Hemolytic a feature disorders accelerated of destruction have cell group a diverse anemias that normal red less By so. shortened 120 the definition, life often markedly to cell than is span days, its of in the which O2 of Regardless elements erythropoietin and release increased increased tissue kidney, from cause, of levels reticulocytes stimulates marrow. low from the turn the growth bone release erythroid trigger erythroid hyperplasia and are hallmarks of Thus, all anemias. reticulocytosis hemolytic In spleen, hematopoiesis in and pronounced nodes. so lymph hemolytic erythropoietic liver, be may extramedullary appears that anemias, severe the the drive

organize several hemolytic There are ways to anemias. them to or pathogenic extrinsic intrinsic (intracorpuscular) cell the (extracorpuscular) defect whether is approach groups red according One (see

). Table 12.1 according more hemolysis is anemias A or whether groups clinically second to useful hemolytic approach extravascular primarily intravascular. caused by destruction by in Extravascular cells is the phagocytes, that defects particularly red spleen. hemolysis the of increase responsible of numbers of for The macrophages, damaged red the spleen the or cells the principal antibody-coated removal cell from circulation. contains large are this and macrophages. in “stuck” become by reduction the are of splenic and cell cells resident splenic shape alterations any necessary sinusoids, makes phagocytosed for passage navigate difficult, recognized deformability Because cells red that red to red extreme the destruction cause As later hemolytic a cell anemias. described in diminished major several chapter, red deformability in is of relatively hemolysis for http://ebooksmedicine.net that are Findings extravascular specific

Fig. hereditary Pathogenesis 12.1 spherocytosis. of membrane major of (Left panel) cell proteins. the organization Normal red skeleton transform the β-spectrin, cells and band trapped that band nondeformable (right skeleton cords plasma association splenic by spherocytes 3 red the and membrane ankyrin, cause membrane panel). 4.2, overlying macrophages. The the in α-spectrin, and into with weaken spherocytes membrane vesicles Mutations shed in are of to phagocytosed the GP, Glycophorin.

compared intravascular following: hemolysis) (as to the include

hemoglobin jaundice, stemming from of and in macrophages degradation Hyperbilirubinemia

the degrees hyperplasia” to of of “work splenomegaly due phagocytes Varying in spleen

of and (pigment If formation an long-standing, risk stones) of gallstones bilirubin-rich increased cholelithiasis

the characterized within so hemolysis, literally red by injuries circulation. contrast, Intravascular cells by is burst severe that heart toxins severely may of complement, fixation or or to damage biochemical defective (e.g., from created forces or physical Intravascular clostridial the valve) by mechanical cell red agents (e.g., hemolysis or turbulence that result membrane heat). exposure a following: from presence Findings hemolysis that hemolysis include intravascular the distinguish extravascular the of

hemoglobinuria, hemosiderinuria. and Hemoglobinemia, the Hemoglobin pass the is enough into space. released urinary to small circulation into are and renal the is Here, hemosiderin, lost into in renal partially sloughed. it by then processed urine is which resorbed tubular when cells cells tubular

to is persistent. Loss of hemolysis deficiency may iron iron, if which lead of so very iron feature iron not By contrast, by deficiency recycling is efficient, extravascular and a hemolytic phagocytes anemias. is

binds haptoglobin, extravascular feature free removed decreased is from plasma and hemolysis A both then and is of final the a levels hemoglobin circulation. intravascular that serum protein of when hemolysis is levels haptoglobin Apparently consumption “regurgitate” cause red extravascular. even of to macrophages entirely sufficient fall, to during hemoglobin cells

now some common We anemias. the of turn hemolytic to

red inherited vulnerable in stems that the spherocytes, and the (intrinsic) cell to are that formation destruction This sequestration the disorder spleen. lead membrane highly nondeformable of from defects cells in to minority autosomal an Hereditary of of patients. transmitted autosomal form usually spherocytosis affects small disease more the severe, as a recessive trait; is a dominant

stabilizes in the inherited lipid membrane network of red ( is by the defects skeleton, a bilayer proteins that cell spherocytosis of the caused Hereditary

Fig. 12.1 ). heterodimer its long, The skeleton flexible is at end major other short actin one that membrane filaments self-associates and protein at binds end. a spectrin, 3 that and linker meshwork a 4.2, contacts glycophorin create the proteins the These to 4.1. proteins via band connected two-dimensional and transmembrane band band is ankyrin,

frequently that spherocytosis cause ankyrin, or involve spectrin. 3, Mutations most band hereditary mutations interactions vertical and The is membrane skeleton pathogenic proteins. of they cell the feature membrane that common weaken the red between intrinsic cells, age. red membrane bilayer of they into shed as lipid the which vesicles circulation the defect This destabilizes the ( until time process surface the and spherical in cytoplasm as become Little progressively cells a decreases area-tovolume is with lost result ratio the

Fig. 12.1

beneficial the the and of is persist, although of spherocytosis anemia in role the the critical illustrated effect corrected. splenectomy; spherocytes spleen is by hereditary The defect cell red deformation cells degrees Red to the of pass cords. undergo splenic extreme through must red considerable shape discoid of latitude cells shape floppy normal allows The changes. for the plentiful the in have By resident by destroyed spherocytes macrophages. are deformability limited sequestered they cords, where and are contrast, splenic

smears, spherocytes red lack pallor and On dark central are

Fig. 12.2 ). marrow red the and genitors whichoccursin40%to50%ofpatientswithhereditaryspherocytosis. increase resultant cell red in ismorecommonandprominentinhereditaryspherocytosisthaninanyotherformofhemolyticanemia.Thesplenicweightusuallyisbetween500and1000g.Theenlargementresultsfrommarkedcongestionofthespleniccordsandincreasesinthenumbersofmacrophages.Phagocytosedredcellsareseenwithinmacrophagesliningthesinusoidsand,inparticular,withinthecords.Theothergeneralfeaturesofhemolyticanemiaalsoarepresent,includingcholelithiasis, in markedbyreticulocytosis.Splenomegaly cell The an destruction and excessive production

Fig. Hereditaryspherocytosis—peripheralbloodsmear.Notetheanisocytosisandseveralhyperchromicspherocytes.Howell-Jollybodies(smallnuclearremnants)arealsopresentintheredcellsofthisasplenicpatient. 12.2 Southwestern Dr. University Texas McKenna, of School,Dallas,Texas.) (Courtesy Robert of W. Pathology, Medical Department of

Features. Clinical The jaundice. splenomegaly, features and characteristic anemia, are moderate it anemia commonly is in from is in to severity, ranging most variable subclinical profound; The degree. fragility of show hereditary when increased Because can placed spherocytosis shape, red solutions, osmotic characteristic their help spherical cells in diagnosis. the that salt hypotonic in a establish

the crises, stable are infection. be of is but The triggered may which parvovirus B19 course most punctuated generally aplastic severe by by has undergo tropism erythroblasts, This virus apoptosis marked replication. viral a for during which 10–14 immune progenitors. (usually virtually of devoid be in Until cell days), may controls the marrow red response the the infection of red span the spherocytosis, in a cells rapid of worsening life cell results the hereditary in few production, a shortened of for even red lack Because anemia. days, of patients is be needed Blood cleared. to transfusions infection the until may support

is no treatment. specific There red removing anemia the the improves major by destruction. cell of site Splenectomy of weighed increased children. splenectomy the serious must particularly bacterial be The risk against benefits infections, in of favor maintaining while children protection because splenectomy hematologic this is approach produces in improvement Partial gaining against sepsis. is a The second size, the resected resection. partially regains will downside many its patients because that need eventually spleen

delayed infection this that of until adulthood, is is The hope be serious can the lower. risk when

hemoglobin. that mutations hereditary group in lead structural inherited are disorders abnormalities caused by to a of Hemoglobinopathies by cell Sickle the anemia, β-globin sickle is a (HbS). caused creates mutation that hemoglobinopathy, prototypic in hemoglobin the scope but of discussion. infrequent been beyond and Numerous described, are hemoglobinopathies these this other have

is cell Sickle common most familial the anemia. hemolytic anemia a frequency parts malaria 30% protective Africa endemic, against of as result effect is malaria. a approaches falciparum of where Plasmodium In the gene the 600 cell and HbS States, sickle heterozygous United are blacks anemia. approximately carriers have 1 in In 8% of about

that acid to tendency self-associate cell substitution single is a for Sickle into polymers. caused amino anemia by results HbS a deoxygenated in in β-globin pairs tetramers two of of Normal hemoglobins composed similar are chains. On cell 3% HbA fetal α2γ2). Hb (α2δ2), average, HbA2 and 96% the contains normal red (α2β2), 1% adult (HbF, only replaced is about carriers, anemia, replaced. patients in HbA sickle In half completely with by heterozygous whereas HbS, cell is the amino residue valine at by glutamate HbS of residue a position in a HbA from β-globin. acid differs having 6th instead involving form change polymers deoxygenation molecules residue. to allows intermolecular a HbS contacts the via undergo that On abnormal conformational valine assumes which ( red These shape sickle, or polymers cell, crescentic, an distort elongated the

Fig. 12.3

on reversible is initially of red reoxygenation. cells sickling The which the causes also membrane However, and each leads membrane influx to calcium, produced of skeleton. by distortion sickling an loss damages episode and the potassium of water hemolysis. time, rapidly cells creates cumulative damage that irreversibly this undergo sickled With

Three HbS than particularly The are hemoglobins intracellular levels other in factors occurs significant whether • patients: clinically determining polymerization of important of in HbS. only the weakly of heterozygotes interacts with Hb remainder and is approximately HbA, HbS In HbS. which is 40% deoxygenated in the vivo. red have greatly polymerization, cells to HbA little retards Because of tendency heterozygotes HbS HbS sickle said trait. persons sickle cell to are Such have generally do sickle of interacts because not Similarly, weakly HbS, (HbF) adult 5 to cell the age the to months. newborns falls 6 with around manifest anemia HbF with levels, until disease fetal hemoglobin of another acid 6. a β-globin, position instead C (HbC), the Hemoglobin residue residue has at lysine normal glutamic mutant are compound heterozygous and heterozygotes. American carriers About about of 2.3% HbC newborns HbC/HbS blacks of 1250 in are 1 a called aggregate heterozygotes sickling greater have disorder as and compound has a a symptomatic with disease. HbS/HbC result HbS HbA, than HbC HbSC does tendency to

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Sicklecellanemia—peripheralbloodsmear.(A)Lowmagnificationshowssicklecells,anisocytosis,poikilocytosis,andtargetcells.(B)Highermagnificationshowsanirreversiblysickledcellinthecenter. 12.3 Texas Medical Pathology, W. University of McKenna, Dallas,Texas.) (Courtesy of Department Robert Dr. of Southwestern School,

concentration of HbS. intracellular The of HbS concentration-dependent. The polymerization strongly deoxygenated is which cell concentration, Hb increases Thus, sickling. facilitates red dehydration, the coexistence which later), Hb α-thalassemia (described of decreases concentration, the Conversely, reduces sickling. the

pass the cells for time through required The to microvasculature. red HbS polymerization The beds of capillary are red too for cells short to of through normal occur. deoxygenated times transit significant as by in are bone spleen sluggish, such is that the Hence, tissues normally those are most which obstruction blood susceptible flow the to marrow. sickling the and face factors inflammation. in other retard may microvascular However, red of beds passage the of the that sickling occur in cells, particularly cells endothelium adhesion to flow by and fluid (Chapter the leukocytes through increasing by blood 4). Recall vessels and red inflammation inducing leaky of the exudation that slows of have of that addition, the cells, because sickling repeated greater cause In a membrane bouts sticky. tendency sickle normal red red damage cells cells endothelial red adhere to to than makes cells apparently times the of transit cells, red prolong the sickling. sickle These significant conspire factors clinically of increasing to probability

damage ischemic pain consequences: The produced cells result which cell major pathologic moderately tissue sickling by chronic anemia, vascular obstructions, ( and red and severe crises has membrane red of damage, in hemolytic two

Fig. 12.4 ). span anemia in of of the that sickled present The blood. of severity 20 averages fraction cells in the cell the are red (one-sixth with mean normal), of correlates the irreversibly sickle and cells only hemolysis days life with superimposed does number inflammation, contrast, sickled cells factors appears result to not within the tendency such and and irreversibly sickle to as Vasoocclusion, from instead of of microvasculature. infection, by the enhance cells all of the red dehydration, which acidosis, correlate

red cells sickled MORPHOLOGYTheanatomicalterationsinsicklecellanemiastemfrom(1)severechronichemolyticanemia,(2)increasedbreakdownofhemetobilirubin,and(3)microvascularobstructions,whichprovoketissueischemiaandinfarction.Inperipheralsmears,elongated,spindled,orboat-shapedirreversibly areevident(

erythroid ).Boththeanemiaandthevascularstasisleadtohypoxia-inducedfattychangesintheheart,liver,andrenaltubules.Thereisacompensatoryhyperplasia of inthemarrow.Thecellularproliferationinthemarrowoftencausesboneresorptionandsecondarynewboneformation,resultinginprominentcheekbonesandchangesintheskullresemblinga“crewcut”inradiographs.Extramedullaryhematopoiesismayappearintheliverandspleen. progenitors Fig.12.3

Inchildrenthereismoderatesplenomegaly (splenicweightupto500g)duetoredpulpcongestioncausedbyentrapmentofsickledredcells.However,chronicsplenicerythrostasisproduceshypoxicdamageandinfarcts,whichwithtimereducethespleentoauselessnubbinoffibroustissue.Thisprocess,referredtoasautosplenectomy, iscompletebyadulthood.

arecommon. and andpigment Vascular infarction canaffectanyorgan,includingthebones,liver,kidney,retina,brain,lung,andskin.Thebonemarrowisparticularlypronetoischemiabecauseofitssluggishbloodflowandhighrateofmetabolism.Priapism,anotherfrequentproblem,canleadtopenilefibrosisanderectiledysfunction.Aswiththeotherhemolyticanemias,hemosiderosis thrombosis, gallstones congestion,

Features. Clinical an its crises. course From disease runs punctuated the unremitting sudden by onset, cell is Homozygous months shift of asymptomatic age the usually from complete. is disease to sickle HbF when HbS until 6 anemia 18% of most have hematocrits severe; The 38%–48%). range, patients is to to 30% (normal moderate http://ebooksmedicine.net The

and with damage times Oxygenation transit H2O Reversibly dehydration deoxygenation cycles damage Extensive K+, Irreversibly Ca2+ membrane Additional Cell membrane sickled cell Deoxygenation, of prolonged

Fig. 12.4 Pathophysiologyofsicklecelldisease.

and reticulocytosis. compensatory with hyperbilirubinemia hemolysis chronic associated is

and serious characteristically are which and with are crises, associated significant vasoocclusive tissue to pain damage mortality. often more Much morbidity lead and the following: are common serious of Among most these vasoocclusive and crises the

syndrome, of presenting Hand-foot symptom feet, children. resulting common is young the in bones infarction in from hands most and the

lung blood to (e.g., chest sluggish syndrome, beds. in pneumonia) area inflamed sickling hypoxemic leads pulmonary an flow which in within Acute of worsening vicious sickling, circle and vasoocclusion. pulmonary of and a systemic dysfunction, creating hypoxemia, pulmonary This exacerbates emboli infarcted fat also emanating from bone. may be triggered Acute syndrome chest by

sometimes in acute syndrome. Stroke, which the the setting of chest occurs Stroke two death. chest the ischemia-related syndrome leading causes and of the acute are

blindness. that to can lead retinopathy, consequence in a of loss of visual Proliferative eye the vasoocclusions acuity and

production. acute by cell a crisis, caused decrease red Another in sudden event, is aplastic by is by spherocytosis, As in usually although infection parvovirus and, the is this erythroblasts of B19 hereditary severe, self-limited. triggered

addition cell sickle infections. to with these disease are patients crises, to prone In infections such adults them encapsulated making and disease with cell asplenic, caused pneumococci. to bacteria, functionally as by are Both susceptible sickle children for basis “hyposplenism” adults In is autoinfarction. the children red interferes cells enlargement, by phase In childhood caused are with development at killing; splenic even with earlier spleens and the for trapped risk enlarged septicemia. the hence, of sickled sequestration congestion apparently of fatal bacterial Salmonella function. understood osteomyelitis, cell sickle in in predisposed disease to defects are because part poorly possibly Patients of with complement also acquired

cell are sickle disease, red seen homozygous sickled routine in In blood peripheral irreversibly smears. cells sickling can by to marked exposing trait, cells cell sickle hypoxia. be vitro In induced in confirmed HbS. by is demonstration diagnosis of The electrophoretic biopsy anemia can Prenatal cell diagnosis villi. by of by of obtained amniocentesis fetal chorionic be performed or DNA analyzing sickle

cell of is highly variable. The clinical sickle course disease improvements of result increasing As patients in are a into an surviving number supportive of care, adulthood. survive now 50% decade. the fifth Approximately beyond patients of Of pneumococcal prevent prophylactic younger in particular with age is especially to penicillin importance than 5. children treatment infections,

mainstay DNA inhibitor A a of “gentle” synthesis. therapy hydroxyurea, is of Hydroxyurea an (4) cell increase increase (2) size, of the in metabolism red platelet reduces (3) HbF; an (1) anemia the cell which concentration; lowers of and production; to potent aggregation. hemoglobin inhibitor intracellular anti-inflammatory white of several because of an NO, its lessens levels inhibition and the and crises through vasodilator including pain effect a effects, in been results potentially is which curative. have transplantation, marrow also allogeneic bone Encouraging with obtained

the inherited decrease globin by caused β-globin. synthesis in disorders that of α-or Thalassemias genes mutations are results by “normal” that caused globin in deficiency Decreased globin of synthesis in of but chains. red one excess cell is Hb, also not a only formed unpaired precipitates from damage Asian that malaria thalassemia mutations regions particularly in cause which is in common The endemic. Mediterranean, are and African, HbS, associated is protect with globin it against As mutations with hypothesized thalassemia falciparum malaria. that

conditions. collection mutations thalassemias, and codominant β-globin diverse are autosomal the α-globin A underlies of which α composed is a of chains. HbA, tetramer previously, chains or hemoglobin, and adult two described As β two http://ebooksmedicine.net encoded The two α-globin α by chains are

the Table genes tandem lying by located encoded on Thalassemias gene chains are 11. single 12.3 in on β-globin of 16, a Classification whereas β Clinical Genetic chromosome chromosome and patient the vary ( The alleles inherited by combination are that depending widely of features mutated on clinical specific the

12.3), Table described next. as

is β+ β-thalassemia chains categories: into there which two β0, reduced which (1) β-globin and no with associated , in (but produced; Mutations fall synthesis. β-globin in are detectable) (2) changes. than genes Sequencing causative of of more a β-thalassemia majority single-base consisting mutations, shown has different 100 symptomatic. known one asymptomatic Persons allele is as minor have β-thalassemia trait), abnormal (also mildly inheriting which or β-thalassemia people a any occasionally, inheriting β-thalassemia persons at major; alleles β-thalassemia termed β+ allele intermedia. Most disease two β0 least inheriting have and one milder have β+ with β-thalassemia underlie deletions contrast later), gene ( In (described α-thalassemia rarely

Table 12.3

and synthesis for responsible disrupt ways. mutations different in β-thalassemia diverse are β-globin several The The others in whereas regions. RNA coding fall lead most promoter gene mutations common the abnormal or splicing, β-globin to allele. the nature is or β0 β+ outcome the The of mutation determines whether specific a

chains, in that β-globin form inadequate erythroid poorly hemoglobinized β-thalassemia by severely which anemia resulting and accumulation formation, Defective toxic damage cells; red to membranes the in red (hypochromic) small contributes two through mechanisms: the α-globin precursors. (1) cells of and unpaired allowing synthesis of of (microcytic), (2) HbA precipitates ( by damaged badly A die they so high apoptosis of precursors fraction are that erythroid

Fig. shortened produced red erythropoiesis, ), phenomenon that a are span. have and the 12.5 cells termed ineffective a few life hematopoiesis the untoward is another intervention to has it Ineffective in inappropriate of with effect; associated leads without overload. iron inevitably dietary absorption an which medical increase iron, hepcidin, a by The inappropriately iron negative regulator is increased iron low absorption later). absorption (see is which caused of

mainly or Unlike genes. α-thalassemia β-thalassemia, caused is one by the α-globin of more deletions involving severity to number ( α-globin is disease of the that the genes are The deleted proportional of

). Table 12.3 silent-carrier the produces in virtually example, α-globin oxygen-delivering red whereas For state, genes all lethal a a single no deletion gene loss cells have four capacity. of is utero α-globin because of (early life) or β-globin excess chains. loss genes three of is a in γ-globin With of relative α-globin there in γ-globin Bart, chains Hb result, as cause β-globin membrane damage respectively, less chains known β4 α-thalassemia. than less tetramers erythropoiesis found form relatively α-globin HbH free and and a are the which is in Excess and β-thalassemia; that as stable pronounced ineffective γ4 tissues. the Hb both an which oxygen, them affinity to Unfortunately, Bart abnormally HbH delivering and oxygen for at renders high ineffective have

cells, (variationincellshape),andanisocytosis MORPHOLOGYArangeofmorphologiesisseen,dependingonthespecificunderlyingmolecularlesion.Ononeendofthespectrumisβ-thalassemiaminorandα-thalassemiatrait,inwhichabnormalitiesareconfinedtotheperipheralblood.Insmearstheredcellsaresmall(microcytic)andpale(hypochromic),butregularinshape.Oftenseenaretarget (variationincellsize).Nucleatedredcells(normoblasts)arealsoseenthatreflecttheunderlyingerythropoieticdrive.β-Thalassemiaintermediaand cellswithanincreasedsurfacearea-to-volumeratiothatallowsthecytoplasmtocollectinacentral,dark-red“puddle.”Ontheotherendofthespectrum,inβ-thalassemiamajorperipheralbloodsmearsshowmarkedmicrocytosis, hypochromia, http://ebooksmedicine.net poikilocytosis

excess ˜-globin relative aggregateHbA °-globin ˜-globin with Reduced Insoluble of synthesis,

of aggregate-containing Destruction spleen in red cells

Fig. α-globin routine not of smears. 12.5 major. blood on that of visible β-thalassemia are Note excess Pathogenesis aggregates sword, its also transfusions attendant but iron constitute complications systemic adding anemia overload. and the a double-edged Blood diminishing to the

two are between that these extremes. associated with peripheral findings lie HbH disease smear

erythropoiesis hemolytic profound in striking The toward progenitors, erythroid early in those β-thalassemia hyperplasia forms. a changes anatomic other and anemias hemolysis but Ineffective of with seen in major kind are are to result degree. shift a in similar in skeleton, completely produce space patients. marrow reminiscent degree The in invade impair lymphadenopathy. in hepatomegaly, cancer skeletal of a phagocytes prominent cachexia of mononuclear hyperplasia the bony splenomegaly, result erythropoietic expanded and and retardation and cortex, growth and intramedullary and growth, fill may erythropoietic of seen bone the of hematopoiesis produce precursors The Extramedullary ineffective consume deformities. that nutrients the develops Unless iron hemosiderosis (Fig. taken severe overload, the to steps span years prevent during are of 12.5 ). growth anemia, are less related erythroid these retardation in and major. severe intermedia also β-thalassemia hyperplasia, to associated than with are splenomegaly, and but disease HbH β-thalassemia

Features. Clinical trait are trait asymptomatic. typically α-thalassemia β-Thalassemia and have these is a patients expectancy. There hypochromic mild usually anemia; only normal microcytic generally, life a red appropriate similar cell Iron is a be tests laboratory (described later). deficiency and excluded by appearance associated anemia with must

as synthesis diminishes. postnatally manifests major HbF β-Thalassemia commences from in retardation Affected infancy. children growth suffer that sustained excessive transfusions, are reduce anemia skeletal associated erythropoiesis. deformities blood and They improve the by which the with the second the systemic or inappropriate transfusions possible, in survival gut owing into third is and from to transfused red gradually iron of alone, develops but overload uptake iron load iron the decade With cells. third from fatal inevitably in patients treated often aggressively dysfunction the or chelators, life. develops with decade iron Unless secondary is second cardiac are and hemochromatosis of at of When stem choice. hematopoietic treatment the feasible, is early age transplantation an cell HbH as hematopoiesis disease severe more intermedia in is not the because α-and chain β-thalassemia as are is β-thalassemia β-globin and effective. great not as and major, synthesis imbalance of transfusions. moderate and severity usually require not Anemia is patients do seen. overload β-thalassemia Thus, is is that the rarely major common in iron so

can grounds. suspected major on β-thalassemia The of diagnosis clinical be strongly or Hb of shows absence increased HbA a and HbF. electrophoresis profound levels of reduction or increased. level The may normal be HbA2 Similar intermedia. affected in noted β-thalassemia are but patients changes less severe by β-thalassemia of is made diagnosis centers DNA by challenging, analysis. Prenatal specialized can be but in DNA-based the In thalassemia molecular disease fact, first of tests, opening by the for diagnostics. field the way was diagnosed of β-thalassemia diagnosis minor level The Hb made by HbA electrophoresis, level which is increased of shows HbA2 (α2δ2). an of reduced typically (α2β2) a and β4 be by electrophoresis. tetramers of by disease HbH detection diagnosed can

glutathione Red cells reduced oxidants, exposed are normally exogenous which (GSH). to and constantly by both endogenous are inactivated vulnerable to cells GSH the leave affecting injury Abnormalities of enzymes hemolysis. red synthesis for responsible oxidative and (G6PD) common dehydrogenase is conditions far the By deficiency. of most glucose-6-phosphate these is G6PD chromosome. gene on the The X been 400 but More are only a few variants disease. than have associated identified, G6PD with carried males States. A− which black in of United , is is approximately G6PD One the 10% by decreased half-life. activity enzymatic a G6PD but has normal a A− synthesize become in activity enzyme cells do proteins, red red cells older and Because progressively A− deficient G6PD GSH. not red to This more oxidant turn older renders sensitive cells damage. in

that (usually stress. oxidant to factor episodes hemolysis with environmental deficiency an caused infectious transient agents or exposure is intravascular drugs) G6PD associated by produces of phenacetin, (in include nitrofurantoin, drugs doses), and K antimalarials sulfonamides, (e.g., aspirin Incriminated derivatives. primaquine), vitamin large More part are hemolysis response. induce to which generate by infection, of phagocytes as commonly host episodes the of triggered oxidants GSH, is in which as normally the by such oxidized to up GSH peroxide, sopped are converted hydrogen These process. oxidants, free chains. “attack” cells, is of Because regeneration oxidants other globin to impaired cell components are in including GSH red G6PD-deficient cell hemolysis that Heinz forming intravascular damage intracellular inclusions results. hemoglobin denatures the Oxidized severely precipitates, called so which bodies, red membrane can and with bite further “pluck lesser out” the attempt and to phagocytes cells lose damage their bodies, creating splenic Other injury suffer cells deformability when ( Heinz

Fig. 12.6 ). hemolysis). the phagocytes by (extravascular are recirculation and trapped become to Such on cells spleen destroyed

Fig. Glucose-6-phosphatedehydrogenasedeficiencyafteroxidantdrugexposure—peripheralbloodsmear.(Inset)Redcellswithprecipitatesofdenaturedglobin(Heinzbodies)shownbysupravitalstaining.Asthesplenicmacrophagespluckouttheseinclusions,“bitecells”similartotheoneinthissmearareproduced. 12.6 (Courtesy of Depart-ment University Medical Pathology, of of W. McKenna, Southwestern Robert Texas Dallas,Texas.) School, Dr.

Features. Clinical Hemolysis and variable of is 2 typically days drug 3 develops or exposure severity. after is injury. cells X-linked, are uniformly to oxidant Because the affected vulnerable G6PD deficient of red males and normal other By creates cells, 7) G6PD-deficient. red of heterozygous females contrast, (Chapter one inactivation and of X two chromosome one random the in populations deficient proportion except cells unfavorable red are carrier unaffected situation a (a with Most those lyonization). chance for females large of known as is of In cells to older variant, it A− the susceptible that mainly lysis. are red G6PD case the for by drug levels cells with anemia the abates the adequate hemolysis if exposure compensates continues. of of increasing Because production red the new even G6PD, marrow its the on deficiency and G6PD the severe. in to exposure found the as the such occur enzyme are East, Mediterranean, variants mainly other In hemolysis more oxidants Middle that

nocturnal glycan required mutations PIGA, hemolytic (PIG), is phosphatidylinositol a Paroxysmal synthesis hemoglobinuria a the of gene from for for which serves membrane as anchor a proteins. acquired that stems many in (PNH) anemia active have mutation sufficient only to Because a PIGA is is X-linked, normal one cells of which PIGA PIGA cause deficiency. gene, leukocytes, occur The in in and capable PNH giving that red progenitor early platelets. pathogenic mutations hematopoietic cells, rise an to is of “PIG-tailed” result, a lysis that clone C5b-C9 are the limit attack inordinately to including from the ability the membrane activity as complement; red Progeny PIGA-deficient complement sensitive of complex. lack derived PIGA-mutated by of cells precursors several proteins, make to the deficiency than the cells take and less to are same so share cells, complement brunt red sensitive are but red the attack. the of Leukocytes that CO2 pH accompanies fixation blood sleep the is occurs that complement by hemolysis nocturnal PNH in enhanced name gives retention). because The (owing decrease to its most However, hemolysis. dramatically from anemia present resulting deficiency iron intravascular patients less chronic and with

http://ebooksmedicine.net

vein. vein occurs PNH and is within thrombosis, the abdominal most often complication vessels portal which the such as The hepatic feared of somehow membrane inhibits activity, complement hemolysis. incidence greatly state binds an prothrombotic and the also as thrombosis C5 the Eculizimab, attack related The that intravascular degree antibody of the of lessens complex, excessive as to the assembly is of C5b–C9 as well hemolysis extravascular and red C3b has surfaces. on continue have Eculizimab because the of of patients of stages complement to of early deposition treated varying no fixation, degrees on effect cell poses all against Loss C5b-C9 sepsis; thus, patients vaccinated Eculizimab a activity meningococcal treated in receiving must infections, particularly Neisseria for be risk patients of

meningococcus. N.

that Immunohemolytic caused is on membranes. cell determinants antibodies to bind anemia by red or may exogenous chemicals. such agents spontaneously by arise drugs antibodies induced be or as These anemia and of is is on presence classified the (summarized Immunohemolytic uncommon (1) nature and of conditions the in based the (2) antibody predisposing

12.4 Table

of the The and/or detection cells. red diagnosis on on depends antibodies complement complement. cells with Coombs or patient’s direct is incubated are red with against which test, the human the This immunoglobulin in antibodies done cause result, cells test antibodies the positive a red clump In patient’s (agglutinate). these to be which of test, the surface patient’s to The defined agglutinate Coombs used bearing antibody. can ability red the then the target serum to indirect the of cells characterize determinants, assesses test

red phagocytes the by this are which to cells, in then from from the entity, binding removed the high-affinity In hemolysis results of autoantibodies circulation

Immunohemolytic Anemias of Table 12.4 Classification

Secondary:Bcellneoplasms(e.g.,chroniclymphocyticleukemia),autoimmunedisorders(e.g.,systemiclupuserythematosus),drugs(e.g.,α-methyldopa,penicillin,quinidine)

infection,infectiousmononucleosis Acute: Mycoplasma

spleen Chronic:idiopathic,Bcelllymphoidneoplasms(e.g.,lymphoplasmacyticlymphoma) and elsewhere. spleen, which consumption just frank and cells red (described in the antibody-coated (“nibbling”) incomplete hereditary erythrophagocytosis, transforms red macrophages spherocytes, are earlier). of removes destroyed rapidly in into by addition spherocytosis as membrane cells to In antibodies IgA are or that antibody caused 37°C. active by at immunohemolytic (rarely) (IgG) is anemia G immunoglobulin Warm are another an to idiopathic induced cases More drugs. by (primary), systemic or (e.g., whereas immunologic disorder secondary are lupus of are 25% underlying 60% than erythematosus) and but mild anemia require is variable, treatment. and patients chronic moderate The no splenomegaly clinical most have severity

drugs poorly hemolysis are and of The instances by mechanisms in understood. varied some induced cell Drugs autoantibodies red Rh α-methyldopa intrinsic blood such against antigens. as particular in group induce constituents, 5). cell thereby drug of tolerance and the the alters Presumably, native epitopes circumvents immunogenicity (Chapter somehow T an such drugs Other cell covalently binding antibody as to induce by proteins. as haptens, red which response act membrane penicillin form red a on circulation deposited complexes the cells. are in recognize antibodies and that immune drug Sometimes complement act may as opsonins, they which to fix hemolysis. Here or of lead either can

and occur membranes such temperatures (e.g., at is ears, below as of cell red antibody low-affinity to Cold parts anemia 30°C, antibodies caused in that body distal bind hands, the weather. in usually cold IgM toes) by immunohemolytic only Although 37°C. complement, inefficiently complement occur the the lower temperatures fixes IgM than bound of at cascade latter steps most not result, with As IgM cells up C3b some bound a but intravascularly. pick are lysed weakly released, areas, travel to the but C3b these warmer cells antibody IgM When bound remains. coating the of is is the is by cases cells the C3b most spleen macrophages, mainly liver; an in (Chapter the hence, extravascular. opsonin 2), in mainly are and Because phagocytosed hemolysis also crosslinks (agglutinate). cells pentavalent Binding causes clump and IgM of to them red of extremities of Sludging blood capillaries agglutination often because the in in of phenomenon produces individuals. affected Raynaud transiently by spp. agglutinins pneumonia Mycoplasma Cold from appear caused also during recovery sometimes mononucleosis, of infectious and producing little anemia mild importance. clinical a anemia B certain More chronic association condition. in neoplasms idiopathic occur of cold as forms important, hemolytic an agglutinin or with cell

in Hemolysis red forces mechanical major to settings. occurs exposure two to of due abnormal cells their blender which valve sufficiently flow blood to defective may cardiac Clinically is hemolysis effect). shear significant create cells (the prostheses, by red turbulent traumatic sometimes produced marathon an incidentally (e.g., racing, drumming). during karate involving body activity or more repeated occurs commonly, parts one physical bongo More pounding it of chopping, that states hemolytic vessels is passing lesions observed or in mechanical in narrowed which predispose cells partially to damage. red Microangiopathic small pathologic anemia obstructed by become intra-vascular most by which the intravascular frequent narrowed (see vessels are (DIC) later), conditions disseminated The fibrin. is of these deposition in coagulation of systemic purpura Other cancer. and thrombotic causes erythematosus, (HUS), hypertension, of lupus hemolytic anemia disseminated hemolytic include thrombocytopenic syndrome (TTP), microangiopathic uremic malignant Mechanical fragmentation leads cells in cells,” smears cells,” “triangle “helmet cells” of of peripheral red “burr and (schistocytosis) blood appearance characteristic ( to the

Fig.

12.7 ). it usually condition. a and a itself, problem microangiopathic in often is underlying clinical not points major serious of Although hemolysis to

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 12.7 Microangiopathichemolyticanemia—peripheralbloodsmear.Thisspecimenfromapatientwithhemolyticuremicsyndromecontainsseveralfragmentedredcells. W. Pathol-ogy,University Medical (Courtesy Texas of of School,Dallas,Texas.) Southwestern of McKenna,Department Dr.Robert

that most kills afflictions people year, million million 500 malaria is serious and estimated the making humans. It of affects 1 more it than one per of the travel jet now widespread Malaria seen are endemic Africa, cases with and but world. in Asia is all over five protozoa. It caused types of one is by of (falciparum which tertian malaria), fatality with the most malaria important rate. disorder high a is these, a causes Plasmodium falciparum, Of species Plasmodium Plasmodium infect vivax, relatively ovale—cause other Plasmodium that Plasmodium knowlesi, four malariae, humans—Plasmodium of and disease. benign The bite forms humans transmitted female the mosquitoes, by of and the are only are Anopheles natural reservoir. All

plasmodia complex cycle life ( of The is

Fig. ). 12.8 sporozoites few human liver As from mosquitoes infect the minutes saliva cells. a within and are introduced blood, feed on thousands of a schizont merozoites. Here multiply to rapidly parasites form containing the varies of that which the quickly species, merozoites, infected the to days Plasmodium with period release the cells. several infect a hepatocytes weeks red After next merozoites or of parasites the rise capable more either infecting mosquito. produce gametocytes to reproduction asexual to hungry Intraerythrocytic continue give four red their asexual in reproduction each into trophozoites. of develops forms cells, the of malaria During when trophozoites lysing The merozoites, to asexual red the the rise give cells. completed by is new phase which escape

malaria. vessels cerebral of the small falciparum complication as known Fatal brain, a involves often the malaria charged that surfaces interact bear red with cells. Normally, cells endothelial negatively poorly red Infection parasite-encoded positively appearance the containing on of to knobs expressed adhesion activated induces molecules with of cells proteins, falciparum surface charged which P. bind endothelium. the in molecule-1 of including to adhesion postcapillary Several mediate red intercellular venules. to trapping (ICAM-1), cells adhesion endothelial this interaction, molecules, appear leads cell which occluded. patients, engorged children, involves of this cerebral an minority In and which mainly become process vessels, unfortunate

Fig. falciparum. 12.8 LifecycleofPlasmodium redbloodcell. ICAM-1, Intercellularadhesionmolecule-1;RBC, Beth by Department (Drawn Boston, Massachusetts.) Dr. Deaconess of Joseph, Jeffrey Pathology, Hospital, Israel http://ebooksmedicine.net

specieshaveasomewhatdistinctiveappearance,allowingexpertobserverstodeterminewhichspeciesisresponsibleforaninfectionfromexaminationofappropriatelystainedthicksmearsofperipheralblood. MORPHOLOGYRedcelltrophozoitesfromeachPlasmodium Thedestructionofredcellsleadstohemolytic isreleasedfromtherupturedredcellsandproducesdiscolorationofthespleen,liver,lymphnodes,andbonemarrow.Activationofdefensemechanismsinthehostleadstoamarkedhyperplasiaofmononuclearphagocytes,producingmassive splenomegaly anemia,withitsattendantfeaturesandlaboratoryfindings.Acharacteristicbrownmalarialpigmentderivedfromhemoglobincalledhematin andoccasionalhepatomegaly.

ovale, P. red from of 48 are knowlesi, hours and at released hours P. falciparum, 24 Showers cells intervals new approximately the malariae. P. vivax, merozoites P. 72 hours and for of P. for for release. shaking, coincide this Episodic fever chills, and with anemia a severity constant Hemolytic of is feature. varying days and with associated within to convulsions, malaria death coma, P. rapidly weeks. usually falciparum is Cerebral progressive; occur often blackwater a falciparum punctuated that pursues by at course fever. more malaria any may be chronic Fortunately, time for with The hemoglobinuria, which hemolysis, trigger this is obscure is uncommon jaundice. associated and complication, massive hemoglobinemia, intravascular

falciparum treat more however, strains. for appropriate due prognosis to is most forms malaria the with difficult chemotherapy, to With emergence of is patients of malaria the good; becoming drug-resistant the early and consequences the serious treatment are diagnosis Because of disease, important. of potentially is elusive. is vaccine, ultimate but solution long an The sought effective which still

Autosomaldominantdisordercausedbymutationsthataffecttheredcellmembraneskeleton,leadingtolossofmembraneandeventualconversionofredcellstospherocytes,whicharephagocytosedandremovedinthespleen

Manifestedbyanemia,splenomegaly

•Autosomalcodominantdisorderscausedbymutationsinαorβ-globinthatreducehemoglobinsynthesis,resultinginamicrocytic,hypochromicanemia.Inβ-thalassemia,unpairedα-globinchainsformaggregatesthatdamageredcellprecursorsandfurtherimpairerythropoiesis. Blockageofvesselsbysickledcellscausespaincrisesandtissueinfarction,particularlyofthemarrowandspleen

•X-linkeddisordercausedbymutationsthatdestabilizeG6PD,makingredcellssusceptibletooxidantdamage

include dietary nutrients, B12. those erythropoiesis supply and folic diminished vitamin caused Anemias an of acid, by iron, inadequate particularly of marrow cells associated inflammation), infiltration inflammatory marrow by with (myelophthisic (aplastic bone failure of of bone systemic or anemia), Other anemia). type anemias tumor this chronic or are inflammation (anemia of discussed some individually. anemias In of examples section, common are this types these

nutritional symptoms in are mostly Deficiency the signs of most that iron clinical to anemia. deficiency in and world related common and the results is of is people iron developing in cause 10% in those and and settings most are anemic, countries living frequent in 50% developed deficiency. countries to 25% the both About of and in responsible understood for factors populations of are deficiency the context iron in differ The metabolism. normal best iron various

3.5 iron mass body The total normal men. g and for is g about 2.5 women for iron 80% the iron-containing and myoglobin remainder hemoglobin, enzymes functional Approximately catalase, in with located of cytochromes). body in present (e.g., is and The iron average the hemosiderin liver, muscle, spleen, iron. ferritin-bound marrow, total in 15% of bone skeletal 20% storage contains consisting on to pool, of body and iron a level ferritin serum is measure stores. pool, from this largely ferritin iron serum good storage of the is Because derived estimating more iron for invasive but bone method iron of stores. is reliable another Assessment marrow plasma transferrin. transported to protein in the the Iron is bound in about in that yielding 33% serum with iron is In men women. levels 100 µg/dL iron, transferrin saturated persons, average and µg/dL 120 normal µg/dL. of 350 to capacity 300 Thus, normal serum the is total iron-binding

http://ebooksmedicine.net

pathways evolutionary the yielded that with toward deficiency, iron metabolic strongly keeping biased iron prevalence pressures retention. In high have are of 1 iron, (described lost 2 later). balanced loss which mg/day skin a regulated of mucosal is through and at be by the Iron dietary shedding is the rate to and must of epithelial cells, this absorption tightly of The 10 of normal mg iron. to contains Western 20 diet daily is vegetables. in present meat within in remainder heme poultry, found with iron the as Most and inorganic hence, sufficient and the of average balance iron losses. diet to absorbable; 2% heme daily nonheme About 20% 1% are fixed of Western iron to contains

duodenum Regulation iron absorption occurs within of ( the

Fig. 12.9 ). ferric ferrous reductase, reduction by After

Fig. 12.9 Divalentmetaltransporter-1. Regulationofironabsorption.Duodenalepithelialcelluptakeofhemeandnonhemeirondiscussedinthetextisdepicted.Whenthestoragesitesofthebodyarerepletewithironanderythropoieticactivityisnormal,plasmahepcidinbalancesironuptakeandlosstomaintainironhemeostasisbydown-regulatingferroportinandlimitingironuptake(middlepanel).Hepcidinrisesinthesettingofsystemicinflammationorwhenironlevelsarehigh,decreasingironuptakeandincreasingironlossbythesheddingofduodenocytes(rightpanel),anditfallsinthesettingoflowplasmaironorprimaryhemochromatosis,resultinginincreasedironuptake(leftpanel)withreducedshedding.DMT1,

membrane metal apical (Fe2+) by transported across http://ebooksmedicine.net (DMT1). the is divalent iron transporter-1 to moves from iron plasma the basolateral cytoplasm ferroportin, the second the membrane. transporter, across A then to iron (Fe3+), is and iron oxidized iron The transferrin. form that ferric ceruloplasmin next of binds to hephaestin by absorbed the newly DMT1 in as Both tissues involved the other in well. distributed and ferroportin are body widely are iron transport and in depicted As in

Fig. of panel), transferrin part that the ferritin incorporated is remainder through mucosal exfoliation and the cells. ferroportin, the of into iron whereas by is enterocytes is enters 12.9 (middle lost to cytoplasmic delivered

liver fashion. a the synthesized small an is fraction that peptide absorbed hepcidin, iron-dependent iron and of The from is that in secreted by regulated is levels general, suppress plasma In in whereas production, iron it. high the hepcidin iron enhance low levels from bone released is to marrow. factors inflammation to hepcidin However, also in and erythroblasts sensitive production the effects of inflammatory and the of on mediators of hematopoiesis, ineffective which increased numbers in because hepatocytes, systemic hepcidin direct rise the in inflammation erythroblasts such of face levels the in bone marrow. by the is as of marked IL-6 setting Specifically, circulates the duodenum, and induces to and Hepcidin where binds ferroportin its degradation. internalization it when concentrations hepcidin ( are elevated Thus,

Fig. levels as , ferritin more levels 12.9 systemic is and high lost serum is fall or right there are is incorporated and panel), inflammation, iron by when iron cytoplasmic excretion. into ferroportin such levels are when ( hepcidin Conversely, low

Fig. the such when (Chapter 12.9 iron is to increased. deficiency, transport is iron that , there hematopoiesis, basolateral genetic panel), ineffective defects left 16), hemochromatosis or primary lead of the as deficiency, as levels overload. but as to hemochromatosis, the is hepcidin low In the in beneficial to hepcidin, of eventually help systemic iron suppression deficiency, primary to inappropriately lead serves iron of correct it

variety arises of in deficiency settings: a Iron

most Western deficiency cause loss iron the anemia blood in the world. Chronic is of important ulcers, hemorrhoids) bleeding cancer). menorrhagia, The are gastrointestinal tract peptic metrorrhagia, the of colon most tract (e.g., the (e.g., female common genital endometrial sources and cancer,

most poor because low common diets developing vegetarian causes In deficiency. bioavailability of the the of are intake iron world, predominantly and

infrequent junk exclusively but in is in subsisting culpable in culprit low teenagers the the States, in dietary on impoverished, United food. an intake fed predominantly is and sometimes infants milk, In elderly, the

demands and pregnancy by met intake normal infancy. Increased during worldwide dietary occur not

disease (Chapter 15). or celiac after with gastrectomy Malabsorption can occur

Fig. 12.10 Irondeficiencyanemia—peripheralbloodsmear.Notetheincreasedcentralpallorofmostoftheredcells.Scattered,fullyhemoglo-binizedcells,fromarecentbloodtransfusion,standoutincontrast. of Texas Medical School, McKenna, Department W. Pathology, Dr. of Robert of University South-western Dallas,Texas.) (Courtesy

cause, insidiously. develops of Regardless the deficiency iron stainable Iron stores decline iron a serum bone marrow. of ferritin by and first, in depleted marked absence are in the the serum the rise are a and transferrin. in by serum followed decrease a changes iron in These and reduced cognitive microcytic the iron-containing hemoglobin, capacity immunocompetence. proteins performance, myoglobin, other is diminished, anemia, even Ultimately, to and synthesize leading work impaired and to

Clinical Features. deficiency is instances mild most asymptomatic. In anemia iron and cases. manifestations, be and present as such pallor, Nonspecific may severe in weakness, listlessness, thinning, including and long-standing of With abnormalities “spooning,” may anemia, appear. fingernails, the flattening, curious or complication nonfoodstuffs as clay. is consume neurobehavioral pica, dirt compunction to A such but the characteristic

( red smears, are cells peripheral microcytic and In hypo-chromic

Fig. ). 12.10 and, levels, indices, cell red low include iron low ultimately, response and anemia, iron-binding transferrin capacity, therapy. iron ferritin criteria increased serum total Diagnostic microcytic hypochromic saturation, to and unclear elevated. count is the often platelet For reasons, marrow are by Erythropoietin is blunted iron usually levels increased. cellularity the response but is slightly only deficiency; marrow thus, elevated, the

often iron die virtually deficiency never with it. Persons but of anemia, a important in some is microcytic disease rather of but hypochromic persons, symptom is well-nourished a anemia point that An disorder. underlying not

anemia anemia the in disease, referred is as chronic of inflammation the form associated anemia patients. with most common of Often to hospitalized chronic

resembles deficiency iron instead but It suppression from by arises the the erythropoiesis of inflammation. systemic of superficially anemia disorders sustained bacterial Chronic lung a inflammation: endocarditis, occurs microbial such and associated It abscess variety in of infections, osteomyelitis, http://ebooksmedicine.net • as with

and regional rheumatoid disorders, immune enteritis such Chronic as arthritis

Neoplasms, lung carcinomas and as Hodgkin breast and lymphoma the such of

stems hepcidin, which downregulating ferroportin of chronic transfer by erythroid of macrophages. iron blocks levels from inflammation The of anemia in the precursors to high plasma The by as caused hepcidin hepcidin levels such hepatic are increase elevated IL-6, cytokines proinflammatory synthesis. which kidney, the synthesis addition, erythropoietin marrow. blunts In by production by lowering cell inflammation red the chronic functional of immunity. adaptations in inhibit microorganisms are The inflammation of to serve the the may iron-dependent growth of they certain aspects face augment unclear; advantages or host to of systemic these

Clinical Features. hypochromic be levels cells of red may deficiency, iron low the iron and usually microcytic. in disease, of chronic anemia and the anemia As the serum are in slightly bone reduced. serum anemia, increased iron are and storage the and capacity iron deficiency ferritin Unlike total is however, iron-binding in marrow the of can and iron erythropoietin of treatment condition improve only anemia, effective but the curative. the Administration underlying is

principal B12 and folate The two anemia deficiency megaloblastic deficiency. vitamin are of causes synthesis are effects identical. essentially required vitamins on for are of Both their the and deficiency DNA hematopoiesis causes important B12 and ways. However, differ deficiency in folate of vitamin the and consequences vitamin review and B12 and are deficiency. We the touch on then to of that specific will first those common folate features some

of the metabolic biosynthesis defects that of one lead DNA. blocks to thymidine, of Megaloblastic anemia building inadequate stems from are for thymidylate, discuss, required replication. folate factors and both essential the of As B12 for which DNA is will we synthesis vitamin throughout dividing cells body, affected. hematopoietic marrow rapidly severely is but the in the abnormalities Thymidine deficiency causes most that Because precursors elements outpaces hematopoietic of thus asynchrony the later). proceeds (described at the RNA cytoplasmic a show the normal synthesis rate nucleus, nuclear-cytoplasmic and and of the in to ways. contributes anemia derangement several This maturational apoptosis that progenitors the they in synthesis cell undergo are so (ineffective hematopoiesis). Many defective marrow in red DNA Others red cells. output cell but do of so cells further after mature diminishing red fewer divisions, into the with most severely) pancytopenia precursors also Granulocyte (anemia, as affected platelet are patients granulocytopenia). (although present and thrombocytopenia, and and not

Fig. 12.11 Megaloblasticanemia.Aperipheralbloodsmearshowsahyper-segmentedneutrophilwithasix-lobednucleus. Southwestern Pathology, Dallas,Texas.) School, Texas Robert Medical (Courtesy of Department of University W. McKenna, Dr. of

metamyelocytes. MORPHOLOGYCertainmorphologicfeaturesarecommontoallformsofmegaloblasticanemia.Thebonemarrowismarkedlyhypercellularandcontainsnumerousmegaloblasticerythroidprogenitors.Megaloblasts arelargerthannormalerythroidprogenitors(normoblasts)andhavedelicate,finelyreticulatednuclearchromatin(indicativeofnuclearimmaturity).Asmegaloblastsdifferentiateandacquirehemoglobin,thenucleusretainsitsfinelydistributedchromatinandfailstoundergothechromatinclumpingtypicalofnormoblasts,aclassicexampleofnuclear-cytoplasmicasynchrony.Thegranulocyticprecursorsalsodemonstratenuclear-cytoplasmicasynchrony,yieldinggiant Megakaryocytesmayalsobeabnormallylargeandhavebizarremultilobednuclei.

theMCVoftenisgreaterthan110fL(normal,82–96fL).Althoughmacrocytesappearhyper-chromic,inrealitytheirhemoglobincontentisnormal.Large,misshapenplateletsalsomaybeseen.Morphologicchangesinothersystems,especiallythegastrointestinaltract,alsooccur,givingrisetosomeoftheclinicalmanifestations. Fig.12.11 macroovalocytes; ),whichappearbeforetheonsetofanemia.Normalneutrophilshavethreeorfournuclearlobes,butinmegaloblasticanemiastheyoftenhavefiveormore.Theredcellstypicallyincludelarge,egg-shaped

intake, is deficiency usually inadequate by dietary result metabolic sometimes the complicated increased demands. Folate of 15 as nearly a foods, result it by is surprising all healthy persons. are Although folate and 10 marginal in cooking, is of folate minutes present number a to stores in destroyed of overt as (the with deprived, or chronic patients those indigent, cell women deficiency anemias, elderly) the with and economically hemolytic The (pregnant highest the such disease). in a increased diet and poor needs risk with of folate sickle is those metabolic

http://ebooksmedicine.net

or Deficiency problems stem absorption metabolism. with may from also folates form a be into Food in predominantly inhibited are monoglutamates beans and other by found split absorption, legumes. in and for substances foods is polyglutamate acidic that and must conversion inhibit such with absorption, phenytoin others, Some such (dilantin), drugs, metabolism. methotrexate, folate interfere folate also whereas as as also of Malabsorptive absorbed, and may the that the disorders, third such folate affect as where uptake. celiac upper intestine sprue, impair folate tropical disease small is

folate and complex. metabolism of functions The are is particularly it conversion by reductase tetrahydrofolate to to dihydrofolate is Here cells dihydrofolate important. that sufficient from its note within the and Tetrahydrofolate donor as required of are in for acceptor (dTMP). monophosphate of reactions deoxythymidine one-carbon an that units several synthesis acts and synthesized dTMP replication stores insufficient megaloblastic leading DNA to blocked, is anemia. is of intracellular folate If fall,

Features. Clinical associated the insidious, The weakness and deficiency being is of of onset anemia with folate nonspecific as easy fatigability. such symptoms vitamins, deficiency The clinical the may complicated alcoholics. coexistent especially in picture of by be other cells system, lining tract, hematopoietic to Because the as turn over alimentary common. tongue, rapidly, the the are sore the such like gastrointestinal referable tract, symptoms vitamin neurologic do (described B12 not later), Unlike occur. deficiency abnormalities in

examination the bone peripheral The diagnosis of megaloblastic is blood smears anemia of from made of marrow. readily a and B12 of folate vitamin vitamin and is deficiency folate The from by of best levels. anemia serum distinguished measuring deficiency that cell B12 and red

foods, synthesized B12 boiling, is Vitamin is cooking is even present gut flora. in to and widely resistant and by is unlike except intake milk deficiency and folate, scrupulously by vegetarians eggs. avoid never B12 virtually in vitamin caused inadequate who Thus, typically that 1. interferes involving B12 with process following some steps: from vitamin Instead, deficiencies complex the abnormality absorption, a arise

B12, allowing it haptocorrin. called protein Peptic dietary a vitamin bind releases digestion to salivary

2.

attaches B12, the secreted On proteases; factor entering from of are processed pancreatic parietal duodenum, complexes mucosa. the intrinsic which the cells gastric haptocorrin–B12 fundic by releases this to

3.

ileum up and cubilin, to to the factor, for into are enterocytes. The complexes receptor intrinsic attach pass taken and a factor–B12 intrinsic distal

4.

transcobalamin, cells body. which is vitamin and across other transferred delivers the membranes of of the vitamin to basolateral liver to B12 enterocytes plasma The absorbed the B12

B12 handles vitamin After efficiently. the body absorption, very sufficient stored to support normally for bodily contains the in reserves needs which It is to 20 5 years. liver, of of typically Because deficiency malabsorption. clinical vitamin large follow presentations years unrecognized of liver these B12 stores,

intrinsic which on the an mucosa vitamin anemia, autoimmune is is deficiency gastric result that cause from The B12 factor. believed most of pernicious attack suppresses to the production frequent of there is in a by and to lymphocytes atrophic cells, marked parietal of a and Histologically, changes chronic a cells, cells similar gastritis mucosal megaloblastic found infiltrate plasma loss erythroid those in precursors. prominent that block complex most The cubilin. binding the the types factor–vitamin prevent or B12 affected several factor of patients contains of of binding to autoantibodies vitamin intrinsic of B12 to serum intrinsic not T they gastric rather, initiates cell but and to autoreactive use, seems the formation autoantibodies. Autoantibodies thought that of primary of of are triggers the mucosal response the cause are it gastric be injury an diagnostic pathology; reserves anemia stored (and of develops. factor-secreting B12 vitamin cells depleted), When falls threshold are the intrinsic below a mass of

function include of cells), intrinsic B12 disorders to intrinsic complex–absorbing distal disease, in loss disease). (resulting Whipple causes factor–B12 (such loss and factor–producing of gastrectomy and the of as tropical of the Crohn disrupt malabsorption sprue, vitamin ileal resection that ileum Other cells), (leading the and of Particularly atrophy release and vitamin the food. which pepsin, are with bound production to in acid in achlorhydria persons, form interfere needed B12 gastric its older from may

B12 of the anemia metabolism. with for intertwined are The metabolic vitamin folate responsible defects deficiency of previously, needed form that B12 described the DNA folate Vitamin is is is recycling which, synthesis. for tetrahydrofolate, for required as B12 administration anemia the folate. of vitamin In the this reversed keeping deficiency with is of relationship, with

contrast, are certain By may not deficiency. prevent folate that neurologic symptoms worsen specific in vitamin to and B12 does fact administration neurologic peripheral B12 columns deficiency spinal main the and in with the The nerves. associated of vitamin cord, posterior lesions demyelination sometimes lateral of are beginning the In may degeneration time, supervene. axonal not The degree neurologic related anemia. manifestations is to of severity the the of absence in Indeed, the may disease overt of anemia. megaloblastic occur neurologic

Features. Clinical of B12 vitamin deficiency manifestations nonspecific. The are even and anemias, pallor, and, failure. with fatigability, severe in dyspnea heart As include findings easy cases, all congestive rise ineffective red of a changes produce to The and give destruction increased mild epithelium progenitors megaloblastic tongue. beefy may in jaundice, because erythropoiesis erythroid may oropharyngeal the of with in loss by and unsteadiness in or position of The feet hands, followed the burning numbness, particularly and tingling, cord begins gait symmetric disease toes. the spinal sense, of to resolve. parenteral B12, anemia fail neurologic to manifestations dramatically the the often responds vitamin Although risk with patients development an for 15, Chapter carcinoma. pernicious the of anemia in gastric increased discussed have As

http://ebooksmedicine.net

(2) levels, leukopenia administration levels, to vitamin diagnosis to supporting folate granulocytes, (within deficiency (5) B12 dramatic B12 of to and Findings 3 (1) are with (3) 2 reticulocytic of vitamin severe B12. anemia, macrocytic serum response the serum low parenteral a or hypersegmented (4) normal moderate elevated days) vitamin antibodies of to findings Pernicious these intrinsic with associated factor. of serum plus anemia presence is all the

myeloid suppressed, and leading cells are bone failure disorder is pancytopenia. multipotent a anemia marrow stem in to Aplastic which hematopoietic devoid elements. often marrow recognizable virtually is The of are red It cell affected distinguished aplasia, only manifestation. pure from only erythroid anemia which progenitors be and in must is the

pathogenesis not fully abnormality major of of extrinsic, The invoked: understood, an etiologies suppression two have but progenitors, of stem cells. immune-mediated anemia intrinsic marrow is an been aplastic and

a cells hematopoietic Experimental on focused which suppress stem activated have model cells. in T studies drugs, by to agents, infectious unidentified hypothesized It stem are other altered is environmental antigenically that first insults. cells exposure or as response, TNF (IFN-γ) produce cells suppress interferon-γ which and cytokines TH1 cellular immune progenitors. activated This such kill during hematopoietic a and that provokes hematopoiesis therapy restores is supported to scenario T This experience which by 70% directed in with 60% against cells, of patients. immunosuppressive

patients inherited abnormality the the stability chromosomes. mentioned observations and 10% supported of that notion defects to from as of intrinsic for from showing by cell an have in earlier, which, is needed stem maintenance Alternatively, is that anemia telomerase, 5% aplastic results leads hematopoietic defect premature hypothesized It the cells. senescence that of stem telomerase in to is replication cells Of interest, hematopoietic as-yet telomeres, short undiscovered of further cases of unusually the marrow in bone cells. excessive an from additional defects possibly or 50% in stem have telomerase stemming telomeres) exclusive, “neoantigens” with altered T also those abnormal because stem are (e.g., targets These mutually two serve a attack. for cells that express cell might as mechanisms genetically not

Clinical Features. ages both of affects Aplastic anemia persons sexes. all and slowly pallor, insidious dyspnea. The of causes development the progressive anemia weakness, and petechiae ecchymoses. and Thrombocytopenia with often manifests stage serious for infections. the set may Neutropenia

It distinguished but important of diseases, “aleukemic aplastic to are presentations by examination is similar easily and marrow. by infiltration which may marrow (myelophthisic have separate granulomatous leukemia,” anemia anemia bone anemia), the clinical from caused diagnosis should be another cause if does not present, anemia Aplastic splenomegaly; sought.

unpredictable. prognosis is The inciting to remission, drug exception. is the sometimes Withdrawal but an leads this of 40 nontransfused patients age. often than is of curative, cell transplantation in younger particularly years stem Hematopoietic a to persons patients thus, it transplantation. sensitizes engraftment must Transfusion failure; for eligible rate producing alloantigens, be of in minimized high the the important immunosuppressive requires an or transplantation that reinforcing “conditioning” chemotherapy, autoimmunity role notion has Successful with radiation disease. in poor therapy. immunosuppressive who patients from As mentioned candidates often earlier, benefit are transplantation

the extensive is anemia tumors by infiltration of lesions. by marrow or Myelophthisic caused other cancer. with It or prostate commonly breast, metastatic associated lung, most is advanced storage osteosclerosis tumors, may tuberculosis, clinical a similar lipid picture. disorders, Other and produce The manifestations include and thrombocytopenia; affected. the cell series white anemia general, principal in less is the seen red in Characteristically are cells, peripheral teardrops, blood. resembling some misshapen also along with granulocytic present leukocytosis. may erythrocytic (leukoerythroblastosis) Immature mild and be precursors underlying directed Treatment the is condition. at

and ANEMIAOFDIMINISHEDERYTHROPOIESISunsteadiness particularly gait the position toes. in sense, loss of of gait the responds in unsteadiness the particularly position dramatically sense, anemia Although loss and of to of toes. Although dramatically anemia the •Causedbychronicbleedingorinadequateironintake;resultsininsufficienthemoglobinsynthesisandhypochromic,microcyticredcells responds to

of Chronic Inflammation Anemia •Causedbyinflammatorycytokines,whichincreasehepcidinlevelsandtherebysequesterironinmacrophages,andalsosuppresserythropoietinproduction

http://ebooksmedicine.net Resultsinenlargedabnormalhematopoieticprecursors(megaloblasts),ineffectivehematopoiesis,macrocyticanemia,and(inmostcases)pancytopenia •Causedbybonemarrowfailure(hypocellularity)resultingfromdiversecauses,includingexposurestotoxinsandradiation,idiosyncraticreactionstodrugsandviruses,andinheriteddefectsintelomeraseandDNArepair

or of unit erythrocytosis, per denotes an volume red increase in peripheral Polycythemia, blood. cells or may (defined mass) be an total increase as relative. cell absolute It red in with such diarrhea, water Relative occurs polycythemia excessive use prolonged the as vomiting, or deprivation, from of dehydration, diuretics. results polycythemia increased described is when Absolute the as primary

Pathophysiologic 12.5 Table of Polycythemia Classification

Abnormalproliferationofmyeloidstemcells,normalorlowerythropoietinlevels(polycythemiavera);inheritedactivatingmutationsintheerythropoietinreceptor(rare)

Adaptive: Lungdisease,high-altitudeliving,cyanoticheartdisease

Erythropoietin-secretingtumors(e.g.,renalcellcarcinoma,hepatomacellularcarcinoma,cerebellarhemangioblastoma) Paraneoplastic:

autonomous Enduranceathletes cell proliferation erythroid proliferation red and from an progenitors, elevated Surreptitious: stems from results the erythropoietin. levels secondary mass when of of excessive is Primary clonal (polycythemia a later neoplasm myeloid considered this chapter. vera) polycythemia in of secondary cause erythropoietin in polycythemia of absolute The forms increases variety causes include a that (

Table 12.5

neoplastic. proliferations, Disorders be and which of cells include deficiencies reactive white or may (leukopenias) primary, a common. disease microbial, to is often in proliferation Reactive response of more staggering common, in age. than although a cancer less and They 40% of Neoplastic approximately are 15 in deaths adults cause disorders, all 9% younger children ominous: years

are followed descriptions detailed nonneoplastic next of some Presented more white the conditions, considerations by of malignant cells. brief of proliferations

a granulocytes, in white most commonly circulating decrease most results Leukopenia from cells. the numerous Lymphopenia is is congenital less advanced immunodeficiency associated it immunodeficiency of common; corticosteroids. much diseases, virus human rare with treatment high infection, with and doses (HIV) discussed of here. common Only leukopenias the more are granulocytes

granulocytes severe, neutropenia is or, of when reduction known agranulocytosis. A in in as number blood the susceptible are severe, persons and bacterial Neutropenic fatal to potentially fungal infections. neutrophil cells/µL. risk count The rises of sharply falls 500 below as the infection

neutropenia mechanisms divided two can be into The categories: broad underlying

granulocyte Decreased production. most extensive the granulopoiesis marrow tumor (such by marrow in by are with chemotherapy chronically with occurs aplastic of or caused with anemia) leukemia). reductions important hypoplasia as replacement cancer transiently (as often and Clinically blood production be suppressed neutrophil may while are unaffected. lineages Alternatively, other by “large granular lymphocytic caused cells by often neoplastic cells or leukemia”). T natural and proliferations This cytotoxic drugs of most (NK) killer certain is (so-called

granulocyte destruction. Increased (triggered in from drugs) rickettsial with use. immune-mediated fungal, resulting some infections encountered This can in peripheral cases or overwhelming by injury increased or be bacterial, to of the and neutrophils. sequestration removal lead can also accelerated Splenomegaly

MORPHOLOGYThealterationsinthebonemarrowdependontheunderlyingcause.Compensatorymarrowhypercellularityisseenwhenthereisexcessiveneutrophildestructionorineffectivegranulopoiesis,suchasoccursinmegaloblasticanemia.Drugsthatselectivelysuppressgranulocytopoiesisareassociatedwithdecreasednumbersofgranulocyticprecursorsandpreservationoferythroidelementsandmegakaryocytes,whilemyelotoxicchemotherapydrugsreducethenumberofelementsfromalllineages.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Clinical Features. Infections major the problem. constitute necrotizing cavity the They the form ulcerating, the buccal within of of mouth, other floor oral of (agranulocytic take gingiva, commonly pharynx, the lesions sites or angina). mucosa, of lesions the masses such microorganisms. contain to sheets large or of leukocytes, lack Owing often addition to present systemic fever. malaise, of inflammation, symptoms usually local In chills, are and consisting patients antibiotics infections of sepsis, covering bacterial fungal both sign and broad-spectrum of Because the danger on are the first infection. started of at treated be (G-CSF), factor a clinical recovery on granulocyte speeds colony-stimulating also factor neutrophil patients context, the Depending that of counts. growth may with

states of is increase in stimuli. in the the nonmicrobial caused inflammatory microbial of An number a in and blood cells by white common variety series to white are classified 12.6). is relatively nonspecific (Table cell according and the that particu lar affected are Leukocytoses

leukocytosis in discussed reactive some As cases later, mimic may leukemia. Such “leukemoid distinguished reactions” be must

Leukocytosis Causes Table 12.6 of

Acutebacterialinfections(especiallythosecausedbypyogenicorganisms);sterileinflammationcausedby,e.g.,tissuenecrosis(myocardialinfarction,burns)

Allergicdisorderssuchasasthma,hayfever,allergicskindiseases(e.g.,pemphigus,dermatitisherpetiformis);parasiticinfestations;drugreactions;certainmalignancies(e.g.,Hodgkinlymphomaandsomenon-Hodgkinlymphomas);collagen-vasculardisordersandsomevasculitides;atheroembolicdisease(transient)

Rare,oftenindicativeofamyeloproliferativeneoplasm(e.g.,chronicmyeloidleukemia)

Chronicinfections(e.g.,tuberculosis),bacterialendocarditis,rickettsiosis,andmalaria;collagenvasculardiseases(e.g.,systemiclupuserythematosus);andinflammatoryboweldiseases(e.g.,ulcerativecolitis)

malignancies. true infection pertussis white Accompaniesmonocytosisinmanydisordersassociatedwithchronicimmunologicstimulation(e.g.,tuberculosis,brucellosis);viralinfections(e.g.,hepatitisA,cytomegalovirus,Epstein-Barrvirus);Bordetella cell from gives consideration merits separate mononucleosis a with distinctive syndrome it Infectious to lymphocytosis. because rise associated

is virus by (EBV), of is self-limited family. of that member adolescents disease and mononucleosis a the Epstein-Barr adults an caused acute, herpesvirus Infectious young lymphocytosis characterized lymphadenitis (2) activated, sore generalized The (1) infection is fever, by cells. T and throat, a CD8+ and of by methods. a only similar can that syndrome serologic be differentiated cytomegalovirus note, infection induces Of

EBV in populations. human is all ubiquitous developing In infection the is world, early childhood nearly in universal. EBV mount most later), continue children infected asymptomatic for half response an remain (described shed virus, usually than Even to though life. immune more and developed is more much and young until in infection By hygiene, common. better typically is adolescence contrast, symptomatic infection delayed countries or of adulthood standards with 20% the developed only virus, healthy to about shed reasons, of infection. seropositive of in only and 50% unclear exposed For those the about acquire virus countries persons the

usually Transmission oral seronegative direct contact. cousin” “kissing involves to a (tonsils underlying cells B infected. hypothesized and and the where cells that initially lymphoid virus spreads then It epithelial is are adenoids), mature infects tissue oropharyngeal to of two cells forms. B one The infection of takes lytic, viral and to minority leading infection the a release is virions. replication of cells, of In as nonproductive and an commonly, persists More episome. form the extrachromosomal in latent virus infection the is

“activated” and are of several EBV latently proliferate become 6). the cells result of with as infected action that (Chapter B proteins a viral including These antibodies sheep specificities, recognize disseminate mononucleosis. secrete that in antibodies diagnostic in unusual are detected for the with cells and circulation tests cells the that red virions of is epithelial known the not these acute is infections, in During or saliva; source it shed whether cells. EBV the cells oropharyngeal is B

proliferation the of the cell response B the and controls T virus. cells of host spread The EBV-infected IgM formed Early the are antigens. capsid course the of viral antibodies in infection, against life. response shifts persist antibodies, serologic to which the IgG Later for cytotoxic B control the EBV-positive More the important in cells. proliferation CD8+ of T cell are Virus-specific is CD8+ circulation atypical the cells a of mononucleosis. in as appear that lymphocytes, T finding characteristic developed responses viral humoral on persons, act cellular healthy shedding. otherwise to brakes fully as the and EBV In however, patient. the In number latently response small of immune infected and most escape EBV-positive a cases, life for cells persist the of the B for impaired high proliferations. patients EBV-driven immunity at cell risk As described cell B places later, T

http://ebooksmedicine.net

lymphocytes, MORPHOLOGYThemajoralterationsinvolvetheblood,lymphnodes,spleen,liver,andoccasionallyotherorgans.Thereisperipheralbloodleukocytosis;thewhitecellcountisusuallybetween12,000and18,000cells/µL.Typicallymorethanhalfofthesecellsarelargeatypical 12to16µmindiameter,withanoval,indented,orfoldednucleusandabundantcytoplasmwithafewazurophilicgranules(

Fig.12.12 Tcells. ).Theseatypicallymphocytes,whicharesufficientlydistinctivetosuggestthediagnosis,aremainlyCD8+

iscommonandismostprominentintheposteriorcervical,axillary,andgroinregions.Onhistologicexamination,theenlargednodesarefloodedbyatypicallymphocytes,whichoccupytheparacortical(Tcell)areas.AfewcellsresemblingReed-Sternberg(RS)cells,thehallmarkofHodgkinlymphoma,oftenareseen.Becauseoftheseatypicalfeatures,specialtestsaresometimesneededtodistinguishthereactivechangesofmononucleosisfromlymphoma. Lymphadenopathy

Thespleen isenlargedinmostcases,weighingbetween300and500g,andexhibitsaheavyinfiltrationofatypicallymphocytes.Asaresultoftherapidincreaseinsplenicsizeandtheinfiltrationofthetrabeculaeandcapsulebythelymphocytes,suchspleensarefragileandarepronetoruptureafterevenminortrauma.

Atypicallymphocytesusuallyalsoinfiltratetheportalareasandsinusoidsoftheliver.Scatteredapoptoticcellsorfociofparenchymalnecrosisassociatedwithalymphocyticinfiltratealsomaybepresent—apicturethatcanbedifficulttodistinguishfromthatinotherformsofviralhepatitis.

Features. Clinical manifests not are lymphadenitis, unusual. mononucleosis with and sore fever, Infectious presentations classically but atypical throat, the localized a specter of unknown of raising lymphadenopathy findings; syndromes to rubella. origin, the rash febrile other Sometimes differentiate difficult lymphadenopathy and one viral that fatigue hepatotropic from only little lymphoma; hepatitis resembling exist, or or unassociated is 16); (Chapter with is fever fever or and of there no on atypical (1) lymphocytes antigens. (3) heterophil of specific reaction the diagnosis presence antibodies of in titer and increasing test); depends positive (Monospot (2) blood; following, the a the specificity: EBV order peripheral a the rising Ultimately, for of in most sometimes In to the mononucleosis but 6 resolves lasts fatigue weeks, 4 longer. patients, within or supervene. one more Occasionally, complications enzyme dysfunction, jaundice, the liver of common liver is associated these most failure. levels, with rarely, Perhaps elevated even appetite, disturbed and, hepatic fatal nervous lungs, eyes, spleen bone rupture). (including involve and system, complications Other the marrow, heart, splenic kidneys,

Fig. Atypicallymphocytesininfectiousmononucleosis. 12.12

including the EBV a plays number in lymphoma a (Chapter pathogenesis that a virus several human role cell is transforming B 6). types of of of malignancies, potent is unimpeded serious in those T EBV-driven complication cell immunity lacking proliferation. B cell A a initiated lymphoma reactivation infection over or B acute be a polyclonal transforms overt proliferation by monoclonal to the of This time. can generally process cell by latent cell that B and as infection an begins regression untreated. sufficient left if is complete of of immunity B is sometimes (e.g., proliferation, to immunosuppressive Reconstitution fatal cell cause uniformly the cessation of by drugs) which

in syndrome ineffective immunodeficiency by EBV home to a is response cellular characterized also importance an of the The response immune controlling driven EBV. (XLP), by inherited infection X-linked lymphoproliferative rare encodes participates NK in the activation that signaling protein have which in and SH2D1A the affected Most a of T cells. gene, mutations boys (HLH, succumb of infections whereas is than 50% EBV-driven not other to later), described by infection, patients causes of to basis or In secondary lymphoma understood. cases, an lymphohistiocytosis often EBV complicated hemophagocytic related hypogammaglobulinemia, which more the acute overwhelming

which stimuli and often nodes, in cells residing inflammatory defensive activate barriers. Infections immune nonmicrobial lymph act as immune response enlargement antigens against lead lymph foreign (lymphadenopathy). can node Any to Infections or lymphadenitis acute may causing and numerous, chronic. be and are varied appearance nonspecific. the is node lymph histologic the reaction In instances most of of A that lymphadenitis later. disease occurs distinctive separately described with cat-scratch form somewhat is

isolated and may conditions. This nodes as infectious local of infection, inflammatory group systemic a draining to generalized, or be of lymphadenitis form a be in

MORPHOLOGYInflamednodesinacutenonspecificlymphadenitisareswollen,gray-red,andengorged.Histologically,therearelarge containingnumerousmitoticfigures.Whenthecauseisapyogenicorganism,aneutrophilicinfiltrateisseenaroundthefolliclesandwithinthelymphoidsinuses.Withsevereinfections,thecentersoffolliclescanundergonecrosis,leadingtotheformationofanabscess. centers germinal

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Affectednodesaretenderandmaybecomefluctuantifabscessformationisextensive.Theoverlyingskinisfrequentlyredandmaydevelopdrainingsinuses.Withcontroloftheinfectionthelymphnodesmayreverttoanormal“resting”appearanceor,ifdamaged,undergoscarring.

one nonspecific histiocytosis. or the follicular three lymphadenitis causative patterns: assume agent, hyperplasia, hyperplasia, chronic Depending of can paracortical sinus on

MORPHOLOGYFollicular Hyperplasia. ThispatternoccurswithinfectionsorinflammatoryprocessesthatactivateBcells,whichmigrateintoBcellfolliclesandcreatethefollicular germinal (or center) reaction. ReactivefolliclescontainnumerousactivatedBcells,scatteredTcells,phagocyticmacrophagescontainingnucleardebris(tingiblebodymacrophages),andameshworkofantigen-presentingfolliculardendriticcells.Causesoffollicularhyperplasiaincluderheumatoid arthritis, infection. andearlyHIV toxoplasmosis, Thisformoflymphadenitismustbedistinguishedfromfollicularlymphoma(discussedlater).Findingsthatfavorfollicularhyperplasiaare(1)thepreservationofthelymphnodearchitecture;(2)variationintheshapeandsizeofthegerminalcenters;(3)thepresenceofamixtureofgerminalcenterlymphocytesofvaryingshapesandsizes;and(4)prominentphagocyticandmitoticactivityingerminalcenters.

Hyperplasia. Paracortical ThispatterniscausedbyimmunereactionsinvolvingtheT regions (especiallyphenytoin). ofthelymphnode.Whenactivated,parafollicularTcellstransformintolargeproliferatingimmunoblaststhatcaneffacetheBcellfollicles.Paracorticalhyperplasiaisencounteredinviral infections (e.g.,smallpox),andinimmunereactionsinducedbydrugs cell (suchasEBV),aftercertainvaccinations

Histiocytosis. Sinus of (histiocytes). lining cells Thisreactivepatternischaracterizedbydistentionandprominenceofthelymphaticsinusoids,owingtoamarkedhypertrophy endothelial andaninfiltrate of macrophages Itoftenisencounteredinlymphnodesdrainingcancersandmayrepresentanimmuneresponsetothetumororitsproducts

is self-limited henselae. the lymphadenitis Bartonella by bacterium caused a Cat-scratch disease than younger age. are 90% patients childhood; is of primarily disease It a the of 18 years of the with in axilla manifests regional frequently the and It most lymphadenopathy, neck. commonly, after thorn approximately The or less feline a enlargement appears after injury. or, scratch splinter a nodal weeks 2 at vesicle, is inflammatory An or site the injury. skin visible eschar the of nodule, sometimes 2 4 enlargement patients during period lymph months. of most In a the to node regresses patients. develop or osteomyelitis, thrombocytopenia may encephalitis, in Rarely,

stellate granulomas necrotizing MORPHOLOGYThenodalchangesincat-scratchdiseasearequitecharacteristic.Initiallysarcoidlikegranulomasform,butthesethenundergocentralnecrosisassociatedwithaninfiltrateofneutrophils.Theseirregular aresimilarinappearancetothoseseeninalimitednumberofotherinfections,suchaslymphogranulomavenereum.Themicrobeisextracellularandcanbevisualizedwithsilverstains.Thediagnosisisbasedonahistoryofexposuretocats,thecharacteristicclinicalfindings,apositiveresultonserologictestingforantibodiestoBartonella, andthedistinctivemorphologicchangesinthelymphnodes.

their symptoms the and to inflammation HLH dysfunction. related is trigger uncommon a which body, activation other in disorder proinflammatory organ blood cells exposures an and leading infection or macrophages throughout phagocytosis systemic viral and cytopenias, to precursors, of of in of of risk Inherited elevated greatly HLH. immune associated the defects a genes are with cells regulate function several that proteins are and in that of involved they but The and T cells they common share required genes are NK CD8+ a cells. function diverse, feature cytolytic for the lymphocytes,” in their Owing “killer are defect this targets cytotoxic kill to unable to (e.g. lymphocytes virus normal of leading with time, infected of cells to and gamma, macrophages. cytokines, remain interferon that such engaged activate excessive targeted for cells) release as periods than longer as of pro-inflammatory IL-6, such activation macrophage that unbridled syndrome conditions that the and results response to inflammatory (Chapter (SIRS) release associated and TNF additional toxic of and in signs with symptoms those producing The lead resemble levels closely sepsis 4). systemic other cytokines, the

several occurs settings. distinct HLH in cytotoxic homozygous essential It component for genes young gene most the cytotoxic PRF1, an that is of common with encodes function, granules. defects children in infants and are perforin, in such required which lymphocyte be infection. this childhood trivial trigger viral normally In may some setting the with is the times, HLH male disorder, Other trigger EBV in infection. older which in children adolescents and lymphoproliferative arises X-linked those EBV-infected to signaling called a cells. (SAP) molecule inefficient in B SLAM-associated inherited of In killing protein defects affected, leads systemic HLH conditions. as also rheumatologic disorders, may inflammatory other complicate such heterozygous HLH. genetic for genes background function, the have subset least creating in a required individuals of lymphocyte that At likelihood defects increases a cytotoxic of these HLH Finally, phenomenon seen patients a secondary in peripheral T as with lymphomas. be may cell precise of leading non-neoplastic this suspected. aberrant in is malignant lymphocytes cells by is production T mechanism cytokine dysregulation cytotoxic The to context uncertain;

HLH and Regardless splenomegaly, pancytopenia. typically with fever, of with patients cause, present organ supervene. In and severe may failure cases, DIC cells. red of and marrow bone marrow shows nucleated phagocytosing cells, An macrophages platelets, the examination cells IL2 and T level high and ferritin Laboratory abnormalities NK (>10,000 soluble levels lymphocytes. µg/L), receptor, hypertriglyceridemia, serum cytotoxic low circulating include high typically a levels of very of for In these sensitive quite concert, findings are specific and HLH. but on the depending generally Treatment is underlying it cause, varies poor. stemming cure. stem from offers for with cell defects, hematopoietic HLH transplantation a chance In inherited those

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cells are white of The disorders neoplasms. most important these considered recognized recently malignant, as of that but a range to from they true all neoplasms. wide some only tumors the that they most Virtually aggressive demonstrate indolent tumors ranging are were behaviors, to be so of cancers man are of of as adults, disorders at occur well ages include affect that as malignancies the Hematologic infants, and old. and children, preferentially very all young the group about malignancies a quite As they hematologic in new each 150,000 diagnosed United are common; States. aggregate, are in there year

systems including markers protein rely Current white of neoplasms molecular criteria, cell a mixture of morphologic findings. on and lineage-specific genetic classifying and on differentiation origin our discussion cells, state dividing cell of white and four based categories follows: will the neoplasms organize into tumor as the broad the We by

the and Lymphoid include leukemias which Hodgkin and lymphomas. neoplasms, certain non-Hodgkin a instances are of that these feature stage differentiation, normal In resembling one composed of for bases many the tumors of some their classification. serves cells as lymphocyte the plasma from and stem in of neoplasms clinical entities, related neoplasms cells. are special lymphoid secreted of and from neoplastic A which the are immunoglobulins group abnormal the that cell manifestations synthesized many

myelodysplastic neoplasms, (MDSs), and syndromes include which leukemias, Myeloid certain myeloproliferative neoplasms. an bone progenitor, and in a common cell stem other typically early have very hematopoietic they from These some origin involve tumors marrow. or the hematopoietic

Histiocytic lesions macrophages cells. of which and proliferative include neoplasms, dendritic cell is histiocytoses). cells of interest a special spectrum of proliferations Langerhans (Langerhans Of

clinical clinicians challenges presentation alike. thus widely in and and lymphoid present and neoplasms numerous students their to vary behavior, The marrow with bone manifest the blood. characteristically and the of involvement peripheral as Some leukemias, or tend tissues. in present as tumors that nodes to masses lymphomas, produce Others other lymph usually within or Plasma immunoglobulin. tumors systemic arise symptoms partial monoclonal manifest production the as bones a to the complete masses, related and of causing cell discrete blood. and other reflected to in entities, given neoplasms particular the the marrow, all Although spread liver, tendencies the peripheral spleen, are and have lymph potential to these to bone especially tissues, reality nodes in lymphoid names cells. overlapping behavior, molecular Because the of tumor their the diagnosis based of characteristics lymphoid is neoplasms morphologic the of clinical and on in patient. it and for is kind the Stated another up tumor to diagnosis way, purposes prognostication, tumor the of, what of on where focus the of most not cell important resides made is

are lymphomas recognized: of groups and Hodgkin Two lymphomas lymphomas. non-Hodgkin (see presence the in which arise greatly of RS giant cells. neoplastic both usually cells Although are by distinctive later), by inflammatory apart set lymphoma lymphoid nonneoplastic commonly is outnumbered tissues, Hodgkin most also the behavior biologic are from clinical practical of importance. lymphoma and of The making different those distinction of Hodgkin NHLs, treatment

morphologic, that for Organization classification working a international and neoplasms biologists, on group scheme behalf features. (discussed the relies formulated of neoplasms accepted myeloid An molecular (WHO) on clinical genotypic, Health combination phenotypic, World lymphoid has a widely later) of and pathologists, of and clinicians subsequent this for As classification, discussion certain the important warrant principles consideration: background of

are ( that B composed of or arrested stage at cells cell T are a of tumors from normal differentiation often derived specific lymphocyte and

Fig. ). 12.13 The diagnosis cell, antigens lineage-specific rely markers (e.g., classification T heavily that these tests markers) NK and B of of and maturity. cytometry) detect (either cell, and immunohistochemistry cell or tumors flow on such their By of markers are by differentiation cluster convention, number. identified (CD) many

instability potentially germinal somatic Class of forms B genomic that and center transforming at relatively high hypermutation place regulated switching are cells risk mistake-prone mutations. for following germinal derived have lymphomas common from B that antigen centers into cells The are most stimulation. migrated showing B confined from have an analyses is to center drawn event lymphomas undergone conclusion cells. germinal cell somatic B This hypermutation, that most than cells which other allows center B undergo class immunoglobulins also IgM. Normal cells switching, immunoglobulin germinal B to express translocations the B diversification of the loci during Many mature the recurrent “accidents” genes. chromosomal appear cell in attempted immunoglobulin and malignancies found of to involve immunoglobulin stem from T which very T only chromosomal give and are mature receptor cell loci. genomically rarely stable, rise to infrequently involving lymphoma the cells, translocations have By contrast,

derived other http://ebooksmedicine.net cell Like neoplasms cancers, a and transformed from lymphoid therefore clonal. • are are single precursor a unique lymphocyte and a T through in antigen mechanism B makes described ensures each As 5, that that antigen single, genes Chapter their receptor. cells rearrange receptor receptor share antigen gene Because the antigen given same (either antigen or always rearrangement derived the cells progenitor immunoglobulins T daughter cell receptor from gene transformation, a precedes malignant receptor receptors). configuration proteins and synthesize identical virtually polyclonal). receptor protein and lymphoid (which antigen products immune (which clonal) used from genes be differentiate reactions their Thus, are are analyses of to can neoplasms

Lymphoid immune often neoplasms • function. normal disrupt infection) patient. by Both the (made be in sometimes increased autoimmunity same and to evident susceptibility immunodeficiency may seen, risk with with infection. certain high at are neoplasms, associated of for patients development the acquired or EBV inherited particularly Ironically, lymphoid immunodeficiencies those

tumor widely at a molecular tissue is show usually that at sensitive particular assays • diagnosis. Although often NHLs disseminated manifest site, the for with with only therapies As are systemic curative NHL. those a exceptions, result, few lymphoma a single contiguous spreads node groups. at lymph By to a arises site predictable and in contrast, Hodgkin often fashion

classification genotype genomes) considers viral (determined ) The clinical karyotype, 12.7 of neoplasms of by (e.g., lymphoid features, each of ( immunophenotyping), morphology, entity. origin the WHO cell of and presence diagnostic the are is evident, numerous. entities As pathogenically will focus clinically illustrative: on are discussion a subset or We our important particularly that

of 12.7 Lymphoid Neoplasms Classification WHO Table

cell syndrome T unspecified Peripheral fungoides/Sézary Mycosis lymphoma,

Naturalkiller;WHO, areamongthemostcommonlymphoidtumors. WorldHealthOrganization.aEntriesinitalics NK,

tumors seen States. in constitute Together the United these of the than neoplasms lymphoid 90% more

tumors lymphoid non-Hodgkin leukemias, cell summarized lymphomas, features and of the salient common are plasma in more The

sections. Table and 12.8 following discussed are in the will and a features. with few We then lymphoma by clinicopathologic uncommon mentioning finish briefly cover distinctive entities Hodgkin

or Acute (pre-T) T of cells, are (pre-B) as (ALLs) are lymphoblastic which to leukemia/lymphomas immature neoplasms composed B referred lymphoblasts. less Band in many evolve present B-ALLs, males picture. behavior is, tend typically which present The There acute as “leukemias.” leukemic as T-ALL; to example, in or 85% adolescent to manifest are “lymphomas.” T-ALLs with clinical however, considerable About a thymic the for overlap common of childhood T-ALLs various Because and clinical of forms will here similarities, considered the of be morphologic ALL together. their

the children. common cancer ALL of most is most States, 2500 are Approximately age. the cases 15 of occurring younger in new diagnosed than individuals United years in year each almost is times and in girls. common than ALL as whites blacks three slightly boys more in is in as frequent in any have Hispanics ethnic of group. the highest incidence because of 3, cells early of life. number about B-ALL peaks the age (the pre-B at normal bone perhaps cell of marrow in greatest is incidence in very origin) the the its the peak Similarly the when maximum incidence age thymus of size. reaches adolescence, in is T-ALL

the cell in ALL and that and expression are seen aberrations chromosomal transcription of differentiation for progenitors. Many of factors the function dysregulate T B required normal a Up are high of gene NOTCH1, such differentiation, cell to cell is T required mutations B for 70% for differentiation, genes gain-offunction whereas a that mutations loss-of-function that T-ALLs in have essential as of fraction has B-ALLs PAX5. in to as These cancers. feature mentioned, increased cells, appear self-renewal, is promote of the of immortalized which, hallmarks maturation mutations arrest and a varied of one

cancer, and transcription growth, mutations activity of that produce RAS are origins aberrations that signaling, such tyrosine mutations in are In also the factor and increase sufficient with common. as multistep to drive genes not cell keeping ALL, kinase ALL sequencing of filling is rapidly deep the remaining genomes in Ongoing gaps. mutations full-blown returns solid ALL; a is simple to produce that to are Early than tumor. tumors, ALL fewer genetically suggest 10 compared hence, sufficient

packed MORPHOLOGYInleukemicpresentations,the marrow is whichreplacenormalmarrowelements.Mediastinal and lymphoblasts, hypercellular masses occurin50%to70%ofT-ALLs,whicharealsomorelikelytobeassociatedwithlymphadenopathyandsplenomegaly.InbothB-andT-ALL,thetumorcellshavescantbasophiliccytoplasmandnucleiwithdelicate,finelystippledchromatinandsmallnucleoli( with

).Inkeepingwiththeaggressiveclinicalbehavior,themitoticrateishigh.Theappearanceoftheblastsisidenticalinpre-Bandpre-TALLsandisnotsufficientlycharacteristictoexcludetheothermajorsubtypeofacuteleukemia,acutemyeloidleukemia(AML,discussedlater).Forthisreason,definitivediagnosisreliesonstainsperformedwithantibodiesspecificforBandTcellantigens( Fig.12.14A

Fig.

12.14B–C ).Histochemicalstainsarealsohelpful,inthat(incontrasttomyeloblasts)lymphoblastsaremyeloperoxidase-negativeandoftencontainperiodicacid-Schiff–positiveglycogengranules.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Leukemias, Lymphomas, Common and the Tumors Characteristics of Cell Lymphoid Table More Non-Hodgkin Plasma 12.8

Frequency of Morphology Cell Clinical Comments Origin Salient Entity

Theperipheralbloodfindingsarehighlyvariable.Thewhitecellcountmaybegreaterthan100,000cells/µLbutinabouthalfofthepatientsislessthan10,000cells/µL.Afewpatientshavenocirculatingblasts(aleukemicleukemia).Anemiaalmostalwaysispresent,andtheplateletcountusuallyisbelow100,000/µL.Neutropeniaisanothercommonfinding.

Genetics. 90% nonrandom karyotypic have abnormalities. Approximately ALLs of fusion translocation genes, a (12;21) RUNX1 and adult ETV6 chromosomes/cell) BCR tumors involving ABL transcription a and 50 involving aberrant (9;22) have 25% the creating in cell a pre–B gene tumors hyperdiploidy childhood an about whereas cell genes. are Most pre–B encoding than and (more common translocation factor, the of with PTEN regulator suppressor (leading of as a the translocations tumors and certain as receptor chromosomal well encodes such that cell negative increased pro-growth are involving as p53. genes signaling) T CDKN2A, factor Pre–T genes, frequent a inactivate and regulator tumors the transcription associated and to cycle cell of diverse including positive loci aberrations, mutations cell which

Immunophenotype. is distinguishing them and immunophenotyping subtyping very mentioned, As from useful ALLs in AML. is deoxynucleotidyl 95% Terminal enzyme of expressed more (TdT), an pre–T specifically in and in cells, present than transferase pre–B cases. markers, such and cell on ALL pre–T relies types cell and for stains B CD3. Further marker the the into T marker subtyping cell as CD19 lineage-specific of pre–B

Clinical Features. present ALL of aggressive onset and patients a within is weeks the symptoms. most disease, an few of signs symptoms are most and the the important following: Among

of thrombocytopenia due to including infections depression secondary resulting fatigue marrow to bleeding related function, from neutropenia; Symptoms fever, and anemia; to reflecting

infiltration of subperiosteum; the compression and caused infiltration, related generalized mediastinum splenomegaly, in and Mass resulting expansion from hepatomegaly; of marrow large lymphadenopathy, and to T-ALL, and effects vessels by including in bone neoplastic airways complications the pain

nerve system and resulting as headache, nervous spread, vomiting, manifestations such from palsies meningeal Central

malignant ALL highly pediatric stories the Despite great its of of natural success one oncology. history, is cured. with remission, about a ALL 85% of chemotherapy, With to obtain 75% 95% are aggressive and children http://ebooksmedicine.net is sobering It

Fig. Acutelymphoblasticleukemia(ALL). 12.14 (A)Lymphoblastswithcondensednuclearchromatin,smallnucleoli,andscantagranularcytoplasm.

(B)and(C)showflowcytometryresultsfortheALLshownin(A).ThetumorcellsarepositivefortheBcellmarkersCD19andCD22;CD10(amarkerexpressedonasubsetofALLs),andTdT(aspecializedDNApolymerasethatisexpressedinpre-Bandpre-Tcells). Dr. Robert of (A,Courtesy

Southwestern Dallas,Texas. School, Pathology, Department of McKenna, Medical of W. Texas University of Portland, Oregon Health Science Louis Oregon.) Picker, BandC,Courtesy Dr. Center, to 35% of 40% the leading affected deaths ALL are cancer consider, only of that however, cause that adults and cured. to children, in remains factors genetically and than blast a peripheral translocations MLL than tumors younger counts prognosis: adulthood; often (2) or greater distinct, in these are years, worse 100,000. Several presentation involving gene; associated with (3) 2 with associated blood largely (1) adolescence age because are the being include markers (2) hyperdiploidy. Favorable and low (3) between years, a (1) and cell count, 10 2 white prognostic age after is molecular worse therapy outcome both a guide The therapy. Band in is residual and T-ALL also of to predictive used disease of being detection

alter in active of myeloid kinase fusion the chromosomal aberrations chronic tyrosine factors, a most creates Although ALL transcription (described leukemia). function BCR-ABL instead encoding t(9;22) under gene the constitutively later a adults. improved B-ALL effective in highly of with BCR-ABL both is t(9;22)-positive outcome and this chemotherapy ALLs inhibitors with of Treatment combination for the in children has conventional subtype kinase and BCR-ABL under ALLs mutated development. identify Tests kinases to lacking tyrosine “targetable” in are other because of regimens remains adult of pathogenesis ALL children. the molecular also in older childhood are the curative and outlook part adults The cannot chemotherapy intensive guarded, for ALL, tolerate because that differences in in and with adults

only of extent Chronic small essentially in (SLL) and lymphocytic identical, blood the (CLL) leukemia differing involvement. lymphoma peripheral lymphocytic are patient count peripheral arbitrarily, if diagnosed cells/µL, the the with lymphocyte 5000 blood exceeds Somewhat is

CLL. the of for which adults Western Most the CLL, criteria is in common fit diagnostic leukemia cases most the world. SLL only By contrast, NHLs. 4% constitutes of less Asia. in common unclear reasons, For much is CLL/SLL

an in slowly appears to tumor be se. than tumor more which cell increased proliferation tumor important growing per survival CLL/SLL is cell indolent, 1 levels BCL2, of apoptosis line (Chapters In this high inhibits contain with protein and 6). idea, cells CLL/SLL that a regulators of of that lead overexpression negative chromosomal genes to appears to the micro-RNAs of that deletions be One mechanism loss are BCL2 BCL2. encoding surface BCR). Also are critical generated (the cell importance signals of so-called by immunoglobulin or receptor, B the CLL/SLL survival intermediary Bruton flow cells. kinase called BCR that signals tyrosine of promote contributes of an (BTK) to ultimately the that through expression genes

cells. causes particularly of CLL/SLL immune also B dysregulation, normal B cell of accumulation often the cells CLL/SLL unclear suppresses in normal mechanisms, Through hypogammaglobulinemia. resulting function, own platelets. their red cells Paradoxically, 15% develop approximately or patients auto-antibodies against of made When present, bystander by immune tolerance. B the nonmalignant cells indicating impair somehow that are CLL/SLL autoantibodies cells,

MORPHOLOGYInvolvedlymphnodesareeffacedbysheetsofsmalllymphocytesandbyscatteredill-definedfocioflarger,activelydividingcells(

Fig.12.15A nuclei,andscantycytoplasm(Fig. ).Thepredominantcellsaresmall,restinglymphocyteswithdark,round

12.15B featuringsmall,mature-lookinglymphocytes.Thesecirculatingcellsarefragileandduringthepreparationofsmearsmanyaredisrupted,producingcharacteristicsmudge cells. whicharepathognomonicforCLL/SLL.Inadditiontothelymphnodes,thebonemarrow,spleen,andliverareinvolvedinalmostallcases.Inmostpatientsthereisanabsolutelymphocytosis centers, ).Thefociofmitoticallyactivecellsarecalledproliferation Variablenumbersoflargeractivatedlymphocytesalsoareusuallypresentinbloodsmears.

Genetics. and Immunophenotype cells and immunoglobulins. surface is CLL/SLL of mature CD20 a the neoplasm B expressing The cells express tumor CD5. also http://ebooksmedicine.net This

Fig. 12.15 Smalllymphocyticlymphoma/chroniclymphocyticleukemia—lymphnode.(A)Low-powerviewshowsdiffuseeffacementofnodalarchitecture.(B)Athighpower,amajorityofthetumorcellshavetheappearanceofsmall,roundlymphocytes.A“prolymphocyte,”alargercellwithacentrallyplacednucleolus,alsoispresentinthisfield(arrow). School, Department Pathology, (A,Courtesy of Southwestern Medical Texas Hernandez, Dr. of Dallas,Texas.) of University José and later) express clue, is a CD5. lymphoma diagnostic mantle cell among since helpful (discussed B CLL/SLL cell lymphomas only commonly 13, and which common 50% of deletions portions chromosomes tumors Approximately involving trisomy and most are abnormalities, 17. karyotypic 12 have the of 11, of B cell translocations other in chromosomal are neoplasms, Unlike rare.

Features. Clinical asymptomatic. is CLL/SLL first often When detected, anorexia. weight signs include most common and symptoms and easy The loss, are nonspecific and fatigability, of in and 50% are hepatosplenomegaly patients. Generalized lymphadenopathy present to 60% cells/µL. slightly (in may may SLL) or only count leukocyte 200,000 increased exceed be The and late to in the to an of bacterial increased patients, more susceptibility course, usually 50% infections. in than the leads develops Hypogammaglobulinemia hemolytic anemia are Less seen. autoimmune commonly, and thrombocytopenia

and and on of findings. highly The depend prognosis and are genetic CLL/SLL variable course the disease stage matched abnormalities the less isolated of are associated 30% general with gene survival is than that not is overall at an the years, associated an 10 with chromosome the presence from in TP53 of abnormalities of of population. different that example, survival suppressor 13q overall tumor whereas For significantly the that variously targeting Insights by into drugs signaling has function. (e.g., to inhibit pathogenesis or molecular new led of of CLL/SLL effective development BCR BTK) BCL2 be with achieved cure cell patients reserved relatively only transplantation, conventional However, is therapies. for hematopoietic which fail young stem may who A transform cell transformation survival is tumors 1 fraction year. after transformation); aggressive than median B of tumors small less resembling occurs, lymphoma diffuse to (Richter the large

in tumor 40% NHLs relatively adult of the This United constitutes the States. common in Asian occurs frequently populations. it CLL/SLL, Like much less

on the translocation of gene a the 85% characteristic to 14. than that locus lymphomas IgH (14;18) have 18 on BCL2 follicular fuses chromosome Greater chromosome chromosomal of contributes 1 6). an will results of you apoptosis which is in (Chapters rearrangement recall to inappropriate This inhibitor the survival cell protein, “overexpression” that and BCL2 has changes to tumors. about cases, Whole histone-modifying epigenetic genesis of identified proteins mutations also one-third sequencing of these lymphomas suggesting the follicular genes of in that contribute encoding additional genome in

).Mostcommonly,thepredominantneoplasticcellsareso-called“centrocytes”,cellsslightlylargerthanrestinglymphocytesthathaveangular“cleaved”nucleiwithprominentindentationsandlinearinfoldings( Fig.12.16A

).Thenuclearchromatiniscoarseandcondensed,andnucleoliareindistinct.Thesecentrocytesaremixedwithvariablenumbersofcentroblasts,largercellswithvesicularchromatin,severalnucleoli,andmodestamountsofcytoplasm.Inmosttumors,centroblastsareaminorcomponentoftheoverallcellularity,mitosesareinfrequent,andsinglenecroticcells(cellsundergoingapoptosis)arenotseen.Thesefeatureshelptodistinguishfollicularlymphomafromfollicularhyperplasia,inwhichmitosesandapoptosisareprominent.Uncommonly,largecellspredominate,ahistologicpatternthatcorrelateswithamoreaggressiveclinicalbehavior. Fig.12.16B

Immunophenotype. note, the transcription BCL6 as that of the CD20 cells. tumors BCL6; center germinal B CD10 markers is cell factor markers such and required is generation These and germinal express a cell center of for B B

Features. Clinical than age and older of equally. affects mainly Follicular adults 50 in years lymphoma and females males occurs as lymphadenopathy. It generalized manifests usually painless, in involved marrow The bone diagnosis cases. of 80% at approximately is lymphoid the other prolonged an 10 is survival, curable, natural not indolent is feature with (overall unfortunate Although years), approximately median relatively malignancies. follicular history lymphoma most shared therapy rituximab disease. drugs (anti-CD20 with and is with for reserved result, a those bulky, As cytotoxic antibody) symptomatic BTK disease are inhibitors in evaluated being are active and BCL2 trials. in also clinical this and about of to diffuse 40% B In patients, cell large lymphoma progresses lymphoma. to follicular 30% de is tumors later. ominous event, cell arising such less diffuse large an curable from as This B are much described lymphomas, conversions than transformation novo

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 12.16 Follicularlymphoma—lymphnode.(A)Nodularaggregatesoflymphomacellsarepresentthroughout.(B)Athighmagnification,smalllymphoidcellswithcondensedchromatinandirregularorcleavednuclearoutlines(centrocytes)aremixedwithapopulationoflargercellswithnucleoli(centroblasts). School,Dallas,Texas.) Robert of (A,Courtesy W. Dr. of Pathology,University Texas Southwestern of Medical McKenna,Department

lymphoid the lymphoma B found cell the normal resembling cells of naive cells composed mantle is Mantle of follicles. zones in all approximately and than occurs NHLs 50 constitutes 6% older of It mainly men years age. of in

all translocation tumors (11;14) D1 gene IgH have that the fuses Almost cyclin to an locus. the to cell will S phase translocation promoting cycle (Chapter from the growth of by which of This of stimulates the leads phase D1, recall progression cyclin to overexpression you the the 6). cells G1

MORPHOLOGYMantlecelllymphomamayinvolvelymphnodesinadiffuseorvaguelynodularpattern.Proliferationcentersareabsent,afeaturethathelpstodistinguishmantlecelllymphomafromCLL/SLL.Thetumorcellsusuallyareslightlylargerthannormallymphocytesandhaveanirregularnucleus,inconspicuousnucleoli,andscantcytoplasm.Lesscommonly,thecellsarelargerandmorphologicallyresemblelymphoblasts.Thebonemarrowisinvolvedinmostcasesandtheperipheralbloodinabout20%ofcases.Thetumorsometimesarisesinthegastrointestinaltract,oftenmanifestingasmultifocalsubmucosalnodulesthatgrosslyresemblepolyps(lymphomatoidpolyposis).

Immunophenotype. cyclin antigen protein. express tumor cell and of they cells and and IgD, surface the B high contain The CD5, CD20, D1 levels IgM

Clinical Features. found with the are marrow, generalized Most disease spleen, fatigue liver, have gastrointestinal present to the patients and tract. bone (often) and lymphadenopathy and involving aggressive incurable. moderately are and tumors These to survival The years. median 6 is 4 it inhibitors that mantle Like hoped outcomes. cell available depend and is newly clinical will BTK survival, for generated cells signals BTK lymphoma cells, through CLL/SLL improve on

the arises in cell lungs, and and This glands, small B such salivary most tissues orbit, indolent stomach, epithelial commonly as bowel, tumor large breast.

by marginal Extranodal arises sustained cancer inflammation. example is zone an and a chronic is that of within lymphoma Hashimoto the to triggered pylori are It by the infection as (such tends in salivary Sjögren (such thyroiditis) syndrome thyroid that chronic develop are by as sites autoimmune H. inflammation tissues the and that gland or gastritis). disorders within involved in gland of chronic with antibiotic eradication their marginal the and T tumor depend growth In H. to gastric secreted leads inflammatory H. of cells, pylori–specific often for of on therapy H. lymphoma, pylori–associated case survival. of cytokines by pylori which cells the regression zone these the it is on of that within observations, context disease initiated Based a supposed reaction. the is polyclonal immune signals With depends acquisition survival. cells mutations, drive initiating for T-helper antigen-stimulated emerges clone the still-unknown that of a that growth on B and cell responsible of the this causes tumor At antigen withdrawal involution. stage, spread clonal to greater As further autonomy, tumor evolution to may cell occur. distant leads sites the lymphomagenesis This monoclonal polyclonal 6). to is pathogenesis in to (discussed transition EBV-induced of of also during theme lymphoma Chapter applicable

http://ebooksmedicine.net

MORPHOLOGYTheclonalBcellscharacteristicallyinfiltratetheepitheliumofinvolvedtissues,oftencollectinginsmallaggregatesthatarecalledlymphoepithelial lesions. Insometumorsthetumorcellsaccumulateabundantpalecytoplasmorexhibitplasmacelldifferentiation,featuresthatarecharacteristicbutnotpathognomonic.

Immunophenotype. mature and expressing IgM. This CD20 a usually cells surface B is of tumor immunoglobulin,

Clinical Features. pylori–induced setting discovered swelling thyroid These procedure. present gland, are orbit or H. the tumors gastritis in often salivary or of an as incidentally imaging the of or simple they excision often When by by radiotherapy. followed cured are localized,

type common of Diffuse NHLs. 35% in most lymphoma approximately large B for lymphoma the cell accounting adults, adult of is an includes aggressive natural subtypes It several share history. that

have large lymphomas one-third of B mutations diffuse activating rearrangements on gene, promoter. located fraction tumors the in and BCL6 BCL6 About of cell higher 3q27, even of have an the point expression center an germinal important in levels regulator transcriptional of Both aberrations BCL6 result protein, in increased of gene B cells. a the involving of translocation (14;18) overexpression results BCL2 Another tumors 30% have BCL2 gene of that in protein. may represent of “transformed” these Some follicular tumors lymphomas. gene. have involving remaining mutations, The translocations such driver as MYC other diverse tumors the

MORPHOLOGYTheneoplasticBcellsarelarge(atleastthreetofourtimesthesizeofrestinglymphocytes)andvaryinappearancefromtumortotumor.Inmanytumors,cellswithroundorovalnuclearcontours,dispersedchromatin,severaldistinctnucleoli,andmodestamountsofpalecytoplasmpredominate(

).Inothertumorsthecellshavearoundormultilobatevesicularnucleus,oneortwoprominentcentrallyplacednucleoli,andabundantpaleorbasophiliccytoplasm.Occasionally,thetumorcellsarehighlyanaplasticandincludetumorgiantcellsresemblingRScells,themalignantcellsofHodgkinlymphoma. Fig.12.17

Immunophenotype. These CD20. B the express cell antigen tumors also surface express and/or Many IgG. IgM expressed. CD10, antigens (e.g., are variably BCL2) Other

Fig. 12.17 DiffuselargeBcelllymphoma—lymphnode.Thetumorcellshavelargenucleiwithopenchromatinandprominentnucleoli. (Courtesy School, Dallas,Texas.) Dr.Robert of Texas of Southwestern of W.McKenna,Department Pathology,University Medical

Special Subtypes. B distinctive large of lymphoma. category cell the included diffuse are clinicopathologic in subtypes Several

arise the lymphomas in immunosuppression in EBV-associated and transplant AIDS, iatrogenic large diffuse (e.g., recipients), elderly. B setting the of cell restored. as posttransplantation that begin regress cell these often immune the tumors if function proliferations may B polyclonal is EBV-driven setting, In

8 also rare pericardium, associated is arise with pleural cavity, herpesvirus may called effusion (HHV-8), which or human type herpesvirus the within primary lymphomas, Kaposi peritoneum. sarcoma (KSHV), oncoproteins, latently infected proteins KSHV, which These D1. with including cyclin homologous encodes several are known to tumors with immunosuppressed. lymphomas, EBV-related patients As are most affected

most occurs central viscera spread B lymphoma shows abdominal a often in and system. women predilection for to young Mediastinal nervous cell and large the

Clinical Features. about about constitutes is at occur childhood 60 large cell 15% the age at lymphoma B age; can diffuse of median Although it presentation lymphomas. any years, one with rapidly mass at a often or Patients typically present symptomatic several sites. enlarging, common. presentations Extranodal are gastrointestinal in tissue. can virtually the but organ common tumors or any site, tract most The appear extranodal is not the (e.g., diagnosis. Unlike bone liver, and spleen, common more of marrow is lymphoma), lymphomas at involvement follicular the indolent

B Without large cell are lymphomas diffuse fatal. treatment, and rapidly aggressive cell and 60% are complete be combination of to 80% in of appear immunotherapy, approximately and patients; cured. the remissions chemotherapy these, anti-CD20 With intensive to remain achieved disease of 50% free stem some cell those so For aggressive other treatments and high-dose offer (e.g., fortunate, transplantation) hematopoietic not hope. chemotherapy

http://ebooksmedicine.net

in occurs including Africa sporadically States. the is parts Burkitt in lymphoma United other and endemic geographic areas, of diseases identical, are there Histologically, African are the and differences. and although virologic nonendemic clinical

MYC that factor. lymphoma of chromosome involving the overexpression on gene in is associated highly Burkitt translocations with 8 the MYC transcription result

regulator a cancer Warburg cell in hallmark As master associated rapid glycolysis), Chapter metabolism growth. that is is (aerobic MYC with 6, mentioned of a human keeping association, tumor. be to lymphoma growing said the In is with this Burkitt fastest but translocations light gene λ or Most on chain κ chromosome IgH the translocations the variant fuse with are 14, also loci observed. MYC involving of net each dysregulation and same—the MYC. is The of result the overexpression EBV, relationship and tumor In in endemic 6. about discussed with 20% are a infected Chapter also of latently cells cases, cases the sporadic most

sky” isamoderateamountofbasophilicoramphophiliccytoplasmthatoftencontainssmall,lipid-filledvacuoles(afeatureappreciatedonsmears).Veryhighratesofproliferationandapoptosisarecharacteristic,thelatteraccountingforthepresenceofnumeroustissuemacrophagescontainingingestednucleardebris.Thesebenignmacrophagesoftenaresurroundedbyaclearspace,creatinga“starry pattern. Fig.12.18).There

Fig. andprominentnucleoli.The“starrysky”patternproducedbyinterspersed,lightlystaining,normalmacrophagesisbetterappreciatedatalowermagnification. Burkittlymphoma—lymphnode.Thetumorcellsandtheirnucleiarefairlyuniform,givingamonotonousappearance.Notethehighlevelofmitoticactivity(arrowheads) 12.18 (Courtesy of Texas of Southwestern W. Dr. School, Dallas,Texas.) Medical Department Robert McKenna, Pathology, of University

Immunophenotype. B CD10 the B BCL6. CD20, center express cell and and IgM, cell germinal markers surface These the tumors marker

Clinical Features. forms the affect children nonendemic sporadic and and young endemic adults. mainly Both of 30% Burkitt NHLs childhood approximately for States. the in United accounts lymphoma The sites. arises extranodal disease usually at common maxillary whereas often America. more mandibular and North abdominal are the involving tumors in tumors masses, or retroperitoneum, bowel, manifest Endemic ovaries as sometimes is different regimens. distinguished with ALL, and treated Leukemic must from drug occur presentations be which patients lymphoma is of regimens, majority with highly however, aggressive; intensive cured. chemotherapy can be Burkitt very a

neoplastic serve and pathologic a cells which proliferations secrete plasma cell or immunoglobulin consequences. that fragment, often have B always contain markers virtually These as tumor monoclonal immunoglobulin for neoplasms. Collectively, neoplasms and cell disorders lymphoid caused account 15% plasma the of by related about deaths is there 15,000 deadly new which about and per common myeloma, year in most States. of these cases multiple The are the United neoplasms of

to identified in as protein, myeloma. A in the M an is referred monoclonal blood reference immunoglobulin to weights fluid and the proteins the plasma have M 160,000 are higher, absence and Because in of glomerular complete urine of molecular excluded restricted damage. to they or from the extracellular immunoglobulin cells plasma neoplastic with light However, along immunoglobulins. synthesize often complete chains excess detected quantified are highly by and produce sensitive may tumors unusual blood the the cases, and chains, in urine light tests. only In which

the abnormal cell associated to gammopathy, and monoclonal paraproteinemia. neoplasms dysproteinemia, plasma Terms immunoglobulins with include describe used clinicopathologic These abnormal entities: with several proteins are associated

as tumorous system. presents myeloma masses most cell Multiple plasma skeletal myeloma), neoplasm, cell the the (plasma usually important throughout scattered tissue. a mass bone single is soft or as an Solitary infrequent plasmacytoma variant in that presents is variant component. plasma another of by and symptoms Smoldering myeloma a high M lack defined uncommon a

moderately signs their significance of gammopathy M patients large symptoms in small Monoclonal who applied without blood. to undetermined is (MGUS) or have to components older low gammopathy, a very in transformation common multiple is most adults but often and a myeloma. of constant has symptomatic rate to monoclonal MGUS

a light Primary or deposited proliferation plasma from secreting as that results cells are monoclonal chains immunocyte-associated of amyloidosis amyloid. minor multiple cells have Some only population but plasma myeloma, in overt of patients others http://ebooksmedicine.net a the marrow. clonal have

to macroglobulinemia is the related syndrome Waldenström blood. lead levels to of IgM • of which high hyper-viscosity in a symptoms in occurs with lymphoma adults, It older commonly in (described association most later). lymphoplasmacytic

of some this specific now the turn entities. clinicopathologic With to we background, immune disorders was the of along in discussed 5. Chapter Primary amyloidosis other system with

most each approximately Multiple year. in of the diagnosed lymphoid malignancies; United common States myeloma 20,000 is one are the cases new median The 70 it more in of is common years, at and males African age in diagnosis is origin. people and is It associated principally throughout lytic usually involves system. with marrow the lesions skeletal and the bone

only IgM, is proteins IgD, The followed M M observed. by produced (60%), IgA are most IgE IgG rarely protein cells or frequent (20%–25%); myeloma by only chains. plasma or cells produce light remaining κ the cases, In λ the also where they light chains excreted Bence small as in size, Because the are free are urine, in are to they Jones proteins. referred cases, proteins. proteins malignant Jones In M free chains both cells both and many complete immunoglobulins and produce Bence the secrete plasma light and thus light effects. later, important excess described chains the pathogenic have As

IgH As that 14 fuse such cyclin D3 on chromosome oncogenes the D1 translocations genes. the chromosomal locus often other with cell has and to myeloma cyclin as most malignancies, B is is multiple and increases this, myeloma dysregulation from be might in contribute common of to surmised to As proliferation. cyclins believed D in cell fibroblasts and which myeloma bone 6 cytokine is the interleukin also by cells macrophages by of supported the in is marrow produced stroma. Proliferation (IL-6), course, sometimes disease. are the involving aggressive MYC in translocations observed, with particularly in Late patients

skeleton, to effects untoward the number mortality: has which kidney, all the and Multiple and system, on a myeloma the morbidity immune contribute of of

the produced of cells plasma multiple bone by mediate destruction, myeloma. feature Factors major pathologic neoplastic in of stromal expression upregulate activate turn ligand importance, by Of factors cells, osteoclasts. myelomaderived which activator receptor particular (RANKL) the NF-κB the bone of marrow potent osteoblast cells inhibitors released function. are Other from tumor factors of is leading The increased bone and net fractures. to pathologic hypercalcemia resorption, effect

in Myeloma causes defects humoral immunity. function myeloma B cells compromise cells. still-uncertain Through of mechanisms, normal the levels production elevated plasma protein, has presence M although of profoundly immunoglobulin an the often of is owing the Ironically, of depressed. functional the antibodies to bacterial a at infections. high patients As for result, risk are

dysfunction effects from that of may several occur myeloma Renal or combination. in alone • stems pathologic distal in often the Most and collecting proteinaceous which important form obstructive convoluted casts, are ducts. tubules the Tamm-Horsfall consist Jones albumin. complete casts proteins immunoglobulin, of The and amounts variable Bence with of protein, mostly along linear interstitium, in damage. as contribute renal chain Light to the deposits, glomeruli amyloid also may the deposition or either or hypogammaglobulinemia. bacterial Completing which of from hypercalcemia, which stem stones, assault in to pyelonephritis, part is lead the may frequent and the dehydration bouts renal and

MORPHOLOGYMultiplemyelomausuallymanifestswithmultifocal lesions destructive skeletal thatmostcommonlyinvolvethevertebralcolumn,ribs,skull,pelvis,femur,clavicle,andscapula. mostfrequentlyinthevertebralcolumnorfemur.Thebonelesionsusuallyappearaspunched-out Thelesionsariseinthemedullarycavity,erodecancellousbone,andprogressivelydestroythebonecortex.Bonedestructionoftenleadstopathologic 1to4cmindiameter( fractures, defects

).Microscopicexaminationofthemarrowshowsincreasednumbersofplasmacells,whichusuallyconstitutegreaterthan30%ofthecellularity.Myelomacellsmayresemblenormalplasmacellsbutmoreoftenshowabnormalfeaturessuchasprominentnucleoliorabnormalcytoplasmicinclusionscontainingimmunoglobulin( Fig.12.19A

).Withdiseaseprogression,myelomacellsmayspreadtothevisceraandothersofttissuesites,andinterminalstagesaleukemicpicturemayemerge. Fig.12.19B

or (AL) amyloidosis,involvingtherenalglomeruliandvesselwalls;andbacterial Renalinvolvement(myeloma to chain necrotic isassociatedwithproteinaceouscastsconsistingmostlyofBenceJonesproteinsthatobstructthedistalconvolutedtubulesandthecollectingducts.Multinucleategiantcellsderivedfrommacrophagesusuallysurroundthecasts.Veryoftentheepithelial casts the owingtothetoxiceffectsofBenceJonesproteins.Othercommonpathologicprocessesinvolvingthekidneyincludemetastatic pyelonephritis, calcification,stemmingfromboneresorptionandhypercalcemia;light cells adjacent become nephrosis) atrophic secondarytotheincreasedsusceptibilitytobacterialinfections.Rarely,infiltratesofneoplasticplasmacellsareseenintherenalinterstitium.

Clinical Features. have (1) production immunoglobulins, excessive findings and of of properties; immunity. the from mainly Clinical stem (3) suppression skeleton; plasma the which (2) often cells the effects the humoral on abnormal of physicochemical

resorption fractures often pain. to pathologic leads Bone and chronic renal as weakness, can lethargy, give such rise dysfunction. hypercalcemia The confusion, and to manifestations, and to attendant contributes neurologic the of infections. sets stage Decreased normal immunoglobulins bacterial recurrent production for is of which Of great renal as a significance infections trails insufficiency, cause death. only of and free in chains in presence Jones of of highlighting associated Bence strongly importance disease. patients light Renal with to and proteinuria, is up the renal 50% occurs the failure level can are as chains renal deposit prone (Chapter type Certain of to well. cause amyloidosis dysfunction which other light also tissues 5), the AL exacerbate in and

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 12.19 Multiplemyeloma.(A)Radiographoftheskull,lateralview.Thesharplypunched-outbonedefectsaremostobviousinthecalvaria. (B)Bonemarrowaspirate.Normalmarrowcellsarelargelyreplacedbyplasmacells,includingatypicalformswithmultiplenuclei,prominentnucleoli,andcyto-plasmicdropletscontainingimmunoglobulin.

immunoglobulins and/or increased Bence typically show the levels in analyses the Laboratory in of Jones proteins urine. blood component in an light light are 70% only Free chains chains patients 20% M protein present. are free to observed whereas in together about and cases, 60% of of completely Around the of detectable exclude the M absence myelomas component not 1% does nonsecretory; are diagnosis. of hence,

laboratory diagnosis findings. on radiologic and rests The be when definitive studies but bone can requires diagnosis lesions, It typical marrow suspected strongly a imaging show examination. bone normochromic involvement thrombocytopenia. sometimes often leukopenia Marrow to anemia, and normocytic a by moderate accompanied rise gives

variable. is prognosis The for with untreated, many more if months, years. bony asymptomatic to myeloma” may multiple patients 12 “smoldering than for with whereas Patients 6 lesions, rarely survive be is survival median years. 4 The to 7 offer new be cures to achieved, hope. have therapies yet Although misfolded sensitive are unwanted that degrades proteasome, organelle to proteins. cellular a of Myeloma the and cells inhibitors immunoglobulin in myeloma pathways, As discussed chains. of misfolded 2, proteins activate accumulation to the prone misfolded, unpaired and Chapter apoptotic cells are tendency. exacerbating this death cell induce Proteasome myeloma inherent likely inhibitors by effective thalidomide-like activities. involves through a the ability treating myeloma, lenalidomide different to is also oncogenic specific in The of mechanism compound stimulate with its degradation but proteins that Biphosphonates, and drugs limit that resorption, reduce hypercalcemia. fractures the pathologic bone inhibit curative. life prolongs transplantation stem proven but Hematopoietic yet has not to cell be

adults seventh presents lymphoma life. of neoplasm Lymphoplasmacytic B that in or older is decade usually sixth of a the cell superficial bearing it the a of resemblance Although substantial that cells. to to tumor undergo CLL/SLL, a fraction differs cells in differentiation terminal plasma Most syndrome in as sufficient hyperviscosity to a plasma Waldenström amounts cell cause commonly, IgM, component macroglobulinemia. monoclonal secretes often known the bone secretion (e.g., Unlike and destruction multiple amyloidosis) not relatively complications chains failure and from myeloma, occur. free stemming light renal does are of the rare

Virtually all MYD88. with associated lymphoma are mutations cases of acquired in lymphoplasmacytic protein BCR and MYD88 (Ig) growth activate adaptor encodes the of promote that augment gene and that cells. also of of an tumor The signaling in signals complex, events which participates may downstream both the the survival NF-κB

bodies) bodies) ofsomeoftheplasmacells.Atdiagnosisthetumorhasusuallydisseminatedtothelymphnodes,spleen,andliver.Infiltrationofthenerveroots,meninges,andmorerarelythebraincanalsooccurwithdiseaseprogression. MORPHOLOGYTypically,themarrowcontainsaninfiltrateoflymphocytes,plasmacells,andplasmacytoidlymphocytesinvaryingproportions,oftenaccompaniedbymastcellhyperplasia.Sometumorsalsocontainapopulationoflargerlymphoidcellswithmorevesicularnuclearchromatinandprominentnucleoli.Periodicacid-Schiff-positiveinclusionscontainingimmunoglobulinarefrequentlyseeninthecytoplasm(Russell orthenucleus(Dutcher

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Immunophenotype. The component whereas such the and the same plasma markers B the as component cell CD20 on lymphoid cell immunoglobulin, the is immunoglobulin surface that secretes expresses of expressed surface cells. lymphoid IgM. immunoglobulin tumors, secreted all the In almost is an

Features. Clinical weakness, dominant complaints The include loss. and are weight presenting fatigue, nonspecific and Approximately hepatomegaly, splenomegaly. and patients lymphadenopathy, the have half infiltration caused common. Anemia by is marrow IgM antibodies by that 10% at agglutinins, red temperatures less to autoimmune of of patients have 37°C. caused than bind About cells hemolysis cold

with have of from signs and additional Patients tumors IgM. IgM-secreting properties symptoms stemming the physicochemical Because large to rise giving increases by hyperviscosity the of IgM blood, greatly syndrome following: its characterized the the concentrations at viscosity a high size, of

with which to and distention Visual is problems congestion, impairment retinal vision reflected venous tortuosity retinal and of with veins; hemorrhages contribute striking also exudates by associated may

problems all stupor, such deafness, as blood Neurologic stemming headaches, flow from and venous sluggish dizziness,

factors macroglobulins well clotting and interference related platelet as Bleeding the function complexes to of formation as between with

at from produces the temperatures, urticaria such cold Cryoglobulinemia low as Raynaud resulting which and macroglobulins of precipitation phenomenon symptoms

lymphoma is disease. incurable Lymphoplasmacytic an progressive IgM by temporarily intravascular, and (e.g., hemolysis) is levels IgM symptoms can Because most alleviated plasmapheresis. the by hyperviscosity high be caused anti-CD20 and has BTK be drugs growth are that can also doses immunotherapy controlled with chemotherapeutic with effective. work shown inhibitors low of recent and antibody, Tumor Transformation uncommon. occurs large-cell is but lymphoma to Median years. about survival 4 is

neoplasms Hodgkin distinctive cell. by group the encompasses are of of a characterized a tumor RS cell, lymphoma the giant presence that stepwise contiguous most Unlike in a of node and a lymphomas NHLs, spread nodes. Hodgkin single lymph or fashion chain typically lymph arise to nodes in anatomically lymphomas Although B from features. clinical are understood NHLs be are unusual Hodgkin of tumors now the origin, their and by cell distinguished they the to pathologic unusual

Fig. Hodgkinlymphoma—lymphnode.AbinucleateReed-Sternbergcellwithlarge,inclusion-likenucleoliandabundantcytoplasmissurroundedbylymphocytes,macrophages,andaneosinophil. 12.20 of Texas University Department of School, Medical McKenna, Southwestern (Courtesy Pathology, W. Dallas,Texas.) Robert Dr. of

Classification. (1) lymphocyte are and sclerosis, depletion, subtypes cellularity, (3) recognized: mixed (4) (2) predominant. lymphocyte rich, of Five nodular Hodgkin lymphocyte (5) lymphoma four researchers these the In together classical certain Hodgkin (described and entities the the features first share rubric RS lump later), immunophenotypic cells under subtypes leading to some lymphoma. morphologic lymphocyte cell apart cells. is RS by type of center B the germinal The predominant by markers expression the set common of mixed-cellularity next. forms sclerosis and classical subtype the types, Hodgkin most discussed the lymphoma, two are nodular This and

nucleolus clear zone,featuresthatimpartanowl-eyeappearance.TypicalRScellsandvariantshaveacharacteristicimmunophenotype,astheyexpressCD15andCD30andfailtoexpressCD45(leukocytecommonantigen),Bcellantigens,andTcellantigens.Asweshallsee,“classic”RScellsarecommoninthemixed-cellularitysubtype,uncommoninthenodularsclerosissubtype,andrareinthelymphocyte-predominancesubtype;intheselattertwosubtypes,othercharacteristicRScellvariantspredominate. by nuclear nuclei or (inclusion-like) Fig.12.20 a ),averylargecell(15to45µmindiameter)withanenormousmultilobatenucleus,exceptionallyprominentnucleoli,andabundant,usuallyslightlyeosinophilic,cytoplasm.Particularlycharacteristicarecellswithtwo containing mirror-image each a lobes, acidophilic surrounded large

sclerosis http://ebooksmedicine.net isthemostcommonform.Itisequallyfrequentinmenandinwomenandhasastrikingpropensitytoinvolvethelowercervical,supraclavicular,andmediastinallymphnodes.Mostpatientsare Nodular Hodgkin lymphoma

Fig. 12.22 Hodgkinlymphoma,nodularsclerosistype—lymphnode.Alow-powerviewshowswell-definedbandsofpink,acellularcollagenthathavesubdividedthetumorcellsintonodules. Texas McKenna, Department Robert W. of University (Courtesy Dallas,Texas.) of of Southwestern Dr. School, Pathology, Medical

Fig. 12.21 Hodgkinlymphoma,nodularsclerosistype—lymphnode.Adistinctive“lacunarcell”withamultilobednucleuscontainingmanysmallnucleoliisseenlyingwithinaclearspacecreatedbyretractionofitscytoplasm.Itissurroundedbylymphocytes. (Courtesy Pathology, Texas Dallas,Texas.) of Southwestern Medical University Robert of Department Dr. School, McKenna, of W. adolescentsoryoungadults,andtheoverallprognosisisexcellent.Itischaracterizedmorphologicallybythefollowing:

Fig.12.21 ),aparticularRScellvariantthathasasinglemultilobatenucleus,multiplesmallnucleoli,andabundant,pale-stainingcytoplasm.Insectionsofformalin-fixedtissue,thecytoplasmoftenistornaway,leavingthenucleuslyinginanemptyspace(alacune).TheimmunophenotypeoflacunarvariantsisidenticaltothatofotherRScellsfoundinclassicalsubtypes.

bands,whichdividetheinvolvedlymphoidtissueintocircumscribednodules( Collagen

Fig.12.22 ).Thefibrosismaybescantorabundantandthecellularinfiltratecontainsvaryingproportionsoflymphocytes,eosinophils,histiocytes,andlacunarcells.

isthemostcommonformofHodgkinlymphomainpatientsolderthan50yearsofageandcomprisesabout25%ofcasesoverall.Thereisamalepredominance.Classic cells lymphoma Mixed-cellularity withinaheterogeneousinflammatoryinfiltratecontainingsmalllymphocytes,eosinophils,plasmacells,andmacrophages( plentiful Hodgkin are RS

Fig.12.23 ).Thissubtypeismorelikelytobedisseminatedandtobeassociatedwithsystemicmanifestationsthanthenodularsclerosissubtype.

Hodgkin Lymphocyte-predominant RS lymphoma,accountingforabout5%ofcases,ischaracterizedbythepresenceoflymphohistiocytic cells variant (L&H) thathaveadelicatemultilobed,puffynucleusresemblingpoppedcorn(“popcorncell”).L&HvariantsusuallyarefoundwithinlargenodulescontainingmainlysmallBcellsadmixedwithvariablenumbersofmacrophages(

).Otherreactivecells,suchaseosinophils,arescantyorabsent,andtypicalRScellsarerare.UnliketheRSvariantsin“classical”Hodgkinlymphoma,L&HvariantsexpressBcellmarkers(e.g.,CD20)andusuallyfailtoexpressCD15andCD30.Mostpatientspresentwithisolatedcervicaloraxillarylymphadenopathy,andtheprognosistypicallyisexcellent. Fig.12.24

cells. ItisapparentthatHodgkinlymphomaspansawiderangeofhistologicpatternsthatoftensimulateareactiveinflammatoryprocess.Regardlessofsubtype,the of reactive the diagnosis the variants or in cells identification RS on background rests of definitive appropriate ImmunophenotypingplaysanimportantroleindistinguishingHodgkinlymphomafromreactiveconditionsandotherformsoflymphoma.Inallsubtypes,involvementofthespleen,liver,bonemarrow,andotherorgansmayappearinduecourseandtakestheformofirregularnodulescomposedofamixtureofRScellsandreactivecells,similartowhatisobservedinlymphnodes.

Fig. Hodgkinlymphoma,mixed-cellularitytype—lymphnode.Adiag-nostic,binucleateReed-Sternbergcellissurroundedbyeosinophils,lympho-cytes,andhistiocytes. 12.23 Robert Dr. Pathology,University W. Texas School,Dallas,Texas.) of Medical of McKenna, Department of (Courtesy Southwestern

Fig. Hodgkinlymphoma,nodularlymphocyte-predominanttype—lymphnode.Numerousmature-lookinglymphocytessurroundscattered,large,pale-staininglymphocyticandhistiocyticvariants(“popcorn”cells). 12.24

W. Medical Texas University of Department McKenna, Dallas,Texas.) of Southwestern of School, Dr. Pathology, (Courtesy Robert http://ebooksmedicine.net

of RS by studies single elegant remained 20th century, origin but the was on The mysterious cells. solved performed RS cells microdissected most through finally of hypermutation. rearrangements these gene given and that genes RS showed somatic same rearranged immunoglobulin have any undergone immunoglobulin possesses that case cell from the every These result, is now agreed As it a that

Hodgkin cells. arises B lymphoma neoplasm a that is center from germinal

EBV. Hodgkin clue of the frequent etiology lymphoma of into from the Another involvement stems fraction mixed-cellularity is RS subtype forms 70% Hodgkin of other as many and in the as EBV in of the of smaller lymphoma. cells present cases of a “classical” all structure given to) related cells transformation genome of in that RS a expansion. clonal (and identical in therefore EBV be may infection case, The and is precedes indicating the several one mixed-cellularity particularly development, to subtype. of of steps probably the contributing tumor infection EBV Thus, is

nonneoplastic, inflammatory of is cell characteristic cytokines. infiltrate The generated number a by growth Some RS an IL-13, may and cell cells, factor-β, eosinophils; including a RS stimulate for chemoattractant IL-5, through fibrogenic of these transforming secreted growth a by mechanism. autocrine factor; which are and that innocent growth factors being cells, additional the the Conversely, RS than and aid bystanders, inflammatory reaction. to contribute cells responding rather tissue the of further survival produce

T host lymphoma of proteins a example cell Hodgkin that escapes function. that expressing by the immune inhibit from response is a cardinal tumor The T lymphoma of that PD of antagonize responses. ligands, cell levels RS factors classical high cells express Hodgkin their many chromosome two on 9 that PD tumors region PD-L1 overexpression. ligands, amplified, the PD-L2, to an the to contribute genes encoding and containing In alteration the is appears (Chapter that PD clinical PD-1, proven block expression receptor ligand antibodies of PD importance T ligands for The 6). has which been of cell is trials in the of resistant PD-1 because other all reactivation presumably tumors, by the that latent was stifled response axis. PD even a that ligand/ host the are to of Most responsive antibodies, signaling to those are PD-1 therapies,

Features. Clinical lymphadenopathy. Hodgkin manifests NHL, painless usually as lymphoma, like from NHL made be distinction a definitive Although by can only

Differences Non-Hodgkin Hodgkin Table Clinical 12.9 Lymphomas and Between

MoreoftenlocalizedtoasingleMorefrequentinvolvementofaxialgroupofnodes(cervical,multipleperipheralnodesmediastinal,paraaortic) lymphoma Hodgkin a diagnosis of clinical of ( biopsy, the tissue features several favor examination

Table ). 12.9 the to therapy is ( prognosis used established, After guide staging determine is diagnosis and

). 12.10 Table of favorable with or (fever, patients usually stage II Younger free subtypes to and more night “B weight tend present are so-called disease I stage symptoms” sweats). loss, with III disease Patients IV) well exhibit pruritus anemia. as B and advanced symptoms as more and to (stages likely are with radiotherapy, Because of patients now chemotherapy. long-term with stage are of I complications treated with systemic even disease the with More is advanced also chemotherapy, generally involved together radiotherapy. treated with disease field sometimes

those outlook, good. very even for with disease, The advanced is is for II-A disease with 5-year more patients I-A than 90%. survival The rate stage or 50%. survival advanced around disease-free rate with the 5-year Even IV-A overall disease (stage IV-B), is or as treated cancer a long-term malignancies, as including lung cancer, risk reported. breast higher survivors has radiotherapy, of disease, certain cardiovascular well been with and Among These minimize toxic and of less the use regimens that spurred results use chemotherapy. radiotherapy new development of sobering have antibodies with in patients responses already anti-PD-1 excellent have produced mentioned, As relapsed,

Non-Hodgkin of Clinical Table Staging Hodgkin and 12.10 Classification) (Ann Arbor Lymphomas

Distribution of Stage Disease

IIIInvolvementoflymphnoderegionsonbothsidesofthediaphragm(III),whichmayincludethespleen(IIIS),limitedcontiguousextralymphaticorganorsite(IIIE),orboth(IIIES) 31:1707,1971. aAllstagesarefurtherdividedbasedontheabsence(A)orpresence(B)ofthefollowingsystemicsymptomsandsigns:significantfever,nightsweats,unexplainedlossofmorethan10%ofnormalbodyweight.FromCarbonePT,etal:Symposium(AnnArbor):staginginHodgkindisease.Cancer Res

and disease a therapy. represent immune-based refractory promising http://ebooksmedicine.net

features important many distinctive of with the forms clinically the neoplasia discussion. or brief Among lymphoid WHO merit classification, in several other

Cell Leukemia. Hairy is presence cell cell neoplasm characterized an cytoplasmic leukemia B by Hairy of indolent hairlike uncommon, the projections. fine, The CD103; cell B cells making other most the immunoglobulin, on and not cell diagnostically latter are two them express CD11c markers present B tumors, useful. and (CD20), antigens surface tumor kinase mutations 6). Virtually in in which other serine/threonine cases diverse BRAF, are the with all also is (Chapter activating mutated cancers associated

Hairy and occurs older cell marrow result in of mainly leukemia from infiltration its bone and males, spleen. manifestations only sometimes the massive, often common physical finding. and Splenomegaly, most is is of infiltration marrow and cases. sequestration, from resulting than half more in splenic Pancytopenia, seen node is rare. Lymph involvement to smear most the but 15% in “hairy peripheral identified Leukocytosis in blood patients, present can uncommon, in cases. only of scattered 20% being is be cells” but problems. is indolent and are if disease major clinical The the infections progressive untreated; pancytopenia hairy to cell other neoplasms, most extremely lymphoid chemotherapeutic Unlike is purine particularly nucleosides. indolent agents, sensitive leukemia the excellent. overall rule Complete are durable is prognosis and responses the responses fail of which become may that choice. the to treatment inhibitors, ultimately BRAF therapy excellent conventional Tumors have

Sézary Mycosis and Syndrome. Fungoides cell T lymphoma. to they often the of tumors cells skin; neoplastic home as These T cutaneous to a referred CD4+ as are result, a manifests erythrodermic a tumor usually nonspecific phase to and then Mycosis as time rash with that phase. progresses to plaque fungoides a appearance and produced cerebriform of epidermis neoplastic infolding dermis. often T marked a the by with infiltrate upper the nuclear membranes, cells, Histologically, disease visceral and With dissemination appear. nodal progression, both generalized (1) peripheral exfoliative cells and by Sézary (Sézary clinical blood. (2) in the tumor is erythroderma variant a syndrome cells) characterized a Circulating as fungoides. many cells also in present are plaqueor 25% as tumor of cases tumor-phase mycosis of years. often early-phase with whereas visceral survive 1 on fungoides disease, for diagnosed to with disease, patients average years, many 3 tumor-phase Patients survive syndrome mycosis or Sézary for

T Leukemia/Lymphoma. Cell Adult cell CD4+ human type virus a caused retrovirus, This leukemia (HTLV-1). neoplasm of cells T T is by 1 Japan, West southeastern basin, and States. the in HTLV-1 in infection Caribbean endemic is and sporadically including the Africa, elsewhere, southern occurs United of tumor is pathogenesis The 6. discussed Chapter in this spinal paraparesis, central addition tropical spastic HTLV-1 affecting In and also nervous the demyelinating to cord. the lymphoid cause infection can malignancies, progressive a disease system

leukemia/lymphoma hypercalcemia, lymphadenopathy, Adult hepatosplenomegaly, lymphocytosis. is and variable associated T commonly skin lesions, with cell levels the addition to the chain. leukemic CD25, express IL-2 of receptor high cells CD4, In α poorly tumor to most the very In aggressive and treatment. is responds cases time about median The survival 8 months. is

Peripheral Lymphoma. T Cell makes of This up group of NHLs. adult heterogeneous tumors about 10% heading, this tumors this most unclassifiable. several distinctive rare are subtypes fall group in Although under aggressive In are these respond tumors poorly general, that therapy. to low. even of these suffer tumors symptoms functional to tumor-derived because the patients are cells, inflammatory from often tumor Moreover, related burden when relatively products, is T

particular to which of produce of worthwhile summarize cancer hallmarks the Before lymphoid ending in mutations neoplasms, behavior is in our changes in it driver ( cellular common pausing manner exemplify entities review specific that

Fig. ). 12.25 not and Such PD-1 lymphoma of antagonize highlight tumors). alterations antibodies (Hodgkin only that block effective but BCL2 (follicular therapies, that B the as pathogenic cell are principles, other increasingly such lymphoma) important targets drugs and

Highlyaggressivetumorsthatmanifestwithsignsandsymptomsofbonemarrowfailure,orasrapidlygrowingmasses

Tumorcellscontaingeneticlesionsthatblockdifferentiation,leadingtotheaccumulationofimmature,nonfunctionalblasts

http://ebooksmedicine.net Indolentcourse,commonlyassociatedwithimmuneabnormalities,includinganincreasedsusceptibilitytoinfectionandautoimmunedisorders

ALL) Cyclin D1 CDKN2A cell translocations in loss lymphoma Many (e.g., of Mantle examples

somatic hypermutation lymphomas B center cell Germinal Class-switching,

unimportant to and circulate intrinsic ability invade of due lymphoid to cells Relatively

Fig. geneinacutelymphoblasticleukemia[ALL]);mutationsinvarioustranscriptionfactors,particularlyinALL,thatblockdifferentiationandenhance“leukemiastemcell”self-renewal;andchronicimmunestimulation,inmarginalzonelymphoma.Bycontrast,becauselymphoidcellsnormallycirculatethroughoutthebody,thereisrelativelylittleselectivepressureinlymphoidmalignanciesforaberrationsthatincreaseangiogenesisoractivateinvasionandmetastasis. Cancerhallmarksexemplifiedbyparticularlymphoidneoplasms.Someofthebestcharacterizedpathogenicmechanismsinlymphoidmalignanciesaresummarizedhere,includingdysregulationofMYCinBurkittlymphoma(leadingtoWarburgmetabolismsandrapidcellgrowth);dysregulationofBCL2infollicularlymphoma(leadingtoresistancetoapoptosis);PD-1ligandgeneamplificationinHodgkinlymphoma(leadingtoevasionofhostimmunity);eventsleadingtolossofcellcyclecontrol(cyclinD1rearrangementsinmantlecelllymphomaandlossoftheCDKN2A 12.25

MatureBcelltumorthatusuallymanifestswithadvanceddiseaseinvolvinglymphnodes,bonemarrow,andextranodalsitessuchasthegut

Associatedwithan(11;14)translocationthatresultsinover-expressionofcyclinD1,aregulatorofcellcycleprogression

MatureBcelltumorarisingatextranodalsitesinvolvedbychronicinflammationresultingfromautoimmunityorinfection(e.g.,H. pylori)

UnusualBcelltumorconsistingmostlyofreactivelymphocytes,macrophages,andstromalcells

MalignantRScellsmakeupaminorpartofthetumormass.

normal Myeloid from marrow elements. neoplasms bone give progenitors hematopoietic involve and to and that marrow replace rise the typically arise proliferations broad acute at the leukemia (AML), There an are neoplasia: of cells development. are myeloid cell myeloid categories neoplastic early • of three blocked In myeloid stage and replace the the peripheral in and Immature accumulate cells blood. marrow elements, (blasts) frequently normal myeloid in circulate

http://ebooksmedicine.net

clone dysregulated differentiation but In terminal myeloproliferative neoplasms, increased continues exhibits neoplastic or the to growth. undergo the Commonly, increase and/or associated these peripheral or an in granulocytes) the in with platelets, are blood. elements formed more one of cells, (red

myelodysplastic syndromes differentiation of peripheral fashion, leading and precursors appearance ineffective terminal blood disordered (MDS), cytopenias. In in the to but and a dysplastic occurs marrow

categories the neoplasms provide these myeloid divisions sometimes useful starting between blur. the three Although a point, myelodysplasia features neoplasms MDS myeloproliferative and AML, both of to myeloproliferative neoplasms transform and have and neoplasms. often some Both relationship myeloid neoplasms multipotent early arise not among is these the all close progenitors, from Because surprising. disorders

an precursor despite marrow. to by asymptomatic characterized prognosis and MDS myeloid It the indeterminant hematopoieis acquired referred AML the arise one normal clonal that CHIP the cells blood counts is from presence (CHIP) clonal of in more often blood and recognized “driver” of is now of in mutations as also progresses of cell appears factor neoplasm a per cardiovascular frequency 10). about to (Chapter an CHIP an for 1% white and important year at be overt to disease risk

years. affects age median adults; the older 50 primarily AML is as later. very It heterogeneous, discussed is replacement leukemic ALL those and by are clinical to marrow symptoms and closely by resemble the normal The of usually produced related signs elements blasts. within pallor, symptoms. abnormal weeks common bleeding, and who infections diagnosed the few present patients, in newly Fatigue, of are of a typically onset “granulocytic sarcoma”). rare ALL, occasions (a on as manifesting mass but tissue a a in Splenomegaly by than are prominent mimics discrete generally lymphoma and AML lymphadenopathy so-called less are karyotypic immunophenotypic, of AML diagnosis morphologic, and based findings. classification and The on histochemical, of outcome. the predictive karyotype these, is Of most

myeloid transcription genes harbor encoding differentiation. are factors normal required for mutations in AMLs Most cell that differentiation early myeloid with in cells, interfere leading marrow. precursors of accumulation myeloid to the the (blasts) mutations These of the translocation the (15;17) Of which fusion chromosome leukemia, gene 15. the 17 of interest acute retinoic α receptor the is gene on and results PML in on particular the (RARA) in promyelocytic acid chromosome the gene produces the by protein fusion differentiationat normal PML/RARA that of chimeric myeloid blocks receptors. The probablyinpart a function retinoic inhibiting acid promyelocyticstage, into this neutrophils to doses of acid and vitamin promyelocytes (ATRA), rapidly. analogue neoplastic block induce retinoic pharmacologic the Remarkably, differentiate an A all-trans (Chapter of overcome 7), clears Because after the rapidly average life ATRA of hours, an neutrophils tumor. treatment die 6 span is involving RARA The very not effect to AMLs specific; without ATRA. respond do trans-locations protein, of than fusion trioxide, ATRA salt effective more the combination alone, producing recently, than cures been more patients. induces of in More of even that 80% is ATRA that noted a the arsenic PML/RARA the has it degradation and defect. example of an therapy This is important tumor-specific highly at molecular a a effective targeted

are the in using has not AML to transcription the Other factors found sufficient work disease. mice that in shown mutations cause Putative the gene and several in RAS kinase been genes in mutations have tyrosine detected. collaborating other

role in genes central mutations have suggesting identified AML. that AML alterations frequent epigenetic Sequencing in genomes a of epigenome, the directly impact that has the also (IDH). with For associated 20% of AMLs 15% isocitrate mutations to dehydrogenase example, are in about enzymes blocks epigenome In that IDH the the with 6). such mutated myeloid (discussed synthesized Chapter by the in protein of “oncometabolite” and differentiation function regulate an tumors, interferes cell of production the remissions oncometabolite molecular IDH and particular prevent of produce often this subtype in AML. mutant the of Inhibitors

MORPHOLOGYBydefinition,inAMLmyeloidblastsorpromyelocytesmakeupmorethan20%ofthebonemarrowcellularity.Myeloblasts (precursorsofgranulocytes)havedelicatenuclearchromatin,threetofivenucleoli,andfineazurophiliccytoplasmicgranules(

Fig.12.26 rods, ).Auer distinctivered-stainingrodlikestructures,maybepresentinmyeloblastsormoredifferentiatedcells;theyareparticularlynumerousinacutepromyelocyticleukemia(

).Auerrodsarespecificforneoplasticmyeloblastsandthusareahelpfuldiagnosticcluewhenpresent.InothersubtypesofAML,monoblasts,erythroblasts,ormegakaryoblastspredominate. Fig.12.27

Classification. maturation. lineage, degree AMLs of in of diverse terms cellular and genetics, are relies these WHO of AML on ( into divide categories to all The four features classification

chemotherapy; outcome MDSs; of ): (2) they features. after AMLs because (1) associated arise genetic they dysplasia, (4) genotoxic 12.11 and Table (3) many any with with foregoing occurring predict AMLs the of which and AMLs are from specific which guide AMLs therapy; aberrations, lacking important that the exhibits. line in AMLs are tumor predominant based of subclassified category the differentiation the last on

Immunophenotype. AML. expression immunologic is heterogeneous markers in of The some CD13, or CD15, CD117 tumors CD64, CD14, of as (KIT). such antigens, Most express combination myeloid-associated stem marker myeloblasts. cells, present is a CD34, hematopoietic often of on are in helpful AML Such markers http://ebooksmedicine.net distinguishing

Fig. 12.26 Acutemyeloidleukemia(AML).(A)Myeloblastswithdelicatenuclearchromatin,prominentnucleoli,andfineazurophiliccytoplasmicgranules.(B)and(C)showflowcytometryresultsfortheAMLshownin(A).ThetumorcellsarepositiveforthestemcellmarkerCD34andthemyeloidlineagespecificmarkersCD33andCD15(subset). (A,Courtesy Robert of Dr.

Texas of Medical Dallas,Texas. W. School, Department Pathology, of McKenna, University Southwestern Portland, BandC,Courtesy Oregon.) Picker, Center, Science Dr. of Oregon Louis Health and in only differentiation. with from minimal identifying AMLs ALL

Features. Clinical few onset within the of and present notably weeks a or thrombocytopenia, fatigue, of and months cutaneous most anemia, bleeding. neutropenia, patients to mucosal Most and fever, spontaneous with symptoms related complaints mentioned As are to these findings very produced those earlier, similar ALL. by in bleeding results a diathesis. Thrombocytopenia tract common. the hemorrhages Cutaneous and urinary mucosal cavities and of into body gingivae and hemorrhages the petechiae the are linings into viscera, ecchymoses, and serosal released the bleeding factors with AML Procoagulants exacerbate in leukemic cells, the fibrinolytic t(15;17), tendency. especially by and are and Infections and are opportunists such by caused commensals. fungi, Pseudomonas, as frequent often related and soft than the the involvement gingiva. often skin monocytic AML tumors and (leukemia cutis) infiltrate to with differentiation but the in striking are ALL, in usually Signs less tissues symptoms of is but common spread occurs nervous than system also in ALL. less Central

remains a disease. AML devastating chemotherapy. all chance with abnormalities with overall 30% Tumors disease-free of 50% only inv[16]) in to but is karyotypic survival, (t[8;21], “good-risk” 15% the patients long-term with are conventional associated survival a TP53 prognosis. associated subtype mutations poor AML with with as particularly has a a emerged acute brought targeted outcomes A bright arsenic and with spot ATRA the treatment in improvement promyelocytic about in is by leukemia salts. also (like blasts. results, of the apparently have differentiation encouraging ATRA) inducing inhibitors produced IDH by AML patients. hematopoietic An are some aggressive more allogeneic approaches, be AML increasing number with with transplantation, treated stem as which such curative of in can cell patients being

Fig. Acutepromyelocyticleukemia—bonemarrowaspirate.Theneo-plasticpromyelocyteshaveabnormallycoarseandnumerousazurophilicgranules.OthercharacteristicfindingsincludeacellinthecenterofthefieldwithmultipleneedlelikeAuerrods. 12.27 University Pathology, Texas of of W.McKenna,Depart-ment Southwestern Dallas,Texas.) Dr.Robert of School, (Courtesy Medical

a disorders cell group clonal by myelodysplastic term (MDS) The stem to syndrome characterized refers of

12.11 Classification Table AML WHO of

AMLwitht(15;17)(q22;q21.1);PML/RARA fusiongeneFavorable

II. AML Multilineage With Dysplasia

III. AML,Therapy-Related

IV. Classified Not AML, Otherwise

SubclassesdefinedbyextentandtypeofIntermediatedifferentiation(e.g.,myelocytic,monocytic)

WorldHealthOrganization. AML, Acutemyeloidleukemia;MDS, nucleophosmin1;WHO, myelodysplasticsyndrome;NPM1,

associated AML. with transformation to a and that http://ebooksmedicine.net risk maturation hematopoiesis ineffective of high defects are

but multipotent in transformed clonal granulocytes, platelets, retains manner both ineffective of disordered. stem wholly or differentiate marrow a to is and and partly that cells, into a the red is bone that by cell the the capacity MDSs, progeny replaced In result, hypercellular more blood a the or marrow cytopenias. usually is the As one normocellular, or but peripheral shows the The to and stem in mutations genetically marrow of the unstable and abnormal acquisition clone to transformation additional is bone eventual the cell prone AML. chemotherapy are exposure alkylating but some Most cases develop idiopathic, therapy. or after agents radiation with to ionizing

recurrently number has Important come have of mutated of a insights genes. new identified MDS sequencing from genomes, which deep functional as These be into follows: genes lumped major categories, can three

factors. Epigenetic like of the AML, of appears important epigenome thus, that be Frequent factors that modifications; of epigenetic including factors MDS. in are in same involving many to the seen regulate mutations histone are DNA methylation dysregulation AML, the genesis mutated and

factors. splicing RNA associated classic of are MDS. involving sideroblasts, a They of drive in the has by proposed that transformation to subset form is splicing with of a machinery processing, are commonly RNA subset seen dysplasia ring A altering mutations RNA tumors that

factors. Transcription mutations deranged to characterizes that transcription are the affect contribute and myelopoiesis These normal MDS. for factors differentiation required that may

mutations the 10% tumor a which presence of roughly In have suppressor gene of and outcomes. clinical in complex karyotype with particularly cases the addition, TP53, MDS loss-offunction correlate poor including and therapy-related MDS and 20q, deletions and similar chromosomal of 7, and MDS trisomy associated Both monosomies abnormalities, 5q, recurrent 8. 7q, 5 with primary are

precursors granules sideroblasts),granulocyteprecursorswithabnormal erythroid MORPHOLOGYInMDS,themarrowispopulatedbyabnormal-appearinghematopoieticprecursors.Someofthemorecommonabnormalitiesincludemegaloblastoid ornuclearmaturation,andsmallmegakaryocyteswithsinglesmallnucleiormultipleseparatenuclei. resemblingthoseseeninthemegaloblasticanemias,erythroidformswithirondepositswithintheirmitochondria(ring

Clinical Features. common described is AML, in affecting States. the to about as often as year United as MDS is per actually patients 15,000 but rare, up 70. the patients and between ages of 50 present Most As result many and of cytopenias, hemorrhages. infections, suffer from anemia, a related symptoms to perhaps of arises background chemotherapy a cell response because stem poor, in MDS damage. is conventional to The usually 40% to 10% to AML patients. in occurs Transformation of 29 mutations. The is prognosis marrow associated months cases in cytogenetic time the worse with is 9 and or survival median blasts, increased TP53 ranges to variable; from abnormalities,

acquired of growth tyrosine The aberrations in of is independence. lead mutated, common other activated neoplasms to the that factor kinases pathways feature pathogenic signaling constitutively presence myeloproliferative or availability cells insight blood of provides tyrosine is satisfying kinase the explanation because the This important observed of for a of inhibitors. and overproduction therapeutically (caused organs progenitors in neoplastic hematopoiesis). (the lymph neoplastic and liver, hematopoietic secondary seed extramedullary spleen, hepatosplenomegaly by nodes), The tend to resulting

Four primary thrombocythemia. polycythemia leukemia (CML), diagnostic entities major myelofibrosis, chronic essential and myeloid recognized: vera, are below: features are Their distinctive listed

the CML with gene, association tyrosine active which fusion a from a by separated the produces abnormality, others kinase. its BCR-ABL is characteristic BCR-ABL constitutively

50% are in vera in and kinase most all activating in occur neoplasms of of about common of the mutations primary genetic “BCRABL–negative” cases cases myelofibrosis The virtually essential and polycythemia which JAK2, the tyrosine myeloproliferative thrombocythemia abnormalities

kinases, growth as activating neoplasms such receptor-β. in platelet-derived associated myeloproliferative factor mutations are other with tyrosine platelet-derived rare Some receptor-α and growth factor

“spent to neoplasms addition, somatic propensities triggered other leukemia, mutations. by presumably myeloproliferative to transform acute all to or acquisition In “blast myelofibrosis the resembling both a to have phase” crisis” variable primary a identical of polycythemia here, to too presented merit CML, neoplasms infrequent primary are and as vera, myeloproliferative discussion. myelofibrosis are other Only

adults affects CML years of and 25 60 age. principally between of fifth The fourth the decades is in incidence and peak life. in About per United cases are diagnosed States. year new 4500 the

22 chimeric by is ABL chromosome gene derived distinguished the 9. of myeloproliferative BCR portions presence on other chromosome of neoplasms gene a the from BCR-ABL gene CML the from and on is from of the chromosome (9;22) BCR. product ABL 9 the to 95% chromosome about In a on 22 BCR-ABL that to cases, gene translocation of a balanced adjacent position moves cytogenetically complex two involving created gene BCR-ABL more by the fusion or cryptic cases, In remaining http://ebooksmedicine.net is than 5% of a rearrangements chromosomes. present and B as The well, precursors, indicating some gene in precursors the tumor cases cell. granulocytic, a transformed stem fusion from hematopoietic is megakaryocytic, arises and T that erythroid, cell in BCR-ABL cell B Although present Ph it adult 25% AMLs. of and of the in is of characteristic highly cell–ALLs chromosome small is a CML, subset also

a protein described portions domain BCR Chapter 6, ABL. BCR-ABL As the the tyrosine fusion gene consisting encodes and in of of kinase of growth by on myeloid and survival. factors depend and generated their receptors Normal signals progenitors for growth generated decreased effects factor the by factor of growth The is mimic greatly signals receptor CML dependence progenitors activation. BCR-ABL of growth by constitutive that production course disease inhibit excessive relatively early normal by not BCR-ABL Importantly, marked and is platelets. of particularly granulocytes differentiation, the cells, because does blood

MORPHOLOGYTheperipheralbloodfindingsarehighlycharacteristic.Theleukocytecountiselevated,oftenexceeding100,000cells/µL.

are circulating cells myelocytes predominantly metamyelocytes, The and neutrophils, (

),butbasophils andeosinophils arealsoprominentandplateletsareusuallyincreased.Thebonemarrowishypercellularowingtoincreasednumbersofmaturinggranulocyticandmegakaryocyticprecursors.Theredpulpoftheenlargedspleenresemblesbonemarrowbecauseofthepresenceofextensiveextramedullary hematopoiesis. Fig.12.28 Thisburgeoningproliferationoftencompromisesthelocalbloodsupply,leadingtosplenic infarcts.

(e.g., The are weakness, of usually CML fatigability, loss). symptoms the easy is nonspecific initial insidious, weight as onset in sensation by abdomen a dragging is first the symptom caused splenomegaly. Sometimes the neoplasms. inflammation, reaction dramatic granulocyte to from lekemoid of CML response necessary elevation infection, may to distinguish it be stress, On count in chronic occasion a a certain and the in by of which distinction be achieved presence fusion fluorescence by testing karyotyping, can for assay. the be hybridization, can or done situ definitively the gene, PCR BCR-ABL This

Fig. CML—peripheralbloodsmear.Granulocyticformsatvariousstagesofdifferentiationarepresent. 12.28 Department Southwestern McKenna, Dallas,Texas.) University Medical of School, Texas Robert of of (Courtesy Dr. Pathology, W.

is The natural one history CML of initially slow of progression. is Even median 3 the treatment, without years. survival marked variable (blast thrombocytopenia, phase of anemia acute abnormalities, the additional transformation approximately into CML accelerated a picture appearance and resembling new (and unpredictable) a and an finally of cases enter by increasing half leukemia period, cytogenetic crisis). After occurs accelerated abruptly, without 50% blast of remaining cases, crisis an phase. In the of crisis the to from precursor-B Of CML cell hematopoietic blast cases cells. ALL, note, further of the origin attesting in 30% stem resembles In AML. resembles cases, the the crisis blast of 70% remaining primary to fibrosis extensive bone CML progresses a resembling myelofibrosis. Less marrow phase of commonly,

been altered dramatically for emergence of has Fortunately by targeted CML therapy. history affected, the those natural of the early blast and induces additional by drive the with the that disease, suppressing crisis, leads kinase to to in prevents particularly apparently toxicity remissions progression with Treatment acquisition sustained manageable with mutations. of tyrosine proliferative patients inhibitors, drugs kinase kinase from BCR-ABL relapse, to that found prevent patients on frequently are mutations inhibitors have in tumors domain binding. When their tyrosine the acquired the of selective the these of tumors by outgrowth many resistant to are BCR-ABL inhibitors, effects The the still that of indicates and created BCR-ABL. by progrowth anti-tumor “addicted” is cells powerful signals explained treated “third-generation” resistant inhibitors. can instances be tumors In some with BCR-ABL but particularly cure, chance of aged. stem a it risks, in substantial offers the carries transplantation others, hematopoietic cell with For

associated the Polycythemia JAK2. mutations strongly with in kinase is point tyrosine activating vera acts factor the signaling in downstream erythropoietin normally other and receptor receptors. the growth pathways JAK2 of mutation, hematopoietic most cells JAK2 for the on growth factors growth survival. and of sharply common dependence lowers The but and granulocytic, an to produces erythroid, increase absolute (panmyelosis), clinical cell are signs symptoms elements mass. This of proliferation excessive megakaryocytic and most in related red polycythemia, must from results distinguished from relative hemoconcentration. which vera Polycythemia be low is is absolute vera which polycythemia, erythropoietin, forms a the serum of neoplastic growth of of with factor–independent clone. Unlike the polycythemia of growth levels associated reflection reactive

http://ebooksmedicine.net

MORPHOLOGYThemajoranatomicchangesinpolycythemiaverastemfromincreasesinbloodvolumeandviscositybroughtaboutbythepolycythemia.Congestion infarctions are common, ofmanytissuesischaracteristic.Theliverisenlargedandoftencontainssmallfociofextramedullaryhematopoiesis.Thespleenusuallyisslightlyenlarged(250to300g)becauseofvascularcongestion.Asaresultoftheincreasedviscosityandvascularstasis,thromboses and particularlyintheheart,spleen,andkidneys.Hemorrhagesalsooccurinaboutathirdofthepatients.Thesemostoftenaffectthegastrointestinaltract,oropharynx,orbrainandmayoccurspontaneouslyorfollowingsomeminortraumaorsurgicalprocedure.Plateletsproducedfromtheneoplasticcloneoftenaredysfunctional,aderangementthatcontributestotheelevatedriskofthrombosisandbleeding.AsinCML,theperipheralbloodoftenshowsbasophilia.

Thebonemarrowishypercellularowingtoincreasednumbersoferythroid,myeloid,andmegakaryocyticforms.Inaddition,somedegreeofmarrowfibrosisispresentin10%ofpatientsatthetimeofdiagnosis.Inasubsetofpatients,thisprogressestoaspentphasewherethemarrowislargelyreplacedbyfibroblastsandcollagen.

Polycythemia insidiously, late appears age. usually middle vera in plethoric cyanotic. are often somewhat and Patients the may incidence also released may basophils account neoplastic the ulceration. to increased Histamine pruritus peptic of from for contribute and thrombotic to hypertension. complaints hemorrhagic Other the referable tendencies to are and and symptoms, melena are Headache, and gastrointestinal dizziness, hematemesis, common. turnover, is the rate cell of cases. of Because high gout 10% to of seen 5% symptomatic in

laboratory. The usually in diagnosis made the is is Red million/µL, cell hematocrit 60% to 6 and counts the or greater. 10 from range often 400,000/µL. count the count 50,000 be more platelet high as can as and than granulocyte cells/µL, is often The Basophilia common. is cases, fragments the are seen most and in and platelets functionally abnormal giant blood. in are often platelets megakaryocyte The 30% of or brain affecting develop thrombotic About usually heart. patients the complications, Hepatic but Budd-Chiari (Chapter syndrome uncommon thrombosis 15) rise an giving to grave complication. vein is from common are and patients. life-threatening and that gums) in hemorrhages epistaxis 5% 10% Minor bleeding occur (e.g., to of hemorrhages from those 10 cell the complications to to treatment, red through is receiving median months; survival normal years increased count vascular no occurs the about lowering death near In phlebotomy. however, within by repeated

phase” “spent to Unfortunately, resembling survival to a has vera myelofibrosis. evolve prolonged a polycythemia shown primary propensity for an 10 such 15% 20% years, average of a of undergo interval to cases transformation. After to fibrosis, the enlarges to the spleen, marrow markedly. hematopoiesis extensive shifts Owing which been of most lead treatment target of to for have JAK2 approved some spent phase patients. improvement and vera polycythemia the Inhibitors in that but a AML identical Transformation frequently crisis” “blast to less much to CML. in than also occurs,

the The development extensive hematopoiesis. hallmark and extramedullary myelofibrosis ofobliterativemarrowfibrosis,whichreducesbonemarrow is cytopenias to of primary leads hematopoiesis and late the other the phase course to occasionally that disorders. spent Histologically, occurs in of identical is the appearance myeloproliferative the similarity pathogenesis. to extends also This underlying

driver to the seems in underlying be signaling all JAK-STAT almost cases. of in mutations cases. 50% of activating an are additional and 1% to 60% MPL, are Thus, cases mutations the seen in to 5% present receptor, JAK2 thrombopoietin in JAK-STAT increased which stimulate signaling. are the other remaining also hypothesized Most of mutations, cases to have is backgrounds suspected. myelofibrosis of are cell the genetic these the disorders two JAK2 origin and give rise Why vera in primary with and not some associated differences others understood; polycythemia mutations in to are that patients in

believed It fibrogenic marrow is factors characteristic is the fibrosis of release the that from neoplastic inappropriate by caused megakaryocytes. factor synthesized factors and TGF-β. Two platelet-derived implicated: been by growth megakaryocytes have fibroblast growth mitogens. you are recall, platelet-derived TGF-β factor and As angiogenesis, causes which In in observed both addition, are deposition and collagen of myelofibrosis. promotes TGF-β

of niches to the as stem up lymph cells appearance in marrow such organs, hematopoietic leading and secondary hematopoietic in progresses, the nodes, spleen, take displaced extramedullary fibrosis As liver, residence the hematopoiesis. the sites understood extramedullary reasons, at is cell red disordered. incompletely production For the suppression moderate and result severe anemia. to function of factor concomitant This in marrow

resultingfromextensiveextramedullaryhematopoiesis,oftenassociatedwithsubcapsular alsoistypical.Thespleenmayweighasmuchas4000g,roughlytwentytimesitsnormalweight.Moderatehepatomegaly,alsoduetoextramedullaryhematopoiesis,iscommonplace.Lymphnodesalsoareinvolvedbyextramedullaryhematopoiesis,butnottoadegreesufficienttocauseappreciableenlargement. ).Redcellsoftenexhibitbizarreshapes(poikilocytes, teardrop Fig.12.29 infarcts, cells),andnucleatederythroidprecursorsarecommonlyseenalongwithimmaturewhitecells(myelocytesandmetamyelocytes),acombinationoffindingsreferredtoasleukoerythroblastosis.Abnormallylargeplateletsoftenarepresentaswell.Thebonemarrowinadvancedcasesishypocellularanddiffuselyfibrotic,whereasearlyinthecourseitmaybehypercellularandhaveonlyfocalareasoffibrosis.Throughoutthecourse,marrowmegakaryocytesarepresentinclustersandhavecharacteristichyperchromaticnucleiwith“cloudlike”outlines.Markedsplenomegaly

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Primarymyelofibrosis—peripheralbloodsmear.Twonucleatederythroidprecursorsandseveralteardrop-shapedredcells(dacryocytes)areevident.Immaturemyeloidcellswerepresentinotherfields.Anidenticalhistologicpicturecanbeseeninotherdiseasesproducingmarrowdistortionandfibrosis. 12.29

who occurs of progressive individuals in come Primary attention anemia than years to 60 older because myelofibrosis splenomegaly. and usually sweats Nonspecific fatigue, such common. night weight are symptoms loss, and as of from secondary cell seen. gout turnover frequently and a also are resulting Hyperuricemia rate high

leukoerythroblastosis. a normocytic to show accompanied by severe Laboratory anemia moderate studies normochromic typically in normal is white early course. be cell elevated count can The the mildly or usually but reduced, usually count platelet but the is as or disease at often The elevated progresses. thrombocytopenia supervenes diagnosis, normal are blood essential not findings specific, These and diagnosis. bone is marrow biopsy for

is and polycythemia than Primary myelofibrosis difficult to vera more CML. treat is The in to of range 5 years. 4 median survival the and cases. to infection, in to AML, to 5% include occurs 20% abnormalities, thrombosis platelet which and transformation bleeding to Threats related of life and presumably are the because molecular even signaling increased JAK2 without in constitutional symptoms, effective inhibitors at subtypes. JAK/STAT those decreasing is splenomegaly JAK2 to mutations, all common to and enough those cell young stem Hematopoietic the fit withstand procedure. be curative may in transplantation

Myeloidtumorsoccurmainlyinadultsandfallintothreemajorgroups: •Associatedwithdiverseacquiredmutationsthatleadtoexpressionofabnormaltranscriptionfactors,whichinterferewithmyeloiddifferentiation •Aggressivetumorscomprisedofimmaturemyeloidlineageblasts,whichreplacethemarrowandsuppressnormalhematopoiesis

Myeloidtumorsinwhichproductionofformedmyeloidelementsisinitiallyincreased,leadingtohighbloodcountsandextramedullaryhematopoiesis

Commonlyassociatedwithacquiredmutationsthatleadtoconstitutiveactivationoftyrosinekinases,whichmimicsignalsfromnormalgrowthfactors.ThemostcommonpathogenickinasesareBCR-ABL(associatedwithCML)andmutatedJAK2(associatedwithpolycythemiaveraandprimarymyelofibrosis).

Allcantransformtoacuteleukemiaandtoaspentphaseofmarrowfibrosisassociatedwithanemia,thrombocytopenia,andsplenomegaly.

proliferative “umbrella” cells is of for macrophages. or The designation disorders histiocytosis term an of a variety dendritic very highly are malignant lymphomas, rare as neoplasms. Some, histiocytic such most benign are reactive. Others, and histiocytic lymph as completely proliferations such nodes, in Langerhans Langerhans these cell relatively of histiocytoses. tumors lie the group cells, of Between extremes a two comprised rare cells. Langerhans similar are cells in to 5, in described antigens cells found dendritic Chapter As epidermis; display to and function they other immature organs, and cells the in are T found capture them many

Langerhans proliferations be variations take basic all the clinical same of cell to forms, but disorder. are different on believed class express proliferating MHC langerin. Langerhans cells antigens, CD1a, and The II terminal trans-membrane a in found electron is structures Birbeck have periodicity Langerin protein pentalaminar racket” sometimes end characteristic rodlike (“tennis micrographs in a appearance). and that dilated cytoplasmic a granules, tubular not the dendritic light the proliferating Langerhans counterparts. resemble microscope, Under do cells their normal cytoplasm histiocytes that an histiocytosis. abundant, Instead, vesicular by hence cell nuclei, more they vacuolated macrophages have the often and (called akin term to Langerhans of appearance morphologists)— tissue

into major Langerhans distinctive cell two grouped histiocytoses relatively be can clinicopathologic entities.

than age. of children younger • usually 2 in (Letterer-Siwe cell Multisystem disease) Langerhans occurs histiocytosis years of skin cells. Langerhans are manifests composed cutaneous It with grossly multifocal eruptions lesions typically and that resemble seborrheic lymphadenopathy, osteolytic the bone and course) affected lesions, lesions. (later pulmonary destructive in hepatosplenomegaly, have Most patients infections. pancytopenia recurrent infiltration to bacterial marrow patient to predisposes Extensive and leads the often if fatal rapidly disease untreated. is The 50% survive years. chemotherapy, of intensive patients 5 With

http://ebooksmedicine.net or may Unisystem granuloma) cell multifocal. unifocal (eosinophilic Langerhans be • histiocytosis lungs, accumulations skin, less bones of expanding or in the cavities of medullary It characterized commonly stomach. or Langerhans within usually cells, the is by which usually of and lymphocytes, neutrophils, admixed variable plasma eosinophils, numbers The cells, cells prominent. with Langerhans are are most any be involved; ribs, bone the calvaria, and commonly Virtually affected. may femur are bone. Unifocal most single often involves a disease fracture. or pathologic and tenderness, asymptomatic may It be cause pain, local may irradiation. or is an It indolent excision by be disorder spontaneously or that cured heal soft extend into that Multifocal bony disease multiple unisystem erosive children with affects usually typically masses sometimes tissues. manifests and the to about diabetes of In leads hypothalamus of 50% cases, of the stalk pituitary posterior insipidus. involvement insipidus, exophthalmos defects, referred to of Hand-Schüller-Christian diabetes calvarial is The as bone combination the triad. and are chemotherapy. others Many patients with experience spontaneous regressions; treated effectively

associated are the clue hyperactivity that Langerhans acquired cell the in in BRAF, A different lies frequently of the that the an to leads mutation kinase the of with serine/threonine clinical pathogenesis to discovery tumors forms kinase. other including cell some benign variety in malignant earlier), papillary (Chapter carcinoma, hairy (described and This mutation tumors, nevi, 6). leukemia found thyroid is of melanoma, a same colon cancers BRAF the the of and Langerhans pathway cellular proliferation that is contribute survival, effects of to component that drives RAS likely neoplastic signaling cells. a growth

(e.g., follow surgery). abnormal which appear can are or or inciting clinically some Bleeding by disorders bleeding, event trauma spontaneously characterized involves wall, described Chapter and As normal platelets, the in the clotting factors. vessel clotting 4, the significant in any can these bleeding. clinically of to components It that lead follows abnormalities the suspected the laboratory specific tests principles with of followed bleeding A in disorder, presented with review coagulation. next, evaluation consideration involved, used is disorders of by along a the of of patients a blood clinically important transfusion. of of few complications a discussion with We finish product

suspected for investigation include The of most coagulopathies important tests the following:

Prothrombin (PT). time coagulation pathways. and extrinsic assesses common test the This for It clot (e.g., thromboplastin needed plasma to addition after extract) tissue ions. measures of (in Ca2+ time and seconds) the brain pathway. prolonged an or with antibody) VII, extrinsic PT prothrombin; fibrinogen from can the (typically factor that or presence of A interferes inhibitor V, the X; or a of result acquired deficiency an

thromboplastin Partial (PTT). time assesses common This the intrinsic coagulation pathways. test and It the measures after clot cephalin, . of the needed Ca2+ (in seconds) time kaolin, plasma for to addition the and contact-dependent platelet for the phospholipids. cephalin Kaolin activates substitutes and XII factor an inhibitor can the that the caused intrinsic by with X, be factor presence PTT interferes or XI, acquired deficiency IX, prothrombin; XII; or of VIII, pathway. of of a V, fibrinogen or Prolongation

count. Platelet anti-coagulated on This electronic obtained using is blood particle an counter. 150,000 reference The range to 450,000/µL. is this blood Counts inspection range confirmed peripheral outside a visual must smear. by of a be

of platelet Tests function. • present no an assessment complex single At of adequate provides the functions of test platelets. will tests measure and that both collagen) of you practice. (which used clinical recall Aggregation to Willebrand is and quantitative certain tests for factor of response subvascular the qualitative (vWF) commonly agonists adherence required are in platelet von platelets to has is bleeding to only An old the and difficult is standardize time, some test, therefore time-consuming but value performed rarely. and of use being provide available function for are not but the assays instrument-based routine in Newer evaluated are quantitative that platelet yet clinic. measures

that In and assess measure split circulating presence factors of of are products clotting levels anti-coagulants. or tests more the available specific fibrin addition, the specialized

abnormalities of stem coagulation factors, in vessels, platelets, may disorders Bleeding combination. or from or alone the of number use, tissues, (scurvy) conditions 5), infectious systemic a rare vitamin amyloidosis with glucocorticoid (Chapter from and large Bleeding chronic and affecting inherited resulting vasculitides. vascular is fragility 8), connective (Chapter deficiency seen hypersensitivity C discussed of conditions beyond book. of chapters; in other are others Some this scope are these the resulting from petechiae trauma). the in minor purely is characterized that skin Bleeding appearance “spontaneous” membranes fragility ecchymoses and vascular of results (probably by mucous from and the are tests coagulation laboratory In most normal. instances of

triggered can be or endothelial Bleeding inflame conditions cells. by that damage systemic also throughout section). next If coagulation known enough, a such system, in condition the convert that surface (DIC) intravascular activates the severe (discussed coagulation insults lining http://ebooksmedicine.net disseminated circulatory a vascular pro-thrombotic to as the DIC, as they (a to up replaced, severe referred are than bleeding often coagulation used lead deficiencies factors in in be may coagulopathy). condition that faster Paradoxically, and resulting to consumptive can platelets

(thrombocytopenia) are important of cause also Deficiencies an of bleeding. platelets These are variety discussed later. a that in occur clinical settings of Other function. from in stem bleeding defects platelet qualitative disorders as be and certain rare after inherited, acquired, disorders. defects disorders may in myeloproliferative disease other or Willebrand and von and in congenital ingestion; as uremia aspirin Such of signs inadequate from trauma, menorrhagia. excessive bleeding include minor bruising, clinical and The platelet easy function nosebleeds,

coagulation or one factors, from the more both in defects stemming prolonged. or In PTT, are PT, disorders bleeding usually Unlike bleeding and absent. are defects, mucosal platelet petechiae are parts lower trauma, occur tend extremities. the of to hemorrhages Instead, to the in joints that the such subject body as of Massive surgery, procedures, severe or dental hemorrhage may after occur trauma. includes important category inherited of disorders. group the coagulation hemophilias, an This

It uncommon consequence is mixture of of a defects. occur to a not bleeding as for inherited This a lesser factor thrombocytopenia and bleeding, disease, both function disorder is coagulation deficiencies contribute and (to the fairly abnormal. function to case in which common DIC, in and in Willebrand a von which platelet coagulation both are factor degree) in

specific now to as turn we the background, disorders. foregoing With bleeding overview

in the the and activation coagulation a variety occurs of wide formation of thrombi it microcirculation. the a throughout results DIC is caused complication systemic of disorders; by of as platelets coagulation consequence, is factors and are consumed activated. secondarily, fibrinolysis As a and, can pathologic elements microinfarcts caused a for related Thus, required the to consumptive tissue hypoxia activation the either or and DIC microthrombi of bleeding to (hence coagulopathy). disorder give depletion myriad fibrinolysis by to of hemostasis rise and the term This probably than entity all congenital the combined. coagulation commonly bleeding disorders more causes of

clotting in first a way must disorders pathogenic by we with the intravascular general occurs. Before specific consider discussing DIC, associated mechanisms which helpful earlier coagulation point. Reference comments 4) normal may (Chapter to this be at blood on pathway, extrinsic factor charged the of substances. by contact, collagen, tissue surface which initiated pathway, intrinsic which the It by to the either can or that is XII activation negatively release triggered or the recall involves of clotting other thromboplastin); factor suffices be by (tissue thrombin. generation of the Both lead pathways to the anticoagulants (e.g., by Clotting macrophages and the rapid factors the activation by of activated of limited clotting protein and normally fibrinolysis. is clearance endogenous liver, concomitant C), the

is by tissue usually of into either (2) damage the widespread cell (1) endothelial triggered ( release or DIC factor substances the or circulation thromboplastic

Fig.

12.30 ). acute of be released adenocarcinomas. cancer the certain into in the cells, those types particularly promyelocytic of leukemia and variety sources—for Thromboplastic a of substances circulation placenta complications or obstetric can from example, cells and ways, releasing may also expressing proteolytic such provoke other by by in as enzymes Cancer tissue factor. coagulation from gram-positive gram-negative DIC), of of stimulate causes tissue and (important monocytes. release or factor In sepsis exotoxins the endotoxins factor, cells IL-1 release expression also simultaneously decrease and the endothelial stimulate of on tissue and Activated thrombomodulin. necrosis tumor of which both monocytes expression the of factor an The protein activates discussed, anticoagulant (Chapter 4). C, latter, as The limit blunting generation of the is of enhanced inhibitory that thrombin the alterations of and pathways these result coagulation. net

tissue by of Severe cell factor and and exposing by can the endothelial DIC causing collagen injury vWF. initiate subendothelial release even forms expression activity tissue factor damage However, procoagulant endothelial subtle can on surfaces. cell of by unleash endothelial stimulating lupus from after be erythematosus), rickettsiae). antigen-antibody Widespread extremes the by (e.g., deposition stroke infections produced in meningococci of by systemic injury temperature can (e.g., heat or or complexes by (e.g., injury), or endothelial burn resulting surprisingly, in syndrome other and, of endothelial 4, SIRS. is triggered As response not systemic frequent DIC (SIRS) inflammatory insults, consequence complication of Chapter by injury sepsis systemic an discussed is important and a

in Disorders listed are associated with DIC

Table 12.12 . sepsis, malignancy, DIC often is to the associated and most brain). complications, (especially Of major with obstetric these, trauma The events multiple these interrelated. often and in are conditions initiating fetus, enters and obstetric lead injury. tissue widespread the often endothelial coexist placenta, can conditions, For derived from to example, amniotic shock, factor the however, or and dead fluid in circulation; hypoxia, retained acidosis which factors as phospholipids, coagulation releases contact act Trauma activate the fat and the the intrinsic brain to of thereby and cascade. arm

pathogenic mechanism, consequences. Whatever DIC has the two widespread deposition fibrin within there microcirculation. First, the is in through The vulnerable (microangiopathic hemolytic and red obstruction leads severely organs more associated vessels thrombi as fibrin to hemolysis passing while the affected traumatized anemia). narrowed ischemia cells or by are plasminogen is and and secondary clotting platelets of the there factors bleeding depletion of activators, tendency. because a Second, of release the superimposed their not reducing thereby to and to but (fibrinolysis) fibrin V Plasmin factors cleaves further. also VIII, concentration only addition, fibrin In degradation creates fibrinolysis products. have of aggregation, anti-thrombin platelet to inhibit impair fibrin activity, ( the and failure polymerization, hemostatic contribute all which These

Fig. 12.30 http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. products injury platelet tissue Consumption hemolytic of occlusion clotting thrombosis aggregation Bleeding Pathophysiologyofdisseminatedintravascularcoagulation.Massive Fibrinolysis Proteolysis factors damage Activation Fibrin Ischemic fibrin Platelet and Endothelial destruction factors split Sepsis anemia thrombin, plasmin polymerization Widespread Inhibition aggregation, 12.30 and tissue of clotting of of platelets Vascular Microangiopathic microvascular

Associated Disorders Disseminated With 12.12 Major Coagulation Table Intravascular

Carcinomasofpancreas,prostate,lung,andstomachAcutepromyelocyticleukemia

Acuteintravascularhemolysis,snakebite,gianthemangioma,shock,heatstroke,vasculitis,aorticaneurysm,liverdisease

tissue of factor Release

(Chapter19).ThebleedingtendencyassociatedwithDICismanifestednotonlybylarger-than-expectedhemorrhagesnearfociofinfarctionbutalsobydiffusepetechiaeandecchymosesontheskin,serosalliningsofthebodycavities,epicardium,endocardium,lungs,andmucosalliningoftheurinarytract. pituitary syndrome aremostoftenfoundinthearteriolesandcapillariesofthekidneys,adrenals,brain,andheart,butnoorganisspared.Theglomerulicontainsmallfibrinthrombi.Thesemaybeassociatedwithonlyasubtle,reactiveswellingoftheendothelialcellsorvaryingdegreesoffocalglomerulitis.Themicrovascularocclusionsgiverisetosmallinfarctsintherenalcortex.Inseverecasestheischemiacandestroytheentirecortexandcausebilateralrenalcorticalnecrosis.InvolvementoftheadrenalglandscanproducetheWaterhouse-Friderichsen postpartum MORPHOLOGYInDIC,microthrombi (Chapter20).Microinfarctsalsoarecommonlyencounteredinthebrainandareoftensurroundedbymicroscopicorgrossfociofhemorrhage.Thesecangiverisetobizarreneurologicsigns.Similarchangesareseenintheheartandoftenintheanteriorpituitary.DICmaycontributetothedevelopmentofSheehan necrosis

As bleeding the the manifestations be might on between clinical is balance and range imagined, enormous. clotting tendencies, possible of depending (e.g., dominated is that those (e.g., manifest chronic tends with to obstetric cancer) to whereas DIC symptoms related complications) in signs as acute In and with thrombosis. by DIC occurs general, with bleeding, associated usually large on involved confined the but microcirculation, vessels abnormal clotting is are The to occasion. or The acute dyspnea, cyanosis, and be failure, convulsions, shock, renal there minimal, manifestations be may may coma. announced and copious presence bleeding DIC is of Most postpartum by the skin. petechiae the on or the and of often, ecchymoses onset prolonged be into may severe hemorrhage the there manifestations, only or or the urinary may tract. These be gut of fibrinogen). and factors, the PTT thrombocytopenia prolongation of shows Laboratory the platelets, (from clotting and evaluation and PT depletion are Fibrin in products increased plasma. split the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

disorder severity nature depending of and the fibrinolysis. widely of the varies prognosis the on underlying and clotting The intra-vascular the as plasma. can life be frozen anticoagulants such must with contained heparin Acute fresh in threatening or DIC aggressively treated coagulants be and the testing. identified laboratory by is Conversely, DIC unexpectedly chronic sometimes either definitive directed treatment must underlying at In be cause. the circumstance,

a thrombocytopenia is bleeding and tests. Isolated normal coagulation with associated tendency less platelets/µL generally 150,000 is count A than considered thrombocytopenia. below until platelets/µL only is platelet counts However, spontaneous platelets/µL. when fall an bleeding is bleeding, of risk counts to fall 5000 posttraumatic 50,000 unlikely to 20,000 there increased and tracts, mucous the blood small, sites. gastrointestinal produces other large Most superficial of urinary skin, in and petechiae or ecchymoses and occurs the membranes vessels from bleeding and the with hazard major nervous counts. platelet the Larger hemorrhages are depressed in markedly a system central those into

of thrombocytopenia causes are major The listed in

. Table 12.13 reduced of important confined production is with increased disorders Clinically destruction to platelets. or thrombocytopenia destruction the When of of compensatory increase marrow the in is number the bone a megakaryocytes. accelerated the usually shows cause platelets, Also of of is one the hematologic note, of common manifestations thrombocytopenia most AIDS. in basis, autoantibodies, HIV-mediated suppression a megakaryocyte of has development course destruction, and anti-platelet the and can occur immune survival. platelet early It complex–mediated including multifactorial HIV infection and of

Immune two thrombocytopenic clinical purpura (ITP) includes subtypes. affect a years. to tends is common 40 Chronic between ITP relatively 20 that women and the disorder ages of after infections. self-limited form seen in Acute mostly ITP viral is a children

complexes against Ib/IX glycoproteins of can roughly chronic detected or 80% membrane Antibodies platelet in directed cases ITP. IIb/IIIa be of of platelets. is major anti-platelet spleen the production an the of antibody IgG-coated important site destruction and The of site importance of a in of not spleen the is premature the splenomegaly feature chronic Although the uncomplicated ITP,

of 12.13 Thrombocytopenia Causes Table

Aplasticanemia:congenitalandacquiredMarrowinfiltration:leukemia,disseminatedcancer

Drug-induced:alcohol,thiazides,cytotoxicdrugsInfections:measles,HIVinfection

Autoimmune:ITP,systemiclupuserythematosus

Isoimmune:posttransfusionandneonatal

Drug-associated:quinidine,heparin,sulfacompounds

Infections:infectiousmononucleosis,HIVinfection,cytomegalovirusinfection

Multipletransfusions(e.g.,formassivebloodloss)

immunethrombocytopenicpurpura;TTP, humanimmunodeficiencyvirus;ITP, thromboticthrombocytopenicpurpura. Disseminatedintravascularcoagulation;HIV, DIC,

of platelet induces platelets which in more and the benefits two-thirds complete is than by destruction a of proved the of patients. normalizes count splenectomy, remission a by bone thrombocytopenia common numbers caused destruction. megakaryocytes, finding of usually of The to increased all contains marrow platelet forms accelerated

is of chronic insidious. The onset ITP gum minor petechiae, hemorrhages bruising, after easy trauma. and Common include findings bleeding, epistaxis, subarachnoid or uncommon. serious are intracerebral hemorrhages more Fortunately, diagnosis clinical The the ITP. examination the secondary features, of of marrow, the on the of thrombocytopenia, exclusion rests and presence available. clinical antibodies tests Reliable are anti-platelet for not agents involves the some Treatment in cases, and, usually immunosuppressive use of splenectomy.

clinical (discussed of detail 4) in special more brief This in mention Chapter merits type drug-induced because thrombocytopenia of importance. its develops after 5% 3% Moderate of in weeks patients to thrombocytopenia 2 heparin. 1 to to treatment unfractionated with severe of IgG caused fashion. platelet 4 platelet disorder is that on factor antibodies bind by heparin-dependent to The membranes a in treat—thrombosis. exacerbating the thereby heparin that aggregation, used Resultant is condition to platelets the of their activation induces limbs) and of thromboses even Both cause (e.g., arterial severe and in morbidity occur, loss the venous thrombocytopenia, may of marked setting and death. cycle Cessation the platelet of heparin consumption. of and therapy breaks activation prevented not by low-molecular-weight (but use preparations. heparin entirely) The risk this is of complication of lowered

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ThromboticMicroangiopathies:ThromboticThrombocytopenicPurpuraandHemolyticUremicSyndrome

spectrum clinical hemolytic syndrome encompasses The thrombocytopenic thrombotic term purpura of (TTP) syndromes thrombotic uremic that a and (HUS). include microangiopathies is anemia, microangiopathic renal thrombocytopenia, hemolytic deficits, of As the with pentad and transient associated fever, TTP failure. neurologic defined, originally associated also of from and failure, renal thrombocytopenia and in TTP but distinguished of with neurologic anemia is is absence frequent 14). children HUS occurrence the microangiopathic acute the symptoms, by dominance hemolytic (Chapter one neurologic with and HUS some as fever adults patients experience more of Clinical have blurred with and distinctions, five these criteria, lack dysfunction. many the has or TTP platelet-rich widespread is Fundamental conditions the both the to in formation of microcirculation. thrombi the consumption anemia. narrowing in results the platelets and The hemolytic microangiopathic platelet-rich leads to of by a thrombocytopenia, vessels blood thrombi of All severity, damage of produce in is in detail of the greater Chapter their renal discussed 14. microangiopathies pathogenesis and variable thrombotic

microangiopathic distinct. as microvascular is note share the It such and pathogenically that important thrombotic hemolytic features microangiopathies anemia, are although and occlusion to DIC they activation normal. importance, TTP tests) (e.g., cascade in PTT laboratory HUS coagulation PT so DIC, and in coagulation unlike the of primary usually tests Furthermore, and and are of the of not the of is results

clotting acquired of congenital factors. or disorders Coagulation result either deficiencies from involve Acquired most common deficiencies are several factors simultaneously. and often prothrombin coagulation IX, vitamin and in deficiency causes X, of severe required for 8, K factors As the and Chapter and VII, its a is defect. clotting discussed synthesis complex synthesizes hepatic and factors liver factors activated The from thus, circulation; coagulation parenchymal several are many of removes coagulation the common hemorrhagic diatheses. diseases causes also multiple already to concomitant As may DIC also deficiencies. lead discussed, factor autoantibodies cause deficiencies may acquired limited single factor. to Rarely, a

factors deficiencies of coagulation have many been Hereditary identified. also A of factor deficiency (a Hemophilia

whereas autosomal X-linked deficiency hemophilia are a (Christmas disorders. deficiencies factor are traits, B VIII) other of IX) and disease, recessive further A, sufficiently Willebrand Of hemophilia common the and are hemophilia B inherited only deficiencies, disease, consideration. von to warrant

are and the defects or von caused disease quantitative Willebrand by factor qualitative involving complex. A Hemophilia VIII–vWF As structure for function and these of useful two proteins background ( these disorders, review to subsequent discussion is it of the

Fig. 12.31

activates factor an essential in coagulation for factor As the factor earlier, described pathway. IX, intrinsic which VIII is cofactor X as of which exists to up multimers vWF, binds noncovalently factor large Circulating to VIII

Fig. weight. 12.31 aggregated Subendothelial defect X StructureandfunctionoffactorVIII–vonWillebrandfactor(vWF)complex.FactorVIIIandvWFcirculateasacomplex.vWFalsoispresentinthesubendothelialmatrixofnormalbloodvessels.FactorVIIItakespartinthecoagulationcascadebyactivatingfactorXbymeansoffactorIX(not XavWF with 20 Platelet platelets in vWF Endothelial Platelet cascade Factor shown).vWFcausesadhesionofplateletstosubendothelialcollagen,primarilythroughtheglycoproteinIb(GpIb)plateletreceptor.Factor GpIb Clotting VIII GpIIb/IIIa Fibrinogen Megadaltons Circulating Activated, VIII vWF n are VIII source vWF, plasma most whereas of in the synthesized factor major is liver. the Endothelial cells in factor bodies, where granules, called plasma in endothelial vWF (in binds cytoplasmic cells the collagen. found to VIII), Weibel-Palade subendothelium, vesicles in within and association is it with platelet the in

exposed platelets, lesser and When subendothelial IIb/IIIa Ib binds cells mainly glycoprotein away to injury, is are a trauma through endothelial glycoprotein ( by stripped and vWF through or degree

Fig. ). 12.31 plug. walls, the platelets crucial of damaged early important The a to a vWF of to is of vessel facilitate the formation function hemostatic in event most blood adhesion disease. Willebrand in the adhesion von bleeding platelet underlie tendency believed to is Inadequate vWF in stabilizes VIII. VIII; deficiency to In adhesion, addition role leads vWF to factor platelet factor secondary also deficiency its thus, a of

various measuring disease are the diagnosed The by forms function of Willebrand of quantity, and vWF. von size, ristocetin test. the vWF assessed platelet agglutination function is using and bivalent glycoprotein be of Ristocetin easily. “bridges” Ib, platelet can event interplatelet cause measured creating clump binding the to vWF that that an (agglutination), somehow “activates” membrane platelets vWF. Thus, platelet as serves agglutination for a ristocetin-dependent bioassay useful

of from VIII–vWF to resulting deficiencies factor the background we discussion this of With complex. now turn diseases

an von is dominant transmitted as Willebrand disease disorder. autosomal presents bleeding menorrhagia. membranes, usually It as and from wounds, excessive bleeding spontaneous mucous from as mild. tests requires and often quite manifestations clinical are the sophisticated diagnosis is the underrecognized, It this disease European in descent. prevalent, persons particularly surprisingly is of Actually, 1% the von United is of bleeding It estimated making in people that approximately disease, it most inherited the Willebrand States disorder. common have

produces in platelet the People function Willebrand and findings. only coagulation, disease defect but in cases compound defects von most platelet with have clinical hemophilia those produce exceptions deficiency with whom (described of homozygous a of von Willebrand in The resembling disease, rare patients factor concomitant enough is to features VIII there later). in severe are

allowing causative The several divided of Willebrand mutations disease von the be into vary, effects to subtypes

von of the 1 and Type Willebrand disease. variant common most is classic quantity vWF which It an reduced. the is in of is circulating disorder dominant autosomal in decrease levels. is factor clinically There VIII measurable a but insignificant also

high–molecular-weight into divided Type of loss vWF. II subtypes selective of several is the multimers characterized by of multimers are deficiency large form, there is functional Because active these most the a vWF. high-molecular-weight multimers type deficiency. true to leading IIA, a not are the In synthesized, “hyperfunctional” that high-molecular-weight are IIB, synthesized type removed multimers circulation. rapidly In are from the abnormal thrombocytopenia, in von very-high–molecular-weight the type IIB chronic mild with multimers situation (a aggregation TTP); resulting people reminiscent disease high-molecular-weight cause consumption. some from These presumably of spontaneous multimer platelet Willebrand have seen platelet indeed, aggregates

A the hereditary Hemophilia serious common most cause bleeding. of is caused VIII reduced by It is an disorder factor recessive activity. X-linked primarily males. It affects presumably the X inactivation (unfavorable females, normal less excessive due heterozygous lyonization). factor bleeding to VIII occurs of chromosome carrying Much commonly, the gene in preferential positive is a cases by the mutations; remainder, family history. are of in caused Approximately new there 30% hemophilia normal). (activity people of 1% factor in is observed levels of A deficiencies < with marked VIII Severe or become in hemostatic the apparent of only deficiencies Milder stressses. face trauma may other splice by The are varying causative mutations. the of degrees deficiency mutations, junction different of many deletions, including VIII factor existence explained inversions, and a causes normal 10% concentration patients, in VIII the of immunoassay, is In that because but activity factor a mutation low factor by VIII is of of function. coagulant about loss the

symptomatic cases after tendency hemorrhage toward or is procedures. there In operative trauma a massive bruising and easy joints, are particularly be can hemorrhages In subject recurrent mechanical to progressive are tissues that (hemarthroses) the lead “spontaneous” where to addition, that crippling. deformities normally frequently encountered bleeds stress, in are absent. Petechiae characteristically assays are factor of used to VIII diagnosis A. for confirm Specific the hemophilia corrected normal hemophilia PTT the a have plasma by is prolonged plasma. that with patient’s A Typically, with patients mixing deficiency VIII. confirm Specific assays factor factor the to of then are used complicated against hemophilia because VIII, probably therapy neutralizing with of is a antibodies those by factor “foreign” A, is approximately of system severe antigen. by replacement 15% the In immune seen VIII the factor development as correct In fails mixing the to these PTT studies. in persons,

is A factor Hemophilia treated with VIII infusions. of was with diseases. it the risk plasma, VIII transmission viral Historically, human of carrying from prepared factor developed thousands Chapter factor and As 5, HIV AIDS. hemophiliacs with 1985 of before received mentioned VIII subsequently contaminated preparations in therapy. risk of VIII infectious more eliminated widespread and VIII replacement have now The VIII concentrates availability purified highly of the and factor use recombinant factor factor

IX from deficiency is factor an X-linked A clinically that much hemophilia but is less indistinguishable disorder Severe is common. PTT The prolonged. is assays The is using of factor diagnosis made IX. specific factor IX. infusion It recombinant of treated by is

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Canbedominatedbybleeding,vascularocclusionandtissuehypoxemia,orboth

Commontriggers:sepsis,majortrauma,certaincancers,obstetriccomplications

Maybetriggeredbydrugs,infections,orlymphomas,ormaybeidiopathic

Bothmanifestwiththrombocytopenia,microangiopathichemolyticanemia,andrenalfailure;feverandCNSinvolvementaremoretypicalofTTP.

CausedbyacquiredorinheriteddeficienciesofADAMTS13,aplasmametalloproteasethatcleavesvery-high-molecular- TTP:

weightmultimersofvWF.DeficiencyofADAMTS13resultsinabnormallylargevWFmultimersthatactivateplatelets. Transfusion of Complications

•Hemolytic Causedbydeficienciesofcomplementregulatoryproteinsoragentsthatdamageendothelialcells,suchasaShiga-liketoxinelaboratedbyE. syndrome: uremic coli strainO157:H7.Theendothelialinjuryinitiatesplateletactivation,plateletaggregation,andmicrovascularthrombosis.

AutosomaldominantdisordercausedbymutationsinvWF,alargeproteinthatpromotestheadhesionofplateletstosubendothelialcollagen.

Typicallycausesamildtomoderatebleedingdisorderresemblingthatassociatedwiththrombocytopenia.

X-linkeddisordercausedbymutationsinfactorVIII.AffectedmalestypicallypresentwithseverebleedingintosofttissuesandjointsandhaveaPTT. A: Hemophilia

X-linkeddisordercausedbymutationsincoagulationfactorIX.ItisclinicallyidenticaltohemophiliaA. B: Hemophilia

and stem complex such cell life,” injuries often permitting that as gift to people rightly prove products procedures otherwise “the would traumatic called surgical hematopoietic fatal. are survive transplantation Blood procedures and of cell red Over in given are 5 million transfusions

hospitals year. each U.S. blood plasma) safer (packed before. are fresh-frozen to of Thanks screening red and cells, donors, ever products than improved platelets, blood

occur. still complications Nevertheless, Most and transient. are minor red sometimes nonhemolytic dyspnea, form is 6 of and febrile mild a of which as to platelets. cells reaction, most referred hours The of takes within or fever a the with chills, common transfusion these is donor caused inflammatory mediators by reactions from thought leukocytes. It are derived that of is frequency age product limit by donor increases The storage reactions decreased the these and with of measures contamination. leukocyte the that short-lived. to respond anti-pyretics are Symptoms and

or but therefore rare, reactions and sometimes have Other transfusion severe are consequences, can and brief merit uncommon fatal discussion.

previously allergic to potentially occur Severe, certain antigens blood when containing are products fatal recipients. given may reactions sensitized 1:300 These with patients IgA in frequency of occur 1:500 likely has deficiency, which a to most to are people. IgA infused recognize IgG in reaction by is that product. antibodies the The triggered blood Fortunately, in deficiency antibodies, in transfusions. reactions are 1 severe these IgA to occurring in with most 1 rare, and develop do 50,000 20,000 such patients not allergic the is the an may be recognized the by in by blood Urticarial presence that reactions of triggered IgE antibodies donated product in recipient. allergen transfusions, mild. common, they in 3% are of These occurring 1% more generally are to but

caused Acute reactions are donor fix against preformed by hemolytic cells that red usually IgM antibodies complement. receive most ABO They allows in from patient of a incompatible labeling an an error that or commonly tube stem patient identification unit to blood. A to rapidly and antigens with B, pain. cells shaking against or chills, associated “natural” usually hemoglobinuria induce fever, blood IgM and Preexisting lysis, and red complement-mediated bind flank antibodies, group intravascular hemolysis, test direct red Coombs The cells positive have all donor of the is unless lysed. signs rather cells (e.g., as and dextrose than without 5% The se, produces osmotic hemoglobinuria activation to any mistakenly symptoms. simultaneously) by red lysis cells symptoms infusing complement and in due per other are red hemolysis water of may process death. cases the severe In and shock, renal failure, rapidly DIC, progress to

recognize hemolytic a red through example, to by the previous antigens caused sensitized recipient that reactions transfusion. are Delayed that for previously, was http://ebooksmedicine.net antibodies blood cell a direct are elevated antibodies typically and features caused These positive with test laboratory and and IgG low by (e.g., LDH). associated haptoglobin Coombs of are hemolysis fix potentially Rh, and sometimes complement, fatal mismatches. those Kidd severe and such as identical to to reactions seen antigens ABO resulting with Kell, Antibodies in signs Other and not fix antibodies symptoms. that relatively hemolysis in result complement minor do and typically extravascular

the frequently acute fatal lung complication the microvasculature. blood in Transfusion-related injury which a is in a neutrophils lung trigger product severe, of (TRALI) activation factors in transfused incidence 10,000 is less 1 probably than low, transfusions. per The hit” hypothesis. TRALI thinking favors Current “two about a The hit pulmonary in endothelial capillaries. cells an exposure activates first is that to sepsis, smoking, This and “priming” shock, event and leads diverse sequestration of neutrophils. has including causes, by the constitutes blood primed The then activated the factor a product, present in are hit. neutrophils which second transfused

in is recognizes “second expressed leading an candidate The product blood antibody transfused on antigens the hit” neutrophils. that class antigens. associated common most bind with I the far TRALI antibodies By are that (MHC) major complex those histocompatibility antibodies expressed in in These by in fetus. antigens are foreign they response to generated the found multiparous whom MHC are women, often TRALI from in to cut Indeed, in multiparous of women incidence donation have plasma being resulted measures exclude the half. diffuse of with sudden associated during infiltrates after a or dramatic, failure is pulmonary bilateral with onset respiratory soon The transfusion. presentation cases is mortality The guarded; to up are in treatment uncomplicated and and in the supportive those 67% 5% ill. is outcome is severely largely who

can blood viral Virtually most so. are products, likely bacterial to any be transmitted infectious agent through and be but infections cell the must growth be which is favors stored produce to room red at than symptoms) bacterial preparations, fact contaminants. red bacterial Significant (sufficient much more platelets because preparations in of contamination platelet of (unlike that temperature, cells) common 5000. of as be in as 1 platelet to high Rates bacterial transfusion secondary infection can patients (fever, laboratory antibiotics in results. may necessary symptomatic the prospectively start those hypotension) to while it and of chills, be transfusion awaiting Many symptoms resemble reactions, broad-spectrum of

have donor viral transmission the decreased dramatically in selection, products. Advances infectious testing by disease screening, blood donor and of incidence However when acutely can on of transmission transfusion-related the occasions infected, still rare is there donor be viruses. estimated hepatitis of B in in 1 are 2 1 C, transmission million, and 500,000, respectively. million, be in 1 Rates hepatitis of to HIV, and 1 agents babesiosis. remains Nile virus, There also of infectious West low risk as trypanosomiasis, a “exotic” and such

of Spleen Disorders Thymus and the

involved The spleen a wide in variety frequently of systemic diseases. is of produces (splenomegaly), and responds signs all spleen set alteration enlarging In stereotypical by instances that the virtually an symptoms. a the aided recognition by disorders. of Evaluation limits produced of enlargement splenomegaly of by splenic usual is specific into or to B12 the the erroneous spleen diagnosis to deficiency, vitamin of an entertain of attribute CML in enlarged pushing be to a would It pelvis absence splenomegaly. Disorders they be grouped degree the characteristically of according splenomegaly that may to produce:

cell leukemias primary leukemia); malaria); myelofibrosis); (e.g., indolent hairy infectious (CLL diseases certain lymphomas; neoplasms many disease Myeloproliferative and Gaucher (CML,

disorders Niemann-Pick with and infections, Chronic spherocytosis, sarcoma typhoid; hemolytic splenic or hemolysis hypertension endocarditis, (portal including major, sarcoidosis; anemia; disease; obstruction); amyloidosis; extravascular leukemias; tuberculosis, or carcinoma acute infective autoimmune vein splenomegaly many thalassemia (hereditary congestive metastatic

congestion; and septicemia, Acute intraabdominal disorders, lupus splenic infectious miscellaneous acute erythematosus, infections mononucleosis; including systemic splenitis;

are in microscopic diseases changes this other these associated and the sections The chapters. discussed with relevant of

resulting A of blood, of more often one leukopenia, the removes excessive formed of thrombocytopenia. chronically anemia, elements or in enlarged numbers or spleen with state that to previously. can of be the referred listed many a This associated is as hypersplenism, diseases or neutropenia. persons pulp; and as addition, result, anemia particularly splenomegaly red a interstices of with sequestration platelets In susceptible severe is are the prevalent in than thrombocytopenia more the is to in

http://ebooksmedicine.net

T As has differentiation. crucial the in cell known, well thymus is a role T therefore, not the that is lineage be particularly surprising, lymphomas, those of can by chapter). earlier this involved (discussed thymus It in cell thymic the and hyperplasia uncommon) (albeit is still of disorders The two frequent focus thymoma. thymus: on here the most

with presence enlargement follicles, lymphoid the Thymic within germinal or the of medulla. often centers, associated is cells, These B numbers are in only germinal in centers which reactive contain thymuses. normal present small with most such lupus myasthenia is found sometimes occurs gravis and and also autoimmune as hyperplasia Thymic erythematosus in in patients systemic diseases, other rheumatoid follicular arthritis. gravis and myasthenia Chapter 22. The between discussed is the in thymus relationship often hyperplastic removal the is in early beneficial of significance, Of disease. thymus the

cells. thymic of Thymomas are tumors epithelial and Several been proposed. cytologic biologic systems have thymoma criteria for on classification based follows: is useful One and classification simple as clinically

or cytologically thymoma: biologically encapsulated benign Benign and

I: aggressive but cytologically and benign Type infiltrative locally

malignant and Type (thymic carcinoma): II cytologically biologically

thymomas, thymomas. theepithelialcellsarespindledorelongatedandresemblethosethatnormallypopulatethemedulla.Asaresult,thesearesometimesreferredtoasmedullary MORPHOLOGYMacroscopically,thymomasarelobulated,firm,gray-whitemassesupto15to20cmindimension.Mostappearencapsulated,but20%to25%penetratethecapsuleandinfiltrateperithymictissues.Microscopically,virtuallyallthymomasarecomposedofamixtureofepithelialtumorcellsandnonneoplasticthymocytes(immatureTcells).Inbenign Inothertumors,thereisanadmixtureoftheplumper,rounder,cortical-typeepithelialcells;thispatternissometimesreferredtoasamixedthymoma.Themedullaryandmixedpatternsaccountfor60%to70%ofallthymomas.

Malignant thymoma type iscytologicallyblandbutlocallyinvasive;itaccountsfor20%to25%ofallthymomas.Thesetumorsalsooccasionally(andunpredictably)metastasize.Theyarecomposedofvaryingproportionsofepithelialcellsandreactivethymocytes.Theepithelialcellsusuallyhaveabundantcytoplasmandroundedvesicularnuclei,anappearancesimilartonormalthymiccorticalepithelialcells;spindledepithelialcellsaresometimespresentaswell.Theepithelialcellsoftenpalisadearoundbloodvessels.Thecriticaldistinguishingfeatureisthepenetrationofthecapsulewiththeinvasionofsurroundingstructures. I

Malignant II type thymoma isperhapsbetterthoughtofasaformofthymiccarcinoma. Thesetumorsaccountforabout5%ofthymomas.Macroscopically,theyusuallyarefleshy,obviouslyinvasivemassesthatoftenmetastasizetosuchsitesasthelungs.Microscopically,mostresemblesquamouscellcarcinoma.

rare. are Thymomas arise any They in at middle-aged may age, but most occur adults. most series about syndrome; discovered in and a In disease, the is gravis, commonly which large to patients. manifestations 20% 30% and systemic 30% of asymptomatic; to myasthenia dyspnea, cava with thymoma remainder such a were 40% concomitant produced associated in cough, as were 15% local vena a superior the to of often neuromuscular Removal improvement tumor disorder. leads the of gravis other myasthenia several In associated thymomas addition pareneoplastic to be , with may syndromes. in order and multi hypogammaglobulinemia, rough cell autoimmunity. These , aplasia, red frequency of include organ pure latter graft host with disease. resemblance The bears versus

RA: hemoglobinuria, 2014. nocturnal Brodsky Blood 124:2804, Paroxysmal concise [A current review.]

Da Hereditary and membrane Blood Galimand other cell disorders, red spherocytosis, elliptocytosis, et 2013. Rev Fenneteau O, al: J, L, Cost 27:167, red overview membrane defects.] cell excellent inherited [An of

2013. Ganz homeostasis, 93:1721, iron Rev Physiol Systemic T: [A and disease.] metabolism health review of iron in

Platt disease, 2008. the OS: of treatment cell J for 358:1362, Med sickle Hydroxyurea Engl N cell in effects the on sickle hydroxyurea [A focused disease.] of review beneficial

Investigating severe cross-geographical a Am J Med Wassmer PK, pathogenesis malaria: and 2015. TE, the et Hyg approach, al: 93(Suppl):42, multidisciplinary Trop Rathod Taylor SC, of pathophysiology forms severe of proposed of [A malaria.] of review the

TE, Update Brandow 2014. et cell Wong of the sickle in therapy 124:3850, al: hydroxy-urea disease, use Lim on AM, Blood W, [A hydroxyurea effects the beneficial cell in disease.] sickle focused on review of

JC: Young and 2010. Marsh anemia: Marrow NS, Transplant Bacigalupo pathophysiology treatment, Aplastic Blood Biol A, 16:S119, telomerase mutations aplastic the anemia.] of and in system of the immune [Discussion role

RD: KC, Carrasco 2011. Anderson of myeloma, Rev 6:249, Pathol Annu Pathogenesis in review myeloma.] [A pathogenesis the of understanding advances of molecular multiple

neoplasms The revision 127:2391, Blood of Arber A, to Health acute World and Organization al: 2016. classification myeloid leukemia, 2016 DA, R, Hasserjian Orazi the et neoplasms.] report the classification WHO rationale of for revision providing myeloid the of [A http://ebooksmedicine.net

381:1943, M, leukemia, Greaves Acute lymphoblastic Mullighan H, Inaba CG: Lancet 2013. [A treatment the ALL.] review and pathogenesis, of of diagnosis,

Hematol Mathas Hodgkin Semin S, 53:139, R: biology, and 2016. Hartmann Pathology lymphoma: S, Kuppers Hodgkin review lymphoma [A of concise pathogenesis.]

lymphoid al: revision World SH, E, the et Pileri 127:2375, SA, Campo neoplasms, Health Organization of The Blood of 2016. classification 2016 Swerdlow the most WHO lymphoid overview of neoplasms.] [An of classification recent

and novo Genomic adult landscapes Med Genome networks myeloid Atlas Network: in leukemia, 2013. de Engl The acute Research N J Cancer epigenomic 368:2059, approaches and genomic in that paper other to genome-wide describe AML.] alterations [Landmark next-generation sequencing uses systematically

2013. LM: 12:229, Targeting signaling RM, in Discov Rev Staudt B receptor Nat Young pathological malignancies, cell lymphoid Drug therapeutic and review receptor a signaling its [An B non-Hodgkin role in target.] potential excellent lymphoma cell of the as of

Med GM, Annu Rev 61:77, Arepally Heparin-induced 2010. thrombocytopenia, TL: Ortel discussion in clinical [A approaches features, pathogenesis, HIT.] and of diagnostic therapeutic criteria,

125:2029, J: 2015. Diagnostic C, Blood disease, Di Ng von to Motto approach Willebrand Paola DG, on vWD.] diagnosis review [A molecular and of the pathogenesis

Nat M, Remuzzi 8:622, Mescia of and complement Rev diseases G: all STEC-HUS, 2013. F, atypical HUS are Nephrol activation, Noris TTP article activation possible of complement excessive pathway TTP.] in HUS the on of focused role the and [An alternative

2010. and 125(S1):S70, Mackman Cellular tissue Pawlinski Thromb R, Res of in factor N: endotoxemia sepsis, sources bacterial the role [An procoagulants of in overview of with infection.] DIC associated cellular

36:71, Hemost thrombocytopenia ADAMTS-13, thrombotic Z, purpura, Nguyen al: Willebrand Thromb Zhou Semin P, and Von Guchhait TC, 2010. factor, et focused deregulation on vWF role the [A TTP.] and of deficiency ADAMTS 13 in review

and That Thymus Spleen Disorders Affect the

SS, the 2005. of World the relevance a 127:755, review, for clinicopathologic Chung and study patients of Prognostic of tumors: Choi thymic clinical Organization Chest Health schema Kim KD, literature 108 epithelial and KY: classification [A shows large that outcome stage that the in of best series clinicopathologic is thymoma.] predictor studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

ChronicInterstitial(Restrictive,Infiltrative)LungDiseases

Human Virus Pulmonary and Disease Immunodeficiency Hemorrhage, Embolism, Infection in Pulmonary

and Hemothorax, Pneumonias Hospital-Acquired Pneumothorax,

and Histoplasmosis, Carcinoma Coccidioidomycosis, Nasopharyngeal

in Pneumonia the Immunocompromised

blood. and oxygen to the lung is major replenish from dioxide of function The remove carbon the ventral respiratory is wall foregut. the an the from Developmentally, system outgrowth of lateral the outpouchings, midline The trachea develops lung buds. two main divides into bud on giving three thus and right rise two bronchi, the into the the main eventually three two to left bronchi, left. right lung and on lobes The their progressively smaller cartilage main the and to lack bronchioles, bronchi giving dichotomously, are airways, rise termed of distinguished which branch from bronchi The walls. within submucosal glands by called part is bronchioles; terminal Additional the to lung to an leads acinus. the the bronchioles terminal branching of bronchiole distal of of walls proceed into immediately of acini whose alveolar ultimate blind branch exchange. alveolar which ends bronchioles of from respiratory ducts, are terminal alveoli, the the (emanating sacs, of bronchiole) gas passages, into entirely site the composed formed respiratory the are Pulmonary that blood following to alveolar alveolar from walls of components, septa) (or the consist The ( air proceeding

Fig. 13.1

membrane. and endothelium The basement capillary

elastic smooth and rare composed fine bundles of pulmonary cells, collagen, of mononuclear interstitium, small cells, muscle fibroblast-like cells, mast a few fibers, The cells.

alveolar cell type of pneumocytes. I Alveolar types: of and of principal consisting covering surface; 95% plate-like two continuous pneumocytes II a rounded type the flattened, epithelium, layer • I cell after type the epithelium surfactant to of and latter involved type main repair pneumocytes. are pulmonary damage in synthesize alveolar The

free within few A lie macrophages alveolar the usually space. alveolar contain macrophages these the city carbon particles. In often phagocytosed dwellers,

the (3) Lung those can broadly airways, and (1) divided interstitium, the (2) the into be affecting pulmonary vascular diseases system. division of compartments This is, discrete into deceptively course, simple. in of secondary function morphology and disease In compartment one others. alterations reality, causes often in

caused collapse, lung known expansion is volume by loss spaces. of air inadequate also Atelectasis, as of of a rise from and results giving veins, shunting ventilation-perfusion It blood to in pulmonary into thus imbalance oxygenated arteries hypoxia. inadequately On the the http://ebooksmedicine.net basis of

Fig.13.1 Microscopicstructureofthealveolarwall.Notethatthebasementmembrane(yellow) isthinononesideandwidenedwhereitiscontinuouswiththeinterstitialspace.

mechanism three classified collapse, atelectasis alveolar forms the and is underlying distribution into of

an from airways. reaching prevents air obstruction occurs atelectasis distal Resorption when air absorbed, becomes and gradually present alveolar collapse follows. Any collapse of is bronchus. a most obstruction The resorption of common cause first bronchiectasis, be chronic result foreign in atelectasis bronchitis, or or aspiration mucous may tumor, asthma, but mucopurulent also of it which postoperatively children), occurs most sign due the from intrabronchial body to intrabronchial in may malignancy. frequently bronchial Resorption (particularly plugs,

cavity. air the is blood, Compression or within with pleural accumulation of atelectasis associated fluid, usually congestive cause failure. A frequent setting occurring pleural of in effusions heart the is the cavity air to (pneumothorax) of pleural Leakage atelectasis. compression leads also into failure after deeply bedridden Basal in ascites, commonly atelectasis in and patients, occurs from patients and surgery. a breath to resulting during with

occurs or (or fibrosis the cicatrization local Contraction pleura hamper expansion. lung atelectasis or when lung affecting atelectasis) the diffuse

contraction) the should superimposed of promptly Atelectasis when reversible by hypoxemia (except be and and is prevent to potentially infection caused treated lung. collapsed

acute and The distress (ARDS) syndrome are epidemiology of definition respiratory evolving. failure, injury, spectrum week defined of occurring bilateral fluid the overload. a severe to within as end insult Formerly not a known considered by lung respiratory imaging, with or of of explained 1 fully is opacities on acute atelectasis, failure be now it clinical effusions, chest cardiac blood the based on changes It severity is graded arterial the of oxygenation. in is all shared alveoli. diverse; lead to that injury feature extensive Causes are the to bilateral

oxygen to by and refractory arterial characterized is that of respiratory onset rapid Severe cyanosis, life-threatening severe insufficiency, ARDS therapy. hypoxemia is histologic The of alveolar ARDS is diffuse lungs damage (DAD). manifestation the as in known is severe and diseases may such sepsis. occur associated clinical systemic a ARDS inflammatory as of in multitude pulmonary primary settings with disorders and frequent most of aspiration, pneumonia reactions. ARDS transfusion abdominal triggers pancreatitis, sepsis surgery, trauma followed (35%–45%) (including and fractures), are (30%–35%), and by The and injury, multiple brain deficiency be of should a the caused by surfactant confused syndrome is by respiratory newborn; distress of prematurity. ARDS latter not with the caused

In and endothelial of the integrity alveolar-capillary by is ARDS, epithelial compromised the injury. membrane reaction initiated of a from stems Most inflammatory ARDS ( an suggests that by mediators work variety pro-inflammatory

Fig. 13.2 ). early chemotactic insult, synthesis acute by As there 8 an potent activating minutes pulmonary neutrophil increased 30 as is (IL-8), agent, of and after a macrophages. interleukin factor capillaries. leads other as of neutrophils and (TNF), and activation such and in IL-1 of factors, tumor and to activation IL-8 pulmonary sequestration endothelial Release necrosis are ARDS. Neutrophils role an to in important thought of have pathogenesis the lungs increased within and vascular the early numbers interstitium, alveoli. the the space, shows disease of the of Histologic in process neutrophils examination endothelium. products that proteases) reactive oxygen the alveolar Activated neutrophils epithelium and of species, release variety a damage (e.g., alveolar surfactant assault leakiness unit and The render unable causes of and expand. loss the endothelium the on to vascular epithelium that anti-oxidants an of by that endogenous can cytokines. destructive neutrophils note, the upregulated anti-proteases array counteracted by unleashed by are Of and be proinflammatory forces factors destructive balance between and is injury the of ARDS. the the protective determines the severity the degree that In it and end, tissue clinical of

of phase ARDS, particularly MORPHOLOGYIntheacute thelungsaredarkred,firm,airless,andheavy.Microscopicexaminationrevealscapillarycongestion,necrosisofalveolarepithelialcells,interstitialandintra-alveolaredemaandhemorrhage,and(particularlywithsepsis)collectionsofneutrophilsincapillaries.Themostcharacteristicfindingisthepresenceofhyaline http://ebooksmedicine.net membranes,

II Sloughed Type cell TNF ALVEOLUS swollen NORMAL Inactivated and ACUTE debris TNF type Proteases Necrotic alveolus cell epithelium macrophage Neutrophil sequestration bronchial cell layer into Hyaline LUNG cell Alveolus Capillary membrane Fibroblast Leukotrienes Endothelial I fluid INJURY Basement Bronchial Injured, cells Cellular epithelium endothelial Fibrin migration IL-1 PAF Interstitium Type Edema Edema I Chemokines Alveolar membrane Surfactant Procollagen surfactant

Fig. andtheinjuredalveolusintheearlyphaseofacutelunginjuryandtheacuterespiratorydistresssyndrome.UndertheinfluenceofproinflammatorycytokinessuchasinterleukinsIL-8andIL-1andtumornecrosisfactor(TNF)(releasedbymacrophages),neutrophilsaresequesteredinthepulmonarymicrovasculatureandthenegressintothealveolarspace,wheretheyundergoactivation.Activatedneutrophilsreleaseleukotrienes,oxidants,proteases,andplatelet-activatingfactor(PAF),whichcontributetolocaltissuedamage,accumulationofedemafluid,surfactantinactivation,andhyalinemembraneformation.Subsequently,thereleaseofmacrophage-derivedfibrogeniccytokinessuchastransforminggrowthfactor-β 13.2 (TGF-β)andplatelet-derivedgrowthfactor(PGDF)stimulatefibroblastgrowthandcollagendepositionassociatedwiththehealingphaseofinjury. Thenormalalveolus(left) from acute respiratory Pathophysiology 2006.) syndrome, (Modified the SeminRespirCritCareMed27:337, injury LB: and Ware lung distress acute of

Fig.13.3 stage, ).Suchmembranesconsistoffibrin-richedemafluidadmixedwithremnantsofnecroticepithelialcells.Overall,thepictureisremarkablysimilartothatseeninrespiratorydistresssyndromeofthenewborn(Chapter6).Intheorganizing typeIIpneumocytesproliferatevigorouslyinanattempttoregeneratethealveolarlining.Resolutionisunusual;morecommonly,thefibrin-richexudatesorganizeintointraalveolarfibrosis.Markedthickeningofthealveolarseptaensuesduetoproliferationofinterstitialcellsanddepositionofcollagen.

approximately lung affects ARDS injury patients United 190,000 of clinical syndrome year per acute or States. the in The hours In insult. it 72 of 85% of within develops initial the cases, (27%, respectively). 45% ARDS, severe 32%, and rate 38.5% mild, is and for moderate, hospital mortality overall The and prognosis Predictors advanced age, multiorgan the of poor include development of failure. (sepsis), bacteremia recover survive the acute respiratory rest insufficiency. to within interstitial leading insult 6 12 chronic respiratory fibrosis Most diffuse function months, normal to the patients develop but who

ARDSisaclinicalsyndromeofprogressiverespiratoryinsufficiencycausedbydiffusealveolardamageinthesettingofsepsis,severetrauma,ordiffusepulmonaryinfection.

NeutrophilsandtheirproductshaveacrucialroleinthepathogenesisofARDSbycausingendothelialandepithelialinjury.

Thecharacteristichistologicpictureisthatofalveolaredema,epithelialnecrosis,accumulationofneutrophils,andpresenceofhyalinemembranesliningthealveolarwallandducts.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 13.3 Acutelunginjuryandacuterespiratorydistresssyndrome.

(A)Diffusealveolardamageintheacutephase.Somealveoliarecollapsed,whileothersaredistended;manyarelinedbybrightpinkhyalinemembranes(arrow). associatedwithregenerationandrepair. (B)Thehealingstageismarkedbyresorptionofhyalinemembranesandthickeningofalveolarseptabyinflammatorycells,fibroblasts,andcollagen.NumerousreactivetypeIIpneumocytesalsoareseenatthisstage(arrows),

be into resistance lung lung any air classified disease, diseases level; characterized disease, (2) and in characterized Diffuse (1) by caused can two at obstruction by decreased to total increase categories: parenchyma capacity. and by pulmonary partial (airway) reduced of restrictive an expansion obstructive complete or flow

obstructive asthma. and chronic bronchitis, emphysema, major The are disorders diffuse bronchiectasis, (FVC) capacity measured expiratory or with expiratory forced rate, second volume 1 the vital as In significantly usually patients while at normal forced diseases, these either is flow (FEV1), the decreased. decreased, slightly is decreased. is FEV FVC ratio the to Thus, of characteristically narrowing, Expiratory from in obstruction classically observed of loss emphysema. may airway from characteristic elastic recoil, or result of anatomic asthma,

is proportionately. or rate expiratory By restrictive reduced diseases, the contrast, reduced and normal flow diffuse is FVC in ratio the normal. Hence, is of FEV near to FVC the affect two lungs normal as with presence pleura, (1) [Chapter and respiratory of occur diseases in Guillain-Barré (2) general diseases. chronic that neuromuscular such obesity, the (e.g., or syndrome 22], and Restrictive chest wall the conditions: of in acute the disorders, defects interstitial lung severe muscles) disorders classic is acute earlier. restrictive ARDS, The discussed disease diseases pneumoconioses, fibrosis sarcoidosis. conditions etiology, interstitial as Chronic such the infiltrative later) of restrictive include unknown and (discussed

four group—emphysema, bronchiectasis—have In forms, disorders ( anatomic distinct bronchitis, clinical chronic prototypical in asthma, characteristics this and and their the

13.1 asthma are overlaps emphysema, and between chronic ), Table bronchitis, but common.

on emphysema is (described bronchitis later). be It basis of defined on and the features clinical features, the defined basis should whereas radiologic is of chronic noted that morphologic these distribution somewhat The involves disorders affects is large different, anatomic the as emphysema whereas bronchitis the of chronic initially airways, also acinus. bronchiolitis) or present. both, disease In advanced severe small cases is airway of also (chronic the without in coexist. bronchitis discussed emphysema α1-anti-trypsin deficiency, Although usually two and (particularly may later) inherited exist versa, vice diseases chronic because underlying the certainly is of both. This major cause cigarette is smoking almost rubric under disease view emphysema obstructive pulmonary of together propensity bronchitis the and grouped chronic coexist, (COPD). of their are chronic often In to fourth COPD and death 10% is of the U.S. adult country. in of the affects cause than more population leading this as airflow ( discussed asthma, largely by airflow characterized later, which, irreversible it distinguishes from COPD obstruction reversible is of obstruction The

Fig. 13.4

air the accompanied their spaces of permanent fibrosis. without to bronchioles, of Emphysema walls terminal significant the destruction characterized distal enlargement is by by is distribution. anatomic its to classified It according bronchioles, to three the earlier, ( discussed is is a lobule called structure acinus acini a cluster and terminal distal to five As the of

Fig. ). 13.5A irregular. acinar, (1) distal types of panacinar, (4) emphysema: and There (3) (2) major four are centriacinar, more significant times first being with 20 emphysema obstruction, about than Only centriacinar types two the panacinar cause common airway disease.

(centrilobular) Centriacinar emphysema. • central parts distinctive of centriacinar http://ebooksmedicine.net emphysema formed is the The by or acini, feature of respiratory proximal that the

Obstruction:The With 13.1 of Spectrum Associated Chronic Pulmonary Airflow Disease Disorders Table Obstructive

ChronicbronchitisBronchusMucousglandhypertrophyandTobaccosmoke,airpollutantsCough,sputumproductionhyperplasia,hypersecretion

BronchiectasisBronchusAirwaydilationandscarringPersistentorsevereinfectionsCough,purulentsputum,fever

EmphysemaAcinusAirspaceenlargement,wallTobaccosmokeDyspneadestruction

Smallairwaydisease,BronchioleInflammatoryscarring,partialTobaccosmoke,airpollutantsCough,dyspneabronchiolitis *Canbepresentinallformsofobstructivelungdiseaseorbyitself.

spared. are are alveoli while distal affected, bronchioles, (see both normal emphysematous the Thus, acinus within spaces exist lobule and and air same

Fig.

). 13.5B segments. lobes, apical more The the are particularly and common in upper severe the in lesions the differentiation becomes distal becomes panacinar the thus, In involved, difficult. severe emphysema, emphysema acinus from also centriacinar and association cigarette This emphysema is common in bronchitis. chronic in often type most smokers, with of

emphysema. (panlobular) Panacinar • (see level emphysema, panacinar In the the (panlobular) terminal of the from the alveoli to uniformly respiratory blind enlarged, are acini bronchiole

Fig. ). 13.5C with emphysema, commonly is to more lower in contrast lung associated occurs zones the panacinar and emphysema α1-anti-trypsin centriacinar deficiency. In

Distal • (paraseptal) acinar emphysema. is is the normal acinus but emphysema, involved. this part proximal distal form portion of the In of primarily the the the and to along striking more tissue septa, pleura, is lobular connective at adjacent emphysema The the

Chronic injury smoking) (e.g.,

Fig. destruction infection, Bronchial etc. wall 13.4 Overinflation inflammation ASTHMA CHRONIC Alveolar BRONCHITIS Airway disease triggered hyperresponsiveness airway Reversible cough allergens, Schematicrepresentationofoverlapbetweenchronicobstructivelungdiseases.Small EMPHYSEMA obstruction Productive by

margins the of lobules. of the usually severe or the and It upper atelectasis half more fibrosis, occurs in scarring, adjacent is of to areas lungs. of characteristic give more cystic forming The presence than than progressive 0.5 contiguous, from enlarged cm, multiple, spaces ranging to is with 2.0 bullae. in less that, rise air finding diameter the sometimes to mm enlargement, structures in often is comes present spontaneous cause of with pneumothorax. who The of type young attention it unknown; to emphysema this adults most

Fig. 13.5 Majorpatternsofemphysema.(A)Diagramofnormalstructureoftheacinus,thefundamentalunitofthelung.(B)Centriacinaremphysemawithdilationthatinitiallyaffectstherespiratorybronchioles. (C)Panacinaremphysemawithinitialdistentionofalltheperipheralstructures(i.e.,thealveolusandalveolarduct);thediseaselaterextendstoaffecttherespiratorybronchioles.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Inflammatory stress, release Oxidative increased cells, of

Fig. Pathogenesisofemphysema.Seetextfordetails. 13.6

Irregular • emphysema. inflammatory the associated named from acinus such as is emphysema, involved, because irregularly healed that so with resulting scarring, almost is diseases. invariably Irregular may common asymptomatic, most be Although form clinically emphysema. this of the

particles inflammation, a smoke disease patients parenchymal and destruction lung in and (emphysema) damage bronchitis). with in which, chronic Inhaled and noxious result genetic airway other (bronchiolitis and predisposition, particularly cigarette cause following Factors influence development the ( of that the emphysema include

Fig. 13.6

factors), amplify changes variety cells cytokines), inflammatory and TNF, (chemotactic Inflammatory been of factors). B4, wide and be process A mediators inflammatory have (growth the inflammatory others) cells from structural (proinflammatory and (including mediators: the IL-8, induce circulation that shown to more attract leukotriene increased cells. cells present include and neutrophils, T inflammatory CD4+ CD8+ lesions The in and macrophages, antigen part a T known as cells or are specific inflammation. are It if for particular not is the of recruited

that imbalance: the and from break connective proteases Several down Protease–anti-protease cells cells are epithelial tissues. released inflammatory (further a is there anti-proteases emphysema, relative who below). discussed develop patients of In protective deficiency

neutrophils. from are particles inflammatory cigarette species macrophages released cells oxygen inhaled Reactive as and by and generated such stress: Oxidative other smoke activated and cause inflammation tissue damage (Chapter 3). These and additional

in Although of infection: Airway a acute thought infection initiation play and/or infections bacterial tissue role the viral cause destruction, to not is exacerbations.

The part which of patients based important that compounded that a by idea in a the to observation pulmonary emphysema, smoking. is the with develop proteases on α1-anti-trypsin is genetic deficiency anti-protease predisposition are have patients About 1% this of all emphysema with have defect. inhibitor inflammation. secreted a elastase) macrophages, serum, tissue proteases present is in (particularly of α1-anti-trypsin, by neutrophils and fluids, normally major during in proteinase 14. chromosome is a (Pi) gene the on encoded α1-anti-trypsin inhibitor by locus serum of population locus is decreased approximately associated The a allele, the is Pi for 0.012% Z α1-anti-trypsin. of U.S. that the with homozygous and levels is polymorphic, genotype markedly of develop these than panacinar 80% age earlier an symptomatic the if emphysema, smokes. and severity individuals at occurs More greater of individual is which

in central has in obstruction seen Protease-mediated damage extracellular role of airway emphysema. matrix the a radial alveoli of open loss in reduces and parenchyma, causes and collapse recoil thus the the to of Small airways tissue walls are normally respiratory lung bronchioles surround the that traction the bronchioles during respiratory by elastic the held of elastic expiration. obstruction obstruction. functional despite the to of absence mechanical leads This airflow

alveolar ( enlarged emphysema to fibrosis, arelessimpressive.Untillatestages,thelungsareadeeperpinkthaninpanacinaremphysemaandlessvoluminous,andtheuppertwo-thirdsofthelungsaremoreseverelyaffectedthanthelowerlungs.Histologicexaminationrevealsdestruction of MORPHOLOGYThediagnosisandclassificationofemphysemadependlargelyonthemacroscopicappearanceofthelung.Typicalpanacinar without leading spaces producespale,voluminouslungsthatoftenobscuretheheartwhentheanteriorchestwallisremovedatautopsy.Themacroscopicfeaturesofcentriacinar walls emphysema air

elastic ).Inadditiontoalveolarloss,thenumberofalveolarcapillariesisdiminished.Terminalandrespiratorybronchiolesmaybedeformedbecauseofthelossofseptathathelptetherthesestructuresintheparenchyma.Withtheloss tissue inthesurroundingalveolarsepta,radialtractiononthesmallairwaysisreduced.Asaresult,theytendtocollapseduringexpiration—animportantcauseofchronicairflowobstructioninsevereemphysema.Bronchiolarinflammationandsubmucosalfibrosisareconsistentlypresentinadvanceddisease. Fig.13.7 of

Fig. Pulmonaryemphysema.Thereismarkedenlargementoftheairspaces,withdestructionofalveolarseptabutwithoutfibrosis.Notethepresenceofblackanthracoticpigment. 13.7

http://ebooksmedicine.net

is first the but is progressive. steadily begins Dyspnea symptom; it usually insidiously cough underlying initial bronchitis patients be may and asthmatic chronic with bronchitis, wheezing In the or chronic complaints. and is malignant severe common be Weight occult tumor. an enough suggest to loss may with function reduced near-normal FVC. tests FEV1 or normal Pulmonary reveal is Hence, reduced. FVC ratio FEV1 the to

in with and dyspneic, component emphysema is in patient barrel-chested sitting obviously forward “bronchitic” hunched-over position. one prolonged The of the which classic presentation with no expiration, is a diffusing In is patients, capacity these low. is air and space enlargement severe and prominent, relatively until late gas hyperventilation gas so in disease, adequate Dyspnea values very that normal. the exchange and is are are blood are of “pink adequate dyspnea Because and called of prominent hemoglobin, these oxygenation puffers.” patients sometimes sometimes

a with emphysema chronic also the pronounced a of history bronchitis and has the recurrent end patient of spectrum who At is clinical infections. other retains cyanotic. becoming prominent, carbon in respiratory hypoxic absence the and drive often usually of and dioxide, Dyspnea is less the increased patient bloaters.” obese—hence tend such reasons, unclear “blue patients the to For designation be

with two symptoms in extremes. fall In most patients the between these COPD development (cor pulmonary and loss heart from the Chapter area of causes right-sided hypertension, gradual pulmonale, surface Hypoxia-induced alveolar to 30% spasm 11). pulmonary destruction to failure of capillary patients secondary of in vascular congestive pulmonary leads which 20% right-sided to either heart related failure or respiratory emphysema failure. Death from is

Related Emphysema to Conditions

conditions Several or of also lungs airspaces abnormal the recognized: air or involving are accumulations within other tissues

to of residual response diseased occurs substance as describes lobe. lung a elsewhere, dilation of such surgical removal Compensatory of or the after loss lung alveoli in emphysema

overinflation lung refers of air trapping. to to due the expansion Obstructive cause a of subtotal A by is obstruction object. airway an or foreign common tumor lung. compression life-threatening of overinflation the portion can expansion the if be produces remaining affected of Obstructive normal

emphysema that to emphysema any Bullous form refers >1 or subpleural blebs cm produces of large bullae (spaces

Fig. Bullousemphysemawithlargeapicalandsubpleuralbullae. 13.8 School, of Teaching (From of Medical the of Dallas,Texas.) Texas University the Pathology, Collection Department South-western distended state) the in ( diameter in

Fig. 13.8 ). localized occasion emphysema; the blebs and of to Such pneumothorax. represent the four blebs most accentuations subpleural, are forms often rupture, one of they of leading on may

where emphysema entry of is of track the the lung, tissue. and from (interstitial) Mediastinal sometimes subcutaneous interstitium it mediastinum into by the caused may • the air to allows occur alveolar to the pressure which with air interstitium. a coughing) intraalveolar if in (as vomiting violent dissect into may sudden It spontaneously or increase produces rupture, in develops children Sometimes whooping with it cough. with may in partial injury It respirators (e.g., in a or occur also a on who rib). perforating patients have individuals bronchiolar fractured obstruction emphysema). the crepitation the patient When subcutaneous with the and interstitial neck balloon, head literally a up (subcutaneous may tissue, the chest swelling and over of marked blow the like crackling air gets into site most entry the resorbed is after In air seals. spontaneously of instances the

Emphysemaisachronicobstructiveairwaydiseasecharacterizedbyenlargementofairspacesdistaltoterminalbronchioles.

Subtypesincludecentriacinar(mostcommon:smoking-related),panacinar(seeninα1-anti-trypsindeficiency),distalacinar,andirregular.

Smokingandinhaledpollutantscauseongoingaccumulationofinflammatorycells,whicharethesourceofproteasessuchaselastasesthatirreversiblydamagealveolarwalls.

Patientswithuncomplicatedemphysemapresentwithincreasedchestvolumes,dyspnea,andrelativelynormalbloodoxygenationatrest(“pinkpuffers”).

Mostpatientswithemphysemaalsohavesignsandsymptomsofconcurrentchronicbronchitis,sincecigarettesmokingisariskfactorforboth.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

the grounds: it diagnosed cough months on Chronic least a least consecutive persistent bronchitis years. presence is is at in of productive 2 by 3 consecutive clinical defined at for is cigarette some 40to 65-year-old common 25% that in urban in age cities; of smog-ridden men the and to smokers group indicate studies disease. have It the among 20% dwellers is raises not stages In sputum, the cough of obstructed. mucoid disease, but the early airflow while airways, bronchitis heavy (COPD). develop other and have hyperresponsive especially bronchospasm of obstruction, usually with with bronchitic chronic (asthmatic Some evidence with chronic patients, bronchitis), emphysema associated wheezing smokers, outflow patients intermittent

feature hypersecretion in large bronchitis mucus, beginning of of is airways. The distinctive chronic the

cause important Although pollutants, other and dioxide may such nitrogen cigarette sulfur smoking, contribute. is the as air most dioxide, induce in as as mucous hypertrophy and well bronchioles. irritants the bronchi mucin-secreting epithelial surfaces bronchi trachea cells and an of the environmental in in These goblet smaller glands of increase cause inflammation marked irritants neutrophils, and the also of infiltration These by macrophages, lymphocytes. chronic contrast with are asthma, in not bronchitis. eosinophils In seen the emphysema. airflow bronchi, defining (1) hypersecretion mucous disease, of and wall bronchitis results a and of bronchiolar coexistent lumen, plugging inflammation, chronic the (2) primarily in reflection induced small bronchiolar fibrosis, large mucus from obstruction of by airway the Whereas is involvement In mild significant airflow general, obstruction, an by while is disease always important chronic obstruction airway complicated bronchiolitis) almost small airflow bronchitis early, component emphysema. of (chronic with is

from irritants of effects are postulated cells. mediated and as T It many local lymphoid by release cells of IL-13 cytokines environmental is such innate epithelium of that respiratory on the neutrophil a smoke. elastase consequence gene increased exposure as production to bronchial of The of of mucin the tobacco transcription in the and epithelium are chiefly a by is inflammation often secondary role, and infection Microbial but maintaining present exacerbating symptoms. has

swollen byedemafluidandiscoveredbyalayerofmucinousormucopurulentsecretions. MORPHOLOGYAsseeningrossspecimens,themucosalliningofthelargerairwaysusuallyishyperemic and ( of glands mucus-secreting the Thesmallerbronchiandbronchiolesalsomaybefilledwithsecretions.Thediagnosticfeatureofchronicbronchitisinthetracheaandlargerbronchiisenlargement

Fig.13.9 obliterans). ).Themagnitudeoftheincreaseinsizeisassessedbytheratioofthethicknessofthesubmucosalglandlayertothatofthebronchialwall(theReidindex—normally0.4).Variablenumbersofinflammatorycells,largelylymphocytesandmacrophagesbutsometimesalsoadmixedneutrophils,arefrequentlyseeninthebronchialmucosa.Chronic (smallairwaydisease),characterizedbygobletcellmetaplasia,mucousplugging,inflammation,andfibrosis,alsoisseen.Inseverecases,theremaybecompleteobliterationofthelumenasaconsequenceoffibrosis(bronchiolitis bronchiolitis Itisthesubmucosalfibrosisthatleadstoluminalnarrowingandairwayobstruction.Emphysematouschangesoftencoexist.

Fig. Chronicbronchitis.Thelumenofthebronchusisabove.Notethemarkedthickeningofthemucousglandlayer(approximatelytwice-normal)andsquamousmetaplasiaoflungepithelium. 13.9 the the Dallas,Texas.) Texas, Medical Collection of Teaching (From Pathology, Department University of of School, Southwestern

bronchitis variable. The quite of chronic course is sputum without ventilatory significant develop patients, while In dysfunction, COPD persist outflow marked with and cough hypercapnia, obstruction cyanosis. others hypoxemia, indefinitely production some and by COPD frequent exacerbations, disease and those alone. have emphysema poorer with progression, rapid bronchitis chronic more and Patients outcomes with than failure. leading failure infections; the and is to development marked 11); disease pulmonary respiratory (Chapter hypertension, by Progressive of ultimately recurrent sometimes cardiac

Chronicbronchitisisdefinedaspersistentproductivecoughforatleast3consecutivemonthsinatleast2consecutiveyears.

Cigarettesmokingisthemostimportantunderlyingriskfactor;airpollutantsalsocontribute.

Chronicairwayobstructionlargelyresultsfromsmallairwaydisease(chronicbronchiolitis)andcoexistentemphysema.

Histologicexaminationdemonstratesenlargementofmucus-secretingglands,gobletcellmetaplasia,andbronchiolarwallfibrosis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of particularly episodes the breathlessness, disorder the in chest is inflammatory a early Asthma causes night recurrent cough, wheezing, that airways morning. and and/or chronic of at tightness, muscle hypertrophy The hallmarks chronic obstruction; of intermittent, smooth airway asthma eosinophils; mucus and bronchial bronchial inflammation reversible secretion. with and are cell increased hyperreactivity; trigger of are attacks trivial Sometimes hyper-reactivity. patients, to in stimuli sufficient airway because mast play role in a cells the inflammatory particular Many cells. response, macrophages, lymphocytes, epithelial eosinophils, and neutrophils, in cells, has past increased Of note, 4 the the over asthma decades. in significantly in world incidence Western to immune in possibly infectious hyperreactivity organisms hygiene in well) in defects explanation results nonpathogenic early (and life. to of immune tolerance which microorganisms for hypothesis, trend childhood troubling according One in subsequent this to the a later exposure lack is stimuli and as

variety Major hypersensitivity the a airway asthma to bronchial include chronic contributing stimuli. of hyperresponsiveness of to and to genetic factors inflammation, I and development predisposition (atopy), acute type

may subclassified of as atopic allergen or be Asthma nonatopic. (evidence sensitization) such and exercise. irritants of (e.g., by (especially airborne types, smoke, episodes infections stress, cold air, as fumes), viral), triggered be In both bronchospasm diverse respiratory may exposures, varying common), inflammation—eosinophilic with differing responses and etiologies, pauci-granulocytic—that (most immunopathologies, inflammatory, associated There neutrophilic, are also patterns and are to treatment. of mixed

atopic form excessive (TH2) activation. type The with is 2 T classic associated cell helper atopic activates and also stimulates IL-4 IL-13 and IL-5 IgE the production. by eosinophils, mucus features asthma— Cytokines of for TH2 produced most account IL-13 production, cells of stimulate allergen coats exposure their contents and IgE which release other mast granule secrete cells, mediators. submucosal to cytokines on and a two cell–derived ( phase of produce mediators Mast (immediate) early phase and late reaction: an waves

Fig. 13.10

vasodilation. mucus early-phase and is dominated bronchoconstriction, by production, reaction The increased is mediators and neural also from mast prostaglandin E4, histamine, LTC4, reflex by triggered and and D2, including D4, released leukotrienes cells, by Bronchoconstriction pathways.

is in The late-phase nature. inflammatory reaction eosinophils) of epithelial thus mediators activator amplifying the is reaction eosinophils, inflammatory cells recruitment by leukocytes, of other initiated to chemoattractant (including TH2 immune cells, that and Inflammatory potent stimulate and chemokines an a that cells. promote produce resident eotaxin,

to inflammation changes structural wall to collectively that bouts Repeated airway bronchial of referred • are lead the as in remodeling. of bronchial occur mucus which sub-epithelial hypertrophy initiation include years vascularity smooth collagen, deposition increased as glands before muscle several and as and and symptoms. changes of may of early These

Asthma role but to of is “run” in genetics families, asthma tends complex. in the pathogenesis. IL-4 asthma risk, are Genome-wide that associated in studies genes receptor number factors some involved identified asthma genetic in of a association clearly enocding have with like the variants to determined. precise remains be disease contribution variants of to the development asthma-associated the However, genetic of

is of reaction and type example This most type I asthma IgE–mediated a (Chapter is common the of hypersensitivity classic 5). begins in It usually childhood. by often urticaria, and/or allergic asthmatic onset attacks of preceded the common, or history asthma eczema. and is atopy positive A rhinitis, is of family allergens Attacks triggered infections. food, or in be or pollen, dander, animal dust, by by may A reaction. offending wheal-and-flare immediate with the in results antigen skin test an based diagnosed asthma (RASTs) be Atopic on serum allergens. IgEs presence radioallergosorbent of that tests that can also recognize specific identify the

sensitization, results do negative. usually of allergen evidence have forms nonatopic not with Patients are test asthma and skin of positive history family asthma is less A common. of (e.g., inhaled Respiratory dioxide) dioxide, rhino-virus, air infections are (e.g., triggers. and nitrogen pollutants due ozone, viruses virus) common sulfur parainfluenza to subepithelial vagal thought respiratory the It lowers mucosa receptors that of the the of is virus-induced threshold to irritants. inflammation similar cellular not in so of a are of both obstruction treated and the variants well are and understood, nonatopic common the humoral asthma, mediators atopic eosinophils) ultimate to airway (e.g., Although they way. are connections

Several agents example. being asthma, pharmacologic most the provoke striking aspirin urticaria, present aspirin polyps, and with recurrent sensitivity bronchospasm. nasal rhinitis, with Patients abnormality precise is pathogenesis in prostaglandin inhibition cyclooxygenase by The of likely unknown stemming is from involve to but some aspirin. metabolism

triggered (toluene), (wood, and gases may dusts resins, organic (epoxy chemicals. plastics), be platinum), by Occupational asthma other and chemical cotton, fumes antigen(s). exposure after attacks inciting usually develop Asthma to repeated the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

granules of and mediators Release

bronchiallumensecondarytoanincreaseinthenumberofmucus-secretinggobletcellsinthemucosaandhypertrophyofsubmucosalglands;intensechronic mediatorsthatdirectlyandvianeuronalreflexesinducebronchospasm,increasedvascularpermeability,mucusproduction,andrecruitmentofleukocytes. inflammationduetorecruitmentofeosinophils,macrophages,andotherinflammatorycells;thickenedbasementmembrane;andhypertrophyandhyperplasia (AandB)Comparisonofanormalairwayandanairwayinvolvedbyasthma.Theasthmaticairwayismarkedbyaccumulationofmucusinthe toantigen(Ag),theimmediatereactionistriggeredbyAg-inducedcross-linkingofIgEboundtoFcreceptorsonmastcells.Thesecellsreleasepreformed ofsmoothmusclecells.(C)Inhaledallergens(antigen)elicitaTH2-dominatedresponsefavoringIgEproductionandeosinophilrecruitment.(D)Onreexposure Fig.13.10 (E) mediators (neutrophils, basophils; and monocytes) Leukocytes to that recruited release site and initiatethelatephaseofasthma.Severalfactorsreleasedfromeosinophils(e.g.,majorbasicprotein,eosinophilcationicprotein)alsocausedamagetothe lymphocytes the eosinophils, of epithelium. reaction additional

containingwhorlsofshedepithelium(Curschmann plugs spirals). MORPHOLOGYThemorphologicchangesinasthmahavebeendescribedinindividualswhodieofprolongedsevereattacks(statusasthmaticus)andinmucosalbiopsyspecimensofindividualschallengedwithallergens.Infatalcases,thelungsaredistendedduetoairtrapping(overinflation),andtheremaybesmallareasofatelectasis.Themoststrikingfindingisocclusionofbronchiandbronchiolesbythick,tenaciousmucous crystals NumerouseosinophilsandCharcot-Leyden (crystalloidsmadeupoftheeosinophilproteingalectin-10)alsoarepresent.Othercharacteristicmorphologicchangesinasthma(

),collectivelycalledairwayremodeling,include Fig.13.10B

Fig.13.11

severe of due mucus and characterized in air An to of attack airspaces lungs. which plugging, trapping asthma wheezing hyperinflation dyspnea of to is and the by distal and bronchoconstriction leads progressive In the and last case, with several hours from attacks 1 subside or therapy. spontaneously to usual either free from difficulties, by are pulmonary overt characteristically attacks between can respiratory but tests. function subtle deficits detected persistent, Intervals be that occurs days does a and for paroxysm therapy respond (status even persists weeks Occasionally not and to severe asthmaticus). disabling the acidosis, and fatal, associated hypercapnia, more in cases be may severe although The than most is condition lethal. hypoxia bronchoconstrictors). drugs, anti-inflammatory are leukotrienes include (recall drugs beta-adrenergic leukotriene Standard bronchodilators as potent inhibitors that glucocorticoids, therapies and and particularly such disease modest broadly efficacious, of and some that mediators, benefit such heterogeneity. IL-5, block Agents immune are in specific patients as but of perhaps are IL-4 because not thermal severe, bronchoscopy reduce mass muscle with patients energy controlled and approach bronchial responsiveness, airway called thermoplasty, smooth of in which involves asthma. to is controlled of the delivery poorly being evaluated Another during

Fig. 13.11 Bronchialbiopsyspecimenfromanasthmaticpatientshowingsub–basementmembranefibrosis,eosinophilicinflammation,andsmoothmusclehyperplasia.

Asthmaischaracterizedbyreversiblebronchoconstrictioncausedbyairwayhyperresponsivenesstoavarietyofstimuli.

AtopicasthmamostofteniscausedbyaTH2andIgE-mediatedimmunologicreactiontoenvironmentalallergensandischaracterizedbyearly-phase(immediate)andlate-phasereactions.TheTH2cytokinesIL-4,IL-5,andIL-13areimportantmediators.Non-TH2inflammationalsohasrolesinatopicasthmathatarebeingdefined.

Triggersfornonatopicasthmaarelessclearbutincludeviralinfectionsandinhaledairpollutants,whichalsocantriggeratopicasthma.

Eosinophilsarekeyinflammatorycellsfoundinalmostallsubtypesofasthma;eosinophilproducts(suchasmajorbasicprotein)areresponsibleforairwaydamage.

Airwayremodeling(sub-basementmembranethickeningandhypertrophyofbronchialglandsandsmoothmuscle)addsanirreversiblecomponenttotheobstructivedisease.

results of supporting of or caused by is necrotizing destruction associated the chronic is tissue; smooth the permanent from muscle typically and with and bronchi bronchioles dilation it Bronchiectasis elastic infections. occurs is or it infection disorder, obstruction primary of always caused by secondary variety not a to conditions. a as persistent It Bronchiectasis a expectoration cough to characteristic purulent rise amounts copious symptom of complex of gives by sputum. dominated and history appropriate dilation. and Diagnosis bronchial radiographic demonstration on of an depends The bronchiectasis that predispose include: commonly to most conditions

Bronchial obstruction. tumors, are causes bodies, foreign impaction of mucus. and Common localized is these segment. to obstructed lung In bronchiectasis the conditions, and also Bronchiectasis complicate bronchitis. atopic asthma may chronic

example: hereditary conditions—for or Congenital

(Chapter fibrosis, from widespread viscid abnormally severe which bronchiectasis obstruction Cystic 7). secondary results in infections caused mucus by and

bronchiectasis immunoglobulin which deficiencies, localized often diffuse infections. develops of because recurrent in Immunodeficiency or particularly states, bacterial

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cilia dyskinesia called Primary the (also ciliary immotile syndrome). sterility frequently in bronchiectasis with recessive that with This associated disorder a is rare autosomal males. is and airways, that the to of persistent clearance is It by leading abnormalities impair cilia of infections. caused inherited mucociliary

spp., organisms suppurative, of or Staphylococcus such particularly as virulent development with to bronchiectasis. pneumonia, patients or Necrotizing, Klebsiella aureus affected predispose be to bronchiectasis a significant areas. continues of in cause Posttuberculosis morbidity endemic

chronic and processes infection. bronchiectasis: contribute to Two intertwined obstruction Either initiator. be the may substrate For favorable impairs obstruction a providing a for secretions, of superimposed infection. caused by clearance example, body foreign the distend airways, further inflammatory the resultant to and The accumulating exudate bronchial dilation. the wall damage leading irreversible to infection in a full-blown of on in may secretions, poor and bronchioles with again fibrosis and peribronchial bronchi, lead culminating persistent clearance inflammation to bronchiectasis. the necrotizing or bronchi Conversely, traction the obstruction,

times dilated be airways MORPHOLOGYBronchiectasisusuallyaffectsthelowerlobesbilaterally,particularlythoseairpassagesthataremostvertical.Whencausedbytumorsoraspirationofforeignbodies,theinvolvementmaybesharplylocalizedtoasinglesegmentofthelungs.Usually,themostsevereinvolvementisfoundinthemoredistalbronchiandbronchioles.The much to as as may diameter usual four their andcanbeseenongrossexaminationalmostouttothepleuralsurface(

Fig.13.12 ).Bycontrast,innormallungs,thebronchiolescannotbefollowedbyeyebeyondapoint2to3cmfromthepleura.

aeruginosa. influenzae Thehistologicfindingsvarywiththeactivityandchronicityofthedisease.Infull-blownactivecases,anintenseacuteandchronicinflammatoryexudatewithinthewallsofthebronchiandbronchiolesleadstodesquamationofliningepitheliumandextensiveareasofulceration.Typically,mixedfloraareculturedfromthesputum.Theusualorganismsincludestaphylococci,streptococci,pneumococci,entericorganisms,anaerobicandmicroaerophilicbacteria,and(particularlyinchildren)Haemophilus andPseudomonas

Whenhealingoccurs,theliningepitheliummayregeneratecompletely;however,theinjuryusuallycannotberepairedandabnormaldilationandscarringpersist.Fibrosisofthebronchialandbronchiolarwallsandperibronchiolarfibrosisdevelopinmorechroniccases.Insomeinstancesthenecrosisdestroysthebronchialorbronchiolarwalls,producinganabscesscavity.

fetid, mucopurulent, of with associated by is sputum. cough characterized expectoration sometimes persistent Bronchiectasis severe, symptoms Other common

Fig. 13.12 Bronchiectasisinapatientwithcysticfibrosiswhounderwentlungresectionfortransplantation.Cutsurfaceoflungshowsmarkedlydilatedbronchifilledwithpurulentmucusthatextendtosubpleuralregions.

hemoptysis. dyspnea, include and rhinosinusitis, the pathogenic tract agents. are precipitated are Symptoms often and introduction upper-respiratory of new or by infections episodic and cor hypoxemia, pulmonale. bronchiectasis hypertension, with defects, ventilatory lead to widespread obstructive significant Severe, may hypercapnia, pulmonary and However, improved pulmonale, in outcomes the abscess, have treatment severe such past. current brain with and frequently occur as amyloidosis cor (Chapter than bronchiectasis, of complications now less 5),

CHRONICINTERSTITIAL(RESTRICTIVE,INFILTRATIVE)LUNGDISEASES

of group heterogeneous are alveoli characterized by diseases disorders interstitial patchy, bilateral, the often affecting (see Chronic mainly walls fibrosis a the of pulmonary

Fig. 13.1 ). intraalveolar pathogenesis; have Many and the are in this of and cause an of component. an interstitial some entities group unknown interstitial diseases characteristic lung categorized features histology based Chronic and clinicopathologic ( are on

). 13.2 Table the conditions. histologic acknowledged be However, different frequent features among that in there it must overlap is the http://ebooksmedicine.net as The in consideration shared clinical and alterations, histologic symptoms, and similarity features their changes pathophysiologic justify radiographic signs, a

of Table Major 13.2 Lung Interstitial Disease Categories Chronic

Usualinterstitialpneumonia(idiopathicpulmonaryfibrosis)NonspecificinterstitialpneumoniaCryptogenicorganizingpneumoniaCollagenvasculardisease-associatedPneumoconiosisTherapy-associated(drugs,radiation) group. in disorders effort hallmark (dyspnea). turn breathe reduced lungs), is which (stiff to The of increased these compliance necessitates abnormalities ratio, in epithelium Furthermore, the to leading interstitial and vasculature damage hypoxia. produces alveolar to the ventilation–perfusion With “ground-glass pulmonale Chest show patients and 11). respiratory pulmonary develop cor irregular lines, may nodules, or shadows.” small hypertension, failure, (Chapter progression, radiographs destruction in as end-stage underlying to of all diseases the and referred to scarring because they etiology result or gross lung, lung. may be the advanced, the determine When of “honeycomb” difficult diffuse

progressive (IPF) pulmonary a to by characterized interstitial fibrosis. fibrosis bilateral unknown etiology patchy, of refers is Idiopathic disorder pulmonary that is cryptogenic its it known as fibrosing unknown, is Because etiology also alveolitis. than virtually never often more it 50 are of aging, and of occurring females, years is before a affected Males disease age. the which interstitial of (UIP), required IPF. diagnosis The as to of referred and is usual for pattern pneumonia radiologic histologic is fibrosis as changes the in such similar Of entities conditions. pathologic diseases, asbestosis, present in may note, other collagen lung be and vascular of Therefore, diagnosis is IPF a exclusion.

predisposed alveolar interstitial characterizes often individual ( is The and IPF epithelium, in believed fibrosis repeated genetically of to injury a repair that from defective result

Fig. ). 13.13 cause including obscure, variety sources The reflux. is have of proposed, a and of the been chronic gastroesophageal injury fraction to of IPF; develop reflux thus, factors other small a proposed other triggers exposed or a suffering from must role. environmental have However, individuals predominant only etiologic come studies. genetic clues clearest The from cellular leading profibrotic to Germ risk, to a phenotype. line mutations suggesting with telomerase associated are senescence contributes of that increased loss cellular also aging observation age the is before line older a years. occurring with is to adults, disorder of 55 IPF in the that The rarely of link defect the cells. to associations Other epithelial also point residing genetic primary in while the affected patients Specifically, line germ MUC5B in variant gene individuals that production affected of have of a a smaller have genetic 35% mutations in of surfactant approximately mucin, genes. number alters the epithelial primary abnormalities lung are that epithelial These cell indicating be IPF. in of initiators expressed cells, only the can genes hypothesized and characteristic abnormal the fibroblastic myofibroblastic is or sites leading inflammation proliferation, the at exuberant It gives repair foci. to chronic fibroblastic to epithelial rise of that injury profibrotic mechanisms as such data of activation point the understood, to Although are fibrosis of incompletely excessive factors TGF-β. recent

whichvariesinintensity( MORPHOLOGYGrossly,thepleuralsurfacesofthelungarecobblestonedduetoretractionofscarsalongtheinterlobularsepta.Thecutsurfaceshowsfirm,rubberywhiteareasoffibrosis,whichoccurspreferentiallywithinthelowerlobe,thesubpleuralregions,andalongtheinterlobularsepta.Histologically,thehallmarkispatchy fibrosis, interstitial

Fig.13.14

factors: Environmental

toxins Other irritants,

At risk epithelium:

Genetics:

collagen production FibrosisProliferation,

Fig. Proposedpathogenicmechanismsinidiopathicpulmonaryfibrosis.Seetextfordetails. 13.13

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Usualinterstitialpneumonia.Thefibrosis,whichvariesininten-sity,ismorepronouncedinthesubpleuralregion. 13.14

foci)( worsenswithtime.Theearliestlesionsdemonstrateexuberantfibroblasticproliferation(fibroblastic

Fig.13.15 ).Overtimetheseareasbecomemorecollagenousandlesscellular.Quitetypicalistheexistenceofbothearlyandlatelesions. fibrosis). ThedensefibrosiscausescollapseofalveolarwallsandformationofcysticspaceslinedbyhyperplastictypeIIpneumocytesorbronchiolarepithelium(honeycomb Theinterstitialinflammationusuallyispatchyandconsistsofanalveolarseptalinfiltrateofmostlylymphocytesandoccasionalplasmacells,mastcells,andeosinophils.Secondarypulmonaryhypertensivechanges(intimalfibrosisandmedialthickeningofpulmonaryarteries)areoftenpresent.

with a presents and onset the nonproductive IPF dyspnea. of cough progressive gradual usually “dry” characteristic patients “Velcrolike” during examination, On or inspiration. have physical most crackles peripheral disease. develop cor later stages may in edema pulmonale, Cyanosis, and of the reticular characteristic and “honeycombing”) radiologic often abnormalities, fibrosis, and clinical (subpleural basilar The findings and diagnostic. are is use, therapies line in little have to idea with be secondary inflammation that pathogenic of of proven the Anti-inflammatory importance. trials kinase use are as anti-fibrotic a with positive such and IPF. inhibitor, of pirfenidone, therapies By in tyrosine in and inhibitor now outcomes produced an have contrast, approved for clinical nintedanib, TGF-β, patients The the is transplantation overall to remains is lung survival however; poor, 3 definitive treatment. only prognosis and only 5 years,

Fig. Usualinterstitialpneumonia.Fibroblasticfocuswithfibersrunningparalleltosurfaceandbluishmyxoidextracellularmatrix.Honey-combingispresenttotheleft. 13.15

need brief pulmonary to with of rare IPF, worthy are be associated of Other in considered of mention. fibrosis several which differential the diseases diagnosis pneumonia is interstitial One (NSIP). nonspecific is its features, distinct bilateral a clinical (despite a etiology, frequent collagen unknown rheumatoid chronic disease lung arthritis. and including histologic, which as vascular NSIP association disorders has name) of with such interstitial radiologic, It NSIP much is a to because better recognize important it IPF. than prognosis has characterized patchy moderate and/or areas in It is involved. to but interstitial by uniform is that chronic fibrosis inflammation mild the pneumonia. cryptogenic associated A fibrosis uncommon entity with organizing is second presents connective with loose dyspnea, or airspace of cough areas organizing due which It intraalveolar of tissue. chest are subpleural and radiographs plugs demonstrate patchy and peribronchial consolidation to most while steroids. oral recover require with treatment, patients Some spontaneously usually entitiies, by differential which of diffuse fibrosing systemic arthritis rheumatoid systemic several fibrosis. erythematosus, pulmonary pulmonary sclerosis, lupus in be rheumatologic complicated Also as and diagnosis may such the are disorders

Diffuseinterstitialfibrosisofthelunggivesrisetorestrictivelungdiseasescharacterizedbyreducedlungcomplianceandreducedforcedvitalcapacity(FVC).TheratioofFEVtoFVCisnormal.

Diseasesthatcausediffuseinterstitialfibrosisareheterogeneous.TheunifyingpathogenicfactorisinjurytothealveolileadingtoactivationofmacrophagesandreleaseoffibrogeniccytokinessuchasTGF-β.

Idiopathicpulmonaryfibrosisisprototypicofrestrictivelungdiseases.Itischaracterizedbypatchyinterstitialfibrosis,fibroblasticfoci,andformationofcysticspaces(honeycomblung).Thishistologicpatternisknownasusualinterstitialpneumonia(UIP).

mineral dusts. Pneumoconiosis coined to caused by term originally inhalation is of lung a describe disorders and inorganic term induced to experts has been The by http://ebooksmedicine.net also regard some and particulates, broadened diseases organic include

Mineral Disease Lung 13.3 Dust–Induced Table

CoaldustSimplecoalworker’spneumoconiosis:maculesandnodulesCoalminingComplicatedcoalworker’spneumoconiosis:PMF

lung fumeand SilicaSilicosisSandblasting,quarrying,mining,stonecutting,foundrywork,ceramics as chemical pneumoconioses. vapor-induced diseases asbestos—usually exposure dust by inhalation which three common mineral dust, and caused workplace. coal of in The pneumoconioses—the stem most of the silica, are from asbestos and exception, as is workplace. mineral to outside individuals the cancer for members of increased to Asbestos workers with exposed family the the this risk extends of

pathologic the and dust the produce with associated Table the conditions in 13.3 disease. each mineral indicates dust exposure may industries which major

on including many The dusts lung reaction the and solubility, particles. reactivity variables, to of depends of shape, the the size, mineral reach to 0.5 out 5 move and For and µm without particles whereas deposition 10 example, into particles of than alveoli, airways, µm often are greater than distal unlikely to smaller injury. substantial 1 dangerous, µm the to most diameter they that are get 5 distal airways. at because are of in the the Particles bifurcation lodged dust is amounts the lungs disease inert, lung be before Coal in detectable. clinically and relatively must large is deposited dust, beryllium more in and Silica, asbestos, concentrations. reactions at than are resulting lower fibrotic reactive coal rapidly mucus entrapped inhaled Most ciliary removed in lung dust from the blanket is by the movement. and where alveolar and macrophages the accumulate become engulf However, particulates. of the at impacted some trapped bifurcations, particles duct

in and alveolar perpetuation fibrosis. and initiation injury pulmonary inflammation, key The cellular is of a macrophage element lung the deposition. to IL-1 the pro-inflammatory of Following well the inflammasome which an release proliferation of initiates response other induce activate and factors, particles cytokine and production by fibroblast as collagen macrophages, that as phagocytosis leads inflammatory the many to response particulates migrating the particles. direct initiate of reach the are by and the may an within immune modified or inhaled thereby drainage of that lymphatics macrophages the particles either self-proteins Some components by and/ to or the reaction. and extension an then This local leads of to amplification particles. worsens dusts, so effects all smoking than more of mineral inhaled the other Tobacco with asbestos

Worldwide greatly disease. reduction coal of in the has mines dust coal dust–induced reduced incidence in which in dysfunction; workers is asymptomatic simple function is reaction; to which of or deposits perceptible macrophages pneumoconiosis is a ranging progressive The wide, massive spectrum findings lung little from without (see compromised accumulate (CWP), and coal complicated pulmonary fibrosis lung which worker’s to in coal in no to CWP (PMF), cellular anthracosis, extensive with pigment fibrosis

Table 13.3 ). less 10% to seems CWP of it PMF. progress that statistics Although cases simple of vary, than is fibrosing of a a be can to a any note, PMF confluent lung; Of in pneumoconioses term reaction this generic applies that the complication here. the discussed of

minerals, inorganic metals, coal and crystalline is mine dust carbon, coal mainly trace Although contains a silica. variety of (“coal bituminous coal; associated has higher with from to a CWP. anthracite The rank”) mining been contaminating chemicals anthracite for of in minerals and risk carbon increases to general, ratio

MORPHOLOGYPulmonary anthracosis isthemostinnocuouscoal-inducedpulmonarylesionincoalminersandalsoiscommonlyseeninurbandwellersandtobaccosmokers.Inhaledcarbonpigmentisengulfedbyalveolarorinterstitialmacrophages,whichthenaccumulateintheconnectivetissuealongthepulmonaryandpleurallymphaticsandindraininglymphnodes.

CWP andlargercoal macules nodules. ischaracterizedbythepresenceofcoal Simple emphysema Thecoalmaculeconsistsofdust-ladenmacrophagesandsmallamountsofcollagenfibersarrayedinadelicatenetwork.Althoughtheselesionsarescatteredthroughoutthelung,theupperlobesandupperzonesofthelowerlobesaremoreheavilyinvolved.Induecourse,centrilobular mayoccur.FunctionallysignificantemphysemaismorecommonintheUnitedKingdomandEurope,probablybecauseintheselocalesthecoalrankishigherthanintheUnitedStates.

Complicated occursonabackgroundofsimpleCWPbycoalescenceofcoalnodulesandgenerallydevelopsovermanyyears.Itischaracterizedbymultiple,darkblackscarslargerthan2cmandsometimesupto10cmingreatestdiameterthatconsistofdensecollagenandpigment( CWP (PMF)

Fig.13.16

benign decrement usually a produces function. CWP little is in lung that disease pulmonary there pulmonary cor PMF is pulmonale. hypertension, whom in develops, those dysfunction, and In increasing levels higher Progression CWP coal burden. from total a to dust and variables been PMF dust exposure variety to of linked including has of further PMF progress the even to established once has a exposure. Unfortunately, tendency in absence taking After and risk that is lung into in distinguishes coal miners, both of exposures carcinoma smoking-related frequency from no asbestos next). there (discussed feature account, CWP increased a silica

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Progressivemassivefibrosisinacoalworker.Alargeamountofblackpigmentisassociatedwithfibrosis. 13.16 121.) Elsevier, EC: Klatt Philadelphia, (From p RobbinsandCotranatlasofpathology,ed 2,

is chronic most occupational in the the Silicosis disease world. prevalent currently in It inhalation silica, settings. occupational crystalline by mostly of caused is Workers involved risk. high at in hard-rock and sandblasting mining particularly are by Silica and but tridymite) cristobalite, both and crystalline quartz, are forms in far crystalline toxic the occurs fibrogenic. and amorphous most (including forms, Of in silicosis. quartz most implicated commonly is these, After particles the macrophages. inhalation, with cells and interact epithelial fibrogenic radicals, of activation lipid including release TNF, the subsequent macrophages, pulmonary cytokines. mediators, of inflammasome silica and IL-1, oxygen-derived cause particles by Ingested the fibronectin, and free mediators inflammatory When mixed quartz fibrogenic is of effect minerals, reduced. other with the quartz as is is pure. This commonplace, fortuitous in rarely the workplace situation hematite. mild iron-containing ore may for lung abundant miners their relatively Thus, lungs protective the of of hematite the because have of in effect yet quartz example, have disease

Fig. 13.17 Advancedsilicosis,seeninatransectedlung.Scarringhascontractedtheupperlobeintoasmalldarkmass(arrow). Notethedensepleuralthickening. (Courtesy and Women’s of Godleski,Brigham Dr. Massachusetts.) Hospital,Boston, John

MORPHOLOGYSilicotic nodules intheirearlystagesaretiny,barelypalpable,discrete,pale-to-black(ifcoaldustispresent)nodulesintheupperzonesofthelungs(

hyalinized arranged fibers ).Microscopically,thesilicoticnoduledemonstratesconcentrically surroundinganamorphouscenter.The“whorled”appearanceofthecollagenfibersisquitedistinctiveforsilicosis( Fig.13.17 collagen

).Examinationofthenodulesbypolarized microscopy silica Fig.13.18 reveals weakly particles,primarilyinthecenterofthenodules.Asthediseaseprogresses,individualnodulesmaycoalesceintohard,collagenousscars,witheventualprogressiontoPMF.Theinterveninglungparenchymamaybecompressedoroverexpanded,andahoneycombpatternmaydevelop.Fibroticlesionsalsomayoccurinhilarlymphnodesandthepleura. birefringent

Fig. Coalescentcollagenoussilicoticnodules. 13.18 Godleski, Massachusetts.) and Brigham Hospital, John (Courtesy Boston, Women’s Dr. of http://ebooksmedicine.net

in radiographs, in the of typically usually is upper workers zones chest which Silicosis detected show nodularity a lung. asymptomatic the routine fine on course, until the Most shortness present. is after of late develop not patients in PMF breath do pulmonale patients develop with a and parenchymal destruction. of and cor PMF pulmonary vasoconstriction hypertension result as Many chronic hypoxia–induced physical slowly pulmonary is disease progressive, is often impairing that to limited. severely The degree a such activity function susceptibility is tuberculosis. Silicosis associated with an to increased silica postulated crystalline kill of cell-mediated that is may mycobacteria. inhibit It ability pulmonary depresses phagocytosed to macrophages the immunity, silicosis and of contain Nodules central a zone silicotuberculosis of caseation. often most and silica increase is lung is that exposure suggest unsettled, with studies in associated some but relationship The between silica risk. cancer

a hydrated family geometry. crystalline fibrous a silicates with of Asbestos is linked malignant laryngeal and peritoneal (6) fibrosis diffuse mesothelioma; (2) (3) (asbestosis); or, pleural plaques, lung parenchymal asbestos On occupational pleural (1) fibrosis exposure rarely, localized carcinoma. (4) the fibrous pleura; carcinoma; and interstitial of studies, basis to epidemiologic in is to effusions; the (5) An in potential incidence asbestos alerted members the hazards public of family of of has workers cancers asbestos the increased environment. the general to in asbestos-related

proinflammatory by activate the asbestos and phagolysosomal phagocytosed As release fibrogenic and once silica with fibers inflammasome damage membranes, macrophages, factors the mediators. crystals, stimulating of initiator a cellular and In a reactions, probably functions as also lung addition fibrotic promoter. tumor asbestos and to both effects which the preferentially generated mesothelial localize the by fibers, of lung distal of Some in are the to free mediated radicals mesothelium the close asbestos asbestos on reactive by oncogenic layer. chemicals toxic onto to asbestos fibers the the of also the contribute potentially undoubtedly adsorbed pathogenicity However, fibers. in lung development tobacco be smoking remarkable and carcinogens may fibers the workers. basis of smoke in onto asbestos the asbestos the example, carcinoma adsorption for tobacco of For between synergy the

Fig. 13.19 High-powerdetailofanasbestosbody,revealingthetypicalbeadingandknobbedends(arrow).

interstitial pulmonary MORPHOLOGYAsbestosisismarkedbydiffuse whichareseenasgoldenbrown,fusiformorbeadedrodswithatranslucentcenter.Theyconsistofasbestosfiberscoatedwithaniron-containingproteinaceousmaterial( bodies, fibrosis,characterizedbythepresenceofasbestos

).Asbestosbodiesapparentlyareformedwhenmacrophagesattempttophagocytoseasbestosfibers;theiron“crust”isderivedfromphagocyteferritin. Fig.13.19

IncontrastwithCWPandsilicosis,asbestosisbeginsinthelowerlobesandsubpleurally,spreadingtothemiddleandupperlobesofthelungsasthefibrosisprogresses.Contractionofthefibroustissuedistortsthenormalarchitecture,creatingenlargedairspacesenclosedwithinthickfibrouswalls;eventually,theaffectedregionsbecomehoneycombed.Simultaneously,fibrosisdevelopsinthevisceralpleura,causingadhesionsbetweenthelungsandthechestwall.Thescarringmaytrapandnarrowpulmonaryarteriesandarterioles,causingpulmonaryhypertensionandcorpulmonale.

andoverthedomesofthediaphragm.Uncommonly,asbestosexposureinducespleuraleffusionordiffusepleuralfibrosis. pleura ),oftencontainingcalcium.Theydevelopmostfrequentlyontheanteriorandposterolateralaspectsoftheparietal Fig.13.20

in clinical from those interstitial any other indistinguishable lung findings asbestosis chronic The disease. are of years 20 10 Progressively exposure. after worsening dyspnea appears to usually cough by sputum. a production accompanied of is It and congestive progress to remain pulmonale, heart death. The disease static and may cor or failure, as usually on densities. and asymptomatic are radiographs circumscribed are detected plaques Pleural

to malignant Both in mesothelioma workers develop and exposed lung asbestos. carcinoma 5-fold rare a for is about more per developing carcinoma for (2–17 normally lung 1000 individuals), asbestos the than tumor risk relative 1 for The risk times million workers; mesothelioma, cases is increased greater. very greatly the mesothelioma. for but cigarette for carcinoma not increases smoking risk Concomitant lung associated particularly a asbestos exposure carries cancer prognosis. pleural with poor or Lung

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Asbestosis.Markedlythickenedvisceralpleuracoversthelateralanddiaphragmaticsurfaceofthelung.Notealsosevereinterstitialfibrosisdiffuselyaffectingthelowerlobeofthelung. 13.20

Pneumoconiosesencompassagroupofchronicfibrosingdiseasesofthelungresultingfromexposuretoorganicandinorganicparticulates,mostcommonlymineraldust.

Pulmonaryalveolarmacrophagesplayacentralroleinthepathogenesisoflunginjurybypromotinginflammationandproducingreactiveoxygenspeciesandfibrogeniccytokines.

Coaldust–induceddiseasevariesfromasymptomaticanthracosis,tosimplecoalworker’spneumoconiosis(coalmaculesornodules,andcentrilobularemphysema),toprogressivemassivefibrosis(PMF),manifestedbyincreasingpulmonarydysfunction,pulmonaryhypertension,andcorpulmonale.

Silicosisisthemostcommonpneumoconiosisintheworld,andcrystallinesilica(e.g.,quartz)istheusualculprit.

ThemanifestationsofsilicosisrangefromasymptomaticsilicoticnodulestoPMF;individualswithsilicosisalsohaveanincreasedsusceptibilitytotuberculosis.Therelationshipbetweensilicaexposureandsubsequentlungcanceriscontroversial.

Asbestosexposureislinkedwithsixdiseaseprocesses:(1)parenchymalinterstitialfibrosis(asbestosis);(2)localized fibrousplaquesor,rarely,diffusepleuralfibrosis;(3)pleuraleffusions;(4)lungcancer;(5)malignantpleuralandperitonealmesothelioma;and(6)laryngealcancer.

•Cigarettesmokingincreasestheriskforlungcancerinthesettingofasbestosexposure;moreover,evenfamilymembersofworkersexposedtoasbestosareatincreasedriskforcancer.

structure Drugs alterations and chronic respiratory a and function. variety of can acute cause in of of as influx direct For by the pneumonitis result stimulating causes the and interstitial agent, cells of into and anti-cancer inflammatory an toxicity the a example, fibrosis drug bleomycin, alveoli. and pneumonitis agent, for Amiodarone, with anti-arrhythmic also risk associated an is fibrosis. irradiation of a complication is of pulmonary pneumonitis tumors. well-known thoracic and Radiation other of as fever, out months infiltrates volume dyspnea to 1 by and in typically irradiated many Acute after radiation irradiated proportion in pleural lung, the the effusion, 20% lung of occurs bed. patients, pulmonary pneumonitis, is the manifested 6 therapy as which to of These may or therapy chronic with pneumonitis, corticosteroid associated to and with resolve radiation progress symptoms fibrosis. pulmonary signs

by many Sarcoidosis tissues unknown characterized of is multisystem disease organs. and etiology inflammation noncaseating in a granulomatous as here a of sarcoidosis We lung disease. it one because is discuss presentation restrictive the therefore, one infections diagnosis of and sarcoidosis diseases, produce exclusion. berylliosis, is histologic noncaseating fungal mycobacterial sometimes granulomas; also Other of or including visible cases. different most ways, Although many hilar both), lymphadenopathy on bilateral is (or the involvement sarcoidosis or in can finding manifest at in lung presentation radiographs, chest major and occasionally the involvement 25% of occurs the of and each skin about presenting Eye in either feature cases, disease. may be

Sarcoidosis the and world, throughout both groups. genders and age all occurs races affecting certain There epidemiologic are, interesting trends: however,

predilection consistent years younger 40 adults than of age. for A

(in frequency States and United incidence 10 than the whites). Danish times A in the high is African in Swedish populations, in and whom Americans higher among

unique pulmonary an association among nonsmokers, virtually is higher A among diseases. prevalence that sarcoidosis to

of exposed to that predisposed individuals lines remains disordered agents. regulation suggest etiology unknown, the in genetically is environmental sarcoidosis it of immune several of a certain Although disease evidence following in summarized the these influences contributory of The discussion. is role of each

http://ebooksmedicine.net

antigen. a cell-mediated sarcoidosis response abnormalities in Several to unidentified of an the immunologic suggest development CD4+ process cells. The by is T helper driven “clues” These immunologic the include following:

interstitial Intraalveolar with CD4+ cells, cell peripheral accumulation cytopenia and of TH1 T

expansion lung the T determined cell Oligoclonal receptor within analysis by T CD4+ as TH1 rearrangements cells of of

IL-2 resulting macrophage and TH1 cytokines T respectively activation, cell Increases IFN-γ, as in and proliferation such in

monocytes in the the TNF, of cytokines additional local inflammatory formation to recruitment protein-1α) in contribute cells environment T that and Increases several favor and of granulomas (IL-8, macrophage

(PPD) test skin as protein derivative common Anergy purified such to or Candida antigens

suggesting and racial of of the Familial cases, clustering factors genetic involvement

After patients, in transplantation, in recurs effect one-third on the sarcoidosis lung of survival. lungs without new but any at least Finally, sarcoidosis the (e.g., gun” infectious is pollen), antigen been inciting “antigens” no viruses, specific putative any “smoking for to linking agent or as several but proposed sarcoidosis agent. Borrelia, there have mycobacteria,

MORPHOLOGYThecardinalhistopathologicfeatureofsarcoidosis,irrespectiveoftheorganinvolved,isthenonnecrotizing granuloma epithelioid (

laminatedconcretionscomposedofcalciumandproteins;and Tcells.Itisnotuncommontoseeintermixedmultinucleategiantcellsformedbyfusionofmacrophages.Earlyon,athinlayeroflaminatedfibroblastsisfoundperipheraltothegranuloma;overtime,theseproliferateandlaydowncollagenthatreplacestheentiregranulomawithahyalinizedscar.Twoothermicroscopicfeaturesaresometimesseeninthegranulomas:(1)Schaumann bodies, bodies, stellateinclusionsenclosedwithingiantcells.Theirpresenceisnotrequiredfordiagnosisofsarcoidosis,andtheymayalsooccuringranulomasofotherorigins.Rarely,fociofcentralnecrosismaybepresentinsarcoidgranulomas,especiallyinthenodularform. (2)asteroid Fig.13.21 ).Thisisadiscrete,compactcollectionofepithelioidcellsrimmedbyanouterzonerichinCD4+

Thelungs Tcells.In5%to15%ofpatients,thegranulomaseventuallyarereplacedbydiffuse resultinginaso-called“honeycomblung”. fibrosis, areinvolvedatsomestageofthediseasein90%ofpatients.Thegranulomaspredominantlyinvolvetheinterstitiumratherthanairspaces,withsometendencytolocalizeintheconnectivetissuearoundbronchiolesandpulmonaryvenulesandinthepleura(“lymphangitic”distribution).ThebronchoalveolarlavagefluidcontainsabundantCD4+ interstitial

Fig. Sarcoid.Characteristicperibronchialnoncaseatinggranulomaswithmanygiantcellsarepresent. 13.21

lymph Intrathoracichilar paratracheal areenlargedin75%to90%ofpatients,whileone-thirdpresentwithperipherallymphadenopathy.Thenodesarecharacteristicallypainlessandhaveafirm,rubberytexture.Unlikeintuberculosis,lymphnodesinsarcoidosisare“nonmatted”(nonadherent)anddonotulcerate. nodes and

lesions thehallmarkofacutesarcoidosis,consistsofraised,red,tendernodulesontheanterioraspectsofthelegs.Sarcoidalgranulomasareuncommonintheselesions.Bycontrast,discretepainlesssubcutaneousnodulescanalsooccurinsarcoidosis,andtheseusuallyrevealabundantnoncaseatinggranulomas. areencounteredinapproximately25%ofpatients.Erythema Skin nodosum,

eye glands patients. lacrimal Involvement of and occurs one-half of the to one-fifth about in involvement. andoptic nerve oriridocyclitis Theocularinvolvementtakestheformofiritis andmaybeunilateralorbilateral.Asaconsequence,cornealopacities,glaucoma,and(lesscommonly)totallossofvisionmaydevelop.Theposterioruvealtractalsoisaffected,withresultantchoroiditis, retinitis, syndrome). Theseocularlesionsarefrequentlyaccompaniedbyinflammationinthelacrimalglands,withsuppressionoflacrimation(sicca parotitis occursinlessthan10%ofpatientswithsarcoidosis;somegoontodevelopxerostomia(drymouth).CombineduveoparotidinvolvementisdesignatedMikulicz with or of painful Unilateral syndrome. parotid enlargement bilateral the glands

marrow liver demonstratesmicroscopicgranulomatouslesions,usuallyintheportaltriads,aboutasoftenasthespleen,butonlyaboutone-thirdofpatientsdemonstratehepatomegalyorabnormalliverfunction.Sarcoidinvolvementofbone mayappearunaffectedgrossly,butinaboutthree-fourthsofcases,itcontainsgranulomas.Inapproximately10%,itbecomesclinicallyenlarged.The spleen isreportedinasmanyas40%ofpatients,althoughitrarelycausesseveremanifestations.Otherfindingsmayincludehypercalcemiaandhypercalciuria.ThesechangesarenotrelatedtobonedestructionbutratherarecausedbyincreasedcalciumabsorptionsecondarytoproductionofactivevitaminDbythemacrophagesthatformthegranulomas. The

http://ebooksmedicine.net

chest as hilar on affected an adenopathy or asymptomatic, films disease is the discovered autopsy. incidental In routine bilateral at entirely as many individuals, finding eye peripheral lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly In involvement, or cutaneous splenomegaly, lesions, may manifestations. presenting be others, signs (shortness respiratory symptoms (fever, of is two-thirds loss, and of vague sub-sternal there gradual cases, of In dry symptomatic weight fatigue, constitutional about or appearance discomfort) breath, night symptoms cough, anorexia, sweats). or similar test presence in exist, presentations, radiologic for involved the and diagnostic not a granulomas identification of the of the the definitive consistent disorders does of sarcoidosis exclusion requires disease, tissues. are diagnosis findings noncaseating and establishing clinical with and that A with other be excluded. tuberculosis must particular, In

characterized interspersed progressive or follows of either by unpredictable Sarcoidosis course chronicity an activity with remissions. periods initiated steroid be remissions therapy by The spontaneous often permanent. or and may are to 70% minimal manifestations. residual with Overall, recover no affected 65% individuals of or develop permanent dysfunction Another impairment. visual lung or 20% cor 10% and to the 15%, progressive pulmonale. pulmonary Of most to fibrosis succumb remaining

Sarcoidosisisamultisystemdiseaseofunknownetiology;thediagnostichistopathologicfeatureisthepresenceofnoncaseatinggranulomasinvarioustissues.

TH1cellsinthelungthatsecretecytokinessuchasIFN-γ. ImmunologicabnormalitiesincludehighlevelsofCD4+

Clinicalmanifestationsincludelymphnodeenlargement,eyeinvolvement(siccasyndrome[dryeyes],iritis,oriridocyclitis),skinlesions(erythemanodosum,painlesssubcutaneousnodules),andvisceralinvolvement(liver,skin,bonemarrow).Lunginvolvementoccursin90%ofcases,withformationofgranulomasandinterstitialfibrosis.

disease primarily mediated often an allergic and therefore immunologically pneumonitis affects inflammatory is is the called alveoli lung that alveolitis. Hypersensitivity heightened such hay often Most it ( to results those antigens an occupational that from in sensitivity is disease moldy found as inhaled

13.4 Table ). focus immunologically bronchial the injury, asthma, of in of in bronchi Unlike the damage are hypersensitivity mediated level which alveoli. pneumonitis occurs the at the lung lung typical it Hence, disease total manifests lung capacity, decreases as and predominantly restrictive diffusion a compliance, in volume. with and and probably the basis. household exposures a syndromes occupational but have common very pathophysiologic The diverse, similar responsible share findings clinical are and pathologic

Table Sources Pneumonitis of Hypersensitivity Antigens Causing 13.4

Antigen Types of Exposures Source of

Mushrooms,fungi,yeastsContaminatedwood,humidifiers,centralhotairheatingducts,peatmossplants

MycobacteriaMetalworkingfluids,sauna,hottub

BirdsPigeons,dovefeathers,ducks,parakeets

ChemicalsIsocyanates(autopainters),zinc,dyes

FromLacasseY,GirardM,CormierY:Recentadvancesinhypersensitivitypneumonitis,Chest 142:208,2012.

hypersensitivity of disease: immunologically that is suggest mediated evidence lines pneumonitis an Several

of T lavage CD4+ specimens show numbers Bronchoalveolar increased lymphocytes. consistently and CD8+

specific offending their antibodies patients antigen the affected in against Most have serum.

walls been demonstrated and by Complement immunofluorescence. immunoglobulins have vessel within

the of granulomas in patients. two-thirds Noncaseating are affected lungs found of

formed MORPHOLOGYThehistopathologicpictureinbothacuteandchronicformsofhypersensitivitypneumonitisincludespatchymononuclearcellinfiltratesinthepulmonaryinterstitium,withacharacteristicperibronchiolaraccentuation.Lymphocytespredominate,butplasmacellsandepithelioidmacrophagesalsoarepresent.Inacuteformsofthedisease,variablenumbersofneutrophilsalsomaybeseen.“Loose,” poorly granulomas, withoutnecrosis,arepresentinmorethantwo-thirdsofcases,usuallyinaperibronchiolarlocation(

).Inadvancedchroniccases,bilateral,upper-lobe–dominantinterstitialfibrosis(UIPpattern)occurs. Fig.13.22

Fig. 13.22 Hypersensitivitypneumonitis,histologicappearance.Looselyformedinterstitialgranulomasandchronicinflammationarecharacteristic.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

and exposure, acute and or malaise, and may fever, manifest a constitutional either cough, reaction, arising Hypersensitivity of by insidious cough, signs pneumonitis 8 dyspnea, with loss. characterized weight 4 disease chronic hours as to dyspnea, after as symptoms onset an temporal of the symptom is With obvious relationship exposure onset antigen. the acute diagnosis incriminating form, the usually and to of the because symptoms complete the after antigenic acute days. pulmonary If resolution attacks disease, within occurs of is exposure of terminated agent inciting remove irreversible chronic interstitial in from Failure to the an environment pulmonary eventually disease. the results

lung number of by of are are characterized by infiltrates release recruited disorders chemotactic in the which A pulmonary local factors. eosinophils, rich to diverse is but the not etiology generally understood. diseases of These are immunologic origin, is divided eosinophilia the into following Pulmonary categories:

on rapid of Acute hypoxia, and fever, pneumonia chest respiratory radiographs. by eosinophilic with failure, dyspnea, diffuse characterized infiltrates pulmonary onset The contains fluid eosinophils. bronchoalveolar more than lavage 25% typically corticosteroids. to There response is prompt

lesions, (Loeffler a Simple pulmonary blood, eosinophilia the clinical characterized syndrome), by benign pulmonary eosinophilia in and transient course. cells. eosinophils occasional and containing alveolar The infiltrate by thickened septa are an giant

by infection with eosinophilia, and helminthic Tropical microfilariae caused parasites

in with asthma, allergies, for example, and vasculitis drug forms association Secondary certain seen, eosinophilia, of

and eosinophils the dyspnea. by the alveolar fever, characterized within fields, pneumonia, lung the night of aggregates by periphery typically lymphocytes of high and in eosinophilic accompanied and septal sweats, chronic and Idiopathic spaces, the walls other pulmonary of once have eosinophilia This out. disease been of causes a is exclusion, ruled

also In lung associated or is interstitial to with is (COPD), addition restrictive diseases. lung smoking disease obstructive disease. of lung interstitial and are related smoking-associated two interstitial (DIP) respiratory examples Desquamative pneumonia bronchiolitis the air The striking of numbers pigment macrophages DIP in large (smoker’s containing is feature of dusty-brown spaces the most histologic macrophages) ( of accumulation

Fig.

). 13.23 thickened are inflammatory interstitial alveolar a mild. when fibrosis, by The is (usually present, lymphocytes); septa sparse infiltrate Pulmonary show a mild tests usually function abnormality. restrictive therapy. prognosis response patients with to however, have Overall, an and patients progress cessation; some excellent steroids despite smoking DIP a and good the characterized DIP, in common in respiratory smokers in lesion macrophages but Respiratory to those pigmented bronchioles). found that intraluminal is (first-and presence bronchiolitis akin a second-order distribution of a “bronchiolocentric” by is also is fibrosis peribronchiolar Mild seen. present patients with As and dyspnea symptoms affected and cessation. recede with the dry DIP, of smoking onset cough, gradual with

Fig. Desquamativeinterstitialpneumonia.Thereisaccumulationoflargenumbersofmacrophageswithinthealveolarspaceswithonlyslightfibrousthickeningofthealveolarwalls. 13.23

PulmonaryEmbolism,Hemorrhage,andInfarction

of when directly course per 50,000 the Thromboembolism fatal in often United deaths year not complicates approximately States and other diseases. the causes even known. is nonfatal of pulmonary embolism true The not incidence in ambulatory small silent. emboli the cases hospital undoubtedly patients, Some outside and the in are clinically occur whom more hospitalized death. than are Even patients, diagnosed one-third before among no general data individuals pulmonary or 1% fractures. trauma, the severe ranging after population, burns, on of vary dying embolism to widely, 30% in hospitalized incidence from the in Autopsy

the that arteries almost always are Blood occlude in embolic origin. large pulmonary clots involve from thrombi deep arise than of vein larger within most all often large emboli the of pulmonary popliteal 95% veins More have and veins it. legs, the above to that propagated the those discussed especially the trauma surgery, knee the factor hypercoagulability the cancer; (7) Chapter of in in surgery pills risk V or heart (e.g., or on predispose failure; content; contraception http://ebooksmedicine.net hip; factors oral prolonged 4). (particularly legs burns period rest bed influences (2) are paramount: following the that fractures); high multiple of the are (1) immobilization Leiden) venous of orthopedic (Chapter the disorders (6) but estrogen severe parturition (4) and with or around thrombosis The use congestive with (including 4, to (3) (5) primary women, legs); in disseminated

size The occluded the consequences of pathophysiologic in depend pulmonary and of the thromboembolism patient. the cardiopulmonary largely the dictates size embolus, of of on the artery, turn which status pulmonary the artery two of mediators parenchyma. blockage important pulmonary mechanisms caused possibly, release A2, by of (e.g., pulmonary of (1) and, an vasospasm serotonin); pulmonary consequences There in flow thromboxane are arterial (2) from of neurogenic downstream increase the pressure ischemia occlusion: and and/or output, in sometimes pulmonale), death. abrupt (acute heart occlusion diminished and increase pressure, an of cardiac in sudden cor right-sided results vessel a major Thus, pulmonary failure artery result If be are clinically vessels the catastrophic and is occluded, even silent. smaller less may result of a mechanisms: Hypoxemia as develops multiple

lung Perfusion atelectatic of zones. to ischemic surfactant in chest because associated reduction in production with wall. a occurs movement embolism reduced and leads areas the of of because collapse pain Alveolar

saturation. oxygen arterial-venous in output in decrease The of the difference widening cardiac causes a

of individuals. shunting blood 30% present ovale, Right-to-left foramen in occur a normal may through of patent

are arteries Recall in from the and air oxygenated that the the not by but pulmonary alveoli. also lungs arteries directly by only bronchial (infarction) necrosis patients occurring 10% thromboemboli. few the is in exception than rather Thus, as the rule, with of ischemic as lung pulmonary is the bronchial result function or in as or if underventilated is circulation, It at disease. if risk of a underlying only region the there cardiac of compromise occurs

( embolus MORPHOLOGYTheconsequencesofpulmonaryembolism,asnoted,dependonthesizeoftheembolicmassandthegeneralstateofthecirculation.Alargeembolusmayembedinthemainpulmonaryarteryoritsmajorbranchesorlodgeastridethebifurcationasasaddle

Fig.13.24 ).Deathusuallyfollowssosuddenlyfromhypoxiaoracutefailureoftherightsideoftheheart(acutecorpulmonale)thatthereisnotimeformorphologicalterationsinthelung.Smallerembolibecomeimpactedinmedium-sizedandsmall-sizedpulmonaryarteries.Withadequatecirculationandbronchialarterialflow,thevitalityofthelungparenchymaismaintained,butalveolarhemorrhagemayoccurasaresultofischemicdamagetotheendothelialcells.

results.Themoreperipheraltheembolicocclusion,thehighertheriskforinfarction.Aboutthree-fourthsofallinfarctsaffectthelowerlobes,andmorethanone-halfaremultiple.Characteristically,theyarewedge-shaped,withtheirbaseatthepleuralsurfaceandtheapexpointingtowardthehilusofthelung.Pulmonaryinfarctstypicallyarehemorrhagicandappearasraised,red-blueareasofcoagulativenecrosisintheearlystages( Withcompromisedcardiovascularstatus,asmayoccurwithcongestiveheartfailure,infarction

Fig.13.25 ).Theadjacentpleuralsurfaceofteniscoveredbyafibrinousexudate.Theoccludedvesselisusuallylocatedneartheapexoftheinfarctedarea.Theredcellsbegintolysewithin48hours,andtheinfarctgraduallybecomesred-brownashemosiderinisproduced.Intime,fibrousreplacementbeginsatthemarginsasagray-whiteperipheralzoneandeventuallyconvertstheinfarctintoascar.

Fig. 13.24 Largesaddleembolusfromthefemoralveinlyingastridethemainleftandrightpulmonaryarteries. School, Southwestern University Department Texas Pathology, of Margraf, of Dallas, (Courtesy Linda Texas.) Dr. of Medical

sustains (60% clinically fibrinolytic of The as consequences mass parenchyma, activity. are of the • are Most 80%) to circulation embolic the they bronchial removed pulmonary lung rapidly silent summarized follows: and the clinical viability is are the because thromboembolism by affected small;

Fig. Asmall,roughlywedge-shapedhemorrhagicpulmonaryinfarctofrecentoccurrence. 13.25

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cardiovascular of (shock) suddenly. or occurs right-sided 5% In heart acute failure, cases, collapse death, is few the Massive virtually pulmonary of one of instantaneous causes embolism death. pulmonary when by is These than embolus emboli. total or simultaneous large a happen typically the obstructed multiple of 60% severe more small consequences vasculature

(10% pulmonary branches also cases) small Obstruction of infarction of insufficiency if medium circulatory to some of is causes to present. pulmonary element 15% who Typically, infarctions sustain individuals dyspnea. with present

in but lead of of <3% significant with a (accounting of emboli sclerosis time, heart recurrent vascular cases), to worsening failure, small hypertension, and, pulmonary “showers” pulmonary right-sided patients of chronic progressively In subset dyspnea. for

Emboli endogenous to their fibrinolytic usually the initial as activity leads resolve dissolution. complete after event, often acute and developing an innocuous presence second. in However, one, a 30% a the chance may of larger embolus who patients factor, of experienced pulmonary predisposing embolism a presage small, one have underlying a have for include calf ambulation and stockings, postoperative intermittent elastic patients, and leg isometric anticoagulation, exercises postparturient patients. bedridden therapy for application may of compression, pneumatic Prophylactic early Those pulmonary develop anti-coagulation therapy. given embolism who are with pulmonary (shock, for hemodynamically are failure) candidates Patients embolism right heart unstable who acute thrombolytic massive therapy. are

and but Nonthrombotic forms, 4). lethal air, (Chapter embolism as potentially several pulmonary fluid amniotic fat, uncommon come such in emboli a Intravenous embolism in microvasculature; in (talc) is trisilicate elicits foreign of mixture the with pulmonary the presence response granulomatous arteries. drug the pulmonary or intravenous associated often interstitium magnesium within abuse body the hypertension. to while to vascular leads the involvement lead interstitium Involvement may pulmonary of fibrosis, Residual within crystals can demonstrated granulomas the talc using polarized be light. massive and to by marrow can bone (denoted elements artery) hematopoietic pulmonary secondary and embolism after a the with presence trauma of infarction fat sickle anemia. patients in Bone within cell occur

Almostalllargepulmonaryarterythrombiareembolicinorigin,usuallyarisingfromthedeepveinsofthelowerleg.

Riskfactorsincludeprolongedbedrest,kneeorhipsurgery,severetrauma,congestiveheartfailure,useoforalcontraceptives(especiallythosewithhighestrogencontent),disseminatedcancer,andgeneticcausesofhypercoagulability.

Mostemboli(60%to80%)areclinicallysilent;aminority(5%,typicallylarge“saddleemboli”)causeacuteright-sidedheartfailure,shock,orsuddendeath;andtheremaindercausepulmonaryinfarction.

Riskforrecurrenceishigh.

pressures. one-eighth low only circulation is pulmonary resistance, of systemic one about blood and pressures The are of pulmonary normally of by blood vascular or, in may more flow. cross-sectional pressures as mm hypertension a Hg less 25 or Pulmonary vascular the of the commonly, at by area increased rest) pulmonary caused bed decrease pulmonary (defined be Health has hypertension Organization Based on classified World shared pulmonary the following five features, groups: the into

affecting left hypertension with heritable these pulmonary of arterial disease disorders to forms that pulmonary virus, diverse hypertension, that connective immunodeficiency tissue by right shunts small cause and arterioles; and of diseases a hypertension human includes collection Pulmonary congenital diseases, pulmonary include heart muscular

heart including left-sided to disease, and and Pulmonary systolic disease dysfunction diastolic valvular due hypertension

and/or hypoxia, interstitial Pulmonary hypertension to due and lung diseases including lung disease COPD

multifactorial mechanisms unclear with hypertension or Pulmonary

gathered pulmonary has As be diverse can classification, this hypertension from causes. following: common the the are Some more of causes

Chronic (group obstructive interstitial 3). diseases lung or obliterate pulmonary increasing alveolar flow secondarily, pressure. diseases resistance pulmonary blood and, These blood capillaries, to

heart disease or acquired (group Antecedent 2). congenital pulmonary to causes an in venous Mitral of pressure leading and vasculature, example, pressure left pulmonary to atrial is stenosis, transmitted arterial that for the the hypertension. increase side eventually

Recurrent 4). thromboemboli (group pulmonary vascular reducing functional the cause pulmonary by area in in of hypertension cross-sectional resistance. emboli pulmonary leads vascular increase the turn Recurrent an which pulmonary to may bed,

1). Autoimmune diseases (group these involve vascular Several notably leading and (most vasculature and/or hypertension. pulmonary interstitium, of the diseases sclerosis) systemic increased to the resistance pulmonary

a and is 3) apnea Obstructive associated is disorder (also common with hypoxemia. group obesity that sleep now hypertension development recognized pulmonary cor It and be significant to a to pulmonale. of the is contributor

http://ebooksmedicine.net

excluded; causes is are as pulmonary this hypertension patients known Uncommonly, to arterial encountered idiopathic all referred whom hypertension. is in in pulmonary trait. primary dominant a of sometimes basis, pulmonary to (sometimes families is genetic referred hypertension being inherited 80% a This up as has as name autosomal to as hypertension) pulmonary “idiopathic” an in however, misnomer, these overt Within families, 20% and 10% there disease. develop members is only incomplete the to penetrance, family of of a pathogenic spotlight As in form pathway. often is molecular on the investigating the shining protein insights, the of (BMP)–signaling basis of disease the morphogenetic this by role provided new case, instance the has an uncommon familial bone in 25% familial protein of and in gene line bone of are 75% pulmonary morphogenetic sporadic 2 cases encoding mutations the found (BMPR2) receptor the germ Inactivating hypertension of cases. recently, mutations involved identified in affected the also genes been in More are patients. have BMPR2 pathway other that in dysfunction to of signaling muscle that leads in pulmonary in Details defects remain worked BMPR2 cells proliferation appears to out, it and vasculature. be smooth the endothelium but of vascular disease, with mutations is likely of of contribute that Because develop only it BMPR2 the also the disorder. environmental 20% genes to and/or to 10% triggers modifier pathogenesis individuals

the of and hypertrophy. elastic MORPHOLOGYRegardlessoftheiretiology,allformsofpulmonaryhypertensionareassociatedwithmedial atherosclerosis, muscular ventricular arterial hypertrophy pulmonary right arteries, pulmonary and Thepresenceoforganizingorrecanalizedthrombifavorsrecurrentpulmonaryemboliasthecause,andthecoexistenceofdiffusepulmonaryfibrosis,orsevereemphysemaandchronicbronchitis,pointstochronichypoxiaastheinitiatingevent.Thevesselchangescaninvolvetheentirearterialtree,fromthemainpulmonaryarteriesdowntothearterioles(

lesion, Fig.13.26 ).Inseverecases,atheromatousdepositsforminthepulmonaryarteryanditsmajorbranches.Thearteriolesandsmallarteriesaremostprominentlyaffectedbymedialhypertrophyandintimalfibrosis,sometimesnarrowingthelumenstopinpointchannels.Anuncommonbutcharacteristicpathologicchangeistheplexiform socalledbecauseatuftofcapillaryformationsispresent,producinganetwork,orweb,thatspansthelumensofdilatedthin-walled,smallarteriesandmayextendoutsidethevessel.

advanced. Pulmonary the when disease symptoms hypertension is produces pulmonary to Idiopathic hypertension occasionally in common is women years in young children. age and 20 of occurs 40 most anginal chest dyspnea presenting but fatigue, pain. have The features are usually patients some and cyanosis, superimposed often Over cor 80% hypertrophy in thromboembolism with and of pneumonia, appear, death right 5 distress, and decompensated respiratory time, patients. years ventricular and within to 2 ensues pulmonale, from

Fig. 13.26 Vascularchangesinpulmonaryhypertension.(A)Atheromafor-mation,achangeusuallylimitedtolargepulmonaryarteries.(B)Markedmedialhypertrophy. (C)Plexiformlesioncharacteristicofadvancedpulmo-naryhypertensionseeninsmallarteries.

depend on underlying cause. Treatment the choices the directed is disease, trigger thromboembolic (e.g., therapy with or hypoxemia). secondary those disease For at belonging to been disease 1 with group A disease or groups. refractory those variety have with in other success used of varying vasodilators definitive the Lung treatment selected is transplantation for patients.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

a lung of Pulmonary some interstitial is complication disorders. hemorrhage dramatic are these pulmonary granulomatosis with Among idiopathic (1) polyangiitis. so-called hemorrhage (3) syndrome, hemosiderosis, Goodpasture and syndromes” “pulmonary (2)

glomeruli certain the type domains renal are are by an and autoimmune disease syndrome of that is to which collagen of alveoli. uncommon caused in IV and pulmonary against membranes autoantibodies circulating basement lung injury kidney Goodpasture intrinsic basement necrotizing in inflammation to rise of giving progressive glomeruli, renal the destruction pneumonitis pulmonary antibodies glomerulonephritis. and rapidly The alveoli membranes trigger and hemorrhagic interstitial and

MORPHOLOGYThelungsareheavyandhaveareasofred-brownconsolidationduetodiffuse hemorrhage. alveolar duetoearlierepisodesofhemorrhage( Microscopicexaminationshowsfocalnecrosisofalveolarwallsassociatedwithintra-alveolarhemorrhage,fibrousthickeningofsepta,andhypertrophictypeIIpneumocytes.Thereisabundanthemosiderin

Fig.13.27 of (usuallyIgG,sometimesIgAorIgM)thatisthehallmarkdiagnosticfindinginrenalbiopsyspecimens(Chapter14)alsomaybeseenalongthealveolarsepta. deposition ).Thecharacteristiclinear immunoglobulin pattern

in Most or of occur their patients syndrome twenties. cases teens in Goodpasture is a many there preponderance. contrast to other In male diseases, autoimmune smokers. are patients of majority The active immunosuppressive improved Plasmapheresis have prognosis. a therapy and markedly once-dismal immunosuppressive drugs removes inhibit exchange and Plasma production. offending antibody antibodies, severe With disease, renal required. eventually renal transplantation is

pulmonary of some or (GPA; and course. their at polyangiitis granulomatosis in develop than formerly More time Wegener with upper-respiratory 80% patients manifestations granulomatosis) in discussed 10. This is Chapter features. Here salient we pulmonary the list of (“angiitis”) and necrotizing by granulomatous a characterized parenchymal combination The lesions inflammation. lung are vasculitis necrotizing signs and epistaxis, lungs and sinusitis, (chronic symptoms stem of the the (cough, from tract nasal perforation) involvement hemoptysis, upper-respiratory The chest pain). cases of 10). present antibodies cytoplasmic 95% (Chapter are Anti-neutrophil in close to (PR3ANCAs)

in United deaths the of all Pulmonary the sixth of form one infections are responsible for in pneumonia States. the be in lung. as defined infection any can broadly Pneumonia non-immune defense the spaces effective to respiratory the highly alveolar parenchyma number a lung system mechanisms the from sterile immune remains Normally, throughout extend nasopharynx ( of that the of because air and

Fig. ). 13.28 aspirated lung of (1) surprising these many not are airborne nasopharyngeal and lungs; and because flora vulnerability individuals; the immune dsepite to lung local is by microbes healthy infection during often inhaled (3) sleep, readily lower defenses. are The (2) into even the regularly defenses diseases

and humoral complement immune infections inherited adaptive by an of patients is all immunodeficiency), lead emphasized to neutrophil (including defenses or or innate preventing in which acquired immunity immunity of importance in defects (e.g., pulmonary with The defects)

Fig. 13.27 Diffusealveolarhemorrhagesyndrome.(A)Lungbiopsyspecimendemonstrateslargenumbersofintraalveolarhemosiderin-ladenmacrophagesonabackgroundofthickenedfibroussepta.(B)ThetissuehasbeenstainedwithPrussianblue,anironstainthathighlightstheabundantintracellularhemosiderin. (From Medical of Center,Dallas,Texas.) Collection of Pathology,Children’s the the Department Teaching http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. of to Phagocytosis lung, initiate mechanisms. and degrade alternative Organisms, macrophage infection: the blanket and mucociliary by the recruited produce by the defense enhances lymph removal remove by immune the In by Innate air activated neutrophils elevator; organisms mucous including and (A) and by or enter those by macrophages alveoli be 13.28 on phagocytosis; the organisms 3, the ingested factors; the pathway draining defenses responses. entrapment by microbial elevator; them of phagocytosis phagocytes, opsonin migrating against spaces 2, Complement 1, can to may kill 5, which from may alveolar depends killing normal 4, means removal mucociliary the reach in and C3b, Lung onto the nodes IgA operate shown); (IgM, tract; block intracellular accumulation IgG) upper-respiratory infections 1, for (B) Additional after fluid mechanisms The viruses yielding the serum immune classic antibodies attachment T 2, in the pathway, present activate (not IgG cells lining epithelium by microorganism is adaptive an important efficiently of immunity: more 3, are Secreted complement In addition, lower-respiratory tract, In to the development can alveolar C3b controlling in is and of by other of opsonin; microorganisms. the the and

PMN, neutrophil.

incidence increased of with infections pyogenic bacteria. caused with as patients H. airways Toll-like defects secretions) pneumococcus in in For in patients such infections, congenital encapsulated immunoglobulin with (the signaling necrotizing increased IgA at to by severe adaptor mutations major susceptible for receptors, pneumonias required risk pneumococcal example, protein while and production an MYD88, are influenzae. by are extremely organisms for to with intracellular atypical TH1 defects mainly such mycobacteria. in infections other On increased cell–mediated immunity the hand, lead as microbes lifestyle infections. and with mechanisms interfere more Much facilitate immune host choices defense commonly, reflexes For (thereby the activity, clearance function cough alcohol impairs and for smoke pulmonary risk epiglottic as example, and and mucociliary well compromises macrophage neutrophile increasing aspiration). cigarette as

no be occurs. agent in specific the etiologic by if to classified isolated, infection which clinical the Bacterial can are the or, pneumonias setting according pathogen in associated a (summarized with each Altogether, distinct recognized, seven group settings clinical of distinct pathogens fairly are

13.5 Table ). a anti-microbial to be setting when therapy helpful clinical the has of given can Thus, empirically. be guide consideration

Bacterial tract viral often pneumonias a follow infection. upper-respiratory pneumoniae common other relative pneumococcus) first, pneumonia is the acute by discussed followed (i.e., is cause community-acquired most of pathogens. and S. the common

acquired settings: diseases or such (2) clinical CHF, increased [AIDS]). (e.g., COPD, immune production syndrome in defects in two as frequency (1) acquired congenital Pneumococcal immunoglobulin occur infections chronic deficiency or and diabetes; with risk the splenic after increases or cell absent function or disease In splenectomy) for greatly sepsis. sickle addition, (e.g., pneumococcal decreased overwhelming the the removing in recall responsible the of and largest body organ major is You for the from the blood. collection contains that phagocytes pneumococci will spleen also The site spleen an for important is

Pathogens The Pneumonia and Implicated Table 13.5 Syndromes

Moraxella Enterobacteriaceae(Klebsiella influenzae Legionella aureus Staphylococcus spp. pneumophila Streptococcus catarrhalis pneumoniae) pneumoniae Haemophilus andPseudomonas burnetii (Qfever) Mycoplasma Chlamydia pneumoniae pneumoniae Coxiella

Respiratorysyncytialvirus,humanmetapneumovirus,parainfluenzavirus(children);influenzaAandB(adults);adenovirus(militaryrecruits)

spp.,Serratia coli)andPseudomonas (Klebsiella Escherichia marcescens, spp. Gram-negativerodsbelongingtoEnterobacteriaceae

(usuallymethicillin-resistant) S. aureus

Anaerobicoralflora(Bacteroides, Peptostreptococcus),admixedwithaerobicbacteria(S. Prevotella, pneumoniae, Fusobacterium,

andPseudomonas aureus, S. aeruginosa) influenzae, H.

NocardiaActinomycesGranulomatous:Mycobacteriumtuberculosisandatypicalmycobacteria,

Histoplasma Coccidioides immitis, capsulatum, Blastomyces dermatitidis

Anaerobicbacteria(extremelycommon),withorwithoutmixedaerobicinfection

Streptococcus andtype3pneumococcus(uncommon) S. pyogenes, pneumoniae, K. aureus,

encapsulated polysaccharides, of antibodies antibodies which production against Mycobacteriumaviumcomplex(MAC)InvasiveaspergillosisInvasivecandidiasis“Usual”bacterial,viral,andfungalorganisms(listedabove) the against protective dominant bacteria. are

presence diagnosis remembered a it the be and the flora pneumoniae numerous of gram-positive, The in lancet-shaped pneumonia, typical sputum 20% of results therefore S. but is diplococci the of part adults, supports that endogenous false-positive may must in of be containing neutrophils obtained. pneumococcal Isolation of blood 20% of more (in is cultures). of phase 30% patients the only have early sensitive cultures to pneumococci from positive blood less but illness, specific polysaccharides individuals used from at common high sepsis. for the serotypes pneumococcal risk vaccines Pneumococcal containing capsular are in

pneumonias. unencapsulated causes community-acquired important of are and H. influenzae forms encapsulated of Both The respiratory former often particularly viral a after in children, of can pneumonia cause infection. a life-threatening form risk chronic at for as those cystic developing infections include chronic bronchitis, bronchiectasis. and Adults with pulmonary diseases fibrosis, such exacerbations cause COPD. common is influenzae the acute of of bacterial most H. against this was in cause vaccination suppurative infancy significantly meningitis an Encapsulated has but the type influenzae organism epiglottitis children, risk. b H. of and important reduced formerly in

as is cause especially adults. catarrhalis in being of M. older recognized pneumonia, bacterial increasingly a cause common exacerbation in is It adults. the COPD of second acute most bacterial of of and M. pneumoniae causes media middle most catarrhalis Along otitis of influenzae, S. children. H. of is with (infection three frequent ear) the one the in

in an both viral children of in healthy (e.g., and measles children and influenza in S. respiratory children adults). and aureus cause is secondary adults bacterial illnesses after pneumonia important and incidence complications, pneumonia associated abscess is Staphylococcal as empyema. a such with lung of high Staphylococcal serious staphylococcal of association abuse. drug pneumonia intravenous with right-sided occurring a complication is in endocarditis later). also is an pneumonia It (discussed of important nosocomial cause

most the frequent gram-negative of cause K. is bacterial pneumoniae pneumonia. Klebsiella-related individuals, and chronic debilitated afflicts malnourished frequently alcoholics. pneumonia particularly sputum because characteristic, organism and which the patient coughing gelatinous viscid is abundant up. have difficulty an the Thick may polysaccharide, produces capsular

commonly in Although its here (discussed most is because later). infections of association community-acquired in nosocomial fibrosis, discussed is P. with pathogens cystic settings infection aeruginosa with seen in in requiring are of pneumonia Pseudomonas chemotherapy; who mechanical patients and burns; to individuals extensive usually ventilation. secondary also neutropenic, common is in victims at P. spread. propensity a invade with consequent has the aeruginosa to site blood of infection, extrapulmonary vessels of with a disease, a bacteremia occurring days. matter within is Pseudomonas fulminant death often Histologic coagulative of vessels leading secondary pulmonary examination necrosis vasculitis), (Pseudomonas reveals necrotic invading the blood walls to organisms of parenchyma. the

disease, L. eponym pneumophila agent the this Legionnaire and epidemic of the an by forms caused organism. for sporadic pneumonia of is is tract self-limited L. without caused infection a fever upper-respiratory pneumophila, related pneumonic Pontiac by symptoms. within tubing of the flourishes water water-cooling aquatic artificial domestic environments, pneumophila (potable) and L. in as supplies. such system towers mode contaminated of transmission thought be organisms either of to aspiration aerosolized The or is water. inhalation drinking of hematologic cardiac, common Legionella pneumonia such immunologic, individuals condition as some or disease. predisposing is in renal, with susceptible. transplant particularly Organ recipients are hospitalization pneumonia frequently quite Legionella immunosuppressed and fatality requiring be individuals. severe, 30% rate 50% in of may producing a to urine by diagnostic a positive test of Rapid or modality. standard diagnosis samples; fluorescent remains culture facilitated the by on the antibody sputum demonstration is antigens Legionella in bronchial PCR-based on secretions tests be used atypical cases. can in

http://ebooksmedicine.net

young are children Mycoplasma common adults. and among infections particularly They local epidemics sporadically closed in (schools, as military or camps, occur prisons). communities Mycoplasma are Mycoplasma testing for polymerase for and antigens chain DNA (PCR) available. reaction Tests

MORPHOLOGYBacterialpneumoniahastwopatternsofanatomicdistribution:lobularbronchopneumoniaandlobarpneumonia(

(Fig.13.30 pneumonia Fig.13.29 ).Theseanatomiccategorizationsmaybedifficulttoapplyinindividualcasesbecausepatternsoverlap,andpatchyinvolvementmayevolvetobecome ).Inthecontextofpneumonias,theterm“consolidation,”usedfrequently,refersto“solidification”ofthelungduetoreplacementoftheairbyexudateinthealveoli.Patchyconsolidationofthelungisthedominantcharacteristicofbronchopneumonia,whileconsolidationofalargeportionofalobeorofanentirelobedefineslobar

Fig. 13.29 Theanatomicdistributionofbronchopneumoniaandlobarpneumoniaaffectingthelowerlobesofthelung.

Fig. Lobarpneumoniawithgrayhepatization.Thelowerlobeisuniformlyconsolidated. 13.30

confluentovertime,producingcompletelobarconsolidation.Moreover,thesameorganismsmayproduceeitherpatterndependingonpatientsusceptibility.Mostimportantfromtheclinicalstandpointareidentificationofthecausativeagentanddeterminationoftheextentofdisease.

Inlobar hepatization thatfollowsischaracterizedbymassiveconfluentexudation,asneutrophils,redcells,andfibrinfillthealveolarspaces( thelungisheavy,boggy,andred.Itischaracterizedbyvascularengorgement,intraalveolarfluidwithfewneutrophils,andoftenthepresenceofnumerousbacteria.Thestageofred pneumonia,fourstagesoftheinflammatoryresponsehaveclassicallybeendescribed.Inthefirststageofcongestion,

hepatization thatfollowsismarkedbyprogressivedisintegrationofredcellsandthepersistenceofafibrinosuppurativeexudate(see ).Ongrossexamination,thelobeisred,firm,andairless,withaliver-likeconsistency,hencethetermhepatization.Thestageofgray Fig.13.31A

Fig.13.31B theexudatewithinthealveolarspacesisbrokendownbyenzymaticdigestiontoproducegranular,semifluiddebristhatisresorbed,ingestedbymacrophages,expectorated,ororganizedbyfibroblastsgrowingintoit( ),resultinginacolorchangetograyish-brown.Inthefinalstageofresolution,

Fig.13.31C ).Pleuralfibrinousreactiontotheunderlyinginflammationisoftenpresentintheearlystagesiftheconsolidationextendstothesurface(pleuritis). Itmayresolveorundergoorganization,leavingfibrousthickeningorpermanentadhesions.

areconsolidatedareasofacutesuppurativeinflammation.Theconsolidationmaybeconfinedtoonelobebutismoreoftenmultilobarandfrequentlybilateralandbasalbecauseofthetendencyofsecretionstogravitatetothelowerlobes.Well-developedlesionsareslightlyelevated,dry,granular,gray-redtoyellow,andpoorlydelimitedattheirmargins.Histologically,aneutrophil-richexudatefillsthebronchi,bronchioles,andadjacentalveolarspaces(see Fociofbronchopneumonia

http://ebooksmedicine.net Fig.13.31A

Fig. 13.31 (A)Acutepneumonia.Thecongestedseptalcapillariesandexten-siveneutrophilexudationintoalveolicorrespondtoearlyredhepatization.Fibrinnetshavenotyetformed. (B)Earlyorganizationofintraalveolarexu-dates,seeninareastobestreamingthroughtheporesofKohn(arrow).

(C)Advancedorganizingpneumonia,featuringtransformationofexudatestofibromyxoidmassesrichlyinfiltratedbymacrophagesandfibroblasts.

totheheartvalves,pericardium,brain,kidneys,spleen,orjoints,causingmetastaticabscesses,endocarditis,meningitis,orsuppurativearthritis. dissemination Complicationsofpneumoniainclude(1)tissuedestructionandnecrosis,causingabscess formation;(2)spreadofinfectiontothepleuralcavity,causingtheintrapleuralfibrinosuppurativereactionknownasempyema;and(3)bacteremic

hemoptysis. occasional acute are cough bacterial and major abrupt symptoms onset of mucopurulent typical shaking fever, of have patients high The sputum; producing community-acquired chills, pneumonia pain accompanied is it pleuritic pleural and is by pleuritis present, When friction rub. whole The in whereas pneumonia, lobe in is there opacities bronchopneumonia. radiopaque are lobar focal

the effective picture by is of antibiotics. modified clinical administration The markedly may initiation signs antibiotics. relatively Treated clinical be the of few after afebrile with 48 72 patients to hours organism therapy. The of of are and determination identification keystones sensitivity antibiotic the of the the its to some most and empyema, from influence, or pericarditis, a results predisposing instances chronic Less enough merit severe or now such as such debility hospitalization succumb, death to than in or endocarditis, as complication, such with alcoholism. of pneumonia 10% patients meningitis,

viral common community-acquired syncytial ). causes virus, of most rhinoviruses, metapneumovirus, (see influenza rubeola are and 13.5 virus varicella adenovirus, The and the human respiratory A B, viruses, pneumonias types of cause infections (“common upper-respiratory also all Nearly cold”). tract agents these

These and share epithelium, infect propensity damage viruses resspiratory producing inflammatory a pathologic to response. an mimic films so of also but is bacterial fluid the spaces alveoli, occur, to some changes may interstitial the that there may process inflammation, When extends alveolar into pneumonia. of chest those outpouring usually on appearance viral alone. result, and distinguish is pneumonia As radiologic not it based on a bacterial possible to secondary epithelium infections. and damage predisposes to respiratory bacterial of the inhibits Moreover, leading necrosis to mucociliary clearance individuals. alcoholics, infants, likely are viral older in adults, of patients, immunosuppressed and more complications malnourished infection Such serious

walls MORPHOLOGYThemorphologicpatternsinviralpneumoniasaresimilar.Theprocessmaybepatchy,oritmayinvolvewholelobesbilaterallyorunilaterally.Macroscopically,theaffectedareasarered-blue,congested,andsubcrepitant.Onhistologicexamination,the alveoli of the largely reaction inflammatory the confined to is (

Fig.13.32 ).Theseptaarewidenedandedematous;theyusuallycontainamononuclearinflammatoryinfiltrateoflymphocytes,macrophagesand,occasionally,plasmacells.Intheclassiccase,alveolarspacesinviralpneumoniasarefreeofcellularexudate.Inseverecases,however,full-blowndiffusealveolardamagewithhyalinemembranesmaydevelop.Inlesssevere,uncomplicatedcases,subsidenceofthediseaseisfollowedbyreconstitutionofthenormalarchitecture.Superimposedbacterialinfection,asexpected,resultsinamixedhistologicpicture.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. right). Viralpneumonia.Thethickenedalveolarwallsareinfiltratedwithlymphocytesandsomeplasmacells,whicharespillingoverintoalveolarspaces.Notethefocalalveolaredema(center) 13.32 andearlyfibrosis(upper

is extremely clinical viral pneumonia The course of varied. may cold” manifest undiagnosed, It infection that immunocompromised as severe upper-respiratory tract “chest patients. as or infection masquerade a in a life-threatening or goes fulminant, The is malaise fever, with acute, febrile later, that initial cough presentation of headache, nonspecific sputum. illness minimal an characterized by and and, usually causes and of to flowing the The which blood exudate alveolar mismatch prevents localization through walls, perfusion. the ventilation oxygenation of turn of spaces air inflammatory in the affected respiratory distress to physical the seems radiographic the of and proportion result, findings. out As a degree often of causative Identifying can the agent difficult. be

of no disorder in concern much an other the developed as epidemic. as influenza causes Perhaps public threat communicable the world The neuraminidase, determines by single-stranded the that RNA has containing nucleoprotein subtype which surface The H3N2). the and hemagglutinin C. influenza virus is a type—A, lipid a virus, or B, (e.g., determine viral the virus bilayer a viral H1N1, bound the Host the hemagglutinin and future neuraminidase with prevent influenza and respectively, to infection ameliorate, antibodies virus. pigs, birds influenza and and humans, type major viruses pandemic the are of infect horses, The A epidemic infections. and cause through of host of that allow to escape mutations Epidemics hemagglutinin occur influenza virus the (antigenic drift). the antibodies neuraminidase most and antigens occur making are of may than more susceptible which the viruses, of RNA widespread through those epidemics, to (antigenic longer and hemagglutinin both with when animals neuraminidase virus the all segments new last Pandemics, shift). animal are and influenza recombination replaced against reasonable disease, especially vulnerable and the older vaccines in available infants in provide influenza adults. Commercially protection

into those Insight studying from pandemics come has past. future virus the this analysis to died who from consistent swine identified that of killed 1918 origin million viral of individuals sequences, lungs shift. influenza million with genomes a the pandemic DNA great 40 in 20 retrieved worldwide having in antigenic its influenza soldier an of an this century, The of flu antigenic in shift also swine first 2009, virus involving origin. resulted pandemic a from strains adults partial conveyed past caused that had apparently protection. because adults, infections influenza particularly in against antibodies severe It young older severe with as disease, infection. immunosuppression associated diabetes, higher and were also risk Comorbidities for lung a disease, heart such

next pandemic? the of source then might What be great the centered is infects avian on birds. One influenza, concern normally which avian has One the H5N1, type birds. world in strain, throughout wild domestic and spread As in have been reported (from Organization and of countries) (WHO). 400 approximately 15 Health World 700 2015, H5N1 deaths virus September humans infections influenza the to been acquired Nearly deaths close most pneumonia. resulted domestic by from birds; cases have all contact with is the inefficient. the Fortunately, of transmission H5N1 avian virus current of an However, strain the human-to-human highly pandemic). emerge capable is infectious recombines for might a next is great causing thus, humans, that H5N1 that (and, with of influenza transmission sustained influenza if

(thepneumococcus)isthemostcommoncauseofcommunity-acquiredbacterialpneumoniaandusuallyhasalobarpatternofinvolvement. S. pneumoniae

Morphologically,lobarpneumoniasevolvethroughfourstages:congestion,redhepatization,grayhepatization,andresolution.

OthercommoncausesofbacterialpneumoniasinthecommunityincludeH. andM. influenzae (usuallysecondarytoviralrespiratoryinfections),K. (bothassociatedwithacuteexacerbationsofCOPD),S. (observedinchronicalcoholics),P. catarrhalis aeruginosa (seeninindividualswithcysticfibrosis,inburnvictims,andinpatientswithneutropenia),and pneumoniae aureus

L.

pneumophila, seenparticularlyinorgantransplantrecipients.

arecharacterizedbyrespiratorydistressoutofproportiontotheclinicalandradiologicsigns,andbyinflammationthatispredominantlyconfinedtoalveolarsepta,withgenerallyclearalveoli. Viral pneumonias

CommoncausesofviralpneumoniaincludeinfluenzaAandB,respiratorysyncytialvirus,humanmetapneumovirus,parainfluenzavirus,andadenovirus.

of defined hospital-acquired, acquired hospital a are stay. as in Nosocomial, the pulmonary infections or course pneumonias add care. the of health but infections course clinical on impact adverse burgeoning http://ebooksmedicine.net also not costs to of the considerably patients, an ill only have These prolonged are disease, those hospitalized underlying Nosocomial are or on those common in immunosuppressed, infections who individuals antibiotic with severe regimens. ventilation are the mechanical this particularly are Patients given acquired ventilator-associated setting pneumonia. on high-risk infections group, and designation in a Gram-negative Enterobacteriaceae of and (members Pseudomonas spp.) rods common community-acquired in not pneumonias, S. hospital unlike pathogen common a most the setting. S. aureus the isolates; is and pneumoniae are

after gastric while during repeated a patients or debilitated or contents in vomiting. those (e.g., Aspiration occurs stroke) unconscious who aspirate pneumonia that Those have reflexes and facilitate swallowing abnormal gag affected aspiration. bacterial. partly and resultant to The due partly gastric the is extremely pneumonia of effects chemical, the acid, irritating more aerobes Typically, being is than (see anaerobes than recovered more on one organism culture, common

Table 13.5 ). and a individuals often Aspiration fulminant frequent death of aspiration. necrotizing, pneumonia is clinical a is pursues predisposed in course, cause to common complication. who formation abscess In is those a survive, Microaspiration, gastroesophageal by does many especially pneumonia. but may reflux, lead lung in those with individuals, diseases exacerbate not contrast, other to occurs and

Lung or abscess pulmonary the refers parenchyma, formation large within one cavities. to a of localized necrosis in the of more resulting area suppurative mechanisms: The organism by of causative any into introduced be the may lung the following

from or teeth infective tonsils. of infected sinuses or material carious Aspiration occur patients may intoxication, coma, surgery, during cough depressed This or anesthesia, debilitated with alcoholic oral in and reflexes.

infectious contents, Aspiration originating of accompanied usually the in by organisms gastric oropharynx.

Streptococcus particularly those a complication pneumoniae, caused necrotizing As Pseudomonas by of type rarely, aureus, and, bacterial spp., 3 pyogenes, K. S. pneumonias, pneumococci. lung abscesses. lead infections and Mycotic may also bronchiectasis to

with carcinoma bronchiole. or bronchogenic obstructing a Bronchial obstruction, bronchus particularly contribute to of and drainage, and aspiration of tumor fragments Impaired distal the blood abscesses. atelectasis, development all also form portion An of an within necrotic may tumor. excavated a abscess

infective endocarditis from right embolism, side the of of heart. Septic the

lung In result spread addition, bacteria hematogenous from pyogenic in of may abscesses infection. disseminated lung abscesses. often characteristically and This in staphylococcal occurs multiple most in bacteremia results

present in in of two-thirds to isolates abscesses, are they are almost cases. lung Anaerobic bacteria exclusive all and the one-third cavity, anaerobes Bacteroides, encountered principally streptococci. in species are oral Prevotella, found The microaerophilic the Peptostreptococcus, normally Fusobacterium, of frequently commensals most and

right the (withitsmoreverticalairways)thanontheleft,andmostaresingle.Ontherightside,theytendtooccurintheposteriorsegmentoftheupperlobeandintheapicalsegmentsofthelowerlobe,becausetheselocationsreflecttheprobablecourseofaspiratedmaterialwhenthepatientisrecumbent.Abscessesthatdevelopinthecourseofpneumoniaorbronchiectasiscommonlyaremultiple,basal,anddiffuselyscattered.Septicemboliandabscessesarisingfromhematogenousseedingarecommonlymultipleandmayaffectanyregionofthelungs. side MORPHOLOGYAbscessesrangeindiameterfromafewmillimeterstolargecavities5to6cmacross.Thelocalizationandnumberofabscessesdependontheirmodeofdevelopment.Pulmonaryabscessesresultingfromaspirationofinfectivematerialaremore on common

Asthefocusofsuppurationenlarges,italmostinevitablyrupturesintoairways.Thus,thecontainedexudatemaybepartiallydrained,producinganair-fluidlevelonradiographicexamination.Occasionally,abscessesruptureintothepleuralcavityandproducebronchopleuralfistulas,theconsequenceofwhichispneumothorax orempyema. Othercomplicationsarisefromembolizationofsepticmaterialtothebrain,givingrisetomeningitisorbrainabscess.Onhistologicexamination,asexpectedwithanyabscess,thesuppurativefocusissurroundedbyvariableamountsoffibrousscarringandmononuclearinfiltration(lymphocytes,plasmacells,macrophages),dependingonthechronicityofthelesion.

that usually of much The abscess lung occasionally, foul-smelling, yields prominent and include a like are purulent, or of those hemoptysis copious sanguineous occurs. a bronchiectasis of manifestations sputum; amounts cough and fever Spiking common. are malaise the of may all anemia occur. Clubbing fingers, loss, and weight in underlying older carcinoma Abscesses patients an carcinoma; 15% with lung in a must to adult, bronchogenic 10% of suspected considered. occur when abscess be is thus, 5) may Secondary in (Chapter amyloidosis develop cases. chronic needed, therapy and, includes Treatment surgical drainage. antibiotic if the in range rate of 10%. the mortality is Overall,

in a often without Chronic an node or lesion with individual, involvement. localized most regional lymph is immunocompetent pneumonia There due granulomatous is bacteria typically to which be (e.g., inflammation, may

M. fungi. tuberculosis) or human such (see immunosuppressive dissemination presentation systemic to causative those regimens, due (HIV) virus infection the or widespread disease immunocompromised with on of illness, In as is usual immunodeficiency debilitating the organism. with patients, later), of spectrum important chronic within entity Tuberculosis the pneumonias. by far is the most

http://ebooksmedicine.net

is a caused chronic disease communicable granulomatous by tuberculosis. Tuberculosis Mycobacterium usually may any tissue involves but or lungs organ affect the It body. in the

most (WHO) The cause of to considers be from agent. the resulting Health tuberculosis World death infectious Organization single a common 1.7 per 1.5 million It 10 year. that with cases is new worldwide, infected are deaths million estimated to and billion 8 individuals deaths world, 1800s In peaked from and the and 1900s. Western in declined 1800 the throughout steadily tuberculosis stopped in in the from a incidence increased HIV-infected decline in abruptly, change However, the new 1984 resulted cases of individuals. tuberculosis that immunosuppressed in surveillance the health tuberculosis incidence a since prophylaxis and among As consequence individuals, public of of tuberculosis has individuals 1992. intensive U.S.-born declined of there tuberculosis States, 60% 9400 immigrants 2014, from countries these in active nearly new were the where is United cases approximately in In of with endemic. occurring tuberculosis

under illness. flourishes of debilitating conditions chronic Tuberculosis and crowding, poverty, In a older members States, disease with of AIDS, patients adults, the United poor, communities. tuberculosis minority and the is urban of from of African Alaska), Asia Hispanics, immigrants and have of the Inuit other population. than (from the rates Americans, segments Southeast higher Americans, Native disease also states lymphoma, such increase disease chronic risk, (particularly alcoholism, failure, lung immunosuppression. silicosis), and chronic malnutrition, diabetes as Hodgkin Certain the mellitus, disease renal tuberculosis. infection HIV dominant the the the where HIV is of infection areas for prevalent, In risk is of development factor world

that is infection be important from differentiated disease. It (i.e., of a focus implies not clinically cause seeding tissue with which significant organisms, disease). or damage may may Infection droplets most airborne acquired susceptible of Although be by person-toperson active from infections are to of other a involved, organisms direct transmission routes case an host. may tuberculosis individuals, and pleural primary the result self-limited, focus uncommonly, infection appears development asymptomatic may of although fever an most In effusions. pulmonary that in of is the of nodule the any is only Generally, telltale infection, if evidence the site at a infection. tiny, remains, fibrocalcific of and loci of life host. may possibly decades, such for the in organisms dormant Viable for the remain active therefore disease infected but transmit do have Such others. and organisms individuals are to not cannot Yet, infection immune lowered, the produce if their potentially to and reactivate disease. defenses communicable life-threatening are may

which the typically M. (Mantoux) tuberculosis of leads the be with to development delayed test. by tuberculin detected Infection hypersensitivity, can purified least weeks peaks the induration and of mL (PPD) that hours. 4 intracutaneous 72 0.1 48 to 5 in About palpable has infection to injection begun, sterile a derivative visible (at in diameter) induces of protein mm after 2 in elicit the some necrotizing unfortunately, produce lesion. responders, more and required is dose large, to may the standard PPD a reaction, Sometimes, not test antigens, cell-mediated tuberculin infection A disease. signifies result differentiate does and to tubercular hypersensitivity positive between but skin malnutrition, and sarcoidosis, be (notably) A immunosuppression, skin overwhelming may Hodgkin by tuberculous active test reactions produced is test false-negative limitation infections, viral lymphoma, of (or well-recognized this disease. certain that anergy) reactions infection by mycobacteria. may from False-positive atypical result

About in 80% certain is and tuberculin-positive. population countries of African Asian the population contrast, to tubercle marked to 10% difference in the of was exposure approximately, in the positive, indicating rates 5% of bacillus. 2012, U.S. In the conversion,” of during year acquire so more individuals do after “tuberculin previously 15% than thereafter. unexposed tuberculosis 3% to In 4% no active general, and first the small fraction develop active disease. who an a contract infection Thus, of only those

that and fuchsin] complex that high a rods bind Ziehl-Neelsen the acid-fast [carbol stain readily are (i.e., decolorization). of they are stubbornly have resist lipids Mycobacteria content slender subsequently is active of tuberculosis; M. with infection tuberculosis responsible individuals cases most is found the hominis of typically for reservoir disease. pulmonary in direct, exposure or Transmission of of is infected inhalation by by expectoration contaminated generated individuals. usually airborne to secretions by in aerosols organisms milk intestinal those except in countries tuberculous by drinking contaminated dairy with unpasteurized and and sales of is Mycobacterium bovis contracted now with Oropharyngeal tuberculosis rare cows infection milk. individuals. mycobacteria, particularly virulent Other M. complex, less immunocompetent rarely and tuberculosis cause in than are avium Mycobacterium much disease cause 10% disease they of with patients in AIDS. 30% However, to

confers to the immunocompetent organism development unexposed pathogenesis of is in the resistance tuberculosis on in and of immunity, The hypersensitivity centered development antigens. cell-mediated results which tissue individual to the previously of tubercular part as tuberculosis, The tissue caseating hypersensitivity such the is are pathologic that parcel and of immune destructive cavitation, of host the and result of response. features granulomas the both for Because cells protective effector the http://ebooksmedicine.net

C3b, others Mannose CR3, others receptor, Mycobacterium Mannose,

acid pH Lack of

of with Bacteremia multiple seeding sites

˜-IFN chemokines TNF,

oxide Production of nitric

oxygen reactive of species Production

Fig. pulmonary by history organism to of primary are of sequence on after exposure. of and Cells resistance to in to Sequence (B) occurring organism. a inhalation thereafter. development drawn tuberculin to hypersensitivity scale. of testing. the positive natural commences This strains 3 is development of first immunity The and conversion accompanied the the the Events (A) result virulent culminates not weeks 13.33 Events of and bacteria events in in skin the Mycobacterium tuberculosis. delayed with MHC, necrosis MTb, inducible major tuberculosis; complex; factor. nitric synthase; histocompatibility TNF, Interferon γ; oxide IFN-γ, tumor Mycobacterium iNOS,

organism. hypersensitivity are of to damaging immunity also acquisition the the signals tissue the hypersensitivity immunity appearance and the of same, containment focus to sequence in of infectious the illustrated events The primary inoculum inhalation the of is from of

Fig. and be follows: can outlined 13.33 as

macrophages. into Entry that complement virulent strain macrophage mycobacterial several the mycobacteria receptor a receptors entry several by cell endosomes, to macrophage macrophage the mannose receptors, of walls. A components gains recognize mediated including process of and

in macrophages. Replication phagocytic lysosomes microbicidal the the responses fusion inhibit with proliferate. the preventing internalized, to mycobacterium by organisms the of vacuole, persist Once and allowing normal the weeks) patient the tuberculosis alveolar the the proliferation phase Thus, earliest spaces, in organisms to (the characterized the primary air bacteremia seeding within and and eventually multiple in is pulmonary sites. first nonsensitized of macrophages by resulting 3 bacillary of have bacteremia, most stage illness. are at asymptomatic a this flulike Despite or mild individuals the

of Development immunity. cell-mediated exposure. This approximately weeks occurs 3 after and lymph cells reach the are CD4 nodes to dendritic antigens draining T cells and presented Processed by mycobacterial macrophages. the that of influence T IFN-γ. IL-12, capable of the of TH1 macrophage-secreted cells subset CD4+ are generated are Under secreting

and cell–mediated of activation bacteria. killing macrophage T subset IFN-γ CD4+ crucial the released in cells T by activating is of macrophages. the TH1 the a inducible important downstream be into and particularly toxic important to which macrophages, characterize including: nitrogen (1) turn are killing effects, undergo create mycobacteria; that (3) genes which “epithelioid peptides that TNF, to anti-microbial histiocytes” that organisms. mediators upregulate oxide which granulomatous to nitric activation of is of and raises mycobacterial variety (defensins) levels, with differentiation synthase recruitment turn, helping (NO) oxide in response; in release intermediates and reactive expression appear of responsible also Activated in the (2) monocytes, for nitric of (iNOS),

and tissue inflammation • Granulomatous damage. to In and response to necrosis. caseous stimulating addition the orchestrates granulomas kill TH1 the macrophages formation mycobacteria, of to activated by Macrophages aggregate epithelioid the differentiate “epithelioid IFN-γ that form cells fuse form granulomas; giant histiocytes” to into some may cells. infection before individuals, response destruction tissue In occur. many halts the significant this illness or the immunosuppression, results age deficits necrosis. immune immune with or in In to other progresses infection due individuals response the caseation ongoing and TNF secrete Activated chemokines, more which promote also macrophages monocytes. of recruitment and who an underscored by rheumatoid increased fact TNF that The treated arthritis importance a patients antagonist risk reactivation. is are TNF have for with the tuberculosis with of

TH1 kill by to is primarily which mycobacteria. a cells, to immunity In tubercular summary, infection mediated stimulate macrophages This and accompanying destruction. the effective, cost tissue hypersensitivity of largely comes response, immune the at while poorly oxide nitric IFN-γ, response TNF, of production) T the or any absence in Defects steps (including cell TH1 of disease resistance, of and granulomas, progression. in formed result a IL-12, pathway with any in mycobacteria. infections Individuals susceptible extremely TH1 inherited with of to mutations are the component defensive infection results bacilli or a previously the a also reexposure rapid the in of sensitized Reactivation of tissue in host increased necrosis. mobilization reaction but to appear resistance too, so, in a by patient) is resistance the tuberculosis-infected (indicated of Just sign ominous fading hypersensitivity loss M. hypersensitivity as to negativity an in parallel, of and the organism. tuberculin

develops and disease therefore patient. form the unexposed a of is previously Primary tuberculosis that unsensitized in About those infected newly of disease. 5% acquire significant

only are tuberculosis of discussed scarring primary the consequence the of of otherwise large earlier. In healthy foci individuals, majority the these a if may as thus later for foci reactivation defenses serve bacilli disease wane. harbor a host However, and nidus at time viable primary infection leads tuberculosis. new Uncommonly, progressive to more immunocompromised characteristic or in malnourished defenses, This individuals. overtly patients host of who subtle in complication have is defects who occurs are as the the of tuberculosis. as Inuit, prone progressive groups, to primary are Certain development also racial such more patients significant particularly counts The cells/µL). incidence below in is T tuberculosis cell high primary HIV-positive of immunosuppression with (i.e., 200 CD4+ progressive of in hypersensitivity characteristic to tuberculosis) mount and most tissue absence the results are reaction the results the Immunosuppression granulomas primary the in an focus; of would because often caseating (see factors, CD4+ T (nonreactive lack that cell–mediated inability a contain response resistance hypersensitivity a concomitant

Fig. 13.35D

Fig. Primarypulmonarytuberculosis,Ghoncomplex.Thegray-whiteparenchymalfocus(arrow) 13.34 isunderthepleurainthelowerpartoftheupperlobe.Hilarlymphnodeswithcaseationareseen(left).

MORPHOLOGYIncountriesinwhichbovinetuberculosisandinfectedmilkhavelargelydisappeared,primarytuberculosisalmostalwaysbeginsinthelungs.Theinhaledbacilliusuallyimplantinthedistalairspacesofthelowerpartoftheupperlobeorintheupperpartofthelowerlobe.Theyaretypicallyclosetothepleura.Duringthedevelopmentofsensitization,a1-cmto1.5-cmareaofgray-whiteinflammatoryconsolidationemerges.ThisiscalledtheGhon focus. Inthemajorityofcases,thecenterofthisfocusundergoescaseousnecrosis.Tuberclebacilli,eitherfreeorwithinphagocytes,travelviathelymphaticvesselstotheregionallymphnodes,whichalsooftencaseate.ThiscombinationofparenchymalandnodallesionsiscalledtheGhon ( complex

(Fig.13.35AtoC ).Lymphaticandhematogenousdisseminationtootherpartsofthebodyalsooccursduringthefirstfewweeks.Developmentofcell-mediatedimmunitycontrolstheinfectioninapproximately95%ofcases.Therefore,theGhoncomplexundergoesprogressivefibrosis,andcalcificationoftenfollows(detectableasaRanke Fig.13.34 onradiograph).Despiteseedingofotherorgans,nolesionsdevelop.Histologically,sitesofinfectionareinvolvedbyacharacteristicinflammatoryreactionmarkedbythepresenceofcaseatingandnoncaseatinggranulomas,whichconsistofepithelioidhistiocytesandmultinucleategiantcells complex

tuberculosis arises of host. sensitized Secondary is the a in that pattern disease previously dormant It after many resistance commonly initial weakened. is but may tuberculosis, host decades from primary primary particularly arises reactivation after lesions of shortly appear when more infection, disease from primary because occur a the may waned of which afforded because reinfection, the also inoculum either large bacilli. virulent to by It of or exposure may has result protection a the source primary disease few of develop subsequently patients Whatever (<5%) secondary with only organism, the tuberculosis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 13.35 Themorphologicspectrumoftuberculosis.Acharacteristictubercleatlowmagnification(A)andathigherpower(B)showscentralgranularcaseationsurroundedbyepithelioidandmultinucleategiantcells.Thisistheusualresponseinindividualswhodevelopcell-mediatedimmunitytotheorganism.(C)Occasionally,eveninimmunocompetentpatients,tuberculargranulomasmaynotshowcentralcaseation;hence,irrespectiveofthepresenceorabsenceofcaseousnecrosis,useofspecialstainsforacid-fastorganismsisindicatedwhengranulomasarepresent. (D)Inthisspecimenfromanimmunosuppressedpatient,sheetsofmacrophagespackedwithmycobacteriaareseen(acid-faststain).

Secondary the pulmonary apex lobes. of upper to classically is localized one tuberculosis both or The reason obscure tension may relate is oxygen to in high the apices. but response preexistence off focus. excite wall a that tissue marked tends and Because the bacilli the the of prompt hypersensitivity, of to result lymph than this the early in prominently are involved nodes a localization, As of disease the tuberculosis. are primary in regional less they readily and secondary to On hand, along form, the cavitation other leading into in erosion occurs the dissemination airways. now because produces bacilli. the patient infectivity, of important Such an become sputum source containing changes

be consideration tuberculosis pulmonary important who an should in patients Secondary present with always disease. HIV-positive degree stages manifestations of at an risk tuberculosis although differ on disease, exists note, depending HIV the for increased all the Of of immunosuppression. cavitation) example, disease resembles while noncavitary 200 below consolidation, lobe and less cell immunosuppression with >300 a and cell present with severe tuberculosis immunosuppression progressive (CD4+ present picture those lymphadenopathy, with middle T For (apical tuberculosis “usual” (CD4+ disease). counts cells/µL) with primary that hilar cells/µL) clinical patients (lower with secondary counts advanced more T determines rising severe 50% immune the 10% also mildly patients immunosuppression to with extrapulmonary than immunosuppressed from extent 15% The of to those in frequency deficiency. of in greater involvement,

pleura. MORPHOLOGYTheinitiallesionusuallyisasmallfocusofconsolidation,lessthan2cmindiameter,within1to2cmoftheapical Suchfociaresharplycircumscribed,firm,gray-whitetoyellowareasthathaveavariableamountofcentralcaseationandperipheralfibrosis.Infavorablecases,theinitialparenchymalfocusundergoesprogressivefibrousencapsulation,leavingonlyfibrocalcificscars.Histologically,theactivelesionsshowcharacteristiccoalescenttubercleswithcentralcaseation.Althoughtuberclebacillicanbedemonstratedbyappropriatemethodsinearlyexudativeandcaseousphasesofgranulomaformation,itisusuallyimpossibletofindtheminthelate,fibrocalcificstages.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 13.36 Secondarypulmonarytuberculosis.Theupperpartsofbothlungsareriddledwithgray-whiteareasofcaseationandmultipleareasofsofteningandcavitation.

pulmonary caseous material lined thatispoorlywalledoffbyfibroustissue( Localized,apical,secondarypulmonarytuberculosismayhealwithfibrosiseitherspontaneouslyoraftertherapy,orthediseasemayprogressandextendalongseveraldifferentpathways.Inprogressive cavity by theapicallesionenlargesandtheareaofcaseationexpands.Erosionintoabronchusevacuatesthecaseouscenter,creatingaragged,irregular tuberculosis,

isderivedfromtheresemblanceofthesefocitomilletseeds).Withprogressivepulmonarytuber-culosis,thepleuralcavityisinvariablyinvolvedandserouspleural Fig.13.36 disease empyema, occurswhenorganismsreachthebloodstreamthroughlymphaticvesselsandthenrecirculatetothelungviathepulmonaryarteries.Thelesionsappearassmall(2-mm)fociofyellow-whiteconsolidationscatteredthroughthelungparenchyma(thewordmiliary orobliterative tuberculous pleuritis fibrous effusions, maydevelop. ).Erosionofbloodvesselsresultsinhemoptysis.Withadequatetreatment,theprocessmaybearrested,althoughhealingbyfibrosisoftendistortsthepulmonaryarchitecture.Irregularcavities,nowfreeofcaseousnecrosis,mayremainintactorcollapseandbecomefibrotic.Ifthetreatmentisinadequateorhostdefensesareimpaired,theinfectionmayspreadbydirectextensionandbydisseminationthroughairways,lymphaticchannels,andthevascularsystem.Miliary pulmonary

tuberculosis endotracheal, Endobronchial, andlaryngeal maydevelopwheninfectivematerialisspreadeitherthroughlymphaticchannelsorfromexpectoratedinfectiousmaterial.Themucosalliningmaybestuddedwithminutegranulomatouslesions,sometimesapparentonlyonmicroscopicexamination.

Systemic ensueswhentheorganismsdisseminatehematogenouslythroughoutthebody.Systemicmiliarytuberculosisismostprominentintheliver,bonemarrow,spleen,adrenalglands,meninges,kidneys,fallopiantubes,andepididymis( tuberculosis miliary

Fig.13.37

tuberculosis Isolated-organ mayappearinanyoneoftheorgansortissuesseededhematogenouslyandmaybethepresentingmanifestationoftuberculosis.Organstypicallyinvolvedincludethemeninges(tuberculousmeningitis),kidneys(renaltuberculosis),adrenalglands,bones(osteomyelitis),andfallopiantubes(salpingitis).Whenthevertebraeareaffected,theconditionisreferredtoasPott disease. Paraspinal“cold”abscessescontainingnecrotictissuesmaytrackalongthetissueplanestopresentasanabdominalorpelvicmass.

isthemostfrequentformofextrapulmonarytuberculosis,usuallyoccurringinthecervicalregion(“scrofula”).Lymphadenopathytendstobeunifocal,andmostpatientsdonothaveconcurrentextranodaldisease.HIV-positivepatients,ontheotherhand,almostalwayshavemultifocaldisease,systemicsymptoms,andeitherpulmonaryorotherorganinvolvementbyactivetuberculosis. Lymphadenitis

tuberculosis Inyearspast,intestinal contractedbythedrinkingofcontaminatedmilkwasfairlycommonasaprimaryfocusoftuberculosis.Indevelopedcountriestoday,intestinaltuberculosisismoreoftenacomplicationofprotractedadvancedsecondarytuberculosis,secondarytotheswallowingofcoughed-upinfectivematerial.Typically,theorganismsaretrappedinmucosallymphoidaggregatesofthesmallandlargebowel,whichthenundergoinflammatoryenlargementwithulcerationoftheoverlyingmucosa,particularlyintheileum.

Fig.13.38

asymptomatic. tuberculosis may be Localized secondary of both with and development insidious they When gradual symptoms appear, signs. in usually onset, manifestations localizing and are systemic malaise, appear anorexia, early cytokines Systemic by related probably and weight and the in IL-1), loss, (e.g., manifestations, include to activated often release disease macrophages fever. of TNF course and the each and occur. the Commonly, remittent subsiding), then low grade is (appearing afternoon late sweats and and night fever purulent, appear. of increasing first With pulmonary and later sputum, amounts involvement, progressive at mucoid tubercle cavitation is When contains the bacilli. present, sputum Some degree of hemoptysis

Fig. 13.37 Miliarytuberculosisofthespleen.Thecutsurfaceshowsnumer-ousgray-whitegranulomas.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Scar DESTRUCTIVE hematogenous LOCALIZED extrapulmonary) extrapulmonary) caseation) PRIMARY (localized node TB (organisms PROGRESSIVE Caseation HEALED LESIONS MILIARY hematogenous dissemination LESIONS COMPLEX Primary dormant; lesions,more Spleen Massive INCREASING Liver lesions,little or Massive Reactivation TB Reinfection SECONDARY Caseation SECONDARY dissemination LESIONS pulmonary TUBERCULOSIS Scar (pulmonary MILIARY or not caseation Scar PROGRESSIVE Spreading CASEATING PRIMARY viable) infection IMMUNITY Localized lymph caseation CaseationCavity (organisms TB in Caseation TB LATENT

Fig. 13.38 Thenaturalhistoryandspectrumoftuberculosis. (Adapted sketch R.K. Australia.) Dr. School Wales, South of Kumar,The provided of from New Pathology, by a Sydney, University half tuberculosis. of of pulmonary all cases present in about is the Pleuritic surfaces. from to of extension result the may pleural pain infection are paraplegia). disease salpingitis present (e.g., Extrapulmonary Pott tuberculous back with tuberculosis deficits, meningitis organ system headache and and of manifestations legion as neurologic tuberculous involved may with on pain infertility, the depend and the of based disease findings of on of diagnosis in part in the history cavitation and apices or lungs. is and pulmonary on the radiographic physical consolidation The Ultimately, tubercle bacilli identified. however, must be

rhodamine. tuberculosis common sputum demonstration staining of remains auramine organisms by or diagnosis most methodology acid-fast of by use The fluorescent for of in liquid within radiometric but provide 10 are able media–based for assays answer detect up require Conventional mycobacteria cultures weeks, to that mycobacterial to metabolism an 2 weeks. can to performed be the media as mycobacterium. on liquid identify well growth, sections, as tissue with on PCR amplification allows However, the the identify diagnostic it also because culture testing of standard and susceptibility. drug occasional modality can PCR-negative remains case infected two to defined (MDR), the becoming tuberculosis more concern, resistance WHO and used multidrug the 2014. that in treatment multidrug-resistant tuberculosis, of as drugs were of is of individuals 500,000 more primary mycobacteria Of resistance estimated newly common, with for or previously of represents treated approximately cases. of new and 20% 3% This cases and troubling locales in this Russia, in strains. up Eastern infections where some with multidrug-resistant Europe The of 20% of to epidemic lies epicenter new are of Of in approximately broad against multidrug tuberculosis. defined greater cases exhibit spectrum resistance extensive to 10% concern, a to by such of antibiotics 5% resistance, use current even

is of of widespread), the The and prognosis the by the organism. the infection status sensitivity versus of (localized host, antibiotic immune the the extent determined tuberculosis. those in with is guarded multidrug-resistant prognosis Understandably, the persistent may Amyloidosis develop cases. in

TuberculosisisachronicgranulomatousdiseasecausedbyM. usuallyaffectingthelungs,butvirtuallyanyextra-pulmonaryorgancanbeinvolved. tuberculosis,

Initialexposuretomycobacteriaresultsindevelopmentofacellularimmuneresponsethatconfersresistanceandleadstohypersensitivity(asdeterminedbyapositiveresultonthetuberculinskintest).

http://ebooksmedicine.net

TheTH1subsetofCD4+ Tcellshasacrucialroleincell-mediatedimmunityagainstmycobacteria;mediatorsofinflammationandbacterialcontainmentincludeIFN-γ,TNF,andnitricoxide.

Thehistopathologichallmarkofhostreactiontotuberculosisinimmunocompetentindividualsisthepresenceofgranulomas,usuallywithcaseousnecrosis.

Primarypulmonarytuberculosisinimmunocompetentindividualsisasymptomaticandresultsonlyinhealedlesions,typicallyinasub-pleuralfocusandadraininglymphnode.

Secondary(reactivation)tuberculosisarisesinpreviouslyexposedindividualswhenhostimmunedefensesarecompromised,andusuallymanifestsascavitarylesionsinthelungapices.

Bothprogressiveprimarytuberculosisandsecondarytuberculosiscanresultinsystemicseeding,causinglife-threateningformsofdiseasesuchasmiliarytuberculosisandtuberculousmeningitis.

HIV-seropositivestatusisanimportantriskfactorfordevelopmentorrecrudescenceofactivetuberculosis.

disease cause individuals. immunocompetent commonly Nontuberculous pulmonary chronic, mycobacteria localized in most kansasii, avium include avium-intracellulare United the called Mycobacterium frequently most Mycobacterium and strains Mycobacterium M. (also implicated abscessus. States, In complex), mycobacterial alcohol upper-lobe uncommon is long cavitary with or patients manifest abuse. of history in smoking disease, not for tuberculosis, mimicking infection nontuberculous It as to especially a Concomitant pneumoconiosis) disease fibrosis, often is present. cystic chronic (COPD, pulmonary

individuals disease In night manifests weight immunosuppressed complex and HIVseropositive associated symptoms sweats, disseminated M. (primarily systemic a patients), (fever, loss). avium as infection with signs common, symptoms by as involvement the is lymphadenopathy, signifying pathogen, the system phagocyte mononuclear gastrointestinal as malabsorption. diarrhea and opportunistic of and Hepatosplenomegaly are such is indistinguishable patients often involvement Pulmonary from with in AIDS. tuberculosis cells/µL. AIDS to course, in cell patients T late clinical fallen in Disseminated when CD4+ occur complex with counts the 100 below have tends avium infection M. Hence, reveal tissue does typically not “stuffed” are mycobacteria foamy atypical usually seen. examination granulomas; instead, macrophages with

Histoplasmosis,Coccidioidomycosis,andBlastomycosis

dimorphic by disseminated commonly which immunocompromised and Blastomyces Coccidioides as infected pulmonary immitis, fungi, disease individuals. individuals, caused in capsulatum, in include seen manifest involvement, with isolated Infections either dermatitidis, or with immunocompetent Histoplasma immunity, individuals compromised are so responses T prone are those immune cell-mediated infection, HIV, to as the critical for with cell–mediated systemic such containing disease. with due together three clinical section. presentations, of diseases fungi in in the In dimorphic infectious because this considered part overlap to all are

distribution, a follows: fungi Each as typical has the dimorphic geographic of

capsulatum valleys United Ohio the States. H. Mississippi River and the Appalachian in the in southeastern Mountains and is central endemic along the an spores. bats soil growth birds mycelial the infectious ideal of Warm, for produces and form, medium droppings provides moist from containing which

known as California’s United and the where is the immitis particularly Valley, western States, C. fever.” far San southwestern in regions “valley endemic Joaquin is in of coccidial infection

distribution States dermatitidis found. the in histoplasmosis in which overlaps that has those with is a B. United

MORPHOLOGYTheyeastformsarefairlydistinctive,whichhelpsintheidenti ficationofindividualfungiintissuesections:

H. roundtooval,smallyeastformsmeasuring2to5µmindiameter( capsulatum:

Fig.13.39A

thick-walled,nonbuddingspherules,20to60µmindiameter,oftenfilledwithsmallendospores(see immitis: C.

Fig.13.39B

(5to25µmindiameter)thatreproducebycharacteristicbroad-basedbudding(see B. dermatitidis: roundtoovalandlargeryeastformsthanHistoplasma

Fig.13.39CandD

pulmonary disease, (1) pulmonary may (3) of miliary form disease. disseminated (granulomatous) manifestations the infection, Clinical (2) chronic or acute take (primary) lymph of similar filled in nodules, nodes. pulmonary composed associated lesions organisms, the with regional with of aggregates primary macrophages The are cells may evolve giant develop with These small granulomas into lesions and fibrosis later calcification. and and necrosis central complete and silver identification The the differentiation with requires seen is forms striking, tuberculosis stains). yeast similarity (best of to primary symptoms are syndrome clinical self-limited. of often resemble The and those “flulike” a and most signs for with disease upper form host, of resembling In predilection chronic vulnerable secondary tuberculosis. develops, lobe, the a pulmonary the the cavitary uncommon mass lesions perihilar bronchogenic give these rise that radiologically. to to not It for fungi resemble is carcinoma pain. chest manifestations include may and this dyspnea stage, cough, At even hemoptysis, and

or immunocompromised particularly infants disseminated develop. HIV may those infection, with disease (analogous In adults, to miliary tuberculosis) Under there circumstances, no granulomas. are well-formed these the spleen, within yeast of tract, bone are tissue Instead, seen phagocytes collections focal and liver, the containing nodes, gastrointestinal of lymphoid marrow. forms lymph ulcers cases, on the meninges form may or also and be tongue, nose the adrenal a in minority the involved, The mouth, glands and in and in of larynx. a produces marked Disseminated thrombocytopenia. anemia, disease and by hepatosplenomegaly, febrile illness leukopenia, cell squamous epithelial hyperplasia, infections be mistaken disseminated organisms which Blastomyces for induce may frequently striking with Cutaneous carcinoma.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. (A)Histoplasma 13.39 yeastformsfillphagocytesinalymphnodeofapatientwithdisseminatedhistoplasmosis(silverstain).(B)Coccidioidomycosiswithintactspheruleswithinmultinucleatedgiantcells.(C)Blastomycosis,withroundedbuddingyeasts,largerthanneutrophils.Notethecharacteristicthickwallandnuclei(notseeninotherfungi). capsulatum immitis organisms. (D)Silverstainhighlightsthebroad-basedbuddingseeninBlastomyces

(e.g., pulmonary irradiation. immune are complications common and serious immunosuppressive signs with by individuals most infection fever) The of that therapeutic and drugs, are appearance of the of infiltrate some systems a disease, in or suppressed involved. rarely cause is A wide variety than individuals, agent “opportunistic” which infection more normal many these settings, cause one often of infections can in in and of pathogens, spp., spp., spp., Cryptococcus (2) include The Listeria bacteria Mycobacterium more L. fungi (P. (1) viruses monocytogenes); pulmonary and herpesvirus); pneumophila, Candida Aspergillus (cytomegalovirus common jiroveci, neoformans). and aeruginosa, and (P. pathogens (3) and

various herpesvirus immune the the Infection the family, by partly forms, age the may of status member (CMV), a in depending and on host. of cytomegalovirus manifest Cells by the and the infected both of cytoplasm exhibit virus nucleus. gigantism the inclusion typically nucleus a symptomatic of clear in which disease. classic the name contains (“owl’s a large that disease The by eye”), halo neonates—cytomegalic occurs form gives surrounded to the inclusion patients of adults, Although here problem. hematopoietic in cytomegalic pneumonitis because inclusion involves classic and a immunosuppressed discussed CMV AIDS recipients cell particularly disease many with stem are serious allogeneic transplants, organs, CMV is infections

the several can group: Transmission by on age depending mechanisms, occur CMV of

(congenital fetus infection). transplacentally acquired reactivated be A newly from a mother can infection in the or CMV infected

milk active virus breast an The or cervical a the infection). be through CMV to infant birth, through can with the at infection of (perinatal transmitted mother later vaginal secretions or

care day it saliva. Preschool acquire can especially through children, centers, in transmit the their Toddlers to readily virus infected so parents.

spread route. contact fecal-oral respiratory but route venereal through transmission, is age, older of 15 years occur may patients with also and mode by than the the secretions of In the dominant

occur transplantation at blood age organ any or through can transfusion. Iatrogenic transmission

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Cytomegalovirusinfectionofthelung.Adistinctnuclearinclu-sionandmultiplecytoplasmicinclusionsareseeninanenlargedcell. 13.40

and cellular µm, 40 exhibit pleiomorphism. often to enlarged, are a diameter and cells nuclear MORPHOLOGYHistologically,thecharacteristicenlargementofCMV-infectedcellsisreadilyappreciated.Intheglandularorgans,theparenchymalepithelialcellsareaffected;inthebrain,theneurons;inthelungs,thealveolarmacrophagesandepithelialandendothelialcells;andinthekidneys,thetubularepithelialandglomerularendothelialcells.Infected strikingly of Prominentintranuclearbasophilicinclusionsspanninghalfthenucleardiameterareusuallysetofffromthenuclearmembranebyaclearhalo(

thecytoplasmofthesecells,smallerbasophilicinclusionsalsomaybeseen. Fig.13.40).Within

adults, and healthy disease the In is children always young asymptomatic. nearly the previous to around antibodies anti-CMV indicating of surveys the adults world, in In 50% serum, demonstrate 100% exposure. CMV mild by The in and test neonatal the infectious infection an illness beyond is function by common clinical abnormal marked manifestation hosts period suggesting of atypical hepatomegaly lymphadenopathy, lymphocytosis, results, fever, accompanied hepatitis. immunocompetent mononucleosis–like most liver CMV virus from for the to occur years. months although fluids may body mononucleosis Most patients recover excretion any of in sequelae, without an Irrespective of individual becomes who seropositive symptoms or after infected presence the life. is absence once infection, of for leukocytes, within latent remains the which major virus The reservoirs. are

stem heart, (such recipients patients cell) and infection AIDS. CMV most in Immunosuppression-related as of with transplants hematopoietic kidney, occurs commonly liver, or in lung, This can latent of be either a infection primary reactivation infection. or is pathogen viral CMV the in AIDS. most common opportunistic

In the infections serious is nervous primarily spared. CMV affect usually gastrointestinal disseminated all these (retinitis); lungs (pneumonitis), of and the tract (colitis), settings, central system retina necrosis, progress to infection associated foci respiratory acute which and the syndrome. distress In may with infiltrates, changes, mononculear of typical cytomegalic lung, is of extensive, to and Intestinal necrosis ulceration may can “pseudomembranes” formation the diarrhea. leading debilitating be and 15) develop and (Chapter lungs either with or most common can and of CMV the tract. of involvement far alone disease, form CMV opportunistic intestinal by in retinitis, occur combination the detection in inclusions DNA. culture, successful tissue Diagnosis viral is anti-viral viral quantitative infection antibody of qualitative CMV and CMV demonstration or assay–based sections, characteristic titer, of rising of by made PCR latter The has revolutionized to approach patients transplantation. the monitoring after

jiroveci considered to as fungus. an formerly infectious opportunistic agent P. a classified now P. protozoan, be a is (previously carinii), indicates years individuals but are infection to the that most first life, the virtually latent. of evidence few Pneumocystis in during exposed Serologic all remains in clinical Reactivation immunocompromised disease of with occurs almost development individuals. exclusively extremely organ P. malnourished it cytotoxic with with individuals also are severely or in patients individuals transplantation Indeed, susceptible jiroveci, infection receiving AIDS chemotherapy to after and corticosteroids). or infect infants and may (especially immunosuppressed strong risk acquiring inverse AIDS, jiroveci patients proportion counts the value. count, P. less 200 to increases a cell predictive than CD4+ In T the cells/µL infections in for having with with interstitial pneumonitis. to largely Pneumocystis is where produces the infection an confined lung, it

foamy, pink-staining MORPHOLOGYInvolvedareasofthelungcontainacharacteristicintraalveolar exudate withhematoxylin-eosin(H&E)stain(“cottoncandy”exudate)(

).Theseptaarethickenedbyedemaandaminimalmononuclearinfiltrate.Specialstainsarerequiredtovisualizetheorganism.Silverstainoftissuesectionsrevealsroundto Fig.13.41A cup-shaped cysts (4to10µmindiameter)withinthealveolarexudates(see

Fig.13.41B

on pneumonia The in and be chest with symptoms immunocompromised abnormal Pneumocystis of should any patient diagnosis respiratory radiograph. findings considered infiltrates in and perihilar of whom in dry occur typical. is radiographic bilateral dyspnea 95% basilar and to patients, evidence of cough, Fever, 90% frequent; is restrictive show lung function pulmonary Hypoxia defect. a studies is identify lavage most of effective using diagnosis fluid the bronchoalveolar sputum organism method immunofluorescence. and or The sensitive in to induced http://ebooksmedicine.net If

Fig. Pneumocystispneumonia.(A)Thealveoliarefilledwithacharacteristicfoamyacellularexudate. 13.41 roundcystswithintheexudate. (B)Silverstaindemonstratescup-shapedand

is particularly good; residual given. or likely organisms before prophylactic underlying corrected unless for because persist, involvement, relapses are common treatment AIDS, widespread however, outlook the is to is recovery immunodeficiency initiated therapy the in is with are patients

most common is albicans the Candida disease-causing fungus. vagina normal individuals. inhabitant in and tract, It cavity, gastrointestinal many oral of a is the pneumonia) (with disease manifestations. to candidiasis restricted Systemic immunocompromised patients that is associated protean a has

MORPHOLOGYIntissuesections,C. demonstratesyeastlikeforms(blastoconidia),pseudohyphae,andtruehyphae( albicans

Fig.13.42A ).Pseudohyphaeareanimportantdiagnosticclueandrepresentbuddingyeastcellsjoinedendtoendatconstrictions,thussimulatingtruefungalhyphae.TheorganismsmaybevisiblewithroutineH&Estains,butavarietyofspecial“fungal”stains(Gomorimethenamine-silver,periodicacid–Schiff)commonlyareusedtobetterhighlightthepathogens.

organs (invasive the mucous Candidiasis deep can skin, and candidiasis). membranes, involve Among infection presentations, the (thrush). cavity varied mention: mucosal brief the merit oral these of following surfaces on Superficial • most This presentation. the common is gray-white, debris. organisms proliferation and the and Florid cells inflammatory of creates composed tissue pseudomembranes dirty-looking matted fungi of inflammation. and is hyperemia Deep mucosal there surface, to the for and flora. debilitated children Thrush antibiotics asthma, broad-spectrum oral and normal receiving competing course a corticosteroids in of that newborns, patients, bacterial after is seen destroy The oral other for group underlying not obvious risk HIV-positive an HIV associated evaluated be thrush with patients; patients includes infection. with major should condition

in are Vaginitis contraceptive common oral those extremely pregnant or is on who or pills. women, especially diabetic

is AIDS patients those in and common in with malignancies. hematolymphoid with Esophagitis other resembling those on dysphagia swallowing) pseudomembranes demonstrates with (painful white surfaces. endoscopy and plaques mucosal pain; present patients retrosternal These found and

folds many as intertriginous infection (balanitis). (folliculitis), fingers can skin manifest the penile including (intertrigo), infection hair forms, armpits nail such nail and the and skin of of in follicles toes Skin webs (onychomycosis), different or (paronychia), moist, in Diaper the region perineum of infants, diapers. infection a with rash wet is cutaneous of the seen in contact candidal

underlying mucocutaneous skin, variety it with disease cell candidiasis refractory Chronic is a and membranes, defects. chronic the afflicting is associated a hair, of mucous T nails; in important variety including are which fungal a defect with (Chapter include T Job an These cell syndrome, responses, inherited in abnormalitles Th17 controlling infections of 5). an in condition

candidiasis dissemination tissues Invasive to blood-borne implies organs. of organisms or various brain pneumonia, any patterns endophthalmitis hepatic (3) involved), abscesses, (see and bilateral pneumonia (4) include Pneumocystis be endocarditis, myocardial (5) structure infiltrates, with meningitis, (most commonly resembling nodular abscess, and Common involvement occur), http://ebooksmedicine.net microabscesses (1) but presenting abscess (virtually (6) eye parenchymal (2) Candida renal can usually

Fig. 13.42 Themorphologyoffungalinfections.(A)Candidaorganismhaspseudohyphaeandbuddingyeasts(silverstain).(B)Invasiveaspergillosis(grossappearance)ofthelunginahematopoieticstemcelltransplantrecipient.(C)Gomorimethenamine-silver(GMS)stainshowsseptatehyphaewithacute-anglebranching,consistentwithAspergillus.(D)CryptococcosisofthelunginapatientwithAIDS.Theorganismsaresomewhatvariableinsize. Southwestern Dominick Dr. Cavuoti,Department School,Dallas,Texas.) of Texas Medical Pathology,University of of (B,Courtesy earlier). prone who neutropenic are after disease. chemotherapy profoundly of Patients particularly development are leukemias the acute systemic to with heart patients valves in fungal abusers. or with is occurring drug common endocarditis, prosthetic Candida the most endocarditis usually in intravenous

in or malignancies. patients exclusively particularly almost caused an infection manifests as with hosts, neoformans, hematolymphoid by Cryptococcosis, opportunistic C. immunocompromised AIDS

MORPHOLOGYThefungus,a5-to10-µmyeast,hasathick,gelatinouscapsuleandreproducesbybudding(see

Fig.13.42D infections,however,pseudohyphalortruehyphalformsarenotseen.Identificationofthecapsuleisakeydiagnosticclue.InroutineH&Estains,thecapsuleisnotdirectlyvisible,butoftenaclear“halo”representingtheareaoccupiedbythecapsulecanbeseensurroundingtheindividualfungi.Indiainkorperiodicacid–Schiffstainingeffectivelyhighlightsthefungus.Thecapsularpolysaccharideantigenisthesubstrateforthecryptococcallatexagglutinationassay,whichispositiveinmorethan95%ofpatientsinfectedwiththeorganism. ).UnlikeinCandida

manifests Cryptococcosis usually or as system, pulmonary, disease. central nervous disseminated bird to contaminated by of or droppings. most be acquired Cryptococcus likely aerosolized soil inhalation is other then fungus the disseminates meninges. sites, the to particularly and in initially The lungs localizes immunodeficient ranges with florid minimal of reactive or hosts) absent a (in by more a are tissue variable which involvement from granulomatous of (in response, Sites the gelatinous host). organisms inflammatory to reaction cell infiltrate marked proliferation a http://ebooksmedicine.net perivascular lesions.” spaces, or In so-called masses the “soap-bubble grow the in the gelatinous fungi central meninges expand these Virchow-Robin nervous within system producing

Opportunistic The Molds

undergoing are limited and recipients. to infections cell those always hematopoietic following those uncommon neutropenia, aspergillosis with stem immunocompromised hematolymphoid hosts, almost and profound particularly that therapy, Mucormycosis corticosteroid transplant or malignancies invasive are

andbranchatrightangles;bycontrast,thehyphaeofAspergillus andbranchatmoreacuteangles(see MORPHOLOGYMucormycosisiscausedbytheclassoffungiknownasZygomycetes.Rhizopus arethetwofungiofmedicalimportancewithintheZygomycetesclass.Theirhyphaearenonseptate organismsareseptate andMucor

).BothzygomycetesandAspergillus blood causeanondistinctive,suppurative,sometimesgranulomatousreactionwithapredilection infarction Fig.13.42C causing (see vascular for necrosis and hemorrahage, walls, invading vessel

Fig.13.42B

sinuses colonize orbit, nasal extension to head or have other into the mucormycosis, and structures. brain, zygomycetes spread a and pulmonary by the then rhinocerebral direct and neck cavity In propensity and are develop diabetic fulminant invasive form likely a rhinocerebral to most Patients ketoacidosis mucormycosis. of with or radiologically Pulmonary can be disease (e.g., involvement. diffuse lesions) may cavitary “miliary” with manifest localized

preferentially infection necrotizing lungs, Invasive most to aspergillosis (see the a often pneumonia as and localizes manifests

Fig. 13.42B ). is a the is especially often dissemination, Systemic fatal. that to complication brain,

in exacerbation type bronchi. fungus caused I growing who asthma in the an bronchopulmonary a with by symptoms aspergillosis patients Allergic the develop hypersensitivity occurs of against IgE eosinophilia. patients and against circulating antibodies peripheral often Aspergillus Such have

dilated (“fungus preexisting pulmonary occurs formation cavitary of by posttuberculosis bronchi cavities lung or colonization (e.g., Aspergilloma lesions). ball”) fungal cysts, to occlude the may predisposing These ball thereby act to infection cavity, the hemoptysis. and as masses patient valves

in contributor be morbidity continues the Pulmonary to HIV-infected to mortality disease individuals. and leading the the and involved diagnosis incidence challenge. improved the markedly chemoprophylaxis makes has and anti-retroviral use of distinct outcomes, plethora has agents Although of a effective decreased treatment and entities potent

“opportunistic” the it “usual” bacterial lower-respiratory should on exceedingly infection in common the infection. tract caused infections, recognized Despite emphasis be HIV that is by pathogens influenzae, include pneumoniae, and rods. organisms S. implicated The S. aureus, gram-negative H. bacteremia those in common, associated and without in more severe, Bacterial infection. than with often individuals HIV-infected pneumonias more more HIV are

are individuals all Not infectious. pulmonary HIV-infected in infiltrates Kaposi (Chapter lymphoma (Chapters non-Hodgkin with diseases, increased 12), lung of must pulmonary primary sarcoma excluded. 5 be host noninfectious 10), and and frequency occur including A cancer, and

the narrowing T useful diagnosis. cell is count often CD4+ in The differential 200 As rule below (CD4+ CD4+ cell stages late the and uncommon of T while occur infections suppressed pneumonia the (more until counts occurs 200 cells/µL). at with cells/µL); T usually M. tubercular mildly of bacterial CD4+ cells/µL, Pneumocystis cell complex infections very CMV a 50 counts and are than below thumb, avium counts disease

common cause, may that result HIV-infected an disease from one in and manifestations. is with pathogens Finally, individuals may even atypical point than more be pulmonary important disease responsible for that

5% are group primary miscellaneous a benign that Roughly leiomyomas), few lung fibrosarcomas, and tumors the lymphomas, carcinomas; mesenchymal lesions. a malignancies of carcinoids, includes span 95% remaining (e.g., small on spherical, benign a tumor to (1 as is “coin The shows often common that so-called 4 imaging. lesion” discrete cm), “hamartoma” chest most up a admixed consists in mature fibrous tissue, vessels blood of with cartilage It fat, various proportions. and mainly that is have name (which a been cytogenetic the actually developmental misnomer. benign indicating abnormalities Clonal and it implies a demonstrated, hamartoma is neoplasm anomaly) a that

of most the cause deaths in countries. important is industrialized Carcinoma lung of cancer-related the held States, as one-third well. It has cause leading for accounting this the long and cancer position deaths women has the among cancer males of about of in men, deaths United in in become deaths. for of 221,200 Society cases new cancer Cancer lung approximately American estimates include 2016 and 158,040 since each women cancers gradually continues from incidence females, from breast The is 1987. increase to lung with males it among cancer more than decreasing, but among dying year http://ebooksmedicine.net These sobering

Classification, Histologic Tumors Epithelial WHO of Lung Simplified Version) Malignant (2015 Table 13.6 Classification

the over the incidence in half women reflect the century. fact increased smoking of statistics that AdenocarcinomaAcinar,papillary,micropapillary,solid,lepidicpredominant,mucinous past markedly peak cancer fifties lung in sixties. The is incidence in and individuals their of an have nodes. lymph have more regional in already the while patients At distant 50% than of additional one-fourth disease diagnosis, metastases, over much rate of 35 stages survival survival the is 5-year not last for remains cancer is rate the to only has The that disease prognosis combined all lung, years; 45%. with the the about 16%, dismal: changed localized figure lung 5-year a even

four cell histologic the carcinoma of cell subtype carcinomas lung squamous carcinoma), (a carcinoma small and carcinoma, cell adenocarcinoma, ( of large major The are neuroendocrine types of

). 13.6 Table In cases, of small adenocarcinoma). some combination cell carcinoma is (e.g., a patterns and there histologic association there the strongest adenocarcinoma. but carcinomas Squamous smoking, association cell an cell small is with also with and have in most cell patterns recent squamous the smoking years. lung has as common replaced adenocarcinoma because carcinoma changes in tumor In United the States, possibly in primary of fact, in in never-smokers, are common age. younger also of the 45 far primary tumors Adenocarcinomas individuals women, years in arising most and than by

classified adenocarcinoma, lung and and squamous cell neuroendocrine lung and (NSCLC), cell large cell were (SCLC) small carcinomas. including large the cancer broad recently, of non–small lung the groups: carcinoma, cancer carcinomas latter cell Until into two This shown a by recently 2015 simplified Organization version has of World (a Table which Health classification been replaced classification is 13.6). in division of SCLCs time for all is metastasized by The virtually that reason historic have diagnosis. this the treated therapy. with radiation best or Therefore, with without systemic are chemotherapy, they to conventional resectable be are NSCLCs usually likely By more poorly chemotherapy. and contrast, respond to However, NSCLC, now specific that that carcinomas. but oncoproteins mainly found in are target also therapies squamous available are subset of a cell adenocarcinomas NSCLC available, therapy adequate analysis is to is is tissue subjected if warranted. to if Thus, determine molecular targeted immunotherapy discussed In approaches new 6) for blockade, SCLC. in and in being (checkpoint tested NSCLC subset a Chapter now addition, are of approved are

cancer. hallmarks cells of benign mutations other cancers, driver carcinomas of arise transformation of stepwise of possessing of in Like result into in lung lung by neoplastic all a the the that smoking-related the progenitor accumulation cells The toward follow sequence histologic to progression that of sequence changes molecular is the random not cancer. but tends a parallels genes is a the KRAS occur inactivation the of the whereas Thus, tumor common late. relatively located on putative tumor (3p) chromosome 3 the suppressor oncogene short mutations early gene of event, suppressor arm TP53 very in and effect”). genetic Certain areas suggesting 3p, cancer, bronchial exposure to the carcinogens on smokers as of lung mucosa benign (“field in material are large changes, even of loss chromosomal such without respiratory epithelium of found mutagenized are that by ultimately soil, cells develop those that accumulate additional mutations cancer. fertile into On this

RAS, (EGFR), and and that kinase of receptor 30% harbor (about in nonsmoking tyrosine growth epidermal particularly involving A stimulates women, mutations other receptor pro-growth subset 10% arising pathways those the downstream in signaling factor molecules. adenocarcinomas that a Asians), in whites activate PI3K, are although response tumors these inhibit sensitive drugs to that Of note, short-lived. signaling, EGFR often the is 30% KRAS (in downstream of mutations adenocarcinomas) expected might since KRAS exclusive, be of lies are EGFR. and EGFR as mutually or (4% mutations of 6% frequency mutations been ALK, that adenocarcinomas Other in ROS1, to tyrosine have a kinases, c-MET. overall), other “targetable” activate including described low HER2, including these of a era genetics the drug, which therapy. of treatment, optimally which guide the a new “personalized” by Each lung of is has kinases tumor cancer spurred targeted in different

lesser are a cancers. that cigarette mutations to to rise regard to strong for the and, much carcinogens there main environmental influences, With extent, is other give evidence that culprits smoking responsible lung carcinogenic the in stopped or those cancers active who recently. About smokers lung occur 90% of of Moreover, the of cigarette a nearly there and cancer lung correlation linear smoking. frequency between is pack-years risk times heavy than 20 packs (two years) is smokers among among The greater habitual a 60 day for nonsmokers. increased are reasons, to tobacco in women smoke unclear than For carcinogens men. susceptibile more baseline over bronchial genetic smokers. cancer developing returns cessation in that lung many to the Although for changes and the full decreases development it former can epithelium never risk persist predate smoking lung levels, time, for years of of cancer the of to cigarette smoking as modestly. and of the developing also smoking risk Passive cigars, (proximity pipes cancer, only for albeit smokers) lung increases does

http://ebooksmedicine.net

work containing mines, and of responsible with in be themselves; smoking act chromium, for exposures dusts include chloride. nickel, influences work by lung associated and arsenic, may concert with occupational with carcinogenic examples uranium or all sometimes vinyl cancer Other asbestos, in inhalation a tobacco between example found of carcinogens is cardinal and asbestos synergistic A two smoking. interaction in approximately cancer whereas the developing to risk is for Exposure 5-fold, elevated in asbestos 55-fold. lung exposed increases to risk heavy in nonsmokers smokers asbestos the

other tobacco causation lung heavy smokers cancer, smoke of environmental Even the paramount influences of exposed and in not do). 11% are smoking all cancer though (about individuals develop to mutagenic of carcinogens is hereditary very (genetic) the factors. effect It that likely modified by is ultimate that the system P-450 many for carcinogens Recall monooxygenase enzyme metabolic via (Chapter require chemicals into conversion 6). activation of a larger greater have exposed an P-450 procarcinogens smoke, certain and Individuals thus activate cancer. cigarette incur developing doses of involving to are found lung to carcinogens with risk and the genes polymorphisms capacity increased lymphocytes subjects. lung for developing tobacco-related increased exposure greater individuals sensitive 10-fold to have cancer Similarly, peripheral whose after risk over a genotype) undergo (mutagen breakages than control carcinogens chromosomal blood

adenomatous colon, the the proposed adenocarcinomas that sequence. of hyperplasia–adenocarcinoma it the through some in sequence in invasive adenocarcinoma lung to atypical arise situ–invasive By analogy an adenoma–carcinoma is (BASCs). lung population of duct bronchioalveolar models at the have Studies in injury junction, stem multipotent mice a cells identified bronchioloalveolar of cells termed injury, replenish and (bronchiolar alveolar the lung cells) Clara this found location, facilitating multipotent types cell normal thereby in and cells After BASCs epithelial regeneration. proliferate escape initiating a results is pulmonary the normal enables “checkpoint” that (for cells in mutation) to hit that It mechanisms KRAS BASCs adenocarcinomas. somatic postulated these and example, incur

of cell carcinomas are in development is The there invasive of squamous before squamous well and smoke changes progress documented; between linear to intensity ever innocuous and metaplasia rather begin sequential carcinoma appearance and exposure changes to basal cell the cigarette squamous with culminating leading and situ, the worrisome cancer. correlation more hyperplasia that of epithelial a in dysplasia

(gland-forming) mucinous );papillary; located, whichisoftenmultifocalandmaymanifestaspneumonia-likeconsolidation);andsolid areusuallyperipherally MORPHOLOGYCarcinomasofthelungbeginassmalllesionsthattypicallyarefirmandgray-white.Theymayariseasintraluminalmasses,invadethebronchialmucosa,orformlargebulkymassespushingintoadjacentlungparenchyma.Adenocarcinomas (Fig.13.43C types. butalsomayoccurclosertothehilum.Ingeneral,adenocarcinomasgrowslowlyandformsmallermassesthandotheothersubtypes,buttheytendtometastasizewidelyatanearlystage.Theymayassumeavarietyofgrowthpatterns,includingacinar Thesolidvariantoftenrequiresdemonstrationofintracellularmucinbyspecialstainstoestablishitsadenocarcinomatousdifferentiation.

Fig.13.43A ),whichisthoughttoprogressinastepwisefashiontoadenocarcinomainsitu,minimallyinvasiveadenocarcinoma(<3cmindiameterwithaninvasivecomponentof<5mm),andinvasiveadenocarcinoma(atumorofanysizewithanareaofinvasion>5mm).AAHappearsasawell-demarcatedfocusofepithelialproliferation(withadiameterof5mmorless)composedofcuboidaltolow-columnarcellsthatdemonstratenuclearhyperchromasia,pleomorphism,andprominentnucleoli.GeneticanalyseshaveshownthatAAHismonoclonalandsharesmanymolecularaberrationswithadenocarcinomas(e.g.,KRAS mutations).

situ in (AIS)(formerlybronchioloalveolarcarcinoma),ofteninvolvesperipheralpartsofthelungasasinglenodule.ThekeyfeaturesofAISarediameterof3cmorless,growthalongpreexistingstructures,andpreservationofalveolararchitecture(see Adenocarcinoma

Fig.13.43B ).Thetumorcells,whichmaybenonmucinous,mucinous,ormixed,growinamonolayeralongthealveolarsepta,whichserveasascaffold.Bydefinition,AISdoesnotdemonstratedestructionofalveolararchitectureorstromalinvasionwithdesmoplasia,featuresthatwouldmeritthediagnosisofinvasiveadenocarcinoma.

aremorecommoninmenthaninwomenandarecloselycorrelatedwithasmokinghistory;theytendtoarise major carcinomas in centrally cell andeventuallyspreadtolocalhilarnodes,buttheydisseminateoutsidethethoraxlaterthandootherhistologictypes.Largelesionsmayundergocentralnecrosis,givingrisetocavitation. bronchi Squamous situ, dysplasia aphasethatmaylastforseveralyears( or Thepreneoplasticlesionsthatantedate,andusuallyaccompany,invasivesquamouscellcarcinomaarewellcharacterized.Squamouscellcarcinomasoftenareprecededbythedevelopment,overyears,ofsquamous metaplasia inthebronchialepithelium,whichthentransformstocarcinoma in

Fig.13.44 ).Bythistime,atypicalcellsmaybeidentifiedincytologicsmearsofsputumorinbronchiallavagefluidsorbrushings,althoughthelesionisasymptomaticandundetectableonradiographs.Eventually,thesmallneoplasmreachesasymptomaticstage,whenawell-definedtumormassbeginstoobstructthelumenofamajorbronchus,oftenproducingdistalatelectasisandinfection.Simultaneously,thelesioninvadessurroundingpulmonarysubstance(

Fig.13.45A ).Onhistologicexamination,thesetumorsrangefromwell-differentiatedsquamouscellneoplasmsshowingkeratinpearls(see

)andintercellularbridgestopoorlydifferentiatedneoplasmsexhibitingonlyminimalsquamouscellfeatures. Fig.13.45B

areundifferentiatedmalignantepithelialtumorsthatlackthecytologicfeaturesofneuroendocrinecarcinomaandshownoevidenceofglandularorsquamousdifferentiation.Thecellstypicallyhavelargenuclei,prominentnucleoli,andmoderateamountsofcytoplasm. cell Large carcinomas

located lung masses cell thatextendintothelungparenchyma.Thesecancersarecomposedofrelativelysmalltumorcellswitharoundtofusiformshape,scantcytoplasm,andfinelygranularchromatinwithasaltandpepperappearance.Numerousmitoticfiguresarepresent( (SCLCs)generallyappearaspalegray,centrally carcinomas Small

).Necrosisisinvariablypresentandmaybeextensive.Thetumorcellsarefragileandoftenshowfragmentationand“crushartifact”insmallbiopsyspecimens.Anotherfeature,bestappreciatedincytologicspecimens,isnuclearmoldingresultingfromcloseappositionoftumorcellsthathavescantcytoplasm.Thesetumorsexpressavarietyofneuroendocrinemarkers( http://ebooksmedicine.net Fig.13.46

Fig. 13.43 Adenocarcinomaandassociatedlesions.(A)Atypicaladenomatoushyperplasiawithcuboidalepitheliumandmildinterstitialfibrosis.(B)Adenocarcinomainsitu,mucinoussubtype,withcharacteristicgrowthalongpreexistingalveolarsepta,withoutinvasion. (C)Gland-formingadenocarcinoma;insetshowsthyroidtranscriptionfactor1(TTF-1)positivity,whichisseeninamajorityofpulmonaryadenocarcinomas.

(e.g.,adenosquamouscarcinoma,mixedadenocarcinoma,smallcellcarcinoma)areseenin10%orlessoflungcarcinomas. 13.7 )andmaysecreteahostofpolypeptidehormonesthatmayresultinparaneoplasticsyndromes(seelater).Bythetimeofdiagnosis,mostwillhavemetastasizedtohilarandmediastinallymphnodes.Inthe2015WHOClassification,SCLCisgroupedtogetherwithlargecellneuroendocrinecarcinoma,anotherveryaggressivetumorthatexhibitsneuroendocrinemorphologyandexpressesneuroendocrinemarkers(synaptophysin,chromogranin,andCD56).Mixed patterns

syndrome. tumors, Eachoftheselungcancersubtypestendstospreadtolymphnodesinthecarina,themediastinum,andtheneck(scalenenodes)andclavicularregions,and,soonerorlater,todistantsites.Involvementoftheleftsupraclavicularnode(Virchownode)isparticularlycharacteristicandsometimescallsattentiontoanoccultprimarytumor.Thesecancers,whenadvanced,oftenextendintothepleuralorpericardialspace,leadingtoinflammationandeffusions.Theymaycompressorinfiltratethesuperiorvenacavatocausevenouscongestionorthevenacavalsyndrome.Apicalneoplasmsmayinvadethebrachialorcervicalsympatheticplexus,causingseverepaininthedistributionoftheulnarnerveorHornersyndrome(ipsilateralenophthalmos,ptosis,miosis,andanhidrosis).SuchapicalneoplasmsaresometimescalledPancoast andthecombinationofclinicalfindingsisknownasPancoast Pancoasttumorisoftenaccompaniedbydestructionofthefirstandsecondribsandsometimesthethoracicvertebrae.Aswithothercancers,tumor-node-metastasis(TNM)categoriesareusedtoindicatethesizeandspreadoftheprimaryneoplasm.

be symptoms. have they in insidious lesions of spread the many are produce that so unresectable lung as to cases before Carcinomas and instances cough some http://ebooksmedicine.net chronic In

Fig. Precursorlesionsofsquamouscellcarcinomas.(AtoC)Someoftheearliest(and“mild”)changesinsmoking-damagedrespiratoryepitheliumincludegobletcellhyperplasia(A),basalcell(orreservecell)hyperplasia(B),andsquamousmetaplasia(C).(D)Moreominouschangesincludetheappearanceofsquamousdysplasia,characterizedbythepresenceofdisorderedsquamousepithelium,withlossofnuclearpolarity,nuclearhyperchromasia,pleomorphism,andmitoticfigures. 13.44 (EandF)Squamousdysplasiamay,inturn,progressthroughthestagesofmild,moderate,andseveredysplasia.Carcinomainsitu(CIS) (E)isthestagethatimmediatelyprecedesinvasivesquamouscellcarcinoma(F).ApartfromthelackofbasementmembranedisruptioninCIS,thecytologicfeaturesofCISaresimilartothoseinfrankcarcinoma. (AtoE,Courtesy Dr. Adi Dallas,Texas. of Texas Southwestern Medical of of Pathology, School, University Department Gazdar, al,editors: F,Reproduced 1999, Travis WD,Colby B,et TV,Corrin from permission with WorldHealthOrganizationhistologicaltypingoflungandpleuraltumors,Heidelberg, Springer.)

Fig. Squamouscellcarcinoma.(A)Squamouscellcarcinomaappearingasacentral(hilar)massthatisinvadingcontiguousparenchyma. 13.45 (B)Well-differentiatedsquamouscellcarcinoma,showingkeratinizationandpearls.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 13.46 left). Smallcellcarcinomawithsmalldeeplybasophiliccellsandareasofnecrosis(top Notebasophilicstainingofvascularwallsduetoencrus-tationbyDNAfromnecrotictumorcells(Azzopardieffect).

attention disease. localized, expectoration to resectable call persistent By hoarseness, poor. cava vena their superior make atelectasis other such pain, or pneumonitis syndrome, chest prognosis pleural appearance, or time or effusion, segmental as the pericardial symptoms, the is to bones often, (pain). by Too the (mental symptoms the with metastatic (hepatomegaly), or or tumor liver such brain spread changes), as caused sites neurologic presents glands cortical adrenal of sufficient adrenal (Addison Although metastatic maintain the obliterated by usually is uncommon, function cells may disease) because persist. adrenal to nearly islands be insufficiency disease,

favorable carcinoma more a adenocarcinoma and SCLC. Overall, prognosis cell than carry squamous possible before pneumonectomy. is lobectomy are high-risk undergoing local by metastasis patients surveillance cure carcinomas or imaging), detected in When or squamous or (as cell spread adenocarcinomas as to responses in Unresectable tyrosine associated show EGFR inhibitors. may remarkable such mutations with adenocarcinomas specific targetable kinases months these the relapse but years, or on year is to within typical. a of of long-term so have A order patients remissions few on alter or target mutation tumors that found the binding) in resistant EGFR to mutations Inevitably, that prevents the (e.g., circumvent are either new tumor drug drug drug dependence an have additional themselves target. is occurring. currently drug resistance mechanisms of that to order targeted prevent strategies from being it effort develop in devoted to the understanding Much tumor that (perhaps those smoking high tumors, because subset related particularly Immune of checkpoint a burden are responses of a of inhibitors in produce

Cell Table Squamous Cell 13.7 Small Cell and Comparison Carcinoma) Non–Small and of Carcinoma Carcinoma Lung Lung (Adenocarcinoma

Forexample,densecoregranulesonelectronPresentAbsentmicroscopy;expressionofchromogranin,synaptophysin,andCD56

Epithelialmembraneantigen,carcinoembryonicantigen,PresentPresentandcytokeratinintermediatefilaments

EGFR mutationsAbsent~20%(adenocarcinomas,nonsmokers,women)

represent http://ebooksmedicine.net avenue a and new rearrangementsAbsent4%–6%adenocarcinomas,nonsmokers,oftenhavesignetringmorphology for ALK hopeful therapy. neoantigens),

picture By has changed unfortunately SCLC the for contrast, little. viable to SCLCs if even time the the resection surgical primary have a appears detected, invariably spread and be option. tumor by thus, are they small is not localized; SCLCs and unavailable. recur, are but yet as of chemotherapy very targeted sensitive invariably are to therapies with at median survival alive treatment 5% 1 year, even and are only only remains 10 The years. Because have high they to mutation a are tumors burden, immunogenic. very be likely these therapies patients checkpoint responses in with Accordingly, produced SCLC. immune encouraging have advanced

the 6). direct develop that In paraneoplastic is the with lung cells, (Chapter effects addition syndromes it of 3% estimated 10% of tumor to patients cancer to of migratory by the including pulmonary hormone); hypertrophic anti-diuretic (6) syndrome, neuromuscular of abnormalities, including and osteoarthropathy; hypercalcemia caused hormone–related (4) of production adrenocorticotropic (2) coagulation (from and These parathyroid nonbacterial thrombophlebitis, hormone; inappropriate peptide; and of include disseminated polymyositis; syndrome and syndromes, coagulation. neuropathy, myasthenic endocarditis, syndrome of clubbing a intravascular a secretion increased secretion peripheral fingers Cushing often cell syndromes neoplasms, the cell Hypercalcemia but neoplasms, and is small hematologic with the most exceptions syndromes adenocarcinomas, with abound. squamous encountered neurologic with

•Thethreemajorhistologicsubtypesareadenocarcinoma(mostcommon),squamouscellcarcinoma,andsmallcellcarcinoma,eachofwhichisclinicallyandgeneticallydistinct.Adenocarcinomasarethemostcommoncancersoverallandareespeciallycommoninwomenandinnonsmokers.

Smokingisthemostimportantriskfactorforlungcancer.

Precursorlesionsincludeatypicaladenomatoushyperplasiaandadenocarcinomainsituforadenocarcinomasandsquamousdysplasiaforsquamouscancer.

Tumors3cmorlessindiametercharacterizedbypuregrowthalongpreexistingstructureswithoutstromalinvasionarecalledadenocarcinomainsitu.

SCLCsarebesttreatedwithchemotherapy,becausealmostallaremetastaticatpresentation.Theothercarcinomasmaybecurablebysurgeryiflimitedtothelung.Targetedtherapies,suchasEGFRinhibitortherapyforadenocarcinomaswithEGFRmutations,canbeeffective,anexcellentexampleofpersonalizedcancertherapy.Immunotherapiesareunderdevelopmentandshowpromise.

Lungcancerscommonlycauseavarietyofparaneoplasticsyndromes.

and, tumors may rarely, tumors malignant neurosecretory cytoplasm cells dense-core hormonally secrete in their active composed Carcinoid are of that granules polypeptides. contain best resectable curable. are are and are often both typical subclassified or thought neuroendocrine low-grade carcinomas They of and atypical; as a 20). part as (Chapter syndrome the endocrine neoplasia They of occur multiple occasionally represent in (mean 5% years) and Bronchial 40 all about young carcinoids neoplasms. pulmonary occur of adults

MORPHOLOGYMostcarcinoidsoriginateinmainbronchiandgrowinoneoftwopatterns:(1)anobstructingpolypoid,spherical,intraluminalmass(

Fig.13.47A lesion. );or(2)amucosalplaquepenetratingthebronchialwalltofanoutintheperibronchialtissue—theso-calledcollar-button carcinoids, Evenpenetratinglesionspushintothelungsubstancealongabroadfrontandarewelldemarcated.Peripheralcarcinoidsarelesscommon.Although5%to15%ofcarcinoidshavemetastasizedtothehilarnodesatpresentation,distantmetastasesarerare.Histologically,typical liketheircounterpartsintheintestinaltract,arecomposedofnestsofuniformcellsthathaveregularroundnucleiwith“salt-and-pepper”chromatin,absentorraremitosesandlittlepleomorphism(see

Fig.13.47B tumorsdisplayahighermitoticrateandsmallfociofnecrosis.Thesetumorshaveahigherincidenceoflymphnodeanddistantmetastasisthantypicalcarcinoids.Unliketypicalcarcinoids,theatypicaltumorshaveTP53 ).Atypical carcinoid mutationsin20%to40%ofcases.Typicalcarcinoid,atypicalcarcinoid,andlargecellneuroendocrineandsmallcellcarcinomacanbeviewedasacontinuumofincreasinghistologicaggressivenessandmalignantpotentialwithinthespectrumofpulmonaryneuroendocrineneoplasms.

Fig. 13.47 Bronchialcarcinoid. (A)Carcinoidgrowingasaspherical,palemass(arrow) protrudingintothelumenofthebronchus.(B)Histologicappearancedemonstratingsmall,rounded,uniformnucleiandmoderatecytoplasm. Pathology, Chicago, of Dr. Department School Pritzker Illinois.) of Medicine, Krausz, Thomas Chicago of of (Courtesy University http://ebooksmedicine.net

including and bronchial signs carcinoid symptoms and manifest Most with to infections. related and intraluminal hemoptysis, recurrent cough, their growth, pulmonary tumors incidentally on and tumors Peripheral asymptomatic chest radiographs. are often are discovered and do intermittent carcinoids by syndrome, the induce cyanosis. flushing, diarrhea, rarely of characterized pulmonary Only carcinoid attacks carcinoids. while rates 10-year to respectively, these 35%, typical rates 56% for 85%, and survival 5and carcinoids above are atypical for drop The reported

disease. complication an a of pulmonary Disease is the underlying of usually pleura pleural and infections at Secondary adhesions autopsy. findings are common infections Important primary (2) the intrapleural neoplasm and primary mesothelioma, a disorders are (1) pleura. bacterial of malignant primary

transudates can Pleural effusions exudates. (fluids or space) the pleural either be in transudate, condition a effusion is the termed When hydrothorax. the is most of common failure heart bilateral is the hydrothorax. cause Congestive cells, often, 30 inflammatory pleuritis. greater than g/L and, characterized content protein exudate, An by suggests through The microbial infection pleural or the causes principal carcinoma, mesothelioma); infarction; of seeding either and four exudate formation pulmonary pleuritis surface, (suppurative (2) pleuritis. a neoplasms to of viral are cancer invasion (4) metastatic empyema); pleural blood-borne or lung or extension (lung direct pulmonary uremia, thoracic are rheumatoid as of exudative as arthritis, less Other, pleural and systemic well effusions erythematosus, previous causes common surgery. lupus Malignant frequently and pleuritis). (hemorrhagic are large effusions characteristically bloody reveal malignant Cytologic the cells. may examination

if Whatever serous residual transudates the effects usually exudates and controlled inciting the or cause cause, without is are remits. resorbed fibrinous, lead that and adhesions pleural contrast, may to suppurative fibrous exudates By calcification. organization, fibrous sometimes or undergo hemorrhagic, yielding thickenings

Pneumothorax,Hemothorax,andChylothorax

gas pleural refers sac. presence other in of or to the air Pneumothorax result such disease or some usually of any men occur or pneumothorax), without disorder as as or healthy young, lung a fractured may a emphysema or (simple rib. adults, thoracic pulmonary known It (secondary apparently spontaneous in pneumothorax), the lesion pleural air consequence is pulmonary the of that access rupture gain the pneumothorax any pleural to surface close to cavity. allows situated of to Secondary inspired abscess, pulmonary other, carcinoma, lung include less Responsible tuberculosis, emphysema, many common lesions processes. and secondary with pneumothorax. may trigger pressure support Mechanical also high ventilatory

possible are several complications of There pneumothorax. a create shifts A ball-valve that tension may mediastinum. the leak pneumothorax may the follow pulmonary and be of may even fatal. Compromise circulation not can surgical is a much that few be scarring never or weeks intervention), leak fully seals may reexpanded. so the and or lung it If (either spontaneously through the occur within medical reexpanded the collects these pleural hydropneumothorax. cases, In creating cavity, fluid in serous does lung as the the becomes prolonged collapse, between cavity pleural when the vulnerable persists. to it With infection, communication and lung of an (pyopneumothorax). important pneumothorax is thus complication Empyema

the bloody aortic that be aneurysm, blood Hemothorax, intrathoracic collection always of pleural effusion) event an fatal. contrast the almost of complication cavity, (in a is with ruptured a may in whole with blood With the pleural effusions, cavity. the bloody clots contrast within in pleural hemothorax,

fluid Chylothorax a collection pleural milky of a lipid. lymphatic containing of is microglobules by as mediastinal major of intrathoracic a The always fluid secondary neoplasm, it cancer or large, total an volume of primary is be not chylothorax usually because lymphoma). a obstruction significant may such (e.g., implies but the ducts, lymph

highly because has exposure mesothelioma great assumed airborne importance related to to asbestos. is Malignant it in parietal pleura; occurs It the a pericardium. mesothelial is of or it and visceral much less the commonly in cancer usually rare also cells, arising peritoneum this to a cancer exposure 90% 80% to with asbestos. of Approximately have history of individuals malignant asbestos relative workers, factory was proximity miners, whose have living an only being Those work in insulators) of mesotheliomas who in at individuals to but risk, worker. directly an greatest appeared are a with asbestos exposure (shipyard asbestos or mesothelioma often time. The are long is over suggesting a slowly, years, causative to for exposure driver 40 acquired period after 25 malignant of that initial the period latent long, mutations developing for increases exposure asbestos and for smoking earlier, but cigarette developing does mesothelioma. lung malignant increase risk combination the the stated As of not carcinoma, the it greatly risk developing

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Once inhaled, life. in asbestos remain for fibers the body with after Thus, risk over which the the time in lifetime smoking, after diminish not decreases does (unlike exposure risk cessation). damage the asbestos has and species reactive preferentially that fibers layer, been DNA near gather oxygen generate mutations. mesothelial cause It where hypothesized that cell they growth control, genomes multiple mesothelioma in of DNA signaling. factor of repair, and cycle involved driver mutations, cell pathways Sequencing cluster has many which revealed in in in families interest, genes line sporadic mutations affected that most showing mesothelioma, BAP1, of Of a one repair involved the mutated suppressor is of a encodes also DNA commonly germ mesothelioma. by high tumor in incidence

thatobliteratesthepleuralspace( typically of yellow-white, fibrosis MORPHOLOGYMalignantmesotheliomasareoftenprecededbyextensivepleural firm, and readilyseenoncomputedtomographyscans.Thesetumorsbegininalocalizedareaandovertimespreadwidely,eitherbycontiguousgrowthorbydiffuseseedingofpleuralsurfaces.Atautopsy,theaffectedlung formation, variably gelatinous plaque tumor by a ensheathed is layer

inwhichspindled,occasionallyfibroblastic-appearingcellsgrowinsheets;and(3)biphasic, inwhichcuboidalcellswithsmallpapillarybudslinetubularandmicrocysticspaces(thisisthemostcommonpatternandalsotheonemostlikelytobeconfusedwithapulmonaryadenocarcinoma);(2)sarcomatous, Fig.13.48 ).Theneoplasmmaydirectlyinvadethethoracicwallorthesubpleurallungtissue,butdistantmetastasesareuncommon.Normalmesothelialcellsarebiphasic,givingrisetopleuralliningcellsaswellastheunderlyingfibroustissue.Inlinewiththispotential,mesotheliomasconformtooneofthreemorphologicappearances:(1)epithelial, havingbothsarcomatousandepithelialareas.

Fig. 13.48 Malignantmesothelioma.Notethethick,firm,whitepleuraltumorthatensheathesthisbisectedlung.

cold.” and children. watery in slight tract pronounced most accompanied most of afflictions in a are clinical nasal of the are humans, discharge; respiratory temperature frequently among sore common increase known: the as dry scratchy, the that young more congestion well manifesting is The sneezing; upper by Acute throat; “common infections features parainfluenza common and influenza coronaviruses, A are but implicated. rhinoviruses, viruses, enteroviruses, streptococci viruses, β-hemolytic even syncytial most sometimes and respiratory adenoviruses, group have The pathogens been the 40%), In perhaps be will determined; be of number (around a new discovered. cause viruses cannot significant cases infections of Most and are or these 1 the occur winter less). for in fall (usually week lasting self-limiting and complicated minority may or of development media sinusitis. be a by of otitis bacterial colds cases, In the

to epiglottis, cold, of the signs addition symptoms In may or upper-respiratory larynx. to produce the the and common tract pharynx, infections localized pharyngitis, manifesting be host by throat, sore Acute a as may a of caused agents. the is Mild most pharyngitis and form minimal common findings accompanies with frequently cold pharyngitis. of physical a adenovirus with severe exudates, marked infections. occur β-hemolytic tonsillitis, associated with and hyperemia More streptococcal with and forms fever. development for and recognize because (“quinsy”) progression is rheumatic acute glomerulonephritis to of or potential poststreptococcal important the treat of for peritonsillar and early, tonsillitis Streptococcal to abscesses associated produce and pharyngeal infection Coxsackievirus may A vesicles ulcers (herpangina). an Epstein-Barr the disease”—reflecting of by previously pharyngitis of and transmission (EBV), bears common caused important “kissing moniker mononucleosis, is nonexposed individuals. in cause mode Infectious virus of a

young a bacterial obstruction the pain an findings. have major who and Acute the airway infection affecting children predominantly are of epiglottis by H. is caused in which influenzae, epiglottitis syndrome onset abrupt. The is fatal to the can for condition maintain a with need an have child airway appreciate Failure consequences. to open this decreased influenzae the against of greatly has H. vaccination this The advent incidence disease. of

from or allergic of caused can be result inhalation may Acute irritants reactions. laryngitis by passages as that nasal and common well It by may cold as the larynx. the pharynx agents involve produce and caused be also usually the but Brief laryngitis: be uncommon tuberculous two and of diphtheritic. made mention of forms important should almost during a protracted which is is of infected The up. tuberculosis, sputum consequence always coughed active former children the Diphtheritic of of immunization toxin. fortunately against become young laryngitis has uncommon diphtheria widespread because fibrinopurulent After elaborates classic diphtheria. of on superficial, a inhaled, pseudomembrane dense epithelium, dirty-gray is airways, of exudate, of mucosal a causes that accompanied necrosis the exotoxin by the where it create the upper diphtheriae powerful implants to it mucosa the Corynebacterium of myocarditis, exotoxins aspiration major airways) (causing are of obstruction of (producing injury). bacterial infection the this other major sloughing peripheral and and pseudomembrane The or absorption tissue neuropathy, hazards of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of most more other also condition. may respiratory but is as In virus agents commonly known croup, parainfluenza cause precipitate virus children, laryngotracheobronchitis, syncytial such this as the common inspiratory may Although frightening and harsh, cause croup self-limited, cough. persistent stridor airway to inflammatory the in reaction narrow occasional respiratory failure. the result laryngeal may sufficiently In cases, infections upper-respiratory influenzae. Viral the in infection, bacterial patient and particularly predispose tract secondary by to H. the streptococci, staphylococci,

of EBV merits (2) because Nasopharyngeal carcinoma high cancer on raises viral comment possibility is this strong a the background and neoplasm a the to susceptibility. of oncogenesis which links Chinese, genetic epidemiologic frequency among (1) of of the that rare the that first EBV nearby thought epithelium then lymphocytes. host infects in the is tonsillar It infecting replicating B nasopharyngeal the by and the to In leads transformation epithelial cells. this individuals, of some another (Chapter with found 12), outside in the carcinomas, nasopharyngeal Burkitt EBV-associated including occur virtually all is tumor, genome endemic areas that lymphoma case EBV the Asia. the Unlike in those

undifferentiated the and cell are last-mentioned cell EBV. nonkeratinizing the squamous carcinoma, closely with most linked variants most carcinoma; keratinizing histologic The is common carcinoma, and the one squamous three (reflecting nucleoli. prominent cell borders by eosinophilic cells with undifferentiated indistinct and large “syncytial” epithelial characterized neoplasm growth) The is carcinomas, the by be to of cells often tumor influx are antigens. cells, nasopharyngeal In to viral responding are a which T believed accompanied striking carcinomas nodes, Nasopharyngeal spread metastasize to cervical lymph to locally, then invade distant and sites. even tend reported, be of cancers. 5-year with patients radiosensitive, They are for 50% advanced survival to and rates therapy. Responses not conventional also providing therapeutic checkpoint strategy respond inhibitors immune to been do to tumors for a new reported, that have

but larynx, comment. the and to of and may mesenchymal A are nodules, variety papillomas, sufficiently benign, merit squamous cell of cord arise neoplasms origin epithelial in and vocal nonneoplastic, carcinomas only malignant common presenting In most these common feature of is the all conditions, hoarseness.

most hemispherical in diameter) often, are nodules true cm protrusions smooth, (“polyps”) the cords. Vocal vocal (usually cord on <0.5 located, squamous mucosa the but can of from be cord. nodules covered by other The tissue stratified with and intact is fibrous are usually that ulcerated trauma contact composed vocal occur These are suggesting chronic the they over nodes), irritation heavy singers use. (singer’s smokers that result or in or of chiefly lesions

that vocal papilloma squamous rarely forms is or cords, on larynx a 1 the located more neoplasm, excrescence the soft, like diameter. papilloma than of usually true a benign Laryngeal raspberry in cm it an covered by and typical, fibrovascular consists projections multiple squamous supported epithelium. central by stratified cores Histologically, orderly, slender, fingerlike of may accompanied that be edge lead is papilloma vocal free of the to on When cord, hemoptysis. the by trauma the can ulceration

is after often in the excision. are as Papillomas are to in multiple whom to usually papillomatosis (RRP), they referred tend in recurrent recur single but respiratory condition children, typically adults since are and lesions regress spontaneously and human 11 puberty. 6 These at (HPV) caused by types papillomavirus often is transformation Cancerous rare. an cause occurrence is mother during in vertical infected most children The transmission delivery. likely from their for types children. recent in provides vaccine that protect of the HPV against and women RRP of for prevention an Therefore, reproductive 11 age of 6 with an availability can opportunity infection

of Larynx Carcinoma the

Carcinoma only all larynx represents the of 2% cancers. of 40 occurs in more women of than ratio of It and 7:1). a after years most commonly (with gender men common is age in play its Environmental exposure smokers, alcohol cases occur and influences very asbestos roles. important all also are in may in nearly and causation; a better tumors, detected which papillomavirus 15% tend about have other of carcinomas. been in prognosis sequences than Human have to

typical carcinomas. laryngeal About are squamous cancers cell 95% of adenocarcinomas from glands. presumably seen, mucous are arising Rarely, <5%). develops arise (subglottic; cases, it the 40%) cords (supraglottic; in to of The cords may the 25% but 75% 60% or tumors) on to directly cords (glottic the below tumor vocal also above of Squamous ( appear later fungating gray, the ulcerating ultimately carcinomas on that and pearly as situ cell lesions wrinkled mucosal begin surface, in plaques larynx the as

Fig.

13.49 ). keratinizing, are to usually moderately cell glottic squamous carcinomas. well differentiated The tumors to with of may dysplasia, situ. carcinoma environmental in As or demonstrate expected from hyperplasia lesions mucosa recurrent exposure even adjacent foci squamous carcinogens, with cell arising

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. arisinginasupraglotticlocation(abovethetruevocalcord). Laryngealsquamouscellcarcinoma(arrow) 13.49

manifests the with larynx hoarseness. Carcinoma of clinically persistent the bearing has prognosis. location of significant The larynx tumor within the a on glottic 90% at larynx diagnosis. tumors to are the For example, confined about of vocal uncommon. region as of has a with disease; spread glottic interference mobility, the First, cord is sparse they course and symptoms result in early larynx the a supply, lymphatic beyond of the develop second, metastasize regional the one-third these nodes. supraglottic contrast, By to nearly of larynx is in lymph and lymphatic spaces, (cervical) tumors rich tumors subglottic remain disease. to advanced usually quiescent, manifesting clinically as The tend one-third disease. cured, many With treatment, surgery, patients of the die can combination radiation about or be therapy, but death metastases widespread sometimes cause of infection. pulmonary complicated usual and cachexia, is The by

Armanios Blackburn Genet The syndromes, EH: M, 13:693, Rev telomere Nat 2013. and role of the idiopathic other telomere review dysfunction fibrosis of pulmonary diseases.] in [A

precision CC: Nat the as Harris case Rev medicine 16:525, Ashley lung in era: cancer development study, V, a Cancer 2016. Biomarker lung and cancer.] the treatment discussion [A of diagnosis therapy impact of on the targeted of

et Austin Curr DH, ED, Opin Cardiol WK, 2014. pulmonary hypertension, Genetics of 29:520, Chung al: Best recent and advances molecular [A in description pulmonary genetic in hypertension.] mechanisms of

10:511, Pathol 2015. Bittar SE: HET, Annu Rev of Wenzel Yousem severe Pathobiology asthma, SA, targeted [A therapy.] the of and severe pathways, remodeling asthma, changes, review and the structural and addressing pathobiology inflammatory cells

immunology, Pathol Annu Altmann 11:523, Boyton 2016. microbiology, in current DM: Bronchiectasis: and concepts pathogenesis, Rev RJ, pathogenesis, interactions bronchiectasis of [A and between review microorganisms.] on focusing immunity host

Carmona 91:1946, diagnosis EM, Pulmonary Kalra Proc Mayo and S, Ryu sarcoidosis: Clin 2016. treatment, JH: current a of enigmatic [A disorder.] concise review still

Hogg The Rev JC, chronic Timens pathology pulmonary 4:435, 2009. disease, Annu obstructive Pathol W: of of small COPD, the tissue roles disease in remodeling, repair and COPD.] and the still [A review airway on stressing pathogenesis relevant inflammation, of

2012. 142:208, Girard advances pneumonitis, Cormier Lacasse Y, Recent Chest Y: hypersensitivity M, in clinical pathophysiologic hypersensitivity and summarizes aspects of pneumonitis.] [This review

Lancet W: Chen Silicosis, ITS, 2012. Yu Leung 379:2008, CC, and its and review to relationship of pathogenesis lung [A the silicosis cancer.] tuberculosis

JW, medicine, Asthma al: et Med 2:405, Lancet, 2014. and Respir genetics Bleecker DA, personalized Holloway ER, Meyers possible for [A reveal triggers genetic review and strategies asthma.] markers of treatment that

between Cooper responses Immunol RT, balance IM, TB-infected Robinson Orme and immune Nat in The AM: pathogenic 16:57, the lung, protective 2015. damage.] discussion response, and immunity, tissue [A the balance host between delicate TB, of

Med asthma-COPD N overlap 373:1241, Engl syndrome, DS, Rabe 2015. Postma The KF: J and and [A asthma, highlighting review comparing features.] contrasting COPD shared distinctive and

cancer, cell A: small 2015. Dev 29:1447, emerging Origins, and of landscape, genetic Berns Nagel Semenova R, EA, lung therapies Genes the of small [A and lung strategies cancer.] treatment review in pathobiology new cell

et MA, G, al: Adatia J Updated 62(SupplD):34, classification Coll Gatzoulis pulmonary hypertension, clinical Am of Simonneau 2013. Cardiol I, based and [A on pathologic classification clinical approaches.] characteristics and hemodynamic therapeutic

J Clinical R: Engl implications in 374:1864, C, N Swanton genomic 2016. discoveries of cancer, Med lung Govinan major clinical approach to focused review the each [A on with the of how changed insights the of http://ebooksmedicine.net subtype lung patients disease.] have genomic pathogenesis into cancer

Levitt respiratory syndrome JE: and distress 35:609, Med Chest early acute 2014. injury, the and Sweatt Evolving Clin acute epidemiology of definitions AJ, lung and the and of mortality, discussion definitions, classification and with strategies.] treatment mild, of better into severe, [A ARDS prediction prevention impact of moderate, of

clinical The Travis E, impact Tumors: Lung World AG, Classification al: classification, et genetic, Organization advances 2015 J Health WD, since 2004 Brambilla radiologic of of Nicholson the and

Thorac 6:244, 2011. Oncol that classification radiologic, of features.] clinical, latest histologic, updated [The and lung molecular, tumors incorporates prognostic

WD, Costabel Idiopathic Pneumonias. ATS/ERS Interstitial Committee U, Hansell al: DM, et Travis on classification Thoracic Society/European 2013. Am J interstitial update Society Respir 188:733, An international Crit of multidisciplinary American official the pneumonias, statement: Med idiopathic Care of the Respiratory and which clinicians, is widely classification lung pathologists.] of used by updated diseases, radiologists, [An interstitial studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

Glomerular of and Mechanisms ChronicKidneyDisease Injury

Kidney of Neoplasms the

out organ secretion a carry number of The of excretion of regulation functions: salt, hormones the important and maintenance of and has of metabolism, kidney body to waste structurally a is evolved of acid a and products complex of prostaglandins. variety that water balance, vessels. affect its components: is those and into as Diseases them study glomeruli, dividing four but complex the its are kidney as facilitated of interstitium, their by structure, blood that tubules, manifestations of to affect is of because diseases distinctive. useful This be the tend compartments each traditional that approach these early more renal be Furthermore, mediated, to for glomerular toxic or are some forms structures interstitial immunologically be to are vulnerable often specific infectious agents. tubular whereas more caused injury; of disorders diseases to and likely example, by seem However, component more the almost means one damage of always kidney than and in interdependence functional that to the structure, disorders one others. affects some structures affect and severe and system; by tubular vascular pressure Thus, cytokines production blood inducing the chemokines, damage intraglomerular conversely, glomerular glomerular lead destruction, sclerosis. peritubular impairs of increasing through the flow to may When stage, the damaged. disease renal chronic disease, end-stage are kidney kidney to of compartments its progresses four most advanced all so-called usually clinically much functional large may the damage capacity often renal kidney, apparent. missed, renal of occur and the to of kidney before dysfunction Due signs reserve becomes early disease are manifestations kidney, Before the individual diseases several we shared discussing describe diseases disorders. by kidney clinical of of

manifestations syndromes. disease renal grouped be clinical reasonably can into well-defined The of are disorders. and renal are diseases, others by several peculiar Some glomerular shared to defined. Before the terms be a few syndromes, we list must

rate blood an a creatinine of urea usually decreased glomerular is (GFR). Azotemia nitrogen filtration and levels reflects elevation and decreased consequence as may intrinsic or GFR of causes. extra-renal renal disease be a kidneys when is Prerenal azotemia extracellular encountered volume). due of reduced to the is hypoperfusion (usually there fluid absence the corrected and decreases is time. renal GFR is if of hypoperfusion This damage in reversible the in usually parenchymal obstructed. when Postrenal outflow urine azotemia results is is obstruction of azotemia. of by followed the the correction Relief

it is gives azotemia uremia. rise abnormalities, clinical systemic manifestations biochemical termed When and to of by characterized not alterations Uremia function but renal incident is to endocrine and also only renal host failure a metabolic by damage. excretory of neuropathy); neuromuscular (e.g., and gastrointestinal (e.g., cardiovascular (e.g., involvement. addition, gastroenteritis); uremic secondary uremic In pericarditis) there peripheral fibrinous is http://ebooksmedicine.net

syndromes diseases renal and features. is with defining a clinical brief their of summary various of the manifestations Below nephrotic syndromes in with nephritic, and detail. The common associated diseases, discussed are most glomerular two

following: characterized syndrome Nephrotic the by is

or adults be the the protein daily with range”) g of to in in in (said “nephrotic more urine Proteinuria, 3.5 loss

than levels albumin g/dL Hypoalbuminemia, with 3 plasma less

the obvious edema, manifestation Generalized most clinical

that the plasma capillary common in of glomeruli diverse a in to increased causes that has nephrotic syndrome share The proteins. the pathophysiology, a walls permeability results derangement may alterations structural the in result permeability GBM. of basement glomerular or (GBM) from Increased membrane physicochemical the and leads decreased, fluid or giving spaces. drop plasma to pressure, blood which osmotic albumin in of heavy serum With a proteinuria, turn long-standing is colloid rise the hypoalbuminemia extravascular in from leakage to into triggers renal Chapter decrease cells. blood the discussed in juxtaglomerular renal As intravascular release of renin 4, in and resulting flow from increased volume kidney. the of Renin salt in angiotensin-aldosterone and by water retention promotes the the which axis, stimulates turn intravascular tendency attributed by decreased of to is cardiac in secretion factors exacerbated the volume. reductions This natriuretic retention edema and aggravates edema further lead anasarca). the proteinuria, if the of generalized may unchecked to of development the continuing In and face salt water (termed there or azotemia, no onset, At the hematuria, or little is hypertension.

The genesis obscure. of more is hyperlipidemia the of synthesis causes massive loss of their hypoalbuminemia Presumably, proteinuria an or the increased in lipoproteins triggers synthesis. of inhibitor liver, of There transport also particles peripheral of circulating and is breakdown lipid lipoproteins. abnormal of impairment the of reflects lipoproteins. lipiduria to the GBM increased associated permeability The

lead glomerular the disease. most that to the primary important characteristically segmental nephrotic are minimal-change syndrome glomerulosclerosis and The lesions focal of important The children; is latter in in more is more the adults. former important and in two also nephrotic glomerulonephritis, diabetes mellitus. as commonly systemic nephropathy other The the and primary diseases, membranous of kidney a disease membranoproliferative syndrome is seen complication

following: nephritic contrast, characterized the By by syndrome is

Proteinuria (usually edema or in range) subnephrotic without the with

onset has by of The caused acute and glomeruli. syndrome nephritic an usually is lesions inflammatory

the an of within glomeruli, the of nephritic infiltrate cells have syndrome the in lesions accompanied that cause by common often leukocytes. proliferation The blood the lead changes pass and permitting GFR. into injures to hemodynamic capillary walls, the the The reaction reduction a in to that urine, inflammatory induces retention, reduced manifested is by The oliguria, and azotemia. GFR fluid clinically both ischemic probably release retention is the the fluid Hypertension and result renin from kidneys. of a augmented and or of glomerulonephritis crescentic lupus GN, systemic result as diseases, various by systemic be The (GN) as disorders of a postinfectious erythematosus. as caused such glomerular acute may primary syndrome forms nephritic such

mild syndrome, presentations proteinuria combination glomerular or or or nephropathy, early other forms diseases. two the Alport a IgA or the hematuria is of Asymptomatic typical nonnephrotic clinical of of presentation

of glomerulonephritis rapid the typically nephritic a of progressive days or in function results syndrome. Rapidly in few loss weeks, setting in (RPGN) renal associated characteristic the The RPGN is histologic GN). of finding (crescentic presence with crescents clinical form specific not Rapidly of a glomerulonephritis a syndrome is GN. etiologic progressive and failure it months. to period a weeks renal death untreated, of to from leads within If

dysfunction (decreased in no kidney an often serum urine oliguria onset characterized by renal anuria refers to Acute injury or with abrupt or creatinine increase flow). associated of acute as cell epithelial glomerular It injury (such injury, thrombotic microangiopathy), (such acute injury progressive injury. GN), from interstitial as can vascular tubular rapidly or result

cause. from kidney any the kidney disease scarring Chronic results progressive in of and and is abnormalities hyperphosphatemia, various characterized acidosis. by metabolic It electrolyte metabolic dyslipidemia, as such of asymptomatic is when develop. it most stages, symptoms uremia often advanced until the However,

typically function dialysis is the transplantation of severe irreversible (ESRD) in or cause. any scarring End-stage loss progressive to disease requiring due kidney renal renal from

bacteriuria pyuria (bacteria characterized is by infection tract Urinary in urine). and the (UTI) leukocytes and only. It or (pyelonephritis) or bladder (cystitis) may the be affect and kidney the symptomatic may asymptomatic,

in collecting red cell and renal and by the casts). refers (without colic is manifested to system of Nephrolithiasis stones hematuria formation

capillaries by invested anastomosing an of two The layers consists of glomerulus network epithelium. of (composed is http://ebooksmedicine.net visceral of of the podocytes) The part epithelium

the Complex and cavity capillary space), encircles plasma filtrate Bowman parietal whereas signaling the of cytoskeletal space of wall, in proteins epithelium collects. (urinary which filtration and unit capillary ( consists the is components the of The following glomerular

Figs. 14.2 14.1

diameter. 70 cells, Fenestrated to in each fenestra 100 endothelial with nm being

lamina glomerular interna the called lamina the peripheral (GBM), layer has basement lamina externa. which and densa, thinner, rara central layers, The rara and electron-dense membrane thick, two electron-lucent a proteoglycans, fibronectin, GBM The glycoproteins. laminin, type of several IV), and polyanionic collagen consists other (mostly

Podocytes, lamina that in possess and are externa. adherent to foot interdigitating rara that embedded the processes cells composed which slit 30-nm–wide of slits, processes by protein Adjacent mainly separated 20to diaphragm thin are later). bridged are filtration the foot (see a nephrin by

between the glomerular tuft. capillaries matrix Mesangial the which cells, mesangial in that lie a supports These

Fig. 14.2 capillarylumen;End, urinaryspace. endothelium;Ep, visceralepithelialcells(podocytes)withfootprocesses;Mes, mesangium;US, Low-powerelectronmicrographofratglomerulus.B, Basementmembrane;CL,

of and response later). down cells, and biologically to of components, collagen origin, a other (described active matrix secreting mediators other are of and laying of capable and cytokines in are factors contractile mesenchymal proliferation, number of

molecules of to (a impermeable almost filtration Normally, and molecular the 70,000-kDa protein). to system permeable albumin size charge solutes water highly is of small and and glomerular the completely permeable), selective the among more permeability less (the according and charge discriminates more (the permeable), to larger, cationic, This shape. protein size the molecules podocytes plasma for important are diffusion Podocyte barriers proteins, responsible for and components. GBM slit largely of also synthesis diaphragms are glycoprotein, adjacent processes. component a the major slit transmembrane between diaphragms Nephrin, foot is the of part signaling The proteins nephrin with interacts (see of and cytoskeletal several intracellular

Fig. ). 14.1 a and maintaining selective podocin, have the associated the crucial its filtration barrier. in Nephrin including glomerular of proteins, permeability role to lead plasma the of This abnormal mutations dramatically in syndrome. nephrin illustrated by is diseases the hereditary or and nephrotic which of proteins partner urine its leakage into proteins rare podocytes with As also are which in defects severity. slit diseases, varying of might proteinuria a number acquired are seen be of diaphragms, associated expected, renal and in

of the in ( be diverse course number diseases systemic of mechanisms a may injured by Glomeruli

Table 14.1 ). them in the which differentiate only glomerular to predominant are organ termed from is or These the diseases those kidney involved. secondary primary this section. The are the constitute latter glomerular various discussed of in later diseases, which types discussed alterations are glomerular systemic The diseases elsewhere. in

glomerular secondary mechanisms types diseases Immune primary of the glomerular underlie most many and diseases. of patients conditions, found in deposits of immunoglobulins, induced often experimental readily are glomerular of components with antibodies, complement, frequently with GN. various can and Under GN be by the antibody or situ ( that have antibodies mesangium, the (intrinsic) in in deposition of glomerular or in capillary fixed glomerular deposition molecules extrinsic circulating mechanisms antigens (1) within Two the (2) antigen-antibody are in glomerulus and established: planted reacting glomerulus, complexes the wall glomerulus of either been with with

Fig. ). 14.3 injury. to and pathways humans exclusive, in contribute are These mutually not all may forms culprit deposition glomerular some in of sole the may GN. and be of Abnormal activation complement a certain mechanisms in may also role Cell-mediated immune play glomerular diseases.

immune glomerular in complexes glomerulus receptor) resulting circulating initiates injury. the in Fc activation, mediated leukocyte of (and/or Deposition complement

in diseases complex discussed of detail The immune in 5. pathogenesis is Chapter is injury a features in salient review that brief Presented to the relate of GN. here glomerular

that malaria), or immune falciparum with the parasitic infections. endogenous may may associated bacterial systemic spirochetal GN circulating antigens (Treponema the probable with (streptococcal), diseases, viral complex–mediated formed GN as complexes lupus pallidum) the B), and In in the is (Plasmodium in antigens, exogenous, be certain erythematosus, as (hepatitis follows be Often the inciting

Diseases Table 14.1 Glomerular

Secondary Glomerulopathies Diseases to Systemic

IgA, ImmunoglobulinA.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

podocytes (at of immune membrane immune Anti-glomerular membrane In glomerulonephritis Antibody (no (membranous complex formed) immune immunofluorescence immunofluorescence glomerular formation Anti-glomerular nephropathy) (at Linear basement glomerular or complexes Subepithelial against basement immune basement antibody complexes surface outer situ on of binding basement complex of membranes) inner surface of Deposition without Mesangial antibodies antigen with circulating membranes) Subendothelial Subepithelial formation Granular

Fig. Antibody-mediatedglomerularinjury.Injurycanresulteitherfromthedepositionofcirculatingimmunecomplexesorfromantibody-bindingtoglomerularcomponentsfollowedbyformationofcomplexesinsitu.Depositionofcirculatingimmunecomplexesgivesagranularimmunofluorescencepattern.Anti-glomerularbasementmembrane(anti-GBM)antibodyglomerulonephritisischaracterizedbyalinearimmunofluorescencepattern;thereisnoimmunedepositformationinthisdisease. 14.3

unknown, GN. of is cases antigen most in membranoproliferative as

they leukocytes. antigen-antibody formed in glomeruli, and Once complement injury are or deposited recruiting the produce complexes activating by of complexes leukocytes contribute the cells Binding receptors immune Fc activation may injury. also and to to on of Morphologically, epithelial and infiltrates mesangial variable leukocytic cells. proliferation parietal glomeruli exhibit and of affected and electron-dense mesangium. immune between the of one GBM of in cells or Electron microscopy outer locations: podocytes between the deposits), the GBM deposits surface (subendothelial (subepithelial the or more reveals endothelial the in and deposits), the three the glomerular complexes or The injury of response. localization determines antigen, antibody, immune glomerular deposited in of proliferation or leukocytes in subendothelium with the complexes endothelium inflammatory models the Studies exuberant and glomerulus of experimental shown have elicit infiltration an that cells. in reaction resident as glomerular (discussed primary directed in contrast, later). subepithelial of antibodies the capillaries region By seen are often noninflammatory, to membranous nephropathy and of in immunoglobulins The deposits by immunofluorescence microscopy. presence be can these complement demonstrated ( is immunofluorescence picturesque “lumpy-bumpy” rather The the microscopy by of pathologists by of deposition given granular, complex description pattern immune

Fig. 14.4A

kidney, cleared complexes degradation Once mesangial mostly leukocytes be the deposited and by infiltrating may eventually or immune cells. in by phagocytosis, reaction to exposure is of cases the inciting inflammatory as may infection–related short-lived the antigen or and poststreptococcal GN. then subside in The acute limited, most if GN. cycles chronic formation, injury repeated deposition, sustained, of if to immune is However, antigen and leading exposure complex to occur, often is is In antigenic in more exposure infection such chronic antigen hepatitis of systemic source lupus nuclear virus the but the B and some erythematosus, cases, antigens clear, in self as unknown. common injury, likely Although circulating limitations. complex deposition identified because of immune mechanism almost never of complexes technical in disease, is are a human

pathway antigens specific fixed injury. (intrinsic) is outside) of planted for major glomerulus of another (from glomerular antibodies or the Deposition in membranous by Antigens implicated been have podocytes in nephropathy. expressed react concentrated in various become the Antibodies deposit in situ with also components. through with which previously and interaction may antigens, kidney nonglomerular glomerular “planted” to include A which systemic the tend as mesangium. [IgG]), patients by breakdown streptococci; in and erythematosus; deposit derived products, immunoglobulin endostreptosin, of aggregated mainly in large cells, G apoptotic Planted with from bacterial lupus aggregated protein such (e.g., complexes, a nucleosomal expressed group proteins antigens free antigens. Locally complexes size immune through circulating in interactions antibodies also and additional formed grow may with on a complexes deposited microscopy. Most GBM, planted by of with deposition immunofluorescence of show granular immune the these antigens, as circulating pattern

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Twopatternsofdepositionofimmunecomplexesasseenbyimmunofluorescencemicroscopy.(A)Granular,characteristicofcirculatingandinsituimmunecomplexdeposition.(B)Linear,characteristicofclassicanti-glomerularbasementmembrane(anti-GBM)antibodyglomerulonephritis. 14.4 (A, Pathology,University Courtesy of J.Kowalewska,Department Washington,Seattle,Washington.) Dr. of of

autoantibodies from GBM. deposition GN glomerular the of Antibody-mediated the components protein directed results of against best-characterized disease crescentic group The antibody–mediated is this GN anti-GBM (see in

Fig. 14.3 disease. also Goodpasture as known ), creating ( visualized are of the in injury, directed In type antibodies against microscopy antigens this pattern with GBM, immunofluorescence linear staining of a when fixed

Fig. 14.4B ). is pattern diagnosis the This glomerular disease. of in useful is A the the is the IV type the α3 GBM. chain antibodies that of of anti-GBM of collagen known antigen target Sometimes lung cross-react resulting basement syndrome, alveoli, Chapter 13). (Goodpasture anti-GBM in kidney antibodies membranes with of lung simultaneous and lesions the

pathway, triggered acquired components is proteins. be of regulatory alternative The of complement by autoantibodies or primary activation inherited against unregulated complement these the which complement may abnormalities of cause diseases injury in complement-mediated disease. may Ensuing systemic result renal and [TMA] and disease category. of forms belong syndrome) thrombotic of and significant this uremic renal (dense GN with a Two disease C3 (complement-mediated atypical hemolytic microangiopathy systemic one deposit or form to GN) manifestations morbidity is disease. manifestation thrombotic microangiopathy of complement-mediated a major condition, renal the represents the systemic Although

Mediators Injury of Immune

glomerular pathway leukocytes. of of and recruitment major A activation injury antibody-initiated complement involves Activation agents neutrophils via (mainly complement generation to for classical of chemotactic leads monocytes. of the C5a) and the pathway damage; radicals, GBM release arachidonic acid proteases, metabolites, cause and which GFR. cause degradation; which reduction which in free Neutrophils to cell oxygen-derived contribute membrane neutrophils through occur prominent, other C5b-C9 of the In of types GN not complex. complement-dependent are which in attack injury assembly may the complex them membrane cells, evidence to that inducing injures is various epithelial There mediators. attack secrete inflammatory injury by lectin perhaps of and complement alternative and pathways be apoptosis, The deposited cell or can activated also by IgA.

and neutrophils to lymphocytes recruited reaction the injury. complement, during implicated by immune addition which and are antibodies In in T have been activated monocytes, glomerular also Platelets aggregate and including mediators, may release prostaglandins. stimulated nitric be arachidonic (interleukin-1), oxide. cytokines as such growth to metabolites, endothelial) mesangial, factors, and (epithelial, glomerular Resident and can mediators cells acid secrete

the described Chapter discussion in to 3 in contribute virtually inflammation may mediators glomerular of all injury. of Thus, the

Injury Mechanisms Non-immune Glomerular of

contribute renal certain Mechanisms glomerular other to abnormalities primary disorders. inflammation in than mention are nephron special that deserve podocyte Two injury loss. and

or conceivably Podocyte can (discussed by by circulating in induced later). glomerulosclerosis podocyte cases be by focal by as poorly antibodies toxins; some injury certain segmental factors, still cytokines; antigens; of to characterized in and the foot changes of the vacuolization, detachment cells injury Podocyte including often results retraction and proteinuria. produces morphologic effacement and of from GBM, processes, of development associated most loss highly these proteinuria. it slit of Of with that normal changes, is the is diaphragms nephrotic structural as mutations podocin, rare of in Germline syndrome. to and diaphragms, of such the with hereditary the are slit nephrin lead also forms associated alterations that components functional

http://ebooksmedicine.net

to rates. reduce of disease or disease, sufficient 30% symptoms to GFR and varying otherwise, 50% glomerular the renal Once progression appear to at end-stage renal proceeds nephrons to normal, destroys called and widespread have Affected glomeruli scarring, proteinuria, glomerulosclerosis. individuals show their to is nephrons. loss in the progressive Such response by occur that of exacerbated changes sclerosis adaptive including single-nephron alteration hypertension). transcapillary with intact changes, Specifically, an pressure renal blood undergo that glomeruli increases and is GFR, function, to in flow, associated maintain (capillary hemodynamic hypertrophy and alterations are permeability proteins, increased ultimately to lipids to and podocyte matrix. and lead endothelial glomerular the mesangial injury, proteins of These further in accumulation and “maladaptive” mesangial segmental increased capillary and glomeruli. obliteration, of is (affecting of global plasma or a portion) sclerosis and proteins, finally followed by deposition This (complete) matrix a further glomerulosclerosis. of progressive of latter The initiating reduction results in mass, cycle nephron vicious

Theclinicalmanifestationsofrenaldiseaseincludenephroticsyndrome,nephriticsyndrome,asymptomatichematuria,rapidlyprogressiveglomerulonephritis,acutekidneyinjury,chronickidneydisease,andend-stagerenaldisease.

Thedominantfeatureofnephroticsyndromeissignificant(i.e.,“nephroticrange”)proteinuria,whilenephriticsyndromeischaracterizedbyproteinuriaandhematuriaofteninassociationwithfunctionalimpairment.

Glomerularinjuryismostoftencausedbydepositonofantibodiesorimmunecomplexes,activationofcomplementandleukocyterecruitmentandactivation.

Themostcommonformsofglomerulonephritis(GN)arecausedbytheformationofimmunecomplexes,whichmaybedepositedfromthecirculationorforminsitu.Immunecomplexesshowagranularpatternofdeposition.

AutoantibodiesagainstcomponentsoftheGBMarethecauseofanti-GBM-antibody–mediateddisease,oftenassociatedwithsevereinjury.Thepatternofantibodydepositionislinear.

Lessfrequently,complementmaybeactivatedintheabsenceofantibody,becauseofacquiredorhereditarydefectsinitsregulation.

now We syndromes of they produce the turn specific consideration to of and GN a ( types

14.2 ). Table this the syndrome, is but cause most systemic and disease adults ( amyloidosis, lupus Many to in primary diabetes, glomerular secondary nephrotic syndrome erythematosus often

). Table 14.3 Chapter those The 5, by are amyloidosis lesions discussed and in 20. by in lupus caused diabetes and renal produced Chapter

Minimal-change the relatively cause benign that the is appearance in disorder, children and nephrotic syndrome by disease, have a normal characterized most by of microscopy. frequent a glomeruli light is is foot processes podocyte of electron Diffuse with seen microscopy. effacement It develop is age, common years 1 of may 7 most age. at any but and between

molecules processes. of foot is cause podocytes proteinuria disease for hypothesis that pathogenesis of some injure popular minimal-change circulating A and with the effacement are numerous been causative of candidate there produced cells, other being biochemically serum definitively the has none as “factors” or lymphocytes and Although established reports by disease. in characterized minimal-change of disease remains unknown. Thus, the pathogenesis

MORPHOLOGYUnderthelightmicroscope,theglomeruliappearnormal,thusgivingrisetothename(

of Fig.14.5A processes the the of ).Thecellsoftheproximalconvolutedtubulesoftenareheavilyladenwithproteindropletsandlipidsduetotubularreabsorptionofthelipoproteinspassingthroughthediseasedglomeruli.Theonlyobviousglomerularabnormalityisthediffuse podocytes (see effacement foot

).ThecytoplasmofthepodocytesappearsflattenedovertheexternalaspectoftheGBM,obliteratingthenetworkofarcadesbetweenthepodocytesandtheGBM.Otherchangesinpodocytesincludevacuolization,microvillusformation,andoccasionalfocaldetachments,suggestingsomeformofpodocyteinjury.Withreversalofthechangesinthepodocytesinresponsetocorticosteroids,theproteinuriaremits. Fig.14.5B

in disease child. with typically of manifests abrupt The otherwise the nephrotic an development healthy syndrome hypertension, in and function is is patients. renal most preserved There of no these albumin (selective proteins, is to chiefly confined loss The protein usually smaller plasma proteinuria). prognosis favorable. The disorder children this with is for recurs of course to of proteinuria whom than become some the 90% however, therapy; short recurring responders, proteinuria are steroids two-thirds when initial a of withdrawn. children More of respond corticosteroid more with in steroid-dependent than it focal in had 5% disease most by this syndrome develop subgroup that after likely segmental and 25 caused http://ebooksmedicine.net kidney Less than nephrotic glomerulosclerosis years, chronic is individuals

Primary Major Table 14.2 Summary Diseases Glomerular of

immunoglobulinM. immunoglobulinG;IgM, GBM, immunoglobulinA;IgG, Glomerularbasementmembrane;IgA,

not by biopsy. detected therapy differentiated minimal-change nonresponders. disease of in its children, from Because other to causes must be responsiveness nephrotic in syndrome of the but common. more relapses and steroid are slower this respond therapy, to also response the with Adults is disease

a sclerosis characterized glomerulus. glomerulosclerosis only not of some is each involves of Focal that (FSGS) glomeruli part affected all) (but segmental by or be (idiopathic) the conditions: of secondary FSGS primary may following to one

(HIV HIV nephropathy). infection therapy. with with infected the is decreasing improved FSGS in of but patients seen HIV, is antiviral incidence 5–10%

Secondary other (e.g., of nephropathy) to forms IgA GN

associated forms which required both in nephron podocytes. discussed Inherited with including the to dominant for integrity earlier) forms, proteins • podocin, cytoskeletal of (as As maladaptation are autosomal of mutations a and loss

to syndrome. Primary the cases 30% FSGS accounts of approximately of for all 20% nephrotic adults a in and an cause children. in It common is remains of nephrotic syndrome frequent increasingly cause

primary is of represent to the thought initiating Injury event FSGS. podocytes to remains injury unknown. what this However, causes believe disease transform to investigators of a them from outset. may be minimal-change but that entities clinicopathologic minimal-change Some are and that have others FSGS, continuum suggested disease and distinct the into part FSGS minimal-change factors As disease, produced permeability-increasing http://ebooksmedicine.net with

of Causes Syndrome Table 14.3 Nephrotic

Ingestionofdrugs(gold,penicillamine,“streetheroin”)

Infections(malaria,syphilis,hepatitisB,HIV)

Malignancy(carcinoma,melanoma)

Miscellaneous(beestingallergy,hereditarynephritis)

HIV, Humanimmunodeficiencyvirus. *Approximateprevalenceofprimarydiseaseis95%ofthecasesinchildrenand60%inadults.Approximateprevalenceofsystemicdiseaseis5%ofthecasesinchildrenand40%inadults.

unproven. by lymphocytes remain suspected but are the where foci the proteins sclerosis by in of of hyaline plasma injury of entrapment develops. caused The and lipids in deposition is glomeruli in supports that podocyte some of cases. FSGS, recurrence patients the to a renal transplantion mediator leads idea within for damage in transplantation, 24 circulating sometimes underoing hours of The proteinuria

MORPHOLOGYPrimaryFSGSinitiallyaffectsonlythejuxtamedullaryglomeruli.Withprogression,eventuallyalllevelsofthecortexareaffected.Thelesionsoccurinsometuftswithinaglomeruluswhilesparingothers(

(lipid-laden) hyaline and mesangial macrophages. foamy ).Theaffectedglomeruliexhibitincreased lumina, capillary of (hyalinosis) Fig.14.6 deposition obliterated matrix, of foot processes, asinminimal-changedisease. Inaffectedglomeruli,immunofluorescencemicroscopyoftenrevealsnonspecifictrappingofimmunoglobulins,usuallyIgM,andcomplementintheareasofhyalinosis.Onelectronmicroscopy,thepodocytesexhibiteffacement

Withtime,progressionleadstoglobalsclerosisoftheglomeruli,pronouncedtubularatrophy,andinterstitialfibrosis.Thisadvancedpictureisdifficulttodifferentiatefromotherformsofchronicglomerulardisease,discussedlater.

Amorphologicvariantcalledcollapsing ischaracterizedbycollapseoftheglomerulartuftandepithelialcellhyperplasia.ThismoreseveremanifestationofFSGSmaybeidiopathicormaybeassociatedwithHIVinfection,drug-inducedtoxicities,andsomemicrovascularinjuries.Itcarriesaparticularlypoorprognosis. glomerulopathy

the courses from to markedly distinguish to because are is responses important and minimal-change therapy clinical FSGS different. It disease, Both hypertension individuals associated with of higher are is with syndrome, but FSGS. nephrotic hematuria in incidence and the and Also, response general poor. nonselective, corticosteroid proteinuria minimal to the in therapy is is change FSGS-associated unlike disease, develop renal with 10 At least within patients 50% disease years of of diagnosis. FSGS end-stage

Membranous the characterized is nephropathy immunoglobulin-containing along subepithelial GBM. deposits by the thickening show wall. appear glomeruli microscopy, diffuse the may in normal but of capillary light Early by cases disease, the well-developed in between and the 60 and 30 slowly an course. follows adults and usually progressive presents ages indolent It of years

membranous of to are caused cases autoantibodies Up podocyte 80% antigens. against of by primary, nephropathy conditions, occurs including remainder, the other In the secondary it to following:

Normal foot membrane effaced Podocyte processes with basement A B

Fig. 14.5 Minimal-changedisease.(A)Whenviewedwithalightmicroscope,thesilvermethenamine–stainedglomerulusappearsnormal,withadelicatebasementmembrane. (B)Schematicdiagramillustratingdiffuseeffacementoffootprocessesofpodocyteswithnoimmunedeposits.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Focalandsegmentalglomerulosclerosis(periodicacid–Schiffstain),seenasacollectionofscarred,obliteratedcapillariesandaccumula-tionsofmatrixmaterialinpartoftheaffectedglomerulus. 14.6 (Courtesy Dr. of

Rennke, H. and Hospital, Brigham Pathology, Boston, Women’s of Massachusetts.) Department

malaria) hepatitis (chronic Infections syphilis, B, schistosomiasis,

the colon lung carcinoma and neoplasms, particularly Malignant melanoma of and

particularly Autoimmune systemic lupus erythematosus diseases,

mercury) (gold, Exposure salts to inorganic

Drugs (penicillamine, captopril, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents)

chronic form glomerular endogenous reacting by immune of is a nephropathy Membranous or induced in glomerulonephritis complex antigens. to planted situ antibodies

but receptor against present are (PLA2R) the is they A2 are Antibodies established that not frequently it podocyte causative. phospholipase antigen of podocytes of on Formation subepithelial (C5-C9). leads surface to the and membrane generates immune attack complement the complex activation deposits turn proteinuria. and injury causes in This podocyte

thickening of MORPHOLOGYThemainhistologicfeatureofmembranousnephropathyisdiffuse capillary the onroutineH&Estains( wall

Fig.14.7A pattern) and dome deposits, ).Electronmicroscopyrevealsthatthisapparentthickeningiscausedinpartbysubepithelial (see whichnestleagainsttheGBMandareseparatedfromeachotherbysmall,spikelikeprotrusionsofGBMmatrixthatforminreactiontothedeposits(spike

of ).Asthediseaseprogresses,thesespikescloseoverthedeposits,incorporatingthemintotheGBM.Inaddition,asinothercausesofnephroticsyndrome,thepodocytesshoweffacement foot processes. Fig.14.7B deposits ofimmunoglobulinsandcomplementalongtheGBM(see Laterinthedisease,theincorporateddepositsmaybebrokendownandeventuallydisappear,leavingcavitieswithintheGBM.Continueddepositionofbasementmembranematrixleadstoprogressivethickeningofbasementmembranes.Withfurtherprogression,glomerulimaybecomesclerosed.Immunofluorescencemicroscopyshowstypicalgranular

Fig.14.4A

of illness; have individuals antecedent proteinuria. syndrome, are nephropathy degrees Most lesser without as membranous sudden cases usually of other present in full-blown onset and nephrotic contrast to therapy. proteinuria disease, corticosteroid In minimal-change respond to usually fails to the nonselective, is and nephropathy ruled membranous Secondary be should out. of causes often a Membranous variable nephropathy indolent follows course. notoriously and of greater to failure renal persists years. patients, 20 although only Overall, progress 60% 2 a in over 40% about than to of proteinuria period have more An a benign of partial 10% with or 30% proteinuria. additional cases course to of complete remission

Fig. Membranousnephropathy.(A)Diffusethickeningoftheglomeru-larbasementmembrane(periodicacid–Schiffstain). 14.7 membrane Thickened deposits Subepithelial foot basement B processes http://ebooksmedicine.net with (B)Schematicdiagramillustratingsubepithelialdeposits,effacementoffootprocesses,andthepres-enceofspikesofbasementmembranematerialbetweentheimmunedeposits.A "Spikes" Podocyte effaced

by of by proliferation is and histologically GBM manifested glomerular mesangium the and MPGN cells. alterations in accounts children 10% to idiopathic cases and It for of in nephrotic adults. of 5% syndrome exhibit others only hematuria a in nonnephrotic patients Some nephroticnephritic proteinuria range; the with or present picture. combined on findings. microscopic, the subclassified In two pathogenic MPGN (I II) distinct past, light basis and immunofluorescence, types and the of ultrastructural, was into type to dense (formerly I These entities, are now MPGN and be II). deposit recognized disease termed MPGN type distinct is here. I and MPGN types of two Of disease, far 80% discussed is (about cases) more the common of type Dense along later C3 glomerulonephritis. related deposit disease condition discussed the will with be of

Type antigen. may be with complex by planted or caused MPGN complexes of in situ formation immune I deposition immune circulating by a known. antigen The inciting is not

endothelial of infiltrating as leukocytes as and mesangial well ( cells MORPHOLOGYBylightmicroscopytheglomeruliarelarge,haveanaccentuatedlobularappearance,andshowproliferation

Fig.

).TheGBMisthickened,andtheglomerularcapillarywalloftenshowsadoublecontour,or“tramtrack,”appearance,especiallyevidentwithuseofsilverorperiodicacid–Schiff(PAS)stains.This“splitting”oftheGBMisduetoextensionofprocessesofmesangialandinflammatorycellsintotheperipheralcapillaryloopsanddepositionofmesangialmatrixaswellassubepithelialimmunecomplexes(see 14.8A

Fig.14.8B ).Thecharacteristiclightmicroscopicglomerularmanifestationsareoftenreferredtoasmembranoproliferative injury. pattern of glomerular

deposits subendothelial Byelectronmicroscopy,typeIMPGNischaracterizedbydiscrete (see

).Byimmunofluorescencemicroscopy,C3isdepositedinanirregulargranularpattern,andIgGandearlycomplementcomponents(C1qandC4)alsooftenarepresent,indicativeofanimmunecomplexpathogenesis. Fig.14.8B

it nephritis proteinuria. nephrotic syndrome, is in of the of as begin or 50% cases may presentation approximately although acute The mode mild generally poor. prognosis is The failure, years complete 30% end-stage nephrotic study, for none had persistent 40% 60 degrees the patients remaining remission; In renal the to 1 of and 30% without 20 syndrome insufficiency, failure. variable showed of to one progressed had renal renal followed liver lupus hepatitis type MPGN as with occur also and I may bacterial erythematosus, B such and MPGN), other disorders chronic association systemic infections. chronic C, disease, in (secondary believed with Indeed, many hepatitis so-called to associated cryoglobulinemia. are related “idiopathic” C cases and be

Fig. 14.8 (A)Membranoproliferativeglomerulonephritis(MPGN),showingmesangialcellproliferation,basementmembraneduplication,leukocyteinfiltration,andaccentuationoflobulararchitecture. disease, deposit (B)SchematicrepresentationofthetwopatternsofMPGN.IntypeI,therearesubendothelialdeposits;intypeII,nowcalleddense intramembranouscharacteristicallydensedepositsareseen.Inbothtypes,mesangialinterpositiongivestheappearanceofsplitbasementmembraneswhenviewedbylightmicroscopy.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

II) glomerulonephritis. conditions, C3 (formerly encompasses The glomerulopathy disease deposit MPGN, and type C3 dense term two part shared These clinical, a features morphologic, of may spectrum that be pathogenic certain rare of are diseases relatively and injury. with set by They appearance. in microscopic are apart electron the differences also however, with nephritic nephrotic mild proteinuria occur. Patients present syndrome, with cases may or only GN, than to usually although low patients these more with deposit younger disease serum likely subtle. have Patients distinctions C3 dense are and C3 with levels are

activation dysregulation hereditary cause pathway underlying deposit abnormalities disease due or of Complement is the alternative C3 GN. of of acquired the complement and to dense have the complement causes an against (C3NeF), C3 factor cleavage convertase, C3 autoantibody uncontrolled by C3 alternative called patients Some nephritic of pathway. that cause In auto-antibodies I, (MCP), are unregulated the protein alternative H, proteins, H, the patients, Factor complement. Factor various complement pathway of of in mutations regulatory activation Factor membrane and as to of cofactor or other such

glomerular capillary staining mesangial for C3 wall MORPHOLOGYAlthoughglomerularchangesindensedepositdiseaseandC3GNvaryfromrelativelysubtletosevere,theclassiclightmicroscopicpresentationissimilartothatseeninMPGN,type1.Theglomeruliarehypercellular,thecapillarywallsshowduplicatedbasementmembranes,andthemesangialmatrixisincreased.Byimmunofluorescencemicroscopy,thereisbright inbothdensedepositdiseaseandC3GN.Indensedepositdisease,C3stainingalsomaybeseenalongthetubularbasementmembranes.IgGandtheearlycomponentsoftheclassicalcomplementpathway(C1qandC4)areusuallyabsentinbothconditions.Byelectronmicroscopy,C3GNfeaturesmesangialandsubendothelialelectron-dense“waxy”deposits;similardepositsalsomaybeseenalongthetubularbasementmembranes.Bycontrast,intheaptlynameddensedepositdisease,thelaminadensaandthesubendothelialspaceoftheGBMaretransformedintoanirregular,ribbonlike,extremelyelectron-densestructure,resultingfromthedepositionofC3-containingmaterial. and

posttransplantation poor and and a relatively rate a at of to both carry Both GN prognosis recur tend deposit C3 dense up to 85%. disease months. end-stage study after of failure or 29% to deposit of with C3 GN, disease dense In patients renal median progressed 70 a of a recent 28 patients

postinfectious especially and by caused immune infiltration glomerular Acute deposition neutrophils. of leukocytes, to proliferation GN of in glomerular cells resulting is of complexes damage and is pattern seen poststreptococcal GN. in classic The postinfectious streptococci than also by GN. organisms Infections be may other with associated as hepatitis viral common measles, as as include chickenpox, certain such staphylococcal C. infections and mumps, and These several pneumococcal and diseases B well

or to infection. typical he from case develops after 4 The she in child group a GN recovers A a 1 poststreptococcal of streptococcal weeks strains of β-hemolytic disease. streptococci certain Only “nephritogenic” glomerular evoke to localized is the the most infection or In cases, skin. pharynx initial disease during In develop the rare cases, can the infection.

complement by is activation primarily an by the caused Poststreptococcal tissue complex GN in pathway. classical which injury disease immune is immune as the IgG seen. complement are of of hypocomplementemia granular features complex GBM, disease, and and deposits Typical on such relevant antigens probably The proteins. are streptococcal dehydrogenase B pathogenesis Specific antigens implicated streptococcal in exotoxin (Spe streptococcal glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate B) and include (GAPDH). for glomerular an have Both plasmin. proteins affinity and if by latter the “planted” complexes not in antigens immune situ (the circulation It binding in clear are the bacterial or is GBM). of antibodies to in mainly formed

GN MORPHOLOGYBylightmicroscopy,themostcharacteristicchangeinpostinfectiousGNisincreased ( cellularity oftheglomerulartuftsthataffectsnearlyallglomeruli—hencethetermdiffuse

Fig.

14.9A ).Theincreasedcellularityiscausedbothbyproliferationandswellingofendothelialandmesangialcellsandbyinfiltratingneutrophilsandmonocytes.Sometimesthereisnecrosisofthecapillarywalls.Inafewcases,“crescents”(discussedlater)maybeobservedwithintheurinaryspace,formedinresponsetothesevereinjury.Electronmicroscopyshowsdepositedimmunecomplexesarrayedassubendothelial,intramembranous,or,mostoften,subepithelial nestledagainsttheGBM(see “humps”

IgG withinthecapillarywallsandsomemesangialareas,correspondingtothedepositsvisualizedbyelectronmicroscopy.Thesedepositsusuallyareclearedoveraperiodofabout2months. complement Fig.14.9B and of ).Mesangialdepositsalsoareoccasionallypresent.Immunofluorescencestudiesrevealscatteredgranular deposits

nephritic common acute syndrome. most The presentation is clinical Edema hypertension azotemia. to common, are mild moderate with and there Characteristically, is to red to due gross oxidation hematuria, of brown rather smoky methemoglobin. than hemoglobin the bright appearing urine feature, to is enough occasionally syndrome. proteinuria constant mentioned of and, may produce be a it as degree earlier, severe nephrotic the Some the cases. during phase levels active disease, elevated poststreptococcal titers in O are are anti–streptolysin complement the serum antibody and of Serum low

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 14.9 Poststreptococcalglomerulonephritis.(A)Glomerularhypercellularityiscausedbyintracapillaryleukocytesandproliferationofintrinsicglomerularcells.Notetheredbloodcellcastsinthetubules. andintramembranousdeposits.BM, capillarylumen;E, visceralepithelialcells(podocytes). endothelialcell;Ep, (B)Typicalelectron-densesubepithelial“hump”(arrow) Basementmembrane;CL,

progressive disease from poststreptococcal injury to in chronic rapidly formation some of crescents, children but secondary renal develop occurs disease, Recovery with with most GN scarring. or owing severe cases sporadic clear. prognosis less in is The 50% decades, of 15% disease over to 1 adults, or few severity. depending to histologic a and on renal 2 end-stage the individuals clinical develop affected In years postinfectious lower. progression chronicity By of contrast, with the GN, children sporadic cases acute in to is much

of the is hematuria most of is common and biopsy gross common causes recurrent glomerular or renal disease IgA nephropathy by microscopic most one revealed the worldwide. hematuria of tract young This within 1 affects and 2 occurs condition of gross that begins infection. and nonspecific usually as a episode or adults days an upper-respiratory children and several hematuria setting it periodically, of then the but Typically, usually viral lasts a recurs infection. in days the subsides, be It local may pain. associated with

the deposition IgA the the mesangium. in is of hallmark disease of The considered variant IgA characterized purpura, of have the nephropathy be also a deposition IgA by Henoch-Schönlein mesangium. Some in experts localized to joints a involving is kidney, is nephropathy, (arthritis). to syndrome IgA tract Henoch-Schönlein with (abdominal also pain), the skin contrast rash), systemic and confined the purpura In (purpuric gastrointestinal which

glycosylated play to (i.e., [Gd-IgA1]) IgA1 galactose-deficient role immunoglobulin abnormally IgA1 is a pathogenesis. thought central in An the circulating with immune complexes abnormal an may IgA. This elicit large autoimmune may response, IgA form autoantibodies and be features of may physicochemical mesangial may complexes IgA by the glomerular unusual mesangium; receptor in the (CD71) location be and related to facilitated IgA1 cells. deposit on an this These pathway mesangium of absence C1q C3 pathogenesis. in and the alternative points presence The of of and the C4 activation complement to in the the the occurrence HLA-identical in of some and in families complement HLA suggested nephropathy frequency genotypes certain in siblings, of A and and influence by IgA is genetic populations. increased injury. IgA gastrointestinal of viruses, glomerular in the abnormally complexes activate food other increased that where microbial Taken in IgA genetically lead and or synthesis, may initiate of to immune data (e.g., bacteria, alternative complement some they these antigens mesangium, deposition and IgA-containing proteins) pathway individuals, together, glycosylated, which the susceptible respiratory suggest or to exposure is and with nephropathy). seen, IgA frequency this in defects in liver intestinal increased occurs whom defective and celiac mucosal of IgA hepatobiliary In individuals complexes in nephropathy which scenario, in clearance disease, there (secondary IgA are disease, with support is of

Histologically,thelesionsinIgAnephropathyvaryconsiderably.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. ImmunoglobulinA. IgAnephropathy.CharacteristicimmunofluorescencedepositionofIgA,principallyinmesangialregions,isevident.IgA, 14.10

IgA, oftenwithC3andproperdinandsmalleramountsofIgGorIgM( proliferativeGN);diffusemesangialproliferation(mesangioproliferativeGN);or(rarely)overtcrescenticGN.Thecharacteristicimmunofluorescencepictureisofmesangial of deposition

).Earlycomponentsoftheclassicalcomplementpathwayusuallyareabsent.Electronmicroscopyconfirmsthepresenceofelectron-densedepositsinthemesangium. Fig.14.10

affects IgA adults. children nephropathy young often and most with 40% nephritic respiratory hematuria, affected than gastrointestinal to commonly, infection present hematuria or, the 5% acute or tract; of proteinuria, without develop syndrome. less or have microscopic urinary an 10% only and to with 30% a More after typical those half of gross and but a in several periodically, typically subsides, days then lasts hematuria viral the initially infection. The setting usually recurs for of course The is highly variable. function Many patients normal renal decades. for maintain in period years. end-stage Slow to 25% 50% to a of disease over cases progression renal occurs of 20 proliferation, those fibrosis. or proliferation, segmental a tubulointerstitial Renal poorer by with endocapillary mesangial findings as indicated sclerosis, help identify may biopsy diffuse prognosis,

of group in encoding glomerular genes by refers Hereditary GBM nephritis caused mutations a proteins. diseases to thin these most Alport basement are membrane syndrome rare The common disease. diseases and of accompanied nephritis syndrome, sensorineural deafness posterior is lens eye by and and disorders, In cataracts, dystrophy. including corneal dislocation, various Alport no familial with systemic disease the membrane most hematuria Thin of manifestations. is basement benign cause common

type The made collagen. collagen, which of GBM heterotrimers type up IV α4, of is largely composed of is and α5 α3, IV

and IV lens, This the cochlea, function collagen for form normal of is glomerulus. of crucial type Alport in α the syndrome. of consequently, manifestations results assembly of any heterotrimer of chains Mutation one the and, defective

is thin andattenuatedearlyinthecourse,butovertimedevelopsirregularfociofthickeningorattenuationwithpronouncedsplittingandlaminationofthelaminadensa,yieldinga“basketweave” appearance.IncontrasttoAlportsyndrome,diffuseanduniformthinningoftheglomerularbasementmembranesistheonlymorphologicfindinginthinbasementmembranedisease. MORPHOLOGYOnhistologicexamination,glomeruliinhereditarynephritisappearunremarkableuntillateinthecourse.Withprogression,increasingglomerulosclerosis,vascularsclerosis,tubularatrophy,andinterstitialfibrosisaretypicalchanges.Undertheelectronmicroscope,theGBM

chain have Alport collagen. majority type the α5 X the gene of a disease syndrome on of of encoding the result IV of chromosome patients X-linked mutation as The renal females are Males more develop affected to than and deafness. end-stage more more therefore severely and and disease are likely frequently autosomal dominant recessive defects linked type encode IV to that collagen. or genes Rare are in or α4 cases the α3 progress by at and failure 5 Individuals with of 20 or to years the to of present age proteinuria, microscopic nephritis overt 50 renal 20 to with ages hereditary and gross years. hematuria a clinical and follow hematuria benign persistent Alport or gender with of course. either nonprogressive autosomal present asymptomatic syndrome the of of usually carriers Female X-linked carriers forms α3 and in of the encoding mutations found chains collagen membrane basement patients Heterozygous disease. are α4 of the genes in 40% type thin with IV

characterized appears cases the (crescentic mediated. RPGN be immunologically presence crescents is most to by of and GN) in syndrome a of specific a is clinical and etiologic GN. form not It the severe renal by of of function, is syndrome, RPGN laboratory loss and characterized typical rapid often nephritic findings oliguria. to period lead a untreated, of weeks within to failure If renal rapidly it can months.

the a Crescentic be to and number others caused diseases, of GN kidney some by restricted may different systemic. disease) characterized of be deposits is cases, Anti-GBM the as crescentic IgG a follows: with number may GN antibody–mediated of linear GBM. by C3 and, associated many diseases, • RPGN in (Goodpasture in associated some failure. membranes the pulmonary also hemorrhages antibodies with anti-GBM pulmonary alveolar to clinical produce to capillary bind the picture of patients, renal basement In are syndrome. Goodpasture patients to These said have diagnosis. in are and the antibodies serum Anti-GBM are in present helpful pathogenic from from important It GN, because benefit the which crescentic affected to individuals plasmapheresis, anti-GBM antibodies removes circulation. recognize antibody–mediated is

http://ebooksmedicine.net

may and including of purpura. complicate nephropathy, the immune lupus any systemic crescentic complex Immune erythematosus, complex–mediated IgA GN Henoch-Schönlein post-streptococcal GN, nephritides, undetermined. In other cause but complexes cases, the immune underlying are demonstrated is to RPGN proliferation and frequently leukocytes in This crescent shows addition tuft, cellular glomerular the of of within influx type formation. of and/or finding of on for GBM A mesangium characteristic immunofluorescence granular the immunoglobulin the staining studies. pattern consistent complement is and/or not usually to disorder This plasmapheresis. does respond

immune deposition. is or anti-GBM lack significant by antibodies defined Pauci-immune complex of crescentic GN the type the in 10, role a found in typically which, Anti-neutrophil (ANCA) discussed have antibodies serum, pathogenic cytoplasmic Chapter vasculitides. are some in as a or with GN component polyangiitis as polyangiitis. such In is granulomatosis crescentic some of systemic vasculitis a therefore, instances, microscopic the however, In to pauci-immune many limited is GN crescentic cases, kidney.

MORPHOLOGYThelightmicroscopicchangesaresimilaralthoughnotidenticalinvariousformsofcrescenticglomerulonephritis.Theglomerulishowcellularproliferationoutsidethecapillaryloops,sometimesinassociationwithsegmentalcapillarynecrosis,breaksinGBM,anddepositionoffibrininBowman’sspace.Thesedistinctiveproliferativelesionsoutsidethecapillaryloopsarecalledcrescents owingtotheirshapeastheyfillBowman’sspace.Crescentsareformedbothbyproliferationofepithelialcellsandbymigrationofmonocytes/macrophagesintoBowman’s space(Fig.

GBM, ).Smallernumbersofothertypesofleukocytesalsomaybepresent.Inadditiontocrescents,cellularproliferationalsoisseenwithinthecapillaryloopsand/orinthemesangialareasincaseswithimmunecomplex-mediatedpathogenesis,suchaspostinfectiousGN,lupusnephritis,orIgAnephropathy.Incontrast,incaseswithanti-GBMantibody–mediatedorpauciimmunecrescenticGN,thereisnoendocapillaryhypercellularity.Immunofluorescencestudiesrevealthecharacteristicstronglinear withIgGandC3alongtheGBMinanti-GBMantibody-mediateddisease,agranular signifyingsevereglomerularinjurythatischaracteristicofthisformofGN.ThecrescentseventuallyobliterateBowman’sspaceandcompresstheglomeruli.Intime,crescentsmayundergoscarring,andglomerulosclerosisdevelops. 14.11 the ofglomerularstaininginimmunecomplex-mediatedGN,whileinpauci-immuneGNthestainsarenegative.Electronmicroscopyshowselectron-denseimmunecomplexdepositswithintheglomeruliinimmunecomplex–mediatedGN,butnotinbiopsiesfromthosewithanti-GBMandpauci-immunecrescenticGN.Electronmicroscopymayshowdistinctruptures pattern staining in

pronounced. the syndrome, onset oliguria nephritic The azotemia more are of that and the except that is much of like RPGN approaching occur. may nephrotic the sometimes range Proteinuria require and anuric transplantation. affected long-term Some become dialysis individuals or in higher. the is patients the of by 80% percentage glomeruli in more have favorable The in are glomeruli, involved than is crescents the less crescents whom whom of fraction roughly present prognosis as prognosis those predicted a than of those GN crescentic with GN. be pauciimmune in exchange ANCA-related cases antibody in and of Plasma some of may benefit anti-GBM

isthemostfrequentcauseofnephroticsyndromeinchildren.Itismanifestedbyproteinuriaandeffacementofglomerularfootprocesseswithoutantibodydeposits. Minimal-change disease

segmental (FSGS)maybeprimaryorsecondary(e.g.,asaconsequenceofpreviousglomerulonephritis,hypertension,orinfectionsuchasHIV).Glomerulishowfocalandsegmentalobliterationofcapillaryluminaandlossoffootprocesses. Focal glomerulosclerosis

nephropathy iscausedbyanautoimmuneresponse,mostoftendirectedagainstthePLA2Ronpodocytes.ItischaracterizedbygranularsubepithelialdepositsofantibodieswithGBM“spike”formation,thickeningandlossoffootprocessesbutlittleornoinflammation. Membranous

glomerulonephritis 1 type Membranoproliferative isanimmunecomplex–mediateddiseasewithimmunedepositsinthesub-endotheliallocation.

Fig. 14.11 Crescenticglomerulonephritis(silverstain).Arrowsindicateareasofnecrosisandcrescentformation.ThesegmentaldistributioninthiscaseistypicalofANCA(anti-neutrophilcytoplasmicantibody)–associatedcrescenticglomerulonephritis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net arecausedbyunregulatedactivationofthealternativecomplementpathway.ImmunofluorescenceispositiveforC3inbothconditions. deposit disease glomerulonephritis •Dense andC3

postinfectious glomerulonephritis typicallyoccursafterstreptococcalinfectioninchildrenandyoungadultsbutmayoccurfollowinginfectionwithmanyotherorganisms.Itiscausedbydepositionofimmunecomplexes,mainlyinthesubepithelialspaces,withabundantneutrophilsandproliferationofglomerularcells. •Acute

characterizedbymesangialdepositsofIgAcontainingimmunecomplexes,isthemostcommonformofglomerulonephritisworldwide.Recurrentasymptomatichematuriaisthemostcommonclinicalpresentation.Itcommonlyaffectschildrenandyoungadultsandhasavariablecourse. nephropathy, IgA

iscausedbymutationsingenesencodingGBMcollagen.Itmanifestsashematuriaandslowlyprogressingproteinuriaanddecliningrenalfunction.ThinbasementmembranediseaseisalsocausedbymutationsencodingtheGBMcollagen,however,unlikeAlportsyndrome,thisisusuallyabenignnonprogressivedisorder. (Alport nephritis Hereditary syndrome)

RPGNisaclinicalentitywithfeaturesofthenephriticsyndromeandrapidlossofrenalfunction.

ItiscommonlyassociatedwithsevereglomerularinjurywithnecrosisandGBMbreaksandsubsequentproliferationofparietalepithelium(crescents).

RPGNmaybemediatedbyautoantibodiestotheGBM(anti-GBMantibodydisease),byimmunecomplexdeposition,oritcanbepauci-immuneoftenassociatedwithanti-neutrophilcytoplasmicantibodies(pauci-immuneGN).

forms tubular interstitium, together. the also two are discussed Most injury the of so involve or injury. diseases heading injury, this tubules of (2) inflammatory to (tubulointerstitial the Presented (1) tubular characterized tubular ischemic nephritis) under interstitium the toxic involvement acute and of by clinical and leading and kidney acute syndrome injury are

inflammatory involve refers and diseases tubules. group the (TIN) nephritis Tubulointerstitial primarily a that of to interstitium kidney be or altogether the course. affected only spared The in glomeruli may late descriptive pyelonephritis pyelo, infection, of by more prominently involved—hence (from term the TIN bacterial “pelvis”). caused In renal is cases pelvis the nonbacterial in interstitial of generally are term that reserved is The nephritis TIN for origin. cases from drugs, disorders These tubular hypokalemia, immune metabolic injury reactions. and viral include as irradiation, resulting such infections, character and of basis the features can inflammatory categories. exudate, of into the TIN and clinical the acute On be divided chronic of followed acute other nephritis. interstitial forms pyelonephritis is of Discussed consideration next by

infection. caused renal of and inflammation is bacterial pyelonephritis, the kidney common Acute pelvis, the a by suppurative or infection which lower can tract, is of urinary (pyelonephritis) urethritis) important tract (UTI), upper or manifestation prostatitis, both. It urinary involve (cystitis, an the cases common. associated see, very urinary lower infections tract, pyelonephritis are of majority As which the the will are of great of we with do the not urinary localized Fortunately, remain most lower to tract of spread kidney. infections the and

causative in The bacilli. pyelonephritis acute are enteric organisms gram-negative principal by common. most Escherichia coli far the is with Klebsiella, (see have anomalies lower of or are Other urinary tract these especially congenital associated in manipulations later). the who or organisms Enterobacter, undergo Proteus, important recurrent acquired infections, usually individuals tract urinary are Pseudomonas; and Staphylococci setting. may pathogens also faecalis in uncommon are and pyelonephritis, Streptococcus this cause but they

urinary (ascending lower infection) bloodstream the or the reach Bacteria the infection) ( from (hematogenous through can tract kidneys

Fig. 14.12 ). tract frequent infection the lower route urinary by the Ascending important bacteria kidney. from most the which reach and is followed surfaces the in to urethra by distal bacteria females). introitus Adhesion of of is the mucosal (and colonization pathogens receptors attach lining infection. both properties cells), the fimbriae susceptibility the bacterial urothelial by to urothelial the on the may and determined Genetically bacterial of conferring urothelium (proteins to facilitate to of that surface adhesion the bladder, the the then colonies reach growth organisms by expansive moving by of urine. and of against The flow instrumentation, may occur catheterization urethral and during cystoscopy. This including

most UTI instrumentation, the In of females. absence commonly affects more rectum, readily the Because close the bacteria urethra of proximity colonization of the enteric female females. in to by occur can Furthermore, bladder. of during bacteria urethra the urinary the the into short intercourse entry trauma and to facilitate the urethra sexual urine bladder the mucosa of bladder and of mechanism of periodic with because sterile, voiding associated properties anti-microbial Normally, the is flushing urine. the bladder outflow obstruction however, the UTI. of mechanisms the With natural overwhelmed, setting bladder dysfunction, stage are for the defense or can or bacteria introduced into presence stasis, undisturbed, of the without http://ebooksmedicine.net the flushed out multiply being In bladder

Common agents:

coli E.

pyelonephritis of Foci Pyelonephritis

agents: Common

Proteus coli Enterobacter E.

Fig.14.12 Pathwaysofrenalinfection.Hematogenousinfectionresultsfrom acombinationofurinarybladderinfection,vesicoureteralreflux,andintra-renalreflux. bacteremicspread.Morecommonisascendinginfection,whichresultsfrom

by destroyed wall. the bladder with may prolapse. tract UTI obstruction, particularly prostatic Accordingly, is benign uterine hyperplasia urinary among occur frequent and as with patients bladder urine, the pelvis contaminated the bacteria and along parenchyma. the From renal the ureters ascend infect to bladder susceptibility predispose which of The stasis. in the infection is because diabetes of urine UTI and increased neurogenic to dysfunction, to also frequency increased pregnancy the from pressure bladder on incidence to to ureters the growing stasis of uterus. urine during attributed is Increased and UTI due

cause resulting orifice, important of of reflux ascending infection. vesicoureteral is the vesicoureteral an in Incompetence (VUR), ureter The allows the reflux pelvis. the to ascend bacteria into UTI, children results of valve. 40% with the as young consequence usually a of in VUR that in is incompetence of present congenital 20% to a ureterovesical defect can secondary VUR bladder spinal with resulting individuals acquired also in or be diabetes. with a to dysfunction from flaccid cord injury bladder urinary which favors residual tract, VUR in growth. after in urine the voiding results bacterial can Furthermore, to ducts tips through ready into bladder which by be at a the propelled mechanism parenchyma urine VUR papillae the of further up reflux). (intrarenal pelvis infected and renal the open the the renal affords factors renal therapy scarring with risk Additional preexisting intraparenchymal for renal obstruction immunodeficiency. and conditions UTI immunosuppressive include and also and

bacteria seeding the from far of common pyelonephritis course kidneys or by septicemia in than may infection, Although spreadis the less of infective acute result hematogenous ascending endocarditis.

benormalinsizeorenlarged.Characteristically,discrete,yellowish, on renal ( apparent are raised the Oneorbothkidneysmaybeinvolved.Theaffectedkidneymay grossly abscesses surface

Fig. scattered or limitedtooneregionofthekidney,ortheymaycoalescetoform may widely asinglelargeareaofsuppuration. ).They 14.13 be

within the renal parenchyma.Intheearlystages,pusformation(suppuration)is interstitial tubularlumina, later formation limited and abscessesruptureinto but necrosis the tissue. liquefactive is the abscess to Thecharacteristichistologicfeatureofacutepyelonephritis Large urine.Typically,theglomeruliarenotaffected. thecollecting ducts,givingrisetocharacteristicwhitebloodcellcastsinthe intratubular neutrophils of masses frequentlyextendwithininvolvednephronsinto

the and the and pelvis, producing does pyonephrosis. ureter, prominent, obstruction is pus When drain may calyces, not renal fill

tractobstruction,andsicklecellanemia.Thislesionismarkedby predisposing definedgray-whitetoyellownecrosisoftheapicaltwo-thirdsof conditions: ischemicandsuppurativenecrosisofthetipsoftherenalpyramids(renalpapillae).Thepathognomonicgrossfeatureissharply has urinary diabetes, which three Asecond(rare)formofpyelonephritisispapillary necrosis,

kidney;thelowerpoleisrelativelyunaffected.Betweentheabscesses,there isdarkcongestionoftherenalsurface. Fig.14.13 paleabscesses,morenumerousintheupperpoleandmiddleregionofthe Acutepyelonephritis.Thecorticalsurfaceisstuddedwithfocal

thepyramids.Onepapillaorseveralorallpapillaemaybeaffected.Microscopically,thepapillarytipsshowcoagulativenecrosissurroundedbyaneutrophilicinfiltrate.

Involvementoftheprostatecangiverisetoacuteorchronicprostatitis,particularlyinoldermaleswithbenignprostatichyperplasia.

pyelonephritis discussion pathogenetic earlier in conditions, Acute of the with predisposing mechanisms. as associated described often is up (an to the age and of first evident) become anomalies life year frequent age, in are females. in more commonly congenital males 40 infections approximately much years of by After which develop urinary of develop if treated. these infection women time during to pregnancy, 20% eventually bacteriuria not and 40% some symptomatic pregnant to 6% Up of With result urinary a of males prostatic of hyperplasia, rises as outflow increasing the which the in incidence age, obstruction. development causes

localizing as onset of at tract sudden, angle chills, frequency, nausea, systemic with pain malaise, fever, and dysuria, acute infection, uncomplicated pyelonephritis urgency. signs The costovertebral such the is and urinary of evidence of usually and pus The contained due the turbid to (pyuria). urine appears develop not The and thus disease renal failure. unilateral, affected usually do is individuals the factors or likely disease be may more In become in bilateral. predisposing and to are is recurrent which cases chronic present, a prognosis. development is poorer of papillary much necrosis associated The with

which in patients history Chronic scarring of of scarring with associated is the are UTI. clinicopathologic of grossly a a pyelonephritis system interstitial and entity deformity inflammation renal visible in parenchyma the and with pelvicalyceal chronic important of pyelonephritis disease. Chronic is kidney an cause chronic divided into two It reflux–associated be forms: can pyelonephritis pyelonephritis. and chronic obstructive

noted, to As predisposes infection. obstruction the kidney diffuse obstructive eventually inflammation scarring, chronic of renal lead lesions superimposed recurrent on and infections bouts localized which Recurrent or to pyelonephritis. cause urethral or unilateral of obstructive ureter. anomalies urethra be bilateral, and occurs valves), calculi The can unilateral, as posterior congenital lesions of the (e.g., with such disease the with as

reflux–associated is Chronic most of pyelonephritis. pyelonephritis cause chronic the common intrarenal on superimposition vesicoureteral results and It a from UTI reflux of reflux. congenital insufficiency. Both the leading the renal damage latter chronic be may potentially and reflux unilateral to renal bilateral, attendant or the

calyces, MORPHOLOGYOneorbothkidneysmaybeinvolved,eitherdiffuselyorinpatches.Evenwheninvolvementisbilateral,thekidneysarenotequallydamagedandthereforearenotequallycontracted.Thisuneven pelvis isusefulindifferentiatingchronicpyelonephritisfromthemoresymmetricallycontractedkidneysassociatedwithvascularsclerosis(oftenreferredtoasbenign scarring orboth,leadingtopapillarybluntingandmarkedcalyceal the ( involving or nephrosclerosis)andchronicGN.Thehallmarkofchronicpyelonephritisisscarring deformities

Fig.14.14

Themicroscopicchangesarelargelynonspecific,andsimilaralterationsmaybeseenwithotherchronictubulointerstitialdisorderssuchasanalgesicnephropathy.Theparenchymashowsthefollowingfeatures:

Uneveninterstitialfibrosisandaninflammatoryinfiltrateoflymphocytes,plasmacells,andoccasionallyneutrophils

Dilationorcontractionoftubules,withatrophyoftheepitheliallining.Manyofthedilatedtubulescontainpinktoblue,glassy-appearingPAS-positivecasts,knownascolloid thatsuggesttheappearanceofthyroidtissue—hencethedescriptivetermthyroidization.Often,neutrophilsareseenwithinthetubules casts,

are because the the in patients renal disease, with pyelonephritis signs of course noticed chronic medical the or tests. kidney to of on because of relatively insufficiency laboratory attention of routine disease gradual Many onset late come cases, heralded is development disease other In the hypertension. of by renal the image and affected radiologic some (caliectasis). system The are contracted, is asymmetrically calyceal degree of with the deformity blunting kidneys of characteristic: not as its not or particularly helpful, presence bacteriuria pyelonephritis. The is rule chronic significant of does absence out absence and (hyposthenuria), by leads an inability is to manifested If disease concentrate the progressive, and polyuria to dysfunction the tubular bilateral nocturia. urine

Fig. Typicalcoarsescarsofchronicpyelonephritisassociatedwithvesicoureteralreflux.Thescarsareusuallylocatedattheupperorlowerpolesofthekidneyandareassociatedwithunderlyingbluntedcalyces. 14.14

http://ebooksmedicine.net

associated eventually, develop with to these contribute As ultimately progressive proteinuria; chronic kidney secondary chronic reflux glomerulosclerosis, or nephropathy some individuals noted with pyelonephritis earlier, injuries disease. all

of an TIN drugs. any reaction number an as of adverse increasing occurs one drug-induced Acute to cimetidine, (furosemide), immune It antibiotics with agents, drugs anti-inflammatory proton other nonsteroidal and (rifampin), inhibitors). ampicillin), diuretics (methicillin, other most associated frequently checkpoint numerous penicillins inhibitors (omeprazole), (phenindione, is pump

disease Many the features suggest of immune mechanism. an reaction the of eosinophilia hypersensitivity nature features rash, similar idiosyncratic the and consistent to the drug reaction lack the the period a same and following of development reaction include reexposure latent lesions, dependence), of (i.e., drug the of recurrence of others structure. dose with between exposure or and Clinical drug immediate IgE some I) levels (type are suggesting hypersensitivity. Serum individuals, in increased of drugs inflammatory IV) infiltrate the of hypersensitivity T positive cases, other the nature and a suggest skin to reaction. tests (type cell–mediated the presence In

likely The haptens drugs cells tubules, of immunogenic. is as sequence bind events by extracellular tubular during that, or the secretion covalently that to and most component cytoplasmic pathogenic act of some become then tubular immune T caused is injury membranes. their reactions by to tubulointerstitial cells The IgEor resultant basement cell–mediated or

MORPHOLOGYTheabnormalitiesinacutedrug-inducednephritisareintheinterstitium,whichshowspronouncededemaandinfiltrationbymononuclearcells,principallylymphocytesandmacrophages(

Fig.14.15 ).Eosinophilsandneutrophilsmaybepresent,ofteninlargenumbers.Withsomedrugs(e.g.,methicillin,thiazides,rifampin),Tcellmediatedreactionmaygiverisetointerstitialnonnecrotizinggranulomaswithgiantcells.Theglomeruliarenormalexceptinsomecasescausedbynonsteroidalanti-inflammatoryagents,inwhichthehypersensitivityreactionalsoleadstopodocytefootprocesseffacementandthenephroticsyndrome.

to rash exposure about and disease by fever, individuals), be The characterized 25% 15 abnormalities. eosinophilia drug about days transient), (in the after and may is (which renal of begins minimal findings or Urinary leukocyturia eosinophils). no (sometimes including and proteinuria, hematuria, include with in 50% oliguria of develops serum A cases, injury acute rising patients. older in or particularly creatinine about kidney drug return Clinical function take several for although by recovery, of may it withdrawal of because offending the to is drug-induced imperative, is renal followed normal. to injury kidney months recognition

Fig. 14.15 Drug-inducedinterstitialnephritis,withprominenteosinophilicandmononuclearinfiltrate. and Department Brigham Rennke, Dr. Hospital, Massachusetts.) Women’s of Boston, H. of Pathology, (Courtesy

TINconsistsofinflammatorydiseaseprimarilyinvolvingtherenaltubulesandinterstitium.

isabacterialinfectioncausedeitherbyascendinginfectionasaresultofreflux,obstruction,orotherabnormalityoftheurinarytract,ormuchlesscommonlybyhematogenousspreadofbacteria;itischaracterizedbyabscessformationinthekidneys,sometimeswithpapillarynecrosis. pyelonephritis Acute

Chronic pyelonephritis usuallyisassociatedwithurinaryobstructionorreflux;itresultsinscarringofthepelvicalycealsystemandtheinterstiumoftheinvolvedkidneyandgradualprogressionofchronickidneydisease.

isanIgE-orTcell–mediatedimmunereactiontoadrug;itischaracterizedbyinterstitialinflammation,oftenwithabundanteosinophils,andedema. nephritis interstitial Drug-induced

is shedding with function, and and of entity injury often tubular urine. clinicopathologic epithelial characterized acute cells Acute damage decline (ATI) in by casts into cells to tubular associated renal the an tubular granular a necrosis, observed the tubular term the rarely is necrosis term acute frank biopsy, acute a use injury. prefer so kidney but tubular in Clinicians pathologists elevation injury, acute as decreased The of constellation concurrent termed with manifests clinically creatinine. GFR kidney serum broadly changes, of ATI <400 of cause of acute as (defined most kidney mL/day). produce the and may injury oliguria common urine is output

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of are causes. the underlying that in There two forms ATI differ

the blood organs flow of most the setting to period a some as in sometimes is such the result hypo-tension peripheral kidney, marked all inadequate and shock. or of often ATI Ischemic of by blood acute of and trauma, loss, variety pancreatitis severe septicemia. be This caused a including conditions, can may flow, and to polyangiitis, result Ischemia from microangiopathies. also malignant in as reduced thrombotic microscopic hypertension, tubules blood intrarenal well a that hemolytic Mismatched picture transfusions blood crises, myoglobinuria, and other produce resembling ischemic also of ATI. clinical as as

carbon such radiographic other metals drugs and of gentamicin tetrachloride); (e.g., as a heavy agents. multitude by caused is variety and organic ATI antibiotics, of poisons, contrast including and (e.g., Nephrotoxic a mercury); solvents

and toxins to sensitive particularly are are cells ( also vulnerable tubular epithelial Proximal to hypoxemia

Fig. ). 14.16 the these solutes of across the that luminal the high resorbed of including from concentrations are concentrations high is predispose water filtrate, and of to resorption by glomerular a to consumption, of functions. and exposure Several intracellular to required transport needed or for elevated are generate oxygen proximal that reabsorption the factors toxic concentrated tubule, rate which ATP is various and ischemic that molecules secreted injury, cells

structural numerous Ischemia epithelial alterations causes in cells. polarity Loss caused reversible of ischemia. by an cell is early event and of distal the (e.g., to of from redistribution proteins surface the membrane Na+,K+-ATPase) luminal basolateral hence to in reabsorption tubules resulting delivery increased It by tubules. sodium leads to sodium cells, the proximal tubular decreased to through further afferent feedback below). a the contributes in decrease and vasoconstriction arteriolar latter, tubuloglomerular The mechanism, (discussed GFR, worsening a perfusion cells epithelial the the causes damaged the of Injury basement urine. cells to shedding membranes, the into from detachment and their up, outflow debris GFR. pressure thereby can (obstruction of casts), in sufficient builds the by urine and If intratubular block tubular the decline exacerbating it increasing pressure, tubules. decreased Additionally, interstitial from of damaged collapse increased interstitium, output, into and the the back leak in resulting may urine tubules the fluid adhesion as Ischemic also recruit molecules leukocytes P-selectin express inflammation) cells that cytokines, participate and in can tubular injury. (interstitial tissue such chemokines, and inflammatory to may contributes that tubular elicit Necrotic an derangements. tubular and the reaction also cells injury functional

reduced is severe GFR. hemodynamic exacerbated Tubular alterations by that cause injury both to tubule) ascending the medulla (thick oxygen outer major intra-renal and (see which proximal flow limb one in in delivery the glomerular segment the tubules reduced results vasoconstriction, and of plasma reduced straight is The

Fig. 14.16 ). increased decreased current sympathetic A2, injury, number this oxide phenomenon release and and thromboxane endothelial nerve have by mediated the activity), been the sublethal to vasoconstrictor is is vasodilatory prostaglandins. (e.g., endothelial of production renin-angiotensin, of in nitric that Although implicated pathways a vasoconstriction vasoconstrictor of leading endothelin opinion evidence direct reduced toxins some a ischemia glomerulus, Finally, effect a or points on glomerular surface. effective filtration to of the causing

recovery of segments The along cause membrane tubular if and necrosis is of foci function the maintenance integrity basement the of precipitating of many the repair injured patchiness of the allow removed. and to proliferate is injured of This capacity the differentiate. reversibly on repair epithelial and cells dependent

Fig. Postulatedsequenceinischemicortoxictubularinjury. 14.16

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ischaracterizedbylesionsinthestraightportionsoftheproximaltubuleandtheascendingthicklimbs,butnosegmentoftheproximalordistaltubulesisspared.Thereisoftenavarietyoftubular includingattenuationofproximaltubularbrushborders,blebbingandsloughingofbrushborders,vacuolizationofcells,anddetachmentoftubularcellsfromtheirunderlyingbasementmembraneswithsloughingofcellsintotheurine( MORPHOLOGYIschemic injuries, ATI

isbasicallysimilar,withsomedifferences.OvertnecrosisisusuallymoreprominentintheproximaltubulethaninischemicATI,andthetubularbasementmembranesgenerallyarespared. Fig.14.17 ).Astrikingadditionalfindingisthepresenceofproteinaceouscastsinthedistaltubulesandcollectingducts,whichconsistofTamm-Horsfallprotein(normallysecretedbytubularepithelium)alongwithhemoglobinandotherplasmaproteins.WhencrushinjurieshaveproducedATI,thecastsalsocontainmyoglobin.Theinterstitiumusuallyshowsgeneralizededemaalongwithamildinflammatoryinfiltrateconsistingofneutrophils,lymphocytes,andplasmacells.Thehistologicpictureinnephrotoxic ATI

Ifthepatientsurvives,epithelialregenerationbecomesapparentintheformofalowcuboidalepithelialcoveringandmitoticactivityinthesurvivingtubularepithelialcells.Insomecases,forreasonsthatarenotentirelyclear,acutekidneyinjurywithunderlyingacutetubularinjuryasitscausemayresultintubularatrophyandinterstitialfibrosisratherthanrepair.

The the course ATI ischemic surgical dominated medical, obstetric is of initially or inciting event. clinical by kidney GFR. oliguria including with decreased often acute patients and of present manifestations injury, Affected and seen. patients all forms anuric have non-oligouric Not oliguria; are both overload. electrolyte abnormalities, and The symptoms is by signs clinical and the uremia acidosis, often picture of and dominated fluid depending and the nature underlying upon injury comorbid prognosis and of severity conditions. The the varies of or In patients supportive the absence dialysis, treatment die. may cause repair injury regeneration acute improvement. of the kidney is to and ATI, When gradual clinical lead tubular in chance recovering kidney ATI who but renal of With of disease. may severe function, single survive care, a also patients episode have a good chronic supportive result those disease chronic frequent, with progression disease, unfortunately recovery renal preexisting to kidney and less complete common. In is end-stage is

Fig. 14.17 Acutetubularepithelialcellinjurywithblebbingattheluminalpole,detachmentoftubularcellsfromtheirunderlyingbasementmem-branes,andgranularcasts.

ATIisthemostcommoncauseofacutekidneyinjury;itsclinicalmanifestationsareelectrolyteabnormalities,acidosis,uremia,andsignsoffluidoverload,oftenwitholiguria.

ATIresultsfromischemicortoxicinjurytorenaltubules,andisassociatedwithintrarenalvasoconstrictionresultinginreducedGFRanddiminisheddeliveryofoxygenandnutrientstotubularepithelialcells.

ATIischaracterizedmorphologicallybyinjuryornecrosisofsegmentsofthetubules(typicallytheproximaltubules),proteinaceouscastsindistaltubules,andinterstitialedema.

the secondarily. blood renal Nearly of the diseases vessels affect kidney all of various vasculitis, vessels, blood as Systemic forms often effects (Chapter function and on diseases, involve renal important also produce vascular renal such 10). clinically essential hypertension. of and Conversely, involved the in pathogenesis the intimately is kidney secondary both lesions This covers associated section the hypertension. renal with

to arteries and with of strongly renal hypertension. is refers sclerosis small that arterioles Nephrosclerosis associated luminal intimal the medial called characteristic The small while of hyaline and arteries show are narrowing. arterioles arteriolosclerosis, morphologic resulting often fibrous alterations the in thickening fibrosis, of various global and focal tubular cause leads The which atrophy, changes to combinations glomerulosclerosis. ischemia, interstitial vascular degree of many 60 nephrosclerosis, individuals older years of in Some than age. mild, is albeit present at of increased hypertension and are lesions frequency any severity the or present. The when age are diabetes Of turn note, renal diseases hypertension, many which nephrosclerosis. is with associated in cause primary superimposed often is kidney lesion other Thus, on diseases. this renal

lesions 10). mainly dysfunction The arterial endothelial activation result with associated platelet and of are (Chapter the hypertension of http://ebooksmedicine.net lesions arterial Two participate in nephrosclerosis: processes the

Medial these thickening, combination a defects, to hemodynamic changes, of and response as aging, genetic some or intimal

extravasation by plasma through by proteins caused endothelium of deposition matrix and walls, membrane basement of arteriolar of increased injured Hyalinization

MORPHOLOGYGrossly,thekidneysaresymmetrically atrophic. arteriolosclerosis. Typicallytherenalsurfaceshowsdiffuse,finegranularitythatresemblesgrainleather.Microscopically,themostprominentchangeishyalinethickeningofthewallsofthearterioles,knownashyaline Thisappearsasahomogeneous,pinkhyalinethickening,attheexpenseofthevessellumina,withlossofunderlyingcellulardetail(

hyperplasia). ).Thenarrowingofthelumenresultsinmarkedlydecreasedbloodflowthroughtheaffectedvessels,withconsequentischemiaandrenalatrophy.Inadvancedcasesofarterionephrosclerosis,theglomerulartuftsmaybecomesclerosed.Diffusetubularatrophyandinterstitialfibrosisarepresent,butinflammatoryinflltratesareabsentorscant.Thelargerbloodvessels(interlobarandarcuatearteries)showintimalthickeningwithreplicationofinternalelasticlaminaalongwithfibrousthickeningofthemedia(fibroelastic Fig.14.18

possibly enough in lead African lesion uremia and renal death. This such some, in to rarely whom except individuals it renal severe groups, from failure, produce to may susceptible, damage as causes genetically Americans, alone or as variably such a some show However, patients functional concentrating GFR. diminished all loss usually impairment, of ability proteinuria finding. a mild of is A degree frequent

Fig. Benignnephrosclerosis.High-powerviewoftwoarterioleswithhyalinedeposition,markedthickeningofthewalls,andanarrowedlumen. 14.18

Pathology, Center, University Antonio,Texas.) Sciences of Texas of Department of (Courtesy M.A.Venkatachalam, Health San Dr.

hypertension, only pressure common in United Malignant the hypertension Hg, 200/120 defined far about essential is States in blood than 5% occurs less usually and hypertensive greater mm of than as individuals. in novo (i.e., arise mild without had hypertension), may an preexisting individual suddenly who may appear it or hypertension. It de prevalence developing countries. hypertension higher in The is malignant of with acute severe renal and may injury kidney present failure. It vasculature to thrombotic may are confined microangiopathy. changes include and Renal the

hypertension changes The it. to the and renal reactions to are related

to long-standing and causes injury, endothelial hypertension vessels the fibrinogen proteins, permeability deposition. plasma and of increased from platelet Injury other resulting of to and leads intravascular of thrombosis the necrosis arteries small and This fibrinoid appearance arterioles

cause hyperplastic hyperplasia Mitogenic and of platelets resulting intimal arteriosclerosis. from platelet-derived in (e.g., growth factors factor) plasma vessels, narrowing, system. which Because of become kidneys elevation markedly of the renin-angiotensin the the blood pressure via ischemic, leads further to luminal

MORPHOLOGYThekidneymaybenormalinsizeorshrunken,dependingonthedurationandseverityofthehypertensivedisease.Small,pinpoint petechial mayappearonthecorticalsurfacefromruptureofarteriolesorglomerularcapillaries,givingthekidneyapeculiar,flea-bitten hemorrhages appearance.

necrosis ofthearterioles( Themicroscopicchangesreflectthepathogeneticeventsdiscussedearlier.Damagetothesmallvesselsismanifestedasfibrinoid

Fig.14.19A ).Thevesselwallsshowahomogeneous,granulareosinophilicappearancemaskingunderlyingdetail.Intheinterlobulararteriesandlargerarterioles,proliferationofintimalcellsafteracuteinjuryproducesanonion-skin appearance(see

arteriolosclerosis, causesmarkednarrowingofarteriolesandsmallarteries,tothepointoftotalobliteration.Necrosisalsomayinvolveglomeruli,withmicrothrombiwithintheglomeruliaswellasnecroticarterioles.Similarlesionsareseeninindividualswithacutethromboticmicroangiopathies(discussedlater),andinpatientswithsclerodermainrenalcrisis. Fig.14.19B ).Thisnameisderivedfromtheconcentricarrangementofcellswhoseoriginisbelievedtobeintimalsmoothmuscle,althoughthisissuehasnotbeenfinallysettled.Thislesion,calledhyperplastic

hypertension of abnormalities, malignant encephalopathy, syndrome full-blown cardiovascular by failure. is papilledema, characterized renal The and to headache, the the vomiting, nausea, pressure and early are scotomas, the “spots” Most increased or before particularly symptoms impairment, visual related include development intracranial http://ebooksmedicine.net often, of and

Fig. 14.19 Malignanthypertension.(A)Fibrinoidnecrosisofafferentarteriole(periodicacid–Schiffstain).(B)Hyperplasticarteriolosclerosis(onion-skinlesion). Dr. Hospital, Pathology, and (Courtesy Women’s of of H. Brigham Rennke, Massachusetts.) Boston, Department eyes. pressure, At hematuria and proteinuria no in macroscopic, function. is alteration of blood significant rapidly marked renal sometimes microscopic, but mounting onset there or the acute Soon, injury develops. kidney however, syndrome lesions prompt aggressive before and renal emergency anti-hypertensive irreversible develop. requires a true represents The that therapy medical 50% are caused 5 the are deaths least cardiac of caused uremia, 90% hemorrhage years; by or of survive at failure. and patients cerebral 10% other About by

accompanied and, in seen hemolytic (TMA) to various thrombosis 10, discussed lesions in microangiopathy anemia, the failure. clinical term refers As microangiopathic thrombocytopenia, certain thrombotic microvascular by renal syndromes characterized Chapter by instances, in forms the the secondary well-defined of with known conditions a develop in etiology. background those primary etiology, diseases without TMA other while The forms of include or syndrome toxin– include TMA of of TMA thrombocytopenic and is excessive uremic Shiga primary HUS, hemolytic activation drug-mediated forms atypical thrombotic Common called (TTP); an some because pathogenic complement (HUS); mediated complement-mediated mechanism; purpura TMAs. the also important TMA and Malignant secondary forms. examples hypertension of scleroderma-associated represent the

The pathogenetic major the microangiopathies platelet and in injury are thrombotic and endothelial aggregation. cell activation factors to can arterioles in and can vessel external be organs. diverse various drugs, lead toxins, the insults, capillaries mutations, caused excessive and inherited small thrombosis by in autoantibodies, including which They results compromise ischemic in injury and dysfunction. organ Vascular are mechanical as classic by red microangiopathic thrombotic vascular injury excessive microangiopathy hemolytic channels anemia laboratory cells of of to due caused manifestations platelet thrombocytopenia The pass and (shearing) through narrowed by thrombi. they consumption, well-defined the etiology thrombotic of is ( forms microangiopathies, In the primary

and the pregnancy, pathogenesis. as etiology 14.4 underlying hypertension, well-defined transplant and diseases, forms are scleroderma, secondary and while such with with anti-phospholipid malignant Table antibodies, conditions various chemotherapy, ), rejection, associated less common forms to of Only thrombotic microangiopathies discusson. primary major are sufficiently the merit three

HUS. Shiga toxin–mediated cases 75% intestinal follow many Shiga toxin–producing with as As infection of

E.

(e.g., ingestion of in ground as dysenteriae meat type I. infections following Shigella such occurs contaminated and coli, with hamburgers) related the to of is toxin. Shiga The pathogenesis effects is but for central a formation endothelial small in studies in basis suggest most The complex, vessels, thrombus role. the damage kidney, has particularly because the glomerular Renal membrane Shiga they for are receptor cells toxin. endothelial express vulnerable cells, activates endothelial to doses, adhesion, leukocyte leading toxin the At low

Thrombotic Forms Classification of 14.4 Primary Major the of Table Microangiopathy Etiologic

thromboticmicroangiopathy;TTP, thromboticthrombocytopenicpurpura. vonWillebrandfactorcleavingprotease;HUS, hemolyticuremicsyndrome;TMA, ADAMTS13,

(both and that well changes nitric other activation. platelet may endothelin decreased and vasoconstriction), as oxide adhesion favoring production production http://ebooksmedicine.net increased promote as causes high At endothelial cell death. doses, the toxin thrombi, most interlobular alterations arteries. contribute which afferent to to glomerular of be may prominent in arterioles, All the formation tend these capillaries, of and

of HUS of the by complement Atypical or caused dampen that hereditary by activation alternative is acquired abnormalities factors pathway. complement, excessive Their leads microvascular with of to ensuing activation injury microvascular absence thrombosis. and C5-9 attack renal off function. The have membrane and turns complex this inhibits a complex antibody role, consumption therapeutic that improves as to platelet central a appears dense activation lead alternative as also disease, pathway may of and deposit glomerulonephritis the Interestingly, of earlier. abnormalities discussed complement to C3

that factor in metalloprotease is thrombospondin-like multimers protease (a smaller motifs), inherited or with by disintegrin cleaves von plasma deficiencies sizes. Willebrand caused into a TTP ADAMTS13 (vWF) acquired and are deficiencies autoantibodies by ADAMTS13 the in against in ADAMTS13 while inhibitory defects ADAMTS13, gene. mutations stem directed caused Acquired from inherited thrombosis multimers formation that kidney. to result multiple activate spontaneously, ADAMTS13 of aggregation of in large vWF platelet Deficiencies and the abnormally the organs, leading including in platelets

MORPHOLOGYThemorphologiclesionsareverysimilarinallformsofTMAregardlessoftheetiology.Thrombiareseeninglomerularcapillariesandalsothearteriolesandsometimesthelargerarteriesinmoreseverecases.Additionalglomerularchangesresultingfromendothelialinjuryincludewideningofthesubendothelialspace,duplicationorsplittingofGBMs,andlysisofmesangialcells.Corticalnecrosisalsomayoccurinseverecases.IfTMApersists,scarringofglomerulimaydevelop.Exceptforvaryingamountsoffibrinogenintheglomeruliandarterioles,immunofluorescencestudiesaretypicallynegative.

of to etiology clinical severity The course according morphologic the varies changes. the and the are typically changes associated less severe vascular with a outcome. favorable More

some gastrointestinal Shiga by bleeding or hemolytic microangiopathic (in prodromal changes. hematemesis neurologic usually manifestations the toxin–associated and HUS is melena), oliguria, of prominent characterized hematuria, individuals) after sudden onset, and severe (especially a anemia, episode, flulike causes in the children. is acute kidney of main injury of one This disease is dialysis, weeks. a injury of recover in matter managed properly kidney with acute If patients most the 25% 15–25 renal insufficiency. however, prognosis long-term develop uniformly (over favorable, years), about is eventually children not The as affected of

without of atypical onset sudden, The diarrhea. prodromal HUS usually is poorer than Shiga HUS. significantly in toxin–mediated The outcome is of approximately renal patients to ratio The function. recover and case-fatality only 60% is 20%, 70% factors disease) antibodies. Plasma used those restore missing or to be with (in can pathogenic temporarily inherited remove exchange complement can transplantation are produced liver factors curative. in liver, Since most be the now renal “complement-mediated” in the have recently, More HUS. shown forms inhibitors function, the to antibody attack of be improving considered been therapy and in complex effective to are membrane of thrombosis first-line reducing be and

nervous of central Shiga than dominant onset commonly toxin are and typical involvement less the system, HUS. with is sudden, atypical of The the also in kidneys and involved TTP a TTP typically rapidly follows 10%. of with fatal rates course, therapy, Without approximately a survival plasma has therapy advent the ADAMTS improved that the prognosis With of dramatically. exchange replaces 13, rare. residual are In patients who those survive, abnormalities renal

Progressive,chronicrenaldamageassociatedwithhypertension.Characteristicfeaturesarehyalinearteriolosclerosisandnarrowingofvascularluminawithresultantcorticalatrophy. Arterionephrosclerosis:

Malignant hypertension: Acutekidneyinjuryassociatedwithsevereelevationofbloodpressure.Arteriesandarteriolesshowfibrinoidnecrosisandhyperplasiaofsmoothmusclecells;petechialhemorrhagesappearonthecorticalsurface.

Disorderscharacterizedbyfibrinthrombiinglomeruliandsmallvesselsresultinginacutekidneyinjury.TypicalHUSisusuallycausedbyendothelialinjurybyanE. Thrombotic microangiopathies: coli toxin;TTPisoftencausedbyabnormalitiesinvonWillebrandfactorleadingtoexcessivethrombosis,withplateletconsumption.ThemostcommoncauseofatypicalHUSiscomplement-mediatedendothelialinjuryduetocomplementdysregulation.

of that describes of resulting common progressive disease any is loss disease. the kidney term nephron broad a kidney pathway type final from Chronic cause are ultimately function and scarring. in further remaining of nephrons Alterations intact maladaptive the and an interstitium glomeruli, sclerosed eventually in original This kidney the end-stage injury. of regardless of tubules, vessels, results site the anatomic with or uremia, death Unless with treated complications disorder dialysis results. other is electrolyte or from end-stage the disturbances, transplantation, of renal disease

http://ebooksmedicine.net

maintain more nephrons, try As renal that to and damage are adaptive function. more progressive initated destroys mechanisms renal loss such compensate from rate glomerular tends to glomerular of the nephrons. hyperfiltration for mechanisms, Among decreased adaptive filtration resulting excretion and ions) and of calcium), hydrogen chronic nephron in of (for tubular phosphate, of late the helps until kidney increase per disease. or homeostasis sodium, creatinine), (for secretion the decreased reabsorption An stages concentrations solutes maintain increased rate (for plasma to via increased tubular potassium even function of original deteriorates when based progressively decline functional rate often The the varies disease; renal original however, on controlled. the is insult hypertension, of the regardless functional in renal Uncontrolled etiology, decline. rapid results more

contracted, whentheunderlyingdisorderaffectsbloodvesselsorglomeruli.Kidneysdamagedbychronicpyelonephritisaretypicallyunevenlyinvolvedandhavedeepscars.Microscopically,thefeaturecommontoallcasesisadvancedscarringoftheglomeruli,sometimestothepointofcompletesclerosis( MORPHOLOGYClassically,thekidneysaresymmetrically andtheirsurfacesarered-brownanddiffusely granular

glomeruli of the Fig.14.20 associatedwithatrophyanddropoutofmanyofthetubulesinthecortex,anddiminutionandlossofportionsoftheperitubularcapillarynetwork.Thesmall-andmedium-sizedarteriesfrequentlyarethick-walled,withnarrowedlumina,secondarytohypertension.Lymphocytic(and,rarely,plasmacell)infiltratesarepresentinthefibroticinterstitialtissue.Asdamagetoallstructuresprogresses,itmaybecomedifficulttoascertainwhethertheprimarylesionwasglomerular,vascular,tubular,orinterstitial.Suchmarkedlydamagedkidneyshavebeendesignatedend-stage fibrosis, ).Thisobliteration kidneys. istheendpointofmanydiseases,anditisimpossibletoascertainfromsuchkidneysthenatureoftheinitiallesion.Therealsoismarkedinterstitial

in asymptomatic. its develop because kidney and late course, disease insidiously it is be discovered may Chronic often medical on routine azotemia or discovery renal of examination. detected by first proteinuria, Frequently, disease is the hypertension, Disease-specific of may kidney development disease. precede chronic findings avenue severe the sclerotic syndrome the for and and resulting in becomes thus result as lessened, in nephrotic glomeruli loss, nephrotic progressively less is disease. protein In loss syndrome, the with patients undergo glomerular disease changes with advanced nephron proteinuria, cases. all almost however, present degree in of Some is very common. is Hypertension microscopic at late infrequent is this is bloody urine stage. hematuria usually present, Although grossly

is progression is prognosis Without uremia treatment, the poor; relentless to and the rule. death The of extremely progression is rate variable.

Fig. 14.20 Chronicglomerulonephritis.AMassontrichromepreparationshowscompletereplacementofvirtuallyallglomerulibyblue-stainingcollagen. M.A. Dr. of (Courtesy of Texas Pathology, Venkatachalam, Department Center,San University Health Antonio,Texas.) Sciences of

heterogeneous hereditary, acquired kidney group a the and Cystic disorders. developmental, comprising diseases of are pathologists be often tumors. radiologists, for can occasionally confused They clinicians, and with problems and diagnostic malignant present as such of major causes adult forms, disease. constitute polycystic chronic disease, Some kidney

of diseases cilia-centrosome of cells. the theme the in cystic tubular the is emerging is in pathophysiology the underlying hereditary An epithelial that defect complex fluid cellular resulting absorption or interfere in formation. defects cyst Such with maturation, may disease. overview more simple by next, discussion polycystic detailed followed form, of brief of presented kidney A common is most a the cysts, of dysplasia, later Renal developmental chapter. under congenital common renal in childhood, and discussed the cystic anomalies in most the is disease form

lesions single are multiple spaces occur cystic that Simple variable innocuous generally cysts size. or of as diameter; lined filled Commonly, by fluid. 1 to smooth clear membrane; in and glistening, translucent; with gray, they are 5 cm a epithelium, of may examination, these completely microscopic layer a On which membranes composed instances or are be cuboidal to seen many in of atrophic. cuboidal single flattened be are confined usually cysts to The the cortex. cysts 10 Rarely, massive in diameter are cm encountered. large as as

has significance. clinical no cysts finding Simple a that common are postmortem in when during from either The importance differentiation they of cysts tumors, are and evaluation incidentally kidney pain. main lies hemorrhage discovered their or of cysts than tumors, show tissue that contrast renal always studies renal almost fluid smooth produce with signals solid in avascular, on are rather and Radiographic have contours, ultrasonography.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

undergone disease disease renal in patients dialysis with cystic occurs years. end-stage have for Acquired many kidney who hematuria. may may and Multiple and bleed, in both present the be the cysts medulla causing cortex times is this setting particularly in renal for The population. general greater risk cystic 100 neoplasms, than the over in ones,

ultimately is affecting that Adult cysts destroy intervening multiple both disease expanding kidney kidneys polycystic characterized parenchyma. the by It approximately is 1000 of 500 chronic cases of 1 10% in and to seen individuals for accounts disease. kidney in heterogeneous. is genetically This disease two of autosomal by caused dominant very penetrance. can genes of at one high It of inheritance least be

PKD1, 85% gene. short the In to arm defective chromosome 90% of the on families, of 16, is a called encodes gene cell This protein (460-kDa) membrane–associated large and polycystin-1. complex and polycystin-1 multiple transmembrane large domain The regions. a extracelluar protein has extracellular to domains that matrix. The bind extracellular have regions can medullary to nephrocystins tubular of later), renal type linked of ciliopathy. localizes do rise to cilium (as as cells giving a primary the disease, cystic the Polycystin-1 cystic to concept of discussed diseases mechanosensors of as Cilia where project are tubular the flow. of the fluid surface hairlike lumina from they cells, that into apical serve organelles mutations in suggests evidence that polycystin defects ( mechanosensing Current produce

Fig. 14.21 ). alters proliferation, to of influx, signaling and cell–cell involving polarity, cell and dysregulation turn, cell–matrix calcium This, in adhesion. events downstream leading lead which enlarge formation in to stimulate of cysts, epithelial secretion progressively which The tubular calcium the is and time. from proliferation thought increase together the cells, to over intracellular Mediators further induce secretion and cells from in fluid can inflammation. fluid epithelial derived cyst enhance the alter too epithelial the of formation matrix, contribute are kidney characteristic thought polycystic to cells and fibrosis the interstitial of that disease. calcium-induced and cyst this interaction with progressive is the signals In addition, to extracellular PKD1 in tubular individuals, present that affected It whereas in are the tubules. only renal to all is interesting some cells gene note germ-line mutations cysts develop of of of alleles This of loss most likely both is to PKD1. due cyst as for “somatic hit” Thus, genes, with second development. is required suppressor a tumor

and resides in chromosome of implicated 4 15% 110-kDa protein. smaller, a encodes PKD2 on gene, The polycystin-2, 10% to cases, also is to calcium-permeable Polycystin-2 to and localized membrane a is as function thought channel, cilia. forming to are structurally distinct, believed Although act and together polycystins heterodimers. by 1 2 rise with to gene same Thus, in patients either the phenotype, gives although essentially mutation

cilia 1, growth Altered and in tubular or calcium differentiation by Altered nephrocystins polycystin or Altered epithelial fibrocystin 2 flux mechanosensation Mutations tubular

Fig. 14.21 Possiblemechanismsofcystformationincystickidneydiseases(seetext).

Glomerular,

progression have rate mutations with of mutations. patients a slower to PKD1 disease PKD2 compared

MORPHOLOGYInautosomaldominantadultpolycystickidneydisease,thekidneymayreachenormoussize;weightsofupto4kgforeachkidneyhavebeenrecorded.Theseverylargekidneysarereadilypalpableabdominallyasmassesextendingintothepelvis.Ongrossexamination,thekidneyseemstobecomposedsolelyofcystsofupto3or4cmindiameterwithnointerveningparenchyma.Thecystsarefilledwithfluid,whichmaybeclear,turbid,orhemorrhagic(

Fig.14.22

Cystsmayariseatanylevelofthenephron,fromtubulestocollectingducts,andthereforetheyhaveavariable,oftenatrophic,lining.Occasionally,Bowman’scapsulesareinvolvedinthecystformation,andinthesecasesglomerulartuftsmaybeseenwithinthecysticspace.Thepressureoftheexpandingcystsleadstoischemicatrophyoftheinterveningrenalsubstance.Somenormalparenchymamaybedispersedamongthecysts.Evidenceofsuperimposedhypertensionorinfectioniscommon.Asymptomaticlivercystsalsooccurinone-thirdofpatients.

until does time of decade adults quite symptoms fourth which large. by not the are life, kidney kidneys Polycystic in usually disease produce the common heavy, dragging most flank sensation. or complaint The a presenting pain is Acute intracystic cause hemorrhage a may obstruction, of or cyst, pain. excruciating either by by distention Sometimes drawn an is mass. abdominal lesion to first the palpation on of attention occurs. commonly hematuria Intermittent gross of renal hypertension and important their The function, deleterious marginal because most urinary are complications, already effect on infection. about 75% severity Hypertension with individuals this in http://ebooksmedicine.net variable of develops of

Fig. Autosomaldominantadultpolycystickidney,viewedfromtheexternalsurface(A)andbisected(B).Thekidneyismarkedlyenlarged(centimeter 14.22 ruleisshownforscale),withnumerousdilatedcysts.

disorder. of 10% with hemorrhage. to Saccular and aneurysms patients high subarachnoid in of are Willis circle a (Chapter associated 23) the 30% are incidence of present of

favorable generally chronic fatal, with than kidney the is more outlook is most the Although ultimately diseases. disease progresses condition The slowly. very at is about renal but normal End-stage are there variation age, in nearly reported. of years occurs the spans disease life 50 wide course, and renal Patients renal disease treated the whom failure transplantation. by progresses are to in from or results complications. Death usually hypertensive uremia

The childhood autosomal kidney disorder kidney a from adult recessive rare is of is genetically polycystic that polycystic distinct disease disease. form 20,000 approximately It live occurs in 1 in births. and at neonatal, been associated juvenile lesions. on presence age and have of infantile, subcategories the presentation hepatic depending defined, Perinatal, putative PKHD1 the fibrocystin. for types from a coding result protein receptor called gene, membrane mutations in All function is its Fibrocystin unknown. cilia cells, found epithelial tubular in remains in but

cysts small cysts andproliferationofportalbileducts. inthecortexandmedullagivethekidneyasponge-likeappearance.Dilated,elongatedchannelsatrightanglestothecorticalsurfacecompletelyreplacethemedullaandcortex.Thecystshaveauniformliningofcuboidalcells,reflectingtheiroriginfromthecollectingtubules.Thediseaseisinvariablybilateral.Inalmostallcases,findingsincludemultipleepithelium-linedliver MORPHOLOGYInautosomalrecessivepolycystickidneydisease,numerous

and may infants usually young neonatal birth, common; or serious most hepatic and die present renal are are from manifestations forms at quickly failure. Perinatal fibrosis). survive hepatic cirrhosis infancy who Patients develop liver (congenital

and associated further, is two of always disease There associated which almost which renal kidney, disease nephrolithiasis, are dysfunction. innocuous sponge not affecting types common cystic relatively major be a the complex, medulla: condition, cystic with discussed will with occasionally usually medullary and nephronophthisis-medullary

cystic usually of that disease underappreciated cause complex in kidney Nephronophthisis–medullary begins chronic disease childhood. is an variants of on and basis nephronophthisis, Four in and cystic later timing adult onset: the are juvenile, recognized the life. infantile, developing of disease adolescent medullary juvenile common. most form the is The extrarenal have often juvenile in most most pigmentosa, the 20% manifestations, with abnormalities, children Approximately which even retinitis blindness retinal appear severe early-onset to of and form. 15% nephronophthisis including as include oculomotor malformations, Other found some mental and liver fibrosis. abnormalities retardation, individuals cerebellar apraxia, in the and most cause in nephronophthisis are the to of children adults. young genetic forms aggregate, renal be end-stage disease now thought various In common of

complex. least forms gene autosomal for identified to nine recessive been of loci nephronophthisis the NHP9) At the (NHP1 have proteins polycystic The components other majority case encode of cilia, that disease. the these types genes with as are of of epithelial is of are these autosomal Types less Various Prevalence adults; Table 14.5 Two disease of Renal Stones cause forms in far common.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

kidneys. MORPHOLOGYPathologicfeaturesofmedullarycysticdiseaseincludesmall contracted Numeroussmallcystslinedbyflattenedorcuboidalepitheliumarepresent,typicallyatthecorticomedullaryjunction.Otherpathologicchangesarenonspecific,butmostnotablyincludeachronictubulointerstitialnephritiswithtubularatrophyandthickenedtubularbasementmembranesandprogressiveinterstitialfibrosis.

The and polydipsia, polyuria of manifestations a tubular consequence diminished usually are initial function. renal end-stage disease 10-year over a 5-to Progression to ensues period. be disease no may is seen imaging. are too the markers, cysts The to because serologic to with small and be difficult radiologic diagnose there if well be not to junction sampled. may renal this difficulty, Adding cysts the on corticomedullary biopsy not apparent is young A positive and of renal chronic nephronophthisis. history patients should family suspicion lead to unexplained in failure

polycystic disease isadiseaseofautosomaldominantinheritancecausedbymutationsinthegenesencodingpolycystin-1orpolycystin-2.Itaccountsforabout10%ofcasesofESRD;thekidneysmaybeverylargeandcontainmanycysts. kidney Adult

disease Autosomal (childhood) kidney polycystic iscausedbymutationsinthegeneencodingfibrocystin.Itislesscommonthantheadultformandstronglyassociatedwithliverabnormalities;thekidneyscontainnumeroussmallcysts. recessive

disease complex isbeingincreasinglyrecognizedasacauseofchronickidneydiseaseinchildrenandyoungadults.Ofautosomalrecessiveinheritance,itisassociatedwithmutationsinseveralgenesthatencodeepithelialcellproteinscallednephrocystins Nephronophthisis–medullary cystic thatmaybeinvolvedinciliaryfunction;thekidneysarecontractedandcontainmultiplesmallcysts.

any level formation collecting the is arise calculi in in calculus often but system, at Urolithiasis kidney. the most urinary is in Symptomatic in urolithiasis men women. more than common is of a men have of States developed in 5.6% kidney occur age, and stones that frequently; women will of the symptomatic 11% 70 it United stone. years by The estimated toward formation been familial has A tendency recognized. long stone

Enteric(4.5%)

Primary(0.5%)Hyperuricosuria(20%)Noknownmetabolicabnormality(15%to

Struvite(Mg,NH3,PO4)

renal three stones: There major types are of

About either composed oxalate calcium phosphate. 80% calcium oxalate of with calcium mixed or are

phosphate. of magnesium are 10% ammonium About composed

Approximately or 6% cystine are acid either 9% stones. to uric

by matrix weight. organic of about stone In an present the 2.5% all mucoprotein is makes of that cases, up

the particularly calcium-containing formation stones. of stone cause of The in case often is obscure, predisposing the bacterial solute, concentration of involved of urine changes confluence and infections. the including in conditions, Probably pH, a is cause their so it solubility The concentration of is constituents, exceeds the stone’s in increased most urinary important (supersaturation). that urine As in shown

of have associated Table with 14.5 hypercalcemia. patients not , calcium that who develop 50% hypercalciuria is stones it renal absorb a calcium excessive group patients primary (absorptive in in gut in calcium of have some hypercalciuria). from this defect urine, amounts excrete and Most and reabsorption promptly the hypercalciuria) the (renal

understood. causes better other of of types The are the renal stones almost from always urine phosphate resulting persistently individuals stones (struvite) Magnesium in with a occur alkaline ammonium UTIs. vulgaris as bacteria, and individuals urea-splitting with Proteus staphylococci, predispose particular, In such urolithiasis. infections to of of stone. Moreover, serve may nidi for particulate as the any kind formation bacteria act the system the In avitaminosis collecting epithelium metaplastic A, nidi. desquamated as from cells of

high possibility levels uric leukemias, such uric in cell diseases acid urine as of the to and involving acid the and stones. lead Gout rapid turnover, have urate increased uric but one stones, tendency < half excrete 5.5). however, persistently urine hyperuricemia pH with an acid (with urine neither About a individuals of to demonstrate nor acidic a unexplained that containing low the of favors formation stone with in stones acid high uric favors This pH phosphate. formation, pH calcium contrast invariably renal almost determined in associated genetically certain with stones the of defect including cystine. amino acids, transport a Cystine are acid acidic. is the are stones Like relatively uric urine to cystine stones, more likely form when

http://ebooksmedicine.net

calculi, whichcreateacastoftherenalpelvisandcalycealsystem.Thesemassivestonesusuallyarecomposedofmagnesiumammoniumphosphate. MORPHOLOGYStonesareunilateralinabout80%ofpatients.Commonsitesofformationaretherenalpelvisandcalycesandthebladder.Often,manystonesarefoundinonekidney.Theytendtobesmall(averagediameter,2–3mm)andmaybesmoothorjagged.Occasionally,progressiveaccretionofsaltsleadstothedevelopmentofbranchingstructuresknownasstaghorn

damage. renal or symptoms present producing Stones significant may without be with is true stones in renal pelvis. large lodged particularly the This lodge stones or toward Smaller they ureter, pain produce pass flank colic, groin. by pain, of as may where intense the and renal known ureteral characterized the into radiating may paroxysms hematuria. is time there gross at this Often stones in significance to capacity sufficient lies their bleeding. produce clinical urine cause ulceration trauma The flow to or and obstruct of to either In the to they predispose bacterial case, sufferer infection. radiologically. readily cases, diagnosis is made most the In

to parenchyma, of renal caused pelvis refers and obstruction accompanying outflow of the the dilation of atrophy to calyces, with urine. by Hydronephrosis the be urinary pelvis. and to the renal or level of The urethra tract, any the insidious, obstruction occur from may may the at it sudden as common The causes categorized are follows: most

aberrant of ptosis or an with such or renal artery urethra, the compressing kinking atresia renal valve as of the the ureter torsion, either ureter, ureter formations the in urethra, Congenital,

or calculi papillae sloughed Foreign necrotic such bodies, as

malignant uterus) lymphoma, of the the of disease as carcinoma), lesions, (retroperitoneal contiguous and bladder prostatic benign prostate, carcinoma hyperplasia, and cervix (papilloma tumors such Proliferative or carcinoma

lesions, such ureteritis, Inflammatory prostatitis, and retroperitoneal as fibrosis urethritis,

damage such as following cord of the Neurogenic, spinal bladder paralysis

pregnancy, reversible and mild which in Normal hydronephrosis is

the of ureters. the Bilateral below occurs obstruction when hydronephrosis the level only is the the ureters lesion at is blockage is If above, unilateral. or allowing is Sometimes obstruction pass; usually is it urine no complete, partial. to only

with into time, systems. venous and where the complete some renal persists glomerular it from returns Even the lymphatic back and ultimately the subsequently and to interstitium obstruction, perirenal spaces, filtration diffuses filtrate for the so. often dilated, filtration, of and affected the become markedly Because continued pelvis calyces through as compression well vasculature. back renal thus generated transmitted the collecting pelvis, unusually that pressure ducts, causes the The high as of in the renal venous result, arterial stasis more latter important. although is Both and the insufficiency probably The they in the are effects seen most increases in papillae, to subjected pressure. are because the severe greatest disturbances are concentrating the ability. manifested impaired Accordingly, primarily tubular, largely initial functional by glomerular filtration begin diminish. does to Only later months indicate 3 that studies with obstruction, incomplete weeks in and serious obstruction. irreversible Experimental with about in complete occurs 3 damage eventually obstruction inflammatory fibrosis. to leading reaction, also addition changes, an functional to the interstitial In triggers interstitial

).Ontheotherhand,whenobstructionissuddenandcomplete,glomerularfiltrationiscompromisedrelativelyearly,andasaconsequence,renalfunctionmayceasewhiledilationisstillcomparativelyslight.Dependingontheleveloftheobstruction,oneorbothuretersalsomaybedilated (hydroureter). MORPHOLOGYBilateralhydronephrosis(orunilateralhydronephrosiswhentheotherkidneyisalreadydamagedorabsent)leadstorenalfailure,andtheonsetofuremiatendstoabortthenaturalcourseofthelesion.Withsubtotalorintermittentobstruction,thekidneymaybemassivelyenlarged(lengthsintherangeof20cm),andtheorganmayconsistalmostentirelyofthegreatlydistendedpelvicalycealsystem.Therenalparenchymaitselfiscompressedandatrophied,withobliterationofthepapillaeandflatteningof thepyramids(Fig.14.23

Onmicroscopicexamination,theearlylesionsshowtubulardilation,followedbyatrophyandfibrousreplacementofthetubularepitheliumwithrelativesparingoftheglomeruli.Eventually,inseverecasestheglomerulialsobecomeatrophicanddisappear,convertingtheentirekidneyintoathinshelloffibroustissue.Withsuddenandcompleteobstruction,theremaybecoagulativenecrosisoftherenalpapillae,similartothechangesofpapillarynecrosis.Inuncomplicatedcases,theaccompanyinginflammatoryreactionisminimal.Superimposedpyelonephritis,however,iscommon.

obstruction Bilateral produces anuria. complete are those the the dominant bladder, bladder is distal distention. obstruction of the symptoms to When a causes true obscure Paradoxically, rather lesion. in incomplete mechanisms, may polyuria the tubular obstruction as result and nature of bilateral concentrating defects oliguria of the than this is completely Unilateral long remain periods dysfunctional. for the kidney also silent may hydronephrosis other unless the is discovered routine on examination. Often kidney physical enlarged as produces the that or the hydronephrosis. renal hydronephrosis, such the obstructing uncover calculi symptoms cause underlying an Sometimes tumor, of changes weeks; full of time return within permits irreversible. of a the usually Removal with become obstruction function few however,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Hydronephrosisofthekidney,withmarkeddilationofthepelvisandcalycesandthinningofrenalparenchyma. 14.23

failure of Congenital represent renal and urinary 50% most 40% age the of worldwide. and for 21 than pediatric renal developmental common the years account abnormalities kidney tract in to of disease younger of end-stage individuals and cause hydronephrosis, vesicoureteral (e.g., affect ureterocele (e.g., (e.g., The and collecting abnormalities valves). kidney reflux), dysplasia, or collecting can urethra hypoplasia), agenesis, and system, (e.g., duplicated urethral megaureter), and posterior bladder the system an feature manifestations. or isolated extrarenal a They part in with as as of present may syndrome association defects Most unknown from of result sporadic developmental cause. mutations genes the kidney of Others the germline and development ureteric are impact that the by in bud. especially caused on presentations the and the spectrum of The depending clinical is nature of underlying abnormalities. broad severity the the affecting kidney. few forms a restrict We discussion to

• Multicystic cystic dysplasia disease common is form childhood. renal the most of in developmental than refers to in this rather a preneoplastic context a term The dysplasia lesion. kidney often renal urinary lower tract, increased is a thought Because pressure developing role obstruction the hydrostatic development. to with associated in is its play the dysplasia in in diameter. range microscopic distorted; several are in from cysts centimeters the to The kidneys grossly usually lined surrounded cells mesenchyme. histologic hallmarks tubules epithelial ducts and The and cellular cuffs are of by by

agenesis: incompatible Bilateral with Renal stillborn is in is encountered infants. agenesis life and usually defects, limb (e.g., It associated is hypoplastic with other often congenital disorders lungs). with Unilateral and other abnormalities life agenesis compatible exist. uncommon is if no normal

occur a failure defect. more early resulting but in as unilateral in commonly bilaterally, is may Hypoplasia encountered childhood, renal and scars fewer. shows usually a lobes renal six hypoplastic The and no of kidney or pyramids, reduced number has

the tract. Many urinary occur malignant of in neoplasms and benign types in benign clinical general, (<0.5 In which small limited in neoplasms have diameter), found autopsies, significance. as of such cortical 40% to up in are papillary adults adenomas cm by The tumor) most neoplasm neoplasms nephroblastoma kidney of and the of in carcinoma, calyces primary frequency (Wilms is followed common the and renal pelvis. cell malignant by renal are Other types and are rare of cancer discussed not here. are of cell twice common tract as renal as Neoplasms carcinomas. the lower about urinary discussed are 18. Chapter They in

ducts, about intercalated Oncocytoma, renal the arises 10% collecting that a represents of benign neoplasms. cells from of neoplasm Y—that neoplasms. them genetic and chromosomes are 1 These changes—loss from distinguish of other neoplasms with renal associated of histologically. by granular color mitochondria, for eosinophilic finely and their seen characterized are basis a Oncocytomas cytoplasm, their providing the plethora tan oncocytomas, on is a stellate central scar, which A characteristic appearance another feature provides imaging studies. of

are the tubular hence and are in predominantly renal carcinomas the they derived cortex. epithelium, located Renal from cell of of adults. and neoplasms 3% in the of cancers These to 2% all represent malignant all 85% to kidney neoplasms primary 80% of data the States; United per year of patients in about the disease. 65,000 40% These translate into die cases the men seventh sixth as from twice are about the most Carcinomas to decades, affected commonly common and are kidney as women. of or is those had in smokers, occupational for and The these developing risk neoplasms cadmium. to patients, exposure hypertensive have higher obese who for as disease with individuals in risk a developing 30-fold increased cell acquired of cancer chronic is polycystic The complication renal dialysis. factors The role cancers is later. of genetic causation the of discussed in these

http://ebooksmedicine.net

morphology basis patterns. cancers growth cell are on Renal the of and classified renal account of molecular into have carcinomas in However, a basis recent to origins understanding genetic tumors. advances the these led new classification the the of takes that of and most clear cell next, carcinoma, carcinoma. three cell papillary renal renal forms, carcinoma, The chromophobe are common discussed

65% cell Clear renal cell type, accounting cancers. are of carcinomas for most common the they composed with cytoplasm. Histologically, of clear cells are (VHL) in Hippel-Lindau they also occur association with are sporadic, familial forms or Although in most von disease. has of clear that study disease causation insights the carcinomas. It into is provided of VHL molecular cell the and the trait characterized is and of of a VHL predisposition neoplasms, to particularly disease but dominant cerebellum autosomal to retina. variety as an hemangioblastomas inherited is by to in 40% Hundreds develop and often clear of cysts of affected multiple, bilateral, renal cell individuals. bilateral 60% carcinomas inherit Those second disease the band chromosomal lose a gene VHL VHL 3p25 mutation. by germline allele with on of the somatic mutation and sporadic The majority VHL in gene carcinomas. is of involved the cell clear also seen are a 3p segment rise cancers. of on to VHL cell giving harbors that in Cytogenetic loss abnormalities sporadic the chromosome gene renal often The 60% in somatic allele hypermethylation non-deleted of is inactivated cases. mutation second, or sporadic by a the be VHL of and of both the loss familial underlying copies common of both inactivation sporadic molecular seems in clear cell abnormality gene forms to carcinomas. or Thus, degradation of VHL hypoxia-induced absence HIFs the factors (HIFs), The and are the of VHL, stabilized. in protein causes factor, contribute an well that stimulating as endothelial vascular to the other transcription number are growth growth by carcinogenesis that drive (VEGF), of factor (Chapter as factors tumor a cell important 6). HIFs of genes angiogenic expression of abnormalities unrelated cytogenetic with uncommon VHL disease also 3 to arm involving carcinoma familial is form An cell associated short the clear chromosome (3p). of “epigenome” that renal mutations clear central that that addition, carcinoma revealed a the In cell has deep the in frequent genes sequencing of recent in this have genomes changes proteins histone of suggesting genesis loss-of-function carcinoma. regulate encode subtype of methylation, in role

part cell 10% of growth renal are and 15% pattern. defined by to for papillary in Papillary carcinomas cancers their account renal all multifocal frequently tumors. early-stage neoplasms as are These and and bilateral appear associated abnormalities familial they papillary chromosome carcinomas, cell in renal Like not occur with neoplasms, these are but clear cancers forms, 3. and unlike sporadic of renal cancers proto-oncogene, in 7q. The the MET on papillary located hereditary cases chromosome most of cell is culprit for hepatocyte kinase encodes receptor MET The factor. a gene tyrosine growth to MET chromosome carcinomas. spur of proximal growth of due to tubular increased abnormal papillary precursors The the the dosage of cell epithelial in gene 7 seems duplications dosage increased in line, the of In in cancers. familial gene cases, the shows MET genetic along mutations analysis with germ activating of of the papillary in with forms sporadic a found gene renal patients are mutations carcinoma. cell of also subset Activating MET

common renal cell Chromophobe the are 5% all renal form, carcinomas carcinomas. of least representing They from arise of cells ducts. collecting intercalated carcinomas. less than clear name in (i.e., they stain Their tumor more observation darkly cell from that are cells the cells clear) the derives These having neoplasms entire extreme losses unique in of to leading are chromosomes multiple hypoploidy. has of been not losses, the Because hit” determined. “critical multiple favorable general, cancers renal prognosis. In have a chromophobe

orange (themostcommonformofrenalcarcinomas)usuallyaresolitaryandlargewhensymptomatic(sphericalmasses3to15cmindiameter),buthigh-resolutionradiographictechniquesforinvestigationofunrelatedproblemssometimesdetectsmallerlesionsincidentally.Theymayariseanywhereinthecortex.Thecutsurfaceofclearcellrenalcellcarcinomasisyellow eitherfreshorold( cell with prominent of MORPHOLOGYClear hemorrhage, to cystic or cancers to gray-white, of softening areas

invades ).Themarginsofthetumorarewelldefined.However,attimessmallprocessesprojectintothesurroundingparenchymaandsmallsatellitenodulesarefound,providingclearevidenceoftheaggressivenessoftheselesions.Asthetumorenlarges,itmayfungatethroughthewallsofthecollectingsystem,extendingthroughthecalycesandpelvisasfarastheureter.Evenmorefrequently,thetumor Fig.14.24 the andgrowsasasolidcolumnwithinthisvessel,sometimesextendinginserpentinefashionasfarastheinferiorvenacavaandevenintotherightsideoftheheart.Occasionally,directinvasionintotheperinephricfatandadrenalglandmaybeseen. renal vein

renal carcinoma of clear or Dependingontheamountsoflipidandglycogenpresent,the cells neoplastic vacuolated almost may be cell may solid. appear cell Theclassicvacuolated(lipid-laden)cellsorclearcellsaredemarcatedonlybytheircellmembranes.Thenucleiareusuallysmallandround(

).Attheotherextremearegranularcells,resemblingthetubularepithelium,whichhavesmall,round,regularnucleienclosedwithingranularpinkcytoplasm.Someneoplasmsarehighlyanaplastic,withnumerousmitoticfiguresandmarkedlyenlarged,hyperchromatic,pleomorphicnuclei.Betweentheextremesofclearcellsandsolid,granularcells,allintergradationsmaybefound.Thecellulararrangement,too,varieswidely.The Fig.14.25 http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Renalcellcarcinoma:Representativecross-sectionshowingyellowish,sphericalneoplasminonepoleofthekidney.Notethetumorinthedilated,thrombosedrenalvein. 14.24

cellsmayformabortivetubulesormayclusterincordsordisorganizedmasses.Thestromaisusuallyscantbuthighlyvascularized.

renal Papillary cell carcinoma renal exhibitvariousdegreesofpapillaformationwithfibrovascularcores.Theytendtobebilateralandmultiple.Theyalsomayshowgrossevidenceofnecrosis,hemorrhage,andcysticdegeneration,buttheyarelessvibrantlyorange-yellowbecauseoftheirlowerlipidcontent.Thecellsmayhaveaclearor,morecommonly,pinkcytoplasm.Chromophobe-type tendstobegrosslytan-brown.Thecellsusuallyhaveclear,flocculentcytoplasmwithveryprominent,distinctcellmembranes.Thenucleiaresurroundedbyhalosofclearcytoplasm.Ultra-structurally,largenumbersofcharacteristicmacrovesiclesareseen. cell carcinomas

Fig. Theclearcellpatternofrenalcellcarcinoma. 14.25

clinical diagnostic that have cell create and several challenging peculiar characteristics Renal especially carcinomas difficult problems. signs 50% vary, The more frequent of than in hematuria, is the occurring cases. and manifestation but symptoms most presenting microscopic fleeting, hematuria. to steady be hematuria on superimposed Macroscopic and tends intermittent a when the grown to it tumor size, large simply itself produce pain and virtue declare may Less flank mass. commonly, palpable by enough of a its has studies detected. conditions, use smaller imaging for widespread tumors of even of unrelated Because are the Extrarenal tumor the association because are renal nonspecific, with their may fever be for are polycythemia, before appreciated. and which, some is they time misinterpreted effects of results affects from 5% 10% cells. of affected Polycythemia cancer production erythropoietin and by to the individuals tumors syndrome, feminization hypercalcemia, Cushing these resulting masculinization. other or hypertension, in Uncommonly, substances, produce or hormone-like as paraneoplastic 6, These, in Chapter noted syndromes. are patients, tumor and metastases symptoms. silent remains is produce discovered the primary some after only In locations the and common the The are for bones. lungs metastases that hematuria, in devious, ways, be mass, must a apparent painless palpable renal manifests abdominal carcinoma of dull It pain some triad and quite many cell is but the flank characteristic.

Renalcellcarcinomasaccountfor2%to3%ofallcancersinadultsandareclassifiedintothreemaintypes:

carcinomas Clear cell arethemostcommonandareassociatedwithhomozygouslossorinactivationoftheVHLtumorsuppressorprotein;tumorsfrequentlyinvadetherenalvein.

frequentlyareassociatedwithincreasedexpressionandactivatingmutationsoftheMET Papillary oncogene;theytendtobebilateralandmultipleandshowvariablepapillaformation. carcinomas renal cell

Chromophobe renal arelesscommon;neoplasticcellsarenotasclearasintheotherrenalcellcarcinomas. cell carcinomas

solid cancer of Wilms in (non-hematologic) age. children years tumor 10 in Although it than is common rare third is the most younger adults, derived mesoderm. of contain variety These from and tissue components, cell a all neoplasms to like arise retinoblastoma, dominant be familial, with tumor, the susceptibility autosomal trait. an or inherited as tumorigenesis Wilms may sporadically This 7 in of in Chapter other discussed tumors childhood. detail is greater neoplasm along with

complement et of syndrome, hemolytic analysis and in 2014. Maga atypical genetic Nephrol Soc coagulation uremic al: F, 25:55, T, genes Am Meyer Comprehensive J Bu NC, uremic [An in-depth review abnormalities of in syndrome.] molecular hemolytic http://ebooksmedicine.net

and pathogenesis 20 Le Mutat 35:1393, autosomal Gall Meur E, Cornec-Le kidney MP, Hum on, Y: dominant Genetics polycystic disease: of 2014. Audrézet years their manifestations.] phenotypic [A to of kidney of the along discovery genes with major polycystic review disease, the leading

primer, Kidney LM: a Dis Cystic 2015. Guay-Woodford Chronic MT, 22:297, Adv disease: kidney Cramer of role on [An emphasis excellent with the dysfunction tubular cystic cells.] epithelial the pathophysiology review diseases, renal on in ciliary of

Crumley Clin Evolving Renal emerging al: subtypes, J L, SM, carcinoma: et 2013. 1:262, Truong and Cases cell Divatia World M, review of upto-date cell subtypes emerging [An of carcinoma.] renal

RJ: N Focal J Kaskel Med segmental FJ, 365:2398, VD, 2011. D’Agati Engl Falk glomerulosclerosis, comprehensive glomerulosclerosis.] of focal [A review segmental

in the of Pediatr of KM: 2015. 27:212, Opin pathogenesis disease, Dell cystic cilia The role Curr kidney of pathogenesis to review functions date and [An up of on of ciliopathies, cilia the with emphasis the normal cystic diseases.] renal

Genovese kidney Science variants Association African in disease et trypanolytic Americans, 2010. Friedman MD, DJ, ApoL1 G, of 329:841, with al: Ross natural L1 risk of selection, study for disease.] kidney genetic landmark a [A Americans protection African against variant apolipoprotein to sickness linking of in sleeping and

microangiopathy, J JN, Syndromes 2014. thrombotic Nester of CM: George Med 371:1847, N Engl the thrombotic microangiopathies.] of [An of excellent review classification

Nephrol Gubler membrane, Nat basement diseases 4:24, Inherited Pract glomerular of MC: 2008. the Clin the hereditary presentations, [A basement of pathophysiology, other Alport and nephritis.] syndrome, review for membrane disease, and clinical thin strategies testing superb types of diagnostic

Nat 10:463, Rheumatol JC, 2014. Rev autoantibody-mediated of Falk RJ: disease, antineutrophil Jennette cytoplasmic Pathogenesis [A of summary mechanisms disease.] clinical in autoantibody–mediated and the antineutrophil manifestations cytoplasmic injury of good

N: Kambham Anat Adv Postinfectious Pathol glomerulonephritis, 19:338, 2012. excellent the pathology of postinfectious and review [An glomerulonephritis.] pathogenesis of

2011. Nephron membranes, Pract 118:c9, Kashtan disorders Clin CE, Y: Genetic basement glomerular Segal of basement [An excellent membrane genetic aspects of review of glomerular diseases.] the

MA, new 15:25, pathogenesis insights Nat 2015. Hurst diversity, Cancer and biology bladder clinical into Knowles CD: of Molecular Rev cancer: comprehensive molecular in types different review bladder cancer.] of the [A changes of

Immunopathol glomerulosclerosis, 2007. Minimal change PW: segmental Semin and nephropathy focal 29:415, Mathieson change insights pathogenesis segmental of versus diagnosis new overview glomerulosclerosis.] and focal the of into excellent minimal [An disease

2001. Emerg pyelonephritis, Miller Am 19:655, RR: and tract Urinary infection Hemphill North Med Clin O, excellent [An tract of infections.] urinary review acute

AS, staging in Murray Clin different Soc Am and AKI PT, research J Levey Devarajan 3:864, in diagnosis al: Nephrol 2008. environments, and questions key A framework P, et kidney [An recent outlining consequences injury.] in of advances acute diagnosis early excellent review and

the of T, Berthelot insights pathogenesis A, into L, IgA nephropathy. al: Molecular Robert Cambier et Mol 2015. Med Review, 21:762, Trends concise of the summary [A IgA glomerulonephritis.] of pathogenesis

P, 385:1983, Debiec shift a in membranous for H: Pathophysiological Lancet in care, patient’s 2015. time advances Ronco nephropathy: developments the excellent glomerulonephritis.] the of field [An of novel membranous summary in

Invest pathogenesis, RW, 2004. definitions, B, 114:5, Acute al: W, Wang Schrier renal diagnosis, failure: J et Poole therapy, Clin and all review aspects covering insightful of renal [An acute failure.]

Pathology Markowitz 2016. Reporting et M, GS, Am Society al: Haas Consensus Mayo on Diagnosis, and 27:1278, Soc Classification, Report GN, Clinic/Renal J Pathologic S, Nephrol of Sethi summary classification of excellent consensus the [An of glomerulonephritides.]

J proteinuria, syndromes Engl Patrakka Hereditary 354:1387, proteinuria Wartiovaava N Tryggvason J: Med J, mechanisms and K, 2006. of excellent of the of [An pathophysiology in permeability.] review defects glomerular

363:954, FL: N 2010. Med Worcester Coe Engl stones, J kidney Calcium EM, common types kidney of management the [A most review pathophysiology and of of stones.] the comprehensive http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

Injury, Lacerations, Esophageal Mucosal and Infections

is small consisting rectum, colon, gastrointestinal esophagus, tube The of hollow anus. intestine, the stomach, and tract a nutrients disposal integrated functions serve complementary, the waste products. highly of and regulate processing, Each and together that ingested and intake, to the of absorption has unique, region with food interfaces in at the system also the principal of and intestines diverse microbes. immune gut antigens site are which a The array present are surprising and involved frequently it is not small that by intestine Thus, infectious inflammatory processes. colon and the Western the common of Finally, is in neoplasia gastrointestinal the most colon populations. site each that chapter, In section diseases affect this the tract. the gastrointestinal of discuss we with that one involved typically such region. Disorders more the considered most than involve disease, are frequently segment, as Crohn the the journey discussion of cavity, our begins. oral is begin with since We food that where of diseases

from and/or support broadly and the into mesenchytures, the affecting (benign oral malignant), teeth of be epithelial divided can derived cavity mucosa, cysts glands, and conditions oral Pathologic salivary diseases jaws. their struc-which tumors and are Odontogenic common are with tooth more also are the sites. Discussed affecting development, these conditions associated tissues mal next briefly. discussed

http://ebooksmedicine.net

fermentation caries caused results by structure the tooth sugars and by from bacteria. generated of demineralization (enamel of acids Dental during dentin) focal Worldwide, 35 loss of cause caries of before is years age. the tooth main containing ready countries of refined developed and foods to very in processed be there to access carbohydrates. prevalence caries high amounts where large used of The is as United has drinking of rate is the fluoridation oral hygiene water such dropped caries of widespread. countries States, the improved has where and However, markedly in the enamel, resistant which of by crystalline into incorporated is degradation structure bacterial the is acids. Fluoride to fluoroapatite, forming regions world’s is as caries a globalization developing economy, being of contrast, the rate foods are of the increasingly the increasing in these of in processed consumed with In nations; result, the world.

surround soft Inflammation defined or mucosa, squamous gingiva, that and the teeth involving is gingivitis. as tissues associated of which gingivitis. cause hygiene, facilitates the dental and the buildup Poor of on teeth, between calculus surfaces and oral most frequent of is plaque sticky salivary plaque is bacteria, epithelial composed cells. and biofilm desquamated proteins, of a Dental becomes or plaque form accumulates, to As calculus, it mineralized tartar. edema, gingivitis, this bleeding. chronic and accompanied In by is gingival erythema, at is of off. which but individuals, 40% after tapers and occur it may to age prevalent where Gingivitis 60% in adolescence, present most severe in any the is incidence can and plaque Fortunately, flossing be regular gingivitis of reduces teeth and accumulation brushing of reversed, by calculus. primarily which

process Periodontitis of structures ligaments), teeth that inflammatory the cementum. bone, is and the alveolar an (periodontal affects supporting and result With ligament destruction tooth periodontal bone progression, of loss. periodontitis eventual alveolar in and may gingival hygiene composition oral Periodontitis that is associated the bacteria. affects poor of with within found anaerobic active plaque at colonize bacteria healthy of are while Facultative and Gram-positive microaerophilic sites, periodontitis. Gram-negative areas organisms cavity, Porphyromonas most reside gingivalis, Although within Prevotella and species (Actinobacillus) bacterial periodontitis 300 about Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans, closely with is the associated intermedia. oral

•Cariesisthemostcommoncauseoftoothlossinindividualsyoungerthan35yearsofage.Theprimarycauseisdestructionoftoothstructurebyacidendproductsofsugarfermentationbybacteria.

Gingivitisisacommonandreversibleinflammationofthemucosasurroundingtheteeth.Itisassociatedwithbuildupofdentalplaqueandcalculus.

Periodontitisisachronicinflammatoryconditionthatcanleadtothedestructionofthesupportingstructuresoftheteethwitheventuallossofdentition.Itisassociatedwithpoororalhygieneandalteredoralmicrobiota.

the common These up to 40% of mucosal population. ulcerations affect superficial 2 are life, the extremely of frequent first recur. often more painful, in They decades and unknown, of associated tend they to the disease, and aphthous inflammatory be cause be with celiac Although ulcers may familal disease. Behçet is bowel and disease, they thin multiple; typically, of shallow, or Ulcers zone with by rimmed erythema a narrow be a a by and are can ( solitary hyperemic base exudate covered

Fig. ). 15.1 but cases In can they to most 10 recur. spontaneously days resolve in 7

compromise a is virus Herpes be there when a causes self-limited reactivated infection that simplex primary can resistance. in host 1 being caused type herpes). herpetic (HSV-1), are orofacial (genital Most virus remainder simplex herpes the by caused infections by with HSV-2 increasingly changing oral common. practices, becoming is sexual HSV-2 With Primary between are years and typically infections 2 asymptomatic. in and 4 age children often occur of oral abrupt throughout with onset cases acute ulcerations 20% primary to However, 10% and vesicles in manifests of the gingivostomatitis, the cavity. infection of herpetic as herpetic Most a virus recurrent can and be resulting harbor so-called latent stomatitis. or in HSV-1, sore” the adults “cold reactivated, include infections, allergies, Factors upper-respiratory ultraviolet extremes exposure immunosuppression. menstruation, and with temperature, reactivation trauma, tract pregnancy, and HSV of associated to light of adjacent groups small appear same or by typically at mucosa occur lesions, innervated (1to site vesicles. 3-mm) in which as primary Recurrent of the inoculation ganglion, the lips labialis), common (herpes and The most mucosa, the locations. orifices, hard palate gingiva, are nasal buccal 10 typically persist days, lesions therapy. 7 anti-viral in systemic Although immunocompromised patients, may they who can within to require resolve seen (see lesions resemble in Morphologically, the those esophageal herpes

Fig. the (Chapter 19). in and genital later herpes 15.8 chapter) The inclusions. have and ballooned large intranuclear infected eosinophilic cells become cells to commonly form large multinucleated fuse Adjacent polykaryons.

Fig. Aphthousulcer.Singleulcerationwithanerythematoushalosur-roundingayellowishfibrinopurulentmembrane. 15.1

http://ebooksmedicine.net

infection is oral the of the most Candidiasis cavity. common fungal a the Candida produces disease oral of is and albicans under flora normal unusual only circumstances. component Predisposing include factors the following:

albicans C. strain specific The of

the flora microbial The (microbiota) oral of composition

normal promote that candidiasis. microbiota Broad-spectrum oral alter antibiotics can the clinical The forms major hyperplastic. are erythematous, oral of pseudomembranous, and three candidiasis thrush. known is is as The most form common and pseudomembranous superficial, a is that This fibrinosuppurative matted scraped composed base. of a inflammatory to organisms curdlike, characterized membrane to enmeshed white erythematous be reveal an readily gray condition underlying can in off exudate by usually or spread in that diabetics, may AIDS. mildly the seen it cell such more with association be sites patients infection in in recipients, or transplant remains chemotherapy-induced individuals, to immunosuppression, with immunosuppressed stem as and In superficial, severe or immunosuppression, hematopoietic debilitated but organ neutropenia, may deep

Aphthousulcersarepainfulsuperficialulcersofunknownetiologythatmayinsomecasesbeassociatedwithsystemicdiseases.

Herpessimplexviruscausesaself-limitedinfectionthatpresentswithvesicles(coldsores,feverblisters)thatruptureandheal,withoutscarring,andoftenleavelatentvirusinnerveganglia.Reactivationcanoccur.

Oralcandidiasismayoccurwhentheoralmicrobiotaisaltered(e.g.,afterantibioticuse).Invasivediseasemayoccurinimmunosuppressedindividuals.

Fig. 15.2 Fibrousproliferations.(A)Fibroma.Smoothpinkexophyticnoduleonthebuccalmucosa. (B)Pyogenicgranuloma.Erythematoushemorrhagicexophyticmassarisingfromthegingivalmucosa.

fibrous in formed connective tissue Fibromas nodular hyperplasia tissue results when reactive masses submucosal are irritation are ( that chronic

Fig. 15.2A ). along bite most often buccal the mucosa line. the on occur They the removal irritation. and of source complete Treatment surgical is of excision

Fig. ) pregnant typically inflammatory of 15.2B on (pregnancy tumor). the an women lesion and children, found gingiva young is adults, vascular ulcerated, gives and These richly typically a purple them lesions red to color. are which growth a fear of raise cases, rapid and In neoplasm. be some can malignant vessels immature examination similar a seen tissue. histologic demonstrates of that However, proliferation to in granulation fibroma. into may mature a Pyogenic peripheral regress, fibrous develop masses, granulomas or dense ossifying into definitive excision is treatment. surgical Complete

known or Leukoplakia off the any World ( characterized any is “a or pathologically lesions white is disease.” and other clinically Health for absence description in Organization that cannot as as be the by in cannot cavity scraped be patch This of arise cause that http://ebooksmedicine.net defined oral reserved the plaque

Fig. 15.3A ). irritation entities patches are planus lichen and such not white caused Accordingly, by leukoplakia. candidiasis considered obvious or as population dsyplastic carcinoma. the to which 5% squamous Approximately at leukoplakic are of lesions, and to has progression risk cell 3% 25% world’s for of all leukoplakias be must precancerous. otherwise by means of histologic evaluation, Thus, until proved considered sometimes is eroded or surrounding A is erythroplakia, depressed the entity, red, mucosa. flat to velvety, common but that less slightly relative a related lesion associated transformation leukoplakia. malignant Erythroplakia risk with a is greater than much for affect may 2:1 be male While in adults age, 70 they a erythroplakia age, between and of any typically individuals 40 leukoplakia years and predominance. at with seen and Although risk for factor the tobacco) and use pipes, common chewing multifactorial, the (cigarettes, is leukoplakia cigars, etiology tobacco most erythroplakia. is

MORPHOLOGYOnhistologicexaminationleukoplakiaanderythroplakiashowaspectrumofepithelialchangesrangingfromhyperkeratosisoverlyingathickened,acanthoticbutorderlymucosalepitheliumtolesionswithmarkedlydysplasticchangessometimesmergingintocarcinomainsitu(

).Themostseveredysplasticchangesareassociatedwitherythroplakia,andmorethan50%ofthesecasesundergomalignanttransformation.Withincreasingdysplasiaandanaplasia,asubjacentinflammatorycellinfiltrateoflymphocytesandmacrophagesisoftenpresent. Fig.15.3B

of carcinomas, are the with cancers cavity of oral 95% glands. of consisting of salivary cell adenocarcinomas largely remainder Approximately squamous the common the world cell today. sixth most in malignancy, the aggressive is an Squamous epithelial neoplasm carcinoma, in than 50% for Despite numerous advances has the long-term past 50 overall rate survival treatment, the years. less remained in cancer advanced large oral dismal at This part is factors, due outlook because diagnosed often several to stage. an is

tumors 3% detected later, years patients that more after who but primary often within to up at tumor diagnosis year; new diagnosis initial interval. of initial 35% be rate have of at a are least Multiple survive 7% present tumor may estimated primary the an at 5 per to one chance developing of whose these initial for devastating be can secondary individuals lesions development The of tumors particularly were small. oral critical for lesions patients of are of new surveillance detection premalignant longterm early and survival cell Therefore, the squamous with carcinoma.

tobacco tumors years the or independently hypothesis of tumors for has primary in carcinogens as that development concept these to as such patients chronic The elevated led to mucosal result “field of This additional suggests exposure (described next). develop multiple a of risk cancerization.” primary of alcohol

Fig. Leukoplakia.(A)Grossappearanceofleukoplakiaishighlyvariable.Inthisexample,thelesionissmoothwithwell-demarcatedbordersandminimalelevation. 15.3 (B)Histologicappearanceofleukoplakiashowingdysplasia,characterizedbynuclearandcellularpleomorphismandlossofnormalmaturation.

virus Squamous pathways, two infection of exposure papilloma (HPV). related pathogenic through other arise one to distinct of and oropharynx variants the risk to high involving human the cancers with carcinogens, and stems use. (both chewed) mainly and from smoked Carcinogen tobacco exposure alcohol chronic In Southeast of and predisposing important paan factors. Asia, quid chewing and betel are India quid lime, Betel nut, all nut containing is slaked wrapped in brew” “witch’s betel tobacco, leaf. and araca a that use– the arise to likely pathway tobacco that associated a is by tumors in It for these West. characterized similar tumors in bear with Deep a cancers molecular sequencing to consistent has of frequent mutations carcinogens revealed that signature tobacco. exposure these TP53 These as RAS. regulate mutations such and that involve genes proliferation, frequently cell to subtypes, HPV-related tonsillar oncogenic and harbor tend The tongue of base the or crypts “high-risk” in the HPV-16. particularly occur the tumors tumors far and cyclin-dependent fewer than kinase a exposure inhibitor. carry with associated overexpress often These those p16, tobacco mutations

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Oralsquamouscellcarcinoma.(A)Grossappearancedemonstratingulcerationandindurationoftheoralmucosa. 15.4 (B)Histologicappearancedemonstratingnumerousnestsandislandsofmalignantkeratinocytesinvadingtheunderlyingconnectivetissuestroma.

in sites surpass carcinoma the anatomic of readily cervix). crypts, part incidence to 2020, or of (unlike the and because will HPV-associated tongue, that oropharynx—are screening cell of base It origin—tonsillar of the that amenable not cytologic by accessible predicted is cervical cancer squamous conservatively oropharyngeal with is HPV-negative better for The tumors. those than HPV-positive prognosis for patients tumors with which squamous frequency hope protective cell offers vaccine, HPV cancer, limit against increasing oropharyngeal carcinoma. is to of The HPV-associated cervical the

age on younger in of 40 no incidence (particularly in the individuals cell than years cavity tongue) oral of known who been The the has rise factors. risk carcinoma have squamous is unknown with group The patients, HPV, are in and not pathogenesis of who this infected are nonsmokers

MORPHOLOGYSquamouscellcarcinomamayariseanywhereintheoralcavity.However,themostcommonlocationsaretheventralsurfaceofthetongue,floorofthemouth,lowerlip,softpalate,andgingiva(

Fig.15.4A ).Inearlystages,thesecancersmayappearasraised,firm,pearlyplaquesorasirregular,roughened,orverrucousmucosalthickenings.Eitherpatternmaybesuperimposedonabackgroundofleukoplakiaorerythroplakia.Astheselesionsenlarge,theytypicallyformulceratedandprotrudingmassesthathaveirregularandinduratedorrolledborders.Histopathologicanalysishasshownthatsquamouscellcarcinomadevelopsfromdysplasticprecursorlesions.Histologicpatternsrangefromwell-differentiatedkeratinizingneoplasms(

Fig.15.4B )toanaplastic,sometimessarcomatoidtumors.However,thedegreeofhistologicdifferentiation,asdeterminedbytherelativedegreeofkeratinization,doesnotnecessarilycorrelatewithbiologicbehavior.Typically,oralsquamouscellcarcinomainfiltrateslocallybeforeitmetastasizes.Thecervicallymphnodesarethemostcommonsitesofregionalmetastasis;frequentsitesofdistantmetastasesincludethemediastinallymphnodes,lungs,andliver.

Fibromasandpyogenicgranulomasarecommonreactivelesionsoftheoralmucosa.

Leukoplakiaanderyhtroplakiaaremucosalplaquesthatmayundergomalignanttransformation.

Theriskformalignanttransformationisgreaterinerythroplakia(relativetoleukoplakia).

Amajorityoforalcavitycancersaresquamouscellcarcinomas.

Oralsquamouscellcarcinomasareclassicallylinkedtotobaccoandalcoholuse,buttheincidenceofHPV-associatedlesionsisrising.

distributed minor and salivary innumerable glands There throughout the are salivary three sublingual—as major well submandibular, glands—parotid, mucosa. oral as Inflammatory develop within may of neoplastic any or disease these.

a resulting Xerostomia mouth of defined the as dry from saliva. is a in decrease production but of 20% 70 been more has older in varies of incidence than among individuals Its than years populations reported age. 5). accompanied a eyes the dry it It of Sjögren is usually disorder by feature (Chapter autoimmune syndrome, in major which is therapy. secretions is also a salivary lack major of of complication radiation A anti-hypertensive, sedative, of effect observed a muscle medications many anti-depressant/ and xerostomia common anti-psychotic, anti-cholinergic, of as agents. is side diuretic, most relaxant, analgesic, frequently anti-histaminic However, including classes reveal and inflammatory only fissuring may syndrome, mucosa in Sjögren the atrophy glands. enlargement with salivary dry papillae and/or the tongue, of of the of The or, ulcerations, cavity concomitant oral increased difficulty as and speaking. include of as well xerostomia dental in swallowing and Complications of rates candidiasis, caries

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of disease. viral by induced referred as to glands, be infection, bacterial autoimmune trauma, sialadenitis, the may or Inflammation or salivary common may mumps, produce of but form parotids. all The the glands viral which salivary is enlargement of most sialadenitis predominantly involves infiltrate. a marked inflammation Mumps inflammatory produces interstitial mononuclear by often causes self-limited benign is While most in children the condition, or mumps pancreatitis sometimes cause adults orchitis; a latter in sterility. it can

blockage from connective with most of tissue the either duct, common inflammatory surrounding is and lesion or leakage the results saliva gland a glands into salivary of consequent of salivay the rupture mucocele stroma. The meals adults, lower the that with and occurs in toddlers, in lip older most size, swelling manifests particularly change of in may often typically young a ( as association adults, fluctuant and Mucocele

Fig. 15.5A ). filled mucin a particularly connective tissue lined that cells, tissue inflammatory Histologic is demonstrates examination ( space granulation with macrophages fibrous by or and cystlike

Fig. 15.5B ). treatment. cyst constitutes minor the definitive the excision Complete of gland and salivary

the that salivary particularly glands. is often a Bacterial major common infection the most submandibular involves glands, sialadenitis The aureus viridans. are Streptococcus pathogens and frequent Staphylococcus most to impacted debris by antecedent also consequent common or by stones infection; be obstruction edema (sialolithiasis) a induced it Duct by is to may injury. food function secretory bacterial can invasion. decreased predispose also Dehydration and to surgery. Systemic to salivary decreased dehydration, may suppurative following major with adult predispose bacterial patients abdominal or in thoracic secretions, older parotitis abscess or, to when staphylococci affected Such other obstruction may largely induced or with necrosis suppurative be invasion and be of may pyogens, bacterial nonspecific formation. and by associated the interstitial that inflammation lead glands

in syndrome, Autoimmune discussed sialadenitis, is Sjögren better as 5. Chapter known

salivary 30 to simple tumors ( their the relatively least Despite distinct glands rise histologically morphology, give at

15.1 ). Table number account of than tumors. A of for more small neoplasms these 90% salivary and uncommon less human gland 2% represent tumors tumors. all are Overall, of relatively than salivary submandibular in the glands, 10% 80% the glands. minor the remainder gland, in parotid, including and 65% the sublingual within Approximately to arise the Approximately parotid tumors 30% of glands in to the malignant. 15% are By 90% are sublingual 70% of approximately and tumors gland, of 50% 40% submandibular, minor of to salivary contrast, cancerous. size inversely that of salivary roughly, likelihood to the a Thus, malignant is the proportional, tumor is the gland. gland

Fig. Mucocele.(A)Fluctuantfluid-filledlesiononthelowerlipsubse-quenttotrauma. 15.5 (B)Cystlikecavity(right) filledwithmucinousmaterialandlinedbyorganizinggranulationtissue.Thenormalglandaciniareseenontheleft.

Salivary with but about slight female occur a adults, in 5% in usually gland tumors occur predominance,

Benign Salivary Histopathologic and the 15.1 Prevalence Tumors Classification Malignant Common Table Most of Gland and

salivary problems in Vol glands, Major pathology the 25: of NOS, pathology. Nototherwisespecified.DatafromEllisGL,AuclairPL,GneppDR:Surgical Philadelphia,1991,Saunders.

of 16 age. years younger children than http://ebooksmedicine.net neoplasms parotid Whatever in below ear. of pattern, the histologic front the produce gland swelling and attention, cancers may more for attention before clinical tumors several their probably present often more come rapid to because coming to to Benign growth. months be of years while promptly, is from no clinical benign evaluation lesions essential. differentiate criteria reliable and on are However, grounds, histopathologic there malignant to

Pleomorphic myoepithelial so are that benign and tumors (epithelial) mesenchymal cells, both exhibit consist a of ductal of mixture adenomas differentiation. and they epithelial tissue. which and even contain variable dispersed of throughout elements osseous mixtures myxoid, matrix, Epithelial are may (cartilaginous), chondroid the hyaline, in they dispersed others, pleomorphic adenomas, some In foci. present in epithelial predominate; elements only the are widely the mixed histologic albeit to This name diversity alternative, has less rise preferred, tumor. given

and in in minor glands, the the 60% are represent adenomas glands. in submandibular parotid, salivary about of are Pleomorphic rare relatively tumors the common less They painless, masses. slow-growing, mobile discrete present as recur incompletely if They excised. approach only after 25% of simple rates 4% enucleation are but wider Recurrence the resection. after tumor, recognize settings, into to extensions both a surrounding tumor tissues. of minute soft In stems from failure recurrence

pleomorphic ex in or a Carcinoma as a adenoma adenoma mixed is to arising tumor. carcinoma pleomorphic variously referred malignant 15 time malignant incidence than years those more than for tumors with present to The years. less of from 10% of 2% increases for transformation present 5 almost for takes cancer usually form adenocarcinoma or carcinoma. The of the undifferentiated an are of neoplasms 30% at with malignant of aggressive salivary 5 glands, Unfortunately, to most 50% among these the rates mortality years.

MORPHOLOGYPleomorphicadenomastypicallymanifestasrounded,well-demarcatedmassesrarelyexceeding6cminthegreatestdimension.Althoughtheyareencapsulated,insomelocations(particularlythepalate),thecapsuleisnotfullydeveloped,andexpansilegrowthproducesprotrusionsintothesurroundingtissues.Thecutsurfaceisgray-whiteandtypicallycontainsmyxoidandbluetranslucentchondroid(cartilage-like)areas.Themoststrikinghistologicfeatureistheircharacteristicheterogeneity.Epithelialelementsresemblingductalormyoepithelialcellsarearrangedinducts,acini,irregulartubules,strands,orevensheets.Thesetypicallyaredispersedwithinamesenchyme-likebackgroundofloosemyxoidtissuecontainingislandsofchondroidand,rarely,fociofbone(

Fig.15.6 ).Sometimestheepithelialcellsformwell-developedductslinedbycuboidaltocolumnarcellswithanunderlyinglayerofdeeplychromatic,smallmyoepithelialcells.Inotherinstancestheremaybestrandsorsheetsofmyoepithelialcells.Islandsofwell-differentiatedsquamousepitheliumalsomaybepresent.Inmostcases,noepithelialdysplasiaormitoticactivityisevident.Nodifferenceinbiologicbehaviorhasbeenobservedbetweenthetumorscomposedlargelyofepithelialelementsandthosecomposedlargelyofmesenchymalelements.

Fig. Pleomorphicadenoma.(A)Low-powerviewshowingawell-demarcatedtumorwithadjacent,deeplystaining,normalsalivaryglandparenchyma. 15.6 (B)High-powerviewshowingepithelialcellsaswellasmyoepithelialcellswithinchondroidmatrixmaterial.

composed of intermediate squamous cells, Mucoepidermoid variable cells, mixtures cells. carcinomas of mucus-secreting are and the about of gland and minor a salivary glands, parotids, they in glands. 15% mainly salivary represent tumors, fraction These all while salivary gland of particularly large the other (60%–70%) account in neoplasms for neoplasms they occur the the most Overall, primary of tumor mucoepidermoid glands. form carcinoma malignant the common of salivary is

MORPHOLOGYMucoepidermoidcarcinomascangrowaslargeas8cmindiameterand,althoughtheyareapparentlycircumscribed,theylackwell-definedcapsulesandoftenareinfiltrative.Thecutsurfaceispalegraytowhiteandfrequentlydemonstratessmall,mucinouscysts.Onhistologicexamination,thesetumorscontaincords,sheets,orcystslinedbysquamous,mucous,orintermediatecells.Thelatterisahybridcelltypewithbothsquamousfeaturesandmucus-filledvacuoles,whicharemosteasilydetectedwithmucinstains.Cytologically,tumorcellsmaybebenign-appearingorhighlyanaplasticandunmistakablymalignant.

grade. and course histologic Clinical depend prognosis on tumors may rate Low-grade cases in but 5-year about invade of a 15% over and only recur survival of and afford locally metastasize 90%. rarely and difficult to neoplasms tumors and, a excise. to invasive are extent, intermediate-grade high-grade lesser contrast, By recur 25% cases, metastasize As distant to result, sites. to in they 30% a of 30% about and The rate is survival only 5-year 50%.

•Sialadenitis(inflammationofthesalivaryglands)canbecausedbytrauma,infection(suchasmumps),oranautoimmunereaction.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Pleomorphicadenomaisaslow-growingneoplasmcomposedofaheterogeneousmixtureofepithelialandmesenchymalcells.Itistypicallybenign.

Mucoepidermoidcarcinomaisamalignantneoplasmofvariablebiologicaggressivenessthatiscomposedofamixtureofsquamousandmucouscells.

epithelium usually odontogenic present are of within derived the jaws. Odontogenic cysts from remnants quite the the in jaws. of to In common rest cysts contrast epithelium-lined are skeleton, the cysts as inflammatory developmental. subclassified or These either are most are lesions the common starting Only developmental with cysts. here, considered

originates (primordial dental thought the of the The of surface enamel around is tissue the dentigerous the cyst tooth teeth). of an degeneration of result that makes crown and be unerupted follicle to a stratified with lined associated a is by in the infiltrate They squamous typically inflammatory tissue. connective are chronic dense that thin, epithelium underlying is Complete removal curative.

located can in Odontogenic frequent but posterior predominance, age 40 keratocysts a typically of the age, and any have male most 10 at are individuals and between occur are mandible. years within it odontogenic keratocyst locally and aggressive from because odontogenic the high Differentiation other important of recurrence cysts has rate. is is a squamous stratified luminal histologic cyst and cell layer On parakeratinized epithelium a thin or consists with lining orthokeratinized epithelial a prominent surface. corrugated a the of layer of examination, basal up Treatment 60% requires with to associated rates aggressive removal; resection. of inadequate recurrence complete and are

etiology. the cysts cyst just with has contrast the described, periapical inflammatory an In developmental the trauma. as caused These caries of or which tooth advanced lesions by at pulpitis, result occur a long-standing extremely be common apex may the of a and into which exit traverse to tissue, the of apex can alveolar bone, of can Necrosis tooth surrounding length the abscess. periapical lead the the root the pulpal epithelial may or an tissue (with without time, Over develop. lining) granulation as result necrotic a Periapical inflammatory tissue or bacterial the area. of lesions infection persist in restoration complete or of removal followed by offending tooth. necessitates of therefore, treatment, Successful material the extraction the the

of histologic behaviors. group diverse with complex lesions and clinical a Odontogenic are tumors appearances Some are others malignant, benign true neoplasms, to be either thought are while or hamartomas. derived Odontogenic odontogenic from both. epithelium, ectomesenchyme, are tumors or are tumors odontoma. and most clinically significant ameloblastoma common The and two

Ameloblastomas from epithelium. arise odontogenic indolent locally and, are invasive, have course. being slow-growing typically an cystic, despite They stroma with loose epithelium stellate cysts overlies palisading cells. that The lined columnar are by a the odontogenic and shows type extensive dentin. epithelium but from deposition tumor, Odontoma, of enamel of common arises most excision. Odontomas are by local cured

Thejawsareacommonsiteofepithelium-linedcystsderivedfromodontogenicremnants.

Theodontogenickeratocystislocallyaggressive,withahighrecurrencerate.

Theperiapicalcystisareactive,inflammatorylesionassociatedwithcariesordentaltrauma.

Themostcommonodontogenictumorsareameloblastomaandodontoma.

cranial esophagus foregut. from the The develops portion of the muscular epiglottis that from extends located gastroesophageal tube distensible It to the the just diaphragm. is the junction, above highly a hollow, reflux cancers esophagus from or incapacitating run lethal diseases an that may the gamut persistent Acquired merely and of to occasional gastroesophageal the the annoyance. chronic of be “heartburn”

in any Atresia, and tract. occur of fistulas, part may the gastrointestinal duplications of after feeding. discovered When esophagus, the shortly are birth, involve regurgitation because during they they usually Prompt surgical repair is required. extremely or agenesis, of Absence, esophagus is the rare. in more common. of segment thin, a which esophagus, cord replaces a Atresia, is noncanalized usually or occurs bifurcation trachea. connecting with frequently associated fistula near or is It tracheal upper lower a pouches most bronchus esophageal the the at and the a or to abnormal and severe result aspiration, suffocation, can or electrolyte in connection fluid pneumonia, imbalances. This

acquired. be more or Esophageal stenosis congenital commonly may fibrous narrowing atrophy thickening of is caused the generally the acquired and of When propria. submucosa the muscularis by may and to other inflammation due chronic caused Stenosis forms scarring irradiation, injury. caustic ingestion of severe by agents, of be gastroesophageal or reflux, typically occurs before solids usually Stenosis-associated dysphagia progressive; is liquids. long with problems difficulty eating

http://ebooksmedicine.net

delivery contractions. and to peristaltic of waves the stomach of food Efficient requires fluids coordinated contraction this and dysmotility can or interferes which spasm take Esophageal forms, of all process of muscularis. are with by the several discoordinated characterized stress, it to also Because can diverticula spasm cause small esophageal wall form. increases on several character into can be dysmotility the depending Esophageal contractile separated forms abnormalities. of the

incomplete tone, lower relaxation, characterized aperistalsis. esophageal the esophageal is by triad (LES) increased and Achalasia of sphincter LES by Primary neurons distal by is of idiopathic. esophageal definition, and is, failure achalasia inhibitory caused neural motor Degenerative to or esophagus vagus may the achalasia. in the secondary within or intrinsic innervation, changes the extraesophageal the dorsal nucleus either of vagus, to nerve lead occurs dilatation. relaxation, in destruction Trypanosoma which cruzi causes myenteric esophageal LES in Chagas infection and plexus, disease, This failure the of of plexuses myenteric colonic, disease. affected in and Duodenal, be also can ureteric Chagas autonomic nuclei, infiltrative be caused may neuropathy, of diabetic disease by surgical dorsal sarcoidosis, disorders which and ablation. malignancy, produced may polio Achalasia-like such be as or amyloidosis, lesions or motor by

are rests) tissues the Ectopic common tract. (developmental gastrointestinal in most third The of an inlet gastric is to the frequent patch. it esophagus, of the is referred upper mucosa where as ectopic site asymptomatic, released mucosa result generally of esophagus, esophagus Barrett tissue in esophagitis, such gastric or, presence by the dysphagia, adenocarcinoma. Although rarely, is can the within acid diverticulum, a by ectopic particularly bowel, small local gastric due colon, small or caused the may patches in of occult loss blood injury Gastric within Meckel with present mucosa acid to heterotopia, secretion.

Instead cava. vena directly the the tract liver of heart, via before the gastrointestinal from the venous portal to is the to delivered returning vein reaching inferior blood in the first-pass by entering intestines pattern This systemic circulation. circulatory the processed the before materials other is effect, absorbed liver for which the and drugs in are responsible cause flow can and portal of the development to lead Diseases an important esophageal blood of portal hypertension, impede life-threatening varices, which bleeding. frequently cause that massive

venous where sites splanchnic the the of and the circulations One esophagus. can communicate systemic is few the caval blood Portal collateral portal into that induces shunt of system. channels to allow development hypertension plexi subepithelial within esophagus. venous enlarge these collateral the distal and the submucosal veins However, cirrhotic commonly varices, in liver These vessels, with develop of patients, termed disease. in most 50% association alcoholic the varices. most Worldwide, cause common schistosomiasis of hepatic second is consideration portal is detailed given more 16. in A hypertension Chapter of

MORPHOLOGYVaricescanbedetectedbyangiography,butaremostcommonlydetectedduringendoscopy(

Fig.15.7AandB

).Theoverlyingmucosacanbeintactorulceratedandnecrotic,particularlyifrupturehasoccurred. Fig.15.7CandD

Varices rupture and but their can are often to lead death. hematemesis massive asymptomatic, emergency. a medical Variceal therefore constitutes rupture as direct as shock. results the of many consequence hepatic hemorrhage due triggered die load intraluminal intervention, well patients as from bleeding half the bleeding from that of protein a as first coma to hypovolemic episode, as either by the or Despite each cases. Among in potentially occur who as many of 20% of episodes hemorrhage, fatal, additional survive, those as

EsophagealLacerations,MucosalInjury,andInfections

often are severe common tears, Mallory-Weiss most are by The retching lacerations or vomiting. induced which esophageal musculature gastroesophageal of contractile Normally, with wave a anti-peristaltic relaxation the reflex precedes the vomiting. associated during wall may to esophageal stretch refluxing prolonged that cause the vomiting, tear. the and with This result relaxation contents fail gastric usually Patients hematemesis. with present

The are longitudinally of gastroesophageal junction cross lacerations Mallory-Weiss the usually oriented syndrome ( roughly and linear

Fig. ). 15.8A without These generally heal quickly superficial surgical intervention. tears intervention. (Boerhaave in tears syndrome) transmural are prompt and esophageal result mediastinitis, contrast, surgical require severe, catastrophic, By

and of excessively hot may irritants The heavy squamous acids variety smoking. by of mucosa damaged the fluids, including alcohol, or alkalis, be stratified esophagus a corrosive and into resulting dissolve than and commonly rather passing esophagitis. may Medicinal in to pill-induced most adhere esophagus doxycycline the esophageal in the pills, bisphosphonates, stomach, the lining immediately pain, causes injury to only swallowing). chemical self-limited Esophagitis (pain with odynophagia particularly due generally may or perforation cases. occur in stricture, Hemorrhage, severe therapy, caused may radiation Iatrogenic by graft-versus-host injury be cytotoxic esophageal chemotherapy, disease. or and changes morphologic nonspecific, acute are ulceration The inflammation. consisting of Irradiation vessel ischemic element an adding causes injury. blood of damage

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Esophagealvarices.(A)Angiogramshowingseveraltortuousesophagealvarices.(B)Althoughtheangiogramisstriking,endoscopyismorecommonlyusedtoidentifyvarices.(C)Collapsedvaricesarepresentinthispostmortemspecimencorrespondingtotheangiogramin(A).Thepolypoidareasaresitesofvaricealhemorrhagethatwereligatedwithbands. 15.7 (D)Dilatedvaricesbeneathintactsquamousmucosa.

is are most debilitated may occur otherwise in who individuals but esophagitis immunosuppressed. or healthy those in Infectious frequent is simplex herpes patients, cytomegalovirus fungal In (CMV), or viruses, infection by common. esophageal organisms these pathogen, may Among although common mucormycosis and is also aspergillosis fungi, most Candida occur. the Crohn such in also The desquamative and skin disease. epidermolysis and, esophagus pemphigoid rarely, diseases bullous may be as involved bullosa

primary a fungi preexisting or complicate or bacteria Infection by can ulcer. be propria lamina while esophagitis Nonpathogenic pathogenic beds, cases, and which are about for organisms, of may mucosa. account in bacteria overlying cause ulcer 10% necrosis invade found frequently the oral infectious of inflammatory covering of advanced by adherent, its densely matted form the pseudomembranes fungal mucosa. most in composed is cells gray-white esophageal Candidiasis hyphae characterized and

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 15.8 Traumaticandviralesophagitis.(A)Endoscopicviewofalongitudinally-orientedMallory-Weisstear.Thesesuperficiallacerationscanrangefrommillimeterstoseveralcentimetersinlength.(B)Postmortemspecimenwithmultipleherpeticulcersinthedistalesophagus.(C)Multinucleatesquamouscellscontainingherpesvirusnuclearinclusions.(D)Cytomegalovirus-infectedendothelialcellswithnuclearandcytoplasmicinclusions. University Illinois.) of of Dr. courtesy Ira (Endoscopic Chicago, image Hanan,The Chicago,

infectious agent identity the esophagitis. appearance often the clue in to The a of provides viral endoscopic punched-out ( typically ulcers cause Herpes-viruses

Fig. a edge within at nuclear ), demonstrates analysis ( of viral histopathologic the degenerating ulcer inclusions 15.8B cells epithelial rim and

Fig. ). 15.8C ulcerations. contrast, CMV shallower causes By Biopsy stromal these nuclear inclusions and cells endothelium within cytoplasmic ( the and lesions capillary of characteristic show

Fig. 15.8D ). antigens useful Immunohistochemical a ancillary viral diagnostic be tool. staining for can

in ailment lower is setting out into esophagitis most and gastrointestinal the http://ebooksmedicine.net Reflux of cause patient present most esophagus frequent contents in of patients gastric the common the which with States. United the the

clinical disease termed associated is reflux The (GERD). gastroesophageal condition sensitive is from to foods to The stratified acid. resistant of but esophagus the is abrasion epithelium squamous mucosal and of proximal protection distal and submucosal to by esophagus contribute mucin The secreting glands bicarbonate. the which against esophageal important, More contents, are of positive reflux gastric high lower pressure. protects under sphincter tone acidic

juices to GERD. central is the gastric in of injury Reflux of development mucosal duodenal exacerbate cases, severe damage. reflux may the In bile sphincter pressure and abdominal (discussed Conditions to GERD hernia decrease gastric increased lower contribute delayed that and volume. esophageal obesity, include nervous pregnancy, later), emptying, use, and tone alcohol or gastric hiatal increase depressants, tobacco central system In cases, cause identified. no many definitive is

MORPHOLOGYSimplehyperemia,evidenttotheendoscopistasredness,maybetheonlyalteration.InmildGERDthemucosalhistologyisoftenunremarkable.Withmoresignificantdisease,eosinophilsarerecruitedintothesquamousmucosa,followedbyneutrophils,whichusuallyareassociatedwithmoresevereinjury(

Fig.15.9A ).Basalzonehyperplasiaexceeding20%ofthetotalepithelialthicknessandelongationoflaminapropriapapillae,suchthattheyextendintotheupperthirdoftheepithelium,alsomaybepresent.

but age in those in common of also children. years occurs is infants most 40 GERD over and less heartburn, contents. The symptoms are regurgitation dysphagia, gastric most noticeable frequently reported and, often, of sour-tasting for attacks chronic severe punctuated heart is Rarely, pain by may that chest disease. mistaken be of GERD pump reduces and inhibitors provides relief. gastric Treatment proton typically symptomatic with acidity of While histologic the of latter degree tends the with increase to the duration. to disease symptoms damage, related is not closely severity ulceration, esophageal hematemesis, carcinoma. a esophagitis lesion esophageal Barrett Complications and of reflux precursor esophagus, development, include to melena, stricture

thorax the through into separation hernia of and crura resulting gap. the Hiatal stomach characterized diaphragmatic protrusion the of by the is but and in are hiatal hernias in are later many Congenital acquired infants life. children, recognized GERD when 10% in of cause hernia incompetence. can fewer Hiatal is than resemble present symptoms hiatal symptomatic since LES adults; hernia

that chronic increasingly recognized. is being immunologically Eosinophilic disorder mediated is esophagitis a intolerance and feeding food and in children. impaction symptoms Symptoms or include adults dysphagia in GERD-like of by is epithelial infiltration superficially eosinophils, large feature numbers particularly histologic (Fig. cardinal The

junction. far and sites 15.9B ) gastroesophageal from at the to Their and abundance eosinophilic esophagitis. of Crohn differentiate disease, causes help from GERD, can esophagitis other in Endoscopically the rings and upper evident

Fig. 15.9 Esophagitis.(A)Refluxesophagitiswithscatteredintraepithelialeosinophils. (B)Eosinophilicesophagitiswithnumerousintraepithelialeosinophils.

(C)Endoscopyrevealscircumferentialringsintheproximalesophagusofthispatientwitheosinophilicesophagitis. Illinois.) (Endoscopic Chicago, Chicago, courtesy of Dr. of The Ira image University Hanan, portions the esophagus of http://ebooksmedicine.net mid (

Fig. esophagitis from ), help may also 15.9C distinguish GERD. eosinophilic to refractory with proton eosinophilic esophagitis are inhibitor Patients high-dose treatment. typically to pump atopic have rhinitis, many dermatitis, asthma, Most allergic are and modest patients eosinophilia. atopic, or peripheral cow as restrictions allergens, exposure to food dietary milk and to or soy such Treatments products, systemic include corticosteroids. prevent and topical

esophagus within mucosa. is GERD complication is metaplasia a intestinal that chronic by characterized esophageal of the Barrett squamous Barrett as as in is of estimated 10% it many is to symptomatic rising; occur The GERD. esophagus individuals incidence with of White 40 age. between years 60 present and and affected often males are most of typically that for Barrett risk it adenocarcinoma. confers esophagus in an is development of increased The concern greatest esophageal Barrett with the to adenocarcinoma of is epithelium be Barrett esophagus esophageal than may consistent view that normal more Molecular to suggest epithelium, direct genetically similar a cancer. that precursor studies dysplasia, 0.2% lesion, to with incidence year; to and symptoms each individuals keeping increases with 1% of with in In epithelial age. esophagus patient of preinvasive develops be duration this, considered increasing Barrett its a be develop that with of associated Barrett individuals are vast cancer. not Barrett do adenocarcinomas Although with it most the majority esophagus, esophagus should esophageal esophageal noted

MORPHOLOGYBarrettesophagusisrecognizedendoscopicallyastonguesorpatchesofred,velvetymucosaextendingupwardfromthegastroesophagealjunction(

Fig.15.10A ).Thismetaplasticmucosaalternateswithresidualsmooth,palesquamous(esophageal)mucosaproximallyandinterfaceswithlight-browncolumnar(gastric)mucosadistally(

).High-resolutionendoscopeshaveincreasedthesensitivityofBarrettesophagusdetection. Fig.15.10BandC

MostexpertsrequirebothendoscopicevidenceofabnormalmucosaabovethegastroesophagealjunctionandhistologicallydocumentedgastricorintestinalmetaplasiafordiagnosisofBarrettesophagus.Thedefiningfeatureofintestinalmetaplasia,andafeatureofBarrettesophagus,isthepresenceofgobletcells,whichhavedistinctmucousvacuolesthatstainpalebluebyH&Eandimparttheshapeofawinegoblettotheremainingcytoplasm(

).Dysplasiaisclassifiedaslow-gradeorhigh-gradeonthebasisofmorphologiccriteria.Intramucosalcarcinomaischaracterizedbyinvasionofneoplasticepithelialcellsintothelaminapropria. Fig.15.10C

esophagus symptoms requires prompted Barrett GERD is and of and usually biopsy. Diagnosis by endoscopy best periodic debate, biopsy of surveillance but clinicians recommend endoscopy The course screen of with matter management to is dysplasia. most a for treated lesions, therapeutic intervention. require and more always carcinoma, high-grade and is intramucosal including often advanced Dysplasia dysplasia modalities photodynamic resection Available radiofrequency newer approaches therapy, include and mucosectomy. ablation, include (esophagectomy); endoscopic surgical

Fig. 15.10 Barrettesophagus.(A)NarrowbandimagingofBarrettesophagusduringendoscopy.Notethetanislandsofectopicmetaplasiawithinbluishsquamousmucosa. (B)GrossimageofBarrettesophagus(compareto

Fig.15.7C ).Onlyafewareasofpalesquamousmucosaremainwithinthepredominantlymetaplastic,reddishmucosaofthedistalesophagus. (C)HistologicappearanceofthegastroesophagealjunctioninBarrettesophagus.Notethetransitionbetweenesophagealsquamousmucosa(lower andmetaplasticmucosacontaininggobletcells(upper). right) Ira of Chicago, image (Endoscopic Dr. University Hanan, Chicago, courtesy of The Illinois.) http://ebooksmedicine.net

esophageal cell for account morphologic variants majority a adenocarcinoma Two of cancers: carcinoma. and squamous adenocarcinoma the but squamous is rise. more carcinoma on Worldwide, cell common, is not tumors rare are discussed Other here.

background typically arises and esophagus a long-standing in adenocarcinoma GERD. Esophageal of Barrett therapy. tobacco, of with documented obese, who and development patients have who greater Risk those is radiation or previous had use in dysplasia in adenocarcinoma are for esophageal the a seven more occurs times common in men United adenocarcinoma and frequently in being States, strong shows women. In than gender in bias, most whites being lowest 60-fold in in varies Ecuador. Japan, the highest United United Thailand, Australia, and Kingdom, with and rates and countries, States, However, the Western the Korea, of by worldwide, the including a Netherlands, Canada, incidence factor any markedly increased than is 1970, since has other cancer. incidence more for countries rapidly esophageal the common, adenocarcinoma almost where more In half Western all which countries, before now accounts States. As esophageal 1970, for a 5% of the including esophageal of adenocarcinoma, in result, esophageal less than some represented cancers United cancers

acquisition suggest extended the adenocarcinoma progression of Molecular changes. genetic esophagus period to that the epigenetic through occurs Barrett studies over stepwise of an and model dysplasia and progression to epithelial accumulate This supported nondysplastic persist by carcinoma. that and is mutations the clones observation in Barrett invasive identified metaplasia during in and stages esophageal early are of TP53 abnormalities Chromosomal often present adenocarcinoma. mutation the changes thought tumor contribute genetic progression. are to Additional to and inflammation

(Fig.

15.11A ).Whileearlylesionsmayappearasflatorraisedpatchesinotherwiseintactmucosa,latertumorsmayformlargeexophyticmasses,infiltratediffusely,orulcerateandinvadedeeply.Onmicroscopicexamination,Barrettesophagusfrequentlyispresentadjacenttothetumor.Tumorstypicallyproducemucinandformglands(

Fig.15.11B

Fig. 15.11 Esophagealadenocarcinoma.(A)Adenocarcinomausuallyoccursdistallyand,asinthiscase,ofteninvolvesthegastriccardia. (B)Esophagealadenocarcinomagrowingasback-to-backglands.

or present with progressive Patients in pain, weight loss, swallowing, vomiting. chest most or difficulty commonly pain time appear, and invaded lymphatic usually By tumor signs the the has symptoms submucosal vessels. survival at the a overall stage than the 5-year result rate advanced of less 25%. diagnosis, As is adenocarcinoma in the patients survival limited mucosa approximates with the contrast, By 80% or to submucosa. 5-year few

times cell older frequently occurs males squamous than females. four carcinoma in 45 affects In years United esophageal typically adults of age States, than and more the frequent very esophageal consumption and caustic achalasia, therapy previous mediastinum. of poverty, and radiation include the alcohol hot beverages, tobacco Risk to syndrome, Plummer-Vinson factors injury, use, six tobacco times than Americans rates of alcohol It cannot that and use. more risk be in disparity nearly is by accounted whites—a common African differences striking in in for and in incidence esophageal 100-fold countries, carcinoma being more than squamous vary within rural cell between more The underdeveloped can by of common areas. and China, The Iran, South Africa. Kong, central incidences Argentina, Brazil, highest with are and Hong countries

to to of esophageal http://ebooksmedicine.net squamous A synergize United the are the cell increase at in risk. and alcohol which Europe effects partially related majority least tobacco, carcinomas of of States use and the due to tobacco cell carcinoma use uncommon in However, are regions also societal squamous some alcohol common is or where esophageal and norms. religious well hydrocarbons, nitrosamines, nutritional areas, found these foods, such and factors. in as as mutagenic the exposure deficiencies, polycyclic compounds, to be suspected are risk In to those other as fungus-contaminated high-risk implicated but esophageal not cell infection squamous in in HPV low-risk regions. has also in carcinoma been remains cell carcinoma The pathogenesis incompletely defined. squamous of molecular esophageal

MORPHOLOGYIncontrasttothedistallocationofmostadenocarcinomas,halfofsquamouscellcarcinomasoccurinthemiddlethirdoftheesophagus(

dysplasia. Fig.15.12A ).Squamouscellcarcinomabeginsasaninsitulesionintheformofsquamous Earlylesionsappearassmall,gray-whiteplaquelikethickenings.Overmonthstoyears,theygrowintotumormassesthatmaybepolypoidandprotrudeintoandobstructthelumen.Othertumorsareeitherulceratedordiffuselyinfiltrativelesionsthatspreadwithintheesophagealwall,wheretheycancausethickening,rigidity,andluminalnarrowing.Thesecancersmayinvadesurroundingstructuresincludingtherespiratorytree,causingpneumonia;theaorta,causingcatastrophicexsanguination;orthemediastinumandpericardium.

Fig. Esophagealsquamouscellcarcinoma.(A)Squamouscellcarcinomamostfrequentlyisfoundinthemid-esophagus,whereitcommonlycausesstrictures. 15.12 (B)Squamouscellcarcinomacomposedofnestsofmalignantcellsthatpartiallyrecapitulatethestratifiedorganizationofsquamousepithelium.

).Regardlessofthehistologysymptomatictumorshaveofteninvadedtheesophagealwallattimeofdiagnosis.Therichsubmucosallymphaticnetworkpromotescircumferentialandlongitudinalspread,andintramuraltumornodulesmaybepresentseveralcentimetersawayfromthemainmass.Thesitesoflymphnodemetastasesvarywithtumorlocation:Cancersintheupperthirdoftheesophagusfavorcervicallymphnodes;thoseinthemiddlethirdfavormediastinal,paratracheal,andtracheobronchialnodes;andthoseinthelowerthirdspreadtogastricandceliacnodes. Fig.15.12B

(pain include cell odynophagia esophagus Clinical the swallowing), manifestations squamous and obstruction. and insidiously of on dysphagia, begin carcinoma of solid esophageal obstruction their obstruction, the diet increasing liquid with other altering by patients to unwittingly As to of may adjust from progressively foods. forms of cachexia. and consequences Extreme impaired may and occur both nutrition debilitation tumor-associated loss as weight As may hemorrhage tumor ulceration. and with adenocarcinoma, accompany sepsis food with via Occasionally, upper fistula. the squamous cell by symptoms esophagus of mid a of and aspiration caused carcinomas tracheoesophageal present

endoscopic cell of diagnosis esophageal screening use of Increased squamous carcinoma. has earlier to led for more for with superficial lower but much Early is patients rates esophageal detection with 75% critical, patients survival are 5-year because tumors. carcinoma advanced 5-year rate The dismal survival remains 9%. a overall

to to DISEASESOFTHEESOPHAGUSrelated tobacco, and the risk of and increase use the alcohol alcohol increase the of which synergize which effects to riskrelated effects of synergize the use to tobacco, of

Esophageal obstruction mayoccurasaresultofmechanicalorfunctionalanomalies.Mechanicalcausesincludedevelopmentaldefects,fibroticstrictures,andtumors.

Achalasia, characterizedbyincompleteLESrelaxation,increasedLEStone,andesophagealaperistalsis,isacommonformoffunctionalesophagealobstruction.

canresultfromchemicalorinfectiousmucosalinjury.Infectionsaremostfrequentinimmunocompromisedindividuals. Esophagitis

Themostcommoncauseofesophagitisisgastroesophageal (GERD), esophagitis. reflux disease whichmustbedifferentiatedfromeosinophilic

Barrett esophagus, whichmaydevelopinpatientswithchronicGERD,isassociatedwithincreasedriskfordevelopmentofesophagealadenocarcinoma.

Esophageal cell isassociatedwithalcoholandtobaccouse,poverty,causticesophagealinjury,achalasia,tylosis,andPlummer-Vinsonsyndrome. carcinoma squamous

http://ebooksmedicine.net

and neoplastic frequent particularly a the of are inflammatory clinical of lesions common. disease, stomach being cause Disorders with of acidity spending on related for health gastric gastrointestinal symptoms to States, United third In disease. all one care account the nearly a a In the cause addition, in including locales, worldwide. death leading certain incidence remains States, of United cancer despite decreasing gastric

antrum. The stomach is divided fundus, the into cardia, four regions: body, major anatomic and shallow glands. foveolar by mainly is cells mucin-secreting lined form cardia The that glands body. cells also similar and endocrine luminal parietal contain by but the antral that secretion stimulate to G release such as The gastrin gastric cells, are within acid fundus cells, and that cells also and as body secrete produce glands contain well-developed of fundus enzymes such chief the pepsin. digestive The

from injury. mucosal results Gastritis as the present, are is When gastritis. lesion referred neutrophils acute to regeneration cells is the cell inflammatory injury absent, gastropathy rare or term present are are but applied. and When anti-inflammatory and drugs, nonsteroidal Agents injury. stress-induced cause that alcohol, gastropathy bile, include as hypertension, cause erosion lesions Acute in following or mucosal or for progresses hemorrhage, disruption Curling such portal gastropathy that also of ulcers flow, typically gastric example, blood can to gastritis. syndrome specific group applied gastropathy to Ménétrier later). exemplified disease is hypertrophic and Zollinger-Ellison by a (discussed diseases of term The

acute and pain, gastritis be epigastric nausea, variable or Both degrees may cause of asymptomatic and vomiting. gastropathy hematemesis, massive loss. melena, rarely, more may blood hemorrhage, or, be severe cases, erosion, ulceration, there In mucosal

1—more to than strongly The million is times with blood. gastric lumen close 1 the acidic more than acidic, a pH potential mucosa. damage to but the digestion This harsh environment also has contributes the to mucosa gastric evolved mechanisms ( to have protect the Multiple

Fig.

15.13 ). layer foveolar prevents epithelium. directly particles cells by large thin of the from Mucin that surface secreted touching food a forms mucus secretion formation epithelial of mucosa; “unstirred” the epithelium that of result mucus of it ions of the fluid bicarbonate over surface as an pH a protects The neutral layer cells. layer also by has a promotes propria. the lamina Finally, buffers gastric that protons of the the rich into back-diffuse removes mucosa efficiently and supply blood Gastropathy, acute

Mucosal into capacity enzymes secretion Surface blood Bicarbonate Defensive Forces: Forces: transport Apical synthesis mucus flow membrane Prostaglandin acidity regenerative mucus secretion surface Epithelial Damaging Peptic Gastric

Fig. 15.13 Mechanismsofgastricinjuryandprotection.Thisdiagramillustratestheprogressionfrommildformsofinjurytoulcerationthatmayoccurwithacuteorchronicgastritis.Ulcersincludelayersofnecroticdebris(N), whichdevelopsovertime,ispresentonlyinchroniclesions. inflammation(I), andgranulationtissue(G); scarring(S),

Ischemia protective any can EXPOSURES Aspirin Gastric Host infection Alcohol factors after occur gastric of NSAID Tobacco H. IMPAIRED hyperacidity of emptying disruption chronic and http://ebooksmedicine.net these OR reflux Shock INJURIOUS Duodenal-gastric gastritis, gastritis DEFENSES Delayed pylori mechanisms. The main include: causes

(COX)-dependent secretion, flow, I2, all and which nearly stimulate anti-inflammatory and of the (NSAIDs) prostaglandins E2 defense and of cyclooxygenase mucosal epithelial restitution. drugs blood bicarbonate mucus mechanisms inhibit synthesis including Nonsteroidal above both mucosal Although than larger plays contribute role to protection. COX-1 COX-2, isoenzymes a example, for nonselective also risk selective result can NSAID-induced Thus, and in development gastric ibuprofen, while or injury celecoxib, inhibitors, gastropathy of the inhibition, such as greatest gastritis. aspirin, with COX-2 for is by naproxen,

The occurs ammonium those and pylori infected ions. inhibition gastric to with patients that bicarbonate H. by in be transporters may injury urease-secreting due uremic of gastric

Reduced secretion and gastritis. adults explain increased of susceptibility have that to suggested mucin been the older bicarbonate factors as

and increased gastropathy account decreased acute altitudes. at of oxygen incidence gastritis Hypoxemia for may an delivery and high

and in damage stromal injury of attempt, severe or suicide as to accidentally either direct cells. result bases, Ingestion gastric acids leads or a particularly to of a epithelial harsh mucosal chemicals, alcohol by to NSAID damage Direct also induced use, contributes cellular gastritis and consumption, radiation therapy. excessive cause inhibit apparatus, renewal. cancer may damage synthesis in the or chemotherapy, insufficient mucosal DNA mitotic that epithelial to due generalized used including Agents those

MORPHOLOGYHistologically,gastropathyandmildacutegastritismaybedifficulttorecognize,sincethelaminapropriashowsonlymoderateedemaandslightvascularcongestion.Thesurfaceepitheliumisintact,buthyperplasiaoffoveolarmucuscellsistypicallypresent.Neutrophils,lymphocytes,andplasmacellsarenotprominent.

erosive inflammation gastritis. Thepresenceofneutrophilsabovethebasementmembraneincontactwithepithelialcellsisabnormalinallpartsofthegastrointestinaltractandsignifiesactiveinflammation,or,atthissite,gastritis(ratherthangastropathy).Thetermactive hemorrhagic acute ispreferredoveracuteinflammationthroughouttheluminalgastrointestinaltract,sinceactiveinflammationmaybepresentinbothacuteandchronicdiseasestates.Withmoreseveremucosaldamage,erosionsandhemorrhagedevelop.Hemorrhagemaymanifestasdarkpunctaeinanotherwisehyperemicmucosa.Concurrentpresenceoferosionandhemorrhageistermed

in forms patients occurs and gastric serious burns, other surgery, injury Stress-related severe of stress. disease, trauma, medical disease, major severe intracranial physiologic with extensive visible develop ill the patients of More during their critically of lesions illness. 3 gastric first endoscopically than 75% days given ulcers associated clinical specific are cases, names some associations. location and In on the based are Examples follows: as

patients sepsis, shock, Stress ulcers trauma. severe or critically affecting with ill

burns associated ulcers duodenum occur and severe with Curling are trauma. in or the proximal

or with a have stomach, in ulcers arise of perforation. intracranial of those duodenum, esophagus disease high Cushing incidence the and

is mucosal stress-related pathogenesis ischemia. to injury often due most gastric local of The resulting reduced systemic be or stress-induced blood This flow hypotension caused splanchnic vasoconstriction. from by may appears Upregulation to to endothelin-1 the vasoconstrictor be while also protective. ischemic increased contributes mucosal of expression injury, and COX-2 increased release gastric stimulation resulting direct Cushing nuclei are be ulcers caused by acid hypersecretion. thought vagal of to Systemic may injury cells. pH also contribute intracellular of the by acidosis mucosal to mucosal lowering

MORPHOLOGYStress-relatedgastricmucosalinjuryrangesfromshallowerosionscausedbysuperficialepithelialdamagetodeeperlesionsthatpenetratethedepthofthemucosa.Acuteulcersareroundedandtypicallylessthan1cmindiameter.Theulcerbasefrequentlyisstainedbrowntoblackbyacid-digestedextravasatedredcells.Unlikepepticulcers,whichariseinthesettingofchronicinjury,acutestressulcersarefoundanywhereinthestomachandareoftenmultiple.Theyaresharplydemarcated,withessentiallynormaladjacentmucosa,althoughtheremaybesuffusionofbloodintothemucosaandsubmucosaandsomeinflammatoryreaction.Thescarringandthickeningofbloodvesselsthatcharacterizechronicpepticulcersareabsent.Healingwithcompletereepithelializationoccursdaysorweeksaftertheinjuriousfactorsareremoved.

Most to patients evidence have critically mucosal histologic damage. units intensive of ill hospital admitted care gastric Ulcers are nausea, hematemesis. and associated melena, with coffee-ground vomiting, that these from Bleeding erosions superficial ulcers 4% or in 1% transfusion of may patients. to gastric develop require Other complications, including occur. perforation, also may the is of may severity Prophylaxis the ulceration, inhibitors the condition. of stress important but blunt determinant proton underlying outcome of with pump the most impact

of bacillus most cause infection The common pylori. chronic Helicobacter the is with gastritis with gastritis, represents H. http://ebooksmedicine.net cases associated 10% without gastric gastritis patients typically less most atrophy, than cause the of in but pylori common of infection. chronic Autoimmune is some discussed third is later. of cause as important NSAID in gastritis Chronic use populations, a reflux. include bile common radiation injury chronic Less and causes

gastritis. with than signs are severe but chronic and persistent acute of less typically gastritis symptoms associated more The those uncommon. vomiting, sometimes hematemesis is and Nausea upper-abdominal occur, with may discomfort but

the H. association of of ulcer understanding peptic of revolutionized with chronic pylori the discovery disease The gastritis. a present gastritis. all in almost or or with ulcers and with those gastric duodenal specimens of are biopsy from gastric spiral-shaped ulcers These chronic curved bacilli patients majority that the rather, pylori subclinical ultimately most to afflicted in H. gastritis attention. Acute cases; it medical person is is chronic infection brings the pylori gastritis an most with acid infection as production. presents often increased H. antral rise or to give acid the The production may stomach. disease of ulcer increased peptic duodenum

gastric the body to the in resulting most mass limited and to in pylori and cases it gastritis some parietal individuals H. progresses acid secretion. is reduced in involve antrum, fundus, While cell results in output hypergastrinemia, autoimmune gastritis. as in atrophic Reduced acid intestinal results fundus increased to of in and the the of gastritis gastric body risk metaplasia and cancer. In addition, gastric extension

pylori the crowding, outside infection H. education, the poor residence limited associated with is United In of in and household areas poverty, States. birth United States, sanitation, with and is in life. acquired then typically for childhood Infection may persist they explains Improved in why among similarly were individuals in today younger ago. rates areas 30 sanitation lower infection than many H. individuals pylori years markedly are aged likely and the prevalence Mexican higher infection States, the is in Americans. Americans In pylori also African H. United of 80% as rates vary less than more from Worldwide, colonization than of factors. age, function geography, 10% a social to and

have the ecologic niche gastric organisms mucus. to H. adapted provided by pylori gastric invade to invasion H. contribution the known. mucosa, may of is Although pathogenesis disease not the pylori H. linked to are features virulence: Four pylori

which the in Flagella, viscous to motile be allow mucus bacteria

around and which the ammonia pH the local urea, gastric generates from bacteria from endogenous acidic Urease, protecting the thereby elevating stomach pH the of organisms

to surface which Adhesins, cells foveolar bacterial adherence enhance

that that Toxins, in by development be or (CagA), encoded may A as cytotoxin-associated such ulcer cancer involved gene

that pylori H. defenses. overcome imbalance an create to those These allow factors forces

MORPHOLOGYGastricbiopsyspecimensgenerallydemonstrateH. pylori ininfectedindividuals(

Fig.15.14A ).Theorganismisconcentratedwithinmucusoverlyingepithelialcellsinthesurfaceandneckregions.Theinflammatoryreactionincludesavariablenumberofneutrophilswithinthelaminapropria,includingsomethatcrossthebasementmembranetoassumeanintraepitheliallocation(

)andaccumulateinthelumenofgastricpitstocreatepitabscesses.Thesuperficiallaminapropriaincludeslargenumbersofplasmacells,ofteninclustersorsheets,aswellasincreasednumbersoflymphocytesandmacrophages.Whenintense,inflammatoryinfiltratesmaycreatethickenedrugalfolds,mimickinginfiltrativelesions.Lymphoidaggregates,somewithgerminalcenters,arefrequentlypresent( Fig.15.14B

(MALT)thathasthepotentialtotransformintolymphoma.Intestinal lymphoid Fig.15.14C characterizedbythepresenceofgobletcellsandcolumnarabsorptivecells( metaplasia, tissue )andrepresentaninducedformofmucosa-associated

),alsomaybepresentandisassociatedwithincreasedriskofgastricadenocarcinoma.H. Fig.15.14D pylori showstropismforgastricfoveolarepitheliumandgenerallyisnotfoundinareasofintestinalmetaplasia,acid-producingmucosaofthegastricbody,orduodenalepithelium.AntralbiopsiesarethereforepreferredforevaluationofH. pylori gastritis.

addition noninvasive organism, to anti–H. developed a of diagnostic identification the In serologic been including for have tests histologic test several breath antibodies, the the for of test stool test, urease. bacterial on organism, a the ammonia pylori and based generation by urea the assay for also Gastric test, culture, by specimens chain analyzed can bacterial bacterial reaction (PCR) rapid polymerase biopsy or DNA. urease be pump treatments and antibiotics Effective include of proton combinations inhibitors. H. usually incomplete with follow or treatment, gastritis can Patients relapses pylori after eradication improve reinfection. although

cases than for Autoimmune chronic gastritis. of gastritis accounts less of 10% antrum spares autoimmune induces H. and gastritis, contrast pylori-associated the gastritis typically marked ( hypergastrinemia In

Table 15.2 ). Autoimmune the following: by gastritis characterized is

parietal cells and serum in be to that http://ebooksmedicine.net factor can intrinsic Antibodies detected secretions gastric and

Fig. 15.14 Chronicgastritis. pylori bacilliarehighlightedinthisWarthin-Starrysilverstain.Organismsareabundantwithinsurfacemucus.(B)Intraepithelialandlaminaproprianeutrophilsareprominent. (A)Spiral-shapedHelicobacter (C)Lymphoidaggregateswithgerminalcentersandabundantsubepithelialplasmacellswithinthesuperficiallaminapropriaarecharacteristicof

H. pylori gastritis. (D)Intestinalmetaplasia,recognizableasthepresenceofgobletcellsadmixedwithgastricfoveolarepithelium,candevelopandisariskfactorfordevelopmentofgastricadenocarcinoma.

and to Vitamin changes anemia B12 deficiency leading pernicious neurologic

of gastritis immune-mediated parietal reductions with and secretion. cells is associated Autoimmune in subsequent intrinsic factor acid loss and gastrin stimulates in acid antral and secretion resulting of release, gastrin-producing cells. G Deficient hypergastrinemia hyperplasia particular deficiency form (Chapter factor anemia intrinsic to anemia absorption, pernicious of 12). B12 ileal and vitamin megaloblastic a called B12 Lack of disables leading I Reduced reflects pepsinogen cell of serum loss. chief concentration pylori pernicious not because is the cell as achlorhydria is not chief damage parietal associated with severe hypochlorhydria, in or as H. can autoimmune anemia, and it Although gastritis. cause

MORPHOLOGYAutoimmunegastritisischaracterizedbydiffusedamage atrophy, (acid-producing)mucosa withinthebodyandfundus.Damagetotheantrumandcardiatypicallyisabsentormild.Withdiffuse of the theoxynticmucosaofthebodyandfundusappearsmarkedlythinned,andrugalfoldsarelost.Neutrophilsmaybepresent,buttheinflammatoryinfiltratemorecommonlyiscomposedoflymphocytes,macrophages,andplasmacells;incontrastwithH. oxyntic maydevelop. gastritis, loss chief cell pylori metaplasia and theinflammatoryreactionmostoftenisdeepandcenteredonthegastricglands.Parietal canbeextensive,andintestinal

Antibodies cells to B12 factor intrinsic only a pernicious in and but are present patients. and early deficiency develop minority anemia of parietal in the disease, a female median age years, there slight predominance. is diagnosis at 60 The is and autoimmune is gastritis with often specific is associated to human other diseases not but (HLA) linked leukocyte Autoimmune antigen alleles.

intestinal gastritis: are and metaplasia, three and chronic disease, dysplasia. important complications atrophy ulcer Peptic mucosal of There shortly. is these of discussed Each

is disease (PUD) Peptic most associated often ulcer with

NSAID use. H. or infection pylori of imbalances The

Gastritis 15.2 Characteristics Autoimmune pylori–Associated and Helicobacter Table of

H. Feature pylori–Associated Autoimmune

InflammatoryinfiltrateNeutrophils,subepithelialplasmacellsLymphocytes,macrophages

SerologyAntibodiestoH. Antibodiestoparietalcells(H+,K+-ATPase,intrinsicfactor) pylori

SequelaePepticulcer,adenocarcinoma,lymphomaAtrophy,perniciousanemia,adenocarcinoma,carcinoidtumor

http://ebooksmedicine.net AssociationsLowsocioeconomicstatus,poverty,residenceAutoimmunedisease;thyroiditis,diabetesmellitus,Gravesdiseaseinruralareas

Fig. PUD. responsible for 15.13 also ) are use most are aging ulcers use becoming pylori is rates the and aspirin United States, is infection population falling increasing. as NSAID H. the common of low-dose gastric in In the cause occur of duodenum. the exposed common antrum in juices is may the but in most PUD any of gastrointestinal gastric first acidic portion to gastric portion and tract the ectopic injury result in gastric a as secretion Peptic acid by acid reflux occur (GERD) of may the (acid-induced) mucosa. or esophagus a including also heterotopia, may that injury gastric be within small the diverticulum. intestine Meckel Peptic with in associated

cause frequent common of visits PUD and is a is worldwide. physician to million States treatment hospitalizations, year. each of 3 and 190,000 the leads United in 5000 deaths individuals, over It approximately 4% females. risk 10% is for males lifetime ulcer for The and an for developing

NSAID use PUD. the H. and are causes underlying pylori primary infection of PUD than H. background of More generally infection are these cases 70% gastritis. associated of individuals a chronic on PUD and pylori in develops with individuals it also among as factors pylori to to 10% variation ulcers, pathogenesis. H. H. pylori–infected 5% of that the host contribute develop probable only Because strains is as well

to fundamental PUD. acid the Gastric pathogenesis is of caused excessive cell may secretory and H. Hyperacidity responses. hyperplasia, infection, pylori be parietal by release stimulatory also as inhibition such mechanisms Insufficient may of gastrin contribute. and tumor by even ulcerations uncontrolled syndrome, release massive is caused production. by the For the duodenum, example, peptic resulting Zollinger-Ellison a multiple by in gastrin characterized stomach, acid of and jejunum,

noted; and flow which impairs which in and healing. smoking, NSAID and corticosteroids, mucosal high-dose prostaglandin chronic impair suppress Cofactors blood cigarette use, healing; ulcerogenesis peptic include synthesis as in renal pulmonary chronic cirrhosis, and frequent failure, disease, more obstructive Peptic are hyperparathyroidism. alcoholic with ulcers chronic individuals latter increases stimulates hypercalcemia two thereby In production secretion. acid conditions, gastrin the and

MORPHOLOGYPepticulcersarefourtimesmorecommonintheproximalduodenumthaninthestomach.Duodenalulcersusuallyoccurwithinafewcentimetersofthepyloricvalveandinvolvetheanteriorduodenalwall.Gastricpepticulcersarepredominantlylocatedneartheinterfaceofthebodyandantrum.

Pepticulcersaresolitaryinmorethan80%ofpatients.Lesionslessthan0.3cmindiametertendtobeshallow,whereasthoseover0.6cmarelikelytobedeeper.Theclassicpepticulcerisaroundtooval,sharply punched-out ( defect

Fig.15.15A ).Thebaseofpepticulcersissmoothandcleanasaresultofpepticdigestionofexudateandonhistologicexaminationiscomposedofrichlyvasculargranulationtissue(

isacomplicationthatdemandsemergentsurgicalintervention. Fig.15.15C ).Ongoingbleedingwithintheulcerbasemaycauselife-threateninghemorrhage.Perforation

adults most without Peptic chronic, than older recurring occur precipitating ulcers often are that conditions, obvious other gastritis. lesions to middle-aged chronic in manifest or burning to although a after complications of complaints come iron fraction as clinical A significant of patient peptic majority deficiency hemorrhage, pain, such attention anemia, aching with perforation. frank epigastric or ulcers meals night, day, is and to or The occur 3 relieved alkali 1 is tends worse food. by hours after pain the during to at present. be may belching Nausea, and bloating, vomiting, Healing with without but tendency ulcers may or subsequent remains. develop therapy, the occur to

Fig. Pepticulcerdisease.(A)EndoscopicviewoftypicalantralulcerassociatedwithNSAIDuse.(B)Grossviewofasimilarulcerthatwasresectedduetogastricperforation,presentingasfreeairunderthediaphragm.Notethecleanedges.(C)Thenecroticulcerbaseiscomposedofgranulationtissueoverlaidbydegradedblood. 15.15 Chicago, Ira (Endoscopic Illinois.) Chicago, of University courtesy of Dr. image Hanan,The http://ebooksmedicine.net

causes more than PUD much mortality. morbidity use used through surgical inhibitors. gastric H. antibiotics current approaches of variety to pylori but and pump neutralization formerly of acid, were usually therapies aimed A at are of eradication with treat PUD, proton reserved need surgical primarily the which uncontrollable is bleeding of for have reduced or management, for treatment These efforts ulcers markedly perforation. with

associated presence Long-standing cells. by metaplasia, be with gastritis of goblet the chronic recognized may intestinal with adenocarcinoma. strongly of is gastric increased development for This associated risk gastric commonly that achlorhydria metaplasia, intestinal the with which In nitrosamines. permits of bacteria addition, associated overgrowth mucosal is of carcinogenic produce atrophy, of pylori caused organism. metaplasia after Intestinal H. eradication chronic by gastritis the may regress

proliferative free gastritis Chronic the inflammation-related stimuli. and damage epithelium to radical exposes the that genetic to of Over can this time, carcinoma. lead result in alterations accumulation dysplasia, recognized epithelial with by variations marked chromatin coarse size, along lesions in as be and situ histologically nuclear is texture, in which enlargement. and can shape, orientation Preinvasive hyperchromasia, distinguish overlap and sometimes with are regenerative injury-associated to difficult changes. from These

Gastritisisamucosalinflammatoryprocess.Wheninflammatorycellsareabsentorrare,thetermgastropathy canbeapplied.

Thespectrumofacutegastritisrangesfromasymptomaticdiseasetomildepigastricpain,nausea,andvomiting.Causativefactorsincludeanyagentordiseasethatinterfereswithgastricmucosalprotection.Acutegastritiscanprogresstogastriculceration.

ThemostcommoncauseofchronicgastritisisH. infection;mostremainingcasesarecausedbyNSAIDs,alcohol,or pylori gastritis. autoimmune

pylori gastritistypicallyaffectstheantrumandisassociatedwithincreasedgastricacidproduction. H.

gastritisinducesmucosa-associatedlymphoidtissue(MALT)thatcangiverisetoB-celllymphomas(MALTomas). pylori H.

Autoimmune causesatrophyofthegastricbodyoxynticglands,whichresultsindecreasedgastricacidproduction,antralG-cellhyperplasia,achlorhydria,andvitaminB12deficiency.Anti–parietalcellandanti–intrinsicfactorantibodiesaretypicallypresent. gastritis

developsinbothformsofchronicgastritisandisariskfactorfordevelopmentofgastricdysplasiaandadenocarcinoma. Intestinal metaplasia

PepticulcerdiseasecanbecausedbyH. pylori chronicgastritisandtheresultanthyperchlorhydriaorNSAIDuse.Ulcerscandevelopinthestomachorduodenumandusuallyhealaftersuppressionofgastricacidproduction,discontinuationofNSAIDuse,or,ifpresent,H. pylori eradication.

nodules level above masses the mucosa. Polyps surrounding of are the that project or 5% to endoscopies. of are in gastrointestinal up identified They tract upper Polyps as cell result may inflammation, stromal ectopia, hyperplasia, develop or or of epithelial neoplasia. a types the occur and in different here. polyps, can stomach, adenomas considered of Although hyper-plastic many fundic and gland polyps are polyps, only inflammatory

or gastric polyps all are inflammatory Up of hyperplastic 75% polyps. to entity; ends and inflammatory the degree solely spectrum on is hyperplastic the single inflammation. stomach, of polyps of the the of opposite based distinction morphologic In represent a that between and hyperplasia affect usually polyp initiates commonly cause injury gastritis most reactive chronic growth. They a background of age, arising 50 that of in years and the 60 individuals regress may If pylori eradication. bacterial gastritis, H. with associated polyps after

in with develops a polyps a these dysplasia, lesion, there polyps 1.5 situ significant with cm. which frequency in larger with The than correlates is increase size; in precancerous risk

become dysplasia, malignant. familial never but show polyposis individuals Fundic (FAP) almost to adenomatous they occur with polyps (but sporadically may Polyps gland associated in and not progress with FAP sporadic) incidence sporadic use result of as pump has proton lesions increased widespread of of a markedly the inhibitors. The glandular from and gastrin. results hyperplasia driven reduced acidity, This to increased by likely response gastrin in secretion, Fundic usually are polyps gland asymptomatic, are an always and nearly incidental finding. gastric occur the and lined are parietal irregular and cells. chief These composed in by of often polyps are cystically glands dilated, body well-circumscribed flattened fundus, multiple, and

to polyps. all gastric adenomas 10% of up Gastric represent adenocarcinoma. age different incidence that gastric with varies populations in with parallel increases and among of Their three between years times of and Patients than males and usually often age, more are affected 50 are 60 females. atrophy and a background occur with metaplasia. almost gastritis always on intestinal of chronic Adenomas as can epithelial be high-grade. dysplasia, exhibit low-or gastrointestinal adenomas All classified which for in lesions particularly diameter. gastric development with risk than the to of cm in related greater adenocarcinoma of size The is lesion is adenomas elevated and 2 the adenomas potential far Overall, gastric malignant the that is greater colonic than of their counterparts. of 30% up of to Carcinoma be present adenomas. gastric may in

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of common is most 90% the the Adenocarcinoma of comprising than more malignancy gastric stomach, cancers. all and resemble gastritis, of chronic symptoms dysphagia, nausea. dyspepsia, Early including those the habits, altered and hemorrhage weight loss, anemia, when stages trigger is clinical bowel as manifestations diagnostic As a advanced result, such anorexia, cancer often evaluation. at diagnosed

geography. Gastric rates with cancer vary markedly in Asia. America, 20 northern and Rica, is Europe, Africa, Costa Chile, Europe Southeast times in Japan, up The Eastern and than to incidence North higher in submucosa). early (i.e., Japan, Mass limited incidence, successful endoscopic screening where have and as of 35% are newly to mucosa cancer such the tumors gastric cases detected programs of been regions high incidence and are America at detected than northern less in mass Unfortunately, which of in screening low, and in 20% cost-effective not is early the are North cases regions stage Europe. an programs

in intestinal in with and groups atrophy cancer multifocal metaplasia. mucosal socioeconomic common lower is more and individuals Gastric of had reflux, higher impart chronic cancer, who gastric patients slightly residual a and as result for not risk risk partial development of but for gastrectomies does have in PUD hypochlorhydria, the for stump gastritis. gastric increased developing an PUD have bile cancer a

85% by gastric United rates the In than the more century. have dropped during cancer States, 20th and in declines reflecting Western the dietary Similar reported many factors. of environmental been have other importance countries, in decrease the gastric is this gastric on Despite cardia the cancer overall incidence, rise. of adenocarcinoma trend obesity reflect This is of of growing may Barrett and esophagus the to GERD. rates prevalence and chronic increased related probably

alterations are cancers certain molecular heterogeneous, Gastric but genetically common. are will with EBV the We infection. role and by H. of followed be these chronic a first association cancers subset the of of inflammation to consider pylori–induced gastric

• Mutations. in provided gastric important the cancer in mutations carcinogenesis gastric familial majority sporadic of have of insights cancers While the identified are not mechanisms hereditary, into cases. type. which with encodes intercellular E-cadherin, the a adhesion, contributes of that gastric protein diffuse Germ line CDH1, associated to are in familial mutations epithelial usually cancers, present in are tumors, rest, E-cadherin promoter. about often decreased the 50% drastically methylation in by of gastric CDH1 diffuse comparison, the while is in of mutations By expression sporadic CDH1 gastric the cancer. diffuse of be development of step loss function Thus, seems E-cadherin in a key to the

cancer. development of coli have In risk have increased contrast mutations patients adenomatous to with intestinal-type who line genes for CDH1, FAP polyposis gastric in germ (APC) an microsatellite p16/INK4a. BAX, gastric intestinal-type several APC IGFRII, with acquired of to including a of genes hypermethylation cancer protein mutations binds and genetic β-catenin, and including protein; Sporadic that both abnormalities TGFβRII, is and instability; E-cadherin associated mutations a present types. of of in sporadic cancers are majority TP53 both histologic gastric

pylori. H. (Chapter may alterations pylori induced development gastritis, be to infection, cancers progression by most diverse commonly Chronic promotes and 6). H. that genetic due the of is as interleukin-1β proteins, proinflammatory of necrosis of chronic increased H. inflammation, chronic pylori–induced associated production gastritis (IL-1β) As such (TNF). factor is tumor case the with many forms with and polymorphisms such genes factors H. that for It enhance increased infection. surprising pylori chronic these of with gastritis-associated development encode risk cancer and not in of is therefore cytokines that coexisting confer production of gastric those

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). commonly infection. pylori Epstein-Barr cancer, with is 10% with of gastric approximately most adenocarcinomas (EBV) are H. While associated virus gastric associated of in that EBV clonal, episomes preceded the precise in neoplastic notable is gastric these Although to adenocarcinomas of it that EBV development tumors the role be are suggesting infection transformation. remains defined, frequently pathogenesis tumors, from mutations the TP53 other molecular that of of Further, distinct in is uncommon are cancers gastric EBV-positive adenocarcinomas. gastric these that suggesting infiltrate. occur a tumors morphology commonly with most a EBV-positive proximal stomach tend have lymphocytic Morphologically, marked in and to diffuse the

MORPHOLOGYGastricadenocarcinomasareclassifiedaccordingtotheirlocationinthestomachaswellasgrossandhistologicmorphology.TheLauren anddiffuse classification typescorrelateswithdistinctpatternsofmolecularalterations,asdiscussedearlier.Intestinal-typecancerstendtobebulky( thatseparatesgastriccancersintointestinal

)andarecomposedofglandularstructuressimilartoesophagealandcolonicadenocarcinoma.Intestinal-typeadenocarcinomastypicallygrowalongbroadcohesivefrontstoformeitheranexophyticmassoranulceratedtumor.Theneoplasticcellsoftencontainapicalmucinvacuoles,andabundantmucinmaybepresentinglandlumina. Fig.15.16A

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.15.16B morphology( )andarecomposedofdiscohesivecellswithlargemucinvacuolesthatexpandthecytoplasmandpushthenucleustotheperiphery,creatingasignet ring cell

plastica. ).Thesecellspermeatethemucosaandstomachwallindividuallyorinsmallclusters.Amassmaybedifficulttoappreciateindiffusegastriccancer,buttheseinfiltrativetumorsoftenevokeadesmoplastic reactionthatstiffensthegastricwallandmaycausediffuserugalflatteningandarigid,thickenedwallthatimpartsa“leatherbottle”appearancetermedlinitis Fig.15.16C

lesions and predominates and Intestinal-type gastric areas from dysplasia precursor develops as adenomas. in cancer high-risk such 55 at age is is years, and mean male-to-female presentation the 2:1. The ratio the contrast, By

Fig. 15.16 Gastricadenocarcinoma. (A)Intestinal-typeadenocarcinomaconsistingofanelevatedmasswithheaped-upbordersandcentralulceration.Comparewiththepepticulcerin

. Fig.15.15A (B)Linitisplastica.Thegastricwallismarkedlythickened,andrugalfoldsarepartiallylost. (C)Signetringcellswithlargecytoplasmicmucinvacuolesandperipherallydisplaced,crescent-shapednuclei.

females. gastric relatively in frequencies identified incidence and countries, occurs uniform are precursor and no cancer diffuse of across is males lesions, at the disease there similar in intestinal associated cancer and only the atrophic applies intestinal to gastritis type, decrease is incidence Of the metaplasia. with note, gastric closely most which of now intestinal some similar gastric result, in a As regions. cancers types incidences and of diffuse are the

and for The prognostic time gastric and of the the depth extent nodal metastasis invasion distant the most powerful cancer. of of remain at indicators diagnosis retroperitoneum characteristic. into also and the pancreas, duodenum, Local invasion is remains the for gastric surgical preferred adenocarcinoma. treatment When possible, resection After the 5-year even are metastases if can 90%, present. for survival cancer surgical resection, lymph exceed early rate gastric node 20%, are contrast, 5-year for have survival current limited in rate advanced By because part below remains gastric regimens chemotherapy impact. cancer the large changing with therapies. individualized This is slowly patients signaling. growth receptor the over-express inhibit tumors from example, benefit that HER2 epidermal factor whose agents For HER2 the in survival most cancers Nevertheless, less United than is advanced discovered at and 5-year gastric 30%. States, stage overall are rate the

the do tissue, so in the lymphomas particularly stomach. extranodal gastrointestinal most arise virtually Although commonly they any can tract, in Epstein-Barr transplant organ most allogeneic stem is bowel the the for and virus–positive cell also In hematopoietic B lymphoproliferations. cell site recipients, frequent the which lymphomas. primary extranodal of are are all B-cell most common of Nearly 5% zone lymphomas, marginal malignancies gastric indolent In of referred these are often the MALTomas. as lymphomas gut, tumors or MALT, to 12. are second B lymphoma diffuse discussed gut, This primary and entity the Chapter lymphoma, of common most cell in the large

tumors, to referred organs (e.g., the endocrine Neuroendocrine from tumors, G and carcinoid neuroendocrine neuroendocrine-differentiated cells). pancreas) (e.g., as gastrointestinal arise epithelia also small the 40% and tumors are A these majority gastrointestinal than in more occur in of tract, found the intestine. tracheobronchial next are tree lungs involved The commonly sites. and the most may gastritis, and associated hyperplasia, tumors cell neuroendocrine endocrine Gastric with syndrome. atrophic Zollinger-Ellison chronic be tumors These are than they because “carcinoid” slower growing called were carcinomas. WHO most The intermediate-grade low-or current tumors. as these neuroendocrine describes classification 13) tumors, neuroendocrine carcinoma, termed are jejunum. the gastrointestinal small carcinoma the common (Chapter neuroendocrine in most the High-grade in of tract, and, lung resemble cell

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Gastrointestinalcarcinoidtumor(neuroendocrinetumor).(A)Carcinoidtumorsoftenformasubmucosalnodulecomposedoftumorcellsembeddedindensefibroustissue. 15.17 (B)Highmagnificationshowstheblandcytologythattypifiesneuroendocrinetumors.Thechromatintexture,withfineandcoarseclumps,frequentlyassumesa“salt-and-pepper”pattern.Despitetheirinnocuousappearance,tumorscanbeaggressive.

Fig.15.17A ).Thetumorsareyellowortaninappearanceandelicitanintensedesmoplasticreactionthatmaycausekinkingofthebowelandobstruction.Onhistologicexamination,neuroendocrinetumorsarecomposedofislands,trabeculae,strands,glands,orsheetsofuniformcellswithscant,pinkgranularcytoplasmandaround-to-ovalstipplednucleus(

Fig.15.17B

in decade, at tumors they The sixth but appear the is incidence neuroendocrine age. may peak any of by produced. hormones are Symptoms the determined cause valvular colicky vasoactive is syndrome substances the example, carcinoid tumor abdominal cardiac flushing, bronchospasm, diarrhea, that right-sided by For fibrosis. caused pain, the and by cutaneous sweating, secreted oral “firstpass” forms with When tumors by substances drugs. are that liver—a seen to similar intestine, to the inactive are confined metabolized effect released the to the vasoactive 10% metastatic than of with occurs and is less in strongly Thus, associated patients disease. carcinoid syndrome

the of Foregut gastrointestinal generally neuroendocrine rarely ligament metastasize esophagus, prognostic tumors duodenum within is important found The are location: cured for and and tumors (carcinoid) to Treitz, factor most the neuroendocrine by resection. • proximal stomach, present diarrhea gastroduodenal gastrinomas, gastrin-producing excessive duodenal inactivation and acid with tumors, including due by production, reflux, bleeding to gastroesophageal enzymes Rare refractory related from and/or acid. neuroendocrine pain to increased also of may ulcers, gastric pancreatic termed symptoms

in ileum, (carcinoid) jejunum neuroendocrine multiple to arise the be often are Midgut and tend and tumors aggressive. these associated necrosis invasion, presence mitoses are In local depth size, and of the poor with of outcome. and tumors,

Hindgut colorectum in discovered arising incidentally. and the typically (carcinoid) tumors appendix neuroendocrine are almost at are Those any course. uniformly and occur the appendix a pursue in age benign produce and may with hormones to manifest weight pain polypeptide tend loss. Rectal abdominal tumors and discovered metastasis neuroendocrine Because tumors rectal small, uncommon. are they when of usually is

than most stromal mesenchymal half the abdomen, the is tumors and occur these stomach. tumor the in (GIST) more Gastrointestinal tumor of common of mesenchymal in arise of stomach. variety may A wide the other neoplasms other the named termed for leiomyomas glomus cell the nail smooth type are are most are according leiomyosarcomas, bodies they or schwannomas, Many beds sheath tumors resemble; example, called at termed nerve and in glomus those to muscle sites and tumors tumors. are resembling discussed tumors not here. These rare and all are are

pathogenesis stem tyrosine gene The mutations KIT, most the of for change factor. genetic the of underlying encoding cell is the gain-of-function GISTs the kinase receptor common are These present 75% 85% to of in all GISTs. tyrosine additional A that related kinase, factor growth activate have mutations (PDGFRA). platelet-derived GISTs a An of 8% receptor the stromal the propria. cells is the reflects confusion about of recognized gastrointestinal The of which of from historical or term now cells, to pacemaker interstitial muscularis origin tumor, arise Cajal, this GISTs For stomach. PDGFRA mutations unknown reasons, overrepresented are the bearing in mutations their signal reflecting activities KIT are PDGFRA exclusive, the gene mutually and within same pathway. transduction also of may develop Cajal diffuse same GISTs GISTs, line multiple cells. genes Germ present rare mutations in which these have patients and are in in hyperplasia familial

that 6). in kinases or and result signals promote (Chapter Both germ sporadic proliferation mutations PDGFRA and KIT survival tumor and active intracellular tyrosine line receptor produce cell constitutively affected. genes commonly In dehydrogenase without (SDH) GISTs mutations, KIT are PDGFRA encoding components or most of complex the succinate mitochondrial risk mutations SDH result function both increased of These paraganglioma. for loss confer and in GIST and second or inherited, with in mutant of mutated allele tumor. the often the copy the is either otherwise gene One lost being causes number is changes, lead reactive but production, of these oxygen transformation hypoxia for of metabolic increased factor on species, including of SDH a loss of increased to how (HIF), ATP glycolysis uncertain. The production induced activation and dependency alterations

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cells cells. MORPHOLOGYPrimarygastricGISTsusuallyformasolitary,well-circumscribed,fleshy,submucosalmass.Metastasesmayformmultiplesmallserosalnodulesorfewerlargenodulesintheliver;spreadoutsideoftheabdomenisuncommon.GISTscanbecomposedofthin,elongatedspindle orplumperepithelioid ThemostusefuldiagnosticmarkerisKIT,whichisimmunohistochemicallydetectablein95%ofthesetumors.

than occurring 10% of of younger in of 40 years age. is GIST less years The with incidence around peak age, 60 than individuals gastric common males. slightly GISTs Overall, are more in to work-up GISTs may clinical come of during symptoms, attention are common. GI other Small which incidentally mass mucosal intestinal effects Larger or as present may obstruction to with ulceration, bleeding. GISTs gastrointestinal symptoms such or related resection Complete primary is treatment gastric localized GIST. the for surgical in correlates with gastric arising prognosis The and those tumor small being with somewhat aggressive location, intestine. GISTs mitotic the less than size, index, active metastasis tumors common but or mitotically 10 Recurrence cm. for than larger for less gastric GISTs 5 diameter than is cm rare in and sometimes inhibitors active often years, or respond, kinase Tumors that imatinib. to tyrosine against as such for are metastatic are PDGFRA, KIT that unresectable to eventually (Chapter Unfortunately, resistance additional outgrowth KIT myeloid arises PDGFRA. chronic imatinib due 12), in as in with or of mutations leukemia subclones to these respond against activity KIT and kinase some retain other to tyrosine inhibitors tumors PDGFRA. instances, that In

and polyps gastric hyperplastic arereactivelesionsassociatedwithchronicgastritis.Riskfordevelopmentofdysplasiaincreaseswithpolypsize. Inflammatory

adenomas developinabackgroundofchronicgastritisandareparticularlyassociatedwithintestinalmetaplasiaandmucosal(glandular)atrophy.Adenocarcinomafrequentlyarisesingastricadenomas,whichthereforerequirecompleteexcisionandsurveillancetodetectrecurrence. Gastric

Gastric adenocarcinomas areclassifiedaccordingtolocationandgrossandhistologicmorphology.Thosewithanintestinalhistologicpatterntendtoformbulkytumorsandmaybeulcerated,whereasthosecomposedofmucus-filledsignetringcellstypicallydisplayadiffuseinfiltrativegrowthpatternthatmaythickenthegastricwall(linitisplastica)withoutformingadiscretemass.

infectionisthemostcommonetiologicagentforgastricadenocarcinoma,butotherassociations,includingchronicatrophicgastritisandEBVinfection,suggestseveralpossiblepathwaysofneoplastictransformation. H. pylori

Primary lymphomas mostoftenarederivedfromthemucosa-associatedlymphoidtissuewhosedevelopmentisinducedbychronicgastritis. gastric

Low-orintermediate-gradeneuroendocrine tumors (carcinoid) arisefromthediffusecomponentsoftheendocrinesystemandaremostcommoninthegastrointestinaltract,particularlythesmallintestine.Tumorsofthesmallintestinetendtobemostaggressive,whilethoseoftheappendixarealmostalwaysbenign.

themostcommonmesenchymaltumoroftheabdomen,occursmostofteninthestomach.GISTsarisefrombenignpacemakercells,alsoknownastheinterstitial cells (GIST), stromal of tumor Gastrointestinal Cajal. Amajorityoftumorshaveactivatingmutationsineitherthec-KITorthePDGFRAtyrosinekinasesandrespondtokinaseinhibitors.

wide affect are diseases, which water variety sites of The colon and of transport. intestine a small many nutrient and of the of diarrhea. these processes malabsorption may cause and Perturbation also microbes. food a immune system array site in of are The and intestines the with the where diverse antigens gut interfaces present principal advances molecular which approaches. Recent using of microbiome, is composition the largely unculturable, have diversity defined and the gut disease. association common diversity is the trend One of microbial in reduced allergy of food partly gut also association which is to exquisitely other diet-induced diseases microbiome microbiome. composition the The and explain sensitive the diet, and may between altered surprising inflammatory processes. by small frequently colon the not it intestine that is involved and infectious and Thus, are populations. neoplasia is site the The gastrointestinal common of in Western colon most

the of any tract relatively may occur because at but the narrow Obstruction often its level, lumen. small most intestine gastrointestinal involved is of of intussusception, and 80% obstructions volvulus for adhesions, Collectively, mechanical ( intestinal hernias, account

Fig. most infarction for the ), while 15.18 and of remainder. account tumors include of and The manifestations vomiting, clinical and intestinal distention, constipation. abdominal pain obstruction Surgical http://ebooksmedicine.net usually involving cases required intervention in is

Fig. obstruction. Intestinal 15.18 obstruction are and (2) between (3) adhesion segment umbilical inguinal intussusception. regions, (1) in The a herniation major intestine, of mechanical intestinal or (4) the volvulus, of four of loops causes

infarction. mechanical severe obstruction or are bowel and loops between illustrated in adhesions well Volvulus

Fig.

15.18 . are the comments about of obstruction. causes made next Brief other

intestine, by a when peristalsis, constricted occurs into the segment. wave immediately the of distal of a segment telescopes Intussusception by the propelled pulls segment along. is trapped, and the Once mesentery invaginated peristalsis vessels, of intestinal may and mesenteric intussusception obstruction, infarction. compression Untreated progress to of age. the obstruction Intussusception is than in years common of younger children cause intestinal 2 most child is usually anatomic There is underlying no defect and the otherwise healthy. are hyperplasia cases viral may infection related Peyer of as reactive and of the and which vaccines the can leading associated Other to act be intussusception. with rotavirus patches, edge diagnostically are are Contrast and effective also in useful and correcting young enemas intussusception children. idiopathic infants in However, typical intraluminal surgical traction, in of children older adults. mass when intervention in necessary is as is as an point tumor or serves and the initiating

1 a births approximately disease and 5000 from defect colonic Hirschsprung congenital occurs of in innervation. in stems live combination abnormalities. developmental or may It be with in occur other isolated severe in common It to but more in males more is be tends females. at are Siblings development of increased Hirschsprung for disease. risk

followed constipation. by postnatal period typically pass as in failure the obstructive Patients to meconium neonates present immediate with major and electrolyte fluid perforation, peritonitis. The life to are and enterocolitis, disturbances, threats the years normal patients of Surgical with the although may of colon for normal bowel effective, to take segment rectum is anastomosis and resection the attain function continence. it to aganglionic

from during The migrate neuronal bowel plexus enteric neural into wall embryogenesis. crest develops that cells the is rectum cecum megacolon, congenital as aganglionic known neural disease, disrupted. also the Hirschsprung migration from when crest of cells normal to results submucosal segment lacks that the and thus This develop Auerbach and (“aganglionosis”), distal myenteric contractions. produces Meissner plexus plexus the coordinated both a peristaltic intestinal to fails approximately tyrosine for cases. majority the and of familial of 15% RET account receptor cases Mutations kinase in sporadic a must well be genes, genes, factors as environmental involved. other in as also Mutations disease-modifying including

disease Most are length of involved cases entire always varies. limited segments severe colon. colon, rectum but sigmoid the involve but the affects to the the disease rectum, and the Hirschsprung additional can the as contracted normal while result may a may region distal a obstruction dilation appearance, normally colon undergo or grossly aganglionic innervated proximal The have progressive functional of (

Fig. ). 15.19 made of segment. ganglion in demonstrating Diagnosis is the absence by the affected cells

Fig. present in (B) dilated study and dilated but of rectum, disease. barium cells intraoperative sigmoid the Preoperative Ganglion appearance showing in colon. colon. 15.19 absent enema Hirschsprung the sigmoid Corresponding (A) the colon. rectum were constricted (bottom) sigmoid Chicago, University of (Courtesy Dr. of Aliya The Chicago, Husain, Illinois.)

may weakness peritoneum hernia Any of of permit pouch cavity the defect the called wall in a serosa-lined protrusion of sac. or a peritoneal occur most Acquired hernias scars. or canals the of femoral commonly anteriorly, and surgical or through sites inguinal umbilicus, at visceral concern These of (external are because protrusion herniation). of to particularly tend inguinal sacs. narrow large which and of have hernias, This orifices is true these also and herniate omentum bowel any most entrapped. portions may loops protrude, of become Small large of bowel but often, or pouch of impair the and venous leading to stasis at the neck Pressure may edema. drainage, leading in infarction. over or result and venous entrapment, changes permanent the increase can and to These of the loop, compromise, bulk herniated arterial incarceration, or strangulation, time,

Intussusception isthemostcommoncauseofintestinalobstructioninchildrenyoungerthan2yearsofageandcanusuallybetreatedbybariumenemaorairenema.

istheresultofdefectiveneuralcrestcellmigrationfromcecumtorectum.Itgivesrisetofunctionalobstruction. disease Hirschsprung

mayoccurthroughanyweaknessordefectinthewalloftheperitonealcavity,includinginguinalandfemoralcanals,umbilicus,andsitesofsurgicalscarring. herniation Abdominal

the celiac, mesenteric the portion gastrointestinal and is superior inferior tract by The mesenteric, of arteries. largest supplied mesenteric the the inferior arcades. and out superior mesenteric wall, fan the intestinal arteries As form they to approach arcades, to small collateral of tolerate one possible Interconnections the and and intestine and proximal distal pudendal circulations iliac the blood slowly between celiac well as make loss colon it supply from as artery. the for supplies progressive from lead By meters intestine. any of contrast, vessel infarction acute several of major compromise of can to

infarction, extending the mural of and the to all from bowel the involving mucosa deeper of submucosa; infarction than damage muscularis mucosal wall. to layers Ischemic mucosa; range no transmural to can three infarction While mural is infarction generally or acute infarctions obstruction. mucosal often chronic hypoperfusion, acute are transmural to secondary or caused by vascular is arterial prominent aortic at cardiac mesenteric contraceptive causes the or of of vessels), atherosclerosis of acute aortic embolization oral obstruction vegetations (which aneurysm, origin use, often states, severe atheromas. Important hypercoagulable and include can associated hypo-perfusion drugs. shock, vasoconstrictive dehydration, Intestinal failure, be also cardiac with or damage Systemic may intestinal vasculitides also arteries. mesenteric thrombosis disease, it ischemic to lead is can venous uncommon. While trauma, or invasive hypertension, abdominal portal causes include neoplasms, that drainage. masses compress portal cirrhosis, the Other

bowel which and that develops, determine vascular it of severity The frame ischemic vessels compromise, of disease. during the variables time severity major are affected occur to in ischemia responses phases. two Intestinal transient occurs The cells hypoxia. although resistant occurs, some epithelial initial and, damage vascular compromise relatively injury onset to the intestinal at hypoxic are of supply of The phase, blood the injury, associated greatest reperfusion is restoration damage. the second with by and initiated cytokines. free underlying inflammatory of infiltration, radical incompletely complement production, involve injury mediators neutrophil understood, While mechanisms such reperfusion as and they and the are aspects vascular Two the to distribution also of of intestinal damage: contribute anatomy ischemic

intestinal refers their to susceptible at to particularly Watershed the are supplies respective arterial ischemia. segments of zones that end extent, superior rectum arterial colon the sigmoid end. mesenteric, pudendal, iliac and where where and arterial to and, lesser splenic the circulations These inferior terminate, inferior circulations the and include flexure, zones mesenteric a should hypoxemia injury hypotension rectosigmoid or colitis ischemic or for splenic Generalized at differential sites, the of and considered cause localized can diagnosis colon. the be in focal disease these flexure therefore

intestinal microvessls. of Patterns capillaries the to the surface glands, venules. at from postcapillary Intestinal turn the alongside making before a hairpin into run surface, empty to crypt This epithelium vulnerable to configuration particularly the injury. leaves ischemic surface signature morphologic epithelial surface constitutes or and epithelial atrophy, or intestinal disease. crypts necrosis even of Thus, ischemic hyperproliferative with sloughing, a normal

mayinvolveanylevelofthegutfromstomachtoanus.Involvementisfrequentlysegmentalandpatchy,andthemucosaishemorrhagicandoftenulcerated.Thebowelwallisthickenedbyedemathatmayinvolvethemucosaorextendintothesubmucosaandmuscularispropria.Withseveredisease,pathologicchangesincludeextensivemucosalandsubmucosalhemorrhageandnecrosis,butserosalhemorrhageandserositisgenerallyareabsent.Damageismorepronouncedinacutearterialthrombosisandtransmural MORPHOLOGYDespitetheincreasedsusceptibilityofwatershedzones,mucosal and mural infarction. infarction Blood-tingedmucusorbloodaccumulateswithinthelumen.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Coagulativenecrosisofthemuscularispropriaoccurswithin1to4daysandmaybeassociatedwithpurulentserositisandperforation.

sloughing epithelium of surface Microscopicexaminationofischemicintestinedemonstratesatrophy ( or

).Bycontrast,cryptsmaybehyperproliferative.Inflammatoryinfiltratesareinitiallyabsentinacuteischemia,butneutrophilsarerecruitedwithinhoursofreperfusion.Chronicischemiaisaccompaniedbyfibrousscarringofthelaminapropria( Fig.15.20A

Fig.

15.20B )and,uncommonly,strictureformation.Inacutephasesofischemicdamage,bacterialsuperinfectionandenterotoxinreleasemayinducepseudomembraneformationthatcanresembleClostridium difficile–associatedpseudomembranouscolitis(discussedlater).

cardiac or bowel occur with coexisting to tends older disease disease. vascular in Ischemic adults typically vomiting, tenderness, stool. melanotic sometimes Acute by accompanied or abdominal bloody transmural grossly nausea, manifests severe sudden, with and diarrhea, infarction pain presentation blood hours loss. vascular a within progress may as result collapse and This shock to of spasm the rigidity sounds Peristaltic and boardlike muscular of diminish abdominal or wall. creates disappear, with ulcer, acute including the emergencies, may diagnosis with perforated consequences. disastrous signs appendicitis, Because abdominal intestinal of overlap or delayed acute physical these missed, cholecystitis, those infarction other of and be exceed can down, develop; rate in the the mortality mucosal 50%. barrier cases enter the As sepsis bacteria circulation breaks may these and

on ischemic progression and The of the of underlying enteritis injury: depends cause overall severity

Mucosal themselves mural fatal. infarctions by and may not be of by more transmural by disease, development of may vascular supply extensive, the infarction However, not chronic progress restored or, collateral correction to in these if adequate the insult is supplies.

with bowel inflammatory of bloody disease, may as periods with episodes interspersed ischemia healing. Chronic masquerade of diarrhea

Fig. Ischemia.(A)Characteristicattenuatedandpartiallydetachedvillousepitheliuminacutejejunalischemia.Notethehyperchromaticnucleiofproliferatingcryptcells. 15.20 (B)Chroniccolonicischemiawithatrophicsurfaceepitheliumandfibroticlaminapropria.

ischemic tropism Cytomegalovirus of for the infection gastrointestinal endothelial disease as consequence (CMV) causes and infection cells. viral of a CMV of be infection 9). immunosuppressive complication a (Chapter therapy can

occurs tract Radiation gastrointestinal irradiated. the when is enterocolitis radiation-induced are In injury damage, addition epithelial vascular significant to ischemic and that be may changes produce to similar disease.

large is that intestines Necrotizing transmural of can and necrosis. the idiopathic enterocolitis an disorder in small result weight. gastrointestinal are common particularly most low the is those neonates, acquired of who premature or emergency It of birth often associated occurrence Its (Chapter oral of feeding initiation is with 7). pathogenesis defined, necrotizing is not ischemic contribute. of Although to enterocolitis injury thought is

presents life. submucosal mucosal the most decade characterized Angiodysplasia, malformed blood and often occurs cecum or and colon, vessels, after in the right sixth usually of by than lower 1% of it major affects 20% bleeding. population, adult episodes for accounts intestinal the of angiodysplasia Although of less

hemorrhoid venous to the pressure vessels systems within anal Hemorrhoids venous dilated elevated portal caval connect perianal are relieve and and collateral the that plexus. similar. esophageal is serious of lesions pathogenesis are these hemorrhoids than although the less varices, Thus, They general population. the 5% affecting are common, about of hypertension. increase and of which venous venous and stasis pregnancy, predisposing include and Common constipation pressures, portal straining, intraabdominal factors associated

Collateral are and the external hemorrhoids. the hemorrhoids, dilation anorectal plexus to result those inferior vessels referred that are line below hemorrhoidal termed ofthesuperiorhemorrhoidalplexuswithinthedistalrectum while as located from within are internal examination, anal mucosa. submucosal On dilated, beneath of vessels or hemorrhoids rectal histologic consist thin-walled, trauma, vessels rectal leads to These are subject which to bleeding. addition, can thrombosed become and In they inflamed.

Hemorrhoids pain seen blood often tissue. toilet bright rectal red particularly with on manifest and bleeding, Hemorrhoids implications also hypertension, the ominous. where are more of a develop portal as result may treatment sclerotherapy, emergency; infrared Hemorrhoidal a coagulation. generally rubber is and bleeding medical not options ligation, include band hemorrhoids removed severe cases, by surgically In may hemorrhoidectomy. be

obstruction. Intestinalischemiacanoccurasaresultofeitherarterial or venous

Ischemicboweldiseaseresultingfromhypoperfusionismostcommonatthesplenicflexure,sigmoidcolon,andrectum; thesearewatershed http://ebooksmedicine.net zones wheretwoarterialcirculationsterminate.

Systemicvasculitidesandinfectiousdiseases(e.g.,CMVinfection)cancausevasculardiseasethatisnotconfinedtothegastrointestinaltract.

Angiodysplasiaisacommoncauseoflowergastrointestinalbleedinginolderadults.

Hemorrhoidsarecollateralvesselsthatforminresponsetovenoushypertension.

amounts than per grams defined mass, as or Diarrhea day. frequency, 200 an stool in typically increase greater is fluidity, to exceed resuscitation, cases, without day 14 in can In volume result death. fluid stool severe L and, per age account second making Worldwide, diarrheal for leading children of deaths years of diseases them under the this group. cause age, than in of 5 death 700,000 greater diarrhea Painful, small-volume known as dysentery. is bloody, of intestinal ischemia, infection, and to common nutritional Diarrhea symptom a including those is due diseases, many inflammation, deficiency. malabsorption, categories: be It major into can classified four

characterized Secretory stool persists fasting. during and isotonic is diarrhea by

Osmotic unabsorbed to lactase diarrhea, exerted is with that forces as luminal due occurring solutes. osmotic such by deficiency, The 50 abates at diarrheal concentrated the mOsm is fluid more fasting. with and least than plasma, condition

is by absorption Malabsorptive associated diarrhea and caused fasting. steatorrhea is inadequate nutrient with by relieved

bloody Exudative diarrhea is and to continue due during that disease stools fasting. by inflammatory characterized purulent,

Table and in Defects 15.3 Malabsorptive Diarrheal Disease

malabsorptive with diarrhea. discussion begin our We disease, cholera inflammatory separate sections. types in exudative secretory diarrhea with associated of bowel (e.g., addressed and Other and respectively) are disorders

proteins, chronic characterized commonly absorption by of and water-soluble as electrolytes, diarrhea and defective manifests minerals, fats, carbohydrates, is water. Malabsorption most fatand vitamins, distention, and anorexia, malabsorption loss, causes wasting. abdominal weight Chronic muscle borborygmi, characterized by bulky, and steatorrhea, clay-colored excessive malabsorption A greasy, stools. hallmark or fat frothy, fecal is of yellow,

celiac are The pancreatic insufficiency, disorders chronic in and countries Crohn Western malabsorptive commonly disease. encountered disease, most enteropathy, is component, has some or a which countries. in within dysfunction, environmental developing pervasive Environmental communities enteric malabsorptive

Malabsorption of nutrient disturbance results in absorption: at phases from one of least the four

are into and broken absorbable digestion, fats forms Intraluminal which in carbohydrates, down proteins,

respectively, the small-intestinal carbohydrates which involves peptides mucosa peptidases, the border of of the by disaccharidases and digestion, Terminal in brush hydrolysis and

within transport, nutrients, electrolytes the transported and processed across and are which in small-intestinal fluid, epithelium Transepithelial

of transport absorbed lipids Lymphatic

many contributes predominates, defect a ( in more these malabsorptive but one one disorders, than of usually In processes

Table 15.3 ). they differ. result, resemble malabsorption than more syndromes other a As each (from and Signs diarrhea symptoms include nutrient

Mycobacterialinfection,Whippledisease +,Indicatesthattheprocesscanbeabnormalinthediseaseindicated.Otherprocessesarenottypicallyaffected.

and pain, weight loss. excessive secretion), abdominal http://ebooksmedicine.net malabsorption intestinal flatus, and of vitamin or K minerals B12 mucositis vitamin deficiency; folate, deficiency; vitamin to and magnesium, and osteopenia in or absorption or Inadequate D pyridoxine, bleeding due or anemia to deficiency; tetany due result due vitamin vitamins to due B12 neuropathy A deficiency. calcium, to and can disturbances A skin may variety endocrine of occur. also and of which section. defects, can with next Mycobacterial infection, transport causes the discussed is be lymphatic lead to infectious diarrhea in

elsewhere Cystic discussed is in 7). fibrosis greater detail (Chapter with Only here. cystic is associated fibrosis the considered malabsorption regulator conductance intestinal cystic with transmembrane in to individuals transport. ion fibrosis (CFTR), have cystic defects ductal epithelial fibrosis the and Owing pancreatic of mutations resulting secretion, and ultimately with interferes luminal bicarbonate, in abnormality sodium, water This hydration. inadequate in meconium may newborns The contents to luminal 10% which with fibrosis. present ileus, cystic of result viscous up is in the In by pancreas plugged ducts are the thick mucus. pancreatic autodigestion insufficiency of more pancreas, patients. exocrine eventual in low-grade This 80% obstruction, to chronic the and leads of than The which phase the effectively with of absorption, in of nutrient treated is oral supplementation. failure result can patients most enzyme be intraluminal

celiac gluten-sensitive sprue wheat, also of enteropathy, triggered gluten-containing predisposed or immune-mediated known an individuals. is cereals, or by disease, such as in rye, Celiac barley, as ingestion genetically enteropathy the disease 0.5% of with populations an is common 1%. of predominantly to countries prevalence estimated disorder, celiac of ancestry, In a consist whites European whose treatment gluten-free diet, which for is The disease primary results for patients. most improvement celiac a in symptomatic

immune an storage similar major of gluten, disease is Celiac reaction and to intestinal grains. protein the wheat by into Gluten that and proteases and brush (Fig. degradation by small-intestinal resistant gastric, acid acids border pancreatic, peptide is to is including digested amino a and gliadin enzymes luminal 33–amino peptides, 15.21 ). and to interact be to is and able HLA-DQ2 antigen-presenting Gliadin HLA-DQ8 cells or with T tissue transglutaminase CD4+ presented deamidated is on cells. by then contribute produce characteristic cytokines to the T damage that histopathology. These cells tissue and in lamina mucosal likely propria anti-endomysial a gliadin, antibodies, and, cross-reactive be This can follows: An as response useful. epitopes, diagnostically transglutaminase, of of deamidated production antibody includes result tissue which against perhaps antibodies be 3 as disease, monitor fall They to months 6 titers typically may gluten-free after of to used diet. also whether or these controversial. However, merely remains contribute markers are of disease activation pathogenesis celiac to immune antibodies an cells an but gliadin addition of damage. accumulation not role tissue that specific causing is are cells, In in ancillary may play to for CD8+ there CD4+ of deamidated that turn It lymphocytes to peptides kill cytotoxic epithelial which become produce cells and triggers induce thought and is CD8+ that activation IL-15, cytokine gliadin the intraepithelial proliferation in

Loss of

Fig. are for elongation numbers and of that of in crypt degrees responses involved A 15.21 model (IELs), (right). epithelial present of adaptive intraepithelial lymphocytes tissue immune both and villous gliadin. atrophy, that pathogenesis the to The alterations varying proliferation may including (left). disease, morphologic increased in celiac innate the be Note with disease celiac mechanisms CD8 receptor, NKG2D cells, shown expressing T in and between lamina are cells. in epithelial CD4 IFNγ) cells (producing propria T

have express enterocytes by been stressors induced various surface to that MIC-A. recognized by molecule NKG2D CD8+ on cells. receptor activated the is T This deamidated increase by The the transglutaminase, cycle damage may peptides of the of epithelium, are thus perpetuating then immune across movement these by disease. gliadin caused mechanisms the tissue which

individuals disease. While most grain gliadin, all gluten and not eat nearly are and exposed celiac to do develop factors develops. determine Thus, host disease whether all HLA-DQ8 celiac individuals the HLA disease or alleles. II to proteins class carry since HLA-DQ2 Among seem with critical, these, be almost immune is other of including 1 diseases disease an syndrome. thyroiditis, association and also type with celiac There Sjögren diabetes,

atrophy lymphocytosis, crypt ( hyperplasia,andvillous MORPHOLOGYBiopsyspecimensfromthesecondportionoftheduodenumorproximaljejunum,whichareexposedtothehighestconcentrationsofdietarygluten,aregenerallydiagnosticinceliacdisease.ThehistopathologyischaracterizedbyincreasednumbersofTlymphocytes,withintraepithelial

).Thislossofmucosalandbrush-bordersurfaceareaduetovillousatrophyprobablyaccountsforthemalabsorption.Inaddition,increasedratesofepithelialturnover,reflectedinincreasedcryptmitoticactivity,maylimittheabilityofabsorptiveenterocytestofullydifferentiateandexpressproteinsnecessaryforterminaldigestionandtransepithelialtransport.Otherhistologicfeaturesofceliacdiseasecanincludeincreasednumbersofplasmacells,mastcells,andeosinophils,especiallywithintheupperpartofthelaminapropria.Itshouldbenotedthatintraepitheliallymphocytosisandvillousatrophycanbepresentinotherdisorders,includingviralenteritis.Thecombinationofhistologicandserologicfindingsis,therefore,mostspecificfordiagnosisofceliacdisease. Fig.15.22

loss, classic celiac affects to (after to gluten with muscle introduction which typically manifest equally, age abdominal children or Pediatric diarrhea, and wasting. may 24 with male failure the weight thrive, disease, of between anorexia, symptoms, female months 6 irritability, distention, and diet) of complaints of constipation. with nausea, at symptoms with tend or present ages bloating, vomiting, to older abdominal nonclassic pain, Children is and gastritis increased in the as of and herpetiformis, lymphocytic well. many of patients, pruritic, characteristic as dermatitis skin colitis present also is as 10% incidence lymphocytic blistering lesion, A

manifests adults, age. years celiac most 30 commonly between of In and 60 disease many periods clinical cases However, of escape presentations. because atypical extended for attention symptoms, Some villous which serology in atrophy have and symptoms. nor positive defined serology patients disease, positive atrophy celiac neither by is or villous without accompanied disease, latent as celiac silent and often to folate and (due disease adult is anemia less fatigue. commonly, associated bloating, deficiency), diarrhea, with and, B12 celiac Symptomatic iron deficiency

Fig. Celiacdisease.(A)Advancedcasesofceliacdiseaseshowcom-pletelossofvilli,ortotalvillousatrophy.Notethedenseplasmacellinfil-tratesinthelaminapropria. 15.22 (B)InfiltrationofthesurfaceepitheliumbyTlymphocytes,whichcanberecognizedbytheirdenselystainednuclei(labeledT).Comparewithelongated,pale-stainingepithelialnuclei(labeledE).

tests performed serologic Noninvasive generally are before biopsy. transglutaminase IgG tissue or The or IgA gliadin. antibodies IgA most sensitive to to are presence antibodies the of deamidated tests than but less other Anti-endomysial are highly antibodies. specific sensitive antibodies

exhibit with disease Patients of rate normal malignancy. than a celiac higher disease– T an intraepithelial T lymphoma, cell The lymphocytes. most aggressive of common tumor is associated cancer enteropathy-associated celiac also frequent in individuals is adenocarcinoma more with celiac Small-intestinal disease. or which diarrhea, as a and be is weight such loss when symptoms to develop a abdominal cancer sprue, the Thus, in lost, gluten-free diet, strict response refractory despite considered. pain, diet gluten-free must failure however, to celiac to causes. It most do the of that with that disease of to is, adhere with symptoms, recurrent gluten-free common well diet recognize cause restrictions most is a important and and die unrelated individuals dietary

parts some of within Australia; and residents Africa, term aboriginal syndrome such to that impaired refers environmental Asia, or within countries, Brazil, The and in Guatemala, communities America enteric and is many within environmental dysfunction, as of Zambia; of including such and South intestinal sub-Saharan stunted growth impoverished populations groups Pakistan. as common northern India, developing function a enteropathy, as tropical dysfunction, of to The which was under enteropathy enteric overstated, it headings tropical impact 150 estimated sprue, or environmental over children grouped is affect be cannot million worldwide. of previously pathogenesis reverse syndrome. disorder, nor to contributes vitamin this supplementation neither mineral are and the most the feeding fully likely Although able to of supplementary malnutrition years of episodes. suffered diarrheal are within 2 life closely diarrhea no infectious first bouts as linked agent these but of enteropathy, Repeated the environmental to in single causal been 3 most or established has a enteritis. biopsy in of reported has as and overlap with infectious as been number celiac histopathology some the cases, have well severe examined Intestinal disease only small specimens

http://ebooksmedicine.net

rise osmotic in gives deficiency diarrhea absence, lumen. remains osmotically lactose its active because, to the Lactase in disaccharidases, the membrane of epithelial cells. in villous including lactase, absorptive border The brush located are apical biochemical, the defect biopsies unremarkable. are is generally Because of two deficiency is types: Lactase

encoding by is gene recessive in lactase. an caused the mutations Congenital lactase disorder autosomal deficiency disease diarrhea stools manifests is milk and The watery, ingestion. rare and abdominal as frothy distention explosive after with abate milk milk and when products is to Symptoms terminated. exposure

is Native deficiency is among of populations. downregulation lactase and by particularly expression Chinese African and Americans, Acquired lactase caused Americans, common gene childhood, was of milk. drinking lactase Downregulation gut lactase in mother’s children reflecting of that, after animals, dairy after perhaps the the occurs farming unnecessary stopped before fact infections. or is enteric with deficiency sometimes bacterial lactase viral acquired associated Onset of

autosomal lipoproteins. an secrete recessive by an Abetalipoproteinemia disease triglyceride-rich inability is characterized to rare, malabsorption. Although of it trans-epithelial leading a defect is an to example transport in the Mutation unable microsomal export acids. fatty protein free and triglyceride renders lipoproteins transfer to enterocytes epithelial a within monoglycerides As and cells. the accumulate triglycerides result, failure Abetalipoproteinemia dominated the picture and to infancy, is and clinical steatorrhea. by diarrhea, manifests thrive, in produce acanthocytic smears. cells lipid in essential in fatty to fat-soluble cells) membranes vitamins, plasma of defects acids and absorb to often blood blood (spur red Failure deficiencies peripheral leads

colitis lymphocytic entities, two and Microscopic colitis. colitis collagenous encompasses without of chronic, diseases idiopathic these watery diarrhea loss. with Both nonbloody, weight manifest and radiologic on Findings normal. studies are endoscopic typically increased Collagenous colitis, collagen is propria. occurs subepithelial intraepithelial the presence dense and lamina within which mixed inflammatory by characterized layer, and older women, numbers primarily the lymphocytes, infiltrate of of a a middle-aged in thickness predominantly T greater. layer the intraepithelial, increase normal be Lymphocytic of and may is collagen is lymphocytes, subepithelial in histologically colitis the but similar, diseases, colitis autoimmune or and disease autoimmune celiac arthritis, lymphocytic gastritis. associated with thyroiditis, including is Lymphocytic and

cell stem allogeneic Graft-versus-host disease hematopoietic occurs after transplantation. colon and most small involved are cases. The bowel in the propria major donor by lymphocytic of typically T infiltrate cells is tissue suggesting be recipient’s that Although to sparse, secreted epithelial the mediators is in may injury. by caused graft-versus-host disease damage cell–mediated cells, cytokines T the lamina the crypt histologic the finding. apoptosis, is most of Epithelial cells, common particularly often disease watery graft-versushost as diarrhea. manifests Intestinal

malabsorptive, orexudative. osmotic, Diarrheacanbecharacterizedassecretory,

insufficiency (i.e.,inadequatepancreaticdigestiveenzymes)anddeficient luminal ofnutrients. breakdown Themalabsorptionassociatedwithcysticfibrosisistheresultofpancreatic

of surface Celiac and,possibly,deficiententerocytematuration. brush isanimmune-mediatedenteropathytriggeredbytheingestionofgluten-containinggrains.Themalabsorptivediarrheainceliacdiseaseisduetoloss disease border area

deficiency diarrhea owingtotheinabilitytobreakdownorabsorblactose. Lactase causesanosmotic

ischaracterizedbyaninabilitytosecretetriglyceride-richlipoproteinsduetoaninheritedtransepithelialtransportdefect. Abetalipoproteinemia

andlymphocytic Thetwoformsofmicroscopiccolitis,collagenous colitis, colitis bothcausechronicwaterydiarrhea.Theintestinesaregrosslynormal,andthediseasesareidentifiedbytheirhistologicfeatures.

responsible more 5 than of 1 million all years worldwide. deaths age and younger deaths for problem in than 10% annually global This than greater patients is of broad pain, including perianal urgency, with symptoms, of signs discomfort, diarrhea, and and abdominal range presents a hemorrhage. incontinence, Enterocolitis immune ( vary infections, well Bacterial pathogens responsible, status, as most enterotoxigenic and age, the such coli, environment with nutrition, common as host Escherichia are as frequently but

Table ). 15.4 measures, epidemics consequence example, are 2010) disaster For of a of the common as public result sanitation, a (e.g., poor cholera of inadequate health in as war. areas or natural of Haitian with or earthquake commonly metabolic is and viruses. may Pediatric by severe which dehydration result in enteric acidosis, infectious diarrhea, caused of the in of and causes bacterial enterocolitis selected summary A of is clinical presented features epidemiology

15.4. Table

Representative enterocolitides viral, and discussed are parasitic bacterial, next.

has disease Vibrio http://ebooksmedicine.net a that cholerae that organisms are gram-negative cause cholera, comma-shaped, bacteria

Table of Features 15.4 Bacterial Enterocolitides

CholeraIndia,AfricaShellfishFecal-oral,waterSporadic,endemic,SmallintestineSeverewateryDehydration,electrolyteepidemic

spp.DevelopedcountriesChickens,sheep,pigs,Poultry,milk,Sporadic;children,ColonWateryorbloodyArthritis,Guillain-Barrécattleotherfoodstravelers Campylobacter

http://ebooksmedicine.net conjunctivitis,hemolytic-countries ShigellosisWorldwide,endemicHumansFecal-oral,food,Children,migrantLeftcolon,BloodydiarrheaReactivearthritis,urethritis,indeveloping waterworkers,travelers,ileum

SalmonellosisWorldwidePoultry,farmanimals,Meat,poultry,eggs,Children,olderadultsColon,smallWateryorbloodySepsis,abscessreptilesmilk

Enteric(typhoid)feverIndia,Mexico,HumansFecal-oral,waterChildren.adolescents,SmallintestineBloodydiarrhea,Chronicinfection,carrierstate,Philippines feverencephalopathy,myocarditis,intestinalperforation

spp.NorthernandPigs,cows,puppies,catsPork,milk,waterClusteredcasesIleum,Abdominalpain,fever,Reactivearthritis,erythemacentralEurope Yersinia appendix,diarrheanodosumrightcolon

imbalancesEnterohemorrhagicWorldwideWidespread,includesBeef,milk,produceSporadicandepidemicColonBloodydiarrheaHemolytic-uremicsyndrome(EHEC) Escherichia coli EnterotoxigenicDevelopingUnknownFoodorfecal-oralInfants,adolescents,SmallintestineSeverewateryDehydration,electrolyte(ETEC)countriestravelers cattleEnteroinvasiveDevelopingUnknownCheese,otherYoungchildrenColonBloodydiarrheaUnknown(EIEC)countries foods,waterEnteroaggregativeWorldwideUnknownUnknownChildren,adults,ColonNonbloodydiarrhea,Poorlydefined(EAEC) diarrheaimbalancesEnteropathogenicWorldwideHumansFecal-oralInfantsSmallintestineWaterydiarrheaDehydration,electrolyte(EPEC)

PseudomembranousWorldwideHumans,hospitalsAntibioticsallowImmunosuppressed,ColonWaterydiarrhea,Relapse,toxicmegacoloncolitis(C. difficile)

WhipplediseaseRural> urbanUnknownUnknownRareSmallintestineMalabsorptionArthritis,CNSdisease

MycobacterialinfectionWorldwideUnknownUnknownImmunosuppressed,SmallintestineMalabsorptionPneumonia,infectionatotherendemic

Centralnervoussystem;GI, gastrointestinal. CNS,

been recorded for of Valley history. in endemic all Bangladesh and the Ganges of India contaminated is V. by cholerae drinking transmitted water. primarily causes cases food in of it also be disease. can seafood-associated present rare and However, Vibrio growth at is locales of bacteria a temperatures. rapid in most marked warm to seasonal due variation There and only The reservoirs are shellfish plankton. animal

Vibrio with absorptive producing toxin of cause are but enterocytes. organisms disease a function interferes noninvasive that by the efficient and activity a necessary in shedding for Flagellar and and detachment is involved are which proteins, stool. are attachment, metalloproteinase the secreted motility also has important in hemagglutinin colonization, bacterial that for bacterial which is it However, causes cholera the preformed enterotoxin, disease. toxin, which subunits is active a and endoplasmic retrograde single the A of delivered direct composed endocytosis by that to is toxin, five transport. B subunit, The reticulum protein Gsα. where ribosylation activate interacts subunit and A to lumen fragment ribosylate reticulum is endoplasmic factors with from ADP cytosol, the the A into cytosolic the of it G the transported and (CFTR), cyclic the the adenylate fibrosis cystic lumen. intracellular in monophosphate chloride stimulates the regulator resulting releases adenosine ions open conductance transmembrane increases This cyclase, into which (cAMP) into lumen, draws secretory leading water to This an that the creates gradient diarrhea. massive osmotic alterations. only show morphologic Remarkably, specimens minimal mucosal biopsy

mild Most are exposed suffer diarrhea. individuals only or asymptomatic and with Those vomiting incubation abrupt watery days. 1 onset to severe period of have disease an an diarrhea after 5 of hypotension, electrolyte of and of may reach volume The leading imbalances, hour, consciousness, dehydration, death. anuria, per shock, muscular to cramping, diarrhea L 1 loss Most within occur hours of first 24 deaths presentation. the for of than mortality without patients. severe can fluid more 99% 70% treatment, Although is 50% replacement save to cholera rate the

and developed of the an is diarrhea. most common in Campylobacter jejuni bacterial pathogen is traveler’s enteric cause important countries contaminated ingestion or with infections can are caused milk improperly of but also outbreaks be unpasteurized water. Most cooked by chicken, associated

The but Campylobacter virulence invasion. poorly adherence, defined, of pathogenesis contribute: motility, major production, infection properties four and remains toxin Flagella allow be to motile. Campylobacter necessary and also are facilitates colonization, for mucosal which This invasion. adherence some toxin–like damage are Cytotoxins also a released C. jejuni that enterotoxin epithelial isolates. cholera and cause by with bloody associated and minority occurs only Campylobacter generally diarrhea, with is Dysentery a or small of strains. invasion fever mesenteric lamina nodes. Enteric within lymph propria and occurs when bacteria the proliferate

patients with primarily result arthritis, in reactive Campylobacter in HLA-B27. infection can Guillain-Barré nerves, complications, erythema syndrome a autoimmune-induced of Other (Chapter extraintestinal caused by HLA-linked. not peripheral inflammation nodosum flaccid 22), paralysis and including are with in Guillain-Barré or Fortunately, infected syndrome 0.1% less individuals develops of

Campylobacter.

Salmonella, MORPHOLOGYCampylobacter, andmanyotherbacterialinfections,includingYersinia andE. Shigella, allinduceasimilarmicroscopicpicture,termedacute self-limited coli, colitis. Specificdiagnosisisprimarilybystoolculture.Thehistologyofacuteself-limitedcolitisincludesprominentlaminapropriaandintraepithelialneutrophilinfiltrates(

);cryptitis Fig.15.23A (cryptswithaccumulationsofluminalneutrophils)alsomaybepresent.Thepreservationofcryptarchitectureinmostcasesofacuteself-limitedcolitisishelpfulindistinguishingtheseinfectionsfromchronicinflammatoryillnessessuchasinflammatoryboweldisease( abscesses (neutrophilinfiltrationofthecrypts)andcrypt

Fig.15.23B

to jejuni as organisms C. after period Ingestion as of an cause days. 8 incubation few up disease 500 can of prodrome, influenza develops primary dysentery or after Watery in manifestation, diarrhea, of like and 50% 15% acute is patients. onset to with the an either more Patients or shed 1 for bacteria resolution. clinical may after month therapy is The generally required. and self-limited, disease is not antibiotic

Fig. Bacterialenterocolitis. 15.23 (A)Campylobacter infectionpro-ducesacute,self-limitedcolitis.Neutrophilscanbeseenwithinsurfaceandcryptepithelium,andacryptabscessispresent(lower right). jejuni infectionissimilartootheracute,self-limitedcolitides.Notethemaintenanceofnormalcryptarchitectureandspacing,despiteabundantintraepithelialneutrophils. (B)Enteroinva-siveEscherichia coli

http://ebooksmedicine.net

that the causes gram-negative for nonmotile, are of anaerobes responsible are common of bloody most unencapsulated, diarrhea. bacilli Shigella facultative one stool than 100 organisms, of food; fewer transmissible phases are dose many organisms as route gram of or each highly the acute disease. infective through the fecal-oral is of ingestion and the water Shigellae during contains and contaminated by as 109

travelers affected. commonly care developing homes United nursing workers, of to children day migrant In countries, are the most residents States in Europe, and and centers, of children diarrheal in in deaths. of deaths is approximately pediatric occur and Most age; countries for Shigella-associated years cases 75% 10% responsible endemic, disease all many infections of than Shigella and as is as younger 5 in of diarrheal which it

the explains stomach, Shigella dose. which resistant very environment of the the infective to partially harsh are low organisms acidic are taken M which organisms specialized are epithelial antigens. the sampling by of luminal for intestine, up in (microfold) uptake Once and cells, propria. the the lamina into proliferation, intracellular bacteria After escape basolateral epithelial then membranes, colonic These which small-intestinal through the cells receptors. express infect and bacterial bacteria bacterial to epithelial Alternatively, luminal junctions modulate expose shigellae tight directly basolateral can receptors. which type partly system. III secretion is directly by into proteins, mediated cytoplasm by the some host a are virulence The of injected latter cell Shiga toxin death. and inhibits Shigella dysenteriae Some serotypes eukaryotic causes release the Stx, also host synthesis protein which

left but ileum be the also the prominent involved, MORPHOLOGYShigella in colon, may are infections most perhapsreflectingtheabundanceofMcellsintheepitheliumoverlyingPeyerpatches.Thehistologicappearanceinearlycasesissimilartothatinotheracuteself-limitedcolitides.Inmoreseverecases,themucosaishemorrhagicandulcerated,andpseudomembranesmaybepresent.PerhapsbecauseofthetropismforMcells,aphthousappearingulcerssimilartothoseseeninCrohndiseasealsomayoccur.Thepotentialforconfusionwithchronicinflammatoryboweldiseaseissubstantial,particularlyifthereisdistortionofcryptarchitecture.

self-limited pain. and of causes about disease characterized fever, abdominal Shigella days diarrhea, 6 by

of month. incubation symptoms watery After phase days, of approximately 1 initial the 7 period an 1 as progresses and long dysenteric for can to constitutional 50% as persist patients, diarrhea a to in presentation also A in minority a adults. of can subacute develop because they medications clearance. treatment clinical the and shed contraindicated but in symptoms delaying are which anti-diarrheal shortens over can bacterial organisms stool, prolong course Antibiotic are by the the reduces duration

sterile of preferentially reactive men uncommon between arthritis, arthritis, that 40 a years and of triad Complications 20 infection affects positive and conjunctivitis age. and HLA-B27– include Shigella are of urethritis, typically syndrome, is coli associated infection secrete enterohemorrhagic (EHEC), which uremic toxin. also occur Hemolytic Escherichia with with shigellae Shiga after may that

but healthy disease. gram-negative gastrointestinal that are colonize subset most bacilli a are the tract; Escherichia nonpathogenic, coli human cause behavior in pathogenesis, (see latter are and mechanism morphology, to vitro of The classified according

). Table 15.4 we their mechanisms: pathogenic summarize Here

are are route. cause traveler’s fecal-oral E. the the coli by principal of Enterotoxigenic spread and diarrhea, organisms (ETEC) toxin toxin express LT. similar They the cAMP effects a a toxin (LT) with caused increases and cGMP that is intracellular heat-stable similar to (ST) elevations by that to heat-labile cholera

to produce in Enteropathogenic and effacing loss by to which the tightly effacement) cause organisms and the enterocyte membranes local (EPEC) of microvilli. characterized apical lesions attaching are (A/E) their E. coli bacteria ability attach (i.e., (LEE). necessary all locus are the A/E enterocyte large for The by of proteins pathogenicity creating genomic lesions effacement encoded island, a encodes proteins Shigella, that similar also injects the a into to secretion in This system, bacterial effector locus III epithelial that type cell cytoplasm. years children can endemic than diarrhea younger well of age. outbreaks diarrheal as particularly in EPEC as cause 2

categorized and Enterohemorrhagic as organisms E. non-O157:H7 coli (EHEC) are O157:H7 serotypes. associated developed with milk, and of have beef, consumption ground O157:H7 Outbreaks the inadequately vegetables. cooked of E. countries coli been in produce and non-O157:H7 O157:H7 dysentery. serotypes toxins Both and can Shiga-like cause hemolytic-uremic also (Chapter 14). trigger can syndrome They

organisms resemble toxins. Shigella coli but produce not Enteroinvasive E. (EIEC) do bacteriologically epithelial gut produce cells the bloody invade They diarrhea. a and

fimbriae. enterocytes Enteroaggregative attach coli E. by adherence organisms (EAEC) to histologic minimal. Although is Shiga-like damage produce toxins, they and LT

are the agent the nontyphoid gastroenteritis. typhi, are of Salmonella bacilli, which gram-negative typhoid divided species, of fever and Salmonella Enterobacteriaceae that into members family strains Salmonella causative cause of to Nontyphoid greater due deaths; occur United infection prevalence than which result is Salmonella each in other year in usually 1 is more the many enteritidis; in million cases countries. http://ebooksmedicine.net Salmonella States, the 2000 adults, in peak incidence summer older common Infection and young with children and a is fall. most in through milk. Transmission food, eggs, and or poultry, undercooked raw particularly contaminated is usually meat,

few the acid-suppressive required or on necessary Very as Salmonella organisms those gastritis therapy, of in absence the are gastric with cause further reduces to inoculum. atrophic viable infection, and individuals acid, proteins system enterocytes. into type that transferring secretion Salmonellae virulence encode of a genes III and cells M possess capable bacterial host grow. Rho into bacterial where cell phagosomes activate thereby the triggering and The GTPases, uptake rearrangement proteins can bacteria actin transferred that the of a potentiates damage. also secrete epithelial molecule lumen mucosal that induces release into chemoattractant and Salmonellae eicosanoid neutrophils a draws cultures essential for Stool are diagnosis.

by Salmonella referred and Typhoid as also paratyphi. caused to typhi enteric fever, Salmonella fever, is worldwide to year. affects 30 up million individuals each It is often in affected. and S. most more endemic typhi by adolescents Infection are areas, common children where living predominates those countries. developed contrast, S. in in travelers paratyphi and By from food transmission the or typhi via S. paratyphi, are or for to Humans person contaminated water. occurs reservoir person and S. and sole be with carrier state. colonization a gallstones associated chronic and may Gallbladder and with by is asymptomatic short a to followed gives associated bloody that symptoms. Acute fever infection anorexia, pain, flulike vomiting, diarrhea and abdominal bacteremia bloating, nausea, way phase with further by antibiotic that phase this treatment and detection culture may disease during It is organisms blood prompt of prevent progression. may positive to that in of tenderness abdominal febrile sustained cases treatment, febrile by followed such phase weeks fevers up the of 90% are mimic Cultures is Without phase 2 during appendicitis. the with high Rose small are erythematous the maculopapular seen chest spots, lesions, abdomen. and on encephalopathy, including pneumonia, myocarditis, endocarditis, complications may extraintestinal seizures, Systemic cause dissemination meningitis, cholecystitis. and disease susceptible are Salmonella with to sickle Patients osteomyelitis. particularly cell

engulfed Like lymphoid then typhi taken underlying cells S. mononuclear tissue. paratyphi up the in S. by cells are M by and S. enteritidis, and the patches ileum like infection to into up cm 8 diameter. Peyer terminal to Thus, enlarge in causes elevations plateau in oriented Mucosal along oval long the ileum. the creates of shedding axis ulcers However, typhi S. S. and via can lymphatic unlike vessels. disseminate and enteritidis, S. blood paratyphi in This nodes, hyperplasia reactive which bacteria-containing of accumulate. lymph draining causes phagocytes soft with obliterated the prominent is pale hyperplasia. phagocyte follicular and markings, and pulp, addition, spleen In red enlarged scattered parenchymal nodules, of aggregates, termed lymph liver, be nodes. can necrosis with and Randomly typhoid marrow, bone foci found small in macrophage the Definitive diagnosis on positive depends cultures. blood Serologic utility, be antibodies unless of titers can areas tests especially rising limited in of demonstrated. are endemic

generally referred colitis diarrhea. difficile, colitis, as antibiotic-associated is antibiotic-associated Pseudomembranous or also caused to by C. also A, as C. colitis. C. by causes only caused may antibiotic-associated Staphylococcus organisms other perfringens or Salmonella, diarrhea such aureus, While be pseudomembranous difficile type overgrowth. colonic is that microbiota antibiotics normal It disruption by allows the likely difficile of C. colonic of any determinants the of antibiotic most responsible; disease and Almost on are the microbiota. may effect important frequency use be the disruption small loss, by as and of difficile tight epithelial GTPases, cause such of the the lead cytokine to Toxins junction and apoptosis. ribosylation release, released C. barrier Rho, cytoskeleton,

MORPHOLOGYFullydevelopedC. ( difficile–associatedcolitisisaccompaniedbyformationofpseudomembranes

Fig.15.24A ),madeupofanadherentlayerofinflammatorycellsanddebrisatsitesofcolonicmucosalinjury.Thesurfaceepitheliumisdenuded,andthesuperficiallaminapropriacontainsadenseinfiltrateofneutrophilsandoccasionalfibrinthrombiwithincapillaries.Damagedcryptsaredistendedbyamucopurulentexudatethat“erupts”tothesurfaceinafashionreminiscentofavolcano(

Fig.15.24B

C. colitis risk exposure, associated difficile– factors antibiotic hospitalization, to In age, advanced addition for and immunosuppression. include organism the adults than in rate most are many colonized patients colonized general disease. as 10 is but in difficile (a population), hospitalized of prevalent as C. are particularly 20% times hospitals; of with free The higher dehydration, C. fever, cases. colitis severe difficile–associated more cramping; watery present be in with with diarrhea abdominal may leukocytosis usually and and Individuals seen be occult leukocytes is Fecal but and diarrhea present, may bloody grossly blood rare. and usually than histopathologic the findings. culture, of is C. difficile characteristic difficile–associated of colitis by toxin, rather is supported Diagnosis C. accomplished detection by or may effective strains hypervirulent recur generally difficile metronidazole but and Regimens of common, patients. treatments, and at-risk vancomycin are antibiotic-resistant C. in the are increasingly infection may microbiota in normal that, cure. lead transplantation fecal to with and microbial recurrent patients reports disease, particularly a restore Recent suggest lasting

Fig. colitis.(A)Thecoloniscoatedbytanpseu-domembranescomposedofneutrophils,deadepithelialcells,andinflamma-torydebris(endoscopicview). 15.24 Clostridium difficile (B)Typicalpatternofneutrophilsemanatingfromacryptisreminiscentofavolcaniceruption.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

gastrointestinal the tuberculosis, including species, be or M. Mycobacterial bovis, disseminated part can of M. species avium M. infection. involve primarily tract and individuals. uncommon in countries, Gastrointestinal in tuberculosis except is immunosuppressed Western In such cases,

common. avium M. infection is most fourth socioeconomic of intestinal typically and including endemic In third India lower and areas, presents afflicts Pakistan, M. tuberculosis the and decades status. in life generally those of In common more settings, infection such primary disease. intestinal is than disseminated differentiation areas, increases of As the these between in disease Crohn incidence

disease more Crohn and tuberculosis difficult. has become M.

the lamina M. propria distend cytoplasm within to tends and histiocytes. accumulate avium the histiocytes lympatic that and, intestine, sheet-like vessels compress result of expansion the propria some in a in malabsorption. small this fill cases, may lamina to leading In clinically morphologically. mimic disease cases These can Whipple and periodic stain, labelled acid-Schiff are stain. is not; Tropheryma (PAS) by both by fast whippelii while M. the is organisms positive avium However, acid

with disease. can present tuberculosis granulomatous M. disease, caseous to have but In contrast on difficult Crohn often multiple, this these which granulomas, generally biopsies. can determine be to necrosis, are the present and wall, in be the perforation, Because strictures, present. all or stenoses, bowel disease can be fibrosis, layers granulomas of with trans-mural can with Patients peritoneal have dissemination ascites. may also

worldwide causes developed virus, of is common gastroenteritis Norwalk-like and Norovirus, cause a all previously as approximately half known sporadic gastroenteritis outbreaks in of countries. water, to contaminated person-toperson sporadic transmission are underlies Local or related most food but outbreaks usually cases. cruise other homes populated spread and, easily schools, on communities nursing hospitals, densely ships. Infections within including individuals period, watery abdominal After develop diarrhea, and a incubation nausea, affected pain. vomiting, short morphology Biopsy nonspecific. is self-limited. The disease is

diarrhea-related deaths encapsulated and making infects million diarrhea cause common of The year, severe the childhood individuals causes most deaths worldwide. rotavirus and 140 1 million rota-virus each and age are Children between 6 of 24 months vulnerable. most rotavirus beyond in months is first infection. milk, 6 that first probably protection antibodies in 2 while life immunity Protection of due breast due after the is of the to of to to years presence age the develops common, centers estimated the day and minimal inoculum is care and only Outbreaks hospitals infective easily; infection are viral spreads in particles. 10 the cells. and villus (absorptive) Rotavirus the selectively small immature mature repopulated is infects surface in by destroys enterocytes secretory intestine, and from nutrients. water This and functional incompletely and diarrhea secretion change an electrolytes, capacity results in of net osmotic absorbed function of absorptive loss by compounded in a rotavirus period manifests incubation days vomiting after infection watery and several diarrhea. norovirus, short Like of symptomatic becomes as and the and rotavirus use infection. of beginning are epidemiology Vaccines available, now to is their change countries Unfortunately, most rotavirus effective vaccines been oral where are in have developing they needed. less

chronic over and half recurrent of disease basis. world’s protozoal Parasitic a affect the infections or population on many Strongyloides; species hookworms and as The trematodes as Ascaris and pinworms; roundworms nematodes, cestodes, tapeworms; the (flukes); flatworms including harbor of including and protozoa. such intestine as parasites, and small 20 can

Ascaris lumbricoides. of This individuals contamination. human more fecal-oral 1 billion as result nematode infects worldwide than a intestinal the mucosa. and the intestine, eggs in penetrate Ingested hatch larvae creating circulation the the systemic migrate hepatic the to cause the where via pneumonitis. Ascaris they then to larvae abscesses, the lung, can and through splanchnic liver, From circulation there, mature larvae In the swallowed, adult latter in arrive the up case, again into to intestine worms. the migrate are trachea, and detection made stools. by in of Diagnosis the eggs is

Strongyloides. in and of can ground live unbroken larvae skin. Strongyloides contaminated fecally soil penetrate The trachea intestines. lungs migrate swallowed mature They and they through adult the from the worms the in where then into are to as the referred ovum intestine that a release can which creating the the within autoinfection. worms, eggs vicious to stage penetrate human, Unlike cycle or hatch larvae of the and mucosa, intestinal outside an other Strongyloides require larval infection immunosuppressed develop can Strongyloides infections. life, individuals http://ebooksmedicine.net and can for overwhelming Hence, persist

Necator and Ancylostoma duodenale. americanus hookworms billion and morbidity. significant worldwide 1 infect individuals cause These the is penetration Infection larval initiated by through skin. further up development lungs, swallowed. the migrate After and are the trachea in larvae the duodenum, worms to the blood, in larvae Once reproduce. the mature mucosa, adult the suck and the attach and a of world. anemia cause developing are Hookworms leading in the iron-deficiency stools in for Detection diagnosis. eggs is used the of

Giardia lamblia. common to food. or fecally by most pathogenic in Giardia humans or protozoan, the duodenalis water parasite intestinalis, flagellated referred This is as contaminated and spread Giardia also is occur Infection of malabsorptive chronic ingestion by cysts characterized after 10 as few may and diarrhea. or is as acute are water Because supplies. in cysts and rural chlorine, are to resistant organisms endemic unfiltered public Giardia released. stomach, and occurs the of In are the excystation trophozoites acidic environment clearance Giardia mucosal are for affected. important and infections, individuals severely immunosuppressed, IL-6 are often agammaglobulinemic, malnourished Secretory responses or and IgA of surface and variant years while can evades through protein, continuous causing surface antigen, or of symptoms. modification the for persist clearance immune major months intermittent Giardia expression microvillous brush small-intestinal of causes cells. infection of including and reduces epithelial damage Giardia enzymes, border apoptosis lactase, and characteristic specimens be in are noninvasive biopsy shape. pear by trophozoites identified duodenal Giardia can and their of assay a the stool of availability has Giardia Giardia for The diagnosis simplified antigen infection.

• histolytica. Entamoeba fecal-oral This transmission. and is by spread amebiasis causes protozoan of annually. in causes and million and 40 Colombia, approximately 500 liver and such India, histolytica Mexico, countries E. million cases abscess dysentery as infects people most be appendix affects ascending amebiasis rectum, also the colon While the colon, and sigmoid often, can involved. and cecum attach Dysentery to epithelium, apoptosis, when induce develops and lamina laterally invade the crypts, the into amebae propria. the colonic burrow neutrophils, a flask-shaped damage, tissue base. narrow broad and This creates with and causes recruits a ulcer neck vessels about splanchnic dysentery. produce and amebic Parasites of to to patients embolize 40% penetrate in liver may with abscesses the lining. 10 scant inflammatory shaggy at their diameter, cm fibrin Amebic which in abscesses, a a liver can reaction and margins exceed have by intestinal after persist extension. rarely the direct and acute may and the abscesses has passed reach illness lung the The heart may and to bloodstream. brain via Amebae spread the kidneys also the

weight Individuals bloody or abdominal with pain, diarrhea, amebiasis with present may loss. occur, and and acute necrotizing are megacolon colitis Occasionally, significant associated both mortality. with

cholerae secretesapreformedtoxinthatcausesmassivechloridesecretion.Waterfollowstheresultingosmoticgradient,leadingtosecretorydiarrhea. Vibrio

isthemostcommonbacterialentericpathogenindevelopedcountriesandalsocausestraveler’sdiarrhea.Mostisolatesarenoninvasive.Salmonella andShigella Campylobacter jejuni infectionisacommoncauseoffoodpoisoning.S. spp.areinvasiveandassociatedwithexudativebloodydiarrhea(dysentery).Salmonella cancausesystemicdisease(typhoidfever). typhi

PseudomembranouscolitisisoftentriggeredbyantibiotictherapythatdisruptsthenormalmicrobiotaandallowsC. difficile tocolonizeandgrow.Theorganismproducestoxinsthatdisruptepithelialfunction.Fecalmicrobialtransplantationisbecomingmorecommonasatherapeuticapproachinindividualswithrecurrentdisease.

isthemostcommoncauseofseverechildhooddiarrheaanddiarrhealmortalityworldwide.Thediarrheaissecondarytolossofmatureenterocytes,resultinginmalabsorptionaswellassecretion. Rotavirus

Parasitic andprotozoal infectionsaffectoverhalfoftheworld’spopulationonachronicorrecurrentbasis.

disease pseudodiverticular the and outpouchings mucosa refers sub-mucosa. In of general, diverticular acquired colonic to but are individuals prevalence the rare 60 of than 50% younger age. diverticula adult in of age, populations Such years in Western 30 colonic older than years approaches as Diverticula multiple, is diverticulosis. and generally condition are to referred the much countries, is disease probably developing less because dietary This common of differences. in

intraluminal under pressure the of conditions sigmoid tend in colon. develop to Colonic diverticula elevated sheaths nerves, create inner discontinuities This circular facilitated vasa in recta, wall. the muscle connective where propria, and by the tissue colonic penetrate coat their the the muscularis muscle arterial unique to structure of is termed propria, discontinuous, these In external into gathered of parts but of the are longitudinal reinforced other the bands muscle the muscularis being three in layer by taeniae intestine, layer gaps is coli. the colon, this which by segments sequestration bulk. pressures of exacerbated generated be peristaltic stool spasmodic low contractions, may diets that by be exaggerated in bowel fiber, may luminal reduce with High

http://ebooksmedicine.net

MORPHOLOGYAnatomically,colonicdiverticulaaresmall,flasklikeoutpouchings,usually0.5to1cmindiameter,thatoccurinaregulardistributioninbetweenthetaeniaecoli(

Fig.15.25AandB ).Theyaremostcommoninthesigmoidcolon,butotherregionsofthecolonmaybeaffected.Colonicdiverticulahaveathinwallcomposedofaflattenedoratrophicmucosa,compressedsubmucosa,andattenuatedmuscularispropria—often,thislastcomponentistotallyabsent(

Fig.15.25CandD andperidiverticulitis.Becausethewallofthediverticulumissupportedonlybythemuscularismucosaandathinlayerofsubserosaladiposetissue,inflammation,increasedpressure,andmucosaluclerationwithinanobstructeddiverticulumcanreadilyresultinperforation. ).Obstructionofdiverticulawithstasisofcontents,leadstoinflammatorychanges,producingdiverticulitis Withorwithoutperforation,recurrentdiverticulitismaycausesegmentalcolitis,fibroticthickeninginandaroundthecolonicwall,orstrictureformation.

diverticular their asymptomatic throughout individuals disease remain with Most lives. About affected of those 20%

Fig. Distributionoflesionsininflammatoryboweldisease.ThedistinctionbetweenCrohndiseaseandulcerativecolitisisbasedprimarilyonmorphology. 15.26

Fig. Sigmoiddiverticulardisease.(A)Endoscopicviewoftwosigmoiddiverticulae.ComparetoB. 15.25 (B)Grossexaminationofaresectedsigmoidcolonshowsregularlyspacedstool-filleddiverticulae.(C)Cross-sectionshowingtheoutpouchingofmucosabeneaththemuscularispropria.(D)Low-powerphotomicrographofasigmoiddiverticulumshowingprotrusionofthemucosaandsubmucosathroughthemuscularispropria. Illinois.) of University courtesy Hanan,The Ira Chicago, image of Dr. Chicago, (Endoscopic

constipation, lesions intermittent continuous colonic Continuous cramping, and abdominal including Skip involvement, complaints diarrhea. develop discomfort, lower studies and over their can in development time. often become diverticula shown regress that have Longitudinal they numerous more larger while early unclear. a such progression or high-fiber is diverticulitis diet Whether prevents against protects often it Even most resolves and relatively occurs, antibiotic patients intervention. spontaneously treatment, after or require few when diverticulitis surgical

microbiota interactions from a intestinal disease resulting is in and bowel chronic immunity complex (IBD) between an mucosal host activation. condition resulting predisposed individuals genetically immune inappropriate Inflammatory colitis. ulcerative two encompasses IBD and entities, disease Crohn distinction of in the morphologic at between large and ( The those distribution disease on affected expression ulcerative sites of based, is sites colitis disease the Crohn part, and

Fig. 15.26

15.5 ). Table colitis Ulcerative the mucosa and submucosa. extends is colon and limited the into and only to rectum regional transmural. any as involvement), to also of and enteritis referred the involve disease, tract frequent Crohn By of gastrointestinal frequently may (because is area contrast, ileal

incidence frequently during peak Crohn diseases adults, second, disease young both a or smaller and the present some fifth ulcerative of colitis after adolescence although decade. the in in Both studies suggest http://ebooksmedicine.net In Western

and knifelikeSuperficial, Features Crohn Colitis to 15.5 submucosaPseudopolypsModerateMarkedUlcersDeep, Ulcerative Ulcerative noneSerositisMarkedNoGranulomasYes Disease Table broad-basedLymphoid of Feature Crohn (∼35%)NoFistulas/sinusesYesNo reactionMarkedModerateFibrosisMarkedMild Colitis Disease

features potentialWith colonic fistulaYes megacolonNoYesNOTE: Perianal may in Nodisease)Fat/vitamin present case. colonic YesinvolvementRecurrence (in CommonNosurgeryToxic Not after a all YesNomalabsorptionMalignant be single

common three the States, times in more most whites and, to among IBD European Jews. five (Ashkenazi) industrialized often is United eastern among nations, occurs predilection least below. This partly is factors, to discussed due genetic as at distribution North is prevalent most and northern geographic is IBD of but America, highly it Europe, in variable, The Australia. historically the on the it was which is of common regions IBD worldwide becoming is more incidence in low. and The rise in prevalence hypothesis, microbes immune reactions. first prenatal resets applied in to to prevents and childhood even system exposure that The that the says asthma, hygiene excessive environmental a way that in Extrapolated IBD, it due resulted immune in responses life. infections to has processes enteric a that development regulatory to hygiene of frequency mucosal reduced improved suggests limit inadequate of early attractive stated, increasing lacking of While mysterious. evidence remains the and incidence is commonly and IBD hence firm

aberrant the not investigators results dysfunction, altered IBD causes Although microbiota, most precise believe that mucosal gut with from of the responses, effects interactions combined host epithelial defined, composition are of yet immune in alterations and intestinal intestinal microbiome. as genetic, epidemiologic, view is well from ( models studies as of supported data This and laboratory clinical by IBD

Fig. 15.27

Genetics. rate disease is monozygotic disease, is family concordance twins approximately member, Crohn the Risk and increased 50%. is there for when affected for an in for ulcerative of IBD. genetic monozygotic is By dominant form contrast, 16%, this in that concordance of only are factors suggesting less colitis twins

affected identified Crohn as NOD2 oligomerization (nucleotide linkage domain Molecular a in of families gene binding susceptibility analyses 2) disease. have protein encodes peptidoglycans intracellular a binds that and to NOD2 NF-κB. activates bacterial subsequently at against that Some NOD-2 form of is disease-associated studies intestinal defending ineffective the suggest bacteria. that of enter the where into reactions. trigger the epithelium to the bacteria inflammatory able they are wall result is The intestine, through recognized Asian Crohn polymorphisms, be these disease. of and develops less It are individuals and polymorphisms disease NOD2 in uncommon should, specific African however, carrying than in 10% with that patients

single-nucleotide association search approaches with associated rich of (GWAS) genes genes as other polymorphisms yielded 200 throughput that IBD-associated sequencing studies IBD. and for as genome-wide well have harvest using over The a assess high (SNPs) discussed particular of autophagy–related interest. two genes Among and NOD2, are these, above, (immunity-related 16–like-1) M) They and IRGM (autophagy-related are GTPase ATG16L1

influxBacteria defects lead to Barrier genes. pathogenesis intracellular of may cell autophagosome luminal host bacteria, involved bacteria important the pathway like to be are of hypothesis in supporting in part against the are responses the Both defense NOD-2, and, that inadequate IBD. colitis. is genes with associated None these ulcerative of

immune responses. Mucosal Crohn immunosuppressive therapy. remain IBD contributes are the of being by immunomodulatory ulcerative disease mucosal pathogenesis the mechanisms of agents deciphered, which still Although immunity and to colitis mainstays and data cells pathogenesis. cells T to disease, in disease contribute that of is also T Polarization the TH17 type suggest well some to recognized helper TH1 and Crohn IL-23 is protection confer involved of development certain and in of Crohn disease the receptor from ulcerative and Consistent with TH17 colitis cells). (IL-23 polymorphisms this, maintenance the synergistic or that However, provided disease. cell the both an agents a TH17-inducing block inhibits that antibody cytokines no TH1-and role suggesting benefit, two have the have receptor T its in IL-17 effective, may whereas subsets is that is that to disease. in degree, and, cytokine lesser colitis, the of a suggest IL-13 Some production ulcerative TH2-derived Crohn data mucosal increased

Defects especially subset, Crohn the believed IL-10producing are especially underlie to disease. regulatory the inflammation cells, in T in the in Mutations receptor with early-onset colitis. are IL-10 severe, associated of intestinal microbes forms activation defective for excessive the is regulation likely combination some IBD. Thus, in inflammation both immune responsible of and chronic by immune

Epithelial defects. or in Crohn have A disease, epithelial described defects ulcerative of both. colitis, been variety epithelial Crohn relatives. subset occur patients barrier healthy intestinal example, in function defects in and junction with disease tight first-degree For a of their and that models and dysfunction specific immunity adaptive sensitize demonstrate This polymorphisms, experimental with can and disease. to barrier disease-associated activate mucosal subjects barrier NOD2 innate cosegregates dysfunction feedback loop potential in which disease providing granules, could abnormal between in disease anti-microbial microbiota Paneth that composition ATG16L1 affect contain luminal a microbiota, to thus and cell defective the of one mutations, which Interestingly, epithelium the carrying can Crohn peptides pathogenesis. the are patients with contribute mechanism

Microbiota. as of (50% fecal many 1012 lumen amounting fecal mass). in microbial gastrointestinal of the in organisms/mL as colon is organisms enormous, The the to material quantity of interindividual is of microbial composition by modified disease. significant population, There diet in this which and is variation the promote from transplants fecal transfer healthy able IBD, trials models suggest patients. may Microbial reduce bacteria benefit beneficial) microbial studies disease in or IBD of are clinical animal and to probiotic that (or even individuals or

cycle luminal adaptive One suggests model responses. flux function, compo unifies and nents the intestinal of epithelial that innate bacterial of which immune immunity and activates microbiota, roles mucosal a by transepithelial genetically In subsequent a susceptible host, release of the

signals luminal directs other to flux epithelia junction TNF the further material. increases and tight which immune permeability, of increase sufficient initiate may These events IBD. to establish a self- IBD. each of forms discuss With features next the of two background and will the clinical of we this of pathogenesis morphologic

andcecum. mayoccurinanyareaofthegastrointestinaltractbutthemostcommonsitesinvolvedatpresentationaretheterminal valve, ileum, enteritis, MORPHOLOGYCrohndisease,alsoknownasregional ileocecal Diseaseislimitedtothesmallintestinealoneinabout40%ofcases;thesmallintestineandthecolonbothareinvolvedin30%ofpatients;andtheremainderofcasesarecharacterizedbycolonicinvolvementonly.Infrequently,Crohndiseasemayinvolvetheesophagusorstomach.Thepresenceofmultiple,separate,sharplydelineatedareasofdisease,resultinginskip ischaracteristicofCrohndiseaseandmayhelpindifferentiationfromulcerativecolitis.Stricturesarecommon( lesions,

Fig.15.28A

appearanceinwhichdiseasedtissueisdepressedbelowthelevelofnormalmucosa( mayprogress,andmultiplelesionsoftencoalesceintoelongated,serpentineulcersorientedalongtheaxisofthebowel.Edemaandlossofnormalmucosalfoldsarecommon.Sparingofinterspersedmucosaresultsinacoarselytextured,cobblestone Theearliestlesion,theaphthous ulcer,

frequentlydevelopbetweenmucosalfoldsandmayextenddeeplytobecomesitesofperforationorfistulatracts.Theintestinalwallisthickenedasaconsequenceoftrans-muraledema,inflammation,submucosalfibrosis,andhypertrophyofthemuscularispropria,allofwhichcontributetostrictureformation.Incaseswithextensivetransmuraldisease,mesentericfatfrequentlyextendsaroundtheserosalsurface(creeping ).Fissures fat) ( Fig.15.28B

Fig.15.28C

ThemicroscopicfeaturesofactiveCrohndiseaseincludeabundantneutrophilsthatinfiltrateanddamagecryptepithelium.Clustersofneutrophilswithinacryptarereferredtoasacrypt thenormallystraightandparallelcryptstakeonbizarrebranchingshapesandunusualorientationstooneanother( mucosal andoftenareassociatedwithcryptdestruction.UlcerationiscommoninCrohndisease,andtheremaybeanabrupttransitionbetweenulceratedandnormalmucosa.Repeatedcyclesofcryptdestructionandregenerationleadtodistortion architecture; abscess of

granulomas metaplasia mayoccurintheleftcolon,wherePanethcellsarenormallyabsent.Thesearchitecturalandmetaplasticchangesmaypersist,evenwhenactiveinflammationhasresolved.Mucosalatrophy,withlossofcrypts,mayfollowyearsofdisease.Noncaseating ).Epithelialmetaplasia,anotherconsequenceofchronicrelapsinginjury,oftentakestheformofgastricantral-appearingglands(pseudopyloricmetaplasia).Paneth ( Fig.15.29A cell

),ahallmarkofCrohndisease,arefoundinapproximately35%ofcasesandmayariseinareasofactivediseaseoruninvolvedregionsinanylayeroftheintestinalwall( Fig.15.29B

Fig.

absence not disease.The of Crohn does 15.29C Crohn diagnosis ).Granulomasalsomaybefoundinmesentericlymphnodes.Cutaneousgranulomasformnodulesthatarereferredto(misleadingly)asmetastatic a preclude of granulomas disease.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 15.28 GrosspathologyofCrohndisease.(A)Small-intestinalstricture.(B)Linearmucosalulcersandthickenedintestinalwall. (C)Creepingfat.

Fig. MicroscopicpathologyofCrohndisease.(A)HaphazardcryptUlcerativecolitisalwaysinvolvestherectumandextendsproxiorganizationresultsfromrepeatedinjuryandregeneration.(B)Noncaseatingmallyinacontinuousfashiontoinvolvepartortheentirecolongranuloma. 15.29 (C)TransmuralCrohndiseasewithsubmucosalandserosal

are manifestations disease The clinical of extremely Crohn variable. pain. relatively intermittent fever, begins In abdominal with mild most disease patients, and of diarrhea, attacks acutely with acute or Approximately patients of appendicitis pain bowel present right and may which 20% mimic perforation. lower-quadrant fever, differential pain, colonic infections. with bloody some present diarrhea diagnosis abdominal creating and a may colonic Patients with involvement with are last Periods intervals asymptomatic by to months. activity weeks for interrupted disease that many of typically associated items, stress, or of variety emotional smoking. with Disease a be NSAID use, can dietary external reactivation specific and cigarette including triggers, physical

and may may malabsorption, in and B12 generalized serum individuals with nutrient colonic bile small-bowel anemia disease develop hypoalbuminemia, while protein of malabsorption vitamin in salts. disease, or loss result extensive Iron-deficiency terminal Fibrosing require of particularly common are resection. and surgical the ileum, strictures, patients and require often site of at resections 40% 10 Disease of many as additional within as recurs years. anastomosis, the loops and may abdominal skin. vagina, bladder, involve and between or develop of urinary Fistulas also perianal the bowel abscesses can also Perforations occur. and peritoneal

before disease migratory may is clubbing of ankylosing disease spondylitis, any the develop manifestations include fingertips, recognized. of Extraintestinal polyarthritis, which of sacroiliitis, Crohn intestinal uveitis, nodosum, erythema and disease are in Pericholangitis occur but Crohn ulcerative may more sclerosing colitis. in common primary cholangitis and increased disease. Crohn in risk of colonic patients for colonic the long-standing As with discussed later, adenocarcinoma development is

granulomas(arrows). Fig.15.30A ).Skiplesionsarenot

http://ebooksmedicine.net seen(althoughfocalappendicealorcecalinflammationoccasionallymaybepresentinthosewithleft-sideddisease).Diseaseoftheentirecolonistermedpancolitis (

).Diseaselimitedtotherectumorrectosigmoidmaybereferredtodescriptivelyasulcerative Fig.15.30B proctosigmoiditis. orulcerative proctitis maybepresentinseverecasesofpancolitis. ileitis, Thesmallintestineisnormal,althoughmildmucosalinflammationofthedistalileum,backwash

Ongrossevaluation,involvedcolonicmucosamaybeslightlyredandgranular-appearingorexhibitextensivebroad-based ulcers. Thetransitionbetweendiseasedanduninvolvedcoloncanbeabrupt(see

Fig.15.30C ).UlcersarealignedalongthelongaxisofthecolonbuttypicallydonotreplicatetheserpentineulcersofCrohndisease.Isolatedislandsofregeneratingmucosaoftenbulgeintothelumentocreatesmallelevations,termedpseudopolyps. strictures occur. serosal do the thickening atrophy not and Chronicdiseasemayleadtomucosal surface is is absent, normal, andaflat,smoothmucosalsurfacelackingnormalfolds.UnlikeinCrohndisease,mural However,inflammationandinflammatorymediatorscandamagethemuscularispropriaanddisturbneuromuscularfunctionleadingtocolonicdilationandtoxic megacolon, whichcarriesasignificantriskforperforation.

and mucosa are superficial HistologicfeaturesofmucosaldiseaseinulcerativecolitisaresimilartothoseincolonicCrohndiseaseandincludeinflammatoryinfiltrates,cryptabscesses,cryptdistortion,andepithelialmetaplasia.However,skip ( absent, is to inflammation submucosa lesions limited the generally and

Fig.15.30D are ).Thisdistinctionmaynotbedemonstratedbyendoscopicbiopsies,whichtypicallysamplethemucosaandlittleornosubmucosa.Inseverecases,mucosaldamagemaybeaccompaniedbyulcersthatextendmoredeeplyintothesubmucosa,butthemuscularispropriaisrarelyinvolved.Submucosalfibrosis,mucosalatrophy,anddistortedmucosalarchitectureremainasresiduaofhealeddisease,butthehistologicpatternalsomayreverttonearnormalafterprolongedremission.Granulomas not present.

SomeextraintestinalmanifestationsofulcerativecolitisoverlapwiththoseofCrohndisease,includingmigratorypolyarthritis,sacroiliitis,ankylosingspondylitis,uveitis,skinlesions,pericholangitis,andprimarysclerosingcholangitis.

relieved Ulcerative relapsing temporarily and material are of colitis lower diarrhea abdominal is stringy, attacks defecation. by expulsion a cramps of that bloody pain disorder mucoid characterized by and with emergency. or before or may and surgical be the for they a severe initial months to symptoms constitute These weeks, subside, enough may persist days, attack medical occasionally patients mild at than a disease, experience 10-year relapse have More of during almost half one but least all period. disease, extraintestinal cures Colectomy manifestations intestinal persist. but may

colitis not precedes infectious that The onset factors ulcerative some disease in enteritis known; cases. are trigger partially smoking symptoms. relieve cessation may occur in The shortly some onset of patients, after smoking symptoms and can of therapeutic agent disappointing. have nicotine been studies a Unfortunately, as

of complications One colitis most ulcerative of development the disease feared and neoplasia. is colonic of long-term the Crohn as begins and a chronic road carcinoma. full-blown dysplasia, This as which, process is just Barrett in gastritis, the esophagus along step to of factors: to related dysplasia several for is development risk The

Duration of disease. 10 increases Risk beginning disease 8 after to years initiation.

of Extent involvement. Patients those are with disease. left-sided with pancolitis than risk at greater only

Fig. Pathologyofulcerativecolitis.(A)Endoscopicviewofsevereulcerativecolitiswithulcerationandadherentmucopurulentmaterial. 15.30 (B)Totalcolectomywithpancolitisshowingactivedisease,withred,granularmucosainthececum(left) andsmooth,atrophicmucosadistally(right). andnormal(top). (C)Sharpdemarcationbetweenactiveulcerativecolitis(bottom) (D)Thisfull-thicknesshistologicsectionshowsthatdiseaseislimitedtothemucosa.Comparewith

Fig.15.29C . of Chicago, Ira Hanan,The (Endoscopic courtesy image University Dr. Illinois.) of Chicago, • Inflammation. http://ebooksmedicine.net of neutrophils) risk. active of severity and Greater by frequency may increase the presence inflammation (characterized enabling the 6). This on carcinogenesis is effect another (Chapter example of inflammation of

years 8 typically of approximately neoplasia, IBD. early programs after To detection facilitate patients surveillance diagnosis enrolled in of are this surveillance are diagnosis. to exception markedly approach sclerosing important development greater the dysplasia of for for generally cholangitis, patients risk time with are in at An of at primary enrolled is and who biopsy, mucosal costly a requires and making it regular Surveillance practice. extensive that by do mucosa in appear of not dysplasia occurs In eye. many flat abnormal areas cases, to Thus, endoscopic techniques detection advanced changes. imaging to are developed of the early dysplastic try being enable

Inflammatoryboweldisease(IBD)isanumbrellatermforCrohndiseaseandulcerativecolitis.

Crohndiseasemostcommonlyaffectstheterminalileumandcecum,butanysitewithinthegastrointestinaltractcanbeinvolved;skiplesionsandnoncaseatinggranulomasarecommon.

Ulcerativecolitisislimitedtothecolon,iscontinuousfromtherectum,andrangesinextentfromonlyrectaldiseasetopancolitis;neitherskiplesionsnorgranulomasarepresent.

BothCrohndiseaseandulcerativecolitiscanhaveextraintestinalmanifestations.

IBDisthoughttoarisefromacombinationofalterationsinhostinteractionswithintestinalmicrobiota,intestinalepithelialdysfunction,andaberrantmucosalimmuneresponses.

TheriskfordevelopmentofcolonicepithelialdysplasiaandadenocarcinomaisincreasedinpatientswhohavehadcolonicIBDformorethan8to10years.

the small are stomach, colon in may but esophagus, intestine. or the Polyps most in occur common are stalks as without Those to sessile. referred enlarge, may effects a traction proliferation luminal the and to to polyp adjacent of cells the polyps sessile the create of protrusion combine stalk. As on termed with pedunculated. are stalks Polyps or neoplastic. intestinal as polyps general, be nonneoplastic In can classified neoplastic to the which cancer. is common polyp The potential progress the adenoma, has to most hamartomatous, Nonneoplastic colonic hyperplastic. further as classified be can polyps inflammatory, or

associated polyp. rectal inflammatory with syndrome a solitary ulcer The purely is an rectal bleeding, anterior of Patients with mucus the inflammatory of triad present discharge, rectal clinical and wall. lesion the relaxation underlying of creating sharp at impaired the anterior shelf. rectal sphincter, The anorectal is cause the angle a leads to mucosa. ulceration overlying of rectal This abrasion recurrent the and polypoid produce of reactive tissue. mass healing composed mucosal a and cycles injury inflamed and of Chronic

Hamartomatous determined syndromes various of and occur genetically components polyps or as ( sporadically acquired

15.6 ). Table are present tumorlike at of develops. As previously, cell site mature the disorganized, at which the composed polyp types described hamartomas growths normally and rare, to of polyposis are Hamartomatous extraintestinal and to members. family but manifestations intestinal they because the important are need screen associated syndromes recognize

are Juvenile most the hamartomatous polyps common of polyp. type syndromic. may sporadic They be or many of individuals dominant juvenile the from solitary, as polyposis. syndrome to varies polyps 3 with as in the but Sporadic 100 autosomal usually juvenile are number when referred adults, the inflammatory present. infiltrates polyp, particularly to inflammatory is In an sometimes form as dense sporadic also are vast juvenile age. of younger of in occur majority 5 children years polyps The than located bleeding. most manifest characteristically are and with the rectum rectal polyps in Juvenile through In prolapse sphincter. and the occurs some the polyp protrudes cases, anal sites syndromeassociated) of risk for with polyposis juvenile development within is occurs polyps, an of syndrome other small the adenocarcinoma ( a and at juvenile increased (mostly Dysplasia proportion associated the colon and in

Table 15.6 ). the be hemorrhage in may associated with to required ulceration Colectomy juvenile polyp limit polyposis.

MORPHOLOGYIndividualsporadicandsyndromicjuvenilepolypsoftenareindistinguishable.Theytypicallyarepedunculated,smooth-surfaced,reddishlesionsthatarelessthan3cmindiameteranddisplaycharacteristiccysticspacesoncutsections.Microscopicexaminationshowsthespacestobedilatedglandsfilledwithmucinandinflammatorydebris(

(TGF-β)signaling,areassociatedwithautosomaldominantjuvenilepolyposis. ).Somedatasuggestthatmucosalhyperplasiaistheinitiatingeventinpolypdevelopment,andthismechanismisconsistentwiththediscoverythatmutationsinpathwaysthatregulatecellulargrowth,suchastransforminggrowthfactor-β Fig.15.31A

hamartomatous of presence mucocutaneous is carries a risk increased multiple rare autosomal http://ebooksmedicine.net by the syndrome for Peutz-Jeghers gastrointestinal defined that polyps disorder hyperpigmentation an and dominant

several of uterus, and Hamartomatouspolyps(rectal)Facialangiofibroma,corticaladulthood neoplasms. well including TuberoussclerosisInfancytoTSC1,TSC2 unusual malignancies, cancers ovaries, colon, of development other breast, the pancreas, as as tubers,renalangiomyolipoma lung, testes, with as the the patients familial half patients mutations present the subset form. Germ LKB1/STK11 syndrome, approximately of as of in a the loss-of-function gene of in well with are line form Peutz-Jeghers sporadic between yet abnormal of alterned cell a tumor cellular links that cancer regulates growth, metabolism, and risk. LKB1/STK11 example suppressive encodes another metabolism, protein kinase occur stomach bladder intestine, and and, most may in common polyps rarely, they and in although also colon the the the lungs. are in small Intestinal pedunculated the contour. large a and evaluation, with polyps On gross lobulated are intestinal arborizing glands smooth normal-appearing examination of lined demonstrates a characteristic connective Histologic propria, tissue, ( muscle, and epithelium network lamina by

Fig. 15.31B

typically are proliferations sixth of hyperplastic the life. polyps in are seventh that epithelial Colonic common discovered and decades formation hyperplastic The these delayed a of cells. understood, from to result cells, pathogenesis of epithelial polyps and is decreased goblet shedding “pileup” of to thought surface turnover of epithelial cell lesions leading incompletely is but Although adenomas, be from malignant that must later. lesions they no distinguished have histologically lesions malignant have similar sessile serrated potential, described these as potential,

MORPHOLOGYHyperplasticpolypsaremostcommonlyfoundintheleftcolonandtypicallyarelessthan5mmindiameter.Theyaresmooth,nodularprotrusionsofthemucosa,oftenonthecrestsofmucosalfolds.Theymayoccursinglybutmorefrequentlyaremultiple,particularlyinthesigmoidcolonandrectum.Histologically,hyperplasticpolypsarecomposedofmaturegobletandabsorptivecells.Thedelayedsheddingofthesecellsleadstocrowdingthatcreatestheserratedsurfacearchitecture,the morphologichallmarkoftheselesions(Fig.15.32

are The of clinically most adenocarcinomas. colorectal polyps adenomas, a important and neoplastic common that benign colonic to rise polyps majority give progress do adenocarcinoma. not to adenomas, however, Most

the dysplasia. by Colorectal epithelial presence characterized of are adenomas polyps often pedunculated growths range lesions. from sessile small, to These large beginning age There living is they world in are 50. no predilection, 50% and the adults of nearly gender present Western at in years cancer, screening recommendations at are United the these of age. precursors colorectal States are that to current polyps colonoscopy undergo starting in Because adults all 50 earlier a history least family risk which screened Because youngest relative before at with at colon in cancer the age diagnosed. individuals are was typically life, they at are for developing a years 10 Western parallel has their in diets frequency more risen are become common. adenocarcinoma) colorectal as increasing and with (in an of less adenomas incidence lifestyles While Asia, common

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ABABFig. Hamartomatouspolyps.(A)Juvenilepolyp.Notethesurfaceerosionandcysticallydilatedcryptsfilledwithmucus,neutrophils,anddebris. 15.31 (B)Peutz-Jegherspolyp.ComplexglandulararchitectureandbundlesofsmoothmusclehelptodistinguishPeutz-Jegherspolypsfromjuvenilepolyps.

MORPHOLOGYTypicaladenomasrangefrom0.3to10cmindiameterandcanbepedunculated (

withthesurfaceofbothtypeshavingatextureresemblingvelvet( Fig.15.33A )orsessile,

( )oraraspberry,duetotheabnormalepithelialgrowthpattern.Histologically,thecytologichallmarkofepithelial Fig.15.33B dysplasia

Fig.15.34C )isnuclearhyperchromasia,elongation,andstratification.Thesechangesaremosteasilyappreciatedatthesurfaceoftheadenoma,becausetheepitheliumfailstomatureascellsmigrateoutofthecrypt.Pedunculatedadenomashaveslenderfibromuscularstalks(see

Fig.15.33C )containingprominentbloodvesselsderivedfromthesubmucosa.Thestalkusuallyiscoveredbynonneoplasticepithelium,butdysplasticepitheliumissometimespresent.

orvillous Adenomascanbeclassifiedastubular, onthebasisoftheirarchitecture.Thesecategories,however,havelittleclinicalsignificanceinisolation.Tubularadenomastendtobesmall,pedunculatedpolypscomposedofsmall,rounded,ortubularglands( tubulovillous,

Fig.15.34A ).Bycontrast,villousadenomas,whichoftenarelargerandsessile,arecoveredbyslendervilli(

).Tubulovillousadenomashaveamixtureoftubularandvillouselements.Althoughfociofinvasionaremorefrequentinvillousadenomasthanintubularadenomas,villousarchitecturealonedoesnotincreasecancerriskwhenpolypsizeisconsidered. Fig.15.34B

adenomas, Thehistologicfeaturesofsessile serrated whicharealsoreferredtoassessileserratedpolyps,overlapwiththoseofhyperplasticpolypsandlacktypicalcytologicfeaturesofdysplasia(

Fig.15.34D ).Nevertheless,sessileserratedadenomas,whicharemostcommonintherightcolon,haveamalignantpotentialsimilartothatofconventionaladenomas.Themostusefulhistologicfeaturethatdistinguishessessileserratedadenomasfromhyperplasticpolypsisthepresenceofserratedarchitecturethroughoutthefulllengthoftheglands,includingthecryptbase,associatedwithcryptdilationandlateralgrowth,intheformer(

Fig.15.34D ).Bycontrast,serratedarchitecturetypicallyisconfinedtothesurfaceofhyperplasticpolyps.

most with malignancy. that important risk correlates for Althoughmostcolorectaladenomasbehaveinabenignfashion,asmallproportionharborinvasivecanceratthetimeofdetection.Size characteristic the is Forexample,while

Fig. Hyperplasticpolyp.(A)Polypsurfacewithirregulartuftingofepithelialcells.(B)Tuftingresultsfromepithelialovercrowding. 15.32 (C)Epithelialcrowdingproducesaserratedarchitecturewhenglandsarecutincross-section.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Colonicadenomas.(A)Pedunculatedadenoma(endoscopicview).(B)Adenomawithavelvetysurface. 15.33 ofapedunculatedtubularadenoma. (C)Low-magnificationphotomicrograph

Fig.15.34 Histologicappearanceofcolonicadenomas.(A)Tubularadenomawithasmoothsurfaceandroundedglands.Inthiscase,cryptdilationandrupture,withassociatedreactiveinflammation,canbeseenatthebottomofthefield.(B)Villousadenomawithlong,slenderprojectionsthatarereminiscentofsmall-intestinalvilli. withanincreasednuclear-to-cytoplasmicratio,hyperchromaticandelongatednuclei,andnuclearpseudostratification.Comparewiththenondysplasticepithelium(bottom). (C)Dysplasticepithelialcells(top) (D)Sessileserratedadenomalinedbygobletcellswithouttypicalcytologicfeaturesofdysplasia.Thislesionisdistinguishedfromahyperplasticpolypbyinvolvementofthecrypts.Comparewiththehyperplasticpolypin

Fig.15.32 cancerisextremelyrareinadenomaslessthan1cmindiameter,somestudiessuggestthatnearly40%oflesionslargerthan4cmindiametercontainfociofinvasivecancer.Inadditiontosize,high-gradedysplasiaisariskfactorforcancerinanindividualpolyp(butnototherpolypsinthesamepatient).

cancer been associated colon rates colonic described. increased syndromes Several with have of and polyps genetic basis and understanding colon ( the sporadic established cancer has of enhanced greatly been current these disorders has of The

Table 15.7

the colorectal by teenage is dominant by adenomas polyposis numerous an marked the disorder autosomal Familial of years. adenomatous (FAP) appearance the gene (APC). coli polyposis by adenomatous caused It mutations of is of necessary count several diagnosis many FAP, least may thousand and a for present be of A as classic 100 at as polyps ( is

Fig. 15.35 ). indistinguishable remarkable from adenomas. their sporadic are for these numbers, growths Except morphologically develops 30 of with patients Colorectal age. years untreated of before adenocarcinoma in FAP, 100% often standard colectomy prophylactic therapy carrying is As mutations. APC result, a individuals for manifestations, risk other at at remain for patients extraintestinal including sites. neoplasia However, of and of FAP variants APC syndrome explain other manifestations and Gardner syndrome. the associated as also Turcot such mutations Specific are development with desmoid polyps, cysts; intestinal unerupted may bones; a dental teeth. and and skull, FAP, clinical include thyroid addition of osteomas of tumors; including Gardner of supernumerary In syndrome, features variant epidermal the to abnormalities, long and mandible, and and by Turcot and characterized central adenomas of nervous is system. is intestinal syndrome tumors the rarer of Two-thirds http://ebooksmedicine.net

Patterns Familial of Common Table Neoplasia Sporadic Colorectal 15.7 and

FamilialadenomatousAPC/WNTpathwayAPC AutosomaldominantNoneTubular,villous;typicalpolyposis(70%ofFAP)

gene Turcot HereditarynonpolyposisDNAmismatchrepairMSH2, medulloblastomas. patients MLH1 have with mutations syndrome AutosomaldominantRightsideSessileserratedadenoma;colorectalcancer APC develop and one-third involved mutations develop in The one glioblastomas. remaining several in of DNA genes and repair have have with MUTYH but repair APC Some hundreds called the adenomas (also base patients mutations mutations polyposis). gene of MUTYH lack of instead excision tumor role later. The discussed is development genes in these of

syndrome, known described at including the endometrium, sites Lynch colorectal ureters, several ovary, familial originally cancer of was as colorectum, cancers (HNPCC), as also stomach, clustering nonpolyposis Hereditary brain,

Fig. 15.35 Familialadenomatouspolyposis.(A)Hundredsofsmallcolonicpolypsarepresentalongwithadominantpolyp(right). (B)Threetubularadenomasarepresentinthissinglemicroscopicfield.

small skin. and tract, bowel, hepatobiliary tend with in HNPCC colon do often ( and occur are than cancers sporadic located Colon cancers the at colon in to ages right patients younger

Table 15.7 ). in HNPCC, not. (i.e., but are Adenomas excessive numbers present is polyposis) In production HNPCC, subsequent in cases, prominent the serrated and associated mucin are with may be adenomas many adenocarcinomas. sessile a

of light on APC remaining the Just in identification in into pathogenesis insights shed the of cases. of responsible a of colon dissection has defects cancers, the FAP sporadic the has sporadic as for majority most HNPCC molecular of mutations provided mechanisms in the replication. is errors and by encode germ repair detection, line occur genes mutations excision, caused proteins responsible that of for HNPCC that inherited during DNA cases either of have MLH1. mismatch recognized, five genes been majority repair or least At MSH2 but such a HNPCC involve DNA HNPCC inherit normal with gene one Patients and mutated allele. repair one of regions higher containing 1000 times in repair as lead to to or DNA. rates microsatellite copy repeating sequences referred mutations defects normal, second DNA mostly silencing, is mutation short When epigenetic lost the than the through in to mismatch up accumulation at are to of human mutations to 100,000 most prone HNPCC. replication expansion and sites frequent The contains microsatellites, genome the which undergo 50,000 represent in approximately DNA during are in repair colonic the defects The discussed adenocarcinoma. of instability microsatellite of mismatch context next resulting and the consequences

Adenocarcinoma and and is major is contributor malignancy the tract a morbidity common colon to of gastrointestinal of most mortality the worldwide. the the uncommon and overall benign small site gastrointestinal accounts the malignant length which of is intestine, 75% for tract, of an for the By contrast, tumors. carcinoid by adenocarcinomas malignant have sarcomas. small-intestinal roughly lymphomas occurrence, tumors, and equal and of Among rates followed tumors (neuroendocrine)

new deaths more Each 130,000 there United from the cases nearly 50,000 and adenocarcinoma. States, colorectal year are than in This second all to 15% cancer-related cancer. lung only represents of nearly deaths, of 20% cancer years to Colorectal 60 of age. before years peaks age; occur of less 70 cases 50 at than incidence are females. affected than slightly often more Males share Sweden, (so-called) Colorectal carcinoma Australia, is the Zealand, developed countries States, in other Denmark, and Canada, diet. lifestyles and New most prevalent that United India, The cancer of America, Africa. incidence 30-fold as is as this in much and South lower Japan, as to (similar in have rates of In very the and low, result now diet. lifestyle levels previously where incidence those a intermediate presumably United in to Kingdom), changes was risen

http://ebooksmedicine.net

The vegetable colorectal are and closely factors with dietary increased of fat. high associated most rates refined and unabsorbable cancer of fiber carbohydrates low intake intake chemoprevention area dietary to an become In pharmacologic addition modification, great of has interest. or have NSAIDs epidemiologic suggest other aspirin studies that a Several protective effect. that polyp after patients place This in studies FAP some in NSAIDs whom rectum consistent is cause was with left showing with in regression the colectomy. proliferation, in highly response inhibition 90% carcinomas expressed to this the enzyme is in epithelial injury. suspected promote and 90% to adenomas (COX-2), by 40% colorectal effect of is particularly cyclooxygenase-2 known which mediated is that of of is to and It

fundamental evolution. provided general the cancer mechanisms Studies colorectal of have of carcinogenesis insights into colonic epigenetic genetic and adenocarcinoma events includes lead combination that and to molecular heterogeneous The of abnormalities. is the two least the have distinct At described. pathways, and instability microsatellite genetic been pathway, pathway APC/β-catenin In microsatellite WNT pathway instability associated the (see with whereas defects in mutations are those increased to the terms, lead repair pathway APC/β-catenin involving DNA signaling, involving mismatch simplest

15.7). Table

differ. multiple accumulation the the of Both mutations involve by but which accumulate mechanisms pathways mutations, involved and the genes stepwise the events, the methylation-induced gene progression both pathways. enhance which along is common may of most silencing, Epigenetic

• APC/β-catenin pathway. The process classic of typically neoplastic in the for 80% adenomacarcinoma early accounts colon sporadic as involves The which suppressor the tumor mutation much as sequence, APC tumors, ( of

Fig. ). 15.36 gene both the epigenetic of either copies events. be must functionally mutation adenomas APC For by to develop, inactivated, or a (Chapter component APC key of of the pathway a 6). regulator WNT signaling negative β-catenin, is of binds normally β-catenin. The APC degradation and to promotes protein β-catenin translocates MYC genes, promote those proliferation. loss where transcription function, D1, and it With the of to of APC encoding the cyclin such that and activates nucleus, as accumulates mutations, including also which growth KRAS, is mutations prevent in activating and This promote additional followed by apoptosis. KRAS is adenomas fewer are than is than late in of conclusion 50% 10% less the mutations mutation supported and adenocarcinomas. cm diameter, present 1 by of in observations The of of diameter, 50% in invasive that that a 1 greater event cm than adenomas progression effectors as associated of other encode such is and suppressor mutations TGF-β signaling. with SMAD2 SMAD4, which tumor Neoplastic also genes in cycle, Because cell of signaling may allow cell unrestrained growth. TGF-β loss genes inhibits normally these the

Fig. follows(“secondhit”).OthermutationsinvolvingKRAS, SMAD4, SMAD2, and andthetumorsuppressorgeneTP53, leadtotheemergenceofcarcinoma,inwhichadditionalmutationsoccur.Althoughtheremaybeapreferredtemporalsequenceforthesechanges,itistheaggregateeffectofthemutations,ratherthantheirorderofoccurrence,thatappearsmostcritical. Morphologicandmolecularchangesintheadenoma-carcinomasequence.ItispostulatedthatlossofonenormalcopyofthetumorsuppressorgeneAPC 15.36 occursearly.Individualsmaybebornwithonemutantallele,makingthemextremelypronetothedevelopmentofcoloncancer,orinactivationofAPCmayoccurlaterinlife.Thisisthe“firsthit”accordingtoKnudson’shypothesis.ThelossoftheintactcopyofAPC

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of suggesting tumor 70% of also suppressor The stages that affected occur to in at tumor TP53 TP53 gene is cancers late is uncommonly adenomas, mutations colon 80% in but progression. mutated TP53 deletions, of of instability often tumor APC/β-catenin a caused function as genes other hallmark chromosomal Loss is suppressor and by the chromosomal pathway. highlighting of of be genes transcriptional CpG silenced site. 5′ and a that includes some islands, genes suppressor start promoter by methylation of Alternatively, may region the frequently tumor also of become lesions Expression as increases advanced. telomerase more

microsatellite The pathway. instability microsatellite accumulate mismatch discussed of repair instability. earlier), condition a repair referred to loss microsatellite patients DNA In mutations repeats, as in as with deficiency mismatch genes, (due to are sequences but noncoding generally located TGF-β are silent, the involved because genes in coding protein and microsatellites the in of in type BAX microsatellite the or regions, as These proapoptotic regulation receptor located regions are encoding other promoter typically (Fig. growth, of those mutations cell such II ). 15.37 can cell enhance BAX Because while inhibits may growth, survival receptor to genetically abnormal epithelial TGF-β II loss of type clones. mutants colonic TGF-β of uncontrolled contribute cell proliferation, the

(CIMP). methylation CpG island hyper phenotype microsatellite instability, no of subset repair cancers enzymes. DNA In in a mismatch there are colon with mutations CpG the tumors (CIMP). These hypermethylation island demonstrate phenotype promoter thereby MLH1 repair these tumors, reducing is In function. typically and expression MLH1 the hypermethylated, region in BRAF in common oncogene mutations Activating the are these cancers. mutated. not contrast, KRAS are and typically TP53 In this of signature such the the carcinogenesis. Thus, pathway methylation microsatellite specific of of instability, combination as BRAF of is and MLH1, targets, mutation,

adenocarcinomas over length the are distributed approximately of Overall, entire colon. the equally ascending as colon; along rarely cause Tumors masses in often large-caliber cecum extend wall the ( polypoid, these one of exophytic obstruction colon proximal that and grow the tumors

Fig. 15.38A ). constrictions be tend lesions carcinomas produce that in ring” contrast, narrowing “napkin annular ( luminal to and the By colon distal

Fig. of sometimes point 15.38B obstruction. to ), the Both wall as forms and the masses be into ( may bowel firm over palpable grow time

Fig. right- ). microscopic colonic are general left-sided of adenocarcinomas and 15.38C similar. The characteristics found Most tumors tall composed are adenomas epithelium of columnar resemble that in cells dysplastic (

Fig. is responsible ). characteristic elicits consistency. tumors a strong component desmoplastic 15.39A for response, The stromal firm these invasive their which of poorly Some differentiated tumors few form glands (

Fig. 15.39B). abundant may that Others the these prognosis. wall, within carry and mucin intestinal a accumulates poor produce also in to composed ring be cancer signet those Tumors ( cells similar of may gastric

Fig. 15.39C

adenomas of presents screening with unique a prevention. combined the carcinomas endoscopic that for The recognition opportunity cancer within arise availability most undetected insidiously may cancers go for colorectal develop and therefore periods. Unfortunately, long until colon underlying or a most cancer Cecal called by and otherwise. anemia.Thus, attention gastrointestinal cancers is it postmenopausal fatigue the anemia right-sided an other clinical often of weakness male to iron-deficiency female the proven due is to appearance of maxim cause older iron-deficiency in and that clinical are occult in Left-sided left produce adenocarcinomas discomfort. colorectal changes cramping lower-quadrant or habits, bleeding, bowel may

invasion with depth differentiated histologic and of most factors are poor important the two prognostic prognosis, patterns mucinous and the are Although associated poorly

PMS1, MSH2 (MSH6, MLH1, PMS2)

"mutator growth, genes phenotype" and/or that Accumulated Microsatellite mutations differentiation, instability/ apoptosis regulate in

BAX, TGF RII, BRAF,

others TCF-4, IGF2R,

Fig. and survival If in permit these molecular develop. repair in mutations involved may Defects mismatch 15.37 and in in of and mismatch micro-satellite changes accumulation cell genes result genes. the of instability proliferation, cancer carcinogenesis. in affect colon Morphologic mutations repair numerous pathway genes of heterozygosity. LOH, Loss

Fig. 15.38 Colorectalcarcinoma.(A)Endoscopicviewofulceratedascendingcolonadenocarcinoma.(B)Circumferential,ulceratedrectalcancer.Notetheanalmucosaatthebottomoftheimage.(C)Cancerofthesigmoidcolonthathasinvadedthroughthemuscularispropriaandispresentwithinsubserosaladiposetissue(left). Areasofchalkynecrosisarepresentwithinthecolonwall(arrow). image Chicago, University Dr. Ira Chicago, Hanan,The of (Endoscopic of courtesy Illinois.) or absence of presence metastases. lymph node recognized (tumor-node-metastasis) Dukes classification form core originally on TNM the staging from Joint These of and Committee factors were by Cancer. the system and and Kirklin American the strategies. systems personalized more treatment complex time, more and nuanced with Staging have therapeutic reflecting approaches become distinctions The important are: most

of invasion. Depth submucosa 100%, that reduces propria (i.e., the 5-year to muscularis respectively approaching the (for 90%, while the and limited do limited tumors primary have mucosae) cross the to to those Tumors or invasion 5-year site). 95% survival not submucosa into rates muscularis survival to 70% adjacent serosal into or Invasion visceral tissues reduces further. organs survival and surface through the

lymph presence metastases ( The of node

Fig. survival. ) 15.40A compromises further result, or with metastases node cases receive radiation lymph As a most chemotherapy. treatments tumor termed resection, neoadjuvant cases, be In therapy. to primary these some may prior administered a process the tumor approach. guiding the in can therapeutic be helpful of characterization Molecular specific

metastases lung to • ( Distant

Fig. 15.40B ), ( liver

Fig. years only 15% sites and ), 5 tumors after are stage or at survival, or patients limits other alive fewer this diagnosis. with of 15.40C also the common is metastatic lesions. the the Because site most of of portal liver drainage, of of circumvent not the rectum the way often metastases by the anorectum portal However, and circulation, liver. from carcinomas drain the region does

distant years however, after stage, small well of for metastases of patients resection numbers some nodules. tumor Regardless of with do metastases and heterogeneity to and the colorectal This of is of molecular particularly carcinomas. lung clinical emphasizes liver or true

Fig. 15.39 Histologicappearanceofcolorectalcarcinoma.(A)Well-differentiatedadenocarcinoma.Notetheelongated,hyperchromaticnuclei.Necroticdebris,presentintheglandlumen,istypical.(B)Poorlydifferentiatedadenocarcinomaformsafewglandsbutislargelycomposedofinfiltratingnestsoftumorcells. (C)Mucinousadenocarcinomawithsignetringcellsandextracellularmucinpools.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Metastaticcolorectalcarcinoma.(A)Lymphnodemetastasis.Notetheglandularstructureswithinthesubcapsularsinus.(B)Solitarysubpleuralnoduleofcolorectalcarcinomametastatictothelung. 15.40 (C)Livercontainingtwolargeandmanysmallermetastases.Notethecentralnecrosiswithinmetastases.

COLONICPOLYPS,ADENOMAS,ANDADENOCARCINOMAS

polyps canbeclassifiedasnonneoplastic orneoplastic. Intestinal Thenonneoplasticpolypscanbefurtherdefinedasinflammatory, orhyperplastic. hamartomatous,

formasaresultofchroniccyclesofinjuryandhealing. polyps Inflammatory

occursporadicallyorasapartofgeneticdiseases.Inthelattercase,theyoftenareassociatedwithincreasedriskformalignancy. Hamartomatous polyps

arebenignepithelialproliferationsmostcommonlyfoundintheleftcolonandrectum.Theyarenotreactiveinorigin,incontrastwithgastrichyperplasticpolyps;havenomalignantpotential;andmustbedistinguishedfromsessileserratedadenomasorpolyps. polyps Hyperplastic

ofthecolonaretermedadeno-mas.Thehallmarkfeatureoftheselesions,whicharetheprecursorsofcolonicadenocarcinomas,iscytologicdysplasia. neoplastic Benign polyps epithelial

serrated adenomas,orpolyps,lackcytologicdysplasiaandsharesomemorphologicfeatureswithhyperplasticpolyps. Incontrastwithtraditionaladenomas,sessile

cancer polyposis nonpolyposis colorectal adenomatous (FAP) andhereditary (HNPCC) Familial mutations,andpatientstypicallyhaveover100adenomasanddevelopcoloncancerbefore30yearsofage. arethemostcommonformsoffamilialcoloncancer.FAPiscausedbyAPC

HNPCCiscausedbymutationsinDNAmismatchrepairgenes.PatientswithHNPCChavefarfewerpolypsanddevelopcanceratanolderagethanthattypicalforpatientswithFAPbutatayoungeragethaninpatientswithsporadiccoloncancer.

Thevastmajorityofcoloniccancersareadenocarcinomas.TheyariseeitherbyAPC-β-cateninpathwayorthemicrosatelliteinstabilitypathway.Thetwomostimportantprognosticfactorsaredepthofinvasionandthepresenceorabsenceofmetastasestolymphnodesordistantorgans.

normal true appendix diverticulum cecum. The a the is of and to diverticulum, Like it any a acute relatively is inflammation, acute prone common appendicitis entity. chronic and is in lesions, the can less Other also common. far tumors, but are including occur appendix

any common may occur young but group. adolescents in adults and Acute in age is appendicitis most males slightly affected risk is The appendicitis often more for are females. lifetime than 7%; with difficult diagnosis the may be diverticulitis. condition Meckel pregnancy, (pain ovulation), can be with and salpingitis, to the acute of prevalence associated mesenteric confused the preoperatively, and ectopic lymphadenitis, confirm mittelschmerz Despite acute appendicitis,

that appendicitis to venous pressure by compromises progressive outflow. is be intraluminal initiated increase thought in Acute luminal mass 50% gallstone, a stone-like 80% stool, small, less acute of worms. of a commonly, of mass by with fecalith, overt tumor, cases, appendicitis or or is associated to usually obstruction, or, In wall, and stasis responses and Ischemic trigger including the favor of contents, edema tissue luminal neutrophilic soft of inflammatory infiltration periappendiceal which muscular tissues. lumen, injury proliferation, and bacterial

appendicitis), suppurative alllayersofthewall.Theinflammatoryreactiontransforms thenormalglisteningserosaintoadull,granular-appearing,erythematoussurface.Althoughmucosalneutrophilsandfocalsuperficialulcerationoftenarepresent,thesefindingsarenotspecific,anddiagnosisofacuteappendicitisrequiresneutrophilicinfiltrationofthemuscularispropria.Inmoreseverecases,focalabscessesmayformwithinthewall(acute Inearlyacuteappendicitis,subserosalvesselsarecongested,and http://ebooksmedicine.net appendicitis, gangrenous whichoftenisfollowedbyruptureandsuppurativeperitonitis. andthesemayevenprogresstolargeareasofhemorrhagiculcerationandgangrenousnecrosisthatextendtotheserosa,creatingacute

appendicitis followed blood count. periumbilical to pain and localizes lower vomiting, early white by that peripheral Typically, low-grade a acute quadrant, elevated produces the nausea, mildly right cell ultimately fever, to the two-thirds at right physical from umbilicus superior (McBurney’s a distance the deep tenderness noted sign, classic location spine of finding iliac A McBurney’s anterior is point). the difficulty absent, clinical often These in symptoms however, creating and diagnosis. signs are

is carcinoid, or the common neuroendocrine well-differentiated of tumor The tumor. appendix most the of examination the discovered resected is a at surgery or incidentally appendix. on It of time usually the 2 appendix, solid where This 3 diameter. in bulbous involves produces of cm the distal most to up it tip a frequently neoplasm to swelling very and metastases evident, exceptionally and is transmural be extension are nodal spread distant infrequent, rare. intramural may Although of acute that mimics or and the enlargement also appendicitis. appendix non–mucin-producing occur obstruction the changes Conventional may in cause adenomas adenocarcinomas and Mucocele, appendix mucinous or be cystadenocarcinoma. stem inspissated appendix a consequence containing obstructed from mucinous or a an mucin, simply may cystadenoma mucin with filled may dilated of In intraperitoneal seeding latter appendiceal can instance spread. invasion lead through the and wall the to may women, for resulting In ovarian mistaken the implants be mucinous tumors. peritoneal most In mucin, abdomen peritonei. pseudomyxoma called cases, the semisolid advanced fills the a tenacious, with condition disease in This but ultimately most instances. debulking, fatal for held by intraperitoneal disseminated repeated is in years be may check

•Acuteappendicitisismostcommoninchildrenandadolescents.Itisthoughttobeinitiatedbyincreasedintraluminalpressureconsequenttoobstructionoftheappendiceallumen,whichcompromisesvenousoutflow.

neuroendocrine ismostoftendiscoveredincidentallyandisalmostalwaysbenign orwell-differentiated Themostcommontumoroftheappendix,thecarcinoid, tumor,

Theclinicalpresentationofappendicealadenocarcinomacanbeindistinguishablefromthatofacuteappendicitis,althoughtheformertendstopresentinolderpatients.

papillomavirus PT, clinical 2009. 88:300, recent squamous carcinoma: Hennessey cell implications, and Dent and Westra and Califano neck JA: Human J Res evidence head WH, and neck discussion associated of cancers head [A with HPV.]

molecular neck Braakhuis biology Brakenhoff Rev BJ, and of RH: head Nat 2011. Cancer Leemans CR, The cancer, 11:9, head of neck cancer.] discussion the molecular of [A biology and

a 45:662, in classification salivary of 2006. molecular Leivo and cancer, Oncol neoplastic into histopathologic I: of gland Insights disease: pathology group advances Acta complex gland review good of spectrum [A of salivary the tumors.] histologic

Annu ME: Eosinophilic insights, esophagitis: rapidly Rev Rothenberg JP, Abonia Med 2012. 63:421–434, advancing [A comprehensive esophagitis.] of eosinophilic review

2014. GE, 383:83–93, Richter Lancet Zaninotto Achalasia, G, JE: Boeckxstaens of focused clinically [A discussion achalasia.]

Dysphagia: scope and problem, the current P, Rev 12:259–270, Clave Shaker 2015. Nat of reality Hepatol Gastroenterol R: management.] brief [A of dysphagia review

Mol McDonald phenotype Lavery gland 2015. Hepatol DL, 1:41–54, in Cell SAC, Gastroenterol al: TA, Barrett’s The Graham et space, [A and metaplasia.] detailed of diiscussion Barrett esophagus

SJ, Med N 2014. 371:836–845, Barrett’s RF: J Spechler Engl Souza esophagus, of oriented review clinically [A Barrett esophagus.]

Clin JT: how, Gastroenterol when, Lin and of 2014. Screening 12:135–138, gastric cancer: Hepatol who, of efficacy.] gastric screening and discussion cancer [A indications

et Shaib 1384, YH, Graham Management endoscopy-based 2013. of al: Rugge DY, Hepatol M, an Gastroenterol approach, 11:1374– gastric polyps: Clin of their gastric management.] discussion [A polyps and

Clin pylori carcinogenesis: RM 42:285–298, gastric Jr: LE, North in Wroblewski Helicobacter Gastroenterol Peek 2013. mechanisms, Am [A review gastritis-associated cancer.] gastric comprehensive of

MG, enteric Staiano 2013. al: PJ, A, practical diagnosis 57:677–686, guide of Nutr nervous Schappi for the Pediatr A system Gastroenterol et Milla J primary disorders, dysmotility.] [A clinically of oriented review

surveillance N Haiti al: Barzilay EJ, during the Schaad Magloire 2013. 2 first et years, Med N, 368:599–609, epidemic—the R, Engl J Cholera epidemic.] Haitian review [A the of cholera

Camilleri Clin quiz 2015. irritable 13:1051–1057, Gastroenterol in e61–e62, secretory Intestinal Hepatol M: syndrome—diarrhea, mechanisms bowel defects in of patients irritable secretion with in discussion [A bowel syndrome.]

environmental factor Engl in celiac 2014. disease, missing Ludvigsson Med PH: Green N JF, 371:1341–1343, J The celiac [A review pathogenesis.] of disease feces M, A, N of 2013. J al: http://ebooksmedicine.net Duodenal et Nieuwdorp Vrieze 407–415, Engl Nood infusion donor Clostridium Med 368: difficile, E, recurrent for van fecal efficacy first showing C. infection.] [The microbial of transplantation recurrent series difficile for

Mosadeghi and Bhuket 31:50–55, in T, management, Curr Opin presentation, classification, disease: Gastroenterol 2015. N: S, Diverticular Stollman concepts evolving of review treatment.] approaches and [A to diverticulitis its

genetic 2012. Weersma S, of Nature architecture Host-microbe Jostins the L, al: bowel shaped RK, Ripke interactions et disease, have inflammatory 491:119–124, polymorphisms defense.] immune inflammatory disease review relationship of comprehensive their [A and bowel to to linked

Rogler ulcerative colitis 345:235–241, Chronic 2014. cancer, G: colorectal Cancer and Lett colitis-associated [A review cancer.] of

Kloor Brenner Pox CP: M, 383:1490–1502, H, Colorectal cancer, 2014. Lancet review colorectal [A oriented cancer.] clinically of

death, of J and Doubeni rate 370:2541, and Adenoma TR: Corley N detection 2014. risk Med colorectal Engl DA, Levin cancer CA: study detection [A relationship adenoma risk.] of cancer and to

MP: 2008. abdominal in Cartwright adults, acute pain Knudson of Physician SL, Am Fam 77:971, Evaluation abdomen.] [Clinically to oriented the approach acute

Lab Endocrine of A: the appendix: 2010. Arch tumors 134:871, Deschamps Pathol Med a review, Couvelard pathologic L, [Pathologyfocused carcinoid appendiceal tumors.] of review studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

The Bile Liver and Ducts

Repair Mechanisms and of Injury

Parasitic, Infections Bacterial, and Helminthic

Jaundice of Pathophysiology

Into Impaired Blood Liver the Flow

Through Flow Blood Liver the Impaired

and Ducts The Liver Bile

normal to gm. The adult liver 1600 1400 weighs 30% supplying 70% blood to supply, to dual It the 60% flow vein hepatic providing artery the has hepatic blood remaining the a of 40%. portal with and liver the porta of the through the and enter vein portal inferior the hepatis. hepatic hilum, The artery or aspect ramifying arteries, the portal to liver, variably of travel parallel ducts tracts, and hepatic the branches. branches Within within portal orders through of 12 veins, 10 in the bile

based the ( used common hepatic the The most describe lobular model to microarchitecture terminology on is

Fig. ). 16.1 that 2-mm lobules centered are vein the terminal diameter liver at of the their tracts divides This model periphery. hepatic demarcated portal into a on by 1to and in tributary simplification. the hexagonal variable; are useful as drawn a shapes nonetheless, structures, in it These far more is though humans are lobules often second triangular liver (see into A acini divides the model

Fig. to ) their of based the 16.1 on relative supply. blood hepatocytes position called terminal hepatocytes hepatic vein the tract the near are vicinity of are periportal. the those in centrilobular; portal The to differs its susceptibility respect to forms and hepatic zones metabolic is zone an parenchyma lobular each concept with activities because injury. of important into Division of the certain

tracts anastomosing or sheets hepatic Within the organized lobule, terminal portal hepatocytes the to “plates” extending veins. are into from Between vascular are sinusoids. of hepatocytes trabecular plates the and Blood exits numerous in wall. vein the into terminal sinusoids traverses veins the orifices the through hepatic the other. by are on Hepatocytes well-mixed thus portal arterial and bathed venous hepatic one blood blood side on which fenestrated (the into perisinusoidal a lined a Disse) of The space hepatocyte endothelium microvilli sinusoids protrude. overlies that abundant space by are arise luminal of in face Attached the are specialized that early long-lived Kupffer scattered cells, macrophages to sinusoids embryogenesis. tissue the of stellate cell a has the specialized Disse in role A. hepatic the in type, found cell, Another the storage is of space vitamin and 1 the to vascular that by bile in membranes hepatocytes adjacent by formed Between in abutting the junctions. and diameter from µm tight canaliculi, separated are hepatocytes are grooves channels plasma space 2 are of terminal drain portal the tracts. the canals bile of into intralobular channels periportal finally into ductules, successively ducts and Hering, within These bile the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 16.1 hepaticartery;PV, portaltracts. Modelsofliveranatomy.Inthelobularmodel,theterminalhepaticveinisatthecenterofa“lobule,”whiletheportaltractsareattheperiphery.Pathologistsoftenrefertotheregionsoftheparenchymaas“periportalandcentrilobular.”Intheacinarmodel,onthebasisofbloodflow,threezonescanbedefined,zone1beingtheclosesttothebloodsupplyandzone3beingthefarthest.BD, centralhepaticvein;HA, Bileduct;CV,

disease, liver major alcoholic of disease viral and diseases are fatty liver carcinoma (HCC). (NAFLD), the hepatitis, liver The hepatocellular primary nonalcoholic disseminated also frequently disease, as infections. in disorders, liver secondarily of damaged cardiac The cancer, and common a such extrahepatic variety is has damage, life-threatening often clinical liver reserve disease but the of the liver liver functional masks mild consequences. of impact The severe diffuse

hepatic of fulminant exception decompensation weeks, which of of With in the injury. liver and is years onset after process months, even the hepatic rare signs symptoms the an failure, or insidious appear disease be may imperceptible ( only patient manifest by to The be and hepatic the laboratory injury test abnormalities

Table may be 16.1 and ), subclinical. injury and also liver healing hepatic liver abnormalities hepatologists with Hence, most disease. individuals have are frequently referred who to chronic

as accumulation reversible injury Injured and potentially is changes, may hepatocytes such of fat die not when apoptosis. or bilirubin reversible, (cholestasis); several necrosis by show hepatocytes ( Necrosis

Fig. seen and 16.2 caused following hypoxia ) commonly ischemia. injury by is hepatic cell ( Apoptotic death

Fig. hepatitides. viral, 16.3 toxin-induced and autoimmune, ) in drug-and predominates

16.1 Evaluation Disease Table Liver Laboratory of

Total: unconjugatedplusconjugated

conjugatedonly Direct: *Mostcommonlyusedtestsareinitalics;†anelevationsuggestsliverdisease;‡adecreasesuggestsliverdisease.

hepatocytes Widespread confluent produce necrosis. death of may autoimmune in or or severe injuries This be seen toxic ischemic hepatitis. may or viral in chronic acute begins central the vein. a as of hepatocyte zone necrosis around dropout Confluent or severity and central portal veins tracts. “bridges” tracts With portal adjacent necrosis increasing

Fig. Hepatocytenecrosis.InthisPAS-D–stainedbiopsyfromapatientwithacutehepatitisB,clustersofpigmentedhepatocyteswitheosinophiliccytoplasmindicatefociofhepatocytesundergoingnecrosis.PAS-D, 16.2 Periodicacid-Schiffstainafterdiastasedigestion.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Hepatocyteapoptosis.ThisbiopsyfromapatientwithlobularhepatitisduetochronichepatitisCshowsscatteredapoptotichepatocytes(“acidophilbodies”;single 16.3 arrows)andapatchyinflammatoryinfiltrate(double arrows).

hepatocytes hepatocytes that those to lost primarily died. of replication place by have adjacent Regeneration takes of mitotic near a in also located of to the stem of forms more liver cells but canal Hering replenishment the in setting may hepatocytes acute cells damage the divide, remains stem In injury liver acute hepatic the of of uncertain. severe niche begin of to contribution hepatocytes. and the chronic replicative In senescence evidence clear parenchymal is there to longstanding liver following significant diseases, preexisting of differentiation make stem restoration, however, probably cell that proliferation contributions The a called progeny liver duct-like regeneration. cell–mediated cells of reactions, these stem ductular tissue differentiating stem morphologic produce marker of structures,

but a often to injury, reaction Scar occurs as more may severe very formation injury. chronic follow acute principal stellate is scar cell perisinusoidal involved The hepatic the cell. deposition type in stellate highly myofibroblasts, Following become cells injury, fibrous scar. may which convert the into and produce activated fibrogenic liver inflammatory Stellate cells, complex Kupffer hepatocytes, between interactions and activation involves cell cells. liver cells, When severe hepatocytes. of is out reticulin, the of causes and that be there regeneration hepatocytes number of orderly there underlying may collapse death large precluding injury of of drop the areas cells, by replaced of is loss liver septae. are stellate cell there the of cases, activation In fibrous and such hepatocytes described cirrhosis. liver encircle disease, fibrous forms septa chronic of regenerating late-stage are Eventually, these many in which surviving, as

forms many disease. in immunologic are reactions involved Inflammation and liver of acute-phase secretion Systemic A of protein, liver, as (a of reactants C-reactive increased serum alters inflammation (Chapter forms regulator and the of leading of metabolism iron metabolic 12). of biosynthetic such a protein to precursor activities the and hepcidin, amyloid) key amyloid some play hepatocytes CD4+ the in As eradication of chronic discuss, injury. CD8+ important cells with in T virus-infected being viral cells disease, adaptive particularly immune and, we role hepatitis, liver will in and a critical

liver is disease of The clinical most consequence liver severe failure. scenarios: in liver occurs failure. acute, primarily clinical and It three chronic, acute-on-chronic

of produces within hepatic liver months liver as disease Acute failure 6 the defined encephalopathy diagnosis. initial that a is the when and onset liver failure of fulminant of within The develops the 2 within develops as jaundice, subfulminant failure encephalopathy as the when months. liver encephalopathy weeks is known condition 3 of hepatitis other B remainder cases A ingestion of for accounts United of acetaminophen cases. almost drugs the for States, account 50% acute infections failure, accidental the or and autoimmune In deliberate liver hepatitis, while toxins, of and acute and and B as predominate acute causes Asia, liver E hepatitis failure. In of acute

MORPHOLOGYTheclinicalsyndromeofacuteliverfailureisreflectedanatomicallyandhistologicallyasmassive hepatic necrosis. Theliverissmallandshrunkenduetolossofparenchyma(

Fig.16.4A ).Microscopically,therearelargezonesofdestructionsurroundingoccasionalislandsofregeneratinghepatocytes(

Fig.16.4B ).Scarismostlyabsentgiventheacutenatureoftheprocess.

with by are coagulation jaundice, hypertension onset vomiting, portal ascites. nausea, of the which associated encephalopathy, and fatigue, with life-threatening defects, followed failure liver manifests Acute and serum the in Typically, are the into thousands. levels transaminase elevated liver but swelling is shrinks then by and parenchyma liver edema the related dramatically. is enlarged to inflammation, destroyed as initially The transaminase are disappears. serum Eventually, values source off as then lost, their hepatocytes as level decline and rapidly result the encephalopathy jaundice, end transplantation, and, Worsening with and coagulopathy, progression, is unabated without develop; death. failure multiorgan Manifestations of liver and to in include other bilirubin to retention only sclera, eliminated acute also retention • due Jaundice the but of due (yellow solutes systemic of the skin respectively) and icterus and not bilirubin, of following: bile. cholestasis failure discoloration

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 16.4 Massivelivernecrosis.(A)Theliverissmall(700g),bile-stained,soft,andcongested.(B)Hepatocellularnecrosiscausedbyacetaminophenoverdose.Confluentnecrosisisseenintheperivenularregion(zone3,arrow).Thereislittleinflammation.Residualnormaltissueisindicatedbytheasterisk. of (Courtesy Washington,Seattle,Washington). Dr. of Matthew Yeh,University

ranging stupor, Hepatic in behavioral spectrum to a death. consciousness of to encephalopathy encompasses disturbances from and confusion subtle abnormalities, and coma days, acute over after few or months a injury. may develop weeks, Encephalopathy neurologic develop. rigidity, signs, hyperreflexia, and asterixis, including may Fluctuating “flapping” held the as to a of nonrhythmic Asterixis rapid arms extension hands refers extremities, in dorsiflexed movement extension-flexion with when head are the the of wrists. seen and best and system correlate brain neuronal Elevated the and with impaired function levels edema. nervous in ammonia central blood

Coagulopathy. of failure, a bruising to the source in coagulation leading easy of bleeding. factors decline of liver and number The liver the face that is to coagulation of occur (Chapter may damaged factors. liver due 12) activated also disseminated remove Paradoxically, coagulation the failure to intravascular

flow obstruction system, there venous arises occur diminished when may level. the intrahepatic, Portal or which portal because the is hypertension through of prehepatic, posthepatic at and liver acute can with chronic it discussed later. portal live in is failure While more failure, occur is commonly seen hypertension major failure, In the obstruction hepatic liver the encephalopathy. consequences intrahepatic ascites usually clinical acute are is and and years, over to hypertension and complex more portal its effects months later). disease, and are widespread develops chronic In (see liver

failure whom a causes in Hepatorenal there form morphologic of renal syndrome • kidney with in are or individuals occurring liver is functional dysfunction. for intrinsic no failure renal free-water renal excretion, retention, Sodium filtration and perfusion and abnormalities. main rate functional impaired are the glomerular decreased nervous causing vasoconstriction further the afferent decreases decreased increased renal due activation is to There arterioles, and activation vasoconstriction vasodilation, renal and of of renin-angiotensin axis, that filtration. the perfusion system sympathetic pressure of renal the glomerular systemic blood decrease begins The a urea onset and syndrome’s with rising in levels. urine creatinine nitrogen output and

refers parenchymal morphologic the associated diffuse liver change the fibrous into most Cirrhosis to surrounded regenerative often liver ( of with it bands nodules disease; by is chronic transformation the

Fig. 16.5 ). chronic leading liver disease. chronic of chronic disease B, worldwide include fatty hepatitis non-alcoholic C, liver alcoholic (NAFLD), failure and liver causes hepatitis The liver liver chronic and of feature number chronic a that cirrhosis a in all cirrhosis, all recognize not to disease diseases, specific While and is not entity, to is disease. of it liver common end-stage is a terminates that cirrhosis it leads not important may patients of treated hepatitis have cirrhosis stage, end to cured liver in function C rise adequate even give the hepatitis face at diseases often or with cirrhosis. For autoimmune chronic not whereas tract do example, biliary as and that and Even diseases, viral such untreated pathophysiology different. cirrhosis morphology to cirrhosis, disease, in NAFLD, are the rise be liver each hepatitis, metabolic in alcoholic likely diseases give may to of

Fig. Cirrhosisresultingfromchronicviralhepatitis.Notethebroadscarsseparatingbulgingregenerativenodulesovertheliversurface. 16.5

http://ebooksmedicine.net

liverdiseaseismostoftenassociatedwithcirrhosis,whichismarkedbythediffusetransformationoftheentireliverintoregenerative bands.Thenodularnatureoftheprocessisreadilyevidentbothgrossly( by MORPHOLOGYLiverfailureinchronic parenchymal fibrous nodules surrounded

Fig.16.5

Fig.16.6,A ).Thesizeofthenodules,thepatternofscarring(linkingofportaltractstoeachothervs.linkingofportaltractstocentralveins),thedegreeofparenchymalloss,andthefrequencyofvascularthrombosis(particularlyoftheportalvein)allvarybetweendiseasesandeven,insomecases,betweenindividualswiththesamedisease.

disease most and with cirrhosis. Asmentionedearlier,stemcellactivationanddifferentiationgivesrisetoduct-likestructures,thesocalledductularreactions.In disease, usually increase prominent are in liver progression reactions chronic ductular Ductularreactionsmayincitesomeofthescarringinchronicliverdiseaseandthusmayhaveanegativeeffectonprogressiveliverdisease.

fibrosis andevenoffullyestablishedcirrhosismayfollowdiseaseremissionorcure.Scarsbecomethinner,moredenselycompacted,andeventuallystarttofragment(see Regression of

).Asfibrousseptabreakapart,adjacentnodulesofregeneratingparenchymacoalesceintolargerislands.Allcirrhoticliversshowelementsofbothprogressionandregression,withthebalancebeingdictatedbytheseverityandpersistenceoftheunderlyingdisease. Fig.16.6,B

advanced asymptomatic until the most individuals of the of 40% with About are disease. stages cirrhosis liver loss, such of manifestations, symptoms earlier. and eventually and, Even nonspecific anorexia, they at signs with weight late as present discussed clinical weakness, stages, failure the liver much from in failure. disease, encephalopathy, chronic Jaundice, as acute result may coagulopathy same and liver there However, additional some significant features: are

pruritus of risk their which patients may be so (itching), of infection. that bouts potentially life-threatening the profound intensity jaundice severe and can skin lead raw Chronic scratch repeated to some indication is for pruritus the patients, In severe primary liver transplantation. seen the body, suggesting but associated with cholestasis, other frequently Pruritus bile to that precise is is of unknown. pathogenesis also the in its is somehow it in related disorders build up salts

Portal failure and in in in failure manifests hypertension more frequent acute is ways complex liver than chronic more ( liver

Fig. ). 16.7 shunts circulation. from to reversed Portosystemic blood portal is flow develop the systemic when shunts are of by collateral vessels. produced principally These dilation which wherever circulations individuals liver venous the the which most capillary portal 40% with notably, the clinically esophagogastric bypasses beds, common advanced-stage develop about share disease. of Most varices, important of are systemic appear in and massive, cause compounding when is fatal there These hematemesis, frequently particularly coagulopathy. often pulp. sequestration to lower of which due hypertension the often can may congestive to splenomegaly, the elements expanded and count platelet Portal these lead in red occurs

palmar erythema to chronic to local male liver of vasodilatation) due and skin. of patients Hyperestrogenemia the impaired failure (a metabolism with can in reflection angiomas estrogen rise give spider gynecomastia. and also to leads Such hypogonadism hyperestrogenemia male from in axis hypothalamic-pituitary women also functioning. may disruption Hypogonadism occur of

carcinoma to hepatocellular discussed of diseases (HCC, liver predispose later). development chronic Most

disease course patient with cirrhosis to chronic vary severity patient. The liver from of and widely cirrhosis which may hypertension following disease regresses in in instances the or due shunts. Even portal persist irreversible remission presence of to cure, The are death of causes

Fig. After1yearofabstinence,mostscarsaregone(Massontrichromestain). Thickbandsofcollagenseparateroundedcirrhoticnodules.B, 16.6 Alcoholiccirrhosisinanactivedrinker(A)andfollowinglong-termabstinence(B).A, of (Courtesy Drs. New of and Fiel, Zhu Sinai School Hongfa Medicine, Isabel New York, Mount York.) http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. shown setting cirrhosis, portal Major consequences 16.7 male. hypertension the the of for of clinical in amenorrhea, and are frequent as sterility In hypogonadism. result a oligomenorrhea, females, of

(as liver disease) HCC. and liver failure in acute criteria used laboratory disease are to findings prognosis the gauge main and and progression. Clinical venous centers, are portal some to the pressures vascular assess wedge It measured of obstruction. degree hypertension. of correlate biopsy with portal the presence Liver findings severity and and whereas For hypertension with of are disease. parenchyma and example, specimens with portal large portend thin end-stage be development fibrosis loss regenerated fibrous the to hypertension, of parenchyma unlikely of portal of islands bands septa and liver broad associated

years develop individuals of signs suddenly acute Some stable, of chronic after liver well-compensated, failure. disease large vascular is there vascular parenchyma In such the insults. with to patients, functioning shunting, often leave superimposed, extensive which liver potentially of vulnerable lethal of with volumes a liver both cirrhosis supply, borderline or established 50%. of of failure form this The short-term mortality is with around liver patients

sclerosing or to D cholangitis; cause bacterial hepatitis patients ascending decompensation medical with hepatitis; viral chronic hepatitis of patients with therapy with parenchyma include: sudden of replacement B; emergence in liver or those carcinoma. of that by superinfection with primary Hepatic disease resistance in chronic cholangitis in of insults metastatic development those liver primary other cause as instances patient tips toxic a a the a systemic or be cirrhotic into failure. injury well-compensated superimposed disorder, may such sepsis, In cardiac that acute liver failure

failure may occur Liver injury, chronic or or follow acute otherwise superimposed disease. chronic insult itmay liver an acute on injury as well-compensated

The of mnemonic causes for liver are follows: as acute failure

hepatitis A: A, acetaminophen, autoimmune hepatitis

B: B hepatitis

tetracycline, valproate, (fatty F: liver Reye ofpregnancy, the fatty of type change syndrome) microvesicular

ascites, coagulopathy, fatal Potentially include portal and liver encephalopathy, hypertension of hypertension. and failure sequelae hepatorenalsyndrome, portopulmonary

drugs/toxins, hepatitis D: D

E: hepatitis E, disease, causes Budd-Chiarisyndrome) esoteric (Wilson

its meaning The different same be chronic can hepatitis can be used because acute terminology attention word, can for situation. in careful the several hepatitis, confusing, any and viral clarify context describe to to entities; applied B, viruses affinity virus) A, that the E hepatotropic, for Firstly, is, that (hepatitis to D, are specific is hepatitis have C, the and liver. name a are and well as autoimmune only injuries chronic patterns and as hepatotropic toxins. drugs, other , also of that Secondly, to hepatic but fever is not EBV, by yellow by CMV and viruses, produced such viruses damage produced acute as reactions, hepatitis applied by which summarized section, focus of hepatotropic will this on in features In the main are we viruses,

discuss and of , and we clinicopathologic 16.2 characteristics viral acute Table chronic hepatitis. will then the

is of fulminant cause rarely chronic benign cases) self-limited does hepatitis. a hepatitis infection (in produces that and 0.1% not about HAV usually incubation weeks. an HAV period of has 3-6 is typically immune host not by cleared establish it It the response, state. a carrier so does in endemic sanitation. with world hygiene and occurs and throughout is infection poor countries The the

Fig. HepatitisAvirus. 16.8 TemporalchangesinserologicmarkersinacutehepatitisAinfec-tion.HAV,

Table Single-strandedRNA;dsDNA, Hepatitis ssRNA, Viruses liver and hepatitisDantigen;ELISA, 16.2 enzyme-linkedimmunosorbentassay.FromWashingtonK:Inflammatoryandinfectiousdiseasesoftheliver.InIacobuzio-DonahueCA,MontgomeryEA,editors:Gastrointestinal double-strandedDNA;HBcAg, Philadelphia,2005,ChurchillLivingstone. hepatitisBcoreantigen;HBsAg, The pathology, hepatitisBsurfaceantigen;HDAg,

associated tends nonspecific and with appetite. of cause and fatigue loss a febrile Acute symptoms HAV such to jaundice as illness Overall, of about hepatitis 25% evident accounts acute clinically HAV for worldwide.

positive-strand its is own RNA picornavirus a occupies HAV small, that Hepatovirus. nonenveloped, genus, HAV nm is icosahedral capsid 27 an Ultrastructurally, in diameter. for for The serve a receptor glycoprotein HAVcr-1, Ebola HAV receptor also membrane may virus. as a that is HAV water before in weeks contaminated after of onset week food stool the for 1 and the 3 shed jaundice. is 2 of and spread to by and ingestion is people unsanitary fecal-oral water-borne schools cases and in epidemics with personal infected contact Thus, nurseries, where such and well in explains institutional live for or accounts as close conditions. as overcrowded, as places outbreaks an contamination settings individual most in be infected and of can also individuals. in saliva HAV detected serum

virus raw of the the sporadic consumption In or contaminated infections countries, that steamed contracted concentrated may be human by sewage. with seawater developed have from shellfish source of workers another outbreaks. the are in industry food Infected seem does HAV to be cytopathic. itself not HAV-mediated in The immune a plays cells, cytotoxic T involving key that cellular hepatocellular CD8+ injury. role particularly response,

for virus. donated blood screened this viremia not transmission is is blood-borne therefore, transient, very rare; is HAV specifically Because ( against in IgM HAV the and infection marker acute is at symptoms antibody onset blood a of of reliable appears

Fig. ). 16.8 the the rises. shedding virus IgM titer as Fecal of ends for usually anti-HAV in followed immunity. IgM IgG persists lifelong of declines The response that often by years, conferring the few a appearance months difference IgG total is IgM from However, tests routinely no and anti-HAV. available the between inferred IgG there presence anti-HAV the are of for anti-HAV; is infection. HAV since effective 1992, in The preventing vaccine, available

hepatitis an widely, “healthy” of with (4) massive varies progressive hepatitis the chronic disease from asymptomatic ending The (2) chronic of (1) nonprogressive state. virus; with outcome acute necrosis; HBV recovery (5) infection clearance and hepatitis; carrier cirrhosis; (3) in liver fulminant http://ebooksmedicine.net and disease HCC. an development liver important of precursor chronic is the also for HBV-induced clinical of HBV depicted The in frequencies various infection of approximate outcomes are

Fig. 16.9

Liver infection due HBV health is problem. global to an disease enormous and with been individuals world’s of the has 400 HBV, infected One-third infections. million have (2 billion individuals) chronic population Pacific Asia in and percent Western Seventy-five the carriers live of chronic rim. global in 2% than Europe, prevalence B of of to from hepatitis Africa in America, parts varies greater than Western North Australia. chronic The and infection 8% less

geographic of with HBV The of the also varies transmission mode locale. high-prevalence cases. childbirth the regions accounts perinatal of In transmission 90% world, during of for horizontal areas childhood, with intermediate prevalence, dominates. in especially early transmission, In individuals. skin through among in breaks membranes or minor children infected occurs mucous following with contact usually Spread the physical and the intravenous sex abuse spread. syringes) drug areas, In of (sharing of low-prevalence unprotected modes needles are chief and donated the Transfusion-related paying screening for blood HBsAg greatly and of of of by has by blood practice been reduced donors. spread cessation 95% protective adolescents. induces response and antibody a of children, infants, in Vaccination be and adopted has vaccination worldwide. Universal but Taiwan yet notable to had has Gambia, in success

HBV has prolonged period a weeks). incubation (2–26 Unlike active HAV, hepatitis. during acute blood and HBV remains the episodes in of chronic newly 70% do HBV have mild of or no and adults jaundice. with not acquired symptoms develop Approximately upper-quadrant constitutional and anorexia, 30% right jaundice, such symptoms have pain. remaining as The fever, nonspecific individuals. self-limited the develops infected in 10% disease resolves In treatment, and most infection chronic but cases, is without of acutely hepatitis infected in approximately rare, occurring of 0.1% 0.5% individuals. to is Fulminant

is a Hepadnaviridae, hepatitis member family in multiple a cause of animal of viruses that HBV DNA species. four open HBVgenomeisapartiallydouble-stranded,3200-nucleotide, The following frames, circular the DNA reading with encode proteins: which

B (hepatitis a designated and with HBeAg antigen). polypeptide longer Nucleocapsid “core” and antigen) e protein core core precore hepatitis region, a B (HBcAg, virions. the directs whereas region assembly the of in the HBeAg HBcAg it The participates hepatocytes, into where in secretion remains of blood, precore polypeptide

Envelope hepatitis B (HBsAg, glycoproteins antigen). surface Infected HBsAg). small hepatocytes secrete envelope noninfective synthesize glycoproteins quantities massive of and (mainly

through which (Pol) genomic replication polymerase via activity DNA to with DNA activity, a transcriptase intermediate unique reverse both and an → DNA polymerase cycle enables RNA → template. RNA occur is of infection used B (described the target This hepatitis polymerase to later). treat unusual drugs

transcriptional virus which protein, genes host transactivator a required and replication genes. HBx act variety wide which as may viral for is a of and for of cancer. implicated in has HBV-associated been It liver pathogenesis the

serum be by the of markers monitoring disease course The certain ( can clinically followed

Fig. 16.10

of disease, levels declines it before weeks). onset and usually may appears as (though to in during 12 the persist peaks symptomatic occasionally long 24 then weeks undetectable HBsAg symptoms, as

4–12 Months weeks Years to http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. TemporalchangesinserologicmarkersforhepatitisBviralinfection.(A)Acuteinfectionwithresolution. 16.10 (B)progressiontochronicinfection.NoteinsomecasesofchronicHBVinfection,serumtransaminasesmaybecomenormal.

disappears. antibody detected several until is to over not months HBsAg acute and the Anti-HBs appears few a is weeks after disease after usually rationale for which life Anti-HBs the may persist HBsAg. vaccines current is for containing and protection, confers

viral in HBeAg after DNA ongoing and HBsAg signify and replication. serum HBV soon appear to Persistence hepatitis. indicator of progression is HBeAg an chronic of is antibodies on an appearance acute of The the that wane. anti-HBe and infection has implies peaked

in the serum of the of symptoms, aminotransferase becomes onset serum (indicative levels IgM concurrent onset hepatocyte elevated before with of detectable anti-HBc destruction). shortly is period antibody anti-HBc. IgM Over months, a replaced by anti-HBc the IgG of its anti-HAV, anti-HBc for IgG the from rising face decline assay direct anti-HBc. presence in anti-HBc; case the total no of inferred there of IgM As is of is in

not strains of produce HBV express HBcAg. emerge replication competent that but are do and mutated Occasionally, HBeAg the be such may patients, HBeAg HBV the or low despite undetectable In presence of DNA. serum in that antibodies. second is ominous mutants presence A development the in of replicate HBV the appearance individuals vaccinated anti-HBs normally of protective

is the The outcome of of determinant host the immune main the response infection. resolution mechanisms with associated a of and protect the Innate γ–producing interferon is immune the of phases CD4+ initial cells CD8+ strong virus-specific by and during acute infection. infection, response the host hepatotoxic, cytotoxic infected hepatocyte by caused cells. is is directly T and attacking HBV generally CD8+ cells most injury not

the of infection chronicity. at time of best age the Patient is predictor at of younger the the chance In of the time infection, higher age the HBV general, the infection. chronic cancer chronic or inhibitors viral the of and interferon liver B liver and eliminate cirrhosis hepatitis slow reduce polymerase prevent progression, does liver infection. Treatment not disease but can damage, with drug treatment viruses a of to resistance. that result, As sometimes fails lead due emergence mutations bearing to

disease, of million approximately with individuals is liver 170 cause HCV major a worldwide. affected population) the have Approximately HCV infection. Americans million (1.6% of chronic 4.1 currently, per infection new a over to a 230,000 peak transfusion-associated a per as cases screening result year infections incidence of primarily mid-1980s due new annual a year infections Notably, has there reduction in from procedures. 30,000 the in of effective to decrease of been patients changing number for continue with recently, to (discussed the Until but later) to therapies chronic appeared outlook better. the infection increase, likely the are of new

Disease are most to Control and HCV factors for the common data follows: Prevention as infection for According from (CDC), risk the Centers

had the months Having surgery last 6 within

an HCV-infected individual contacts Multiple with

the in field Employment or dental medical

about times blood transmission HCV (1.8 the of HIV needle to for United in HCV transfusion than acquiring Currently, 0.3%). States; zero close by that higher six stick the by risk vs. is for is children, of perinatal the mother. the transmission infection route vertical from major For is but individuals one-third risk multiple Some no http://ebooksmedicine.net factors, have patients risk have an factors, mystery. enduring of identifiable

member Flaviviridae in family. 1989, discovered of a HCV, the is replication Just of the HIV, of the an and highly assembly facilitated case (described effective understanding development below). in viral drugs of has anti-HCV as encoding into genome enveloped, HCV is functional small, that is several 10 a by a virus single-stranded RNA single proteases processed 9600-base with polyprotein proteins. a protease viral processing that into viral proteins replication essential and for a of polymerase the that is NS5A, ( genome the these RNA for among viral polyprotein; virions; a viral HCV needed a is protein assembly for necessary is is mature complete Included of that of

Fig.

). 16.11 of low is the to unstable, the genome genetic of a polymerase, high the new HCV viral giving variants RNA at rise Because inherently fidelity pace. persists. new in the virus or are of replication host led in a genetic This as worldwide, the major genotype, as due has six but to long one generated single more of individuals genotypes are a with most HCV each to appearance Infections viral variants “subspecies.” a usually HCV each closely result, infected of As with related be divergent as to known quasispecies. population variants but a patient comes

a to 26 period mean for 4 weeks, incubation from The hepatitis HCV 9 with of ranges weeks. unrecognized. infection of the and acute goes In 85% is individuals, about asymptomatic RNA for elevations with in weeks, HCV to is in 3 blood serum coincident detectable ( transaminases 1

Fig. ). 16.12 remaining the of are the anti-HCV 6 after symptomatic weeks. patients; 3 to HCV only 70% antibodies emerge in antibodies detected acute In 50% patients, infection, anti-HCV to in course of HBV. HCV hepatitis The than that clinical is acute of milder known of why is minority infection. individuals capable is HCV of It not small clearing a only

nature acute and despite chronic the HCV asymptomatic of infection, infection hepatitis hallmarks the generally Persistent illness. the of are majority the In in as occurs of disease occurs cirrhosis chronic many eventually in one-third. contrast HCV-infected to HBV, as and (80%–90%), individuals strategies uses the leading chronicity mechanisms clear not are to immunity. to but multiple is understood, The well host that anti-viral virus evade it to to allow to signaling variants, in hepatocytes rapid that elude receptor encodes In neutralizing of resist virus activites and that Toll-like addition proteins inhibit allow the viral otherwise hepatocytes, interferon antibodies, which may infection. genetic would HCV generation

presence of HCV In the of neutralizing antibodies HCV despite 90% patients persists circulating infection, in RNA chronic (see

Fig. ). 16.12 to chronic confirm Hence, the testing done HCV of must for infection. be diagnosis HCV RNA A episodic HCV normal is of elevations of serum aminotransferases or in separated infection clinical near-normal feature chronic periods by levels. characteristic enzyme even HCV for with anyone are treatment developing normal and at HCV-infected patients long-term damage, RNA medical follow-up. liver risk and high However, transaminases with serum detectable permanent needs

template Synthesis (–) of replication RNA anti-sense RNA

Fig. shown, with hepatitis entry, C. and cycle are steps anti-viral of Viral budding replication, be 16.11 drugs. Life can emphasizing assembly, effectively that targeted

stem that development HCV of of drugs in from protease, the virus production and improvements are infection RNA seen which for dramatic NS5A specifically have recent viral of polymerase, of all ( treatment required that protein, target years Fortunately,

Fig. ). 16.11 remarkably (a be proven with strategy to drugs therapy these drug has therapy effective. akin triple HIV) Combination to for high HCV after by with stopped 6 a months and which RNA is is goal The is probability treatment the detectable RNA, blood to in defined treatment eradicate of is the cure. of of current associated HCV absence this curable, to new 95% further of as Currently, drugs improve can available. and expected be anti-viral HCV infections become are over a therapy next over course and is 5 treatment these it generate the years. The $50 high advances HCV $100,000, over major of infections drug may alone estimated of expenses States downside is costs in the United very of that cost; their over of billion curative

that unique RNA is HDV is virus Also a life cycle its called dependent for on delta agent, HBV. the in with Infection arises settings: following HDV the

by and HBV. HDV Coinfection HBsAg, the for of production first necessary must provide complete is which established virions. HDV HBV become The to is cancer. abusers, chronic of and hepatitis liver in of and with of which often severe infection, to higher fulminant higher HDV failure, drug intravenous rates complicated rates acute with particularly liver associated HBV Coinfection is progression emergence and by

by Superinfection carrier HDV. chronic of HBV a in later chronic or acute The previously a preexisting as to unrecognized superinfection HBV hepatitis of an 30 severe exacerbation 50 presents hepatitis carrier as days B. infection in such occurs patients. to of 80% 90% HDV Chronic chronic replication phase may replication high of HDV HBV acute an and phase followed and disease to and by ALT decreases, cirrhosis two which in suppression phases: progresses fluctuate, levels hepatocellular increases, The have HBV active cancer. with HDV replication the levels, superinfection ALT a with

estimated occurs (about 15 and infection the by infected an individuals of individuals HDV affects million worldwide 300 million HBV). 5% prevalence Its being and in Amazon East, the and Southeast Africa, Middle lowest China. in basin, varies, the highest Italy, Asia Southern and who western and intravenous drug had is multiple it largely countries, have In abusers transfusions. to those most blood restricted

of is symptomatic the time HDV and disease. in onset detectable at RNA the acute liver blood of is exposure, recent frequently IgM short-lived. is of but indicator reliable HDV a anti-HDV is HDV with infection coinfection IgM with against and HBV new of HBcAg HDAg by B). (denoting hepatitis Acute the associated presence and and With in serum, longer. IgM) delta anti-HDV HDV persist or chronic present months superinfection, for and arising from is (IgG HBsAg antibodies hepatitis infection by vaccination its of HDV against HBV, is on HBV. dependency prevented Because

produces self-limiting infection an a that transmitted, enterically water-borne disease. usually is HEV adults. typically young virus The middle-aged infects to animal cats, monkeys, zoonotic is reservoirs pigs, and dogs. include disease that with HEV a cases subcontinent, have seen the regions in sporadic are Asia Epidemics and farming Mexico, sub-Saharan and incidence. travelers in and reported Indian nations, in and high where Western is pig returning been from of Africa, particularly common HEV frequency to 60% importance, sporadic for the in greater infection India, accounts of Of cases of acute 30% hepatitis of HAV. exceeding approaching rate is high women, A mortality among of infection pregnant 20%. HEV the characteristic feature associated cases, disease chronic is most with liver persistent or not viremia. In HEV average weeks. following The to 5 exposure is incubation 4 period

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Discovered virus an Hepevirus is unenveloped, in the genus. RNA positive-stranded in 1983, HEV are stool in illness. Virions the acute during shed by RNA and serum. in onset HEV can Before clinical of the virions be PCR illness, and detected HEV stool IgM aminotransferases, The clinical rising and titers are simultaneous. elevated virtually illness, serum of onset anti-HEV IgM Symptoms time which to rise. during and weeks, resolve titers titers 4 the in 2 fall anti-HEV IgG

of Clinicopathologic Syndromes Hepatitis Viral

As outcomes. produces wide range discussed, of hepatitis viruses infection already with a the symptomatic infection viruses or each may Acute hepatotropic asymptomatic. be by of cause hepatitis. adults chronic hepatitis, small of a HEV and and HBV-infected only do develop HAV not number chronic producing HCV notorious is infections. contrast, for In chronic is HBV, and seen Fulminant or with HDV HAV, primarily infections. unusual is hepatitis similar many clinicopathologic hepatitis responsible for HBV most are Although there (discussed cases toxin-induced of and hepatitis, other autoimmune and causes of chronic including later). drugand hepatitis are presentations, HCV and serologic Therefore, and essential the between of various distinguishing diagnosis viral molecular are hepatitis for for the types. studies

Infection Asymptomatic Recovery. Acute With in group of the on serum this anti-viral transaminases or identified the presence Patients incidentally of elevated antibodies. are basis frequently particularly and infections, childhood, in HAV are HBV subclinical.

Symptomatic Recovery. With Acute Infection is consisting an of length (1) involved, similar a period (see course, disease variable of: incubation virus follows acute Whichever

convalescence. and icteric (4) (3) Table a 16.2 symptomatic phase; days asymptomatic infectivity early period acute of the incubation symptoms. of Peak last the occurs during the and days

Fulminant Failure. Hepatic responsible the rest by 12% is hepatic Viral about HBV two-thirds HAV. failure; for hepatitis caused of of are fulminant cases these, and of infection by Survival replication via recovery week occur may than residual permit of 1 hepatocytes. more to for stem/progenitor very canals to to of is rise ductular Activation restitution. full of prominent usually gives insufficient Hering cells accomplish but in the the reactions viral that follows Fulminant supportively. acute hepatitis failure hepatic treated is patients and other does secondary inevitable. only Liver for failure as is infections the transplantation option organs of disease otherwise whose is not death from resolve,

6 months. are of clinical predictive extremely not are outcome. variable features and The patients, signs of the of chronic are transaminases. serum some In only disease elevations in may alkaline instances, time Laboratory prolongation and, studies levels. phosphatase and the in elevations of hyperbilirubinemia, reveal hyperglobulinemia, also mild some prothrombin there symptomatic most commonly, of of less is common bouts loss malaise, mild jaundice. individuals, is appetite, the fatigue; In and finding precirrhotic the are angiomas, few, erythema, being mild most splenomegaly. physical findings hepatic chronic and tenderness, hepatitis, palmar spider common In mild hepatomegaly, disease and or glomerulonephritis and 14). complex (subcutaneous develops results immune visceral, HCV, Chapter vasculitis in (Chapter Occasionally, HBV of in that cases 10) C. is 35% individuals about with of Cryoglobulinemia in found hepatitis chronic

State. The Carrier chronically hepatropic infected has sub-clinical is virus disease. A with of individual who evidence carrier an or no a and is liver constitute cases, both these latter, the infection. individuals particularly for In reservoirs presence low normal significant have and of of In undetectable case DNA absence a or or lack typically HBV injury. aminotransferases, an that serum showing HBV, liver carriers” biopsies and show studies anti-HBe, of inflammation the of HBeAg, serum the “healthy parenchymal of non-endemic than state in rare. (such whereas in rise HBV a 90% more gives and endemic as life Asia, in China, regions acquired the carrier cases, state Africa) to Southeast sub-Saharan early infection is in areas carrier 10% been in it to of States a United state that produces 40% the has cases. infection By carrier in contrast, HCV estimated

Hepatitis. Viral Chronic and HIV risk viruses overlapping a HIV coinfection of clinical transmission is and and hepatitis common factors, of problem. their similar Because modes HBV of in with the HCV causes and HBV and HIV-infected In are HIV-infected are therapy. 10% coinfected receive and United individuals anti-HIV when in individuals, effective 25% mortality even HCV, important untreated, and, those States, of who morbidity with chronic infection to in second individuals progress acquired immunodeficiency common most Similarly, syndrome disease cause who of the death. is liver (AIDS), However, HIV non-HIV–infected and anti–hepatitis that in progression HCV and treated of severity in virus adequately and to patients, HBV response resembles the immunocompetent infection individuals. therapy seen

MORPHOLOGYClinicalassessmentofchronichepatitissometimesrequiresliverbiopsyinadditiontoclinicalandserologicdata.Liverbiopsyishelpfulinconfirmingtheclinicaldiagnosis,excludingcommonconcomitantconditions(e.g.,fattyliverdisease,hemochromatosis),assessinghistologicfeaturesassociatedwithanincreasedriskformalignancy(discussedlater),gradingtheextentofhepatocyteinjuryandinflammation,andstagingtheprogressionof scarring.Historically,histologicgradingandstagingofchronic

Chronic Hepatitis. as than period todeterminationsofwhethertoattempttreatmentoftheunderlyingdisease;however,withthenew,highlyeffectivetargetedantiviraltherapiesforhepatitisC,fewerpretreatmentbiopsiesarebeingperformed. for is or relapsing Chronic tent more defined persis disease a http://ebooksmedicine.net of hepatic hepatitis

hepatotropic and acute are and shared mimicked among viruses chronic or by reactions viral morphologic Fig.16.13 drug in changes the hepatitis. be can .The autoimmune hepatitis

viral hepatitis. Acute Grossly,liversinvolvedbymildacutehepatitisappearnormalorslightlymottled.Attheotherendofthespectrum,massivehepaticnecrosismayproduceagreatlyshrunkenliver,asdiscussedearlier.Microscopically,thereisconsiderablemorphologicoverlapinacutehepatitiscausedbyvarioushepatropicviruses.Asistypicalofmanyviralinfections,mononuclearcellspredominateinallphasesofviralhepatitis.AsubtledifferenceisthatthemononuclearinfiltrateinhepatitisAmaybeespeciallyrichinplasmacells.Mostparenchymalinjuryisscatteredthroughoutthehepaticlobuleas“spottynecrosis”orlobular hepatitis.Portalinflammationinacutehepatitisisminimalorabsent.Asdiscussedearlier,hepatocyteinjurymayresultinnecrosisorapoptosis.Intheformer,thecytoplasmappearsempty,withonlyscatteredwispsofcytoplasmicremnants,andeventualruptureofcellmembranesleadsto“dropout”ofhepatocytes.Intheirplace,collapsedsinusoidalcollagenreticulinframeworkremainsbehindalongwithscavengermacrophages.Withapoptosis,hepatocytesshrink,becomingintenselyeosinophilic,andtheirnucleibecomepyknoticandfragmented;effectorTcellsmaybepresentintheimmediatevicinity.

Insevereacutehepatitis,confluentnecrosisofhepatocytesisseenaroundcentralveins.Intheseareas,theremaybecellulardebris,collapsedreticulinfibers,congestion/hemorrhage,andvariableinflammation.Withincreasingseverity,thereiscentral-portalbridgingnecrosis,followedbyparenchymalcollapse.Initsmostsevereform,massivehepaticnecrosisandfulminantliverfailureensue.

feature hepatitis.The aswell,inadditiontolobularhepatitis,distinguishedbyitslocationattheinterfacebetweenhepatocellularparenchymaandportaltractstroma.Thehallmarkofprogressivechronicliverdamageisscarring.Atfirst,onlyportaltractsexhibitfibrosis,butinsomepatients,withtime,fibroussepta—bandsofdensescar—willextendbetweenportaltracts.Inthemostseverecases,continuedscarringandnoduleformationleadstothedevelopmentofcirrhosis,asdiscussedearlier. infiltration.Itmaybemildtosevereandvariablefromoneportaltracttotheother.Thereisofteninterface viral Chronic viral hepatitis is hepatitis defining chronic of mononuclear histologic portal

hepatocytes (cellswithendoplasmicreticulumswollenbyHBsAg)areadiagnostichallmark,andthepresenceofviralantigeninthesecellscanbeconfirmedbyimmunostaining( Certainhistologicfeaturespointtospecificviraletiologiesinchronichepatitis.InchronichepatitisB,“ground-glass”

).LiverbiopsiesinvolvedbychronichepatitisCquitecommonlyshow Fig.16.14 http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 16.14 Ground-glasshepatocytesinchronichepatitisB,causedbyaccu-mulationofhepatitisBsurfaceantigen.Hematoxylin-eosinstainingshowsthepresenceofabundant,finelygranularpinkcytoplasmicinclusions;immunostaining(inset) withaspecificantibodyconfirmsthepresenceofsurfaceantigen(brown).

).Often,hepatitisC,particularlygenotype3,isassociatedwithfattychangeinscatteredhepatocytes.BileductinjuryisalsoprominentinsomecasesofhepatitisCandmaymimicthehistologicchangesseeninprimarybiliarycholangitis(seelater);clinicalparametersdistinguishthesetwodiseaseseasily,however. Fig.16.15

Inthealphabetofhepatotropicviruses,someeasymnemonicdevicesmaybeuseful:

Thevowels(hepatitisAandE)nevercausechronichepatitis,onlyAcutEhepatitis.

Fig. 16.15 ChronicviralhepatitisduetoHCV,showingcharacteristicportaltractexpansionbyadenselymphoidinfiltrate.

Onlytheconsonants(hepatitisB,C,D)havethepotentialtocausechronicdisease(Cforconsonantandforchronic).

HepatitisBcanbetransmittedbyblood,birthing,and“bonking”(astheysayintheUnitedKingdom).

HepatitisCisthesinglevirusthatismoreoftenchronicthannot(almostneverdetectedacutely;85%ormoreofpatientsdevelopchronichepatitis,20%ofwhomwilldevelopcirrhosis).

HepatitisD,thedeltaagent,isadefectivevirus,requiringhepatitisBcoinfectionforitsowncapacitytoinfectandreplicate.

HepatitisEisendemicinequatorialregionsandfrequentlyepidemic.

TheinflammatorycellsinbothacuteandchronicviralhepatitisaremainlyTcells;itisthepatternofinjurythatisdifferent,notthenatureoftheinfiltrate.

Patientswithlong-standingHBVorHCVinfectionsareatincreasedriskfordevelopmentofHCC.

Bacterial,Parasitic,andHelminthicInfections

helminths tree, fungi, bacteria, can including A parasites, and and biliary the of multitude protozoa. other liver organisms infect and pathways: through organisms reach the liver can Infectious several

cholangitis) the and biliary gut (ascending Ascending infection, via tract

the seeding, through tract Vascular often portal the most gastrointestinal system via

from (e.g., cholecystitis) Direct bacterial an invasion, source adjacent

syphilis. infection in that fever, may in typhoid an aureus or in pallidum shock establish the and Salmonella the tertiary in Treponema toxic include liver via Bacteria Staphylococcus secondary blood typhi syndrome, infections ducts. common the partial which complete gut bile most biliary the static flora, in Ascending may typically setting in colonize or of and by are tract the caused obstruction are may abscesses of the upper-quadrant pain, Whatever pyogenic bacteria, the intrahepatic develop, right hepatomegaly. with and tender producing organisms fever, source necessary therapy abscesses, lesions. often is small larger surgical drainage sterilize may Although for antibiotic indirectly, in extrahepatic varying particularly the bacterial More infections, mild degrees infectious without hepatic liver. cholestasis and hepatocellular of establishing commonly, induce an nidus sepsis, inflammation

merit with pathogenic infectious non-viral important liver features unusual or that comment. cause specific Other disease agents worldwide. • common Schistosomiasis, of Africa, South found causes include most the portal is following: Asia, and America, the noncirrhotic one in commonly These of most hypertension a of and the with where induce produce numerous in way circulation, Adult associated portal marked worms lodge fibrosis. into the they their find some gut granulomatous which eggs, reaction

http://ebooksmedicine.net

progress cause of amebic to foci abscesses. portal called large ascends produces through that to infection (Chapter necrotic liver the of areas 15), can dysentery an histolytica, sometimes Entamoeba secondary liver and circulation important abscesses lobe of in liver. common right the Amebic the are more liver but cells, abscesses, absent. unlike necrotic abscess contains cavity The neutrophils pyogenic are

Southeast in Liver fluke most infection, is a Asia, rate cholangiocarcinoma. high with of associated common hepatica, Clonorchis Fasciola Responsible sinensis. Opisthorcis include and organisms species,

intrahepatic may surrounding of pressure on or cysts Echinococcal due produce the cause formation following that rupture. structures to hydatid infections symptoms

with chronic, predisposition, of diseases, genetic other diseases presence of response progressive the is association autoantibodies, general: all features with in immunosuppression. to and a autoimmune the hepatitis Autoimmune therapeutic autoimmune hepatitis

mechanistic is the Caucasians, allele other hepatitis in disorders associated as autoimmune DRB1* relationship certain HLA for this basis is in autoimmune unclear. alleles, the Risk with as for such but Triggers infections include or or reaction toxin may exposures. the for immune drug viral

100,000, highest 1.9 annual Europeans at are groups northern all among is in incidence white susceptible. The but ethnic a There predominance female (78%). is is the on patterns hepatitis two circulating into antibodies. types, of based classified Autoimmune

(SMA), 1, common muscle liver of anti–smooth and antigen more (ANA), (AMA), liver-pancreas antinuclear is anti–soluble presence actin (anti-SLA/LP) characterized the Type in and antigen/ middle-age older antibodies. individuals, by antimitochondrial

anti–liver microsome-1 kidney usually antibodies Type chararcterized anti–liver 2, presence cytosol-1 antibodies. and teenagers, is and of children by in seen the

•Necrosis MORPHOLOGYAlthoughautoimmunehepatitissharespatternsofinjurywithacuteorchronicviralhepatitis,thetimecourseofhistologicprogressiondiffers.Inviralhepatitis,fibrosistypicallyfollowsmanyyearsofslowlyaccumulatingparenchymalinjury,whereasinautoimmunehepatitis,thereisanearlyphaseofsevereparenchymaldestructionfollowedrapidlybyscarring.Forunclearreasons,thisearlywaveofhepatocytedamageisoftensubclinical.Thefollowingfeaturesaretypicalofautoimmunehepatitis: inflammation,indicatedbyextensiveinterfacehepatitisorfociofconfluent(perivenularorbridging)necrosisorparenchymalcollapse and

hepatic weeks clinical is An illness within a sometimes progressing 8 of the (40%); onset. disease is presentation acute to common fulminant, encephalopathy Mortality in survivors. within 40% autoimmune approximately develops diagnosis, of least cirrhosis with severe at and is untreated 6 hepatitis of 40% patients months for diagnosis imperative. intervention Hence, and are leading long-term of Immunosuppressive effective, remission is to and in enabling therapy 80% survival. usually patients an is disease for End-stage liver indication transplantation. 20% transplanted recurrence liver in is after occurs transplant The of but cases. the survival rate 75%, 10-year organ in

SUMMARY•Therearetwoprimarytypesofautoimmunehepatitis:

Type1autoimmunehepatitisismostoftenseeninmiddle-agewomenandischaracteristicallyassociatedwithantinuclearandanti–smoothmuscleantibodies.

Type2autoimmunehepatitisismostoftenseeninchildrenorteenagersandisassociatedwithanti–liverkidneymicrosomalautoantibodies.

Autoimmunehepatitismayeitherdevelopwitharapidlyprogressiveacutediseaseorfollowamoreindolentpath;ifuntreated,botharelikelytoleadtoliverfailure.

Plasmacellsareaprominentandcharacteristiccomponentoftheinflammatoryinfiltrateinbiopsyspecimensshowingautoimmunehepatitis.

As in the and organ injury to subject drug enormous the detoxifying array and an environmental the metabolizing of from liver chemicals. is major body, therapeutic direct a into cellular by toxin, through hepatic compound to of may from an active acting occur may toxicity, as as a be xenobiotic conversion a an or the drug may immune hapten mechanisms, result immunogen. a Injury metabolite convert or protein such by to produced agent, A causes. made association temporal removal inciting exclusion diagnosis toxin-induced of be the liver liver of may other a damage of of injury and upon toxin (usually) the potential drugor recovery or basis with drug exposure, on of to a be disease. liver diagnosis included should or of form in any of therapeutic the differential toxin agent always Exposure

in are injury of Chapter toxic and 8. drug Principles discussed (idiosyncratic). (intrinsic) to drug note unpredictable that be suffices reactions or may Here predictable it

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Injury Drugand Table Injury of in Toxin-Induced 16.3 Hepatic Patterns

Pattern Injury of Associated Examples of Findings Morphologic Agents

CholestaticBlandhepatocellularcholestasis,withoutContraceptiveandanabolicsteroids,antibiotics,HAARTinflammation

CholestatichepatitisCholestasiswithlobularnecrosisandinflammation;Antibiotics,phenothiazines,statinsmayshowbileductdestruction

HepatocellularnecrosisSpottyhepatocytenecrosisMethyldopa,phenytoin

MassivenecrosisAcetaminophen,halothane

“Microvesicularsteatosis”(diffusesmalldropletfat)Valproate,tetracycline,aspirin(Reyesyndrome),HAART FattyliverdiseaseLargeandsmalldropletfatEthanol,corticosteroids,methotrexate,totalparenteralnutrition

SteatohepatitiswithMallory-DenkbodiesEthanol,amiodarone

FibrosisandcirrhosisPeriportalandpericellularfibrosisAlcohol,methotrexate,enalapril,vitaminAandotherretinoids

GranulomasNoncaseatingepithelioidgranulomasSulfonamides,amiodarone,isoniazid

VascularlesionsSinusoidalobstructionsyndrome(veno-occlusiveHigh-dosechemotherapy,bushteasdisease):obliterationofcentralveins

Peliosishepatis:blood-filledcavities,notlinedbyAnabolicsteroids,tamoxifenendothelialcells

liver pathology, HAART, Highlyactiveanti-retroviraltherapyAdaptedfromWashingtonK:Metabolicandtoxicconditionsoftheliver.InIacobuzio-DonahueCA,MontgomeryEA,editors:Gastrointestinal and Philadelphia,2005,ChurchillLivingstone.

dose-dependent in reactions all fashion. Predictable drug affect or individuals toxin a response rate reactions particularly to immune propensity the Unpredictable be or which at the depend can host, of antigenic the the agent mount metabolized. stimulus an the to on idiosyncrasies to immediate develop be take of weeks ( months may classes or injury to Both

Table 16.3

States. acetaminophen, the cause liver most is predictable necessitating now in acute United common of classic, the hepatotoxin A failure transplantation by toxic agent toxic the produced The rather but is itself not acetaminophen system. metabolites P-450 cytochrome hepatocytes damage cases. lobules encompass extends begins centrilobular the in most severe in The entire to but

are cause that hepatitis repeated and a Examples exposure. in patients to can cholestasis can slow drugs after fatal causes which it, cause that who chlorpromazine, derivatives, an and immune-mediated idiosyncratic agent reactions metabolize include its halothane of

well-known steatosis, is can cirrhosis. manifest histologically of and liver cause steatohepatitis, disease in as adults and a Alcohol fatty mimic years, spectrum the hepatic evident (NAFLD),” it fatty so-called associated of another with disease that liver entire In changes can entity, recent abuse. become alcohol has “nonalcoholic features and pathogenesis NAFLD by of Since changes together, discussed of they entity. clinical indistinguishable, are are the alcoholic distinctive and each followed morphologic the

Threetypesofliveralterationsareobservedinfattyliverdisease:steatosis(fattychange),hepatitis(alcoholicorsteatohepatitis),andfibrosis.

steatosis. Hepatocellular Hepatocellularfataccumulationtypicallybeginsincentrilobularhepatocytes.Thelipiddropletsrangefromsmall(microvesicular)tolarge(macrovesicular),thelargestfillingandexpandingthecellanddisplacingthenucleus.Assteatosisbecomesmoreextensive,thelipidaccumulationspreadsoutwardfromthecentralveintohepatocytesinthemidlobuleandthentheperiportalregions(

Fig.16.16

Fig. Fattyliverdiseaseassociatedwithchronicalcoholuse.Amixofsmallandlargefatdroplets(seenasclearvacuoles)ismostprominentaroundthecentralveinandextendsoutwardtotheportaltracts.Somefibrosis(stained ispresentinacharacteristicperisinusoidal“chickenwirefence”pattern(Massontrichromestain). 16.16 blue) (Courtesy University, of St. Dr. Louis, Elizabeth Brunt, Washington Missouri.) http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 16.17 Hepatocyteinjuryinfattyliverdiseaseassociatedwithchronicalcoholuse.(A)Clusteredinflammatorycellsmarkingthesiteofanecrotichepatocyte.AMallory-Denkbodyispresentinanotherhepatocyte(arrow). inwhichkeratinshavebeenubiquitinylatedandhavecollapsedintoanimmunoreactiveMallory-Denkbody,leavingthecytoplasm“empty.”(Courtesy line) (B)“Ballooned”hepatocytes(arrowheads) University, Louis, of showsaballoonedcell(dotted Missouri.) associatedwithclustersofinflammatorycells.Theinsetstainedforkeratins8and18(brown) Brunt,Washington Dr. St. Elizabeth

Macroscopically,fattyliverswithwidespreadsteatosisarelarge(weighing4–6kgormore),soft,yellow,andgreasy.

Steatohepatitis. ThesechangestypicallyaremorepronouncedwithalcoholusethaninNAFLD,butcanbeseenineither:

Hepatocyte ballooning. Singleorscatteredfociofcellsundergoswellingandnecrosis;aswithsteatosis,thesefeaturesaremostprominentinthecentrilobularregions(

Fig.16.17A

bodies. Mallory-Denk Theseconsistoftangledskeinsofintermediatefilaments(includingubiquitinylatedkeratins8and

Fig.16.17B •Neutrophil infiltration. Predominantlyneutrophilicinfiltrationmaypermeatethelobuleandaccumulatearounddegeneratinghepatocytes,particularlythosecontainingMallory-Denkbodies.Lymphocytesandmacrophagesalsomaybeseeninportaltractsorparenchyma.

Steatofibrosis. vein Fattyliverdiseaseofallkindshasadistinctivepatternofscarring.Likeotherchanges,fibrosisappearsfirstinthecentrilobularregionascentral sclerosis. pattern PerisinusoidalscarringappearsnextinthespaceofDisseofthecentrilobularregionandthenspreadsoutward,encirclingindividualorsmallclustersofhepatocytesinachicken fence wire (see

fibrous septa. Fig.16.16 portal ).Tendrilsoffibrosiseventuallylinktoportaltractsandthencondensetocreatecentral cirrhosis. Asthesebecomemoreprominent,thelivertakesonanodular,cirrhoticappearance.Becauseinmostcasestheunderlyingcausepersists,thecontinualsubdivisionofestablishednodulesbynew,perisinusoidalscarringleadstoaclassicmicronodular orLaennec Earlyinthecourse,theliverisyellow-tan,fatty,andenlarged,butwithpersistentdamageoverthecourseofyearstheliveristransformedintoabrown,shrunken,nonfattyorgancomposedofcirrhoticnodulesthatareusuallylessthan 0.3cmindiameter—smallerthanistypicalformostchronicviralhepatitis.Theend-stagecirrhoticlivermayenterintoa“burnedout”phasedevoidoffattychangeandothertypicalfeatures.Amajorityofcasesofcryptogenic cirrhosis, withoutclearetiology,arenowrecognizedas“burned-out”NAFLD.

chronic of Excessive disease than deaths consumption 50% liver for countries causes more in 60% to cirrhosis. Western ethanol to of and due 40% accounts referred hepatic liver forms liver as overlapping (1) and are (3) alcoholic important and disease the chronic adverse hepatitis, most ( alcohol-related alcohol the fatty fibrosis (2) of discussed: disease steatosis, alcoholic of consumption effects to cirrhosis, collectively already Among

Fig. 16.18

100% fatty cirrhosis. and of whereas alcoholics develop hepatic alcoholic heavy of liver hepatitis, develop 20% of only chronic to steatosis), 8% drinkers 10% those, 90% (i.e., to 35% develop and Between independently, do so develop continuum sequential fibrosis a of they and necessarily sequentially changes. Steatosis, may not alcoholic hepatitis, represent or alcoholic of to carcinoma cirrhosis. in with patients arises 10% Hepatocellular 20%

ounces Short-term of liquor) hepatic much such changes, liver. fatty mild day of as ingestion produces ethanol as per 8–9 (5–6 reversible beers as 80-proof of 80 g generally or 80 factor a for intake Chronic to considered of is g/day severe risk 40 borderline injury. women injury. metabolism reasons of ethanol to relate For in more to that composition, are and decreased differences gastric men susceptible than hepatic may body development. disease one It risk may how that what liver affect the and often for seems drinks more For causes http://ebooksmedicine.net drinking example, binge

Fig. among disease. key are morphologic shown The features and and hepatitis, listed. are 16.18 alcoholic steatosis, cirrhosis Alcoholic hepatic interrelationships alcoholic liver hepatitis, alcoholic the along all continuum. text, in a discussed and steatosis, steatofibrosis independently develop As not and may

associated consumption. injury with lower-level liver than steady, that not but possibly known. susceptibility of the everyone risk must factors Since who are markers reliable all gets genetic, complications, individual, exist, drinks listed no level a of the of a is understanding the In state constitutes liver difficult influence consumption. safe that alcohol of damage, what to absence clear factors it

through mechanisms. caused several Hepatocellular alcohol by steatosis is acetaldehyde which shunting of alcohol amounts and nicotinamide-adenine First, toward large generates dehydrogenase (NADH), of substrates increases dinucleotide of dehydrogenase lipid and by away metabolism from ethanol biosynthesis. catabolism impairs secretion lipoproteins. the Second, ethanol assembly of and net is cause of the effect to The lipids. accumulation intracellular

byproducts hepatitis from may more but ethanol of following cause is of uncertain, it The its metabolites: or and alcoholic toxic of stem the one

ethanol) and Acetaldehyde disrupt lipid adduct formation, major and peroxidation function. cytoskeleton which membrane induces of may acetaldehyde-protein metabolite (a

fluidity. membrane affects directly and Alcohol mitochondrial function

of oxygen by and proteins. react damage with oxidizing generated microsomal Reactive during oxidation membranes and the ethanol system species ethanol produced hepatocyte necrosis. species infiltrate which are of also oxygen Reactive by neutrophils, areas

maximal in and most region Because region, injury. radicals centrilobular free this is the susceptible to toxic of is acetaldehyde generation first Pericellular in sinusoidal the lobule. area and develop this of fibrosis liver accelerator of hepatitis particularly C, a in Concurrent viral is major alcoholics. disease hepatitis, The with versa). 30% (and alcoholic of prevalence vice individuals C is about among hepatitis liver disease

chronic reasons, alcoholics. small a in of develops fraction only For unknown cirrhosis regression macronodular transforms there parenchymal organ the ); of occurs, a of cirrhosis 16.6 With (see regeneration micronodular cirrhotic into least complete at though is liver regression altogether. abstinence, rarely, partial scarring and

bilirubin and of hepatomegaly serum be or rise with steatosis Alcoholic mild to phosphatase. alkaline give may elevations innocuous Severe unusual. hepatic compromise is adequate withdrawal and treatment. diet the are of Alcohol an sufficient provision

to hepatitis years months develop that of excessive It drinking 15 occur estimated abuse. alcoholic but is alcohol weeks necessary are alcoholic can just of cirrhosis, to after or 20 of particularly bout is often heavy and follows onset a The typically acute drinking. range laboratory and to minimal from severe. Symptoms abnormalities weight anorexia, discomfort, patients loss, with and malaise, fever. present Most tender upper-abdominal hepatomegaly, alkaline elevated levels, findings serum phosphatase hyperbilirubinemia, include and Typical neutrophilic leukocytosis. and remain Serum but below aminotransferases elevated 500 aspartate U/mL. are alanine usually to outlook death. a 10% for 20% each of hepatitis alcoholic unpredictable; is carries risk The bout about years. With appears bouts, repeated one-third patients a few in of within cirrhosis

The to of are cirrhosis. other similar manifestations alcoholic cirrhosis those of of forms major the nutrients may other B12). diet, in vitamin to deficiencies thiamine, and (e.g., be of ethanol source vitamin chronic malnutrition alcoholics, leading calories displacing In the and effects damage chronic and to digestive intestinal these mucosal impaired gastric function, related pancreatitis. is primarily and Compounding

alcoholic variable. is disease liver outlook patients long-term with for The The alcohol. important treatment most from of is aspect abstinence of 50% 60% survival to and abstainers in rate 90% who drops individuals free 5-year but are approaches who to to jaundice, in ascites, imbibe. The hematemesis, continue follows: with end-stage Among immediate disease, alcoholic causes of death are as the those liver

which individuals are Intercurrent predisposed) infection (to affected

Hepatocellular cases) of (3%–6% carcinoma

Alcoholicliverdiseasehasthreemainmanifestations,hepaticsteatosis,alcoholichepatitis,andcirrhosis,whichmayoccuraloneorincombination.

Cirrhosistypicallydevelopsaftermorethan10yearsofheavydrinking,butonlyoccursinasmallproportionofchronicalcoholics;alcoholiccirrhosishassimilarclinicalsignsandsymptomsascirrhosiscausedbyviralhepatitis.

Themultiplepathologiceffectsofalcoholincludechangesinlipidmetabolism,decreasedexportoflipoproteins,andcellinjurycausedbyreactiveoxygenspeciesandmetabolitesofalcohol.

who develops which disease NAFLD liver alcohol. fatty drink is condition not in a individuals common do in

alcoholic of any than the types on of prominent liver disease. and average less is (steatosis, can cirrhosis), in discussed inflammation changes The show earlier three liver though steatohepatitis, The hepatitis term injury, of clinical of (NASH) histologic elevated transaminases, already features steatohepatitis to the describe used and discussed. nonalcoholic overt features liver is as such the is insulin NAFLD associated syndrome 8). with and consistently (Chapter resistance metabolic associated as Other commonly abnormalities are follows:

history condition) (or the 2 family of Type diabetes

obesity whites kg/m2 primarily >25 >30 index mass (body in and central Asians) Obesity, kg/m2 in

low-density cholesterol, lipoprotein high low cholesterol) lipoprotein Dyslipidemia high-density (hypertriglyceridemia,

in key events of resistance, adipose and and to latter liver. initiating within insulin appear The obesity the be development NAFLD the tissue both the adipose hepatocytes. acids fatty taken the acids hepatocytes, by mobilization fatty synthesis of factors the to These tissue, and within increase combine stimulate are up of to which from free novo of the found It cells. derived in remainder is liver NAFLD from de the in half coming tissue, from most that over is with estimated of adipose in lipid synthesis hepatocytes the the predisposes Precisely lipid may in accumulation development of interrelated involve known hepatocytes how is NASH to and several of mechanisms. not and syndrome. effects intermediates amounts in of Excessive to enhance inflammatory and intrahepatic the the which lipids produced the increased of metabolic in in the hepatocytes insulin liver resistance toxic their sensitize metabolic cytokines, setting are lipids, effects In leading pro-inflammatory indirect cytokine inflammasome of or evidence release show possibly with of NASH to particular to hepatocytes local IL-1. of addition, direct patients in the due activation, products to production reactive of lipid be toxic hepatocytes; stress, function. to appear disruption metabolism increased species, induction mitochondrial proposed of oxygen ER directly Other and of include of mechanisms various injury which collagen hepatocyte lead from stellate damage NASH. cell and full-blown Liver deposition, ongoing hepatic activation, along fibrosis, insults these with causes resulting to

elevation is incidental transaminases. of serum most the common of cause NAFLD or may severe be or symptoms fatigue, of have with steatosis are disease. upper-quadrant more liver right may asymptomatic, active but chronic asymptomatic; individuals Most fibrosis patients discomfort, with also steatohepatitis some malaise, identify it Liver biopsy NAFLD. uncomplicated required and distinguish to from is NASH steatohepatitis frequency Fortunately, from of then steatosis low active ( progression steatohepatitis from to the to and active cirrhosis is

Fig. ). 16.19 cirrhosis. considered of contributor pathogenesis NAFLD “cryptogenic” Nevertheless, is significant to to a the be of Because they risk share incidence factors, in disease NAFLD. is artery patients the with also increased coronary common

toward insulin and resistance. of is Current therapy reversal reduction directed obesity that treatment. be effective lead to of most appear form Lifestyle and loss weight exercise) to (diet the modifications

metabolic approach and increasing proportions. epidemic problem becoming syndrome obesity Pediatric as an is NAFLD tend children, neutrophilic infiltrates as lesions In portal in and mononuclear histologic appearance infiltrates somewhat and than rather be the more regions, predominate. periportal is scarring the and the of tracts to prominent different, inflammation

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 8 (NAFLD) (NASH) disease over over >80% liver variability cirrhosis Decompensation steatohepatitis Isolated Nonalcoholic 1. Naturalhistoryofnonalcoholicfattyliverdisease.Isolatedfattyliverdiseaseshowsminimalriskforprogressiontocirrhosisorincreasedmortal-ity,whilenonalcoholicsteatohepatitisshowsincreasedoverallmortalityaswellasincreasedriskforcirrhosisandhepatocellularcarcinoma.DM, ~31% 15 16.19 HCC years over fatty but ~7% ~11% significant years NASH Diabetesmellitus.Nonalcoholic 6.5 liver years, fatty very to cirrhosis 2. progression None to minimal general compared of the population No with increased risk death

Nonalcoholicfattyliverdisease(NAFLD)isassociatedwiththemetabolicsyndrome,obesity,type2diabetes,anddyslipidemiaand/orhypertension.

NAFLDmayshowallthechangesassociatedwithalcoholicliverdisease:steatosis,nonalcoholicsteatohepatitis(NASH),andcirrhosis,althoughthefeaturesofsteatohepatitis(suchashepatocyteballooning,Mallory-Denkbodies,andneutrophilicinfiltration)oftenarelessprominentthantheyareinalcohol-relatedinjury.

PediatricNAFLDisincreasinglybeingrecognizedastheobesityepidemicspreadstopediatricagegroups,althoughitshistologicpatterndifferssomewhatfromthatseeninadults.

there common, disease, deficiency. Although entities some here: are many metabolic only inherited are hemochromatosis, discussed hereditary interesting and diseases, Wilson (α1AT) liver pathogenically relatively alpha-1-anti-trypsin

organs. and of deposited endocrine pancreas, as which primarily in as organs and iron, is excessive caused such parenchymal heart, as the is the joints, absoprtion in liver Hemochromatosis by well most commonly It inherited from disorder, results an hereditary hemochromatosis. iron, transfusions, a form usually of consequence in hemochromatosis. iron accumulation called administration is occurs acquired it the of as of parenteral When also myelodysplastic Secondary syndromes particularly with associated diseases ineffective and are 12). that thalassemia complicate (Chapter iron overload persistent erythropoiesis, can

6 in iron the 0.5 hepatocytes. discussed stored 12, As pool adults; normal gm body in ranges in is gm Chapter from total about to 2 may In liver. iron hemochromatosis, of one-third accumulates severe 50 gm, exceed which total in the (up abnormal (2) Fully to exhibit and skin diabetes pigmentation (up developed (1) micronodular cirrhosis; patients); of of patients). 80% mellitus to cases (3) 80%

of body intestinal body, iron there absorption. from content by total is regulated tightly the is excretion the no regulated iron Because key regulator iron intestinal in of discussed Chapter is 12, that peptide a a acts as hepcidin uptake. As circulating negative hormone lower Diverse have hemochromatosis, described hepcidin mutations or which diminish in genes several hereditary been function. of all levels in hepcidin accumulation intestinal an to leading the 0.5 increase year. defect, gm of iron, net dietary per is result of an absorption underlying of iron in the 1 Whatever to

HFE, patients chromosome close most cluster. HLA mutated on which gene the in frequently located 6 gene is is with hemochromatosis The to hereditary hepcidin the class encodes regulates I–like hepatocytes. an in molecule synthesis that HFE HLA of acid cysteine-to-tyrosine common most at HFE amino 282 (C282Y). is The a mutation substitution in inactivates most mutation, and hemochromatosis common populations. patients in the protein, is 70% HFE present with over which This is hereditary European diagnosed of other http://ebooksmedicine.net hemochromatosis, mutations well other to HFE itself. also as 2 give and including receptor in transferrin mutations can Several as hepcidin mutations in in rise condition The of and milder associated alternative some with mutations childhood. more with others, severe clinical is these 20 disease Whatever of cause, iron of lated. the stored have occurs onset underlying after the typically accumu gm tissues. host Excessive to be directly appears iron to toxic include Mechanisms injury the following: liver of

by of activation of Stimulation formation cells collagen stellate hepatic

leading oxygen damage to lethal cell predisposition by species, HCC reactive to injury or DNA

with iron tissue removal The of of on are therapy function. injured of are deleterious not effects promotes reversible, that excess iron fatally recovery cells and

inthefollowingorgans(indecreasingorderofseverity):liver,pancreas,myocardium,pituitarygland,adrenalgland,thyroidandparathyroidglands,joints,andskin;(2)cirrhosis;and(3)pancreatic hemosiderin fibrosis.Intheliver,ironbecomesevidentfirstasgolden-yellowhemosideringranulesinthecytoplasmofperiportalhepatocytes,whichcanbehistochemicallystainedwithPrussianblue( of deposition MORPHOLOGYThemorphologicchangesinseverehemochromatosisarecharacterizedprincipallyby(1)tissue

).Withincreasingironload,thereisprogressivedepositionintherestofthelobule,thebileductepithelium,andKupffercells.Atthisstage,thelivertypicallyisslightlyenlargedandchocolatebrown.Fibrousseptadevelopslowly,linkingportaltractstoeachotherandleadingultimatelytocirrhosis inanintenselypigmented(verydarkbrowntoblack)liver. Fig.16.20

ispartiallyattributabletohemosiderindepositionindermalmacrophagesandfibroblasts,mostofthecolorationresultsfromincreasedepidermalmelaninproduction.Thecombinationofthesepigmentsrenderstheskinslate-gray.Withhemosiderindepositioninthejointsynoviallinings,anacutesynovitismaydevelop.Thereisalsoexcessivedepositionofcalciumpyrophosphate,whichdamagesthearticularcartilageandsometimesproducesdisablingpolyarthritis,referredtoaspseudogout. alsobecomespigmented,acquiresdiffuseinterstitialfibrosis,andmayshowparenchymalatrophy.Hemosiderinisfoundintheacinarandtheisletcellsandsometimesintheinterstitialfibrousstroma.Theheart pigmentation Thepancreas oftenisenlarged,withhemosideringranuleswithinthemyocardialfibers.Thepigmentationmayinduceastrikingbrowncolorationofthemyocardium.Adelicateinterstitialfibrosismayappear.Althoughskin Withtheonsetofcirrhosis,thetestesmaybecomeatrophic.

than men earlier menopause. menstrual women in bleeding since until the iron usually of limits Symptoms appear in accumulation of clinically iron 5:1 significant 7:1. male-to-female results approximately of in overload a to This ratio fifth In life sixth in by of women. the most in HFE form in symptoms and common appear and men the later decades usually caused mutations, rate population iron variable (C282Y) not accumulation. homozygosity disease screening, mutation that common genetic development other the thus inevitable, the it most penetrance; of because is With and HFE influence clear presumably environmental has for shows factors become

Fig. Hereditaryhemochromatosis.InthisPrussianblue–stainedsection,hepatocellularironappearsblue.Theparenchymalarchitectureisnormalatthisstageofdisease,evenwithsuchabundantiron. 16.20

cardiomyopathy), mellitus in dysfunction pain, glucose include and arthritis. frank deranged due (particularly principal islets, pigmentation destruction areas), of sun-exposed cardiac (arrhythmias, skin atypical hepatomegaly, pancreatic homeostasis manifestations The diabetes or to abdominal (e.g., is in hypogonadism of some amenorrhea the libido the and the complaint patients, In in male). loss presenting female, impotence in years age. males clinically becomes disease As common more rarely is 40 apparent noted, of evident and before cirrhosis may cardiac from or result disease. Death for by risk of untreated increased in disease, the oxidants iron and presumably damage the with effects generated HCC genotoxic of those the because In is liver ongoing liver. 200-fold,

before diagnosed occurred. has damage long hemochromatosis can be tissue Fortunately, irreversible family is important. members of Screening of probands level iron, not to excessive a tissue also that significant Heterozygotes accumulate causes but damage. Currently iron diagnosed due to in workup). most (as are routine diagnostic with precirrhotic the patients subclinical, another stage serum hemochromatosis measurements of part this excess is results phlebotomy with simple expectancy of iron, tissue treatment Regular removal steady in normal. life and

and Wilson disease mutation to excretion impaired in failure ceruloplasmin. is disorder copper of an autosomal a recessive by incorporate the into results caused which gene, into ATP7B copper bile of copper liver, eye. of and tissues toxic and by levels the disorder marked is the in organs, This accumulation principally many brain, mg/day) is small histidine Normally, to with 40% duodenum and to it the complexed of ingested in (2–5 proximal intestine, http://ebooksmedicine.net transported liver. copper where is 60% albumin and from absorbed the taken enzymes dissociates secreted by Here, is incorporated and into and to copper form α2-globulin up which copper free is where the ceruloplasmin, (apoceruloplasmin) into is blood. hepatocytes, carries to 90% of 95% Ceruloplasmin plasma copper. eventually the into by Circulating ceruloplasmin is copper released within bile. the and which after desialylated, is excreted liver, lysosomes, endocytosed degraded is This for route pathway elimination. primary copper the degradation/excretion

that on ATP7B expressed located gene, membrane. The on is encodes ATPase a 13, hepatocyte copper-transporting chromosome transmembrane canalicular the ATP7B compound different of each patients disease majority with loss-of-function with overwhelming allele. The heterozygotes affecting mutations Wilson are alleles The of the 1:30,000 frequency of overall is to and approximately prevalence is mutated 1:50,000. the 1:100, disease not its ATP7B into is protein copper and of apoceruloplasmin function into impairs transport of form. in the bile the incorporation the ceruloplasmin, Loss of which copper secreted the abnormalities liver decrease and in These ceruloplasmin. in to accumulation lead copper a plasma Accumulating the 3). Fenton species of through (Chapter production reaction liver the reactive oxygen by causes injury copper parathyroid cell such and and red the in into corneas, copper joints, copper the released allowing other as causing hemolysis bones, glands. tissues, Eventually, to circulation, from injured deposit non-ceruloplasmin–bound hepatocytes kidneys, brain, is Concomitantly, minuscule of increases from urinary copper markedly normal excretion levels. its

maybeseen.Copperdepositioninhepatocytescanbedemonstratedbyspecialstains(rhodaminestainforcopper,orceinstainforcopper-associatedprotein). change MORPHOLOGYTheliveroftenbearsthebruntofinjury.Thehepaticchangesarevariable,rangingfromrelativelyminortomassiveandmimicmanyotherdiseaseprocesses.Theremaybemildtomoderatefatty inWilsondiseaseexhibitsmoderatetosevereinflammationandhepatocytenecrosis,areasoffattychange,andfeaturesofsteatohepatitis(hepatocyteballooningwithprominentMallory-Denkbodies).Inadvancedcases,cirrhosis (steatosis) canmimicacuteviralhepatitis.Chronic associatedwithfocalhepatocytenecrosis.Acute, hepatitis fulminant hepatitis

rings, greentobrowndepositsofcopperinDesçemetmembraneinthelimbusofthecornea. Toxicinjurytothebrainprimarilyaffectsthebasalganglia.NearlyallpatientswithneurologicinvolvementdevelopeyelesionscalledKayser-Fleischer

are Wilson clinical disease the The age variable. at presentation of and extremely onset between Symptoms and 6 appear 40 age. years usually of are Acute common disease chronic features. liver or presenting are copper ganglia. of basal initial deposition most remaining in of cases manifestations and in features Neuropsychiatric the the the from stem

most an serum ceruloplasmin, of increase disease is on most urinary specific of sensitive test), of The based test). (the excretion levels diagnosis copper and content low in copper (the Wilson increased hepatic to 250 gram of copper Hepatic dry 80% diagnostic, excess taken is µg per but liver about content only of be sensitive. weight is in liver such copper elevated depends other the presence abnormalities, lower with those levels, Kayser-Fleischer on serum In low ceruloplasmin, copper, as of and the diagnosis rings. urinary different complicates Unlike the genetic of of diagnostic in hereditary test. number where genetic the causative ATP7B7 limited fairly simple, sequencing makes use testing a as the number of variants hemochromatosis, DNA mutations large stage of depending liver on are low, or the normal, of elevated, disease. no also they as diagnostic levels Serum the may value, copper be

dramatically (with altered course. has copper uptake or Early long-term in copper zinc-based (which progressive Trientine) the recognition therapy therapy inhibits D-penicillamine usual and chelation gut) the downhill or curative. cirrhosis with advanced can require be Individuals hepatitis or transplantation, liver which

α1-Anti-trypsin (α1AT) is that misfolding marked very disorder that of α1AT. levels low circulating is lead an caused mutations deficiency autosomal to of recessive by by α1-antitrypsin 3, cathepsin which at released to are major neutrophils The from and elastase, of inflammation. proteases, G, of neutrophil sites function inhibit is α1AT proteinase particularly development not proteases of to leads inhibited the because 13). activity of the destructive is deficiency α1AT (Chapter pulmonary emphysema of protein. of disease also accumulation hepatocellular as a consequence misfolded causes It α1AT the liver

α1AT 394–amino by a synthesized acid small predominantly plasma is glycoprotein hepatocytes. chromosome located very gene, polymorphic. The on is 14, been by their gel. variants 75 on isoelectric alphabetically have At relative migration least an denoted α1AT identified, two position genotype the the general denote alphabetic notation the The two an and inhibitor” for “protease letter of “Pi” for is gel; the on alleles. letters occurring The PiMM, genotype in most of individuals “wild-type”). (the 90% common is

most α1AT levels common circulating only 10% clinically normal. homozygotes significant are that The PiZZ have is of mutation PiZ; risk for These high individuals at developing clinical disease. are and, Variant are alleles have of codominant, intermediate heterozygotes levels PiMZ plasma consequently, α1AT. births. descent, European live individuals state PiZZ affects of 1800 1 the northern in Among of liver Because of disease, hepatic disorder children. the is commonly in most and the early deficiency infants diagnosed presentation α1AT the genetic

acid a aggregation due residue and to substitution (E342K). to prone glutamine-to-lysine misfolding single 342 at polypeptide PiZ The http://ebooksmedicine.net is amino reticulum leads creates and This stress protein turn in which the apoptosis. to response, unfolded endoplasmic ultimately triggers liver protein protease worth leading from the misfolding, activity. that α1AT whereas the lung It is emphasizing damage is and by caused excessive of stems to emphysema function damage loss 15% development the PiZZ other in only endoplasmic genotype to individuals or liver must the thus, genetic accumulate a 10% develop factors α1AT-Z Although reticulum with factors disease; disease. all role in overt play the of of clinical hepatocytes, environmental liver also

Fig.16.21 ).Periportalhepatocytesaremostaffectedinearlyandinmildformsofthedisease,withcentrallobularhepatocytesbeingaffectedlaterorinmoreseveredisease.Otherpathologicfeaturesvary,rangingfromhepatitistofibrosistofull-blowncirrhosis.

in jaundice to 10% with cholestatic hepatitis α1AT of 20% deficiency. Neonatal appears with newborns hepatitis to be or symptoms In presenting cirrhosis. related adolescence, may may progressively with they become cirrhosis. hepatitis Attacks chronic recovery, of lead apparent subside or and may to complete silent the may cirrhosis middle appears until to Alternatively, disease life. remain in adult later of 3% usually HCC PiZZ setting the in 2% to in develops cirrhosis. of adults, treatment, for disease hepatic liver is definitive severe transplantation. The of and with of because crucial, not cigarette In α1AT. of avoidance in smoking in results smoking release of is the elastase inactivated patients neutrophils is disease, lack because pulmonary that accumulation of lung to 13). action fibers destroys of neutrophil proteases emphysema walls, leading The unopposed in elastic derived (Chapter alveolar

Fig. 16.21 α1-Anti-trypsindeficiency.Periodicacid–Schiff(PAS)stainafterdiastasedigestionoftheliver,highlightsthecharacteristicmagentacytoplas-micgranules.

HemochromatosisismostcommonlycausedbymutationsintheHFE geneandlesscommonlybymutationsinothergenes,allofwhichresultindecreasedhepcidinlevelsorfunctionandincreasedintestinalironuptake.Itischaracterizedbyaccumulationofironintheliver,pancreas,andothertissues.

Wilsondiseaseiscausedbyloss-of-functionmutationsinthemetaliontransporterATP7B,whichresultsinaccumulationofcopperintheliver,brain(particularlybasalganglia),andeyes(Kayser-Fleischerrings).

Wilsondiseaseeffectsontheliverareprotean,showingchangesrangingfromacutemassivehepaticnecrosis,tofattyliverdisease,tochronichepatitisandcirrhosis.

α1ATdeficiencyisadiseaseinwhichmutationsinα1ATleadtoitsmisfolding,causinglivertoxicityandafunctionaldeficitofα1ATintheplasma.Thisdeficiencyplacesaffectedindividualsathighriskforemphysema,particularlysmokers,duetotheunopposedeffectsofproteasesreleasedfromneutrophils.

are of and and emulsification water-soluble bile (2) the functions: detergent in excreted gut dietary bilirubin, the elimination to products other of major salts, the excess into that be fat through of the lumen insufficiently Hepatic action bile xenobiotics, of two cholesterol, urine. the (1) serves waste and and (discussed due later). cholestasis with to that to retention Processes jaundice to excretion bilirubin, of icterus of interfere bile lead

any an production Jaundice occur extravascular (e.g., settings hepatocyte clearance production and (summarized hepatitis), equilibrium the or dysfunction can bile (e.g., cell (e.g., hemolysis), of in may red bilirubin bilirubin flow obstruction of the increase in impacted which of between gallstone), of disturb

Table ). 16.4 steps: biliary occurs four by The liver with and bilirubin metabolism the from intracellular of glucuronic storage; the uptake excretion. conjugation circulation; in acid; are These next. discussed

of degradation is end ( heme Bilirubin product the

Fig.

). 16.22 breakdown gm) liver, red macrophages the the daily marrow. Approximately bone from derived cells by (0.2–0.3 and of of senescent is 85% spleen, production in marrow from cell red 12). precursors heme remainder hepatic P-450 and of in destruction derived from bone is turnover or of (Chapter The the the (e.g., hemoproteins the cytochromes) heme (step source, Whatever oxidizes 1 biliverdin intracellular the heme in oxygenase to

Fig. 16.22 http://ebooksmedicine.net

Jaundice Causes Table Major of 16.4

Production of Bilirubin Excess

of hematomas)Ineffective (e.g., blood bleeding, internal alimentary pernicious erythropoiesis anemia, Hemolytic (e.g., thalassemia) tract hemorrhage from anemiasResorption

the hepatitis, disease of drug-induced (e.g., newbornDiffuse viral Physiologic jaundice hepatocellular cirrhosis) or

(e.g., (e.g., nutrition, canalicular infection) damage viral systemic hepatitis, total drug-induced oral membrane toxicity parenteral cyclosporine)Hepatocellular contraceptives, or or dysfunction Drug-induced

intrahepatic primary primary disease, transplantation) destruction cholangitis, bile of biliary (e.g., Inflammatory sclerosing ducts liver graft-versus-host cirrhosis,

immediately reductase. to by reduced carcinoma (e.g., the is External bilirubin which of biliverdin pancreas) compression Bilirubin is highly virtually is is (step formed critical and insoluble toxic released aqueous to serum pH to also solutions thus since physiologic bilirubin tissues. binds and albumin at in 2), which glucuronic step molecules reticulum. carries where endoplasmic uridine the two hepatocytes of (UGT1A1, or bilirubin bilirubin diphosphate taken conjugated and in with to is (UDP)–glucuronyltransferase 4) the liver, by 3) acid Albumin into (step bilirubin one up then excreted nontoxic are the Water-soluble, bilirubin glucuronides into bile. 5). the degraded urobilinogens (step Most deconjugated β-glucuronidases bilirubin to and colorless glucuronides gut are by bacterial lumen in in intact pigment residue excreted urobilinogens feces. and The largely of are the urobilinogens are the into Approximately the of formed colon, 20% the to ileum reexcreted reabsorbed liver, in and bile. returned and urobilinogen urine. A is of amount in small reabsorbed excreted the

glycine. bile bile of bile with Two-thirds of by the or are the taurine in organic are acids which conjugation formed materials salts, of carboxylated products Bile major chains. the a acids, are side cholesterol, sterols water-soluble catabolic family of with The are bile and acid. acid primary acids human chenodeoxycholic cholic are highly Bile effective acids detergents. Their physiologic secreted to lumen. gut and the dietary bile, is hepatocytes lipids solubilize role into primary by solubilize in water-insoluble to also lipids helping to of liver maintain unconjugated, Ninety-five percent bile acids, bile or to gut (enterohepatic digestive pool recirculate secreted large from of circulation), purposes. and and the a excretory the thus conjugated endogenous for acids reabsorbed are lumen

bilirubin (bilirubin may and conjugated accumulate systemically. unconjugated Both glucuronides) bilirubin and virtually to albumin. discussed As earlier, unconjugated bound is bilirubin insoluble tightly the blood even a excreted urine, result, cannot are it high. when levels As in be plasma. very small as present free in anion amount Normally, a a is unconjugated of bilirubin brain particularly this If rise, unconjugated injury. in and levels infants, toxic fraction the diffuse may unbound into bilirubin produce tissues, The or bilirubin albumin. in protein-binding increases hemolytic severe from plasma disease displace unbound fraction when drugs which may referred brain, unconjugated damage, kernicterus accumulation of fetalis) as to to hemolytic in cause the newborn neurologic of can Hence, lead bilirubin the (erythroblastosis severe disease

Fig. metabolism and 16.22 elimination. Bilirubin

(Chapter 7). loosely water-soluble, In conjugated to albumin. only contrast, is and bilirubin nontoxic, bound of weak excreted with solubility conjugated excess in association in Because its be can plasma bilirubin albumin, and urine.

normal bilirubin between Serum and 1.2 0.3 the levels in adult mg/dL. vary serum levels levels mg/dL 2.5 40 as above rise evident when becomes 2 the 30 to mg/dL; Jaundice high severe with to disease. can occur as bilirubin with Causes jaundice. unconjugated of patient value differ, is hyperbilirubinemia of and measurement so and both of evaluating in forms a conjugated

hepatic newborn jaundice jaundice the or age, mature transient almost of and until not for neonatal the termed machinery conjugating 2 excreting develops hyperbilirubinemia, does Because fully about and of mild newborn. unconjugated weeks physiologic every bilirubin be due may by This action to the breast milk. exacerbated of in enzymes breastfeeding, bilirubindeconjugating discussed the the section. newborn jaundice later is Nevertheless, in abnormal and “ sustained ” is in

the following: errors result population) inborn the may (7% inherited of of hyperbilirubinemia severity. fluctuating variable from that of condition • also metabolism, is as unconjugated syndrome a Gilbert including common Jaundice manifests decreased gene the disorder. a hepatic play the in may The glucuronosyltransferase cause UGT1A1; attributed in primary of of mildly the variable is levels expression mutation to role gene, a encoding this polymorphisms in Gilbert any associated syndrome is morbidity. not with disorder a Syndrome severe called By in infancy. 1 fatal deficiency rare causes Crigler-Najjar Type that is glucuronosyltransferase contrast,

recessive from responsible protein the across bilirubin syndrome • in hepatocellular an of glucuronides the defect results canalicular transport Dubin-Johnson membrane. excretion for autosomal hyperbilirubinemia. Affected individuals conjugated exhibit are bilirubin) pigmented darkly polymerized normal. Other epinephrine liver patients hepatomegaly, and having (from not metabolites, than a

obstruction or a defects bile Cholestasis intrahepatic of is in channels bile hepatocyte extrahepatic caused secretion. by condition or by A on cholangiocytes. characteristic related (GGT), deficiencies Patients enzymes malabsorption, of finding elevated fat-soluble intestinal including γ-glutamyl symptoms or K. hepatocytes and may phosphatase present is the xanthomas the vitamins A, nutritional or D, jaundice, (focal apical alkaline that accumulation and pruritus, laboratory transpeptidase of membranes to are of serum skin cholesterol), have

MORPHOLOGYThemorphologicfeaturesofcholestasisdependonitsseverity,duration,andunderlyingcause.Commontobothobstructiveandnonobstructivecholestasisistheaccumulationofbilepigmentwithinthehepaticparenchyma(

Fig.16.23 ).Elongatedgreen-brownplugsofbilearevisibleindilatedbilecanaliculi.Ruptureofcanaliculileadstoextravasationofbile,whichisquicklyphagocytosedbyKupffercells.Dropletsofbilepigmentalsoaccumulatewithinhepatocytes,whichcantakeonafine,foamyappearancereferredtoasfeathery degeneration. Occasionalapoptotichepatocytesalsomaybeseen.

and (gallstones, is common post-surgical strictures. in cholelithiasis by most bile The discussed later), followed adults extrahepatic malignant cause of duct obstructions, obstruction syndromes insufficient fibrosis, bile duct intrahepatic there of extrahepatic children are in anomaly which Obstructive (paucity include tree), (a the of and biliary conditions ducts syndromes). in bile choledochal cystic cysts atresia, biliary cystic and of initial The features discussed been the obstruction. morphologic correction entirely with of reversible cholestasis have are later. cirrhosis, to discussed can biliary Prolonged obstruction lead

Fig. Cholestasis. 16.23 andcomparisonwithnormalliver(left). (A)Morphologicfeaturesofcholestasis(right) Cholestatichepatocytes(1)areenlargedandareassociatedwithdilatedcanalicularspaces(2).Apoptoticcells(3)maybeseen,andKupffercells(4)frequentlycontainregurgitatedbilepigments. (B)Cholestasis,showingthecharacteristicaccumulationofbilepigmentsinthecytoplasm.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Ascending complicate biliary secondary obstruction. of may duct cholangitis, infection bacterial the tree, culprits. and such Enteric coliforms as are common organisms enterococci chills, Cholangitis usually abdominal presents with fever, jaundice. pain, and bile which cholangitis, bile in of purulent distends The most form suppurative fills severe cholangitis is and ducts. intervention potentially rather are sepsis grave evaluation prompt process, than to diagnostic imperative. Since dominate this cholestasis and tends

treatment, surgical is imperative. frequently is correct diagnosis prompt to extrahepatic amenable biliary Since and obstruction to In benefited or of by condition surgery may an intrahepatic (short patient’s by hepatocellular and of cholestasis operative is cholestasis) failure the procedure. transplantation), biliary diseases tree the (collectively secretory be not termed contrast, worsened due intrahepatic thus underlying important to establish the It jaundice basis cholestasis. is for and

istheinfluxofperiductularneutrophilsintothebileductepitheliumandlumen( reactions MORPHOLOGYAcutebiliaryobstruction,eitherintrahepaticorextrahepatic,causesdistentionofupstreambileducts,whichoftenbecomedilated.Inaddition,ductular appearattheportalparenchymalinterfacealongwithstromaledemaandneutrophils.Thehallmarkofsuperimposedinfection(ascending cholangitis)

Fig.16.24

biliary initiateperiportalfibrosis,eventuallygeneratingsecondary or Leftuncorrected,theinflammationandductularreactionsresultingfrom obstruction obstructive cirrhosis biliary chronic (

causedbythedetergenteffectsofextravasatedbile. infarcts bodies periportal of Fig.16.25 hepatocytes,atypeofcytoplasmicswellingoftenassociatedwithMallory-Denk degeneration andbile ).Cholestaticfeaturesintheparenchymamaybeprominent.Thesetaketheformofextensivefeathery

in (as conjugated live 2500 approximately termed in neonate, cholestasis 1 Prolonged hyperbilirubinemia discussed neonatal neonatal the jaundice) the opposed to affects already births. disorders (discussed the atresia conditions primarily in it cholangiopathies, (1) (2) referred major as neonate, to variety later), causing hepatitis. conjugated biliary collectively The and of hyperbilirubinemia neonatal are a causing

Fig. Acutelarge-ductobstructionwithascendingcholangitis.Super-imposedonfeaturesofductobstruction(edema,ductularreaction)isaninfiltrateofneutrophilsinvolvingthebileduct,thehallmarkofascendingcholangitis. 16.24

inflammatory hepatitis specific is basis. necessarily nor Neonatal an not does entity, it have a conduct recognizable than a 85% an Rather is for cases it liver as and indication infectious identifiable search to greater have diligent causes. diseases, toxic, of metabolic,

treatment a atresia procedure), (Kasai requires is cholestasis from whereas since disorders. child surgery important, adversely biliary intervention neonatal of may nonobstructive other of affect definitive very surgical biliary Differentiation atresia with of made can about of clinical 90% discrimination basis in be the Fortunately, cases. on data from cases, liver to identifiable be cholangiopathy. 10% In biopsy an distinguish neonatal hepatitis of necessary may hepatomegaly. have dark stools, light jaundice, or and urine, infants acholic Affected be identified, of may degrees Variable synthetic as hypoprothrombinemia. dysfunction such hepatic

Fig. Cirrhosissecondarytoprimarybiliarycholangitis. 16.25

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Neonatalhepatitis.Notethemultinucleatedgianthepatocytes. 16.26

Fig.16.26 )includestrikinggiant-celltransformationofhepatocytes,associatedwithlobulardisarray,focallivercellapoptosisandprominenthepatocellularandcanalicularcholestasis.Insomecases,thisparenchymalpatternofinjuryalsoisaccompaniedbyductularreactionandfibrosisofportaltracts.

atresia biliary that is 3 the first a defined of complete tree as within Biliary partial occurs the of months extrahepatic obstruction life. or in one-third of liver the and It neonatal approximately childhood. early cases cause underlies disease most from single death of frequent cholestasis of is to liver 50% have of transplantation 60% children referred atresia. for biliary Approximately

timing atresia these of are the obliteration. biliary luminal presumed Two forms of are recognized; on based major

congenital The of interrupted form vena of as viscera, and developmental involving inferior associated cases as abdominal other abdominal cava, including heart anomalies fetal for malrotation with and organs, polysplenia, 20% is accounts thoracic and the many disease. commonly

obstructed tree biliary Much is common the atresia, in following injured which apparently more of normally perinatal is an biliary and form developed birth. unknown; suspects. atresia biliary and considered viral toxic exposures etiology of The perinatal prime infection are is

or stricture bile insomeindividuals,periductularinflammationalsoextendsinto common fibrosing the hepatic of ducts; theintrahepaticbileducts,leadingtoprogressivedestructionoftheintrahepaticbiliarytreeaswell.Whenbiliaryatresiaisunrecognizedoruncorrected,cirrhosisdevelopswithin3to6monthsofbirth.

procedure).Unfortunately,in90%ofpatientstheobstructionalsoinvolvesbileductsatorabovetheportahepatis.Thesecasesarenotcorrectable,sincetherearenopatentbileductsamenabletosurgicalanastomosis. Thereisconsiderablevariabilityinthepatternofbiliaryatresia.Whenthediseaseislimitedtothecommonductorrightand/orlefthepaticbileductswithpatentintrahepaticbranches,thediseaseissurgicallycorrectable(Kasai

neonatal postnatal biliary Infants weight birth with weight but and gain. exhibit cholestasis, with present normal atresia There is predominance. slight a female but are the stools as become Initially normal, progresses. acholic disease they of the and/or of the Ascending cholangitis and obstruction tree. intrahepatic attempts progression biliary may of disease resection at the impede bypass surgical and its donor hope the young is bile liver saving for primary of ducts patients. Transplantation these a accompanying usually 2 Without years surgical birth. death of occurs intervention, within

ducts: intra-hepatic comprise disorders two and sclerosing cholangitis. distinct cholangitis bile biliary Autoimmune immunologically-mediated primary that involve primary cholangiopathies The are of these listed salient features in

16.5 Table

bile smalland nonsuppurative, feature (PBC) biliary primary an Primary of autoimmune cholangitis medium-sized ducts. destruction whose disease is inflammatory intrahepatic is intrahepatic ducts biliary tree are involved. and Large extrahepatic the not Previously, is cirrhosis, and to not stage, this biliary primary biliary do the patients name disease now but cholangitis was known progress as preferred. this primary most

of disease ratio middle-age of is primarily a female-to-male women, with 6:1. PBC a years between is peak of incidence 50 Its 40 and age. Northern prevalence (Minnesota), cases. in United million is (England as the where The countries and 400 per the disease and as States 1 prevalent most is high Scotland) European Northern and its prevalence pathogenesis. with suggest along in genetic are incidence that important increases geographic in and environmental Recent factors both clustering patients PBC developing increased disease. an of Family for risk have members the

initiate thought diseases other is as be autoimmune an disorder, PBC that triggers PBC unknown. are with but autoimmune the to http://ebooksmedicine.net are most Anti-mitochondrial the antibodies

Features Cholangitis Main and Table of Primary Cholangitis Biliary Sclerosing Primary 16.5

ClinicalProgressiveUnpredictable,butcourse

anti-nuclearanti-body;ANCA, anti-neutrophilcytoplasmicantibody. Anti-mitochondrialantibody;ANA, AMA,

PBC. characteristic in finding the immune-mediated T cells mitochondrial enzymes supporting an for process. the disease, another feature certain are of notion specific of duct autoantibodies cells on and of include around findings altered frequent centromeric other proteins, the epithelial presence accumulation immunity other expression bile nuclear cells, of aberrant autoreactive against proteins of Other and II T bile suggestive components. of pore MHC ducts, class molecules cellular

florid without with or lymphoplasmacytic inflammation by ( actively duct ducts are lesion) MORPHOLOGYInterlobular destroyed (the granulomas bile

followonthisductinjury,andtheseinturnparticipateinthedevelopmentof reactions Fig.16.27 septal portal-portal fibrosis. ).Somebiopsyspecimens,however,donothaveactivelesionsandonlyshowtheabsenceofbileductsinportaltracts.Thediseaseisquitepatchyindistribution;itiscommontoseeasinglebileductunderimmuneattackinonelevelofabiopsyspecimen,whileothernearbyducts,areunaffected.Ductular

Intheabsenceoftreatment,thediseasefollowsoneoftwopathstoend-stagedisease.Inthefirst,mostclassicpathway,thereisincreasinglywidespreadductloss,slowlyleadingtoestablishedcirrhosisandeventuallytoprofoundcholestasis.Alternatively,somepatientseventuallydevelopedprominentportalhypertensionratherthanseverecholestasis.Fortunately,bothoftheseoutcomesarenowrarelyseen.

Fig. Primarybiliarycirrhosis.Aportaltractismarkedlyexpandedbyaninfiltrateoflymphocytesandplasmacells.Notethegranulomatousreac-tiontothebileductundergoingdestruction(the“floridductlesion”). 16.27

an asymptomatic serum itching. alkaline are following the phosphatase severe Most by a diagnosed elevated or level while triggered workup of identification patients

Hypercholesterolemia common. is in Anti-mitochondrial present 95% of patients. 90% are antibodies to seen highly autoantibodies of are other although They of a be may in number characteristic PBC, cases. small is florid is which lesion a liver is present. by biopsy, considered disease The confirmed diagnostic duct if slowly increasing fatigue appear, with is pruritus. their When typically onset and patients complaining of symptoms insidious,

disease with by progression. oral ursodeoxycholic improved treatment has years, recent dramatically acid early outcomes slowing In the is acid pool to unclear, remains action enter of presumably bile bile. ursodeoxycholate biochemical related the to the and ability mechanism but Its alter composition of of

secondary D including steatorrhea, xanthelasmas, malabsorption–related vitamin skin features With osteoporosis. may time, treatment, and even hyperpigmentation, and/or emerge, with osteomalacia (Sjögren dry mouth autoimmunity, Raynaud phenomenon, systemic sicca of disease. PBC Individuals celiac with and also syndrome), complex and manifestations eyes may extrahepatic of have thyroiditis, rheumatoid including sclerosis, the arthritis, advanced best for transplantation individuals treatment is disease. liver Liver with the

and preserved intrahepatic obliterative of leading segments. cholangitis characterized ducts, by of to sclerosing Primary and fibrosis inflammation dilation is (PSC) bile extrahepatic of Irregular characteristic the strictures by intrahepatic tree dilations biliary and biliary the extrahepatic seen cause MRI. and “beading” bowel approximately disease of 15), (Chapter most with PSC. commonly coexists ulcerative individuals 70% in Inflammatory colitis, 4%. the of individuals PSC colitis prevalence ulcerative about Conversely, in with is Like 2:1 in occur tends bowel inflammatory disease, PSC to (see the fifth male through a of decades and life predominance has third

16.5 Table http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 16.28 Imagingstudiesofapatientwithprimarysclerosingcholangitis.

broad or absence). areas) (A)Magneticresonancecholangiographyofthebileductsshowsfocaldilationinsomeducts(bright, andstricturingofothers(thinning (B)EndoscopicretrogradecholangiographyofthesamepatientshowsnearlyidenticalfeaturesasinA. Scottsdale, of Arizona.) Dr. M. MD, Clinic, (Courtesy Mayo Harrison, Edwyn

Several bile ducts. to of mediated PSC immunologically features suggest injury the underlying, process. T presence MHC cells the all association an in of stroma, with to HLA-B8 immunologic and autoantibodies, and alleles, colitis an other periductal clinical linkage support ulcerative First-degree risk factors increased that are suggesting developing disease, at with of the contribute. genetic PSC relatives patients also for

is damaged colitis in a on migrate an they duct with the bile cells autoimmune model, of to recognize the activated liver, patients In cross-reacting proposed ulcerative that assault it bile mucosa and T where one initiate ducts. antigen that a patients. characteristic envelope cytoplasmic up as PSC atypical recognize antibodies to in as in in are perinuclear Autoantibody PBC, but 80% protein anti-neutrophil of are found (pANCA) nuclear not profiles PSC unknown. of The to is relationship pathogenic pANCA

skin” resemblesthatseeninulcerativecolitis,takingtheformofneutrophilsinfiltratingintotheepitheliumsuperimposedonachronicinflammatorybackground.Inflamedareasdevelopstricturesasscarringnarrowsthelumen.Thesmaller ducts, duct inflammation MORPHOLOGYMorphologicchangesdifferbetweenlargeducts(intrahepaticandextrahepatic)andsmallerintrahepaticducts.Large fibrosis however,oftenhavelittleinflammationandshowastrikingcircumferential,“onion aroundanatrophicductlumen(

),whicheventuallyisobliterated,leavinga“tombstone”scar.Becausethelikelihoodofsamplingsmall-ductlesionsonarandomneedlebiopsyissmall,diagnosisdependsonradiologicimagingoftheextrahepaticandlargeintrahepaticducts.Asthediseaseprogresses,theliverbecomesmarkedlycholestatic,culminatingincirrhosis.Biliaryintraepithelialneoplasiaoftenappearinthesettingofchronicinflammationandcholangiocarcinomadevelopsinupto7%ofpatients,usuallywithafataloutcome. Fig.16.29

of are persistent phosphatase, screened. ulcerative in who to particularly only Patients because come serum colitis alkaline may elevation attention being with of routinely those develop. Alternatively, fatigue, and may progressive pruritus, jaundice of PSC. or of Acute the cholangitis also bouts may ascending presence progression signal gallbladder pancreatitis pancreatic the chronic to ducts cholecystitis of seen. are and and also Chronic involvement due some associated patients, cholangitis with autoimmune sclerosing pancreatitis. is In IgG4 related cases chronic 5). manifestation In disease of PSC be one may (Chapter such

steatorrhea. patients liver afflicted symptoms chronic of course years, protracted cholestatic 5 to disease, follows and including have of 17 a severely typical PSC medical there is PBC, Unlike with satisfactory no treatment. has none to immunosuppressive have tried, A proven been the been of disease variety course. but alter agents used obstruction. to or dilation sphincterotomy with stenting relieve Endoscopic is for individuals definitive treatment disease. liver end-stage with Liver transplantation only is the

Cholestasis occurswithimpairedexcretionofbile,leadingtojaundiceandaccumulationofbilepigmentinthehepaticparenchyma.Causesincludemechanicalorinflammatoryobstructionordestructionofthebileductsormetabolicdefectsinhepatocytebilesecretion.

ismostcommonlyassociatedwithgallstonesandmalignanciesinvolvingtheheadofthepancreas.Chronicobstructioncanleadtocirrhosis. obstruction Large duct bile

isnotaspecificentity;itisvariouslyassociatedwithcholangiopathiessuchasbiliary cholestasis Neonatal atresia hepatitis. andavarietyofdisorderscausingconjugatedhyperbilirubinemiaintheneonate,collectivelyreferredtoasneonatal

biliary isanautoimmunediseasewithprogressive,inflammatory,oftengranulomatous,destructionof cholangitis Primary

Fig. 16.29 Primarysclerosingcholangitis.Abileductundergoingdegenera-tionisentrappedinadense,“onion-skin”concentricscar.

http://ebooksmedicine.net smalltomediumintrahepaticbileducts.Itmostoftenoccursinmiddle-agewomenandisassociatedwithanti-mitochondrialantibodiesandoftenwithotherautoimmunediseases,suchasSjögrensyndromeandHashimotothyroiditis.

cholangitis sclerosing isanautoimmunediseasewithprogressiveinflammatoryandsclerosingdestructionofintrahepaticandextrahepaticbileductsofallsizes.Diagnosisismadebyradiologicimagingofthebiliarytree.Itmostoftenoccursinyoungermenandhasastrongassociationwithinflammatoryboweldisease,particularlyulcerativecolitis. •Primary

of Hepatic inflow, in abnormalities flow-through, outflow according can the leads ( circulatory grouped blood the to whether or to be disorders disorder

Fig. 16.30

supply infarcts Liver double rare, liver. the the are blood thanks to to the Nonetheless, artery branch of embolism by thrombosis hepatic an of or intrahepatic obstruction (

Fig. may be process neoplasia, pale if which 16.31 (Chapter either an or hemorrhagic polyarteritis from blood portal may circulation. as suffused an or the ), infarct, produce with nodosa such 10) inflammatory Blockage organ, accessory through as parenchyma. artery particularly usually ischemic sustain the liver of sufficient vessels the not retrograde flow arterial if otherwise to of and the liver is hepatic main produce the venous may the is portal supply normal, necrosis

Fig. Hepaticcirculatorydisorders.Formsandclinicalmanifestationsofcompromisedhepaticbloodflow. 16.30

Fig. Liverinfarct.Athrombusislodgedinaperipheralbranchofthehepaticartery(arrow)andcompressestheadjacentportalvein;thedistalhepatictissueispale,withahemorrhagicmargin. 16.31

in the of Blockage or somewhere fall vague may cause event; cases portal lethal vein only extrahepatic between. symptoms most be catastrophic and a potentially may its of other the portal of major produces disease abdominal or typically radicles varices rupture. manifestations and esophageal hypertension, are to portal pain vein prone Occlusive that principally and is Ascites is block (because massive when is present, often but, intractable. the presinusoidal), common not

portal be one-third of cases) of or idiopathic from may conditions. obstruction Extrahepatic may (approximately vein a number arise following: obstruction the portal for settings Some of extrahepatic most of common the include development vein

whom with thrombosis vein other factors associated portal patients, of is well which Cirrhosis, as some have 25% of risk in

myeloproliferative (Chapter and such such as as as vera Hypercoagulable syndrome 4), conditions neoplasms Leiden thrombophilias 12), such (Chapter hypercoagulable and factor hemoglobinuria antiphospholipid including paroxysmal nocturnal V inherited polycythemia antibody states, miscellaneous

pancreatitis vein portal vein, intraabdominal sepsis such as processes and splenic Inflammatory involving or the

surgical Trauma, otherwise or

caused be radicles portal thrombosis. Obstruction by acute of vein intrahepatic may sharply results discoloration demarcated ischemic red-blue infarction not of thrombosis cause but area infarct The instead of called does Zahn. a in atrophy distended necrosis, severe and is of marked hepatocellular There sinusoids. congestion no only small vein parasites portal of eggs lodge branch vein common is the in cause most the and obstruct smallest of branches. schistosomiasis; obstruction The portal the now referred hypertension. presents which noncirrhotic The often pattern of injury disorders producing this other collectively are portal to as obliterative venopathy, portal as are well understood. not of portal venopathy obliterative Causes be in treated in and anti-retroviral may HIV occurs a of complication disease, both untreated and some instances therapy. It

http://ebooksmedicine.net

earlier. as intrahepatic common cirrhosis, is cause The discussed blood of flow obstruction most tumors. addition, of metastasis disseminated of occlusion in sinusoids In solid cell eclampsia, occurs intravascular and physical coagulation, sickle the disease, intrasinusoidal of and sufficient disorders massive If and necrosis obstruction failure. fulminant flow produce these of cause severe blood may to of unabated, hepatocytes hepatic all

branches. any vein occur of events Occlusive in can caliber hepatic sinusoidal produces syndrome occurs veno-occlusive as it the it branches, smallest in (formally obstruction If known disease). intrahepatic cell pyrrolizidine A primarily first but containing cancer stem of whom within it the consumption well-known transplantation, bush but of it have 3 following as allogeneic receiving cause chemotherapy, patients 30% mortality. now high Jamaican this weeks, syndrome as in tea, hematopoietic rare, alkaloid– or usually in can occurs is

a syndrome. veins known condition enlargement, or pain, major obstruction ascites, hepatic The liver Budd-Chiari and produces two of as more is silent. thrombosis clinically vein single of a main hepatic by Obstruction the Hepatic pressure. intrahepatic damage of is increased blood consequence thrombosis vein is as vein well with hypercoagulable intraabdominal states cancers, portal as thrombosis the as associated same Hepatic particularly HCC. thrombophilic with or various As as is combined syndrome underlying pregnancy disorder. afflicted such those in several patients contraceptive oral case thrombotic Budd-Chiari in the with risk often occurs with factors, an disorders, use often

MORPHOLOGYInBudd-Chiarisyndrome,theliverisswollenandred-purpleandhasatensecapsule(

).Theremaybeareasofhemorrhagiccollapsealternatingwithareasofpreservedorregeneratingparenchyma,dependingonwhichsmallandlargehepaticveinsareobstructed.Microscopically,theaffectedhepaticparenchymarevealsseverecentrilobularcongestionandnecrosis.Centrilobularfibrosisdevelopsininstancesinwhichthethrombosisismoreslowlydeveloping.Themajorveinsmaycontainfreshocclusivethrombior,inchroniccases,organizedadherentthrombi. Fig.16.32

Fig. Budd-Chiarisyndrome.Thrombosisofthemajorhepaticveinshascausedseverehepaticcongestion. 16.32

hepatic is mortality untreated The vein thrombosis high. acute of is are largely condition The empiric. rare, and treatments They veins; surgery, order include to creation prevent either portovenous thrombolysis; shunts, patency or anti-coagulation of using of invasive angioplasty approaches radiologic in to the restore clot decompress occluded propagation; to liver. and the years. more chronic and alive two-thirds than of form lethal, patients The after less 5 is are far

congestion centrilobular hepatic of systemic a considered and morphologic compromise—passive they because necrosis—are continuum. These together manifestations represent circulatory preterminal circulatory in of are death. every seen commonly there autopsy, element at Both changes nontraumatic an is failure as virtually

MORPHOLOGYRight-sidedcardiacdecompensationleadstopassivecongestionoftheliver.Theliverisslightlyenlarged,tense,andcyanotic,withroundededges.Microscopicallythereiscongestionofcentrilobular necrosis). sinusoids.Withtime,centrilobularhepatocytesbecomeatrophic,resultinginmarkedlyattenuatedlivercellplates.Left-sidedcardiacfailureorshockmayleadtohepatichypo-perfusionandhypoxia,causingischemiccoagulativenecrosisofhepatocytesinthecentralregionofthelobule(centrilobular

Thecombinationofhypoperfusionandretrogradecongestionactssynergisticallytocausecentrilobular hemorrhagic necrosis. Thelivertakesonavariegatedmottledappearance,reflectinghemorrhageandnecrosisinthecentrilobularregions(

Fig.16.33A ).Thisfindingisknownasnutmeg duetoitsresemblancetothecutsurfaceofanutmeg.Theretypicallyisasharpdemarcationbetweenviableperiportalandnecroticoratrophicpericentralregionsthataresuffusedwithblood(see liver

Fig.16.33B sclerosis)orevencirrhosisdevelops. ).Uncommonly,withsustainedchronicseverecongestiveheartfailure,centrilobularfibrosis(cardiac

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Acutepassivecongestion(“nutmegliver”).(A)Thecutliversection,inwhichmajorbloodvesselsarevisible,isnotableforavariegatedmottledredappearance,representingcongestionandhemorrhageinthecentrilobularregionsoftheparenchyma. 16.33 (B)Onmicroscopicexamination,thecentrilobularregionissuffusedwithredbloodcells,andatrophiedhepatocytesarenoteasilyseen.Portaltractsandtheperiportalparenchymaareintact.

Circulatorydisordersofthelivercanbecausedbyimpairedbloodinflow,defectsinintrahepaticbloodflow,andobstructionofbloodoutflow.

Portalveinobstructionbyintrahepaticorextrahepaticthrombosismaycauseportalhypertension,esophagealvarices,andascites.

Themostcommoncauseofimpairedintrahepaticbloodflowiscirrhosis.

Obstructionsofbloodoutflowincludehepaticveinthrombosis(Budd-Chiarisyndrome)andsinusoidalobstructionsyndrome,previouslyknownasveno-occlusive disease.

to of attention masses reasons. variety a come for Hepatic generate routine may or studies examination fullness discomfort or They indications. by and be for detected radiographic physical other epigastric true Hepatic hyperplasias masses nodular neoplasms. include and

or the hyperplastic nodules Solitary develop nodular hepatocellular noncirrhotic may liver in multiple hyperplasias. that focal are called hepatic or local lesions radicles of or parenchymal inflammatory alterations posttraumatic and in augmentation supply, from blood such obliteration as of vein blood These compensatory arteriovenous supply. malformations portal arise arterial

hyperplasia nodular appearsasawell-demarcated,poorlyencapsulatednoduleranginguptomanycentimetersindiameter( MORPHOLOGYFocal

).Itpresentsasamasslesioninanotherwisenormalliver,mostfrequentlyinyoungtomiddle-ageadults.Typically,thereisacentralgray-white,depressedstellatescarfromwhichfibrousseptaradiatetotheperiphery(see Fig.16.34A

Fig.16.34B

Fig. Focalnodularhyperplasia.(A)Resectedspecimenshowinglobu-latedcontoursandacentralstellatescar. 16.34 (B)Low-powerphotomicrographshowingabroadfibrousscarwithmixedhepaticarterialandbileductele-mentsandchronicinflammationwithinhepaticparenchymathatlacksnormalarchitectureduetohepatocyteregeneration.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Microscopically,thecentralscarcontainslargeabnormalvesselsandductularreactionsalongthespokesofscar.Avascularlesionisprobablytheinitiatinginsult,asitisbelievedthathypoperfusedparenchymacollapsestoproducethesepta,whereashyperperfusedregionsundergohyperplasia.Thehyper-plasticregionsarecomposedofnormalhepatocytesseparatedbythickenedsinusoidalplates.

hemangiomas (Chapter common most benign Cavernous tumors 10). the are liver that intraoperatively from of or clinical cavernous must radiographically chief is The distinguished significance metastatic be hemangiomas tumors. they

are from Benign hepatocytes developing called ( neoplasms adenomas hepatocellular

Fig. 16.35 ). a hepatic incidentally when they be abdominal imaging as on cause mass or They symptoms. detected may placed may the pressure liver is of be necrosis by outstrips symptom tumor it The or blood its which hemorrhagic most common on by expanding mass as caused the the pain, supply. capsule intraabdominal occasionally life-threatening to Hepatocellular may bleeding. that lead an rupture, event adenomas

risk and intermediate, malignant can adenomas low, for Hepatic molecularly high into be transformation. subclassified at tumors (e.g., tumor regression, in and oral types the and frequency hormones exposure tumor growth clearly some markedly contraceptive often—but always—leads cells linking hepatic cases. pills, of adenoma, anabolic of Sex all increases cessation exposure to hormone sex hormones sex of not to of the steroids) to survival

tumors metastatic. Malignant the liver primary can be in or occurring are far The more latter common. tumors. focused primary is Our on hepatic discussion here Most liver hepatocytes (HCC). and carcinoma primary from are cancers arise hepatocellular termed bile are duct common of less cancers origin, Much cholangiocarcinomas. liver as hepatocellular rare further cancers, angiosarcoma, childhood are of such merit primary too (a hepatoblastoma and tumor) Other types discussion. to

of approximately widely world. different also parts known incidence 5.4% all cancers, in accounts its HCC, the hepatoma, for as varies Globally, erroneously but of than high chronic with More 85% in HBV of occur of countries cases rates infection. in China, as HBV incidence in Asia is vertically of Africa, the Korea, highest is and (southeast sub-Saharan The HCC and, transmitted Taiwan) carrier which starts in discussed, infancy. areas already state combined the aflatoxin, for many to increases HBV exposed with infection of when risk dramatically. Moreover, populations these are HCC which the is and, between incidence in of of 40 tumor of these and The of appears the areas cases, in peak almost age HCC 50% in absence cirrhosis. years 20

Fig. 16.35 Livercelladenoma. (A)Resectedspecimenofthelivermass.

(B)Microscopicviewshowingcordsofhepatocytes,withanarterialvascularsupply(arrow) andnoportaltracts.

lower hepatitis of HCC decades, Western its increased in States the HCC rising, the but owing prevalence to to The in cases of the countries. 30-fold than counties, incidence of is new still C. some Asian recent tripled United In is number in incidence largely 8-fold rapidly stem that United for rising infection effective will of new, the tide is HCC in the hoped treatments hepatitis C States. It becomes in cases rarely of cirrhosis emerges malignancy years age, of the established. almost Western HCC 60 In after 90% manifests and populations, before about areas. 8:1 low-incidence as throughout areas the pronounced predominance There is in and 3:1 world, as high a in high-incidence male

HCC. for of emergence most the setting common diseases liver Chronic are in not required hepatocarcinogenesis. background of usually cirrhosis identified is While a cirrhosis, for Rather, place to progression over to take cirrhosis hepatocellular and in many to parallel years decades. cancer

http://ebooksmedicine.net

are (HBV, alcohol). infections injuries HCV) underlying most viral The important hepatocarcinogenesis toxic factors (aflatoxin, and in endemic, where a HCV high and HBV incidence are there HCC. of Thus, very is risk. further increases Coinfection crops in mycotoxin contaminates food that is a staple produced by Aspergillus species Africa Aflatoxin Asia. and Aflatoxin aflatoxin-albumin in foods, are serum. consume present the adducts who of as these individuals metabolites urine in are have importance populations aflatoxin biomarkers hepatocarcinogenesis. of the risk at in These and confirm to helped identify earlier, increase discussed to HCV) (and perhaps further. risk synergizes also As with with aflatoxin HBV

associated chronic with ability HCC of injury factors to the inflammation. varying cause risk share all degrees liver Other include: factors These

smoking. which and consumption, increases risk possibly synergistically HBV, even with Alcohol HCV, cigarette

and and lesser α1AT Inherited hereditary deficiency, to degree particularly disease a Wilson hemochromatosis disorders,

mellitus, HCC. which of NAFLD, and diabetes attendant Metabolic syndrome all and increase its obesity, risk for the

Fig. 16.36 (A)HepatitisC–relatedcirrhosiswithadistinctivelylargedys-plasticnodule(arrows). Nodule-in-nodulegrowthsuggestsanevolvingcancer.

left). (B)HistologicallytheregionwithintheboxinA andasubnoduleofmoderatelydiffer-entiatedhepatocellularcarcinomawithinit(center, showsawell-differentiatedhepatocellularcarcinoma(right side) Japan.) Kojiro, University, Kurume (Courtesy of Dr. Kurume, Masamichi

is tumor oncogenes with As in cancers, acquired driver mutations by suppressor genes. and HCC induced all genetic molecular alterations HCC. sequence No leads emergence or of single, universal of to of beta-catenin in function p53 mutations. are Gain driver common of loss most mutations two in mutations function and the 40% are up to mutations Beta-catenin identified of in HCCs. are These to HBV to be instability. genomic demonstrate more likely tumors unrelated and to is present TP53 of HCCs. in to up Inactivation 60% of be associated strongly aflatoxin, TP53 cases exposure for These in which with appears responsible causative are to to the tumors directly many mutations.

lesions. arise often from HCC precursors appears premalignant to which been carry mutations. adenoma of has some discussed, Hepatic beta-catenin–activating already cellular with dysplasias disease called change. associated is small-cell large-cell liver and Chronic change at aggressive or any indicate stage and of found chronic which surveillance. be development These disease, may cancer liver after before cirrhosis, to need more patients serve of or in specimens (including are nodules radiologically Dysplastic either cirrhosis, resected usually found explants). in Low-grade a they HCC. may undergo may not higher lesions, dysplastic risk to higher-grade but transformation or nodules indicate for hepatitis disease. important of High-grade dysplastic viral probably most in are alcoholic nodules liver HCC and precursor the nodules in resection or biopsy found dysplastic high-grade often HCC in Overt is specimens.

(1) a unifocal MORPHOLOGYHCC may appear grossly ( large) as (usually mass

diffusely or distributed cancer, of );(2) a Fig.16.37 variable size; infiltrative nodules multifocal,widely (3) permeatingwidelyandsometimesinvolvingtheentireliver.SometimesHCCsarisewithindysplasticnodules(

Fig.16.37 ),eventuallyovergrowingtheseprecursorlesions.Intrahepaticmetastasesbyeithervascularinvasionordirectextensionbecomemorelikelyoncetumorsreach3cminsize.Thesemetastasesareusuallysmall,satellitetumornodulesaroundalargerprimarymass.Vascularinvasionisalsothemostlikelyrouteforextrahepaticmetastasis,especiallybythehepaticvenoussystem,usuallyonlyinadvancedcases.Occasionally,long,snakelikemassesoftumorinvadetheportalvein(causingportalhypertension)orinferiorvenacava;inthelatterinstance,thetumormayextendallthewayupintotherightventricle.Lymphnodemetastasesarelesscommon.

HCCsrangefromwelldifferentiatedtohighlyanaplasticlesions.Well-differentiatedHCCsarecomposedofcellsthatlooklikenormalhepatocytesandgrowasthicktrabeculae(recapitulatinglivercellplates)orinpseudoglandularpatternsthatrecapitulatepoorlyformed,ectaticbilecanaliculi(see

Fig.16.37

and populations manifestations often are underlying HCC in symptoms to hepatitis. are varied or The by cirrhosis masked Western chronic of related clinical exposure as In (although clinical tropical areas incidence, such may patients common, cirrhosis of no disease of high aflatoxin at detected history usually have where be Africa autopsy). is liver ill-defined or pain, populations, most both loss, an abdominal have mass upper-abdominal malaise, abdominal fullness. and patients weight awareness of In sometimes fatigue, Jaundice, findings. are esophageal fever, bleeding or inconstant gastrointestinal and variceal

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Hepatocellularcarcinoma.(A)Liverremovedatautopsyshowingaunifocal,massiveneoplasmreplacingmostoftherighthepaticlobeinanoncirrhoticliver. 16.37 (B)Malignanthepatocytesgrowingindistortedversionsofnormalarchitecture:largepseudoacinarspaces,essentiallymalformed,dilatedbilecanaliculi,andthickenedhepatocytetrabeculae.

conclusive. Laboratory provide clues are but rarely studies may Elevated found specific or well-differentiated this for in premalignant a advanced serum HCC, 50% marker is α-fetoprotein levels early neither but of of with nor sensitive are cancers. individuals Better ultrasonography, and tests magnetic as studies, imaging. detection computed tomography, for are small such of resonance imaging tumors can so and diagnostic, need Increasing progression during be of arterialization the can by identified HCC and is for tissue that imaging be biopsy. the precluding development its characteristic detection

lungs. the to primary disturbs HCC involves history until most of function metastasizes, mass natural hepatic The the commonly progressive the of enlargement it or (1) liver rupture bleeding, the variceal hepatic of Death tumor rarely hemorrhage. cachexia, (4) (3) failure from fatal occurs or coma, (2) with or esophageal gastrointestinal usually with years the The of and die majority of tumors large survival patients 2 of dismal, diagnosis. within 5-year is

in advances detection and of screening procedures increased of available. where implementation than countries imaging, less the HCCs facilities diameter cm are in has 2 With such in or These small outcomes. freezing) (e.g., removed with through surgically microwave embolization, be good tumors or can ablated radiation, advanced and a may of liver is liver be arise stage (cirrhotic) option chronic If small curative. transplantation disease, relatively HCCs better setting the in chemoembolization for ablation Radiofrequency used control unresectable local tumors. and of are advanced-stage life The prolong of sorafenib can with kinase individuals inhibitor HCC. the

arises and ducts. bile Cholangiocarcinoma intrahepatic HCC, the second after liver (CCA), common extrahepatic most of primary malignant tumor from the 2000 each United in are cases cancers new approximately It States, there the to accounts year. 3000 of gastrointestinal where for 3% in cholangiocarcinoma at areas in more common, 40 liver to of northeastern and Cambodia fluke liver is Asia without higher infestation. than with where flukes Thailand, is much as southeast endemic, However, 30 regions some Asia rates of times infestation occurring Laos, such

for cause somatic inflammation cholangiocarcinoma promote chronic epigenetic or which cholangiocytes. occurrence of in All mutations alterations risk presumably and factors cholestasis, disease. large risk liver flukes sclerosing of The ducts include cholangitis), liver inflammatory fibropolycystic (such infestation factors and by and the Clonorchis species), as chronic primary disease bile Opisthorchis hepatolithiasis, (particularly are elevated with hepatitis B patients C and and of rates As HCC, in cholangiocarcinoma also NAFLD. with

biliarytractearlyintheircourse.Mosttumorsappearasfirm, lesionsatthetimeofdiagnosis,astheycauseobstructionofthe infiltrative,whileothersarepapillaryorpolypoid.Intrahepatic

produceasinglemassivetumor. Fig.16.38A

cinomas.Mostarewelltomoderatelydifferentiated,growingas

Fig.16.38B ).Theytypicallyincitemarkeddesmoplasia.Lym metastases.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Cholangiocarcinoma. 16.38 (flukesnotvisible)(B)Invasivemalignantglandsinareactive,scleroticstroma. (A)MultifocalcholangiocarcinomainaliverfromapatientwithinfestationbytheliverflukeClonorchis sinensis Caritas M.S.Tsui, Hong Centre, (A, Dr.Wilson Medical Courtesy of Kong.)

Theliveristhemostcommonsiteofmetastaticcancersfromprimarytumorsofthecolon,lung,andbreast.

arebenigntumorsofhepatocytes.Mostcanbesubclassifiedonthebasisofmolecularchangeswithvaryingdegreesofmalignantpotential.Theyareassociatedwithuseoforalcontraceptivesandandrogens. adenomas Hepatocellular

Thetwomaintypesofmalignanttumorsarehepatocellular and carcinomas cholangiocarcinomas;HCCsaremuchmorecommon.

HCCisacommontumorinregionsofAsiaandAfrica,anditsincidenceisincreasingintheUnitedStates.

ThemainetiologicagentsforHCCarehepatitisBandC,alcoholiccirrhosis,hemochromatosis,andexposuretoaflatoxins.IntheWesternpopulation,about90%ofHCCsdevelopincirrhoticlivers;inAsia,almost50%ofcasesdevelopinnoncirrhoticlivers.

Thechronicinflammationandcellularregenerationassociatedwithviralhepatitisarepredisposingfactorsforthedevelopmentofcarcinomas.

HCCmaybeunifocalormultifocal,tendstoinvadebloodvessels,andrecapitulatesnormalliverarchitecturetovaryingdegrees.

Cholangiocarcinomaisatumorofintrahepaticorextrahepaticbileductsthatisrelativelycommoninareaswhereliverflukes,suchasOpisthorchis andClonorchis species,areendemic.

afflict 20% in adults 10% Hemisphere, of Gallstones 40% countries. Northern in 3% in to only Latin 4% Western American countries, residing and 20% Asian to the in countries to are to annually, the United stones per gallstones surgery, in removal million as of two-thirds 1 tons undergo In States, of and new individuals resulting the diagnosed of 50 of much million as affected so year! 25 cases about monohydrate main of made crystalline two There calcium types stones, and of pigment bilirubin countries), stones are gallstones: salts. Western stones, containing cholesterol in (80% of cholesterol

as for of cholesterol only or pathway Bile as excess significant the formation free from salts. bile is either elimination body, the cholesterol bile by Cholesterol and water-soluble lecithins. with aggregation rendered is salts and no concentrations (supersaturation), bile remain the capacity of cholesterol longer crystallizes When solubilizing of out solution. can exceed dispersed cholesterol mucus is aggregation gallbladder the into by by enhanced formation the which enhancing with their (stasis), promotes hypomobility Cholesterol stones. nucleation, of hypersecretion, thereby trapping consequent crystals, gallstone of and

liver such of in biliary bile high as may Pigment bilirubin the with extravascular of flukes. the contains in concentration tree, stones a the when tract, unconjugated patients hemolysis red or cell biliary certain occur form chronic as with infections insoluble calcium precipitates salts. are primarily bilirubinate The

gallstones major risk are factors listed in for The

16.6 . Table with 80% of only are factors risk the up gallstones, gender. In individuals age and identifiable to on risk these gender. Some follows: Age and • elaboration factors of The gallstones life. increases prevalence throughout stones, than than years of older 25% the of contrast to population of less to age in with http://ebooksmedicine.net In 6% United 5% younger 30% than those the 40 has States,

for Table Factors 16.6 Risk Gallstones

Demography:NorthernEuropeans,NorthandSouthAmericans,Native

Americans,MexicanAmericansAdvancingageFemalesexhormones

age. years 80 of resectionorbypass,cysticfibrosiswithpancreaticinsufficiency Demography:AsianmorethanWestern,ruralmorethanurbanChronichemolysis(e.g.,sicklecellanemia,hereditaryspherocytosis)BiliaryinfectionGastrointestinaldisorders:ilealdisease(e.g.,Crohndisease),ileal twice of is all ages in as women in as men. about prevalence high The

geographic. and Ethnic stones Native Hopi, Navajo), rare. prevalence certain approaches 50% Cholesterol 75% (Pima, are gallstone whereas in pigment to populations and American these prevalence cholesterol related to seems hypersecretion. high populations be in biliary The to

Heredity. salt associated those secretion. history variety addition metabolism, impaired to In such positive as family synthesis and inborn increased bile imparts errors of of risk, a ethnicity, with a do as

Environment. of cholesterol cholesterol. biliary excess leading to uptake increase Estrogens and hepatic synthesis, secretion the increased pregnancy. use explain and effects with contraceptive with disease oral risk for gallstone These associated disease. risk for and increased biliary agent the and with secretion gallstone strongly hypocholesterolemic rapid also with clofibrate Obesity, are treatment loss, cholesterol weight

disorders. Acquired to gallstones, as cord predisposes loss, and motility such reduced which rapid condition gallbladder pregnancy, in is Any weight injury. spinal however, cases, cause. gallbladder In most without is present hypomotility obvious

ariseexclusivelyinthegallbladderandconsistof50%to100%cholesterol.Purecholesterolstonesarepaleyellow;increasingproportionsofcalciumcarbonate,phos phates,andbilirubinimpartgray-whitetoblackdiscoloration(Fig. MORPHOLOGYCholesterol stones

16.39 ).Theyareovoidandfirm;theycanoccursingly,butmostoftenthereareseveral,withfacetedsurfacesresultingfromtheirapposition.Mostcholesterolstonesareradiolucent,althoughasmanyas20%maycontainsufficientcalciumcarbonatetoberadiopaque.

mayariseanywhereinthebiliarytreeandareclassifiedintoblackandbrownstones.Ingeneral,blackpigmentstonesarefoundinsterilegallbladderbile,whilebrownstonesarefoundininfectedintrahepaticorextrahepaticducts. stones Pigment

Fig. Cholesterolgallstones.Thewallofthegallbladderisthickenedandfibroticduetochroniccholecystitis. 16.39

Thestonescontaincalciumsaltsofunconjugatedbilirubinandlesseramountsofothercalciumsalts,mucinglycoproteins,andcholesterol.Blackstonesareusuallysmall,numerous,andfragiletothetouch(

).Brownstonestendtobesingleorfewinnumberandtohaveasoft,greasy,soaplikeconsistencyowingtothepresenceoffattyacidsaltsreleasedfrombiliarylecithinsbybacterialphospholipases.Becauseofcalciumcarbonatesandphosphates,50%to75%ofblackstonesareradiopaque.Brownstones,whichcontaincalciumsoaps,areradiolucent. Fig.16.40

and 80% symptoms, 70% life. causing any with present remain may asymptomatic gallstones individuals Gallstones be of to for throughout decades without In are the symptoms an minority, however, striking. unfortunate commonly, spasmodic. often or pain, upper-quadrant There less constant which or, excruciating, right be usually is epigastric may Such inflammation obstruction gallbladder caused the of “biliary” tree gallbladder by is itself. pain or by or biliary cholestasis biliary fistulas, of severe and empyema, tree, complications inflammation the More perforation, obstructive include pancreatitis. produce The small or it likely the the “gravel,” stones, less or enter dangerous. to are the obstruction; to thus, common the stone, cystic is larger very ducts stone adjacent intestinal may small bowel, loop directly large obstruction generating a erode of Occasionally into an

Fig. 16.40 Pigmentgallstones.Severalfacetedblackgallstonesarepresentinthisotherwiseunremarkablegallbladderfromapatientwithamechanicalmitralvalveprosthesis,leadingtochronicintravascularhemolysis.

ileus). http://ebooksmedicine.net (gallstone

acute, and almost association be chronic, of superimposed the in or occurs may Inflammation chronic, on always gallstones. with gallbladder acute of the is one common United States, surgery. abdominal the indications cholecystitis In most for gallstones. distribution of that parallels epidemiologic closely Its

duct. cholecystitis inflammation acute obstruction stones gallbladder gallbladder or of termed and calculous is precipitated of is Acute in a 90% contains of neck that the cases cystic by for major complication and the of gallstones the most common cholecystectomy. most frequent is indication emergency It suddenness a and Manifestations may remarkable appear emergency. with constitute of surgical obstruction may however, symptoms resolve mild without In intervention. some be and cases,

initially results the inflammation due and cholecystitis bile gallbladder of Acute obstruction irritation wall of chemical calculous from to outflow. mucosa which glycoprotein several the biliary protective the of the including: to obstruction is Gallbladder mucosal to the hydrolyze bile normally lysolecithin, lecithin stems from action mucous of injury to detergent toxic from bile is the the mucosa; derived epithelium phospholipases salts. layer setting sources, disrupted, exposing in compromise blood prostaglandins flow the wall enhance and inflammation; gallbladder mucosal and released distention intraluminal of the within may and mucosa. ; pressure increased mural the to distended be of effects in infection, which later. of bacterial superimposed All occur may these absence the

5% of and cholecystitis acute for gallbladders removed no 12% Between gallstones. contain patients. seriously Most cases in occur ill as the insults predisposing most Some of common follows: are

motor trauma (e.g., Severe from vehicle crashes)

Other vascular include stasis contributing factors contamination. compromise, and and dehydration, bacterial sludging, gallbladder

it sequel most any attacks. the of antecedent to instances but cholecystitis, repeated without cholecystitis bouts may Chronic be acute in history develops acute of almost gallstones. acute it with Like cholecystitis, always associated is do of to However, gallstones an and seem symptoms seen not because those of inflammation the development acalculous be to causes alterations or form. essential part the cholecystitis calculous chronic initiation similar morphologic of pain, the in of appears predispose chronic in supersaturation to bile inflammation Rather, both and, stone to formation. most instances, E. only bile the in and one-third usually cases. about from be coli Microorganisms, of cultured can enterococci, by obstruction Unlike of stones gallbladder is not calculous outflow requisite acute chronic cholecystitis, in cholecystitis. after show elective cholecystitis, surgery Most features at removed gallstones of gallbladders that emerge likely symptoms and it chronic coexistence making low-grade gallstones inflammation. biliary long-term of for

thegallbladderusuallyisenlargedandtense,andhasabrightredorblotchy,violaceouscolor,thelatterimpartedbysubserosalhemorrhages.Theserosafrequentlyiscoveredbyafibrinousor,inseverecases,afibrinopurulentexudate.In90%ofcases,stonesarepresent,oftenobstructingtheneckofthegallbladderorthecysticduct.Thegallbladderlumenisfilledwithcloudyorturbidbilethatmaycontainfibrin,blood,andpus.Whenthecontainedexudateismostlypus,theconditionisreferredtoasempyema the gallbladder. cholecystitis, MORPHOLOGYInacute of Inmildcases,thegallbladderwallisthickened,edematous,andhyperemic.Inmoreseverecases,thegallbladderwallisgreen-blackandnecrotic—aconditiontermedgangrenous cholecystitis. Onhistologicexamination,theinflammatoryreactionsarenotdistinctiveandconsistofsomecombinationoftheusualpatternsofacuteinflammation(i.e.,edema,leukocyticinfiltration,vascularcongestion,abscessformation,gangrenousnecrosis).

areextremelyvariableandsometimessubtle.Themerepresenceofstoneswithinthegallbladder,evenintheabsenceofacuteinflammation,oftenistakenassufficientjustificationforadiagnosis.Thegallbladdermaybecontracted,ofnormalsize,orenlarged.Mucosalulcerationsareinfrequent;thesubmucosaandsubserosaoftenarethickenedfromfibrosis.Intheabsenceofsuperimposedacutecholecystitis,collectionsoflymphocytesinthewallaretheonlysignofinflammation( cholecystitis Themorphologicchangesinchronic

Fig.16.41A ).Outpouchingsofmucosalepitheliumthroughthewallofthegallbladder(Rokitansky-Aschoffsinuses)maybequiteprominent(see

Fig.16.41B

calculous lasts with that cholecystitis presents 6 for biliary Acute pain more hours. than and severe, right location, upper is usually pain radiates abdominal shoulder. steady, in The to often the prostration presence the and suggests hyperbilirubinemia nausea, obstruction classic; conjugated duct. of leukocytosis, bile are common of the Fever, spasm rigid result occasionally markedly is tender as a and region abdominal The a right of subcostal of http://ebooksmedicine.net the muscles;

Fig. Chroniccholecystitis.(A)Thegallbladdermucosaisinfiltratedbychronicinflammatorycells. 16.41 fragmentedbilepigmentstone. (B)ARokitansky-Aschoffsinuscontaininga

be tender, gallbladder can distended palpated. 1 over recurrence days; is Mild common. spontaneously however, 10 attacks usually to subside are to intervention. 25% of symptomatic ill patients sufficiently require Approximately surgical

based of wall. accompanied of detection by usually on by of the typically evidence cholecystitis The thickened acute gallstones ultrasonography, is gallbladder a diagnosis because following the for the potential important of is complications: to this disorder Attention serious

leading to sepsis cholangitis superinfection or Bacterial

to peritonitis rupture Gallbladder diffuse leading

fistula, bile into (cholecystenteric) drainage enteric and tree, intestinal into Biliary the air organs, (ileus) of with and adjacent potentially of bacteria gallstone-induced entry biliary obstruction

illness, liver renal, with decompensation cardiac, preexisting medical pulmonary, of or Aggravation

for development arising cholecystitis usually acute cholecystitis. by or condition, the surgical of acalculous stage which serious sets medical from Symptoms another the are obscured suspicion. diagnosis high therefore The on a index rests of the striking cholecystitis by recurrent pain. and attacks is steady upper-quadrant Chronic the of manifestations characterized lacks acute usually of forms or right epigastric Nausea, intolerance frequent foods and accompaniments. for are vomiting, fatty a gallbladder. the pathologic the on examination of resected is cholecystitis based diagnosis Chronic the carcinoma its above, (discussed inflammation with association gallstones in and of the Beyond principal may next). symptoms and signs mentioned lie chronic importance of gallbladder

most common gallbladder extrahepatic biliary Carcinoma malignancy the the of the tract. is of occurs of most in more life. is in women the decade and frequently slightly common seventh It is incidence The in States 50,000. United the 1 in unchanged and 5-year Only has over remained 5% discovered past a is rate years. survival to resectable it the at about at the 12% mean rarely stage, many in carcinoma with factor (cholelithiasis), present is associated are most which risk gallbladder gallstones of The 95% important cases. stones containing a 6). known Presumably, cancer as of of enabler result chronic agents gallbladders a develop organs in (Chapter inflammation, several infectious or malignancy are suspected role. play derivatives a Carcinogenic to also of acids bile is also cholangitis Primary a risk factor. sclerosing

MORPHOLOGYCarcinomasofthegallbladdershowtwopatternsofgrowth:infiltrating andexophytic. Theinfiltratingpatternismorecommonandusuallyappearsasapoorlydefinedareaofdiffusewallthickeningandinduration.Theexophyticpatterngrowsintothelumenasanirregular,cauliflowermass,butatthesametimeinvadestheunderlyingwall(

Fig.16.42 ).Mostcarcinomasofthegallbladderareadenocarcinomas.About5%aresquamouscellcarcinomasorhaveadenosquamousdifferentiation.

of gallbladder of Preoperative is the fewer of the than diagnosis rule, 20% than patients. rather the carcinoma in exception occurring abdominal associated and cholelithiasis: indistinguishable Presenting and those are vomiting. anorexia, typically with insidious jaundice, symptoms nausea from pain, the is no of the There diagnosis. bladder advanced treatment cancer gall to of time due satisfactory stage at at is that a surgery. enough 10% curative stage early diagnosed Only are attempt to

SUMMARYGALLBLADDERDISEASES•Gallbladderdiseasesincludecholelithiasisandacuteandchroniccholecystitis,andgallbladdercancer.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ABABFig. Gallbladderadenocarcinoma.(A)Theopenedgallbladdercon-tainsalarge,exophytictumorthatvirtuallyfillsthelumen. 16.42 (B)Microscopically,thetumorhasthesameappearanceasthatofintrahepaticcholangiocarcinoma.

GallstoneformationisacommonconditioninWesterncountries.Thegreatmajorityofthegallstonesarecholesterolstones.PigmentedstonescontainingbilirubinandcalciumaremostcommoninAsiancountries,duetothehigherincidenceofchronichemolyticdisordersandliverflukeinfestationsintheselocales.

Riskfactorsforthedevelopmentofcholesterolstonesareadvancingage,femalegender,estrogenuse,obesity,andheredity.

Cholecystitisalmostalwaysoccursinassociationwithcholelithiasis,althoughinabout10%ofcasesitoccursintheabsenceofgallstones.

Acutecalculouscholecystitisisthemostcommonreasonforemergencycholecystectomy.

Gallbladdercancerisalmostalwaysassociatedwithgallstones.Becauseoftheadvancedstageatdiagnosis,ithasaverypoorprognosis.

Repair of Mechanisms Liver and Injury

Hepatology Ductular diversity livers: at Gouw in human ND: 54:2011, reactions interface, Theise the ASW, 1853. Clouston AD, liver diseases, of that reactions, stem of [A response mechanisms the livers and all neoplasia.] review human ductular in of fibrogenesis, regeneration, to related cell are

P, fibrosis and Front basis cancer, 2013. hepatic 5:217, of Cellular and role (Schol Biosci in SL: Kocabayoglu inflammation its Friedman Ed) inflammatory, the cells disease is stellate cells what fibrosing, of liver [Interweaves with about and neoplastic and processes.] known hepatic other myofibroblastic

and Acute-on-Chronic Liver Failure Chronic, Acute,

J: failure, 369:2525, New W, Bernal Wendon Med Acute liver Engl J 2013. review.] clinical excellent [An

Seijo S, Expert 2013. in 7:141, E, Rev liver Assessing portal A, Reverter et diseases, Gastroenterol al: Berzigotti Hepatol hypertension [Evolving for definitions portal hypertension.] methodologies evaluating and

16:301, Clin Poordad F: Khungar Hepatic encephalopathy, Dis Liver V, 2012. most overview forms failure.] sequelae of of good [A of liver one the of ominous the all

2016. the C, and biopsy liver aetiology implications of progression, et Quaglia Histopathology for al: regression, A, Alves disease: remodelling Balabaud liver of parenchymal 68:953, Role in interpretation, VA, pathologic liver general acute and diseases. different and [A of stages and comparing clinical contrasting advanced chronic review variants ].

Choudhary 2016. et a A, M, 4:131, Hepatol comprehensive Yoon Acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity: J E, Transl Babar al: Clin update,

Chung RT, chronic Curing hepatitis arc triumph, C—the New TF: Med 370:1576, Engl Baumert of 2014. medical J and cured.] how be [An why can excellent C hepatitis perspective on

HLY, Chan A: Trepo Hepatitis Lancet 2014. Lok B C, 384:2053, infection, [A B evolving nature continually the of prevent and at thorough treat look hepatitis and to our it.] attempts

improve 2012. conference JW, single-topic on Hepatology a on Ward and Lok DL: Thomas AS, Report treatment,” viral 55:307, of to screening effectiveness hepatitis—strategies “Chronic viral to overview hepatitis management.] the and aspects and pathology of of [An relationship course disease all of chronic

KD: cirrhosis, Primary Lancet EJ, Lindor Ali AH, 386:1565, 2015. biliary Carey is classic latest remain origins disease obscure—the [A understood hypothesized.] what or whose in liver

Eng 2016. J NF: 375:1161, sclerosing cholangitis, Med KN, N Primary LaRusso Lazaridis comprehensive this of of disease.] [A review all aspects

Vergani MP, J Manns 62:S100, D: Lohse 2015, hepatitis—update 2015. Hepatol Autoimmune AW, approaches.] treatment pathogenesis, diagnosis, of and review [A

liver alcoholic Crawford Dis Histologic JM: in findings Clin disease, Liver 16:699, 2012. thorough look the that liver produce and morphologic at mechanisms them.] [A underlying disease alcoholic in the changes

Semin liver DE: 2009. drug-induced injury, Liver The of 29:364, pathology Dis Kleiner

of mechanisms Rev liver injury Nat 12:231, Gastroenterol Mathurin 2015. disease: treatment, Louvet Hepatol A, targeted and Alcoholic P: of progression pathways discussion possible interventions.] and [A of disease

spectrum, Rev Pathol T, liver and Hardy Oakley Anstee Annu QM, 2016. Nonalcoholic et al: disease Pathogenesis disease: 11:451, fatty F, NAFLD pathogenesis.] comprehensive of [A discussion

A: hemochromatosis: Hereditary 139:393, and Pietrangelo 2010. diagnosis, Gastroenterology treatment, pathogenesis, comprehensive review.] [A http://ebooksmedicine.net

Schilsky Dis and pathogenesis M: clinical Wilson in 2011. disease: and treatment, Rosencrantz Liver 31:245, considerations diagnosis Semin R, still [A basic of translational of features and review the current disease.]

Hepatology al: ME, PBC: Gish et to 2015. “cholangitis”, RG, “cirrhosis” 62:1620, From for Gershwin Beuers nomenclature U, Changing to their liver of experts needs and in change made the by [A response nomenclature patients disease advocates.] in

Gastroenterology liver and approaches, GM, Gershwin EJ, therapeutic disease cholestatic Pathogenesis Heathcote 139:1481, 2010. of ME: Hirschfield the most [A of overview common thorough liver features of disease.]

a reflections Hepatology physician-scientist, Paumgartner disease: Biliary 51:1095, G: physiology 2010. of and on work slowly, exert impact an over [How bench sometimes, to decades.] comes top medicine, clinical

new markers, hepatocellular of immunohistochemical resected P, Balabaud Dis the using Cubel 31:91, 2011. nodules Revisiting pathology G, benign Liver Semin Bioulac-Sage C: the subclassifications responsible the molecular new largely [From hepatocellular team adenomas.] of for

Tumours Classification 2010, Switzerland, Bosman of of R, F, F, System, WHO Hruban Geneva, editors: ed WHO 4, Press. the Digestive Carneiro tumors and digestive and biliary rest the [The of of current for the bible liver the tract.] tree

J: carcinoma, A, JM, 379:1245, Forner Bruix Llovet 2012. Hepatocellular Lancet pathologic, [Clinical, radiologic, perspectives together.] and all oncologic woven

2014. GJ: Lancet 383:2168, N, Gores Razumilava Cholangiocarcinoma, [Update pathogenesis on features.] and clinical

T, Hepatol cancer 2014. Nat 11:340, genomes, of Gastroenterol Rev liver H: Shibata Exploration Aburatani cancer prism pathogenesis analysis through genomes.] hepatocellular of carcinoma seen [A of the review studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

organ the to so-called The transversely of loop” the duodenum the hilum a extending “C spleen. oriented pancreas of from retroperitoneal the is organ into anatomic pancreas ligaments body, to the tail. and have adjacent does a serve subdivisions, the and not head, demarcate well-defined vessels Although

two really packaged The pancreas is into organs one. functions, source up in pancreas islets enzymes exocrine major that the for bulk are digestion. scattered this the Langerhans critical The organ makes a portion and of of the is that essential of endocrine serve mortality. affecting pancreas can the of the morbidity be and source Diseases significant retroperitoneal of to requires associated suspicion. dysfunction the vague the allow or undiagnosed extended generally of degree for pancreatic with disorders many and progress with signs pancreatic recognition pancreas of time; and symptoms a portion of injury of thus, nature location Unfortunately, the periods its high of diseases exocrine the

complex gets the pancreas pankreas, Greek name The lobulated meaning “all from a its organ. flesh,” is and of constitutes somatostatin. about the only clusters, 1 2% islets and and cells endocrine composed cell the is million secrete glucagon, 1% to insulin, The pancreas Langerhans; these portion of of significant in in these 20 discussed and and Chapter are pancreas are disorders endocrine diabetes detail most the neoplasms; further here. discussed not The are of mellitus

ducts the ductules pancreas that and convey to acinar of and duodenum. is exocrine cells their secretions the composed The The digestive that cells for made in inactive pro-enzymes stored are mostly of as enzymes, synthesis which are responsible the are granules. zymogen acinar When

editions acknowledged. this chapter those are of of book authored this contributions previous gratefully in who The

to contents into release membrane the the with cells acinar stimulated are central and lumen. their apical secrete, acinar the fuse granules plasma transported These anastomosing of the duodenum are ducts. through a series secretions to

mucin. participants also secretion: fluid, ducts larger the lining cells lining that smaller line cells pancreatic ductules the the produce ducts cells in columnar active secrete the are The epithelial bicarbonate-rich cuboidal while The transmembrane biochemical secretions. The this epithelial and express of content conductance also aberrant of (CFTR); ducts regulator of function protein viscosity cells fibrosis pancreatic affects the the cystic membrane the of 7). fundamental disease (Chapter cystic pancreatic a role CFTR the pathophysiology fibrosis in in has with individuals

of be in catastrophic later, a As can event. autodigestion discussed (e.g., pancreatitis) pancreas the have of phenomenon: this minimize evolved A of to occurrence for risk number mechanisms the “fail-safe”

of sequestered as earlier. enzymes are A as synthesized granules, pancreatic mentioned zymogen majority pro-enzymes in and membrane-bound inactive

to trypsin by of of called pro-enzymes trypsinogen Activation (also requires conversion duodenal enterokinase). enteropeptidase

are ductal acinar inhibitor) known cells. as secreted inhibitors Trypsin SPINK1, by pancreatic (e.g., also trypsin and secretory also

itself, local inactivates a limit negative a trypsin. on cleaves Trypsin that normally puts mechanism and levels feedback activated of

Acinar as trypsin, A2. and are such remarkably chymotrypsin, resistant phospholipase action activated cells enzymes of the to

and Diseases acute neoplasms. and congenital include fibrosis, exocrine chronic of anomalies, the pancreatitis, cystic pancreas detail discussed pathologic in this chapter. the processes 7; in other fibrosis is discussed are Cystic in Chapter

http://ebooksmedicine.net

this process give subtle in variations ventral rise anatomy. to and process deviations congenital dorsal pancreatic primordia; development in is frequently of a complex involving fusion Pancreatic to can disease, the anatomy) these in (especially do endoscopist ductal While clinical surgeon. of challenges present not and cause the variants most recognize resulting anatomy to failure in during example, of inadvertent a result in For idiosyncratic pancreatic surgery, duct pancreatitis. severing could

additional invariably) associated be rarely, incompatible a (but malformations pancreas Very condition totally are life. usually severe the not that absent, with with may mutations for is transcription of homeobox normal and associated gene homeodomain pancreatic been germline 1 duodenal (PDX1) have a this pancreatic agenesis. factor Pancreatic with critical development,

is the of incidence the congenital pancreas, Pancreas 10%. 3% of most to common an with anomaly divisum (the main individuals, to of of most accessory papilla. papilla duct bile and into just duct proximal Vater, drains joins In of duct minor the duct (the pancreatic a the separate duodenum the duct the through common pancreatic Wirsung) Santorini) the duct the is pancreatic failure Pancreas and the systems caused primordia. ventral fetal of divisum of fusion dorsal a of by drains the the duodenum the of primordium) through dorsal papilla. the pancreas into minor the pancreatic small-caliber a by result, bulk (formed As portion head of Vater. through a the The the individuals papilla divisum the small of of with in duct of gland drains Wirsung only individuals More 95% are of than asymptomatic. remaining through acute of the secretions or possibly The develop chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic inadequate to drainage 5% related papilla. minor

a tissue in a Annular ring relatively encircles of pancreas which pancreatic of pancreatic the fusion completely uncommon duodenum. variant is with symptoms distention It and gastric such duodenal can obstruction as of manifest and signs vomiting.

the in population; occurs tissue about followed 2% and sites and duodenum, favored pancreatic the ectopic, or Aberrantly of are jejunum, the diverticulum, by situated, Meckel ileum. stomach pancreatic to composed acini centimeters diameter) occasional located millimeters are they typically from the of rests islets. with small submucosa; These are in (ranging are normal and in embryologic and cause mucosal may become usually or—rarely—can ectopic to inflamed, pain, pancreas incidental bleeding. leading Though asymptomatic, arise (Chapter pancreatic ectopic in neuroendocrine 2% Approximately tumors of tissue. 20) pancreatic

anomalous result from of development the ducts. pancreatic Congenital cysts disease, polycystic (Chapter contain all kidneys, In pancreas 14). cysts liver, may and the and range 5 microscopic cm generally cysts in to are unilocular Congenital diameter. from in by capsule. uniform or lined are and enclosed cuboidal flattened either are epithelium a thin, fibrous They cystic from neoplasms, of later). mucinous point important benign fluid—an contain (discussed often These distinction serous pancreatic which cysts clear are

pancreas chronic and disorders forms. divided of acute the are into Inflammatory underlying normal the acute is removed. to return cause can inflammation In function pancreatitis, of if pancreatitis chronic of irreversible pancreas. exocrine By causes contrast, destruction

focal inflammatory hemorrhagic fat is disorder edema from to pancreatitis Acute a necrosis. that severity, varies widespread in reversible necrosis and Western common an 10 the 100,000 to with relatively annual 20 This incidence is world. of condition, a people per in

pancreatitis through to the intake. alcohol the enzymes the impaction States cause United acute pancreatitis most of bile ampulla by common of gallstones excessive common of of (“gallstone within pancreatic the The is the pancreatitis”); secondary is flow Vater closely duct, in this impeding followed for remaining by and cases, account of the caused Overall, of than multitude factors pancreatitis ( alcoholism a greater 80% with acute gallstones

17.1 ). Table the These include following:

or Clonorchis biliary lumbricoides particularly “sludge,” (e.g., of the and other pancreatic ducts or periampullary pancreatic due pancreas Ascaris to obstruction parasites, neoplasms, sinensis) divisum, Non–gallstone-related cancer

use estrogens, in clinical diuretics, anti-convulsants, than Medications agents, more others thiazide chemotherapeutic and 85 cancer including

pancreatic or exocrine cells coxsackievirus, infect can directly mumps which virus with Infections

Metabolic hypertriglyceridemia, hyperparathyroidism, states including disorders, and other hypercalcemic http://ebooksmedicine.net

Table Etiologic Factors Acute in 17.1 Pancreatitis

*MostcommoncausesintheUnitedStates. HyperlipoproteinemiaHypercalcemiaDrugs(e.g.,azathioprine)

due embolism, to vasculitis, or Ischemia vascular shock thrombosis,

surgery force Trauma, iatrogenic both or endoscopy and blunt during

Germline genes involving enzymes or mutations inhibitors. pancreatic encoding their is usually childhood. For characterized by of with hereditary example, severe 80% rare attacks is pancreatitis, beginning autosomal pancreatitis penetrance dominant recurrent disease that a in by trypsin. mutations of is pancreatic PRSS1 gene, trypsinogen, the It which proenzyme encodes caused in the negative site feedback and trypsin inactivates abrogating mutations the mechanism. important an which itself, pathogenic The cleaves through alter but many to the defect for activation. their leads This trypsin, hyperactivation of require of digestive that the only trypsin other to also hyperactivation cleavage not enzymes result As this protease pancreas prone unbridled of to autodigestion the activity, a is injury. and pancreatitis. less as SPINK1 hereditary genes encode with inhibitors commonly associated in such are mutations Loss-of-function protease that

although (idiopathic of pancreatitis), have of suggests many that of have genetic cases 20% to underlying cause no note, an may body identifiable basis. 10% evidence a growing acute Of pancreatitis example, of these a pancreas of pancreatitis patients the (Chapter has symptoms line so-called underlying mutations gene subset the germ restricted 7). predominantly CFTR idiopathic For to with

to caused appears the pancreatic autodigestion inappropriately be enzymes. by activated Acute by pancreatitis of pancreas once As converting of forms enzymes their trypsin other activated discussed zymogen forms. active earlier, of to capable is pancreatic (e.g., pancreas the proenzymes of and can activation these inflammation. Premature phospholipases the leading and trypsin substance of elastases), within unleash to tissue injury factor its by sets Trypsin XII the converts complement also of form, 4). (Hageman systems activation kinin prekallikrein to factor), sparking system, thus and, activated and clotting also (Chapter motion in the activation the may Three initial incite pathways lead enzyme to that ( pancreatitis acute can

Fig.

17.1

duct obstruction. Pancreatic of or and biliary mass compression sludge, blocks system interstitial by the pressure, ductal a enzyme-rich a of accumulation of allows extrinsic Impaction increases fluid. ductal flow, or gallstone intraductal an result. Since in necrosis may is active lipase fat local form, secreted an myofibroblasts, microvasculature. and periacinar and pro-inflammatory interstitial then promote that through edema inflammation a Injured local leaky leukocytes cytokines tissues, release ischemic Edema and compromises to injury further acinar blood flow, cells. local insufficiency causing vascular

acinar Primary injury. cell (e.g., direct the by into in pancreatitis to trauma mumps), mechanism infections pathogenic ischemia, acute pancreas. and caused viral This drugs, play comes

transport cells. Defective intracellular acinar of proenzymes within transported and synthesis zymogen for granules normal lysosomes discrete destined acinar digestive in cells, are (and reticulum. in enzymes In endoplasmic eventually extracellular for release) pathways intended the after enzymes hydrolytic in pancreatic some metabolic become hydrolases packaged animal models at However, and injury, together. of lysosomal least proenzymes local of rupture of proenzyme phospholipases), release in activated activation, enzymes. results and This lysosomal (action acute not role is of pancreatitis in mechanism The this human clear.

may by pancreatitis cause consumption mechanisms. several Alcohol regulating exocrine papilla muscle sphincter the pancreatic Vater). increases Oddi secretion juice (the flow of pancreatic of transiently contraction and Alcohol of the of through on acinar damage oxidative acinar of which induction cells, stress (discussed has in cells, direct membrane later). Alcohol to including effects also toxic leads plugs the pancreatic the to protein results fluid, which ingestion of small Finally, deposition inspissated secretion in alcohol leads obstruction chronic of pancreatic and of ducts. protein-rich

of proteolytic of acute edema, fat reaction, blood lar (4) leading (2) necrosis by parenchyma, an hemorrhage. of destruction vessels lipases, leakage (3) inflammatory pancreatic and (5) to causing interstitial destruction

http://ebooksmedicine.net

INTRACELLULAR ACINAR DEFECTIVE TRANSPORT CAUSES: DUCT OBSTRUCTION INJURY CELL

MECHANISMS:

LESIONS:

of and intracellular hydrolases lysosomal proenzymes Release

enzymes (intracellular of (lipase, Activation phospholipase) (proteases) or extracellular)

Delivery lysosomal proenzymes compartment of to

of Intracellular activation enzymes

Proposedpathogenesisofacutepancreatitis. Fig.17.1

necrosisinthepancreasandperipancreaticfat( Inmildforms,thereisinterstitialedemaandfocalareasoffat

thatprecipitateinsitu. ).Fat Fig.17.2A necrosis cells; destruction results from the fat releasedfattyacidscombinewithcalciumtoforminsolublesalts enzymatic of

ofLangerhans,andbloodvessels.Macroscopically,thepancreas areasinterspersedwith Inmoresevereforms,suchasacute exhibits foci of pancreatitis,thedamagealsoinvolvesacinarandductalcells,theislets necrosis( necrotizing red-blackhemorrhagic yellow-white,chalkyfat

Fig.17.2B extensive mesentery,andevenoutsidetheabdominalcavity(e.g.,insubcutaneousfat).Inmostcases,theperitoneumcontainsaserous, parenchymal canoccurinextrapancreaticfat,includingtheomentumandbowel ).Fatnecrosisalso thegland. hemorrhagic slightlyturbid,brown-tingedfluidwithglobulesoffat(derivedfrom pancreatitis, isaccompaniedbydiffusehemorrhagewithinthesubstanceof enzymaticallydigestedadiposetissue).Inthemostsevereform, necrosis

the and Abdominal severe is severity mild to from pain pancreatitis.Its of acute manifestation varies incapacitating. uncomfortable and cardinal Acute of the plasma amylase presence elevated pain. of primarily pancreatitis other of is abdominal exclusion and causes lipase of and the by levels diagnosed cases, disease. pancreatitis acute is 80% develop 20% the self-limiting; and In remaining mild severe of

of is the individuals Full-blown pain, and an sounds. order.Affected the onset emergency bowel experience pancreatitis “acute abdomen” guarding, of acute a the of first with ominous sudden usually calamitous absence medical causes from constant, back; to upper peptic pain is biliary as occlusion other must Characteristically, such of the infarction of with perforated differentiated the be the rupture, of with ulcer, mesenteric acute intense and colic, vessels referred it cholecystitis and bowel. pain

of pancreatitis digestive systemic attributable enzymes manifestations to release acute severe The of are and

Fig. Acutepancreatitis. 17.2 (A)Themicroscopicfieldshowsaregionoffatnecrosis(right) andfocalpancreaticparenchymalnecrosis(center). left). (B)Thepancreashasbeensectionedlongitudinallytorevealdarkareasofhemorrhageinthepancreaticsubstanceandafocalareaofpalefatnecrosisintheperipancreaticfat(upper

inflammatory the of explosive response. activation The distress (Chapter diffuse coagulation leukocytosis, damage) 12), reveal disseminated diffuse and alveolar to syndrome necrosis. (due may clinical 13), fat intravascular initial acute evaluation (Chapter respiratory 14). acute (shock) result vascular tubular breakdown gastrointestinal a as permeability of ensue and increased can flora rapidly bloodstream), microvascular resultant (Chapter barriers between by to endotoxemia due and the hypovolemia, compounded and necrosis collapse (from renal the of Peripheral failure

amylase serum lipase hours) 24 rising during (within 72–96 levels. Laboratory first elevated include followed hours, markedly serum by the findings from poor can sign. necrosis; fat is it of prognostic result precipitation Hypocalcemia a if areas calcium of in persistent, be computed pancreas can visualized (MRI). The inflamed resonance or tomography by (CT) magnetic enlarged imaging

by restriction management and blood oral pancreatitis “resting” therapy pain) acute maintaining food fluids. total (e.g., pancreas crux of of the of and supportive The and alleviating is pressure the the further of organisms from In alimentary of complicating to 60% pancreatitis, the gram-negative debris tract, infected, course. necrotizing by the acute cases 40% necrotic becomes clinical usually acute eventually are of and failure pancreatitis most ominous illness; shock the during some renal distress complications. die acute recover, respiratory individuals 5% acute from week Although with first syndrome or pancreatic pseudocysts. sequelae In patients, “abscesses” include infected or sterile pancreatic surviving

common pancreatitis) in a pancreatic pseudocyst. A alcoholic is particular, of (and sequela pancreatitis acute pseudo). areas necrotic epithelial walled of lining lacking form the (hence cystic become designation by tissue off tissue pancreatic a fibrous to an space, Liquefied a diagnostic. assessment cyst and be can rich the aspirate contents The cyst enzymes, laboratory of in are pancreatic pancreatic cysts. 75% all Pseudocysts approximately account for of spontaneously larger secondarily can perforate infected, even pseudocysts adjacent become or and pseudocysts many While they compress into resolve, can structures.

).Theycanrangeindiameterfrom2cmto30cm.Sincepseudocystsformbywallingoffareasofhemorrhagicfatnecrosis,theytypicallyarecomposedofnecroticdebrisencasedbywallsofgranulationtissueandfibroblastslackinganepitheliallining(see Fig.17.3A

Fig.17.3B ).Iftheygetinfected,apancreaticabscessisformed.

loss pancreas, of is followed leads that exocrine long-standing characterized of by by of destruction Chronic the inflammation to eventually islets the pancreatitis irreversible Langerhans. Of over pancreatitis note, time of of regardless can etiology chronic evolve acute pancreatitis. bouts into recurrent ranges between the of pancreatitis to U.S. population. but probably of chronic determine The is and 0.04% prevalence 5% difficult

most By abuse. chronic is long-term cause pancreatitis of common far alcohol the patients bulk Middle-aged constitute men of etiologic the this group. in pancreatitis causes include of following: common chronic Less the

Obstruction. Duct duct pancreatic pseudocysts, divisum. pancreas by calculi, Long-standing e.g., of or obstruction neoplasms,

Asia, having of with pancreatitis, heterogeneous a disorder a Africa and Tropical seen a characterized hereditary in basis. cases poorly subset

Hereditary in the pancreatitis (PRRS1), the or pancreatic SPINK1 trypsinogen mutations gene (see to encoding gene inhibitor due trypsin a

Table 17.1

mutations. Chronic associated pancreatitis with CFTR in discussed pancreatitis chronic The Chapter in of pathophysiology in 7. is fibrosis detail cystic

is associated with of http://ebooksmedicine.net pancreatitis the distinct Autoimmune pathogenically a that form pancreatitis chronic is

Fig. 17.3 Pancreaticpseudocyst.(A)Cross-sectionrevealingapoorlydefinedcystwithanecroticbrownishwall. (B)Histologically,thecystlacksanepithelialliningandinsteadislinedbyfibrinandgranulationtissue,withtypicalchangesofchronicinflammation.

plasma pancreas. IgG4-secreting presence the cells of in multiple IgGrelated of which Autoimmune disease pancreatitis tissues. may is 5), involve manifestation one (Chapter important to therapy. It because recognize responds to steroid it is

pancreatitis chronic recognizable predisposing As factors. with have many individuals no as of 40% these cases however, important are are acute inherited for with genes, “idiopathic” pancreatic of in a normal associated function. growing CFTR, exocrine number such As pancreatitis, mutations as that with susceptibility also identified enzymes, A1 (CPA1) polymorphisms may have including to studies chronic increased that confer (CEL), genes exocrine carboxypeptidase in encoding pancreatic pancreatitis. lipase Recent and

are is not pancreatitis the several hypotheses proposed: chronic defined, of Although well pathogenesis

concretions. obstruction Ductal by proteins ductal plugs. in of the pancreatic (e.g., concentration of and alcohol) Many these chronic increase form protein the can inciting pancreatitis secretions, agents

Toxic-metabolic. metabolites, can accumulation, loss, fibrosis. cell eventually alcohol effect on direct Toxins, acinar toxic exert its including and parenchymal a acinar lipid cells, leading to and

Oxidative stress. stress generate chemokines leading Alcohol-induced radicals may to inflammatory subsequent in free of expression (Chapter 2), like membrane and cells, acinar oxidative which recruits interleukin-8 cells. (IL-8), damage fibrosis. fusion zymogen also promotes granules stress Oxidative resulting and cell acinar the and lysosomes with inflammation, necrosis, of

mutations due Inappropriate activation affecting earlier. enzymes pancreatic mentioned genes of to

pancreatitis factor-β growth platelet-derived growth acute such secreted by factor, (TGF-β), variety cells In to and factor, connective cytokines, as transforming in contrast growth macrophages. tissue of profibrogenic immune a pancreatitis, as infiltrating are chronic such activation rise myofibroblasts deposit give of which induce fibrosis. cells”), cytokines (“pancreatic the collagen and periacinar and proliferation stellate These to

variable fibrosis, size and the acini, thereisarelativesparingoftheisletsofLangerhansinitially( MORPHOLOGYChronicpancreatitisischaracterizedbyparenchymal reduced dilation of pancreatic and ducts; of number

loss Fig.17.4A ).Acinar isaconstantfeature,usuallywithachronicinflammatoryinfiltratearoundremaininglobulesandducts.Theductalepitheliummaybeatrophiedorhyperplasticorexhibitsquamousmetaplasia,andductalconcretionsmaybenoted(

Fig.17.4B ).TheremainingisletsofLangerhansbecomeembeddedinthesclerotictissueandmayfuseandappearenlarged;eventuallytheyalsodisappear.Ongrossevaluation,theglandishard,sometimeswithextremelydilatedductsandvisiblecalcifiedconcretions.

pancreatitis). Autoimmunepancreatitis(AIP)isadistinctformofchronicpancreatitisthatischaracterizedbystrikinginfiltrationofthepancreasbylymphocytesandplasmacells,manyofwhicharepositiveforIgG4,accompaniedbya“swirling”fibrosisandvenulitis(lymphoplasmacytic sclerosing

abdominal and it insufficiency indigestion, repeated a recurrent back as jaundice, may mellitus consequence entirely develop until pancreatic vague (the diabetes of persistent destruction). or as latter Chronic bouts pancreatitis and or silent of or pain, manifests be islet or precipitated demand by or alcohol the drugs be tone other opiates Oddi. Attacks of on overeating that secretions), sphincter of the (which pancreatic increases can abuse, muscle increase

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 17.4 Chronicpancreatitis. andducts(right), withasprinklingofchronicinflammatorycellsandacinartissue. (A)Extensivefibrosisandatrophyhaveleftonlyresidualislets(left) (B)Ahigher-powerviewdemonstratingdilatedductswithinspissatedeosinophilicconcretionsinapatientwithalcoholicchronicpancreatitis.

pancreatitis The degree chronic clinical of diagnosis high suspicion. requires of a may there and pain, attack elevations serum amylase. be modest an During abdominal of fever of mild acinar that destruction elevations however, absent. enzyme so end-stage are disease, In advanced may be elevated levels alkaline Gallstone-induced obstruction may serum of manifest jaundice phosphatase. or as CT is helpful or very pancreas ultrasonography. by visualization A within calcifications of finding the and by insufficiency to Weight loss malabsorption also edema can disease. from point pancreatic the exocrine hypoalbuminemic caused

not with rate outlook life-threatening, usually a chronic the Although pancreatitis 20 is poor, mortality acutely long-term is years. to 25 over 50% chronic most pancreatitis sequelae of vitamins (Chapter with deficiency insufficiency longterm malabsorption of 8). The enzymes, of exocrine is consequent and pancreatic common fat-soluble (Chapter endocrine diabetes with dysfunction, and loss predates islets of insufficiency mellitus can severe develop patients 20). typically Exocrine other In patients, pain picture. severe the may dominate clinical chronic (discussed develop about pseudocysts earlier) in 10% patients. Pancreatic of The long-term pancreatic chronic most is of feared complication pancreatitis cancer. is malignant with risk adult-onset more at 5% years. The cancer patients in disease of no than 20 developing transformation for modest, 40% pancreatic mutations, childhood, confers pancreatitis PRSS1 risk secondary begins as a in such pancreatitis for that chronic lifetime cancer. In to to hereditary contrast, 55% unusual with undergo is to mutations patients pancreatectomy. for It prophylactic PRSS1 not

•Acute ischaracterizedbyinflammationandreversibleparenchymaldamagethatrangesfromfocaledemaandfatnecrosistowidespreadparenchymalnecrosisandhemorrhage;theclinicalpresentationvarieswidely,frommildabdominalpaintorapidlyfatalvascularcollapse. pancreatitis

ischaracterizedbyirreversibleparenchymaldamageandscarformation;clinicalpresentationsincludechronicmalabsorption(duetopancreaticexocrineinsufficiency)anddiabetesmellitus(duetoisletcellloss). Chronic pancreatitis

obstruction alcohol andlong-term abuse arethemostcommoncausesinbothforms.Inappropriateactivationofpancreaticdigestiveenzymes(duetomutationsingenesencodingtrypsinogenortrypsininhibitors)andprimaryacinarinjury(duetotoxins,infections,ischemia,ortrauma)alsocausepancreatitis. Bothentitiessharesimilarpathogenicmechanisms,andindeedrecurrentacutepancreatitiscanresultinchronicpancreatitis.Ductal

can or solid. cystic Pancreatic exocrine neoplasms be all are the most benign, lethal malignancies. of tumors are among Some while others

Cystic tumors to invasive, range potentially neoplasms are diverse lethal, cancers. that benign from cysts harmless of pancreatic 15% are all pancreatic less Approximately neoplastic; of these 5% all constitute than neoplasms. cysts 5% to others, Some malignant. (e.g., can such mucinous cystadenoma); neoplasms, are always benign these be of benign as almost cystic or serous

of Serous straw-colored containing all are neoplasms; for 25% clear, cystic account approximately composed cells cystadenomas cuboidal they glycogen-rich pancreatic of surrounding fluid small cysts (

Fig. 17.5 ). decade female-to-male of in ratio life seventh such with tumors nonspecific as the symptoms manifest pain; is 2:1. typically the abdominal The curative the of resection is uniformly almost in patients. tumors vast and These majority surgical are benign, cystadenomas is mutations (VHL) von Hippel-Lindau loss tumor Most suppressor hypoxia-inducible will negative factor of carry recall which function you gene, alpha of of (Chapter the regulator (HIF-1-alpha) 6). a 1 serous somatic

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Serouscystadenoma.(A)Cross-sectionthroughaserouscystad-enoma.Onlyathinrimofnormalpancreaticparenchymaremains.Thecystsarerelativelysmallandcontainclear,straw-coloredfluid. 17.5 (B)Thecystsarelinedbycuboidalepitheliumwithoutatypia.

slow-growing and the of to or body to cystic painless, cystic neoplasms in pancreas, manifest in masses. tumors, 95% as close contrast In tail serous usually mucinous women, the of arise epithelium by ( with columnar of thick, with The cystic densely are the tenacious ovary lined the stroma a associated mucin, resembling mucinous filled and cellular that cysts an spaces are

Fig. 17.6 ). moderate, cystic or and the mucinous cytologic dysplasia. in low-grade, lining, Based are as degree epithelial noninvasive severe neoplasms classified of the atypia architectural harboring on serous adenocarcinoma, associated tumors. with important cysts from one-third invasive to can another be the these an difference Up of even cysts setting Distal in typically pancreatectomy curative, of is dysplasia. severe mucinous the noninvasive for

intraductal neoplasms papillary more in In women neoplasms, than frequently mucinous with cystic head occur the in frequently pancreas. and contrast mucinous men (IPMNs) the involve more of seen the branch lack or IPMNs cystic neoplasms in its ducts, pancre-atic cellular ducts, the mucinous one arise main of stroma and ( major in

Fig.

17.7 ). with neoplasms, grades the and of lesions a IPMNs cystic various mucinous invasive adenocarcinoma. dysplasia, epithelia of associated is As noninvasive with harbor subset of of which adenocarcinomas pancreas, an abundant mucin extracellular the In malignant particular, always with nearly associated are transformation production, represent IPMN. carcinomas “colloid” of which encodes IPMNs GNAS 20q13, (Chapter subunit alpha Gs stimulatory two-thirds the of Up to G-protein, a 20). on of of chromosome harbor oncogenic mutations predicted G-protein is intracellular cascade activation this in proliferation. result to an of that Constitutive cell promotes

Fig. 17.6 Mucinouscysticneoplasm.(A)Cross-sectionthroughamucinousmultiloculatedcystinthetailofthepancreas.Thecystsarelargeandfilledwithtenaciousmucin. (B)Thecystsarelinedbycolumnarmucinousepithe-lium,withadenselycellular“ovarian”stroma.

preceded cancer) pancreatic cancers. lung deaths States, the the in referred United adenocarcinoma of only and cause by of commonly as Infiltrating ductal to the colon pancreas is third (more leading cancer mortality of of killers near the the other it malignancies, common because carcinoma pancreatic substantially is is Although than it two one of the highest top rates. less the carries list period and Americans in rate 5-year to in diagnosed short all with after 8%. the pancreatic a cancer dismal were die Close 2015, diagnosis; is virtually will survival a 49,000

http://ebooksmedicine.net

pancreatic all acquired Like cancer in cancers, as a inherited mutations arises and cancer-associated consequence of

Fig. the the showing of 17.7 duct. main papillary a neoplasm. pancreas pancreatic (A) Cross-section distending Intraductal mucinous papillary head neoplasm prominent through the the neoplasm involves main (B) duct smaller pancreatic The ducts (left) ductules and is mucinous the (right). down extending papillary into and

genes. noninvasive there that invasive cancer nonneoplastic, progressive in to of to epithelium pancreatic from accumulation progression to In changes carcinoma ( multi-step genetic seen is pattern it colon precursor 6), (Chapter the proceeds as a lesions, of analogous a in

Fig. 17.8 ). intraepithelial lesions small pancreatic ductules, progress most are While papillary neoplasias cancer mucinous pancreatic and (PanINs). and can cystic called adenocarcinoma, intraductal mucinous and neoplasms ducts arise antecedent neoplasms to the invasive both common in of microscopic are precursor of includes of to two that a genetic infiltrating frank observations carcinomas alterations. adjacent these malignancy PanINs to lesions Evidence the favor the number relationship found of in often the and share contribute epithelial PanINs show hallmarks. cells predisposing shortening, lesions to chromosomal pathogenic the spectrum abnormalities cancer to the in full these that acquisition telomere dramatic Moreover, potentially may of of

mutations most that cancer The sequencing by neoplasm: SMAD4,andTP53: in genome commonly genes affected has this of recent confirmed four p16, the KRAS, CDKN2A/ pancreatic somatic are

cancer; by greater KRAS a is activated most the it than frequently 90% of in point altered is mutation pancreatic cases. oncogene in These of that protein it the intrinsic the KRAS is constitutively mutations active. so activity impair GTPase signaling that (Chapter a In activates intracellular of pathways 6). number promote turn, carcinogenesis KRAS

in off The turned suppressor being cases. gene p16 of frequently pancreatic inactivated 95% the tumor gene cancer, most (CDKN2A) in is an role protein control; checkpoint. inactivation The in a critical has removes important p16 cell-cycle

and tumors; tumor downstream plays is it SMAD4 the a The of in important growth in in rarely codes only other role that suppressor protein inactivated an 55% factor-β gene transduction cancers pancreatic signal for receptor. of transforming

occurs to gene of 70% TP53 cancers. 50% in the tumor Inactivation pancreatic suppressor of gene Its

Fig. 17.8 for pancreatic of Progression cancer. development model the than that in mutations oncogene genes stages, while is and of shortening temporal numbers tumor mutations intermediate more development of early inactivation TP53, order. that the occurrence at PanINs. of of specific stages labels and It refer occur stages. changes, Pancreatic SMAD4, the the to of Note general at the p16 following telomere a suppressor BRCA2 accumulation late multiple the their The important at there PanIN, neoplasm. intraepithelial is a the on tumor the occurs postulated KRAS top of sequence occurs is gene stages, and suppressor inactivation in Hruban Pancreatic Mech Maitra RH: from 2008.) Annu A, (Modified cancer, Dis Rev Pathol 3:157, product, p53, as checkpoints (Chapter of both inducer an senescence and acts 6). to apoptosis or cell-cycle enforce late cancers. BRCA2 in subset is of also a pancreatic mutated

between occurring 60 years of a is and cancer Pancreatic 80 with older of adults, disease 80% cases primarily age. of the doubles influence strongest The environmental is which risk. smoking, pancreatic diabetes associated with risk increased a also Long-standing are for pancreatitis chronic cancer. mellitus and modestly entities have link a bidirectional with pancreatic cancer. two These example, the obstruction tumors for parenchyma, diabetes while pancreatitis the neoplasm. arising distal pancreatitis and of underlying Thus, cause head of subsequent may caused manifestation duct the in the pancreas by in an be chronic often fact, new-onset adult approximately of older the an pancreatic population 1% cancer. unsuspected diabetes with harbor In pancreatic are of a of inherited reported, has defects growing cancer clustering recognized pancreatic risk. now that increase number been and cancer Familial genetic heritage. seen cases line BRCA2 arising 10% ovarian Jewish For are germ in in mutations of Ashkenazi of individuals of familial example, the breast/ approximately cancer gene

entire the the involves of diffusely head remaining body, arise Approximately in 5% the of in 60% pancreatic the in the the organ. in and the 20%, cancers tail; 15% gland, neoplasm Carcinomasofthepancreasusuallyarehard,gray-white,stellate,poorlydefinedmasses(

Fig.17.9A

response). Twofeaturesarecharacteristicofpancreaticcancer:Itishighlyinvasive(even“early”invasivepancreaticcancersinvadeperipancreatictissuesextensively),anditelicitsanintensehostreactionintheformofdensefibrosis(desmoplastic

distal carcinomas duct the of asitcoursesthroughtheheadofthepancreas.In50%ofsuchcases,thereismarkeddistentionofthebiliarytree,andpatientstypicallyexhibitjaundice.Incontrast,carcinomasofthebodyandtailofthepancreasdonotimpingeonthebiliarytract.Pancreaticcancersoftenextendthroughtheretroperitonealspace,entrappingadjacentnerves(thus,accountingforthepain),andoccasionallyinvadethespleen,adrenalglands,vertebralcolumn,transversecolon,andstomach.Peripancreatic,gastric,mesenteric,omental,andportahepaticlymphnodesfrequentlyareinvolved,andtheliveroftenisenlargedwithmetastaticdeposits.Distantmetastasesmayoccur,principallytothelungsandbones. the obstruct head common pancreas bile Most the of

poorly differentiated Onmicroscopicexamination,pancreaticcarcinomausuallyisamoderately to adenocarcinoma formingabortiveglandswithmucinsecretionorcellclustersandexhibitinganaggressive,deeplyinfiltrativegrowthpattern(see

Fig.17.9B ).Densestromalfibrosisaccompaniestumorinvasion,andthereisaproclivityforperineuralinvasionwithinandbeyondtheorgan.Lymphaticinvasionalsoiscommonlyseen.

Fig. 17.9 Carcinomaofthepancreas. (A)Cross-sectionthroughtheheadofthepancreasandadjacentcommonbileductshowingbothanill-definedmassinthepancreaticsubstance(arrowheads) andthegreendiscolorationoftheductresultingfromtotalobstructionofbileflow. (B)Poorlyformedglandsarepresentinadenselyfibrotic(desmoplastic)stromawithinthepancreaticsubstance.

Lesscommonvariantsofpancreaticcancerincludeadenosquamous withfocalsquamousdifferentiationinadditiontoglandulardifferentiation;andundifferentiatedcarcinomaswithosteoclast-likegiantcellsofmonocyticlineageintermixedwithintheneoplasm. carcinomas

some silent structure. Carcinomas their other extension pancreas of the on remain until typically impinges often cancers is cure. these but symptom, point by that are usually the beyond first Pain draws soon head associated be attention jaundice intervention. cancer with timely but the it carcinoma of pancreas, enough the can in the to rarely for Obstructive Weight loss, disease. are weakness of malaise anorexia, manifestations and advanced and generalized 6). elaboration its products or the about necrotic is (Chapter and factors and 10% occurs thrombophlebitis in platelet-aggregating to attributable patients (Trousseau the Migratory from syndrome) of of tumor pro-coagulants is in of previously manifestation patients. some the new-onset stated, pancreatic diabetes cancer first As

http://ebooksmedicine.net

is The and distressingly often brief. rapidly clinical pancreatic progressive of carcinoma course than Less resectable cancers diagnosis. 20% pancreatic are of of time at the been curable, cancers. detecting for It is profound potentially there recognized biomarkers early, long capable has that need pancreatic of a (e.g., antigens markers and to many CA19-9 of screening. levels carcinoembryonic neither enzymes sensitive enough are for these serum and Although useful elevated, are specific nor antigens) be scans, high-resolution are imaging tests. as and helpful are investigation but endoscopic screening Several such cases CT suspected in cancer for techniques, not ultrasonography of practical

andSMAD4). Pancreaticcancerprobablyarisesfromnoninvasiveprecursorlesions(mostcommonly,PanINs),developingbyprogressiveaccumulationofmutationsofoncogenes(e.g.,KRAS)andtumorsuppressorgenes(e.g.,CDKN2A/p16,TP53,

Typically,theseneoplasmsareductaladenocarcinomasthatproduceanintensedesmoplasticresponse.

Mostpancreaticcancersarediagnosedatanadvancedstage,accountingforthehighmortalityrate.

Obstructivejaundiceisafeatureofcarcinomaoftheheadofthepancreas;manypatientsalsoexperiencedebilitatingpain.

Carcinomasofthetailofthepancreasareoftennotdetecteduntillateintheircourse.

Duell Andren-Sandberg et Å, of DK, cancer: summary EJ, al: Pancreatitisdiabetes-pancreatic an NIDDK-NCI workshop, Andersen

Pancreas 42:1227–1237, 2013. [A evidence relationship the state pancreatitis diabetes of cancer. complex and or that between summarizes pancreatic chronic the regarding and white current bidirectional paper described pancreatogenic diabetes also is The recently discussed.] of entity

Bailey Nones of subtypes molecular Genomic Nature analyses DK, al: K, cancer, Chang P, identify 2016. pancreatic 531:47–52, et cancer pancreatic genomic Cancer International Consortium. comprehensive of Genome profiling [A by the ].

an Ann acute Surg Determinant-based et classification Forsmark international consultation, pancreatitis al: 256:875–880, Dellinger 2012. Layer severity: EP, P, CE, of multidisciplinary opinions from international the which consensus physicians acute pancreatitis, of classification represents of countries.] severity clinical 49 system [An spanning the for

149:39–51, Gastroenterology advances Hart 2015. ST: pancreatitis, Zen autoimmune in Chari Recent Y, PA, of expert and one groups on foremost on subject.] of the [An pancreatitis up-to-date clinical autoimmune subtypes the from this review etiopathogenesis

EM, ES, diversity Brody opportunities Gastroenterology pancreatic 2016. Knudson medicine, ductal 150:48–63, for JR, and precision O’Reilly adenocarcinoma of al: et Genetic the drug in possible sequencing description abnormalities the of [An cancer next-generation revealed by of and targets.] molecular up-to-date pancreas

Pancreatic 371:1039–1049, Hong N DP, 2014. TS, Bardeesy Ryan Engl J adenocarcinoma, N: Med newly [An on outstanding cancer, for molecular targets pancreatic including clinically therapy.] update oriented emerging

for 12:359–371, acute DC: Genetics 2014. and Gastroenterol Curr Shelton Options CA, treatment options pancreatitis, Whitcomb Treat chronic recurrent and review enhance result germ pancreatitis, in mutations as recurrent that polymorphisms well pancreatitis.] recently identified risk the on that [A as for comprehensive line

for M, International pancreas, consensus 12:183– al: the IPMN Tanaka 197, guidelines of of the 2012 and MCN Pancreatology management 2012. et identify of the precursor of 2006 the and guidelines cancer diagnostic within malignancy imaging consensus pancreatic lesions how using presence criteria. to update on cystic other [An to versus require observation.] are deciding these cyst not for patients surgery used definitive, widely Although guidelines which studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

Scrotum,Testis,andEpididymis

Ureter,Bladder,andUrethra

the the located. most urethral penis orifice is are common the distal of malformations which abnormally in those Among abnormal found In anywhere shaft. is along penis the of on urethral ventral the the the hypospadias, opening aspect urinary tract This infections. resulting tract urinary for orifice in and risk obstruction sometimes is an anomalous constricted, increased as and be other births occurs with inguinal 300 male hernia Hypospadias undescended in anomalies, such 1 congenital in live testis. may and associated is epispadias, of common, In orifice the the penis. less the is abnormal which urethral dorsal on aspect

and balanoposthitis prepuce, of local of overlying Balanitis the respectively. refer penis to the and inflammation glans Candida more common and the Gardnerella, are pyogenic Among agents anaerobic bacteria, albicans, bacteria. a poor the Most smegma, in sweat, termed hygiene as of debris, which a to as consequence uncircumcised irritant. cases cells, occur accumulation epithelial and desquamated acts males, leading local of in Phimosis over cannot glans condition be the a is easily prepuce which penis. the retracted may stem congenital be prepuce scarring cases a most of but from caused balanoposthitis. the anomaly, Phimosis by

95% squamous on of than penile neoplasms More epithelium. arise relatively penis accounting of uncommon, squamous are the for males. the United In carcinomas all about of 0.4% cell cancers States, in occurs at penile In much carcinoma however, rates. countries, developing higher 40 older than cases patients Most uncircumcised years of occur in age. types infection poor resultant of and Several exposure potential in particularly (HPV), papillomavirus have carcinoma, implicated penile carcinogens smoking, and the 18. been pathogenesis 16 smegma), factors including in human (with cell squamous to with hygiene

grossly in of occurs penis. disease) older the of cell in the shaft situ and penis on appears (Bowen uncircumcised solitary as carcinoma Squamous plaque a males the throughout no underlying with the of stroma invasion epidermis the dysplastic examination reveals Histologic cells (

Fig.

18.1 ). rise approximately in carcinoma patients. to squamous It gives cell of 10% invasive

or the crusted, on the prepuce. a Invasive papular as most cell carcinoma penis gray, of appears squamous penis lesion, commonly glans irregular In with underlying tissue infiltration ( lesion cases, many indurated, an ulcerated margins produces connective the of

Fig. 18.2 ). Histologically, typical tumor carcinoma. keratinizing often the is squamous most a cell tumor. prognosis The is the related the to of stage survival metastasis 27% With a 66%, the lymph survival inguinal carries lesions, 5-year to grim is rate. nodes rate localized 5-year whereas virtually deep a carcinoma squamous characterized is variant papillary of and Verrucous non-HPV–related by rounded, margins. carcinoma no pushing cell architecture, atypia, cytologic do not locally but carcinomas metastasize. invasive Verrucous are

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Carcinomainsitu(Bowendisease)ofthepenis.Theepitheliumabovetheintactbasementmembraneshowsdelayedmaturationanddisor-ganization(left). 18.1 Highermagnification(right) showsseveralmitoticfigures,someabovethebasallayer,andnuclearpleomorphism.

Squamouscellcarcinomaanditsprecursorlesionsarethemostimportantpenilelesions.ManyareassociatedwithHPVinfection.

Squamouscellcarcinomaoccursontheglansorshaftofthepenisasanulceratedinfiltrativelesionthatmayspreadtoinguinalnodesandinfrequentlytodistantsites.Mostcasesoccurinuncircumcisedmales.

Otherimportantpeniledisordersincludecongenitalabnormalitiesinvolvingthepositionoftheurethra(epispadias,hypospadias)andinflammatorydisorders(balanitis,phimosis).

Fig. 18.2 Carcinomaofthepenis.Theglanspenisisdeformedbyanulcer-ated,infiltrativemass.

SCROTUM,TESTIS,ANDEPIDIDYMIS

including skin such (Chapter of Several psoriasis inflammatory processes the as dermatoses, may and local infections the systemic fungal 24). scrotum, affect unusual. are the scrotal sac of Neoplasms sweeps. the associated these, common is in that environmental from the malignancy high exposures, of the human Percival cell dating it carcinoma, of observation in of Squamous Pott’s a historical Sir disease first of incidence represents most chimney interest with The subsequent by successful measures public most the Sweeps Guild that must remains cancer prevention. the of daily for members one its Chimney health bathe edict enlargement. to disorders Several as and may testes the unrelated epididymis scrotal present serous vaginalis. cause accumulation common scrotal within swelling, most tunica of fluid by an Hydrocele, caused the the of is or idiopathic arise to in tumors. neighboring may response be or It infections all pass lymph, it are hydrocele distinguishing which of or (transluminescence), through from light a cloudy or opaque. allows collections clear to pus, fluid blood, The of of fluid termed cause may hematocele tunica chylocele, within vaginalis, enlargement. scrotal Accumulation also blood and lymphatic respectively, the of or sizes—a grotesque lower extremities and extreme cases by enlarge filariasis, the to caused, the may for of termed elephantiasis. example, condition scrotum In obstruction, lymphatic

scrotum. failure is into testicular of Cryptorchidism a the descent abdominal scrotum the testes canals the the from of life. 2 of cavity into through then gestation intrauterine descend the the during by Normally, last third inguinal and the the pelvis into month months The year because cryptorchidism complete the certainty descent at premature particularly of testicular is always age, established with only after diagnosis not birth. 1 in into of is infants, scrotum Cryptorchidism affects the of male population. 1% cause majority vast the unknown. is In the of cases, and The patients, of have bilateral aberrations affected a chromosomal condition is developmental of abnormalities. approximately other in percentage whom 10% small atrophic, sterility. cryptorchidism undescended in bilateral become results Because testes reasons, of be contralateral with may the gonad. even associated For cryptorchidism unclear descended unilateral atrophy

testicular with risk infertility, 5-fold of for a cancer. increased descent 3to testicular to failure associated addition is In with also cryptorchidism Patients descended contralateral, at are the cancer simple some normally unilateral than of failure descent, development risk. rather the for that in the risk underlies abnormality, intrinsic suggesting increased increased testis, cancer of placement of 18 the into undescended testis cancer. testicular to by of recommended scrotum is Surgical infertility, atrophy, the months age decrease and testicular likelihood the of (orchiopexy)

usually life, may early testis of of The but cryptorchid the normal atrophy onset is of in by be puberty. evident size some degree the usually appear age, advanced Microscopically, atrophy begins by years of is 6 to of puberty. by and 5 time tubular to in-situ cryptorchid tumors. in be Germ is later) testes and precursor subsequent (discussed a may germ present neoplasia cell likely of cell conditions cryptorchid as in chemotherapy, caused chronic chronically associated Atrophic may cirrhosis). be ischemia, levels testes (e.g., irradiation, changes to elevated other those anti-neoplastic estrogen and as including trauma, with well by similar insults,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Cryptorchidism referstoincompletedescentofthetestisfromtheabdomentothescrotumandispresentinabout1%of1-year-oldmaleinfants.

Bilateralor,insomecases,evenunilateralcryptorchidismisassociatedwithtubularatrophyandsterility.

Thecryptorchidtestiscarriesa3-to5-foldhigherriskfortesticularcancer,whicharisesfromfociofgermcellneoplasiain-situwithintheatrophictubules.Earlyorchiopexyreducestheriskforsterilityandcancer.

common proper. the than epididymis Inflammatory more the testis of are lesions in in the testis infectious Sexually the transmitted discussed chapter. are disorders in later and testicular orchitis, inflammation tuberculosis. of epididymitis nonspecific and include Other mumps, causes orchitis vas begin lymphatics infection epididymitis through a and or tract of that as deferens the Nonspecific usually the primary testis to the spermatic cord. urinary the spreads testis neutrophils. histologic The and is and numerous tender, examination reveals involved swollen testes but infected adults. children in involving rare male in the 20% is of roughly infection occurs Mumps infiltrate. Affected edematous a contain and are inflammatory testes and congested, lymphoplasmacytic lead mumps Severe to extensive sterility. fibrosis, and orchitis necrosis, atrophy, epithelium, seminiferous loss tubular may of elicit testis. inflammation including granulomatous and may the conditions, Several infections autoimmune in injury, the common. Of tuberculosis is most these, Testicular generally of the as an involvement testis. secondary tuberculosis epididymitis, begins with to tuberculosis caseous sites. inflammation identical other that necrosis there and in active in seen granulomatous is Histologically,

of obstruction patent. cord, or arteries testicular Torsion, more typically leaving spermatic drainage thick-walled twisting the and resilient of in the while venous results is infarction unless leads and the This relieved. vascular torsion intense engorgement to of are testicular two There types torsion. utero birth. after occurs in either or shortly Neonatal torsion account associated no to defect is for occurrence. There its anatomic Adult manifests onset of adolescence is pain. typically the seen torsion sudden with in and testicular to congenital torsion anomaly is with bilateral from whereby torsion, abnormally mobility increased (bell in In sac contrast the abnormality). giving the rise scrotal neonatal a testis clapper anchored results adult patient pain sudden any awaken the injury; occurs sleep. heralding inciting from often torsion It the without may even

urologic few constitutes emergencies. one of the Torsion explored likely testis 6 is approximately cord will testis viable. If the surgically the hours, manually remain and within the untwisted is (orchiopexy). the scrotum fixed contralateral occurrence catastrophic of torsion surgically prevent the the in testis, the within To typically unaffected is testis

roughly Testicular 6 occur neoplasms 100,000 males. in per 34-year-old In in are these common the in the 15to men. when tumors incidence, neoplasms peak most group, they age of and tumors tumors. include are sex cord–stromal testis and germ the heterogeneous Neoplasms cell are tumors almost malignant. germ all of from testicular postpubertal and cells, arise 95% In males, usually uncommon Leydig derived tumors contrast, cord-stromal By Sertoli benign. cells and are or sex from discussion cell focus this is testicular tumors. of of germ the remainder The on

neoplasms testicular The of cause understood. poorly is in incidence the has blacks, tumors in are decades. Testicular in white over whites and increased common more recent than populations as well contralateral an for in in a as As cancer undescended 3to the testis, discussed descended is for earlier, increased 5-fold cancer in increase the testis. risk cryptorchidism with the associated risk of of approximately cryptorchidism present is 10% in of history testicular cancer. A cases are dysgenesis, also an frequency of cancer. insensitivity with testicular including Intersex gonadal and syndrome associated increased androgen syndromes, increased owing factors. history with Family brothers risk, cell germ of inherited 8to males important, as have tumors 10-fold an is to presumably The contralateral with a one for markedly the neoplasia risk development is associated of in testis also testis. in cancer increased the chromosome of of 12 in isochromosome usually arm the virtually are an of 12, all cell due tumors. short Extra found [i(12p)], germ copies to presence of relatively note, cell solid the oncogenes frequency are any that occurring Of adults. in mutations create tumor at germ in point rare lowest tumors, are which are up in mutations tumors. to oncogenic these 25% Among in KIT of found

in neoplasia testicular tumors in males germ arise Most cell from postpubertal situ. conditions high germ of risk that with gonads) for developed cryptorchidism, cell is precursor chromosome in exhibits developing and This a (e.g., germ tumors. fully present cell lesion abnormality tumors 12 dysgenetic associated is of characteristic the same neoplasia often situ testis adjacent “normal” might As cell found to full-blown expected, cell in tumors. be in is germ germ

18.1 nonseminomatous cell subclassified seminomas germ tumors tumors and Testicular ). ( cell into germ are accounting most http://ebooksmedicine.net for are Seminomas about common,

18.1 Summary Testicular Table Tumors of

Spermatocytic50-60Small,medium,andlargepolygonalcells;noNegativetumor

of germ 50% Yolksactumor3Poorlydifferentiatedendothelium-like,cuboidal,90%ofpatientshaveelevatedAFPorcolumnarcells cell neoplasms. testicular the dysgerminomas, nervous occur extragonadal central and are which system in germinomas, histologically the which in other tumors and to sites. called They ovary, occur identical

MORPHOLOGYGermcelltumorsmaybe“pure”(i.e.,composedofasinglehistologictype)ormixed(seenin40%ofcases).Seminoma presentsasasoft,well-demarcated,gray-whitetumorthatbulgesfromthecutsurfaceoftheaffectedtestis(

cells Fig.18.3 nucleoli glycogen-rich and ( nuclei, ).Largetumorsmaycontainfociofcoagulativenecrosis,usuallywithouthemorrhage.Seminomasarecomposedoflarge, uniform with cytoplasm, cell distinct borders, conspicuous round clear,

).Thecellsoftenarearrayedinsmalllobuleswithinterveningfibroussepta.Alymphocyticinfiltrateusuallyispresentandmay,onoccasion,overshadowtheneoplasticcells.Seminomasalsomayelicitagranulomatousreaction.Inapproximately15%ofcases,syncytiotrophoblastsarepresent;thesecellsarethesourceoftheminimallyelevatedserumhumanchoriogonadotropin(hCG)thatisencounteredinapproximately10%ofcases.Theirpresencehasnobearingonprognosis. Fig.18.4

Spermatocytic seminoma)isadistinctclinicalandhistologicentity.Itisanuncommontumorthatoccursinoldermenthanothertesticulartumors;affectedpatientsgenerallyarebeyond50yearsofage.Incontrastwithseminomas,spermatocytictumorslacklymphocyticinfiltrates,granulomas,andsyncytiotrophoblasts;arenotadmixedwithothergermcelltumorhistologies;arenotassociatedwithgermcellneoplasiain-situ;anddonotmetastasize.Thetumorusuallycomprisespolygonalcellsofvariablesizethatarearrangedinnodulesorsheets. tumor (formerlycalledspermatocytic

presentsasill-defined,invasivemassescontainingfociofhemorrhageandnecrosis( carcinoma Embryonal

nucleoli. ).Theprimarylesionsmaybesmall,eveninpatientswithsystemicmetastases.The prominent indistinct basophilic large and cells large nuclei, tumor Fig.18.5 cytoplasm, cell are have borders, and Theneoplasticcellsmaybearrayedinundifferentiated,solidsheetsormayformprimitiveglandularstructuresandirregularpapillae(

Fig.18.6 ).Inmostcases,cellscharacteristicofothergermcelltumors(e.g.,yolksactumor,teratoma,choriocarcinoma)areadmixedwiththeembryonalareas.Pureembryonalcarcinomasaccountforonly2%to3%ofalltesticulargermcelltumors.

Fig. 18.3 Seminomaofthetestisappearingasawell-circumscribed,pale,fleshy,homogeneousmass.

Fig. Seminomaofthetestis.Microscopicexaminationrevealslargecellswithdistinctcellborders,palenuclei,prominentnucleoli,andasparselymphocyticinfiltrate. 18.4

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Embryonalcarcinoma.Incontrastwiththeseminomain 18.5

,thistumorishemorrhagic. Fig.18.3

Yolk tumor sac isthemostcommonprimarytesticularneoplasminchildrenyoungerthan3yearsofage;inthisagegroup,ithasaverygoodprognosis.Inadults,yolksactumorsmostoftenareseenadmixedwithembryonalcarcinoma.Thesetumorsoftenarelargeandmaybewelldemarcated.Theyarecomposedoflowcuboidaltocolumnarepithelialcellsthatformmicrocysts,lacelike(reticular)patterns,sheets,glands,andpapillae(

Fig.18.7 ).Adistinctivefeatureisthepresence

Fig. 18.6 Embryonalcarcinoma.Notethesheetsofundifferentiatedcellsandprimitiveglandlikestructures.Thenucleiarelargeandhyperchromatic.

bodies. ofstructuresresemblingprimitiveglomeruli,theso-calledSchiller-Duval Thesetumorsoftenhaveeosinophilichyalineglobulescontainingα1-anti-trypsinandalphafetoprotein(AFP),whichcanbedemonstratedbyimmunohistochemicaltechniques.

Choriocarcinoma isatumorinwhichthepluripotentialneoplasticgermcellsdifferentiateintocellsresemblingplacentaltrophoblasts. like cells cells thatareirregularlyintermingledwithorcappedbylarge,eosinophilicsyncytiotrophoblast containingmultipledark,pleomorphicnuclei( like Theprimarytumorsoftenaresmallandnonpalpable,eveninpatientswithextensivemetastaticdisease.Thetumoriscomposedofsheetsofsmallcuboidalcytotrophoblast

).HCGcanbeidentifiedinthesyncytiotrophoblasticcellsbyimmunohistochemicalstaining. Fig.18.8

differentiatealongmultiplesomaticcelllineages.Thesetumors

Fig. 18.7 Yolksactumordemonstratingareasoflooselytextured,micro-cystictissueandpapillarystructuresresemblingadevelopingglomerulus(Schiller-Duvalbodies).

Fig. middle) arepresent.Hemorrhageandnecrosisareprominent. 18.8 andsyncytiotrophoblasticcellswithmultipledarknucleiembeddedineosinophiliccytoplasm(arrow, upper-right) Choriocarcinoma.Bothcytotrophoblasticcellswithsinglecentralnuclei(arrowhead,

(Fig. ofcartilage.Theymayoccuratanyagefrominfancytoadultlife.Pureformsofteratomaarefairlycommonininfantsandchildren,beingsecondinfrequencyonlytoyolksactumors.Inadults,pureteratomasarerare,constituting2%to3%ofgermcelltumors,andtheremainingtumorsareseenincombinationwithotherhistologictypes.Teratomasarecomposedofaheterogeneous,helter-skeltercollectionofdifferentiatedcellsororganoidstructures,suchasneuraltissue,musclebundles,islandsofcartilage,clustersofsquamousepithelium,structuresreminiscentofthyroidgland,bronchialepithelium,andbitsofintestinalwallorbrainsubstance,allembeddedinafibrousormyxoidstroma http://ebooksmedicine.net

in teratomas mature prepubertal of teratomas of regardless capable whereas they the immature 18.9 benign, whether majority males elements. metastasis malignant, are composed postpubertal are ).Elementsmaybemature(resemblingvarioustissueswithintheadult)orimmature(sharinghistologicfeatureswithfetalorembryonaltissues).In of or of being are males,

transformation. Rarely,non–germcelltumorsmayariseinteratoma—aphenomenonreferredtoasteratoma malignant with Examplesofsuchneoplasmsincludesquamouscellcarcinoma,adenocarcinoma,andvarioussarcomas.Thesenon–germcellmalignanciesdonotrespondtotherapiesthatareeffectiveagainstmetastaticgermcelltumors(discussedlater);thus,theonlyhopeforcureinsuchcasesresidesinsurgicalresection.

neoplasms testicular with by is mass testicular most (unlike with cell a Patients present hydroceles) germ frequently painless enlargements nontranslucent. caused that would for which to in skin with a addition associated a risk orchiectomy. of is the spillage, testicular of neoplasm Biopsy scrotal excision necessitate tumor the standard orchiectomy, of on solid the is management Consequently, testicular based a mass radical malignancy. presumption of cell neoplasms, tumors, germ of in may testicular palpable time metastasized especially a widely of diagnosis nonseminomatous lesion. absence by the the have Some

Seminomas nonseminomatous in behavior their clinical and differ tumors and course.

may periods confined remain often diagnosis. long before and to size for considerable reach Seminomas the testis iliac nodes, region. lumbar upper lymph commonly paraaortic the in particularly are encountered most and Metastases in the the disease. late Hematogenous course occur the metastases in of

cell routes. metastasize by lymphatic to germ earlier, neoplasms as well hematogenous as Nonseminomatous tend most Hematogenous metastases the liver lungs. and in common are may germ or may of testicular tumor Metastatic primary to be the identical lesions other contain cell tumors. elements

Fig. 18.9 Teratoma.Testicularteratomascontainmaturecellsfromendodermal,mesodermal,andectodermallines. (AtoD)Fourdifferentfieldsfromthesametumorspecimencontainneural(ectodermal)(A),glandular(endodermal)(B),cartilaginous(mesodermal)(C),andsquamousepithelial(D)elements.

in markers cell important Assay of (summarized in is tumors by markers these secreted germ two ways; tumor

, Table is diagnostically and and valuable are diagnosis therapy helpful along the response 18.1 following tumors the in morphologic clinical of after salient to very features) established. with individuals elevated syncytiotrophoblastic with in tumors noted, with may HCG choriocarcinoma and, cell always other minimally patients cells. be elevated as containing in germ is Increased in component. the a yolk AFP testicular neoplasm of setting indicates a sac tumor levels tumor lactate of The the dehydrogenase correlate with burden. (LDH)

of treatment is testicular germ a remarkable success cell clinical story. The neoplasms yearly, die roughly the new are 8000 disease. of 400 fewer occur United States of men cases the expected to Although cancer in testicular than prognosis. has long localized radiosensitive best tends extremely remain periods, to and is the Seminoma, which for disease of patients can More than early-stage 95% cured. with be subtype histologic influence nonseminomatous not cell tumors, the Among therapy. does germ the most 90% Approximately patients aggressive achieve with chemotherapy, cured. and of are remission complete a The choriocarcinoma, with which prognosis. is poorer exception associated is recurrences, treatment. the within years typically first in distant 2 usually all testicular tumors, of With form after metastases, the occur

Testicularneoplasmsarethemostcommoncauseofpainlesstesticularenlargement.Theyoccurwithincreasedfrequencyinassociationwithundescendedtestesandwithtesticulardysgenesis.

Germcellsarethesourceof95%oftesticulartumors,andtheremainderarisefromSertoliorLeydigcells.Germcelltumorsmaybecomposedofasingle“pure”histologicpattern(60%ofcases)ormixedpatterns(40%).

Themostcommonhistologicpatternsofgermcelltumorsareseminoma,embryonalcarcinoma,yolksactumor,choriocarcinoma,andteratoma.Mixedtumorscontainmorethanoneelement,mostcommonlyembryonalcarcinoma,teratoma,andyolksactumor.

Clinically,testiculargermcelltumorsaredividedintotwogroups:seminomasandnonseminomatoustumors.Seminomasremainconfinedtothetestisforalongtimeandspreadmainlytoparaaorticnodes;distantspreadisrare.Nonseminomatoustumorstendtospreadearlier,bybothlymphaticsandbloodvessels.

HCGisproducedbysyncytiotrophoblastsandisalwayselevatedinpatientswithchoriocarcinomasandthosewithseminomascontainingsyncytiotrophoblasts.AFPiselevatedwhenthereisayolksactumorcomponent.

( are important biologically of most and prostate peripheral into be regions, The divided which distinct transition the can the zones

Fig. ). 18.10 are different of proliferative The each in region. lesions types peripheral in most arise example, inner most transition hyperplastic the while zones. zone, arise the For (70%–80%) carcinomas lesions in often by result, more whereas to cause exammination, are obstruction. As rectal hyperplasias detected likely are carcinomas a urinary with basal cell a and normal prostate flat overlying secretory glands two layer The contains cell cell columnar layer. layers, an smooth stroma tissue. and fibrous muscle Surrounding a of prostatic contains mixture infectious, far and involved prostate by disorders, by which hyperplastic, The inflammatory, prostate neoplastic important cancer is of the is clinically. most

Fig. Adultprostate.Thenormalprostatecontainsseveraldistinctregions,includingacentralzone(CZ),aperipheralzone(PZ),atransitionalzone(TZ),andaperiurethralzone.Mostcarcinomasarisefromtheperiph-eralglandsoftheorgan,whereasnodularhyperplasiaarisesfrommorecentrallysituatedglands.BladderProximal stroma fibromuscular Anterior zone Ejaculatory urethra 18.10 vesicle Rectum CZTZTZPZCZSeminal Periurethral Distal urethra duct

(1) also infections; urinary common prostatitis organisms cases), other of cases), (3) into the pain syndrome Prostatitis associated by caused acute pelvic acute bacterial by caused bacterial (2%–5% (2) is prostatitis uropathogens; and of chronic cases). three (2%–5% tract categories: same chronic with divided of (90%–95% are The cases, can and latter leukocytes noninflammatory subdivided secretions, in which are cases, inflammatory with which prostatic absent. associated in into leukocytes be

typically are can prostatitis not result nonspecific infected The biopsy as sepsis. an the biopsy, based on prostatitis histologic of of is diagnosis and in findings rule out prostatitis, biopsy prostatic cancer. granulomatous exception prostate to produce The induration, to may which leading is of superficial instillation of common is for most treatment bladder In the granulomatous cancer. Calmette-Guérin the bladder cause prostatitis United Bacille the within States, (BCG) of a immune produces strain tuberculosis tuberculosis. indistinguishable is histologically that from is reaction an that BCG attenuated granulomatous in world. rare tuberculosis the Western is also but occurs Prostatic is hosts. seen immunocompromised only Fungal granulomatous prostatitis in typically into that ruptured and leak foreign-body tissue relatively common prostatitis a stems and to from Nonspecific is fluids granulomatous from reaction acini. prostatic ducts granulomas prostatic also Postsurgical be seen. may

http://ebooksmedicine.net

with perineal chills, obstruction; and be complicated fever, sepsis. pain, bacterial of by sudden prostatitis may presents dysuria, Acute it bladder onset outlet boggy, is rectal bacteremia. exquisitely tender suspected, can as prostate digital If the acute contraindicated, cause is prostatitis examination pressure on by infections bracketed tract bacterial prostatitis is urinary Chronic asymptomatic associated with periods. usually recurrent and low and Presenting pain, back discomfort. include suprapubic dysuria, manifestations perineal acute antibiotics. bacterial treated chronic with prostatitis Both and is pelvic syndrome Chronic by pain suprapubic is the pain and perineum, penis. chronic localized area, characterized to or is Pain during finding. after ejaculation a prominent is is diagnosis if an and pain prostate. a The not even it the is related uncertain, exclusion; clear is the abnormality of of indeed, to it etiology nature chronic on of is symptoms. pain and empirical the pelvic the syndrome for depends Therapy

Bacterialprostatitismaybeacuteorchronic;theresponsibleorganismusuallyisE. coli oranothergram-negativerod.

Chronicpelvicpainsyndrome,despitesharedsymptomatologywithchronicbacterialprostatitis,isofunknownetiologyanddifficulttotreat.

Granulomatousprostatitismaybeeitherinfectious(e.g.,followingtreatmentwithBCG)ornoninfectious.

extremely of an of proliferation hyperplasia resulting elements. cause glandular (BPH) from and enlargement of Benign prostatic stromal prostatic common is present thereafter, 40 by of frequency years decade 90% significant of is rises progressively the of eighth and in life. It men by a its number reaching age, important the is BPH of obstruction. The in an prostate cause of with enlargement men urinary

androgen-dependent of and Although excessive role. cause a central has understood, glandular is of growth stromal incompletely the BPH elements androgen BPH or that activity. in castrated in diseases onset does males of block with puberty the before occur who not genetic males are (DHT), is prostatic circulating ultimate the prostate 5α-reductase, action the by growth, testosterone Dihydrotestosterone the of synthesized of type 2. the in enzyme from mediator stromal the of expression of which that DHT binds genes and to the survival nuclear cells. and regulate support receptors, androgen prostatic epithelium growth can to and times receptors also potent. is stimulate DHT Although growth, 10 testosterone bind androgen more

virtually MORPHOLOGYBPH of prostate. always the in zone transition the occurs inner Theaffectedprostateisenlarged,typicallyweighingbetween60and100g,andcontainsmanywell-circumscribednodulesthatbulgefromthecutsurface(

Fig.

18.11 ).Thenodulesmayappearsolidorcontaincysticspaces,thelattercorrespondingtodilatedglands.Theurethraisusuallycompressed,oftentoanarrowslit,bythehyperplasticnodules.Insomecases,hyperplasticglandularandstromalelementslyingjustundertheepitheliumoftheproximalprostaticurethraprojectintothebladderlumenasapedunculatedmass,producingaball-valvetypeofurethralobstruction.

Microscopically,thehyperplasticnodulesarecomposedofvariableproportionsofproliferatingglandularelementsandfibromuscularstroma.Thehyperplasticglandsarelinedbytall,columnarepithelialcellsandaperipherallayerofflattenedbasalcells(

).Theglandularluminaoftencontainlaminatedproteinaceoussecretorymaterialknownascorporaamylacea. Fig.18.12

common stream the portions urinary difficulty (hesitancy) in are starting preferentially inner most urine the of often in BPH related the to of obstruction, lower Because prostate, form of the the manifestations involves tract

Fig. 18.11 Nodularprostatichyperplasia.Well-definednodulescompresstheurethraintoaslitlikelumen.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Nodularhyperplasiaoftheprostate.(A)Low-powerphotomicrographdemonstratesawell-demarcatednoduleattherightofthefield,withaportionofurethraseentotheleft.Inothercasesofnodularhyperplasia,thenodularityiscausedpredominantlybystromal,ratherthanglandular,proliferation. 18.12 (B)Higher-powerphotomicrographdemonstratesthemorphologyofthehyperplasticglands,whicharelargeandhavepapillaryinfoldings.

of the stream intermittent urinary while interruption voiding. and bladder These frequency, urgency, symptoms nocturia, of indicative are urinary accompanied irritation. by all frequently and pathologic with prostatic hyperplasia manifestations of BPH. of about men occur evidence 10% of Clinical only in for residual the increases tract urinary obstruction in bladder urine to chronic infections. due the The of presence risk appropriate of leads urinary and, resultant BPH men, affected the obstruction, some with In bladder of (Chapter 14). absence to treatment, in distention complete the painful hydronephrosis pharmacologic, by as from agents prostatic using that is DHT blocking testosterone 5-alpha receptors. (such that inhibitors) the of muscle inhibit targeted therapeutic Initial treatment or reductase relax α1-adrenergic smooth formation reserved are recalcitrant cases symptomatic surgical medical are to therapy. that severely for techniques Various

BPHischaracterizedbyproliferationofbenignstromalandglandularelements.DHT,anandrogenderivedfromtestosterone,isthemajorhormonalstimulusforproliferation.

BPHoriginatesintheperiurethraltransitionzone.Thehyper-plasticnodulesexhibitvariableproportionsofstromaandglands.Hyperplasticglandsarelinedbytwocelllayers,aninnercolumnarlayerandanouterlayercomposedofflattenedbasalcells.

Clinicalfindingsresultfromurinarytractobstructionandincludehesitancy,urgency,nocturia,andpoorurinarystream.Chronicobstructionpredisposestorecurrenturinarytractinfections.

Adenocarcinoma prostate men, of 2014. is in of States cancer common cancer 27% in the and United for accounting in form the most the cases of of is age 50 uncommon the years. Its before States. Over the several has decreased currently and mortality United in significantly, only of it decades, deaths 10% cancer the past cancer prostate from causes

prostate effective of is in to is with disease screening cancer controversial. men related relatively rate saving increased later), the lives low at how mortality in through screening detection but of (discussed part The is paradox from is disease to seeming fatal This and natural in the no of prostate history variation indolent of cancer, wide clinical rapidly significance. related the to aggressive cancer prostate Indeed, more cancer. many than of at commonly other of prostate die prostate autopsy with men in dying and carcinoma causes, is found incidentally men to treatment men is prostate of no actors” their inconsequential with possible are of be tumors. that clinically and are certain not saved is the equally doubt others some tumors that thus, by “cured” identify cancers, being certainty; will while it early currently detection “bad It

somatic the progression environmental roles heredity, and pathogenesis observations androgens, prostate mutations factors, in and that acquired cancer. of experimental suggest and have Clinical

are Androgens of importance. central • before develop the that somehow which puberty, cancer not the provide in androgens the “soil,” males of within who does Cancer cellular prostate indicating castrated prostate are develops. context, to to cancers, androgens chemical which often This in response established regress a time extends dependence on or for surgical castration. Notably, that receptor to of their often gene or receptors mutations despite to resistant androgen amplifications expression therapy. anti-androgen permit activate acquire target that the are genes therapy tumors androgen tumors on the of depend in androgen recur gene by growth Thus, survival. face regulated receptors that their for therapies still and anti-androgen products carcinogenesis, with like are associated risk. levels nor prostate while initiate on is its is However, evidence dependent prostate that androgens androgen cancer, there survival, cancer no normal androgens for prostate,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

contributes, an Heredity there is increased of relatives among first-degree with cancer. as patients also risk prostate African-Americans countries. among is in Prostate and Asians uncommon incidence its and is highest cancer in Scandinavian disease significant than Caucasians. is clinically Aggressive, African-Americans in common in more identified studies risk variants number association associated are Genome-wide of prostate for increased with have genetic a developing that cancer. in such to up 5-fold risk general the the that multiple a is have with risk, compared increased increase Although may men population. to each only effect multiplicative, alleles carries variant risk a small

seen level Americans). also in to the not incidence the evidenced to in role, Japanese (although Environment the rises a as fact that native-born of plays States United by disease immigrants the the increasing. significant the in the region Asia is of Also, more cancer becomes westernized, as this clinically incidence of world prostate the diet in However, relationship between components the risk is and prostate dietary cancer unclear. specific

in transformation. the drivers are cancers, as Acquired • genetic cellular of aberrations, other actual are variations seen number rearrangements frequently tumors. specific and Copy in primary regions chromosomal gene in rearrangements promoter family most transcription factors. the prostate cancer the in gene androgen-regulated create genes the fusion common and of of TMPRSS2 ETS gene coding sequence The of consisting of TMPRSS2-ETS genes to found and in prostate tumorigenesis. fusion cancers early are in 40% relatively they populations, approximately in Caucasian 60% occur among is African-Americans other and of rearrangements these lower the ethnic prevalence groups. Notably, are PI3K most mutations to mutations PTEN, activity. commonly the a involving acts PI3K/AKT of activation as 6); brake tumor signaling of which on suppressor common Other (Chapter the the pathway these, loss-of-function lead

MORPHOLOGYCarcinomasdetectedclinicallyareusuallynotvisiblegrossly.Moreadvancedlesionsappearasfirm,gray-whitelesionswithill-definedmarginsthatinfiltratetheadjacentgland(

Fig.18.13

adenocarcinomas thatproducewell-definedglands.Theglandstypicallyaresmallerthanbenignglandsandarelinedbyasingleuniformlayerofcuboidalorlowcolumnarepithelium,lackingthebasalcelllayerseeninbenignglands.Infurthercontrastwithbenignglands,malignantglandsarecrowdedtogetherandcharacteristicallylackbranchingandpapillaryinfolding.Thecytoplasmofthetumorcellsrangesfrompale-clear(asinbenignglands)toadistinctiveamphophilic(darkpurple)appearance.Nucleiareenlargedandoftencontainoneormoreprominentnucleoli( differentiated Mostprostatecancersaremoderately

Fig.

intraepithelial prostatic neoplasia (HGPIN). ).Somevariationinnuclearsizeandshapeisusual,butingeneral,pleomorphismisnotmarked.Mitoticfiguresareuncommon.Withincreasinggrade,irregularorraggedglandularstructures,cribriformglands,sheetsofcells,orinfiltratingindividualcellsarepresent.Inapproximately80%ofcases,prostatictissueremovedforcarcinomaalsoharborspresumptiveprecursorlesions,referredtoashigh-grade 18.14 ManyofthemolecularchangesseenininvasivecancersarealsoseeninHPIN.

Fig. left). Adenocarcinomaoftheprostate.Carcinomatoustissueisseenontheposterioraspect(lower 18.13 Notethesolidwhitertissueofcancer,incontrastwiththespongyappearanceofthebenignperipheralzoneonthecontralateralside.

1),andtheleastdifferentiatedtumorsmeritascoreof10(5+ 5).AnewgradingsystemalsobasedonglandularpatternwasrecentlyacceptedbytheWorldHealthOrganization(WHO)tobeusedinitiallyinconjunctionwiththeGleasonsystem;itrangesfrom1(excellentprognosis)to5(poorprognosis). ProstatecancerisgradedbytheGleason system, createdin1967andupdatedin2014.Accordingtothissystem,prostatecancersarestratifiedintofivegradesonthebasisofglandularpatternsofdifferentiation.Grade1representsthemostwelldifferentiatedtumors,andgrade5tumorsshownoglandulardifferentiation.Mosttumorsarepatterns3,4,or5.Sincethemajorityoftumorscontainmorethanonepattern,aprimarygradeisassignedtothedominantpatternandasecondarygradetothenextmostfrequentpattern.ThetwonumericalgradesarethenaddedtoobtainacombinedGleasonscore.Tumorswithonlyonepatternaretreatedasiftheirprimaryandsecondarygradesarethesame,and,hence,thenumberisdoubled.Thus,themostdifferentiatedtumorshaveaGleasonscoreof2(1+

on the elevated an antigen investigate United needle level States, asymptomatic are cancers serum biopsy In most lesions discovered (discussed prostate performed nonpalpable, to small, (PSA) later). prostate-specific arise examination. 80% digital may Some and on outer be of rectal in the a of palpable 70% hard (peripheral) glands, nodules irregular prostate these as subset cancers to resection of removed of unexpectedly during prostate tissue discovered is for trans-urethral carcinomas minority BPH. examination histologic A by of Because less location, its is than in stages. obstruction cancer urethral BPH prostate the cause likely to initial peripheral may the cancers rectum. prostate of the tissues, periurethral advanced wall and soft adjacent (less the of the or seminal zones invade the bladder, and the often Locally urinary vesicles infiltrate commonly) the osteoblastic be to (bone-producing) are metastases, in axial that particularly frequent on cause disease http://ebooksmedicine.net detected late lesions and can the typically skeleton, Bone

Fig. (A)Adenocarcinomaoftheprostatedemonstratingsmallglandscrowdedinbetweenlargerbenignglands. 18.14 (B)Highermagnificationshowsseveralsmallmalignantglandswithenlargednuclei,prominentnucleoli,anddarkcytoplasm,ascomparedwiththelarger,benigngland(top).

bone radionuclide scans.

of used diagnosis in The management from suffers number the but limitations. widely assay and it of cancer, test is the most PSA prostate a prostatic PSA is the epithelium semen. is normally secreted product a and in of decades. studies”) detect can clinically confirmed cancers prostate Although no that treatment, studies prostate are of PSA screening history early natural the have disease the of for requiring “watch-and-wait course, in insignificant, many (so-called their sometimes cancers incontinence. particularly significant indolent Overtreatment these erectile of cause can cancers and dysfunction morbidity, biomarker is A of that is PSA as not a second cancer-specific. it limitation of prostatitis, infarcts, instrumentation levels. prostatic all serum increase the may prostate, and ejaculation PSA BPH, Conversely, cancer have to of patients to used patients prostate identify with 20% cancer. have who below prostate are that organ-confined the PSA values 40% cutoffs are likely to

reappraised PSA screening of assays being these problems, tests. are Because as of cancer of assessing in response serial PSA value once is to are great By diagnosed, contrast, measurements the therapy. of prostatectomy for disease For or radical after example, is level PSA or rising disease. a disseminated recurrent localized radiotherapy indicative

treatments are and The most radiotherapy. cancer radical clinically prostatectomy localized common for prostate radical based resected on the grade. after specimens prognosis whether pathologic stage, margins Gleason the prostatectomy and of The is of the are free tumor, stage, predictors are and Gleason outcome important radiotherapy. clinical values serum after PSA The of grade, Because active older indolent is low low-grade follow with significant appropriate an cancers comorbidity, course, and serum or patients for PSA prostate cancers. (“watchful men, values many approach with an some surveillance men younger waiting”) small, even synthetic hormone–releasing is either by administration (LHRH). by by treated orchiectomy carcinoma deprivation, of metastatic agonists androgen Advanced or hormone of luteinizing metastatic synthesis therapies reduce cancer. in or androgen are addition, that many signaling prostate In new there remissions, disease Although emerge, and anti-androgen therapy death. rapid leading clones induces invariably progression to androgen-independent almost mechanisms arise prostate in androgen-dependent, of are clones many continue to therapy. to deprivation context As that in signaling, androgen genes commonly the express suggesting these even normal androgen mutant earlier, reactivate that discussed

Carcinomaoftheprostateisacommoncancerofoldermenbetween65and75yearsofage.

Prostatecarcinomasrangefromindolentlesionsthatwillnevercauseharmtoaggressivefataltumors,whicharemorecommoninAfrican-Americans.

fusiongenesoracttoenhancePI3K/AKTsignaling,whichpromotestumorcellgrowthandsurvival. ThemostcommonacquiredmutationsinprostaticcarcinomascreateTPRSS2-ETS

Carcinomasoftheprostatearisemostcommonlyintheouter,peripheralzoneoftheglandandmaybepalpablebyrectalexamination.

GradingofprostatecancerbytheGleasonsystemcorrelateswithpathologicstageandprognosis.

SerumPSAmeasurementisacontroversialcancerscreeningtest,buthasclearvalueinmonitoringprogressiveorrecurrentprostatecancer.

URETER,BLADDER,ANDURETHRA

bladder, are called lined by renal multi-layer ureters, and pelves, urothelium. epithelium urethra specialized The transitional mucosa makes propria are up the deeper and, Beneath propria yet, lamina the muscle), muscularis the which (detrusor bladder wall. the congenital diseases, include and Clinically aberrations, infectious significant neoplasms. other organs and disorders these inflammatory involving

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ureter congenital the of include neoplasms, disorders, Disorders and uncommon and reactive are conditions. few merit mention. brief A

(UPJ) results disorder, Ureteropelvic congenital in junction hydronephrosis. obstruction, a is in more and manifests It common much in infancy or childhood than boys usually girls. in is and frequent cause in children. hydronephrosis of It most infants the

and (discussed Malignant pathologically are bladder in of later). the calyces, renal to those arising similar ureter tumors pelvis, the carcinomas. Most urothelial are

fibrosis proliferative inflammatory of the narrowing cause an retro-peritoneal by and ureteral or characterized encasing structures uncommon obstruction causing a hydronephrosis. is fibrous process Retroperitoneal to age. middle old in disorder The occurs in proportion lesions characterized association of fibroinflammatory (Chapter IgG4-related plasma in least IgG4-secreting At these disease, 5). rich by occur cases with a cells urinary derivatives, Other carcinomas). drug (ergot prior adrenergic associated with radiation, tract surgery, disease infection, exposures (lymphomas, cases blockers), malignant or are Most are and (Ormond however, obvious cases, cause or have primary, considered no disease). idiopathic

of a diverticulum bladder or wall. pouchlike of A consists vesical bladder the evagination acquired consequence by arise more may for as a of benign congenital prostatic urethral but commonly lesions be hyperplasia. obstruction caused, are persistent that Diverticula example, to bladder formation. and they predisposing and recurrent Although stone asymptomatic, urinary small sometimes tract are most to lead urinary infections stasis diverticula

forms. many takes Cystitis

cystitis in is common, particularly women. Bacterial bacteria. etiologic most agents coliform are common The

infection. cytotoxic in as receiving adenovirus cyclophosphamide, drugs, Hemorrhagic and sometimes patients anti-tumor complicates cystitis occur such may

typically Interstitial chronic cystitis pain women. in a pelvic causes syndrome, is filling and by is urination day leading emptying, bladder that very characterized relieved both with suprapubic It by and bladder pain night. frequent during to increases dysuria. urgency, include hematuria, and symptoms Other petechial findings include are nonspecific and hemorrhages. Cystoscopic patients spontaneous of have to Up remissions. 50% transmural leading course, the to fibrosis in a may bladder. contracted ensue, Late

uncommon an is most bladder. disease occurs commonly in inflammatory the Malakoplakia that in It phagocytic function macrophages. the defects or of from results degradative undigested material abundant As this bacterial in cytoplasm granular of which sections the as defect, seen within of histologic macrophages. a products result phagosomes, are distended within accumulate enlarged concretions bodies, as mineralized calcium lysosomes. macrophages from The which abnormal of result salts contain the deposition laminated Michaelis-Gutmann known also in

bladder of which from edema. as condition in the projections Polypoid bulbous is an marked inflammatory irritation result resulting is into urothelium broad polypoid the cystitis a mucosa to submucosal thrown with and papillary be urothelial Polypoid confused cystitis histologically. clinically both carcinoma may

undergo the forms may metaplasia. various Transitional lining bladder epithelium of sometimes lamina (Brunn into urothelium of grow nests) Nests the propria. downward filled by Here, resembling (intestinal cells glandularis); metaplasia). cystica); into central mucosa their urothelium fluid intestinal a with epithelium cells flattened (cystitis variously cuboidal columnar clear epithelial differentiate may or goblet cystic lined (cystitis spaces lining or commonly response epithelium, urothelium in to normal undergoes glycogenated a squamous be found As the women. the which trigone squamous often differentiated at injury, from metaplasia, must

United in Bladder approximately 5% accounts cancer of and of cancer cancers the for 3% States. deaths urothelial the (95%–97% are 60%–90% The United of carcinomas. Africa) States; in cancers majority in vast bladder United to where common carcinomas are 7% States such endemic. Egypt, in the in about much cancers is 3% more represent of as Squamous bladder cell schistosomiasis urinary but countries are Adenocarcinomas of bladder the rare. whites in in more urban and Carcinoma men the in than rural common dwellers, than in of developing African-Americans. in is in bladder in women, than industrialized in nations, than About 80% 50 age. years 80 of between of patients and are

urothelial the cyclophosphamide or include are smoking, and factors pathogenesis cigarette of Environmental radiation various and in prior important occupational carcinogens, carcinoma therapy. bladder risk of family known history is a cancer A factor. endemic. Squamous to areas infections haematobium is carcinoma is related Schistosoma where it in cell in Cancers the a you number schistosoma will provides inflammation, cancers “soil” infections 6). for (Chapter in a of of the which the setting of chronic development recall arise of occurring different background

have urothelial carcinoma. in identified been aberrations Acquired genetic acquire of disease. leading been Based is to bladder 9q, to genes tumor on the of formation these observations, 9p which tumor-suppressor by on carcinogenesis which and invasive model mutations TP53 the then papillary deletions proposed and for tumors, has progress a superficial in may initiated to carcinoma mutations, initiated progresses genes leads first pathway, TP53 of from with loss to invasion. then, A by possibly situ chromosome and second in 9, telomerase, in receptor (FGFR3) factor mutations pathways. include alterations superficial 3 PI3K/AKT fibroblast Additional RAS well of and components in genetic in as growth tumors the and mutations as have RB mutations 6). Muscle both (Chapter invasive TP53 often and tumors involving

http://ebooksmedicine.net

).Themostcommonisanoninvasivepapillarytumor( Fig.18.15

Fig.18.16 ).Theotherprecursoriscarcinomainsitu(CIS),whichisdiscussedlater.Inaboutone-halfofpatientswithinvasivebladdercancer,noprecursorlesionisfound;insuchcases,itispresumedthattheprecursorlesionwasovergrownbythehigh-gradeinvasivecomponent.

Themostimportantprognosticfactorinnoninvasivepapillaryurothelialneoplasmsistheirgrade,whichisbasedonbotharchitecturalandcytologicfeatures.Asshownin

papillary of low Table18.2 potential (PUNLMP); (2)papillary carcinoma; urothelial urothelial carcinoma and(4)high-grade urothelial papillary ,thegradingsystemsubclassifiestumorsasfollows:(1)papilloma; malignant (3)low-grade neoplasm

Fig. 18.15 Morphologicpatternsofurothelialneoplasia.

18.2 Noninvasive Neoplasms Papillary Urothelial Table

Fig. Cystoscopicappearanceofapapillaryurothelialtumor,resem-blingcoral,withinthebladder. 18.16

whichisentirelybenignandnotassociatedwithanincreasedriskforsubsequentcarcinoma. ).Theseexophyticpapillaryneoplasmsaretobedistinguishedfrominverted urothelial Fig.18.17 papilloma,

the by of defined overtly flat presence a malignant-appearing CIS cells ( within is urothelium

).Likehigh-gradepapillaryurothelialcarcinoma,thetumorcellsinCISlackcohesivenessandareshedintotheurine,wheretheycanbedetectedbycytology.CIScommonlyismultifocalandsometimesinvolvesmostofthebladdersurfaceorextendsintotheuretersandurethra.Withouttreatment,50%to75%ofCIScasesprogresstoinvasivecancer. Fig.18.18

(staging) important factor. diagnosis invasion of Invasiveurothelialcancerassociatedwithpapillaryurothelialcancer(usuallyofhighgrade)orCISmaysuperficiallyinvadethelaminapropriaorextendmoredeeplyintounderlyingmuscle.The extent and is spread the time prognostic of most at the initial Almostallinfiltratingurothelialcarcinomasarehighgrade.

Squamouscellcarcinomasofthebladdertypicallyshowextensivekeratinizationandarenearlyalwaysassociatedwithchronicbladderirritationandinfection.Adenocarcinomasofthebladderarehistologicallyidenticaltoadenocarcinomasseeninthegastrointestinaltract.Somearisefromurachalremnantsinthedomeofthebladderorinassociationwithextensiveintestinalmetaplasia.

low-gradepapillaryurothelialcarcinoma;PUNLMP, HGUC, papillaryurothelialneoplasiaofuncertainmalignantpotential. High-gradepapillaryurothelialcarcinoma;LGUC, *Rarecasesofprogressionhaveoccurredinimmunocompromisedpatients.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. showsslightlyirregularnucleiwithscatteredmitoticfigures(arrow). Noninvasivelow-gradepapillaryurothelialcarcinoma.Highermagnification(right) 18.17

present most painless Bladder tumors hematuria. commonly with Patients a may recurrences tumors with and after have develop exhibit whatever higher grade, grade. new tendency a their tumors, urothelial to excision, mucosa. CIS tumor surrounding recurrence multifocality, in and/or mitotic dysplasia for index, The size, is factors, including several risk and stage, related associated to grade, the true the thus, those different tumor recurrences tumor; sites. cells tumors same shedding that original new arise the stem initial the and as are implantation of from clonal yet that these the abnormalities lesion, original than Many recurrent at sites share of at of subsequent carcinomas carcinoma, (see with recur or papillary but urothelial lower-grade high-grade concurrent invasive urothelial frequently papillary neoplasms either invade urothelial often infrequently are associated Whereas

18.2 Table

Fig. 18.18 Carcinomainsitu(CIS)withenlargedhyperchromaticnucleiandamitoticfigure(arrow).

papillary. grade of cancer stage or the bladder tumor flat is Treatment on on and lesion whether depends and therapeutically high-grade, For small, papillary both transurethral diagnostic that is localized and sufficient. resection tumors not are (BCG), an intravesical risk Patients recurrence followed Calmette-Guérin sometimes chemotherapy. Bacillus of or progression with typically topical consisting for high the tuberculosis attenuated tumors instillation receive are of of intravesical bacillus at called strain that immunotherapy by triggers response. anti-tumor local also a an that immune effective reaction granulomatous BCG elicits are closely Patients recurrence cystoscopy studies. tumor with cytologic monitored and for urine periodic CIS high-grade cells. (1) or invading reserved Radical urethra propria; refractory the down the the prostatic is (2) prostatic muscularis cancer tumor and where neoplastic CIS contact come BCG ducts, for in cannot extending BCG; and to papillary into (3) the cystectomy using curative. cancer chemotherapy, can treated palliate which is but Advanced seldom bladder is

(STDs) diseases complicated transmitted for human existence centuries. have Sexually STD affect 20to of approximately 4 Globally, 24-year-olds. and 6 occur of 15to 19-year-olds, million 15 million million affect every year; cases these, new be are to more to asymptomatic. become and Women far infected an STD likely by ( infection, United syndrome the B—are leading infectious States, acquired syphilis, (CDC) and diseases gonorrhea, the STDs (AIDS), the Of Control of for Disease immunodeficiency require Prevention that 10 in notification Centers and hepatitis five—chlamydial

). 18.3 Table STDs the do notification. HPV infection, are and genital CDC In not United most require genital herpes the but two these States, common

http://ebooksmedicine.net

HerpessimplexvirusPrimaryandrecurrentherpes,neonatalherpes

HumanpapillomavirusCancerofpenis(somecases)Condylomaacuminatum,analcancer,Cervicaldysplasiaandcancer,vulvarcanceroropharyngealcarcinoma

trachomatis salpingitis,andsequelae Chlamydia Urethritis,epididymitis,LymphogranulomavenereumUrethralsyndrome,cervicitis,bartholinitis,proctitis

vaginalis Urethritis,balanitis Trichomonas

in other discussed Several such B, entities, immunodeficiency are histolytica, E. of with virus HPV chapters. infection, hepatitis as and infection human these infection, (HIV)

venereal the or by lues, infection chronic Treponema spirochete pallidum. Syphilis, caused a is Pox, Great Europe in the parts epidemic in syphilis First of recognized form all in is as 16th-century the world. endemic States, primary increase the syphilis United CDC a the and year threefold 2014, to secondary In 20,000 of representing were the reported almost 2000. since in cases increase The with be part sex to in men have increased most the the can men. attributed for incidence who to in congenital that well, from the syphilis 2013-2014, there may impending mother. as increase the During raising acquired the an began increase incidence women of concern in be cases is strong than Americans evident; disparity six often affected times whites. racial African are more A and organ in syphilis is also is Syphilis to common patients, whom more progress to neurosyphilis. HIV-infected in likely involvement more

host fastidious pallidum is natural organism is T. man. whose a only early a usual sexual with a secondary) contact in the of of partner (primary infection cutaneous mucosal stages or lesion is The source in or syphilis. such activity mucous from partner. uninfected through or skin sexual is transmitted The membranes breaks the during lesions the minute of organism in the of infection. In fetus, to early mother stages transmitted across the from pallidum cases, maternal during congenital placenta is T. particularly

of the to introduced body, distant lesions through the at and lymphatics the Once before appearance primary site. blood, sites disseminate organisms the inoculation the rapidly into even disease manifestations protean This dissemination for of ( the accounts widespread the

Fig. can tertiary into primary, and ), which secondary, divided adults stages. 18.19 be in

Primary syphilis. termed entry. after 21 infection a days), a of spirochete appears weeks the Several lesion, (mean, primary point chancre, at mounts period, response. the while host of Systemic dissemination during this an immune organisms occurs types to constituents that antibodies antibodies) are antibodies (nontreponemal antibodies Two treponemal specific antigens. formed: with cross-react and host of humoral the fails however, eradicate This organisms. to response,

syphilis. Secondary of approximately development is syphilis The 4 weeks secondary to 25% in over syphilis. patients a spontaneously the 6 resolves period by of and followed primary of of chancre untreated secondary mucocutaneous of The in lymphadenopathy detail later, greater generalized lesions. manifestations include syphilis, discussed and secondary highly with both The syphilis primary are lesions teeming mucocutaneous spirochetes of are and and infectious. patients latent-phase point are chancre, resolve syphilis which lesions early antimicrobial in secondary the to of therapy, the at be syphilis. without said Like even

syphilis. Tertiary after phase initial enter of latent as more than asymptomatic, the year being next the untreated an infection. syphilis Patients 1 illness, late defined with next of over In to cases, one the 5 develop 20 about third symptoms new years. marked phase, development nervous less of or, This system, the lesions organs. the cardiovascular in symptomatic other late system, is or frequently, by tertiary central syphilis, difficult Spirochetes http://ebooksmedicine.net later demonstrate to the much during are more

General Neurosyphilis: Tabes paresis dorsalis Meningovascular

bone, others lobatum Aortitis: regurgitation Skin, Gummas: Aneurysms Aortic Hepar

Infantile:

Childhood: Hutchinson Eighth teeth nerve deafness

Fig. Proteanmanifestationsofsyphilis. 18.19

of likely or much of are be are those than in disease, accordingly secondary stages the infectious primary to less patients and disease. stages

fetus T. development the may syphilis. of pallidum to pregnancy, the transmitted infected leading any placenta at the to congenital time be also from mother an during across The is transmission greatest numerous. most are of of spirochetes stages during early disease, secondary) likelihood and (primary when the manifestations routine of for be maternal is the all pregnancies. serologic subtle, syphilis in testing may Because disease mandatory congenital until typically after of month not fourth syphilis the pregnancy. The of develop do stigmata infants as die in month. the utero, fourth of treatment, of after the In typically absence many as 40% infected expected rise The of in rates congenital years. have is recent women syphilis to because incidence increased in infection

cells. lesion MORPHOLOGYThe endarteritis with infiltrate inflammatory an plasma pathognomonic a proliferative is of rich in microscopic syphilis accompanying Endarteritishasacentralroleintissueinjuryatallsitesinvolvedbysyphilis,butitspathogenesisisnotunderstood;thereisnoevidencethatthespirochetescauseanydamagetohosttissuesdirectly.Instead,itisthoughtthatthehostimmuneresponseisresponsiblefortheendothelialcellactivationandproliferationthatisthehallmarkoftheendarteritis,whicheventuallyleadstoperivascularfibrosisandluminalnarrowing.

ducreyi distinguishitfromthesoftchancreofchancroidcausedbyHaemophilus characteristiclesions.Thechancre (discussedlater).Theprimarychancreinmalesusuallyisontheglans,corona,orperianalregion.Infemales,multiplechancresmaybepresent,usuallyonthelabiaorvaginaaswellastheperianalregion.Thechancrebeginsasasmall,painless,firmpapule2to4weeksaftersexualexposure,whichgraduallyenlargestoproduceapainlessulcerwithwell-defined,induratedmarginsanda“clean,”moistbase( ofprimarysyphilisistypically to induratedandhasbeenreferredtoasahardchancre,

Fig.18.20 ).Regionallymphnodesoftenareslightlyenlargedandfirm.Microscopicexaminationoftheulcerrevealsthetypicallymphocyticandplasmacyticinflammatoryinfiltrateandendarteritis.Spirochetesarereadilydemonstrableinhistologicsectionsofearlylesionswiththeuseofstandardsilverstains(e.g.,Warthin-Starrystains)orimmunohistochemicalstainsspecificforspirochetes.Withinapproximately2monthsofresolutionofthechancre,thelesionsofsecondarysyphilisappear.Themanifestationsofsecondarysyphilisarevariedbuttypicallyincludeacombinationofgeneralizedlymphnodeenlargementandavarietyofmucocutaneous lesions. of feet. soles Skinlesionsusuallyaresymmetricallydistributed;maybemaculopapular,scaly,orpustular;andcharacteristicallyinvolvethepalms of hands the and the mayappear(nottobeconfusedwithcondylomaacuminatacausedbyHPV)(Chapters18and23).Superficialmucosallesionsresemblingcondylomatalatacanoccuranywherebutareparticularlycommonintheoralcavityandpharynxandontheexternalgenitalia.Histologicexaminationofmucocutaneouslesionsduringthesecondaryphaseofthediseaserevealsthecharacteristicproliferativeendarteritisand,withspecialstainsorimmunohistochemistry,spirochetes,whichareoftenabundant.Lymphadenopathyismostcommonintheneckandinguinalareas.Histologicexaminationofenlargednodesdemonstrateshyperplasiaofgerminalcentersaccompaniedbyincreasednumbersofplasmacellsor,lesscommonly,granulomasorneutrophils.Lesscommonmanifestationsofsecondarysyphilisincludehepatitis,renaldisease,eyedisease(iritis),andgastrointestinalabnormalities. Inmoistskinareas,suchastheanogenitalregion,innerthighs,andaxillae,broad-based,elevatedlesionstermedcondylomata lata

Fig. 18.20 (A)Syphiliticchancreofthescrotum.Suchlesionstypicallyarepainlessdespitethepresenceofulceration,andtheyhealspontaneously. (B)Histologicfeaturesofthechancreincludeadiffuseplasmacellinfiltratebeneathsquamousepitheliumofskin.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

aortitis accountsfor10%ofcasesoftertiarysyphilisoverallbutoccursatincreasedfrequencyinthosewithconcomitantHIVinfection;itisdiscussedindetailinChapter22.Largeareasofparenchymaldamageintertiarysyphilisresultintheformationofagumma. developinapproximatelyonethirdofuntreatedpatients,usuallyafteralatentperiodof5yearsormore.Thesearedividedintothreemajorcategories:cardiovascularsyphilis,neurosyphilis,andso-called“benign”tertiarysyphilis, Lesionsassociatedwithtertiary andaccountsformorethan80%ofcasesoftertiarydisease;itismuchmorecommoninmenthaninwomen.SyphiliticaortitisisdiscussedfurtherinChapter10.Neurosyphilis syphilis whichmayoccursinglyorincombination.Cardiovascularsyphilistakestheformofsyphilitic Onmicroscopicexamination,thegummacontainsacentralzoneofcoagulativenecrosissurroundedbydensefibroustissuecontainingamixedinflammatoryinfiltratecomposedoflymphocytes,plasmacells,activatedmacrophages(epithelioidcells),andoccasionalgiantcells,featuresthatsuggestadelayedhypersensitivityreaction.Gummasoccurmostcommonlyinbone,skin,andthemucousmembranesoftheupperairwayandmouth,butanyorganmaybeaffected.Spirochetesareonlyrarelydemonstrable.Oncecommon,gummashavebecomeexceedinglyrarethankstoeffectiveantibioticssuchaspenicillin.TheyarereportednowmostlyinpatientswithAIDS.

includestillbirth,infantilesyphilis,andlate(tardive)congenitalsyphilis. syphilis Manifestationsofcongenital

Amonginfantswhoarestillborn,themostcommonmanifestationsarehepatomegaly,boneabnormalities,pancreaticfibrosis,andpneumonitis.Theliveroftenshowsextramedullaryhematopoiesisandportaltractinflammation.Changesinthebonesincludeinflammationanddisruptionoftheosteochondraljunctioninlongbonesand,onoccasion,boneresorptionandfibrosisoftheflatbonesoftheskull.Thelungsmaybefirmandpaleasaresultofthepresenceofinflammatorycellsandfibrosisinthealveolarsepta(pneumoniaalba).Withspecialstains,spirochetesarereadilyseenintissuesections.

syphilis Infantile infantspresentwithchronicrhinitis(snuffles)andmucocutaneouslesionssimilartothoseseeninsecondarysyphilisinadults.Visceralandskeletalchangesresemblingthoseseeninstillborninfantsalsomaybepresent. referstocongenitalsyphilisininfantsthatmanifestsatbirthorwithinthefirstfewmonthsoflife.Affected

syphilis tardive, congenital or referstocasesofuntreatedcongenitalsyphilisofmorethan2years’duration.ClassicmanifestationsincludetheHutchinsontriad:notchedcentralincisors,interstitialkeratitiswithblindness,anddeafnessfromeighthcranialnerveinjury.Otherchangesincludeaso-called“sabershin”deformitycausedbychronicinflammationoftheperiosteumofthetibia,deformedmolarteeth(“mulberrymolars”),chronicmeningitis,chorioretinitis,andgummasofthenasalboneandcartilagewitharesultant“saddlenose”deformity. •Late,

Syphilis to stages short all antibiotics sufficient a sensitive highly such the of of remains to as treat penicillin, disease. course which is of Serology mainstay is diagnosis. the antibody include tests nontreponemal antitreponemal syphilis Serologic and for antibody tests tests. Nontreponemal that antigen host is an cardiolipin, to tissues tests the antibody in both measure treponemal wall. cell present and rapid antibodies and reagin the Laboratory by Venereal Disease Research tests. These (RPR) plasma detected (VDRL) are positive positive infection weeks antibody of 6 are Nontreponemal of to secondary infection. are in and 4 phase tests usually the strongly by some persistently revert antibody However, tertiary may to during on conversely, or, the may positive successful negative in results nontreponemal test treatment. phase be occasion after patients antibody deserve points additional regarding emphasis: nontreponemal tests Two

disease, primary are chancre. antibody the results during of of test often even Nontreponemal early the in negative stages a presence of be should suspicion, few a in these is there If high weeks. degree tests repeated a

to syphilis. As many as VDRL positive 15% unrelated results test are of and including false-positive may a results, frequency acute antibody These conditions, which in 4). syndrome (transient) (persistent), with chronic increase with variety associated are age or (Chapter antiphospholipid of be the

weeks an but remain positive infection after tests) also 4 antibody positive treatment. become after they Treponemal even successful those (unlike 6 for indefinitely, nontreponemal usually antibody within to tests antibody test. those confirm used have in with been nontreponemal diagnosis of treponemal antibody the tests syphilis positive Historically, a to and to algorithm treponemal use diagnosis. antibody tests screening test to the confirm some this have centers and reversed now tests improvements, antibody However, for thanks recent nontreponemal considered tests, be to confounding when and infection response the tests As mounted) influence pitfalls antibody infection, the are too for an HIV-infected. timing who been test these with interpreting the (e.g., altered immunity, including the all particularly relative certain for to have those must serologic of of early in

http://ebooksmedicine.net

SyphilisiscausedbyT. pallidum andhasthreestages.

developsontheexternalgenitaliaalongwithregionallymphnodeenlargement. Primarysyphilis:Apainlesslesioncalledachancre

Secondarysyphilis:Generalizedlymphadenopathyandmucocutaneouslesionsthatmaybemaculopapularortaketheformofflatraisedlesionscalledcondylomata lata.

Tertiarysyphilis:Maycauseproximalaortitisandaorticinsufficiency;mayinvolvethebrain,meninges,andthespinalcord;ormaycausefocalgranulomatouslesionscalledgummas inmultipleorgans.

Congenitalsyphilisiscausedbymaternaltransmissionofthespirochetesduringvaginalbirth,mostlyduringtheprimaryandsecondarystagesofdiseaseinthemother.Itmayleadtostillbirthorcausewidespreadtissueinjuryinliver,spleen,lung,bones,andpancreas.

Mostsyphiliticlesionsdemonstrateproliferativeendarteritisandaplasmacell–richinflammatoryinfiltrate.Gummashaveacentralareaofnecrosissurroundedbylymphoplasmacyticinfiltrates,activatedmacrophages,andfibrosis.

Thediagnosticmainstayisserologictesting.Nontreponemalantibodytests(VDRLandRPR)areusuallypositiveinearlydisease,butmaybenegativeinadvanceddisease.Treponemespecificantibodytestresultsbecomepositivelaterandremainpositiveindefinitely.

by Gonorrhea is sexually infection caused Neisseria gonorrhoeae. a transmitted diseases to It only among chlamydial second is the States. reportable (discussed later) infection in communicable United 2014, health an problem. cases major reported public remains in a With 350,000 estimated it of with in Chlamydia particularly common, other trachomatis, is Coinfection which with found males STDs gonorrhea. 30% is of gravity resistant of to that gonococcal infections antibiotics. gonorrhoeae are increased N. strains the has multiple of The with emergence

Humans natural for the are reservoir N. gonorrhoeae. only spread requires of direct an highly mucosa sexual is organism during The infection the contact individual, activity. infected fastidious, with usually and of adhesion and molecules initially or a 9). termed variety bacteria attach to the using columnar structures mucosal epithelium, pili The of transitional type, (Chapter of particularly membrane-associated such being prevents body as urine the fluids endocervical from away attachment organism unceremoniously or flushed Such by mucus. of then tissues to host. The the through cells invade epithelial the organism the penetrates deeper

MORPHOLOGYN. gonorrhoeae provokesanintense,suppurativeinflammatoryreaction.Inmales,thismanifestsmostoftenasapurulenturethraldischarge,associatedwithanedematous,congestedurethralmeatus.Gram-negativediplococci,manywithinthecytoplasmofneutrophils,arereadilyidentifiedinGramstainsofthepurulentexudate(

).Ascendinginfectionmayresultinthedevelopmentofacuteprostatitis,epididymitis( Fig.18.21

disease ),ororchitis.Abscessesmaycomplicateseverecases.Urethralandendocervicalexudatestendtobelessconspicuousinfemales,althoughacuteinflammationofadjacentstructures,suchastheBartholinglands,isfairlycommon.Ascendinginfectioninvolvingtheuterus,fallopiantubes,andovariesresultsinacutesalpingitis,sometimescomplicatedbytuboovarianabscesses.Theacuteinflammatoryprocessisfollowedbythedevelopmentofgranulationtissueandscarring,withresultantstricturesandotherpermanentdeformitiesoftheinvolvedstructures,givingrisetopelvic inflammatory Fig.18.22 (Chapter19).

Fig. 18.21 gonorrhoeae. Neisseria Gramstainofurethraldischargedemon-stratescharacteristicgram-negative,intracellulardiplococci(arrow). Dallas,Texas.) Dr. Pathology, of Medical of University Texas Rita Southwestern (Courtesy Gander, Department School, of

Fig. Acuteepididymitiscausedbygonococcalinfection.Theepididy-misisinvolvedbyanabscess.Normaltestisisseenontheright. 18.22

http://ebooksmedicine.net

dysuria, a infected time most is infection. initial presence urinary males, urethral to exudate In the gonorrhea and of mucopurulent of by of 2 days the 14 frequency, manifested within contacts asymptomatic gonorrhea. women in detected of can infection be gonococcal urethral symptomatic However, of male 40% with with of in of anti-microbial Treatment organism symptoms. eradication and results therapy prompt resolution appropriate the to the may involve infections and ascend Untreated testis. prostate, seminal vesicles, epididymis, sterility. in more may Neglected be by complicated permanent by cases stricture advanced cases, chronic and, urethral Untreated carriers gonorrhoeae. also may chronic N. of men become

may associated or vaginal intercourse vaginal discharge. Among asymptomatic female be infections by acquired acute may and lower patients, be with pain, dysuria, pelvic leading tubes by may complicated cases ovaries. ascending inflammation infection, the fallopian of acute (salpingitis) Untreated and to be increased risk resultant an tubes for the with infertility occur, and ectopic fallopian Scarring of pregnancy. may to genital the peritoneal gutter infection may right liver, in of the spread gonococcal cavity, of resulting dome the perihepatitis. may extend tract paracolic Gonococcal where exudate up the upper the to the and both oropharynx primary females anorectal proctitis, other include Depending sites of and infection practices, the acute and sexual with the on respectively. in area, pharyngitis resultant males

to much infection than infection, 0.5% in is of cases occurring of less local gonorrhea. Disseminated 3% common than more It females males. in in is frequent and include, or tenosynovitis, commonly, Manifestations arthritis, hemorrhagic skin lesions. pustular most meningitisarerarepresentations.Strainsthatcausedisseminated infecting usually to of complement, the but rare the with Endocarditis susceptible inherited infection are complement to resistant spread and regardless patients deficiencies systemic lytic of are action strain.

through canal. birth Gonococcal to infants may during passage the transmitted be infection eyes the an past. important of cause in develop of neonatorum), purulent affected The the blindness neonate infection (ophthalmia may The application this routine ointment of newborns eyes of to has markedly disorder. reduced antibiotic the

of nucleic culture and a that infections. variety gonococcal to tests can organism-specific acids diagnose used be detect Both The that determination advantage antibiotic of of permits sensitivity. it culture is more are and being culture, are acid–based more sensitive Nucleic somewhat and rapid than increasingly. tests used

GonorrheaisacommonSTDaffectingthegenitourinarytract.Controlofdisseminationrequiresaneffectivecomplement-mediatedimmuneresponse.

Gonorrheapresentswithdysuriaandamilky,purulenturethraldischarge,althoughahighfrequencyofcasesareasymptomatic.

About30%ofmenwithgonococcalurethritisalsoareinfectedwithC. trachomatis.

Pregnantwomencantransmitgonorrheatonewbornsduringpassagethroughthebirthcanal.

Diagnosiscanbemadebycultureoftheexudatesaswellasbynucleicacidamplificationtechniques.

forms most the Nongonococcal of common cervicitis (NGU) urethritis and STD. are the C. in and Trichomonas are and Mycoplasma urealyticum. A of organisms NGU trachomatis, of cervicitis, genitalium, pathogenesis including Ureaplasma vaginalis, variety implicated cause the States, this of most by cases United organism In caused STD apparently trachomatis, believed the United in be bacterial are to the C. States. is and most common NGU. a cause as of a genitalium is Mycoplasma close second certain in agents men geographically sex men. The of and patient a frequency having populations causative with such varies no pathogen world 50% wide can be of almost identified. cases In the As is infection. gonorrhea earlier, frequently infection accompanied discussed by chlamydial

intracellular is trachomatis pathogen. small bacterium an that gram-negative is obligate C. a It two forms. exists in elementary is extracellular limited capable infectious least in of survival the form, environment. body, at The the process endocytosis. body up The of primarily host cells, is taken receptor-mediated a through by elementary Once body. reticulate metabolically the form, into cell, active differentiates a the inside the elementary termed body epithelial reticulate the which and tropism ultimately new bodies, of Using body infectious cells. cell, for columnar host elementary have energy the sources a replicates the forms

are from associated are of range trachomatis with indistinguishable that caused by clinical a C. N. features those infections wide virtually gonorrhoeae. present exposure Clinically, dysuria after urethral 5 with or without weeks 1 to typically with patients discharge. and, Patients sex, engage pelvic conjunctivitis, disease, in inflammatory develop individuals may pharyngitis, anal prostatitis, among proctitis. perihepatic who epididymitis, inflammation, is the young epididymitis of common men. in It cause most large men to percentage gonococcus, of are both women asymptomatic. and a Similar in venereum next C. discussed (LGV), the section. lymphogranuloma also trachomatis causes transmitted to exposed and be 50% 15% develop of pneumonia develop conjunctivitis. up infection birth, The chlamydial during may vaginal chlamydial newborns newborns to where

the and chlamydial virtually lymphogranuloma are venereum, morphologic clinical The of features identical to gonorrhea. of those of with infection, exception a predominance characterized of by a The mucopurulent contains watery is infection discharge that primary neutrophils. to are sections. Organisms visible not Gram-stained in culture use isolated gonococcus, of media. C. contrast trachomatis the with cannot conventional be In the with best now The acid standard. urine, a on made test voided by nucleic is the gold amplification is which diagnosis syndrome), Another in infection who important positive. patients of chlamydial (formerly known is HLA-B27 as manifestation Reiter reactive are predominantly arthritis condition of mucocutaneous as typically a and lesions. urethritis, arthritis, combination conjunctivitis, manifests This generalized

•NGUandcervicitisarethemostcommonformsofSTD.MostcasesarecausedbyC. http://ebooksmedicine.net trachomatis, andtherestbyT. vaginalis,

M. urealyticum. genitalium and U.

trachomatis C. isagram-negativeintracellularbacteriumthatcausesadiseasethatisclinicallyindistinguishablefromgonorrheainbothmenandwomen.Diagnosiscanbemadebysensitivenucleicacidamplificationtestsinurinesamplesorvaginalswabs.

InpatientswhoareHLA-B27positive,C. trachomatis infectioncancausereactivearthritisalongwithconjunctivitisandgeneralizedmucocutaneouslesions.

certain or of C. trachomatis the a common caused disease nongonococcal strains ulcerative that those from earlier. LGV is discussed cervicitis urethritis causing by distinct chronic, more are Caribbean Africa, Asia, It endemic region, of South in the is America. and parts who co with HIV. often are in in been An infections the with the incidence men of part past in having 15 infected has large US in years, men, increased due sex noted in partners. most among often seen later), are LGV of with multiple individuals the case granuloma of sporadic (discussed cases sexual As inguinale

neutrophilic MORPHOLOGYLGVmaypresentasnonspecificurethritisorpapularorulcerativelesionsinvolvingthelowergenitalia.Subsequently,tenderenlargedmattedinguinaland/orfemorallymphadenopathyensuesthattypicallyisunilateralandisoftenassociatedwithfistuloustracts.Proctocolitisalsocanbeseen.Thelesionscontainamixed inflammatory granulomatous and response. abscesses). Variablenumbersofchlamydialinclusionsmaybeseeninthecytoplasmofepithelialcellsorinflammatorycellswithspecialstainingmethods.Regionallymphadenopathyiscommon,usuallyappearingwithin30daysofthetimeofinfection.Lymphnodeinvolvementischaracterizedbyagranulomatousinflammatoryreactionassociatedwithirregularlyshapedfociofnecrosisandneutrophilicinfiltration(stellate Withtime,theinflammatoryreactiongivesrisetoextensivefibrosisthatcancauselocallymphaticobstructionandstrictures,producinglymphedema.

exposure, a mucosal form a infection ulcer of genital to Within site of at inflammatory or inoculation 1 the the reaction. primary 2 in appears weeks of nodes, to exposure. 2 seed lymphadenitis after the organisms at but heal triggering draining lesions 6 sites primary These initial lymph a the spontaneously, necrotizing weeks these is and formation. lead usually to and The unilateral may painful, abscess lymphadenitis Abscesses tissues. inflammatory surrounding soft the process spreading sometimes rupture, into bowel bleeding, pain, associated mimic may to fever, and that with constipation, disease. infections features Rectal progress proctocolitis, inflammatory If may inflammation and fibrosis. untreated, fissures develop and strictures to secondary rectal

are is of The laboratory diagnosis not LGV serologic difficult specificity. because low and tests have tests standardized more sensitivity with As specific highest acid becoming amplification and chlamydial have the available. tests infections, are and other widely nucleic not where amplification tests are acid particularly areas in still are but less and sensitive Culture available. used, tests nucleic are serologic

ducreyi, Chancroid, called the by coccobacillus. venereal “third” (after an gram-negative sometimes disease a and gonorrhea), small, caused infection acute, ulcerative is syphilis Haemophilus disease most among groups, lower prostitutes. The more is in is in have areas regular and with contact particularly prevalent who socioeconomic tropical and subtropical common men the in the Africa Chancroid is cofactor an of and infection. as where one serves of most in Asia, causes it common Southeast genital of transmission HIV ulcers important widely PCR-based and most are facilities in probably not tests do underdiagnosed Chancroid H. not for STD have isolating is United available. clinics ducreyi, States the because

MORPHOLOGYTheprimarylesionofchanchroidappearsfirstasapapulethatrapidlybreaksdowntoproduceaulcer.Onmicroscopicexamination,theulcerofchancroidcontainsasuperficialzoneofneutrophilicdebrisandfibrin,withanunderlyingzoneofgranulationtissuecontainingareasofnecrosisandthrombosedvessels.Adense,lymphoplasmacyticinflammatoryinfiltrateispresentbeneaththelayerofgranulationtissue.Secondarilyinvolveddraininglymphnodesalsoexhibitnecrotizinginflammationthatfrequentlyprogressestoabscessformation.

days primary chanchroid within lesion appears 7 of of inoculation. The to 4 on most area. usually vagina patients, periurethral lesions in or female occur In is male lesion the penis; the the primary in patients, is of in of Over to be more irregular the to than likely days, course surface the primary the several painful lesion erodes an which females. ulcer, males in produce 2 cases of of tender inguinal within enlarged and particularly primary the to in 1 about 50% lymph inoculation. regional nodes, The weeks in the region, become ulcers. the and nodes overlying erode (buboes) to chronic, draining In enlarged skin inflamed the may cases, produce untreated on culture definitive is when used, ducreyi available H. than sources; requires media the not 80%. are identification even less widely media are from special commercial A of sensitivity such that diagnosis based on Therefore, the clinical alone. grounds is diagnosis often

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Calymmatobacterium related chronic coccobacillus caused granulomatis, encapsulated minute, inguinale to the Klebsiella is a disease genus. inflammatory Granuloma a by is Western and the subtropical parts tropical rural the endemic certain it of in in This United is regions. but States uncommon disease Europe, and transmission associated of a granulomatis occurs C. in of multiple is partners. urban with typically sexual it history settings, When genitalia. with cases scarring, external by (elephantiasis) associated obstruction lymphatic and often of lymphedema the are Untreated characterized extensive and of widely difficult, is not assays organism the are Culture available. PCR-based

MORPHOLOGYGranulomainguinalecausesgenitalulceration,accompaniedbythedevelopmentofabundantgranulationtissue.Disfiguringscarsmaydevelopinuntreatedcases,sometimesassociatedwithformationofurethral,vulvar,oranalstrictures.Incontrastwithchancroid,regionallymphnodestypicallyaresparedorshowonlynonspecificreactivechanges.

hyperplasia). Microscopicexaminationofactivelesionsrevealsmarkedepithelialhyperplasiaatthebordersoftheulcer,sometimesmimickingcarcinoma(pseudoepitheliomatous Amixtureofneutrophilsandmononuclearinflammatorycellsispresentatthebaseoftheulcerandbeneaththesurroundingepithelium.TheorganismsaredemonstrableinGiemsa-stainedsmearsoftheexudateasminutecoccobacilliwithinvacuolesinmacrophages(Donovan bodies). Silverstains(e.g.,theWarthin-Starrystain)alsomaybeusedtodemonstratetheorganism.

LYMPHOGRANULOMAVENEREUM,CHANCROID,ANDGRANULOMAINGUINALE

serotypesthataredistinctfromthosethatcausenongonococcalurethritis.LGVisassociatedwithurethritis,ulcerativegenitallesions,lymphadenopathy,andinvolvementoftherectum.Thelesionsshowbothacuteandchronicinflammation;theyprogresstofibrosis,withconsequentlymphedemaandformationofrectalstrictures.Diagnosisismadebynucleicacidamplificationtestsandserology. LGViscausedbyC.trachomatis

ducreyi H. infectioncausesanacutepainfululcerativegenitalinfectioncalledchancroid. Inguinalnodeinvolvementoccursinmanycasesandleadstotheirenlargementandulceration.Ulcersshowasuperficialareaofacuteinflammationandnecrosis,withanunderlyingzoneofgranulationtissueandmononuclearinfiltrate.Diagnosisispossiblebycultureoftheorganism.

inguinale Granuloma isachronicfibrosingSTDcausedbyC. granulomatis. Theinitialpapularlesiononthegenitaliaexpandsandulcerates,withformationofurethral,vulvar,oranalstricturesinsomecases.Microscopicexaminationrevealsgranulationtissueandintenseepithelialhyperplasiathatcanmimicsquamouscellcarcinoma.Organismsarevisibleassmallintracellularcoccobacilliwithinvacuolatedmacrophages(Donovanbodies).

protozoan transmitted cause frequent vaginalis T. that sexually is a a is of vaginitis. form adheres superficial lesions. to it causes mucosa, where trophozoite The the In acid-producing lactobacilli. with females, is loss associated vaginalis infection T. of often The incubation period is days. 28 to 4 yellow pruritus be It discharge. a may with asymptomatic associated profuse, vaginal or and be frothy, may cause and urinary dysuria. colonization frequency Urethral asymptomatic T. in may cases in infection but nongonococcal vaginalis some as manifest males typically is urethritis. in vaginal demonstrable of organism usually The smears scrapings. is

is or genitalis, herpes common infection, Genital a STD. herpes very approximately people States. year CDC, United get infections every 800,000 new According the to in US. the infection has 49 and in ages the HSV-2 of persons between One in 14 six HSV-1 higher. is likely genital With the of infections herpes overall prevalence of much rate increasing anogenital of both or can by 1 infections, (HSV-1) Although HSV-2. HSV-2 most are cases anogenital cause virus simplex caused herpes oral herpes and caused seen years by number sex. recent in due However, rise HSV-1, of infections oral to of have the in a practice increasing part genital the Genital population. sexually may infection active occur HSV any in contacts. is STDs, directly of for related risk to number infection As other with the the sexual are 95% HSV-1 HSV-2. for have men seropositive HIV-positive of sex who to with and/or Up men comes susceptible when or into broken mucosal of host. HSV is contact a with surface skin the a virus transmitted if at requires contact readily room direct because is dried. temperature, virus infected particularly transmission an inactivated individual, the Such with

vesicles erythematous A inclusion onthemucosaorskinofthelowergenitaliaandadjacentextragenitalsites.Theanorectalareaisaparticularlycommonsiteofprimaryinfectionamongmenwhohavesexwithmen.Histologicchangesincludethepresenceofintraepithelial MORPHOLOGYTheinitiallesionsofgenitalHSVinfectionarepainful, vesicles appearsasalightpurple,homogeneousintranuclearstructuresurroundedbyaclearhalo.Infectedcellscommonlyfusetoformmultinucleatesyncytia.TheinclusionsstainwithantibodiestoHSV,permittingarapid,specificdiagnosisofHSVinfectioninhistologicsectionsorsmears. accompaniedbynecroticcellulardebris,neutrophils,andcellsharboringcharacteristicintranuclearviralinclusions.TheclassicCowdry type

both mucocutaneous lesions. recurrent infection, HSV-2 and earlier, HSV-1 both As oral and indistinguishable cause or or produce discussed primary can genital be Primary produce a may asymptomatic of may signs HSV-2 infection symptoms. often with variety or and dysuria, accompanied and urethral lymph local be painful aches, node may such vesicular and systemic muscle tenderness, discharge, fever, Locally headache. as and manifestations, by lesions enlargement http://ebooksmedicine.net until mucosal the and period, during shedding is healed. lesions shed completely this actively HSV continues have months asymptomatic 3 occur shedding as viral However, can as long after diagnosis. disease. primary Signs several of may phase and weeks last the during for symptoms Recurrences than of and the are shorter milder primary episode. in duration often Diagnosis nucleic a by is “unroofing” culture acid viral most after testing lesion. or amplification vesicular fluid collected of made of

herpes genitalis is generally not life-threatening. In adults, immunocompetent in whom to patients, disseminated immunosuppressed develop. threat fatal, poses major HSV However, a disease may one-half Also genital either of vaginally which about is in HSV or from recurrent occurs herpes neonatal infection. infants delivered suffering of mothers infection, life-threatening primary canal. is the passage through viral during birth infection acquired The HSV Its parallel with risen has infection. incidence in the genital rise in involvement from and lungs. of the superficial disseminated to of eyes mouth) and such organs The herpes of as sites of infection vary or without manifestations neonatal liver other the (skin, involvement with CNS, of infants significant disease, die one-half of affected in morbidity with survivors. of Approximately the occurring the about 60% the testing for preferred PCR-based method diagnosis is of encephalitis. and more far sensitive

number several that tract, squamous HPV a carcinomas. of in proliferations to causes transformation as including undergo acuminatum, precancerous condyloma commonly the as well genital lesions but cervix latter involve also in commonly and occur oropharyngeal tonsil, penis, the vulva, most the 19), conjunctiva. (Chapter The Condylomata 11. by and types venereal acuminata, known caused HPV are as 6 also warts, These well female penis occur genitalia. as on as on the lesions the lata They with be confused syphilis. of not should condylomata secondary the delivery. Genital may be neonates vaginal transmitted during HPV to infection life-threatening subsequently potentially in upper develop respiratory affected and of the Recurrent papillomas tract may infants.

MORPHOLOGYInmales,condylomataacuminatausuallyoccuronthecoronalsulcusorinnersurfaceoftheprepuce,wheretheyrangeinsizefromsmall,sessilelesionstolarge,papillaryproliferationsmeasuringseveralcentimetersindiameter.Infemales,theycommonlyoccuronthevulva.ExamplesofthemicroscopicappearanceoftheselesionsarepresentedinChapter19.

•HSV-2and,lesscommonly,HSV-1cancausegenitalinfections.Initial(primary)infectionmaybeasymptomaticorcause painful,erythematous,intraepithelialvesiclesonthemucosaandskinofexternalgenitalia,alongwithpainfulregionallymphnodeenlargement.Recurrentlesionsingeneralarelesspainfulandlessextensivethanprimarylesions.

Onhistologicexamination,thevesiclesofHSVinfectioncontainnecroticcellsandfusedmultinucleategiantcellswithintranuclearinclusions(CowdrytypeA)thatstainwithantibodiestothevirus.

Neonatalherpescanbelife-threateningandoccursinchildrenborntomotherswithgenitalherpes.Affectedinfantsmayhavegeneralizedherpes,oftenassociatedwithencephalitisandconsequenthighmortality.

HPVcausesmanyproliferativelesionsofthegenitalmucosa,includingcondylomaacuminatum,precancerouslesions,andinvasivecancers.

genome: CE, perspectives The potential, SA: Tomlins prostate Oncol 2014. Barbieri and cancer Urol 32:53.e15, of from in cancer recent [A molecular prostate alterations data.] review sequencing

in of PJ, outcome et 68:1033, Bjartell prostate Genomic Catto AS, Boström 2015. JW, predictors Eur al: Urol cancer, decision useful in clinical [A are that recent prostate of cancer.] making review biomarkers for

Etiology, 36:403, 2009. of Clin natural W: epidemiology, hyperplasia, Am Bushman benign Urol and North history prostatic

al: Oncol Cuzick detection 15:e484, cancer, J, Thorat and G, et Prevention Lancet early prostate of Andriole 2014. MA, and factors for as methods as and well epidemiology of [A screening prostate review the current biomarkers.] risk cancer

Origins of bladder 11:494, McConkey Dinney B, Pathol Czerniak C, Annu Rev D: cancer, 2016. recent advances molecular in characterization of cancer.] [Reviews bladder

infections Lancet HIV, Sexually Donovan than 2004. 363:545, other B: transmitted of [A clinical STDs.] review

update system, J Urol An the JI: 183:433, 2010. grading Gleason of Epstein

Clin RN, transmitted in diseases—2014, Fanfair Med J KA: 81:91, Clinical Workowski update Cleve 2014. sexually with review treatment concise [A recommendations.] updated

Testicular 2014. 371:2005, J and Einhorn Med NH, updates, N Hanna cancer—discoveries LH: Engl and review features current [A pathologic germ cell of of tumors.] clinical comprehensive testicular

syndromes, tract 36:527, pain Genitourinary North lower prostatitis and Le Am 2009. symptoms, Urol Schaeffer BV, urinary Clin AJ: of and etiology, recent treatment pelvic cystitis the review [A with along and pain diagnosis, prostatitis syndromes.] interstitial of symptoms,

Clin 2010. Am PK, KB: 90:99, infections Lee Surg human and including Wilkins other immunodeficiency North Condyloma virus,

Urol of management Clin 5:211, AK, Nat Medical 2008. in Patel urinary tract approaches, treatment Chapple current and future symptoms men: Pract CR: lower terminology lower to article tract the [This evaluate urinary with symptoms.] used clarifies men

tumour, 2010. for cell Dev 20:225, testicular Rapley Predisposition Curr germ Nathanson alleles Genet EA, Opin KL: cell inherited in tumors. germ update risk [An on factors ].

penile in Compr 2013. cancer, J Natl Spiess al: Current et PE, 11:617, S, Pagliaro LC, Horenblas concepts Netw Canc the treatment systematic [A epidemiology penile of current cancers.] review of and

Reprod Semin transmitted Sexually diseases, PJ: 2003. Sulak 21:399, Med STDs.] exhaustive [An review of studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

the of Carcinoma Vulva

Cervical (SIL, Lesion Squamous Intraepithelial

Carcinoma the Cervix of Invasive

Mole: Partial Hydatidiform Complete and

(Toxemia Preeclampsia/Eclampsia of

vulva hair-bearing majora) the The and is genitalia and skin mucosa the minora). external female (labia includes (labia Disorders frequently vulva uncomfortable than rendering them inflammatory, most serious. more the are of life-threatening, vulva, tumors although Malignant the of are rare.

stimulus, dermatitis) of One irritant causes (contact common an the allergen most which (contact reactive exogenous to an vulvitis in response be of allergic is or an irritant dermatitis). may inflammation exacerbates often to “itching” Scratching-induced primary the (pruritus) condition. trauma associated intense secondary

erythematous to deodorants, and as well-defined or may a soaps, manifests be and crusting antiseptics, dermatitis weeping detergents, urine, Contact and eczematous plaques alcohol. reaction papules irritant dermatitis Allergic from other and soaps; chemical may perfumes; clinical treatments additives on in to appearance and creams, a lotions, antigens. has and similar clothing; result allergy

transmitted. which infections, are be often may sexually Vulvitis caused by also the pallidum, of vulvar the the cause papillomavirus causative herpes carcinoma intraepithelial genital infection (VIN), primary of and in N. (HSV-1 agent later); agent vulvovaginal acuminatum, or (discussed which squamous condyloma neoplasia North vulvar sites glands; are agents at inoculation. causes of important type infectious suppurative Treponema human chancre of of The a vulvar virus of gonorrhoeae, and HSV-2), America (HPV), one herpes; most simplex vulvitis, but Candida is cause sexually transmitted. a of not is also

is important An obstruction Bartholin complication of the of excretory vulvitis glands. ducts of abscess result This dilation glands of the and in painful blockage cyst) may formation. (Bartholin

http://ebooksmedicine.net

sclerosus infiltrate thinning is pegs, bandlike acellular, ( a cell zone of epidermis, a by characterized inflammatory fibrosis, rete homogenized, disappearance mononuclear and Lichen of of the dermal

Fig. 19.1 ). papules extend or that (termed white plaques It as and in may smooth, coalesce. time leukoplakia) appears become vaginal atrophic is the the stiffened, When the entire constricted. is and labia vulva affected, orifice and commonly prepubertal sclerosus groups Lichen women most postmenopausal affects all girls. but occurs and in age but pathogenesis etiology. affected of subepithelial frequency presence uncertain, activated an The inflammatory disorders the of increased and infiltrate in women T cells autoimmune autoimmune the is in the suggest sclerosus lichen symptomatic negative with however, sclerosus vulva. the benign; of HPV women cell Lichen carcinoma 5% develop 1% squamous to of is

of chronicus epithelial simplex is stratum granulosum) (particularly the marked and by hyperkeratosis. Lichen thickening there in suprabasal Increased seen layers; and is basal epithelial atypia is ( the however, mitotic activity no

Fig. 19.1 ). the infiltration Leukocytic is of pronounced. sometimes dermis are nonspecific irritation, chronic by an pruritus related These to inflammatory changes caused dermatosis. often underlying consequence a of leukoplakia. appears chronicus as simplex an of Lichen area is lesions the present isolated, cancer has are neoplastic simplex when often to some with lichen margins association increased at predisposition cancer, vulvar been demonstrated of While established no disease. chronicus suggesting

different chronicus may may lesions coexist form the the both lichen Lichen person, of sclerosus body areas the and leukoplakia. in same take in of and simplex carcinoma. or such in of Similar dermatoses, seen patches well cell white invasive 24), plaques variety vulva, malignant of are as carcinoma in squamous and psoriasis other squamous in cell as as as such lesions the benign and planus also (Chapter lichen situ a Thus, microscopic to are differentiate often examination biopsy similar-appearing and clinically these lesions. needed

Lichensclerosusischaracterizedbyatrophicepithelium,sub-epithelialdermalfibrosis,andbandlikechronicinflammation.

Lichensclerosuscarriesaslightlyincreasedriskfordevelopmentofsquamouscellcarcinoma.

Lichensimplexchronicusischaracterizedbythickenedepithelium(hyperplasia),usuallywithadermalinflammatoryinfiltrate.

Thelesionsoflichensclerosusandlichensimplexchronicusmustbebiopsiedtodistinguishthemdefinitivelyfromothercausesofleukoplakia,suchassquamouscellcarcinomaofthevulva.

the of vulva. name Condyloma any warty lesion the is to given can lesions two distinctive forms. assigned to one Most be of such syphilis today, (Chapter 18). in that elevated seen secondary minimally not are occur Condylomata commonly flat, lesions lata, common or acuminata The elevated distinctly somewhat flat papillary be and and more condylomata may rugose. but lesions. may on often single the They as sometimes multiple anogenital occur more anywhere as surface, vulva, to few to centimeters many diameter ( range When red-pink located they in millimeters a and on from the pink-brown are

Fig. 19.2 ). infection (a koilocytosis the a hallmark cytoplasmic a characteristic contour), cellular nuclear feature change is On examination, cytopathic characterized of by ( and vacuolization perinuclear histologic HPV wrinkled

Fig. 19.2 ). positive condylomata of than subtypes 11. are Indeed, for and 90% HPV more 6 acuminata men the lesions is transmitted, identical and the in men anus penis on occur around in HPV and and women. sexually HPV low-risk and 6 and progress to viral types, condylomas do are hence, cancer. commonly vulvar not 11 other cervix. the women in condyloma acuminata lesions vagina risk of and However, with HPV-related having are at

Fig.19.1Nonneoplasticvulvarepithelialdisorders.(A)Lichensclerosus.Thereismarkedthinningoftheepidermis,fibrosisofthesuperficialdermis,andchronicinflammatorycellsinthedeeperdermis. (B)Lichensimplexchronicusdisplayingthickenedepidermisandhyperkeratosis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.19.2(A)Numerouscondylomasofthevulva.(B)Histopathologicfeaturesofcondylomaacuminatumincludeacanthosis,hyperkeratosis,andcytoplasmicvacuolization(koilocytosis,center). Quebec, Dr.Alex McGill Ferenczy, (A, Montreal, of Courtesy Canada.) University,

women older mostly Carcinoma of age the vulva female all of genital 3% 60. represents in tract than occurring cancers, about carcinomas; the cell of tumors cell carcinomas. squamous are of adenocarcinomas basal are most other or carcinomas 90% Approximately

vulvar distinct forms cell carcinomas to differ two that and course. squamous appear There in of be pathogenesis related strains is in middle-aged type (especially occurs women, to cigarette and high-risk less HPV common particularly smokers. HPV form 16) The This neoplasia in is epithelium the termed changes often precancerous form vulvar preceded (VIN). intraepithelial by inevitable invasive patients many however, after to of and to progresses atypia in degrees carcinoma progression not many carcinoma eventually only in to is situ; and greater occur years. may VIN the appear risk to increase factors progression. and such immunodeficiency cigarette as Environmental of such smoking

principally following reactive women, lichen occurs sometimes history sclerosus. a of changes, in carcinoma A second form of squamous long epithelial older the lesion, subtle differentiated by (dVIN), abnormal vulvar a It cytologic characterized and preceded is layer intraepithelial neoplasia basal by confined atypia to keratinization. squamous untreated negative, to carcinoma. it cell HPV left keratinizing well-differentiated, If may give rise

MORPHOLOGYVINandearlyvulvarcarcinomascommonlymanifestasareasofleukoplakia.Inaboutone-fourthofthecases,thelesionsarepigmentedowingtothepresenceofmelanin.Withtime,theseareasaretransformedintoovertexophyticorulcerativeendophytictumors.HPV-positivetumorsareoftenmultifocalandwartyandtendtobepoorlydifferentiatedsquamouscellcarcinomas,whereasHPV-negativetumorsusuallyareunifocalandtypicallyarewell-differentiatedkeratinizingsquamouscellcarcinomas.

forms few of and carcinoma to for of to nodes. to years invade usually ultimately their first vulvar origin a Both lymph regional but tend confined spread, site remain correlates with metastasis the invasion. depth The of risk of with carcinomas, on outcome stage. most dependent tumor is As The nodes negative for decreases metastases. node 25% survival patients overall to to patients 5-year is to with lymph but 70% with lymph 93% for 41%

occur disease or Paget skin cells nipple (described an breast of that epithelial proliferation in is of the vulva can the of intraepidermal later). the underlying virtually vulvar associated where minority an always is (extramammary) an breast, the carcinoma, of underlying disease tumor. of only a Paget However, Paget with disease in unlike have cases arise cells. commonly vulvar progenitor most cells Instead, Paget appear from to epidermal

crusted a Paget the of scaly, inflammatory mimic red, as plaque may manifests dermatitis. appearance that disease an examination, the and finely ( On epidermis, cells pale, infiltrate and cytoplasm occasional large singly abundant with cytoplasmic granular groups histologic vacuoles in

Fig. ). 19.3 staining, melanoma, which is of acid–Schiff mucin, detected disease Paget periodic vulvar useful presence by mucin. The lacks (PAS) as from distinguishing in

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.19.3Pagetdiseaseofthevulva.Largetumorcellswithpale-pinkcyto-plasmareseeninfiltratingtheepidermis.Chronicinflammatorycellsarepresentintheunderlyingdermis.

may Paget decades years of for Intraepidermal or invasion. without evidence disease even persist Paget ultimately tumor there appendages, metastasize. associated and invade cells However, locally is when involving skin an may the poor. is prognosis After occurs, the metastasis

HPV-relatedvulvarsquamouscellcarcinomasusuallyarepoorlydifferentiatedlesionsandsometimesaremultifocal.Theyoftenevolvefromvulvarintraepithelialneoplasia.

Non–HPV-relatedvulvarsquamouscellcarcinomasoccurinolderwomenandusuallyarewelldifferentiatedandunifocal.Theyareoftenprecededby“differentiated”vulvarintraepithelialneoplasiaassociatedwithlichensclerosus.

VulvarPagetdiseaseischaracterizedbyared,scalyplaquecausedbyproliferationofepithelialcellswithintheepidermis;usually,thereisnounderlyingcarcinoma,unlikePagetdiseaseofthenipple.

of site disease. the primary vagina adult a seldom is females, In it involved or in cervix, often, organs is secondarily infections adjacent cancer bladder, arising vulva, by More (e.g., rectum).

septate vagina associated a duct or septate absence as fortunately cysts septate a congenital, total persistent entities vagina, lateral uterus), arising and from the rests. double and wolffian Congenital duct and, vagina are cervix of (usually Gartner include of the such uncommon anomalies sometimes, with

transient usually condition no of consequence. a common and is is Vaginitis that clinical vaginal (leukorrhea). a the with is of associated It discharge production fungi, including and bacteria, organisms parasites. implicated, variety large have of A been causes pregnancy, recent normal the setting flora), or immunodeficiency, that of commensals pathogenic disruption of in diabetes, become systemic Many abortion. are (which normal only microbial therapy antibiotic primary vagina adults, of uncommon. is infection In the gonorrheal frequent Trichomonas offenders, worthy because are and other of organisms mention, are Candida The vaginalis. they albicans white Candidal characterized by a is (monilial) discharge. curdy vaginitis by symptomatic influences strain. of or the 5% the aggressive women, a above is the of one more part normal listed of always almost This about infection involves superinfection of in appearance predisposing flora vaginal so organism new, vaginalis identified transmitted; copious is watery, parasites by in gray-green it be T. a which sexually can microscopy. produces discharge new 10% identified about also active in transmission from Trichomonas women; strain. of be can of usually stems a thus, asymptomatic infection sexual

60 cell occurs women with later). is to risk in usually cancer carcinoma of Squamous an (discussed than carcinoma vagina the of similar the uncommon the of those in that cervix older years extremely setting factors associated lesion that (VAIN) nearly with Vaginal is HPV intraepithelial a precursor always infection. associated is neoplasia of associated presumably is cases, DNA of carcinoma HPV-positive squamous with of HPV cell from VAIN. vagina the than the presence the more derived in Invasive half

prevent pregnancy adenocarcinoma, diethylstilbestrol clear in a was cell mothers tumor, to women very young a took threatened abortion. identified whose 1970, cluster rare of In during is determined to in in persons 40 Follow-up of low greater (<1 unexposed this utero incidence per exposed about than in that the the population). albeit 1000, times studies tumor diethylstilbestrol women, inclusions or In glandular develop one-third mucosa. about small of vaginal in exposed microcystic the appear by as ciliated These cells. or foci granular lesions lined mucus-secreting columnar red, condition recognize adenosis This and but lesions cell to is such because vaginal from important that is benign called arises. clear precursor is adenocarcinoma it is

http://ebooksmedicine.net

women. younger SarcomaBotryoidesand in uncommonly but may 5 years of young occur age, than children be other bladder bile may botryoides is also the urinary found (embryonal such as It sites, in ducts. Sarcoma and rhabdomyosarcoma) cancer primary as polypoid soft form of soft masses. a is tumors manifests tissue rare It with discussed vaginal further other that in is It Chapter in usually encountered infants 21.

cancers but lesions cervical in the (cervicitis), the inflammations of of cervix site is most the worldwide. also women relatively one are common Most banal

of be vaginal with Inflammatory purulent may extremely discharge. conditions cervix are the a associated common and although and coli differentiation enterococci, normal noninfectious, infectious aerobes vaginal Escherichia Candida and or be including streptococci, anaerobes, staphylococci, subclassified owing flora of to as presence vaginal incidental can Cervicitis the is difficult spp. and

and transmitted. are T. types Chlamydia urealyticum, Neisseria vaginalis, (the important of gonorrhoeae, HSV-2 certain all of often Much agent HPV, herpes more are Urea-plasma trachomatis, which sexually genitalis), of clinics. far these the of infection in accounting cases trachomatis of many sexually 40% of is pathogens, as for as common transmitted encountered by most cervicitis C. the newborn. maternal–infant common, noteworthy may serious, in infection are systemic less result sometimes transmission infections herpetic herpetic during in childbirth Although because fatal

or on attention comes leukorrhea. examination Cervicitis commonly routine because to of with antibiotics gonococcus. treated chlamydia and It is against empirically active are often that In instances, vaginalis. to amplification nucleic well of acid as as identify Trichomonas are presence some the these fluid used organisms on vaginal tests

origin HPV. the strains by cervix are caused of of epithelial tumors are oncogenic Most of and endocervix covering squamous the the the mucus-secreting to joined exocervix the epithelium of development, is at the epithelial columnar of During cervical os. junction undergoes the become the With to on puberty, squamocolumnar the exocervix. eversion, epithelium of onset columnar causing the visible however, a ( transformation zone, The metaplasia, columnar tumors commonly where arise called forming eventually most undergo the cells, exposed squamous region

Fig. 19.4

the of for squamous zone. tropism agent cervical causative neoplasia, cells the immature has transformation HPV, of a the are host eliminated within Most by and the months transient infections response. immune are HPV A and develop. lesions from which intraepithelial some invasive persists, cause precursors are squamous however, infections which (SILs), cervical carcinomas of most subset

by intraepithelial is nearly carcinoma. cervical in cases neoplasia molecular cervical of detectable HPV all (CIN) and methods Important related exposure the directly development factors thus of and are invasive HPV and for carcinoma include: to CIN risk

with previous partners multiple sexual partner Male

of high-risk papillomavirus strains by infection Persistent

replicate and DNA viruses, Like produce DNA its polymerases genome uses HPV most to virions. other cell host shed the prevent of circumstances virus be accompanied surface replication, which normal is the production. would of by mucosa, DNA yet under cessation a squamous Virions squamous from must maturation cell problem the two HPV viral “solves” E7. action and of oncoproteins, E6 through this HPV two and cells respectively RB, squamous they division that mature. tumor suppressors of variants suppress potent the (Chapter as 6), p53 E6 act risk” The proteins inhibit “high and E7 of to life and role HPV activity E7 in and have (e.g., central prone largely are E6 the of a to cycle other in vulva, HPV that explain infection cervix carcinogenic thus of HPV oropharynx). penis, sites the and the

low-risk propensity or to types HPV classified based their high-risk carcinogenesis. are as variants induce on

Fig.19.4Cervicaltransformationzoneshowingthetransitionfrommatureglycogenatedsquamousepithelium,toimmaturemetaplasticsquamouscells,tocolumnarendocervicalglandularepithelium.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

HPV Low-risk others) (hundreds (16, thousands/yr) (~1 of Invasive 18, million/yr) (5000/yr) infection (50,000/yr) integration Viral hSIL Persistent Metastasis (13,000/yr) cancer SIL Condyloma (6,11)

Fig.19.5Possibleconsequencesofhumanpapillomavirus(HPV)infection.Progressionisassociatedwithintegrationofvirusandacquisitionofadditionalmutationsasdiscussedinthetext.SIL, Squamousintraepitheliallesion;hSIL, High-gradecervicalintraepitheliallesion.

can for risk development important HPV to progress most of the carcinoma. infection that factor High-risk the SIL is viruses, HPV 16 approximately Two 18, of for and cases cervical SIL high-risk carcinoma. account types 70% and of to carcinoma. for HPV high-risk which risk types with to infections a persist, progression general, factor is more In likely are host to an integrate HPV propensity into a progression. is that cell types linked also to show genome, These event the the variants Low-risk 6 of 11) ( (e.g., types tract and the with condylomas genital development of lower HPV associated

Fig. and E6 contrast, 19.5), by express

host viral E7 as instead DNA. activities episomal weaker genome, with and different or remaining variants not do integrate the free into the cervix, HPV HPV cancer neoplastic of association the of infection process. with strong Despite sufficient drive is to the not invasive not high-grade mentioned lesions As later, precursor cancer. progress HPV-infected to do invariably such status a other sexually factors immune role. other suspected play with transmitted to as and agents are and hormonal Diverse coinfection tumor Collectively these the acquired both that factors mutations and of suppressor favor somatically involve genes. oncogenes acquisition host such well. integration contribute transformation leading a ways: which and to as always Viral integration to 2) negatively sometimes overexpression that integrates MYC, its to leads as regulates to disrupts E6 in increased near and 1) expression; their appear an cell HPV HPV two E7, gene oncogene

SquamousIntraepithelialLesion(SIL,CervicalIntraepithelialLesion)

termed the with usually epithelial SIL, development begins precedes carcinogenesis HPV-related decades. an overt of change the cancer by which years, sometimes precancerous many of whereas in In 45 idea, support about SIL carcinoma of invasive this of 30 incidence years at about peaks age, age. years peaks at

classification has time. with cervical The lesions of precursor evolved a the The system. two-tiered terminology of is a biology also only system current three-tiered management, replacing the disease reflects not that but patient

and low-grade SIL of intraepithelial still squamous neoplasia II lesion into and to lesion cervical cervical intraepithelial I), neoplasia II (CIN system. III referred III) and (CIN as intraepithelial previous I is encompassing the squamous often three-tiered divided (LSIL), intraepithelial (HSIL), high-grade

is HPV invasive not progress associated infection directly productive and LSIL does with carcinoma. to and to progress most Actually, LSILs regress a small only percentage HSIL.

levels replication. HSIL increased proliferation, of arrested demonstrates and maturation, epithelial viral lower at progression LSIL not treated risk considered high as for lesion, is carcinoma. is HSIL a premalignant to whereas

times progress is than to Importantly, to them HSILs the and more cancer of majority 10 even and fail are LSIL HSIL common while may precancerous, regress. discussed diagnosis later. the Patient rests on histopathologic as management shown in As

treat groups is two LSIL these of based decision HSIL lesions. in histories observe 19.1 on of the Table to and the differences , to natural

are cytologic preparations precancerous be with abnormality detected abnormalities on Cervical long can associated inspection. is any visible before in gross that lesions and rationale Papanicolaou are is for from the transformation examined SIL (Pap) of microscopically. which cells scraped the test, in zone detection the Early Pap developed. smear the The test ever cancer-screening successful remains most lowered dramatically year; 10 States, the of incidence deaths the women. In a top United has about mortality screening per in no cancer tumors 4000 cases the cervical fact, of about U.S. invasive cancer with to cervical among Pap in longer 13,000 annually ranks of causes its the 50,000 Paradoxically, annually. increased present more has level than of of cases incidence SIL to this. Increased contributed has detection certainly to HPV Drug approved for has testing Administration cervical U.S. The and DNA Food in scrapings. but sensitive has highly is This lower test

Table19.1NaturalHistoryofSquamousIntraepithelialLesions(SILs)

aProgressionwithin10years.LSIL,Low-gradeSIL;HSIL,high-gradeSIL. HSIL(CINII,III)30%60%10%(tocarcinoma)

http://ebooksmedicine.net

image). Fig.19.6Spectrumofsquamousintraepitheliallesions(SIL)withnormalsquamousepitheliumforcomparison:LSILwithkoilocytoticatypia;HSILwithprogressiveatypiainalllayersoftheepithelium;andHSILwithdiffuseatypiaandlossofmaturation(carcinomainsitu,far right

established. well guidelines not for have use its smear, been than Pap specificity and the specific that while that early system women cleared is the by in acquire process to over occurs these One most never 20s, and HPV usually years. a immune are progress infections their SIL, many consideration positive to to 30 with may identify is screening this this infection aged neoplasia. or more persistent DNA HPV as individual at only For is age that reason, women cervical likely for a recommended lead test older, an a

frequency warts are vaccine in and 16, the 11, HPV vaccine, associated quadrivalent HPV with cervical greatly cancers very lower 9-valent expected types genital genotypes. these to introduced and 6, more and effective recently of preventing HPV 18, The and the infections for are are cancer and vaccines only of protect women its Despite does current genotypes. already many vaccination HPV screening—many the for some supplant routine efficacy, the oncogenic against not at-risk infected, need cervical

Fig.19.6 illustratesthethreestagesofSIL.LSILischaracterizedbydysplasticchangesinthelowerthirdofthesquamousepitheliumandkoilocytoticchangeinthesuperficiallayersoftheepithelium.InHSIL(CINII),dysplasiaextendstothemiddlethirdoftheepitheliumintheformofvariationincellandnuclearsize,heterogeneityofnuclearchromatin,andthepresenceofmitoses,someatypical,abovethebasallayerextendingintothemiddlethirdoftheepithelium.ThesuperficiallayerofcellsinCINIIstillshowsdifferentiationandoccasionalkoilocytoticchangesHSIL(CINIII)ismarkedbyalmostcompletelossofdifferentiation,evengreatervariationincellandnuclearsize,chromatinheterogeneity,disorderlyorientationofthecells,andabnormalmitoses,changesthataffectvirtuallyalllayersoftheepithelium.Koilocytoticchangeusuallyisabsent.Thesehistologicfeaturescorrelatewiththecytologicappearancesshownin

Fig.19.7

Fig.19.7Cytologicfeaturesofsquamousintraepitheliallesion(SIL)inaPapanicolaousmear.Superficialsquamouscellsmaystaineitherredorblue.

(A)Normalexfoliatedsuperficialsquamousepithelialcells.(B)Low-gradesquamousintraepitheliallesion(LSIL). (CandD)Bothhigh-gradesquamousintraepitheliallesions(HSILs).Notethereductionincytoplasmandtheincreaseinthenucleus-to-cytoplasmratioasthegradeofthelesionincreases.Thisobservationreflectstheprogressivelossofcellulardifferentiationonthesurfaceofthecervicallesionsfromwhichthesecellsareexfoliated(see

Fig.19.6).

and Brigham Edmund Hospital, Boston, Dr. S. (Courtesy Massachusetts.) Women’s Cibas, of http://ebooksmedicine.net

clinical smear to Pap result. abnormal SIL an is attention through and asymptomatic comes lesions followed by is be they acetic colposcopy, the up in which so biopsied. These to cases used can highlight are acid Women treated careful excision biopsy). whereas are managed with conservatively biopsy-documented LSIL with persistent observation, (cone with HSILs and are surgical LSIL at vulvar, HSIL, as cervical, patients and Follow-up HPV-associated risk these for examination smears vaginal in women required remain cancers. with clinical and are

The adenocarcinomas small cervical adenosquamous cell (75%), mixed carcinomas cell most (20%) neuroendocrine carcinomas squamous carcinomas by followed (<5%). and common carcinomas and are HPV. with these are types associated of All carcinomas of of the carcinoma the been Pap invasive and increasing in owing glandular by of smear. proportion has detection lesions suboptimal adenocarcinomas of recent incidence squamous relative to Of interest, decades decreasing

a of precursor detection cell incidence at the after 15 to has 10 age Squamous about years SIL. of years, some carcinoma peak 45 and As SIL discussed, carcinoma unpredictable as already to well variable as genes in infection oncogenes. of and requires is progression mutations invasive suppressor HPV and tumor that progression (HIV) suggesting finding progression. in factors latter include Risk immunodeficiency cigarette preventing the virus a smoking immune for human plays infection, role surveillance and lesions. likely disease may progress risk carcinoma, suspicious and monitor with with factors smears examinations way is only who biopsy Pap patients identify Although reliable the of are help to the to SIL to coupled physical frequent course from

Fig.19.8 ).Microscopically,theinvasivetumorsoftenconsistoftonguesandnestsofsquamouscellsthatproduceadesmoplasticstromalresponse.Gradingisbasedonthedegreeofsquamousdifferentiation,whichrangesfromminimaltowell-differentiatedtumorsthatelaboratekeratinpearls.Raretumorswithneuroendocrinedifferentiationresemblesmallcellcarcinomasofthelungmorphologically.Tumorsencirclingthecervixandpenetratingintotheunderlyingstromaproduceabarrelcervix,whichcanbeidentifiedbydirectpalpation.Extensionintotheparametrialsofttissuescanaffixtheuterustothesurroundingpelvicstructures.Thelikelihoodofspreadtopelviclymphnodescorrelateswiththedepthoftumorinvasionandthepresenceoftumorcellsinvascularspaces.Theriskofmetastasisincreasesfromlessthan1%fortumorslessthan3mmindepthtomorethan10%afterinvasionexceeds3mm.

Fig.19.8Cervicaloswithsurrounding,invasive,exophyticcervicalcarcinoma.

in seen had have who is smear years. have Pap women never who not screened many Invasive been for a most cancer cervical often or cervical symptomatic, for coitus such leukorrhea, is coming (dyspareunia), In painful with unexpected dysuria. to patients medical attention often cancer bleeding, vaginal cases, or hysterectomy and treatment carcinomas biopsy. is treated small be node may The primary cone dissection; lymph with microinvasive alone and is not curative. of benefit in are chemotherapy instances also Radiation surgery where case carcinomas an by pursue cell tumor strongly course) predicted Mortality to and, type. in of most the is neuroendocrine (which stage aggressive

protruding benign (sometimes through endocervical masses seen are from polypoid the Endocervical exocervix). polyps the mucosa spaces smooth, few cystically as They centimeters filled glistening and can a have underlying with with large dilated a be surface mucinous as secretions. endocervical lining The the same of and the that cells are line epithelium composed canal. of surface mucus-secreting cysts the columnar underlying The cells. stroma scattered and may mononuclear contain edematous is and to may ulcerations. lead Superimposed of overlying squamous epithelium metaplasia the chronic inflammation arousing may have These they potential. lesions no concern, bleed, malignant thereby but

RiskfactorsforcervicalcarcinomaarerelatedtoHPVexposure,suchasearlyageatfirstintercourse,multiplesexualpartners,andotherfactorsincludingcigarettesmokingandimmunodeficiency.

theHPVvaccineiseffectiveinpreventinginfectionresultingfromtheHPVtypesmostcommonlyassociatedwithcarcinoma. http://ebooksmedicine.net NearlyallcervicalcarcinomasarecausedbyHPVinfections,particularlyhigh-riskHPVtypes16,18,31,and33;

•HPVexpressesE6andE7proteinsthatinactivatethep53andRBtumorsuppressors,respectively,resultinginincreasedcellproliferationandsuppressionofDNAdamage–inducedapoptosis.

Incervicalcancer,high-riskHPVisintegratedinthehostgenome,aneventthatincreasestheexpressionofE6andE7andcontributestoprogressiontocancer.

ThePapsmearisahighlyeffectivescreeningtoolforthedetectionofSILandcarcinomaandhassignificantlyreducedtheincidenceofcervicalcarcinoma.HPVtestingiscurrentlybeingusedinconjunctionwiththePapsmear.

myometrium, and consisting of of smooth made (corpus) glands up endometrium, the body The is stroma, uterus the composed of of muscle. and the are here. considered of significant more and frequent The uterus disorders the

depending whether respectively. neutrophilic of or chronic predominates, the Inflammation infiltrate or as is a on a acute classified endometrium lymphoplasmacytic presence of as are even chronic diagnosis the the plasma endometrium. present endometritis lymphocytes requires The cells, in normal of generally

of is or a pelvic disease Endometritis and C. infection. frequently gonorrhoeae inflammatory is result component of N. a trachomatis infiltrate the lymphoplasmacytic in superficial a shows Histologic neutrophilic with infiltrate. coexisting examination a endometrium stromal lymphoid follicles infection. particularly be seen, chlamydial Prominent may in causes with associated and frequently Tuberculosis endometritis, peritonitis. salpingitis granulomatous tuberculous inflammatory mainly tuberculous have it pelvic in differential and the is endemic, in women should is common from included endometritis for disease who immunocompromised countries recently Although States United persons, in be diagnosis emigrated in tuberculosis seen areas. endemic in in the which

also a of may to delivery or an presence as such subsequent result retained miscarriage of Endometritis foreign the device. be of or intrauterine a body conception products act intestinal a flora. infection or as tissue bodies foreign nidus Retained tract vaginal ascending or for by in of the body foreign Removal results typically or resolution. tissue offending

fever, pain, all Clinically, abdominal with abnormalities. forms menstrual endometritis manifest and of the ectopic there increased and fallopian damage is of addition, scarring to tubes. infertility pregnancy due and In an risk of

tissue endometrial to Adenomyosis of the myometrium. in refers presence the deep between of myometrium stroma, the interposed bundles. Nests are muscle endometrial or in the both glands, found uterine the wall. myometrium, in endometrial enlarged, uterus, often globular reactive tissue induces an of resulting This with a thickened hypertrophy just dysmenorrhea, produce prior and Extensive particularly can and menorrhagia, to endometriosis. with pain, pelvic may coexist adenomyosis menstruation,

the location in glands a outside the stroma defined endometrial and Endometriosis by is uterus. of presence in 10% of with infertility. many nearly It as occurs half of in their reproductive and as in years women women and and It ligaments, pouch multifocal frequently of structures pelvic Douglas, (ovaries, septum). tubes, involves uterine is rectovaginal often or periumbilical are Less the peritoneal cavity frequently, of distant tissues involved. areas as such heart, distant muscle, even are affected. and or lungs, nodes, skeletal sites lymph bone Uncommonly,

lesions, all the put which Four origin hypotheses been viable: are explain forth of of endometriotic dispersed have to

tubes menstrual through backflow implantation. leads proposes fallopian to is which currently The theory, favored, regurgitation that the

blood The the vessels “spread” to uterus holds metastases lymphatics. distant via sites can that tissue endometrial benign from and theory

which originates) (mesothelium abdomen other posits the theory, differentiation coelomic as hand, endometrium endometrial of and source. on from of metaplastic pelvis epithelium the The

circulating cell bone stem/progenitor extrauterine that marrow The theory, differentiate tissue. the endometrial cells from stem/progenitor proposes into

is suggest abnormal misplaced not tissue also is but just ( that Studies endometriotic

Fig. 19.9 ). E2. normal endometrium, particularly mediators, As tissue increased to exhibits of endometriotic levels compared inflammatory prostaglandin the stromal by and of It that proposed is by endometrial macrophages cells. activation results recruitment inflammation factors from made the also local of cells leading make aromatase, production estrogen. Stromal to treatment of survival explain and help pathogenesis in location endometriotic and of and inhibitors a effects of enhance foreign endometriosis) to tissue (a endometriosis. aromatase the beneficial the persistence COX-2 key These the feature the within inhibitors in factors the of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

factors Retrograde implants Activated PGE2 and Endometriotic macrophages cysts inflammatory Endometriotic Uterus Fig.19.9Proposedoriginsofendometriosis.Ovary COX2 proinflammatory mediators Stromal menstruation tube PGE2 Fallopian COX2 other

MORPHOLOGYEndometriosistypicallyconsistsoffunctioningendometrium,whichundergoescyclicbleeding.Becausebloodcollectsintheseaberrantfoci,theyappeargrosslyasred-brownnodulesorimplants.Theyrangeinsizefrommicroscopicto1to2cmindiameterandlieonorjustundertheaffectedserosalsurface.Often,individuallesionscoalescetoformlargermasses.Whentheovariesareinvolved,thelesionsmayformlarge,blood-filledcyststhatturnbrown(chocolatecysts)asthebloodages(

Fig.

19.10 ).Withseepageandorganizationoftheblood,widespreadfibrosisoccurs,leadingtoadhesionsamongpelvicstructures,sealingofthetubalfimbriatedends,anddistortionofthefallopiantubesandovaries.Thediagnosisdependsonfindingbothendometrialglandsandstromaatsitesexternaltotheendometrium.

Fig.19.10Ovarianendometriosis.Sectioningofovaryshowsalargeendo-metrioticcystwithdegeneratedblood(“chocolatecyst”).

manifestations the the The distribution of of endometriosis on clinical lesions. depend abdomen scarring eventual in lower of and Extensive often ovaries discomfort sterility. tubes the the fallopian produces and involvement on wall can dysuria, of bladder produce and (painful serosa defecation, the or Rectal involvement uterine respectively. pain may whereas intercourse) dyspareunia cause bleeding and pain and intraabdominal from cases all feature severe pelvic adhesions. intrapelvic dysmenorrhea Almost resulting

uterine seek the metrorrhagia medical periods), bleeding between time attention menorrhagia Women commonly prolonged bleeding. postmenopausal (irregular as bleeding for the or such (profuse period), or of the bleeding, abnormal at hyperplasia, causes and Common dysfunctional endometrial include leiomyomas, endometrial carcinoma. endometrial uterine bleeding, polyps,

( bleeding given case age in of depending the the of uterine probable any cause on varies patient The

Table 19.2 ). in bleeding uterine dysfunctional an uterus uterine called absence the is Abnormal lesion from organic the bleeding. of is dysfunctional cause uterine bleeding of (failure most ovulate). The anovulation common to in Anovulatory common and because cycles menarche in period hypothalamus/pituitary/ovarian most imbalances result and the perimenopausal are axis. fluctuations the of from hormonal at are causes of common anovulation Less

disease, disorders, disease, such Endocrine or as adrenal pituitary thyroid tumors.

polycystic on that follows). ovarian functioning such syndrome cell lesions, as or (granulosa tumors) a section (see Ovarian tumor ovarian

or other disorders. metabolic as disturbances, obesity, systemic malnutrition, such chronic Generalized

may from bleeding luteal thought also uterine stem from an Dysfunctional which result is to inadequate phase,

Table19.2CausesofAbnormalUterineBleedingbyAgeGroup

ReproductiveageComplicationsofpregnancy(abortion,trophoblasticdisease,ectopicpregnancy)Proliferations(leiomyoma,adenomyosis,polyps,endometrialhyperplasia,carcinoma)AnovulatorycycleOvulatorydysfunctionalbleeding(e.g.,inadequatelutealphase)

Proliferations(carcinoma,hyperplasia,polyps)

PostmenopauseProliferations(carcinoma,hyperplasia,polyps)Endometrialatrophy http://ebooksmedicine.net insufficient corpus by the of luteum. production progesterone

Adenomyosisreferstogrowthofendometriumintothemyometriumoftenwithuterineenlargement.

Endometriosisreferstoendometrialglandsandstromalocatedoutsidetheuterusandmostofteninvolvesthepelvicorabdominalperitoneum.Rarely,distantsitessuchasthelymphnodesandthelungsalsoareinvolved.

Theectopicendometriuminendometriosisundergoescyclicbleeding,andtheconditionisacommoncauseofdysmenorrheaandpelvicpain.

polyps, uterine hyperplasia, corpus the endometrial tumors. of and endometrial most carcinomas, common The smooth endometrial proliferative muscle lesions are earliest tend abnormal uterine produce All their to as bleeding manifestation.

if progestin, important can estrogen precursor marked, endometrial is proliferation which exaggerated carcinoma. prolonged to of sufficiently endometrial of relative (hyperplasia), An excess an or induce common cause of estrogen converts tissue as into estrogens. excess is A adipose precursors obesity, steroid ovary). causes syndrome and steroids ovarian of progestin, (such include in the failure granulosa-theca prolonged estrogenic cell ovulation tumors polycystic without (such counterbalancing excess of as estrogen estrogen-producing lesions ovary administration perimenopause), potential of as and of Other

categories of Endometrial atypia and on cytologic with is atypia hyperplasia without presence hyperplasia ( hyperplasia the placed two atypia: in based

Fig. 19.11).

of cytologic or development carcinoma. that classification concurrent this correlates atypia with the importance the The of finding presence is of endometrial endometrial progression and with whereas neoplasia 3%) risk also higher carries atypia endometrial Hyperplasia without called for (20%–50%). (EIN), a carcinoma, much hyperplasia is atypia, risk with 1% associated to cellular (between a low intraepithelial atypia must it with warrants the for patients cancer no carefully usually When longer be is evaluated hysterectomy of hyperplasia fertility. in a desiring and presence discovered, with progestins may In attempt to treatment younger the preserve be uterus. used an in patients, high-dose

also PTEN is risk 50%) carcinoma later), has (see most a atypia with type tumor identified been substantial factor (>70%). of in gene at suppressor estrogen hyperplasia of endometrioid carcinoma Unopposed the the endometrial frequency and inactivation common a for and (approximately that Along and a is precursor studies, these atypia with indicate for clinicopathologic lesion epidemiologic findings endometrioid carcinoma. endometrial hyperplasia with

Fig.19.11Endometrialhyperplasia.(A)Anovulatoryor“disordered”endo-metriumcontainingdilatedglands.(B)Hyperplasiawithoutatypia,character-izedbynestsofcloselypackedglands. (C)Hyperplasiawithatypia,seenasglandularcrowdingandcellularatypia.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

United In the countries, is States female frequent occurring many cancer genital tract. endometrial the other most in carcinoma the Western and and years 55 and between appears It 65 generally uncommon is 40. the age ages of before can into carcinoma. Endometrial serous and be endometrioid pathogenically broadly and carcinoma distinct two histologically divided categories: be are common such (carcinosarcoma), cell mixed other clear as tumor will of further. Mullerian carcinoma, not endometrial discussed less but and There types these carcinoma

hyperplasia endometrial in setting endometrial cancers the atrophy older setting estrogen arise the perimenopausal with excess of in of association whereas Endometrioid women, postmenopausal arise cancers in in women. serous in of endometrial of The for 80% carcinomas. cases endometrioid type accounts of glands. tumors histologic normal as endometrial because their to These designated similarity endometrioid are carcinoma and to (1) hypertension, exposure of (3) factors obesity, (2) Risk diabetes, this include for unopposed type infertility, (4) (5) estrogen. associated Many with are of of result endometrial estrogenic risk in stimulation the and increased hyperplasia. these factors endometrium In replacement endometrioid risk estrogen-secreting of is and prolonged it fact, that well ovarian therapy of the endometrial the estrogen carcinoma. type recognized increase tumors of the mismatch carcinoma. Mutations PTEN events in genes stepwise gene and suppressor repair in tumor the development early are endometrioid and mismatch germline in genes Syndrome) Syndrome) mutations for risk germline alterations at (Cowden (Lynch high are cancer. in PTEN Women this DNA repair with mutations and are of uncommon TP53 are this type. the late but tumor events in occur genesis relatively

is aggressive. less also serous common but carcinoma far endometrial of more type The endometrial accounts, tumors unopposed with estrogen is hyperplasia. roughly for not It of or and 15% associated mutations of in gene, all tumor mutations TP53 in whereas and genes have carcinoma Nearly DNA the PTEN repair rare. suppressor mismatch cases serous are in form an Serous early lesion are of of endometrial mutations carcinoma detected, such tumors role carcinoma. often for this (SEIC) TP53 a are development suggesting intraepithelial the serous in endometrial called which in mutations preceded by

Fig.19.12A–B ).Theyincludearangeofhistologictypes,includingthoseshowingmucinous,tubal(ciliated),andsquamousdifferentiation.Endometrioidcarcinomasofteninfiltratethemyometriumandcanentervascularspaces(lymphovascularinvasion).Theymayalsometastasizetoregionallymphnodes.Endometrioidcarcinomasaregraded1to3,basedonthedegreeofdifferentiation.

Serouscarcinomastypicallygrowinsmalltuftsandpapillaewithmarkedcytologicatypia.Theycanalsoformglandsthatattimescreateconfusionwithendometrioidcarcinoma,howeverserouscarcinomasexhibitmuchgreatercytologicatypia.Serouscarcinomasbehaveaggressivelyandthusarebydefinitionhighgrade.Immunohistochemistryoftenshowsdiffuse,strongstainingforp53inserouscarcinoma(

Fig.19.12C–D mutations(mutantp53accumulatesandhenceismoreeasilydetectedbystaining). ),afindingthatcorrelateswiththepresenceofTP53

carcinomas usually Endometrial irregular bleeding. manifest with postmenopausal or enlarges and structures tissues. uterus surrounding infiltrates may the become as surrounding the to affixed cancer progression, With metastasize, usually distant disseminates eventually to slow if is and nodes to untreated, carcinoma regional left Endometrioid more but sites. but precipitously 90%, therapy, is for rate 5-year the drops in early-stage higher-stage survival With endometrioid survival carcinoma tumors. with prognosis staging behavior often of strongly serous as The on with prognosis. operative high-stage it disease because a carcinomas its is but poor dependent presents aggressive

Endometrialhyperplasiaresultsfromunopposedendogenousorexogenousestrogen.

Riskfactorsfordevelopingendometrialhyperplasiaincludeanovulatorycycles,polycysticovarysyndrome,estrogen-producingovariantumor,obesity,andestrogentherapywithoutcounterbalancingprogestin.

Hyperplasiaisclassifiedbasedoncytologicatypia,whichdeterminestheriskofdevelopingendometrioidcarcinoma.

Onthebasisofclinicalandmoleculardata,twomajortypesofendometrialcarcinomaarerecognized:

carcinoma Endometrioid isassociatedwithestrogenexcessandendometrialhyperplasia.EarlymolecularchangesincludeinactivationofDNAmismatchrepairgenesandthePTEN gene.

oftheendometriumarisesinolderwomenandusuallyisassociatedwithendometrialatrophyandadistinctprecursorlesion,serousintraepithelialcarcinoma.MutationsintheTP53 geneareanearlyevent,usuallybeingpresentinserousendometrialintraepithelialcarcinomaaswellasinvasiveserouscarcinoma. Serous carcinoma

Stageisthemajordeterminantofsurvivalinbothtypes.Seroustumorstendtomanifestmorefrequentlywithextrauterineextensionandthereforehaveaworseprognosisthanendometrioidcarcinomas.

in from These 0.5 usually to 3 are diameter. sessile polyps cm range and project polyps from may http://ebooksmedicine.net Larger the

Fig.19.12Endometrialcarcinoma.(A)Endometrioidtype,grade1,infiltratingmyometriumandgrowinginaglandularpattern.(B)Endometrioidtype,grade3,hasapredominantlysolidgrowthpattern.(C)Serouscarcinomaoftheendometrium,withpapillaformationandmarkedcytologicatypia. mutation. (D)Immunohis-tochemicalstainingshowsaccumulationofp53,afindingassociatedwithTP53

uterine into the cavity. endometrial mucosa small They are composed with arteries. basalis, endometrium resembling frequently the of muscular are glands more are Some dilated. but they cystically architecturally, often normal the The often rearrangement monoclonal, the neoplastic component are thus cells of a stromal with constitute polyp. and of 6p21, region chromosomal

they of polyps Although time at any are endometrial the occur common menopause. most age, around may is abnormal they may significance Their clinical bleeding. produce uterine that main

are smooth termed that firmness often of to properly tumors the their from clinically are leiomyomas, in muscle the fibroids. Benign as referred myometrium arise because cells but reproductive more most tumor women. are of Leiomyomas age, considerably are and in women 30% frequent affecting black to the 50% common females, benign in of recurrent a These with such 6 of variety associated are endometrial several benign and also of different including other in are lipomas. chromosomes abnormalities, that polyps rearrangements 12 chromosomal found tumors and neoplasms, as have complex, in which leiomyomas. of component of transcription a encodes Mutations 70% identified to RNA the in the polymerase gene, up MED12 been presently by which not leiomyomas development mechanism understood. mutations to contribute is The of the MED12 leiomyomas; oral contraceptives Estrogens conversely, and shrink possibly stimulate tumors of postmenopausally. these growth the

MORPHOLOGYLeiomyomasaretypicallysharplycircumscribed,firmgray-whitemasseswithacharacteristicwhorledcutsurface.Theymayoccursingly,butmoreoftenoccurasmultipletumorsthatarescatteredwithintheuterus,rangingfromsmallnodulestolargetumors(

Fig.19.13 )thatmaydwarftheuterus.Someareembeddedwithinthemyometrium(intramural),whereasothersmaylieimmediatelybeneaththeendometrium(submucosal)ortheserosa(subserosal).Inthelatterlocation,tumorsmayextendoutonattenuatedstalksandevenbecomeattachedtosurroundingorgans,fromwhichtheymaydevelopabloodsupply(parasiticleiomyomas).Onhistologicexamination,thetumorsarecharacterizedbybundlesofsmoothmusclecellsmimickingtheappearanceofnormalmyometrium.Focioffibrosis,calcification,anddegenerativesofteningmaybepresent.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.19.13Uterineleiomyomas.(A)Theuterusisopenedtoshowmultiplesubmucosal,myometrial,andsubserosalgray-whitetumors,eachwithacharacteristicwhorledappearanceoncutsection. (B)Microscopicappearanceofleiomyomashowsbundlesofnormal-lookingsmoothmusclecells.

on often incidentally Leiomyomas examination. routine pelvic being of discovered uterus are the asymptomatic, with presenting most or menorrhagia, sign frequent metrorrhagia. without is The ever, into rarely, of lesions malignancy. sarcomas, the the of increase does risk and transform not if presence Leiomyomas multiple

mesenchymal virtually de myometrium. of always Leiomyosarcomas of from novo arise the cells uterus the the to in occur contradistinction and most solitary postmenopausal almost in always They often are women,

inflammation the fallopian invariably almost most a disorder is pelvic (salpingitis), tubes as component inflammatory disease. of common The occurring of Less abnormalities pregnancy common and ectopic are (tubal) endometriosis.

of almost always caused by infection. fallopian tubes the is Inflammation and Chlamydia, organisms, such and the major to are Mycoplasma as the coliforms, setting) nongonococcal gonorrhea, In (in hominis, addition streptococci postpartum staphylococci offenders. those similar produced by genital The (Chapter the changes to are gonococci in male tract 18). morphologic which staphylococci Infections can and of and with arise are leiomyomas, multiple wall coliforms, penetrate frequently usually premenopausally. streptococci, the

the yielding and is a to after with Recurrence cancers, 5-year surgery these rate about typically lungs, common many metastasize, of 40%. survival anaplastic outlook than with favorable well-differentiated tumors The with less tumors. is

MORPHOLOGYLeiomyosarcomastypicallytaketheformofsoft,hemorrhagic,necroticmasses.Thehistologicappearancevarieswidely,fromtumorsthatcloselyresembleleiomyomatowildlyanaplasticneoplasms.Well-differentiatedtumorsmaylieatthemorphologicinterfacebetweenleiomyomaandleiomyosarcomaandaresometimesdesignatedsmoothmuscletumorsofuncertainmalignantpotential.Thediagnosticfeaturesofleiomyosarcomaincludetumornecrosis,cytologicatypia,andmitoticactivity.Becauseincreasedmitoticactivityissometimesseeninbenignsmoothmuscletumors,particularlyinyoungwomen,anassessmentofallthreefeaturesisnecessarytomakeadiagnosisofmalignancy.

blood-borne sites. the to distant seed to that giving tubes, rise infections salpingitis combination endometritis. in common almost far is less and with encountered is tuberculous always Tuberculous the with may tubes debris result forms of of of or are lower produce pelvic exudate fever, and All which either ( or pain, distention inflammatory salpingitis masses, the abdominal pelvic

Fig. 19.14 ). inflamed tuboovarian the produce a adjacent ligamentous the ovary tube may and of abscess. Adherence tissues to the ovary in subsides. inflammation when adhesions the and tubes the in This result may between turn plicae, pregnancy risk of ectopic later). adhesions associated (discussed of are tubal with Even more which are increased tubal serious the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.19.14Pelvicinflammatorydisease,bilateralandasymmetric.Thetubeandovarytotheleftoftheuterusaretotallyobscuredbyahemorrhagicinflammatorymass.Thetubeisadherenttotheadjacentovaryontheotherside.

be ovaries variants are physiology. and that may considered Follicle normal commonplace cysts luteal the so they of in lesions and originate then follicles that innocuous These immediately from or follicles from unruptured rupture graafian seal. Such the cysts the serosa ovary. develop subjacent multiple are and often of to fluid. typically are with small filled clear serous (1–1.5 and in cm They diameter) are palpable Occasionally, they cm) and pain. large (4–5 to pelvic produce masses sufficiently become pressure lining luteal atrophy or When fluid small, cells, but accumulates, cells cause are granulosa by may cells. of as these they lined Sometimes cysts (acute bleeding producing symptoms rupture, and abdomen). intraperitoneal peritoneal these

chronic characterized anovulation, fertility. (formerly hyperandrogenism, Polycystic menstrual endocrine called decreased Stein-Leventhal complex syndrome) syndrome disorder abnormalities, polycystic ovaries, ovarian a and by is and attention young oligomenorrhea, It hirsutism, obesity. with usually infertility, who or sometimes menarche teenage to girls comes in with adults after present

cortex, to smooth The subcortical twice with gray-white in normal ovaries are size, diameter. usually studded outer a 1.5 cm and cysts 0.5 with the lined a cystic fibrotic luteinized theca examination with by Histologic overlying capsule innumerable thickened, interna. ovarian cells a follicles hyperplastic granulosa shows the conspicuous ovary. There absence is a in corpora lutea of

the permanent of produce obstruction may lumina tubal sterility. to Damage or

may fallopian the thought adenocarcinomas of to Once of uncommon, the in tube primary many be serous ovary. for to long origin the arise site of be thought high-grade carcinomas the intraepithelial the in fimbriated fallopian tubal the presence tubes. have serous identified carcinoma of Studies of ends (STIC) precursor more in serous TP53 mutations STICs cases. in have Like carcinoma, the than uterine of 90% of known removed and and BRCA2 from without in factors. who from removed genetic women tubes mutations women found These tubes less instances are are where in prophylactically carry BRCA1 fallopian frequently in lesions risk commonly the serous fallopian idea “ovarian” later) led This carcinomas to tube. in the sporadic originate (discussed has also that carcinomas of cavity and fimbriated the frequently access with ovary the associated fallopian peritoneal tube intimately omentum, end is Because at presentation. has the and peritoneal to the the ovary, involve tube fallopian cavity,

over 2016 cancer will that States women. to In estimated in be ovarian mortality 20,000 over 14,000 leading ovarian cancer there it cancer contributor deaths, leading making the cases is in diagnosed fifth to United the epithelium, Tumors multipotent they cells. totipotent remarkably any varied the types ovary: sex normal the cells, the three in of (coelomic) the as germ surface arise cell may of the cord–stromal are and ovary the from in account malignant Neoplasms great ovarian epithelial their for cancers origin majority and, 90% almost of ovarian of tumors for ( account the forms, of

19.3 ). Table frequent; for less tumors the cord–stromal they responsible much although ovary. Germ than tumors, are constitute 20% of to tumors 30% ovarian sex malignant of and they 10% of cell cell are less collectively

epithelial majority of cysts the of fallopian the the or arise in tube ovarian from The cortex tumors ovary (

Fig.

19.15 ). epithelium shown to fimbriated the many the tube now surface arise the that covers have from that of ( the studies thought mentioned, of are from of ovary to thought As the coelomic tumors end arise the fallopian

Fig. 19.15 ). of fallopian epithelium cortical be derived surface may cysts or lining displaced lining The the ovarian from epithelium tube. the epithelial transformation undergo different or rise tumors. become These can metaplastic to to neoplastic give number a of may (cystadenoma) are (cystadenofibroma). an cystic usually stromal and accompanying Benign have component lesions tumors (cystadenocarcinoma) may (carcinoma). or solid Malignant also cystic be

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Table Ovarian Major Frequency Tumors of 19.3

tumors. currently tumors fall category to as into epithelial ovarian referred Some borderline intermediate an the can and a manner majority recur progress some benign can of behave in borderline carcinoma. Although tumors they to

Important and family for factors mutations germline in ovarian risk history, cancer certain include nulliparity,

epithelium They progress histology. neoplasms. ovarian tumors of that II various often rise low-grade arise intraepithelial via are commonly I that tumors Type of benign demonstrate to precursors high-grade tumors may tumors Derivation, borderline cysts/fallopian not 19.15 through Fig. most identified. tube carcinoma. from a are features from give Type inclusions serous and STIC, serous intraepithelial carcinoma. tubal

genes. suppressor tumor women is low higher of in a parity. There women unmarried with and incidence carcinoma married use of interest, contraceptives reduces oral risk. prolonged the Of in BRCA2 5% mutations associated 10% most ovarian of these are and genes. Around to of are BRCA1 tumor cancers the familial, or with suppressor associated discussed in BRCA2 be later, breast mutations As hereditary are BRCA1 and also will cancer. with 30% BRCA2 is average risk the lifetime in approximately cancer risk carriers; somewhat for in ovarian The lower. BRCA1 carriers is ovarian 10% in mechanisms. cancer, with are only BRCA1 cancers, in alternative molecular mutations arise of contrast In found and ovarian to which sporadic appear BRCA2 familial to through 8%

malignant and of ovarian the the make tumors tumors epithelial ovarian Serous also greatest fraction of tumors. are common the overall, most up benign, borderline, 60% 15% malignant. 25% and About are are are of serous encountered lesions are 65 of malignant age. 45 and 30 seen and years and 40 patients between usually between years tumors age, Benign in are more commonly

are low-grade types There high-grade. of and carcinomas, serous two progress slowly borderline carcinoma. become invasive arise manner former or stepwise benign from and to lesions a The in tumors member in proteins, RAS as family. signaling with low-grade the associated genes gene of such encoding mutations a These KRAS, are high-grade develop The tumors rapidly. serous the ovarian already tubal end of fimbriated tube many coelomic than carcinoma, of in fallopian As arise mentioned, the high-grade intraepithelial these rather serous via epithelium. lesions of serous 95% virtually ubiquitous being are mutations present high-grade in TP53 cancers, over cases. in BRCA2 frequently NF1 RB, tumor genes in familial and ovarian suppressors and include cancers. Other as mutated the BRCA1 well as

representing serous 40 with cystic bilateral. usually divided are cm multiple the to serosa. septa of tumor cystic filled to section, cystic are structures multiloculated ones has 30 a into cavity, the The the are serous invaded covering tumors, benign irregularities frequently single masses. On to In areas of by but the nodular tumors spaces fluid. cut glistening. About clear spherical in larger tumors ovoid, in a surface diameter. tumors small contrast, has Most often adenocarcinomas and have benign the may serosal the smooth are which 25% up large, is By cavities are tumors the are prominent Protruding into more cystic ( which papillary in projections, malignant

Fig. 19.16

tips are bodies usually layer papillae. concretions) ovarian In are examination, ciliated. the line the contain invade common columnar high-grade Psammoma carcinoma the atypical, by cysts. benign multilayered, (concentrically markedly the are calcified cells that single nests and of definition On formations The sheets cells complex a stroma. the epithelial or histologic laminated cells or of malignant papillary often are tumors cyst and in of cells obviously Between and clearly malignant forms benign

Fig.19.16Ovarianseroustumors.(A)Borderlineserouscystadenomaopenedtodisplayacystcavitylinedbydelicatepapillarytumorgrowths. (B)Cystadenocarcinoma.Thecystisopenedtoshowalarge,bulkytumormass.

(Courtesy Crum, of Brigham and Boston, Massachusetts.) Dr. Christopher Hospital, Women’s lieborderlinetumors,whichexhibitlesscytologicatypiaandtypicallynostromalinvasion.Borderlinetumorsmayseedtheperitoneum,butfortunatelythetumorimplantsusuallyare“noninvasive.”Ingeneral,malignantseroustumorsspreadthroughouttheperitonealcavityandtoregionallymphnodes,includingperiaorticlymphnodes;distantlymphaticandhematogenousmetastasesareinfrequent.

heavily prognosis serous the at surgery poor, for diagnosis. even disease after is The stage of chemotherapy, the high-grade carcinoma patients with depends and on and but with The higher tumors than is falls stage. confined with to ovary one 90%, 40% for on to less carcinoma depending precipitously exact women the survival 5-year about stage survival. In are associated with borderline nearly contrast, tumors 100% with containing Of better women than lack prognosis genetic BRCA1/2 tumors whose abnormalities. tumors have to a these women tend note, mutations

considerably likely Mucinous epithelium tumors and respects: tumors mucin-secreting two less mucinous are neoplastic differ of cells; tumors be from consists in the serous malignant. to benign. are 10% are Overall, of are and another 80% only borderline, mucinous malignant; 10% tumors

MORPHOLOGYOngrossexamination,mucinoustumorsproducecysticmassesthatmaybeindistinguishablefromseroustumorsexceptbythemucinousnatureofthecystcontents.However,theyaremorelikelytobelargerandmulticystic(

Fig.19.17A ).Serosalpenetrationandsolidareasofgrowtharesuggestiveofmalignancy.Mucin-producingepithelialcellslinethecysts(

Fig.

19.17B ).Malignanttumorsarecharacterizedbysolidareasofgrowth,pilingup(stratification)ofliningcells,cytologicatypia,andstromalinvasion.

Comparedwithseroustumors,mucinoustumorsaremuchlesslikelytobebilateral.Thisfeatureissometimesusefulindifferentiatingmucinoustumorsoftheovaryfrommetastaticmucinousadenocarcinomafromagastrointestinaltractprimary(theso-called“Krukenbergtumor”),whichmoreoftenproducesbilateralovarianmasses.

Rupturedovarianmucinoustumorsmayseedtheperitoneum;however,thesedepositstypicallyregressspontaneously.Stableimplantationofmucinoustumorcellsintheperitoneumwithproductionofcopiousamountsofmuciniscalledpseudomyxomaperitonei;inmostcases,thisdisorderiscausedbymetastaticspreadoftumorsinthegastrointestinaltract,primarilytheappendix(Chapter15).

than histologic rather of stage somewhat major that outcome. type than mucinous) is counterpart, determinant better versus The (serous serous the although prognosis cystadenocarcinoma of of mucinous its is this KRAS detected mucinous high a approximately are ovarian frequency in does of Mutations GI carcinomas, not them help from of tumors, mutations. distinguish in which 50% KRAS metastatic have however also

in sometimes association they may endometriosis. or with tumors cystic; develop solid These be the the formation glands, examination, lining cystic of spaces. of are of microscopic within tubular On the those they distinguished similar endometrium, by to endometrioid Although borderline are exist, tumors benign malignant. and usually forms of 30% ovarian women of in to carcinoma. these They bilateral about with and have cases, 15% a endometrial are tumors concomitant 30% as suppressor act carcinomas ovary of the as PI3K-AKT the endometrioid well other mutations mutations the to PTEN that in of tumor in endometrium, frequently endometrioid-type upregulating carcinoma by signaling. gene have Similar genes also

Brenner of transitional-type of tract. stroma tumor is epithelium containing of resembling nests an uncommon, that abundant ovarian The tumor consisting urinary the usually solid, unilateral Occasionally, cells. the lined nests by mucus-secreting cystic are are columnar and 20 cm gray-white to in smoothly ranging from encapsulated diameter. Brenner centimeters and few a generally are section, on tumors cut epithelium within surface the from ridge. epithelium the may trapped or tumors These germinal arise from urogenital malignant described. benign, most borderline been and tumors are both Although have

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.19.17Ovarianmucinouscystadenoma.(A)Mucinouscystadenomawithmulticysticappearanceanddelicatesepta.Notethepresenceofglisteningmucinwithinthecysts. (B)Columnarcellliningofmucinouscystadenoma.

and sufficiently stromal origin germ of Many of sex in also only the description. cell the teratomas germ but cord– arise merit to origin other of are types ovary, tumors common cell

presents neoplasms other features of 19.4 cell salient sex origin. some cord Table germ and of

to 15% 20% tumors. constitute of Teratomas ovarian germ the to matters 2 the the malignancy. these of the first cell of in likelihood decades A is younger to person, their arise distressing life; the greater feature worse, predilection tumors of make germ these More malignant of mature neoplasms, than are benign teratomas; 90% rare. immature, variant the cell is cystic however,

from and (mature) mature three derived Benign presence marked teratomas mesoderm. tissues of layers: endoderm, are cystic the by ectoderm, cell germ all dermoid cysts contain replete common these adnexal with lined tumors cysts. the by designation appendages—hence epidermis Usually are abdominal incidentally women by on found are contain toothlike radiographs or calcification foci young or within they because discovered tumor. the masses ovarian Most as in structures produced contained scans of 90% unilateral, About side with more affected. commonly are right the cystic 10 Rarely cm in these exceed diameter. do masses hair-bearing a epidermal cut filled reveal On and hair lining section, when are often sebaceous ( that, matted secretion with removed, they

Fig. 19.18 ). Sometimes there projection protrude. is from teeth which nodular a present. nests gastrointestinal or or cartilage, tissues Occasionally, of epithelium, and foci bronchial bone other are of

10%–15% acute surgical neoplasms prone constitutes torsion (in cases), unknown these produce undergo and of sometimes are reasons, infertility which emergency. For an to in women A with containing neural limbic fascinating, develop which mature paraneoplastic teratomas encephalitis, may and often resection. tumor rare, remits but with tissue complication is of carcinoma, cell is to in 1% squamous seen cases. about usually transformation, a Malignant

age being at detection 18 life, the (immature) early teratomas are years. in found mean Malignant clinical sebaceous are present features on contain bulky of and they often those to section, similar solid are and contain of foci cut cystic mature necrosis; and They other hair, uncommonly, appear typically teratomas. that secretion, areas feature other is nerve, of distinguishing minimally the or or microscopic On cartilage, muscle, the tissues. elements differentiated examination, bone, immature presence with stage. the grade on As prognosis other tumors, depends and

rare tissue. subtype entirely A of is teratoma specialized composed of most struma example common The is http://ebooksmedicine.net ovarii,

may that composed hyperthyroidism. of actually mature which produce entirely is tissue thyroid Twotypesofepithelialcells:cytotrophoblastPrimaryfocusmaydegenerate,andsyncytiotrophoblastleavingonlymetastasesResistanttochemotherapy appear These solid, unilateral masses. tumors as ovarian small, brown rare syndrome. Other include carcinoid, in carcinoid produces instances specialized teratomas ovarian which

tumors well a signs formidable usually only ovarian are poses when symptoms all appear advanced. or neoplasms, challenge, With management clinical because (e.g., origin until pressure they of surface asymptomatic tumors complaints, urinary enough pain, are large Ovarian frequency). epithelial local to symptoms become usually cause gastrointestinal about gynecologic ovarian discovered incidentally of are 30% all examination. Indeed, routine on neoplasms the may epithelial Larger particularly an cause in increase girth. abdominal common masses, tumors, an pedicles their dermoid on acute severe producing that masses, Smaller cysts, particularly mimics abdomen. abdominal pain (torsion), twist sometimes tumors come they whereas functioning of produce. the serous ovarian because endocrinopathies Metastatic seeding tumors malignant causes of to often often attention ascites,

Fig.19.18Maturecysticteratoma(dermoidcyst)oftheovary.Aballofhair(bottom)andamixtureoftissuesareevident. Crum, Women’s Massachusetts.) and Hospital, Christopher Boston, of (Courtesy Dr. Brigham

only increase of in a Unfortunately, been treatment achieved survival ovarian unsatisfactory; tumors mid-1970s. the since remains modest has early methods badly tumors those limited value. are of detect Screening to evaluated but needed, are date that epithelial the 75% 90% is women elevated marker, ovarian in CA-125, such of sera protein One the of cancer. with to conditions 50% undetectable cancer up conversely, in women is cancers. and CA-125 the often with to However, limited in is a variety benign nonovarian of elevated of it to ovary; is asymptomatic a limited. Hence, its post-menopausal women screening usefulness in as test in Currently, response of are value CA-125 therapy. measurements monitoring greatest to

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Tumorsmayarisefromepithelium,sexcord–stromalcells,orgermcells.

Epithelialtumorsarethemostcommonmalignantovariantumorandaremorecommoninwomenolderthan40yearsofage.

Themajortypesofepithelialtumorsareserous,mucinous,andendometrioid.Eachhasabenign,malignant,andborderlinecounterpart.

Serouscarcinomaisthemostcommonandmanyariseinthedistalfallopiantube.

Sexcord–stromaltumorsmaydisplaydifferentiationtowardgranulosa,Sertoli,Leydig,orovarianstromalcelltype.Dependingondifferentiation,theymayproduceestrogensorandrogens.

Germcelltumors(mostlycysticteratomas)arethemostcommonovariantumorinyoungwomen;thevastmajorityarebenign.

Germcelltumorsmaydifferentiatetowardoogonia(dysgerminoma),primitiveembryonaltissue(embryonal),yolksac(endodermalsinustumor),placentaltissue(choriocarcinoma),ormultipletissuetypes(teratoma).

and to mortality and pregnancy both are placenta morbidity and pathologic for mother the of child. important conditions contributors Diseases of to section of of lesions knowledge Discussed understanding this of in are morphologic the which contributes an disease. a number disorders limited clinical in

canal hematogenous the may two (1) placenta spread. ascension the or (transplacental) birth paths: Infections by of either (2) through reach

are they the rupture and most premature are associated infections common; of in the bacterial instances Ascending fetal membranes. by far are more with (acute microscopic congestion infiltration edema neutrophilic associated chorioamnionitis). examination, the shows chorioamnion with and On the beyond placental membranes, With and the involve the umbilical vasculitis (funisitis). cord cord resulting villi, acute of infection the in extension may of flora. Candida, infections Mycoplasma, caused by the vaginal bacteria and Ascending are

bacteria Uncommonly, of (villitis). examination, may spread placental infections villi arise placental structures the most on are other hematogenous frequently histologic affected and organisms; by cytomegalovirus, simplex can herpes listeriosis, toxoplasmosis, cause (rubella, various tuberculosis, all villitis. virus) viruses placental Syphilis, and (toxoplasmosis, fetus to and other so-called give Transplacental infections, the “TORCH” 7). infections can complex cytomegalovirus infection, affect the rubella, rise (Chapter herpes)

1% ovum in as defined occur the pregnancy pregnancies. fertilized any of which may many of implantation a than is other site as as Ectopic uterus, in occurs ovaries abdominal and cavity. cases, other the In include the of implantation 90% these tube the sites (tubal pregnancy); fallopian in more than Any retards ovum that pregnancy. predisposes the passage of factor tube fallopian the ectopic to through of passage from In passage half the tumors and results chronic inflammation endometriosis oviduct; intrauterine scarring also cases, may the slowed of and ovum. hamper about in the other In cause of 50% is no evident. pregnancies, tubal the anatomic in is Ovarian which result fertilized pregnancies ruptures. instances follicle the ovum probably as the rare from just out and the occurs of drops fertilized peritoneum. fallopian within fimbriated the of cavity the on tube Gestation when end abdominal the egg implants the

MORPHOLOGYInallsites,earlydevelopmentofectopicpregnanciesproceedsnormally,withformationofplacentaltissue,theamnioticsac,anddecidualchanges.Withtubalpregnancies,theinvadingplacentaeventuallyburrowsthroughthewallofthefallopiantube,causing intratubalhematoma(hematosalpinx),intraperitonealhemorrhage,orboth.Thetubeisusuallydistendedbyfreshlyclottedbloodcontainingbitsofgrayplacentaltissueandfetalparts.Thehistologicdiagnosisdependsonvisualizationofplacentalvillior,rarely,oftheembryo.

and hormones. a urinary elevation placental may pregnancy, normal and from rupture occurs, an menstruation cessation serum ectopic be with indistinguishable of pregnancy of Until characteristic of hormones, and Under hypersecretory endometrium pregnancy. changes decidual (in of these influence the approximately 50% the of cases) the undergoes of absence poor attachment placenta because the of the and diagnosis necrosis gonadotropin elevated The levels does not are exclude common. ectopic be an and signs with an Rupture pain ectopic sudden abdominal often of may of followed onset the shock. of catastrophic, pregnancy intense acute abdomen, by intervention surgical necessary. is Prompt

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Ectopicpregnancyisdefinedasimplantationofthefertilizedovumoutsideoftheuterinecorpus.Approximately1%ofpregnanciesimplantectopically;themostcommonsiteisthefallopiantube.

Chronicsalpingitiswithscarringisamajorriskfactorfortubalectopicpregnancy.

Ruptureofanectopicpregnancyisamedicalemergencythat,ifleftuntreated,mayresultinexsanguinationanddeath.

trophoblastic refers disease Gestational proliferation fetal of cells. an trophoblast abnormal to divides nonmolar The broadly lesions. lesions two World Organization categories: these molar and Health diseases into hydatidiform invasive molar partial, further complete, and The into lesions divided moles. are uncommon consists and category types other choriocarcinoma nonmolar malignancies. more trophoblast-derived The of of levels than the and at normal those is higher in All blood during elaborate chorionic pregnancy. urine gonadotropins which (hCG), detected found considerably human used or in can levels treatment blood diagnosis, to be aiding the to monitor hCG urine addition In efficacy. the than as by of gestational disease significantly response subtyping pathologic umbrella levels, therapy, more prefer the term to hormone important lesions. because is Clinicians judged the trophoblastic of each. discussion genetics, sufficiently and distinct of natural are the pathology, history merit to these However, disorders

HydatidiformMole:CompleteandPartial

swollen, appearing mole grapelike of a chorionic typical dilated, The structures. as cystically hydatidiform voluminous villi, sometimes mass grossly is epithelium swollen highly to cover of chorionic villi. normal atypical Varying the amounts two of subtypes hydatidiform There moles: distinctive are partial. complete and with are not contain parts. fetal Complete embryogenesis moles hydatidiform and compatible rarely the chorionic 46,XY). epithelial are villi of abnormal, or, are chorionic All the uncommonly, (46,XX and diploid cells The therefore 19.5 and parts, partial compatible ). always fetal and with triploid 69,XXY) formation early may is (e.g., has ( hydatidiform embryo normal villi, is mole chorionic contain almost some fertilization from material. paternal result types excess abnormal of with genetic Both an of spermatozoa paternal paternal sperm), (or a a (or the mole a with fertilized entire only triploid a a a in content karyotype partial complete diploid mole diploid genes. two yielding is resulting two genetic In in sperm), diploid spermatozoa cells preponderance by chromosomes, is by a egg containing normal whereas supplied

Table19.5FeaturesofCompleteandPartialHydatidiformMole

hCG,Humanchorionicgonadotropin. Karyotype46,XX(46,XY)Triploid(69,XXY)

The countries. complete Western mole United to is other the about States incidence 1 per in of 1.5 and pregnancies 2000 hydatidiform countries. is in unknown higher the incidence reasons, For much Asian condition are most risk of subsequent age increases before of for pregnancies. age and disease and the the molar history 40 20 the a years, of in the after Moles common monitoring 14 gestation pregnancies during a disease that weeks “too detection. pregnancy discovered dates,” was early of for lowered at at the gestational has Although by ultrasound was investigation molar large 12 of formerly age for to In absence maternal the heart blood moles, of both elevation sounds and hCG complete fetal partial in typical. are and of

MORPHOLOGYInadvancedcasestheuterinecavityisexpandedbyadelicate,friablemassofthin-walled,translucentcysticstructures(

Fig.19.19 ).Fetalpartsarerarelyseenincompletemolesbutarecommoninpartialmoles.Onmicroscopicexamination,thecompletemoleshowshydropicswellingofpoorlyvascularizedchorionicvilliwithaloose,myxomatous,edematousstroma.Thechorionicepitheliumtypicallyshowsaproliferationofbothcytotrophoblastsandsyncytiotrophoblasts(

Fig.19.20 ).HistologicgradingtopredicttheclinicaloutcomeofmoleshasbeensupplantedbymonitoringofhCGlevels.Inpartialmoles,villousedemainvolvesonlyasubsetofthevilli,andthetrophoblasticproliferationisfocalandslight.Inmostcasesofpartialmole,somefetalcellsarepresent,rangingfromfetalredcellsinplacentalvillito,inrarecases,afullyformedfetus.

do to 90% 80% next). complete are (described but thorough not of after moles invasive 10% recur curettage, moles of Overall, rise 3% No give more choriocarcinoma. to than to 2%

but are of locally moles that potential moles metastatic the invasive choriocarcinoma. Invasive complete are lack rupture An invasive hydropic hemorrhage. villi, causing which sometimes the penetrate possibly life-threatening deeply, uterine mole wall retains and of and components. shows changes, villi epithelium trophoblastic examination, both proliferation atypical syncytiotrophoblast microscopic with the On of the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.19.19Completehydatidiformmole,consistingofnumerousswollen(hydropic)villi.

of do metastases makes invasiveness this occur. removal the marked technically difficult, not Although lesion emboli do regress distant behave metastases villi Hydropic but true as brain, not to such may and like lungs may embolize organs, these spontaneously. or serum if is treatment invasion β-hCG is deeper remains an so invasive difficult the remove of curettage, by completely mole myometrium, elevated, into to further Because required. possible is cases with chemotherapy. Fortunately, in cure most

malignant tumor, tumor). gonads (as the totipotential or, germ cell epithelium less frequently, a from arises a chorionic very from aggressive cells Choriocarcinoma, gestational within are African per in in but the Western the reaching about in United Hemisphere occur common countries, States), frequency (they in 30,000 more much 1 pregnancies of and tumors a rare 1 are pregnancies. These in 2000 Asian an while complete after Approximately moles; choriocarcinomas abortion, remainder pregnancy. the arise normal 50% 25% of about an following arise manifest apparently hydatidiform from titer in of urine, and accompanied seen a such brownish a marked discharge the absence as would bloody, enlargement, of most choriocarcinoma be cases, presents β-hCG a by with rising in mole. blood as uterine In higher the than a In associated mole. are those titers much with β-hCG general,

andproliferationofthechorionicepithelium(above) areevident. Fig.19.20Completehydatidiformmole.Inthismicroscopicimage,dis-tendedhydropicvilli(below) (Courtesy Department Medical Southwestern Molberg, University Texas Pathology, of School,Dallas,Texas.) Kyle of of Dr.

MORPHOLOGYChoriocarcinomasusuallyappearashemorrhagic,necroticuterinemasses.Sometimesthenecrosisissoextensivethatlittleviabletumorremains.Indeed,theprimarylesionmay“selfdestruct,”andonlythemetastasestellthestory.Veryearly,thetumorinsinuatesitselfintothemyometriumandintovessels.Incontrastwithhydatidiformmolesandinvasivemoles,chorionicvilliarenotformed;instead,thetumoriscomposedofanaplasticcuboidalcytotrophoblastsandsyncytiotrophoblasts(

Fig.19.21

Bythetimeachoriocarcinomaisdiscovered,widespreadvascularspreadusuallyhasoccurredtothelungs(50%),vagina(30%–40%),brain,liver,orkidneys.Lymphaticinvasionisuncommon.

nature sensitive the aggressive Despite chemotherapy. these of tumors placental are remarkably to choriocarcinoma, extremely sites affected even with are 100% lungs. patients distant Nearly as cured, at such those the metastases of is choriocarcinomas contrast, response poor. arise gonads in to or By testis) (ovary the relatively that chemotherapy with on gonadal This are that in the presence related striking of antigens placental be lacking may paternal choriocarcinomas difference to in lesions. prognosis adjunct tumor immune acting as antigens by the helps the (paternal) foreign an to response against maternal clear chemotherapy. Conceivably, a

Fig.19.21Choriocarcinoma.Thisfieldcontainsbothneoplasticcytotro-phoblastandmultinucleatesyncytiotrophoblast. Hospital, (Courtesy of and Brigham Massachusetts.) Women’s David Genest, Boston, Dr. R. http://ebooksmedicine.net

functional Placental trophoblastic syncytiotrophoblasts. that or trophoblast, the those that and of and placental cell site trophoblasts derived are tumors overlap a from features site morphologic intermediate with has a tumors, diploid after typically XX uncommon pregnancy. karyotype, arise These few in often months hCG large intermediate concentrations slightly elevated. do not trophoblasts in amounts, produce are hCG only Because typically, tumors human lactogen. More placental produce these outcome is is indolent if a course the An with the endomyometrium. clinical generally confined tumor typical, favorable to however, spread trophoblastic and chemotherapy the beyond poor tumors, to placental the occurs Of note, are tumors prognosis sensitive trophoblastic is uterus. other site as are as not when

Molardiseaseisaresultofanabnormalcontributionofpaternalchromosomestotheconceptus.

Partialmolesaretriploidandhavetwosetsofpaternalchromosomes.Theytypicallyareaccompaniedbyfetaltissue.Thereisalowrateofpersistentdisease.

Completemolesarediploid,andallchromosomesarepaternal.Rarelyareembryonicorfetaltissuesassociatedwithacompletemole.

Amongcompletemoles,10%to15%areassociatedwithpersistentdiseasethatusuallytakestheformofaninvasivemole.Only2%ofcompletemolesprogresstochoriocarcinoma.

Gestationalchoriocarcinomaisahighlyinvasiveandfrequentlymetastatictumorthat,incontrastwithovarianchoriocarcinoma,isresponsivetochemotherapyandcurableinmostcases.

Placentalsitetrophoblastictumorisanindolenttumorofintermediatetrophoblastthatproduceshumanplacentallactogen.Itcanbecuredsurgicallybutonceitspreadsitdoesnotrespondwelltochemotherapy.

the trimester accompanied is of development to as pregnancy, and third proteinuria referred hypertension, preeclampsia. edema in of by The particularly in women with older 10% years. 5% syndrome pregnancies, first occurs of than 35 to pregnancies in This is those termed and the then seizures affected, occur, symptom complex may In eclampsia. severely toxemia to of precedent, sometimes referred as By are preeclampsia long-existing and eclampsia pregnancy. sanctified been has is this and toxin term blood-borne a identified, No historically misnomer. have now early treatment made preeclampsia eclampsia, of and rare. fatal Recognition particularly eclampsia,

arteries secondary are is vascular these bed. to underlying blood feature events all exact insufficient While triggering the spiral cases uteroplacental the common unknown, syndromes remodeling placenta the a inadequate of maternal flow of initiating to dilate In walls trophoblasts, of wide pregnancy, to sinusoids. vascular them invaded the spiral are by into normal arteries musculoelastic permitting the In walls eclampsia, retained, and preeclampsia and is are remain channels the remodeling narrow. vascular this impaired, the musculoelastic angiogenesis. appears regulate uteroplacental to altered flow factors Decreased blood hypoxia, that result dysfunction, placental circulating of in release the placental and Specifically, the factors been have soluble (sFlt1) in (sEng) and factors, soluble in anti-angiogenic Flt1 endoglin VEGF, increases noted. proangiogenic such reductions and as cell These and result endothelial in hypothesized end-organ to hyperreactivity, are dysfunction, vascular microangiopathy. disturbances consequences basis been to further Although condition: the of defined, this preeclampsia serious exact associated remains be with several have

infarction, from Placental stemming chronic hypoperfusion

and prostacyclin production increased A2 prostaglandin endothelial the Hypertension, of from vasoconstrictor resulting production from of vasodilators the and E2 reduced thromboxane

the factor placenta tissue and of endothelial Hypercoagulability, due release dysfunction from to

liver, of notably with End-organ occurs most in failure, and full-blown eclampsia. the kidney which the patients (DIC). due thrombocytopenia to and consumption, “HELLP with disseminated by preeclampsia of coagulation the fullblown so-called 10% intravascular characterized enzymes, severe hemolytic develop Approximately liver syndrome”, elevated anemia, patients platelet sometimes microangiopathic the

disorder.Placentalabnormalitiesinclude

Infarcts,whichcanbeafeatureofnormalpregnancy,butaremuchmorenumerouswithseverepreeclampsiaoreclampsia

Prematurematurationofplacentalvilliassociatedwithvillousedema,hypovascularity,andincreasedproductionofsyncytialepithelialknots

weeks insidiously Preeclampsia pressure. proteinuria, to rising and edema, 24 during 25 of gestation with blood presents renal rises eclampsia, function may and into the blood is occur. condition convulsions impaired, pressure further, evolve Should Prompt course therapy changes, the after early delivery abnormalities in all aborts organ cesarean resolving or after the promptly associated with section.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

important from Three breast other organs. the features distinguish First, major than infant. for individual, support nutritional the essential rather being another the is of survival, the function regression lobular the expansion of adulthood, throughout organ during ultimately and remodeling system pregnancy, and lobules. of of and after especially undergoes periodic involution structure Second, the menarche, marked life: during after changes the organs. a by not Finally, shared result significance breasts social, a personal and as cultural, other have are visible and considering presentations, these features the of origins, a treatment role breast and play disease. when of All

stroma. unit supported functional the intralobular a specialized which by breast the The lobule, is is of during produce lactation. luminal cells epithelial inner milk The function located membrane. basally in also help milk The support ejection have the aid myoepithelial contractile basement cells to and The nipple. to milk for conduits are reach the ducts size determined interlobular age. breast primarily by which puberty during the The stroma, and of with is increases involutes Each source of and normal benign constituent a malignant lesions ( is both

Fig. 19.22

diseases are and of inflammatory breast the (Fig. changes, “lumpiness,” The nipple or palpable symptoms predominant of mass discharge, signs a pain, 19.23A ). investigating for the their malignancy. as evaluate is cause to the require reason However, possibility so of treatment, few are and primary symptoms to severe breast lesions Most (>90%) are benign. symptomatic through whereas cancer, about come with have symptoms, tests to women the remainder screening 45% attention ( Of

Fig. 19.23B

mastodynia) symptom or related a is due Pain often to cyclic (mastalgia possibly and edema common to menses, swelling. tissue trauma localized usually necrosis). ruptured specific cyst adipose caused a a area (fat Pain by is or in to cancers small painful of benign, Almost pain. for (about masses are a reasons fraction unknown but cause 10%) all

erythematous an and causes edematous Inflammation breast. infections, and lactation is which any often most frequency It breastfeeding. is during caused by and with only occur rare mimic of important An

(red) DCIS (blue) Phyllodes NORMAL Nipple Papilloma Angiosarcoma Invasive ing Hemangioma Interlobular disease cellsmaygiverisetofibroadenomasandphyllodestumors,whereasinterlobularstroma(green) cells of hyperplasia Normal (black) the stroma (green) Myoepithelial Fig.19.22Originsofbreastdisorders.Benignepitheliallesionsincludeintraductalpapillomasthatgrowinsinusesbelowthenippleandepithelialhyperplasiathatarisesinlobules.Malignantepitheliallesionsaremainlybreastcarcinomas,whichmayremaininsituorinvadeintothebreastandspreadbymetastasis.Specializedintralobularstroma(green) carcinoma Fibroadenoma Epithelial lobule MALIGNANT and tumor Intralobular origins, presentations, cells stroma BENIGN maygiverisetoavarietyofrarebenignandmalignanttumors.Luminal treatment breast

cancers 5% are Inflammation PATIENTS Pain 5% cancers A mass cancers other or cancers 1% are symptoms SYMPTOMS 7% Lumpiness <1% are are OF Palpable are discharge Nipple cancers

Fig.19.23Presentingsymptomsofbreastdisease.(A)Commonbreast-relatedsymptomsthatbringpatientstoclinicalattention. (B)Presentationsofbreastcancer.

is “inflammatory” carcinoma (discussed later). inflammation breast

may be quantity discharge Nipple when and normal bilateral. small in the most ducts lesion in papilloma nipple benign producing a ( arising common The discharge large below the a is nipple

Fig. ). 19.22 spontaneous, and are that for bloody malignancy. are unilateral, concern greatest Discharges of

normal glandular tissue. is the diffuse result usually nodularity breast, a a throughout Lumpiness, or of may to mass When pronounced, determine help is present. a discrete imaging whether studies

from they epithelial size when to cm cells masses 2 arise of and 3 cells stromal proliferations ( in can are generally are or Palpable detected

Fig. 19.22 ). borders. to be tend benign; have oval and to circumscribed to (~95%) round are these Most invade across In contrast, borders. have malignant planes tissue and tumors irregular usually cancers deceptively masses However, circumscribed some evaluation. as all palpable require masses, grow because

in males. only is the symptom common breast Gynecomastia both which stimulate and an which breast an androgens, There resulting increase in is stroma cells from counteract estrogens, and imbalance epithelial tissue, these effects. between

increases Regardless age. likelihood with of malignancy symptom, the of presenting than age to example, older than years women of the in risk cancer women 7% increases 60. from For being 60 discharge of in due younger 30% to nipple 40 women 10% as 50. women in than of of Similarly, palpable years age 60% to older than compared masses only in are carcinomas, younger

was early, 1980s has as detect in to introduced asymptomatic before carcinomas Mammographic breast means occurred. spread the a nonpalpable screening metastatic cancers diagnosis. by will than promise, 15% palpation), at of by nodes invasive average of (significantly cm time to about lymph 1 identified regional detected Mammography size only and has mammography as the this the met is have carcinomas smaller metastasized by now mammography women of States, most are United 50 cancers age ( detected years than more in In the

Fig. 19.23B ). increases age, by caused 50. with mammographic 40 likelihood malignancy age 10% than to that As 25% the in more is older abnormal finding lesions, from an than age symptomatic breast with at women

Symptomsaffectingthebreastsareevaluatedprimarilytodetermineifmalignancyispresent.

Regardlessofthesymptom,theunderlyingcauseisbenigninthemajorityofcases.

Breastcancerismostcommonlydetectedbypalpationofamassinyoungerwomenandinunscreenedpopulationsandbymammographicscreeninginolderwomen.

autoimmune disease, be the diseases breast are reactions. caused by body–type may Inflammatory rare foreign infections, and or of pain accompanied by and focal erythema Symptoms often and edema, tenderness. include inflammatory are symptoms the diseases carcinoma inflammatory possibility Because later). considered should caused rare, that always by the be (discussed are

is of during to frequency breastfeeding. disease skin only entry The breast gains the cause nipple first with fissures infectious any Staphylococcus via which weeks agent aureus, typically in lead of invading to The collections of organisms tissue. abscesses,” in “lactational fibroadipose and neutrophils may associated the bacteria formation the untreated, tracks appearance tissue opening may lead onto necrosis skin. of If fistula to the and milk. adequately with cases expression are antibiotics treated Most of continued incision Rarely, required. surgical drainage and is

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of in different interlobular, intralobular of The rise stroma neoplasms ( types and to breast, two types give the

Fig.

19.22 ). following and Historically, which cleanly malignant course. intralobular stroma divided tumors have excision benign rarely phyllodes pursue recur derived from sometimes a and more been fibroadenomas into cellular tumors, part appear mutations a appreciated related of spectrum share driver is to genes that now and of be It tumors these same the neoplasms. in engrained old classification the is in Nevertheless, we it and follow here for simplicity’s the medical will sake. lexicon

MORPHOLOGYTumorsderivedfromintralobularstromaarecomprisedofbothstromalcellsandepithelialcells(i.e.,theyare“biphasic”),astheneoplasticproliferationofspecializedlobularfibroblastsalsostimulatesreactiveproliferationoflobularepithelialcells.Astheintralobularfibroblastsproliferate,theypushanddistorttheepithelialcellssothattheyformelongatedslitlikestructuresratherthanroundacini.Inbenignfibroadenoma,thetumormasshascircumscribedbordersandlowcellularity(

arerare.Bycontrast,inphyllodestumorsthestromalcellstendtooutgrowtheepithelialcells,resultinginbulbousnodulesofproliferatingstromalcellsthatarecoveredbyepithelium( Fig.19.24A);mitoses

Fig.19.24B ),thecharacteristic“phyllodes”(Greekfor“leaflike”)growthpattern.Inhigh-gradephyllodestumorsepitheliummaybescantorabsent,producingasarcomatousappearance.Overall,about2%ofphyllodestumorsmetastasizetodistantsites.

Lesionsofinterlobularstromaaremonophasic(onlycomprisedofmesenchymalcells)andincludebenignsofttissuetumorsfoundelsewhereinthebody,suchashemangiomas(Chapter10)andlipomas(Chapter21).Theonlymalignancyderivedfrominterlobularstromalcellsofnoteisangiosarcoma(Chapter21),whichmayariseinthebreastafterlocalradiother-apy.Themorphologiesoftheselesionsaredescribedelsewhere.

epithelial of findings are mammography. lesions incidental detected The majority by benign to significance cancer. subsequent risk breast the of is clinical relationship developing major their Their disease into atypia, risk and with without atypia, divided nonproliferative associated disease, of cancer proliferative proliferative breast three groups, with are Benign each a disease ( degree different changes

19.6 Table

is disease cancer. of Nonproliferative increased risk associated with breast not an

polyclonal with risk Proliferative a that increased are atypia breast hyperplasias without slightly associated of disease encompasses cancer.

with overall, women breast 13% with risk associated cancer these Proliferative with the atypia cancer. increase are of in 17% includes disease modest both breasts; that breast “precancers” monoclonal of lesions in to a develop

MORPHOLOGYNonproliferativediseaseconsistsofthreemajormorphologicchanges:cysts,fibrosis,andadenosis.Itistermed“nonproliferative”becausethelesionscontainsinglelayersofepithelialcells.Themostcommonnonproliferativebreastlesionsaresimplecystslinedbyalayerofluminalcellsthatoftenundergoapocrinemetaplasia(

).Theapocrinesecretionsmaycalcifyandbedetectedbymammography.Whencystsrupture,chronicinflammationandfibrosisinresponsetothespilleddebrismayproducepalpablenodularityofthebreast(so-called“fibrocysticchanges”).Proliferativediseasewithoutatypiaincludesepithelialhyperplasia,sclerosingadenosis,complexsclerosinglesion,andpapilloma.Eachisassociatedwithvaryingdegreesofepithelialcellproliferation.Forexample,inepithelial Fig.19.25A

Fig.19.24Intralobularstromalneoplasms. (A)Fibroadenoma.Thisbenigntumorhasanexpansilegrowthpatternwithpushingcircumscribedborders.

(B)Phyllodestumors.Proliferatingstromalcellsdistorttheglandulartissue,formingcleftlikespaces,andbulgeintosurroundingstroma.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Table19.6FactorsAssociatedWithDevelopmentofInvasiveCarcinoma

Womenwithnoriskfactors1.03% 1.2–9.04%–30%

Germlinetumorsuppressorgenemutation(e.g.,BRCA1 mutation)2.0–45.06%to>90%

Ageatmenarche<12years1.34%

Ageatmenopause>55years1.5–2.05%–6%

Firstlivebirth<20years(protective)0.51.6%

Firstlivebirth20–35years1.5–2.05%–6%

Firstlivebirth>35years2.0–3.06%–10%

Neverpregnant(nulliparous)3.010%

Breast-feeding(slightlyprotective)0.82.6%

Proliferativediseasewithoutatypia1.5–2.05%–6%

Proliferativediseasewithatypia(ALHandADH)4.0–5.013%–17%

Carcinomainsitu(ductalorlobular)8.0–10.025%–30%

Ionizingradiation1.1–1.43.6%–4.6%

Mammographicdensity3.0–7.010%–23%

Postmenopausalobesityandweightgain1.1–3.03.6%–10%

Postmenopausalhormonereplacement1.1–3.03.6%–10%

Alcoholconsumption1.1–1.43.6%–4.6%

Alcoholconsumption1.1–1.43.6%–4.6% aRelativeriskisthelikelihoodofdevelopingcancercomparedtoawomanwithnoriskfactors—whoserelativeriskis1.0.Absolutelifetimeriskisthefractionofwomenexpectedtodevelopinvasivecarcinomawithoutariskreducingintervention.Forwomenwithnoriskfactors,thereisabouta3%chanceofdevelopinginvasivebreastcancer.bThemostcommonfamilyhistoryisamotherwhodevelopedcanceraftermenopause.Thishistorydoesnotincreasetheriskofherdaughters.

hyperplasia,increasednumbersofbothspindledmyoepithelialcellsandepithelioidluminalcellsexpandductalandlobularspaces(

Fig.19.25B

Proliferativediseasewithatypiaincludesatypicallobularhyperplasia(ALH)andatypicalductalhyperplasia(ADH).ALHcloselyresembleslobularcarcinomainsitu(LCIS)andADHcloselyresemblesductalcarcinomainsitu(DCIS)(bothdescribedlater),butaremorelimitedinextent.ThecellsinADHareuniforminappearanceandformsharplymarginatedspacesorrigidbridges(

Fig.19.25C

causes of the (excluding cancer) majority women. and malignancy globally nonmelanoma skin Breast most deaths carcinoma is the cancer common women of in

decrease in and decreased slightly an attributed mammographic a therapy United the rate. screening), plateau and is the Although increasing States and incidence stabilized alarming use to (changes at incidence then undergoing the women worldwide mortality in number of in the 2002 a of in the postmenopausal hormone childbearing, and to countries this delayed are be with changes underlying increase that optimal in to care. pregnancies, risk—specifically, breast of lack breastfeeding—combined social developing cancer a thought trend factors major fewer reduced The health access

Fig.19.25Benignepithelialbreastdisease.(A)Nonproliferativedisease.Anapocrinecystisshownthatisacommonfeatureofnonproliferativebreastdisease.(B)Proliferativebreastdiseaseischaracterizedbyincreasednumbersofepithelialcells,asinthisexampleofepithelialhyperplasia. (C)Proliferativebreastdiseasewithatypia.Theproliferatingepithelialcellsaremonomorphicinappearanceandpileuptoformabnormalarchitecturalstructures.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

90 8 breast age to risk in for the living 1 lifetime of cancer in is United The women States. die women predicted cancers of the to will among about diagnosed will disease—a about only 2016 It in cancer. that breast 250,000 be second cancers is and 40,000 lung toll 20%. than has from mid-1980s rate to less the dropped the mortality Since 30% have some treatment. detects The systemic cancers metastasized, to attributed decrease more screening, they effective which is improved and both before

breast are (>95%). malignancies adenocarcinomas all Almost useful expression of the most groups: receptor (HER2, progesterone receptor based (PR)—and system, three the In on of receptor human clinically classification cancers growth factor the and known as receptors—estrogen also into breast are ERBB2), hormone epidermal expression the 2 divided major (ER)

ER cancers) negative; positive 50%–65% of (HER2

or of positive 10%–20% positive cancers) negative; HER2 (ER

Triple PR, and (ER, cancers) HER2 of negative 10%–20% negative;

These ( metastatic outcome patterns, patient response, relapse, features, differences time characteristics, in three to striking groups treatment show pathologic and 19.7

Fig. ). 19.26 histologic clinical (discussed subtypes each Within some group additional have which also are of importance. later),

Table19.7SummaryoftheMajorBiologicTypesofBreastCancer

HER2-negative Estrogen receptor HER2-negative Estrogen receptor positive, negative, HER2-positive

Fig.19.26Ageandtheincidenceofbreastcancersubtypes.

with relies alternative expression substantial gene classification profiling. on system overlap An divides mainly into This the currently of clinical system, is used research, major four in which cancers context types: breast

Luminal A. are cancers lower-grade are negative that The ER-positive HER2 majority

Luminal B. positive that The ER-positive majority be are cancers may HER2 higher-grade

HER2-enriched. not ER overexpress and The HER2 majority express do

Basal-like. The cells are and resemble by myoepithelial HER2-negative located expression profiling majority basally gene ER-negative,

Breast rate cancer 100,000 (per women)

HER2Positive(ERPositiveTripleNegative(ER,PR,FeatureERPositive/HER2NegativeorNegative)andHER2Negative)

CompleteresponsetoLowgrade(<10%),highergradeERpositive(15%),ERnegative30%chemotherapy(10%)(>30%)

MetastaticsitesBone(70%),viscera(25%),brainBone(70%),viscera(45%),brainBone(40%),viscera(35%),brain(<10%)(30%)(25%)

SimilargroupdefinedbymRNALuminalA(lowgrade),luminalBLuminalB(ERpositive),HER2-Basal-likeprofiling(highgrade)enriched(ERnegative)

CommonspecialhistologictypesLobular,tubular,mucinous,papillaryApocrine,micropapillaryCarcinomawithmedullaryfeatures

(40%)TP53 (75%),PIK3CA (40%),TP53 (85%) CommonsomaticmutationsPIK3CA (26%)TP53

encodesphosphoinositide3-kinase(PI3K). PIK3CA

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of ( identified A number large for cancer factors risk been have breast

). 19.6 Table important are the more Some factors risk next. of summarized

Gender. Age and after 30 is in Breast rapidly in but women cancer ( increases than age age younger 25, incidence rare

Fig. than 5% cancer 75% 40. older 19.26 and age, women than of younger with 50 ); are breast only years are of in incidence only The that is in of men 1% women.

Cancer. Family of Breast History affected greatest with relatives first-degree The breast risk individuals with for is multiple early-onset cancer. responsible are most of genes penetrance, is families, combinations for various that low increased cancer thought In it risk. “weak” later). to penetrant (discussed of occur approximately mutations genes 10% in breast persons inherit germline tumor in 5% highly suppressor cancers who However, individuals, the of risk breast may these lifetime be cancer greater For 90%. than

Factors. Geographic countries. incidence mortality breast have differences cancer Significant the various been in reported of and in rates than in higher Asia Africa. in risk The significantly and Americas the is and Europe For rates five the higher example, United times than mortality States in Japan. in are the incidence and areas factors to of must home be Some low-incidence tend high-incidence their the risk from to countries. migrants modifiable because rates acquire new practices reproductive Diet, are breastfeeding patterns, thought to be involved. and to parts with be rates in In world that cancer habits. the Western line this, breast of appear adopting rising are

Race/Ethnicity. of rate a cancer incidence breast of because ER-positive in cancers. of highest The women European higher descent, is largely of tumors. American aggressive age are Hispanic develop to and more younger and tend to at women a African likely develop cancer are are access study. Such an social factors, area genetics, to care intense of to from result a combination differences thought health in disparities and and of

Reproductive History. “at-risk” at menarche, of to breast increases increased with because all absence estrogenic are first stimulation. the and age probably age associated of older each cells Early of risk, pregnancy exposure nulliparity, breastfeeding, epithelial

Radiation. Ionizing while of is occurs if breast chest Radiation the risk cancer the the to breast still increases exposure developing. women 25% risk not irradiation the cancer teens in 30% life develops lymphoma breast their underwent to later treated example, and Hodgkin 20s, in is in for women elevated. who but For of for

Risk Factors. Other replacement, also postmenopausal density, and Postmenopausal have obesity, factors. risk consumption as alcohol hormone implicated mammographic been with probably is tissue. adipose exposure obesity risk the to to by breast estrogen associated The due produced of obesity that an express only this, is risk with tumors associated keeping of ER. increased with In

breast the driver by epithelial defined major the distinct pathways expression differential of HER2 receptors cancer the ( acquisition three and mutations in of through of cells that stepwise involve subtypes system hormone The arise of duct/lobular more-or-less

Fig. ). 19.27 genetic, that grouped the breast of and cancer environmental into Factors contribute directly hormonal, can categories. to development be

Genetic. are carcinogenesis to can mutations that be genes inherited divided and into those Driver in that breast are cancer acquired. that those contribute are genes regulate in affect stability cancer breast genomic pathways. susceptibility that to progrowth involved major germ-line or mutations that conferring The signaling both 6). BRCA2 that arises and cancer in tumor (Chapter suppressor are when only BRCA1 classic defective are inactivated or alleles genes, BRCA2 are kinds for certain repair of BRCA1 proteins required encode of damage. that DNA and normally and mainly genes expressed an to (discussed They and risk breast these are ovarian why cancer serous mysterious. tissues, germline in mutations remains earlier) in many of and increased different lead cells develop to of the cancers an BRCA1 of years, of of and the average age and BRCA2 to carriers degree breast compared 70 women The risk with age of cancer breast onset, penetrance, most susceptibility many 12% types but as germ-line mutations, about of other by differ cancer. among triple-negative are whereas mutations mutations primarily BRCA1 tumors, unclear show with strong reasons, BRCA2 ER-positive a associated ( association with For cancers

Fig. 19.27 ). endometrial breast carcinoma negative Cowden PTEN familial of important of and “guardian (the factor 6) risk earlier syndrome. pro-growth mutated genes Chapter so-called include Other (an a of the TP53 associated as with part pathway), genome”, already PI3K-AKT as cancer regulator for the mentioned

expected, function genes As cancers. breast familial in in be cancer breast sporadic also the pathways which often are might disturbed triple-negative in sporadic but in methylation in BRCA1 mutations BRCA2 and up 50% to inactivated BRCA1 rare by cancers. are cancers, is Somatic of and breast Somatic particularly cancer, in tumors in ( HER2-positive mutations common triple-negative TP53 are

), frequently 19.7 and ( signaling activate in mutations sporadic are found that breast whereas PI3KAKT HER2-positive cancers ER-positive Table

Fig. 19.27

the important cancer is driver common breast in A mutation HER2 gene. of clinically amplification the RASand promotes cell apoptosis kinase PI3K-AKT proliferation stimulating signaling by that a is and opposes tyrosine receptor pathways. HER2 proliferative. that overexpress distinct Cancers and highly are pathogenically HER2 a markedly target with the of therapeutic specifically improved however, that they had the prognosis; patients agents HER2 past poor availability prognosis In has the HER2-amplified tumors. for

“Luminal” of cancers) gain http://ebooksmedicine.net loss PIK3CA (50-65% mutations 16q 1q

(20% HER2 Germline TP53 cancers) amplification breast HER2 mutations “HER2 of Normal enriched” Positive

arrow).ThesecancersmaybepositiveornegativeforERandareusuallyassociatedwithgermlineTP53 andTP53 leadstoER-positivecancers.Morphologicallyrecognizedprecursorlesionsincludeflatepithelialatypia,ADH,andDCIS,allofwhichsharecertaingenomiceventswithinvasiveER-positivecarcinomas,suchgainsofchromosome1,lossesofchromosome16,andmutationsofPIK3CA functionandaregenomicallyunstable.Themajorityoftriple-negativecancersareclassifiedas“basal-like”bygeneexpressionprofiling. arrow).ThesecancershavelossofBRCA1 mutations.Apossibleprecursorlesionisatypicalapocrineadenosis,whichsharesfeatureswithapocrineDCIS.TheleastcommonbutmolecularlymostdistinctivetypeofbreastcancerisnegativeforERandHER2(“triplenegative”;blue arrow) Fig.19.27Majorpathwaysofbreastcancerdevelopment.Themostcommonpathway(yellow mutations.LesscommonarecancersthatoverexpressHER2becauseofgeneamplification(green (thegeneencodingPI3K).Bygeneexpressionprofiling,thesecancersareclassifiedas“luminal.”ThisisthetypeofcancerthatarisesmostcommonlyinindividualswithgermlineBRCA2

Influences. Hormonal transforming and mechanisms. which such of platelet-derived paracrine others, growth may Estrogens factor, fibroblast stimulate through autocrine promote the factors, development factor-α, growth production as tumor growth and factor, growth growth. other important estrogen-dependent addition, for of ER or an genes fashion, dozens of some which in tumor In regulates development are express (which malignant precursor to during carcinomas. metastatic drive of development fully typically even ER) cancers from and likely influences proliferation lesions strongly Hormonal the are high ER-positive measure found tumors. benefits the ER-positive The treatment and importance women of the development antagonists, therapeutic risk in estrogen cancers of of established of of at estrogen the which in in the mainstays is clearest reduce

Factors. Environmental (e.g., the United living the and suggested in by influences differences States) in Japanese homogeneous geographic discussed women cancer genetically in cancer incidence, Japan and variable breast as incidence groups the Environmental earlier. breast of are

MORPHOLOGYThemostcommonlocationoftumorswithinthebreastisintheupperouterquadrant(50%),followedbythecentralportion(20%).About4%ofwomenwithbreastcancerhavebilateralprimarytumorsorsequentiallesionsinthesamebreast.

andthosethathavespreadbeyonditaredesignatedinvasive situ carcinomas. Breastcancersareclassifiedmorphologicallyaccordingtowhethertheyhavepenetratedthebasementmembrane.Thosethatremainwithinthisboundaryaretermedin carcinomas, Inthisclassification,themainformsofbreastcarcinomaareasfollows:

1. A.Noninvasive

2.

B.Invasive 1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

andlobular aremisleading,asbothtypesofCISarethoughttoarisefromcellsintheterminalductthatgiverisetolobules.LCISusuallyexpandsinvolvedlobules( Therearetwomorphologictypesofnoninvasivebreastcarcinoma:ductalcarcinomainsitu(DCIS)andlobularcarcinomainsitu(LCIS).Thetermsductal

),whereasDCISdistortslobulesintoductlikespaces( Fig.19.28A

Fig.19.28B ).Bydefinition,both“respect”thebasementmembraneanddonotinvadeintostromaorlymphovascularchannels.

DCIShasawidevarietyofhistologicappearances,includingsolid,comedo,cribriform,papillary,micropapillary,and“clinging”types.Nuclearappearancesrangefromblandandmonotonous(lownucleargrade)topleomorphic(highnucleargrade).Thedistinctivecomedosubtypeischaracterizedbyextensivecentralnecrosis,whichproducestoothpastelikenecrotictissuethatextrudesfromtransectedductsonapplicationofgentlepressure.CalcificationsfrequentlyareassociatedwithDCIS(

Fig.19.28C ),resultingfromcalcificationofnecroticdebrisorsecretorymaterial.DCISconstitutesonly5%ofbreastcancersinunscreenedpopulationsbutupto30%inscreenedpopulations,largelybecauseoftheabilityofmammographytodetectcalcifications.CurrenttreatmentstrategiesforDCISusesurgeryandirradiationtoeradicatethelesion.Treatmentwithanti-estrogenicagentssuchastamoxifenalsoisusedtodecreasetheriskofrecurrenceofER-positiveDCIS.Theprognosisisexcellent,withgreaterthan97%long-termsurvival.Ifuntreated,DCISprogressestoinvasivecancerinroughlyone-thirdofcases,usuallyinthesamebreastandquadrantastheearlierDCIS.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.19.28Carcinomainsitu.(A)Lobularcarcinomainsitu(LCIS).(B)Ductalcarcinomainsitu(DCIS).DCISpartiallyinvolvesthelobuleinthelowerhalfofthisphotoandhascompletelyeffacedtheupperlobules,producingaductlikeappearance. (C)MammographicdetectionofcalcificationsassociatedwithDCIS.

PagetdiseaseofthenippleiscausedbytheextensionofDCISupthelactiferousductsandintothecontiguousskinofthenipple,producingaunilateralcrustingexudateoverthenippleandareolarskin.UnlikePagetdiseaseofthevulva(describedearlier),Pagetdiseaseofthenipplestemsfrominsituextensionofanunderlyingcarcinoma.TheprognosisofthecarcinomaoforiginisaffectedbythepresenceofPagetdiseaseandisdeterminedbyotherfactors(discussedunderClinicalFeatures).

LCIShasauniformappearance.Thecellsaremonomorphic,havebland,roundnuclei,andarefoundinlooselycohesiveclusterswithinthelobules(

Fig.19.28A inthecontralateralbreast.Thus,LCISisbothamarkerofanincreasedriskofcarcinomainbothbreastsandadirectprecursorofsomecancers.Currenttreatmentoptionsincludecloseclinicalandradiologicfollow-up,chemopreventionwithtamoxifenor,lesscommonly,bilateralprophylacticmastectomy. ).LCISisvirtuallyalwaysanincidentalfindingbecause,unlikeDCIS,itisonlyrarelyassociatedwithcalcifications.Therefore,theincidenceofLCIShasremainedunchangedinmammographicallyscreenedpopulations.Approximatelyone-thirdofwomenwithLCISeventuallydevelopinvasivecarcinoma.UnlikeDCIS,invasivecarcinomasfollowingadiagnosisofLCISmayariseineitherbreast—2 13

Thedistinctivehistologicpatternsofthesubtypesofinvasivecarcinomaaredescribedfirst,followedbygrading,whichisusedforall.

Invasiveductalcarcinomaisatermusedforallcarcinomasthatcannotbesubclassifiedintooneofthespecializedtypesdescribedbelow.Amajority(70%–80%)ofcancersfallsintothisgroup.ThistypeofcancerusuallyisassociatedwithDCIS.Themicroscopicappearancevaries,rangingfromtumorswithwell-developedtubulesandlow-gradenuclei(

Fig.19.29A )totumorsconsistingofsheetsofanaplasticcells.Mostinvasiveductalcarcinomasproduceadesmoplasticresponse,whichreplacesnormalbreastfat(resultinginamammographicdensity;

Fig.19.29B )andeventuallyleadstotheappearanceofahard,palpableirregularmass.About50%to65%ofductalcarcinomasareERpositive,20%areHER2positive,and15%arenegativeforbothERandHER2(

Table19.7

InvasivelobularcarcinomaconsistsofinfiltratingcellsthataremorphologicallysimilartothetumorcellsseeninLCIS;indeed,two-thirdsofthecasesareassociatedwithLCIS.Thesetumorscomprise10%to15%ofallbreastcarcinomas.Thecellsinvadestromaindividuallyandoftenarealignedin“single-file”(

Fig.19.29C ).Althoughmostmanifestaspalpablemassesormammographicdensities,asignificantsubgroupinvadewithoutproducingadesmoplasticresponse;suchtumorsmaybeclinicallyoccultanddifficulttodetectbyimaging(

Fig.19.29D ).Thepatternofmetastasisoflobularcarcinomaisuniqueamongbreastcancers,astheyfrequentlyspreadtocerebrospinalfluid,serosalsurfaces,gastrointestinaltract,ovary,uterus,andbonemarrow.Almostalllobularcarcinomasexpresshormonereceptors,whereasHER2overexpressionisrare.

Carcinomaswithmedullaryfeaturesareaspecialtypeoftriple-negativecancercomprisingabout5%ofallbreastcancers.Thesecarcinomastypicallygrowasroundedmassesthatcanbedifficulttodistinguishfrombenigntumorsonimaging(

).TheyconsistofsheetsoflargeanaplasticcellsassociatedwithpronouncedlymphocyticinfiltratescomposedpredominantlyofTcells( Fig.19.29F

Fig.19.29E ).Thepresenceoflymphocytesisassociatedwithafavorableprognosis,atleastinpartduetoabetterresponsetochemotherapycomparedtopoorlydifferentiatedcarcinomaswithoutlymphoidinfiltrates.ThistypeofcarcinomaisseenfrequentlyinwomenwithgermlineBRCA1 mutations,butmostwomenwiththesecarcinomasarenotcarriers.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.19.29Growthpatternsofinvasivebreastcarcinomas.(A)Mostgrowastubules(“ductal”carcinoma)andstimulateareactivedesmoplasticstromalproliferation.Inmammograms(B),thesecarcinomasappearasdensemasseswithspicularmarginsresultingfrominvasionofadjacentradiolucentbreasttissue.(C)Lobularcarcinomasarecomposedofnoncohesivetumorcellsthatinvadeaslinearcordsofcellsandinducelittlestromalresponse.Accordingly,inmammograms(D)lobularcarcinomasoftenappearasrelativelysubtle,irregularmasses(arrows).(E)Uncommonly,carcinomasconsistoftightlyadhesiveclustersofcells,asinthiscarcinomawithmedullaryfeatures,orwhenthereisabundantextracellularmucinproduction. (F)Suchtumorsmayappearaswell-circumscribedmassesinmammograms,mimickingtheappearanceofabenignlesion.

Mucinous(colloid)carcinomaisanER-positive/HER2negativetumorthatproducesabundantamountsofextracellularmucin.Thetumorsusuallyaresoftandgelatinousbecauseofthepresenceofmucinpoolsthatcreateanexpansilecircumscribedmass.

TubularcarcinomaisanothertypeofER-positive/HER2negativecancerandisalmostalwaysdetectedonmammographyasasmallirregularmass.Thetumorcellsarearrangedinwell-formedtubulesandhavelow-gradenuclei.Lymphnodemetastasesarerare,andtheprognosisisexcellent.

Inflammatorycarcinomaisdefinedbyitsclinicalpresentation,ratherthanaspecificmorphology.Patientspresentwithaswollenerythematousbreastwithoutapalpablemass.Theunderlyinginvasivecarcinomaisgenerallypoorlydifferentiatedanddiffuselyinfiltratesandobstructsdermallymphaticspaces,causingthe“inflamed”appearance;trueinflammationisabsent.Manyofthesetumorsmetastasizetodistantsites;theoverall5-yearsurvivalislessthan50%,andunderstandablyevenlowerinthosewithmetastaticdiseaseatdiagnosis.AbouthalfexpressERand40%to60%overexpressHER2.

Alltypesofinvasivebreastcarcinomaareassignedagradefrom1(low-grade)to3(high-grade)basedonnuclearpleomorphism,tubuleformation,andproliferation.Low-gradenucleiaresimilarinappearancetothenucleiofnormalcells.High-gradenucleiareenlargedandhaveirregularnuclearcontoursresultingfromabnormalDNAcontentandstructure.Mostlow-gradecarcinomasformwell-definedtubulesandmaybedifficulttodistinguishfrombenignlesions,whereashigh-gradecarcinomaslosethiscapacityandinvadeassolidsheetsorsinglecells.Proliferationisevaluatedbycountingmitoticfigures.ThemajorityofHER2-positiveandtriple-negativecarcinomasarehighlyproliferative,whereasER-positivecancersshowawiderangeofproliferation.

by As (including are women, a cancers young most is indicated) affected mass palpable discussed, breast the screening previously not as whom in for patient. populations detected unscreened typically 3 invasive to size. Such in are cm almost are carcinomas all and least at 2 lymph regional At least cancers have will already of spread half these to nodes. cancers symptoms present. 60% screened older breast of molecular inhibitors HER2, similar before outcomes of approximately to are populations, discovered are In were carcinomas. situ in are 20% About with triple-negative patients carcinomas. to with com-Invasive 2 chemotherapy, in is exceed 1 therapy rates are targeted carcinomas older response when lymph have combined However, the 60% size nodes. detected to by plete outlook for metastasized 15% and will screening in cm these only and women improved. markedly the in older has group cancers age patients been Palpable expression suddenly method screening • a appear is of are that profiling newer intervals. often cancers—cancers “interval” subclasbetween RNA interval cancers. sifying Understandably, usually and the proliferation. prognosis generally are proliferative cancers, involved breast genes that are of are in predict many cancers highly For high grade. http://ebooksmedicine.net of their is these greatest value clinical assays The

woman slow-growing, with of morphologic diagnosis. at with The identify cancer the be features spared anti-can and ability the clinical to breast can estrogen-responsive of molecular and who based for cancers a cancer patients the the predicted on stage time be outcome its chemotherapy. of toxicity that stage. outcome Factors influence the • include Tumor following: Biologic “Stage” type. is tumor measure a of extent of • the time at biologic for of of a evaluated all histologic important type is diagnosis is of the appearance, by (includ-types cancer carcinoma. combination The biologic of grade and proliferative It of nodes regional the ing tumor lymph features is based and rate), of (N), expression HER2. involvement receptors, expression of on of primary (T), hormone of the distant presence (M) and metastases (

Fig. 19.30

Proliferation used responsiveness United cytotoxic by to T2, tied in closely count The tumors is chemother-States evaluated T1, T3 and mitotic to and and as staging system, classifies Europe, AJCC/UICC the is apy. the tumors division. the T4 deep on cells involvement DNA whereas otherwise to cell are interfere ation of muscles have is cancer agents tumor This of based damage ulcer-more of rapidly sensitive growing the because or size, skin, that with clinically chest wall, as are the or diagnosed inflamma-

or pre-tory of carcinoma. receptors estrogen Expression progesterone The metastasize cancers anti-estrogen dicts response to majority of therapy. to first nodal and nodes, inhibited involvement regional very receptor–positive be hormone of cancers strong is growth for prognostic factor. can The a therapy most in two for to lymph the with Lymphatic nodes patients is and it axilla or goes in sentinel many possible drainage one patients. years periods for with long to metastases. survive distant are not eventually remaining the these are However, nodes nodes often of usually resistance carcinoma. axillary involved, develops—in If free in because Sentinel some mutations cancers node for ER. of gene biopsy the associated with ment, nodal become assessing the chemo-which therapy are which lymph there has targeted with morbidity. triple-negative are is extensive more significant treated standard replacing node contrast, for no available involve-In dissections, for cancers, Distant therapy. newly respond of therapy the patient. only initial usually death in diagmetastasize of to metastases do (M) are and that 5% cause detected Cancers not the nosed women. is is CIS, Stage with which 0 associated

20% greater than rates about of seen breast is 95%. Overexpression HER2 in of survival I Stage women cancers. includes micrometastases. one HER2 smaller of against effective therapy with with a either examples nodes of best-characterized free directed is small cancers that only remains the carcinoma or very and of an lesion. tumor-specific is Survival molecular therapy, years. at targeted Before ~86% 10 of of or II Carcinomas classified take to as form Stage of may larger because which blocking are antibodies tumor size because small the up either or

Fig.19.30Ten-yearbreastcancerspecificsurvivalaccordingtoAJCCstageforER-positiveandER-negativecancers.Bothstageandbiologictypeofcancerareimportantdeterminantsofsurvival.ER-positiveinvasivecancershaveimprovedsurvivaloverER-negativecancersatallstages,butthisadvantagediminishesafter5yearsbecauseoflaterecurrencesofER-positivetumors. data of Dr. courtesy SEER-18,1992–2012. Stephanie from (Graph Wong;

http://seer.cancer.gov

lines) Estrogen positive 3 Stage three Breast cancer lines) Stage negative receptor specific Stage 0 receptor 1 0.4 (dashed http://ebooksmedicine.net nodes. Stage 0.8 Stage 4 cancers 0.6 positive 1.0 cancers survivalEstrogen 2 (solid 0.2 declines Stage to at ~71% Survival

II. is four advanced by positive involvement wall, cancers Stage more or group of by skin the nodes. locally or large size, chest III or of defined Only survive years. patients 10 ~54% of and poor is with survival for patients very reserved (~11%). is distant Stage IV metastases, The site likely a of the biologic distant cancer. varies most recurrence with type of to and ( which bones and more in HER2 contrast ER-positive brain to viscera, most likely to the are cancers often cancers, metastasize to cancers Triple-negative metastasize

Table 19.7

a accurate Combining factors may assessment and stage provide of outcome. biologic more For the postdiagnosis, for stage, each cancer patients patients of example, cancers IV Stages survival is 5 higher ER-negative III and ( especially ER-positive with years with cancers for than

Fig.

19.30 ). It differences diminishes with ( at advantage years being noted, be time, smaller progressively and must post-diagnosis 10 this beyond seen with however,

Fig.

). 19.30 differences This two by is of survival factors. explained narrowing cancers 5 deaths years most of from ER-negative diagnosis First, within ( happen

Fig. ). 19.31 tumors live to those this beyond point and cured. many treatment, had have whose may these are excellent of responses Women women be who anti-estrogen by curative check to and cancers years for is although the of Second, this resistant ER-positive cancers growth these therapy, not held treatment. become is in therapy may eventually

women within Historically, 3 cancer died to untreated virtually with all 4 years. breast of cancer survive. 80% great have made will treatment receive strides with now therapy and optimal However, breast been who women in

with Endocrine remain ER-positive very is and dormant cancers, inhibitors which years. for aromatase for may tamoxifen effective therapy many

effective Targeted being than of ( chemotherapy has conventional therapy less and promise the toxic more

Table19.8TargetedTreatmentofBreastCancer

Fig.19.31Timetorecurrenceofbreastcancers.Thehazardratioreflectstheriskofrecurrenceofeachmoleculartypeofbreastcanceratvariouspointsintimeafterdiagnosis.ER-negativecancersusuallyrecurwithinthefirst8years.Patientswhosurvivebeyondthisintervalarelikelycured.Incontrast,ER-positivecancershavealowerrateofrecurrence,butremainatriskdecadesaftertheprimarydiagnosis.

target ), carcinomas by marked of in improvement that of as 19.8 with the women survival proven following therapies HER2. already HER2-positive introduction to pathway. PI3K-AKT-signaling and Newer alternative inhibition DNA blockage of approaches BRCA-mutated repair targeted therapy of cancers include the pathways in patients breast cancer. with is under blockade therapy evaluation in (Chapter 6), Immune checkpoint hoped that such breast It will outcomes generally is cancer. triple as improve negative have in prognosis, new such currently poor that a subtypes approaches

ImmunecheckpointBlockingantibodiestoPD-L1,PD-1,andIHCforimmunecheckpointUnderinvestigationinpatientswithproteinsotherimmunecheckpointproteinsproteins—notyetvalidatedtriple-negativebreastcancer

Estrogenreceptor;HRR, immunohistochemistry;ISH, insituhybridization. ER, homologousrecombinationrepair;IHC,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

ThelifetimeriskofdevelopingbreastcancerforanAmericanwomanis1in8.

Amajority(75%)ofbreastcancersarediagnosedaftertheageof50.

Themajorriskfactorsfordevelopingbreastcancerarerelatedtohormonalfactorsandinheritedsusceptibility.

About12%ofallbreastcancersarecausedbyidentifiedgerm-linemutations;BRCA1 genesaccountforone-halfofthecasesassociatedwithsingle-genemutations. andBRCA2

DCISisaprecursortoinvasiveductalcarcinomaandismostoftenfoundonmammographicscreeningascalcifications.WhencarcinomadevelopsinawomanwithapreviousdiagnosisofuntreatedDCIS,itisusuallyisaninvasiveductalcarcinomainthesamebreast.

LCISisbothamarkerofincreasedriskandaprecursorlesion.WhencarcinomadevelopsinawomanwithapreviousdiagnosisofLCIS,two-thirdsareinthesamebreastandone-thirdisinthecontralateralbreast.

Invasivecarcinomasareclassifiedaccordingtohistologictypeandbiologictype:ER-positive/HER2-negative,HER2-positive,andER/PR/HER2-negative(triple-negative).Thebiologictypesofcancerhaveimportantdifferencesinpatientcharacteristics,grade,mutationprofile,metastaticpattern,responsetotherapy,timetorecurrence,andprognosis.

Prognosisisdependentonthebiologictypeoftumor,stage,andtheavailabilityoftreatmentmodalities.

N J Engl 2009. SE: 360:268, Mechanism Bulun disease: endometriosis, Med of the of of basis review molecular endometriosis.] [Excellent

N of Engl 2004. Med S: ovary, Cannistra 351:2519, J Cancer comprehensive [A review.]

2007. carcinoma, Rev DiCristofano LH: Pathol Endometrial Annu 2:57, A, Ellenson pathogenesis.] of discussion [A comprehensive

ovary Polycystic 2004. Engl syndrome, Ehrmann Med 352:1223, J N DA: review.] detailed [A

M: the of H, 42:209, advances pathology the Histopathology in vulva, Fox Wells 2003. Recent on short [A pathology.] update vulvar

2009. CS: Recent Herrington gynaecological molecular Histopathology in 55:243, advances pathology, review endometrial and of [A cervical, of neoplasia.] ovarian, genetics molecular

RC: Kathleen cancer, Annu Ovarian 2009. Rev 4:287, Dis Mech Pathol molecular discussion review with subject genetics.] on good [A of the

Human oncoproteins: 10:550, 2010. pathways transformation, Nat Moody Rev Cancer to papillomavirus CA: review [A cervical on current opinion carcinogenesis.] of

cancer, Morice 2016. A, Leary C, Creutzberg P, 387:1094, al: et Lancet Endometrial comprehensive subject.] the of [A review

Woodson Litton 2015. Surg J Rich AH, breast TA, 111:6–80, testing, syndromes genetic Hereditary J, and al: Oncol et cancer sequence. many will individuals [Soon DNA know entire their genes.] review moderate-penetrance the of susceptibility detecting discusses complexities lowand This

RS: Gestational Lancet MJ, trophoblastic Berkowitz 2010. Seckl Sebire 376:717, NJ, disease, discussion management.] trophoblastic of [A gestation including regarding review

of important Fumagalli al: for systemic molecular up? follow cancer differentiation Is et staging, the subtypes Sotiriou C, A, Sonnenblick local breast therapy, D, and and into Rev 2014. Cancer 1095, 40:1089– Treat the into practice discussed.] of translation is [The types biologic cancer clinical of studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

Features Adenomas: General Pituitary

of Forms Thyroiditis Other

1 Diabetes Pathogenesis of Type

2 Diabetes Type Pathogenesis of

of Forms Monogenic Diabetes

Other of Diabetes Subtypes

Acute of Complications Metabolic

Complications Chronic of Diabetes

AdrenocorticalHyperfunction:Hyperadrenalism

Cushing Hypercortisolism: Syndrome

Disease Insufficiency: Adrenocortical Addison Chronic

or metabolic together is that conprised The of maintain body’s organs a endocrine homeostasis. work widely group the equilibrium, distributed to of system cells site cells system of called this that secreting The endocrine from distant hormones, frequently on which act their of achieve synthesis. are molecules, the by target the A target carried hormone is endocrine the typically its to from gland blood by tissues. response in needs. trophic, to are metabolic response in particular hormones, to produced other, so-called secreted are which hormones Most Production as a often trophic the process of feedback that hormone known gland a inhibition. of the secretes the stimulating hormone, activity downregulates

class by such as composed broad molecules, to small classified of on and such insulin, Hormones This of (2) large and receptors: categories, their compounds the (1) as nature be of binding into hormones, hormone based • surface is receptors: cell that epinephrine. act can Hormones several growth peptide groups: two these to hormones (cAMP), adenosine (IP3), second in monophosphate intracellular as 1,4,5-trisphosphate receptors an calcium. cyclic and to ionized leads of such cell messengers, inositol Binding increase surface differentiation, alter cell or compounds pathways may these Elevated can activate or signaling intracellular more function. of or of one stimulate growth levels cell that

the nucleus. Many or diffusion binding the receptors that to interact pass with act the membrane cytosol hormones to plasma lipid-soluble through by by in Hormones • receptors: intracellular in DNA, thereby The regulatory the genes. expression of specific affecting to target specifically complexes resulting hormone-receptor bind elements type (e.g., of thyroxine. steroids estrogen, A), include retinoids progesterone, this and Hormones glucocorticoids), (vitamin

generally effects neoplasms, a biochemical hormones, may underproduction with to hormone; underproduction end-organ be with nonfunctional diseases or hormones. resistance or of overproduction overproduction may (1) associated of associated caused clinical or which and are the of be consequences; Endocrine or by: (2) (3) metabolites. on hormones, of the biochemical heavily In of other diseases of measurements settings, and the relies their levels regulators, study many endocrine

http://ebooksmedicine.net

the within small, turcica. lies confines the sella the at gland bean-shaped The brain a the base pituitary structure of is of that hypothalamus, rich is the the a portal stalk, and which intimately a circulation. connected It by venous related a hypothalamus, composed of to is extending it from plexus axons with constituting glands. a with the the most endocrine central hypothalamus, in the Along of other the has pituitary of regulation role (neurohypophysis). composed and the posterior lobe components: two lobe morphologically is pituitary the functionally of distinct anterior (adenohypophysis) and The anterior the the the lobe. affect be pituitary, posterior affect lobe divided that those can that of Diseases those primarily into and accordingly, primarily

hormones trophic adrenal, from production adenohypophysis, or that The anterior thyroid, the glands. produces other the stimulate pituitary, and of hormones pituitary developing cells The embryologically oral of anterior the composed from derived is epithelial cavity. or (chromophobic) histologic cytoplasm, is cytoplasm, cells sections, of eosinophilic colorful containing poorly basophilic ( a In cytoplasm staining array routine present

Fig. ). 20.1 are other their activity techniques control the these the of demonstrated within presence Detailed properties microscopy glands. electron of studies related staining polypeptide hormones and immunohistochemical the different have endocrine that cytoplasm cells to of using that factors in while control (e.g., ( dopamine) hypothalamus; the and others stimulatory release, and factors hypothalamic under of hormones promote produced The hormone these release the are somatostatin most pituitary are inhibitory is of pituitary

Fig. ). 20.2 be pituitary primary pituitary underproduction a of abnormality. signs hypothalamic may caused disease or rather overproduction by symptoms of Rarely, than and factors,

fall the pituitary of and following signs Symptoms disease into categories:

Fig.20.1Normalanteriorpituitarygland.Theglandispopulatedbyseveraldistinctcelltypesthatexpressdifferentpeptidehormones.Thesehormonesarebasophilic(blue),eosinophilic(red),ornonstaininginroutinesectionsstainedwithhematoxylinandeosin,whichallowsthevariouscelltypestobeidentified.Notealsothepresenceofafinereticulinnetworkbetweenthecells.

effects: from trophic of arises excessive related Hyperpituitarism secretion Hyperpituitarism hormones. pituitary be from extrapituitary and pituitary may an lesions, often as most later. results It other anterior but also adenoma by caused discussed of symptoms discussed chapter individual hyperpituitarism in The are signs context the of (see in and tumors later the

Table 20.1

deficiency may reactions. processes a ischemic destructive from hormones of surgery, radiation, that injury, trophic Hypopituitarismrelatedeffects:Hypopituitarismiscaused including pituitary, damage and and variety of the inflammatory by results encroach nonfunctional the addition, adenomas normal anterior hypopituitarism. and destroy causing upon may pituitary, In pituitary

neoplasms of of disruption diaphragma pituitary earliest the sellae. Among sellar including expansion, radiographic bony sella and effects: abnormalities Local are with associated the changes the turcica, mass erosion, often the compress to of proximity and Because chiasm. expanding nerves sella, optic pituitary the the the in of chiasm lesions fibers optic close decussating visual This hemianopsia”. the in (temporal) fields—a so-called lateral visual in the abnormalities, classically give of to defects “bitemporal field rise can form including in and of case and intracranial symptoms of may intracranial headache, elevated mass, produce the tumors any signs vomiting. As expanding pressure, nausea, pituitary cranial involvement the result of brain obstructive into or Pituitary can sella in of the extend seizures produce base the that hydrocephalus; neoplasms nerves palsy. nerve cranial turcica beyond termed the and loss of hemorrhage apoplexy. enlargement with pituitary neoplasm pituitary of rapid situation occasion, a On consciousness, is associated into a lesion acute is rapidly may Acute be considered and be emergency. apoplexy pituitary neurosurgical to therefore a fatal

pituitary anterior benign are cause pituitary which most of adenomas. most are tumors, disorders The of common abnormalities, nonfunctional produce and and hormones result are in and produce endocrine effects. mass these Some others of general We discuss pituitary tumors. the then of adenomas, first features specific

PituitaryAdenomas:GeneralFeatures

cause adenoma arising The hyperpituitarism common in anterior the most is a of hormone-producing lobe. of tumors, hyperplasia by and carcinomas some anterior Other, common, hormones certain less hypothalamic disorders. extrapituitary and pituitary, secretion causes include the of Pituitary follows: stains Some basis are detected of neoplastic the performed of by adenomas by immunohistochemical on are on sections which pituitary • hormone(s) as cells, classified tissue salient the features ( produced are adenomas

20.1 Table http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.2Thehypothalamic/pituitaryaxis.Thehypothalamusregulatesthesecretionofhormonesfromtheadenohypophysis(anteriorpituitarygland)byreleasingstimulatory(corticotropin-releasinghormone,CRH;growthhormone–releasinghormone,GHRH;gonadotropin-releasinghormone,GnRH;thyrotropin-releasinghormone(TRH)andinhibitoryfactors(growthhormoneinhibitoryhormone,GIHorsomatostatin;prolactininhibitoryfactor,PIFordopamine).Theseinturnmodulatethereleaseofsixhormonesfromtheanteriorpituitary:adrenocorticotropichormone(ACTHorcorticotropin);follicle-stimulatinghormone(FSH);growthhormone(GH,orsomatotropin);luteinizinghormone(LH);prolactin(PRL);andthyroid-stimulatinghormone(TSH,orthyrotropin).

of demonstration or Pituitary functional hormone clinical silent producing hormone (i.e., production the excess). level can only, be at or (not producing) (hormone of hormone), nonfunctioning manifestations adenomas without tissue at functional type and nonfunctioning pituitary cell exceptions. single produce Both adenomas but usually composed of predominant and most a there hormone, are are single a rarely, are common hormones adenomas secrete pituitary prolactin most being hormone and different the combination); Some (growth plurihormonal. pituitary two adenomas

they diameter are if exceed in cm macroadenomas are if than as designated microadenomas in Pituitary diameter. they less 1 1 adenomas and cm

macroadenomas. likely are Table20.1ClassificationofPituitaryAdenomas likely to therefore, to adenomas stage a be more attention clinical later and to • come are, Nonfunctioning at and leading larger upon to parenchyma, destroy hypopituitarism. their encroach nonfunctioning anterior size, adjacent Because pituitary adenomas of may

in pituitary abnormalities • one most identified: the common G-protein Several with of have are mutations been adenomas adenomas. associated alterations genomic genetic pituitary surface role G-proteins signal signals e.g. in from play receptors cell transmitting a critical transduction, growth

MammosomatotrophProlactin,GHMammosomatotrophadenomasCombinedfeaturesofGHandprolactinexcess

GonadotrophFSH,LHGonadotrophadenomasHypogonadism,masseffects,Silentgonadotrophadenomas(“nullcell,”oncocyticadenomas)andhypopituitarism

ACTH,Adrenocorticotrophichormone;FSH,follicle-stimulatinghormone;GH,growthhormone;LH,luteinizinghormone;POMC,pro-opiomelanocortin;TSH,thyroid-stimulatinghormone. accompaniedbyhypopituitarism effects duetodestructionofnormalpituitaryparenchyma.Thesefeaturesareparticularlycommonwithgonadotrophadenomas.PartiallyadaptedfromAsaSL,EssatS:Thepathogenesisofpituitarytumors.AnnuRevPathol4:97,2009. *Notethatnonfunctional(silent)adenomasineachcategoryexpressthecorrespondinghormone(s)withintheneoplasticcells,asdeterminedbyspecialimmunohistochemicalstainingontissues.However,theseadenomasdonotproducetheassociatedclinicalsyndrome,andtypicallypresentwithmass

http://ebooksmedicine.net

P P GDP TSH, P Mutation GTP (GHRH, ˜°˛ GTP synthesis P secretion ˜°˛P Adenyl P Ligand cAMP cyclase P ˜°˛P Receptor PTH) P and Proliferation Hormone GDP P

guanosinetriphosphate;P, Guanosinediphosphate;GTP, inorganicphosphate. Fig.20.3G-proteinsignalinginendocrineneoplasia.MutationsthatleadtoG-proteinhyperactivityareseeninavarietyofendocrineneoplasms,includingpituitary,thyroid,andparathyroidadenomas.Gproteinsplayacriticalroleinsignaltransduction,transmittingsignalsfromcellsurfacereceptors(GHRH,TSH,orPTHreceptor)tointracellulareffectors(e.g.,adenylcyclase),whichthengeneratesecondmessengers(cAMP,cyclicadenosinemonophosphate).GDP,

messengers intracellular adenyl hormone–releasing (e.g., hormone cyclase), second effectors then which cAMP). generate to (e.g., (GHRH) receptor, G-proteins are that of and α-subunit a with composed ( guanine receptors surface intracellular proteins, binds heterotrimeric cell both specific nucleotides effectors and interacts

Fig. ); the β-and the noncovalently bound α-subunit. γ-subunits are 20.3 to is including protein endocrine has organs, pituitary. in pivotal role the a G that stimulatory Gs several signal transduction a in of (Gsα) by α-subunit The gene. is the GNAS encoded Gs (GDP) bound Gs guanine exists of nucleotide-binding inactive basal in diphosphate state, an Gsα. guanosine with the state, to In the site binds triphosphate guanosine protein. ligand-bound G the and receptor, cell surface the activating Gsα, interaction to dissociates, On (GTP) with GDP proliferation cells), thyroid and of is (e.g., cellular mitogenic cells, stimulus in a somatotrophs follicular promoting and hormone which parathyroid and cells endocrine results secretion. the cAMP, of potent several synthesis generation activation Gsα corticotrophs, The in pituitary of α-subunit, GTPase Normally, into transient the Gsα in GTP is intrinsic hydrolyzes because activation which GDP. an activity the cAMP, of of bear of generation cell persistent GNAS Approximately Gsα, abrogate that 40% activity cellular to somatotroph leading Gsα, activation constitutive mutations proliferation. unchecked adenomas of GTPase and adenomas, adenomas; are described mutations cAMP-dependent from GNAS a via but cells thyrotroph, of pathways. which and not whose hormones hypothalamic signal absent gonadotroph have minority been corticotroph arise release in in do also lactotroph,

a adenomas predisposition. pituitary of inherited result of Approximately arise an as 5% PRKAR1A, been far thus adenomas: Four CDKN1B, pituitary familial of identified genes as AIP. cause and have a MEN1, genes transcription and the cycle. regulate cell These mutations these note, rarely in of Of adenomas. four sporadic somatic genes encountered pituitary are

mutations overexpression include the with TP53, as behavior of retinoblastoma aggressive gene (RB). cell and associated epigenetic checkpoint cycle of abnormalities genes, of aberrations cyclin Molecular in such silencing D1, are mutations pituitary carcinomas. observed In the in RAS addition, activating rare oncogene of genes in discussed were 6. of The functions Chapter these

MORPHOLOGYTheusualpituitaryadenomaisawell-circumscribed,softlesion.Smalltumorsmaybeconfinedtothesellaturcica,whilelargerlesionsmaycompresstheopticchiasmandadjacentstructures(

),erodethesellaturcicaandanteriorclinoidprocesses,andextendlocallyintothecavernousandsphenoidalsinuses.Inasmanyas30%ofcases,theadenomasarenonencapsulatedandinfiltrateadjacentbone,dura,and(uncommonly)brain.Fociofhemorrhageand/ornecrosisarecommoninlargeradenomas. Fig.20.4

Pituitaryadenomasarecomposedofrelativelyuniform,polygonalcellsarrayedinsheets,cords,orpapillae.Supportingconnectivetissue,orreticulin,issparse.Thenucleioftheneoplasticcellsmaybeuniformorpleomorphic.Thiscellularmonomorphismandtheabsenceofasignificantreticulinnetworkdistinguishpituitaryadenomasfromnon-neoplasticanteriorpituitaryparenchyma(

mutationsoftendemonstratebriskmitoticactivityandhigherproliferationratesandaredesignatedatypicaladenomasbecauseoftheirpotentialforaggressivebehavior. ).Mitoticactivityusuallyisscanty.Thecytoplasmoftheconstituentcellsmaybeacidophilic,basophilic,orchromophobic,dependingonthetypeandamountofsecretoryproductwithinthecell,butitisfairlyuniformthroughouttheneoplasm.Thefunctionalstatusoftheadenomacannotbepredictedfromitshistologicappearance.AdenomasthatharborTP53 Fig.20.5

Fig.20.4Pituitaryadenoma.Thismassive,nonfunctioningadenomahasgrownfarbeyondtheconfinesofthesellaturcicaandhasdistortedtheoverlyingbrain.Nonfunctioningadenomastendtobelargeratthetimeofdiagnosisthanthosethatsecreteahormone.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.5Pituitaryadenoma.Themonomorphismofthesecellscontrastswiththeadmixtureofcellsseeninthenormalanteriorpituitaryglandin

.Notealsotheabsenceofthereticulinnetwork. Fig.20.1

Themostcommoncauseofhyperpituitarismisananteriorlobepituitaryadenoma.

Pituitaryadenomascanbemacroadenomas(>1cmindiameter)ormicroadenomas(<1cmacross),andonclinicalevaluation,theycanbefunctionalornonfunctioning.

Macroadenomasmaypotentiallyleadtomasseffects,includingvisualdisturbances.

Functioningadenomasareassociatedwithdistinctendocrinesignsandsymptoms.

MutationoftheGNAS gene,whichresultsinconstitutiveactivationofastimulatoryGprotein,isoneofthemorecommongeneticalterations.

Thetwodistinctivemorphologicfeaturesofmostadenomasaretheircellularmonomorphismandabsenceofareticulinnetwork.

hormones. reflect cell from hormones Adenomas the that pituitary type clinical of arising and different activity the cells that syndromes cause produce characteristic of

of recognized are adenoma, type frequent the adenomas most of clinically pituitary lactotroph for Prolactin-secreting about 30% all accounting cases. hyperfunctioning to effect. expansile microadenomas considerable with associated mass range size in large, tumors from They the within cytoplasm is techniques. the neoplastic Prolactin immunohistochemical of demonstrable cells by secrete can to efficient, microadenomas hormone symptoms. systemic that secretion by highly such sufficient adenomas induce is lactotroph Prolactin even

loss and amenorrhea, galactorrhea, libido, infertility. of Hyperprolactinemia causes women, reproductive these with obvious hyperprolactinemia manifestations women age in diagnosed of amenorrhea) than are tumors. in are Because earlier an in stage prolactinomas premenopausal of others at (e.g., hyperprolactinemia men clinical women, are tumor a contrast, in coming subtle of whom and the size may large attention. older in By to before the effects reach also dopamine-inhibiting therapy, renal Hyperprolactinemia feature failure, and pregnancy, hypothyroidism, conditions, is other drugs of (e.g., lesions, estrogen reserpine). hypothalamic a including high-dose may In influence mass in mechanism of as secretion, known the stalk any hypothalamus disturb the prolactin suprasellar on addition, normal effect. the resulting inhibitory hyperprolactinemia—a in compartment mild patient a with (<200 prolactin a neoplasm. not pituitary necessarily indicate do prolactin-secreting adenoma elevations Thus, a serum µg/L) of in

adenomas cause of type children in adults. pituitary common adenoma, the and hormone–secreting most somatotroph in gigantism second are functioning Growth or acromegaly excess manifestations growth to clinical subtle, of they clinical large the come may adenomas cell quite somatotroph time Because be attention. by be may the hormone within hormone sparsely and examination, of demonstrates of the On cells. growth the producing or adenomas composed hormone– densely granulated staining microscopic immunohistochemical cells, growth are cytoplasm neoplastic immunoreactive often well. of prolactin as amounts are Small present

insulin-like with muscle. induce conjunction (IGF1), Persistent which of excess hormone 1 to bones hepatic growth stimulates growth and secretion of overgrowth factor hormone growth acts in the result secreting levels of in a the epiphyses as excessive gigantism. prepubertal case in IGF1 adenoma children, growth is hormone If the develops close, and growth before hormone– in and size, arms generalized body disproportionately a condition with is This legs. increase by long characterized the hands, most closure the in of develop conspicuous of tissues, acromegaly, hormone and soft and develop of bones and which growth in individuals viscera, epiphyses, feet. or is growth skin, levels affected after elevated If face, IGF1 the persist the results the jaw of the of teeth. and of protrusion face, (prognathism), its broadening in Enlargement lower separation and The sausage-like. are feet broad hands enlarged, the are and fingers and accompanied is of most evidence by gigantism instances In acromegaly. slowly the quite large is adenoma it may develop being These hence over detected. before may decades be changes recognized, before

diabetes is of most excess Persistent hormone with important is mellitus. the also growth abnormalities, which associated metabolic hormone–induced body’s which growth later). the to resistance, This “ insulin levels “blunts” arises of (see elevated peripheral ”, because glucose response hormone suppress for oral Failure glucose growth tests production load to one most the acromegaly. in an response sensitive of to of is arthritis, hormone muscle failure, weakness, gonadal excess an of manifestations cancers. growth heart Other gastrointestinal generalized hypertension, for congestive and increased include dysfunction, risk

http://ebooksmedicine.net

adrenal by cortisol production development corticotroph hypercortisolism ACTH and adenomas as syndrome). Excess hypersecretion Cushing (also of known to the functioning leads of of conditions (discussed syndrome adrenal gland) with by Cushing of other may later diseases be the caused well. as is of who hypercortisolism first pituitary, it disease ACTH called after the production the by described by Cushing is excessive When Cushing Harvey caused neurosurgeon the disorder. the

diagnosis. adenomas time corticotroph at Most of (microadenomas) are the small ACTH protein. (PAS) result of as periodic stain the glycosylated acid–Schiff a positively of with accumulation These adenomas stains, be immunohistochemical specifically detected also by can ACTH methods. clinically Large, Cushing surgical adenomas adrenal aggressive cell corticotroph glands treatment syndrome. develop for the of may after of removal condition, effect Nelson instances most a In inhibitory from on preexisting of known corticosteroids the syndrome, of loss this results microadenoma. adrenal corticotroph as absent in Because individuals Nelson with not syndrome, hypercortisolism are does adrenals develop. the the effects with tumor. Instead, of mass patients present pituitary the stimulating that synthesis of hormone skin Patients the which with from derived Cushing (MSH), of melanocyte ACTH. ACTH production of syndrome increased as so same hyperpigmented often its have precursor is accompanies because

produce with Other and not part hyperpituitarism, are disorders hormonal pituitary adenomas hormonal not considered are do disturbances. of nonfunctional associated or

and they named act follicle-stimulating on hormones (gonads). produce Gonadotroph so are reproductive (luteinizing adenomas hormone [FSH]) organs hormone because [LH] that recognize to secretory not recognizable products a the because do be variably syndrome. These and they can inefficiently difficult hormones and cause clinical usually adenomas secrete signs when to vision, to impaired tumors local related cause apoplexy. such effects, and They the large or headaches, enough typically as become mass pituitary are detected symptoms diplopia, the subunits; and α-subunit neoplastic is FSH hormone. cells usually the β-FSH secreted demonstrate usually the and immunoreactivity gonadotropin common specific β-LH predominant The for

1% of (thyroid-stimulating for a hyperthyroidism. all hormone constitute pituitary about of adenomas cause account [TSH]–producing) Thyrotroph and adenomas rare

25% group are to a tumors. that of Nonfunctioning all 30% heterogeneous constitutes pituitary pituitary adenomas is typical by characterized effects. the surprisingly, Not mass presentation These impinge residual due appear may gradual slowly and enlargement (pituitary acute on to of pituitary also intratumoral or apoplexy). hypopituitarism, may hemorrhage adenoma which anterior abruptly of produce lesions the the because

are carcinomas exceedingly Pituitary rare. In tumors sites. the virtually extension to local metastasize these addition turcica, beyond sella always distant to

Prolactinomas: amenorrhea,galactorrhea,lossoflibido,andinfertility

hormone cell) adenomas: (somatotroph gigantism(children),acromegaly(adults),andimpairedglucosetoleranceanddiabetesmellitus Growth

Corticotrophcelladenomas:Cushingsyndrome,hyperpigmentation

Allpituitaryadenomas,particularlynonfunctioningadenomas,maybeassociatedwithmasseffectsandhypopituitarism.

more of 75% Clinically significant parenchyma. with loss the or absence occur may pituitary hypopituitarism of anterior or (exceedingly abnormalities acquired pituitary. of result from range of or may be intrinsic wide congenital a rare) the It hormone–releasing anterior of from factors interfere pituitary frequently, as hypothalamus, delivery tumors, hypofunction cause such Less of the hypothalamic that pituitary. the the with disorders in of dysfunction of origin. form is by Hypopituitarism hypothalamic always later) (discussed pituitary posterior almost accompanied diabetes insipidus the of evidence the caused anterior Most by following: hypofunction are of pituitary cases

clinically anterior of anterior postpartum significant or the the necrosis is of pituitary, called the syndrome, of anterior Sheehan common necrosis pituitary. the most form pituitary, Ischemic necrosis of enlarges, pregnancy, because increase of the anterior During pituitary and of prolactin-secreting number an mainly size in cells. the supply hypophyseal low-pressure in blood not hyperplasia system. This is the by an portal accompanied venous increase from The ischemic peripartal especially injury, enlarged in is women gland hypotension thus experience who during the to vulnerable period. pituitary much is and blood from injury. ischemic to susceptible less arterial directly posterior contrast, the branches receives By its pressure, Pituitary in any elevated of necrosis disseminated and shock occur the setting cell also of injury, may origin. anemia, sickle intravascular traumatic coagulation, intracranial

by include lesions ablation tuberculosis, Other, or Iatrogenic pituitary common inflammatory or radiation http://ebooksmedicine.net less the of pituitary surgery as trauma, pituitary of involving such causes causes metastatic and tumors the anterior sarcoidosis include hypo-function •

of on depend The lacking. the hormones specific hypo-function manifestations pituitary that anterior clinical are deficiency. occur In growth as failure may dwarfism) hormone result children, (pituitary of growth a Gonadotropin in and in loss women of gonadotropin-releasing deficiency and and infertility to libido, hair or to leads and pubic impotence, hormone men. (GnRH) amenorrhea axillary decreased and ACTH result hypothyroidism in and TSH later). hypoadrenalism, deficiencies respectively (discussed lactation. in postpartum results deficiency Prolactin failure of melanocytes. stimulatory is manifestations pallor effects produces a of that rich of anterior therefore, the is hypopituitarism loss pituitary of of from one from of ACTH; MSH, synthesized also source The same skin on the precursor molecule of MSH

in extending cell from supraoptic composed of the nerve axonal of paraventricular nuclei pituicytes) bodies cells glial modified the and processes posterior pituitary, and The hypothalamus. is neurohypophysis, or (termed peptides: hormone and neurons two oxytocin. produce The (ADH) hypothalamic anti-diuretic in into response in are stored They appropriate the terminals stimuli. axon and neurohypophysis released in the to circulation nonapeptide is the nucleus. ADH a synthesized supraoptic predominantly hormone in distention, into general In pressure, terminals atrial states, the exercise, response emotional the osmotic in is several circulation. certain stimuli, released and neurohypophysis axon ADH from plasma increased including different left to of the of tubules the kidney free water. on collecting promote The to the resorption acts hormone mammary muscle of stimulates the of smooth uterus glands. the ducts surrounding lactiferous the in of pregnant and the muscle Oxytocin contraction with associated been abnormalities. Impairment not and of clinical has oxytocin significant release synthesis

overproduction. ADH involve clinically underor syndromes pituitary important posterior The

resorb urination to of ADH insipidus, urine. properly condition the by the an a diabetes (polyuria) causes from to due water inability deficiency excessive characterized kidney causes, and and the several the can disorders head surgical or neoplasms, involving Diabetes insipidus inflammatory of pituitary. pituitary, including procedures hypothalamus and from result from hypothalamus trauma, condition arises The spontaneously (idiopathic). sometimes caused by insipidus, differentiate ADH. designated insipidus from from unresponsiveness which renal it circulating tubular to ADH is to Diabetes is nephrogenic central, deficiency diabetes an clinical inappropriately the manifestations and of both gravity. diseases include large excretion dilute similar volumes low are of urine specific of with The of as of and increased thirst free resulting excessive water, loss Serum renal sodium in result a polydipsia. and are osmolality in can but for bedridden, develop who water dehydration. generally ability to water who drink obtunded, urinary limited may otherwise patients obtain their life-threatening Patients are or compensate losses,

The inappropriate amounts syndrome is excess, (SIADH) secretion with hyponatremia. excessive resulting of of water, typically of causes in associated ADH resorption ADH free which the SIADH the of small-cell injury neurohypophysis. of the the of of lung), or lung, local carcinomas to Causes neoplasms hypothalamus and secretion by ectopic diseases non-neoplastic include ADH (particularly malignant dominated and manifestations clinical cerebral resultant hyponatremia, neurologic edema, of dysfunction. The SIADH by are edema body not normal, does water develop. total and remains blood increased, Although peripheral volume is

two of and a usually by located the anterior below consists to lobes thyroid lateral isthmus, gland larynx. thin bulky The relatively connected pharyngeal the evagination that the at developing of an the position develops descends The in from of from the tongue embryologically base foramen thyroid anterior its neck. cecum gland to the epithelium normal descent other or the commonly high in base of most located tongue of at explains thyroid) thyroid neck. pattern This (lingual the ectopic occasional of sites the tissue, the at abnormally presence

is about to into evenly composed lobules, 20 of follicles. thyroid dispersed 40 The each divided is cuboidal are thyroid to active columnar lined precursor hormone. filled with of follicles by which epithelium, The low protein the thyroglobulin, iodinated thyrotrophs the pituitary from the factors TSH response is anterior trophic in the released hypothalamus, called by to (also thyrotropin) circulation. In into associate G-protein and its on in cells thyroid change TSH to results receptor allowing receptor, The follicular a in activation binding stimulatory epithelial it with ( conformational of to the

Fig. 20.6 ). in illustrated As

Fig. stimulatory of G-protein 20.3, in synthesis results in increase activation an which release. cAMP intracellular hormone levels, and stimulates thyroid triiodothyronine (T4) and Thyroid convert cells amounts of (T3). epithelial into follicular thyroglobulin thyroxine lesser for tissues. such most and peptides T3 released transport bound of T4 circulating circulation, where systemic to proteins, are as peripheral globulin, into plasma T4-binding these to the are proteins available (free) hormones the T4 The tissues. readily serum are that the unbound maintain while the concentrations and to within T3 limits binding narrow ensuring

http://ebooksmedicine.net

GTP cAMP T3, expression Pituitary receptor GDP protein T4 receptor G Gene gene G T4 hormone Thyroid TSH TSH TRH Thyroid on Target T3,

loop. Fig.20.6Homeostasisinthehypothalamus-pituitary-thyroidaxisandmechanismofactionofthyroidhormones.Secretionofthyroidhormones(T3andT4)iscontrolledbytrophicfactorssecretedbyboththehypothalamusandtheanteriorpituitarygland.DecreasedlevelsofT3andT4stimulatethereleaseofthyrotropin-releasinghormone(TRH)fromthehypothalamusandthyroid-stimulatinghormone(TSH)fromtheanteriorpituitary,causingT3andT4levelstorise.ElevatedT3andT4levels,inturn,suppressthesecretionofbothTRHandTSH.Thisrelationshipistermedanegative-feedback TSHbindstotheTSHreceptoronthethyroidfollicularepithelium,whichcausesactivationofGproteins,releaseofcyclicAMP(cAMP),andcAMPmediatedsynthesisandreleaseofthyroidhormones(i.e.,T3andT4).Intheperiphery,T3andT4interactwiththethyroidhormonereceptor(TR)andformacomplexthattranslocatestothenucleusandbindstoso-called“thyroidresponseelements”(TREs)ontargetgenes,therebyinitiatingtranscription.

nuclear is with 10-fold majority activity. in T4 T4 affinity binds of the has the hormone greater In to thyroid latter than receptors to deiodinated proportionately periphery, and free cells the greater target T3; its of hormone-receptor of receptor thyroid cellular genes. to that hormone the nuclear creates thyroid a hormone regulates Binding subset a (TR) of complex transcription effects, diverse This and protein catabolism a synthesis wide in carbohydrate range and cell cellular lipid including produces types. increased of the is increase of result processes an rate. basal metabolic net in these The

the thyroid of to surgical amenable Clinical medical management. or because is diseases recognition of important, are most lesions of Such deficiency conditions hormone diseases hormones (hypothyroidism), thyroid thyroid thyroid. and excessive mass the include with release of associated (hyperthyroidism), disturbed followed the the problems. an are that function, generate next thyroid consequences Considered of of overview clinical by disorders these

caused and elevated state of a hypermetabolic levels is circulating Thyrotoxicosis by T4. T3 free thyroid of is gland, most thyrotoxicosis hyperthyroidism. referred is hyperfunction to commonly the Because it often by caused as from preformed release however, either oversupply ( an hormone related thyroiditis) In rather extrathyroidal (e.g., of in a to excessive than source, certain or gland conditions, thyroid is hyperfunctioning comes the

). Table 20.2 only the common) of is thyrotoxicosis. (albeit category hyperthyroidism one speaking, Thus, most strictly Despite thyrotoxicosis following common to this clear the distinction, adheres the interchangeably. using and the terms hyperthyroidism discussion of practice

are the gland: The thyrotoxicosis of of common three with causes associated hyperfunction most

disease, disease of of hyperplasia associated thyroid autoimmune cases) form for of Graves 85% thyroid with the a (accounts Diffuse

the (“toxic”) adenoma of Hyperfunctional thyroid

mainly by are overactivity are sympathetic attributable induced nervous the thyrotoxicosis manifestations of system: to The hormone thyroid and of the hypermetabolic clinical state and protean

sweating Constitutional vasodilation intolerance skin individuals of be symptoms: and flushed heat because are tends soft, The loss; to thyrotoxic peripheral and and increase common. flow to excessive blood of increased warm, heat sympathetic in despite increased hypermetabolism activity result Increased loss appetite. weight and

of time gut which the rapid cause can Stimulation Gastrointestinal: results (hypermotility), and fat transit malabsorption steatorrhea. in

and to cardiac and Palpitations both due common increased increased tachycardia are Cardiac: contractility

Table20.2CausesofThyrotoxicosis

TSH, Thyroid-stimulatinghormone. *AssociatedwithincreasedTSH;allothercausesofthyrotoxicosisassociatedwithdecreasedTSH.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.7Apatientwithhyperthyroidism.Awide-eyed,staringgaze,causedbyoveractivityofthesympatheticnervoussystem,isoneoftheclassicfeaturesofthisdisorder.InGravesdisease,oneofthemostimportantcausesofhyperthyroidism,accumulationoflooseconnectivetissuebehindtheorbitsalsoaddstotheprotuberantappearanceoftheeyes.

peripheral oxygen requirements. congestive Older failure. heart disease may heart preexisting adult develop with patients

overactivity. sympathetic due and tremor, experience nervousness, the frequently Neuromuscular: Patients to irritability develop muscle myopathy). Nearly 50% weakness proximal (thyroid

hyperthyroidism. changes Ocular call often to attention muscle), upper of (Müller’s superioris because sympathetic the lag palpebrae wide, staring present and tarsal ( are levator raise the eyelid gaze lid of alongside A which muscle the superior to overstimulation muscle functions

Fig. ). 20.7 in is associated with thyroid disease ophthalmopathy feature later). fullblown However, a only seen proptosis (discussed Graves

Thyroid storm onset abrupt severe designates of the hyperthyroidism. might infection, patients form from encountered in levels, an any disease catecholamine probably cessation elevation be Graves during in with acute results medication, as stress. and most often It occurs of surgery, or anti-thyroid of storm cardiac of arrhythmias. as of is patients medical significant untreated Thyroid number emergency, a die a

the Apathetic to adults, features older refers blunted. in thyrotoxicosis excess of are thyroid hormone often hyperthyroidism whom in typical occurring underlying is disease. thyroid workup during detected unexplained disease loss worsening usually for or cardiovascular weight laboratory The

data. hyperthyroidism and diagnosis The on based is features of laboratory clinical even The earliest the still hyperthyroidism, single TSH useful decreased levels for at serum disease are because of is measurement when screening most may subclinical. test be the stages, TSH the hypothalamus-associated (secondary) hyperthyroidism, TSH either rare In cases normal are raised. levels pituitaryor or of T4. associated increased usually low A free is of with value TSH levels predominantly levels from increased toxicosis). patient, T3 occasional In results hyperthyroidism the of circulating (T3 direct useful. may levels In of decreased, free measurement and be be such may cases, T4 serum T3 hormone combination determining in measurement thyroid gland of valuable the the and thyrotoxicosis of TSH be etiology. uptake a diagnosis free iodine the by by confirmed assays, of can has been thyroid radioactive Once solitary or uptake decreased show increased disease, may For uptake Graves in in uptake a increased in diffusely in example, adenoma, such toxic scans thyroiditis. nodule

derangements with or that functional Hypothyroidism is structural production. hormone caused interfere thyroid by disease hypothalamic from divided pituitary ( secondary whether an thyroid intrinsic primary into in be disorder the may on and from depending abnormality categories, or arises it This or

). Table 20.3 be Primary causes. can congenital, hypothyroidism or to iatrogenic autoimmune, secondary

(dyshormonogenetic cause synthesis of dysgenesis) hormone thyroid thyroid are congenital common the of overall goiter) development Genetic or most the rare defects U.S. perturb (thyroid hypothyroidism that the in but

manifested early of hyothryoidism by has is but caused congenital, Endemic called deficiency genetic in typically iodine been not childhood is also defects. dietary and by cause in hypothyroidism a worldwide. of and is infants children common It

cause salt of the common Autoimmune hypothyroidism iodine where disease in thyroid in dietary a is products. of world regions supplemented is are The of to due hypothyroidism later). Hashimoto majority of (discussed vast thyroiditis autoimmune cases

either certain an can of Iatrogenic hypothyroidism effect or as caused thyroid of surgical drugs. radiation-induced unintended be parenchyma, ablation adverse by or

clinical manifestations The include of hypothyroidism cretinism and myxedema.

infancy hypothyroidism developing to in childhood. early Cretinism or refers disorder was formerly This

Table20.3CausesofHypothyroidism

PostablativeSurgery,radioiodinetherapy,orexternalirradiationAutoimmunehypothyroidism

*Associatedwithenlargementofthyroid(“goitroushypothyroidism”).Hashimotothyroiditisandpostablativehypothyroidismaccountforthemajorityofcasesofhypothyroidismindevelopedcountries. Drugs(lithium,iodides,p-aminosalicylicacid)

http://ebooksmedicine.net the including is the Himalayas where such and Andes deficiency as common areas mountainous world endemic, fairly dietary in cretinism). of areas the iodine (endemic of is much widespread now the iodine. It supplementation less salt with frequent of because defects By of interfere cause synthesis contrast, that sporadic with cretinism. are hormone enzyme a thyroid nervous central of protruding severe stature, of facial coarse cretinism Clinical system umbilical skeletal impaired features a development mental include the and short features, hernia. and retardation, system, tongue, in seems mental the state The influenced in to severity utero. time of be deficient cretinism the of onset the of impairment by to T3 T4, critical maternal and brain the Normally, are that development, fetal placenta. cross hormones including fetal of before the is mental maternal thyroid severe. present deficiency development gland, the retardation If is thyroid in later contrast, after fetal By brain thyroid normal development. has maternal reduction the allows hormones thyroid pregnancy, developed, in

children • as in a and myxedema. condition older known results adults Hypothyroidism in The sluggishness, fatigue, which apathy, may depression. include initial mental and mimic symptoms generalized sympathetic and results sweating. in decreased constipation activity Decreased of decreased blood pale The skin is flow. cool because and exercise Reduced contributes breath frequent decreased and shortness to output capacity, cardiac complaints. of two ATPases, calcium in maintaining such Thyroid cardiac transcription the efficient sarcolemmal products critical hormones several encoded of output. genes, whose regulate are as to mortality the this levels—that rates increase total profile—an hypothyroidism addition, may and cholesterol lipid contribute disease. atherogenic lipoprotein an adverse promotes In in (LDL) low-density cardiovascular in in acid, viscera. is such skin, glycosaminoglycans Histologically, accumulation of substances, hyaluronic an there matrix and and subcutaneous as tissue, tongue, and of coarsening voice. the This of edema, facial of features, deepening nonpitting enlargement results and in the broadening

hypothyroidism evaluation. is laboratory diagnosis on The of based case As screening measurement of is serum TSH sensitive test. of most the the hyperthyroidism, in

the concentration and respectively. pituitary, a production of thyrotropin-releasing because TSH inhibition loss in of The and hormone primary by hypothyroidism of increased is feedback hypothalamus TSH (TRH) serum by concentration is pituitary hypothalamic primary increased TSH in with disease. The caused individuals or hypothyroidism not hypothyroidism with any in is T4 patients origin. Serum of decreased

disease thyroid cause of Autoimmunity is (AITD). a underlying are autoimmune diseases, to collectively thyroid which as referred variety of the include Graves disease). necessarily are thyroid by not function inflammation (exemplified with antibody-mediated These thyroiditis, disturbances that in disorders and associated forms the discuss We of various thyroiditis. first

some form thyroid disorders encompasses by of of characterized diverse Thyroiditis inflammation. group a thyroiditis, thyroiditis. on Hashimoto thyroiditis, clinically the (2) (3) focuses subacute and discussion and Quervain) This subtypes: (de granulomatous lymphocytic most three common (1) significant

areas common most Hashimoto sufficient. iodine are in the hypothyroidism of of is levels the cause world thyroiditis where autoimmune destruction is It gland. the thyroid of failure characterized to gradual secondary by thyroid to between more 20:1. in is of 10:1 with to and a is 45 prevalent common and most ratio women It age of male years 65 female it it women, age, can of childhood. a primarily is Although older disease occur any including at

response caused is thyroid disease thyroiditis by Hashimoto to (Chapter autoantigens 5). immune an an autoimmune against thyroid the patients. of in present majority Circulating are antigens autoantibodies vast lymphocytic and immune cells progressive depletion of thyroid leads to associated infiltrates The fibrosis. response with epithelial inciting to have multiple not response elucidated, identified but events The cell that have leading may autoimmune immunologic fully contribute to been damage the mechanisms thyroid ( been

Fig. the including ), following: 20.8

killing epithelial thyroid cells. T-cell–mediated of CD8+ cytotoxic

death. cell Cytokine-mediated the and interferon-γ activation with macrophages recruitment leads gland, of damage and cytokines of activation to follicles. in T-cell resultant thyroid such as inflammatory the production to

(Chapter Binding of followed cell–mediated 5). by anti-thyroid antibodies), cytotoxicity peroxidase antibodies and anti-thyroid antibody-dependent (anti-thyroglobulin,

component, and significant rate disease concordance the presence twins have approximately in patients. anti-thyroid based about a to affected on 40% of appears siblings a antibodies of of mono-zygotic 50% The in genetic of asymptomatic cytotoxic (CTLA4), T-cell is negative which with (Chapter genes, is thyroiditis lymphocyte–associated of codes 5). associated antigen-4 of for responses Increased gene significant susceptibility polymorphisms to immune which the most regulation– associated regulator T the Hashimoto a in

http://ebooksmedicine.net MORPHOLOGYThethyroidusuallyisdiffuselyandsymmetricallyenlarged.Microscopicexaminationrevealswidespreadinfiltrationoftheparenchymabyamononuclearinflammatoryinfiltratecontainingsmalllymphocytes,plasmacells,andwell-developed

thyroid Breakdown self-tolerance and of in induction autoimmunity

Fig. of thyroiditis. Pathogenesis Hashimoto 20.8 progressive by T infiltrating thyroid cells, autoantigens results immune antibody-dependent locally cytotoxicity. autoimmune or cytokines, released tolerance Breakdown of to in cytotoxic of destruction thyrocytes

Fig. ongoing ultrastructural in follicular of the follicles Hürthle Hürthle, is This abundant. cuboidal and granular Interstitial prominent epithelium epithelial atrophic areas abundant examination, termed are The by many are a eosinophilic, lined mitochondria. the by the be normal are to is of may presence on numerous response cells by metaplastic oxyphil, 20.9 distinguished increased characterized cells. injury; tissue cytoplasm, or ). cells thyroid and low connective is commonly, result variant). Less atrophic small and as fibrosis (fibrosing the extensive thyroid a more of

thyroid, attention the with comes some hypothyroidism, painless woman. in a usually enlargement middle-age Hashimoto of to as associated clinical often thyroiditis degree of

Fig. Hashimoto with lymphocytic contains thyroid thyroiditis. germinal parenchyma 20.9 centers. The dense infiltrate a lined also Hürthle follicles deeply thyroid are cells by eosinophilic Residual seen.

be and diffuse, sufficiently for of but is enlargement cases suspicion symmetric usually the neoplasm. some The may it in gland raise to localized develops In gradually. course, clinical the hypothyroidism usual thyroid thyrotoxicosis however, follicles, hormones some caused disruption by (hashitoxicosis). secondary release transient cases, of with preceded be thyroid by In may of it this is phase, free is uptake elevated, iodine T4 and During decreased. T3 and TSH diminished, radioactive are concentrations a TSH. fall, T4 and levels by in accompanied progressively supervenes, increase compensatory As hypothyroidism T3 lymphomas at autoimmune development of the increased gland. B-cell thyroid and for non-Hodgkin diseases Hashimoto arise are typically other Patients within which with often the 12), have thyroiditis risk (Chapter morphologic and and a thyroid between carcinomas. suggesting cancers disease papillary some epithelial molecular relationship with Hashimoto predisposition to The studies remains controversial,

as Hashimoto is Subacute common thyroiditis, thyroiditis, disease. also de less much known granulomatous than Quervain most frequently and, thyroiditis, men. more thyroiditis De 30 of forms between than like in 50 is years age Quervain other and women of occurs in common inflammatory a be by infection an or by triggered thyroiditis viral Subacute autoimmune believed to infections, caused an viral by is process process. not and A a majority of an before of thyroiditis. upper-respiratory the history patients onset have infection of shortly immune not autoimmune thyroid in the remits. the in subacute so response disease, process granulomatous Unlike thyroiditis is spontaneously self-perpetuating,

MORPHOLOGYTheglandisfirm,withanintactcapsule,andmaybeunilaterallyorbilaterallyenlarged.Histologicexaminationrevealsdisruptionofthyroidfollicles,extravasationofcolloid,andinfiltratingneutrophils,whicharereplacedovertimebylymphocytes,plasmacells,andmacrophages.Theextravasatedcolloidprovokesanexuberantgranulomatousreactionwithgiantcells,somecontainingfragmentsofcolloid.Healingoccursbyresolutionofinflammationandfibrosis.

onset is acute. The this of of form often thyroiditis thyroid. is It and the malaise, enlargement neck of variable with by pain characterized (particularly fever, swallowing), of follicles of thyroiditis, excessive Transient of of a may thyroid release as in as hyperthyroidism cases other result disruption thyroid hormone. and occur, rates increased. count are sedimentation leukocyte erythrocyte The and a hypothyroid With gland ensue. transient may progression the of destruction, phase within is 6 a self-limited, most 8 weeks. to The with state patients euthyroid condition to returning typically

silent or (postpartum patients, in also a the known of Subacute lymphocytic follows thyroiditis). as is onset thyroiditis; painless thyroiditis subset pregnancy antithyroid etiology, is autoimmune a in likely found majority circulating are in disease most This of as patients. antibodies women, neck a painless excess. It or hormone with mass mostly present middle-aged features who of thyroid affects to by to euthyroid followed damage) (which to The of a a return phase likely months. secondary is thyrotoxicosis be tissue is initial few thyroid within state eventually individuals, minority to condition progresses of In a hypothyroidism. the affected gross enlargement, mild for on symmetric inspection. possible thyroid Except the appears normal within of histologic germinal consist hyperplastic The thyroid parenchyma. centers and infiltration the lymphocytic features

is involving manifestation characterized rare thyroid thyroiditis, Riedel neck 5), extensive fibrosis by and contiguous IgG4-related structures. of (Chapter that the a disease a is disorder mass, a thyroid hard evaluation a fixed simulating demonstrates Clinical thyroid neoplasm. and other in It body, the fibrosis sites be retroperitoneum. with such associated may idiopathic in as the

•Chroniclymphocytic(Hashimoto)thyroiditisisthemostcommoncauseofhypothyroidisminregionswheredietaryiodinelevelsaresufficient.

Hashimotothyroiditisisanautoimmunediseasecharacterizedbyprogressivedestructionofthyroidparenchyma,Hürthlecellchange,andmononuclear(lymphoplasmacytic)infiltrates,withorwithoutextensivefibrosis.

Tcells,cytokines(IFN-γ),andanti-thyroidantibodies. MultipleautoimmunemechanismsaccountforthyroidinjuryinHashimotodisease,includingcytotoxicitymediatedbyCD8+

Subacutegranulomatous(deQuervain)thyroiditisisaself-limiteddisease,probablysecondarytoaviralinfection,andischaracterizedbypainandthepresenceofagranulomatousinflammationinthethyroid.

Subacutelymphocyticthyroiditisisaself-limiteddiseasethatoftenoccursafterapregnancy(postpartumthyroiditis),typicallyispainless,andischaracterizedbylymphocyticinflammationinthethyroid.

females” Robert in of long “violent and his palpitations of a the characterized gland. enlargement associated with thyroid observations continued Graves on by In 1835, reported disease is most hyperthyroidism. common cause Graves the disease endogenous of It of triad characterized is by manifestations: a

hyper-functional thyroid a by diffusely Thyrotoxicosis, caused enlarged,

as resultant 40% as many exophthalmos, in An ophthalmopathy infiltrative with patients noted of

cases myxedema), minority designated pretibial a dermopathy in seen A of infiltrative (sometimes localized,

to Graves more women times a with men. has seven affected of commonly 20 up being age, incidence years disease than between 40 and peak women United of This the estimated affect to disorder, 2% States. common a is in to 1.5% are of in concordance the as the is disease; monozygotic in Graves relatives in twins Genetic factors rate increased and high 60%. patients, affected incidence important is as products the (HLA) the genetic antigen T-cell polymorphisms including HLA-DR3, responses, leukocyte and to with tyrosine susceptibility human genes phosphatase associated is regulate T-cell disease the of and whose CTLA-4 certain presence autoimmune haplotypes, inhibitory a Graves in PTPN22. disorders, other receptor with As specifically

against follicular TSH stimulate, endogenous receptor manifestations to, of the independent thyroid and that Many autoantibodies caused by cells of bind Graves trophic hormones. disease are including produced disease, autoantibodies Thyroid-stimulating the are in following: Graves • immunoglobulin (TSI). Multiple adenyl stimulating receptor to This cyclase, resultant the of hormones. TSH, mimics and increased binds with release thyroid of IgG TSH action the antibody of Graves have which Graves Almost disease. individuals relatively all detectable autoantibody, amounts for with disease is specific this

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Thyroid growth-stimulating immunoglobulins. antibodies directed in follicular the proliferation Also thyroid epithelium. receptor, implicated these the been against TSH of have

inhibitor TSH-binding immunoglobulins. in cell function. TSH anti-TSH on doing receptor epithelial its cells may from binding These and so antibodies inhibit thyroid prevent receptor thyroid to some unusual, why The develop is explain same of immunoglobulins hypothyroidism. and of stimulating the inhibiting patient the and coexistence not may serum patients of episodes in

A disease. also the involved phenomenon Graves development characteristic is of infiltrative T-cell–mediated ophthalmopathy of in the autoimmune extraocular infiltration retroorbital increased of of inflammatory components, muscles and (1) of of muscles; is space retroorbital mononuclear the T (2) edema the predominantly accumulation and hyaluronic specifically (fatty Graves swelling marked numbers increased ophthalmopathy, infiltration). hydrophilic sulfate; adipocytes connective cells; and due as extraocular (3) and chondroitin cells, (4) tissues glycosaminoglycans volume extracellular by matrix of In the acid such to forward, potentially function the the of with interfering muscles. These displace extraocular eyeball changes the

occupies span hypothyroidism, manifesting which lies characterized and end. other continuum at of Graves a disease, Autoimmune thyroid as the diseases one thyroid, thus Hashimoto in extreme disease, by the hyperfunction affected times Sometimes hypofunction; and thyroiditis spontaneously on develop individuals an disease may other may preexisting kindred. Graves Hashimoto Graves with at supervene within hyperthyroidism while may occasionally, thyroid Hashimoto disease thyroiditis, coexist also disorders center germinal (most an lymphoid the overlap thyroid histologic between characteristically, of element intrathyroidal formation). with cell Not is surprisingly, autoimmune there infiltrates prominent In frequency of disorders, the autoimmune diseases, other diabetes, lupus pernicious erythematosus, both as disease, increased. is and type anemia, such 1 Addison systemic

MORPHOLOGYInthetypicalcaseofGravesdisease,thethyroidglandisenlarged(usuallysymmetrically)duetodiffusehypertrophyandhyperplasiaofthyroidfollicularepithelialcells.Theglandisusuallysmoothandsoft,anditscapsuleisintact.Onmicroscopicexamination,thefollicularepithelialcellsinuntreatedcasesaretall,columnar,andmorecrowdedthanusual.Thiscrowdingoftenresultsintheformationofsmallpapillae,whichprojectintothefollicularlumen(

Fig.20.10 ).Suchpapillaelackfibrovascularcores,incontrastwiththoseofpapillarycarcinoma.Thecolloidwithinthefollicularlumenispale,withscallopedmargins.Lymphoidinfiltrates,consistingpredominantlyofTcells,withfewerBcellsandmatureplasmacells,arepresentthroughouttheinterstitium;germinalcentersarecommon.

Changesinextrathyroidaltissuesincludegeneralizedlymphoidhyperplasia.Inindividualswithophthalmopathy,thetissuesoftheorbitareedematousbecauseofthepresenceofhydrophilicglycosaminoglycans.Inaddition,thereisinfiltrationbylymphocytes,mostlyTcells.Orbitalmusclesinitiallyareedematousbutmayundergofibrosislateinthecourseofthedisease.Thedermopathy,ifpresent,ischaracterizedbythickeningofthedermis,asaresultofdepositionofglycosaminoglycansandlymphocyteinfiltration.

Fig.20.10Gravesdisease.Thefolliclesarelinedbytallcolumnarepithelialcellsthatareactivelyresorbingthecolloidinthecentersofthefollicles,resultingina“scalloped”appearanceofthecolloid.

include diffuse those manifestations as those thyroid, disease: Graves of earlier), of to uniquely the thyrotoxicosis with all ophthalmopathy, as common disease (discussed The forms clinical dermopathy. well associated of Graves and hyperplasia conspicuous from degree sometimes The manifestations changes of the case, other related of varies disease. be may less the case than to and thyrotoxicosis through of gland an bruit. audible produces flow the hyperactive Increased often blood Sympathetic gaze produces lid overactivity and characteristic a staring wide, lag. Graves results the of protrusion (exophthalmos). The disease in of ophthalmopathy eyeball abnormal corneal the The persist despite thyrotoxicosis, injury. in resulting treatment may sometimes progress exophthalmos successful or of The are often muscles weak. extraocular skin The involves it overlying induration skin of commonly dermopathy the most thickening myxedema). scaly (pretibial where and infiltrative as the shins, manifests the skin lesions peel orange nodules papules The an may slightly pigmented often be or have and texture. and disease T4 Laboratory serum include in Graves T3 TSH. findings serum elevated and depressed free is of the iodine by increased of diffusely. ongoing uptake stimulation Because radioactive TSIs, follicles thyroid

•Gravesdisease,themostcommoncauseofendogenoushyperthyroidism,ischaracterizedbythetriadofthyrotoxicosis,ophthalmopathy,anddermopathy.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

GravesdiseaseisanautoimmunedisordercausedbyautoantibodiestotheTSHreceptorthatmimicTSHactionandactivateTSHreceptorsonthyroidepithelialcells.

ThethyroidinGravesdiseaseischaracterizedbydiffusehypertrophyandhyperplasiaoffolliclesandlymphoidinfiltrates;glycosaminoglycandepositionandlymphoidinfiltratesareresponsiblefortheophthalmopathyanddermopathy.

LaboratoryfeaturesincludeelevationsinserumfreeT3andT4anddecreasedserumTSH.

most manifestation the of the disease. is of or Enlargement thyroid common thyroid, goiter, by multinodular Diffuse and often are impaired of most the iodine deficiency. of goiters synthesis caused dietary result thyroid hormone, the TSH, hypertrophy and, hyperplasia the follicular compensatory to thyroid drives the hormone of serum thyroid enlargement thyroid cells of a synthesis of rise and which Impairment gland. ultimately, in leads to hormone and is duration degree thyroid level thyroid The of enlargement proportional of the deficiency. the deficiency state maintain individuals. metabolic of vast and a euthyroid overcome affected the compensatory majority hormone changes These in in disorder responses congenital is compensatory (e.g., goitrous if hypothyroidism. the may a underlying defect), the severe resulting biosynthetic be inadequate, However,

endemic or sporadic. Goiters be can

diet goiter the occurs in geographic • little contains where iodine. Endemic areas than a present 10% used population the goiters in region. are endemic of given when more in designation is The the areas and are Such Himalayas in common of world, conditions Andes. mountainous including the the particularly of supplementation, frequency iodine the dietary of availability and declined significantly. severity have increased With endemic goiter

less frequently endemic goiter. • than goiter Sporadic occurs with or an there than peak when is males, females a physiologic more young condition The for T4. is adulthood, common in in demand incidence in puberty increased sprouts, Cruciferae) calcium conditions, vegetables substances several Brassicaceae the to turnips). as caused with such synthesis, excessive hormone may the interfere and cabbage, that thyroid family cauliflower, including Brussels ingestion called belonging be of (e.g., Sporadic (also by goiter thyroid result may from (dyshormonogenetic In synthesis defects interfere other hormone inherited goiter instances with goiter). enzymatic that In the of however, is goiter cause not most cases, sporadic apparent.

MORPHOLOGYEarlyinitsdevelopment,TSH-inducedhypertrophyandhyperplasiaofthyroidfollicularcellsusuallyresultindiffuse,symmetricenlargementofthegland(diffusegoiter).Thefolliclesarelinedbycrowdedcolumnarcells,whichmaypileupandformprojectionssimilartothoseseeninGravesdisease.Ifdietaryiodinesubsequentlyincreases,orifthedemandsforthyroidhormonedecrease,thefollicularepitheliuminvolutestoformanenlarged,colloid-richgland(colloidgoiter).Thecutsurfaceofthethyroidinsuchcasesusuallyisbrown,glassy-appearing,andtranslucent.Onmicroscopicexamination,thefollicularepitheliummaybehyperplasticintheearlystagesofdiseaseorflattenedandcuboidalduringperiodsofinvolution.Colloidisabundantduringthelatterperiods.

Withtime,recurrentepisodesofhyperplasiaandinvolutioncombinetoproduceamoreirregularenlargementofthethyroid,termedmultinodulargoiter.Virtuallyalllong-standingdiffusegoitersconvertintomultinodulargoiters.Multinodulargoitersaremultilobulate,asymmetricallyenlargedglandsthatmayattainamassivesize.Oncutsurface,irregularnodulescontainingvariableamountsofbrown,gelatinouscolloidareevident(

).Olderlesionsoftenshowareasoffibrosis,hemorrhage,calcification,andcysticchange.Themicroscopicappearanceincludescolloid-richfollicleslinedbyflattened,inactiveepitheliumandareasoffollicularepithelialhypertrophyandhyperplasia,accompaniedbytheregressivechangesjustnoted(see Fig.20.11A

Fig.20.11B

Fig.20.11Multinodulargoiter.(A)Grossmorphologicappearance.Thecoarselynodularglandcontainsareasoffibrosisandcysticchange.(B)Photomicrographofaspecimenfromahyperplasticnodule,withcompressedresidualthyroidparenchymaontheperiphery.Thehyperplasticfolliclescontainabundantpink“colloid”withintheirlumina.Notetheabsenceofaprominentcapsule,afeaturedistinguishingsuchlesionsfromneoplasmsofthethyroid. Pathology,Johns of (B, Westra,Department of Courtesy Hopkins University,Baltimore,Maryland.) Dr.William http://ebooksmedicine.net

clinical dominant the those of the mass goiter The caused by effects are features of enlarged gland. cosmetic (so-called vena to the large neck also dysphagia, syndrome”). cava “superior may airway of In goiters cause compression the obvious of upper thorax problem mass, addition neck and large a in and vessels obstruction,

silent, to secondary (approximately Multinodular over nodules that of produce thyrotoxicosis stimulation. the minority a manifest 10 of goiters with independent hormonally are development but 10% hormone thyroid autonomous typically years) TSH of by Graves condition, This syndrome, the and or accompanied thyrotoxicosis. disease–associated is not multinodular dermopathy ophthalmopathy as toxic known infiltrative goiter Plummer demonstrate (e.g., malignancy or low and symptoms changes with for concern but The in not (<5%) goiters multinodular size is in long-standing sudden hoarseness). that zero, of goiters malignancy associated arises incidence

highly carcinomas. aggressive, adenomas benign to anaplastic tumors Thyroid range circumscribed, from possibility patients present clinical in a is major with who concern tumor standpoint, of nodules. thyroid of From the a either in multinodular of a adenomas or of nodule nodules be goiter, majority (e.g., prove or Fortunately, of to overwhelming solitary foci dominant the conditions benign simple thyroid the thyroiditis). non-neoplastic localized, cysts, of thyroid by solitary nodules. the than are of accounting 1% contrast, for Carcinomas less thyroid, uncommon, clue provide a clinical a to Several of nature given nodule: criteria thyroid the

more neoplastic multiple general, nodules. Solitary be in likely are than to nodules, are

Nodules individuals or be very in likely neoplastic. old years) years) are very more young to (>70 (<20

in be in are females. to more those neoplastic than males are Nodules likely

increased is an incidence history with thyroid malignancy. of exposure of radiation associated A

studies imaging more likely are to (hot iodine radioactive up Nodules nodules) in take that be benign.

of recognition of timely evaluation the little patient, however, associations, whom significance in be are given lifesaving. may Such the malignancy in a of a information nodule. fine-needle the nature most the of histologic evaluation with provide surgically the combined of of morphologic tissue, the about thyroid thyroid definitive Ultimately, a resected nodule aspiration, study by

Adenomas neoplasms the derived are benign of epithelium. thyroid follicular from usually solitary. are adenomas Follicular may they from be less distinguish for or to multinodular in grounds, carcinomas. and nodule On clinical from example, dominant follicular a common morphologic difficult goiter, thyroid majority apparent (toxic causing small the adenomas a proportion are clinically nonfunctional, thyrotoxicosis. adenomas), hormones Although vast produce of at of general, alterations adenomas carcinomas; adenomas. subset the forerunners a follicular support least In carcinomas genetic shared preexisting arise nevertheless, to are in not follicular that possibility

role in receptor mutations important signaling pathway toxic in TSH of an the play the (see adenomas pathogenesis Driver

Fig. 20.6 ). encoding and, the receptor system—most follicular (GNAS)—allow two Gs the the components signaling somatic Activating gene thyroid of commonly, secrete TSH (TSHR) this one often of autonomy). in independent stimulation hormone mutations of cells TSH less (thyroid of itself (gain-of-function) α-subunit to nodule a studies. symptomatic imaging overabundance with hyperthyroidism, on The result is this of thyroid seen “hot” signaling are present toxic of over receptor pathway in TSH Overall, slightly somatic in half adenomas. mutations the goiters, earlier. to toxic in nodules surprisingly, rise such also that subset Not give are discussed mutations a autonomous multinodular of observed both trophic in follicular stems of independent hormone thyroid release to the and factors ability from autonomy of cells TSH). Thus, toxic adenomas goiter toxic (i.e., of (<20%) (discussed adenomas with carcinomas that genes, shared are other follicular other mutations nonfunctioning exhibit genetic or in follicular RAS A minority alterations later).

MORPHOLOGYThetypicalthyroidadenomaisasolitary,sphericallesionthatcompressestheadjacentnonneoplasticthyroid.Theneoplasticcellsaredemarcatedfromtheadjacentparenchymabyawell-defined,intactcapsule(

Fig.20.12A ).Onmicroscopicexamination,theconstituentcellsarearrangedinuniformfolliclesthatcontaincolloid(see

).Occasionally,theneoplasticcellsacquirebrightlyeosinophilicgranularcytoplasm(oxyphilorHürthlecellchange)( Fig.20.12B

).Similartoendocrinetumorsatotheranatomicsites,evenbenignfollicularadenomasoccasionallyexhibitfocalnuclearpleomorphism,atypia,andprominentnucleoli(endocrineatypia);bythemselves,thesefeaturesdonotconstituteevidenceofmalignancy.Thehallmarkofallfollicularadenomasisthepresenceofanintactwell-formedcapsuleencirclingthetumor.Carefulevaluationoftheintegrityofthecapsuleisthereforecriticalindistinguishingfollicularadenomasfromfollicularcarcinomas,whichdemonstratecapsularand/orvascularinvasion(discussedlater). Fig.20.13

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.12Follicularadenomaofthethyroidgland.(A)Asolitary,well-circumscribednoduleisvisibleinthisgrossspecimen. (B)Thephotomicro-graphshowswell-differentiatedfolliclesresemblingthoseofnormalthyroidparenchyma.

as Most examination. nodules, physical painless a the thyroid discovered adenomas manifest often of during routine masses may local as produce Larger in symptoms difficulty such swallowing. features thyrotoxicosis. present of Individuals may with adenomas with toxic up less normal parenchyma. iodine most of avidly radioactive After adenomas iodine, take than injection thyroid relative the nodules radionuclide to normal adenomas therefore, cold thyroid adjacent gland. scanning, On as appear as Toxic appear in scan. nodules hot adenomas, however, warm the or eventually be 10% malignant. as to nodules prove many cold of As is By hot nodules. contrast, uncommon malignancy in are techniques of biopsy. fine-needle in aspiration the and adenomas used ultrasonography Essential suspected evaluation preoperative the after thyroid integrity, Because only of evaluating careful need for of microscopic definitive adenoma specimen. can resected capsular of diagnosis made the examination be the thyroid therefore of adenomas to malignancy. are Suspected exclude removed the surgically prognosis do an excellent or metastasize. Thyroid carry recur not adenomas and

largely in use gland asymptomatic to the of small United due ultrasound increasing dramatically of other cancerous imaging increased the last studies. States clinically , years, has The over thyroid nodules and the of the thyroid few detection questions outcome about remained this stable for thyroid favorable insignificant Nonetheless, thyroid detecting raising detected (and underscoring cancers). clinically relatively have the carcinomas cancer from incidentally during deaths of also period, value the such and has among A carcinoma early who middle years. the patients female noted develop predominance in thyroid adult been equally in cases life males and By late seen contrast, are and distributed females. adult between childhood (except medullary lesions. majority vast carcinomas) epithelium, are are derived follicular and these, thyroid well-differentiated of carcinomas the the thyroid Most from as subtypes their major thyroid The frequencies relative of follows: and are carcinoma

for Papillary (accounting of 85% than cases) carcinoma more

carcinoma (5% of 15% cases) Follicular to

Anaplastic cases) (undifferentiated) carcinoma (<5% of

(5% cases) Medullary carcinoma of

described biologic each type these and thyroid with Because the are unique features separately. associated of carcinoma, clinical of next thyroid the pathogenesis is of cancers. an of all overview molecular Presented

Distinct events thyroid four of in of major the are variants cancer. pathogenesis involved molecular the follicular and are pathway (PI-3K)/AKT mitogen-activated receptors three growth malignancies two and of the factor oncogenic the along Genetic alterations phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase protein downstream clustered lie RAS—the in pathways (MAP) pathway cell–derived that kinase

Fig.20.13Hürthlecelladenoma.Onthishigh-powerview,thetumoriscomposedofcellswithabundanteosinophiliccytoplasmandsmallregularnuclei. Boston, Dr. (Courtesy of and Sunday, Brigham Women’s Mary Hospital, Massachusetts.) http://ebooksmedicine.net

PAX8:PPARG

Fig. ). 20.14 growth kinases, by are factors cells, which of binding in results receptor to normal these pathways activated In transiently signal tyrosine transduction. In mutations cancers carcinomas, thyroid activation, of factors, in of gain-of-function lead solid promoting even constitutive growth thus in the components absence pathways with as carcinogenesis. these (Chapter to 6), many

carcinomas. thyroid Papillary a of MAP carcinomas. papillary kinase most feature of Activation pathway the is common in product kinase mechanisms rearrangements kinase signaling of The whose point pathway component receptor MAP mutations 1); and is the (2) (see the of MAP and in RET NTRK1 genes BRAF, tyrosine (1) most a that are: activating kinases encode kinase tyrosine (neurotrophic receptor

Fig. ). 20.14 thyroid carcinomas harbor third One mutation driver mutation this papillary in to which the of neoplasm. most half in common BRAF, one is gain-of-function a RET abnormality, or have BRAF not rearrangements mutations the the thyroid demonstrate chromosomal molecular Since genes papillary of carcinomas and effects, but or either NTRK1 one other of redundant both.

carcinomas. Follicular thyroid carcinomas PI3K/AKT thyroid of frequently harbor the Follicular or RAS signaling in pathway. components mutations driver in PTEN, PI3K, a in are of gain-of-function loss-of-function seen. negative PI3K mutations and mutation in Both regulator found also PI3K carcinomas suggesting are mutations a and histogenesis. next) adenomas to and in follicular benign anaplastic RAS (see shared that peroxisome is terminal also the differentiation gene paired is development, half proliferator–activated hormone a of of have that whose (q13;p25) gene third and nuclear PAX8, receptor homeobox carcinomas (PPARG), disrupts gene unique implicated in thyroid important to cells. product one a a follicular One receptor translocation in (2;3)

carcinomas. Anaplastic follicular or These or, can papillary arise well-differentiated more carcinoma. of a tumors highly by de novo progression commonly, aggressive or in well are (e.g., seen mutations), carcinoma. as carcinomas present Molecular also well-differentiated anaplastic as mutations additional anaplastic in to carcinomas include specific RAS that alterations those PIK3CA mutations are mutations loss-of-function these TP53, have carcinomas. to in the in believed role which of of development The common an important unique are most anaplastic

carcinomas. Medullary thyroid C In rather parafollicular arise with these the subtypes neoplasms from the described follicular cells, than earlier, epithelium. the contrast endocrine the that carcinomas with medullary tyrosine are multiple thyroid occur activation lead kinase to constitutive and (MEN-2) 2 in (see of mutations RET later) RET type line proto-oncogene receptor. germ Familial neoplasia associated medullary mutations thyroid approximately nonfamilial are also (sporadic) in RET one-half of cancers. seen

Environmental Factors. factor cancer life. of radiation, the during The thyroid first particularly to risk is ionizing 2 predisposing major decades exposure to among with of there nuclear a in to 1986. finding, was after radiation incidence in In keeping papillary this children exposed disaster increase ionizing the Chernobyl carcinomas the marked carcinomas. frequency extension, higher with by goiter) dietary Deficiency follicular a (and of association an linked of with is iodine

are As earlier, form most thyroid the common cancer. carcinomas papillary mentioned of vast with These of may associated majority to any radiation. age, at account for they occur the tumors and thyroid previous ionizing carcinomas exposure

margins. solitary carcinomas lesions. others Some infiltrate Papillary well have are encapsulated; and may the ill-defined and parenchyma circumscribed multifocal or adjacent be tumors foci to surface ( that point cut sometimes reveals papillary the diagnosis The

Fig. 20.15A ). of The the neoplasms following: papillary include hallmarks microscopic

Fig.

20.15B ). morphologies the seen. even may most covering cuboidal morepleomorphic cells, epithelium but In orderly or papillae be the haswell-differentiated, cases, anaplastic uniform,

Fig.20.15Papillarycarcinomaofthethyroidgland. (AtoC)Apapillarycarcinomawithgrosslydiscerniblepapillarystructures.Inthisparticularexample,well-formedpapillae(B)arelinedbycellswithcharacteristicempty-appearingnuclei,sometimestermedOrphan Annie eye nuclei(C).(D)Cellsobtainedbyfine-needleaspirationofapapillarycarcinoma.Characteristicintranuclearinclusionsarevisibleinsomeoftheaspiratedcells(arrows). Southwestern School,Dallas,Texas.) S. of of Texas Dr. of Medical Pathology,University Gokasalan,Department (Courtesy

Nucleiwithfinelydispersedchromatin,whichimpartsanopticallyclearoremptyappearance,givingrisetothedesignationground-glassorOrphanAnnieeyenuclei(see

Fig.

20.15B ).Inaddition,invaginationsofthecytoplasmoftengivetheappearanceofintranuclearinclusions(“pseudo-inclusions”)orintranucleargrooves(see

).Thesenuclearfeaturesaresufficientforthediagnosisofpapillarycarcinoma,evenintheabsenceofpapillaryarchitecture. Fig.20.15D

Concentricallycalcifiedstructurestermedpsammomabodiesareoftenpresentwithinthelesion,usuallywithinthecoresofpapillae.Thesestructuresarealmostneverfoundinfollicularandmedullarycarcinomas.

Focioflymphaticinvasionbytumorareoftenpresent,butinvolvementofbloodvesselsisrelativelyuncommon,particularlyinsmallerlesions.Metastasestoadjacentcervicallymphnodesoccurinuptoone-halfofcases.

Thereareoveradozenvariantsofpapillarythyroidcarcinoma,themostcommonofwhichistheso-calledencapsulatedfollicularvariant,comprisedoffollicleslinedbycellsharboringnuclearfeaturesofpapillarycancers(discussedearlier).

carcinomas in nonfunctional the are a often or tumors, painless a cervical manifest they a as mass as neck, most node. within the lymph in thyroid Papillary either so metastasis the A fine-needle be preoperative usually can nuclear aspiration earlier. based on features diagnosis characteristic by described established with rates of in 95%. survival are indolent lesions, carcinomas 10-year excess Papillary isolated Of of not metastases significant cervical node presence on prognosis. influence does the a interest, have are the of a minority In patients, present lung. at diagnosis, of commonly hematogenous metastases to the most time including general, the of favorable years metastases long-term survival presence with extension, and patients age patients prognosis cancer factors, is age), distant among 40 thyroid older dependent of papillary less is The on than (in several extrathyroidal of (stage). presence of

of essentially that Recent of that variants malignant invasion lack shown evidence studies carcinoma no follicular have have for potential behavior. papillary benign suggest which this, these recommendations from should recognition forthcoming the name the neoplasms prevent be will henceforth to be World carcinoma overtreatment. tumors, as In Organization from stripped classified Health of

15% 5% carcinomas primary account Follicular thyroid cancers. of for to common age. years women at They papillary more than in of with older are a (occurring incidence age between 60 peak ratio 3:1) manifest an a and in and carcinomas, of 40 dietary remained cancers), frequent for its decreased areas the world. thyroid has of deficiency in areas 25%–40% stable carcinoma more (accounting in either iodine-sufficient is of or with iodine while Follicular incidence

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.16Follicularcarcinomaofthethyroidgland.Afewoftheglandularluminacontainrecognizablecolloid.

MORPHOLOGYOnmicroscopicexamination,mostfollicularcarcinomasarecomposedofuniformcellsformingsmallfollicles,reminiscentofnormalthyroid(

);inothercases,folliculardifferentiationmaybelessapparent.Aswithfollicularadenomas,Hürthlecellvariantsoffollicularcarcinomasmaybeseen.Follicularcarcinomasmaybewidelyinvasive,infiltratingthethyroidparenchymaandextrathyroidalsofttissues,orminimallyinvasive.Thelattertypearesharplydemarcatedlesionsthatmaybeimpossibletodistinguishfromfollicularadenomasongrossexamination.Thedistinctionbetweenfollicularadenomaandcarcinomarequiresextensivehistologicsamplingofthetumorcapsule–thyroidinterface,toexcludecapsularand/orvascularinvasion( Fig.20.16

).Asdiscussedearlier,invasivefollicularlesionsinwhichthenuclearfeaturesaretypicalofpapillarycarcinomasareregardedasfollicularvariantsofpapillarycancers. Fig.20.17

as nodules. manifest Follicular frequently most solitary cold thyroid carcinomas they cases, In may rare be hyperfunctional. and the These bone, to bloodstream liver. (hematogenous neoplasms the metastasize tend dissemination) lungs, to through uncommon. with In carcinomas, contrast nodal regional are papillary metastases the invasive 10 invasive patients As follicular of same time widely many patients while with span. their within of than succumb to minimally carcinomas one-half less as 10% with die years, carcinomas disease within treated are with Follicular carcinomas excision. surgical metastases up such radioactive also be and take Well-differentiated to may identify ablate lesions. can which used iodine,

less tumors carcinomas Anaplastic are 5% undifferentiated than tumors. for accounting thyroid of follicular the thyroid of epithelium, They with a rate are approaching mortality aggressive, 100%. age with years. anaplastic cancer, 65 of carcinoma of older those mean with are types thyroid with than a Patients other harbor specimen. patients a thyroid carcinoma, resected a thyroid the well-differentiated another of Approximately tumor in well-differentiated have of with anaplastic one-fourth history one-fourth a and concurrent carcinomas

MORPHOLOGYAnaplasticcarcinomasmanifestasbulkymassesthattypicallygrowrapidlybeyondthethyroidcapsuleintoadjacentneckstructures.Onmicroscopicexamination,theseneoplasmsarecomposedofhighlyanaplasticcells,whichmaybelargeandpleomorphicorspindleshapedandinsomecasesmixtureofthetwocelltypes.

Fociofpapillaryorfolliculardifferentiationmaybepresentinsometumors,suggestingoriginfromabetter-differentiatedcarcinoma.

Fig.20.17Capsularinvasioninfollicularcarcinoma.Evaluatingtheintegrityofthecapsuleiscriticalindistinguishingfollicularadenomasfromfollicularcarcinomas.(A)Inadenomas,afibrouscapsule,usuallythinbutoccasionallymoreprominent,surroundstheneoplasticfolliclesandnocapsularinvasionisseen;compressednormalthyroidparenchymausuallyispresentexternaltothecapsule(top). (B)Bycontrast,follicularcarcinomasdemonstratecapsularinvasionthatmaybeminimal,asinthiscase,orwidespread,withextensionintolocalstructuresoftheneck.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

abandon Anaplastic carcinomas despite grow with therapy. wild occurs compromise the Metastases distant result less than aggressive structures and in of to of cases neck. in a are growth but most local sites vital common, in year 1 as death

carcinomas parafollicular cells, are of neuroendocrine thyroid of the cells, or Medullary derived thyroid. the the tumors from C of follow-up an which patients. medullary cells, C secrete and of Like carcinomas important calcitonin, the measurement normal postoperative role diagnosis in plays cases, cells In and vasoactive elaborate such as polypeptide intestinal somatostatin, other the peptide. hormones serotonin, tumor some arise carcinomas sporadically Medullary 70% about cases. in of of (MEN) multiple setting or 30% as neoplasia associated thyroid the familial remaining occurring syndrome or The MEN discussed syndrome, 2B, endocrine later. are in medullary 2A carcinoma familial, an without sporadic are in the medullary familial gain-of-function with tyrosine associated kinase. mutations Both driver forms RET receptor and familial Sporadic as adults, decades. without fifth occur in an medullary with peak well as the incidence MEN in syndrome, associated sixth cases a carcinomas, and patients, Cases associated MEN-2B, contrast, by with or in younger to children. MEN-2A occur tend including

MORPHOLOGYMedullarycarcinomasmayariseasasolitarynoduleormaymanifestasmultiplelesionsinvolvingbothlobesofthethyroid.Multicentricityisparticularlycommoninfamilialcases.Largerlesionsoftencontainareasofnecrosisandhemorrhageandmayextendthroughthecapsuleofthethyroid.Onmicroscopicexamination,medullarycarcinomasarecomposedofpolygonaltospindle-shapedcells,whichmayformnests,trabeculae,andevenfollicles.Amyloiddeposits,derivedfromalteredcalcitoninmolecules,arepresentintheadjacentstromainmanycases(

Fig.20.18 )andareadistinctivefeature.Calcitoninisreadilydemonstrablebothwithinthecytoplasmofthetumorcellsandinthestromalamyloidbyimmunohistochemicalmethods.OneofthecharacteristicfeaturesoffamilialmedullarycarcinomasisthepresenceofmulticentricCcellhyperplasiainthesurroundingthyroidparenchyma,afeatureusuallyabsentinsporadiclesions.FociofCcellhyperplasiaarebelievedtorepresenttheprecursorlesionsfromwhichmedullarycarcinomasarise.

hoarseness. often carcinoma as or sometimes a cases, dysphagia manifests most the such in associated sporadic with as mass In effects compression medullary neck, hormone by initial some intestinal peptide). diarrhea secretion of the are peptide instances by In secretion of (e.g., caused manifestations the vasoactive the a caused tumors calcitonin mutations of early RET relatives in cases. permits the of Screening familial or for elevated detection levels patient’s carcinomas. micromedullary in of cm) carcinomas; is of mutations only medullary carrying to prophylactic cell MEN-2 the presence the histologic later, RET small finding or discussed are kindreds thyroidectomies development thyroid all C these of (<1 preempt offered As hyperplasia carriers of asymptomatic often, the the members resected

Fig.20.18Medullarycarcinomaofthethyroidgland.Thesetumorstypicallycontainamyloid,visiblehereashomogeneousextracellularmaterial,derivedfromcalcitoninmoleculessecretedbytheneoplasticcells.

thyroid Mostthyroidneoplasmsmanifestassolitary butonly1%ofallthyroidnodulesareneoplastic. nodules,

arethemostcommonbenignneoplasms,whilepapillarycarcinomaisthemostcommonmalignancy. Follicular adenomas

carcinogenesis. Multiplegeneticpathwaysareinvolvedinthyroid oncogene(inpapillarycancers),andmutationsofRET fusion(infollicularcarcinoma),chromosomalrearrangementsinvolvingtheRET (inmedullarycarcinomas). SomeofthedrivermutationsthatarefairlyuniquetothyroidcancersincludePAX8/PPARG

botharecomposedofwell-differentiatedfollicularepithelialcells;thelatteraredistinguishedbypresenceofcapsularand/orvascularinvasion. Follicular and adenomas carcinomas

arerecognizedbynuclearfeatures(groundglassnuclei,pseudoinclusions),evenintheabsenceofpapillae.Theseneoplasmstypicallymetastasizebywayofthelymphatics,buttheprognosisisexcellent. Papillary carcinomas

Anaplastic carcinomas arethoughttoarisebyprogressionofmoredifferentiatedneoplasms.Theyarehighlyaggressive,uniformlylethalcancers.

Medullary cancers arenonepithelialneoplasmsarisingfromtheparafollicularCcellsandcanoccurineithersporadic(70%)orfamilial(30%)settings.MulticentricityandCcellhyperplasiaarefeaturesoffamilialcases.Amyloiddepositsareacharacteristichistologicfinding.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

to that from also pharyngeal pouches parathyroid give The glands rise are developmentally derived the thymus. most in pathway commonly carotid located lobe proximity to be each the pouches, of but the of anywhere lower elsewhere along pharyngeal the and including poles may sheath, in the found mediastinum. close descent upper and anterior of thymus, the They the are thyroid composed the chief containing Most of of which cells is secretory gland hormone (PTH). parathyroid granules have Oxyphil normal small either cells clusters. parathyroid in are singly throughout the found or cells, have chief tightly packed with than mitochondria. and larger slightly They are are the acidophilic cytoplasm,

glands Parathyroid homeostasis. calcium of are regulators key controlled activity blood, rather level by parathyroid than free of (ionized) hormones pituitary. secreted of the by and glands calcium is the trophic in hypothalamus the The the by on following and kidneys the synthesis of of stimulate free and target Normally, tissues, PTH, the which levels calcium bones: effects decreased the secretion its has the

of reabsorption calcium tubular renal Increased

phosphate calcium) phosphate ionized to binds (since Increased excretion, phosphate thereby serum levels lowering urinary

hyperplasia lesions carcinoma—1% • to 95% • turn conversion D hyperparathyroidism in is Parathyroid (diffuse Adenoma—85% nodular)—5% primary active underlying of Primary follows: to augments its 10% Increased kidneys, dihydroxy as form • vitamin or the in which to

with in two genes associated are Abnormalities commonly parathyroid tumors:

Cyclin gene D1 rearrangements. a positive Cyclin cycle. regulator of D1 the is cell so (normally gene 11 elements that that it adjacent on gene An repositions D1 inversion regulate resides to PTH genomic the the cyclin (on on chromosome 11q), 11p). drive PTH-producing of of cells, increased leading cyclin expression D1 abnormal proliferation in to these These elements cells. genetic adenomas acquired of 20% Between this and defect. have 10% in existence approximately overexpressed lead of indicating is adenomas, its Cyclin mechanisms D1 of the that additional parathyroid 40% to dysregulation.

MEN1 mutations. parathyroid mutations sporadic tumors gene of MEN1 of copies both to have 20% tumor in 30% Approximately the (see suppressor later). familial to virtually adenomas. in of parathyroid identical is The MEN1 the mutations tumors spectrum sporadic in that

bone Enhanced (i.e., • activity resorption, osteoclastic

into differentiation releasing promoting by osteoclasts MORPHOLOGYthus mediated indirectly calcium), the osteoclast ionized progenitor mature of cells

net activities result an blood, the free inhibits PTH the cells. level these of which secretion is The in chief calcium of from increase in parathyroids hyperfunction both Abnormalities and hypofunction. of include the rather than of secretion unlike mass glands, because Tumors to PTH, attention of usually the excessive tumors, thyroid parathyroid come effects. of

and, forms, tertiary in less hyperparathyroidism. major and Hyperparathyroidism secondary, occurs commonly, two as primary PTH, patients phenomena in conditions an overproduction occur of as The latter while represents with chronic condition the first autonomous, secondary insufficiency. typically two spontaneous renal

common Primary is a disorder and of important hypercalcemia. an cause hyperparathyroidism endocrine calcium of in patients. There routine serum the of in of performance the due latter hospitalized detection assays cases 20th the increase a to was century, half dramatic in mainly the of of parathyroid The various occurrence frequency

Themorphologicchangesinprimaryhyperparathyroidismincludethoseintheparathyroidglandsandinotherorgansaffectedbyhypercalcemia.In75%to80%ofcases,oneoftheparathyroidglandsharborsasolitaryadenoma.Thetypicalparathyroidadenomaisawell-circumscribed,soft,tannodule,investedbyadelicatecapsule.Bydefinition,parathyroidadenomasareconfinedtoasinglegland(

Fig.20.19 ).Theotherglandsarenormalinsizeorsomewhatshrunken,asaresultoffeedbackinhibitionbyelevatedserumcalcium.Mostparathyroidadenomasweighbetween0.5and5g.Onmicroscopicexamination,parathyroidadenomasarecomposedpredominantlyofchiefcells(

Fig.20.20 ).Arimofcompressed,non-neoplasticparathyroidtissue,generallyseparatedbyafibrouscapsule,oftenisvisibleattheedgeoftheadenoma.Thechiefcellsoftheadenomaarelargerandshowgreaternuclearsizevariabilitythannormalchiefcells.Cellswithbizarreandpleomorphicnucleiareoftenseenwithinadenomas(so-called“endocrineatypia”)andmustnotbetakenasasignofmalignancy.Mitoticfiguresarerare.Incontrastwiththenormalparathyroidparenchyma,adiposetissueisinconspicuouswithinadenomas.

Fig.20.19Technetium-99radionuclidescandemonstratesanareaofincreaseduptakecorrespondingtotheleftinferiorparathyroidgland(arrow). Thisprovedtobeaparathyroidadenoma.Preoperativescintigraphyisusefulinlocalizinganddistinguishingadenomasfromparathyroidhyperplasia,inwhichmorethanoneglandwilldemonstrateincreaseduptake.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.20Chiefcellparathyroidadenoma.(A)Inthislow-powerview,asolitaryhypercellularadenomaisdelineatedfromtheresidualnormocellularglandontheupperright.(B)High-powerdetailshowsminimalvariationinnuclearsizeandoccasionalfollicleformation. Chicago, Cipriani, Pathology, Department (Courtesy of Chicago, Nicole Illinois.) University Dr. of of

Parathyroidhyperplasiaistypicallyamultiglandularprocess.Insomecases,however,enlargementmaybegrosslyapparentinonlyoneortwoglands,complicatingthedistinctionbetweenhyperplasiaandadenoma.Microscopically,themostcommonpatternseenisthatofchiefcellhyperplasia,whichmayinvolvetheglandsinadiffuseormultinodularpattern.Lesscommonly,theconstituentcellscontainabundantclearcytoplasmasaconsequenceoftheaccumulationofglycogen—aconditiondesignatedwater-clearcellhyperplasia.Asinthecaseofadenomas,stromalfatisinconspicuouswithinfociofhyperplasia.

Parathyroidcarcinomasmaybecircumscribedlesionsthataredifficulttodistinguishfromadenomas,ortheymaybeclearlyinvasiveneoplasms.Thesetumorsenlargeoneparathyroidglandandconsistofgray-white,irregularmassesthatsometimesexceed10ginweight.Thecellsusuallyareuniformandresemblenormalparathyroidcells.Theyarearrayedinnodularortrabecularpatterns.Thetumormassisusuallyenclosedbyadense,fibrouscapsule.Thereisgeneralagreementthatadiagnosisofcarcinomabasedoncytologicdetailisunreliable;invasionofsurroundingtissuesandmetastasisaretheonlydefinitivecriteria.Localrecurrenceoccursinone-thirdofcases,andmoredistantdisseminationoccursinanotherone-third.

•Skeletalchangesincludeincreasedosteoclasticactivity,whichresultsinerosionofbonematrixandmobilizationofcalciumsalts,particularlyinthemetaphysesoflongtubularbones.Boneresorptionisaccompaniedbyincreasedosteoblasticactivityandtheformationofnewbonetrabeculae.Inmoreseverecases,thecortexisgrosslythinnedandthebonemarrowcontainsincreasedamountsoffibroustissueaccompaniedbyfociofhemorrhageandcysts(osteitisfibrosacystica)(Chapter21).Aggregatesofosteoclasts,reactivegiantcells,andhemorrhagicdebrisoccasionallyformmassesthatmaybemistakenforneoplasms(browntumorsofhyperparathyroidism). Morphologicchangesinotherorgans:

•Renalchanges.PTH-inducedhypercalcemiafavorstheformationofurinarytractstones(nephrolithiasis)aswellascalcificationoftherenalinterstitiumandtubules(nephrocalcinosis).

•Metastaticcalcificationsecondarytohypercalcemiaalsomaybeseeninothersites,includingthestomach,lungs,myocardium,andbloodvessels.

disease is is men women much ratio more usually nearly and common of (gender adults in hyperparathyroidism Primary a of than 4:1). in ionized is primary manifestation common hyperparathyroidism serum in of calcium. The an increase most clinically the of cause hypercalcemia. silent common hyperparathyroidism In most fact, primary is Other produce ( also may hypercalcemia conditions

). Table 20.4 most The apparent hypercalcemia cause of clinically common

Table20.4CausesofHypercalcemia

PTH-relatedprotein. PTH, Parathyroidhormone;PTH-rP, *Primaryhyperparathyroidismisthemostcommoncauseofhypercalcemiaoverall.

†Secondaryandtertiaryhyperparathyroidismaremostcommonlyassociatedwithprogressiverenalfailure.

of adults in mechanisms, through and a bone which (Chapter PTH-like variety metastases cause cancer, osteolytic http://ebooksmedicine.net secretion is of 6). including hypercalcemia polypeptides can poor, hypercalcemia cancers. prognosis in often with occurs those it advanced for is patients malignancy-associated because with The serum low PTH to parathyroid with with hyperfunction, malignancy. serum nonparathyroid caused is is In whereas inappropriately hypercalcemia caused in by including hypercalcemia undetectable individuals those elevated, by PTH diseases, of PTH to both excretion alterations laboratory and include phosphate. and calcium referable excess urinary Other increased hypophosphatemia

bones, include groans, painful renal associated and that hyperparathyroidism a of abdominal been constellation stones, has symptoms Primary with traditionally moans. psychic hyperparathyroidism. and stones, cystica was resulting time manifestation with or primary at uropathy, to of fractures prominent one Pain, obstructive fibrosa osteitis by bones from a osteoporosis of renal secondary weakened hyperparathyroidism usually most unrelated is patients tests now who early course. blood detected is routinely for Because in serum assessed in conditions, need its calcium to clinical particularly disease, many Hence, much of frequently. referable the are manifestations, seen those classic bone renal less and include encountered may in and symptoms be that the signs following: cases some Additional

Gastrointestinal constipation, disturbances, and pancreatitis, ulcers, including nausea, peptic gallstones

alterations, depression, lethargy, nervous Central seizures including system and

including Neuromuscular abnormalities, weakness and hypotonia

the and the of these weakness) poorly muscle understood. some of polyuria to (e.g., manifestations are remains of clearly many related the pathophysiology of other alterations Although disorder hypercalcemia,

result caused calcium hyperparathyroidism overactivity serum to by Secondary levels, depression compensatory of of often the parathyroids. leading as failure, of a chronic is renal most fully secondary complex mechanisms and which not The induces understood. chronic renal by failure hyperparathyroidism are Chronic insufficiency associated renal results hyperphosphatemia. decreased with in phosphate is in excretion, which turn serum The calcium serum levels elevated levels. directly depress phosphate required renal for reduces synthesis the of is 8). which vitamin the form of the α1-hydroxylase In (Chapter absorption addition, calcium active of of loss D, intestinal activity, parathyroid cause glands. activity hypocalcemia, chronic the alterations the stimulates which These of

ismarehyperplastic.Asinprimaryhyperplasia,thedegreeof glandularenlargementisnotnecessarilysymmetric.Onmicroscopicexamination,thehyperplasticglandscontainanincreasednumberofchiefcells,orcellswithmoreabundant,clearcytoplasm(water-clearcells),inadiffuseormultinodulardistribution.Fatcellsaredecreasedinnumber.Bonechangessimilartothoseseeninprimaryhyperparathyroidismalsomaybepresent.Metastaticcalcificationmaybeseeninmanytissues.

renal to are hyperparathyroidism usually manifestations those by failure. secondary clinical dominated related chronic of The abnormalities associated severe those (renal PTH Bone in in than osteodystrophy) primary are, excess hyperparathyroidism. other seen changes with less and general, Serum levels the in because PTH normal serum compensatory calcium. calcium sustains remains increase near damage The metastatic significant in vessels process to occasionally hyperphosphatemia) calcification may skin ischemic referred organs—a result other as (secondary calciphylaxis. and to to blood of minority sometimes tertiary a and may become In resultant activity process of termed patients, excessive, autonomous with parathyroid hyperparathyroidism. hypercalcemia—a in may control the to be Parathyroidectomy patients. hyperparathyroidism such necessary

Primaryhyperparathyroidismisthemostcommoncauseofasymptomatichypercalcemia.

Inamajorityofcases,primaryhyperparathyroidismiscausedbyasporadicparathyroidadenomaand,lesscommonly,byparathyroidhyperplasia.

Parathyroidadenomasaresolitary,whilehyperplasiatypicallyisamultiglandularprocess.

Skeletalmanifestationsofhyperparathyroidismincludeboneresorption,osteitis tumors. cystica, andbrown fibrosa Renalchangesincludenephrolithiasis(stones)andnephrocalcinosis.

Mostcasesofhyperparathyroidismareclinicallysilentbecauseofearlydetectionofhypercalcemiaduringroutinebloodtesting.

Secondaryhyperparathyroidismiscausedbyhypercalcemiamostoftensecondarytorenalfailure,andtheparathyroidglandsarehyperplastic.

Malignanciesarethemostimportantcauseofsymptomatichypercalcemia,whichresultsfromosteolyticmetastasesorreleaseofPTH-relatedproteinfromnonparathyroidtumors.

than hyperparathyroidism. common Hypoparathyroidism is less far • major ablation: the most of neck is removal or of The causes hypoparathyroidism inadvertent other thyroidectomy dissections. following: cause during surgical parathyroids common Surgical include The

http://ebooksmedicine.net

defects, deletions on occurs absence: chromosome in cardiac thymic (Di secondary aplasia 7). syndrome) This Congenital with to conjunction George (Chapter 22q11.2 and

hypoparathyroidism: auto-antibodies deficiency polyglandular endocrine is to a hereditary and thyroid, Autoimmune arising multiple from syndrome adrenals, pancreas). (parathyroid, This organs extensively context is caused (AIRE) more This in autoimmune discussed gene later, the mutations regulator autoimmune and adrenalitis. condition of is by in the

to secondary manifestations The hypoparathyroidism hypocalcemia. are clinical major of (tingling, occasion, after or and, tetany), cardiac sustained irritability may increased seizures. increased surgical cases and manifest Acute occur carpopedal on pressure neuromuscular and intracranial muscle ablation) spasms, grimacing, as facial spasm (as arrhythmias, hypoparathyroidism cerebral the Manifestations chronic cataracts, calcification basal abnormalities. dental of of include ganglia, and

PP and The types—beta, consists endocrine major of islets four which contain Langerhans, polypeptide) delta, (pancreatic cell of the pancreas alpha, cells. motility. several and activity will insulin, blood as discussion enzymes exerts detailed in reduces cell pancreatic glucose tissues the glucagon suppresses and levels, secrete and stimulation its which regulates alpha the in secretes intestinal of cells as glucose which glucose diabetes; inhibition of gastric beta polypeptide, and in cell be insulin which glucagon, cells effects, delta intestinal liver; raises gastrointestinal the glycogenolytic somatostatin, The of secrete secretion and utilization such produces through both levels of PP which release; production disease endocrine action deficient diabetes the of most important by is The insulin. caused of pancreas mellitus, or

mellitus Diabetes hyperglycemia. characterized disorders group metabolic a by is of parlance, from commonly, secretion, the action, insulin (in diabetes not results is “mellitus” common used) in most both. defects suffix Hyperglycemia often in or, insulin The associated diabetes metabolic the in multiple systems, vessels. of with blood often especially hyperglycemia and kidneys, and abnormalities eyes, secondary damage chronic nerves, attendant organ are nontraumatic United diabetes cause disease, the of end-stage is leading atherosclerosis the lower-extremity renal resulting In of adult-onset amputations from States, and blindness, arteries.

population, 29 that and States, or the to diabetes Diabetes affects children Association, of American hyperglycemia. in have United nearly they unaware one-third million currently of adults, over are According the 9.3% the whom year diabetes prevalence variability different wide is new million in are Approximately there and each between the United States, in 1.4 cases diagnosed a of ethnic groups. in the prevalence example, almost that diabetes twice of Natives Indian/Alaskan of Caucasians. American For is diabesity obesity, termed poor some and increases to epidemic. in which the diabetes eating and sedentary lifestyles have habits the have contributed Increasingly which million A diagnosis States for that as risk not have diabetes. diabetes 86 the the have development reach in elevated of an prediabetes, individuals criterion outright adults next); elevated accepted frank an United of with staggering prediabetes is does sugar for (discussed defined blood

normally mg/dL. range, in 120 is a to narrow glucose maintained 70 usually Blood very to Association diabetes 1. (ADA) for Diabetes the criteria following: the Organization include Health diagnostic the According World (WHO), and American

2. or mg/dL, greater than and/or fasting equal to plasma 126 glucose A

classic equal A random glucose signs, plasma to discussed mg/dL a greater than later), (in hyperglycemic 200 and/or with or 3. patient

mg/dL greater an 4. loading tolerance glucose plasma or than to equal during A and/or gm, 75 a glucose 2-hour with 200 of dose oral test

level chronic 6.5% of further or (HbA1C) A hemoglobin discussed (glycated hemoglobin than greater equal diabetes) to is under glycated complications

All to in glucose except the repeated blood random need separate day. and on a patient hyperglycemic classic tests, with signs, test confirmed a be stress, hyperglycemia cortisol the and catecholamines as hormones that acute transient lead oppose insulin. such note, many with due such as infections, associated of of effects severe secretion trauma, or conditions to burns, Of to can diagnosis hyperglycemia acute of The requires following diabetes the illness. persistence resolution of of

as: glucose (prediabetes) defined tolerance Impaired 1. is

glucose”), and 2. (“impaired fasting 100 plasma fasting between and/or 125 glucose mg/dL A

and/or glucose during an test, tolerance 3. oral and level HbA1C between 6.4% 5.7%

will as 5 many with additional risk next such obesity such the risk. impaired factors years, individuals overt diabetes with as history one-fourth of compounding glucose family in tolerance and As develop with of individuals have cardiovascular prediabetes addition, In risk disease. an elevated

causes of underlying feature, vary share hyperglycemia widely. all as hyperglycemia forms a common diabetes of Although the at of on http://ebooksmedicine.net diabetes disease based onset Previous classification schemes the of were age

Table20.5SimplifiedClassificationofDiabetes 1.

Type Betacelldestruction,usuallyleadingtoabsoluteinsulindeficiency 2. Diabetes 1

3.

Beta Defects Maturity-onsetdiabetesoftheyoung(MODY)(seetext)Insulingenemutations of 4. Cell Function Genetic

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Care 37:S81-S90;2014. ModifiedfromDiagnosisandclassificationofdiabetesmellitus(AmericanDiabetesAssociation).Diabetes

the a reflects the contrast, variant on mode each the understanding classification ( of greater or of therapy; current of etiologic in pathogenesis

Table ). 20.5 one of fall of into majority The of vast diabetes two classes: cases broad

an an of disease autoimmune 1 by is insulin. destruction pancreatic characterized diabetes deficiency β-cell Type absolute and years for of and younger accounts subtype is diagnosed 20 to approximately age. all the common than most 10% patients of in It cases, 5%

insulin pancreatic response (“relative Type β by the peripheral to resistance an deficiency”). insulin caused by inadequate combination action 2 a and of is cells diabetes secretory 2 are 95% many patients them have and diabetic diabetes, overweight. Approximately type of of 90% to obesity 2 in increasing increasing the these an groups. of rates in children classically “adult-onset,” of type age due pace considered diabetes adolescents is the and alarming to at Although prevalence

are and (discussed for monogenic A remaining causes variety responsible later). secondary cases of the diabetes common type and forms for secondary when diabetes). together Of (which makes note, them >10% more 1 combined, than account of monogenic of diabetes principal of although An major in and long-term eyes, arise mechanisms, by and point the types different pathogenic the kidneys, is of morbidity death. nerves, causes the complications important same are vessels are diabetes blood and the that

Before we diabetes, of types of the glucose pathogenesis review major and normal insulin physiology briefly two metabolism. discussing the

peripheral (especially skeletal utilization the by (1) glucagon). regulated in and muscle; uptake Normal actions processes: glucose is hormones glucose production and tissues, interrelated glucose counterregulatory by of (3) liver; homeostasis the (2) chiefly and insulin tightly three

in glucose principal therate into function (Fig. of transport The cells is the ofinsulin certain toincrease body 20.21 ). These the adipocytes, total cells (including representing body collectively cells) of muscle a and, about to two myocardial striated extent, are lesser thirds weight. uptake Glucose insulin-independent. tissues, brain, other most peripheral notably the in is cell then glucose intermediates muscle cells, metabolic (ATP) for is to glycogen adenosine stored oxidized triphosphate or as In growth. generate either and needed are metabolized tissue, In is to lipids, fat. which adipose as glucose stored adipocytes. Besides insulin promoting inhibits in synthesis also lipid (lipogenesis), degradation (lipolysis) lipid Similarly, acid inhibiting amino protein and protein uptake degradation. insulin while promotes synthesis can metabolic the Thus, of of reduced degradation be synthesis increased and summarized effects anabolic, glycogen, insulin as with protein. lipid, and functions, metabolic insulin growth cells effects, including initiation differentiation. of and has DNA mitogenic In addition several certain to their stimulation of synthesis these and in

of Insulin production from the reduces the liver. glucose effects homeostasis. and on opposing have glucose regulatory glucagon Insulin low states, During fasting

Fig.20.21Metabolicactionsofinsulininstriatedmuscle,adiposetissue,andliver.

preventing (glycogen glycogenolysis and glycogen hepatic breakdown) decreasing glucagon while http://ebooksmedicine.net thereby levels facilitate hypoglycemia. and insulin high gluconeogenesis synthesis, are fasting primarily by determined glucose output. Thus, glucose levels plasma hepatic a glucose rise to levels the glucagon large in insulin levels After fall and response meal, load.

important The cells stimulus is itself. pancreatic triggers release beta insulin from glucose most that multiple secretion notably by to Oral hormones, cells of incretins the produced leads intestines. food intake in of the which and delay reduce beta gastric These insulin stimulate glucagon cells, promotes emptying, from also hormones and secretion secretion satiety. in glycemic improved blunted The and diabetes, of significantly 2 loss incretin is control type function with patients (through weight lead satiety). restoration to of incretin restoring can and effect their enhance resulted new that for type endogenous delaying or have with These patients the in through levels classes 2 drugs diabetes incretins the of incretins development of degradation. observations of mimic

number secreted homeostasis. triggering the glucose intracellular to responses tissue), (skeletal adipose and insulin postprandial In a insulin muscle glucose and that binds uptake glucose peripheral utilization, receptor, maintaining of tissues promote thereby beta can by and interactions synthesis to from tissues, Abnormalities this in points cells result release insulin peripheral receptor at insulin of in along complex phenotype. signaling the various cascade, diabetic

Type diabetes in is against disease reacting antigens. primarily an endogenous beta by destruction cells is caused effector immune which cell autoimmune islet 1 is it to any 1 common in diabetes childhood, can type is form Although of diabetes remember at it the important that present most age. without depend patients with develop insulin they such serious survival; for coma. insulin on as diabetes 1 and exogenous metabolic type ketoacidosis complications Most diabetes a chronic abrupt, onset becomes it usually type cells from before the is on disease ( starts of results the evident autoimmune years that attack Although beta 1 clinical

Fig. ). 20.22 the cells manifestations more (such The as 90% the ketoacidosis) than destroyed. after course, been beta in of disease of occur have its classic late

genetic factors. and pathogenesis 1 As environmental with type involves diseases, autoimmune susceptibility of most diabetes the identified studies Genome-wide 20 loci susceptibility over 1 type have for diabetes. association Of genes. the association II strongest with MHC class is these, (HLA-DR) normal contrast subjects, DR4, 40% patients and 5% DR3/DR4 in patients contrast 1 95% heterozygotes, have with type of or or with HLA-DR3, 40% both, about 50% of normal in diabetes of Between white of and are 90% with subjects. to disease contribute it. the alleles by HLA develop but cause Of do do these that these most diabetes, however, not, note, individuals who genes indicating to inherit themselves, not 1 encoding gene within to also the increase polymorphisms Several genes diabetes, (?) type non-HLA susceptibility including release loss Overt Precipitating release Genetic insulin of event

Fig.20.22Stagesinthedevelopmentoftype1diabetesmellitus.Thestagesarelistedfromlefttoright,andhypotheticalβ cellmassisplottedagainstage. GE: autoimmune diabetes—a Eisenbarth disease. Type (From 1 chronic NEnglJMed314:1360, 1986.) as well and CTLA4 as itself, insulin PTPN22. responses, CTLA-4 so to is thought are PTPN-22 receptor protein stage functional a are with Chapter for and that set is activation. interfere T-cell 5, phosphatase; of As in their inhibitory T expected both tyrosine inhibit to the excessive polymorphisms activity T-cell an discussed cells, self the of reducing T reactive the thus in protein its elimination this in may (Chapter expression cells insulin reduce Polymorphisms thymus, gene the with 5).

in factors, suggests involved environmental evidence 1 diabetes. are that especially infections, type Additional viruses coxsackie perhaps conclusively been mimic islets, to bystander beta this viral some (mumps, be rubella, has antigens, antigens is and viruses, because not proposed that established. idea particular) in cell the to may leading It damage triggers, certain initiating B but More of advances type from pathogenesis to have diabetes the the studies elucidating contributions microbiome. human environmental of 1 come recent in species microbiome, to in composition reduction with (change during bacterial for and subclinical have the Studies “intestinal in diversity certain of of clinical children stages evidence usual reduced dysbiosis” commensal disease. of shown of flora), progression diabetic of abundance in the hyperglycemia remains is of this Whether consequence a cause or unclear.

is beta failure 1 T of abnormality in for in cells The cell fundamental type self-tolerance a diabetes immune antigens. specific effector tolerance normally responses This abnormalities thymus T-cell of defective from result some T and that cells of combination T clonal failure self-reactive of the of may deletion cells dampen in (Tregs) 5). (Chapter regulatory self of cell the is autoantibodies glutamic which antigens, insulin of of beta enzyme 70% acid blood variety the and 80% tolerance consequence against are One cell detected decarboxylase, of a of in to loss production the of patients. including beta http://ebooksmedicine.net in have which the pancreatic examined lesions cases the been rare In

cellfailure,anddiabetesensues. cellcompensationisfollowedbyβ Fig.20.23Developmentoftype2diabetes.Insulinresistanceassociatedwithobesityisinducedbyadipokines,freefattyacids,andchronicinflammationinadiposetissue.Pancreaticβ cellscompensateforinsulinresistancebyhypersecretionofinsulin.However,atsomepoint,β failure. with β-cell permission Insulin resistance and from (Reproduced M: Kasuga pancreatic 2006.) JClinInvest116:1756, the lymphocytic show infiltration later). described cells early (so-called beta islets “insulitis”, necrosis the and of in disease process,

2 genetics, disease and heterogeneous involves that complex of Type a interactions and environmental diabetes inflammation. factors, is risk multifactorial 1 basis. no there an diabetes, however, of evidence Unlike type autoimmune is inadequate ( insulin manifested insulin of characterize decreased as diabetes is type that respond ability tissues The are: resistance) beta insulin to (insulin 2 a to (1) the resistance hyperglycemia face defects secretion cell two and that dysfunction and of (2) in peripheral

Fig. 20.23 ). Insulin beta the of usually and hyperinsulinemia the of resistance the accompanied by hyperglycemia hyperfunction evolution of predates diabetes. cell is development in compensatory early stages and

as sedentary role, with unequivocally the a a habits, dietary factors, association described lifestyle the in Environmental play and of subsequent discussion such as obesity. concordance twins, are involved, for diabetes. larger an 80% of in as perhaps even also Genetic component rates suggesting diabetes in type to rate 50% type 90% 1 even is genetic by concordance (approximately which factors than evidenced monozygotic in greater that twins), a 2 called loci recent genome-wide evidence emerged a have has genes. large-scale from Additional susceptibility studies, of diabetogenic association for identified basis dozens genetic which is tolerance disease to immune in not CTLA4). diabetes, and linked genes 1 type the regulation however, Unlike involved (e.g., HLA,

failure to resistance Insulin of target the defined to tissues is as insulin. normally respond resistance tissue liver, skeletal The are the follows: adipose as and muscle, where manifests insulin tissues major

to endogenous inhibit contributes fasting the levels glucose to (gluconeogenesis) Failure production blood glucose liver, high which in

glucose Abnormally following blood muscle meal, high a postprandial uptake and glycogen which glucose in low contributes a skeletal level to synthesis

inhibit excess exacerbates lipase of insulin free circulating discussed, in which, to tissue, leading to be will acids the state resistance as hormone-sensitive (FFAs), Failure adipose fatty

development Few role play a as insulin resistance of important in obesity. the factors as obesity majority has of association of 2 in The type decades, being been obesity common a diabetes for recognized with with affected visceral patients. indicating abnormality unaccompanied fundamental present of is even in resistance signaling excess. a of Insulin states insulin simple by obesity hyperglycemia, fat with intolerance, constellation has insulin accompanied term hypertension to factors profiles. obesity, by of lipid syndrome visceral metabolic by a findings and dominated as resistance, abnormal risk glucose applied and such cardiovascular The been type development high metabolic are for at diabetes. syndrome of risk with the Individuals 2

subcutaneous) is (abdominal central with has likely (gluteal/ associated more also absolute not the an only on obesity. effect peripheral be but is is It than insulin resistance of that obesity the fat distribution insulin sensitivity: amount to body fat) impact can in ways sensitivity adversely Obesity numerous (see insulin

Fig. 20.23

Excess FFAs. Cross-sectional FFAs an and insulin inverse between plasma have correlation demonstrated studies fasting sensitivity. obese and taken up liver FFAs of circulating in into are triglycerides these organs. level presumably is The muscle individuals, because in markedly increased intracellular excess often which than central explain pattern of tissue, adipose might peripheral “lipolytic” distribution. particularly consequences more is the the fat Central adipose of deleterious tissue of resistance potent triglycerides products and an inhibitors fatty insulin are acquired in Intracellular of state. signaling result metabolism insulin and acid

Adipokines. to in is fat; hormones organ endocrine merely it storage that tissue for passive also a not an is depot in metabolic releases changes Adipose status. response been collectively have circulation tissue A identified variety the adipose as that of adipokines (or cytokines). adipose are into proteins known by systemic secreted of adiponectin) sensitivity blood in increasing leptin glucose, and insulin http://ebooksmedicine.net these and as hyperglycemia, by tissues. promote Some part the others (such decrease peripheral of levels contributing insulin are in to resistance. obesity, Adiponectin decreased thus

Inflammation. • the emerged has an past type Over pathogenesis the years, important 2 contributor several of inflammation as to diabetes. known FFAs) response a both secreted peripheral to are in insulin inflammatory such beta dysfunction as cytokines (discussed (mediated proinflammatory resistance It nutrients by later). in cell excess results and is that milieu that now permissive the multiprotein secretion Excess cells inflammasome, cytokine complex within beta and that cytoplasmic Chapter a macrophages leads activate 5). the FFAs to of interleukin (IL-1β; can IL-1β as resistance other tissues. secretion as stimulates and proinflammatory well islets, insulin promote in cytokines other cells, macrophages, cytokines IL-1 the and of additional peripheral from of well FFAs the insulin as release as directly, impede cytokines. indirectly excess can through Thus, signaling

by development component cell diabetes. itself essential lead in is dysfunction to While an of resistance overt glucose tolerance, the can impaired beta insulin most euglycemia. type 2 early cell function as with maintain diabetes, insulin actually process compensatory Beta in patients a and the to measure resistance increases mainly counter disease in to beta state relative long-term insulin way and the to state demands unable deficiency. resistance, hyperinsulinemic are peripheral of however, the Eventually, insulin cells of a to adapt gives

mechanisms been causing in diabetes, have dysfunction including Several beta cell implicated the in type 2 following:

earlier) release effect, (discussed hormones incretin to promote leading insulin of that secretion reduced Abnormal

Amyloid of more of islets in than replacement islets, ). present diabetic 90% (see is beta cell cause “burnout.” It amyloid whether or is a unclear effect of the

that associated insulin for secretion. an increased with control Polymorphisms diabetes 2 genes in type lifetime risk

Type despite with and complex, defect predisposition diabetes genetically for (mutation) 1 to no multiple account and loci, can diseases. susceptibility these associations type are the single-gene 2 By (see forms contrast, monogenic diabetes of

diabetes gene. result Table of are mutations single examples uncommon ) the loss-of-function of occurring as within a 20.5 a and cell in of defects Monogenic beta causes diabetes signaling. insulin function include receptor primary classified the the Monogenic diabetes period young period) which early develops of of and onset before diabetes diabetes be onset neonatal maturity neonatal of (manifesting based age. onset age into on years can congenital beyond 25 but usually the (MODY), in and mitochondrial causes of diabetes deafness pattern DNA of itself, maternally a sine underlying bilateral mutations the include insulin Some mutations). (the non being a mutations in of diabetes inheritance to of congenital syndrome DNA of gene qua lead and that inherited of maternal the mitochondrial (due of cause receptor can by synthesis, of instances severe downstream insulin that mutations receptor Rare accompanied inhibition) or signal resistance, hyperinsulinemia insulin lack congenital and to transduction binding, affect insulin feedback diabetes. genes factors encoding MODY In driving caused mutations (see contrast, in beta is by cell function

clinical in resemble superficially, Table many its and features. ), type to usual least tends diabetes of 2 at 20.5 of individuals not mutation. the diagnosis in it who is surprising that an underlying missed MODY harbor Thus, is often pathogenic

pregnancy-induced diabetes, diabetes. of addition Types and secondary monogenic 2 and and broad forms to diabetes In other 1 include (“gestational”) the subtypes in example, of result this syndrome or diabetes excess) been have as growth relevant portions (for arising of hormone chapter. endocrinopathies a Cushing described Secondary (“pancreatogenic” we as important chronic will Here, known secondary discuss of briefly diseases subtype a arising a of the of a variety exocrine pancreatic diabetes and result form gestational diabetes. as diabetes),

diabetes. Gestational the States of pregnancies in are occurring hyperglycemia. United complicated by Approximately 5% is a state state resistance. of the in hormonal Pregnancy favors insulin “diabetogenic” milieu prevailing which a euglycemic gestational to this diabetes. some can women give In rise pregnant congenital stillbirth present increased malformations the with the period) an in fetus periconception diabetes Women hyperglycemia 7). already for is (where risk pregestational in (Chapter and have later of prevent fetal overgrowth pregnancy defects, Therefore, needed glycemic is pregnancy control trimesters (macrosomia). prevent the early to in tight through and congenital to latter in maternal factors secretion the occurs insulin-like of hyperglycemia can fetus. compensatory induce because The growth insulin pregnant gestational glycemic who develop for require diabetes control. Most women the diabetes years (highest ten years first the outright an women next however, for of of after after to which diabetes. five that without pregnancy), the reverts Gestational there gestational resolves risk diabetes typically diabetes following developing delivery; in antecedent elevated is risk within

of occurring a as defined as exocrine diabetes disorder the (see pancreas hyperglycemia Pancreatogenic is of a result

Table ). 20.5 chronic diabetes heterogeneous, is causes with pancreatitis, pancreatic ranging to underlying to fibrosis, from adenocarcinoma. Pancreatogenic cystic that new-onset pancreatic of diabetes evidence an of adults in is occult a In older fact, approximately adenocarcinoma. manifestation actually 1% suggests

http://ebooksmedicine.net

brevity of diverse to difficult diabetes with mellitus. discuss It the clinical is presentations discussion We by of for of and acute initial will major each chronic presentation of two subtypes, mode common complications the followed or of the diabetes. a diagnosis most discuss

In as of requirements control eventually manifestation reserve after to because insulin overt 2 exogenous exhausted years becomes cell hyperglycemia. be secretion, is minimal diabetes the type initial essential 1 insulin but exogenous may of the honeymoon to beta 1 residual period), or insulin and the (referred infection. destruction transition the impaired tolerance such is gradual process, event heralded overt by an as requirements diabetes beta Although cell from insulin associated with be increased may a to abrupt, glucose is ketoacidosis, The diabetes), by onset classic marked of resulting in derangements triad polyuria, polyphagia metabolic cases, from all polydipsia, as the and of severe (known diabetes (

Fig. 20.24

Since insulin a major widespread anabolic its has hormone, effects. deficiency is assimilation of The into glucose

of Langerhans Islets

glucose decreased Leads tissue to

DEPLETION (free Glucagon Muscle Ketonuria lipolysis Increased (amino COMA DIABETIC adipose acids) muscle catabolism or tissue protein blood Fig.20.24Sequenceofmetabolicderangementsleadingtodiabeticcomaintype1diabetesmellitus.Anabsoluteinsulindeficiencyleadstoacatabolicstate,eventuatinginketoacidosisandseverevolumedepletion.Thesederangementsbringaboutsufficientcentralnervoussystemcompromisetocausecomaand,eventually,deathifleftuntreated.Adipose POLYDIPSIA fatty into Increased and is POLYURIA tissue Gluconeogenesis Liver spillover Kidney diminished Ketogenesis abolished. POLYPHAGIA sharply Glycosuria VOLUME d excess utilization HYPERGLYCEMIA KETOACIDOSIS acids) liver reserves and of and depleted ceases, are muscle Storage by in glycogen glycogenolysis. ensues. exceeds glycosuria resultant threshold for and renal hyperglycemia reabsorption, The the the water electrolytes. and The loss glycosuria causing induces of osmotic polyuria, and diuresis water, loss to the combined in due of intracellular renal hyperosmolarity water in increased triggering the osmoreceptors glucose The blood brain. with levels depletes of events This (polydipsia). intense generates thirst sequence The of the and catabolism proteins deficiency fats. of insulin to leads the Gluconeogenic blocks proteolysis and are building liver used produced and up taken by by as amino glucose. for acids increasing triad. negative proteins leads thus turn balance, in appetite of (polyphagia), induces The completing to energy catabolism fats classic and a the which in muscle effects resulting and dominate, increased Despite weight weakness. loss catabolic the appetite, loss of diabetes. polyphagia to always The is and weight possibility combination and point of should the paradoxical

metabolic significant unusual to infection, with ketoacidosis. or from forms activity, deviations other the patients may of In dietary type physical any 1 stress intake, normal leading diabetes, imbalance, diabetic worsen usually deficiency 700 (epinephrine, the hormones in result The unopposed absolute and is counter-regulatory range a to glucose of of 500 as mg/dL plasma of effects insulin glucagon). causes the hyperglycemia The diuresis of dehydration ketoacidotic and osmotic an marked state. characteristic machinery. effect ketogenic is The major second the of activation which FFAs, of Insulin liver to ketones. resultant giving are produce by breakdown with oxidized the to adipose rise stores, leads lipase, activation of excessive increased deficiency hormone-sensitive to an as a Ketogenesis source by vital the of for brain). generating in organs energy starvation, ketones adaptive times of is consumption phenomenon (e.g., leading may can by the ketonemia formed at be ketones peripheral at to rate which exceed are The used they and rate which ketonuria. tissues, in the the decrease of acidosis. excretion ketones is ketones blood by accumulating resulting dehydration, metabolic pH, compromised If urinary

polydipsia. diabetes manifest and 2 polyuria Type may with also In unexplained is cases, some of loss. weakness because or medical sought attention weight routine in asymptomatic the is diagnosis urine Most after made however, or individuals. frequently, blood testing with may diabetes the patients 2 In coma. state, type develop nonketotic decompensated hyperosmolar This diuresis syndrome resulting loss from sustained engendered fluid hyperglycemia. due and by dehydration is to osmotic urinary chronic severe maintain is stroke is adult or individual an is intake. adequate infection unable and disabled water by diabetic to older Typically, affected an the who a symptoms respiratory situation delays onset its The of and of ketoacidosis difficulties) (nausea, and of of the the severe absence until seriousness the vomiting, coma. recognition dehydration

from complications macro-vascular both resulting disease) largeand the induced of damage morbidity muscular with associated arteries in results hyperglycemia, disease). small-vessels any diabetes and (diabetic microvascular chronic long-standing of type the medium-sized (diabetic and The infarction, among causes myocardial disease increased atherosclerosis diabetics, resulting and accelerated in ischemia. lower-extremity stroke, Macrovascular kidneys, of most retina, peripheral neuropathy, nerves, in diabetic are respectively in and retinopathy, and disease microvascular resulting effects The ( nephropathy, profound the

Fig. ). 20.25 and are pathologic consequences in The tissues these findings described next. their clinical extreme onset among the the particular of organs their involved. of or is time and patients in variability complications, organ severity, There these control of be their the tight for hyperglycemia). In the individuals with (hence onset control delayed of need tight diabetes, may

Complications of Pathogenesis Diabetes of Chronic

long-term (glucotoxicity) of to mediator. pathogenesis is key The although diabetes complications be a the seems hyperglycemia persistent multifactorial, of tissue-specific it complications; of three metabolic a in distinct be play to likely involved the least seem a them role of manner. At pathogenesis all long-term is pathways in that

1. advanced glycation (AGEs). end of products Formation of a (glyoxal, glucose-derived the AGEs and nonenzymatic formed between reactions methylglyoxal, proteins. as groups precursors of are amino result and intracellular 3-deoxyglucosone) by AGE accelerated The hyperglycemia. formation greatly rate of is receptor (macrophages and expressed (RAGE), vascular endothelium bind which and to inflammatory cells muscle. a cells), smooth T is AGEs specific on the detrimental within effects AGE-RAGE of following: The signaling vascular include compartment the

Release growth growth vascular including leads (TGFβ), implicated of transforming factors, (VEGF), excess (discussed factor later) cytokines which material, retinopathy and β diabetic endothelial deposition in to of growth factor membrane basement and

in species reactive Generation of oxygen (ROS) endothelial cells

AGEs synthesis muscle proliferation smooth matrix can and of vascular directly to extracellular proteins. effects, matrix addition cross-link cells of In receptor-mediated Enhanced extracellular membrane within low-density trapped proteins; accounting walls, diabetic of or albumin interstitial gets plasma trap (LDL) later). is while microangiopathy for in These capillary atherosclerosis part walls, can the characteristic large-vessel can (discussed lipoprotein proteins AGE-modified that trapped be other cross-linked within (Chapter example, for thickening basement accelerating 10),

2. (DAG) kinase intracellular messenger Activation important Activation protein C. calcium second is C http://ebooksmedicine.net protein ions and kinase an of by of the diacylglycerol (PKC)

Fig. 20.25 diabetes. of complications Long-term

signal many pathway in systems. transduction cellular stimulate hence and novo de intermediates hyperglycemia of Intracellular cause glycolytic activation PKC. can the of from synthesis DAG transforming and downstream production in molecules membrane and retinopathy, and factor profibrogenic include of molecules the increased material. implicated leading deposition matrix basement seen factor in vascular neovascularization endothelial β, extracellular of PKC as of are growth (VEGF), proangiogenic numerous to The as diabetic activation such growth effects such

3. polyol in pathways. Disturbances require do vessels), to lens, that dinucleotide a nicotinamide transport uses nerves, to In that hyperglycemia increase aldose for reduced as fructose, cofactor. (the reductase is leads tissues and enzyme polyol, that insulin a a reaction then some form glucose of metabolized (e.g., eventually intracellular not kidneys, phosphate) by sorbitol, an glucose blood to in NADPH in the in (GSH). regenerates enzyme reductase is glutathione NADPH glutathione also the reaction reduced that by required a GSH is susceptibility cell, cellular As the of the in Chapter reductions stress. in important one mechanisms 2, in anti-oxidant and oxidative GSH described increase to appears cause neuropathy neurons, major hyperglycemia (glucose to In diabetic neurotoxicity). of persistent be the underlying

morphologic systemic of are complications late most important many related to The diabetes. the changes in 1 2 both (see diabetes changes type seen type These are and

Fig. 20.25

inconstant. the pancreas in Lesions Pancreas. are or One more alterations may of present: the following be

type 1 is particularly This changemost islets. disease. often seen rapidly number Reduction in size with the in advancing of diabetes, and detected. easily not are Most islets of the small, inconspicuous, and

Fig. 20.26A ). at of most clinical type diabetes time seen are the 1 presentation. They often

2 islets and between deposition in Amyloid diabetesbegins around within and in capillaries cells. type islets be (see may virtually stages, At obliterated the advanced

Fig. be ); 20.26B observed. fibrosis also may normal Similar aging. of older may part found be in as apparently lesions nondiabetics,

the and number size of in increase characteristic An especially of islets, nondiabetic newborns of diabetic mothers. to Presumably, hyperplasia maternal the undergo in response fetal hyperglycemia. islets

disease. macrovascular Diabetic atherosclerosis diabetic accelerated of macrovascular is The hallmark disease

Fig.20.26(A)Autoimmuneinsulitisinahumanpancreaticexplant.ArrowspointtoinflammationsurroundingisletofLangerhans,whilethesurroundingacinarstructuresareessentiallynormal. by Martha (Photograph Florida.) Network of Dr. provided Pancreatic JDRF Donors, Campbell-Thompson, Organ University Gainesville, Florida., for withisletinflammationnotedatearlierobservations. (B)Amyloidosisofapancreaticisletintype2diabetes.Amyloidosistypicallyisobservedlateinthenaturalhistoryofthisformofdiabetes,

affectingtheaortaandlarge-andmedium-sizedarteries.Exceptforitsgreaterseverityandearlierageatonset,atherosclerosisindiabeticsisindistinguishablefromthatinnondiabetics(Chapter10).Myocardialinfarction,causedbyatherosclerosisofthecoronaryarteries,isthemostcommoncauseofdeathindiabetics.Significantly,itisalmostascommonindiabeticwomenasindiabeticmen.Bycontrast,myocardialinfarctionisuncommoninnondiabeticwomenofreproductiveage.Gangreneofthelowerextremities,asaresultofadvancedvasculardisease,isabout100timesmorecommoninindividualswithdiabetesthaninthegeneralpopulation.Thelargerrenalarteriesalsoaresubjecttosevereatherosclerosis,butthemostdamagingeffectofdiabetesonthekidneysisexertedattheleveloftheglomeruliandthemicrocirculation,asdiscussedlater.

Hyalinearteriolosclerosis,thevascularlesionassociatedwithhypertension(Chapters10and14),isbothmoreprevalentandmoresevereindiabeticsthaninnondiabetics,butitisnotspecificfordiabetesandmaybeseeninolderadultswhodonotsufferfromeitherdiabetesorhypertension.Ittakestheformofanamorphous,hyalinethickeningofthewallofthearterioles,whichcausesnarrowingofthelumen(

).Notsurprisingly,indiabeticpatients,itsseverityisrelatednotonlytothedurationofthediseasebutalsotothepresenceorabsenceofhypertension. Fig.20.27

Diabeticmicroangiopathy.Oneofthemostconsistentmorphologicfeaturesofdiabetesisdiffusethickeningofbasementmembranes.Thethickeningismostevidentinthecapillariesoftheskin,skeletalmuscle,retina,renalglomeruli,andrenalmedulla.However,italsomaybeseeninnonvascularstructuressuchasrenaltubules,theBowmancapsule,peripheralnerves,andplacenta.Bybothlightandelectronmicroscopy,thebasallaminaseparatingparenchymalorendothelialcellsfromthesurroundingtissueismarkedlythickenedbyconcentriclayersofhyalinematerialcomposedpredominantlyoftypeIVcollagen(

Fig.20.28 ).Ofnote,despitetheincreaseinthethicknessofbasementmembranes,diabeticcapillariesareleaky,leadingtoextravasationofplasmaproteins.Themicroangiopathyunderliesthedevelopmentofdiabeticnephropathy,retinopathy,andsomeformsofneuropathy.Anindistinguishablemicroangiopathycanbefoundinagednondiabeticpatients,butrarelytotheextentseeninindividualswithlong-standingdiabetes.

Diabeticnephropathy.Thekidneysareprimetargetsofdiabetes(seealsoChapter14).Renalfailureissecondonlytomyocardialinfarctionasacauseofdeathfromthisdisease.Thelesionsincludemainly:(1)glomerularlesions;(2)renalvascularlesions,principallyarteriolosclerosis;and(3)pyelonephritis,includingnecrotizingpapillitis.

Themostimportantglomerularlesionsarecapillarybasementmembranethickening,diffusemesangialsclerosis,andnodularglomerulosclerosis.Theglomerularcapillarybasementmembranesarethickenedalongtheirentirelength.Thischangecanbedetectedbyelectronmicroscopywithinafewyearsoftheonsetofdiabetes,sometimeswithoutanyassociatedchangeinrenalfunction(

Fig.20.29

Fig.20.27Severerenalhyalinearteriolosclerosisinaperiodicacid–Schiffstainedspecimen.Notethemarkedlythickened,tortuousafferentarteriole.Theamorphousnatureofthethickenedvascularwallisevident. Dr. (Courtesy M.A. of Center, Department Antonio,Texas.) Science Health Venkatachalam, Pathology, of San University Texas of http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.28Renalcortexshowingthickeningoftubularbasementmembranesinaspecimenfromadiabeticpatient.(Periodicacid–Schiffstain.)

Diffusemesangialsclerosisreferstoanincreaseinmesangialmatrixassociatedwithmesangialcellproliferationandbasementmembranethickening.Itisfoundinmostindividualswithdiseaseofmorethan10years’duration.Whenglomerulosclerosisissevere,patientsdevelopthenephroticsyndrome,characterizedbyproteinuria,hypoalbuminemia,andedema(Chapter14).

Fig.20.30 ).ThesenodulesarePAS-positiveandusuallycontaintrappedmesangialcells.Nodularglomerulosclerosisisencounteredinapproximately15%to30%ofindividualswithlong-termdiabetesandisamajorcontributortorenaldysfunction.Diffuse

Fig.20.29Renalglomerulusshowingmarkedlythickenedglomerularbase-mentmembrane(B) inadiabetic.L,Glomerularcapillarylumen;U,urinaryspace. Haven, (Courtesy Medicine, of Connecticut.) of of Michael Kashgarian, School Dr. Univer-sity New Department Pathology,Yale

Fig.20.30Nodularglomerulosclerosisinarenalspecimenfromapatientwithlong-standingdiabetes. (Courtesy Chicago, Yerian, of Illinois.) Dr. Lisa Pathology, University of of Chicago, Department mesangialsclerosisalsomaybeseeninassociationwitholdageandhypertension;bycontrast,thenodularformofglomerulosclerosisisvirtuallypathognomonicofdiabetes.Boththediffuseandthenodularformsofglomerulosclerosisinducesufficientischemiatocausescarringofthekidneys,manifestedbyafinelygranular–appearingcorticalsurface(

Fig.20.31

Renalatherosclerosisandarteriolosclerosisconstitutepartofthemacrovasculardiseaseseenindiabetics.

Thekidneyisoneofthemostfrequentlyandseverelyaffectedorgans;thechangesinthearteriesandarteriolesaresimilartothosefoundthroughoutthebody.Hyalinearteriolosclerosisaffectsnotonlytheafferentbutalsotheefferentarterioles.Suchefferentarteriolosclerosisisrarelyifeverencounteredinindividualswhodonothavediabetes.

Fig.20.31Nephrosclerosisinapatientwithlong-standingdiabetes.Thebisectedkidneydemonstratesdiffusegranulartransformationofthesurface(left) andmarkedthinningofthecortex(right). Additionalfeaturesincludesomeirregulardepressions,theresultofpyelonephritis,andanincidentalcorticalcyst(far right).

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.32Characteristicmorphologicchangesofdiabeticretinopathy.Fea-turesincludeadvancedproliferativeretinopathywithretinalhemorrhages,exudates,neovascularization,andtractionalretinaldetachment(lower-right corner). Dr. of Apte,Washington Medicine, Rajendra (Courtesy of Missouri.) St. University Louis, School

Pyelonephritisisanacuteorchronicinflammationofthekidneysthatusuallybeginsintheinterstitialtissueandthenspreadstoinvolvethetubules.Boththeacuteandchronicformsofthisdiseaseoccurinnondiabeticsaswellasindiabeticsaremorecommoninindividualswithdiabetes,andonceaffected,diabeticsalsotendtohavemoresevereinvolvement.Onespecialpatternofacutepyelonephritis,necrotizingpapillitis(orpapillarynecrosis),ismuchmoreprevalentindiabeticsthaninnondiabetics.

Ocularcomplicationsofdiabetes.Visualimpairment,sometimeseventotalblindness,isoneofthemorefearedconsequencesoflong-standingdiabetes.Theocularinvolvementmaytaketheformofretinopathy,cataractformation,orglaucoma.Retinopathy,themostcommonpattern,consistsofaconstellationofchangesthattogetherareconsideredbymanyophthalmologiststobevirtuallydiagnosticofthedisease.Thelesionintheretinatakestwoforms:nonproliferativeretinopathyandproliferativeretinopathy.

Nonproliferativeretinopathyincludesintraretinalorpreretinalhemorrhages,retinalexudates,microaneurysms,venousdilations,edema,and,mostimportantly,thickeningoftheretinalcapillaries(microangiopathy).Theretinalexudatescanbe“soft”(microinfarcts)or“hard”(depositsofplasmaproteinsandlipids)(

Fig.20.32 ).Themicroaneurysmsarediscretesacculardilationsofretinalchoroidalcapillariesthatappearthroughtheophthalmoscopeassmallreddots.Dilationstendtooccuratfocalpointsofweakening,resultingfromlossofpericytes.Retinaledemapresumablyresultsfromexcessivecapillarypermeability.Underlyingallofthesechangesisthemicroangiopathy,whichisthoughttoleadtolossofcapillarypericytesandhencetofocalweakeningofcapillarystructure.

Theso-calledproliferativeretinopathyisaprocessofneovascularizationandfibrosis.Thislesionleadstoseriousconsequences,includingblindness,especiallyifitinvolvesthemacula.Vitreoushemorrhagesmayresultfromtheruptureofnewlyformedcapillaries;thesubsequentorganizationofthehemorrhagecanpulltheretinaoffitssubstratum(retinaldetachment).

Diabeticneuropathy.Thecentralandperipheralnervoussystemsarenotsparedbydiabetes.Themostfrequentpatternofinvolvementisthatofaperipheral,symmetricneuropathyofthelowerextremitiesaffectingbothmotorandsensoryfunction,particularlythelatter.Otherformsincludeautonomicneuropathy,whichproducesdisturbancesinbowelandbladderfunctionandsometimessexualimpotence,anddiabeticmononeuropathy,whichmaymanifestassuddenfootdroporwristdroporisolatedcranialnervepalsies.Theneurologicchangesmaybetheresultofmicroangiopathyandincreasedpermeabilityofthecapillariesthatsupplythenerves,aswellasdirectaxonaldamage.

Diabetes Clinical Chronic Features of

common pathophysiologic 1 of entities distinct diabetes hyperglycemia. are with type type manifestation the As has and previous the 2 emphasized, discussion

features 20.6 histopathologic and Table some two distinguish summarizes the the clinical, diseases. of that genetic stated, 1 of sequela the diabetes, arising a as result of and long-term types both previously as Nonetheless, 2 uncontrolled

Table20.6Type1VersusType2DiabetesMellitus

Betacelldepletion,isletMildbetacelldepletionatrophy

majorhistocompatibilitycomplex. HLA, Humanleukocyteantigen;MHC,

poorly are in of for controlled mortality similar, http://ebooksmedicine.net responsible morbidity are hyperglycemia, the diabetics. or and and much most years 20 the complications instances of appear In 15 hyperglycemia. onset to approximately these after described the complications chronic disease of The are major next.

such in and are common mortality infarction, vascular long-standing the Macrovascular complications, insufficiency, myocardial accidents, causes diabetes. renal most cerebrovascular of as artery Diabetics greater of than coronary from have times complications, fourfold and a cardiovascular risk nondiabetics. to four two higher incidence a death disease, of on development favor syndrome). cardiovascular Diabetes including dyslipidemia accompanied hypertension conditions and events, the discussion metabolic by that often is earlier (see adverse of underlying of The macrovascular disease disease). medium-sized arteries of atherosclerosis cardiovascular is the (i.e., large-and hallmark accelerated already obesity is the importance development of discussed, been has of but it insulin of factor atherosclerosis. an resistance also pathogenesis independent The in risk for

the is Diabetic nephropathy disease leading of a renal in cause States. United end-stage of amounts appearance the day). mg/ earliest is of the nephropathy of in diabetic (>30 The <300 albumin but manifestation urine small nephropathy macroalbuminuria of interventions, 2 hypertension. overt approximately type type appearance with specific (excretion accompanied those 40% develop 15 with will Without 80% the to >300 mg/day) usually and of years, with the ensuing patients diabetes of 20% by over to diabetes of 10 1 progression drop and a highly overt by to from rate. glomerular disease filtration in evidenced The end-stage progressive nephropathy renal is variable is more than of diabetes disease, transplantation. diagnosis, 20 with of and renal By type years 2 20% 1 with necessitating or individuals with those will after dialysis develop renal about overt nephropathy 75% end-stage type diabetes

the sometimes of consequences is one blindness, long-standing impairment, Visual diabetes. total of more feared even is the blindness in of acquired leading the United Diabetes States. fourth cause patients of 60% of after Approximately retinopathy 15 some years develop form to 80% to diagnosis. approximately diabetic 20 The VEGF of fundamental attributable the overexpression in lesion retinopathy—neovascularization—is of to retina. hypoxia-induced anti-angiogenic intravitreous includes agents. of for injection this treatment condition Current In to contribute impairment formation, glaucoma cataract diabetic also diabetes. addition for an both patients to propensity and which visual retinopathy, in increased of have

afflicting nervous neuropathy system, produce variety sensorimotor syndromes, of a nerves, can system. peripheral Diabetic clinical the autonomic and nervous central particularly both symmetric latter most involvement frequent affects pattern the extremities polyneuropathy of and lower distal that (Chapter 22). function, The nerve the of motor a sensory is extremities thus Over polyneuropathy. and involved stocking” well, upper as be of the approximating time, “glove a may pattern palsies. which Other wristdrop, produces mononeuropathy, may diabetic neuropathy, impotence, and bladder bowel manifest as sexual nerve in function footdrop, sometimes and disturbances include or sudden isolated cranial autonomic and forms which

to Diabetic • an and susceptibility pyelonephritis. infections plagued patients pneumonia, are the increased tuberculosis, of skin, by about 5% Infections cause of diabetes-related deaths. a individual a the be in may ultimately may event pneumonia) long neuropathy, of in a trivial bacteremia, first (gangrene, toe infection complications to death. diabetic succession lead In that an with

demonstrated that by control. morbidity complications, mortality, glycemic the and strict the large-scale from diabetes studies microvascular and prospective Several have are associated attenuated convincingly dietary with nonpharmacologic the 2 (which for restrictions while are 1 exercise “first diabetes. line sensitivity) as therapy of is diabetes, approaches often defense” improves and insulin mainstay replacement insulin For the type type such patients of treatment, 2 with hyperglycemia. therapeutic to intervention type patients reduce require Most eventually diabetes as known Glycemic glycosylated cells. moieties of red assessed percentage measuring glucose is which in by by HbA1C, of nonenzymatic hemoglobin the formed also control addition is clinically to hemoglobin, glucose measure (2–3 months) Unlike periods glycemic by relatively blood of and variations. of day-to-day HbA1C long a unaffected time over control is levels, is of maintenance than HbA1C to 7% reduce at recommends less risk for The long-term the complications. levels ADA HDL macrovascular for maintain and addition, need reduce optimal cholesterol the at LDL diabetics to complications. triglycerides risk In levels to and one adoption modern the lifestyle defenses against scourge. a active day and healthy remains of of The best this

Type1diabetesisanautoimmunediseasecharacterizedbyprogressivedestructionofisletbetacells,leadingtoabsoluteinsulindeficiency.BothautoreactiveTcellsandautoantibodiesareinvolved.

Type2diabetesiscausedbyinsulinresistanceandbetacelldysfunction,resultinginrelativeinsulindeficiency.Autoimmunityisnotinvolved.

Obesityhasanimportantrelationshipwithinsulinresistance(andhencetype2diabetes),mediatedbyvariousfactors,includingexcessfreefattyacids,aberrantlevelsofadipokines,andanalteredinflammatorymilieuwithinadiposetissue.

Monogenicformsofdiabetesareuncommonandarecausedbysingle-genedefectsthatresultinprimarybetacelldysfunctionorleadtoabnormalitiesofinsulin–insulinreceptorsignaling.

Thelong-termcomplicationsofdiabetesaresimilarinalltypesandaffectmainlybloodvessels,andthekidneys,nerves,andeyes.Thedevelopmentofthesecomplicationsisattributedtothreeunderlyingmechanisms:formationofAGEs,activationofPKC,anddisturbancesinpolyolpathwaysleadingtooxidativestress.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

exocrine are only also pancreatic islet comparison neuroendocrine tumors, 2% tumors accounting cell pancreas, all with tumors in known of Pancreatic of for as rare the (PanNETs), neoplasms. is of site single the common PanNETs metastases. most be liver adults are multifocal; most are the common when they may malignant, in or and have hormones, propensity pancreatic tumors to elaborate some are but nonfunctional. a These to larger production. in symptoms to the hormone at functional attention latter with come natural later they present often their PanNETs, history which time are related of typically The clinical excessive since than diagnosis, such to exception with the distant fact, PanNETs, malignant and as features manifest of potential, as aggressiveness, local All having of invasion regarded insulinomas or tissues biologic into metastases. 90% PanNETs in with of 60% are later), overtly malignant (see and or have tumor in genes (e.g. frequently suppressor in mutations PTEN, MEN1 genes tumors mutations The inactivating maintain products ATRX) length. telomere whose

50 induce to attacks blood PanNET levels fall insulin below hypoglycemia Beta (insulinomas) sufficient glucose cell the type elaborate mg/dL. tumors most are common when of and of confusion, manifest stupor, These attacks consciousness. as of and loss and by glucose. are promptly precipitated relieved of feeding administration exercise They or fasting by or parenteral are resection. by surgical Most insulinomas are cured

MORPHOLOGYThemajorityofinsulinomasareidentifiedwhiletheyaresmall(<2cmindiameter)andlocalizedtothepancreas.Mostaresolitarylesions,althoughmultifocaltumorsortumorsectopictothepancreasmaybeencountered.Malignancyininsulinomasoccursinlessthan10%ofcases,andisdiagnosedonthebasisoflocalinvasionormetastases.Onhistologicexamination,thebenigntumorslookremarkablylikegiantislets,withpreservationoftheregularcordsofmonotonouscellsandtheirorientationtothevasculature.Malignantlesionsalsotendtobewell-differentiatedandmaybedeceptivelyencapsulated.Depositionofamyloidisacharacteristicfeatureofmanyinsulinomas(

).Undertheelectronmicroscope,neoplasticbetacells,liketheirnormalcounterparts,displaydistinctiveroundgranules. Fig.20.33

cell Fig.20.33Pancreaticneuroendocrinetumor(PanNET),alsocalledislet tumor. Theneoplasticcellsaremonotonousinappearanceanddemonstrateminimalpleomorphismormitoticactivity.Thereisabundantamyloiddeposition,characteristicofaninsulinoma.

of (gastrinomas), in arise tumors duodenum in to the in soft tissues pancreas so-called triangle”). usually hypersecretion and as are just peripancreatic (the its which the origin gastrin as “gastrinoma gastrin-producing has likely Marked of of islet The syndrome patients the lesions association of with hypersecretion ulceration, 90% in cell gastrinomas. pancreatic peptic to present and gastric refers severe with to 95% acid Zollinger-Ellison acid stimulates in causes or pancreatic peptic ulceration. extreme a from duodenal tumor secretion, which, Hypergastrinemia gastric turn, unresponsive duodenal the found often are usual general those in ulcers they therapy. although they and are to identical gastric The multiple; population, are often to in jejunal locations addition, should as the In may Zollinger-Ellison found, syndrome unusual occur intractable when are considered. such ulcers jejunum; be ulcers manifestation. one-half of than have in More patients 30%, diarrhea; affected presenting it the is

MORPHOLOGYGastrinomasmayariseinthepancreas,theperipancreaticregion,orthewalloftheduodenum.Overone-halfofgastrin-producingtumorsarelocallyinvasiveorhavealreadymetastasizedatthetimeofdiagnosis.Inapproximately25%ofpatients,gastrinomasariseinconjunctionwithotherendocrinetumors,thusconformingtotheMEN-1syndrome(discussedlater);MEN-1–associatedgastrinomasfrequentlyaremultifocal,whilesporadicgastrinomasusuallyaresingle.Aswithinsulin-secretingtumorsofthepancreas,gastrin-producingtumorsarehistologicallyblandandrarelyexhibitmarkedanaplasia.

endocrine are of distinct three The types. consist-consists of layers organs paired cell adrenal glands of the regions, zona in function. the the two gland cortex which layer differ adrenal of of and their narrow development, medulla, the capsule is ing Beneath and structure, cortex The glomerulosa. reticularis An zona the http://ebooksmedicine.net abuts equally narrow

Hyperfunction: medulla. Adrenocortical Hyperadrenalism785 about is makes the which broad total Intervening of fasciculata, the up cortex. 75% zona

synthesizes The three different of types steroids: adrenal cortex

the reticularis zona with primarily small the (principally in synthesized contribution a Glucocorticoids from cortisol), fasciculata, zona

most the important Mineralocorticoids, being in zona generated glomerulosa aldosterone, the

reticularis the Sex (estrogens steroids produced in and zona androgens), largely

medulla composed synthesize of is cells, secrete epinephrine. which catecholamines, mainly adrenal chromaffin The and medulla. first and deals of disorders adrenal the with cortex This of section the then with or hypofunction. cortex adrenal Diseases hyperfunction divided can conveniently associated those be the of cortical into

HYPERADRENALISM ADRENOCORTICAL HYPERFUNCTION:

or production each three clinical syndromes, cortex: distinctive caused hormones are of one abnormal three of by the layers the of more by produced the hyperadrenal There

excess of cortisol Cushing an syndrome, by characterized

excess an caused Hyperaldosteronism, mineralocorticoid by of

caused syndromes, androgens virilizing or by Adrenogenital an excess of

clinical syndromes similarities of functions show of the some adrenal shared of because of some features steroids. these The

Syndrome Hypercortisolism: Cushing

by levels. elevated caused (Cushing Hypercortisolism glucocorticoid syndrome) is cases of are syndrome of vast Cushing the of In glucocorticoids result of clinical practice, administration the exogenous (iatrogenic). majority are and the follows most as common three ( remaining disorders endogenous, The are cases

Fig. 20.34

associated with diseases hypothalamic-pituitary ACTH of hypersecretion Primary

of neoplasms nonpituitary ectopic ACTH by Secretion

and, (adenoma carcinoma) hyperplasia or Primary rarely, cortical neoplasms adrenocortical primary

disease as associated of also hypothalamic-pituitary hypersecretion known disease, ACTH, with Cushing Primary

20.34 as forms, common the as syndrome: more Fig. (iatrogenic) The well of endogenous Schematic various representation exogenous three the of Cushing form. forms hormone. Adrenocorticotropic ACTH,

syndrome. 70% Cushing spontaneous, for accounts of of approximately cases endogenous of most about it thirties). young The than occurs twenties men, prevalence during and this among (the women is times disorder and higher frequently adulthood among four ACTH-producing majority microadenoma produce mass the brain. in cases, an the vast In of contains not does pituitary the that effects gland cases hyperplasia is microadenoma without cell discrete the a adenoma. corticotroph rarely, In and contains anterior areas of pituitary a there some to may less tumor. hormone ACTH (CRH)–producing or, be release hypothalamic corticotropinreleasing excessive cell Corticotroph much secondary by hyperplasia primary commonly, a cortical show later), (“ACTHdependent” secondary ACTH patients in The of syndrome). bilateral glands to with of levels Cushing adrenal (discussed variable hyperplasia degrees disease elevated Cushing nodular the hypercortisolism. The turn, for hyperplasia in responsible the cortical is,

Cushing nonpituitary of ACTH ectopic cases 10% about tumors of for of Secretion by syndrome. accounts the responsible carcinomas although neoplasms, and carcinoma associated the medullary instances other of small-cell carcinoids, In a have including the the thyroid, syndrome. PanNETs, is many of lung, been with tumor and occasional ectopic which, ACTH, ectopic CRH, to in ACTH tumors hypercortisolism. secretion causes addition that elaborate neoplasms In turn, produce neuroendocrine short elevated these but in the of variant, hyperplasia the undergo cortical bilateral pituitary downhill with cuts enlargement. adrenal glands to the the secondary cancers course ACTH, patients rapid As often adrenal

of because adenoma adrenal endogenous autonomously. and about cases also 15% function Primary carcinoma, and hyperplasia, ACTH-independent cortical to Cushing adrenals the for syndrome, are responsible as adrenal designated 20% Cushing rarely, of primary neoplasms, syndrome, such syndrome low is levels levels of ACTH. of The Cushing serum elevated adrenal cortisol of hallmark and biochemical be (carcinoma). (adenoma) adrenal caused a by may which syndrome benign is adrenocortical Cushing neoplasm, malignant cases, unilateral In most or Primary Cushing syndrome. of cause cortical hyperplasia the a adrenal of cortices rare is macronodules first cm as the variants the sizes this less (1–3 varying and There than mm). of entity; presents are (typically as of diameter) in second two micronodules 3

MORPHOLOGYThemainlesionsofCushingsyndromearefoundinthepituitaryandadrenalglands.ThepituitaryinCushingsyndromeshowschangesthatvarywithdifferentcauses.Themostcommonalteration,resultingfromhighlevelsofendogenousorexogenousglucocorticoids,istermedCrookehyalinechange.Inthiscondition,thenormalgranular,basophiliccytoplasmoftheACTH-producingcellsintheanteriorpituitaryisreplacedbyhomogeneous,lightlybasophilicmaterial.Thisalterationistheresultoftheaccumulationofintermediatekeratinfilamentsinthecytoplasm.InpituitaryCushingsyndrome,thereisanadenoma(describedunderdiseasesofthepituitary).

Fig.20.35Diffusehyperplasiaoftheadrenalgland(bottom) contrastedwithanormaladrenalgland(top). Adrenocorticotropichormone. Inacross-section,theadrenalcortexisyellowandthickened,andasubtlenodularityisevident.TheabnormalglandwasfromapatientwithACTH-dependentCushingsyndrome,inwhombothadrenalglandswerediffuselyhyperplastic.ACTH,

(2)diffusehyperplasia,(3)macronodularormicronodularhyperplasia,or(4)anadenomaorcarcinoma. Morphologicchangesintheadrenalglandsalsodependonthecauseofthehypercortisolismandinclude:(1)corticalatrophy,

Inpatientsinwhomthesyndromeresultsfromexogenousglucocorticoids,suppressionofendogenousACTHresultsinbilateralcorticalatrophy,duetoalackofstimulationofthezonafasciculataandzonareticularisbyACTH.Thezonaglomerulosaisofnormalthicknessinsuchcases,becausethisportionofthecortexfunctionsindependentlyofACTH.Incasesofendogenoushypercortisolism,bycontrast,theadrenalseitherarehyperplasticorcontainacorticalneoplasm.

).Bothglandsareenlarged,eithersubtlyormarkedly,eachweighingupto30g.Theadrenalcortexisdiffuselythickenedandvariablynodular,althoughthelatterisnotaspronouncedasincasesofACTH-independentnodularhyperplasia.Theyellowcolorofdiffuselyhyperplasticglandsderivesfromthepresenceoflipid-richcells,whichappearvacuolatedunderthemicroscope. Fig.20.35

Inprimarycorticalhyperplasia,thecortexisreplacedalmostentirelybymacronodulesor1-to3-mmdarklypigmentedmicronodules(

).Thepigmentisbelievedtobelipofuscin,awear-and-tearpigment(Chapter2). Fig.20.36

Functionaladenomasorcarcinomasoftheadrenalcortexarenotmorphologicallydistinctfromnonfunctioningadrenalneoplasms(discussedlater).Boththebenignandmalignantlesionsaremorecommoninwomenintheirthirtiestofifties.Adrenocorticaladenomasareyellowtumorssurroundedbythinorwell-developedcapsules,andmostweighlessthan30g(

).Onmicroscopicexamination,theyarecomposedofcellssimilartothoseencounteredinthenormalzonafasciculata(see Fig.20.37A

).ThecarcinomasassociatedwithCushingsyndrome,bycontrast,tendtobelargerthantheadenomas. Fig.20.37B

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.36(A)Primarypigmentednodularadrenocorticalhyperplasiashowingprominentpigmentednodulesintheadrenalgland.(B)Onhistologicexamination,thenodulesarecomposedofcellscontaininglipofuscinpigment,seenintherightpartofthefield. Carney, courtesy Department Medicine, of Rochester, (Photographs of Clinic, Aidan Dr. Minnesota.) Mayo

Thesetumorsarenonencapsulatedmassesfrequentlyexceeding200to300ginweight,havingalloftheanaplasticcharacteristicsofcancer,asdetailedlater.Withfunctioningtumors,bothbenignandmalignant,theadjacentadrenalcortexandthatofthecontralateraladrenalglandareatrophic,asaresultofsuppressionofendogenousACTHbyhighcortisollevels.

known an actions glucocorticoids. represent symptoms of signs Cushing exaggeration syndrome of of the The and Cushing subtle quite other be endocrine gradually stages. many abnormalities, syndrome may and, develops like in usually early its of with is syndrome underlying this exception associated lung, the carcinomas of major small-cell characteristic development the insidious rapid features. of when disease the precludes A of course many Cushing onset to the weight Early syndrome and manifestations gain. of include Cushing hypertension neck With the accumulation obesity, truncal fat resultant of time, back adipose the posterior redistribution hump”). and becomes centripetal with of apparent, tissue in more (“buffalo characteristic “moon and facies,” selective decreased mass limb and atrophy weakness. muscle proximal fast-twitch with causes (type Hypercortisolism of II) myofibers, resultant uptake hyperglycemia, and with the of gluconeogenesis and in polydipsia. secondary glucose Glucocorticoids attendant diabetes induce resulting its cells, by inhibit glucosuria, resistance collagen. effects cause catabolic insulin of of The on proteins loss cutaneous are skin easily abdominal in is and striae area thin, the particularly fragile, common the bruised; ( Thus,

Fig. ). 20.38 in to with to also on of diverse calcium lead bone, resorption metabolism results osteoporosis, Cortisol fractures. susceptibility the consequent has increased that which of effects development of Cushing for Because syndrome glucocorticoids with increased a immune risk also variety are infections. response, at patients the suppress a as menstrual hirsutism symptoms psychiatric well depression, and as abnormalities, psychosis. Additional manifestations number including of swings, mood include frank and melanocyte-stimulating ACTH in Cushing usually secretion to is activity molecule. associated ACTH secondary skin the caused increased ectopic pituitary precursor by pigmentation syndrome with Extraadrenal or

Fig.20.37Adrenocorticaladenoma.(A)Theadenomaisdistinguishedfromnodularhyperplasiabyitssolitary,circumscribednature.Thefunctionalstatusofanadrenocorticaladenomacannotbepredictedfromitsgrossormicroscopicappearance. (B)Histologicfeaturesofanadrenalcorticaladenoma.Theneoplasticcellsarevacuolatedbecauseofthepresenceofintracytoplasmiclipid.Thereismildnuclearpleomorphism.Mitoticactivityandnecrosisarenotseen.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.38ApatientwithCushingsyndrome.Characteristicfeaturesincludecentralobesity,“moonfacies,”andabdominalstriae. with et Pathology, (Reproduced of from Lloyd Atlasofnontumorpathology:endocrinediseases.Washington, 2002.) RV, DC, Registry American permis-sion al:

elevated In ACTH are of and high Cushing characterized levels syndrome, excreted is corticosteroids. urine ectopic the and pituitary by levels low In Cushing syndrome contrast, adrenal ACTH secondary levels to in are tumors.

Themostcommoncauseofhypercortisolismisexogenousadministrationofsteroids.

followedbyprimaryadrenalneoplasms(ACTH-independent disease), EndogenoushypercortisolismmostoftenissecondarytoanACTH-producingpituitarymicroadenoma(Cushing hypercortisolism)andparaneoplasticACTHproductionbytumors(e.g.,small-celllungcancer).

Themorphologicfeaturesintheadrenalincludebilateralcorticalatrophy(inexogenoussteroid-induceddisease),bilateraldiffuseornodularhyperplasia(mostcommonfindinginendogenousCushingsyndrome),oranadrenocorticalneoplasm.

of aldosterone by is excess the chronic related group generic Hyperaldosteronism closely for characterized secretion. a conditions term Hyperaldosteronism cause. extraadrenal secondary be or an it may primary, may to be

the hyperaldosteronism Primary autonomous of overproduction suppression refers renin-angiotensin to plasma decreased activity. resultant of with renin aldosterone system and primary causes ( as The follows hyperaldosteronism are of

Fig. 20.39

adrenal glands. of Bilateral by the nodular hyperaldosteronism, characterized hyperplasia bilateral idiopathic of the This 60% primary is underlying cause common accounting most hyperaldosteronism, of for about cases. a unclear, in a gene, the The which expressed in adrenal harbors of gland. is encodes channel hyperaldosteronism that although pathogenesis line the KCNJ5 idiopathic potassium mutations is germ protein subset

or, rarely, an aldosterone-producing adrenocortical most adenoma cause) Adrenocortical either (the common neoplasm, an carcinoma. cases, condition as is In referred primary caused of aldosterone-secreting approximately solitary by Conn syndrome. a hyperaldosteronism a 35% adenoma, to also in of earlier) present a mutations are Somatic of subset KCNJ5 adenomas. aldosteronesecreting (see

aldosterone Rarely, leads synthase of hyperaldosteronism to overactivity CYP11B2. result familial the from defect may a gene, that genetic

back from reabsorbed into bloodstream is tubular urine Na

is K and from moves excreted bloodstream into tubule

Fig.20.39Themajorcausesofprimaryhyperaldosteronismanditsprincipaleffectsonthekidney.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

response aldosterone to secondary In of release activation hyperaldosteronism, occurs the renin-angiotensin in system. This association levels increased encountered of and following: plasma is condition by renin is characterized with in the

nephrosclerosis, Decreased perfusion (arteriolar renal renal stenosis) artery

syndrome) (congestive and nephrotic edema heart hypovolemia failure, cirrhosis, Arterial

MORPHOLOGYAldosterone-producingadenomasarealmostalwayssolitary,small(<2cmindiameter),well-circumscribedlesions.Theyarebrightyellowoncutsectionand,surprisingly,arecomposedoflipid-ladencorticalcellsmorecloselyresemblingfasciculatacellsthanglomerulosacells(thenormalsourceofaldosterone).Ingeneral,thecellstendtobeuniforminsizeandshape;occasionallythereissomenuclearandcellularpleomorphism.Acharacteristicfeatureofaldosterone-producingadenomasisthepresenceofeosinophilic,laminatedcytoplasmicinclusions,knownasspironolactone bodies. Thesetypicallyarefoundaftertreatmentwiththeanti-hypertensiveagentspironolactone,whichisthedrugofchoiceinprimaryhyperaldosteronism.IncontrastwithcorticaladenomasassociatedwithCushingsyndrome,thoseassociatedwithhyperaldosteronismdonotusuallysuppressACTHsecretion.Therefore,theadjacentadrenalcortexandthatofthecontralateralglandarenotatrophic.Bilateralidiopathichyperplasiaismarkedbydiffuseorfocalhyperplasiaofcellsresemblingthoseofthenormalzonaglomerulosa.

clinical important of consequence hypertension. The hyperaldosteronism most is of hypertensive identifiable may With among prevalence cause of hyperaldosteronism an to be unselected to hypertension (i.e., rate patients, hypertension primary most the 10% common cause). secondary estimated secondary an 5% volumes) increase myocardial diastolic stroke of and hyperaldosteronism-induced hypertension such events left (e.g., and infarction. in and The the cardiovascular reduced ventricular an hypertrophy adverse are compromise effects of prevalence as long-term visual frank wasting of including from disturbances, Hypokalemia when a cause variety neuromuscular tetany. present, paresthesias, renal potassium can results manifestations, weakness, and occasionally and, a largely detection. to feature of considered Hypokalemia patients hyperaldosteronism, mandatory due of early normokalemic was almost now are diagnosed primary but being 50%

cause. according In varies the to therapy primary hyperaldosteronism, amenable surgical to are Adenomas excision. young not very is due contrast, primary children in beneficial with bilateral intervention surgical in which often and occurs adults. to patients hyperplasia, By hyperaldosteronism antagonist medically managed patients spironolactone. with an such These are best aldosterone as secondary cause on the treatment underlying of hyperaldosteronism The correcting rests hyperstimulation. of renin-angiotensin the system

syndromes disorders of number refer from and Adrenogenital etiologies, disorders excess, a a disorders. group to androgen primary by which may adrenal primary stem of gonadal including caused several in conversion secretes require cortex testosterone and The two peripheral adrenal their effects. androgenic androstenedione—which compounds—dehydroepiandrosterone to for tissues androgens, gonadal Cushing an androgen Unlike as adrenal of formation disease. features excessive or secretion in syndrome ACTH; regulated thus, can isolated with by combination is present designated excess of group adrenal of (CAH). hyperplasia include The disorders an androgen adrenocortical and uncommon congenital causes adrenal neoplasms collectively excess adenomas. are (virilization) to with carcinomas symptoms androgen of associated be Adrenocortical more neoplasms than likely other nonfunctional cortical neoplasms. or to are identical morphologically They functional

adrenal hereditary represents a CAH a defect particularly autosomal involved each characterized enzyme in group biosynthesis, by in cortisol. an steroid of disorders, recessive absence to In ACTH in a results conditions, increase of decreased these compensatory secretion cortisol inhibition. production feedback in due cortisol production activity. synthesis into are resultant The precursor adrenal then which increased steroids, with causes of of androgens hyperplasia channeled virilizing may enzyme salt aldosterone impair defects syndrome. also the adding loss to secretion, virilizing Certain The CAH enzymatic cases. more in most is accounts 90% for common defect of than 21-hydroxylase which deficiency, the in deficiency loss, from on mild to lack mutation. may the nature a of underlying a degree range 21-hydroxylase depending total adrenal aldosterone synthesized intermediates. and various cortisol, from the In are sex glands steroids through cholesterol sex steroids. of cortisol required for and aldosterone is synthesis but 21-hydroxylase not the common and the of reduces aldosterone sex Thus, this cortisol pathway. precursors synthesis deficiency and into shunts enzyme steroid a

MORPHOLOGYInallcasesofCAH,theadrenalsarehyperplasticbilaterally,sometimesexpandingto10to15timestheirnormalweights.Theadrenalcortexisthickenedandnodular,andoncutsection,thewidenedcortexappearsbrownasaresultofdepletionoflipid.Theproliferatingcellsmostlyarecompact,eosinophiliccellsintermixedwithlipid-ladenclearcells.Hyperplasiaofcorticotroph(ACTH-producing)cellsispresentintheanteriorpituitaryinmostpatients.

manifestations The aldosterone of specific CAH glucocorticoid deficiency. abnormalities include related by without enzyme androgen deficiency clinical determined excess, or and are and to the with clinical the symptoms perinatal the later in (less childhood, enzymatic nature defect, commonly) period, and on the of Depending may occur severity adulthood. the of or onset

http://ebooksmedicine.net

of in excessive and infants to deficiency, girls. hirsutism, acne oligomenorrhea, 21-hydroxylase from females, in activity pseudohermaphroditism androgenic signs and ranging causes in hypertrophy clitoral masculinization postpubertal In males, patients. and genitalia In is androgen in with associated puberty of excess of other enlargement external evidence precocious young the fertile men development CAH of some Leydig oligospermia. but with have Most cell failure are and wasting. deficiency, is 21-hydroxylase individuals enzymatic with severe approximately the with (sodium) In defect produce one-third salt enough aldosterone to resultant deficiency, of places deficiency insufficiency later). Concomitant cortisol with acute (discussed for CAH individuals risk at adrenal

be in genitalia. neonate any suspected should ambiguous CAH with can life-threatening in with be enzyme Severe a dehydration, and wasting. vomiting, salt deficiency infancy condition, hirsutism. menarche, present milder variants, or In women with may oligomenorrhea, the delayed androgen-producing ovarian be all excluded. In an must cases, neoplasm adequate for with of abnormalities. of steroid the of the also levels, synthesis the clinical many CAH ACTH decreasing excessive responsible levels of Treatment is thereby providing to exogenous addition glucocorticoids, suppress in glucocorticoids, hormones which, supplementation in CAH. the salt-wasting required is Mineralocorticoid variants of

carcinomas)orcongenitaladrenalhyperplasia(CAH). Theadrenalcortexcansecreteexcessandrogensineitheroftwosettings:adrenocorticalneoplasms(usuallyvirilizing

CAHconsistsofagroupofautosomalrecessivedisorderscharacterizedbydefectsinsteroidbiosynthesis,usuallycortisol;themostcommonsubtypeiscausedbydeficiencyoftheenzyme21-hydroxylase.

ReductionincortisolproductioncausesacompensatoryincreaseinACTHsecretion,whichinturnstimulatesandrogenproduction.Androgenshavevirilizingeffects,includingmasculinizationinfemales(ambiguousgenitalia,oligomenorrhea,hirsutism),precociouspubertyinmales,and,insomeinstances,salt(sodium)wastingandhypotension.

Bilateralhyperplasiaoftheadrenalcortexischaracteristic.

hypoadrenalism) hypoadrenalism). deficiency either disease may hypofunction, of from caused resulting by be primary the decreased (primary ACTH (secondary Adrenocortical or adrenals adrenal stimulation or insufficiency, or (Addison crisis), Primary disease). (called be acute chronic insufficiency may adrenocortical adrenal

Table20.7CausesofAdrenalInsufficiency

APS2, Autoimmunepolyendocrinesyndrometypes1and2;AIRE, APS1, autoimmuneregulatorgene.

clinical Acute in the most adrenocortical listed settings insufficiency occurs in commonly

. 20.7 Table acute crisis may after any develop reserves. with taxes their insufficiency an chronic that physiologic limited stress adrenocortical Individuals a hormones. similar or patients of the exogenous failure to corticosteroids, In glucocorticoid withdrawal adrenals may steroid acute on increase of because crisis, to atrophic inability rapid in the of response stress produce an doses to maintained steroids adrenal precipitate acute the to may insufficiency. adrenal hemorrhage Massive adrenocortical of destroy cortex enough adrenal cause This setting, the postoperative suffering in during who patients Waterhouse-Friderichsen as sepsis; therapy, maintained from on develop in overwhelming intravascular anti-coagulant disseminated ( syndrome in it occur known patients is in the latter patients condition coagulation, and pregnancy, may

Fig. ). 20.40 can This syndrome by is classically other with associated catastrophic also Neisseria caused organisms. septicemia but be meningitidis at can children. in more syndrome somewhat occur Waterhouse-Friderichsen any but is common age hypersensitivity hemorrhage 4), small in seeding intravascular (Chapter endotoxin-induced is of to direct vasculitis. the The some coagulation be disseminated development of the may form for basis or the uncertain adrenal attributable but vasculitis, adrenal, of bacterial vessels

ChronicAdrenocorticalInsufficiency:AddisonDisease

destruction progressive adrenocortical insufficiency, or of an cortex. the from Addison adrenal uncommon disease, disorder is resulting chronic attributable immune tuberculosis, adrenalitis, one acquired (see deficiency metastatic autoimmune the 90% (AIDS), syndrome of or than are all four cases More cancer disorders: of to

cause cases infectious far is countries accounts uncommon. primary and to insufficiency for are • causes Table the adrenal in Autoimmune of most 70% of common 60% where 20.7 by adrenalitis autoimmune patients. key autoantibodies of have the is name implies, in detected enzymes destruction several to been As steroidogenic affected cells, there and steroid-producing (APS). Autoimmune several distinct association autoimmune in adrenalitis with syndromes occur polyendocrine may The mutations APS1, caused which gene by http://ebooksmedicine.net autoimmune the regulator in these (AIRE) characterized chromosome best is is on of

Fig.20.40Waterhouse-Friderichsensyndrome.Bilateraladrenalhemor-rhageinaninfantwithoverwhelmingsepsis,resultinginacuteadrenalinsuf-ficiency.Atautopsy,theadrenalglandsweregrosslyhemorrhagicandshrunken;inthisphotomicrograph,littleresidualcorticalarchitectureisdiscernible.

21. dystrophy) organs. is enamel, organ-specific mucocutaneous association by result candidiasis with nails destruction a disorders It and in of occurring and skin, that target abnormalities (ectodermal combination of characterized in autoimmune of dental in expression 5). is and for elimination of thymus T specific these The antigens AIRE the tissue in of protein the cells involved antigens (Chapter the IL-22, APS1 effector 5). develop against TH17 IL-17 with (Chapter the which cells and T secreted by cytokines principal are Individuals autoantibodies develop candidiasis. fungal these TH17-derived affected patients for infections, against crucial two mucocutaneous chronic are cytokines Because defense

tuberculosis cause chronic may fungi, primary adrenocortical also insufficiency. particularly produced Infections, • those and by therapy. cases which anti-tuberculosis 90% once common has of become as accounted improved as Tuberculous less adrenalitis, of many for Addison with disease, the must HIV because tuberculosis adrenal deficiency of infection mainly of this of in and be borne cause With immunodeficiency, resurgence mind. in sites, present, genitourinary When other adrenalitis tuberculous infection lungs and is usually the associated particularly active tract. with Histoplasma chronic in also Among and may result Coccidioides disseminated infections by caused fungi, immitis capsulatum adrenocortical insufficiency. Patients noninfectious AIDS disease. from the development avium-intracellulare) with their and (Kaposi at adrenal risk insufficiency complications are (cytomegalovirus, for of sarcoma) other of Mycobacterium infectious several

Metastatic are adrenal adrenals • insufficiency. the involving potential another neoplasms cause of common sufficient destroy insufficiency. to metastases a adrenals The cortex site disseminated for carcinomas, adrenal degree fairly are which patients with in adrenal a sometimes of produce a of and adrenals. majority source the metastases are in Carcinomas of the of lung breast the

of disorder the similarities of the infarction, leads reduces pituitary having hypoadrenalism output disease. cancer, metastatic Any irradiation, of syndrome that and hypothalamus ACTH, Addison a infection, such or as many to to ACTH instances, alone, but it part is pituitary with hormone one associated panhypopituitarism, in only of occur deficiency deficiencies. multiple some may the adrenal of form in destruction the to disease, exogenously In response prevents ACTH levels increased with of cortex patients primary the plasma cortisol. of a administered insufficiency rise characterized adrenocortical cortisol plasma to By administration. secondary low ACTH in prompt in is a contrast, by and response ACTH serum levels

MORPHOLOGYTheappearanceoftheadrenalglandsvarieswiththecauseoftheadrenocorticalinsufficiency.Insecondaryhypoadrenalism,theadrenalsarereducedtosmall,flattenedstructuresthatusuallyretaintheiryellowcolorbecauseofasmallamountofresiduallipid.Auniform,thinrimofatrophicyellowcortexsurroundsacentral,intactmedulla.Histologicevaluationrevealsatrophyofcorticalcellswithlossofcytoplasmiclipid,particularlyinthezonafasciculataandzonareticularis.Primaryautoimmuneadrenalitisischaracterizedbyirregularlyshrunkenglands,whichmaybeexceedinglydifficulttoidentifywithinthesuprarenaladiposetissue.Onhistologicexamination,thecortexcontainsonlyscatteredresidualcorticalcellsinacollapsednetworkofconnectivetissue.Avariablelymphoidinfiltrateispresentinthecortexandmayextendintothesubjacentmedulla(

Fig.20.41 ).Themedullaisotherwisepreserved.Intuberculosisorfungaldiseases,theadrenalarchitecturemaybeeffacedbyagranulomatousinflammatoryreactionidenticaltothatencounteredinothersitesofinfection.Whenhypoadrenalismiscausedbymetastaticcarcinoma,theadrenalsareenlarged,andtheirnormalarchitectureisobscuredbytheinfiltratingneoplasm.

insufficiency appear not of has compromised. been the do adrenal In least 90% clinical manifestations at cortex until adrenocortical general, of as which weakness initial The complaints. dismissed easy often progressive nonspecific be manifestations may include and fatigability, loss, include are common and disturbances weight anorexia, Gastrointestinal vomiting, nausea, and diarrhea. stimulate hormone mucosal melanocytes, with with disease, patients increased levels precursor the primary of hyperpigmentation resultant In ACTH skin and adrenal of surfaces. and sites perineum areolae, of common The axillae, nipples, hyperpigmentation. face, particularly are seen are because in insufficiency is increased. By hormone not with contrast, melanotropic hyperpigmentation secondary not patients adrenocortical levels and in near-normal sodium patients and in insufficiency with or synthesis. and by potassium is volume activity primary hypoadrenalism secondary results (aldosterone) Decreased but aldosterone adrenal whereas cortisol androgen normal depletion, deficient loss, characterized hypotension, with hyperkalemia, retention hyponatremia, output consequent mineralocorticoid may as occur occasionally gluconeogenesis. a deficiency of result and impaired glucocorticoid Hypoglycemia adults. infants in is than more and children It common procedures in crisis, vascular hypotension, an abdominal or Stresses pain, may affected and surgical by intractable coma, precipitate infections, manifested collapse. as acute such trauma, adrenal vomiting, patients replaced follows rapidly are immediately. unless Death corticosteroids

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.41Autoimmuneadrenalitis.Inadditiontolossofallbutasubcapsularrimofcorticalcells,thereisanextensivemononuclearcellinfiltrate.

Primaryadrenocorticalinsufficiencycanbeacute(Waterhouse-Friderichsensyndrome)orchronic(Addisondisease).

ChronicadrenalinsufficiencyintheWesternworldmostoftenissecondarytoautoimmuneadrenalitis,whichoccursinthecontextofautoimmunepolyendocrinesyndromes.

Tuberculosisandinfectionsduetoopportunisticpathogensassociatedwiththehumanimmunodeficiencyvirusandtumorsmetastatictotheadrenalsaretheotherimportantcausesofchronichypoadrenalism.

Patientstypicallypresentwithfatigue,weakness,andgastrointestinaldisturbances.PrimaryadrenocorticalinsufficiencyalsoischaracterizedbyhighACTHlevelswithassociatedskinpigmentation.

discussion the be should evident functional various hyperfunction of that It for any be neoplasms adrenal adrenocortical hyperadrenalism. responsible may the of of forms from commonly syndrome, adenomas to a functional virilizing be a are with associated is likely carcinoma. more with Cushing While and most neoplasm hyperaldosteronism hormones. steroid however, elaborate all neoplasms, Not adrenocortical functional is its or cortical neoplasm Determination clinical laboratory. the not based in whether of of metabolites the measurement is or and a evaluation hormone on

MORPHOLOGYAdrenocorticaladenomasweredescribedearlierinthediscussionsofCushingsyndromeandhyperaldosteronism.Mostcorticaladenomasdonotcausehyperfunctionandusuallyareencounteredasincidentalfindingsatthetimeofautopsyorduringabdominalimagingforanunrelatedcause.Infact,thehalf-facetiousappellationof“adrenalincidentaloma”hascreptintothemedicallexicontodescribetheseincidentallydiscoveredtumors.Oncutsurface,adenomasusuallyareyellowtoyellow-brown,owingtothepresenceoflipidwithintheneoplasticcells(see

).Asageneralruletheyaresmall,averaging1to2cmindiameter.Onmicroscopicexamination,adenomasarecomposedofcellssimilartothosepopulatingthenormaladrenalcortex.Aswithotherendocrinetumors,pleomorphismmaybeencounteredinbenigntumorsandisnotareliablemarkerofmalignancy. Fig.20.37

necrosis,hemorrhage,andcysticchange(Fig. Adrenocorticalcarcinomasarerareneoplasmsthatmayoccuratanyage,includinginchildhood.TworareinheritedcausesofadrenalcorticalcarcinomasareLi-Fraumenisyndrome(Chapter6)andBeckwith-Wiedemannsyndrome(Chapter7).Inmostcases,adrenocorticalcarcinomasarelarge,invasivelesionsthateffacethenativeadrenalgland.Oncutsurface,adrenocorticalcarcinomastypicallyarevariegated,poorlydemarcatedlesionscontainingareasof

).Microscopicexaminationtypicallyshowsthesetumorstobecomposedofwell-differentiatedcellsresemblingthoseseenincorticaladenomasorbizarre,pleomorphiccells,whichmaybedifficulttodistinguishfromthoseofanundifferentiatedcarcinomametastatictotheadrenalgland( 20.42

).Adrenalcancershaveastrongtendencytoinvadetheadrenalvein,venacava,andlymphatics.Metastasestoregionalandperiaorticnodesarecommon,asisdistanthematogenousspreadtothelungsandotherviscera.Bonemetastasesareunusual.Themedianpatientsurvivalisabout2years.Ofnote,carcinomasmetastatictotheadrenalcortexaresignificantlymorefrequentthanaprimaryadrenocorticalcarcinoma. Fig.20.43

Fig.20.42Adrenalcarcinoma.Thetumordwarfsthekidneyandcom-pressestheupperpole.Itislargelyhemorrhagicandnecrotic.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

functionally, and cortex. adrenal from is the structurally medulla adrenal embryologically, The distinct by cells cells) (sustentacular) crest is their the from (chromaffin It and derived neural cells. populated supporting their brown-black The after are exposure cells because dichromate. named potassium chromaffin of so to color response preganglionic from synthesize and They in nervous the to signals catecholamines system. sympathetic fibers in secrete nerve extraadrenal the cells collections are distributed body throughout in Similar paraganglion of system. the the neuronal include tumors) cell important adrenal both and (including of of cells medulla neoplasms and chromaffin (pheochromocytomas). neoplasms more which neuroblastomas are mature most ganglion The neoplasms, composed diseases

cells, release composed like cases, synthesize of are in nonneoplastic peptide and their catecholamines counterparts, and, chromaffin Pheochromocytomas which, neoplasms some hormones. other give aldosterone-secreting form although importance special rise correctable a of uncommon, hypertension. These because, are to surgically adenomas) (like they of tumors

as in rather are such pheochromocytomas. where and than of the of subscribe sites the organ they usually extraadrenal, body, to convenient Pheochromocytomas called Zuckerkandl paragangliomas, carotid are “rule 10% of a pheochromocytomas occurring usually 10s”:

of are rise 10% syndromes. proportion familial 50% in that bilateral; adrenal are to cases pheochromocytomas this may with associated

serious complication even hypertension potentially associated of the represents of adrenal a although benign malignant, and pheochromocytomas are 10% lethal tumors.

Fig.20.43Adrenalcarcinomawithmarkedanaplasia.

sites. arising common in more somewhat malignancy is extraadrenal Frank tumors in

are of adrenal hypertension. pheochromocytomas not 10% with • associated blood pressure that two-thirds and be present 90% episodes can, approximately with Of have on associated hypertension, occasion, “paroxysmal” which with rise fatal. in the palpitations, sudden

“traditional” familial that since 10% modified been cases. has to pertains One rule is succinate sensing. now in known the 14 that as subunits oxygen and genes MEN genes, mutation individuals with causes transport encoding SDHC, (SDHB, involved complex later); three in 22); 25% causes is (Chapter SDHD), which line VHL, dehydrogenase NF1, least including and neurofibromatosis which causes within 23); type and of and It RET, at disease and 1 (Chapters (described 2 a mitochondrial one as which six syndromes recognized Hippel-Lindau pheochromocytomas type von electron harbor many which paragangliomas germ of subunits 1α factor to stabilization of (HIF-1α), It in leads of hypoxia-inducible one tumorigenesis. postulated of the loss these that more promoting is factor function or transcription

MORPHOLOGYPheochromocytomasrangeinsizefromsmall,circumscribedlesionsconfinedtotheadrenaltolarge,hemorrhagicmassesweighingseveralkilograms.Oncutsurface,smallerpheochromocytomasareyellow-tan,well-definedlesionsthatcompress ).Largerlesionstendtobehemorrhagic,necrotic,andcysticandtypicallyeffacetheadrenalgland.Incubationofthefreshtissuewithpotassiumdichromatesolutionsturnsthetumordarkbrown,asnotedearlier. theadjacentadrenalgland(Fig.20.44

Onmicroscopicexamination,pheochromocytomasarecomposedofpolygonaltospindle-shapedchromaffincellsandtheirsupportingcells,compartmentalizedintosmallnests,byarichvascularnetwork(

).Thecytoplasmoftheneoplasticcellsoftenhasafinelygranularappearance,highlightedbyavarietyofsilverstains,becauseofthepresenceofgranulescontainingcatecholamines.Electronmicroscopyrevealsvariablenumbersofmembrane-bound,electron-densegranules,representingcatecholaminesandsometimesotherpeptides.Thenucleioftheneoplasticcellsareoftenquitepleomorphic.Bothcapsularandvascularinvasion,aswellascellularpleomorphism,maybeencounteredinsomebenignlesions.Therefore,thedefinitivediagnosisofmalignancyinpheochromocytomasisbasedonthepresenceofmetastases.Thesemayinvolveregionallymphnodesaswellasmoredistantsites,includingliver,lung,andbone. Fig.20.45

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.20.44Pheochromocytoma.Thetumorisenclosedwithinanattenuatedcortexanddemonstratesareasofhemorrhage.Thecomma-shapedresidualadrenalglandisseen(lower portion).

observed dominant of in of hypertension, 90% is pheochromocytoma manifestation patients. clinical The hypertension as elevation associated tachycardia, sense with episodes, blood with patients and two-thirds which Approximately tremor, abrupt, of an headache, of palpitations, precipitous a paroxysmal are pressure, described demonstrate in sweating, apprehension. may in associated or abdomen and chest, These the nausea, with pain episodes also vomiting. be aforementioned elevation paroxysmal the patients more by chronic, blood pressure fewer paroxysms. occur demonstrate hypertension of in episodes of half a Isolated than commonly, patients; punctuated in sustained are induced of by congestive may blood ventricular elevations of edema, release the catecholamines infarction, heart failure, fibrillation, myocardial that acutely and pressure accidents. cerebrovascular sudden precipitate pulmonary The ventricular cardiomyopathy, The complications cardiac attributed catecholamine myocardial have to called catecholamine-induced been been and what has or instability arrhythmias. somatostatin clinical secrete be and associated pheochromocytomas In peptide these with may other some cases, ACTH therefore other hormones. to the and as features and effects hormones of such related metanephrines. excretion free their increased diagnosis and based urinary vanillylmandelic such as of The laboratory of catecholamines on demonstration is metabolites, and acid with pheochromocytomas treated surgical are excision. benign Isolated multifocal may required. medical With long-term be for hypertension treatment lesions,

of solid most the childhood. extracranial tumor is Neuroblastoma common occur neoplasms most infancy. commonly years first during life may 5 the during and arise These of and system common tumors they retroperitoneal the a the medulla these sympathetic either the within sympathetic majority the are anywhere adrenal Neuroblastomas the brain, may in abdomen; occur nervous in but occasionally ganglia. in arise most or of Most are familial have cases although described. neuroblastomas also been sporadic, are along 7, with Chapter These pediatric tumors discussed in other neoplasms.

Fig.20.45Photomicrographofpheochromocytoma,demonstratingcharac-teristicnestsofcellswithabundantcytoplasm.Granulescontainingcate-cholaminearenotvisibleinthispreparation.Itisnotuncommontofindbizarrecells(suchastheoneinthecenterofthisimage),eveninpheochro-mocytomasthatarebenign.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

adenomas, proliferative by carcinomas) lesions syndromes (hyperplasias, The inherited multiple MEN diseases are and a endocrine group organs. caused of of of Like certain arising with 6), distinctive inherited cancer other tumors disorders shared that have not endocrine their counterparts: MEN context (Chapter are syndromes sporadic the features in

occur a younger cancers. typical These sporadic age that for at tumors than

metachronously or multiple same in They (at organs, (at time) different either synchronously times). the endocrine arise

are one Even often the in tumors multifocal. organ,

patients demonstrate to usually by almost an C origin asymptomatic of preceded MEN-2 The tumor thyroid carcinomas). are with stage endocrine in the involving hyperplasia of the parenchyma cell hyperplasia adjacent cell thyroid medullary the tumors universally of (e.g.,

tumors These a than sporadically. proportion are higher of that cases occur and recur similar in tumors more aggressive endocrine usually

Menin. mutations MEN-1 the in tumor is a which germ by encodes caused line suppressor syndrome gene, called MEN1 protein function is promoting component Menin binding and of to transcription endocrine of leads loss different several factor partners, the a of complexes, corresponding Menin deregulation neoplasia. the parathyroid, the and Organs most are pituitary—the “3 the involved pancreas, commonly Ps.”

Parathyroid. initial the by Primary the manifestation years manifestation is most to appearing 50 the of in of of disorder almost all (80%–95% in 40 of and most is common MEN-1 age. patients) hyperparathyroidism patients, abnormalities adenomas. Parathyroid include and hyperplasia

Pancreas. MEN-1. are tumors in leading cause Endocrine of death the the of pancreas These with disease. present are aggressive metastatic and tumors usually tumors (i.e., endocrine functional often Pancreatic hormones). are secrete and are endocrine gastrinomas, syndrome, with associated associated manifestations. with hypoglycemia, common insulinomas, Zollinger-Ellison

Pituitary. prolactin-secreting syndrome tumor MEN-1 in with is frequent most patients macroadenoma. The a pituitary In somatotropin-secreting develops with association cases, acromegaly some tumors. in

of MEN-2 two comprises of the distinct syndrome that RET locus gain-of-function) proto-oncogene actually the of (i.e., mutations are unified activating chromosomal by disorders groups occurrence 10q11.2. at genotype-phenotype MEN-2 in correlation the has A strong mutation for account features been recognized two for the subtypes. patterns and differences variable in syndromes, the in inherited autosomal dominant an is pattern. MEN-2

include Organs following: in the commonly involved MEN-2A

untreated Thyroid: the in of thyroid Medullary virtually the carcinoma develops first all in occur decades life. tumors usually the and cases, of 2 adjacent are cell of the commonly can foci hyperplasia in found multifocal, tumors be and C The thyroid. seen Familial characteristic listed without medullary here. MEN-2A, cancer is variant other manifestations the thyroid in of a comparison occurs In typically MEN-2, and indolent with more course. at medullary age a an follows older carcinoma familial

Adrenal medulla: develop more in of 50% pheochromocytomas the these malignant. fortunately, tumors of 10% patients; than Adrenal no are

10% of patients Parathyroid: hyperplasia with Approximately manifestations of develop primary 20% to gland hyperparathyroidism. parathyroid

in MEN-2A, seen single be of from all mutations MEN-2B. A the to for distinct virtually in that cases responsible seems are amino change RET, acid multifocal carcinomas, aggressive develop and pheochromocytomas. and medullary in than are MEN-2A, usually which thyroid Patients more MEN-2B features: distinctive the following has

patients hyperparathyroidism MEN-2B. Primary not develop does in with

are patients MEN-2B. Extraendocrine with in manifestations characteristic habitus, of of the tongue) appearance axial long lips, tract, an sites Marfan syndrome These marfanoid overly which resembling include mucosal ganglioneuromas in (Chapter (gastrointestinal 7). skeleton bones that in give and a

often syndrome tests, the were with Before screened which of MEN-2 relatives genetic with advent patients sensitivity. annual lacked the biochemical testing, of genetic kindreds. Now, earlier more testing and routine RET MEN-2 mutation identifies in reliably carriers individuals prophylactic development to medullary the prevent of inevitable mutations carrying advised thyroidectomy have are carcinomas. RET germ to line All

A, a Duell Pancreas Andersen al: et summary Andren-Sandberg of EJ, workshop, DK, cancer: 42:1227–1237, NCI-NIDDK 2013. Pancreatitisdiabetes-pancreatic known and the as well [This as pancreatic summary diabetes. discusses as emergence workshop 3c complex http://ebooksmedicine.net cancer, or the pancreatogenic the entity diabetes relationship between recent of type of of 3c One is the causes cancer.] diabetes type pancreatic

problems neoplasia, pituitary Ezzat approaches S: 25:209–213, Genomic 2014. Endocr SL, Asa in Pathol to neoplasia from two on on review [A recognized of authorities best genomics of tumors.] the pituitary these

I, S, Bancos and insufficiency, adrenal Diagnosis et Hahner Tomlinson of Lancet management 3:216–226, al: Endocrinol J, 2015. Diabetes of and oriented etiology review the clinically insufficiency.] adrenal [A acute on chronic

Bilezikian Primary NE, 2016. 2:16033, hyperparathyroidism, Khan al: AA, Rev Dis et Nat JP, Cusano Primers and summary heavy journal figures format is written other in [This this that overviews reviews review for on a audience. follows of broad the encouraged browse other the to diseases.] periodically for of The pertinent discussions journal is reader

L: KD, practice. Burman Clinical Wartofsky N J Med Thyroid nodules, Engl 2015. 373:2347–2356, management nodules. etiology on thyroid authoritative and review [An of to supplement chapter discussion.] the Useful

1:15019, 2015. Ferrannini E, mellitus, diabetes Rev et Nat Groop L, DeFronzo Dis RA, Primers 2 Type al: overview figures diabetes, again 2 excellent pathophysiology on complications. [An with and type of overview of The beyond can scope of discussion chapter, so level supplement use their the the is knowledge.] to this review readers

918, S, Hyperthyroidism, Braverman LE: Lancet 388:906– SY, Lee Leo De 2016. uncommon clinically excellent causes.] on oriented and recent hyperthyroidism, review and of [An common etiology including

et A, Rev 1:15077, thyroid Primers cell-derived J, cancer, Dralle Dis H, Basa 2015. Follicular al: Machens Nat including thyroid papillary cancers, neoplasms. follicular timely and of [A review useful diagnosis, the genetics, reader.] and spans for journal, text very the As reviews management can to curious in symptoms, text with and supplement this be the a

of Faillot the adrenocortical Eur tumors, 174:R249–R265, Endocrinol S, genomics G: Endocrine J 2016. tumors: Assie also including this cancers, focused hyperplasia.] genetics and on encompasses primary review other adenomas of adrenocortical adrenal the to [In pathologies, TCGA contrast is below paper that

Higham Johannsson Lancet 2016. 388:2403–2415, G, Shalet SM: CE, Hypopituitarism, etiology current and management.] review on [A including hypopituitarism

CA, Lancet et syndrome, Stratakis al: RA, Feelders 386:913–927, A, 2015. Lacroix Cushing’s on including review management. and [A genetics, laboratory Cushing symptoms, syndrome, definitive pathophysiology, diagnosis, text.] be exhaustive and is can The for the by discerning the supplementing used text

encapsulated revision Oncol papillary Nomenclature follicular JAMA Tallini of al: 2016. Seethala for tumors, Nikiforov overtreatment et 2:1023–1029, YE, to RR, G, shift thyroid variant of paradigm reduce carcinoma: a indolent carcinoma. defining encapsulated variant nomenclature thyroid the [The led of for as follicular to entity papillary changing known erstwhile the paper that also which concept imaging important becoming is paper the due of to understand to factor a of increasing use This “overdiagnosis,” modalities is increasingly patients.] in

2016. 387:2331–2339, type Lancet Lernmark Genetic A: factors risk 1 F, for diabetes, Pociot of complex with and 1 interface [A might the review the genetics recent alleles, HLA especially these diabetes, how on environment.] the type

T, of The disease a Lancet et with Santoro faces many diabetes: 383:1084–1094, N, al: increasing 2014. S, Caprio heterogeneity, Tuomi factors heterogeneity underscoring how of the excellent that of many hyperglycemia.] phenotype the genetic the environmental to diverse we “diabetes”—and and as etiologic [An know review contribute so entity

al: Dewal carcinoma, N, 2016. characterization AD, Zheng Cancer Cherniack 736, S, Cell adrenocortical et of Comprehensive pan-genomic 29:723– The genomics on (TCGA] [The of study from Atlas Genome definitive adrenocortical Cancer cancers.] http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

and Joints, Soft Bones,

of Healing Fractures

of Tumors Unknown Origin

muscles, mineral blood of homeostasis, include generated of cells. protection The of functions by providing a support, the niche viscera, bone for of mechanical production transmission forces and specialized of and include matrix of matrix. The cells maintenance production extracellular the an bone responsible constituents for and

composed matrix component a (65%). known Bone organic as is osteoid an mineral and (35%) of component that bone osteocytes and osteoclasts including bone lay bone that Embedded are variety matrix within down cells bone. the of reabsorb a These types maintain homeostasis. bone cells two other with up I is type smaller of collagen glycosaminoglycans made and of amounts proteins. predominantly Osteoid imparted is hydroxyapatite moiety matrix, feature inorganic the The of its bone unique hardness, (Ca10[PO4]6[OH]2). by in lamellar or woven The bone one synthesized histologic two (Fig. forms, of is matrix ). 21.1 parallel is development produced as rapidly, in slowly collagen produced than orfracturerepair,butthehaphazardarrangementofcollagen Woven such fibers fibers less integrity during lamellar imparts bone structural the bone. fetal always In presence for is bone the is but specific abnormal, woven an it not disease. particular adult, of bone any trabeculae shows medulla of bony a and a of outer bone long cross cortex a A section separated composed by marrow. central typical dense

contains regulate and bone the • types: transport Bone ( and matrix major assemble its the synthesize, three matrix, cell Osteoblasts, located of surface on mineralization

Fig. 21.2A ). cells are additionally medullary stem the in from are in that periosteum derived and later bone the under located They space mesenchymal the life. in developing

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.21.1Wovenbone(A)ismorecellularanddisorganizedthanlamellarbone(B).

Fig.21.2(A)Activeosteoblastssynthesizingbonematrix.Thesurroundingspindlecellsrepresentosteoprogenitorcells. (B)Twoosteoclastsresorbingbone.

are as of cytoplasmic by the processes network interconnected bone, intricate through known tunnels an within Osteocytes, located canaliculi. biologic them called activity—a mechanical detect levels, and into mechanotransduction. phosphate process help calcium translate and Osteocytes to forces, control

monocytes, the which ( from circulating responsible are surface resorption multinucleated bone, bone macrophages, derived for of Osteoclasts, specialized are located on

Fig. 21.2B ). and of surface bone integrins, extracellular By osteoclasts to sealed trench cell (resorption a attach means matrix pit). create and The matrix acid pit, proteases secrete the the (predominantly these into cells metalloproteases resorb and bone. [MMPs]) enzymes neutral

cartilage long of process ossification. develop endochondral During a mold embryogenesis, bones the by from

is cells. mesenchymal precursor synthesized mold A (anlagen) by cartilage is gestation, the the creating medullary weeks’ canal. portion anlagen resorbed, At the 8 approximately of central begin ossification midshaft radially. cortex the periosteum the deposit (diaphysis), primary the at to beneath Simultaneously, producing and osteoblasts the bone center growing of a fashion endochondral proceeds center (secondary of (epiphysis), centrifugal each At ossification longitudinal in ossification). end the Eventually, between entrapped ( centers cartilage or a of expanding the plate physis of growth plate two forming becomes ossification, the

Fig. ). 21.3 sequential The the hypertrophy, undergo growth apoptosis. chondrocytes and proliferation, plate within by osteoblasts, synthesize of capillaries, mineralizes region matrix is providing for which the apoptosis and osteoid. In invaded the the nutrients longitudinal process This produces bone growth.

contrast, bones. is ossification, development responsible for of by the flat Intramembranous formed osteoblasts by example, for http://ebooksmedicine.net Bones the directly cranium, are of

Fig.21.3Activegrowthplatewithongoingendochondralossification.1,Reservezone.2,Zoneofproliferation.3,Zoneofhypertrophy.4,Zoneofmineralization.5,Primaryspongiosa.

layer a tissue, from fibrous without anlagen. cartilage of surface. a The enlargement flat of achieved on is bones of preexisting by deposition bone new

tightly appears but actually regulated constantly over in remodeling. a is turning process known adult as The skeleton static multicellular bone locus basic) and the the surface. of a which at bone unit (BMU), consists as on Remodeling osteoclast (or a activity osteoblast place coupled of microscopic unit known takes

regulated the at are The BMU and interactions ( by cytokines cell–cell events

Fig. ). 21.4 cells; receptor on and which osteoblasts important pathway and (3) involves of is a remodeling osteoclast RANK activator expressed NF-κB transmembrane receptor stromal interaction expressed marrow with is block that osteoblasts three made (RANK), that RANK by (RANKL), secreted precursors; ligand can (2) on controls (OPG), An “decoy” the (1) signaling factors: which RANKL. osteoprotegerin essential generation of for RANK the the osteoclasts. which signaling NF-κB, survival activates and factor transcription is monocyte-colony (M-CSF), pathways Other factor important by stimulating produced include osteoblasts. trigger by bind proteins LRP6 the cells various of receptors production OPG. and to on LRP5 produced the and WNT osteoblasts LRP5 rare RANK, disturbances cause bone germline genes, of of RANKL, metabolism and which importance OPG, severe these proven (described The the informative by in later). is pathways but mutations

by can be favored resorption the or tipping Bone bone RANK-to-OPG formation ratio. inflammatory hormones, growth and (e.g., vitamin factors (e.g., include cytokines factors that Systemic affect balance IL-1), factors). morphogenetic D, bone this and glucocorticoids turnover. and but bone osteoclast mechanisms parathyroid hormone complex, are IL-1, (PTH), differentiation promote The activity contrast, and differentiation expression. testosterone) In BMPs by osteoclast or (estrogen, generally OPG favoring block sex hormones

after skeletal bone cessation is in Peak growth. the early of adulthood mass achieved is by factors, receptors, and nutrition, This many vitamin and D in the LRP5/6 including polymorphisms set physical activity. determined point formation, in Beginning resorption mass. exceeds resulting skeletal in decline decade, the fourth in a

abnormalities first and the Congenital become manifest frequently from of result skeleton mutations inherited

Fig.21.4Paracrinemolecularmechanismsthatregulateosteoclastformationandfunction.Osteoclastsarederivedfromthesamemononuclearcellsthatdifferentiateintomacrophages.Osteoblast/stromalcellmembrane-associatedRANKLbindstoitsreceptorRANKlocatedonthecellsurfaceofosteoclastprecursors.Thisinteractioninthebackgroundofmacrophagecolony-stimulatingfactor(M-CSF)causestheprecursorcellstoproducefunctionalosteoclasts.Stromalcellsalsosecreteosteoprotegerin(OPG),whichactsasa“decoy”receptorforRANKL,preventingitfrombindingtheRANKreceptoronosteoclastprecursors.Consequently,OPGpreventsboneresorptionbyinhibitingosteoclastdifferentiation.

early stages formation. bone during of the http://ebooksmedicine.net is classification The and standardized. spectrum is not of broad, disorders system of the developmental bone diseases to we perceived will Here according their major pathogenesis. the categorize

(dysostosis) in condensation abnormalities and result global anomalies (dysplasia). bone Congenital from the can localized mesenchyme cartilage of and/ of migration disorganization or or result their mesenchymal from the cartilage the condensations into formation differentiation of and defects anlage. Dysostoses in (supernumerary a The digits of craniosynostosis). bone or syndactyly, forms extra fusion complete and digit the (e.g., include or bones digit), of absence most abnormal bones a common (aplasia), genes, common Genetic among are cytokine the and affect alterations receptors that homeobox cytokines, especially dysostoses. from dysplasias in that control the development entire of skeleton. contrast, or In remodeling mutations genes arise than neoplasia premalignant implies abnormal developmental term that, of It other growth dysplasia lesion context for a tissues, as note important to the anomalies is the rather 6). in used in (Chapter as

dysostoses More than most been rare, skeletal 350 of extremely and described. have dysplasias, them diseases defined are below. of Examples abnormalities discussed genetic with diverse in similar in to point genes COL2A1) single can various that mutations rise (e.g., Note LRP5, different give (e.g., mutations in gene whereas phenotypes, phenotypes. clinical result a RANKL) can

disorder cartilage cause autosomal and growth. major resulting dwarfism, dysplasia of Achondroplasia, dominant the from an skeletal most is common retarded a receptor 3 (FGFR3). in gain-of-function by growth factor is mutations fibroblast caused disease The growth. inhibits Normally, endochondral FGF constitutively FGFR3 suppressing in active and growth. thereby mutation results exaggerating this a effect receptor, mutations, of occur allele. new paternal which stem almost from 90% cases the of all Approximately in an depression shortened length, of and root normal relatively have forehead the enlarged with conspicuous Affected trunk bulging a and of of the proximal extremities, individuals nose. head usually associated status. are The skeletal intelligence, not abnormalities or changes longevity, in reproductive with

the zone in of of lethal form proliferation from chondrocytes and Thanatophoric disorganization dysplasia, proliferation. dwarfism, of most results diminished common the cause are caused mutations FGFR3, distinct gain-of-function by albeit those achondroplasia. from that in is ones It that also It 20,000 in live of 1 every about occurs births. bell-shaped frontal a shortening bossing, Affected and macrocephaly, have abdomen. individuals limbs, the of micromelic chest cavity, small relative a birth underdeveloped and or cavity die thereafter. soon these at usually The thoracic individuals to insufficiency, leads respiratory

collagen. (OI), a type common diverse in disorder imperfecta caused the the tissue, I is of inherited phenotypically most disorder synthesis Osteogenesis by of connective deficiencies OI principally eyes, in type and skin, teeth). ears, and other rich (joints, collagen bone I affects tissues the collagen. mutations dominant chains usually α2 autosomal of α1 the I It results in that encode genes from and type interfere function). with the of negative and of the they loss assembly (a collagen These proper dominant cause misfolding defects wild-type chains collagen polypeptides, mutated of

extreme The OI fundamental bone, in fragility. little in abnormality is skeletal too resulting in and include sclerae and collagen partial blue Other sclera deficiency content, in related secondary hearing the and sensorineural blue-yellow loss choroid; (small, visualization by misshapen, imperfections abnormalities making to ear; caused of decreased to underlying dental translucent a the dentin. the deficit the a middle findings impeded due bones of teeth) and to conduction allowing

into widely subtypes severity. vary OI that separated in clinical be multiple can end fatal is of uniformly type the one and or perinatal in variant is 2 spectrum during The period. utero at the childhood. life normal 1 fractures, a form span individuals the type particularly during despite to a contrast, with have susceptibility In

a impaired genetic formation rare as of and osteoclasts. resorption marble also function diseases refers reduced diffuse to that or of by group disease, characterized known sclerosis bone skeletal from symmetric are Osteopetrosis, bone resulting the The term quality osteopetrosis reflects of stonelike the bones. bones abnormally piece a the are brittle and of chalk. easily, However, fracture like clinical on classified findings. inheritance Osteopetrosis and the mode of of into based the severity both is variants

required acidification the of with matrix. of calcium process of osteopetrosis hydroxyapatite within the interfere resorption of Most underlying dissolution which osteoclast the the the mutations is pit, for to of which that the in gene, mutations recessive in vacuolar down include carbonic anhydrase (CA2), ATPase enzyme pH component a maintain which 2 in osteoclasts, These autosomal for mutations helps is bone. encodes acidic the a breaking TCIRG1 or essential osteopetrosis are long medullary ends bulbous Bones deformity) bones misshapen. by lack canal, and flask and of the a involved (Erlenmeyer compress and nerves. small foramina exiting are The neural hematopoietic marrow. medullary growth, during primary the no spongiosa, removed The normally is which and room the cavity, persists fills for leaving

extramedullary Severe is autosomal hepatosplenomegaly. can despite of to often that lead leukopenia, fatal recessive because extensive prominent and hematopoiesis is infantile osteopetrosis repeated may be discovered is autosomal on dominant fractures. form radiographic for or adolescence mild The adulthood, when detected it not studies until and have anemia. deficits cranial also individuals nerve mild may These

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Abnormalitiesinasingleboneoralocalizedgroupofbonesarecalleddysostosesandarisefromdefectsinthemigrationandcondensationofmesenchyme.Theymanifestasabsent,supernumerary,orabnormallyfusedbones.Globaldisorganizationsofboneand/orcartilagearecalleddysplasias.Developmentalabnormalitiescanbecategorizedbytheassociatedgeneticdefect.

FGFR3mutationsareresponsibleforachondroplasiaandthanatophoricdysplasia,bothofwhichmanifestasdwarfism.

MutationsinthegenesfortypeIcollagenunderliemosttypesofosteogenesisimperfecta(brittlebonedisease),characterizedbydefectiveboneformationandskeletalfragility.

MutationsinCA2 andTCIRG1 resultinosteopetrosis(inwhichbonesarehardbutbrittle)andrenaltubularacidosis.

the as significantly decreased of osteopenia while risk The is enough mass, is bone to that to severe fracture. defined term increase osteopenia osteoporosis refers standard peak bone osteopenia 2.5 mean. to is Radiographically, 2.5 mass, at standard considered 1 deviations deviations bone the below least mean mass whereas is below osteoporosis skeleton). localized (involving The be may generalized entire disorder or the is most Although secondary (e.g., or corticosteroids), disorders (e.g., (e.g., malnutrition), can primary. to osteoporosis gastrointestinal disorders endocrine hyperthyroidism), osteoporosis be drugs

types. most senile of common The forms are the and osteoporosis postmenopausal largely of these The osteoporosis. following relates to discussion forms

young mass during is adulthood. Peak bone achieved magnitude bone influence later). hereditary that (discussed the genes is by Its factors, especially influenced in polymorphisms metabolism strength, hormonal also state diet, muscle Physical make important contributions. activity, and per mass attained, loss of 0.7% in bone deficit year. maximal in net is formation with continues mass turnover a skeletal of After resulting an bone average bone pathogenesis osteoporosis much into resorption of insights molecular and discoveries have in ( provided the new remains Although formation of biology bone unknown, the

Fig. changes. 21.5 Age-related • individuals response from and factors compared proliferative individuals. osteoblasts Osteoblasts to older have younger and potential in biosynthetic growth reduced to reduced is net The make diminished capacity a result bone. to osteoporosis, senile This known as as form osteoporosis, categorized osteoporosis. of is a low-turnover

TNF Increased levels IL-1, IL-6, •

factors BONE osteoprogenitor Decreased • activity RANK, Increased replicative activity osteoclast matrix-bound RANKL activity of synthetic expression PEAK Decreased • physical Reduced osteoblasts of • Increased Decreased activity activity • MASS cells biologic of • of growth

Fig.21.5Pathophysiologyofpostmenopausalandsenileosteoporosis(seetext).

Reduced activity. physical aging that The physical osteoporosis. activity contributes normal is associated with decreased senile to in stimulate remodeling paralyzed forces normal an by Mechanical loss or as evidenced bone immobilized extremity. bone load bone influences cycles. load magnitude than the type exercise The as density of of more is important, number more than effective for training bone as repetitive endurance weight mass resistance activities bicycling. stimuli such Thus, as increasing are exercises such

Genetic factors. (e.g., only gene Single a fraction account small LRP5 cases. of for mutations) osteoporosis defects signaling genome-wide particular in linked have other genes by Wnt in the been osteoporosis in to genes Polymorphisms pathway. studies, association

state. Calcium nutritional intake, that tend peak girls) factor (particularly have mass. low a calcium to bone dietary restricts Adolescents deficiency, development osteoporosis. play senile the reduced also increased of of PTH a concentrations, Calcium and role levels may in vitamin D

influences. Hormonal decade reductions bone 9% be In much in bone yearly as of of after bone. medullary mass cortical and may the menopause, 2% as this close osteoporosis. role affected deficiency the major to by of in phenomenon Estrogen postmenopausal are women and 40% plays keep increase menopause to osteoporosis. Decreased high-turnover estrogen leading resorption does up after both not former, and formation the bone with but levels the latter increase cytokines secretion estrogen decreased monocytes. of may by inflammatory The stimulate These osteoclast of by OPG, expression and the proliferation, the activity cytokines preventing levels apoptosis. decreasing increasing recruitment osteoclast diminishing and RANKL, osteoclast of such in downstream implicated also as have IL-1 independently either Cytokines IL-6, as osteoporosis, or been signaling. estrogen TNF-α, of mediators and postmenopausal

http://ebooksmedicine.net

shortenedbycompressionfracturescomparedwithanormalvertebralbody(left).Notethattheosteo-poroticvertebrahasacharacteristiclossofhorizontaltrabeculaeandthick-enedverticaltrabeculae. Fig.21.6Osteoporoticvertebralbody(right)

MORPHOLOGYThehallmarkofosteoporosisishistologicallynormalbonethatisdecreasedinquantity.Theentireskeletonisaffectedinpostmenopausalandsenileosteoporosis,butcertainbonestendtobemoreseverelyimpacted.Inpostmenopausalosteoporosistheincreaseinosteoclastactivityaffectsmainlybonesorportionsofbonesthathaveincreasedsurfacearea,suchasthecancellouscompartmentofvertebralbodies(

Fig.

).Thetrabecularplatesbecomeperforated,thinned,andlosetheirinterconnections( 21.6

),leadingtoprogressivemicrofracturesandeventualvertebralcollapse. Fig.21.7

clinical The are manifestations on involved. which osteoporosis bones depend of in deformities, are Vertebral multiple, and occur painful, lordosis and, and lumbar height various lumbar of fractures the thoracic including that can frequently regions kyphoscoliosis. cause significant when loss and pneumonia, of or the fractures 40,000 per such spine The 50,000 year. immobility following and in pelvis, embolism deaths complications neck, femoral to pulmonary as accounting for results

Fig.21.7Inadvancedosteoporosis,boththetrabecularboneofthemedulla(bottom) aremarkedlythinned. andthecorticalbone(top)

of alkaline radio-graphs until the diagnostic. not mass measurement bone and of reliably levels 40% blood detected are lost, cannot in calcium, is plain of be and Osteoporosis phosphorus, 30% to phosphatase Osteoporosis to for a screen in thus condition difficult people. is asymptomatic estimates techniques, The rarely computed imaging absorptiometry x-ray such from bone biopsy density. bone which aside quantitative dual-energy of performed), as radiographic best of both tomography, (which specialized is and are loss, measure

and of vitamin includes osteoporosis and treatment calcium postmenopausal appropriate agents and resorption and (bisphosphonates). exercise, decrease that intake, prevention D pharmacologic The senile osteoclast osteoclast apoptosis. activity induce reduce and Bisphosphonates shown anti-RANKL treating Denosumab, in activation, postmenopausal has osteoporosis. antibody of forms an that osteoclast promise some blocks and major inability has in The of bone uncouple pharmacotherapy resorption. been to osteoporosis the challenge formation overcome an Novel limitation. are attempt agents to this clinical undergoing currently trials in have receptor modulators. complications, stroke, the and estrogen therapy menopausal venous prevent Although prompted been thrombosis used fracture, hormone search to selective has particularly more for deep

and Both Chapter its of (detailed vitamin metabolism 8). osteomalacia D abnormal in are or deficiency manifestations rickets in in Rickets to children, bone deposition growth whom plates. disorder with refers the the interferes in the of it remodeling in adult fractures. is Osteomalacia to a bone during which resulting the in is undermineralized, counterpart, formed predisposition is a of defect of mineralization matrix. fundamental unmineralized resultant impairment an The accumulation and

activity, Excess osteopenia. result resorption, in and increased PTH osteoclast bone of activity and production bones the some Although entire conspicuous radiographically. is is affected, (e.g., the in phalanges) osteopenia more skeleton Isolated adulthood a peaks neoplasia of multiple IIA). if and and earlier slightly as in (MEN, endocrine presenting I hyperparathyroidism types middle component

role effects: in discussed a in plays central 20, PTH Chapter through calcium As following homeostasis the

mobilization. resorption, Osteoclast activation, and increasing calcium bone osteoblasts. RANKL expression by PTH effect on mediates increased indirectly the

renal of the Increased calcium resorption by tubules.

Increased excretion urinary phosphates. of

from absorption RANKL synthesis vitamin and 1,25(OH)2-D, osteoblasts. of turn calcium enhances by the by kidneys, on gut Increased which the http://ebooksmedicine.net inducing D, active calcium mobilizes bone in

net of The result of calcium, inhibits PTH circumstances, elevation the production. in PTH normal actions which, further an is under serum or (see excessive hyperparathyroidism) However, hyperparathyroidism) can of result Chapter 20). secretion levels (secondary parathyroid occur from the disease of autonomous can or setting inappropriate (primary in renal underlying PTH is changes primary bone for PTH in seen responsible directly the hyperparathyroidism. in hyperphosphatemia, 1,25-(OH)2-D chronic bone dialsysis). those contribute inadequate disease acidosis, undergoing include hyperparathyroidism that synthesis, and insufficiency secondary deposition from stemming renal bone metabolic to Abnormalities aluminum renal (in in

osteitis MORPHOLOGYSymptomatic,untreatedprimaryhyperparathyroidismmanifestswiththreeinterrelatedskeletalabnormalities:osteoporosis,browntumors,andosteitisfibrosacystica.Osteoporosisisgeneralized,butismostsevereinthephalanges,vertebrae,andproximalfemur.Osteoclastsmaytunnelintoanddissectcentrallyalongthelengthofthetrabeculae,creatingtheappearanceofrailroadtracksandproducingwhatisknownasdissecting (

).Themarrowspacesaroundtheaffectedsurfacesarereplacedbyfibrovasculartissue.Thecorrelativeradiographicfindingisadecreaseinbonedensity. Fig.21.8

(Fig.21.9 Thebonelosspredisposestomicrofracturesandsecondaryhemorrhagesthatelicitaninfluxofmacrophagesandaningrowthofreparativefibroustissue,creatingamassofreactivetissue,knownasabrowntumor ).Thebrowncoloristheresultofthevascularity,hemorrhage,andhemosiderin.Theselesionsoftenundergocysticdegeneration.Thecombinationofincreasedbonecellactivity,peritrabecularfibrosis,andcysticbrowntumorsisthehallmarkofseverehyperparathyroidismandisknownasgeneralizedosteitisfibrosacystica.

Fig.21.8Hyperparathyroidismwithosteoclastsboringintothecenterofthetrabecularesemblingatraintrack(dissectingosteitis).

Fig.21.9Resectedrib,harboringanexpansilebrowntumoradjacenttothecostalcartilage.

are patients problems. fractures, bone deformation, increasingly mass As affected susceptible joint bone decreases, to and at is stage. is because diagnosed blood fibrosa cystica now hyperparathyroidism encountered Osteitis treated tests on early routine and an rarely usually PTH of bone completely to the Restoration levels changes. reverse can normal hence the hyperparathyroidism, as is as Secondary as or abnormalities primary skeletal prolonged not tend be milder. severe to hyperparathyroidism usually

Osteopeniaandosteoporosisrepresenthistologicallynormalbonethatisdecreasedinquantity.Inosteoporosisthebonelossissufficientlyseveretosignificantlyincreasetheriskoffracture.Thediseaseisverycommon,withmarkedmorbidityandmortalityfromfractures.Multiplefactorsincludingpeakbonemass,age,activity,genetics,nutrition,andhormonalinfluencescontributetoitspathogenesis.

Osteomalaciaischaracterizedbybonethatisinsufficientlymineralized.Inthedevelopingskeleton,themanifestationsarecharacterizedbyaconditionknownasrickets.

HyperparathyroidismarisesfromeitherautonomousorcompensatoryhypersecretionofPTHandcanleadtoosteoporosis,browntumors,andosteitisfibrosacystica.However,indevelopedcountries,whereearlydiagnosisisthenorm,thesemanifestationsarerarelyseen.

increased, a of unsound, but and bone. disordered disease Paget condition structurally is ( with activity osteoclastic–osteoblastic a (1) into phases: stage (3) ends initial stage, which skeletal osteolytic final sequential This can evolves an be stage, disease divided into mixed quiescent (2) a and osteosclerotic of unique three a burned-out osteoblastic predominance

Fig. Soft Tumors http://ebooksmedicine.net Tissue Bones, Joints, 21.10 21 804CHAPTER and

Fig. of bone in the Paget the Diagrammatic disease. phases three the disease representation demonstrating of evolution of 21.10

adulthood. begins usually disease in Paget late 1% affected. the age population is estimated of older 40 An U.S. than intriguing aspect geographic An striking is the the variation in prevalence. Zealand, of New in States. United Australia, regions common and disease whites is the relatively in Germany, France, Paget Austria, England, Scandinavia, In contrast, the populations and is native China, Japan, in Africa. the disease rare of

Paget genetic of suggests Current evidence causes environmental and disease. both Approximately mutations harbor gene. of SQSTM1 cases and Paget the of 50% sporadic in familial disease 10% NF-κB, in which, increase activity. the The increases turn mutations osteoclast activity of mutations for and Paget disease. cases inactivating in OPG account some RANK Activating in juvenile of mutations of suggestive is some geographic distribution influence. environmental The osteoclast resorption. precursors measles shown in with culture have cell viruses D note viruses bone as studies which or lead infection can vitamin that regard, alters of IL-6 other secretion, Of to sensitivity RNA this of increased such and both

site from throughout histologic remarkable site. shows variation Paget time disease and to mosaic bone seen sclerotic a ( phase, in the The hallmark, of pattern is lamellar

Fig. The bone. it 100 the oriented is In fracture. structural and is by bone The The initial osteoclasts puzzle–like large phase, by cement have produced lytic prominent ). or deformation thickened lines, the jigsaw resorption of osteoclasts sclerotic nuclei. less phases which appearance numerous findings unusually specific. may The lamellar characterized other during and the lacks units is pits. phase more haphazardly stability to join but 21.11 vulnerable are making Osteoclasts by persist of prominent in are surfaces many osteoblasts. the also phase, lined bone mixed the but

remainder. polyostotic disease Paget cases the in in and of about monostotic 15% is up involved is cases. of or proximal skeleton femur to axial 80% in The Most and finding. radiographic as incidental asymptomatic cases are an discovered are common to bone localized symptom. the Pain is affected a compresses or microfractures and spinal caused by cranial by roots. nerve is overgrowth that bone Pain produce may the is for Enlargement (lion head the skeleton so person that cranium a the hold face) erect. to of difficult leontiasis craniofacial ossea heavy and lead base of (platybasia) and the skull the The weakened bone posterior fossa. to may Pagetic of invagination compression Weight bearing bowing of the anterior causes tibiae and femurs

Fig. Mosaic of of Paget bone pathognomonic 21.11 disease. lamellar pattern

and heads, distorts development resulting osteoarthritis. the secondary severe in femoral of the in are bones usually the fractures another lower of long and occur frequent the stick–type Chalk extremities. complication the result spinal of kyphosis. the Compression injury spine fractures and in of development cord findings. The from made be can diagnosis radiographic the frequently have alkaline and calcium elevated affected individuals phosphatase Many levels but serum serum normal phosphorus.

conditions and of bone. variety A in develop tumor tumorlike Pagetic in disease. with to appears with but polyostotic of 5% than disease, individuals Paget occurs those severe 10% all 1% of Secondary osteosarcoma less in disease not life-threatening or serious usually is transformation, a the of malignant disease. absence In Paget mild with calcitonin and are affected by Most that individuals treatment suppressed bisphosphonates. have symptoms readily

as bone diminished A is from strength. fracture bone integrity defined loss of resulting and/or injury mechanical

are common conditions bone. Fractures most the pathologic affecting affect fracture qualifiers treatment: and The describe types following

is Simple: intact the skin overlying

communicates the the with surface bone Compound: skin

fragmented the bone Comminuted: is

the site bone at are the ends fracture aligned not of Displaced: the

activity repetitive a follows a in slowly fracture to increased physical the bone which developing Stress: period subjected that of loads is

common partially only are when infants soft extending in bones Greenstick: the bone, through

as such disease underlying involving weakened bone by process, a tumor Pathologic: an

of stages Fracture into biochemical, particular molecular, histologic, involves regulated and overlapping features. of be with biomechanical and repair a genes multitude separated can expression

which in injury area the fracture, rupture the ( results surrounds fracture after hematoma, and Immediately gap of blood of fills bone vessels a

Fig. ). 21.12 clotted provides sealing influx scaffold the capillaries. of fibrin mesh, of The fracture site creating off and and the inflammatory a the and fibroblasts new blood for a cells ingrowth inflammatory TGF-β, FGF, and PDGF, the in osteoclastic surrounding activate migrating activity. tissues periosteum, that soft medullary cavity, and stimulate platelets and cells release other osteoprogenitor cells degranulated factors and and Simultaneously, osteoblastic of By of first procallus—provides callus called ends end anchorage soft between the mass fractured the the bones. the or a tissue— of predominantly week, uncalcified weeks, a 2 transformed is bony callus After into approximately callus. the soft The

Fig.21.12Thereactiontoafracturebeginswithanorganizinghematoma.Withintwoweeks,thetwoendsofthebonearebridgedbyafibrinmesh-workinwhichosteoclasts,osteoblasts,andchondrocytesdifferentiatefromprecursors.Thesecellsproducecartilageandbonematrix,which,withadequateimmobilization,remodelsintonormallamellarbone.

deposit bone. cells woven http://ebooksmedicine.net activated osteoprogenitor mesenchymal fracture and tissues into hyaline surrounding chondrocytes cartilage. fibrocartilage in also line make bone the and activated the cells cases, some the differentiate that In soft trabeculae along in newly medulla bone contiguous forming The formed with endochondral bone the fracture periosteum. deposited newly the line the cartilage network ossification, a of and undergoes beneath In ends the this fractured fashion, are bridged (

Fig. 21.12

stressed not the physically forces, portions are is matures subjected callus are that to resorbed. and weight-bearing As the and as reduces fractured This until outline bone size lamellar remodeling bone. are of the callus the shape reestablished of the complete medullary healing process the is The cavity. of with restoration

impeded blocked. a of can or in the sequence events be healing of fracture The easily in some result Displaced fractures deformity. comminuted frequently and Inadequate the in callus maturation, nonunion. or permits its resulting union of delayed movement and immobilization prevents normal become or If undergoes a pseudoarthrosis. joint creating lined luminal persists, by cells, callus nonunion surface cystic the false malformed may and a the degeneration, synovial-like healing. a to especially of the obstacle Infection is fractures, open common fracture serious in site, dysplasia hinder also skeletal healing. fracture and Malnutrition

and Osteonecrosis infarction (ischemic cells. bone refers necrosis) marrow to of ischemia, and disease (e.g., to crisis), predisposes conditions including set corticosteroids), (sickle vasculitis), vascular (e.g., drugs cell radiation. systemic bone of diverse injury trauma, A cause is In the unknown. of about cases, 25% suspected The three disruption extravascular osteonecrosis mechanisms thrombotic compression. occlusion, are vessels, causing mechanical and of in the for range hip wide peaks about has Osteonecrosis 30s accounts to the and a United of replacements States. 10% 50s in but age

MORPHOLOGYRegardlessofetiology,medullaryinfarctsaregeographicandinvolvethetrabecularboneandmarrow.Thecortexisusuallynotaffectedbecauseofitscollateralbloodflow.Insubchondralinfarcts,atriangularorwedge-shapedsegmentoftissuethathasthesubchondralboneplateasitsbaseundergoesnecrosis.Theoverlyingarticularcartilageremainsviable,asitcanaccessnutrientsthatarepresentinsynovialfluid.Microscopically,deadboneisrecognizedbyemptylacunaesurroundedbynecroticadipocytesthatfrequentlyrupture.Inthehealingresponse,osteoclastsresorbthenecrotictrabeculae.Trabeculaethatremainactasscaffoldingforthedepositionofnewboneinaprocessknownascreepingsubstitution.Insubchondralinfarcts,thepaceofthissubstitutionistooslowtobeeffective,sothereiscollapseofthenecroticboneanddistortion,fracture,andevensloughingofthearticularcartilage(

Fig.21.13

Fig.21.13Femoralheadwithasubchondral,wedge-shapedpaleyellowareaofosteonecrosis(arrow).Thespacebetweentheoverlyingarticularcartilageandboneiscausedbytrabecularcompressionfractureswithoutrepair.

extent of symptoms the The on infarct. depend and location cause pain only constant. infarcts initially with subchondral then becomes is Typically, that associated activity but and secondary Subchondral collapse osteoarthritis. often infarcts lead severe, may to measures surgery. from immobilization) to ranges bearing, weight (limited Treatment conservative

marrow, Osteomyelitis bone of inflammation denotes virtually infection. and to secondary always disease. Osteomyelitis but solitary systemic frequently manifests of as any infection a focus of a complication primary may be common. of organisms, types viruses, produce infections osteomyelitis, pyogenic and most All including the but parasites, and by bacteria, fungi, bacteria certain can caused are mycobacteria

osteomyelitis caused is Pyogenic and almost rarely by by always fungi. bacteria contiguous orthopedic compound hematogenous bone a fractures Organisms reach and (2) (1) implantation spread, (3) site, by procedures. or from after extension the direct may the healthy otherwise most bones. long In in in children, is hematogenous origin and develops osteomyelitis more occurs procedures, and open feet however, diabetics. complication as surgical fractures, the often in a infections osteomyelitis of adults, In of

of is of cases the culture-positive 90% pyogenic responsible to Staphylococcus for 80% aureus osteomyelitis. bone. to that proteins components organisms such cell bind matrix to facilitate adherence wall These express collagen as and bone coli, isolated Escherichia drug Klebsiella tract and from who Pseudomonas, with infections are or intravenous abusers. are genitourinary individuals more frequently inoculation into open are infections Mixed surgery, or direct spread, organisms bacterial fractures. of seen of during the in setting pathogens, disease sickle In are individuals and B streptococci frequent the and are to Haemophilus with cell infection. influenzae neonatal group period, Salmonella predisposed cases, be organisms 50% In no of almost isolated. can suspected

http://ebooksmedicine.net

location The osseous most of the circulation, determines in age, vascular bones. which with infection long varies and of between and infants adults, vascular spread In the epiphysis. allows the infection metaphysis communication the the growth epiphysis. the infection plate child metaphysis and in spread interrupts avascular contrast, By the between

MORPHOLOGYChangesassociatedwithosteomyelitisdependonthestage(acute,subacute,orchronic)andlocationoftheinfection.Intheacutephase,bacteriaproliferateandinduceaneutrophilicinflammatoryreaction.Necrosisofbonecellsandmarrowensueswithinthefirst48hours.ThebacteriaandinflammationspreadlongitudinallyandradiallythroughouttheHaversiansystemstoreachtheperiosteum.Inchildren,theperiosteumislooselyattachedtothecortex.Thus,sizablesubperiostealabscessmayformthatdissectforlongdistancesalongthebonesurface.Liftingoftheperiosteumfurtherimpairsthebloodsupplytotheaffectedregion,contributingtothenecrosis.Thedeadboneisknownasasequestrum. Ruptureoftheperiosteumleadstoasofttissueabscess,whichcanchanneltotheskin,creatingadrainingsinus.Sometimesthesequestrumcrumbles,releasingfragmentsthatpassthroughthesinustract.

Ininfants(anduncommonlyinadults),epiphysealinfectionmayspreadthroughthearticularsurfaceoralongcapsularandtendoligamentousinsertionsintoajoint,producingsepticorsuppurativearthritis,whichcancausedestructionofthearticularcartilageandpermanentdisability.

Afterthefirstweek,chronicinflammatorycellsreleasecytokinesthatstimulateosteoclasticboneresorption,ingrowthoffibroustissue,andthedepositionofreactiveboneattheperiphery.Thenewlydepositedbonecanformashelloflivingtissue,knownasaninvolucrum,aroundthesegmentofdevitalizedinfectedbone(

).Thehistologicfindingsofchronicosteomyelitisaremoreproteanbuttypicallyinvolvemarrowfibrosis,sequestrum,andaninflammatoryinfiltrateoflymphocytesandplasmacells. Fig.21.14

illness throbbing leukocytosis, chills, pain osteomyelitis acute affected sometimes fever, the Hematogenous manifests with systemic an malaise, marked as over region. and the often infants) fever (most presentation pain or instances unexplained only often In subtle, (most adults). localized is in with in other a suggested surrounded sclerosis. by bone the strongly zone findings The focus lytic radiographic of characteristic diagnosis of is by a of destruction are in instances. cultures most required and Biopsy pathogen bone identify the to surgical and The usually drainage curative. antibiotics of combination is

resolve to of fails infection. cases, chronic In and osteomyelitis to 5% persists as acute 25% Chronic diagnosis, debridement, infections is therapy when there develop host extensive bone antibiotic surgical inadequate may or defenses. delay in weakened necrosis, or be punctuated by infections spontaneous chronic these years The of and dormancy. occur may acute may usually of are flare-ups; after course Other in draining sepsis, complications carcinoma development the the bone. the of infected cell of fracture, endocarditis, and chronic squamous in amyloidosis, tracts include secondary and sinus osteomyelitis sarcoma pathologic

Fig.21.14Resectedfemurinapersonwithdrainingosteomyelitis.Thedrainagetractinthesubperiostealshellofviablenewbone(involucrum)showstheinnernativenecroticcortex(sequestrum).

the immunocompromised problem has world incidence osteomyelitis, in patients. in in immigration a developing and of historically Mycobacterial patterns developed because increased countries, individuals of 1% to extrapulmonary or 3% infection. tuberculosis exhibit pulmonary with Overall, approximately osseous

of disease originate focus stages visceral active and organisms usually blood a borne the of during are initial The from infection. primary nodes occur. may tracheobronchial also into (e.g., extension focus from Direct a vertebrae) into from or rib pulmonary adjacent a infection being may for persist years before bone The recognized. pain, with chills, weight fevers, Typically, present localized low-grade and individuals loss. affected usually except Infection in solitary individuals. is immunocompromised typical tuberculosis. The namely granulomas, caseous of are histologic findings, necrosis and osteomyelitis tends osteomyelitis. than resistant be Mycobacterial to destructive pyogenic to control more and

vertebrae. Tuberculous (Pott disease) a is infection spondylitis of destructive osteomyelitis. 40% spine in involved The of is cases of mycobacterial discs intervertebral vertebrae and the infection soft breaks into to tissues. extends multiple through The affect fractures produce and permanent compression discs kyphosis secondary in compression. to and cord frequently spinal scoliosis vertebrae or that deficits results Destruction neurologic nerve of and

http://ebooksmedicine.net

the group to tumors especially and surgery The bone malignancy of often-disfiguring challenging. treat rarity bone required make a primary this of disorders annually primary United States. About in are the diagnosed sarcomas 2400 bone function body of the maintaining affected optimize to Therapy while survival aims parts. clues. important anatomic The sites provides certain predilection for and of age types tumors specific of particular diagnostic groups proximal involves involves peaks during For and affects adolescence knee, the and most whereas example, adults pelvis chondrosarcoma and frequently osteosarcoma the extremities. older

in present tumors Bone of may ways. a number common The incidental benign asymptomatic are findings. more often lesions mass. produce tumors, or a however, pain Many slow-growing presence fracture. of some hint a pathologic a circumstances first is tumor’s the In lesions. imaging Radiographic important diagnosing role an in these have studies extent can exact the the imaging of tumor, diagnostic to narrow studies possibilities. and addition location In the detect providing features that necessary In instances is almost diagnosis. all definitive for biopsy

classified When they produce. the to matrix possible, tumors normal are or bone cell according not clinicopathologic grouped features their normal are tissue according ( that do Lesions to counterparts have

21.1 Table ). their and counterparts tumors occur with greatly malignant outnumber Benign

greatest Table21.1ClassificationofSelectedPrimaryBoneTumors of frequency life. within first decades the three is likely to older more In a tumor be adults, malignant. bone

all this osteoid mineralized or produce woven bone. Tumors in unmineralized category

similar differ clinically but radiographically. that features benign bone-producing histologic and have are Osteoid osteoblastoma osteoma and tumors 2 young by definition, are, in than men. less cm in osteomas and are common Osteoid most diameter, cases the the 50% arise About of cortex. femur involve typically in tibia, wherein they or is thick cortical Usually, radiographically. bone clue be reactive only may rim the of there that a Despite size, pain and other they relieved anti-inflammatory that severe is small nocturnal with agents. by present nonsteroidal aspirin their pain prostaglandin The by osteoblasts. probably caused by is produced E2 involves 2 cm of Osteoblastoma the posterior is and pedicles) more larger vertebrae frequently. (laminae the than components and bony tumor and aspirin, induce does marked The pain not usually a the unresponsive is reaction. to frequently or curetted ablation, osteoblastoma is Osteoid osteoma whereas excised. treated radiofrequency by is usually rare. is Malignant transformation

ofhemorrhagicgrittytantissue.Theyarewellcircumscribed

——OsteoblastomaVertebralcolumn10–20Posteriorelementsofvertebra,histologysimilartoosteoidosteoma BoneformingBenignOsteoidosteomaMetaphysisoflong10–20Cortical,interlacingmicrotrabeculaebones

UnknownoriginBenignGiantcelltumorEpiphysisoflong20–40Destroysmedullaandcortex,sheetsbones ——AneurysmalboneProximaltibia,distal10–20Vertebralbody,hemorrhagicspacescystfemur,vertebra separatedbycellular,fibrousseptae

Tumors, Bone AdaptedfromUnniKK,InwardsCY:Dahlin’s ed6.Philadelphia,2010,Lippincott-Williams&Wilkins;bypermissionofMayoFoundation.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.21.15 ).Thestromasurroundingtheneoplasticboneconsistsoflooseconnectivetissuethatcontainsmanydilatedandcongestedcapillaries.Therelativelysmallsize,well-definedmargins,andbenigncytologicfeaturesoftheneoplasticosteoblastshelpdistinguishthesetumorsfromosteosarcoma.Osteoidosteomaselicittheformationofalargeamountofreactivebone,whichencirclesthelesion.

produces matrix malignant mineralized osteoid a that Osteosarcoma is bone. tumor or hematopoietic most tumor tumors Excluding bone. and the primary malignant of osteosarcoma common is lymphoma), (myeloma than has persons a younger distribution; Osteosarcoma 20 age of bimodal of osteosarcomas age. years 75% occur in suffer disease, and older frequently conditions osteosarcoma, peak The infarcts, adults, from radiation. such Paget previous smaller bone second who as known occurs predispose to in to These are secondary as osteosarcomas. referred to commonly (1.6:1). affected than more Overall, men women are metaphyseal most distal proximal regions common the femur the and of are in adolescents sites tibia. The

as enlarging progressively Osteosarcomas present masses. painful, fracture indication. a Sometimes pathologic first the is show Radiographs mass large, and sclerotic usually mixed with a ( lytic margins destructive, infiltrative

Fig. ). 21.16 breaks the through reactive bone periosteum, and resulting subperiosteal frequently cortex in lifts formation. the tumor The tumor, aggressive between triangular is of periosteum, shadow is triangle, and pathognomonic of The raised ends but the known Codman radiographically not indicative of osteosarcoma. an as cortex

acquired osteosarcomas complex 70% aberrations. abnormalities Approximately and genetic chromosomal as such of have numerical structural tumor have the critical tumors cycle. negative suppressors a Molecular is • cell these usually have oncogenes: regulator that mutations well-known and studies of shown RB in in somatic of with to RB up and 70% in RB are osteosarcoma, Patients risk increased osteosarcomas. have germline of a sporadic present mutations mutations 1000-fold

Fig.21.15Osteoidosteomacomposedofhaphazardlyinterconnectingtra-beculaeofwovenbonethatarerimmedbyprominentosteoblasts.Theintertrabecularspacesarefilledbyvascularizedlooseconnectivetissue.

Fig.21.16Distalfemoralosteosarcomawithprominentboneformationextendingintothesofttissues.Theperiosteum,whichhasbeenlifted,haslaiddownatriangularshellofreactiveboneknownasaCodmantriangle(arrow).

genomic a functions and irreversibly gene of as guardian cells. whose of by TP53 repair apoptosis is damaged DNA integrity the product promoting that Patients with p53 greatly who abnormalities and germline gene elevated osteosarcoma, a function TP53 with common interfere incidence syndrome, mutations, have tumors. in have Li-Fraumeni of are sporadic

in is inactivated osteosarcomas. CDKN2A many p16 cyclin-dependent of suppressors, augments gene p53 (which This regulator encodes (a function). tumor negative and kinases) p14 two

which cell overexpressed RB function, and osteosarcomas. low-grade many and that p53 are are in inhibit respectively, MDM2 regulators CDK4, cycle

the plate in osteosarcomas time and adolescent fastest growth. incidence most in in spurt of noteworthy region occur the with growth the growth peak the bones of also the frequently around It that is at sites The proliferation predispose osteosarcoma development. increased to these may

MORPHOLOGYOsteosarcomasarebulkytumorsthataregritty,gray-white,andoftencontainareasofhemorrhageandcysticdegeneration(

).Thetumorsfrequentlydestroythesurroundingcorticesandproducesofttissuemasses.Theyspreadextensivelyinthemedullarycanal,infiltratingandreplacingthemarrow. Fig.21.17

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.21.17Osteosarcomaoftheproximaltibia.Thetan-whitetumorfillsmostofthemedullarycavityofthemetaphysisandproximaldiaphysis.Ithasinfiltratedthroughthecortex,liftedtheperiosteum,andformedsofttissuemassesonbothsidesofthebone.

Infrequentlytheypenetratetheepiphysealplateorenterthejoint.

).Theneoplasticboneusuallyhasafine,lacelikeconfigurationbutalsomaybedepositedinbroadsheetsorasprimitivetrabeculae.Thetumorcellsvaryinsizeandshape(pleomorphic) Fig.21.18 andfrequentlyhavelargehyperchromaticnuclei.Bizarretumorgiantcells,vascularinvasion,andnecrosisarecommon.Mitoticactivityishigh,includingabnormalforms(e.g.,tripolarmitoses).

Osteosarcoma approach that surgery, (3) treated (2) and chemotherapy. multimodality neoadjuvant of a with is (1) chemotherapy, consists of an at The prognostic found resection necrosis chemotherapy-induced amount finding. important is surgical lungs. spread to neoplasms aggressive hematogenously These the detectible advent in for the with rates prognosis chemotherapy, survival osteosarcoma is 5-year reaching 70% recurrent initial patients has substantially Although still patients without since or the metastases diagnosis, 60% at to secondary poor. the metastases, disease, outcome improved with of

Fig.21.18Fine,lacelikepatternofneoplasticboneproducedbyanaplasticmalignanttumorcellsinanosteosarcoma.Notetheabnormalmitoticfigure(arrow).

by are of cartilage. These formation tumors characterized the hyaline Benign cartilaginous are than malignant more ones. tumors common much

to tumor underlying benign as by exostosis, clinically the skeleton is known attached cartilage-capped is a that bony stalk. Osteochondroma, a 85% solitary. are About the seen exostoses remainder multiple (see hereditary of part as later). are syndrome The childhood. diagnosed are late in adolescence adulthood, osteochondromas apparent but Solitary early and during multiple osteochondromas usually become first often are than more three Men times affected women. knee of bones near and metaphysis the Osteochondromas from origin in arise develop ( the of tubular plate bones, long the especially endochondral near growth

Fig. 21.19 ). as stalk can if which slow-growing they on if painful fractured. be nerve is They a the impinge or masses, present incidentally. are cases many detected In they hereditary bones may In associated and exostoses, disturbance multiple shortened, underlying growth. the an bowed be in reflecting epiphyseal

in either EXT1 germline associated are wild-type gene of the remaining and the or in with mutations plate. allele subsequent of EXT2 the the exostoses growth Hereditary loss chondrocytes loss-offunction EXT2 observed been expression also EXT1 sporadic osteochondromas. of in has Reduced or sulfate synthesize heparan genes encode glycosaminoglycans. These that enzymes glycosaminoglycans are thereby or differentiation abnormal factors, diffusion local Hedgehog normal regulators growth, development. reduced may skeletal chondrocyte and prevent of cartilage disrupting The which of

MORPHOLOGYOsteochondromasaresessileorpedunculated,andtheyrangeinsizefrom1to20cm.Thecapiscomposedofbenignhyalinecartilage(

Fig.21.20 )andiscoveredperipherallybyperichondrium.Thecartilagehastheappearanceofadisorganizedgrowthplateandundergoesendochondralossification,withthenewlymadeboneformingtheinnerportionoftheheadandstalk.Thecortexofthestalkmergeswiththecortexofthehostboneresultingincontinuitybetweenthemedullaoftheosteochondromaandthehostbone.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.21.19Thedevelopmentofanosteochondroma,beginningwithanoutgrowthfromtheepiphysealcartilage.

Fig.21.20Osteochondroma.(A)Radiographofanosteochondromaarisingfromthedistalfemur(arrow). (B)Thecartilagecaphasthehistologicappearanceofdisorganizedgrowthplate–likecartilage.

time growth stop of at the plate growing Osteochondromas closure. usually tumors by simple are Symptomatic excision. cured those commonly osteochondromas sporadic exostosis Rarely in in progress multiple to with more but hereditary chondrosarcoma. (5%– 20%), cases,

hyaline tumors in cartilage are that endochondral Chondromas of occur usually of benign bones origin. They medullary cavity on chondroma). within (enchondroma) cortical the or (juxtacortical surface the arise are diagnosed of age. Enchondromas 50 to usually years individuals in 20 the and appear lesions they Typically, the bones as of metaphyseal solitary of feet. hands tubular intact sclerotic cortex central of features and an lucency irregular consist a rim, circumscribed ( radiographic a with The calcifications,

Fig. ). 21.21 enchondromas disorders syndrome disease multiple (enchondromatosis). Ollier are characterized and Maffucci by other Maffucci tumors. also syndrome is with rare associated

Most enchondromas incidentally. are asymptomatic detected large bones of and are pathologic fracture. cause are they painful and Occasionally, may enchondromatosis in The large, severe the deformities, be tumors producing of especially digits. and numerous

Fig.21.21Enchondromaoftheproximalphalanx.Theradiolucentnoduleofcartilagewithcentralcalcificationthinsbutdoesnotpenetratethecortex.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

function have in been enzymes and chondrocytes for IDH1 syndromic dehydrogenases, isocitrate solitary mutations the Heterozygous genes, gain IDH2 coding and enchondromas. of the the in identified of IDH subset Patients with enchondroma mosaics, otherwise of throughout a mutations syndromes cells harboring are their normal only in bodies. enzymatic to The synthesis a mutations of that leads IDH confer proteins the activity on 2-hydroxyglutarate. the new tumors DNA with Chapter 6, myeloid in is of discussed interferes subset also this in acute and certain regulation leukemias. so-called implicated of a methylation glial “oncometabolite” and As

MORPHOLOGYEnchondromasareusuallysmallerthan3cmandaregray-blueandtranslucent.Theyarecomposedofwell-circumscribednodulesofhyalinecartilagecontainingbenignchondrocytes(

Fig.

).Theperipheralportionofthenodulesmayundergoendochondralossification,andthecentercancalcifyandinfarct.Syndromicenchondromasaresometimesmorecellularwithmoreatypiathansporadicenchondromas. 21.22

chondromas limited. growth The is of potential on Treatment depends situation and observation curettage. usually includes or the clinical enchondromatosis but associated rarely chondromas sarcomatous so frequently. undergo with Solitary do those transformation, more including also of developing at gliomas. brain syndrome are Maffucci with neoplasms, Individuals other risk

cartilage. malignant Chondrosarcomas are that tumors produce are and clear They cartilage–producing), dedifferentiated, cell, types. subclassified into mesenchymal conventional (hyaline type. of Approximately conventional are of 90% the chondrosarcomas as Chondrosarcoma is common about as half osteosarcoma. chondrosarcoma in conventional with older. are Individuals usually their 40s or as frequently as twice tumors women. affect These men clear the The and mesenchymal variants adults. cell young and occur children especially in skeleton, and pelvis, especially the Chondrosarcomas ribs. shoulder, in commonly axial the arise involved. are rarely benign the extremities Unlike distal enchondroma, foci tissue appears cartilage destroy imaging, the as densities soft may the On calcified of cortex form and a that mass. flocculent of from About 15% are osteochondroma. enchondroma conventional arising chondrosarcomas or a secondary, preexisting

Fig.21.22Enchondromacomposedofanoduleofhyalinecartilageencasedbyathinlayerofreactivebone.

heterogeneous, identified. been are have Although few abnormalities reproducible chondrosarcomas genetically a multiple and mutations IDH2 genes, exhibit sporadic osteochondroma chondromatosis-related and arising in both and EXT have Chondrosarcomas may in IDH1 chondrosarcomas syndrome the mutations. Mutation the gene silencing the collagen tumor and of of COL2A1 CDKN2A

MORPHOLOGYConventionalchondrosarcomasarelargebulkytumorscomposedofnodulesofglisteninggray-white,translucentcartilage,alongwithgelatinousormyxoidareas(

Fig.21.23A ).Spottycalcificationsaretypicallypresent,andcentralnecrosismaycreatecysticspaces.Thetumorspreadsthroughthecortexintosurroundingmuscleorfat.Histologically,thecartilageinfiltratesthemarrowspaceandentrapsnormalbonytrabeculae(

Fig.21.23B ).Thetumorsvaryincellularity,cytologicatypia,andmitoticactivityandareassignedagradefrom1to3.Grade1tumorshaverelativelylowcellularity,andthechondrocyteshaveplumpvesicularnucleiwithsmallnucleoli.Bycontrast,grade3chondrosarcomasarecharacterizedbyhighcellularity,extremepleomorphismwithbizarretumorgiantcells,andmitoses.

suppressor are relatively tumors. DNA in sporadic also gene by methylation common

Chondrosarcomas usually progressively present as painful, enlarging masses. 5-year outcome, 3 survival Grade Grade to tumors. tumors 1 from grade 43% ranges which predicts for Tumor 80% for of whereas 3 70% spread metastasize, the to grade chondrosarcomas hematogenously, rarely especially lungs. Grade 1 tumors excision. conventional The of is surgical wide treatment chondrosarcoma their with and treated dedifferentiated The because additionally tumors clinical chemotherapy are also and are of mesenchymal more course. aggressive excised

a of is cells primitive sarcoma tumor round Ewing with of http://ebooksmedicine.net composed varying neuroectodermal degrees malignant

Fig.21.23Chondrosarcoma.(A)Nodulesofhyalineandmyxoidcartilagepermeatingthroughoutthemedullarycavity,growingthroughthecortex,andformingarelativelywell-circumscribedsofttissuemass. (B)Conventionalchondrosarcomaentrapsnativelamellarboneasaconfluentmassofcartilage.

differentiation characteristic molecular signature and later). a (see previously have category as Askin been of classified tumor neuroectodermal Entities the tumor and primitive unified Ewing (PNET) sarcoma. single into

Ewing bone as tumors second sarcoma osteosarcoma follows of bone for sarcoma accounts the children. malignant and primary in 10% common most approximately years). are have younger Ewing sarcomas 20 presentation age (80% sarcomas, the Of at average youngest than all bone affected for is Boys frequently girls, Caucasians. there slightly a predilection than are more and usually The long diaphysis in tubular 20% are but the extraskeletal. of tumors arise bones present frequently site warm, They enlarging as tender, the masses, swollen. painful and and affected is lytic tissues. radiographs that a into soft tumor with permeative destructive show surrounding Plain extends margins the fashion. in periosteal deposited of The reactive reaction onion-skin produces bone an characteristic layers

of (85%) on 11. contain a gene in-frame (11;22) vast gene chromosome to EWSR1 generating the sarcomas The Ewing FLI1 balanced (q24;q12) the on 22 translocation chromosome fusion of majority other factor translocations fuse transcription of the family. to ETS Variant members EWSR1 splicing, to fusion have unsettled; the contribute transcription, RNA on and transformation cycle cell effects all EWS proteins How been remains machinery proposed. the candidates origin leading neuroectodermal and cell mesenchymal remains identified; to be Similarly, are stem cells. primitive of cells still the

MORPHOLOGYArisinginthemedullarycavity,Ewingsarcomausuallyinvadesthecortex,periosteum,andsofttissue.Thetumorissoft,tan-white,andfrequentlycontainsareasofhemorrhageandnecrosis.Itisoneofthesmall,roundbluecelltumorsfoundinchildren(Chapter7).Likeothertumorsinthisgroup,Ewingsarcomaiscomposedofsheetsofuniformsmall,roundcellsthatareslightlylargerandmorecohesivethanlymphocytes(

Fig.21.24 ).Theyhavescantcytoplasm,whichmayappearclearbecauseitisrichinglycogen.Homer-Wrightrosettes(roundgroupingsofcellswithacentralfibrillarycore)maybepresentandindicateagreaterdegreeofneuroectodermaldifferentiation.Thetumorcellsdonotproduceboneorcartilage.

malignancies sarcomas followed chemotherapy or treated excision Ewing with surgical are without by with neoadjuvant radiation. aggressive 75% cure 5-year is survival of chemotherapy, in and patients of possible. 50% long-term With

is named cells giant dominate tumor osteoclast-type histology. Giant multinucleated so because cell the almost neoplasm locally It is a that aggressive adults. exclusively affects long most distal tumors arise tibia. bones, cell the commonly epiphyses and of in the femur Giant proximal tumors typical The causes arthritis-like these symptoms. joints frequently near location of Occasionally, they with present pathologic fractures.

Fig.21.24Ewingsarcomacomposedofsheetsofsmallroundcellswithsmallamountsofclearcytoplasm.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

the tumor Experimental tumor. only osteoblast of cells cells that represent precursors, neoplastic in evidence the giant the the a minority cell suggests which of are precursors of cells which and high osteoclasts. neoplastic differentiation proliferation promotes the of express normal into levels RANKL, osteoclast The in osteoclasts The highly destructive but cause resorption turn localized bone. of

MORPHOLOGYGiantcelltumorsoftendestroytheoverlyingcortex,producingabulgingsofttissuemassdelineatedbyathinshellofreactivebone(

).Grossly,theyarered-brownmassesthatfrequentlyundergocysticdegeneration.Microscopically,thetumorconspicuouslylacksboneorcartilage,consistingofnumerousosteoclast-typegiantcellswith100ormorenucleiwithuniform,ovalmononucleartumorcellsinbetween( Fig.21.25

Fig.21.26

with 40% tumors Giant treated are typically recur cell to curettage, but 60% locally. to are tumors lungs, Up seldom regress to fatal. metastasize sometimes of but they 4% and spontaneously the these promise giant Denosumab, RANKL cell tumor. in has inhibitor, treating The shown

is by cyst benign tumor (ABC) blood-filled characterized a spaces. bone multiloculated Aneurysmal cystic occurs 2 first of and generally the has decades ABC during life

Fig.21.25Radiographically,giantcelltumoroftheproximalfibulaispre-dominantlylytic,expansilewithdestructionofthecortex.Apathologicfractureisalsopresent.

Fig.21.26Giantcelltumorillustratinganabundanceofmultinucleatedgiantcellswithbackgroundmononuclearstromalcells.

predilection. sex no frequently the of most bodies. posterior of long It the elements and develops metaphysis vertebral in bones and Pain swelling common. are

with lesion usually Radiographically, margins lytic, is well-defined ABC metaphyseal eccentric, ( an expansile,

Fig. ). 21.27A and resonance fluid-fluid magnetic tomography imaging ( levels internal Computed characteristic and septa demonstrate may

Fig. 21.27B

of osteoblasts, genes in primary cells of the the region expressed of ABC fusion USP6 USP6 leading highly of rearrangements chromosome to overexpression. 17p13 resulting regulatory of frequently are elements demonstrate spindle-shaped in coding that to The removes encodes an enzyme proteins from that (a residues deubiquitinase). USP6 ubiquitin USP6 the enhances of transcription the factor expression proposed increased activity that NF-κB. It is resorption may matrix upregulate NF-κB activity cystic Increased metalloproteases, to leading of bone.

MORPHOLOGYAneurysmalbonecystconsistsofmultipleblood-filledcysticspacesseparatedbythin,tan-whiteseptae(

arecomposedofplumpuniformfibroblasts,multinucleatedosteoclast-likegiantcells,andreactivewovenbone,buttheyarenotcoveredbyendothelium. Fig.21.28).Theseptae

ABC of treatment The surgical. is is Curettage low recurrence. with risk of effective

fibroma likely a be proliferation http://ebooksmedicine.net in that is reactive, Nonossifying may present benign, mesenchymal (NOF)

Fig.21.27(A)Coronalcomputedaxialtomographyscanshowingeccentricaneurysmalbonecystoftibia.Thesofttissuecomponentisdelineatedbyathinrimofreactivesubperiostealbone. (B)Axialmagneticresonanceimagedemonstratingcharacteristicfluid-fluidlevels(arrow).

adults many of 50% as and children years. aged young as 2–25 to It or respectively. synonymous metaphyseal the with defect medulla, localized cortical cortex defect or if fibrous fibrous is in majority the and of eccentrically proximal The tibia. arises femur distal vast the metaphysis a sharply to cortex demarcated long parallel Plain oval ( the radiolucency with the radiographs axis show

Fig.

21.29 ). findings on are that is sufficiently biopsy radiography The specific plain rarely necessary. NOFs form yellow-brown to and containing fibroblasts macrophages. cellular lesions gray with The form or giant clustered storiform may in and the macrophages cytologically multinucleated arranged frequently (pinwheel) cells fibroblasts are take ( the cytoplasm of foamy pattern, a cells bland

Fig. ). 21.30 present. is commonly Hemosiderin undergo several within NOFs small Most spontaneous resolution years.

Fig.21.28Aneurysmalbonecystwithblood-filledcysticspacesurroundedbyafibrouswallcontainingproliferatingfibroblasts,reactivewovenbone,andosteoclast-typegiantcells.

of a tumor been localized benign arrest a likened dysplasia developmental is Fibrous that to constituents. bone has

appear lesions but clinical in several distinctive overlapping during sometimes The patterns: skeletal development, and they arise

Monostotic: of bone involvement a single

of multiple involvement bones Polyostotic:

Fig.21.29Nonossifyingfibromaofthedistaltibiametaphysisproducinganeccentriclobulatedradiolucencysurroundedbyascleroticmargin.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.21.30Storiformpatterncreatedbybenignspindlecellswithscatteredosteoclast-typegiantcellscharacteristicofafibrouscorticaldefect.

and Mazabraud tissue dysplasia fibrous soft syndrome: myxoma

and fibrous McCune-Albright syndrome: skin endocrine polyostotic puberty abnormalities, especially pigmentations, precocious café-au-lait dysplasia,

result variants (Chapter adenomas is somatic from a the gene All in of pituitary the mutation that also in 20). mutated GNAS1, gain-of-function aforementioned levels a produce proliferation promotes mutations Gs-protein by constitutively The cellular that active cAMP. of cellular increasing of mutation. the depends stage fate cell harboring and the acquired mutation The of phenotype when embryo-genesis the is the on on the mutation syndrome, the embryogenesis results whereas during the of after formation fibrous mutation osteoblast early produces monostotic A skeleton in McCune-Albright during precursor in dysplasia. a or an normal cAMP–mediated of The arise manifestations skeletal from interruption a osteoblast differentiation.

MORPHOLOGYThelesionsoffibrousdysplasiaarewellcircumscribed,intramedullary,andvarygreatlyinsize.Largerlesionsexpandanddistortthebone.Thelesionaltissueiscomposedofcurvilineartrabeculaeofwovenbonesurroundedbyamoderatelycellularfibroblasticproliferation.Thetrabeculaelackprominentosteoblasticrimming(

).Cysticdegeneration,hemorrhage,andfoamymacrophagesareothercommonfindings. Fig.21.31

stops often enlarging plate dysplasia of Monostotic at closure. the growth time fibrous incidentally, length. it is is may discovered in usually frequently The asymptomatic discrepancies lesion and pain, fracture, cause limb but and cured by Symptomatic are lesions curettage.

to continue fibrous may Polyostotic dysplasia problems into cause adulthood. and deformities involves limb If it girdles, can cause crippling it the fractures. usually syndrome with The precocious in sexual most McCune-Albright presents development, girls. often medically. manifestations skeletal fibrous are the The for treated polyostotic other are whereas as endocrinopathies dysplasia, managed

greatly primary bone Metastatic cancers. outnumber tumors spread direct bone intraspinal or and the plexus seeding veins). include of Batson to (2) (via pathways hematogenous (3) tumor (1) The dissemination, lymphatic of extension, adults the can lung. to of prostate, cancer spread breast, of than in originate bone, and from kidney, 75% metastases cancers more skeletal Any but to Wilms rhabdomyosarcoma. from children, neuroblastoma, metastases originate In tumor, bone and

the multifocal are axial Skeletal skeleton, especially vertebral involve and column. the metastases typically (bone (bone may destroying), of or radiographic blastic purely forming), appearance mixed. The metastases lytic be purely changes matrix. for in cells that and the native bone account cells cancer Bidirectional bone manifest interactions the between metastatic secrete and PTH-like activity. Tumor that osteoblasts substances as RANKL stimulating cells thereby stromal on such prostaglandins, peptide cells and upregulate cytokines, osteoclast IGF-1, growth FGF) and resorbed. same the supported bone the factors matrix-bound as tumor cell of growth is is TGF-β, time, (e.g., At release by metastases. bone proteins that cells sclerotic secreting Tumor osteoblastic WNT formation stimulate may produce

presence of bone a carries poor The prognosis. metastases systemic radiation, and Therapeutic include chemotherapy, options bisphosphonates. necessary may stabilize pathologic fractures. be to Surgery

Fig.21.31Fibrousdysplasiacomposedofcurvilineartrabeculaeofwovenbonethatlackconspicuousosteoblasticrimmingandariseinabackgroundoffibroustissue.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Primarybonetumorsareclassifiedaccordingtothecelloforiginorthematrixthattheyproduce.Theremainderisgroupedaccordingtoclinicopathologicfeatures.Mostprimarybonetumorsarebenign.Metastases,especiallyfromlung,prostate,kidneys,andbreast,arefarmorecommonthanprimaryboneneoplasms.

isanaggressivetumorofmalignantosteoblasts,predominantlyoccurringinadolescents. •Boneforming:Osteoblastomaandosteoidosteomaconsistofbenignosteoblaststhatsynthesizeosteoid.Osteosarcoma

genes.Chondromasarebenigntumorsproducinghyalinecartilage,usuallyarisinginthedigits.Chondrosarcomasaremalignanttumorsofchondroidcellsthatinvolvetheaxialskeletoninadults. Cartilageforming:Osteochondromaisanexostosiswithacartilagecap.SporadicandsyndromicformsarisefrommutationsintheEXT

Ewingsarcomasareaggressive,malignant,smallroundcelltumorsmostoftenassociatedwitht(11;22).

Fibrousdysplasiaisanexampleofadisordercausedbygain-of-functionmutationsthatoccurduringdevelopment.

stability. mechanical allow providing movement Joints while as solid cavitated (nonsynovial) classified are and They (synovial). minimal The solid and as also joints, integrity movement. known structural synarthroses, only provide allow the They cartilage) tissue that type are a of the according grouped joint bridges space and connective of tissue (fibrous bones. or to ends the lack bonds of and roots between teeth Fibrous the synarthroses jawbones. sutures cranial the the and include pelvis. the symphyses the between (synchondroses) the represented between and and of Cartilaginous by are bones synarthroses ribs the sternum motion. in that Synovial for a range joints, of wide have a allows joint contrast, space these joints. Synovial enclose membranes are synoviocytes similar various and A by specialized type synoviocytes macrophages are are hyaluronic lined with that fibroblasts and The that activity to phagocytic acid B and proteins. type synthesize membranes basement and for of gases which between synovial blood and exchange fluid. allows a nutrients, membrane, synovial lining lacks The wastes, efficient a filtrate and for acts is cartilage. containing nutrition hyaluronic fluid lubricant provides a as that acid Synovial viscous plasma produced by cells synovial the articular

cartilage absorber an Hyaline tissue suited connective to elastic a and shock surface. unique serve ideally is wear-resistant as lacks It and supply, lymphatic drainage, blood a innervation. of II chondrocytes. composed collagen and (70%), Hyaline (10%), (8%), is proteoglycans type water cartilage vertical and resists The stresses loads. collagen transmits tensile friction. water proteoglycans compression and The limit and resist enzymatically it. well matrix as as chondrocytes the digest synthesize The forms and secrete Chondrocytes inactive the degradative inhibitors. enzymes in enrich with enzyme matrix

structural results in joints. that of of functional by characterized is degeneration called degenerative (OA), failure disease, joint and synovial Osteoarthritis cartilage also It disease the of common most is joints. in disorder stresses the intrinsic in to Although osteoarthritis of matrix an considered the term breakdown an chondrocytes resulting of the failure and repair. mechanical which of its and implies biochemical disease, inflammatory respond it is cartilage and mediators worsen injury little release perpetuate whose later) is damage. by triggered there inflammatory (described the doubt that Nevertheless joint is

OA primary as appears an initiating or instances (idiopathic In cause, most aging without insidiously, osteoarthritis). apparent phenomenon cases usually the oligoarticular (affects these disease In few is joints). cases, deformity, underlying younger joint OA in with about 5% joints disease In previous predisposing systemic such that places joint an risk. condition, of injury, some or a at as appears individuals called osteoarthritis. settings these is In disease secondary the than The prevalence 40% 50, of OA beyond the older age of and affected. exponentially are 70 about people increases of

of repair. of OA articular degeneration lesions stem disordered the cartilage and from its The a bone. underlying serves to Articular low-friction transmits as surface that loads the cartilage collagen, II resists secreted by type of through chondrocytes. Cartilage matrix viscoelastic properties proteoglycans, water) the extracellular (principally the and compression stress role. play of the factors, matrix including OA, components development signaling encoding and genetic Repeated of also molecules, biomechanical a contributes but to genes of leads thought ( to in turn which to are matrix the chondrocyte extracellular injury, factors alteration predispose to These

Fig. ). 21.32 ultimately the Although proteoglycans chondrocytes disease synthesis, composition as proteoglycans, and changes of degradation continuously synthesize the proliferate exceeds progresses. and and secrete Meanwhile, by type degrade chondrocytes network. collagen MMPs the II secreted have particularly and implicated TGF-β oxide, factors in and TNF, nitric induces cells, been MMPs), synovial and diffusible (which prostaglandins, from chondrocytes Cytokines

OA (Fig. 21.32 ). disease. Chronic, to of the the inflammation contributes progression low-level the chondrocyte a disease. degraded loss of Ultimately, severely mark and stage matrix late the

http://ebooksmedicine.net

MORPHOLOGYIntheearlystagesofOA,chondrocytesproliferate,formingclusters.Concurrently,thewatercontentofthematrixincreasesandtheconcentrationofproteoglycansdecreases.ThenormallyhorizontallyarrangedcollagentypeIIfibersarecleaved,yieldingfissuresandcleftsatthearticularsurface(

Fig.21.33 1. ).This INJURY CHONDROCYTE

proliferation NO, Aggrecanases IL-8 BMP PGE2, proteoglycans Degrade Chondrocyte TGF-˜2. Degrade MMPs TNF collagen EARLY Chondrocyte bone OSTEOARTHRITIS 3. Subchondral Apoptosis changes dropout OSTEOARTHRITIS LATE

Fig.21.32Schematicviewofosteoarthritis(OA).OAisthoughttobeinitiatedbychondrocyteinjury(1)inageneticallypredisposedpatientleadingtochangesintheextracellularmatrix.(2)Althoughchondrocytesmayproliferateandattempttorepairdamagedmatrix,continueddegradationexceedsrepairinearlyOA. (3)LateOAisevidencedbylossofbothmatrixandchondrocyteswithsubchondralbonedamage.

( mice).Theexposedsubchondralboneplatebecomesthenewarticularsurface,andfrictionwiththeopposingsurfaceburnishestheexposedbone,givingittheappearanceofpolishedivory(bone manifestsasagranularsoftarticularsurface.Eventually,full-thicknessportionsofthecartilagearesloughed.Thedislodgedpiecesofcartilageandsubchondralbonetumbleintothejoint,formingloosebodies(joint eburnation)

).Smallfracturesthroughthearticulatingbonearecommon,andthefracturegapsallowsynovialfluidtobeforcedintothesubchondralregionsinaone-way,ballvalve–likemechanismformingfibrous-walledcysts.Outgrowths(osteophytes) Fig.21.33 developatthemarginsofthearticularsurfaceandarecappedbyfibrocartilageandhyalinecartilagethatgraduallyossify.Thesynoviumisusuallyonlymildlycongestedandfibrotic,anditmayhavescatteredchronicinflammatorycells.

presents are in in Primary they their patients 50s. usually OA manifestations a of If search cause should underlying OA, for some has a person significant be young made. and symptoms that stiffness, pain joint crepitus, of morning movement. worsens range use, limitation Characteristic include of with by spinal results in foramina muscle compression radicular on atrophy, osteophytes cervical lumbar nerve deficits. spasms, and pain, muscle root Impingement and and neurologic joints ( hips The the include involved commonly

Fig. lower knees, first fingers, and distal proximal of ), lumbar the 21.34 carpometacarpal joints. tarsometatarsal vertebrae, joints, cervical and joints and first interphalangeal not osteophytes prominent are common the distal at men). joints, in interphalangeal nodes, Heberden (but women in can but not place deformity joint joint With occur, rheumatoid unlike take does ( next), time, (discussed fusion arthritis

Fig. 21.35). with radiographically, however, of level well and disability. disease pain The detected correlate does severity not progression. of are means satisfactory halting methods no there its no of and effective preventing are There still primary OA, for and, pain, inflammation, modification, intra-articular Therapy to severe includes arthroplasty. NSAIDs reduce of activity corticosteroids, management cases,

of autoimmune producing attacks the nonsuppurative inflammatory arthritis Rheumatoid synovitis. inflammatory origin that a and principally (RA) is joints, a chronic disorder proliferative cases cartilage and, of the some the destruction progresses RA the articular (adhesion) ankylosis in joints. often to of heart, in blood skin, lesions lungs. may vessels, Extraarticular and the occur women approximately 1%, it States in three prevalence The men. in times and is than more in the is United common life. through is fifth of the incidence third The peak decades in

and As progression, factors autoimmune disease. and the the of predisposition development, genetic contribute chronicity in diseases, other to environmental http://ebooksmedicine.net mediated self-antigens changes The are antibodies pathologic by against

Fig.21.33Osteoarthritis.(A)Histologicdemonstrationofthecharacteristicfibrillationofthearticularcartilage. subchondralbone(1),subchondralcyst(2),andresidualarticularcartilage(3). (B)Eburnatedarticularsurfaceexposing

by inflammation caused secreted cytokines, by predominantly and CD4+

(Fig. cells T 21.36

chemically cells with by modified RA or may microbial T reacting the a in autoimmune an arthritogen, self-antigen. (TH) CD4+ perhaps response helper initiate that cytokines cells stimulate to other cells tissue The effect T inflammatory injury: produce

cells cells. and IFN-γ TH1 from macrophages synovial activates

cells monocytes. recruits TH17 neutrophils IL-17 from and

Fig.21.34Severeosteoarthritisofthehip.Thejointspaceisnarrowed,andthereissubchondralsclerosiswithscatteredovalradiolucentcystsandperipheralosteophytelipping(arrows).

and on stimulates RANKL osteoclasts cells expressed activated T bone resorption.

to destroy stimulate macrophages synovial cells that TNF and cartilage. from resident hyaline proteases secrete IL-1

in of pathogenesis has be implicated TNF RA, the (see Of the later). antagonists effective proved to been for most therapies firmly have these, TNF disease and

may germinal against follicles contains antibodies, synovium and self-antigens. which some that RA secondary with of of The plasma centers abundant cells be produce in detected of patients citrulline. for the autoantibodies Many converted are are citrullinated in serum specific to arginine posttranslationally which peptides residues and vimentin α-enolase, of type II fibrinogen, In with in collagen, joints. antibodies RA, deposit the complexes citrullinated cell citrullinated a protein in contribute Evidence response (ACPA) anti-citrullinated disease to T combination with proteins that chronicity. to antibodies the suggests the 30% blood. have in not ACPA patients do of RA the Approximately IgA the autoantibodies of IgM or that About 80% bind own have their of portions IgG. patients Fc to serum rheumatoid the not and RA be in can also as complexes, autoantibodies without immune disease. all in are These called in may present uniformly patients deposit found are and factor patients with although joints they

RA developing of 50% to estimated inherited risk susceptibility. genetic of is related It that is the RA. class with HLA ACPA-positive locus II associated is The T HLA-DQ and protein, epitope of presented cells mimics that a epitope microbes by an on Evidence is CD4+ an target citrullinated alleles. the on suggests vinculin, many predisposing when to PTPN22, a A protein linked tyrosine to is second inhibit postulated activation. RA, phosphatase gene cell T encodes that Numerous genetic been reported. have associations other

been antigens have promote environmental candidate factors whose autoimmunity postulated. Many patients have of their 70% RA blood, in may At which ACPA http://ebooksmedicine.net least

Fig.21.35Comparisonofthemorphologicfeaturesofrheumatoidarthritisandosteoarthritis.

tolerance, factors Susceptibility modification lymphocyte of of Failure smoking) citrullination) Environmental self (e.g., (e.g., infection, genes protein other) unregulated (HLA, activation Enzymatic

in to T responses and tissues) (including cell antigens self antigens B joint

RAtypicallymanifestsassymmetricarthritisprincipallyaffectingthesmalljointsofthehandsandfeet.Grossly,thesynoviumbecomesedematous,thickened,andhyperplastic,transformingitssmoothcontourtoonecoveredbydelicateandbulbousvilli(

).Thecharacteristichistologicfeaturesinclude(1)synovialcellhyperplasiaandproliferation;(2)denseinflammatoryinfiltratesofCD4+ helperTcells,Bcells,plasmacells,dendriticcells,andmacrophages( Fig.21.37A–B

);(3)increasedvascularityresultingfromangiogenesis;(4)neutrophilsandaggregatesoforganizingfibrinonthesynovialandjointsurfaces;(5)osteoclasticactivityinunderlyingbone,allowingthesynoviumtopenetrateintothebone,causingperiarticularerosionsandsubchondralcysts.Together,theaforementionedchangesproduceapannus:amassofedematoussynovium,inflammatorycells,granulationtissue,andfibroblaststhatgrowsoverthearticularcartilageandcausesitserosion.Inadvanceduntreatedcasesthepannuscanbridgethebonestoformafibrousankylosis,whichmaylaterossifyasabonyankylosis( Fig.21.37C

Fig.21.35

RheumatoidnodulesareaninfrequentmanifestationofRAandtypicallyoccurinsubcutaneoustissueincludingtheforearm,elbows,occiput,andlumbosacralarea.Microscopically,theyresemble necrotizinggranulomas(Fig.21.38 ).Rarely,RAcaninvolvethelungs(rheumatoidnodules,interstitiallungdisease).

immune TH17 joint Antibodies enter Lymphocytes, cell complexes cell antibodies and TH1

of proteases Fibroblasts Release and

Destruction cartilage formation bone and of Pannus

Fig.21.36Majorprocessesinvolvedinthepathogenesisofrheumatoidarthritis.

be produced inflammation. during self-proteins, of trigger (including new such as smoking epitopes periodontitis) Insults that infection promote may creating and autoimmune reactions. citrullination

recruiting inflammation and/or activation The synovial the proliferation and of chondrocytes, and to cells, triggering macrophages joint, localizes fibroblasts. of bone cartilage contributes enzymes increased the cytokines to production destruction osteoclast ( The and through proteolytic of activity, and,

Fig. http://ebooksmedicine.net 21.36

Fig.21.37Rheumatoidarthritis.(A)Schematicviewofthejointlesion. (B)Lowmagnificationshowsmarkedsynovialhypertrophywithformationofvilli.

(C)Athighermagnification,subsynovialtissuecontainingadenselymphoidaggregate. of M: rheumatoid anti-TNF arthritis. for therapy from Feldmann (A,Modified Development 2002.) NatRevImmunol2:364,

of of can other and forms characteristic by findings. by RA from distinguished be presence inflammatory polyarticular ACPA arthritis the radiographic begins patients, and insidiously musculoskeletal and pain. about slowly of with generalized malaise, RA In half fatigue, joints the to months, involved. weeks become several After hands wrists, generally feet, affected. knees symmetrical involvement is joint most the ankles, and and The elbows, and of pattern commonly are interphalangeal frequently contrast are proximal involved joints see OA, The and earlier). to metacarpophalangeal (in

Involved warm, and painful. are swollen, joints or OA, to patient In rises joints inactivity. the are morning following the contrast in stiff when typical of chronic pursuing range patient waning waxing and a joint course. has enlargement decreased motion progressive and The RF of disease or and even may the minority especially patients, In stabilize those ACPA, lacking a regress.

Fig.21.38Rheumatoidnodulecomposedofcentralnecrosisrimmedbypalisadedhistiocytes.

of skeletal deformity). the fingers adjacent and flexion-hyperextension produces ligaments, the the the Inflammation occasionally arthritis accompanies and ulnar boutonnière tendons, in the deformity, characteristic and of fingers deviation the muscle frequently (swan-neck juxtaarticular are joint and joint osteopenia of articular of cartilage and effusions Radiographic loss narrowing and the space hallmarks ( with erosions

Fig. 21.39

corticosteroids, of other for consists treatment The immunosuppressants antagonists. methotrexate, TNF such and, RA most as notably, anti-TNF to TNF avoid However, maintained antagonists must be flares. patients agents and curative, not disease on are term of with tuberculosis. antagonists it infections such M. treatment TNF as organisms with increased Long risk carries with

arthritis and present group persist arthritis heterogeneous weeks. unknown age at 6 of of with 16 Juvenile least for before a idiopathic (JIA) cause disorders is that antibody are common. is small disease often seropositivity large factor RA, (4) JIA: joints systemic affected to (ANA) (1) rheumatoid more in and common, is more joints, contrast frequent, absent, anti-nuclear (3) oligoarthritis are nodules is than usually and In more rheumatoid factors The pathogenesis RA; risk include similar and PTPN22 HLA but variants. adult to unknown is in cells. damage TH1 and caused Also, to cytokines RA, by produced JIA these and TH17 like and adult by appears cells be other inflammatory antibody using systemic receptor in Treatment some adult an the in to similar is RA IL-6 with form. success Long-term variable. of is JIA prognosis very many http://ebooksmedicine.net Although have affected individuals

Fig.21.39Rheumatoidarthritisofthehand.Characteristicfeaturesincludediffuseosteopenia,markedlossofthejointspacesofthecarpal,metacarpal,phalangeal,andinterphalangealjoints,periarticularbonyerosions,andulnardriftofthefingers.

about only chronic develop 10% disease, functional serious disability.

are share a group the following features: spondyloarthropathies The of disorders that heterogeneous

rheumatoid Absence factor of

changes rather ligamentous than the attachments synovium in Pathologic

joints, without joints of with sacroiliac or Involvement other

HLA-B27 Association with

Bony leading joints) proliferation to of (fusion ankylosis

are triggered by with presumably cross-react immune directed infectious, an antigen, antigens are the The undefined cells mediated against expressed T cell a and response may manifestations that of musculoskeletal possibly system. on

and of joints. destruction the of prototypical spondyloarthritis, the cartilage sacroiliac articular ankylosis, spondylitis, bony Ankylosing especially causes symptomatic of life spinal back and lower becomes in disease and decades second as The immobility. pain third the peripheral of the of shoulders, least affected and knees, one-third occurs individuals. joints, such Involvement at in as hips, patients 90% but how Approximately are HLA-B27 not disease contributes is to allele the known. the of positive, B27 antiIL-17 antibody An some efficacy has this in shown disease.

cervicitis, defined Reactive or conjunctivitis. triad arthritis, is and nongonococcal arthritis a of by urethritis their in affected positive. 80% men individuals Most are than and are 20s 30s, more HLA-B27 or initiated the tract disease of by gastrointestinal caused previous The probably Salmonella, reaction system an Yersinia, infection genitourinary autoimmune Campylobacter). (Chlamydia) or (Shigella, the is by Within experience of weeks several diarrhea, pain. low urethritis back patients or often, feet asymmetric knees, pattern. ankles, in most affected The frequently and an are of disease severe spondylitis. spine Patients indistinguishable have is chronic involvement with the that ankylosing from

the from become a abscess infected from dissemination, Joints soft inoculation spread or contiguous direct osteomyelitis. skin, or can from tissue through hematogenous permanent can arthritis cause because serious, is joint Infectious rapid, destruction. potentially it

by sites that suppurative from cause acute joints enter the usually Bacterial hematogenous infections distant spread. arthritis epiphyseal In from underlying however, occur. may spread contiguous neonates, osteomyelitis of S. H. gonococcus in influenza predominates adulthood. arthritis late and is main years than aureus children adolescence young age, 2 and prevalent younger and agent the older during adults, is in children disease Individuals sickle are with prone Salmonella. infection to with cell affect gonococcal active sexually equally the is except arthritis, in These joint infections women. sexes seen mainly which for C9) Individuals disseminated complement C6, components susceptible and of C7, gonococcal are hence infections (C5, to or deficiencies arthritis. with

sudden range has of motion. The presentation the a of development joint that restricted painful, acutely swollen is an classic and warm, Systemic rate common. of sedimentation findings leukocytosis, are elevated and fever, the frequency infection cases, sternoclavicular a knee, and wrist, hip, commonly of in single by In most joints. involves nongonococcal joint, 90% decreasing the elbow, the followed shoulder, only drug more users. often in involved are The joints axial causative Joint in be can purulent identified. aspiration diagnostic fluid agent the which if is it yields destruction. earlier, to recognition As permanent therapy limited and anti-microbial potential, vital has prompt repair joint is prevent mentioned effective so cartilage

incidence predominantly states, arthropod-borne but the and States, the are and Lyme New is range arthritis disease affecting the geographic United mid-Atlantic in increasing. leading England complex. the spirochete ricinus is transmitted It caused which Ixodes ticks burgdorferi, the by is with by deer Borrelia of infection progressively involves In organ ( its classic three through Lyme systems phases clinical disease form, multiple

Fig. 21.40 ). of early localized followed the initial by or is skin, stage, The http://ebooksmedicine.net an infection

Fig.21.40Lymediseaseprogressesthroughthreeclinicallyrecognizablephases:earlylocalized,earlydisseminated,andlatepersistent.Althoughinitialmanifestationsresultdirectlyfromspirocheteinfection,latersignsandsymptomsarelikelyimmune-mediated. San California. San University of modified California Chiu, Charles from Francisco, Dr. (Figure Francisco, permission.) with Used involving disseminated stage skin, meninges. and heart, nerves, early cranial especially occurs to left weeks If months knee, of the arthritis, after infection. untreated,

at are because of cured cases an than arthritis Currently, occurs in 10% stage. most patients less earlier 80% lasting untreated if approximately 60% migratory weeks a to months. individuals However, to arthritis left develop (Lyme arthritis) of for be testing confirmed in identified for anti-Borrelia Spirochetes with by of diagnosis antibodies. only arthritis, be the can serologic about can but 25% joints antibiotics against consists Borrelia. Lyme Treatment activity disease with of of with of been standard regimens. Cure 90% have rates achieved development. is A vaccine under the stage. a in However, refractory antibiotic that can develop chronic is arthritis disseminated late be PCR. many by the fluid cannot of even In detected joint in Borrelia patients, these to has arthritis. It that late, (especially humoral this initiate surface responses outer autoimmune, been proposed cellular may protein TH1) Borrelia A and manifestations, cognitive to include Lyme as in collectively known (PTLDS). disease chronic can pain, posttreatment joint nonspecific addition The (fatigue, complaints), syndrome symptoms

hyperplasia, walls. infiltrates and exhibits fibrin marked cells), CD4+ Infected cell T synovitis synovium (especially deposition, chronic mononuclear a arterial synoviocyte onionskin of by thickening morphology RA. that closely cases of The can severe resemble in

associated joint a deposits disorders. variety Articular crystal with of are (gout), dehydrate include to basic shown (pseudogout), Endogenous urate calcium (MSU) calcium monosodium pyrophosphate phosphate. be crystals pathogenic and Exogenous and debris joints, the with as and used local crystals, may methyl methacrylate arthritis. accumulates polyethylene, in such prosthetic result erosion, their in silicone, that triggering inflammatory reaction destroys an Crystals by cartilage. disease that produce

acute by and Gout crystals transient around is within marked of arthritis urate attacks joints. by initiated deposited the feature to is uric excessive fluids. primary other disease, secondary some gout Whether tissues body or acid and in common underlying is the major In gout the unknown. the usually cause disease form of cases), is primary and is of the manifestation (90%

is level not the for development of necessary, (plasma sufficient, but Hyperuricemia gout. above mg/dL) 6.8 urate

Uric be acid follows: summarized as metabolism can

Synthesis. acid is end of product purine the catabolism. Uric synthesis some reflects purine Increased production. in abnormality typically synthesis two nucleotides, The turn, in interlinked of involves pathways. purine purine synthesized they and the are catabolism in through purine from are from pathways the novo or nucleotides bases In of nucleotides. precursors, pathway, de salvage free diet synthesized obtained nonpurine purine the

Excretion. is from resorbed kidney. acid of the glomerulus the circulation the filtered and by by completely virtually the Uric proximal tubule secreted the excreted in nephron is urine. of A by the acid fraction resorbed and distal the uric small

21 Tumors Joints, Bones, Soft 824CHAPTER and http://ebooksmedicine.net Tissue

most which gout, uric most of primary the commonly reduced acid unknown from In in patients. is excretion, results basis elevated is of as of A gout caused overproduction small result acid enzymatic uric by minority defects. primary a identifiable (HGPRT) so into the instead, and salvaged metabolites deficiency are, pathway, degraded purine example, transferase guanine phosphoribosyl interrupts be uric of For salvage acid. cannot partial hypoxanthine but Complete syndrome) it condition of results also classified HGPRT dominate clinical in gout. (Lesch-Nyhan manifestations picture is significant so this as of hyperuricemia, secondary the absence neurologic lysis renal syndrome) during or by (chronic production (rapid leukemia, disease). chemotherapy be decreased lysis can Secondary gout also for tumor increased so-called excretion cell caused

of ( is inflammation the joints, in precipitation in urate recruit the cytokines of leukocytes gout by crystals that stimulating triggered production The

Fig. 21.41 ). a cytosolic Macrophages activates (Chapter and which 5). crystals, neutrophils inflammasome the the phagocytose sensor, is IL-1β. involved The inflammasome which caspase-1, activates active production in of the accumulation is and of promotes more proinflammatory, IL-1

in of joints urate Precipitation crystals

Activation of complement

of crystals ReleaseSynovium

of neutrophils Lysis

injury and of Release Tissue

Note mediators inflammatory of phagocytosed that various the of chemokines Urate in cytokines, IL-1, the tissue gout. pro-inflammatory 21.41 turn and the of major production production characteristic of the arthritis. and that of crystals Fig. of stimulate other gouty by acute cells. elicit one stimulates macrophages from a are cytokines Pathogenesis inflammation variety IL-1β, interleukin B4; 1β. Leukotriene LTB4,

and the macrophages joint. in neutrophils radicals, These free proteases, cytokines, in metabolites. cells, release acid and arachidonic other turn, of the mediators. ingested The leading to damage leakage also membranes phagolysosomes, crystals these of more alternative contribute recruitment. by Activation the may complement pathway of to leukocyte weeks. remits in is an which typically result to The spontaneously days acute arthritis, inflammatory in crystals tophi, synovial inflamed the tissue, aggregates and tissue. lead the of Repeated formation eventually arthritis periarticular to and acute attacks of urate membranes of and the Severe is the develops joints damage the compromised. of cartilage to function

with 10% about patients gout. of Only hyperuricemia clinical develop symptomatic factors contribute gout: Other

duration the of and of Age the hyperuricemia. individual to Gout after of hyperuricemia. 20 30 appears usually years

predisposition. Genetic urate also associated well-defined polymorphisms of the addition with with are involved or inflammation genes in HGPRT, In transport to abnormalities gout. and X-linked possibly ion

Alcohol consumption.

Obesity.

reduce urate. thiazides) (e.g., of Drugs that excretion

The various sites, arthritis, chronic changes distinctive (1) gout morphologic nephropathy. (2) (3) tophi (4) in are acute gouty in and tophaceous arthritis,

permeates in is in a by arthritis negatively long, the are synovium Acute of are found fluid. slender, synovium. and and crystals neutrophils and are frequently the Urate birefringent. clusters the small They needle-shaped, in are inflammatory dense cytoplasm and synovial infiltrate characterized arranged the that macrophages. and contains plasma synovium lymphocytes, and and it also congested, edematous cells, scattered is The

acute arthritis repetitive precipitation the during crystals urate of attacks. from evolves Chronic tophaceous articular form encrust crystals in synovium visible ( The deposits chalky the surface and the

Fig. ). 21.42A a cells thickened synovium fibrotic, destroys underlying hyperplastic, and by cartilage. the forms that becomes and inflammatory pannus The

ligaments, cartilage, and articular the tendons, in Tophi of are gout. bursae pathognomonic They intense of formed an by surrounded reaction crystals body by large cell ( urate aggregations giant are foreign

Fig. 21.42B–C

nephropathy interstitium caused or refers tubules. Gouty renal by urate or tophi medullary in complications the crystals renal the to and nephrolithiasis pyelonephritis. include acid uric Complications

failure, is years. syndrome, alchohol excess intake, and sex, age than renal greater Gout male metabolic with obesity, associated 30 Four are clinical recognized: stages

appears puberty and Asymptomatic men women. menopause in hyperuricemia in after around

and sudden after as arthritis joint Acute warmth. excruciating presents hyperemia, pain, localized onset several years first 50% occur Most in first are monoarticular; metatarsophalangeal attacks the joint. gouty hours last there but resolution. for to is weeks, complete Untreated, gradually acute may arthritis

Resolution to interval. • arthritis of the symptom-free Asymptomatic a intercritical leads acute period: the decreasing at In absence polyarticular. frequently and therapy, become appropriate intervals the of recur attacks

Fig.21.42Gout.(A)Amputatedgreattoewithwhitetophiinvolvingthejointandsofttissues.(B)Goutytophus—anaggregateofdissolveduratecrystalsissurroundedbyreactivefibroblasts,mononuclearinflammatorycells,andgiantcells. (C)Uratecrystalsareneedleshapedandnegativelybirefringentunderpolarizedlight.

attack. Chronic years gout develops average about acute tophaceous initial 12 after the on • loss the bone show of At space. joint juxtaarticular characteristic radio-graphs stage, and this

lower (e.g., Treatment to (e.g., gout NSAIDs) and xanthine and lifestyle reduce at aims of urate oxidase inhibitor). levels medication modification symptoms

(CPPD), common pseudogout, increasing years more 50 known usually more individuals with Calcium than deposition as disease occurs old also becomes in age. pyrophosphate and crystal affected. races are genders and equally The is hereditary, sporadic divided CPPD into (idiopathic), and secondary types. the in germline resulting The pyrophosphate mutations and in relatively by in crystal variant arthritis is dominant channel deposition life. caused autosomal early transport including hyperparathyroidism, form. joint disorders, Various secondary to and previous predispose the hemochromatosis, diabetes, damage, degraded, articular which cartilage allowing that Studies chondrocytes. inhibit crystallization proteoglycans, around are mineralization, normally suggest by macrophages. gout, inflammasome in inflammation As of in caused is the activation

MORPHOLOGYThecrystalsfirstdevelopinthearticularcartilage,menisci,andintervertebraldiscs,andasthedepositsenlargetheymayruptureandseedthejoint.Thecrystalsformchalky,whitefriabledeposits,whichareseenhistologicallyinhematoxylin-andeosinstainedpreparationsasovalblue-purpleaggregates(

).Individualcrystalsarerhomboid,0.5to5µmingreatestdimension( Fig.21.43A

Fig.21.43B ),andarepositivelybirefringent.Inflammationisusuallymilderthaningout.

CPPD is asymptomatic. frequently subacute, may RA. acute, or be chronic confused that OA clinically produce it can or with However, arthritis ankles, the days knees, and and monoarticular polyarticular; may or several be by commonly the involvement shoulders, to affected. most from joint elbows, followed The wrists, are last weeks may significant individuals 50% approximately damage. joint Ultimately, experience affected of Therapy supportive. is slows There known treatment is no crystal or prevents that formation.

Osteoarthritis(OA,degenerativejointdisease),themostcommondiseaseofjoints,isadegenerativeprocessofarticularcartilageinwhichmatrixbreakdownexceedssynthesis.Inflammationisminimalandtypicallysecondary.Localproductionofinflammatorycytokinesmaycontributetotheprogressionofjointdegeneration.

besystemic.RAiscausedbyacellularandhumoralimmuneresponseagainstself-antigens,particularlycitrullinatedproteins.TNFplaysacentralroleandantagonistsagainstTNFareofclinicalbenefit. http://ebooksmedicine.net Rheumatoidarthritis(RA)isachronicautoimmuneinflammatorydiseasethataffectsmainlysmalljoints,butcan

SeronegativespondyloarthropathiesareaheterogeneousgroupoflikelyautoimmunearthritidesthatpreferentiallyinvolvethesacroiliacandvertebraljointsandareassociatedwithHLA-B27.

Suppurativearthritisdescribesdirectinfectionofajointspacebybacterialorganisms.

LymediseaseisasystemicinfectionbyBorrelia burgdorferi,whichmanifests,inpart,asaninfectiousarthritis,possiblywithanautoimmunecomponentinchronicstages.

Goutandpseudogoutresultfrominflammatoryresponsestriggeredbyprecipitationofurateorcalciumpyrophosphate,respectively.

Fig.21.43Pseudogout.(A)Depositsarepresentincartilageandconsistofamorphousbasophilicmaterial. (B)Smearpreparationofcalciumpyrophos-phatecrystals.

commonly as osteochondral lesions, and involve synovial joints tumorlike and loose tendon cysts, such ganglions, bodies, sheaths. Reactive They much than are more neoplasms. and processes degenerative common or result from trauma usually and structures. Primary native (synovial fat, and vessels, joints and membrane, tend tissue are usually to recapitulate the cells to types related rare, tissue, fibrous benign, and blood neoplasms cartilage) tumors. thought to is although related sarcoma as or with joint, derived once uncertain the sarcoma, recognized of a to tissues origin of is tissue and later be now discussed the from Synovial soft

near located or is joint that a ganglion cyst cm) A (1–1.5 capsule almost always a tendon sheath. small is fluctuant, around wrist, where the translucent the nodule. appears is as of a A pea-sized location common firm, joints it of connective wall a cystic the degeneration result cyst lacks lining. a It arises as of myxoid cell hence tissue; or change. through of The lesion multilocular and coalescence myxoid adjacent of may enlarges areas be however, to the The communication no fluid is similar is joint cyst there the fills that with space. synovial fluid; unrelated the is Despite nervous ganglia name, the of the lesion to system.

cyst. or of a through synovial synovium capsule bursa joint produce Herniation enlargement massive may a a of the of forms in in well-recognized example synovial OA that RA setting A or cyst). cyst the the space is popliteal (Baker contain fibrin. hyperplastic cells The and may inflammatory synovial and lining be

term sheaths, a bursae. tendon of in neoplasm giant the the and for lining tumor Tenosynovial benign that joints, is synovial cell develops localized tumor and Clinical of type. the (previously villonodular giant variants tenosynovial diffuse type as the cell include known pigmented synovitis), hand. tends sheath, a to form diffuse in nodule joints, tendon discrete the involve commonly Whereas the large as to type usually occurs the localized a attached

of fusion collagen resulting chromosomal type of in Diffuse to a harbor reciprocal both this tumor somatic α-3 types the localized (p13;q37), and t(1;2) the promoter M-CSF gene. translocation, VI the tumor proliferation tumor giant and paracrine (described macrophages Consequently, a similar through cells stimulates overexpress autocrine in to M-CSF, of effects, previously). manner cell bone of which,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.21.44Tenosynovialgiantcelltumor,diffusetype.(A)Excisedsynoviumwithfrondsandnodulestypicalofpigmentedvillonodularsynovitis. ofproliferatingcellsintenosynovialgiantcelltumorbulgingthesynoviallining. (B)Sheets

MORPHOLOGYIndiffusetumorsthenormallysmoothjointsynoviumisconvertedintoatangledmatbyred-brownfolds,fingerlikeprojections,andnodules(

Fig.21.44A ).Incontrast,localized(nodular)tumorsarewellcircumscribed.Theneoplasticcells,whichaccountforonlyaminorityofthecellsinthemass,arepolygonal,moderatelysized,andresemblesynoviocytes(

Fig.21.44B ).Bothdiffuseandlocalizedvariantsareheavilyinfiltratedbymacrophagescontaininghemosiderinandfoamylipid,oraremultinucleated.

knee 80% giant in tenosynovial cases. tumor in presents Diffuse cell of the to typically pain, recurrent and similar monoarticular of swelling arthritis. Affected locking, individuals complain is a Sometimes, palpable mass appreciated. involves frequently slow-growing, the a The as hand. solitary, manifests variant painless localized that mass more recurrence is common surgical form. the types Both excision, to diffuse amenable but in are signaling unresectable are investigating with pathway patients of M-CSF disease. trials antagonists for Clinical the

to restricted By soft convention, is skeleton, conditions to system, soft soft hematopoietic to of they this neoplasms. Although tissues and joints, compartment, confined so lymphoid non-epithelial involve area refers nonneoplastic can seldom tissue are tissue, tissue tissue excluding central the nervous the pathology

malignant of With the by soft 100-fold. sarcomas, skeletal outnumber muscle tumors the their tissue exception neoplasms, benign counterparts, States, cancers. 1% is tissue all In sarcomas than approximately of year, incidence the which less the per is soft 12,000 United of of mortality, reflecting 2% all cause behavior. their Sarcomas, however, cancer aggressive thigh. in soft the arise Most tissue the especially tumors extremities, Approximately in age. the 15% with arise incidence children but increases

known sporadic sarcomas are no Most cause. predisposing have and 1, tumor neoplasms (neurofibromatosis are Li-Fraumeni small mutations Rendu suppressor associated syndrome, Osler-Weber A syndrome, tissue soft Gardner of syndrome). minority germline with genes in known radiation, as tumors A burns, such exposures environmental be to can linked few toxins. or

tumors sarcomas colorectal unknown. is lesions, origin usually precursor that of such the recognized arise Unlike as from carcinomas which mutations. acquire best “driver” arise the is cells, mesenchymal from guess that The somatic pluripotent stem tumors can based be mechanisms Despite made tumorigenesis heterogeneous of complexity: genomic on some among sarcomas, their generalizations

enough often occur chromosomal lymphomas, number are as to and or sarcomas): changes euploid many in early single that tumorigenesis and of tumors (15%–20% are serve diagnostic Like markers. a Simple limited with of karyotype leukemias sarcomas specific appearance to with monomorphic Tumors patients have commonly tend microscopically. younger arise and most these features in a sarcoma. include Ewing sarcoma, Examples described and earlier, synovial is of well the rearrangements some understood. oncogenic reasonably effect In cases, these others, mechanisms unknown. the In are molecular therapy. fusion targets Oncogenic represent tumor-specific for potential proteins

and and demonstrate genomic underlying aneuploid feature that or sarcomas): gains polyploid a suggests tumors instability. chromosomal of usually karyotype Complex are losses, multiple (80%–85% These undifferentiated http://ebooksmedicine.net pleomorphic and Examples sarcoma. include leiomyosarcoma adults tumors be microscopically in more pleomorphic. Such are common to tend and

Classification continues identified. tumors genetic tissue soft molecular evolve new abnormalities of to are as highly metastatic to with and treatment lesions benign, locally risk self-limited significant grade, soft minimal malignancies aggressive tumors intermediate range from aggressive require tissue with Clinically, metastatic mortality. that risk minimal to tumors highly as used is metastasizing among are this less malignancies but category. All aggressive, aggressive locally consistently classified term rarely the sarcomas and molecular classification morphology (e.g., muscle immunohistochemistry, integrates differentiation), Pathologic diagnostics. addition prognostic grade depth) In to indicators. are (size and accurate stage (degree diagnosis, and of important differentiation)

we soft this will illustrative especially consider tumors. primer, or representative a tissue as With

a adults. most tumor the tumor is benign soft in fat, Lipoma, common tissue of according is most which rare lipoma conventional and/or subtype, distinguished the genetic morphologic variants features. characteristic common from are The to Conventional mass mature of adipocytes. is a lipoma well-encapsulated and subcutis usually of frequently during extremities in the middle It arises the trunk, adulthood. proximal most large, intramuscular, Infrequently, lipomas are poorly and circumscribed. by simple are lipomas usually Most cured excision.

adipose are tumors tissue. of malignant Liposarcomas one Liposarcoma sarcomas adulthood. of most the common is of and the 60s occurs retroperitoneum. soft to in in people in their mainly deep It tissues 50s

MORPHOLOGYLiposarcomasaredividedintothreesubtypes:

Fig.21.45A ).Thetumorsharboramplificationofchromosomeregion12q13-q15,whichincludesthegeneforMDM2.YouwillrecallMDM2encodesapotentinhibitorofp53.

Myxoidliposarcomacontainsabundantbasophilicextracellularmatrix,arborizingcapillaries,andprimitivecellsatvariousstagesofadipocytedifferentiationreminiscentoffetalfat(

).Thet(12;16)translocationcharacterizesmyxoidliposarcoma.Theresultantfusiongenearrestsadiposedifferentiation. Fig.21.45B

Pleomorphicliposarcomaconsistsofsheetsofanaplasticcells,bizarrenuclei,andvariableamountsofimmatureadipocytes(lipoblasts).Thesetumorshavecomplexkaryotypes.

types excised. locally liposarcoma unless All often of recur repeatedly adequately and the frequently behavior, whereas the is usually in is malignant intermediate type its cell variant variant metastasizes. and The relatively is aggressive pleomorphic well-differentiated indolent, myxoid/round

is myofibroblastic fibroblastic of typically occurs young and adults. proliferation fasciitis the self-limited upper a extremities that Nodular tumors in grow history is of 25% months. weeks 50% cases, present trauma a several of period during A or to the of and approximately rapidly nodular self-limited, purely a yet a Whereas lesion, fasciitis translocation was of reactive historically is a proliferation. producing clonal, indicates considered a t(17;22) that fusion MYH9-USP6 identification it gene It senescence. to avoid the some that cells hallmark the perhaps key lack cancer, of is ability hypothesized proliferating that a between gene. Intriguingly, reactive also earlier), sits a fusion zone gray USP6 ABC proliferations, in contains another neoplastic and tumor (discussed excised, fasciitis spontaneously Nodular rarely can recurs. and, regress if Malignant virtually is nonexistent. transformation

MORPHOLOGYNodularfasciitisarisesinthedeepdermis,subcutis,fascia,ormuscle.Grosslythelesionislessthan5cm,circumscribed,orslightlyinfiltrative.Itishighlycellularcontainingplump,immatureappearingfibroblastsandmyofibroblastsarrangedinapatternreminiscentofculturedfibroblasts(

).Agradientofmaturation(zonation) Fig.21.46 fromcellular,loose,andmyxoidtoorganizedandfibrousistypical.Thecellsvaryinsizeandshape(spindletostellate)andhaveconspicuousnucleoli;mitoticfiguresareabundant.Lymphocytesandextravasatedredbloodcellsarecommonbutneutrophilsareunusual.

can deformity innocuous course. an fibromatosis Superficial has clinical but is an cause local that infiltrative proliferation than forms females. fibromatosis superficial of All males affect more frequently by surrounded broad sweeping or are They collagen. characterized fibroblasts nodular in abundant fascicles fascicles, defined poorly by long, of dense Several identified: have been clinical subtypes

(Dupuytren contracture). Palmar fascia thickening of the Irregular or or bilaterally. palmar unilaterally either nodular

Plantar. contractures. unilateral patients, in without and Common young

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig.21.45Liposarcoma.(A)Thewell-differentiatedsubtypeconsistsofmatureadipocytesandscatteredspindlecellswithhyperchromaticnuclei. (B)Myxoidliposarcomawithabundantgroundsubstanceandarichcapillarynetworkinwhichtherearescatteredimmatureadipocytesandmoreprimitiveround-tostellatecells.

Penile (Peyronie • disease). Palpable dorsolateral aspect mass the or of induration the penis. on

plantar progress, fibromatoses stabilize to cases, in do 25% the some not instances 20% and spontaneously. In and about resolving of palmar variant. the Some particularly recur plantar excision, after

are metastasize. desmoid fibromatoses, masses but that large, tumors, frequently infiltrative recur do called not also Deep in They to the frequently occur in most teenage women. 30s, predominantly years abdominal in the mesentery. Abdominal musculoaponeurotic the but wall arises fibromatosis the of or arise the can generally structures in tumors girdles anterior limb leading or the contain to APC Deep in signaling. Wnt fibromatoses mutations increased genes, (β-catenin) CTNNB1 with APC have individuals Most who predisposed are adenomatous deep Chapter to familial polyposis mutations (Gardner but syndrome, fibromatosis. tumors 16) sporadic, germline are

MORPHOLOGYFibromatosesaregray-white,firm,poorlydemarcatedmassesvaryingfrom1to15cmingreatestdiameter.Theyarerubberyandtough,andhavemarkedinfiltrationofsurroundingmuscle,nerveandfat.Cytologicallyblandfibroblastsarrangedinbroadsweepingfasciclesamiddensecollagenarethecharacteristichistologicpattern(

Fig.21.47 ).Thehistologyresemblesascar.

often difficult. extensively excision nature, the infiltrative complete Because of is efforts and alternatives have Recent as concentrated therapy medical on radiation surgery. to

Fig.21.46Nodularfasciitiswithplump,randomlyorientedspindlecellssurroundedbymyxoidstroma.Notethemitoticactivity(arrowheads).

Fig.21.47Deepfibromatosisinfiltratingbetweenskeletalmusclecells.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

other neoplasms, almost to are lineages, muscle in contrast of all Skeletal tumors malignant. rhabdomyoma more individuals benign The with tuberous sclerosis. in frequent is

skeletal muscle is a tumor differentiation. malignant mesenchymal Rhabdomyosarcoma with are alveolar (60%), Three main subtypes (20%). pleomorphic recognized: (20%), and embryonal 20. age of soft the adolescence, tissue Rhabdomyosarcoma embryonal) sarcoma common usually and is childhood appearing most before and (alveolar adults. predominantly Pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcoma is seen in normally neck, mature, head mesenchymal genitourinary forms that muscle, differentiated and tract, much in arise cells. do from arise underscoring contain sinuses, locations not often that notion pediatric skeletal terminally do not sarcomas the the The and subtypes genetically are The heterogeneous. and embryonal pleomorphic

the (2;13) to fusions either translocations, gene contains frequently FOXO1 of or PAX7 marked or gene, Alveolar of presence the by (1;13) rhabdomyosarcoma the rearrangements the PAX3 respectively. that differentiation, to differentiation, leukemias. PAX3-FOXO1 transcription fusion that of transcription the proteins interferes is fusion many protein are it muscle a acute found initiates that the chimeric mechanism factor with in factor a and skeletal appears PAX3 similar

MORPHOLOGYEmbryonalrhabdomyosarcomapresentsasasoftgrayinfiltrativemass.Thetumorcellsmimicskeletalmuscleatvariousstagesofdifferentiationandconsistofsheetsofbothprimitiveroundandspindledcells(

Fig.21.48A ).Rhabdomyoblastswithstraplikecytoplasmandvisiblecross-striationsmaybepresent.Sarcomabotryoidesisavariantofembryonalrhabdomyosarcomathatdevelopsinthewallsofhollowviscerasuchastheurinarybladderandvagina.

(Fig.21.48B Inalveolarrhabdomyosarcoma,anetworkoffibrousseptaedividethecellsintoclustersoraggregates,creatingacruderesemblancetopulmonaryalveoli.Thetumorcellsareuniformlyroundwithlittlecytoplasmandtheyareonlyminimallycohesive

Pleomorphicrhabdomyosarcomaischaracterizedbynumerouslarge,sometimesmultinucleated,bizarreeosinophilictumorcellsthatcanresembleotherpleomorphicsarcomas.Immunohistochemicalidentificationofmusclespecificproteinssuchasmyogeninisusuallynecessarytoconfirmrhabdomyoblasticdifferentiation.

without therapy. are or radiation are surgery and chemotherapy, neoplasms with treated aggressive with usually Rhabdomyosarcomas that often prognosis, variant whereas has fatal. rhabdomyosarcoma botryoid subtype the pleomorphic is the embryonal of best The

Fig.21.48Rhabdomyosarcoma.(A)Embryonalsubtypecomposedofmalig-nantcellsrangingfromprimitiveandroundtodenselyeosinophilicwithskeletalmuscledifferentiation. (B)Alveolarrhabdomyosarcomawithnumer-ousspaceslinedbydiscohesive,uniformroundtumorcells.

a but arise uterus in muscle, Leiomyoma, site. tumor common of can tissue soft most the smooth is any benign in leiomyomas are menorrhagia. and symptoms including cause common and may (Chapter of infertility 19) variety a Uterine also gastrointestinal in the from in and tract. the soft rarely leiomyomas) Leiomyomas the somatic skin may arise tissues deep erector (pilar or muscles pili multiple leiomyomas, mutation leiomyomas, and leads on uterine located loss-of-function chromosome carcinoma. (FH) in cutaneous 1q42.3 germline gene the hydratase fumarate renal A cell to Krebs and constitutes of the and intriguing association metabolic link FH of abnormalities enzyme example this cycle, another neoplasia. is the an between

angles. 1 cells to other spindle each tend usually are composed in fascicles densely to of are leiomyomas tissue and intersect cm at Soft 2 that of eosinophilic right size show figures. minimal nuclei blunt-ended, atypia few and tumor elongated and mitotic The have cells lesions with are surgery. cured Solitary

http://ebooksmedicine.net

soft leiomyosarcoma tissue tissue for Soft of 20% to sarcomas. accounts 10% frequently women occur They than men. adults and more affect in and develop the from of retroperitoneum great vessels. the or Most soft extremities arise in deep tissues the stem acquired genotypes Leiomyosarcomas defects instability. that to that have profound from complex lead genomic

MORPHOLOGYLeiomyosarcomaspresentaspainlessfirmmasses.Retroperitonealtumorsmaybelargeandbulkyandcauseabdominalsymptoms.Theyconsistofeosinophilicspindlecellswithblunt-ended,hyperchromaticnucleiarrangedininterweavingfascicles.Theyexpresssmoothmuscleproteins(actin,desmin,caldesmon),whichcanbedetectedbyimmunohistochemistry.Unlikeleiomyomas,mitoticactivityandnecrosisarecommoninleiomyosarcoma.

grade. depends tumor Treatment on size, location, and and usually good spread, the are control to both the difficult lungs. small retroperitoneum extension have prognosis, metastatic especially those death are and cause of to by leiomyosarcomas whereas Superficial and local a

tissue of histologic a mesenchymal to recognizable tumors many soft large any Although types, can be known do not proportion assigned recapitulate lineage. tumors complex karyotypes; simple is includes This examples with each described of one or group type here.

joint sarcoma the near and soft was synovium described first in cases knee tissues the relationship because Synovial morphologic arose the to so-named was a postulated. with an this a from misnomer, are is features that However, can as synoviocytes. and morphologic tumors synovium locations lack in present these origin their inconsistent name account sarcomas. sarcomas for approximately 10% soft tissue all of Synovial to their Most occur in people 20s in 40s. a years. been present several with for usually has present deep-seated that mass Patients Most SSX factors chimeric of gene characteristic t(x;18)(p11;q11) composed and show that translocation sarcomas derail chromosomal one three genes SS18 fusion encode control. producing portions genes transcription synovial that the cell of cycle a of

Fig.21.49Synovialsarcomashowingtheclassicbiphasicspindlecellandglandlikehistologicappearance.

MORPHOLOGYSynovialsarcomasaremicroscopicallymonophasicorbiphasic.Monophasicsynovialsarcomaconsistsofuniformspindlecellswithscantcytoplasmanddensechromatingrowinginshort,tightlypackedfascicles.Thebiphasictypecontainsglandlikestructurescomposedofcuboidaltocolumnarepithelioidcellsinadditiontotheaforementionedspindlecellcomponent(

Fig.

21.49 ).Immunohistochemistryishelpfulinidentifyingthesetumors,sincethetumorcells,especiallyinthebiphasictype,arepositiveforepithelialantigens(e.g.,keratins),differentiatingthemfrommanyothersarcomas.

with and Synovial sarcomas chemotherapy. are aggressively limb-sparing treated frequently surgery and to patient from stage The 25% age. related varies 5-year 62%, to survival and, for lymph regional metastases Common are sites lung sarcomas, of the unusual nodes.

cannot cells (UPS) tumors immunophenotype, pleomorphic mesenchymal histomorphology, classified sarcoma by malignant pleomorphic be a and high-grade, category genetics. another with combination that includes ultrastructure, of into Undifferentiated extremity, tissues or the soft adults. of older middle-aged the arise especially thigh the in deep Most of fallen of morphologic tumors exists reclassified (MFH), The (1) both out with no use used with genetics, of (2) and has definition that of fibrous diagnosis the histiocytoma interchangeably lineage. category undifferentiated malignant and fibrohistiocytic others for could consensus be included immunohistochemistry sometimes the UPS, because and aneuploid numerical changes. chromosomal multiple with structural and are tumors Most

832CHAPTER http://ebooksmedicine.net 21Bones,Joints,andSoftTissueTumors

Fig.21.50Undifferentiatedpleomorphicsarcomashowinganaplasticspin-dledtopolygonalcells.

MORPHOLOGYUPSsareusuallylarge,grey-whitefleshymassesthatcangrowquitelarge(10–20cm)dependingontheanatomiccompartment.Necrosisandhemorrhagearecommon.Microscopically,theyaresomeofthemostpleomorphicmalignanciesencountered.UPSsconsistofsheetsoflarge,anaplastic,spindledtopolygonalcellswithhyperchromaticirregular,sometimesbizarrenuclei(

Fig.21.50 ).Mitoticfigures,includingatypicalnonsymmetricforms,areabundantasisnecrosis.Bydefinition,tumorcellslackdifferentiationalongrecognizedlineagesorcharacteristicgeneticdefects.

UPSs are chemotherapy adjuvant malignancies and/or treated are with and surgery radiation. that aggressive cases. metastases The arising poor, is in of prognosis with 30% to generally 50%

Thecategoryofsofttissueneoplasiadescribestumorsthatarisefromnon-epithelialtissues,excludingtheskeleton,joints,centralnervoussystem,andhematopoieticandlymphoidtissues.Asarcomaisamalignantmesenchymaltumor.

Althoughallsofttissuetumorsprobablyarisefrompluripotentmesenchymalstemcells,ratherthanmaturecells,theycanbeclassifiedas

Tumorsthatrecapitulateamaturemesenchymaltissue(e.g.,fat).Thesecanbefurthersubdividedintobenignandmalignantforms.

Tumorscomposedofcellsforwhichthereisnonormalcounterpart(e.g.,synovialsarcoma,UPS).

Sarcomaswithsimplekaryotypesdemonstratereproducible,chromosomal,andmolecularabnormalitiesthatcontributetopathogenesisandaresufficientlyspecifictohavediagnosticuse.

Mostadultsarcomashavecomplexkaryotypes,tendtobepleomorphic,andaregeneticallyheterogeneouswithapoorprognosis.

chapter. this previous outstanding editions to Rosenberg We for contribution Dr. thank of his Andrew

Structure Biology and Basic Bone of

G, biology Rep Kogianni 2007. The osteocytes, BS: Osteoporos of Noble Curr 5:81–86, basis cellular [Good review of remodeling.] bone the of

Bone Annu Olsen development, Cell AM, 16:191–220, BR, 2000. Rev Dev Reginato Wang Biol W: development.] molecular and genetic [Update basis of on vertebrate the skeletal

remodeling Skeletal M: disease, Med Zaidi 801, in 2007. Nat health and 13:791– and genetics the [Excellent review of skeletal pathophysiology of diseases.]

MK, J: Askmyr new A, osteopetrosis, understanding 140:597–609, a and J Haematol therapeutics Br better Fasth Towards of Richter 2008. summary of gene options therapy.] treatment including [Nice for osteoporosis

skeletal Genet Med Krakow D, Rimoin The DL: 12:327–341, 2010. dysplasias, summary summary table.] of [Comprehensive the with useful dysplasias very

Pals Med Van revisited, FS, al: J Osteogenesis Classification RR, 2010. et Dijk Rijn Eur 53:1–5, of Van Imperfecta G, Genet imperfecta findings.] [An the and overview molecular based of osteogenesis of clinical on classification current

Found Novartis L: of Mechanisms 235:150–166, 66–71, age-related discussion Symp bone loss, 2001. Mosekilde between [Nice review and of relationship remodeling osteoporosis.]

and Engl fractures, Multiple bone S, for al: N BV, density et Styrkarsdottir Halldorsson U, loci 2008. mineral Gretarsdottir Med genetic 358:2355–2365, J pathways underly molecular osteoporosis.] [Seminal elucidating that the paper

bone Clin R: Estrogen and loss: deficiency Invest 2006. tale, inflammatory MN, Weitzmann J an Pacifici 116:1186–1194, the between and relationship osteoporosis.] estrogen review of understanding of [Excellent current

22:41–50, hormone: 2015. BC, JP: catabolic the Bilezikian Opin Parathyroid skeleton, on Silva actions Pharmacol and anabolic Curr [Nice bone on of hormone and calcium effects parathyroid metabolism.] summary of

Clin 208, of JJ: J Paget 115:200– Roodman Windle Invest GD, disease 2005. bone, manifestation Paget illustrated, disease.] clinicopathologic [Concise, nicely summary of of

interactions, bone: etiology The Metab of and Cell 2011. viral FR: genetic 13:5–6, Singer Disease Paget’s of disease.] about [Very genetic and Paget pathways viral review good in the

Arthritis Keller 2012. T, The 601763, nontraumatic al: Seamon et J, osteonecrosis, pathogenesis of osteonecrosis.] femoral pathophysiology regarding developments of head [Summarizes recent

J Clin and Osteosarcoma: variants, Klein Pathol 2006. MJ, histologic Am anatomic Siegal 125:555–581, GP: recent update osteosarcoma.] classification of on [Most

G, 2011. ER, in Luther osteogenic et Defective osteosarcoma, http://ebooksmedicine.net al: the of Sarcoma differentiation Wagner Zhu G, development 2011:325238, [Discusses development osteoblast normal relationship molecular the of osteosarcoma.] pathogenesis between

Rev and bone pathology and 2010. targets, Wunder et JV, possible Nat Cartilage PC, Bovee al: tumours JS, Cancer Hogendoorn development: molecular therapeutic 10:481–488, review tumors] good [A the of in genetic these abnormalities known

with Maffucci in R, associated and Somatic IDH1 P, 43:1256–1261, van mutations and IDH2 Eijk d’Adamo 2011. cell mosaic Genet Pansuriya syndrome, Nat disease enchondroma spindle and Ollier are et TC, hemangioma al: mutations identifying tumors.] article inherited IDH [Seminal cartilage in

of exostoses: genes, 15:220–227, the Hum 2000. Hul mutations in Van basis Mutat and Molecular Wuyts multiple EXT2 W, EXT1 W: osteochondroma basis [Discussion multiple of of syndrome.] genetic

initiate 2010. JA: partnerships: Erkizan pathways Res EWSFLI1 Ewing’s Toretsky of Cancer Uversky protein Clin interactions key Oncogenic 16:4077–4083, HV, sarcoma, VN, the protein [Excellent of effects EWS-FLI1 molecular in sarcoma.] Ewing found fusion of summary

Tumor Cell of Giant Bone

303, cell a 55:300– cellular J paradigm tumor of Robinson unique Biochem Giant of Cell TA: stromal-hematopoietic interactions, Einhorn 1994. bone: D, discussion bone insight regarding and [Nice gained underlying molecular of cell mechanisms normal giant tumor remodeling.]

2012. Biosci AM, a mystery TRE17/USP6 oncogene: inside wrapped The an Chou Ed) enigma, riddle MM: in Front a 4:321–334, Oliveira (Schol self-limited various review clonal in genetic tumors.] the rearrangement of [Excellent USP6 mesenchymal

I, stem Endocrinol of Mol al: PG, 45:355–364, Riminucci bone et Saggio the 2010. J Robey fibrous GNAS and progenitors gene: Skeletal cells, M, through read dysplasia how affect can of dysplasia.] expression [Excellent skeletal a cells progenitor fibrous clinical cause mutation and of discussion

2010. SR: the bone Ann MB, Articular Acad subchondral and Sci Y cartilage Goldring osteoarthritis, pathogenesis N Goldring in of 1192:230–237, role the presentation and of osteoarthritis.] [A succint articular the of in development of thoughtful structures

AM, hip TD: 2011. Spector and 7:23–32, Rheumatol epidemiology Nat Genetic knee Rev osteoarthritis, of Valdes that have to genes association of candidate studies [Useful to predisposing genome-wide lead review osteoarthritis.]

2014. 228, and and Nat SLE, focus Rev rheumatic of Rheumatol H: RA on Deane Pathogenesis KD, 10:212– prevention disease: El-Gabalawy preclinical illustrated, on [Recent, RA and nicely update pathogenesis of SLE.]

Wolfe 376:1094–1108, Lancet F, DL, 2011. arthritis, TW: Rheumatoid Huizinga Scott disease.] the and of [Review of pathogenesis treatment basis Jansen HLA-based arthritis, microbes van a al: DT, Commun 2015. against to protection J, 6:6681, rheumatoid molecular Heemst Nat et Crossreactivity for and provides vinculin [Describes alleles microbes.] relationship HLA between and autoimmunity, the

Iliopoulou Rheumatol BP, immune Lyme Opin Infectious and Curr Huber BT: arthritis 22:451–455, dysregulation: 2010. disease, lessons from immune mechanisms arthritis] overview of [Recent underlying Lyme

A: 22:341–360, Infect Chronic Dis Lyme Marques North disease: review, Am 2008. Clin a Lyme [In-depth of disease.] review

2007. AK: deposition Curr Update Rheumatol in 19:158–162, Rosenthal Opin calcium diseases, succint, of arthritis.] review [Recent, crystal-induced

Metabolism 2010. Gout: 1):S32–S36, TB: of VanItallie 59(Suppl painful epitome arthritis, the biology underlying cellular recent and molecular of the [Excellent gout.] developments summary in

F, giant al: 2008. Mertens identification 47:21–25, Chromosomes tenosynovial N, Molecular tumors, of et E, Moller Mandahl in Genes cell transcripts fusion COL6A3-CSF1 Cancer clonal giant rearrangement [Seminal cell identifying in tenosynovial article chromosomal tumor.]

soft in CR, tissue P: recurrent translocations Cin Promiscuous in chromosomal tumours, involved Dal Pathology Antonescu 2014. 46:105–112, genes soft (or thereof) specificity tissue in of of defects [Excellent review tumors.] genetic lack

Gustafson Rydholm malignant al: subclassification, histiocytomas: 19:3045–3050, CD, Fletcher Oncol 100 prognostic A, P, of fibrous Clinicopathologic et relevance 2001. Clin of re-evaluation J malignant (MFH) histiocytoma reassessing article [Seminal more diagnosis classification.] the fibrous of allowing specific http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

of Neurofibromatosis Peripheral Nerve Schwannomas Junction Miscellaneous Patterns and Neuromuscular Injury

of Muscle Type Injury 1 Patterns Neurofibromatosis Skeletal and

Skeletal Muscle Inherited of Disorders

of Muscle Skeletal Acquired Disorders

with skeletal our about nerves information and permit muscles the The surroundings. peripheral and purposeful brain sensory movement provide and anatomic lesions the diseases. symptoms classifying signs in associated helpful neuromuscular Both of are their distribution and disorders anatomic skeletal neuromuscular proximal distal and disorders muscle. peripheral along and traces to nerves, neuromuscular organized discussing following junctions, The from discussion by of system lines is neuromuscular the of

processes functional axonal cells. Schwann elements their two nerves are are by and made of major The myelin which peripheral sheaths, each and are myelin thickness and velocity. correlated with conduction diameter with Axonal other inputs mediate and types These sensory distinct are of different characteristics which to axons, motor distinguish function. used axons. with fast unmyelinated transmitted thin by thickly is transmitted myelinated large-diameter axons by touch, slow, is Light conduction for sensation velocities, temperature whereas example, or the maintains In along case exactly a cell and of myelinated one axon Schwann internode, one axons, myelin ( makes segment, single

Fig. 22.1A ). conduction which along the nodes occurs. of saltatory Adjacent are separated internodes Ranvier by axons serving and nerve sizes different different given of axons functions. Any contains cells. of fascicles These ensheathed layer perineurial arranged are into a by on the endoneurium epineurium barrier cells inside Perineurial a between the and of the form fascicle outside. on

features. mixed axonal though even demyelinating, often as are exhibit subclassified or Peripheral many neuropathies diseases insults are injure axon. neuropathies Axonal the caused by that directly degenerates. an axon distal portion of The entire affected secondary with myelin loss associated ( is Axonal degeneration

Fig. 22.1B). The term

of experimental borrowed from neuropathies. involving is axonal nerves in changes Wallerian to describe degeneration analogous observed transection studies the ( Regeneration and through remyelination axonal of the axon place distal regrowth takes subsequent

Fig. 22.1C ). axonal hallmark a studies nerve strength is in a morphologic correlates axons, decrease or the decrease density electrophysiologic signal impulses. of of of neuropathies amplitude The in in the which with

amplitude. but resulting to in axonal myelin with characterized Demyelinating velocities relative neuropathies sparing, or nerve Schwann preserved are abnormally cells slow conduction by damage along an of Demyelination random individual typically occurs in distribution. inter-nodes a the discontinuously, axon length affecting termed is process demyelination ( This segmental

Fig. 22.1B ). and density normal axons features a demyelination of relatively segmental demyelinating show neuropathies of Morphologically, and repair. recognized internodes with thin sheaths presence ( the myelin axons abnormally by short and of is This

Fig. 22.1C ). http://ebooksmedicine.net nature The discontinuous

Fig. Patternsofperipheralnervedamage. 22.1 (A)Innormalmotorunits,typeIandtypeIImyofibers(see

later)arearrangedina“checkerboard”distribution.Theinternodes,separatedbynodesofRanvier(arrows) alongthemotoraxonsareuniforminthicknessandlength. Table22.2 producesrandomsegmentaldegenerationofindividualmyelininternodes,whilesparingtheaxon. axon) resultsindegenerationofthedistalaxonanditsassociatedmyelinsheath,withatrophyofdenervatedmyofibers.Bycontrast,acutedemyelinatingdisease(lower (B)Acuteaxonalinjury(upper axon) allowsconnectionswithmyofiberstore-form.TheregeneratedaxonismyelinatedbyproliferatingSchwanncells,butthenewinternodesareshorterandthemyelinsheathsarethinnerthantheoriginalones.(NodesRanvieraremarkedbyarrows;comparewithpanelA. axon) (C)Regenerationofaxonsafterinjury(upper Fig. )Remissionofdemyelinatingdisease(lower 22.2 Pathologicchangesinperipheralneuropathies. withalongthickdarkmyelininternodeflankedbynodesofRanvier(arrows;comparewith (A)Regenerationaftersegmentaldemyelination.Teasedfiberpreparationsallowforexaminationofindividualaxonsofperipheralnerves.Anormalaxon(left)

Fig.

marknodesofRanvier;comparewith ).Allmyelininternodesalonghisaxonwouldbeexpectedtobeofsimilarlengthandwidth.Therightaxon,bycontrast,showsasegmentsurroundedbyaseriesofthinlymyelinatedinternodesofunevenlengthflankedonbothendsbynormalthickermyelininternodes(arrows 22.1A

Fig.22.1C ). desalsoareshorterandhavethinnermyelinsheathsthanflankingnormalundamagedinternodes. axon) allowsremyelinationtotakeplace,butthenewinterno (B–C)Vasculiticneuropathy.In(B),theperineurialconnectivetissuecontainsaninflammatoryinfiltratearoundsmallbloodvesselsthathasobliteratedavessel.In(C),aspecialstainthatcolorsmyelinatedaxonsdarkbluehueshowsthatthenervefascicleintheupperportionofthisfield(asterisk) haslostalmostallofitslargemyelinatedaxons,incontrastwiththeotherfascicleshown.Suchinterfascicularvariationinaxonaldensityisoftenseenin

http://ebooksmedicine.net neuropathiesresultingfromvascularinjury.

of preparations series examining internodes in axons ( when random to teased along fiber individual is visualized best damage a of internodes

Fig. 22.2A

Peripheral neuropathies anatomic patterns. exhibit several

affect Polyneuropathies peripheral symmetric, nerves fashion. usually a length-dependent in pronounced the the distal longest loss segments in more is nerves. Axonal typically of start sensation the and that spread in and commonly loss Patients upward. toes paresthesias of present with sensory are a time picture By in resulting reach the as the knees, the the level changes hands described of “stocking-and-glove” distribution. affected, the also is This often and with encountered pattern toxic metabolic damage.

right in Mononeuritis a multiplex, at point in palsy which and, affects wrist randomly drop. nerve time, foot in nerves, the individual drop radial left (for a and resulting example) a damage separate by is vasculitis. caused multiplex often Mononeuritis

injury, mononeuropathy Lyme carpal is a disease. certain most of involves (e.g., single simple commonly as the result such nerve tunnel syndrome), and only entrapment infections A or traumatic

associated ( Many be may neuropathy with different peripheral diseases

22.1 ). Table that discuss that We are are type a next prototypical specific for of polyneuropathy or common. particularly entities selected

22.1 Table Neuropathies Peripheral

InheritedCharcot-Marie-Toothneuropathy,type1,typeII,andX-linkedHereditaryneuropathywithliabilitytopressurepalsy

http://ebooksmedicine.net OthersParaneoplastic,someleukodystrophies

lead from of within of to failure is in muscles rapidly progressive weakness ascending symptoms. demyelinating syndrome death days motor of acute that resulting onset a affecting axons, Guillain-Barré can disorder respiratory the diseases of system. one nervous peripheral is common the of most It life-threatening infection to or response. by down autoimmune triggered self-tolerance, to thereby vaccination Guillain-Barré an be that breaks an syndrome appears leading agents and, human jejuni, infectious include Associated recently Epstein-Barr (HIV), virus virus, most virus. immunodeficiency Campylobacter cytomegalovirus, Zika proximal with segments in The most macrophages. is nerve nerve cell roots rich extensive injury in associated mononuclear and and is the infiltrates a the are humoral believed cellular Both role disease immune play in process. responses to and immune immunoglobulin as antibodies), remove care, (which supportive and infusions ventilatory mechanisms), responses unclear plasmapheresis include suppress (to such intravenous through support. offending Treatments Patients initial with acute phase usually time. who the disease recover the survive of

symmetrical acquired by that inflammatory more. sensorimotor most or persists polyneuropathy peripheral the common 2 months characterized neuropathy, CIDP chronic for mixed is motor weakness, are walking, such pain tingling abnormalities numbness, and sensations. and in or difficulty sensory Both as common, mediated. Guillain-Barré CIDP syndrome, immune Like is chronic, contrast course. follows relapsing-remitting, or a in progressive syndrome, to But Guillain-Barré CIDP immune erythematosus and with disorders, frequency such increased other as patients occurs infection. in It HIV with lupus systemic remyelination show nerves ( and segments of demyelination peripheral The

Fig. 22.2A ). cases, likened and cells of long-standing activation structures concentric of multilayered to of in with arrangement multiple produce to result Schwann the proliferation bulbs. In regeneration Schwann individual around cells onion axons repeated episodes plasmapheresis includes administration agents. immunosuppressive and of Treatment of bouts recover recurrent often loss of disease lead Some more nerve but completely, to symptomatic permanent function. patients

neuropathy, Diabetes the usually cause common disease. of with is long-standing developing peripheral most occur Diabetic together. or forms singly can neuropathies include several that

by bowel, sexual bladder, characterized cardiac, Autonomic neuropathy in or changes function. is

muscle to asymmetric progress weakness and Lumbosacral extremity can pain that radiculopathy manifests with atrophy. lower usually

the polyneuropathy diabetic Distal symmetric form is neuropathy. sensorimotor common most of severely affected are motor numbness. Sensory axons, clinical dominated a resulting in paresthesias than by axons presentation more and category the but and fit polyneuropathy form the or of often exhibits nerves instead degeneration of demyelinating both. diabetic into features This neatly peripheral results does axonal not from length-dependent of implicated. metabolism, of changes, is increased end pathogenesis species, and from advanced of reactive axonal accumulation of levels glycosylation oxygen been complex; diabetic all neuropathy in resulting The have microvascular products changes hyperglycemia, control form is best of the therapy. glycemic Strict

Toxic,Vasculitic, Inherited and Peripheral of Forms Neuropathy

neuropathy ( diverse of There are causes other peripherlal

brief merit Table of which some discussion. 22.1 ),

transport toxins function with interfere axonal neuropathies. produce Drugs or often peripheral that environmental cytoskeletal and The axons most are appear and hence distal longest in extremities. susceptible, the most first symptoms are pronounced

different ( of many in systemic vasculitis nerves are Peripheral damaged forms

Fig. granulomatosis. nodosa, syndrome, with 10), and polyarteritis polyangiitis ) 22.2B (Chapter Churg-Strauss including nerve vasculitis damage is a the at patients time all about with of in peripheral Overall, seen third presentation. of The mixed a of multiplex peripheral asymmetric and mononeuritis that most common sensory painful picture neuropathy. clinical is motor with also involvement the level, of interfascicular microscopic variation in at considerable apparent damage degree show may axonal single is nerves ( Patchy as the

Fig. 22.2C

diseases nerves prevalence but in peripheral Inherited of 1 with disorders, to of 4 10,000. are heterogeneous a group relatively a common of They axonal. or demyelinating be can polyneuropathies. disorders that may Many course in that manifest acquired slowly of mimic and follow adulthood a such progressive most genes The myelin-associated the mutations in encoding causes proteins. common are

Peripheralneuropathiesmayresultinweaknessand/orsensorydeficitsinpatternsdescribedaspolyneuropathy,mononeuritismultiplex,andmononeuropathy.

Axonalanddemyelinatingperipheralneuropathiescanbedistinguishedonthebasisofclinicalandpathologicfeatures.Somedisordersareassociatedwithamixedpatternofinjury.

Diabetesisthemostcommoncauseofperipheralneuropathy.

Guillain-Barrésyndromeandchronicidiopathicdemyelinatingpolyneuropathyareimmune-mediateddemyelinatingdiseasesthatfollowacuteandchroniccourses,respectively.

Metabolicdiseases,drugs,toxins,connectivetissuediseases,vasculitides,andinfectionsallcanresultinperipheralneuropathy.

Anumberofmutationscauseperipheralneuropathy.Manyoftheseareadult-onsetdiseasesthatmaymimicacquiredones.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

junction is muscle a neuromuscular to axons control skeletal and nerve muscle The structure the contraction. at located interface serves of that motor complex specialized of the peripheral that processes Here distal terminate in nerves into boutons. small branch bulbous motor ends synaptic calcium membrane, depolarize and Nerve of stimulating impulses release the cleft. presynaptic the synaptic into influx the acetylcholine to electromechanical receptor through the of myofiber on its bind to postsynaptic contraction the membrane, leading and coupling. depolarization synaptic diffuses cleft Acetylcholine across the ultrastructural any morphology neuromuscular the produce changes. junction functional deficits of alterations absence in the in disorders beyond significant Often of neuromuscular this that interesting common or the pathogenically disorders of of in Considered the signals are transmission some junction. section more across disrupt the

that with fluctuating by gravis target disease muscle junction. Myasthenia an is autoantibodies is that caused weakness autoimmune neuromuscular the common is postsynaptic the (AChR). target receptor most antigenic The acetylcholine Other receptor-related antibodies muscle-specific recognize pathogenic (MuSK) low-density lipoprotein kinase and protein (LRP4). junctions. receptors loss lead the to the structure and of damage These of antibodies to has disease an in approximately The persons. of 2 100,000 incidence distribution with features. age Anti-AChR have bimodal distinctive somewhat clinical mediated cases Early centers enlargement follicles the the due (follicular females germinal years common frequently 50 with cell to of in age is and presence more and thymic hyperplasia). is of onset before thymus B associated cases a thymoma associated gender neoplasm thymic Late-onset more equal are show epithelium. distribution a derived from and (Chapter 12), with the perturb believed B stage are generation of tolerance self-antigens, cells. setting autoreactive to T for of the lesions these Both thymic and to

ptosis gravis myasthenia eyelids) with Clinically, extraocular (double (drooping or the in diplopia vision) of manifests frequently weakness muscles. because there different primary sparing distinctly This diseases, from is muscles. which and is weakness myopathic in of pattern of relative that facial most extraocular of severity weakness few of a The periods the over rapidly, minutes. often of fluctuates sometimes are Characteristically, features strength whereas repetitive cholinesterase useful. muscles of markedly, diagnostically makes weakness severe, firing inhibitors that improve more the are treatments Effective thymic cholinesterase include thymectomy. plasmapheresis, inhibitors, (in and lesions) with patients immunosuppression, 95%. 5-year greater have the than to survival interventions rate improved These

autoantibodies release inhibit into the of synaptic is syndrome the reducing the Lambert-Eaton function calcium channels, thereby caused of by that cleft. acetylcholine presynaptic in contrast gravis. stimulation, improvement weakness in with repetitive to myasthenia experience suffering those Lambert-Eaton Patients from with syndrome stimulation acetylcholine to release. serves intracellular facilitate up calcium Repetitive sufficient build to

paraneoplastic with as small a cell particularly patients lung syndrome Lambert-Eaton disorder, arises in often carcinoma. effective, toward causative inhibitors directed through or plasmapheresis either therefore antibodies, of and therapy are immunosuppression. not reducing titer is Cholinesterase the of the worse malignancy. because that of frequent an of underlying than prognosis gravis is myasthenia The coexistence

disorders other Several merit brief junction neuromuscular mention.

neuromuscular group junction various proteins. that the result heterogeneous that mutations a diseases syndromes disrupt Congenital of function from of comprise myasthenic the defects cleft responsiveness across the Depending skeletal transport affected (postsynaptic). of acetylcholine the may muscle the the protein, (synaptic), synaptic of (presynaptic), or on level the acetylcholine of at release occur present Hence mimicking with Lambert-Eaton may they myasthenia symptoms or syndrome gravis. respond with Some inhibitors. treatment to forms acetylcholinesterase

in muscle bacteria contraction. with Infections be neural and associated exotoxin-producing may defects transmission with neurotoxins neuromuscular release botulinum both interfere potent with Clostridium 9) that tetani (Chapter and extremely transmission. Clostridium and sustained (known release to and blocks inhibitory toxin tetanospasmin) Tetanus acetylcholine leading of increased the action the (tetanus). neurons, spasm muscle contraction as of Botulinum inhibits by paralysis. contrast, flaccid release, toxin, acetylcholine producing a as and conditions attribute after of toxin stable muscular has with (Botox) an blepharospasm strabismus). antidote (e.g., purified that unwanted use The is other widespread and to an activity associated injection, a led its variety for remarkably wrinkles

Disordersofneuromuscularjunctionsmanifestwithweaknessthatoftenaffectsfacialandextraocularmusclesandmayshowrapidfluctuationinseverity.

BothmyastheniagravisandLambert-Eatonsyndrome,whicharethemostcommonforms,areimmunemediated,beingcausedbyantibodiesthattypicallytargetpostsynapticacetylcholinereceptorsandpresynapticcalciumchannels,respectively.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Myastheniagravisoftenisassociatedwiththymichyperplasiaorthymoma.Lambert-Eatonsyndromeisaparaneoplasticdisorderinthemajorityofthecases;thestrongestassociationiswithsmallcelllungcancer.

Geneticdefectsinneuromuscularjunctionproteinsandbacterialtoxinsalsocancausesymptomaticdisturbancesinneuromusculartransmission.

one with together motor which system principal its skeletal innervates. is component motor is and lower axon, it of fibers muscle The of junctions, neuron the neuromuscular associated unit, composed the the the motor

fast ( Skeletal of classified type and fibers slow twitch I broadly as different consists type II fiber types twitch muscle

). Table 22.2 innervation. type on The dependent fiber is the therefore same share myofibers of fiber unit motor the type. a All Normally in the are checkerboard of patterns types ( distributed fibers different

Fig. ). 22.1A skeletal complexes proteins muscles. of structure function for unique A of the and number are crucial and protein proteins up complex the that dystrophinglycoprotein sarcomeres the ( make These and include

Fig. as to well metabolic as unusual enzymes it ), allow meet requirements. muscle that 22.3

muscle that or disorders changes secondary diseases myopathies caused from neuropathic disrupt distinguished innervation. to muscle have be by Primary function Both with has are ( but morphology, muscle each features altered distinctive associated and

Fig. 22.4 ). conditions Myopathic necrosis often regeneration associated individual of are and ( segmental muscle with fibers

Fig. 22.4B ). with Some inflammatory myopathies inclusions. as features, associated such morphologic intracellular or are other also infiltrates by of disease muscle conditions. reflective as in well both and of occur as replacement can endomysial neuropathic Disruption fatty fibrosis myopathic chronicity is that

Both processes atrophy. neuropathic and myopathic cause muscle fiber follows: certain patterns with associated are However, • as atrophy, changes. particular Neuropathic of disorders of atrophy of myofibers. causes Loss innervation grouped neurogenic hallmarks ( of and morphologic two atrophy grouping main type changes, The fiber

Fig. result denervation ), 22.4C of the reinnervation. multiple and rounds are of axon of an motor or results unit of lower ( in that are of part neuron myofibers atrophy this motor the Loss

Fig. 22.4C2 ). be atrophic by of units, size the reinnervated motor axonal motor branches from adjacent Atrophic ( to myofibers trophic returning myofibers and the can these units increasing input

Fig. 22.4C3 ). motor units Multiple larger of increasingly rounds denervation number a of reinnervation size. of result dwindling in and produce setting In myofibers, clusters will atrophy large of loss grouped this of ( atrophic therefore innervation

Fig. 22.4C5 ). Because

Fig. Thedystrophin-glycoproteincomplex(DGC).Thiscomplexofglycoproteinsservestocouplethecellmembrane(thesarcolemma)toextracellularmatrixproteinssuchaslaminin-2andtheintracellularcytoskeleton.Akeysetofconnectionsismadebydystrophin,ascaffoldingproteinthattethersthemyofibrillarcytoskeletontothetransmembranedystroglycansandsarcoglycans,andalsobindssignalingcomplexescontainingdystrobrevin,syntrophin,neuronalnitricoxidesynthetase(nNOS),andcaveolin.MutationsindystrophinareassociatedwithX-linkedDuchenneandBeckermusculardystrophies;mutationsincaveolinandthesarcoglycanproteinswithautosomallimb-girdlemusculardystrophies;andmutationsinα2laminin(merosin)withaformofcongenitalmusculardystrophy. 22.3

Muscle 22.2 Table Fiber Types

EnergymetabolismLowglycolyticHighglycolyticcapacity,highcapacity,lowoxidativecapacityoxidativecapacity

MYH2,MYH4,geneexpressed MyosinheavychainMYH7 http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 22.4 Patternsofskeletalmuscleinjury. (A)Normalskeletalmusclehasrelativelyuniformpolygonalmyofiberswithperipherallyplacednucleithataretightlypackedtogetherintofasciclesseparatedbyscantconnectivetissue.Aperimysialinterfascicularseptumcontainingabloodvesselispresent(top center).

(B)Myopathicconditionsoftenareassociatedwithsegmentalnecrosisandregenerationofindividualmyofibers.Necroticcells(B1–B3)areinfiltratedbyvariablenumbersofinflammatorycells.Regenerativemyofibers(B4,arrow)arecharacterizedbycytoplasmicbasophiliaandenlargednucleoli(notvisibleatthispower).(C)Neurogenicchanges.(C1)Thisdiagrammaticrepresentationoffournormalmotorunitsshowsacheckerboard-typeadmixtureoflightanddarkstainedfibersofoppositetype.(C2)Damagetoinnervatingaxonsleadstoalossoftrophicinputandtheatrophyofmyofibers.(C3)Reinnervationofmyofiberscanresultinaswitchinfibertypeandsegregationoffibersofliketype.Asillustratedhere,reinnervationisalsooftenassociatedwithanincreaseinmotorunitsize,withmoremyofibersinnervatedbyanindividualaxon. fibersonthisATPasereaction(pH9.4),correspondingtofindingsin(A). andtypeII(dark) (C4)NormalmusclehasacheckerboarddistributionoftypeI(light) (C5)Clusteredflattened“angulated”atrophicfibers(grouped areatypicalfindingassociatedwithdisruptedinnervation. atrophy) (C6)Withongoingdenervationandreinnervation,largeclustersoffibersappearthatallsharethesamefibertype(fiber type grouping).

unit, type innervating depends to I vice from fibers on and motor myofiber type reinnvervated change the II type may versa. by the of type, presence checkerboard increasingly alters normal grouping type the producing units same motor larger The distribution large of fiber clusters type fibers ( of

Fig. 22.4C6).

bone) a or more disuse • muscles sick, (e.g., Prolonged prolonged fibers. of tends casting the II from broken I bed of atrophy, fibers focal affect may generalized rest to cause in which than cause muscle type type any

(e.g., in syndrome), also exposure, may cause muscle • Glucocorticoid atrophy. or endogenous Cushing exogenous whether are in this type Proximal affected and setting. preferentially muscles myofibers II

muscle. by marked defects mutations skeletal of Inherited are collection in disorders a diverse for responsible muscle organs some others in skeletal disease, the In while are main involved. site of disorders, of these multiple is http://ebooksmedicine.net Of

Duchenne other Dystrophinopathies: heart involvement the the is is life-limiting. and particular organs because and is of involved, impor- cardiac tance, common often the disorders of this inherited Included in muscular following: group are

function have normal birth. muscle muscle with in at progressive patients injury associated are dystrophies who Muscular

progressive, diseases. Congenital muscular are by dystrophies, contrast, early-onset with of are Some malformations system. nervous the associated also central

time. improve infancy tend typically myopathies or defects be that Congenital with static with present to muscle to in even are with often They associated of muscle. structural abnormalities the distinct

glance appear discussion different terminologies. of The confusing at systems muscular may dystrophies classification and of first because our of and is genetic from on based based these inheritance reflective understanding mutations. diseases, description to phenotype pattern, of one a on underlying evolving This phenotypes. from that of stems and genotypes simple between An there complexity layer is a the not fact correspondence additional one-to-one gene in illustrated autosomal Instead recessive as and in different several present as (such for single muscular a mutations by dystrophy; example, conversely muscular different dystrophin) dystrophy. can of lead to can, types mutations phenotypes, different Becker genes as Duchenne limb-girdle very clinical

called muscular and by the disrupt dystrophin. are common large protein most X-linked The a caused that mutations of are function structural dystrophies diseases dystrophinopathies. referred as are a these As to result, are Duchenne (DMD) important in diseases (BMD) and the Becker this muscular most dystrophy muscular dystrophy two group. births and of an follows course. invariably 1 fatal an incidence per about has 3500 live male DMD becomes are evident early they patients dead childhood; by are the adulthood. are in of their wheelchair-bound time clinically by disease most It and early teenagers and The less is Becker type dystrophy less of common severe. muscular

MORPHOLOGYThehistologicalterationsinskeletalmusclesaffectedbyDMDandBMDaresimilar,exceptthatthechangesaremilderinBMD(

).Thehallmarksoftheseaswellasothermusculardystrophiesareongoingmyofibernecrosisandregeneration.Progressivereplacementofmuscletissuebyfibrosisandfatistheresultofdegenerationoutpacingrepair.Asaresultofongoingrepair,musclestypicallyshowmarkedvariationinmyofibersizeandabnormalinternallyplacednuclei.BothDMDandBMDalsoaffectcardiacmuscles,whichshowvariabledegreesofmyocytehypertrophyandinterstitialfibrosis. Fig.22.5

Fig. 22.5 Duchennemusculardystrophy.Histologicimagesofmusclebiopsyspecimensfromtwobrothers.(A–B)Specimensfroma3-year-oldboy. side) (C)Specimenfromhisbrother,9yearsofage.Asseenin(A),atayoungeragefascicularmusclearchitectureismaintained,butmyofibersshowvariationinsize.Additionally,thereisaclusterofbasophilicregeneratingmyofibers(left andslightendomysialfibrosis,seenasfocalpink-stainingconnectivetissuebetweenmyofibers.In(B),immunohistochemicalstainingshowsacompleteabsenceofmembrane-associateddystrophin,seenasabrownstaininnormalmuscle(inset).In(C),thebiopsyfromtheolderbrotherillustratesdiseaseprogression,whichismarkedbyextensivevariationinmyofibersize,fattyreplacement,andendomysialfibrosis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

dystrophin are BMD and on of chromosome disrupting gene located X DMD function the mutations caused arm by the Both (Xp21). short the the of kD Dystrophin in protein of ( brain, and very is found large peripheral and muscle, (427 in dystrophin-glycoprotein weight) part it nerves; complex is a skeletal molecular cardiac the

Fig. ). 22.3 the stabilizes be may complex during cell with This interactions muscle other in cell and proteins. involved contraction signaling through they defects also cells during and thought membrane calcium vulnerable signaling. tears that transient to to disrupt muscle contraction to intracellular Dystrophin-glycoprotein make influx, complex lead may are for that degeneration with capacity myofiber out-paces time the result The repair. is develops this is dystrophin-glycoprotein why in also important eventually cardiomyopathy The for muscle function; cardiac complex many explains patients.

dystrophin genes. megabases human 1% gene the of largest (about spans it 2.4 roughly chromosome), the of X one The making size likely equal mutations, more things Its prone enormous which are chance sporadic affect make being genes. to by more may it all to large mutations. are mutations most followed point common frameshift by and The deletions, a and two DMD first have either on the muscle Patient of usually absence complete biopsy. of show with dystrohpin Patients BMD residual and have point mutations make forms. defective with often but of genotype The with correlates and disease extent severity deficiency. of dystrohpin therefore

peers the and symptoms Often because weakness. of first muscle of inability clumsiness DMD are with keep an up to girdle. begins girdle typically involves in and the next pelvic the The shoulder weakness physical pseudohypertrophy, calves, finding. early Enlargement an termed is of the muscle an part and progressively endomysial initially fibrosis. the increasing bulk myofibers muscle increased as replaced of but by tissue myofiber is The hypertrophy, adipose stems degenerate, from lead and fatal. may to muscle Cardiac which failure may fibrosis heart and damage arrhythmias, prove cognitive may in occur classified structural impairment mental also severe to been system be and central enough the nervous have as Although described, may be abnormalities retardation. no progresses. muscle fall serum are ongoing the to creatine muscle as is at persist degeneration, Owing decade and high disease present through first the as but birth mass levels life kinase of lost insufficiency, cardiac respiratory results decompensation. Death pneumonia, from and

BMD and adolescence or childhood a symptomatic and rate. slower later progresses in becomes at variable more a nearly span. live well adulthood Many into normal patients and have life clinical feature may weakness. and involvement dominant be of Cardiac even the may muscle the result in death, skeletal significant absence in

patients Treatment with challenging. is dystrophinopathies of Current supportive of primarily treatment consists care. fibers. of muscle Definitive therapy restoration levels cardiac in requires and dystrophin skeletal to Genetic are approaches this clinical in being accomplish tested trials. to of deleterious strategy of thus alter the exons expression anti-sense of containing One splicing RNAs cause involves a so protein. dystrophin expression truncated, but the mutations, functional, partially RNA that “skipping” permitting as protein. involves use second that synthesis enable the another promote dystrophin of ploy functional the A drugs codons, “read-through” stop of some ribosomal may strategy of that

clinical, dystrophy and DMD BMD features but muscular with and distinct features. of Other pathologic share forms genetic, have

dystrophy. Myotonic • in involuntary dystrophy. myotonic group sustained of is symptom cardinal muscles, contraction the the neuromuscular of a Myotonia, after and example, relaxing of handshake. their complain grip, for a difficulty Patients often stiffness in (Chapter an dominant autosomal is disease expansion inherited Myotonic trait. nucleotide as is dystrophy a that 7) repeat have protein More patients mutations encodes kinase in dystrophia than of the the myotonica dystrophy myotonic that 95% with (DMPK). gene repeats, normal to whereas 37 subjects, gene CTG affected several In contains 5 this 45 patients usually carry thousand. to nucleotide anticipation, of manifestations repeat exhibits each diseases, of As because repeat expansion. by worsening the with generation disease trinucleotide other with dystrophy passing expansion further myotonic characterized located the CTG The of DMPK repeat is 3′ untranslated the mRNA. in region “toxic” skeletal that from phenotype expansion. studies stems repeat gain-of-function the muscle triplet suggest Experimental by the caused a with the resulting The mRNA mutant RNA DMPK muscleblindlike CUG splicing. expansions in proteins involved sequesters functional of This expression depletion tissues cardiac of proteins like and alters RNA in disrupts skeletal gene the normal splicing involved and muscle. diseased patterns function facial the and weakness often hands muscles with wrist gait childhood the late abnormalities foot of progression of and with muscles, subsequent due dystrophy dorsiflexors, of Myotonic ptosis. intrinsic extensors, to of atrophy manifests weakness in to the potentially balding, fatal cataracts, in of and other arrhythmias, endocrinopathies, systems early organ cardiac testicular results Involvement atrophy. frontal

dystrophies. muscular Limb-girdle and of affect the musculature proximal the trunk muscular dystrophies limbs. preferentially These Their is basis heterogeneous. genetic list The 7 includes autosomal at subtypes. growing least dominant 15 recessive subtypes and affect Some other dystrophin. mutations of responsible complex dystrophin-glycoprotein of components the than the of vesicle and (caveolin-3 dystroglycan, of injury of affect Others cytoskeletal complex. posttranslational component the after proteins cell modification dysferlin), dystrophin-glycoprotein membrane or in proteins, and transport repair a involved

structural mutations caused in a disorder http://ebooksmedicine.net is affecting found muscular heterogeneous nucleus. (EMD) Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy by proteins the genetically the caused encoding dominant results form X-linked by an form gene autosomal gene is in An in mutations the whereas A/C. lamin emerin, the protein from encoding mutations proteins muscle). that mechanical defects nucleus integrity the of subjected compromise cardiac stress skeletal is in It that the repetitive to and are (e.g., in these hypothesized cells structural expression proteins gene chromatin thereby also structure patterns. affect regulate and These may muscle progressive and clinical picture weakness the cardiac is characterized and wasting, ankles, of disease. contractures and The elbows by cardiac patients. sudden lead The of with death to arrhythmias to is cardiomyopathy 40% being in involvement severe, up that associated and

genetic muscular expression an DUX4 dominant in of that is mature that repressed by dystrophy transcription is allow caused complex form Facioscapulohumeral • autosomal changes dystrophy the normally of that is tissues. factor disease thought expression involved of caused the normal by that of It DUX4 is in of function is genes, muscles. are target which over many the skeletal in 20 muscles Most symptomatic of years, facial weakness the age the patients by owing to shoulder. and become usually the of trunk weakness lower foot. exhibit the and the in dorsiflexors also the Patients persons normal have expectancy. life affected a Most

and Metabolic Myopathies, Channelopathies, Myopathies Mitochondrial

function. are defects result inherited and channels Other skeletal metabolism, ion of mitochondrial (channelopathies), disorders the in of important muscle

defects in relapsing with channel disorders associated characterized or Ion by levels, channels are ion • a by paralysis myotonia, episodes abnormal of potassium hypotonic serum inherited of are myopathies that both. caused group familial gene mutations periodic skeletal the muscle sodium encoding contraction. paralysis which the during results sodium Hyperkalemic entry in from SCN4A, channel regulates by Malignant spasms, rare is a hyperthermia tachycardia, characterized syndrome hyperpyrexia. muscle and tachypnea, agents halogenated is efflux receive a RYR1, anesthetic It succinylcholine or calcium patients carrying during receptor triggered channel, the surgery. mutations ryanodine when in production. excessive to leads producing exposure calcium anesthetic, of from receptor the and mutated reticulum, heat tetany increased the sarcoplasmic On to efflux mutations unusually is There stroke). are evidence RYR1 people susceptible hyperthermia that exertional (heat also to some carrying

include due to errors handling. inborn metabolism and (Chapter synthesis of 7) of glycogen lipid and degradation disorders Myopathies • The of of lead latter enzyme lipid system, myopathies). to carnitine which in dehydrogenase both myocytes system include accumulation (lipid the mitochondrial of and of disorders the deficiencies transport can muscle-specific These or systemic phenotype. may storage disorders as as disease a manifest damage weakness. muscle associated with Some and are may acute lead failure. (rhabdomyolysis), fasting-induced myoctyes of Others renal manifest severe which myoglobulinuria and damage, muscle exerciseor recurring necrosis with to if of episodes

because Mitochondrial mitochondrial either proteins genomes can stem nuclear from mutations that are critical • myopathies encode or RNAs both and function. the in mitochondrial for by 7). show inheritance variants (Chapter mitochondrial mutations The caused maternal in Mitochondrial manifest with adulthood with sometimes proximal ocular (external ophthalmoplegia). and weakness usually involvement myopathies early muscle severe the musculature of peripheral There cardiomyopathy. symptoms, and neuropathy, acidosis, also neurologic endocrinopathy, lactic be signs may and latter a in appearance diseases mitochondria; ragged the muscle whereas of special fibers. aggregates term the red normal show Some others are mitochondrial impart with morphology, red blotchy stains—hence associated abnormal inclusions. ultrastructural of shape to abnormal abnormal some examination, size, these crystalline and aggregates mitochondria On correspond with containing

diverse acquired disorders with muscle manifest muscle cramping, of or pain. weakness, muscle A group may muscle rhabdomyolysis, include muscle diabetes. infarction toxic postinfectious in the of and These setting myopathies, inflammatory injuries, these with are onsets. In of or instances acute most disorders adults subacute

inflammatory myopathies. Polymyositis, myositis traditional the body of inclusion dermatomyositis, triad and represent as variable well a here. delineated is phenotypes simplified are as diseases outlined not triad of that This with always complex view this to outline principles. approach Nevertheless, still key helps

expression endomysial molecules autoimmune cells. class is Polymyositis inflammatory with of T cytotoxic I infiltrates on associated and an increased myofibers predominantly MHC disorder containing CD8+ necrosis and ( leads attack The regeneration autoimmune subsequent myofiber to

Fig. 22.6A ). corticosteroids Patients other are or successfully polymyositis often treated immunosuppressive agents. with with

children, most whom entity. in is the isolated inflammatory appears it an as in Dermatomyositis common myopathy manifests a disorder. In often adults, as it paraneoplastic In contexts, basis. is have an autoimmune to believed it both with the interstitial as associated also systemic manifestations have disease. implied manifestations, by is as typically disease skin and The lung such may name, studies, in ( endothelial of microscopic a cells, with examination inclusions” or and capillaries, mononuclear cell so-called in of infiltrates is myofiber associated plasma ultrastructural On perifascicular it damage “dropout” presence with perivascular the paraseptal pattern cells, and “tubuloreticular

Fig. 22.6B http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 22.6 Inflammatorymyopathies.(A)Polymyositisischaracterizedbyendomysialinflammatoryinfiltratesandmyofibernecrosis(arrow).(B)Dermatomyositisoftenshowsprominentperifascicularandparaseptalatrophy. (C)Inclusionbodymyositis,showingmyofiberscontainingrimmedvacuoles(arrows).ModifiedGomoritrichromestain.

5), such some 1 products as diseases (Chapter affected with As upregulated SLE interferon-induced gene other in type autoimmune strongly muscles. are that p155 functions. dermatomyositis; and against with have (a patients Mi-2 relatively for antibodies and uncertain p140, specific are include proteins these autoantibodies helicase) Some nuclear

common Inclusion years the • than myopathy age. body older in patients is most inflammatory myositis of 60 be effect grouped or a forms is yet inflammation of disorder. cause to it in whether this other determined myositis, has It but with an is the myositis presence rimmed morphologic of of hallmark inclusion vacuoles body is The (

Fig. degenerative aging. from tau, patients the ) 22.6C diseases—hyperphosphorylated that is β-amyloid precursor in neurodegenerative that protein, and a contain the speculate (Chapter brains that 23)—leading disorder some derived of same accumulate to aggregates with this amyloid of proteins TDP-43 of fatty replacement, are typical Other fibrosis, endomysial mononuclear chronic cell myopathic changes, myopathies, inflammatory and features evident. infiltrates, including of also event. agents, respond inflammation suggesting disease well follows does secondary and not immunosuppressive course is that to feature a generally another The progressive chronic, a

cause thyroxine) intoxication, number intrinsic injury, including of factors various drugs). extrinsic A acute toxic can insults and alcohol factors (e.g., (e.g., muscle

may of myopathy chronic can be the and or either weakness, of muscle the proximal thyrotoxicosis. first indication Thyrotoxic take form it acute Histologic and myofiber regeneration. necrosis include findings

binge myopathy occurs Ethanol an drinking. of episode after failure renal to be The acute leading myoglobinuria. sometimes of may to secondary rhabdomyolysis degree severe, pain, single or group. Patients may to be a which confined generalized usually muscle of acute complain muscle is Microscopically, necrosis, there regeneration. and myocyte swelling,

produced can by • variety a myopathy Drug agents. of be complication pravastatin), example, approximately simvastatin, statins is myopathy of 1.5% occurring users. of (e.g., the atorvastatin, most in For common statin-induced (1) are of statin HMG-CoA myopathy forms associated myopathy. (2) reductase recognized: causing toxicity and of mediated drug an immune Two autoantibodies the

of Muscles Tumors Skeletal

are Chapter soft discussed These tumors 21 along other with of tissues. in

Skeletalmusclefunctioncanbeimpairedbyaprimary(inheritedoracquired)myopathyorsecondarilybecauseofproblemswithmuscleinnervation.

Thegeneticformsofmyopathyfallintoseveralfairlydistinctclinicalphenotypes,includingmusculardystrophy,congenitalmyopathy,andcongenitalmusculardystrophy.

DystrophinopathiesareX-linkeddisorderscausedbymutationsinthedystrophingeneanddisruptionofthedystrophinglycoproteincomplex.Dependingonthetypeofmutation,thediseasemaybesevere,suchasDMD,ormild(e.g.,Beckerdystrophy).

Acquiredmyopathieshavediversecauses,includinginflammationandtoxicexposures.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

A of nerves. peripheral tumors number arise different from structures. tissue function with soft of related other manifest or loss to on tumors surrounding as or impingement may nerves Such pain masses, of show the nerve cell Schwann In evidence tumors, differentiation. neoplastic cells peripheral most occur These variants. and adults benign and both usually malignant tumors in include their 2 familial and neurofibromatosis association the type (NF1) with important (NF2). is frequent neurofibromatosis syndromes type An 1 feature tumor

or benign internal roots. tumors are that spinal soft occur tissues, Schwannomas encapsulated in nerve may organs, the of most portion nerve. cranial the nerve affected commonly is vestibular The eighth with nerve be of schwannomas. associated arising Tumors to in symptoms or which compression, includes case vestibular may hearing in nerve related a vestibular root the the root loss nerve

but are Most 10% are sporadic, familial neurofibromatosis associated 2 about type (NF2). schwannomas with risk 23). of latter multiple in NF2 are described meningiomas, developing patients schwannomas, are at (the Chapter and ependymomas patients. vestibular hallmark not name, a later) presence are is of found schwannomas in the neurofibromas (described The of despite bilateral NF2; NF2 mutation the carry dominant a gene merlin Affected loss chromosome of patients function of 22. on by (Chapter inhibition E-cadherin–mediated Merlin is that facilitating a contact functions cytoskeletal protein as 6). a tumor suppressor contact loss of proliferate tumor inhibition lost. the merlin function, because cells is With of Of because possibly somatic mutations. merlin disrupted note, in expression also schwannomas, sporadic is

MORPHOLOGYMostschwannomasappearascircumscribedmassesabuttinganadjacentnerve.Onmicroscopicexamination,thesetumorsoftenshowanadmixtureofdenseandlooseareasreferredtoasAntoniAandB,respectively(

Fig.22.7A–B).They B areas,blandspindlecellswithbucklednucleiarearrangedintointersectingfascicles.Thesecellsoftenaligntoproducenuclearpalisading,resultinginalternatingbandsofnuclearandanuclearareascalledVerocaybodies.Axonsarelargelyexcludedfromthetumor.Intheloose,hypocellularAntoni arecomprisedofauniformproliferationofneoplasticSchwanncells.InthedenseAntoni A areas,thespindlecellsarespreadapartbyaprominentmyxoidextracellularmatrix.Thick-walledhyalinizedvesselsoftenarepresent.Hemorrhageorcysticchangesalsoaresometimesseen.

are benign sheath Neurofibromas nerve peripheral tumors. important recognized: Three subtypes are

neurofibromas cutaneous superficial tumors. as nodular polypoid arise Localized or sporadic solitary 1 occur context the of in neurofibromatosis multiple These or lesions lesions often as as (NF1). either

the nerve or nerve confines of a plexus. neurofibromas Plexiform grow diffusely within associated is lasting deficits. with therefore and neurologic enucleation such often of is lesions difficult Surgical virtually NF1 are for Plexiform neurofibromas (discussed later). pathognomonic malignant real other sheath tumors, benign but a transformation. of associated are small with Unlike tumors risk nerve these

that large, masses. form take infiltrative the disfiguring are neurofibromas Diffuse can subcutaneous of proliferations These often associated are also with NF1.

ormayexhibitadiffuselyinfiltrativegrowthpattern.Alsoincontrasttoschwannomas,theneoplasticSchwanncellsinneurofibromaareadmixedwithothercelltypes,includingmastcells,fibroblastlikecells,andperineurial-likecells.Thebackgroundstromaoftencontainsloosewavycollagenbundlesbutalsocanbemyxoidorcancontaindensecollagen( MORPHOLOGYUnlikeschwannomas,neurofibromasarenotencapsulated.Theymayappearcircumscribed,asinlocalized neurofibromas, cutaneous

Fig.22.7D involvemultiplefasciclesofindividualaffectednerves( ).Plexiform neurofibromas

).Diffuse neurofibromas Fig.22.7C showanextensiveinfiltrativepatternofgrowthwithinthedermisandsubcutisoftheskin.

suppressor an long caused NF1 encoded (17q). autosomal is in the the on arm chromosome 17 of neurofibromin, by mutations dominant disorder tumor the is negative potent regulator of Ras oncoprotein Neurofibromin a (Chapter 6). of neurofibromin to be hyperactivity feature tumors. cardinal NF1associated a function resulting of appear Ras the and Loss NF1. gene, for arising is would suppressor allele or sole tumors of the normal silenced anticipated a be setting in in mutated NF1 the As tumor neurofibromas of malignant sheath peripheral three glial nerve tumors, main tumors. “optic and all types, These include other gliomas,” (axillary NF1 and addition, stenoses, and café-au-lait various patients the skeletal vascular degrees. skin abnormalities, iris pigmented pigmented seizures, freckling in learning abnormalities of (Lisch exhibit lesions with arterial with In spots) nodules), disabilities, nodules

peripheral nerve. peripheral of a evidence show in tumors a from cell clear sheath nerve Schwann derivation and sometimes neoplasms adults typically that origin seen are Malignant from of type. the of plexiform may They transformation arise neurofibroma, usually a of in About develop malignant all tumors arise to NF1, one-half of patients with peripheral such a http://ebooksmedicine.net NF1 with 10% patients 3% and

Fig. 22.7 Schwannomaandplexiformneurofibroma. andloose,paleAntoniBareas(right),aswellashyalinizedbloodvessels(right).(B)AntoniAareawiththenucleioftumorcellsalignedinpalisadingrows. (A–B)Schwannoma.Asseenin(A),schwannomasoftencontaindensepinkAntoniAareas(left) cellsadmixedwithwavycollagenbundleslikenedtocarrotshavings. (C–D)Plexiformneurofibroma.Multiplenervefasciclesareexpandedbyinfiltratingtumorcells(C),whichathigherpower(D)areseentoconsistofblandspindle

sheath lifetimes. tumor their during nerve these activity. of overt highly infiltrative features Histologically, pleomorphism, proliferative malignancy, growth pattern, and cellular tumors high including necrosis, and are exhibit anaplasia,

transection nerve. associated of injury a is proliferation leading previous a Traumatic peripheral to nonneoplastic with neuroma a (see activate Such program a injuries regenerative

Fig. the of and proximal stump. elongation ) axonal by sprouting from processes 22.1 characterized injuries new disrupt “miss” With the processes nerve. the sheath, target, their of transected end distal that may severe these the perineurial and of painful a consists the a axonal cells, induce misguided nodule mixture formation proliferation that connective reactive of The Schwann a of localized axons, processes of tissue. elongating cells, haphazard can leading Schwann to

Inmostperipheralnervesheathtumors,theneoplasticcellsshowevidenceofSchwanncelldifferentiation.

PeripheralnervesheathtumorsareimportantfeaturesofthefamilialtumorsyndromesNF1andNF2.

Schwannomasandneurofibromasarebenignnervesheathtumors.

Schwannomasarecircumscribed,usuallyencapsulatedtumorsthatabutthenerveoforiginandareafeatureofNF2.

Neurofibromasmaymanifestasasporadicsubcutaneousnodule,asalarge,poorlydefinedsofttissuelesion,orasagrowthwithinanerve.NeurofibromasareassociatedwithNF1.

About50%ofmalignantperipheralnervesheathtumorsoccurdenovoinotherwisenormalpersons,whereastheremainderarisefromthemalignanttransformationofapreexistingNF1associatedneurofibroma.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Panse 52:90–100, of R: and Autoimmun Berrih-Aknin gravis: comprehensive dysregulation Myasthenia etiological mechanisms, a 2014. J review immune S, Le gravis.] myasthenia [Review of and of subtypes etiology

Semin disease, nerve HR: of Neurol 29:124, complications Peripheral 2009. Briemberg medical the diseases ways including diseases, cancer, infections [Review diabetes, tissue of and connective peripheral affect medical nerves.]

J Inflammatory 2015. N muscle Med 372:18, MC: Engl diseases, Dalakas idiopathic of myopathies.] current of pathophysiology inflammatory concepts the on [Discussion

Falzarano diagnosis et to Duchenne from Scotton 20:18168, Molecules therapy, 2015. al: MS, C, C, Passarelli muscular dystrophy: the [Molecular of treatment this and disease.] techniques diagnosis for

2010. for III: Therapeutic Habib neuropathy, Curr Brannagan Rep strategies Neurosci AA, TH 10:92, diabetic Neurol clinical neuropathy.] diabetic [Review especially focused on therapy of and features

Advances muscular Griggs JAMA 72:741, RC: dystrophies, in PB, Kang 2015. pathogenesis dystrophies of their [An treatment.] on muscular and update molecular the

2008. Autoimmune Phillips neuromuscular 28:212, B, of VC: LH, transmission, disorders Mahadeva Juel Neurol Semin Lambert-Eaton of and gravis myasthenia syndrome.] [Review

McClatchey Neurofibromatosis, 2007. Pathol Annu Rev AI: 2:191, type that a [Review features with and 2, 1, the type neurofibromatosis on of schwannomatosis, focus genetics.] neurofibromatosis distinguish

Obrosova peripheral the Diabetes Acta IG: Biophys Biochim 1792:931, and nerve, 2009. diabetic [Detailed of discussion pathophysiology of neuropathy.] the

biology, AM, tumor 35:537–548, Oncogene of Fernández-Valle Merlin/NF2 Role inactivation on Petrilli C: 2016. NF2 action tumors.] the the of in of gene [Mechanisms neuronal of pathogenesis

138:246, blurring boundaries, Laing congenital Ravenscroft the 2015. Brain focus, the NG, Pathophysiological G, in CG: concepts sharpening Bönnemann the myopathies: the overlapping lesions of genetic in [A review nonoverlapping and myopathies.] congenital

Facioscapulohumeral path Skelet Tapscott SM, der pathophysiology, R, van Maarel to consensus 4:12, the SJ: Muscle on dystrophy: Tawil 2014. complex a including the of of FSHD [Review discussion genetics.] myopathies: MA: 2009, Dis van BA, update 2009. J Neuromuscul Tarnopolsky Clin Adel 10:97, Metabolic of myopathies.] metabolic [Review

Zlatohlavek Physiol 63(Suppl clinical al: et from Vrablik genetic predisposition T, L, Res Stulc myopathy: M, 2014. Statin-associated management, to 3):S327, factors and statininduced [A therapy.] its for myopathy the of risk discussion

pre-mRNA Wang S, NA, proteins, Cody and 150:710–724, et ET, Transcriptome-wide localization Cell 2012. splicing of mRNA regulation by al: Jog muscleblind changes myotonic [Study the transcriptional dystrophy.] with of studentconsult.com http://ebooksmedicine.net

Edema,Herniation,andHydrocephalus

Ischemia, Infarction Hypoxia, and

and disorders nervous some vascular, central neoplastic diseases the Degenerative, the of infectious, most inflammatory, mankind. serious are of (CNS) of system unique functions that structure highly many CNS. specialized have of the These features diseases the reflect and neuron. of The is the functional the CNS principal unit distribution used, functional a activity requirements, at Neurons of roles, distinct including locations neurotransmitters of levels properties, types of in different have and different and given moment. connections, their metabolic electrical together show properties. thus in more or of selective may vulnerability not set A of insults necessarily because it to clustered the brain, region these shares various a of neurons, one different pattern signs on different functions, and follow brain clinical injury the of regions the involved brain depend of region the the participate on process. Since as as pathologic that much in symptoms of of neurologic number cell the neurons neurons small of specific a leave deficit. for even individual so with division, of essential Mature may a destruction a incapable are function oligodendrocytes, and neurons astrocytes the such CNS contains cells, the up make addition as In other which to glia. from and (e.g., respond of unique common ischemia, affected of is disorders other components also by in The to CNS neurologic distinct the are a tissues. manner infection) insults number a that

are of morphologic review disorders, briefly specific will in the in often CNS or Before characteristic we the the injury seen delving into setting that infection. changes

Features of Neuronal Injury. injury becomesevidentonroutinehematoxylinandeosin(H&E)staining( Inresponsetoinjury,anumberofchangesoccurinneuronsandtheirprocesses(axonsanddendrites).Within12hoursofanirreversiblehypoxic-ischemicinsult,neuronal

chromatolysis). Fig.23.1A ).Thereisshrinkageofthecellbody,pyknosisofthenucleus,disappearanceofthenucleolus,lossofNisslsubstance,andintenseeosinophiliaofthecytoplasm(“redneurons”).Axonalinjuryalsoleadstocellbodyenlargementandrounding,peripheraldisplacementofthenucleus,enlargementofthenucleolus,andperipheraldispersionofNisslsubstance(central Inaddition,acuteinjuriestypicallyresultinbreakdownoftheblood-brainbarrierandvariabledegreesofcerebraledema(discussedlater).

inclusions (e.g.,LewybodiesinParkinsondiseaseandtanglesinAlzheimerdisease).Pathogenicvirusesmayforminclusionsininfectedneurons,justasinothercells,andsuchinclusionsaidinthediagnosis.Insomeneurodegenerativediseases,neuronalprocessesbecomethickenedandtortuous;thesearetermeddystrophic neurites. Manyneurodegenerativediseasesareassociatedwithspecificintracellular

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Patternsofneuronalinjury.(A)Acutehypoxic-ischemicinjuryinthecerebralcortex.Thecellbodiesareshrunkenandeosinophilic(“redneurons”),andthenucleiarepyknotic.(B)Reactiveastrocytes,witheosinophiliccytoplasmandmultipleradiatingprocesses. 23.1 (C)Collectionofmicroglialcellsformingapoorlydefinednodule,acommonfindinginviralinfections.

Repair. and Astrocyte Injury Astrocytesaretheprincipalcellsresponsibleforrepairandscarformationinthebrain,aprocesstermedgliosis. astrocyte; Inresponsetoinjury,astrocytesundergobothhypertrophyandhyperplasia.Thenucleusenlargesandbecomesvesicular,andthenucleolusbecomesprominent.Thecytoplasmexpandsandtakesonabrightpinkhue,andthecellextendsmultiplestout,ramifyingprocesses(calledgemistocytic see

astrocytes). ).Unlikeelsewhereinthebody,fibroblastsparticipateinhealingafterbraininjurytoalimitedextentexceptinspecificsettings(penetratingbraintraumaoraroundabscesses).Inlong-standinggliosis,thecytoplasmofreactiveastrocytesshrinksinsize,andthecellularprocessesbecomemoretightlyinterwoven(fibrillary Fig.23.1B Rosenthal arethick,elongated,brightlyeosinophilicproteinaggregatesfoundinastrocyticprocessesinchronicgliosisandinsomelow-gradegliomas. fibers

Oligodendrocytes, whichproducemyelin,exhibitalimitedspectrumofspecificmorphologicchangesinresponsetovariousinjuries.Inprogressivemultifocalleukoencephalopathy,viralinclusionscanbeseeninoligodendrocytes,withasmudgy,homogeneous-appearingenlargednucleus.

Microglial arelong-livedcellsderivedfromtheembryonicyolksacthatfunctionastheresidentphagocytesoftheCNS.Whenactivatedbytissueinjury,infection,ortrauma,theyproliferateandbecomemoreprominenthistologically.Microglialcellstakeontheappearanceofactivatedmacrophagesinareasofdemyelination,organizinginfarct,orhemorrhage;inothersettingssuchasinfections,theydevelopelongatednuclei(rod cells). cells (see Aggregatesofelongatedmicroglialcellsatsitesoftissueinjuryaretermedmicroglial nodules

Fig.23.1C ).Similarcollectionscanbefoundcongregatingaroundandphagocytosinginjuredneurons(neuronophagia).

linetheventricularsystemandthecentralcanalofthespinalcord.Certainpathogens,particularlycytomegalovirus(CMV),canproduceextensiveependymalinjury,withtypicalviralinclusions.Choroid isincontinuitywiththeependyma,anditsspecializedepithelialcoveringisresponsibleforthesecretionofcerebrospinalfluid(CSF). Ependymal cells plexus

EDEMA,HERNIATION,ANDHYDROCEPHALUS

within passing encased spinal The blood specific foramina. nerves and skull and brain spinal canal, and with through are cord vessels the structures room advantage states. arrangement of provides rigid housing little obvious, this for hard, delicate expansion The the of within disease the but in brain CNS is increase pressure. in a increase brings virtually in intracranial skull an with it contents volume of As the the result, any the serious the in of in system compromise the fatal deliver Substantial consequences. decreased brain to resulting with the or intracranial increases to brain, perfusion, cardiovascular ability pressure blood that generalized tumors. Disorders as in hemorrhages, increases include edema, hydrocephalus, ischemia, such and dangerous contents mass cause cerebral may of volume lesions the intracranial

within accumulation fluid the of brain is edema Cerebral excess parenchyma. the particularly together, injury. after often are generalized types, two There which occur

when vascular extracellular blood-brain into the allowing to integrity is of the compartment barrier occurs brain. the the from normal fluid Vasogenic of the edema disrupted, shift spaces permeability be the in generalized. increased can (e.g., vascular localized Vasogenic or result due of inflammation or tumors) to edema

might neuronal an hypoxic or is insult fluid intracellular to Cytotoxic or follow to and increase ischemic in toxins. certain injury, secondary cell generalized glial edema exposure as

and edematous vault. softer the to often cranial “overfill” than normal appears The is brain are compressed gyri cavities intervening narrowed, sulci the are edema, generalized In and the the ventricular flattened, are (

Fig. 23.2 http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Cerebraledema.Thesurfacesofthegyriareflattenedasaresultofcompressionoftheexpandingbrainbytheduramaterandinnersurfaceoftheskull.Suchchangesareassociatedwithadangerousincreaseinintra-cranialpressure. 23.2

being circulates within CSF Magendie and where ventricles, by the arachnoid choroid produced the ventricular the by Luschka the and it of After through subarachnoid flows into is foramina system granulations. through plexus absorbed the space, The generation regulates between CSF resorption of balance volume. and rates

Hydrocephalus to increase the volume CSF within refers system. an ventricular the in of the consequence or resorption disorder This flow of is a impaired most CSF. decreased often of the enlarges not. system, flow obstacle is remainder a within there portion while to does ventricles of the a CSF If the localized then ventricular and Monro hydrocephalus obstructing or referred aqueduct. foramen masses caused to cerebral is by the most noncommunicating This pattern of as commonly compressing is the is the it CSF ventricular entire communicating is hydrocephalus, caused by resorption. reduced In system usually enlarged;

sutures, before develops cranial infancy the hydrocephalus enlarges. If the in of head closure but change hydrocephalus Once causes the sutures no expansion head in increased and fuse, pressure, ventricular circumference ( intracranial

Fig. 23.3 ). disease). compensatory brain is secondary infarction, CSF the contrast increase vacuo) to from In any a (e.g., of underlying volume disorders, (hydrocephalus a in increased process, these may volume occur volume ex loss CSF cause primary which in neurodegenerative to hydrocephalus the significance. and primary the no disorder of clinical In merely such is settings, reflects

of tissue another displacement is response from one brain to the Herniation pressure. to compartment in increased intra-cranial divided and tentorium). is (falx by intra-cranial compartment folds The rigid dural of high, brain is sufficiently displaced portions are across the these the structures. rigid If pressure to supply often of blood compromise This and compressed producing herniation. tissue, further the additional to herniation infarction, leads swelling,

There ( three are main types herniation of

Fig. 23.4

cingulate the asymmetric the herniation of edge occurs under (cingulate) or falx. expansion unilateral the gyrus a Subfalcine when hemisphere of cerebral displaces This artery. cerebral may anterior compress the

of the margin occurs the free the Transtentorial against herniation the compressed lobe aspect tentorium. temporal when of is (uncinate) medial lobe cranial displaced, lesion pupil”). compromised, movements resulting third in of the side on and (“blown the nerve impaired is is temporal dilation the ocular As the pupillary tissue artery may in visual ischemic be vessel, resulting also compressed, cortex. supplied the The injury including that primary cerebral by to posterior on contralateral the the temporal peduncle the to further the pressure may cerebral of resulting herniation. displacement tentorium, mid-brain lobe, of side With ipsilateral the against compress hemiparesis the in the peduncle a compression Kernohan’s of notch. creates as known The deformation reticular ascending the herniation Compression of midbrain leads the activating consciousness. with to system transtentorial and depressed in by often of or midbrain Progression Duret ( and is accompanied hemorrhages transtentorial termed the herniation linear flame-shaped pons, hemorrhages

Fig. 23.5 ). the the occur brain paramedian to arteries veins and usually and of result supplying penetrating of These believed be are upper and the lesions midline stem. in tearing regions

of tonsils refers to cerebellar foramen Tonsillar the displacement herniation the through magnum. the of This compression causes brain respiratory and fatal. medulla, cardiac type stem is vital and often compromises and in herniation centers

Fig. Hydrocephalus.Dilatedlateralventriclesseeninacoronalsectionthroughthemid-thalamus. 23.3

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Herniationsyndromes.Displacementofbrainparenchymaacrossfixedbarrierscanbesubfalcine,transtentorial,ortonsillar(intotheforamenmagnum). 23.4

EDEMA,HERNIATION,ANDHYDROCEPHALUS

Cerebraledemaistheaccumulationofexcessfluidwithinthebrainparenchyma.HydrocephalusisdefinedasanincreaseinCSFvolumewithinallorpartoftheventricularsystem.

Increasesinbrainvolume(asaresultofincreasedCSFvolume,edema,hemorrhage,ortumor)raisethepressureinsidethefixedcapacityoftheskull.

Increasesinpressurecandamagethebrainbydecreasingperfusionorbydisplacingtissueacrossduralpartitionsinsidetheskullorthroughopeningsintheskull(herniations).

Fig. Durethemorrhage.Asmasseffectdisplacesthebraindownward,thereisdisruptionofthevesselsthatentertheponsalongthemidline,leadingtohemorrhage. 23.5

are brain disorders blood diseases vessels. Cerebrovascular pathologic caused involving processes by prevalent are developed in the of a are morbidity. the of death world most They and cause cause neurologic major vascular mechanisms (3) (1) (2) three occlusion, The occlusion, main rupture. pathogenic are thrombotic and embolic of the begin applied all to when Stroke designation these conditions is acutely. clinical symptoms have for vessel. of of ischemic regions loss embolism injury consequences the brain: metabolic substrates, infarction and Thrombosis affected oxygen or similar by the in supplied resulting and shock), (e.g., or complete injury when of perfusion, loss hypovolemic Similar there is occurs hypoxemia hypoglycemia. severe profound globally damage well Hemorrhage as injury. to of secondary ischemic direct as and tissue leads accompanies vessels rupture Traumatic injury is context discussed vascular separately in the trauma. of

Hypoxia,Ischemia,andInfarction

tissue glucose a the from blood. brain continual highly of that supply oxygen requires and The is a oxygen-dependent than for of body oxygen 20% is brain more cardiac responsible 15% body total 2% consumption. of the no of output resting receives and it Although weight, constitutes the remains of range flow over vascular Cerebral a and pressure intracranial pressure because of stable blood resistance. of blood wide autoregulation normally oxygen general two be by The brain mechanisms: may of deprived

that toxins impaired high use anemia, Functional monoxide cyanide poisoning) carbon altitude), caused oxygen severe hypoxia, poisoning), partial pressure interfere by (e.g., capacity of or a (e.g., (e.g., oxygen low with oxygen-carrying

be either by both vascular can due or which obstruction, transient permanent, hypotension, or hypoperfusion, caused tissue to Ischemia,

setting in systemic hypotension, pressures shock. Widespread cardiac injury as in arrest 50 the and usually below mm systolic ischemic-hypoxic can of Hg, when occur fall severe clinical duration with severity The insult. outcome the and the of varies eventual is transient may postischemic only a be there confusional with the mild, insult recovery. When state, complete than most hypoxic the more susceptible the to cells pyramidal are neocortex Purkinje Neurons injury the the and cerebellum. cells, and cells susceptible of are glial hippo-campus and neurons of are even insults vulnerable may transient individuals, some mild or In to areas. damage ischemic cause global these In death vulnerability. irrespective occurs widespread cerebral severe ischemia, global neuronal regional of impaired remain survive severely vegetative and persistent Patients state. neurologically a in often who death,” drive. respiratory absent, patients so-called and voluntary brain all brain which including meet for function and criteria stem in reflex clinical Other is “brain the of with resulting brain.” on the When are gradually undergoes the injury in patients “respirator http://ebooksmedicine.net brain maintained ventilation, mechanical form irreversible autolysis, so-called this

changes, MORPHOLOGYInthesettingofglobalischemia,thebrainisswollen,withwidegyriandnarrowedsulci.Thecutsurfaceshowspoordemarcationbetweengraymatterandwhitematter.Thehistopathologicchangesthataccompanyirreversibleischemicinjury(infarction)aregroupedintothreecategories.Early occurring12to24hoursaftertheinsult,includeacuteneuronalcellchange(redneurons)(see

)characterizedinitiallybymicrovacuolation,followedbycytoplasmiceosinophilia,andlaternuclearpyknosisandkaryorrhexis.Similarchangesoccursomewhatlaterinastrocytesandoligodendroglia.Afterthis,thereactiontotissuedamagebeginswithinfiltrationofneutrophils( Fig.23.1A

occurringat24hoursto2weeks,includenecrosisoftissue,influxofmacrophages,vascularproliferation,andreactivegliosis(see Fig.23.6A ).Subacute changes,

seenafter2weeks,ischaracterizedbyremovalofnecrotictissueandgliosis(see Fig.23.6B ).Repair,

Fig.23.6C

occurinregionsofthebrainandspinalcordthatlieatthemostdistalportionsofarterialterritories.Theyareusuallyseenafterhypotensiveepisodes.Inthecerebralhemispheres,theborderzonebetweentheanteriorandthemiddlecerebralarterydistributionsisatgreatestrisk.Damagetothisregionproducesawedge-shapedbandofnecrosisoverthecerebralconvexityafewcentimeterslateraltotheinterhemisphericfissure. zone Border (“watershed”) infarcts

of ischemia the leads arterial first infarction and in distribution vessel. the Cerebral focal occlusion to to then compromised that extent modified damage be collateral results blood the of may location, infarct shape and and the flow. by of tissue The size, can some Specifically, Willis anastomoses of flow through collateral or regions. in cortical-leptomeningeal damage the circle limit such white the are matter, little collateral and any deep by blood deep vessels. contrast, is there which flow if By thalamus, penetrating as supplied structures basal to ganglia,

more than thrombosis. are common infarctions due Embolic to infarctions are valvular source are myocardial factors. important of frequent disease, atrial Cardiac fibrillation a dysfunction, emboli; thrombi mural and predisposing carotid arise from in Thromboemboli the atheromatous also arteries most in or arch. arteries, plaques often aortic from arterial origin fat the trauma. of through emboli, a brain (paradoxical in these Emboli foramen over see the bone and patent circulation thromboemboli veins deep cross usually to venous include lodge ovale and leg may embolism; Chapter 4); following embolic carotid by the extension most The infarction. frequently of middle territory of internal cerebral is artery, direct artery, a the affected lodge where tend Emboli or stenosis, in caused of branch by to atherosclerosis. areas vessels usually

origin of atherosclerotic either infarctions cerebral artery, on Thrombotic usually and are end the the cerebral occlusions sites plaques; basilar causing bifurcation, superimposed are artery. middle the common of the carotid anterograde fragmentation and distal accompanied may embolization. as be extension, occlusions by thrombus These well as infarcts occlude when diameter, only penetrating (discussed later). to so-called causing occur “lacunar occlusions a long-standing damage, from of usually chronic small in small due hypertension few arteries millimeters infarcts,” Thrombotic

Fig.

). 23.7 there is hemorrhagic or either of through may emboli. Nonhemorrhagic into after acute of occlusions from infarcts infarcts collaterals vascular when evolve dissolution tissue, and ischemic reperfusion result

Fig. Cerebralinfarction.(A)Infiltrationofacerebralinfarctionbyneutrophilsbeginsattheedgesofthelesion,wherethevascularsupplyisintact.(B)Byday10,anareaofinfarctionshowsthepresenceofmacrophagesandsurroundingreactivegliosis. 23.6 (C)Oldintracorticalinfarctsareseenasareasoftissuelossandresidualgliosis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

infarcts MORPHOLOGYHemorrhagic usuallymanifestasmultiple,sometimesconfluent,petechialhemorrhages(

Fig.23.7AandB ).Themicroscopicpictureandevolutionofhemorrhagicinfarctionparallelthoseofischemicinfarction,withtheadditionofbloodextravasationandresorption.Inindividualswithcoagulopathies,hemorrhagicinfarctsmaybeassociatedwithextensiveintracerebralhematomas.

infarct evolvesovertime.Duringthefirst6hours,thetissueisunchangedinappearance,butby48hours,thetissuebecomespale,soft,andswollen.Fromdays2to10,theinjuredbrainturnsgelatinousandfriable,andtheboundarybetweennormalandabnormaltissuebecomesmoredistinctasedemaresolvesintheadjacentviabletissue.Fromday10toweek3,thetissueliquefies,eventuallyleavingafluid-filledcavity,whichgraduallyexpandsasdeadtissueisresorbed(see Themacroscopicappearanceofanonhemorrhagic

Fig.23.7C

Microscopically,thetissuereactionfollowsacharacteristicsequence.Afterthefirst12hours,ischemicneuronalchange(redneurons)(see

)andcytotoxicandvasogenicedemaappear.Endothelialandglialcells,mainlyastrocytes,swell,andmyelinatedfibersbegintodisintegrate.Duringthefirstseveraldaysneutrophilsinfiltratetheareaofinjury,butthesearereplacedoverthenext2–3weeksbymacrophages.Macrophagescontainingmyelinorredbloodcellbreakdownproductsmaypersistinthelesionformonthstoyears.Astheprocessofphagocytosisandliquefactionproceeds,astrocytesattheedgesofthelesionprogressivelyenlarge,divide,anddevelopaprominentnetworkofcytoplasmicextensions.Afterseveralmonths,thestrikingastrocyticnuclearandcytoplasmicenlargementregresses.Inthewallofthecavity,astrocyteprocessesformadensefeltworkofglialfibersadmixedwithnewcapillariesandafewperivascularconnectivetissuefibers. Fig.23.1A

(3) and wall vascular Hemorrhages are leading such tumors. (2) and structural cavernous brain (1) to caused other injury, malformations, lesions the diseases as arteriovenous and by hypertension within other ruptured occur are also with vascular malformations. Subarachnoid most of commonly aneurysms result but hemorrhages the epidural usually associated or Subdural with trauma. are hemorrhages

are years Spontaneous intraparenchymal incidence adult of mid about to life, at peak (nontraumatic) most with 60 common age. late hemorrhages a in to small due are a of rupture intraparenchymal Most the vessel. the accounts for hypertension. individuals brain underlying Hypertension chronic roughly of deaths among hemorrhage 15% with cause, leading is and can Intracerebral system; portions small can clinically be extends it affect it the alternatively, regions brain ventricular silent. large the clinically and of affects be or devastating hemorrhage into when cerebellum intraparenchymal hemorrhages Hypertensive in the thalamus, ( typically pons, and occur basal ganglia,

Fig. clinical location determining ), the the its 23.8 and manifestations. the bleed size with of ensues, event, of resolution clinical the hematoma the with survives sometimes individual improvement. considerable gradual If the acute

Fig. Cerebralinfarction.(A)Sectionofthebrainshowingalarge,discolored,focallyhemorrhagicregionintheleftmiddlecerebralarterydistribution(hemorrhagic,orred,infarction).(B)Aninfarctwithpunctatehemorrhages,consistentwithischemia-reperfusioninjury,ispresentinthetemporallobe. 23.7 (C)Oldcysticinfarctshowsdestructionofcortexandsur-roundinggliosis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Cerebralhemorrhage.Massivehypertensivehemorrhagerupturingintoalateralventricle. 23.8

MORPHOLOGYInacuteintracerebralhemorrhage,theextravasatedbloodcompressestheadjacentparenchyma.Withtime,hemorrhagesareconvertedtoacavitywithabrown,discoloredrim.Onmicroscopicexamination,earlylesionsconsistofclottedbloodsurroundedbyedematousbraintissuecontainingneuronsandgliadisplayingmorphologicchangestypicalofanoxicinjury.Eventuallytheedemaresolves,pigment-andlipid-ladenmacrophagesappear,andproliferationofreactiveastrocytesbecomesvisibleattheperipheryofthelesion.Thecellulareventsthenfollowthesametimecourseobservedaftercerebralinfarction.

disease as which in same later) and (CAA) a Cerebral peptides small-caliber medium-and of deposit found walls Alzheimer amyloid cortical meningeal those angiopathy vessels. disease (discussed amyloidogenic the the in is in confers rigid, and appearance Congo amyloid The pipe-like stains with a red. distribution in and vessel from with which those hypertension. the weakens differ walls associated hemorrhages, for deposition risk increases Amyloid in of hemorrhages (lobar often hemorrhages). the occur the lobes cortex cerebral CAA-associated (<1 symptomatic small addition mm) to also hemorrhages CAA hemorrhages, In (microhemorrhages). these cortical in results

saccular aneurysm. nontraumatic frequent rupture hemorrhage The of a clinically subarachnoid cause most significant of is (berry) from trauma, of rupture may subarachnoid vascular an ventricular system, hemorrhage coagulopathies, into the intracerebral tumors. into the also space result malformation, Hemorrhage and

as an increase the at sexual acute pressure, orgasm. or In intra-cranial about one-third such stool occurs rupture saccular of in aneurysm with cases, of straining a time occurs at of often excruciating pressure subarachnoid thunderclap the rapidly “the a Blood (known headache, is I’ve sudden, as with headache and is described forced headache and space, into patient worst the loses ever as under consciousness. arterial had”) stricken the 25% individuals survivors. bleed, affected die in from first are and bleeds recurrent of 50% common and Between bleeding worsens each prognosis surprisingly, episode. the with Not

arterial near 90% circulation points aneurysms branch anterior in major of occur saccular About ( the

Fig.

exist 20% aneurysms cases. of in 30% to 23.9 multiple ); time The are in the because develop aneurysms not birth media. underlying over vessel present but defects at of (Chapter and for with in genetic autosomal an 14) disorders syndrome). (e.g., dominant of kidney is matrix extracellular increased patients disease polycystic risk There Ehler-Danlos aneurysms proteins bleed probability Overall, with rupture of per aneurysms increasing 1.3% with roughly year, size. of the risk larger diameter have cm 50% in example, aneurysms 1 bleeding for than a per year. For roughly period of ischemic after early In additional risk an from other injury for there vessels. is subarachnoid hemorrhage, the a vasospasm and the obstruct attendant CSF fibrosis Healing to hydrocephalus. disrupt CSF sometimes or meningeal and flow resorption, leading scarring

).Beyondtheneckoftheaneurysm,themuscularwallandintimalelasticlaminaareabsent,suchthattheaneurysmsacislinedonlybythickenedhyalinizedintima.Theadventitiacoveringthesaciscontinuouswiththatoftheparentartery.Ruptureusuallyoccursattheapexofthesac,releasingbloodintothesubarachnoidspace,thesubstanceofthebrain,orboth. Fig.23.10

dissecting also mycotic, traumatic, atherosclerotic, saccular In to and addition intracranially. occur aneurysms, aneurysms often frequently are commonly anterior artery. atherosclerotic saccular circulation, aneurysms) are three aneurysms found last and fusiform whereas types involve most the The the basilar most (like in hemorrhage. vascular subarachnoid occlusion of Nonsaccular manifest due usually cerebral as instead infarction to aneurysms

nature http://ebooksmedicine.net are malformations (AVMs), on malformations principal types abnormal classified based brain vessels: of into four the arteriovenous of Vascular the the cavernous

Fig. artery Basilar Anterior cerebral artery Middle venous communicating 23.9 and communicating Internal artery 20%34%40%4% artery Posterior angiomas. carotid Commonsitesofsaccularaneurysms.Anterior telangiectasias, artery artery malformations, Posterior cerebral artery capillary cerebral and as between a of the 30 10 frequently these, age AVMs, an with affect twice years as hemorrhage. seizures, commonly and females most males or intra-cerebral subarachnoid hemorrhage, most of manifest common veins. to shunting failure from blood arteries period, In lead large of AVMs may high-output congestive the because to heart newborn makes The dangerous for risk most of type vascular AVM the malformation. bleeding in an hereditary telangiectasia, setting autosomal TGFβ mutations pathway. with often can seen the dominant AVMs associated be hemorrhagic the Multiple of affecting condition

mayinvolvesubarachnoidvesselsextendingintobrainparenchymaoroccurexclusivelywithinthebrain.Ongrossinspection,theyresembleatanglednetworkofwormlikevascularchannels( MORPHOLOGYAVMs

Fig.23.11 ).Microscopicexaminationshowsenlargedbloodvesselsseparatedbygliotictissue,oftenwithevidenceofprevioushemorrhage.Somevesselscanberecognizedasarterieswithduplicatedandfragmentedinternalelasticlamina,whileothersshowmarkedthickeningorpartialreplacementofthemediabyhyalinizedconnectivetissue.

consistofdistended,looselyorganizedvascularchannelswiththincollagenizedwallswithoutinterveningnervoustissue.Theyoccurmostofteninthecerebellum,pons,andsubcorticalregions,andhavealowbloodflowwithoutsignificantarteriovenousshunting.Fociofoldhemorrhage,infarction,andcalcificationfrequentlysurroundtheabnormalvessels. Cavernous malformations

(varices)consistofaggregatesofectaticvenouschannels.Theselattertwotypesofvascularmalformationareunlikelytobleedortocausesymptoms,andmostareincidentalfindings. aremicroscopicfociofdilatedthin-walledvascularchannelsseparatedbyrelativelynormalbrainparenchymathatoccurmostfrequentlyinthepons.Venous angiomas telangiectasias Capillary

basal sclerosis supply Hypertension matter, the arteriolar the deep the ganglia, hemispheric and hyaline the stem. white causes penetrating and that arterioles brain arteries of Affected arteriolar walls weakened are and to rupture. are vulnerable more In than in vessels diameter. µm instances, minute some microaneurysms) (Charcot-Bouchard form less aneurysms 300 in In (discussed intracerebral pathologic earlier), are outcomes addition hemorrhage hypertension. massive other to to several related

Fig. Saccularaneurysms.(A)Viewofthebaseofthebrain,dissectedtoshowthecircleofWilliswithananeurysmoftheanteriorcerebralartery(arrow). 23.10 (B)ThecircleofWillisisdissectedtoshowalargeaneurysm. (C)Sectionthroughasaccularaneurysmshowingthehyalinizedfibrousvesselwall.Hematoxylin-eosinstain.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Arteriovenousmalformation. 23.11

most matter, the pons. commonly ganglia that infarcts a matter infarcts, internal are white cavitary few small the millimeters found thalamus), the gray size, capsule, lacunar deep and Lacunes and in or (basal in just are the deep artery. large branch a of by of single caused are penetrating occlusion a cerebral They can on be neurologic location, their cause clinically or impairment. significant silent Depending lacunes

penetrating to small may development Rupture the of leading vessels of small-caliber the hemorrhages. occur, time, cavity hemorrhages brownish leaving behind (slit resorb, these discoloration. a surrounded In by slit-like hemorrhage)

pressure mm sudden most is in often sustained Acute blood increases than greater 130 Hg. with hypertensive to associated encephalopathy diastolic convulsions, dysfunction, as headaches, intracranial characterized increased and cerebral It is pressure sometimes and coma. confusion, vomiting, by manifesting global essential. reduce pressure to blood is intervention Rapid therapeutic the tonsillar edema, or brain or show may herniation. without examination Postmortem transtentorial with be of necrosis white gray seen matter arterioles microscopically. may the matter Petechiae and and fibrinoid in

or processes and flow cause vessels blood may blood dysfunction compromise infarction. cerebral Inflammatory involving association tuberculosis, in syphilis more caused small and the is as or setting by CMV) with infections seen was mainly immunosuppression. vessels of aspergillosis, opportunistic but of Infectious previously in and arteritis large often zoster, now (such herpes polyarteritis cause forms and involve may cerebral such systemic or of nodosa, as vessels vasculitis, infarcts. single multiple Some medium-sized parenchymal Primary granuloma angiitis walls. or (with is form the of without formation), characterized and a of small-to vessels multinucleate chronic of giant cells vasculitis that and destruction subarachnoid multiple CNS and vessel is involves by inflammation, Affected encephalopathy, dysfunction. cognitive diffuse a present with with individuals often immunosuppressive of Treatment consists agents.

istheclinicaltermforacute-onsetneurologicdeficitsresultingfromhemorrhagicorobstructivevascularlesions. Stroke

Cerebralinfarctionfollowslossofbloodsupplyandcanbewidespreadorfocal,oraffectregionswiththeleastrobustvascularsupply(“watershed”infarcts).

Focalcerebralinfarctsaremostcommonlyembolic;withsubsequentdissolutionoftheembolusandreperfusion,anonhemorrhagicinfarctcanbecomehemorrhagic.

Primaryintraparenchymalhemorrhagestypicallyareduetoeitherhypertension(mostcommonlyinwhitematter,deepgraymatter,orposteriorfossacontents)orcerebralamyloidangiopathy(cerebralcortex).

Spontaneoussubarachnoidhemorrhageusuallyiscausedbyastructuralvascularabnormality,suchasananeurysmorarteriovenousmalformation.

disability. the cause and and is of to Trauma a brain death cord significant spinal spinal of cubic frontal (involving the cord), silent (if injury injury several fatal clinically may in the brain brain severely severity and affect the The of outcome: (affecting or lobe), parenchyma centimeters be stem). site disabling of the

may or blunt; injury. open may blow penetrating A be head an or it the a cause closed to the time motion in whether is lesions The brain shape distribution on the injury. the the trauma, of the of impact, causing the and object of traumatic of depend at head resulting force magnitude and underlying of fractures external to damage brain skull occur damage head severe signs can absence even do brain. not conversely, in the lacerations Severe the indicate and injury, and necessarily of or When may the the the injuries involve both. the parenchyma, brain is damaged, vasculature,

injury at site the opposite head, occur may brain impact—a object impacts contrecoup of When the of brain—a injury—or of injury. coup an other site side the on the the impact contrecoup appearances. and coup microscopic gross lesions Both comparable contusions, and are with channels, hemorrhage, injury, of is tissue tissue rapid displacement, A and contusion disruption and vascular by subsequent edema. caused gyri skull, closest to Since they are are the of to most traumatic the susceptible the the injury. are that crests parts the of brain irregular surfaces, lobe overlying common the and regions the tips. skull and the regions are in rough temporal orbitofrontal such Contusions of brain inner as and a projectile skull as causes vascular such or tearing, fragment laceration, hemorrhage. a the a tissue from fracture Penetration brain a of disruption, bullet by a with

http://ebooksmedicine.net

MORPHOLOGYContusionsarewedge-shaped,withthewidestaspectclosesttothepointofimpact(

Fig.23.12A ).Withinafewhoursofinjury,bloodextravasatesthroughouttheinvolvedtissue,acrossthewidthofthecerebralcortex,andintothewhitematterandsubarachnoidspaces.Althoughfunctionaleffectsareseenearlier,morphologicevidenceofneruonalinjury(nuclearpyknosis,cytoplasmiceosinophilia,cellulardisintegration)takesabout24hourstoappear.Theinflammatoryresponsetotheinjuredtissuefollowsitsusualcourse,withneutrophilsprecedingtheappearanceofmacrophages.Incontrastwithischemiclesions,inwhichthesuperficiallayerofcortexmaybepreserved,traumaaffectsthesuperficiallayersmostseverely.

Oldtraumaticlesionscharacteristicallyappearasdepressed,retracted,yellowishbrownpatchesinvolvingthecrestsofgyri(see

).Theselesionsshowgliosisandresidualhemosiderin-ladenmacrophages. Fig.23.12B

Althoughcontusionsaremoreeasilyseen,traumamayalsocausemoresubtlebutwidespreadinjurytoaxonswithinthebrain(calleddiffuse injury),sometimeswithdevastatingconsequences.Themovementofoneregionofbrainrelativetoanotheristhoughttodisruptaxonalintegrityandfunction.Angularacceleration,evenintheabsenceofimpact,maycauseaxonalinjuryaswellashemorrhage.Asmanyas50%ofpatientswhodevelopcomashortlyaftertraumaarebelievedtohavewhitematterdamageanddiffuseaxonalinjury,usuallyintheformofaxonalswellingsthatappearwithinhoursoftheinjury. axonal

loss describes Concussion reversible altered with consciousness, brain head injury. or from without function, of neurologic consciousness, transient of arrest, temporary includes loss dysfunction reflexes. The respiratory of loss characteristic and although Neurologic the is for norm, the recovery event amnesia persists. The of activity of the sudden is nervous disruption pathogenesis unknown. including in deficits persistent can episodes Repeated of development and impairment, result cognitive later profound parkinsonism, neurologic others, and and of processes. concussion neurodegenerative contact athletes boxers now (dementia recognized occur as in in settings, such sports. participating range is in to wider it in pugilistica), described Initially of a of tangles (see This accumulation chapter). brain cerebral encephalopathy chronic other “ later in is the and syndrome characterized in by the and termed traumatic ” section regions is cortex

vessel CNS often disrupts ( directly trauma leading to walls, hemorrhage

). Table 23.1 ( the or intraparenchymal Depending hemorrhage subarachnoid, epidural, may vessel, the affected on subdural, be

Fig. alone or in 23.13A ), combination. occurring occur lacerations. often Subarachnoid contusions and sites of at and most intraparenchymal hemorrhages

Fig. Cerebraltrauma.(A)Acutecontusionsarepresentinbothtemporallobes,withareasofhemorrhageandtissuedisruption. 23.12 (B)Remotecontusions,seenasdiscoloredyellowareas,arepresentontheinferiorfrontalsurfaceofthisbrain.

injury. artery— vessels—especially Dural traumatic meningeal vulnerable to are the middle the vessel, a skull even easily tear traumatic of of infants, fracture. in deformable skull the may In displacement a absence children In involving contrast, skull almost adults, tears from stem and vessels fractures. dural always by accumulates dissects applied tightly dura inner from under surface away and Once pressure a the arterial (see blood skull tears, the vessel

Fig. hematoma ), producing surface. compresses 23.13B brain that a the be after patients the for neurologic can traumatic before several hours Clinically, lucid signs event appear. to constitutes epidural rapidly repair and drainage necessitating emergency may prompt expand neurosurgical An prevent and a hematoma death.

the bridging hemispheres the movement of brain cerebral from http://ebooksmedicine.net the tear can trauma veins extend that Rapid during

23.1 Central Nervous System Injury Vascular the Table Patterns of in

SubduralspaceTraumaLeveloftraumamaybemild;slowlyevolvingneurologicsymptoms,oftenwithadelayfromthetimeofinjury

off Venous fracture skull) Arterial C blood (still A Dura to (peeled skull) B Skull Dura attached blood

Fig. Traumaticintracranialhemorrhages. 23.13 (A)Epiduralhematoma(left) damagetobridgingveinsbetweenthebrainandthesuperiorsagittalsinushasledtotheaccumulationofbloodbetweenthethetwolayersofdura. inwhichruptureofameningealartery,usuallyassociatedwithaskullfracture,hasledtoaccumulationofarterialbloodbetweentheduraandtheskull.Inasubduralhematoma(right), (B)Epiduralhematomacoveringaportionofthedura.

(C)Largeorganizingsubduralhematomaattachedtothedura. General Boston, Dr. late Massachusetts (B, Courtesy of the Raymond Adams, Hospital, Massachusetts.) D. subarachnoid and the subdural the through to http://ebooksmedicine.net dural sinuses. space Their into produces bleeding disruption space. subdural the the to and in close is is layer dura. the of the blood it between of quite dura reality the very layers Because layer, dura but two the to the and arachnoid arachnoid, between appears the in cell inner be thin proximity bridging older adults. are patients subdural space for move, the rate has accounting within additional with In hematomas brain veins which brain the of in atrophy, to higher stretched the and out hematomas thin their Infants subdural are because bridging walled. veins are also susceptible to

48 hours become typically after first the Subdural manifest within hematomas injury. the may bilateral. They hemispheres be over lateral aspects most the common are cerebral and of to exerted attributable the brain. pressure Neurologic signs adjacent are the on and headache, Symptoms progressive confusion, of most slowly form the taking deterioration. often nonlocalizing, are neurologic

MORPHOLOGYAcutesubduralhematomaappearsasacollectionoffreshlyclottedbloodapposedtothecontourofthebrainsurface,withoutextensionintothedepthsofsulci(see

).Theunderlyingbrainisflattened,andthesubarachnoidspaceisoftenclear.Subduralhematomasorganizebylysisoftheclot(about1week),growthofgranulationtissuefromtheduralsurfaceintothehematoma(2weeks),andfibrosis(1–3months).Subduralhematomascommonlyrebleed,presumablyfromthethin-walledvesselsofthegranulationtissue,leadingtomicroscopicfindingsconsistentwithhemorrhagesofvaryingages.Symptomaticsubduralhematomasaretreatedbysurgicalremovalofthebloodandassociatedreactivetissue. Fig.23.13C

the to dural and subdural CENTRALNERVOUSSYSTEMTRAUMAthrough space the subarachnoid sinuses. produces and to dural into sinuses. Their subdural the bleeding disruption the the subthrough space subarachnoid bleeding sub produces Their into the disruption

Physicalinjurytothebraincanoccurwhentheinsideoftheskullcomesintoforcefulcontactwiththebrain.

Inblunttrauma,theremaybebraininjurybothattheoriginalpointofcontact(coupinjury)andontheoppositesideofthebrain(contrecoupinjury)owingtoimpactswiththeskull.

Rapiddisplacementoftheheadandbraincantearaxons(diffuseaxonalinjury),oftencausingsevere,irreversibleneurologicdeficits.

Traumatictearingofbloodvessels,dependingonthelocation,leadstoepidural,subdural,orintraparenchymalhematomaaswellassubarachnoidhemorrhage.

The is neural of or mental to 2%. tube estimated giving retardation, malformations, rise CNS to incidence defects, 1% palsy, at cerebral of brain of in the defects. setting multiple Malformations common the are more birth tissue with development insults cause or perinatal or Prenatal damage. may normal CNS interfere phenotypes. with determines timing leading malformation, During pattern more typically an to of earlier events the severe of the injury gestation, malformation or communication affecting intercellular or the glial regulate Mutations cause CNS maturation, that or dysfunction. neurons cells differentiation, can of genes effects. various teratogenic have infectious chemicals Additionally, and agents

produce neuronal absence in morphologic dysfunction abnormalities. Some developmental the disorders of profound Genetic contribute implicated of various the for of of have many emerged to connections. genes the autism underpinnings or recently; synaptic maintenance development forms the an associated dominant encoding of is modifications mutations Rett regulator gene X-linked disorder chromatin. a epigenetic in with of syndrome appear normal, in neurologic to and 2 initially by 1 years girls of Development is but deficits movement affected age. cognition affecting

gives the spinal the in tube, development brain, brain rise of the formation system, ventricular the One neural which earliest steps of cord. to and is reversal and or involving of several or closure neural tissues. characterized malformations, to meninges, lead soft by overlying abnormalities tissue, bone failure each may Partial neural tube CNS tube neural the are most frequent of malformation. defects Collectively, type as an up through defects to child-bearing risk prevention, of women opportunity represents uncertain to folate for administration the mechanisms the tube neural and during of 70%. Folate first increases reduces incidence by trimester age sharply important deficiency of defects. and The maternal screening the combination early detection tube studies has of neural elevated αfetoprotein for increased imaging of

the tube following: include Neural defects

the of from the involve most common defects The forms. spinal tube, end cord neural the posterior which of disorganized of consisting associated flat, a (spina an spinal malformation occulta) meningeal severe range outpouching. asymptomatic bony spina cord These can from defects a segment with bifida to bifida, overlying

in the of CNS a tissue that defect most column an the in Myelomeningocele through region extension commonly lumbosacral is vertebral occurs (

Fig. 23.14 ). and in and problems control. motor have lower the extremities bowel deficits bladder sensory and Patients with The the derive from infections clinical overlying are problems abnormal from extending or skin. the compounded spinal segment often thin ulcerated by cord and

leads the the top of the the of anterior and a skull. the that end forebrain neural to is malformation of the absence Anencephaly of tube fossa posterior Varying be present. may amounts of structures

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 23.14 Myelomeningocele.Bothmeningesandspinalcordparenchymaareincludedinthecystlikestructurevisiblejustabovethebuttocks.

• in CNS through tissue of encephalocele cranium. An a the defect malformed diverticulum extending a is It region or often the posterior most the occipital involves fossa. brain When tissue anteriorly, into sinuses. it may occurs extend the

a in usually small of is malformations as head describes with too of the the Microencephaly well group is brain associated (microcephaly). which it volume small; utero. (HIV) of a It immunodeficiency Zika virus wide in acquired abnormalities, and chromosome and alcohol infection human range including virus associations, fetal syndrome, has of generation the feature is for cerebral decreased destined cortex. The neurons unifying ventricular of as balance generated. in proliferate those glial proliferating the and form the cells and cortex to the brain pool zone, cells the the cells the population During stages number remaining overall development, leaving affects progenitor early progenitor between of neurons the in subependymal inadequate leading the progenitor small there to a of brain. cells leave many generation mature is pool If neurons, too prematurely, far always with less common brain and volume rare mostly associated with is is large excessive that head, associated is Megalencephaly, genetic disorders. a

neocortical abnormalities and location. and differentiation the gyration ending up development in neuronal of taking form of during often architecture, migration neurons Disruption can wrong of to lead the various genes control in variety migration Mutations in a malformations. of result that of representative characterized normal A disruption patterning. is midline holoprosencephaly, example by bulbs absence structures of related olfactory Mild and the (arrhinencephaly). show forms In forms, hemispheres is such brain there may defects lobes, divided as facial the cyclopia. severe or into be not and midline or The components known causes acquired inherited involve pathway. of of Hedgehog genetic the signaling mutations best loss in function

and complete may (polymicrogyria). be of (lissencephaly) which increased loss of gyri Other formed irregularly or partial, examples number include gyri,

in in brain region malformations cerebellum. the of this portions result common of or misplacement absence most the of The

with II through extension the magnum; typically and downward midline lumbar a Arnold-Chiari combines malformation) malformation (Chiari cerebellum type foramen present. the of small and a hydrocephalus misshapen also vermis fossa are myelomeningocele posterior a

has milder cerebellar far low-lying foramen type tonsils that The magnum. extend through Chiari malformation I the obstruction magnum only foramen medulla, adult symptoms headache and tissue nerve results manifesting in flow Excess with cranial of in the deficits of life. compression of in often partial or the CSF can symptoms. the intervention alleviate Surgical

malformation is midline a cyst. Dandy-Walker of the cerebellar large posterior enlarged characterized by absence fossa, an and vermis,

neurologic injury the is occurring of period perinatal important Brain disability. cause in an childhood and spasticity, attributable palsy for motor perinatal occurring injury periods. Cerebral to nonprogressive during ataxia is prenatal neurologic and deficits paresis term a by dystonia, characterized athetosis, or the be apparent and later, symptoms at only may well not Signs and themselves event. the after declare birth causal

that types the hemorrhages period injury and are occur major The two perinatal infarcts. in of reactions differ otherwise the in of and in lesions adults engender. tissue their These they locations similar the terms from germinal there In the increased hemorrhage infants, the adjacent to is of for an often premature ventricle. intraparenchymal anterior lateral horn most matrix, within the risk causing subarachnoid extend from there space, hydrocephalus. system ventricular the to into sometimes the Hemorrhages and may periventricular (periventricular infants. Infarcts white leukomalacia), premature may in supratentorial the especially in matter occur necrosis of and plaques these residua consisting The calcification dystrophic white are ( of infarcts chalky yellow of regions discrete matter

Fig. ). 23.15 matter, cystic encephalopathy. lesions the severe the When involve hemispheres, throughout multicystic white and develop termed large gray condition can to a enough matter

propensity a transplacentally acquired cause birth, infections, have or Certain to destructive may brain lesions. which be during to discussed group can result parenchymal include as (commonly calcifications are this Agents in CMV, later. and in toxoplasmosis both in more TORCH) these with referred along tissue injury; which the detail

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 23.15 Perinatalbraininjury.Thisspecimenfromapatientwithperiven-tricularleukomalaciacontainsacentralfocusofwhitematternecrosiswithaperipheralrimofmineralizedaxonalprocesses.

Malformationsofthebraincanoccurbecauseofgeneticfactorsorexternalinsults.

Thedevelopmentaltimingandpositionoftheinjurydetermineitspatternandcharacteristics.

Variousmalformationsstemfromfailureofneuraltubeclosure,improperformationofneuralstructures,andalteredneuronalmigration.

Perinatalbraininjurymostlytakesoneoftwoforms:(1)hemorrhage,oftenintheregionofthegerminalmatrixwiththeriskforextensionintotheventricularsystem;and(2)ischemicinfarcts,leadingtoperiventricularleukomalacia.

Certaininfectionsmayaffectthebrainduringdevelopmentwithsubsequenttissuedestructionandneurologicconsequences.

brain be coverings of can The and sites infection. its (e.g., for (e.g., system the relative other well rabies), have predilection others brain while a the as aureus). Some or Staphylococcus nervous infectious many affect as organs agents absolute may be nervous neurons to by the the infectious direct or may toxins, consequence be of a tissue of consequence or microbial or glial Damage host response. of injury immune agent cells the

through spread • routes: several common the of entry. the way the reach system Infectious blood nervous agents supply of means arterial most may is by Hematogenous face There can also anastomoses skull. venous venous sinuses through retrograde of spread be of the the the veins and between the the

lumbar almost puncture into invariably needle surgical cases or trauma; is a of when a as open be with or microorganisms implantation to rare microbes iatrogenic, due introduced are can field. Direct penetrating

Local with occur spine. can skull infections of the extension or or mastoid the frontal; osteomyelitis; meningomyelocele. congenital spinal teeth; infected often include cranial or and air such malformations, Sources most sinuses, as

viruses few rabies may Peripheral herpes a as entry nerves pathogens—in particular, also serve zoster. of such and as for paths

infectious ( that we agents are the system following nervous injury Chapter the mechanisms specific central 9; associated Basic are in discuss sections with in to of infections discussed

Table 23.2

epidural be subdural local bacterial can by spread. usually direct involved spaces as The a fungal and consequence of or infections, from as or such arise Epidural focus osteomyelitis. abscesses infection, adjacent an sinusitis of the spinal cause neurosurgical abscesses emergency. cord a epidural and When they space, in compression occur constitute may spinal of subdural producing skull empyema. air space, spread also the Infections may subdural or sinuses to the mass but The and subdural underlying arachnoid effect. large usually unaffected, a subarachnoid empyema are may spaces produce a bridging in in develop resulting of the subdural cross veins space, the may addition, venous the In thrombophlebitis infarction brain. that occlusion and the and Most stiffness, lethargy, infection, focal develop if referable the may untreated and site coma. signs are of febrile, to neurologic and with neck headache patients With empyema a occurs be from surgical residual the side; of resolution dural drainage, the dura finding. only treatment, complete, may the including thickened if resolution is complete With treatment, recovery usual. is prompt

is within the meningoencephalitis. if Meningitis space; is leptomeninges into spreads underlying infection process inflammatory it the subarachnoid termed involving the brain, the an meningitis, cyst, nonbacterial cells metastatic to used a such of as such a to settings are meningitis, These and space. debris ruptured chemical terms from response as epidermoid in a also the carcinomatous the cancer spread non-infectious irritant subarachnoid

and (usually into (usually chronic Infectious meningitis spirochetal, bacterial), tuberculous, aseptic fungal) subtypes. (usually broadly viral), acute or pyogenic be divided can of Examination CSF distinguishing is among various in the of useful often causes the meningitis.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

EmpyemaPolymicrobial(staphylococci,anaerobicgram-negative)

Rickettsia, Fungi and Spirochetes,

The meningitis likely most causes of with patient bacterial vary age. streptococci. In Escherichia and coli organisms common B neonates, are group adults, In meningitidis adults, Streptococcus Neisseria young adolescents Listeria most in the are common and is monocytogenes common. more pneumoniae and older pathogen; ages, infection irritability, and consciousness, along Across systemic meningeal signs neck photophobia, patients impairment, neurologic clouding including show and stiffness. of with headache, irritation typically of an protein, reduced increased CSF pressure; reveals elevated and abundant neutrophils, examination the Lumbar of puncture shows glucose. is with antibiotics, of pyogenic meningitis can diagnosis and be fatal, administration saved. prompt patients often but most Untreated

MORPHOLOGYInacutemeningitis,anexudateisevidentwithintheleptomeningesonthesurfaceofthebrain(

).Themeningealvesselsareengorgedandprominent,andtractsofpusmayextendalongbloodvessels.Onmicroscopicexamination,neutrophilsmayfilltheentiresubarachnoidspaceor,inlessseverecases,maybeconfinedtoregionsadjacenttoleptomeningealbloodvessels.Inuntreatedmeningitis,Gramstainrevealsvaryingnumbersofthecausativeorganism.Severeinvolvementofleptomeningealveins(phlebitis)mayleadtovenousocclusionandhemorrhagicinfarctionoftheunderlyingbrain.Whenthemeningitisisfulminant,theorganismsandtheassociatedinflammatorycellsmayspreadintothesubstanceofthebrain(focalcerebritis),sometimesleadingtotheformationofabscesses,discussedlater(see Fig.23.16A

).Extensiontotheventricles(ventriculitis)alsomayoccur.Iftreatedearlyandeffectively,resolvedmeningitismayleavelittleornoresiduum. Fig.23.16B

clinical viral Aseptic meningitis illness term and acute symptoms with is to meningeal is believed signs origin. for that a be of meningitis course clinical typically The fulminant and in than is less is pyogenic self-limiting. elevation, moderate meningitis, CSF often be pyogenic cultured. lymphocytosis, but a cannot of the normal level, In and contrast to glucose protein bacteria shows examination is the application suspected, agent to methods; While change of our has responsible serologic culture to the difficult these an virus is identify nucleic sequencing acid understanding often viral potential and of it by cases. underlying may which instances. brain for are no There except seen distinctive only macroscopic in swelling, some be findings there a or mild either leptomeningeal examination, moderate to lymphocytic no microscopic On is abnormality infiltrate. recognizable

chronic and a meningitis; also involve organisms brain including infections mycobacteria, fungi, cause with these some pathogens, the Several parenchyma. spirochetes, may

meningitis manifests confusion, mental symptoms malaise, usually with signs of Tuberculous headache, and generalized and vomiting. cellularity, the typically in glucose content normal. a and and or protein mononuclear strikingly elevated, or is with of is mixture CSF reduced cells; level mononuclear often the a polymorphonuclear only There so, cells moderately moderate is increase with also meningitis. intraparenchymal which well-circumscribed Infection mass in tuberculosis associated may Mycobacterium result be may a (tuberculoma), with leads with from arachnoid tuberculous and fibrosis resorption hydrocephalus CSF. meningitis of interference to Chronic

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Bacterialinfections.(A)Pyogenicmeningitis.Athicklayerofsuppurativeexudatecoversthebrainstemandcerebellumandthickenstheleptomeninges. 23.16 (arrows). (B)Cerebralabscessesinthefrontallobewhitematter From Golden bacterial medicine: in DN: acute clinical JA, Louis meningitis. Images (A, NEnglJMed333:364, 1994. Copyright Medical 1994 © Society. Massachusetts All reserved.) rights

of tertiary about occurs infection. 10% a untreated pallidum with stage syphilis, Treponema Neurosyphilis, of individuals in HIV neurosyphilis, risk often is for increases disease with developing and this aggressive Infection the more in the setting. of combination. several be may syphilis, by involvement in which are patterns There present alone CNS or

and Meningovascular base endarteritis usually lymphocytes. brain, rich is meningitis, the a of chronic obliterative an with the plasma cells in neurosyphilis involving often •

neuronal Paretic associated by is involvement and parenchymal spirochetes of cells. proliferation and from with marked neurosyphilis stems microglial loss causes dementia. of mental physical functions, progressive mood severe eventually and loss delusions form an alterations of Clinically, grandeur), the of insidious and (including this disease

to damage sensory from the nerves results roots. dorsal the in dorsalis Tabes disturbances, include sensory damage reflexes. position deep sensation, ataxia; and loss of absence joint and joints); pains”; skin “lightning of sense to tendon impaired leading joint particularly other pain and Consequences the (Charcot characteristic

of burgdorferi, Neuroborreliosis the by system the of causative to spirochete involvement refers the agent Lyme Borrelia disease. nervous and aseptic palsies, and symptoms are highly polyneuropathies. include variable Neurologic meningitis, encephalopathy, signs and facial nerve mild

parenchymal chronic and, as times pathogens, rise with with infection. can Fungal to infection nervous system be of this at the other can associated meningitis give Immunosuppression the occur. is requirement a infection but these not increases for it for diseases, risk to CNS cause fungal Several disease: pathogens

Cryptococcus of both setting can neoformans in the cause meningoencephalitis, meningitis and often immunosuppression. evolving in or 2 It as fulminant and months be over indolent, as be may little weeks fatal or may years. on can mucoid be but yeasts few encapsulated CSF India elevated visualized have the The and protein, cells preparations. may ink the in Virchow-Robin Extension vessels the spaces. into follows brain a appearance spaces rise bubble”–like these “soap As proliferate, organisms expand, giving ( to

Fig. 23.17

in system Histoplasma nervous of disseminated involves capsulatum the infection. setting the commonly is infection. risk an the There disease setting HIV for increased in of Histoplasmosis mild pleocytosis. decreased a protein, lymphocytic CSF typically and with glucose, causes meningitis, mildly basilar elevated from Parenchymal mostly can organisms along of occur, lesions spaces. Virchow-Robin tracking

Coccidioides fungus disseminated in the of endemic most setting meningitis immitis, American of desert regions infection. to Southwest, causes a commonly the made CSF can by for specific the Diagnosis be examining antibody. fatality. Without high a has coccidioidal treatment, meningitis

gamut parasites) (viruses pathogens infect brain, of The in patterns. can entire the infectious often to characteristic meningitis) associated while viral produce other general, infections are (when In infections mixed organisms bacterial not diffuse, are localized, with patterns. hosts, widespread involvement is In typical. immunosuppressed with more agent any

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Cryptococcalinfection.(A)Whole-brainsectionshowingthenumerousareasoftissuedestructionassociatedwiththespreadoforganismsintheperivascularspaces. 23.17 (B)Athighermagnification,itispossibletoseethecryptococciinthelesions.

bacterial abscesses caused are infections. by most Brain often extraction). by can organisms, bones, or the implantation tooth a adjacent hematogenous of primary arise spread These after distal local extension in lungs, foci (mastoiditis, from direct heart, or site from or (usually paranasal sinusitis), in a Predisposing filtration released produce with a microbes spread may chronic provide of heart right-to-left shunt congenital associated include of emboli cyanotic bacterial pulmonary from that as pulmonary which which hematogenously. organisms; and that infections, disease, conditions bronchiectasis, and abscesses; septic multiple endocarditis, of loss source acute are

necrosis vascularized granulation with lesions destructive rim (see fibrous liquefactive by discrete of Abscesses central a surrounded tissue are and

Fig. ). 23.16B reactive gliosis. Outside is fibrous capsule the of a zone focal deficits progressive intracranial with present signs as to Patients general related well increased almost invariably as pressure. cultured more may CSF reliably little has protein draining cell in the be elevated, abscess While brain blood role organisms diagnosis since directly. of abscess white and by the puncture are lumbar count In cerebral there pressure puncture herniation contents CSF the is lumbar mass significant the deterioration. from abscess, decrease and can if following in result effect in of lumbar downward neurologic addition, or infection or may systemic of A apparent. not may local be source sinus may and intracranial rupture and meningitis, The lead herniation, fatal can brain pressure increased thrombosis. ventriculitis, abscess cause venous to Surgery leading rate, to intervention otherwise better reduce earlier and with antibiotics mortality high outcomes. the

is Viral inflammation brain with that encephalitis parenchymal of almost invariably the associated infection (meningoencephalitis). a is meningeal different characteristic of and histologic features injury, viruses cell the neuronophagia varying infiltrates, mononuclear patterns While most microglial are nodules, parenchymal and show ( perivascular

Fig. 23.18A–B ). viruses form Certain bodies. also inclusion characteristic

to The system viruses is as particularly nervous such rabies poliovirus. and susceptible certain virus medial viral viruses the while that the specific brain or CNS temporal lie (such involve particular entry. others limbic of route types, along system) cell as lobes, regions Some the infect preferentially transplacental of cause developmental virus causes of brain. infection lesions, the destructive Intrauterine and viral abnormalities following may and Zika rubella spread CMV CNS injured addition infection also of immune after system, direct can mechanisms nervous the infections. be In the to by viral systemic

important morbidity epidemic world, viruses) the (arthropod-borne of in and mortality. an are are capable cause high especially causing of and tropical encephalitis, Arboviruses of serious regions Nile and encountered encephalitis the infection. types equine commonly and more virus are West Eastern Western Among symptoms, such and Patients as well signs, ocular coma, or reflex confusion, seizures, as palsies. stupor neurologic such generalized asymmetry develop and as focal as delirium, CSF to that but the The normal. converts but usually neutrophilic concentration pleocytosis elevated, is lymphocytosis; is slightly a pressure elevated glucose the is and an a early protein with colorless rapidly CSF from bacterial distinguish viral the helps CNS. infections of to examination Thus,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 23.18 Viralinfections.(AandB)Characteristicfindingsinmanyformsofviralmeningitisincludeperivascularcuffingoflymphocytes(A)andmicroglialnodules(B).(C)Herpesencephalitisshowingextensivedestructionofinferiorfrontalandanteriortemporallobes.(D)Humanimmunodeficiencyvirus(HIV)encephalitis.Notetheaccumulationofmicrogliaformingamicroglialnoduleandmultinucleategiantcell. Courtesy Dr.T.W. of (C, Smith, of Massachusetts University

School,Worcester, Massachusetts.) Medical

MORPHOLOGYArbovirusencephalitidesproduceasimilarhistopathologicpicture.Characteristically,thereisaperivascularlymphocyticmeningoencephalitis(sometimeswithneutrophils)(see

Fig.

(see 23.18A nodules ).Multifocalgraymatterandwhitematternecrosisisseen,oftenassociatedwithneuronophagia,thephagocytosisofneuronaldebris,aswellaslocalizedcollectionsofmicrogliatermedmicroglial

Fig.23.18B ).Inseverecases,theremaybeanecrotizingvasculitiswithassociatedfocalhemorrhages.

is in adults. may HSV-1 in group most encephalitis and but children any common age young occur reflecting behavior, lobes. typically in memory, with manifests mood, of It frontal and temporal and alterations the involvement with defense. receptor TLR-3), which that inherited important interfere mutations Toll-like with that HSV-1 associated sometimes anti-viral is (specifically encephalitis Recurrent role of has in an signaling

Fig.23.18C ).Theinfectionisnecrotizingandoftenhemorrhagicinseverelyaffectedregions.Perivascularinflammatoryinfiltratesusuallyarepresent,andlargeeosinophilicintranuclearviralinclusions(CowdrytypeAbodies)canbefoundinbothneuronsandglialcells.

affects meningitis of in system, the in usually form the nervous HSV-2 adults. also in born neonates active delivery with to vaginal women HSV infections. primary many encephalitis genital occurs Disseminated by severe

any of involvement. Varicella-zoster primary neurologic during virus usually infection, (VZV) evidence chickenpox causes without ganglia. dorsal in establishes root The latent infection virus of neurons a skin in manifests distribution few painful, Reactivation one (shingles). eruption the or a as vesicular dermatomes of in adults syndrome region the affected a usually persistent pain is there may self-limited neuralgia). in (postherpetic process, but a be This

http://ebooksmedicine.net

can to cause a VZV that tissue may lead also arteritis infarcts. granulomatous immunosuppressed can occur. In herpes patients, encephalitis acute zoster cells neurons. can bodies Inclusion glial and in found be

infects and immunosuppressed fetuses individuals. system CMV nervous the in glial All to CNS are infection. susceptible endothelium) and within (neurons, cells ependyma, the cells, necrosis, causes periventricular later microcephaly Intrauterine calcification. by periventricular followed infection with adults severe in region. most encephalitis, the periventricular CMV also infected, produces a are often When is subacute which typical hemorrhagic viral cells. contain inclusion–bearing Lesions can be and

sub-clinical neurons an is most and a motor cord damages it (paralytic a spinal enterovirus causes brain often that in fraction small secondarily of system Poliovirus and or the the gastroenteritis; nervous poliomyelitis). cases, invades stem mild in and in loss the of hyporeflexia corresponding with in of results region paralysis The motor wasting neurons a flaccid the muscle body. disease, occur the acute muscles. death In can from of paralysis respiratory decreased pain post-polio may poorly infection the initial after years progressive Long understood associated and a has after syndromeof illness, typically with to bulk muscle resolved, 35 25 the weakness appear. the has as The re-emergent distribution same prior polio weakness infection. the

transmitted to encephalitic rabid a is animals, from bite. infection a usually humans Rabies fatal by Various natural reservoirs. are mammals a species, to a is evidence without Exposure also some risk of factor. even bite, bat brain. peripheral distance the site, The along ascending on incubation enters period virus a CNS the the and the wound by depends wound the months) the the nerves from (usually few between so malaise, headache, symptoms disease of The nonspecific with and manifests initially fever. motor patient is As touch the advances, infection the violent slightest responses shows convulsions. progressing CNS extraordinary painful, the with to excitability; of (hydrophobia). water aversion may musculature an create Contracture to pharyngeal the swallowing even mania of stupor Periods to death, and and from eventually respiratory progress typically coma failure.

owing opportunistic the first AIDS, neuropathologic the so were examination as along of with (HIV 90% as cases, lymphoma. primary demonstrated virus in CNS the to changes many direct at of infections In after to 15 80% postmortem or effects of system nervous on years and recognition encephalitis), active of antiretroviral the these highly of (HAART) has of decreased infection. HIV frequency secondary Introduction effects therapy HIV-associated cognitive of dysfunction is term under to be continues dementia the morbidity. source disorder mild that (HAND) to ranging from neurocognitive umbrella a However, full-blown lumped cells of infection to microglial responses. of in the from immune This believed activation innate is stem and HIV syndrome brain toxic HIV-derived cytokine-induced Neuronal effects likely of of a proteins. and inflammation injury combination from stems

infection can the antibodies and be 2 be within demonstrated, HIV primary of to can 1 Aseptic isolated to patients; HIV occurs of the about meningitis 10% in onset from CSF. weeks of virus mild some shown few studies of the symptomatic asymptomatic HIV early the neuropathologic phases and of perivascular meningitis, lymphocytic have in or myelin The the system inflammation, loss of invasion hemispheres. and nervous acute

risk anti-HIV (IRIS). syndrome reconstitution a is setting there of involvement the neurologic for associated with begun established in inflammatory immune the is infection, When therapy effective and include rapidly edema. manifestations Neurologic cerebral developing impairment cognitive unclear previously effective to infection. brought IRIS pathogenesis response of The be the suppressed a but of treatment activation is by HIV to is about inflammatory due of it thought inciting absence it opportunistic is disease. other mycobacterial, with the associated although IRIS infection, or also of presence viral the any in occur CNS a often fungal of can

MORPHOLOGYHIVencephalitisisachronicinflammatoryprocesswithwidelydistributedmicroglial nodules, sometimeswithassociatedfocioftissuenecrosisandreactivegliosis(see

Fig.23.18D ).Themicroglialnodulesalsoarefoundinthevicinityofsmallbloodvessels,whichshowabnormallyprominentendothelialcellsandperivascularfoamyorpigment-ladenmacrophages.Thesechangesareespeciallyprominentinthesubcorticalwhitematter,diencephalon,andbrainstem.Animportantcomponentofthemicroglialnodulearemacrophage-derivedmultinucleate cells. Insomecases,therealsoisadisorderofwhitemattercharacterizedbymultifocalordiffuseareasofmyelinpallor,axonalswellings,andgliosis.HIVispresentinCD4+ mononuclearandmultinucleatemacrophagesandmicroglia.

Tcellinfiltrate,botharoundbloodvesselsanddiffuselyintheparenchyma,intheabsenceofsignificantHIVburdenormultinucleatedcells. UnlikeHIVencephalitis,thebrainlesionsofIRISmaybeassociatedwithaCD8+

demyelination leukoencephalopathy which Progressive oligodendrocytes, die. are injured polyomavirus, caused virus, a multifocal then infects in and resulting cells (PML) as these is by JC preferentially show immunosuppressed restricted disease is is reactivation, of exposure to evidence believed during JC the from childhood, individuals. to people PML and it as that serologic virus virus Most results or often and progressive white and matter. develop extensive, in lesions and relentlessly focal signs studies neurologic multifocal the hemispheric imaging symptoms, Patients cerebellar show

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Progressivemultifocalleukoencephalopathy.(A)Sectionstainedformyelinshowingirregular,poorlydefinedareasofdemyelination,whichbecomeconfluentinplaces. 23.19 (B)Enlargedoligodendrocytenucleistainedforviralantigenssurroundanareaofearlymyelinloss.

MORPHOLOGYThelesionsarepatchy,irregular,ill-definedareasofwhitematterdestructionthatenlargeasthediseaseprogresses(

Fig.23.19 ).Eachlesionisanareaofdemyelination,inthecenterofwhicharescatteredlipid-ladenmacrophagesandareducednumberofaxons.Attheedgesofthelesionaregreatlyenlargedoligodendrocytenucleiwhosechromatinisreplacedbyglassy-appearingamphophilicviralinclusions.Thevirusalsoinfectsastrocytes,leadingtobizarregiantformswithirregular,hyperchromatic,sometimesmultiplenucleithatcanbemistakenforatumor.

usually associated Fungal produce often meningitis. infections parenchymal with abscesses, or granulomas common infections patterns: have the following fungal The most distinctive

Candida multiple usually produces or albicans microabscesses, without formation. with granuloma

or Mucormycosis, Mucorales, in typically by the caused nasal patient diabetic order cavity as an with the belonging infection sinuses presents fungi several ketoacidosis. a of to to vascular the cribriform invasion plate. through may by extension the direct or through It brain spread reach Mucor The brain distant hematogenous to dissemination it from other brain fungi, apart of invade sets which directly proclivity sites. the from the by

• distinctive its invasion thrombosis. of Aspergillus blood to because for hemorrhagic pattern marked infarctions subsequent a of tends predilection vessel wall cause widespread with septic fumigatus

a the can and three common organisms infect range its only nervous here. other of entities considered are relatively covering, While wide system

Cerebral organism who Toxoplasma with can mother in with from the occur an infection. immunosuppressed gondii newborns adults in the acquire infection transplacentally or active a protozoan consequences the calcifications. and The intracranial hydrocephalus, chorioretinitis, of include triad adults, clinical In the diffuse. weeks, and over subacute, and focal be may are both symptoms evolving and barrier of infection, of with breakdown associated edema studies ring-enhancing sites lesions. inflammation blood-brain show at imaging the Due to often

MORPHOLOGYWhentheinfectionisacquiredinimmunosuppressedadults,thebrainshowsabscesses,frequentlymultiple,mostofteninvolvingthecerebralcortex(nearthegray-whitejunction)anddeepgraynuclei.Acutelesionsconsistofcentralfociofnecrosissurroundedbyacuteandchronicinflammation,macrophageinfiltration,andvascularproliferation.Bothfreetachyzoitesandencystedbradyzoitesmaybefoundattheperipheryofthenecroticfoci(

Fig.23.20

by Tenia solium. of the end-stage Cysticercosis an the consequence is infection tapeworm tapeworms, mature into tract, ingested where gastrointestinal the the would they encyst. they otherwise of lumen organisms develop leave If larval be and throughout can within found subarachnoid are space. Cysts and the body brain common the lesion typically as mass can Cysticercosis cause and a seizures. manifests after can organism as therapy. dies, encysted occurs the intensify Symptoms when

within a The with found a is lining. smooth organism cyst wall and hooklets parts from mouth body most recognized. The are commonly including surrounding Death marked reaction may gliosis. the intense produce inflammatory the an in encysted of organism and eosinophils, brain, often

clinical depending the meningoencephalitis on manifests with syndromes, Amebic different pathogen. responsible stagnant ponds, Naegleria associated fowleri, fresh warm with a in encephalitis. swimming rapidly water causes fatal necrotizing species By meningoencephalitis. a granulomatous cause Acanthamoeba contrast, various of chronic

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 23.20 Toxoplasmainfection.(A)Abscessesarepresentintheputamenandthalamus. Bradyzoitesarepresentasapseudocyst,againhighlightedbyimmunohistochemicalstaining. (B)Freetachyzoitesaredemonstratedbyimmunohistochemicalstaining.Inset,

abnormal the Prion agent in protein. causative cellular group of a a are is diseases infectious form an which of diseases and as cattle iatrogenic, disease”). animal diseases sheep variant bovine sporadic, of (CJD), These and forms as disease in scrapie encephalopathy cow well in as (“mad such include familial, spongiform Creutzfeldt-Jakob protein may conformation termed abnormal called (sc conformational for PrPsc a undergo an normal from The protein, to prion change its (PrP), (PrPc) causative scrapie). shape an is term a for the proteolysis (hence makes protease-resistant). rich PrPres—i.e., form, to content alternative high pathogenic PrPsc characteristic β-sheets, has but PrP that it of a resistant in normally α-helices, conformation More the interacts with PrPsc them it molecules, to physically important, ( when PrP induces adopt PrPsc

Fig. ), PrPsc. for a accounts nature the property “infectious” that of 23.21 this time, accumulation burden high a to brain. molecules pathogenic leads in the the process PrPsc of self-amplifying Over of in of PrPc mutations the [fCJD]). conformational these (PRNP) variants gene associated forms Certain with rate change; prion disease of Creutzfeldt-Jakob are early-onset spontaneous encoding disease (familial the accelerate familial (sporadic spontaneously accounting of Creutzfeldt-Jakob PrPc an conformation also cases for its low sporadic extremely prion rate), disease may [sCJD]). disease (but at change but of unknown. cell the injury, neural seems underlying in and the cytopathic still PrPsc of mechanisms tissue death eventual neuronal are Accumulation be the cause changes to

behavior CJD a changes is a of from death first onset rapidly duration typical only in in subtle dementing progressive 7 to and with illness, memory months. sporadic 1 a million. of and incidence about is approximately in worldwide has per It cases annual 85% of While commonly

Fig. Pathogenesisofpriondisease.α-HelicalPrPcmayspontaneouslyshifttotheβ-sheetPrPscconformation,aneventthatoccursatamuchhigherrateinfamilialdiseaseassociatedwithgermlinePrPmutations.PrPscmayalsobefromexogenoussources,suchascontaminatedfood,medicalinstrumentation,ormedicines.Oncepresent,PrPscconvertsadditionalmoleculesofPrPcintoPrPscthroughphysicalinteraction,eventuallyleadingtotheformationofpathogenicPrPscaggregates. 23.21

affecting in familial individuals. 70 may than in individuals by mutations present age, of forms PRNP caused younger years http://ebooksmedicine.net older electrodes human contaminated growth and of with keeping iatrogenic well-established implantation nature In cases are of PrPsc, by deep the there hormone preparations. infectious transmission

transformation deep and cerebral gray the (caudate,putamen);thismultifocalprocessresultsintheunevenformationofsmall,apparentlyempty,microscopicvacuolesofvaryingsizeswithintheneuropil(theeosinophilicregionsingreymatterthatcontaindendrites,axons,andsynapses)andsometimesintheperikaryonofneurons( of matter MORPHOLOGYTheprogressiontodeathinCJDusuallyissorapidthatthereislittle,ifany,macroscopicevidenceofbrainatrophy.Onmicroscopicexamination,thepathognomonicfindingisaspongiform cortex structures

Fig.

23.22A ).Inadvancedcases,thereissevereneuronalloss,reactivegliosis,andsometimesexpansionofthevacuolatedareasintocystlikespaces(“statusspongiosus”).Noinflammatoryinfiltrateispresent.ImmunohistochemicalstainingdemonstratesthepresenceofproteinaseK–resistantPrPscintissue,whilewesternblottingoftissueextractsafterpartialproteasedigestionallowsdetectionofdiagnosticPrPsc.

illness United appeared Starting in cases in Kingdom. CJD-like of a 1995, the two these and of The CJD, affected behavioral new in respects: a features neurologic than relationship were important the prominently from CJD typical disease illnesses, and young the those adults; CJD. new somewhat stages; early several disorders disease disorder more this similar between slowly findings figured cases to in the molecular typical of differed suggesting yet close progressed syndrome neuropathologic spongiform Creutzfeldt-Jakob a evidence disease bovine to Multiple cattle, disease, the of (vCJD) prion variant termed new of encephalopathy. called disease is indicate of that lines exposure this consequence transmission transfusion. is there blood Also, by documentation now of to change in with spongiform form and This types pathologic absence inflammation. similar CJD, appearance of other variant of a has that by surrounded however, abundant the amyloid there plaques, vCJD, (see spongiform cortical In change are

Fig. 23.22B

Pathogensfromvirusesthroughparasitescaninfectthebrain;inaddition,priondiseaseisaprotein-inducedtransmissiblediseasethatisuniquetothenervoussystem.

Differentpathogensusedistinctroutestoreachthebrain,andtheycausedifferentpatternsofdisease.

Bacterialinfectionsmaycausemeningitis,cerebralabscesses,orachronicmeningoencephalitis.

Viralinfectionscancausemeningitisormeningoencephalitis.

HIVcandirectlycausemeningoencephalitis,orindirectlyaffectthebrainbyincreasingtheriskforopportunisticinfections(toxoplasmosis,CMV)orCNSlymphoma.

Priondiseasesaretransmittedbyanalteredformofanormalcellularprotein.Theycanbesporadic,transmitted,orinherited.

tightly electrical are the that impulses. rapid propagation of by allows ensheathed insulator an CNS, neural axons myelin, Within are highly assembled layers consists plasma of by oligodendrocytes. multiple of Myelin apposed that membranes specialized, closely Although are present matter; they white are all the white in areas primarily of dominant in matter the the brain, of most myelinated therefore, myelin disorders. axons diseases are component cell (3) oligodendrocytes; nerve myelin myelin the while Schwann CNS, specialized important is are single a one different. for internodes in cells, and (2) lipids oligodendrocyte; a are processes the in The provides peripheral coming created CNS, myelin peripheral (1) not made Schwann by only by from each internode, differences: also several and is the many with proteins but the in nerves myelin similar in peripheral to significant of extent, Most the nerves do involve versa. CNS vice any diseases myelin peripheral and to not

Fig. 23.22 Priondisease. Highmagnificationofaneuronwithvacuoles. (A)HistologicfeaturesofCreutzfeldt-Jakobdisease(CJD)includespongiformchangeinthecerebralcortex.Inset, thatsitintheregionsofgreatestspongiformchange. (B)VariantCJD(vCJD)ischaracterizedbyamyloidplaques(inset)

http://ebooksmedicine.net

groups. general, are two into broad involving diseases CNS separated myelin In

to conditions Demyelinating of the damage CNS characterized by preferential are acquired myelin. diseases previously normal related common group result injury, most immune-mediated multiple disorders. in this such sclerosis The from (MS) and as diseases by this that injury other viral type and leukoencephalopathy disease and oligodendrocytes, (see drugs infection of caused can agents. toxic of Other processes progressive as include in earlier), multifocal cause

diseases, contrast, not other or turnover abnormal kinetics. is properly myelin has formed in By are of function be by normal sheaths. formation most mutations for disrupt required would that myelin proteins expected, these of of the caused the As diseases. These are under leukodystrophy dysmyelinating diseases grouped or

that of that in characterized produce matter separated white activity, demyelinating separated time, disorder an is lesions MS space. by in autoimmune disease are episodes most the Europe, appears is prevalence 1 in United the per and approximately and of demyelinating increasing. be It disorder, to incidence common 1000 its having States a individuals rare. The age, or in after at but 50 of present years is onset disease may childhood any age as men. affected often are twice Women as

lesions MS sheath. myelin an autoimmune against caused are The of the of components directed response by of is susceptibility triggers. MS in related autoimmune 5), development genetic the diseases As undefined environmental other largely and to (Chapter an monozygotic 150-fold twin. a The disease is with 15-fold higher in and roughly MS incidence affected of when the present first-degree higher relative is a and disease many loci been explained, genetic Only of the identified the has basis with other of autoimmune portion of associated the are diseases. genetic with a MS in encoding in and 3-fold involved include associated with risk genes the strong There for that allele it HLA-DRB1*1501 brings roughly the and histocompatibility is effect inherits each MS. an proteins other immune individual of a copy receptor genes Other increase IL-2 the major complex; loci the responses. are of IL-7

of the Immune are that mechanisms investigation. focus destruction of myelin much the underlie and that disease the is TH1 evidence against The antigens TH17 react secrete myelin and by cells that T indicates cytokines. initiated available inflammation encephalomyelitis, unimmunized Experimental passively which TH1 with recognize of cells to model and myelin animal be transferred TH17 demyelination immunization of an proteins, animals that myelin and in with animals can MS after occur antigens. autoimmune activates which TH17 the macrophages, cells promote of and cells leukocytes. IFN-γ, recruitment secrete TH1 leukocytes demyelination The products. their and injurious by activated is caused of CD8+) cells macrophages. regions and infiltrate of in CD4+, the consists T and plaques brain (mainly The some surrounding play the cell but indicated B B success as and the lymphocytes also an antibodies depleting disease, of important, defined, by in role surprising therapies. poorly

MORPHOLOGYMSisprimarilyamultifocalwhitematterdisease.Grossly,thecharacteristiclesions,termedplaques,arediscrete,slightlydepressed,glassy-appearing,andgray-tanincolor(

Fig.23.23A ).Plaquesarecommonneartheventriclesandalsofrequentlyoccurintheopticnervesandchiasm,brainstem,ascendinganddescendingfibertracts,cerebellum,andspinalcord.Thelesionshavesharplydefinedbordersatthemicroscopiclevel(see

Fig.

containabundantmacrophagesstuffedwithmyelindebris,evidenceofongoingmyelinbreakdown.Lymphocytesalsoarepresent,mostlyasperivascularcuffs.Smallactivelesionsoftenarecenteredonsmallveins.Axonsarerelativelypreservedbutmaybereducedinnumber.Whenplaquesbecomequiescent(inactive 23.23B plaques theinflammationmostlydisappears,leavingbehindlittletonomyelin,astrocyticproliferation,andgliosis. plaques), ).Active

is recovery remission; followed course is relapses The typically, of but commonly of are there during MS not by variable, multiple complete. episodes remissions stepwise, gradual, consequence, is there of a a over usually often accumulation As deficits. time neurologic in are from demonstrated with have that brains can the often more patients lesions lesions previously studies of examination, there be come and often MS expected the than than go that might Imaging suspected. much clinical more was and be in the Changes much deficits. present, cognitive are can than function other but milder often treatments, the to which current immune when relapses any decreasing the relapse control response, recovering aim next rate lost intended at individual function. severity most and rather will to are it predict occur; than the In patient, difficult of is

one-third of there with level The a mildly cases, protein CSF of in an proportion is shows in MS increased moderate immunoglobulin; patients pleocytosis. with elevated the immunoglobulin When examined bands are usually is identified. oligoclonal further, disease variety antigenic of a directed against as antibodies used can of activity. be targets These markers and are is The unclear. antibodies contribution these the of disease to process

Immune-mediated illnesses, systemic http://ebooksmedicine.net infectious demyelination can of number including after occur a

Fig. Multiplesclerosis(MS).(A)Sectionoffreshbrainshowingaplaquearoundoccipitalhornofthelateralventricle. 23.23 (B)Unstainedregionsofdemyelination(MSplaques)aroundthefourthventricle.Luxolfastblue–periodicacid–Schiffstainformyelin.

relatively viral diseases. mild to to are the the agents infectious to system. spread be of These thought not direct related nervous it antigens, against in resulting responding is cells cross-react damage. immune myelin pathogen-associated that myelin antigens believed Rather, to

unlike both monophasic There associated myelin; are two acute-onset to are of they illnesses. MS, patterns reactions autoimmune postinfectious general with contrast disseminated weeks lethargy, or encephalomyelitis, in coma), the are 2 focal nonlocalizing after antecedent findings with and In (headache, develop and acute infection typically 1 of an MS. symptoms Symptoms is in and as 20% is fatal cases; remaining illness recovery. many of there patients, rapidly, as complete the the progress in and which devastating affects Acute related more typically encephalomyelitis is children. hemorrhagic young disorder, adults necrotizing a

centered spinal neuromyelitis Other (NMO), demyelinating a typically of nonimmune include by evolving central the optic optica acquired in that disease damage diseases after of sudden caused hyponatremia, nerves an may rapidly to pontine oligodendrocytes cord, quadriplegia. and antibody-mediated on myelinolysis, result myelin and correction

progressive reactivation a virus As disease is occurs discussed (PML) immunosuppressed leukoencephalopathy multifocal demyelinating after the patients. earlier, in that JC of

Leukodystrophies myelin are diseases synthesis or dysmyelinating caused abnormal by turnover. inherited of myelin. are genes are or mutations in the turnover, maintenance They of caused involved products by whose generation, proteins. are affect enzymes, while myelin with others lysosomal a mutations involve of associated Some few these enzymes; in peroxisomal mutations are X-linked occur. also Most although diseases of inheritance, autosomal recessive hypotonia, There diffuse spasticity, or ataxia. skills, matter involvement motor leading to white typically is deterioration of in leukodystrophies separate features clinical from diseases. Several demyelinating function, leukodystrophies diffuse at imaging an typically begin and changes insidious are The associated with with on symmetric progressive studies. younger ages, often of and present loss and

MORPHOLOGYMuchofthepathologicchangeofleukodystrophyisfoundinthewhitematter,whichisdiffuselyabnormalincolor(grayandtranslucent)andvolume(decreased).Earlyintheircourse,somediseasesmayshowpatchyinvolvement,whileothershaveapredilectionforoccipitallobeinvolvement.Intheend,though,nearlyallofthewhitematterusuallyisaffected.Withthelossofwhitematter,thebrainbecomesatrophic,theventriclesenlarge,andsecondarychangescanbefoundinthegraymatter.Myelinlossisassociatedwithinfiltrationofmacrophages,whichoftenbecomestuffedwithlipid.Someofthesediseasesalsoshowspecificinclusionscreatedbytheaccumulationofparticularlipids.

Becauseofthecriticalroleofmyelininnerveconduction,diseasesofmyelincanleadtowidespreadandsevereneurologicdeficits.

Multiplesclerosis,anautoimmunedemyelinatingdisease,isthemostcommondisorderofmyelin,affectingyoungadults.Itoftenpursuesarelapsing-remittingcourse,witheventualprogressiveaccumulationofneurologicdeficits.

Other,lesscommonformsofimmune-mediateddemyelinationoftenfollowinfectionsandaremoreacuteillnesses.

Leukodystrophiesaregeneticdisordersinwhichmyelinproductionorturnoverisabnormal.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

that and diseases resulting in present life. processes neurons early in in glia, Several disorders progressive genetic disrupt metabolic or the affected the (neurons very grouped compartment organelle long–chain affected cells (e.g., white These or the by metabolic affected matter), vs. pathway subcellular diseases or be acid mitochondrion), (e.g., fatty metabolism). peroxisome, sphingolipidoses, can lysosome, underlying that nervous degradation are system. to mutations or affect these pathways specific The diseases synthetic the typically

accumulation material storage Neuronal storage typically diseases are within death. neuronal neurons, leading by characterized the to of leads involvement neuronal may and Cortical to cognitive function also cause seizures. of loss in gangliosides), by they defects specific mucolipids; autosomal others of the lipid sphingolipids caused or protein enzyme involved caused mucopolysaccharides, of or neurons. deficiency be a disorders commonly, trafficking the (including are appear catabolism recessive the Most by to in within diseases, are mucopolysaccharidoses, of examples as 7. Chapter discussed in and these and diseases such Several Niemann-Pick Tay-Sachs

multiple including of Mitochondrial muscle are affecting oxidative phosphorylation, (Chapter disorders tissues skeletal often encephalomyopathies 22). than of severely be involve matter, of the is white When brain, greater because matter affected neurons. gray the as would more requirements they metabolic expected be by in These the or genomes. mitochondrial may the mutations nuclear caused disorders

metabolic acquired of causes neurologic relatively Toxic illnesses. and are common diseases its particularly of and metabolic in is state. to diseases Because metabolic vulnerable brain the nutritional alterations demands, high

features these requirements of disorders presentations distinct because of anatomic unique uneven of Some of the brain. regions have and clinical pathologic lesions or different A the few injury of of types more here. discussed are common

may of syndrome termed Wernicke thiamine addition onset the and (beriberi), encephalopathy. to In in eye of effects it systemic movement confusion, with be the abnormalities associated abrupt ataxia, also deficiency result syndrome. largely thiamine with profound but delayed is called these disturbance if irreversible memory Korsakoff a reverses deficits, the treatment is Treatment linked, closely often the are Wernicke-Korsakoff Because term syndrome two is the used. syndromes the patients gastric also common particularly vomiting. in thiamine persistent with setting disorders, surgery, syndrome encountered The of in resulting bypass may gastric or but is from be alcoholism deficiency chronic

MORPHOLOGYWernickeencephalopathyischaracterizedbyfociofhemorrhageandnecrosis,particularlyinthemammillarybodiesbutalsoadjacenttotheventricles,especiallythethirdandfourthventricles.Earlylesionsshowdilatedcapillarieswithprominentendothelialcellsandprogresstohemorrhage.Asthelesionsresolve,acysticspaceappearsalongwithhemosiderin-ladenmacrophages.LesionsinthemedialdorsalnucleusofthethalamusseemtobestcorrelatewiththememorydisturbanceinKorsakoffsyndrome.

In neurologic anemia, of the vitamin in spinal spinal the cord, lead of addition associated changes degeneration syndrome a deficiency causing combined to to deficits resulting B12 in with subacute may called cord. tracts spinal ascending As both and are the of implies, descending cord name the affected. Symptoms develop weeks. over to often progress mild sometimes, which signs paraplegia ataxia weakness of numbness spastic Early lower and the lower-extremity tingling, can include complete ensues. and extremities; clinical has replacement produces however, therapy is Prompt clinical developed, poor. if vitamin improvement; recovery paraplegia

glucose systemic levels abnormal only dysfunction may produce associated liver and with are CNS metabolic dysfunction; considered here. derangements those Several

cellular those requires production, hypoxia. energy brain generally resemble substrate diminished glucose global Since the the a of glucose of effects as for hypoglycemic injury, cerebellar relatively Hippocampal susceptible neurons spared. particularly while are Purkinje cells are to if to injury hypoglycemia As anoxia, are there of the of and level brain. duration areas be with widespread may many sufficiently the severe,

the of and ketoacidosis hyperosmolar or in diabetes either inadequately can coma. setting Hyperglycemia with be controlled most common associated is mellitus caused dehydration Patients eventually stupor, and the associated state. confusion, coma hyperosmolar with intracellular by develop be correction hyperglycemia corrected must edema. produce because gradually, can severe rapid The cerebral

and may be of levels consciousness with Decreased associated coma. hepatic function sometimes depressed the arms “flapping” the when (asterixis) palms exhibit characteristic patients the tremor observer. stages, a In early with extending facing urea levels the the the which normally clears hyponatremia, combination changes in with inflammation brain through Elevated liver function. and cycle, in ammonia, cause of contributing factor, vary is patients it levels widely. only symptomatic ammonia one in Because glutamine Alzheimer of the in action as type the and astrocytes the develop astrocytes in to II through hyperammonemia, occurs swollen, ganglia pale setting metabolism Within cells). synthetase, only basal of and ammonia in nuclei the (referred cortex CNS,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

with list the The long. brain of toxins on is effects extremely (in industrial pollutants the mercury; pesticides) categories injury and blindness organophosphates carbon retinal Among including chemicals, hypoxia environmental pallidus). selective substances major lead, monoxide from and (combining including arsenic, such (causing to of damage); globus metals, as methanol and are with neurotoxic the

has brain. of variety a the Ethanol effects on result intoxication profound death. reversible, metabolic is can excessive While brain including in and intake swelling disturbances, acute truncal of with gait, leads vermis in to exposure Chronic 1% cerebellar associated the atrophy with of unsteady anterior cerebellum. cases, in about nystagmus, dysfunction ataxia, the and alcohol

Ionizing papilledema, months tumors, evolving years and commonly nausea, treat intracranial and cause can signs vomiting, to rapidly used headache, including after radiation, even symptoms irradiation. to of coagulative large material. thickened Affected show regions like blood fibrin intramural necrosis, and areas containing edema, vessels brain with walls

Neurodegenerative groups interconnections. by of loss typically of characterized affecting with neurons diseases the are functional progressive neurons, to tend signs ( diseases have therefore Different and systems stereotypic involve neural and symptoms particular presenting relatively

23.3 Table

present and the and involve changes, associated Diseases often behavior, disturbances cortices language. that of with including hippocampus cognitive memory, disease. dementia, time to these as with progress occurs With Alzheimer

that with disease, as disease. basal ganglia Huntington or Parkinson hypokinetic, be affect the manifest these hyperkinetic, as with as Diseases movement disorders; may

its input ataxia, output that and as result seen in in affect the or circuitry the ataxias. spinocerebellar Diseases cerebellum

swallowing and sclerosis. difficulty When are seen weakness with amyotrophic often the as respiration lateral system the bears burden, with motor first, and

A process most neurodegenerative by protein accumulation shared the aggregates, of pathologic is diseases

23.3 Major of Features Diseases Neurodegenerative histologic specific hallmarks serve the Table as which disorders of

Table 23.3 ). involved that the of mutations disrupt that because arise or in processing the of may protein’s conformation proteins. Aggregates clearance alter pathways or stochastic to proteins. may environmental, and or synthesis In (due situations, that clearance be subtle a allows of other there protein accumulation genetic, gradual imbalance factors) between and The cellular accumulate neurons. to may an inflammatory degradation are resistant be directly proteases, response, often to by within toxic aggregates elicit normal cells, is from As evident

diseases. may the as proteins aggregates same present be , Table 23.3 in multiple the the distribution of is more disease by of the The determined neurodegenerative the aggregates clinical nature than of aggregating phenotype protein. by the

features neurodegenerative are other diseases: to Two many common

capable that of that to spreading be experimental many in appear is healthy evidence affected diseases neurons. to There accumulate in of aggregates protein the these neurons disease Thus, the the process aggregates, of more development spread, like can seed aggregates can and prions. for to evidence no individuals. from there However, affected transmission is healthy

immune innate a Activation neurodegenerative of common system feature is of diseases. the this TREM2 by between been disease) the of has strengthened that components pathways. immune encode genes importance of further risk confer for identification the system regulatory immune that brain (e.g., Alzheimer for the and diseases interaction The of

Alzheimer as disease common with increasing adults, incidence a of function most is dementia of (AD) http://ebooksmedicine.net cause in the an older age. older of age, to 47% is 19% those and individuals incidence 3% 84 of The about years 65 in in 74 age, 84 those in to than years age. of 75 years at but 10% least familial. 5% are Most are sporadic, cases to of AD some 50 cases forms. heritable is present with but seen rarely of age, years before onset Sporadic early

mood with onset impairment, usually memory intellectual function, the manifests of and impaired insidious altered and The behavior. higher disease Over immobile. mute aphasia, profoundly dysfunction, cortical in are and disabled, of often the AD time, indicative phases disorientation often and of findings those severe develop; final Death usually or intercurrent infections. occurs from other pneumonia

in and plaques result and changes of death, forms tangles, and in effects these in (Aβ tau) two the The including specific neuronal brain the accumulation reactions. respectively; of secondary proteins dysfunction, inflammatory regions, in is abnormality fundamental neuronal AD death. Aβ then tau, in deposits the of while binding tangles are Plaques micro-tubule the intracellularly peptides of neuropil, aggregates neuronal develop and which after aggregated are persist extracellularly protein neural plaques dysfunction. appear Both to to and contribute tangles The interplay pathogenesis the a AD lead details of unraveled. between the processes aggregates the of be these yet to critical accumulation abnormal are that that of to aspect has

and of evidence the Aβ critical the experimental development initiating for is suggests that event strongly AD. Clinical generation risk but alterations number whereas for for of cause do precursor protein or Notably, AD, elevated gene AD the not associated with an to gene the rather of degenerations. frontotemporal rise lobar in are give the tau in copy mutations Aβ mutations encoding can in of disease Aβ Overexpression animal models. replicate the

The involves reactions. as as Aβ AD and pathogenesis other Tau of deposits, inflammatory and factors risk well

Aβ. of Role • protein enzymes precursor the ( cleaved (BACE) protein Aβ β-amyloid–converting γ-secretase when and sequentially created is by enzyme transmembrane (APP) is the amyloid

Fig. 23.24 ). by also is peptide liberating different be and that γ-secretase, α-secretase can nonpathogenic. cleaved a APP of the or most by the aggregation-prone Mutations γ-secretase AD presenilin-2 particularly (encoded to rate at lead form, its familial APP by increasing Aβ, in presenilin-1 which components generated. is in gene) or and duplications leads is (Down to trisomy those the because gene, 21 small higher with and presumably APP, with also this an too Aβ interstitial is for of located copy patients such APP in as gene syndrome) individuals AD The risk greater the chromosome of on with generation. 21, APP extra Once these generated, highly propagate forms small is fibrils. into Aβ and first and prone oligomers, to it large eventually aggregates aggregation; plaques. the as are brain that in these and deposit aggregates visible It is disrupted. the number underlie so oligomers that synapses felt that alter and learning remain of function decrease those of the present are evidence these There processes memory to is that the and cellular

of Role tau. protein, there the in tangles of role protein interest in the has Because much this contain been neurofibrillary tau AD. axons network. is in with the protein a Tau in microtubule-associated microtubular association present becomes of AD, a in loses tau With to and bind distribution, shifts hyperphosphorylated, microtubules. the the ability tangles development somatic-dendritic to to formation The tangles an important the of component poorly mechanism neurons but to injury is remains of tangle understood. of AD, protein response, the elicit toxicity function death; and and persists leading pathways of neuronal tau which have and 2), tau a Two of stress is to leads suggested; death. eventually aggregates cell been lost, microtubule protein 1) stabilizing to been the can aggregates of tau of that the next; synapses shown passed It across some lesions this the neuron may brain. to be across from has underlie spread one

Other risk factors. genetic locus that on apolipoprotein developing a The 19 has encodes risk influence strong on chromosome AD. for genetic E (ApoE) the identified have based amino (ε2, ε4) been acid alleles on Three and ε3, two polymorphisms. the of increases for dosage the risk The AD. allele ε4 although ApoE been promotes established. have and generation the Aβ deposition, not This mechanisms isoform estimated to for has risk Overall, of development this been of locus convey fourth late-onset one the about AD. encoded the association Genome-wide of that to identified multiple pathogenesis the disease in the but other proteins roles are established. for have risk not AD, studies contribute loci

inflammation. Role of system the innate genetic and histologic Aβ to Both immune have indicated that tau. responds and studies of response elicit microglia Deposits Aβ from an astrocytes. inflammatory and This secretion but time. aggregated the of mediators peptide, may in probably response cause neuronal assists over the the stimulate injury of also clearance that

cognitive for Basis impairment. Aβ brain advance begin Deposits in the appear tangles impairment. of in well of and cognitive to plaques While tangles dementia large with best of individuals presence regarding of AD, cognitive strongly the correlate dysfunction. in a disagreement of severe the and is there remains burden with associated degree the number does of plaques. better of with tangles neuritic than the neurofibrillary correlates number dementia The of with amyloid the include Biochemical have that dementia of markers degree correlated been burden.

MORPHOLOGYBrainsinvolvedbyADshowavariabledegreeofcorticalatrophy,resultinginawideningofthecerebralsulcithatismostpronouncedinthefrontal,temporal,andparietallobes.Theatrophyproducesacompensatoryventricularenlargement(hydrocephalusexvacuo).Atthemicroscopiclevel,ADisdiagnosedbythepresenceofneuritic tangles (anextracellularlesion)andneurofibrillary plaques (anintracellularlesion)(

http://ebooksmedicine.net Fig.23.25

Fig. stain). dystrophic well as plaques surrounding of stain Alzheimer 23.25 region of neurites amyloid (A) Plaques and the in central disease. a present (arrow) Peptide (Bielschowsky for the a core contain (B) core the in Immunohistochemical is of Aβ. surrounding as region. Neurons for stained with specific tau. (C) antibody tangles an containing

Neuritic plaques arefocal,sphericalcollectionsofdilated,tortuous,processesderivedfromdystrophicneurites,oftenaroundacentralamyloidcore(see

(see Fig.23.25A ).Neuriticplaquesrangeinsizefrom20to200µmindiameter;microglialcellsandreactiveastrocytesarepresentattheirperiphery.Plaquescanbefoundinthehippocampusandamygdalaaswellasintheneocortex,althoughthereisrelativesparingofprimarymotorandsensorycorticesuntillateinthediseasecourse.TheamyloidcorecontainsAβ

plaques; Fig.23.25B ).Aβ thesearefoundinthesuperficialcerebralcortex,thebasalganglia,andthecerebellarcortexandmayrepresentanearlystageofplaquedevelopment. depositsalsocanbefoundthatlackthesurroundingneuriticreaction,termeddiffuse

(see tau arebundlesofpairedhelicalfilamentsvisibleasbasophilicfibrillarystructuresinthecytoplasmoftheneuronsthatdisplaceorencirclethenucleus;tanglescanpersistafterneuronsdie,becomingaformofextracellularpathology.Theyarecommonlyfoundincorticalneurons,especiallyintheentorhinalcortex,aswellasinthepyramidalcellsofthehippocampus,theamygdala,thebasalforebrain,andtheraphenuclei.Amajorcomponentofpairedhelicalfilamentsishyperphosphorylated Neurofibrillary tangles

Fig.23.25C

changes. andtheformationoftanglesprecedetheemergenceofcognitiveimpairmentbyasmuchas15to20years.Forthisreason,thecurrentdiagnosticcriteriaconsidertheburdenanddistributionofamyloiddeposits,tangles,andneuriticplaques—aconstellationknownasAlzheimer InindividualsharboringautosomaldominantmutationsthatcauseAD,depositionofAβ disease neuropathologic Thestagingofeachoftheseprocesses,whichhasafairlyconsistentpatternacrossindividuals,isthenusedtoassessthelikelihoodthattheobservedlesionsresultedincognitiveimpairment.

lobar Frontotemporal and/ temporal affect encompasses degeneration that preferentially several disorders or lobes. frontal (FTLD) the disorders features, and personality. certain as have such As changes of clinical shared progressive these a in deterioration language result, these to neuropathologic applied term as the frontotemporal syndromes degeneration describe are dementias. referred The changes; to commonly clinically, is problems changes may language or distribution behavioral on the (frontal or temporal), disease dominate. Depending behavioral a assists between discrimination that precede memory in AD. language distinction and the disturbances, general, In clinical problems FTLD and for occurs younger for AD. The onset FTLD at of ages symptoms than

the neuronal classification, TDP43. clinical distinguished tau or subgroups characteristic composition that exist In inclusions, pathologic addition the of are to based on contain which two may Pick which with One known associated of is inclusions disease, subtype FTLD-tau smooth, as bodies. well-recognized round is Pick Alzheimer may of the lead How to neurodegeneration earlier, in tau disease. was discussed context aggregation FTLD DNA/RNA-binding other characterized (FTLD-TDP43). of is TDP43 aggregates by protein form containing the major The leads remain this to gain-of-function to of TDP43 possibilities. is loss neurodegeneration; how activity toxic the protein related uncertain aggregates It and a both lateral (ALS). large cases in sclerosis also found amyotrophic of proportion a TDP43 are of neuronal inclusions ALS clinically, FTLD. This manifest of evidence also as individuals is with show overlap many

MORPHOLOGYThegrossappearanceisindependentofthetypeofinclusions,withatrophyoffrontalandtemporallobesofvariableextentandseverity,accompaniedbyneuronallossandgliosis(

Fig.

23.26A–B ).InFTLD-tau,thecharacteristicadditionallesionisthepresenceoftau-containingneurofibrillarytangles,similartothetanglesfoundinAD(see

).InFTLD-TDP,thereislossofnuclearstainingforTDP43associatedwiththeappearanceofTDP43-positiveinclusions(see Fig.23.26C

Fig.23.26D

substantia caused is by loss from (PD) is neurodegenerative dopaminergic neurons that movement marked a Parkinson of disorder the disease nigra. disease by a hypokinetic a instability. tremor, is characterized bradykinesia, by Parkinsonism syndrome rigidity, and clinical the the control to neurons, of types substantia motor range project nigra be striatum involved dopaminergic activity. are and that disturbances diseases a These which damage in motor in from of may of seen can be drugs such induced toxins neurons. Parkinson-ism selectively as dopaminergic injure antagonists by or dopamine that characteristic diseases, containing α-synuclein. the Among neurodegenerative parkinsonism caused PD, of most is cases neuronal by which with associated are inclusions

and brain. and abnormalities, nigra PD elsewhere accumulation mitochondrial and substantia is with protein the in in the aggregation, loss neuronal associated protein in have defects to the appears in it abnormal pathogenic and the Based due genetics that a disease. clearance and of on PD, autophagy degradation role organelle lysosomal One involved a Lewy of transmission. disease in inclusion diagnostic and feature the is characteristic synaptic protein α-synuclein, the a containing body, clue of α-synuclein in PD. PD sporadic, the cause is and duplications cases mutations While point most autosomal encoding dominant gene mutations pathways all in others) autophagy. are and roles autophagy (LRRK2, in in to whose implicated Synuclein genes have cleared trafficking PD several by products with Parkin, are (Chapter aggregates endosomal associated appear 2), been risk glucocerebrosidase for that is heterozygosity the demonstrated mutation in for factor It a disease–causing Gaucher PD. also has suggesting another constituents of turnover that abnormal clue development a lysosomal yet is the stage sets the somehow enzyme, for cellular PD. Glucocerebrosidase of

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Frontotemporallobardegeneration(FTLD).(A)Atrophyofthetemporalcortexcanbeseenincomparisontotherelativepreservationoffrontalcortex.(B)Severeneuronallossandgliosisintheregionofatrophy.(C)FTLD-tau.CytoplasmicinclusionscontainingTDP43areseeninassociationwithlossofnormalnuclearimmunoreactivity. 23.26 (D)FTLD-TDP.SomeformsofFTLDareassociatedwithneuronalintranuclearinclusionscontainingTDP43.

Fig.23.27A–B )andlocusceruleus.Microscopicfeaturesincludelossofthepigmented,catecholaminergicneuronsintheseregionsassociatedwithgliosis.Lewy bodies (see

)maybefoundinthoseneuronsthatremain.Thesearesingleormultiple,cytoplasmic,eosinophilic,roundtoelongatedinclusions.Onultrastructuralexamination,Lewybodiesconsistoffinefilaments,composedofα-synucleinandotherproteins,includingneurofilamentsandubiquitin.TheothermajorhistologicfindingisthepresenceofLewy Fig.23.27C dystrophicneuritesthatalsocontainaggregatedα-synuclein.Immunohistochemicalstainingforα-synucleinhighlightsmoresubtleLewybodiesandLewyneuritesinmanybrainregionsoutsideofthesubstantianigraandinnon-dopaminergicneurons,includingregionsofthemedulla,thepons,theamygdala,andthecerebralcortex.Eventuallytheyappearinthesubcorticalareasandthecerebralcortex.Withinvolvementofthecerebralcortex,thereistypicallydementiapresentinadditiontothemovementdisorder. neurites,

Fig. Parkinsondisease.(A)Normalsubstantianigra.(B)DepigmentedsubstantianigrainidiopathicParkinsondisease. 23.27 (C)Lewybodyinaneuronfromthesubstantianigrastainspink.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

a underlying of disorder absence exposure known etiology. in a commonly or other as manifests toxic PD the movement eventually progresses near of immobility. producing to 10 The usually 15 disease point slowing years, the to motor over severe instability. Death aspiration trauma caused pneumonia falls the is of or usually by from postural result

initially symptoms to L-dihydroxyphenylalanine Movement disease not slow progression. treatment (L-DOPA), respond does PD but this of in motor fluctuations becomes time, cause function. and effective begins less L-DOPA problematic Over to treatment implanted are pallidus modulate dose. in of reduction L-DOPA in the basal globus deep PD symptoms circuitry, often a electrodes to significant allowing which nucleus for ganglia stimulation, motor brain Another in the subthalamic is or

movement of an clinical has feature of the dopaminergic pathologic it manifestations. extensive clear the with more and pathway While disorder is disease important the PD, nigrostriatal associated loss is that the before in problems. sleep stem in of Lesions give of (in and disorder nigral the behavioral dorsal nucleus in the motor vagus advance brain reticular motor the involvement, can to the often rise formation), hallucinations, mildly to a cerebral is course in typically cortex. attributable individuals Dementia, PD and with of and many involvement with emerges fluctuating the symptoms, 1 it body year When is of onset Lewy (LBD). to the within referred dementia of motor dementia arises

dominant and of an (HD) associated disorder is with movement putamen). striatum disease (caudate autosomal degeneration the Huntington are movements jerky involuntary the movements disorder is by of The extremities typical. of all characterized of the writhing body; parts progressive, is in death The of an after 15 resulting average relentlessly years. disease course about be to and forgetfulness thought dementia. may Early disorders, include progression symptoms a affective and and severe there cognitive an part of these changes, As for behavioral increased carries HD early a suicide. risk

HD CAG that trinucleotide located protein on in the expansions repeat 4p16.3 by caused a gene huntingtin. is encodes repeat; to repeats into in Normal number the alleles, 34 alleles the contain copies disease-causing sometimes the of of increased, 11 hundreds. is with genotype-phenotype There earlier-onset repeats larger resulting in correlation, numbers of strong is a disease. repeat the symptoms however, the affected is by Once the illness appear, length. of not course may in associated earlier so Further paternal referred as the (glutamine-encoding) CAG anticipation during a occur generation, next spermatogenesis, expansions repeats be (Chapter of with phenomenon the onset transmission 7). to

related toxic in be a caused HD to appears polyglutamine the huntingtin. tract gain-of-function expanded to by

is The yielding intra-nuclear mutant to proteolysis, aggregates. protein and large subject that ubiquitination can form fragments the other in diseases, abnormal degenerative fragments protein of be As to suspected toxic. aggregates are smaller actions, of function. factors, been and of transcription of protein sequestration have potentially a disruption range injurious shown aggregates to including pathways, These perturbation mitochondrial degradation of have these of HD that to aberrations pathogenesis. some contributes likely It is combination

MORPHOLOGYOngrossexamination,thebrainissmallandshowsstrikingatrophyofthecaudatenucleusand,sometimeslessdramatically,theputamen(

).Theglobuspallidusmaybeatrophiedsecondarily,andthelateralandthirdventriclesaredilated.Atrophyfrequentlyalsoisseeninthefrontallobe,lessoftenintheparietallobe,andoccasionallyintheentirecortex. Fig.23.28

Microscopicexaminationrevealsseverelossofneuronsfromaffectedregionsofthestriatumalongwithgliosis.Themedium-sized,spinyneuronsthatreleasetheneurotransmittersγ-aminobutyricacid(GABA),enkephalin,dynorphin,andsubstancePareespeciallysensitive,disappearingearlyinthedisease.Thereisastrongcorrelationbetweenthedegreeofdegenerationinthestriatumandtheseverityofmotorsymptoms;thereisalsoanassociationbetweencorticalneuronallossanddementia.Inremainingstriatalneuronsandinthecortex,thereareintranuclearinclusionsthatcontainaggregatesofubiquitinatedhuntingtinprotein(see

,inset). Fig.23.28

that ataxias Spinocerebellar sensory neuropathy. group of clinical findings several ataxia, diseases combination and are a peripheral heterogeneous include of dozen a spasticity, (SCAs) and sensorimotor cerebellar with are one distinguished different They from on based another

Fig. comparedwithahemispherewithHuntingtondisease(right) 23.28 showingatrophyofthestriatumandventriculardilation.Inset, Huntingtondisease.Normalhemisphere(left) Anintranuclearinclusioninacorticalneuronisstronglyimmunoreactiveforubiquitin. Columbia University, Dr.Vonsattel, New of (Gross York.) photo York, New courtesy patterns signs of mutations, and and onset, age symptoms. inheritance, causative at http://ebooksmedicine.net of brain other peripheral and extent, regions, variable affects, group cord, the a nerves. spinal diseases This to cerebellar cortex, occurs changes, is associated the without affected Degeneration often of with mild gliosis. distinctive areas in and histopathologic other neurons, help the subtypes. additional accompany symptoms ataxia that well-characterized clinical between can distinguish The forms. many many that do distinct fall the of SCA already identified, there remain one types have Although characterized cases not been genetic of into

HD, forms are by expansions of repeat in caused several polyglutamine CAG tracts genes. encoding As various SCA with between In an onset. these as repeat inverse correlation and are forms degree expansion of intranuclear of HD, present protein, and of true there SCA, is inclusions age abnormal containing is neuronal the for the untranslated of are repeat Other other caused by expansions or types regions in SCAs mutations. by

followed recessive is first that dysarthria. and ataxia by disorder autosomal manifests generally decade hand in of gait clumsiness with an Friedreich ataxia, life the and is Most there patients pes a and cardiac and cavus diabetes. develop disease kyphoscoliosis, high of incidence protein in is the encoding usually the repeat gene in levels, a that The trinucleotide frataxin, a iron mitochondria. disease cellular by particularly caused regulates expansion GAA as results through decreased repeat frataxin in levels leads transcriptional The dysfunction protein increased silencing; expansion to decreased as oxidative mitochondrial damage. well

motor neurons as (ALS) cord death of cells) from the and Amyotrophic (Betz lower in neurons spinal in brain well motor cortex. upper lateral results stem the the motor sclerosis as loss condition), “amyotrophy” lower the loss paresis, neurons neurons (the muscles, the in sign. a in results atrophy and of The denervation along with fasciculations, and weakness, upper motor muscular motor Babinski while spasticity, of results of hyperreflexia, of motor is neuron of cord in degeneration spinal the corticospinal portion sclerosis”). tracts loss upper of the (“lateral additional the consequence of An lateral unaffected, is impairment is infrequent. but usually cognitive Sensation not

disease in men decade and The than clinically affects fifth becomes frequently later. the slightly or women more manifest distal with extremity begins weakness. subtle usually It asymmetric the termed As strength and diminish, occur. fasciculations, and muscle units, contractions progresses, bulk disease of individual motor involuntary recurrent respiratory usual death. disease bouts to of is cause pulmonary eventually leading The muscles, the infection, involves which of the vary, neuron motor and can patients most balance between lower The involvement upper involvement exhibit although of both. as disease and In amyotrophic to nuclei the a lower early lateral brain degeneration cranial occurs of sclerosis. referred pattern motor bulbar some patients, stem progresses of rapidly, this swallowing With pattern, speaking of disease abnormalities and dominate.

inheritance. are autosomal are most dominant 10% sporadic, mostly with familial, While about cases the similar sporadic than forms. appear, disease, once life both earlier but begins course Familial is symptoms in in clinical disease gene, the about superoxide Mutations the the on genetic 20% ALS of and SOD1, in 21 chromosome were forms. first for dismutase familial cause identified account of abnormal SOD1 the to may of cause trigger the protein generate mutations These unfolded apoptotic of thought response are misfolded death which protein, neurons. and forms

loci A of other with genetic associated ALS. been as number identified have C9orf72, is with in repeat in frontotemporal expansion most familial which The of common also cause gene degeneration. hexanucleotide cumbersome lobar a name the rather frequently expanded is ALS may encoded RNA RNA FTLD) (also and notably, other with associated associates binding mutated The C9orf72 TDP43 FUS, encode cause proteins. protein two that genes binding ALS, by proteins; with when much an processing into directly it that discovered. indirectly to to and RNA the uncertain This ALS, abnormality convergence in be suggests picture, pathogenesis of mutations but remains of how SOD1 contributes is this fit or the there impairment. overlap, between as clinical expected overlap ALS As from such some FTLD, genetic and is cognitive

horn MORPHOLOGYThemoststrikinggrosschangesarefoundinanteriorrootsofthespinalcord,whicharethinandgray.Inespeciallyseverecases,theprecentralgyrus(motorcortex)ismildlyatrophicduetothedeathofuppermotorneurons.Microscopicexaminationdemonstratesareduction anterior cell throughoutthespinalcordassociatedwithreactivegliosisandlossofanteriorrootmyelinatedfibers.Similarfindingsarefoundwithinvolvementofmotorcranialnervenucleiexceptthosesupplyingtheextraocularmuscles,whicharesparedinallbutafewlongtermsurvivors.CytoplasmicinclusionsthatcontainTDP43maybeseeninasubsetofcases.Withthelossofinnervationfromthedeathofanteriorhorncells,skeletalmusclesshowneurogenicatrophy. number in neurons of the

Neurodegenerativediseasescausesymptomsthatdependonthepatternofbraininvolvement.Corticaldiseaseusuallymanifestsascognitivechange,alterationsinpersonality,andmemorydisturbances;basalgangliadisordersusuallymanifestasmovementdisorders.

Manyoftheneurodegenerativediseasesareassociatedwithvariousproteinaggregates,whichserveaspathologichallmarks.Familialformsofthesediseasesareassociatedwithmutationsinthegenesencodingtheseproteinsorcontrollingtheirmetabolism.Someoftheseproteinaggregatescanshowprionlikeproperties,facilitatingspreadfromonecelltothenext.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Amongdementias,Alzheimerdisease(withplaquesofAβ andtanglesoftau)isthemostcommon;otherpredominantlydementingdiseasesincludethevariousformsofFTLDs(bothformswithtau-containinglesionsandwithothertypesofinclusions)anddementiawithLewybodies(withα-synucleincontaininglesions).

Amongthehypokineticmovementdisorders,Parkinsondiseaseisthemostcommon,withα-synucleincontaininginclusions.

Amyotrophiclateralsclerosis(ALS)isthemostcommonformofmotorneurondisease,withdiversegeneticcausesaswellassporadicforms.

intraspinal per to 1 to from 2 intracranial about annual 10 The for 100,000 individuals decades 100,000 ranges of per individuals for 17 tumors; one- tumors incidence and life. tumors of CNS hemispheres. are in found usually the cerebral They common neurologic and related most symptoms focal to The the site involvement. and are presenting of seizures, signs headaches, anatomic deficits increases. three (grade of diffuse astrocytomas increasingly basis the II), (grade into groups: astrocytoma histologic prognosis and are anaplastic features, as IV), with III), stratified astrocytoma glioblastoma grim On grade (grade the

emerging prognostic important provides is There information. subtyping genetic evidence additional that

point Diffuse years. the progress; more is be at years, can but survival than some mean for static astrocytomas several they 5 patients of suffer features tumor growth. anaplastic clinical deterioration is more that Eventually, with rapid and rapid the appearance correlated outset. the with present patients Other glioblastoma from treatment 15 the appear, and the is glioblastoma very is the Once chemotherapy), poor; of prognosis features median survival only (resection, with months. radiotherapy, histologic

to the are and primary half are tumors, rest metastatic. three-fourths CNS of of many as childhood all pediatric up Tumors tion tumors. larger of make propor- the 20% of a for accounting cancers, those from location. subtype and in both adults Childhood histologic differ tumors in CNS In whereas posterior fossa, are likely to in are in tumors supratentorial. mostly tumors childhood, the adults arise

body. elsewhere Tumors neoplastic in system characteristics of apart them the the processes unique that from nervous have set

do have morphologically in stages situ comparable tumors of those carcinomas. not evident premalignant or to These

resected, leading may to the regions serious infiltrate to be poor of clinical lesions deficits, large inability and low-grade prognosis. brain, Even

from independent The may (e.g., local medulla). a cause meningioma of can outcome histologic cardiorespiratory anatomic of neoplasm the of to effects compression influence due classification site the arrest benign

gliomas most of the CNS. rarely spread the Even outside highly malignant

resemblance on have as brain types astrocytomas, the based oligodendrogliomas, of are different their cells. morphologic tumors that and classified glial to long parenchyma ependymomas of Gliomas been emerging of lesions, family of that clear the histologic gliomas distinct are patterns. has become genetic molecularly it a information, With the neoplastic independent molecular histologic and patterns guide treatment, characterization. on Nonetheless, continue refinement with diagnosis inform to based that and include the vast diffuse adults, majority oligodendrogliomas. occur astrocytomas in The constitute and of gliomas diffuse gliomas

of 80% gliomas. Astrocytomas adult about account for in the the They sixth most through are fourth frequent

GradeIIandIIIastrocytomasarepoorlydefined,gray,infiltrativetumorsthatexpandanddistorttheinvadedbrainwithoutformingadiscretemass(

).Infiltrationbeyondthegrosslyevidentmarginsisalwayspresent.Thecutsurfaceofthetumoriseitherfirmorsoftandgelatinous;cysticdegenerationmaybeseen.Inglioblastoma,variationinthegrossappearanceofthetumorfromregiontoregionischaracteristic(see Fig.23.29A

Fig.

).Someareasarefirmandwhite,othersaresoftandyellow(theresultoftissuenecrosis),andstillothersshowregionsofcysticdegenerationandhemorrhage. 23.29B

Microscopically,low-grade(WHOgradeII)astrocytomasarecharacterizedbyamildtomoderateincreaseinthenumberofglialcellnuclei,somewhatvariablenuclearpleomorphism,andaninterveningfeltworkoffine,glialfibrillaryacidicprotein(GFAP)-positiveastrocyticcellprocessesthatgivethebackgroundafibrillaryappearance.Thetransitionbetweenneoplasticandnormaltissueisindistinct,andtumorcellscanbeseeninfiltratingnormaltissuemanycentimetersfromthemainlesion.Anaplasticastrocytomasshowregionsthataremoredenselycellularandhavegreaternuclearpleomorphism;mitoticfiguresarepresent.Glioblastomahasahistologicappearancesimilartothatofanaplasticastrocytoma,aswellaseithernecrosis(commonlypresentasserpiginousbandsofnecrosiswithpalisadedtumorcellsalongtheborder)ormicrovascularproliferation(see

Fig.23.29C

for life. the fourth of are 15% 5% and commonly of account detected most fifth Oligodendrogliomas gliomas and decades in to have of often antecedent had Patients including neurologic may complaints, seizures. years several lobes. the in hemispheres, mostly frontal mainly temporal lesions are The found cerebral the or in years 5 of survival for (WHO 10 III) yields surgery, and grade oligodendrogliomas The to oligodendrogliomas. (WHO II) combination years radiotherapy 20 for well-differentiated to 10 or grade of chemotherapy, average anaplastic an

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 23.29 Diffuseastrocytomas.(A)GradeIIastrocytomaisseenasexpandedwhitematteroftheleftcerebralhemisphereandthickenedcorpuscallosumandfornices.(B)Glioblastomaappearingasanecrotic,hemorrhagic,infiltratingmass. (C)Glioblastomaisadenselycellulartumorwithnecrosisandpseudo-palisadingoftumorcellnucleialongtheedgeofthenecroticzone.

MORPHOLOGYWell-differentiatedoligodendrogliomas(WHOgradeII)areinfiltrativetumorsthatformgelatinous,graymassesandmayshowcysts,focalhemorrhage,andcalcification.Onmicroscopicexamination,thetumoriscomposedofsheetsofregularcellswithsphericalnucleicontainingfinelygranularchromatin(similartothatinnormaloligodendrocytes)surroundedbyaclearhaloofcytoplasm(

Fig.23.30 ).Thetumortypicallycontainsadelicatenetworkofanastomosingcapillaries.Calcification,presentinasmanyas90%ofthesetumors,rangesinextentfrommicroscopicfocitomassivedepositions.Mitoticactivityusuallyislow.Ana-plasticoligodendroglioma(WHOgradeIII)isamoreaggressivesubtypewithhighercelldensity,nuclearanaplasia,increasedmitoticactivity,andoftenmicrovascularproliferation.

have Several of alterations described tumor-causing in genetic been gliomas. classes

commonly • and are grade in II genes (IDH) Mutations oligodendrogliomas. isocitrate observed dehydrogenase in astrocytomas to in several occur the expression These gene or of with activity lead interferes production 2-hydroxyglutarate, mutations of which IDH2 increased may and 6). regulate (Chapter IDH1 that enzymes

tumors. contribute are (Chapter the Mutations other the 6), promoter cells telomerase, astrocytic which tumor in to immortalization glioblastomas in and seen for of In telomere mechanism can of suppresses are alternative events mutations called loss preserve of lengthening function these tumors often that IDH mutations with recombination a ATRX, uncommon; telomeres. telomerase tumors instead, mutations, which in normally length, have

19q chromosomal Co-deletion of present segments and are oligodendrogliomas. 1p in these to treatment morphology known. tumor response not chromosomal shape which through and mechanism is The alterations

common of in are 6). the or lead and other tumors receptor EGF genetic outside Other receptor tyrosine include CNS, (Chapter the that alterations, p53 disable overexpression kinases which or RB to mutations also

brain stem spinal occur the the arise in and also and the pons) gliomas most cord Midline (specifically in in commonly thalamus. significant critical structures. in disruption are and the infiltrative nearby impairment They result because neurologic of of aggressively. Although typical necrosis high-grade or as they not such often features vascular may behave show proliferation, they histone of cancer another via of post-translational H3, which the the alteration in modifications lesions a of of of loss typically lysine regulate target example that acquired is These consequence point cell mutations gene oncogenesis have expression, is residue that “epigenome”. the contributes transformation to to this determined. how cellular be Precisely mutation remains

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 23.30 Inoligodendroglioma,tumorcellshaveroundnuclei,oftenwithaclearcytoplasmichalo.Bloodvesselsinthebackgroundarethinandcanformaninterlacingpattern.

astrocytomas that typically relatively children and are affect adults. benign tumors Pilocytic young cerebral cord, hemispheres. Most pathways, third cerebellum, ventricle, also commonly may spinal the the the and optic in involve the located they occasionally the associated with often lesions symptoms is enlargement, cyst be cyst associated a and the of incomplete than rather component. resection after may solid of with the the There tumor, appearing growth the be are the that cannot resected Tumors problematic hypothalamus completely. involve because especially they

encoding mutations kinase have of activation pilocytic serine-threonine A of signaling pathway. involving BRAF, proportion the gene which or activating in the the high translocations astrocytomas result MAPK supporting diffuse astrocytomas IDH2, their IDH1 from do in and have mutations the not low-grade gliomas. distinction Pilocytic

MORPHOLOGYApilocyticastrocytomaofteniscystic,withamuralnoduleinthewallofthecyst;ifsolid,itisusuallywellcircumscribed.Thetumoriscomposedofbipolarcellswithlong,thin“hairlike”processesthatareGFAP-positive.Rosenthalfibers,eosinophilicgranularbodies,andmicrocystsareoftenpresent,whilenecrosisandmitosesarerare.

the to system, the canal cord. ependymalined next often central the ventricular of spinal Ependymomas arise most including ventricle and of 10% typically this constitute In near tumors primary they group. the 5% the decades in occur the life, brain of to fourth first 2 age site adults, most frequent setting tumors particularly 2 in their is of this common spinal location; 22). (Chapter the are in the type In cord neurofibromatosis resected is ependymomas the for than those The supratentorial posterior in clinical outcome for fossa. completely spinal and better

canals) MORPHOLOGYInthefourthventricle,ependymomastypicallyaresolidorpapillarymassesextendingfromtheventricularfloor.Thetumorsarecomposedofcellswithregular,roundtoovalnucleiandabundantgranularchromatin.Betweenthenucleiisavariablydensefibrillarybackground.Tumorcellsmayformroundorelongatedstructures(rosettes, thatresembletheembryologicependymalcanal,withlong,delicateprocessesextendingintoalumen(

);morefrequentlypresentareperivascular Fig.23.31 pseudorosettes inwhichtumorcellsarearrangedaroundvesselswithaninterveningzonecontainingthinependymalprocesses.Anaplasticependymomasshowincreasedcelldensity,highmitoticrates,necrosis,microvascularproliferation,andlessevidentependymaldifferentiation.

are that lesions typically frequent present Far than lower-grade with tumors often less seizures. of characteristics with gliomas, neuronal composed cells in primarily some of composed markers, tumors, observed can cells are neurofilaments. that synaptophysin in lesions express differentiation and group While many neuronal be as neuronal such this

adjacent a found ventricular of • low-grade it Central and the and third islands nuclei the by characterized is neuropil. is or spaced, neurocytoma within often to uniform ventricle); round, commonly evenly system neoplasm (most lateral

Fig. 23.31 Microscopicappearanceofependymoma.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

resection. Dysembryoplastic a a of neuroepithelial seizure disorder, that children after manifests as adults young slowly, a carries tumor and prognosis and distinctive, often low-grade is grows tumor favorable consists and around round It temporal cells in columns of neuronal arranged superficial processes. typically cores lobe in located the central and is small, of

are neurons. a low-grade elements, with Gangliogliomas mature-appearing of astrocytoma usually glial tumors a and mixture Most tumors often with of are these slow seizures. growing, manifest and point of mutations gene. the 20% harbor to 50% gangliogliomas BRAF in About

a progenitor Some tumors is origin encountered reminiscent the of neuroectodermal cells appearance cell” in normal CNS. primitive have “small round of developing that along progress but limited, often Differentiation may lineages. is multiple tumors. The the of most brain is 20% common accounting medulloblastoma, pediatric for

in exclusively occurs the Medulloblastoma predominantly in children cerebellum. and and a to expressed, markers are at limited nearly extent. least Neuronal always glial It however, highly prognosis and the is malignant, patients dismal; is exquisitely for untreated is radiosensitive. medulloblastoma and excision, as total 5-year chemotherapy, irradiation, 75%. high as be may the survival rate With series part patterns genetics. a observed correlate which in and informative histologic are the are There about medulloblastoma, of prognosis underlying in with

MORPHOLOGYInchildren,medulloblastomasarelocatedinthemidlineofthecerebellum;lateraltumorsoccurmoreofteninadults.Thetumorofteniswellcircumscribed,gray,andfriableandmaybeseenextendingtothesurfaceofthecerebellarfoliaandinvolvingtheleptomeninges(

).Medulloblastomasaredenselycellular,withsheetsofanaplastic(“smallblue”)cells(see Fig.23.32A

Fig.

).Individualtumorcellsaresmall,withlittlecytoplasmandhyperchromaticnuclei;mitosesareabundant.Often,focalneuronaldifferentiationisseenintheformofrosettes,whichcloselyresembletherosettesencounteredinneuroblastomas;theyarecharacterizedbyprimitivetumorcellssurroundingcentralneuropil(delicatepinkmaterialformedbyneuronalprocesses). 23.32B

revealed of different associated clinical has Genetic subtypes medulloblastoma several with outcomes. analysis separate with Current into or pathogenic different mutations. distinct groups core driver medulloblastoma pathways approaches are tumors following: pathways of Examples oncogenic in these the

the β-catenin; the most gene subtypes all gain for mutations have function commonly are the of tumors. genetic most of and prognosis these favorable classic-type Wnt activation, with pathway commonly in associated of

tumors pathway mutations in an PTCH1, of associated activation, loss the intermediate these poor very the of confers have function commonly prognosis. of Hedgehog concomitant prognosis, but presence regulator a with Hedgehog; TP53 negative mutation a most

have prognosis. increased to MYC as tumors MYC due other in result as the expression; that these changes overexpression, poorest amplification well

avoiding seek to molecular are possible. therapy when that with trials tailor of Clinical goal alterations, to the radiation ongoing therapy targeted

mostly as lymphomas, tumors. Primary diffuse occurring lymphomas large of and B-cell 1% lymphoma, 2% extranodal CNS intracranial for accounts of positive virus is tumors nearly most always It in Epstein-Barr (EBV). whom CNS common the the for are neoplasm in immunosuppressed individuals, populations, increasing age 60 spectrum years the In age. wide, of nonimmunosuppressed incidence after the relatively with is peripheral chemotherapy lymphoma primary with disease compared brain an with Regardless poor clinical lymphomas. a response relatively as is context, of the to aggressive

Fig. 23.32 Medulloblastoma.(A)Sagittalsectionofabrainshowingmedulloblastomainvolvingthesuperiorvermisofthecerebellum. (B)Microscopicappearanceofmedulloblastoma,showingmostlysmall,blue,primitive-appearingtumorcells.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

tumor brain with is CNS multiple Patients yet of lymphoma of found primary sites parenchyma, have to brain often the uncommon. nodules the involvement within are outside the spreads involves tumor the outside to usually occurs, the lymphoma the Conversely, CSF this or when also CNS the brain meninges. originating parenchyma; rarely

MORPHOLOGYLesionsofteninvolvedeepgraystructures,aswellasthewhitematterandthecortex.Periventricularspreadiscommon.Thetumorsarerelativelywelldefinedascomparedwithglialneoplasms,buttheyarenotasdiscreteasmetastases.EBV-associatedtumorsoftenshowextensiveareasofnecrosis.ThetumorsarenearlyalwaysaggressivelargeB-celllymphomas,althoughotherhistologictypesmaybeencountered.Microscopically,malignantlymphoidcellsaccumulatearoundbloodvesselsandinfiltratethesurroundingbrainparenchyma.ThediagnosisisconfirmedbyimmunohistochemistryforBcellmarkerssuchasCD20,whichalsoisatargetoftherapeuticantibodies.

and the in the cell pineal most germ regions. along tumors brain commonly occur suprasellar the midline, Primary brain of but of in individuals in account as European for 10% of tumors descent individuals in Japanese of They many 1% as to tumors ethnicity. brain 0.2% the tumor of 90% occurring decades the 2 They of during a are first young, with life. Germ male pineal tumors region cell a in the show predominance. strong The most common CNS tumor primary a is germ resembles tumor germinoma, testicular seminoma that closely (Chapter cell 18). also CNS tumors occurs. Secondary germ metastatic gonadal involvement cell by

that predominantly arachnoid Meningiomas are benign from meningothelial tumors arise cells. are adults usually to attached dura. and They in the occur often along arise the they be surfaces of may Meningiomas where system, as any from as stromal well found within the ventricular the the brain of of plexus. external cells choroid arachnoid the brain. vague They compression symptoms, or of come attention because with to of referable often to adjacent nonlocalizing findings focal brain, are a underlying separable infiltrative, associated but feature are recurrence. increased from for meningiomas Most easily an with risk some tumors determined size location, histologic overall the accessibility, grade. surgical and is lesion by prognosis and The

be diagnosis neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) or multiple especially meningiomas, (Chapter the glial When should 22). eighth-nerve has association of with individual in tumors, schwannomas type considered an half somatic meningiomas mutations the 22 About of associated chromosome suppressor on not NF2 in have (22q). loss-of-function tumor NF2 of with arm the long gene they all tumor in that in are are of involved initiation. mutations suggesting found meningioma, grades These lack genes that other been the signaling sporadic pathway NF2, as several tumors Hedgehog including and driver Among mutations have regulate in well that molecules as in identified factors. in transcription mutations various

withelongatedcellsandabundantcollagendeposition;transitional, namedforwhorled,tightclustersofcellswithoutvisiblecellmembranes;fibroblastic, withnumerouspsammomabodies(see withfeaturesofthemeningothelialandfibroblastictypes;psammomatous, Fig.23.33A ).Extensionintotheoverlyingbonemaybepresent.Thevariedhistologicpatternsinclude:meningothelial,

Fig.23.33B );andsecretory, withglandlikespacescontainingPAS-positiveeosinophilicmaterial.

Atypical (WHOgradeII)arerecognizedbythepresenceofeitheranincreasedmitoticrate,orprominentnucleoli,increasedcellularity,patternlessgrowth,highnucleus-tocytoplasmratio,ornecrosis.Thesetumorsdemonstratemoreaggressivelocalgrowthandahigherrateofrecurrenceandmayrequiretherapyinadditiontosurgery.Somehistologicpatterns—clearcellandchordoid—alsocorrelatewithmoreaggressivebehavior,asdoesthepresenceofbraininvasion. meningiomas

meningiomas (WHOgradeIII)arehighlyaggressivetumorsthatmayresembleahigh-gradesarcomaorcarcinomamorphologically.Mitoticratesaretypicallymuchhigherthaninatypicalmeningiomas. Anaplastic (malignant)

carcinomas, lesions, one-fourth approximately for Metastatic tumors. one-half mostly of to intracranial account of common are which together kidney, The (melanoma), cases. about 80% primary for tract, gastrointestinal lung, and breast, most sites account skin matter sharply local often edema Metastases elicit the at junction, masses, grey-white ( demarcated and form

Fig. 23.34 ). gliosis. is the microscopic reactive surrounding brain The between at tumor parenchyma sharp and with well, level boundary as

the peripheral central produced clinical direct metastases, addition localized the syndromes and recognition and of by the may neoplasm. involve effects preceding malignant paraneoplastic sometimes even In to nervous the systems, syndromes antibodies with patients tumor antigens. Many have against paraneoplastic the cells, Purkinje cerebellar resulting common degeneration gliosis, • with inflammatory more of infiltrate following: of mild a patterns destruction Some and include in http://ebooksmedicine.net Subacute ataxia, the

Fig. 23.33 Meningioma.(A)Parasagittalmultilobularmeningiomaattachedtothedurawithcompressionofunderlyingbrain. (B)Meningiomawithawhorled patternofcellgrowthandpsammomabodies.

subacute nodules, temporal lobe the encephalitis cells, perivascular centered all dementia, in neuronal a Limbic and with loss, causing inflammatory microglial medial gliosis,

leading neuropathy sensation, of in dorsal association from Subacute to root with sensory with sensory altered loss inflammation pain ganglia, neurons

and N-methyl-D-aspartate the (NMDA) antibodies ovarian psychosis, epilepsy, and against catatonia, with teratoma rapid-onset receptor. associated Syndrome of coma

increased by associated for various mutations suppressor cancers. an particular inherited with Several tumor caused genes risk types of are in syndromes the covered are peripheral of are 22. discussed Those in of here; particular syndromes Chapter with tumors nervous CNS familial associated system involvement the with

Fig.23.34 Metastaticmelanoma.Metastaticlesionsaredistinguishedgrosslyfrommostprimarycentralnervoussystemtumorsbytheirmulticentricityandwell-demarcatedmargins.Thedarkcolorofthetumornodulesinthisspecimenisduetothepresenceofmelanin.

and Tuberous by dominant the autosomal development neoplasms an tissues. other characterized involving and hamartomas syndrome of benign is the sclerosis brain including larger giant hamartomas consist known variously as tubers CNS subependymal cell subependymal of and astrocytoma. tumefactive form cortical a hamartomas, and/or the (see of which Because they their therapy often surgical hydrocephalus, intervention mTOR with present an foramen to with Monro, requires acutely proximity obstructive of inhibitor later). and to can be with anti-epileptic associated difficult Seizures with control cortical drugs. are tubers renal lymphangiomyomatosis, retinal angiomyolipomas, include lesions Extracerebral rhabdomyomas. and glial pulmonary cardiac hamartomas, may and various sites, found the liver, be kidneys, including pancreas. at Cysts fibromas. (shagreen Cutaneous leaf hypopigmented and (ash patches patches), leathery subungual in patches), localized thickenings angiofibromas, areas lesions include

of hamartin, or sclerosis Tuberous which encodes TSC2, results encodes either TSC1, which from disruption tuberin. cell’s a status two mTOR, kinase regulates “senses” form cellular proteins and the dimeric TSC that The a that complex nutrient metabolism. negatively regulates and feedback of protein growth. nutrients upregulates that increased activity, which Loss mTOR to of leads either disrupts mechanisms restrict cell uptake normal

arefirmerthannormalcortexandhavebeenlikenedinappearancetopotatoes—hencetheappellationtubers. MORPHOLOGYCortical hamartomas Theyarecomposedofhaphazardlyarrangedlargeneuronsthatlackthenormalcorticallaminararchitecture.Thesecellsmayexhibitamixtureofglialandneuronalfeatures,havinglargevesicularnucleiwithnucleoli(likeneurons)andabundanteosinophiliccytoplasm.Similarabnormalcellsarepresentinsubependymal inwhichlargeastrocytelikecellsclusterbeneaththeventricularsurface. nodules,

http://ebooksmedicine.net

cerebellar spinal the hemangioblastomas within autosomal affected individuals commonly, hemispheres, retina, less dominant brain In roots. and this stem, and, cord, the nerve develop disorder, kidneys have increased involving to liver, the develop an Patients carcinoma. also may cysts pancreas, propensity and cell have and renal 40,000. frequency 30,000 in to The is disease 1 laser ablation of tumors. cerebellar is including symptomatic retinal tumors resection Therapy at of the and surgical neoplasms, directed

tumor a part degrades encodes factor the gene, affected ubiquitin-ligase is suppressor protein complex hypoxia-inducible a transcription of the factor VHL, (HIF). that The that disease function. with generally all have in patients protein Hippel–Lindau arising von VHL Tumors lost express latter VEGF, which high expression a the polycythemia. effect of and result, of the drives various erythropoietin; a tumors form levels paraneoplastic of As factors, growth the sometimes may HIF, produce

family,whichservesasausefuldiagnosticmarker. theprincipalneurologicmanifestationofthedisease,isahighlyvascularneoplasmthatoccursasamuralnoduleassociatedwithalarge,fluid-filledcyst.Theseoccurmostcommonlyinthecerebellum,butcanbefoundalongthespinalcordandintheretina,andrarelyatothersitesinthebrain.Onmicroscopicexamination,thelesionconsistsofnumerouscapillary-sizedorsomewhatlargerthin-walledvesselsseparatedbyinterveningstromalcellswithavacuolated,lightlyPAS-positive,lipid-richcytoplasm.Thesestromalcellsexpressinhibin,amemberoftheTGF-β MORPHOLOGYHemangioblastoma,

TumorsoftheCNSmayarisefromthecellsofthecoverings(meningiomas),thebrain(gliomas,neuronaltumors,choroidplexustumors),orotherCNScellpopulations(primaryCNSlymphoma,germcelltumors),ortheymayoriginateelsewhereinthebody(metastases).

Evenlow-gradeorbenigntumorscanhavepoorclinicaloutcomes,dependingonwheretheyoccurinthebrain.

Distincttypesoftumorsaffectspecificbrainregions(e.g.,cerebellumformedulloblastoma,anintraventricularlocationforcentralneurocytoma)andspecificagepopulations(medulloblastomaandpilocyticastrocytomasinpediatricagegroups,andglioblastomaandlymphomainolderpatients).

Glialtumorsarebroadlyclassifiedintoastrocytomas,oligodendrogliomas,andependymomas.Increasingtumormalignancyisassociatedwithmorecytologicanaplasia,increasedcelldensity,necrosis,andmitoticactivity.

Metastaticspreadofbraintumorstootherregionsofthebodyisrare,butthebrainisnotcomparablyprotectedagainstthespreadofdistanttumors.Carcinomasarethedominanttypeofsystemictumorsthatmetastasizetothenervoussystem.

NINDS/NIBIB McKee to criteria AC, 131(1):75–86, first al: NJ, Cairns diagnosis et Dickson for neuropathological encephalopathy, 2016. of chronic Neuropathol The Acta DW, meeting define traumatic consensus the [The the objectively neuropathologic define which to CTI.] define changes effort first

The 2015. encephalopathy, of TD, neuropathology al: 25(3):350–364, Pathol Brain et PT, traumatic AC, Stein McKee chronic Kiernan prior CTE of basis the as summary associated much with descriptive a tauopathy [A of of the work emergence the for brain laying trauma.]

A, JG: Primary developing Coufal cilia Neuron 2014. Gleeson brain, mature 82(3):511–521, in the and Guemez-Gamboa NG, accompany this malformations the of consideration discussion the cilia brain of posterior of that development, cilium.] well as of disorders [A fossa, role particularly primary in as

features of Neurol causes, development: R, Dobyns Malformations cortical WB: Lancet clinical 2014. Guerrini and 13(7):710–726, genetic as that well [A the as the of disorder process.] the many disrupt biological mechanisms underlie of review genetic cortical clear that development

of Nervous the System Infections

2015. inflammatory Neurological Opin recovery, the 28(3):295–301, DB: riding immune immune Neurol reconstitution Curr of Clifford response: tide result clinical inflammatory of HAART system.] immune of the and accompany the aspects [Discusses of syndrome a pathological aspects can which initiation of of the as recovery

D, Dickens 12(4):234–248, Sacktor neurocognitive Neurol al: N, Saylor Nat prospects et Rev disorder—pathogenesis 2016. and treatment, HIV-associated for AM, underlying infection.] therapies on for of HIV-induced neurologic complications the impact the existing of these [Summary of mechanisms dysfunction and

of CA, 2015. Immunol Fugger Immunopathology MA: Dendrou Nat multiple L, sclerosis, 15(9):545–558, Rev Friese of to are that assumed.] has immune for increasing the basis many than myelin, has [While previously accepted this and axons, injury clear been oligodendrocytes it MS become of complexities there years,

Podestà pathological al: Neurosci 2015. counterparts Faravelli Rep Curr manifestations, I, MA, Neurol D, clinical and mechanisms of 15(4):18, Cucchiari Neurological et hyponatremia: discussion.] osmolality addressed alterations remains complex acute between relationship but injury myelin is [The in to mechanistic in serum partially and this

Ransom optica: Neuroimmunol questions, 2016. BR, Ma Yang more neuromyelitis 298:63–70, role More X, of The JF: in J AQP4 answers, syndrome [While simple optica, disorder.] of aquaporin-4 more antibodies than disease autoimmune the helped a complex neuromyelitis to the a of remains presence clarify it

42(1):6–19, pathology, alpha CH: RA, Barker features Review: seen Neuropathol clinical spectrum with Williams-Gray Appl synuclein the of Neurobiol 2016. this aspects marks considers diseases, of and shared several neurodegenerative distinct and pathologic α-synuclein review of the [Aggregation findings.]

disease TREM2 M, new Alzheimer 2016. pathogenesis, 17(4):201–207, decipher keys Wang Colonna Nat Rev variants: Neurosci Y: to surfaces disease microglia and associated strongest TREM2 the risk between is of the with on links [One Alzheimer microglia.] of of variants the

FTD: and in Converging disrupted 79(3):416–438, M, 2013. protein homeostasis, RNA DW: and ALS Neuron Ling Polymenidou SC, mechanisms Cleveland and of can mechanisms clear consequences to within with this for the cells summary altered consequence [A linked the be RNA of proteins.] of that dynamics neurodegeneration associated http://ebooksmedicine.net

frontotemporal studies, from of 138(Suppl into dementia: disease Neumann Molecular M: mechanisms neuropathology Neurochem 2016. postmortem insights 1):54–70, J IR, Mackenzie clinical frontotemporal to give [A and that family well associated as as of mechanisms.] the consideration pictures degenerations, different histologic with complex findings lobe of disorders different rise

8(6):595–608, 25 Hardy years, 2016. DJ, EMBO The amyloid Alzheimer’s Mol Selkoe disease J: hypothesis Med of at to the the relationship disease.] pathogenesis summary of [A current of Alzheimer Aβ of

Acta Central Nervous World DN, A, The al: of Organization 2016 Reifenberger a summary, 2016. Tumors Health of Louis Neuropathol et the Classification Perry System: 131(6):803–820, G, molecular findings as course multiple summary including as incorporate therapy.] concept of brain types [A and order the recent predict diagnoses information histologic of to classification most “layer” of that of tumors, well concise guide the in http://ebooksmedicine.net studentconsult.com

diverse, and melanoma. Skin acne are ranging common from irritating to diseases life-threatening are some involving many are diseases to erythematosus skin, as manifestations systemic syndromes lupus as the tissues, intrinsic such genetic of Many but neurofibromatosis. such or accessible this numerous which skin through uniquely be is “window” In disorders recognized. a the sense, can

the organ, mantle the actually complex body. largest Skin a is mere in not but a rather protective environment. is from It nonmicrobial microbial antigens constantly to exposed and the participant it not Given in is this, active responses. that the surprising is immune skin an Langerhans cells, which initiate intraepithelial bear derived are responses. antigens processed antigenic and Environmentally nodes regional lymph their cargo by to immune Squamous homeostasis maintain cytokines to squamous providing cells dermal of a influence the and that plethora insults barrier secreting both by microenvironments. physical by help environmental a and skin (keratinocytes) occasional of which and memory cutaneous The regulatory of cells as receptors resident well the of (Tregs) B lymphocytes, some lymphocyte CD8+ T specialized cells. populations and contains skin helper by cytotoxic as such cells, home dermis T to CD4+ antigen, virtue T as contains mast cells, immune all epidermis innate scattered including of the the macrophages, lymphocytes, system. while cells and intraepithelial dermis contains components γ/δ perivascular The T released patterns and clinical and and of the morphologic immune cells infectious involving expressions inflammatory cytokines these account Responses locally skin disorders. for

and skin focuses pathogenically common on diseases. chapter illustrative This is In the these considering diseases, of that appreciate important practice to it

chapter in to are gratefully editions The Murphy contributions of Dr. George this acknowledged. previous

in dermatopathology on gross at history, as specific dermatologists, a interactions clinicians, lesions relies important findings the are particularly with close distribution diagnosis. of appearance, clinical and often as arriving the as microscopic skin large, understand “skin-specific” the in can skin dermatologists a become order using that because student, to for familiar and Diseases diseases. lexicon with the communicate in must of students part confusing be dermatopathologists and important of these in are listed definitions terms The most

Table 24.1

Thousands challenging of inflammatory experienced the even of clinicians. diagnostic acumen exist, dermatoses weeks epidermal, or vascular, lesions, and injury. as edema, several characterized general, days by are duration, subcutaneous In inflammation, defined in sometimes acute to than by sites. marked dermatoses rather cells neutrophils, of acute at most disorders unlike mononuclear Acute are consisting often inflammatory infiltrates other while are Some phase, may self-limited. lesions chronic transitioning persist, others a to acute

degranulation, localized microvascular is hyperpermeability. leads by to Urticaria disorder mast (“hives”) common which cell mediated dermal a erythematous, resulting are and pruritic The plaques wheals. edematous, termed

cell immediate trigger http://ebooksmedicine.net reaction most binding (Chapter antigens from which hypersensitivity stems 1) urticaria 5), by an (type in mast degranulation cases, to In

of Nomenclature Skin Lesions 24.1 Table

ExcoriationTraumaticlesionbreakingtheepidermisandcausingarawlineararea(i.e.,deepscratch);oftenself-inflicted

LichenificationThickened,roughskin(similartoalichenonarock);usuallytheresultofrepeatedrubbing

Macule,patchCircumscribed,flatlesiondistinguishedfromsurroundingskinbycolor.Maculesare5mmindiameterorless,whilepatchesaregreaterthan5mminsize.

Papule,noduleElevateddome-shapedorflat-toppedlesion.Papulesare5mmindiameterorless,whilenodulesaregreaterthan5mminsize.

PlaqueElevatedflat-toppedlesion,usuallygreaterthan5mmindiameter(maybeformedbycoalescenceofpapules)

PustuleDiscrete,pus-filled,raisedlesion

ScaleDry,horny,platelikeexcrescence;usuallytheresultofimperfectcornification

isthecommontermforbothlesions. Vesicle,bulla,blisterFluid-filledraisedlesion5mmorlessindiameter(vesicle)orgreaterthan5mmindiameter(bulla).Blister

WhealItchy,transient,elevatedlesionwithvariableblanchinganderythemaformedastheresultofdermaledema

DyskeratosisAbnormal,prematurekeratinizationwithincellsbelowthestratumgranulosum

HyperkeratosisThickeningofthestratumcorneum,oftenassociatedwithaqualitativeabnormalityofthekeratin

ParakeratosisRetentionofnucleiinthestratumcorneumofasquamousepithelium.Onmucousmembranes,parakeratosisisnormal.

E attached mast the surface (IgE) antibodies Fc cell receptor. immunoglobulin through to their Responsible pollens, insect viruses, and drugs, antigens venom. foods, include mast directly incite from result IgE-independent such also degranulation, urticaria and can exposure to certain substances opiates antibiotics. as cell that the of majority extensive with cause In vast no is discovered even investigation. clinical cases,

MORPHOLOGYThehistologicfeaturesofurticariaoftenaresubtle.Thereisusuallyasparsesuperficialperivenularinfiltrateofmononuclearcells,rareneutrophils,andsometimeseosinophils.Superficialdermaledemacausessplayingofcollagenbundles,makingthemappeartobemorewidelyspacedthannormal.Degranulationofmastcells,whichresidearoundsuperficialdermalvenules,isdifficulttoappreciatewithroutinehematoxylin-eosin(H&E)stainsbutcanbehighlightedusingaGiemsastain.

of individuals 40 is no 20 age typically years and Urticaria between age, immune. affects but fade days within lesions and or develop persist hours, Individual for but usually even months. episodes can small, in erythematous size range pruritic nature plaques. Lesions large, edematous, from to and papules particular body of part They may localized generalized. the to be or a pressure of buttocks). urticaria In in exposed feet or type only urticaria, the lesions specific (such to are found areas termed as pressure a not embarrassment social life-threatening, compromise of and the urticaria of severe Although pruritus quality life. can the with action drugs. more of require or antibodies block treatment cases antagonists, Most may antihistamines, monoclonal leukotriene but immunosuppressive disease that to severe, respond IgE, refractory

with a of a embraces Eczema conditions number varied that clinical is underlying etiologies. term lesions papules, form become erythematous the overlying vesicles, which often and with crusted. of New take ooze is characteristic. Pruritus raised, into lesions scaling plaques. these coalesce With persistence, these the nature degree The clinical and vary among changes following: the subtypes, of which include

allergen hypersensitivy caused and from reactions. contact by is an to delayed exposure dermatitis—stems Allergic topical

often now dermatitis—formerly skin Atopic keratinocyte from in it substances allergen stem exposure, antigens attributed to which potential exposed, increased to barrier is permeability defects such to with as to function, defined as thought

Drug-related reaction dermatitis—hypersensitivity eczematous drug a to

reaction UV or Photoeczematous an visible light abnormal as to dermatitis—appears

mechanically damage the chemically, from substances to exposure or physically, irritant that dermatitis—results Primary skin

cause. a when underlying of other is resolve persist While offending is or the forms predisposition years eczematous investigating stressing reflects of stimulus or the dermatitis importance dermatitis for can limited, genetic the removed and completely exposure decades, atopic common the most form, here. contact Only is dermatitis, considered

arm be such is the as that agent, of creating with to reacts triggered cell poison recognized the adaptive T contact system. dermatitis exposure by can environmental immune that self-proteins, by neoantigens Allergic chemically contact-sensitizing http://ebooksmedicine.net ivy, an The migrate to to present cells, cells. lymph the by nodes self-proteins T naïve which the draining epidermal are antigen modified processed by agent Langerhans and CD4+ This of the circulation. the the memory event immunologic skin affected sites the normal reexposure lymphocytes memory; of T to acquisition activated to antigen, to migrate course on during sensitization leads as any they additional reaction and There delayed-type release also 5). epidermal that in cytokines mediate hypersensitivity cells damage, recruit (Chapter inflammatory

MORPHOLOGYAsthenameimplies,skininvolvementincontactdermatitisislimitedtositesofdirectcontactwiththetriggeringagent(

dermatitis. orepidermaledema,characterizesallformsofacuteeczematousdermatitis—hencethesynonymspongiotic Fig.24.1A ),whereasinotherformsofeczema,lesionsmaybewidelydistributed.Spongiosis, Edemafluidseepsintotheepidermis,whereitsplaysapartkeratinocytes(

Fig.24.1B ).Inter-cellularbridgesarestretchedandbecomemoreprominentandareeasiertovisualize.Thischangeisaccompaniedbyasuperficialperivascularlymphocyticinfiltrate,edemaofdermalpapillae,andmastcelldegranulation.Eosinophilsmaybepresentandareespeciallyprominentinspongioticeruptionsprovokedbydrugs,butingeneralthehistologicfeaturesaresimilarregardlessofcause,emphasizingtheneedforcarefulclinicalcorrelation.

pruritic, and of Lesions are dermatitis oozing plaques, vesicles edematous, often containing acute eczematous bullae. (acanthosis). With scaly become exposure, thickens lesions (hyperkeratotic) persistent antigen as the epidermis may discussed or later). Some scratching the lesion “ (see ”, by are changes exacerbated produced of as jobs”—disease circulating food to an as sometimes external (such resulting antigen of or into an internal poison (such from with causes antigen contact an clinical The jobs”—reaction and ingested eczema divided “outside drug)— ivy). are “inside

the of inherited; concordant 20% of atopic fraternal 80% is identical to twins twins. Susceptibility disorder is dermatitis often in and as mature and in appears early It usually remits into childhood patients spontaneously adults. have often rhinitis, the allergic dermatitis and atopic triad. asthma atopic Children termed with encode identified immunity, and cell genes T studies function. risk polymorphisms have with keratinocyte barrier innate function, genetic increased in in that proteins associated involved Recent

lymphocytes. by by characterized skin-homing T epithelial Erythema cytotoxic mediated injury is multiforme CD8+ to It to uncommon, usually is hypersensitivity certain appears and drugs. a that an response infections be disorder self-limited include mycoplasma, and drugs and some implicated by anti-malarials. penicillin, those while fungi, caused Antecedent hydantoins, include simplex, sulfonamides, infections salicylates, herpes still mucosal basal of T and of cutaneous attack presumably focused The the on epithelia, due cell cells cytotoxic antigens. to recognition is unknown disease. the Certain antigen haplotypes (HLA) associated human with are lymphocyte

Fig. Eczematousdermatitis. 24.1 (A)Patternederythemaandscalestem-mingfromanickel-inducedcontactdermatitisproducedbyanecklace.

(B)Microscopically,thereisaccumulationoffluid(spongiosis)betweenepidermalcells,whichmayprogresstofrankblisterformation.

MORPHOLOGYAffectedindividualspresentwithawidearrayoflesions,whichmayincludemacules,papules,vesicles,andbullae(hencethetermmultiforme).Well-developedlesionshaveacharacteristic“targetoid”appearance(

).Earlylesionsshowasuperficialperivascularlymphocyticinfiltrateassociatedwithdermaledemaandmarginationoflymphocytesalongthedermoepidermaljunctioninintimateassociationwithapoptotickeratinocytes(see Fig.24.2A

thenecrosisextendsthroughthefullthicknessoftheepidermis. ).Withtime,discrete,confluentzonesofbasalepidermalnecrosisappear,withconcomitantblisterformation.Inararerandmoresevereformofthisdisease,toxic Fig.24.2B necrolysis, epidermal

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 24.2 Erythemamultiforme.(A)Targetlikelesionsconsistingofapalecentralblisterorzoneofepidermalnecrosissurroundedbymacularery-thema. (B)Earlylesionsshowlymphocytesalongthedermoepidermaljunc-tion(interfacedermatitis)associatedwithscatteredapoptotickeratinocytes,markedbydarkshrunkennucleiandeosinophiliccytoplasm.

range Erythema severity. multiforme a has of broad with The associated infection are less (most often severe. forms herpesvirus) serious eruptions, such syndrome to or Stevens-Johnson necrolysis. progress may as by epidermal toxic Erythema multiforme more medications caused sloughing the loss seen burn-injured in and fluid can in be may patients. similar infections of portions life-threatening, complications those to resulting of forms as epidermis, These cause large they

that stage. most with although exhibit years, are their many conditions dermatoses characteristic persistent skin over months may they inflammatory begin Chronic features an to acute some result is (desquamation). as inflammatory of or shedding surface skin dermatoses in excessive roughened a formation The chronic and abnormal scale

2% is in affecting the States. Psoriasis United a residing chronic 1% to individuals dermatosis, common inflammatory of Recent an attack a to psoriasis a chronic studies inflammatory is heart for be associated with that and have related stroke, state. risk increased that relationship shown may epidemiologic 10% patients cases up be severe. to which Psoriasis arthritis, of in also is in some may with associated

not presumed although well disease, origin, to inflammatory cell-mediated be described. antigens is a are autoimmune T in Psoriasis the loci) (HLA and Both contribute to susceptibility factors other genetic the and types environmental risk. It combination antigens, is the whether the environmental are antigens self-antigens, unclear or two. of some inciting Sensitized in epidermis. CD4+ TH17 the home and accumulate including the cells, cells TH1 to dermis, T T and populations cells CD8+ and of in secrete These factors the growth and hyperproliferation, cells induce characteristic that resulting keratinocyte cytokines lesions. development. trauma a which by be local in lesion can induce may Psoriatic promotes individuals inflammatory induced response susceptible local lesions phenomenon), that (Koebner psoriasis for studies have signaling, in increased association affecting an antigen presentation, Genome-wide (GWAS) risk HLA to skin polymorphisms TNF and linked and barrier genes function. loci of development Several loci more of associated also with arthritis, disease. complication psoriatic are this a the severe

salmon– pink plaque loosely adherent MORPHOLOGYThetypicallesionisawell-demarcated, covered scale to by silver-white ( colored

withregulardownwardelongationofthereteridges(see ).Thereismarkedepidermalthickening(acanthosis), Fig.24.3A

granulosum Fig.24.3B stratum scale. parakeratotic extensive ).Thepatternofthisdownwardgrowthhasbeenlikenedto“testtubesinarack.”Increasedepidermalcellturnoverandlackofmaturationresultsinloss of the and sign). Alsoseenisthinningoftheepidermalcelllayeroverlyingthetipsofdermalpapillae(suprapapillaryplates),anddilatedandtortuousbloodvesselswithinthepapillae.Thesevesselsbleedreadilywhenthescaleisremoved,givingrisetomultiplepunctatebleedingpoints(Auspitz Neutrophilsformsmallaggregateswithinboththespongioticsuperficialepidermisandtheparakeratoticstratumcorneum.Similarchangescanbeseeninsuperficialfungalinfections,whichneedtobeexcludedwithappropriatespecialstains.

glans cleft, the most lumbosacral penis, frequently the of intergluteal elbows, vulva. affects and skin areas, knees, scalp, Psoriasis Nail of the changes 30% fingers toes occur on in cases. and be and psoriasis widespread is distribution, in most In cases limited severe. but can it clinical involvement of by pattern severity. subtypes defined The are and mediators. release is the at or Treatment inflammatory actions preventing aimed of or or other with ointments such topically disease with immunosuppressive agents, therapy agents antagonists. treated corticosteroids has immunosuppressive or severe effects) phototherapy TNF is methotrexate whereas Mild immunomodulatory containing with treated more as (which disease systemic is

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 24.3 Chronicpsoriasis.(A)Erythematouspsoriaticplaquescoveredbysilvery-whitescale. (B)Microscopicexaminationshowsmarkedepidermalhyperplasia,downwardextensionofreteridges(psoriasiformhyperplasia),andprominentparakeratoticscalewithinfiltratingneutrophils.

polygonal, “Pruritic, the mucosa. planar purple, and that Ps papules, are and of this skin squamous plaques” tongue-twisting disorder describe unknown a The that as response antigens lesions viral the by exposure. the junction and cell produced T or consequence layer are from mechanisms, infection a in result may perhaps cytotoxic CD8+ of dermoepidermal drug cell–mediated against basal a

flat-topped violaceous, papules MORPHOLOGYCutaneouslesionsoflichenplanusconsistofpruritic, thatmaycoalescefocallytoformplaques(

).ThesepapulesarehighlightedbywhitedotsorlinestermedWickham striae. Fig.24.4A Hyperpigmentationmayresultfrommelaninlossintothedermisfromdamagedkeratinocytes.Microscopically,lichenplanusisaprototypicalinterface dermatitis, socalledbecausetheinflammationanddamageareconcentratedattheinterfaceofthesquamousepitheliumandpapillarydermis.Thereisadense,continuousinfiltrateoflymphocytesalongthedermoepidermaljunction(see

).Thelymphocytesareintimatelyassociatedwithbasalkeratinocytes,whichoftenatrophyorbecomenecrotic.Perhapsasaresponsetodamage,thebasalcellstakeontheappearanceofthemorematurecellsofthestratumspinosum(squamatization).Thispatternofinflammationcausesthedermoepidermalinterfacetoassumeanangulated,zigzagcontour(sawtoothing). Fig.24.4B bodies. Anucleate,necroticbasalcellsareseenintheinflamedpapillarydermisandarereferredtoascolloidbodiesorCivatte Althoughthesechangesbearsomesimilaritiestothoseinerythemamultiforme(anothertypeofinterfacedermatitisdiscussedearlier),lichenplanusshowswell-developedchangesofchronicity,includingepidermalhyperplasia,hypergranulosis,andhyperkeratosis.

Fig. Lichenplanus. 24.4 (A)Flat-toppedpink-purplepolygonalpapulewithwhitelacelikemarkingsreferredtoasWickham striae. (B)Microscopicexaminationshowsabandlikeinfiltrateoflymphocytesalongthedermoepi-dermaljunction,hyperkeratosis,hypergranulosis,andpointedreteridges(“sawtoothing”),whichresultsfromchronicinjuryofthebasalcelllayer.

http://ebooksmedicine.net

uncommon disorder is usually presents middle-aged Lichen in adults. an that planus on and particularly the elbows are multiple usually The vulva penis. cutaneous wrists around and extremities, symmetrically the and distributed, and and glans often are the on occur lesions oral of papules Approximately netlike the 70% also as appearance. lesions a reticulate where white involve mucosa, or manifest the with cases within planus 1 be cutaneous lesions 2 lichen to oral persist of with food intake. may and of sufficient resolve to but The interfere usually lesions the severity years, spontaneously

as of tree. on roughening on appearance chronicus Lichen reminiscent takes simplex which the an manifests a skin, lichen of trauma, rubbing response to from usually scratching. It local is repetitive a or referred forms are exist prurigo that to nodularis. Nodular as eventual of simplex but and trauma induces the lichen epithelial not pathogenesis dermal probably scarring. chronicus hyperplasia The is understood,

MORPHOLOGYLichensimplexchronicusischaracterizedbyacanthosis, hyperkeratosis, andhypergranulosis. Alsoseenareelongationofthereteridges,fibrosisofthepapillarydermis,andadermalchronicinflammatoryinfiltrate(

Fig.24.5 ).Ofinterest,theselesionsaresimilarinappearancetonormalvolar(palmsandsoles)skin,inwhichskinthickeningservesasanadaptationtorepetitivemechanicalstress.

erythematous, and often for lesions raised, neoplasms. are mistaken scaly can The keratinocytic and be simplex mask on chronicus be and another dermatosis. Lichen can superimposed pruritic) (often entirely an cause while be rule important to may that underlying therefore It is trauma-related. recognizing the lesion out

Fig. 24.5 Lichensimplexchronicus.Notethedistinctiveacanthosis,hyper-keratosis,andhypergranulosis.Superficialdermalfibrosisandvascularectasia,bothcommonfeatures,alsoarepresent.

ManyspecificinflammatorydermatosesexistandcanbemediatedbyIgEantibodies(urticaria),antigen-specificTcells(eczema,erythemamultiforme,andpsoriasis),ortrauma(lichensimplexchronicus).

Underlyinggeneticsusceptibilityplaysaroleinatopicdermatitisandpsoriasis.

Thesedisorderscanbegroupedbasedonpatternsofinflammation(e.g.,interfacedermatitisinlichenplanusanderythemamultiforme).

Clinicalcorrelationisessentialtodiagnosespecificskindiseases,sincemanyhaveoverlapping,nonspecifichistologicfeatures.

in Numerous skin. bacterial occur infections superficial impetigo, range that known bacteria as caused are Pseudomonas wounds These by with as abscesses associated infections to dermal puncture such from aeruginosa. deeper similar infections (Chapter that to pathogenesis for The microbial is 9). elsewhere discussed impetigo is here. Only

MORPHOLOGYImpetigoischaracterizedbyanaccumulationofneutrophilsbeneaththestratumcorneumthatoftenproducesasubcornealpustule.Nonspecificreactiveepidermalalternationandsuperficialdermalinflammationaccompanythesefindings.BacterialcocciinthesuperficialepidermiscanbedemonstratedbyGramstain.

the one the Impetigo, primarily seen infections bacterial skin, in of common is of children. most direct a is acquired or, pyogenes, typically organism causative contact with aureus less source. Staphylococcus Streptococcus The through and usually commonly, is the or near nose begins the rapidly lesion ( a macule, the usually the a often Impetigo as face mouth, which or into evolves single larger on small extremities

Fig. honey-colored crust serum. of dried a often ), with 24.6 Individuals (usually be anal) or who nasal likely colonized or are more S. affected. aureus are S. by to pyogenes disorder. impetigo mimic an childhood blistering form A autoimmune less of may common bullous

spp. superficial infections infections are from Candida or Fungal varied, ranging with Tinea to http://ebooksmedicine.net life-threatening

Fig. Impetigo.Achild’sarminvolvedbyasuperficialbacterialinfectionshowingthecharacteristicerythematousscablikelesionscrustedwithdriedserum. 24.6 (Courtesy Wyatt,Bellaire,Texas.) of Dr.Angela

Aspergillus spp. infections in immunosuppressed individuals. subcutis), superficial immunocompromised the corneum, spread, infections can or (stratum systemic, hematogenous nails), through Fungal and patient. be type arising (dermis or often in an hair, deep last

MORPHOLOGYThehistologicappearancevariesdependingontheorganism,hostresponse,anddegreeofsuperinfection.Superficialinfectionsareoftenassociatedwithaneutrophilicinfiltrateintheepidermis.Deepfungalinfectionsproducegreatertissuedamageandoftenelicitagranulomatousresponse.Aspergillus canbeangioinvasive.Periodicacid–Schiff(PAS)andGomorimethenaminesilverstainsarehelpfulinidentifyingthefungalorganisms.

superficial while those scale be produce pruritic, macules erythematous infections with such can Superficial seen that as spp. deeper usually infections Aspergillus with sometimes are often associated nodular erythematous with and hemorrhage. and local may an appearance. have fungal Superficial infections annular infection However, conditions induce other of important is consider are the mimic that they possibility these psoriasiform or also may so fungal in diagnosis. differential lesions eczematous the to dermatoses, when it

epithelial (HPV). are Verrucae papillomavirus are human lesions that squamous cells caused of proliferative by

in and age in any be children encountered common group. most They are adolescents, but may with individual infected infection HPV contact direct an autoinoculation. or stems usually from Verrucae most regressing self-limited, spontaneously are months years. to often 6 within generally 2

HPV (Chapters some invasive cutaneous and caused and the anogenital warts are potential. HPV by the transforming low-risk members that subtypes preneoplastic are lack cancers with family 18), While of associated mainly of region 6 to dysregulated low-risk and increased oncoproteins E7 survival. viruses high-risk express and viral growth cell that HPV, Like lead epidermal E6 structural interactions that warts low-risk in instead viruses likely proteins proteins. E7 variation affect host due their E6 Why with cancer and of is to cause growth response, of the more numerous by the is halted immune immunodeficiency with is associated normally warts larger verrucae. and Because

MORPHOLOGYDifferentkindsofwartsareidentifiedonthebasisoftheirgrossappearanceandlocationandgenerallyarecausedbydistinctHPVsubtypes.Verruca ( vulgaris

wart, plantaris (venereal occuronthesolesandpalms,respectively.Theserough,scalylesionscanreach1to2cmindiameterandmaycoalescetoformasurfacethatcanbeconfusedwithordinarycalluses.Condyloma Fig.24.7A hyperplasia, acuminatum plana, andverruca wart) whichisoftenundulantincharacter(so-calledverrucous orflat ),themostcommontypeofwart,canoccuranywherebutisfoundmostfrequentlyonthehands,particularlyonthedorsalsurfacesandperiungualareas,whereitappearsasagray-whitetotan,flattoconvex,0.1-to1-cmpapulewitharough,pebblelikesurface.Verruca hyperplasia)( palmaris orpapillomatous epidermal occursonthepenis,femalegenitalia,urethra,andperianalareas(Chapters18and19).Histologicfeaturescommontoverrucaeincludeepidermal iscommononthefaceordorsalsurfacesofthehands.Thesewartsareflat,smooth,tanmacules.Verruca

whichpreferentiallyinvolvesthemoresuperficialepidermallayers,producinghalosofpallorsurroundinginfectednuclei.Infectedcellsalsomaydemonstrateprominentkeratohyalingranulesandjaggedeosinophilicintracytoplasmicproteinaggregatesasaresultofimpairedmaturation( ,top panel),andcytoplasmicvacuolization(koilocytosis), Fig.24.7B

, bottom Fig.24.7B panel).

dermatitis), a distinctive which the occur disorders of bullae vesicles conditions phenomena secondary as and herpes-virus blisters and infection, spongiotic in primary feature. several (e.g., there in Although group unrelated is are (blisters) most within the distinction in occur is diagnosis specific critical diseases Blistering skin, that levels morphologic for at these a to ( tends

Fig. 24.8

disorder epidermis an squamous within blistering is loss intercellular Pemphigus normal from the of mucosal autoimmune resulting epithelium. attachments uncommon and the are major variants: There three

vulgaris Pemphigus common (the type) most

entity with last and internal not malignancy here. The discussed associated is is

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. 24.7 Verrucavulgaris.(A)Multiplewarts,withcharacteristicrough,pebblelikesurfaces.(B)Microscopically,commonwartscontainzonesofpapillaryepidermalproliferationthatoftenradiatesymmetricallylikethepointsofacrown(top). (bottom). Pallororhalosaroundnuclei,prominentkeratohyalingranules,andrelatedcytopathicchangesareseenathighermagnification

5). antibody-mediated (type foliaceus (Chapter II) and hypersensitivity pemphigus are autoimmune Pemphigus vulgaris by caused diseases reactions are skin IgG proteins The membranes. pathogenic types bind (desmoglein and 3) antibodies and 1 desmosomal intercellular that mucous in found autoantibodies to the proteases adhesive as activate intercellular antibodies of the intercellular function may and disrupt well. desmosomes The determines the lesions. of the desmoglein location The the within of distribution epidermis proteins of characteristic sites study, direct lesional a By show pattern IgG ( deposits immunofluorescence intercellular fishnet-like

Fig. ). 24.9 many alleles. HLA particular other with autoimmune pemphigus is associated As diseases, with

MORPHOLOGYPemphigus vulgaris involvesbothmucosaandskin,especiallyonthescalp,face,axillae,groin,trunk,andpointsofpressure.Thelesionsaresuperficialflaccidvesiclesandbullaethatruptureeasily,leavingdeepandoftenextensiveerosionscoveredwithaserumcrust(

).Pemphigus Fig.24.10A arare,milderformofpemphigus,resultsinbullaethataremainlyconfinedtotheskin,withonlyinfrequentinvolvementofmucousmembranes.Theblistersinthisdisorderaresuperficial,suchthatmorelimitedzonesoferythemaandcrustingofrupturedblistersareseen( foliaceus,

Fig.24.11A

( lysisoftheintercellularadhesivejunctionsbetweenneighboringsquamousepithelialcellsthatresultsintheroundingupofdetachedcells.Inpemphigusvulgaris,acantholysisselectivelyinvolvesthelayerofcellsimmediatelyabovethebasalcelllayer,givingrisetoasuprabasal acantholytic blister Thecommonhistologicdenominatorinallformsofpemphigusisacantholysis,

Fig.

24.10B ).Inpemphigusfoliaceus,acantholysisselectivelyinvolvesthesuperficialepidermisatthelevelofthestratumgranulosum(

Fig.24.11B ).Variablesuperficialdermalinfiltratescomposedoflymphocytes,macrophages,andeosinophilsaccompanyallformsofpemphigus.

is Pemphigus women than commonly older occurs rare men. a often vulgaris disorder adults that in in in and most more frequently secondary when are and infections. painful, particularly ruptured, Lesions develop some course. their involvement in point Most at affected oropharyngeal have patients therapy, is life. mainstay of The for treatment sometimes immunosuppressive pemphigus, pemphigus induce pemphigus vulgaris. often foliaceus Medications can more than bite black an of (fogo selvagem) is pemphigus with the associated is America foliaceus a endemic that fly. South There also unusual in of form putatively

pemphigoid basis. an blistering autoimmune another distinctive Bullous is disorder with acquired

autoreactive by bullous deposition and complement pemphigoid linear Blistering triggered is antibodies the in membrane basement ( epidermal the IgG of in

Fig.

24.12A ). attachment where the most also located. plaques collagen) (most pemphigoid in is occurs basement XVII bullous antigen membrane type Reactivity commonly (hemidesmosomes), have proteins dermoepidermal roles autoantibodies The that the are structural adhesion. in by recognized tissue by cause to recruiting injury components neutrophils hemidesmosome autoantibodies fix IgG eosinophils. and complement and are by similar pemphigoid pathogenic and pemphigus http://ebooksmedicine.net caused Bullous thus vulgaris

Fig. 24.8 Levelsofblisterformation.(A)Subcorneal(asinpemphigusfoliaceus).(B)Suprabasal(asinpemphigusvulgaris). (C)Subepidermal(asinbullouspemphigoidordermatitisherpetiformis).

clinical presentation pemphigoid, their course (hemidesmosomes location in variation in but target the bullous pemphigus). in in the to antigen and mechanisms, differ desmosomes due of

).Theoverlyingepidermischaracteristicallylacksacantholysis.Earlylesionsshowvariablenumbersofeosinophilsatthedermal-epidermaljunction,occasionalneutrophils,superficialdermaledema,andassociatedbasalcelllayervacuolization.Thevacuolatedbasalcelllayereventuallygivesrisetoafluid-filledblister( Fig.24.12B

Fig.24.12C ).Theblisterroofconsistsoffull-thicknessepidermiswithintactintercellularjunctions,akeydistinctionfromtheblistersseeninpemphigus.

Fig. 24.9 Directimmunofluorescencefindingsinpemphigus. alongkeratinocytecellmembranesinacharacteristic“fishnet”pattern. (A)Pemphigusvulgaris.Notetheuniformdepositionofimmunoglobulin(green) (B)Pemphigusfoliaceus.Immunoglobulindepositsareconfinedtosuperficiallayersoftheepidermis.

by of and, bullous pemphigus without readily rupture heal lesions do if in not as scarring. as uncomplicated The pemphigoid infection, disease a topical and and or course systemic to to responds agents. follow tends relapsing immunosuppressive remitting The of (also since second viral is subtype pemphigoid a distinct no the or etiology) pregnancy. Gestational misnomer herpes that third a trimester is during clinically known gestationis, as there appears suddenly autoantibodies by pemphigoid against antigen. also bullous It caused is after may subsequent childbirth, resolves but recur Gestational typically with pemphigoid pregnancies.

Fig. Pemphigusvulgaris.(A)Anerosiononthelegarisingfromcoalescenceofagroupof“unroofed”blisters. 24.10 (B)Suprabasalintraepidermalblisterinwhichrounded,dissociated(acantholytic)keratinocytesareplenti-ful(inset).

http://ebooksmedicine.net

Fig. Pemphigusfoliaceus.(A)Atypicalblister,whichismoresuperfi-cialthanthoseseeninpemphigusvulgaris. 24.11 (B)Microscopicappearanceofacharacteristicsubcornealblister.

pruritic gluten grouped disorder characterized is papules. is associated with by vesicles blistering autoimmune Dermatitis an extremely herpetiformis that and sensitivity disease and life. third in predominantly often fourth affects the of The decades males, only patients disease; are with small of 80% cases associated celiac herpetiformis. with dermatitis conversely, fraction a celiac Up of disease develop to diet. gluten-free herpetiformis disease, Like dermatitis responds a celiac to

strong herpetiformis provides with pathogenesis. to disease association clue a of its The dermatitis celiac by wheat to gliadin) gluten expressed transglutaminase including keratinocytes. epidermal tissue the well predisposed develop from dietary IgA endomysium (derived Geneti-cally cross-react as as individuals autoantibodies that and with IgA antibodies protein transglutaminases, in deposits IgA immunofluorescence, selectively By discontinuous, localized the tips direct of skin ( of shows granular papillae dermal the

Fig. 24.13A ). a produce and The subepidermal inflammation blister. resultant injury

Fig. Bullouspemphigoid.(A)DepositionofIgGantibody(detectedbydirectimmunofluorescence)inthesubepidermalbasementmembrane(epidermisisontheleftsideofthefluorescentband).(B)Grossappearanceofcharacteristictense,fluid-filledblisters.(C)Subepidermalvesiclewithaneosinophil-richinflammatoryinfiltrate. 24.12 Dr. Courtesy of G. Prieto, Victor (C, Houston,Texas.) http://ebooksmedicine.net

MORPHOLOGYThelesionsofdermatitisherpetiformisarebilateral,symmetric,andgroupedandpreferentiallyinvolvetheextensorsurfaces,elbows,knees,upperback,andbuttocks(

dermal formingsmallmicroabscesses( of ).Initially,neutrophilsaccumulateselectivelyatthetips papillae, Fig.24.13B

).Thebasalcellsoverlyingthesemicroabscessesshowvacuolizationandfocaldermoepidermalseparationthatultimatelycoalescetoformatruesubepidermal Fig.24.13C blister.

Blisteringdisordersareclassifiedbasedontheleveloftheepidermisthatisaffected.

Thesedisordersoftenarecausedbyautoantibodiesspecificforepithelialorbasementmembraneproteinsthatleadtounmooringofkeratinocytes(acantholysis).

PemphigusisassociatedwithIgGautoantibodiestovariousintercellulardesmogleins(partofthedesmosome),resultinginbullaethatareeithersubcorneal(pemphigusfoliaceus)orsuprabasilar(pemphigusvulgaris).

BullouspemphigoidisassociatedwithIgGautoantibodiestobasementmembraneproteins(partofthehemidesmosome)andproducesasubepidermalblister.

DermatitisherpetiformisisassociatedwithIgAautoantibodiestotransglutaminase,andalsoischaracterizedbysubepidermalblisters.

arise from epithelial are hair cells and Benign epidermis probably and residing stem common neoplasms follicles. in the size not a These undergo grow do malignant generally limited transformation. to tumors and

tumors in older middle-age epidermal pigmented These most occur common frequently or individuals. and of head, are involvement. extremities, be may They and the particularly neck although on sites spontaneously also arise trunk, the numerous

Fig. 24.13 Dermatitisherpetiformis.(A)CharacteristicselectivedepositionofIgAautoantibodyatthetipsofthedermalpapillae.(B)Lesionsconsistofintactanderoded(usuallyscratched)erythematousblisters,oftengrouped(seenhereonelbowsandarms).(C)Blistersassociatedwithbasalcelllayerinjury,initiallycausedbyaccumulationofneutrophils(microabscesses)atthetipsofthedermalpapillae. Dr.Victor G. Prieto, Courtesy of (A, Houston,Texas.)

caused keratoses pathways. mutations acquired factor in are by Seborrheic signaling growth activating RAS such in RAS factor which and have in significant the as activating A others harbor kinase possesses that of downstream mutations tyrosine receptor activity a these and PI3K/AKT tumors (FGFR3), stimulates pathway, mutations activating pathway fibroblast growth fraction PI3K. while components 3 are concerns, seborrheic little cosmetic keratoses Except usually clinical of for importance. suddenly hundreds appear of paraneoplastic Leser-Trelat). rare patients of syndrome in lesions However, (sign as may a Patients with internal epidermal tract malignancies, harbor factors presentation stimulate which gastrointestinal may that growth produce carcinomas, most commonly proliferation. this

appearance( thatvaryindiameterfrommillimeterstocentimetersandhavea“stuck-on” exophytic, coinlike plaques MORPHOLOGYSeborrheickeratosesareround,

Fig.24.14 ,inset).Theyaretantodarkbrownandhaveavelvety-togranular-appearingsurface.Occasionally,theirdarkcolorissuggestiveofmelanoma,leadingtosurgicalremoval.

Microscopically,seborrheickeratosesarecomposedofmonotonoussheetsofsmallcellsthatresemblethebasalcellsofthenormalepidermis(see

).Variablemelaninpigmentationispresentwithinthesebasaloidcells,accountingforthebrowncolorationseengrossly.Hyperkeratosisoccursatthesurface,andthepresenceofsmallkeratin-filledcysts(horncysts)anddowngrowthofkeratinintothemaintumormass(pseudo–horncysts)arecharacteristicfeatures. Fig.24.14

a mutations skin. caused also that are keratosis of carcinoma other associated UV-induced frequently mutated in is by DNA cell damage lesion is genes Actinic and squamous in TP53 the with premalignant that of chronic such exposure Because lesions are the result usually to

Fig. 24.14 Seborrheickeratosis.Acharacteristicroughened,brown,waxylesionthatappearstobe“stuckon”theskin(inset). Microscopicexaminationshowsanorderlyproliferationofuniform,basaloidkeratinocytesthattendtoformkeratinmicrocysts(horncysts).

actinic they keratoses. called hyperkeratosis, are are with sunlight associated and (sun-related) varying from cell to The to 2.6% small, per 0.1% of squamous year. rate is progression carcinoma stable. Most remain regress or

MORPHOLOGYActinickeratosesusuallyarelessthan1cmindiameter,tan-brownorred,andrough(sandpaper-like)tothetouch (Fig.

24.15A ).Microscopically,lowerportionsoftheepidermisshowcytologic atypia, oftenassociatedwithhyperplasiaofbasalcells(see

)orwithatrophyanddiffusethinningoftheepidermalsurface.Thedermiscontainsthickened,blue-grayelasticfibers(solarelastosis),theresultofchronicsundamage.Thestratumcorneumisthickenedandshowsabnormalretentionofnuclei(parakeratosis).Uncommonly,full-thicknessepidermalatypiaisseen;suchlesionsareconsideredsquamouscellcarcinomainsitu( Fig.24.15B

Fig.24.15C

very sun fair-skinned and with in and incidence increase in keratoses are individuals age Actinic common exposure. hands). sun-exposed the of would is As dorsum for predilection (face, areas arms, expected, be a there for actinic malignant reasons. progression, Despite for the risk are or cosmetic low progression treated, prevent keratoses often either to agents effective eradication topical or cryotherapy safe. with (superficial freezing) Local is and

Round,flatplaquesmadeupofproliferatingmonotonousepidermalbasalcells,whichsometimescontainmelanin.Hyperkeratosisandkeratin-filledcystsarecharacteristic. keratosis: Seborrheic

Actinic keratosis: Presentonsun-exposedskin,theselesionsshowcytologicatypiainlowerpartsoftheepidermisandinfrequentlyprogresstocarcinomainsitu.

Althoughbothoftheselesionsareassociatedwithoncogenicmutations,malignanttransformationisexceedinglyrareinseborrheickeratosesandoccursinonlyasmallsubsetofactinickeratoses.

is cell a common carcinoma typically Squamous arises older that sites in on tumor sun-exposed adults. higher men in These than have women. tumors in a incidence

and extremely (Chapter loads UV mutational 6). is by cell mainly carcinoma leads DNA light squamous Cutaneous damage widespread to exposure, high which caused are risk. an disrupts with repair high pigmentosum, imagine, xeroderma disorder damage, exceptionally UV-induced the As patients of which might DNA one at rare as in which activating Notch and differentiation TP53 normal that mutations are epithelia. are regulate loss-of-function receptors, common, orderly RAS squamous mutations the signals of mutations in transmit

Fig. 24.15 Actinickeratosis.(A)Red,rough(sandpaper-like)lesionsowingtoexcessivescalearepresentonthecheekandnose.(B)Basalcelllayeratypia(dysplasia)withepithelialbudsassociatedwithmarkedhyperkeratosis,parakeratosis,anddermalsolarelastosis(asterisk). (C)Squamouscellcarcinomainsitulesionshowingfull-thicknessepithelialatypia.

in with transplant particularly is cutaneous of be that squamous recipients, associated increased cell incidence with organ associated Immunosuppression, to HPV are infection. carcinomas an likely chronic arsenicals, scars, predisposing and Other and include industrial carcinogens oils), ionizing radiation. ulcers, ingestion (tars factors of non-healing burn old

MORPHOLOGYSquamouscellcarcinomasinsituappearassharplydefined,red,scalingplaques;someappeartoariseinassociationwithprioractinickeratoses.Microscopically,squamouscellcarcinomainsituischaracterizedbyhighlyatypicalcellsatalllevelsoftheepidermis,withnuclearcrowdinganddisorganization.Moreadvanced,invasivesquamouscellcarcinomasarenodular,oftenscalylesionsthatmayundergoulceration(

).Suchtumorsshowvariabledegreesofdifferentiation,rangingfromtumorswithcellsarrangedinorderlylobulesthatexhibitextensivekeratinizationtoneoplasmsconsistingofhighlyanaplasticcellswithfociofnecrosisandonlyabortive,single-cellkeratinization(dyskeratosis)( Fig.24.16A

Fig.24.16B

Invasive of resectable. while cell squamous the skin carcinomas discovered are and often small to than have regional Less nodes 1% at diagnosis. metastasized lymph will to is invasion the lesion of of metastasis related The likelihood into degree thickness the of subcutis. and the but behave actinic metastasize ulcers, arising arising long those from more while aggressive after keratoses only Tumors burn may locally time, be scars, skin generally non–sun-exposed periods often in aggressively. of and lung, generally invasive at sites internal (unlike skin) possibly lesions because go arising (oropharynx, cell unrecognized. the early aggressive, in anus) and carcinomas are Squamous esophagus,

Fig. Invasivesquamouscellcarcinoma.(A)Anodular,hyperkeratoticlesionoccurringontheear,associatedwithmetastasistoaprominentpostauricularlymphnode(arrow). 24.16 (B)Tumorinvadesthedermalsofttissueasirregularprojectionsofatypicalsquamouscellsexhibitingacantholysis.

is metastasizes. common that Basal cancer a rarely cell carcinoma slow-growing exposure sites to at and tends sun subject pigmented individuals. chronic It in lightly occur to

in is basal carcinoma cell signaling; negatively molecular gene a tumors The loss-offunction pathway regulates suppressor Hedgehog of constitutive PTCH1, exhibit tumor that hallmark mutations Hedgehog hence, activation. implicated linked genes transformation. Hedgehog to malignant host turn and other growth in downstream of Excessive activates in and survival phenotypes a cell activation of mutations telltale bear sporadic UV damage. PTCH1 In the carcinoma, cell signs of light–induced DNA basal central cell inherited associated cell of is familial that syndrome, increased in autosomal Hedgehog by defects caused carcinoma Gorlin by in PTCH1 emphasized with is basal carcinoma. The disorder basal signaling an role dominant further anomalies. often important with and is of pathway Hedgehog subtle development, developmental regulator embryonic manifest Gorlin syndrome also The patients an damage in Mutations common by sporadic familial UV in caused tumors. light–induced are TP53 and also both

prominent,dilatedsubepidermalbloodvessels(telangiectasia) papules,oftenwith Basalcellcarcinomasmanifestaspearly

Fig.24.17A growingdownwardintothedermisascordsandislandsofvariablybasophiliccellswithhyperchromaticnuclei,embeddedinafibroticormucinousstromalmatrix( superficial originatingfromtheepidermis,andnodular ).Sometumorscontainmelaninpigmentandcanhaveanappearancesimilartomelanocyticneviormelanomas.Microscopically,thetumorcellsresemblethenormalepidermalbasalcelllayerorfolliculargerminativeelements.Becausetheyarisefromeithertheepidermisorthefollicularepithelium,theyarenotencounteredonmucosalsurfaces.Twocommonpatternsareseen:multifocal growths, lesions

Fig.24.17B ).Peripheraltumorcellnucleialignintheoutermostlayer(apatterntermedpalisading),whichoftenseparatesfromthestroma,creatingacharacteristiccleft(

Fig.24.17C

million that It basal the annually. 1 in treated more than States United estimated carcinomas are is cell common sun cell By the risk cumulative far is Northern equator, locales. States, is its such Australia, it the important and of basal European higher the is climates is sunny warm exposure; in incidence as in factor southern than 40-fold regions United more carcinoma near in most local are usually by 40% develop tumors another basal 5 Individual within of patients cured cell years. carcinoma but approximately excision, local and are lesions extensive bone invasion may lesions may if ulcerate, the occur neglected. Advanced sinuses or of facial is Metastasis exceedingly rare. metastatic tumors. pathway to treat advanced inhibitors locally Hedgehog used or are

Fig. Basalcellcarcinoma.(A)Aprototypicalpearly,smooth-surfacedpapulewithtelangiectaticvessels.(B)Tumoriscomposedofnestsofbasaloidcellsinfiltratingafibroticstroma. 24.17 (C)Tumorcellswithscantcytoplasmandsmallhyperchromaticnucleithatpalisadeontheoutsideofthenest.Thecleftbetweenthetumorcellsandthestromaisahighlycharacteristicartifactofsectioning.

incidence strongly squamous both cell lifetime of basal The increasing exposure. cell with correlated carcinomais sun and

squamous UV inflammation exposure carcinoma includefair to setting HPV light and skin, chronic exposure, cutaneous Risk chemicals, skin cell carcinogenic for factors of scarring, the infection(in immunosuppression). and

the usually carcinoma recognized it metastasis for cell excised but potential so. and Cutaneous has does squamous before is

aggressive worldwide, most mutations cell common locally theHedgehog in pathway. the tumor associated is Basal malignancy carcinoma, a with is rare. Metastasis very

congenital lesion speaking, of any Strictly denotes skin. term nevus the the any congenital refers melanocytes. acquired however, Melanocytic or nevus, to of benign neoplasm

mutations by Melanocytic in RAS. nevi gain-of-function or caused are benign neoplasms BRAF somatic from melanocytes, normally pigment-producing keratinocytes. interspersed dendritic among with are projections cells Nevi basal that derived are of RAS lies recall encodes the regulated You in a pathway. that (ERK) will downstream that extracellular kinase serine/threonine kinase BRAF evidence signaling unbridled proliferation Experimental suggests initially by followed senescence. BRAF/RAS induces that melanocytic by is is nevi malignant these melanomas. that “brake” very coordinated senescence but the transform into explains why opposing it believed effects induced provided on are few How proliferation unclear, of dermoepidermal the cells dermis Indeed, of the are is that and changes by cellular ( migration junction senescence as nevus the accompanied taken morphologic evidence from underlying into growth

Fig. ). 24.18 are grow and cords nevus cells nevus cells. no in deeper in and larger smaller, melanin and pigment, little cells grow produce to tend single Superficial nests; pigment or are produce or have nevus The grow cells fascicles. deepest in and contours fusiform melanomas. diagnostic morphologic importance, changes sequence of since absent This from they of are is

papules with rounded Common borders across) small (5 pigmented, tan-to-brown, mm or less well-defined, uniformly ( are melanocytic nevi

Fig. dermoepidermal “nests” uniform inconspicuous contain in oval the that 24.19A of to Early cells Nuclei mitotic lesions composed junction. grow are along are round, little no ). activity. and with round or and nucleoli junctional nevi. called Such are lesions early-stage nevi nests Eventually, or and underlying creating as may dermis (compound be lost of into grow in nevi nevi), older most the cords cells intradermal lesions the nests ( epidermal entirely, junctional

Fig. 24.19B

melanocytic of appearances. There with varied nevi, types are numerous irritation Although or cosmetic of usually surgical concern, may these only they melanoma, requiring removal. are cause lesions their mimic more nevi Compound junctional elevated often intradermal than are and nevi.

Dysplastic