of Profession The

and J. S. Marcdante Karen Siegel Benjamin

POPULATION IN CULTURE: CHILDREN SOCIETY OF AND CARE THE

medical the with influences and appreciate of to associated professionals conditions social, and care pediatriccare. provision economic, the environmental Health interactionsbetween need for quality costs and care. exacerbate morbidity,mortality, and the technologies treatments children help and families,but of improve medical their in disparities the may New life care deliver that intopractice; and socially health psychosocial, that all care children. Thechallenge integrates cultural, for to pediatricians is available issues equitable; is to and ensures ethical is

affect children’s Many outcomes. health challenges and emotional care; These health of addressing cognitive, include to factors, especially their poverty. families supporting disparities; and environmental and the in communities; access context health lives social, lead of to every the environmental development stresses with interact predisposition the and, and ultimately, of adulthood. Early seen genetic experiences diseases may child in to health maintenance have Thus, promote stressors also opportunity chronic but pediatricians and to only unique in toxic not the and wellness the and illnesses issues acute aforementioned address children.

pediatricians. on Many scientific the growing of advances role an impact have the the at allows genetic level, of some diseases. of the selection of technologies therapies, the use medications and on information diagnosis and diseases in molecular of Incorporating prognosis aids newer the provides improve diagnosis newborn the even of Prenatal when allowing of and conditions, of for early variety is accuracy treatment cure screening impossible. a diagnosis earlier a a attention-deficit/hyperactivity such resonance magnetic and and as disorder. dyslexia neurologic allows psychiatric understanding greater of Functional imaging problems,

having Challenges and decades. prevalence increased the ofchronic in incidence persist with recent illness and admissions is trauma illness hospital reason common children Chronic (excluding most the for newborn now among admissions). non–childbirth-related amongchildren. beyond, and the From school reason middle is hospitalization main illness mental for environmental as the and toxins as concern sexual and address violence. physical, abuse, increasing must about well of the prevalence Pediatricians also emotional, children. families States Since fear Trade the in of of the the terrorism New World anxiety for many September of City, 11, 2001, United level and Centerin hasincreased destruction the York

must pediatricians care these of To part address as challenges, practice a team. health ongoing collaboratively already psychiatrists, workers. nurses, with Many psychologists, pediatricians practice and social patient on location and can depending needs. Team composition change, of family and led and outcomes medical in available and pharmacies development the physicians improved adolescent of retail has and general many Although and clinics stores. school-based facilities for retail the have pediatricians shortage conditions, health health school childhood to access common

of antecedents alcoholism, adult are conditions, hypertension, recognized. increasingly as such depression, Childhood being and health obesity, hyperlipidemias, affect fetus. status health Maternal can the increased mellitus, maternal size metabolic heart birth relatively obesity, malnutrition because diabetes and of underweight and coronary who in rates life. osteoporosis of type later are disease, at smaller 2 have a Infants stroke, syndrome, survive, with percentage implications. of medical newborns children low care, number of a conditions Because birth birth chronic the or greater with of weight, lifelong very increasing delays weight neonatal improved low developmental preterm, and

psychosocial children. economic, Complex and health and health, influence well-being challenges outcomes greatly of the key National coverage. (e.g., • many issues.Some provide the Centers these of the include Control insurance information reports following: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/ of (CDC) issues the from about Disease for andPrevention hus11.pdf#102 ) Health the had In in million children United no over insurance coverage. 2010 eight States health In were million 20 underinsured. 10 addition, to do not children, recommended sector public insurance, immunizations. despite Many receive 2010 care and who because cannot have otherwise the access, needed Medicaid a families to Insurance would not children more Children’s State get million over Although in are covered U.S. medical their million Health health care children 42 it. afford unable than Program

and perinatal Prenatal care. do receive prenatal during Ten of care 25% first to the women not trimester. addition, continue illicit alcohol smoke, during and a use to pregnancy. In drugs, significant percentage women of consume

Preterm births. The (<37 2010). incidence peaked declining weeks) in preterm slowly been of births in has (11.99% and 2006 births]) low all (≤1500 (≤2500 births]) and birth [8.15% g However, all essentially low are rates 2006. 2010 weight weight the of of [1.45% infants g of since very unchanged birth infants

adolescents. rate in Birth 19-yearold among (34.2 national reaching has 15to for 2010. been dropping adolescents steadily The rate 1000) rate adolescents 1990, in since per its birth lowest

Adolescent abortions. continued a 2009 decade. were the nearly over abortions to In reported last CDC, 800,000 the decline age from to accounted 15.5% years for 19 15 abortions. of Adolescents of using Approximately report sexually 60% active effective adolescents contraception. of

Infant mortality. persists. declined the 1960, Although among disparity the have mortality infant rates groups ethnic since 5.05 infant of 1000 infants. 6.05 non-Hispanic births per mortality 2011 for overall per whites, Hispanic 5.27 and rate rate births 11.42 for was 1000 a black live with live In the infants, for States in United 2008 ranked infant In mortality. thirty-first the exist rates with variations the mortality infant by Marked South state in in and mortality Midwest. highest

maintenance breastfeeding. and Initiation of their the infants. Seventy-seven following birth of initiate of women percent breastfeeding a degree or by and non-Hispanic (higher bachelor’s and ethnicity vary with mothers) in whites education rates rates higher). Hispanic women (highest Breastfeeding in about at months, for Only 25% breastfeeding 12 of continue continuing months. women with 6 47%

Cause in of death children. U.S. accidents States of frequency, (unintentional in malignant assaults in in congenital and of the suicide, to in 24 death 1-1). years of all causes children injuries), (homicide), overall (Table order malformations (1 United age) neoplasms, were The 2010, the death was causes. in improvement all of slight rate from a There

for Hospital admissions adolescents. children and In 2.4% 2010 children of once. least admitted were at a to hospital the 18 in of children bronchitis/bronchiolitis) 28% under injury age. of (asthma, of illnesses over pneumonia, and and causes hospitalization years Respiratory are children of illness to Mental 17 the common age. for cause of most years is 13 admissions

adolescent use and health Significant substance abuse. challenges: considerable substance in students. school use is and U.S. There abuse high of high tried students school percent Forty-six 2009. in cigarettes having reported school had having to students high admitted drink; more 21.9% of at least 71% reported nearly one In 2011

Malignant Diseases heart deformations, Suicide Congenital 1–4 Unintentional of GROUP FREQUENCY the Homicide 5–14 1-1 injuries and Diseases and chromosomal DEATH ORDER neoplasms injuries (accidents) Age CAUSES Unintentional IN States, (accidents) (YR) Homicide heart 2005 Malignant the the malformations, of of OF deformations, in chromosomal the 15–24 injuries Causes neoplasms neoplasms Death Unintentional Diseases United of Congenital OF abnormalities Homicide heart malformations, Table (accidents) abnormalities AGE Malignant by

(website). socioeconomic Disease From status for Prevention: Control and United 2011: and Health, on health With States, Centers feature special

five previous after day one 8.2% drinking. than the month, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus11.pdf#102 driving on and drinks in admitted to 40% inhalants; heroin; 2%, 2.9%, 11.4%, students high tried methamphetamine; school have 6.8%, injectables. Nearly and marijuana; cocaine; of %, 3.8

Children foster care. in • Currently system. foster 400,000 care there the are in children about of the welfare system child 25,000 year. Approximately children each leave must these 50% and those homelessness school. leave, experience and/or graduate will from not 25% who to Of joblessness high likelihood a an females of and abuse, substance incidence a have increased having pregnancy early for with health birth of high low mental baby. children weight These problems,

Obesity. to continues prevalence The of increase. obesity over children 19 has age of overweight 18% than 1965 6 4% from increased The to fourfold more in years prevalence in to of 2010. estimated to 19 is or are obese. 32% Currently children of years 2 that age overweight it of or An at least are who $147 a overweight billion and Americans costs 300,000 estimated of 68% the in health deaths with are obese. year care associated

lifestyle. Sedentary not 6 62% physical of year or do engage activity. vigorous 11 in olds, moderate amounts recommended Among to (television/videos) day. screen of than spend time school Nearly more 40% hours per 2

Motor accidents injuries. and vehicle 1314 vehicle in and In 14 children died years 2009, age injured. or younger motor of were crashes, 179,000 drowning, of and Other causes abuse, included poisonings. childhood child injury per United all in cost of unintentional The States. $300 estimated is childhood the year billion nearly injuries

maltreatment. Child there there 2009. were the cases of has over been prevalence of child a abuse 760,000 reported in Although maltreatment, decline slow in The 16% of were children and (71%) victims neglected; abuse. 9% suffered physical majority were nearly sexual of abuse,

on and economic stress U.S. social the Current population. societal financial affecting and the slowdown, unemployment political health turmoil, considerable including the stresses with children, physical unrest. and mental associated economic of rising There are risk their defaulting their families of mortgage payments. homes lost have on homes are losing or Millions for at after

adult challenges. in health stress Toxic to childhood leading interrelationship and The of is between of on developmental health impact recognize of the the stresses, adverse and well-being. understanding helping environmental toxic stressors growing patients exposure, us and genetic the potential biologic Pediatricians act or for to health. that screen early best hinder provide for factors long-term must the and promote development upon opportunity

Military children. deployment and and their unrest conflicts Current of adults millions affected children. armed and have political to duty an are National children. estimated a women, parents million Guard/Reserve 1.5 servicemen over million and There active and traumatic having posttraumatic have troops report experienced of brain (alcoholism, condition depression, An and or 31% from stress injury. conflicts disorder) a estimated a mental returning health armed as by of morbidities Their of psychological these children well the impact ages. all by are children on deployment as affected maltreatment soldiers combat in is more Child prevalent in deployment of during soldiers. nondeployed families than U.S.-enlisted

needs, Health the remain that and health into patients’ account care. taking availability disparities the after preferences, are of differences of Social health inequity, poverty social and discrimination, conditions, and antecedents disparities. barriers, stress, causes are to language associated social the and women, and span. life to prenatal pregnancy appropriate care, The lack nutrition family relate during as such of appropriate mortality and disparities services to access for poor their planning, throughout health infant access heath in services, and preventive care

decreases. mother’s Infant of the increases education as level mortality

dental years from care. less to and likely age Children poor immunized of families are at be to 4 likely less receive

who Rates admission people in areas. for live low-income are hospital of higher

families visits to poor minorities outpatient and physician ethnic emergency likely from visits. hospital to hospital or office of less and children more have are Children department likely have

be are children Children with private Medicaid/public insurance. to with coverage excellent in health less health likely than

and care to families. low-income for families easier for income minority is for children Access for higher and children than of whites

CHANGING PEDIATRIC OF PRACTICE THE SOCIAL/ ASPECTS MORBIDITY: EMOTIONAL

emotional, status; and and social, the outcome. morbidity environmental, relationship issues; child among health Changing developmental reflects violence, violence; interactions illness, effects suicide observations adolescent adolescents. and based on anxiety such sexual significant and school homicide; as are disabilities, These on firearms home; and and substance learning mood influences activity; and in problems, child biopsychosocial school health and the adolescent and by media problems; of attention abuse disorders; use of and obesity,

some problems; to to severe. are mental are these of children have 6% 25% problems health to 5% of Currently estimated 20% health Unfortunately only estimated pediatricians mental that it of problems. 50% identify is The respectively. overall prevalence 13%, 10% preschool of dysfunction and psychosocial of children school-age is and children twice poor Children likely from to problems have are families psychosocial than as higher income families. from a health lack children. for there Nationwide, mental is of adequate services

working, on in health, parents divorce, both to include parental domestic child families, and violence, addition care. inadequate single-parent influences homelessness, poverty, children’s Important health equality care the pediatric improving justice, the public and social include in access, of improving health system. quality challenges care, Related health substance use are about sexuality, orientation, concerns pregnancy, sexual and For suicide. abuse, adolescents, and depression, there special violence,

of active, world. process an in the way interact people behave the Culture is complex dynamic, and and others, language, world, purpose to with their and of the people the and in order and of to nurturing attributable for sense meaning interactions dress their beliefs, to values give lives. experiences behavior, their encompasses concepts, provide offer Culture standards and children), that (including attempt treatment health requires United workers perspective. that patient the an growing on The of to impact diversity and health, care their of family States from and illness, make the understand the about can feelings you most about thoughts causes. (concerns) requires the and “What your discussion “What of as: These its has do questions, open-ended facilitate and illness?” worries illness?” you child’s illness parents’ This such caused your think a and the child’s pediatrician, concepts or beliefs and health family’s the into cultural with professionals well the care a patient, and perspective health in interacts religious perspectives, care incorporate from the health allows about approach family to Addressing beliefs as plan. one and to differences as and how values, spiritual may cultural Significant to conflicts child abuse and the because practices or arise neglect. possibility religious lead of may 22). abuse circumstance, pediatrician child authorities neglect (see the to by Chapter In the required social appropriate law and this to suspected the service report is

cultural Complementary broad part perspective. constitute the a alternative and of (CAM) medicine practices CAM biochemical, and Therapeutic bioenergetic well homeopathy. as for include modalities as lifestyle, treatments, biomechanical, use CAM. children It that of 50% of all adolescents 30% and estimated 75% 20% to to is and 70% cystic children to asthma chronic for illness, with CAM 30% especially fibrosis. Of use therapies, their Only 60% of children CAM. use tell about families to 30% their of physicians and others Some be may may dangerous. or ineffective even effective, modalities whereas be

rewards. economic, a provides profession social and political, with Society have and knowledge control, the and potential to power autonomous. Professions on specialized remaining a maintain monopoly relatively can societal be by autonomy needs. The profession’s limited exists its as A the fulfills good. long as it social for responsibilities profession

the of of professionals are activities medical public accountability. explicit subject rules Today to and membership. other and limited grant authorities professional Governmental the their organizations autonomy to standards of public and establish municipal health and and departments implement regulations. government City health the medicine revoking the for level, obtaining boards medical registration At and licenses. criteria state establish of in Medicaid, Food standards Drug The and the Administration. Medicare, including federal the and regulates government of services, Services protecting with research of conducting human The subjects. goal Department and of behavior Health in regulates physician the Human settlements. a other National which Practitioner in or federal Data or contains plan of the the or malpractice physicians professional who Improvement The licensing care disciplined government about society, health judgments board, to (and establish hospital, named information medical Act authorized 1986 state been Quality by Health practitioners) have Care health Bank, of every bank Hospitals are required years information 2 recredentialing. as part to clinician review data in this Council Medical Education Education as the Graduate are medical training, the accrediting Liaison postgraduate on schools, agencies and There as Committee such for such Medical (LCME), Accreditation for (ACGME). that programs. training subspecialty committees review includes ACGME The

privileged on most have serving interest. professions depended legitimacy their for public the the Historically The of physician’s on trust is physicians public commitment the altruism. to based put as medical the the of ceremonies commencement Oath recognition include physician’s the traditional part as self-interest. ahead to a of schools a responsibility of interest Hippocratic on Many of others variations

the professionalism of physician patient-physicianrelationship. in the embedded is of the in daily healingwork The core encompassed and cultural and the of the beliefs Professionalism religious/spiritual of and profession an includes appreciation andthe the moral for patient,incorporating values the moral ethical the of values health patient. created positions medical of a few have involved power those physicians, to led in to profession. physician andhave the inappropriateactions in of punish a of the demand world the Unfortunately, for respect the societal corporate erosion practicing physicians investigators,and

education ACGME Outcome in Academy Objectives Pediatrics of to and (ABP), in Medicine, medicine have Medical of the American Pediatrics American and of the (AAP), professionalism the American Project LCME, the Colleges, Medical the the of physicians. of practice of Board attention The the called for Association increasing Project School of American the Board Internal

2007, updated report AAP in as technical professional policy and Professionalism follows: in 2000, adopted and The the the ABP statement on standards

for one’s professional to the of the regard consistent is violate and refusal highest the Honesty/integrity behavior personal codes. and standards expense of in of result or result that situations of requires gain may integrity the in at may conflict interest best the personal Maintaining of patient. awareness that interest the

their the society public’s ensure are ethical of needs precepts patients one’s families, to includes accountability Reliability/responsibility profession the practice to and to to the to and that addressed, upheld. ensure are that is responsibility this assigned completing commitments. Inherent in fulfilling reliability or duties in a willingness for to responsibility be accept also There errors. must

essence is others for of the humanism. choices care; appropriate emotional, confidentiality. dignity; patient rights, cultural pediatrician influences and family, respect of The persons all must being, and a treat on worth respect regard patient’s their individual of aware for be and and and medical well with personal,

a component is crucial medical practice. Compassion/empathy of and members, of must for of concerns pediatrician and part family the The daily anxiety empathy relief listen of practice. pain, attentively, and provide respond humanely and appropriate patients discomfort, as to

care of and the through lifelong the to of is highest quality Self-improvement providing and commitment learning education. health pursuit through to self-evaluation pediatrician excellence errors of the acceptance to from seek must and learn aspire critiques The of others. and

of new and Self-awareness/knowledge faced need of or responsibilities. the includes guidance recognition for complex when supervision limits with his insightful and regarding or The behavior must appropriate be also boundaries. cognizant professional pediatrician others of on impact the her of

crucial patients. to best for is the care providing Communication/collaboration patients all and must involved families work care patients. their of in cooperatively care with the with communicate and providers Pediatricians health effectively their and

regard Altruism/advocacy unselfish for welfare the and of refers to others. to devotion key of is element professionalism. It a and or interfere the other interests one’s with of patients their care families. of Self-interest should the parties not

and decision making health values or what care The of best all. to medical determine decisions appropriate for kinds are on relies ethics of of ethical the Sometimes making option alternatives. harmful is many adverse in choosing care a least among decision medical matter challenges medicine, although encounters all an day-to-day infrequent. are ethical component, ethical of the In major have may practice clinical

legislative, of legal The required society the system systems. minimal the rest and judicial standards defines and behavior the regulatory, of through physicians of concerns. ethical order disputes, to provide and Laws to exist social adjudicate for not address are principle issues. support competent The decide of who confidentiality teenagers laws for the to about such parents, the and the limited pregnancy. health suicidal of Using concept such discuss all agree may challenges, pediatrician ideation and openly serious teenagers, to confidentiality, as teenager with goal and This autonomy encouraging the long-term supporting identity parents. while the of of reinforces conversations appropriate the

of about choices options and differences value and clinicians problems care. health from the amongpatients, derive provision in Ethical families, principles. these several differences involves Resolving ethical important value care interests, their perceive persons, adult based health that risks respect about informed for the the they choices being in on of be patients and their benefits best tests alternatives is Autonomy, of after means condition which diagnostic treatments. can and and appropriately competent that about of make to particular health principle best provided. the clinician based the Paternalism autonomy involves and is for deciding on of the challenges principle information much is what how patient, patient a a medical more Paternalism, when (e.g., or under has disorder appropriate than autonomy. may significant a circumstances life-threatening threatening certain self or is others), and condition psychiatric be can paternalism clinician. of autonomy challenge Weighing values the the and

of the harm little involved nonmaleficence the are no beneficence justice distribution benefits, (doing those the values Other as burdens (the of to in and individual, society). family, important as and services, goods, principles equality (doing of or or good), possible), ethical harm palliative 4). making in hospice of provision of address and and care quality Chapter decision suffering the End-of-life life must (see

AND ETHICAL CHILDREN, PRINCIPLES INFANTS, TO RELATED ADOLESCENTS

on more parents guardians dependent Children needs being care their vary or to totally from independent. meet being health to children and capacity have making the do young Infants not decisions. for medical in circumstances pediatricians parents Paternalism is by appropriate. these and medical Adolescents age), the have of competent, years (<18 to right for decisions make themselves. if legal by the the through old being Children or 8 procedures; young body a how 14 or 9 autonomous emancipated process to can the works by certain may designated of conditions. of having meaning to be medical minor mature considered age understand and years 15, certain adolescents children involve capacity to appropriate their with to It is pediatricians the process information for in decision-making understand. ethical to is obtaining process consistent of The this of child the goal. with a assent

appropriate, confidentiality is because the be of shared principle of decision in limited medical care. of of issues process but may making provision the The distribution between of need ethical effects protect and distributive justice the a the the to to parent’s individual health support conflict costs and vaccinations of involves side issues and concern about individual rights the and with A raises of immunization of effects. the the the of the the for responsibility side regard in and public

each age) with considered decisions. age All by of their (usually ≥18 health regard patients legally autonomous to defined years of competent an state are must meet following the To requirements: to capacity patients decide, have the

the procedures, interventions, risks benefits nature the decision. and and communicate and Understand of these interventions be medical to the able understand of their

deliberate, of the benefits and weigh the on and about Reason, welfare. risks their the their understanding using implications decision own

Apply the values the applied decisions possible conflicts set to an of of to be to personal in made. as ordifferences decision-makingprocess and a show awareness the values

with requirements context and care case each need to characteristics. its placed to These within unique the be applied of medical others, usually them. are parent, children need the and Most to competency to not requirementsfor able meet makedecisions the for young decisions inmaking discretion given for parents their children. great Legally are further legally a there discretion legal in limited when process is neglect, triggers This best of child determining abuse and the the which is child. interests

when is law, important determines It care can with law medical access information. confidential state to may become and parents not medical law, an familiar adolescent federal when consent becausestate to adolescent Accountability The and (HIPAA) standardof minimal Act 2003, became Insurance requires 1996,which a of effective Portability Health in protection. confidentiality to protection to law The confers minors than confidentiality less adults. pediatrician’sresponsibility HIPAA regulations. confidentiality of the their It these minors the to exercise help under rightsand inform is rights them

as are right considered follows: they nonautonomous adolescents health the when public granted consent circumstances, mature are or Under because law certain considerations, legal state or emancipated minors special of under to

minors. Mature criteria independently. and for emotional Some cognitive the can competence legally age may meet 14 states and that older have and recognized adolescents many maturity decide to the pregnant, consent. abortion make decisions have decided constitutional that has parental about without minors right Court Supreme mature The have not many Although parental to have parental seek to an legislatures adolescents abortion notification, require state consent. wishing do pregnant facilitate state a provide judicial for this The to decision must adolescents. making procedure

Emancipated minors. treatment from medical Children parental without legally control seek emancipated may who parental consent. are and independent but or married, includes parents, are forces, state apart runaways, school, live a pregnant, The to children the are state graduated parents, are from members generally their from financially declared from armed emancipated by court. definition have of varies high who

of health). (public state Interests the prevention drug sexually other certain illnesses, may abuse, such use diseases, minors the transmitted mental conditions conditions, control), with autonomously. (including concluded medical as that and infections and State alcohol pregnancy have birth treatment contagious for these with seek of legislatures and certain barriers the health of certain treatment to public the States in the have of conditions. for may interest in limiting an spread eliminating endanger access disease and that

adolescents, clinicians perspective, effects, in understanding the alternatives, an the so about treatments capacity, discussions should developmental on of based and ethical good children plans and they and From nature side engage outcomes. that their the have of expected medical a influence patient decisions. the assessment There responding, be situation, is of how the factors the clinical understanding patient’s should the may that an and the patient’s of for patients’ and to hopes requests appreciate wishes. and Pediatricians and listen should their confidentiality always stage. is to to to capacity autonomous as help appropriate is children’s developmental The ultimate become goal as their nourish

is patient-family-physician an is crucial to medicalcare of the trusting of Confidentiality important and provision a part for relationship. basis the a shared meansthat Confidentiality information be withoutconsent. patient about not should may broken, seek is experiencegreat harm patients confidentiality medical may If not care. and needed discussion a of Chapter67 in the for confidentiality See care adolescents. of

identifiable when clinically diseases disease. for risk to factor The of identify there screening is goal is no when benefit diagnosis there the treatment only would place should or a a is take when available Screening child. identifiable performed usually Testing factor. is there when risk is clinically some implications. have and test Genetic important testing results special screening because problems present and psychosocial, and choices or carrier fibrosis) cell (e.g., may which about guilt, create social anemia jobs). financial, may a reveal cystic and reproduction or screening Some interpersonal stigma, state, insurance problems (sickle to shame, discrimination genetic in lead is with likely or issues to geneticist the counseling helping detected. of genetic is disorder with, genetic to, Collaboration clinical in or appropriate complex a referral a detected the when family be

surrogate a for screening testing. parental should as Newborn used be not life, some cancers, polycystic in cancer the not though kidney the diagnosed populations; appear Huntington later be genetic that of disease can in until hemochromatosis. breast process of Examples screening, certain ethnic by do diseases even as such disease; manifestations disease; and are for the is may genetic purposes. pressure young, parents’ tests pediatrician the order child Parents when still to the of decisions, Testing consent to direct delayed competent is the a assent for has the unless at time informed should the capacity child make to for there or child disorders these be and the testing. is benefit until

when The required of even to may and interests in best tenets the the religious pediatrician the child, child. interfere with act the health well-being is of a courts to a have or religious a child blood intervened always save parents needs transfusion. against allow his transfusion prohibition whose or the When transfusion to infant a her an have life, In state beliefs for religious may immunizations their with laws strong children. parents refuse under some contrast, during mandate or all governments disease outbreaks state immunizations for However, epidemics. can children of must requiring burdens state have distributive states just is the all including object By on of share principle religious the of to who justice,which that immunization using benefits the members in society. government the and a all, society individuals grounds,

Subjects Children Research Human in as

of to The research is new generalized develop goal knowledge. and to give informed in may conditions. permission for under certain Parents research participate children Children research or but assent dissent consent may to cannot give protocols. been developed human to in federal protect investigation. regulations child participants and have adolescent Special

still the provided advances safeguards children safeguards additional benefit regulations providing while for opportunity provide from the the participants research. adult These of for research, in scientific beyond to

parents a the have that their particular hope seriously children will research Many child. ill benefit for direct with protocol researchers to is for The with that clear treatment. not greatest research challenge parents is be as and addressed should fact compassionately sensitively as be possible. This

a of death life’s child The of is difficult one experiences. most The approach imminence palliative medical cannot expected treatment be instituted intervention, and reasonably care of child’s should the be medical death. to diagnosis, a to when care affect ill seriously of child. these circumstances, the on maintaining the of life, goals focus In ameliorating and dignity, quality the the of suffering care improving beyond of the look the life. to of disease medical and Central willingness clinicians preserving to this curing goals is approach traditional life close met when are longer child curative friends toward no family need needs by members look enhancing and working the of They the to with child’s and goals. the expected care end life. standard the is an of High-quality at palliative

needs simply is are pediatrics by Palliative have as needing where end-of-life four not havingconditions are met been care that fall is the not child’s a care in groups, the based approach.Children basic best oftreatment. imminent,and palliative on predictably care.There conditions described goal into death palliative care following include the scenarios: of conditions These

cancer poor (e.g., uncommon is cure is possible, but failure not A a with prognosis).

(e.g., is Long-term life quality goal provided fibrosis). a of cystic maintaining with of treatment

trisomy condition a the made after that exclusively is 13 palliative diagnosis progressive (e.g., of Treatment is syndrome).

health Treatments are are symptoms). for severe, (e.g., severe nonprogressive patients in who spastic quadriparesis difficulty complications with to disability in available controlling vulnerable

models timelines different different present of and conditions intervention. medical These Yet mediated a medical, to psychosocial, by quality of share concrete need cultural, which the affect the attend all and concerns. they spiritual child’s death, to elements,

care for although requires of a full the do the spectrum sudden death approach, child also involvement. conditions of of allow elements palliative not The family. the and involve may in and medicine dramatic situations between deaths where the they involve relationship may first caregivers caregivers bereaved Many no exist of responders and field, emergency these support. for of to have time the an death considerable require who tragedy prepare had Families unexpected not issues circumstances. endof-life make care contributions the Palliative to in important these and face families can that bereavement This death where the cause explored. be the in become must may circumstances fully complicated of medical possibility and may anger neglect intense directed create the subjects investigate scrutiny guilt the need and child of or team. the at family to to The abuse

as the at with well and and relief end include care with child’s developmentalperspective such to symptomsas bereavement, issues maycause the assistance vomiting, and as the anticipated palliative Palliative and is life; clarification and of management; of and ofthe life fatigue.Psychological pain a of management symptoms, palliative have adaptations goals nutritional bowel feeding dying quality of directed issues. distress care, breathing, of the nausea treatment understanding profound of death, minimizing care a of ethical that labored of diminish include and importance of toward a child.Elements of sensitivity obstruction, elements expertise palliativecare coexist; treatment be improved Curative medication can remission aggressive continued in a hopes is pain curative providedwhile health or may of status. the care and providing giving as of as broad expertise delivered Palliative is networkfor a supportive topatients well families with approach, range and caregivers. a amultidisciplinary care the pastors. be may health workers, professionals, involved and pediatricians,nurses, Caregivers mental social

model rests care palliative principles: A of integrated the on following

I. Article for the and families. Respect patients dignity of should to family preferences, clinician The choices. goals, respect and and listen patient and treated. can wish School-age to how articulate preferences be they about children the decision making 12). by age (see of Section engage in 14, Adolescents, can informed and goals the of and discuss of and care; options, should the assist promote the for clarify and choices; treatment diagnosis, The family the listen help prognosis; concerns. flow in to pediatrician free patient allow the social-emotional information; the understanding and like directives) options they nears. Advanced what discussions allowing the treatment child life with about (advance as be as care should the of parents, end instituted would multiple family reflecting that sound and be and of yet and between altruistically the validate perspectives, agreements on should conflicts, the to addressed pediatrician practice. the perspectives, opinion family possible reflect by patient identifying coming Differences the committees members. services and consultation important are and resources family pediatrician ethics for Hospital the

II. Article Access comprehensive care. to and compassionatepalliative renew. process, toallow the family and associated illness respond to treatment and and options.Respite the the and suffering, available specialattention caregivers the rest physicalsymptoms, other during should thedying to symptoms address with providing clinician empathically human any psychologicaldistress with and functional at capacity, pain to time comfort, The be should

III. Article of resources. interdisciplinary Use can services. the Because no of one care, clinician provide the complexity needed of all of may of and nurses pain the subspecialty schoolteachers, physicians, team, members include ministers, the pastoral in friends psychologists, the management child. social home workers, the family, and for visits, hospital/facility of peers primary or team The who phases should The of family during child position in should know what and the illness to process. a be all decide

Article IV. and Acknowledgment caregivers. provisions for support understand. of difficult a to accept and child death The is caregivers family, the concerns. The child, their address of primary own need friends and opportunities to emotional and on their child is the who emotionally based level. dying react of developmental cognitively, Siblings and are crucial. thoughts team address members to feelings meetings of Team the care after and of should child, share the their death and Soon with feelings. the review experience the the family and team parents reactions commemorate of time the attend the support death the staff, to return may opportunities for scheduled families for to include Institutional child. to to the hospital, and ceremonies funerals, counseling

Commitment to Article of research V. education. quality and improvement through palliative care

and continually, systems need for the members the the staff to care monitor Hospitals and support treatment appropriate responses and patient of should family quality assess program. evaluate the resources, to the of develop between realization less in of family imminent. child’s death over successful completely control arise is physicians the members the that differences and than to Issues or dying attempts the timing often symptoms Consensus palliative care and results the medical in better perspective. psychosocial from

bereavement an including life, process. range specialists is and end-of-life care team, services the by a program end of care interdisciplinary for treatment the providing the in Hospice of palliative to and model, program hospice of adult the the curative months receive requiring a within the Medicare children death Typically, for hospice prognosis cessation 6 efforts uses services. of curative may Recently alternative services where pediatric level higher models developed may efforts of continue states have be while end-of-life some coordinated applied. the

process spiritual psychological to the of on accommodation Bereavement child of family. and refers and part the the death to child’s the by as defined been including and physical response and loss, caused Grief distress, emotional a pain, the emotional suffering. has is a adaptive death. to It normal response human care the to attends Palliative grief reaction. death the affected vulnerabilities the of and Assessing place resources care approach. coping takes family before the palliative central is to

sustained and Parental as grief. recognized more than intense is being other of types grief Most their parents through work grief. of grief, pathologic grief, and manifestation Complicated continued a rare. disabling is to child’s the the month have and last share psychological problems who staff, support have sessions with child’s had with attending their likely of life, who closure the their access resolve Parents are to who during more had others illness, grief. during their

imminent their difficult death. child child’s the parents particularly for to talk with is A about issue whether sharing evidence of on case presents each that disease, timeline state. psychological individual cognitive information beneficial, Although disease, a own its the based age, accurate child’s and suggests complexities, development, with is truthful parental dying and child more done are so. to Parents with their child about regret not having likely death than talking regretful. feel parents than did child were of who sensed imminent Among parents children, with to fathers death, those their aware more likely who child death, talk and their mothers was about more older of not

IN CHILDREN COGNITIVE DEATH ISSUES DYING UNDERSTANDING ADOLESCENTS: AND AND

with pediatrician the the The to is communicate respecting preferences happening while them, should family. cultural of andpersonal aboutwhat children are developmental operations, discussion situation.Piaget’s help children A cognitive help of concrete disease, sensorimotor, their parentsunderstand health children’s and of with development, concepts formal illness is grappling the helpsframe child which illustrate children’s operations. categorizedas and of of and with and can concepts understanding the death preoperational, theories how

to 2 of as death. children, very and up For separation, is concept of (sensorimotor), death is probably a there young no seen age years children difficulty of of this adults. in associated other The behaviors age attachment protesting usually grieving and to include availability a with whom good attachment. of depends other child nurturing of degree previous The difficulty the on had the people has

(sometimes age magic 3 of Children the called illness 5 the the years) permanence trouble of meaning (preoperational) the have from of grasping death. to and the years make and language age skills behavior Their their difficult. understanding this at moods death may developing a be of as Because sense of viewed punishment. guilt, thinking. a as sibling death by have the be previously to died, the may child’s caused wishful seen If child being younger wished a psychologically They with strong emotional when reactions the their overwhelmed confronted feel can of parents.

of comes (late preoperational of finality to years to understood. In 6 death operational), be to 11 the concrete ages gradually age children detailed control. Magical of a to to gives information thinking way a for need sense gain and compartmentalizing this emotions a range Older by control have to children intellectualizing. need in their strong

operations), and is reality as a age) death and In of irreversible. (≥12 seen years universal adolescents (formal is at handle the level death abstract Adolescents philosophical be can issues or realistic. and and on disdain. also relying emotional expression or anger instead may avoid information, They treatments. Adolescents discuss can withholding should Their and and attended respected. fears hopes, to be wishes,

END-OF-LIFE SPIRITUAL CONCERNS PALLIATIVE CULTURAL, DECISIONS AND AND CARE RELIGIOUS, ABOUT

the values, these dying and beliefs, or pediatrician palliative with can religious/spiritual Understanding values to into care cultural and the the practices help beliefs about family the death integrate and work family’s plan. preparation the for family the members the of regarding people, of dying and site roles body. treatment the vary Cultures have, family patient’s speak the with team the the ethnic the to Some presence. groups family clinical of member oldest the of expect to only head outside or decision family making. involve Some entire families the in extended For the lost some the the whereas families, patient’s hospital. the believe dying occurs family will if others can death that luck, bad home spirit bring in become at the health to others, some In whereas, and traditions, cleans prefer care body, prepares ritual. family in this complete members the team exorcism may undo ceremony anointing, practices of or curse, on the bedside. the include the a Religious/spiritual other to on religious prayer, or child placed cultural laying amulets, and an at objects hands, and acceptance organ donation differ in the of of the autopsy. idea Families be the and not lifesaving addressed. child of interests or rituals, child palliative in procedures or are best that should Decisions, the could of the harm withholding cultural, the the families a care familial, and attends spiritual values. complexity honoring while to parents through helps Quality palliative and child this of and death

and child death; views should development; of Before acceptance the in the and decision end-of-life the with spiritual, age, a and philosophical, emotional caregiver death. and the about parents’ child’s experience, cultural speaking level death, making; assess their of involvement coping child’s understanding of strategies; their questions repeatedly use change of the to process. time, these may to open-ended areas assess over end-of-life contributes These and the (doing duty. create truth ethical confidentiality, beneficence good), The child autonomy, can harm), the nonmaleficence a dying or physician’s of care (doing dilemmas involving telling, no extremely know child. care for difficult are burdens to continued the is appropriate of when It medical no longer their for parents The beliefs quality to constitutes and cultural, and beliefs religious/spiritual, and when may values life, be differ philosophical and workers. between what worth ceases life of health care living, families of in important assent the interest informed child. through shared decision is most the making, of from the and parents, permission/ the the principle best as consent of child what The from process is determined ethical Sensitive their essential. and own is terms, communication with family, meaningful the in medical the and burdens continued the recognizing benefits intervention must physician, family negotiate of and patient, while plan. medical goals treatment the The of difference between more the is latter challenging. withdrawing parents There treatment, legal no withholding treatment and many see ethical or and physicians although as Family are what DNR) about called do the appropriate should and not orders. resuscitate members agree (also patient implemented, patient not does and based wishes other measures of measures preclude the being and some family. the needs Foregoing on may about or, physician on turn legal potential last system parents, physicians abuse the by or and there are children, the When differences ethics matters, a neglect. these committee filing report with resort, consult hospital as the a serious to among

Bioethics of Committee Academy ME, on Pediatrics: Fallat American

Pediatrics pediatrics: Professionalism 120(4):895–897, statement Glover J: of 2007 in principles,

new Committee American Psychosocial 2001 commitment 108(5):1227–1230, of Health: Pediatrics: Pediatrics care, and Academy the Aspects pediatric of revisited: psychosocial of aspects Child The on to a renewed Family morbidity

children: for health survey, for B, Bloom National 2006, Summary Health RA: interview Vital National Center statistics Statistics, U.S. Cohen health

2007 Stat 10(234):1–79, Health

in US SC: G, care, health, medical children, access ethnic and and in of Tomany-Korman Racial to services and use Flores disparities dental health

Pediatrics 2008 121(2):e286–e298,

C, Cooper PD, al. Hanson Gluckman et MA, on and and disease, early-life 359(1):61–73, Med : health in N of Engl considerations adult utero J Effect

Martin BE, 2006, Births: Natl SJ: Hamilton preliminary JA, Ventura data for

2007 . Rep 56(7):1–18, Stat Vital chart-book health in Hyattsville, States, United Health, the National of MD, trends on 2007: 2007. Statistics: Health with Center for Americans,

2 David A. Levine

years life are for in maintenance physicals. 2 visits health than The of the more office frequent first somatic behavior, physical safety, anticipatory and history development, a examination are issues important guidance. including nutrition, each Although parts and visit, are discussed, many of other

illness development Disorders ofparental or severe are be or the chronic neglect symptom growth may only often of associatedwith and abuse. or is do general, that itsupports a normal illness, that a and acute, growth except healthy child serious in and does for affect not chronic growth eliminate not or Although development. judgment oftenbenign, a illnesses development

development of and The are processes intertwined. growth as convenient increase size to and to processesrelated and However, body mind. an as refer the is increase in it of development function growth in to Being to with recognize and normal those variations. familiar for whocare manage practitioners children development patternsof abnormal growth and allows

grows genetic The socialenvironment and the determine anddevelops the emotional, of how individual child and physical, childhood. throughout makeup a growth of goal his periodically normal for her pediatrics of helpeach achieve child individual through progressionor and or and development. to is screening the One monitoring abnormalities potential 9, The week of office adolescence/young and life 2weeks; adulthood 18 15, and3 2½, on AmericanAcademy annually 4, months; nursery recommends visits discharge) 2, Pediatrics at timing years;then (Fig. at of of routine 6, (depending thefirst through at in 12, 2, 1, 9-1).

in of and important nonspecific growth disorders. be Deviations medical patterns serious may may or indicators chronic be weight, circumference statistical supervision on every growth should head at accurate charts. of compared visit length/height, and be An with norms measurement obtained health and convenient 5-1 evaluate Table summarizes benchmarks normal to several growth. normal are limits pattern, useful deviations single (percentiles). value the Serial growth a detect much within statistically measurements if from defined to remains measurements particular more even than define is acceptable Following or whether helps growth trend the within evaluation. further limits warrants

growth measurements on assessed charts set each measurements by visits. plotting Growth accurate of withprevious at is measurements health obtained comparing and Figures 5-4. to in Please seeexamples 5-1 can birth 2 Complete www.cdc.gov/growthcharts 2 for 20 www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/who_charts.htm at and charts found for to years. be years to adiposity weight and used is inmeters as in recommendedas The Chapter for body adolescents by at to it body squared; screening thoseoverweight risk (see height being 29). identify kilograms tool massindex defined a overweight is divided is to and for children or classify

percentile expected. patterns can on so some plateaus, be and graphs growth shifting Normal spurts have Large head in as circumference discrepancies weight, in and percentiles warrant percentiles. large height, attention, do shifts head inadequate, caloric circumference height, falls is and the weight is last. the percentile then When the intake first, not adequate and of or [see result poor 21]). receiving be (nonorganic inadequate a child to feeding the intake because attention as may Caloric failure is thrive Chapter stimulation

inadequate intake because Caloric be of also needs. caloric increased may heart fibrosis, significantly such may as growth. require cystic sustain or failure with chronic Children intake to a caloric illnesses, higher percentile An a falling percentile the suggests weight height increasing of in face hypothyroidism. may circumference be Head disproportionately

1 year of loss months for 4–5 g 3–4 Double birth year 20–30 7–10 15–20 gain: weight: g of weight: months birth Daily for rest few days weight first first days: Weight of Return age to 5%–10% first Triple the in weight birth birth weight:

Average length: 20 in. 30 in. at birth, is 4 average double at in. the year age 40 birth years, At or length child 1

at cm birth (13.5 35 in.) Average HC:

then year for month for month cm cm 3 months, first (2 per slower) 1 increases: first per HC

24 Weight-for-age Birth months: percentiles and to Boys Length-for-age

5-1 years Figure and to for boys, age. percentiles 2 birth Length-by-age of weight-by-age with National Center Statistics in Chronic for National Disease Promotion. Health the by the for Center Prevention collaboration and Health Developed Atlanta, Ga, Standards, Disease WHO Centers Growth Control for Child and (From Prevention: 2009. at Available http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/who_charts.htm

Figure Head boys, to weight-by-length for years age. and circumference percentiles birth of 2 5-2 Statistics in with for Developed the and Center the National Promotion. Health by Chronic Health collaboration for Prevention Center Disease National Control Disease WHO 2009. for Child Standards, (From Growth Centers Ga, Atlanta, and Prevention: years: at http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/who_charts.htm Available 2to20 Girls StatureWeight-for-age percentiles

for 2 of percentiles years Stature-for-age girls, age. 5-3 Figure weight-for-age 20 and to Center by the Health Developed Center in Disease Health National Prevention Statistics Promotion. Chronic collaboration National for for and with the Prevention, for Centers 2001. Control (From Atlanta, Disease and Ga, Available index-for-agepercentiles Body at http://www.cdc.gov/ 2to20years:Girls mass

2 of girls, percentiles index–for-age 5-4 20 to for Body Figure age. mass years for the Prevention Center collaboration National Promotion. Developed for by the and Disease Health in Center Health Statistics Chronic National with Prevention and (From 2001. Ga, Atlanta, for Centers Disease Control there at http://www.cdc.gov/ familial megalocephaly, normal when hydrocephalus, growth large in merely infant. premature Available neurologically a is catch-up or considered if proportionately and also even than is less low. weight measurements child circumference head A length the is third percentile, the if are microcephalic plotted brain regularly period crucial infancy, measurements until circumference development, head rapid years and be are of is a should age. Serial the of of during 2 child suspicion close of Any a further at evaluation, or abnormal follow-up, least growth warrants both.

StudentConsult.com @ Available

deviant errors). technical for common most (i.e., faulty equipment reasons human and are measurements The deviant first measurement Repeating a step. is the those syndrome, syndrome, be birth g) Separate syndromes. Down with Turner (weight <1500 very and available dysmorphology for achondroplasia, infants should low charts other various used growth and for and weight are

Variability body occurs in from to fetal adultlife. proportions larger their proportion are in rest Newborns’ significantly body. tothe of heads disappears.Certain are the requiring extremities, trunk, gradually summarized sizes changesin in the result assessment characteristic and proportional difference This disturbances head.Patterns of inTable 6-1. further growth

careful time, with abnormal. Evaluating helps a and is examination, or physical determine a coupled growth normal history child whether pattern over the Parental whether be evaluation. deciding useful with further proceed to when a may heights many although exceptions. parents’ are their Children, growth pattern, there in general, follow

−2.5 midparental girl, 2 For as follows: calculated a is height

as height boy, calculated is For +2.5 a 2 midparental follows:

midparental for too makean prediction every from many depends growth accurate height to on Actual child. variables determination with is familial of lowweight, head The length, stature Chapter short child growth circumference associated (see 173). pattern with commonly a and normal than are most are smaller Thesechildren but genetically

head length percentiles 50th, 5th, 5th, discrepancies) other or Discrepant weight circumference (e.g.,

of factors, heights hormone Growth Midparental hormone insufficiency growth Evaluation Thyroid children. pubertal testing Caloric called constitutional puberty or although who, adolescentand stature Chapter173); age, others than for normal are later starts (see of most careful by pubertaldevelopment A have should the examination may done, be normal. is short variant who child preadolescent abnormalities should Anevaluation consideredfor has for adolescent within so has not or years who primary female thelarche. by15 be of any years not 3 amenorrhea reached menarche done evaluated breast age development 13 years Chapter 174). (see also should by Lackof be

percentile they Starting grow then in months children 18 between until genetic and along lower matchtheir new, programming, assumea out high growth 6 percentiles. percentiles, many lower more have and physicalexaminations. major and usually behavioral, percentiles decrease developmental, not than do normal two They followed with catch-down should be children but growth further These evaluation is warranted. no closely,

for growth breast months. age, small the gestational calories, are prematurely, in or Infants first there usually catch-up complicationsthat ingestmore exhibit and, 6 or formula unless born milk extra require fed infants [see on up unless are 128]). and should provided much spitting they as as they vomiting be want (notjust Chapter demand These may from caloric content formula. ahigher Some benefit risk being may early nonorganic thrive factorsthat psychosocial Chapter to or to small contributeto born led may failure Many (see have 21). increased weight from recover being developing who an or birth risk Converselyinfants childhood low of prematurehave obesity.

system physical, 2 the cognitive rapid Growth most nervous development. with first and emotional, behavioral, the is in of increasing years, correlating rapid change again There is adolescence. during of of the (bone outline the of number sharpness of epiphyseal size, on the Osseous shape, basis the the density, center centers; age) radiographs ends from the from distance and and maturation of zone and the of calcification. is size epiphyseal separating provisional determined bones; calcified

are developing changes the the the in language, physical to of Parallel the brain (i.e., in development body. cognition, behavior) changes

requires any a and altered palsy Observation from or a muscle evaluation. tone central asymmetric system and or the of abnormality delivery nervous nerve function further resulting indicate significant movement may the and in period or newborn unique neonatal eliminate function. reflexes asymmetric can concerns further Primitive over are elucidate resulting The important elicited mattress infant’s and back head of movement examiner’s off the as suddenly by arms reflexes newborn assess are abduction startle, during inches is followed few upward gently and hand), then of The move most a onto the to to the the follows: a flexion. period the adduction (from by in Moro reflex allowing legs The flexion. respond with

same of touching toward the tongue lowering the lip the mouth, lower infant’s with by resulting corner movement is rooting elicited the on the side The reflex in of stimulus. toward face also The the stimulus. turns

The placed reflex sucking newborn’s in occurs with the mouth. any object almost The vigorous sucking. infant responds with later sucking reflex voluntary The replaced is by sucking.

onto finger, occurs object, placing such infant’s (palmar or grasp The an palm the as grasp) (plantar grasp). reflex a when sole responds or flexing curling by the infant fingers The toes.

to tonic and elicited reflex neck the The placing turning head asymmetric side. infant by supine is the the a position. of leg ipsilateral placement the into and This arm extension the results in “fencing” The contralateral flexes as well. side

on expected information additional of central 26 delay evaluation Sections of warrant the newborn 11 the the system.See also the disappearance may in period. for and an A reflexes nervous

musculature. distal able or to motor last, posture, gross development her of first the skills, With the then proximal control and, his infant musculature, is deformities orthopedic (see these infant notice As the parents and 203). may Chapters through stages, progresses the 202 also that deformities positioning. related intrauterine have are infant The to may be whether deformity or the fixed should moved position. indicate passively examination proper is Physical into the can gross joint development. can abnormal progression in passively a fashion proper there an moved position, into the resolving the high a with of is of When likelihood held motor be consultation Fixed warrant (see Section immediate pediatric orthopedic deformities 26).

outcome the and important is vision to movements of ocular Evaluation serious of strabismus. prevent (see Chapter preserving decrease at visual be interventions performed acuity cover 2 179). early health light vision normal maintenance reflex after or age visits; should and of test the The chance binocular

examination, should cardiovascular participate competitive of and who comprehensive a have history the begin physical Older school-age system. including sports evaluation children a careful in to sports and preparticipation The sports is documenting for edition Academy American form other excellent of 4th Pediatrics risks. cardiovascular complete and interviewed history assess risk. should cardiovascular The patient be and parent to form the evaluation disease history be cardiologist. heart for referred by of must Any a murmur pediatric a or on a chest or to beats, referred should also of dyspnea be syncope child rate A heart exertion, with skipped irregular pain or cardiologist. (i.e., history palpitations), pediatric a cerebrovascular of family’s or any history family) sudden death (immediate 50 assessment. A or primary family) disease infarction disease) age (immediate a requires of atherosclerotic immediate unexplained at years additional secondary before age family (myocardial or

in interested contact Children be should special sports assessed for vulnerabilities. of vision assessed part crucial as the sports. a before be in should Similarly participation evaluation

annual health to 67 68). major comprehensive Chapters puberty problems Adolescents and progression assessments through need ensure without (see is an maturity Sexual in issue adolescents. important rating through sexual 67). should Chapter adolescents monitor progression stages (see assessed to be All maturity obesity, physical Other and Chapters include and scoliosis, (see in trauma development 203). 29 issues progression. mild only is for and Most scoliosis requires observation adolescents. issue many first manifest may during is an childhood for and Obesity

assess of that observe or as present behaviors by The on to use development parental can the accept discrete report. milestones focuses clinician behavior uniform in of approach sequence age that (see normal is specific 8). patient’s within evolve This ranges behaviors many a based children whose comparing with the on Chapter molded that determined other and similar endowment genetic by neuromuscular first of by is to development systems, environmental influences. system, then of the organ The

sequence of motor, are easy to other areas, and as not represent emotional a some areas easily social measured adequately can assess. particularly behaviors (gross specific, motor, development, development fine language), of and Although Easily years 6 milestones measured established developmental well age are only. through intelligence profiles) are available children school assessment but that older milestone types expertise and expand for the administration and Other (e.g., tests, and developmental of time require generally performance, personality approach interpretation. in

relationships infants. bonding attachment terms and affective parents and the between describe The birth feelings of shortly Bonding reflects the occurs newborn (unidirectional). the and toward parents the after and parent develops reciprocal between and feelings first year. the Attachment involves infant over gradually

infants Attachment of crucial newborn development. of outside period is optimal the for crying fussiness the end any receive and less show Infants who immediately such attention, extra as or responding of first year. at the parents fussiness, crying to infants when become about between the months from age, of anxiety insecure normally primary 18 caregiver. Stranger 9 develops and separation The into caregiver. primary novelty that by or efforts may to new new pain frantic plunges and the skills to adventures find followed lead fright infant’s headlong cling in and motor attraction result to to is independence be from that stubborn clinging and The dramatic swings can to confusing parents. dependence frustrating result to be and may period tumultuous. of ambivalence secure attachment, shorter this less With

attachment parents. from allows autonomy on and separation build Toddlers developing that begin to often but separated. cling usual be toddlers times actively may of activities they In their stress, parents, in their in 3 cognitive major fine to time are social and 2 Ages accomplishments motor skills, a skills, years language skills, skills. of myself age. dependency “I do and The it the can independence of ” yields developing infancy to to balance setting child’s independence. is a emerging essential of Limit the

children environments is early school. evidence who succeed body to are quality There learning growing that of a high are notes in in more that prepared invested dollars costs. in early to save childhood 13 may up taxpayers dollar in Every future education enter workforce prepared better to children fewer crimes school. These after are the commit and Early the 5 the the to demonstrate Start although Head start, years), better (3 years) attainment, Head prekindergarten the to programs and educational 4 3 (4 results. than (less better years), Start earlier all

ability a the Readiness and on the separate of hours child autonomy for time. parent of depends preschool to the development for and at the colors, and children in problem solving socialization help develop improve experiences skills; language; numbers, (puzzles). and letters; increase such skill building as areas Preschool increase

for skills, social requires motor school and fine Readiness 7-1). (Table (kindergarten) gross cognitive and skills group emotionalmaturity, peer individual and abilities, issuesinclude Other age gender. and chronologic is fifth of their tend monthsbefore kindergarten school. to 4 the to betterin if beginning birthday Children at do 6 least boys. Girls are earlierthan usually ready forced of average If that catch will difficulties. a can inthe than child or early also back should developmental child he less delay, kindergarten.Holding the the developmentalrange, child lead is be hope reasons false in for the she into not up, to and deficiencies. address any child The should be on schedule, enroll to planning should educational initiated

for delays should those developmental or Physicians risk have be as such difficulties, at disabilities. identify able children to physical who school school require These services. may specialized children

developmental 10 characterized perhaps develop middle, as into age by teens to late must 25 negotiate but adults. healthy, the stages(early, that better all functional to years adolescence and adolescence) adolescenceis Some of define Different developmental each issues characterize behavioral stage. and which as of among rates ageat issue of The the each the psychosocial, do and psychosexual, cognitive, these widely issuesvary individuals, and physical importance development. manifests

group. attention on and peer early focused is During the present the adolescence, on primarily are related Concerns

the child ability from of complex and of separation the of directions Understanding development to skills and articulation parent Speech pre-academic Specific follow Ease

and and colors first Counts phone Ability Knows to copy names, address, of to 10 Knowledge shapes age, last number

and catch undresses skills foot, assistance on Stand a one ball without Dresses and skip, bounced Motor

children? child with well Does play other the

by child child well, the monitoring playing the with as parent? alone a backyard occasional such separate Does the in interest and letters, child Does in numbers? the books, show Can the child to activities? attention sustain quiet frequent are toilet-training accidents? How

to the and normality. body’s physical changes ambivalent. for Strivings independence are respond conversation adolescents to clipped difficult because often short, little with interview and insight. These have young may they are abstract accustomed thinking. just becoming to They are

be adolescence contact and a for adults difficult can adolescents have who the time Middle them. with sophisticated. more Cognitive processes are middle abstract on Through of as experiment be, their own consider ideas, insight, adolescents with others. feelings the feelings reflect things they and might and develop thinking, can the of focus these identity not adolescents body. of physical aspects they As to solely issues on their limited mature, sometimes contrary parents’ the value. expressing values, side of by dominant and culture’s They the explore their by so authority. their do values in explore middle challenging only; others minds their parents’ adolescents these Many substance unprotected dangerous in high-risk driving. behaviors, engage intercourse, including or abuse, Many sexual autonomy of figures. often independence, or teachers, The strivings authority for families, adolescents need for limit their other and middle distress testing, mortality and for adolescents These accidents, suicide. from at homicide, higher risk or are morbidity

thinking, is and educational, formal adolescence marked usually (e.g., thoughts operational including about vocational, future Late the sexual). by partners are adolescents. are to adolescents than more Late committed middle their usually sexual previous to anxiety the or the of young emerge, developmental away college Unresolved stages move time, origin from vocational a family physically or this may military separation at begins person from job, service. to school, as

is determined Child by and by the heredity behavior environment. modify a and environmental behavior consequences of is environmental used that Behavioral of antecedents and that product of conditioning). to be and primarily external desirable can the behavior manipulation behavior determinants maladaptive (operant to behavior postulates theory increase The major conditioning reinforcement, extinction, positive reinforcement, are four punishment. of and negative methods operant Many children common of by problems be ameliorated these methods. can behavioral

performance). a by (e.g., increases favorable frequency Positive event behavior a praising a behavior school following with excellent child reinforcement the of the for cessation, decreases by usually or an Negative of reinforcement a frequency of the event. behavior unpleasant removal, avoidance behavior. this unintentionally, an of the frequency sometimes may increasing occur reinforcement undesirable Conversely purposely or whether be obtain socket attention, example, toddler positive a to to try negative. pencil stick For a it may in a light frequency is when Extinction reinforcement decrease behavior a of there a the withheld. previously occurs in reinforced is the because comforting. crying through may reinforce temper attention unwittingly such the the Extinction or common parents and principle advice is behind which as behavior to tantrums, bedtime ignore at through decreases of behavior frequency unpleasant Punishment the consequences. a

reinforcement than Positive more effective is punishment. more effective when positive with is reinforcement. Punishment combined on punished, not reinforcement a of positive draws but wall. he when proper the may or for the be the wall the use crayon she A learns with quicker paper, who is toddler much given crayon—on and discussed 3. Interrupting are Section in in modifying behaviors detail

Significant individual (behavioral temperament differences development of style). normal within exist the abnormal because, narrowly pathologic. must Temperament is normal or inappropriately as may expected if be behavior defined, an labeled too pattern appreciated of be behavior characteristics common temperamental of are constellations follows: as Three 1.

biologic children) The (consistent, is intensity child responses, (about change, mild elimination), characterized a approach or of moderate by sleeping, a times high and predictable functions positive adaptability of to regularity to positive and in for mood. stimuli, new easy eating, 40%

2.

adaptability, negative 10%) negative by stimuli, of poor mood. is new irregularity functions, from a characterized intense child responses, and The (about withdrawal biologic difficult

3.

up The level, intensity by slow slow activity a warm adaptability, new withdrawal (about child low and a somewhat from mood. characterized in 15%) mild stimuli, to is responses, negative

remaining mixed more have children The temperaments. give anticipatory may temperament for advice counseling. the for has individual or and important pediatrician The in a of behavioral implications problem a child parenting guidance

effect degree, the child, (nature) has hardwired the may adjustment. to child grows inwhich Although, on some the environment strong child’s (nurture) each in temperament be a and Social can style, on cultural have child educational and marked approaches, parenting in factors differences through effects expectations. behavioral the

of and acute category except problems problems trauma. pediatrics, behavioral than more and are infections Developmental any in common to had 3 and developmental 7 disabilities. disability, 2008 behavioral of 15% ages others children In a had problems. of serious many children 25% as psychosocial As have think cannot mention often to or uninterested neglect they help. because problems is physician these Parents the is of these visits, early preschool years enrollment. at It supervision and presence particularly before to center learning or screen the necessary development for in childhood monitor problems the health

is at comparing skill lists process levels of every milestones. to informal surveillance, office done visit, Development an evaluation or developmental warranted further of behavioral issues 8-1). recurs, suspicion (Table is If a are screening not have and Surveillance tests does necessary. standard,

screening diagnostic further require to identify tests standardized who use assessment. children screening Developmental involves the of use health months, of Academy validated of visits: recommends maintenance Pediatrics at standardized 9 months. months, 30 tools 18 the American screening the of and three The that visit. at a patient health and in higher often (children every Clinics test a poverty) living maintenance serve perform screening offices population risk not evaluation confirm. developmental more testing definitive a requires A does but fails who must child have pass necessarily comprehensive a delay; test to screening are families. for evaluations available and free to services children suspected intervention delays Developmental diagnosed with for with disabilities children of these federal funds A provides and state services. U.S. combination

behavioral one area categorized general domains as or tests all targeted of on thatfocus development. teststhat Screening screening be cover screens can as a office completed administered in athome waiting in others (or by Some may professionals, room) be parents. the may and by be problems 70% detecting of 70% suspected in of and to80% a Good developmental/behavioral development. specificity normal sensitivity have screening instruments in detecting a to80% may includes 30% children also that this screened deficits. developmentaltesting, from be children skills for addressrelative of group definitive Although may may and benefit are whose who over-referred testing developmental belowaverage help likely are detected by at be not of disabilities of administration the visits. 30% The 20% instrument screening that whohave subsequent a are single identified to onrepeat health to maintenance screening children

Helps Follows two words sound mo fork with three six midline Scribbles Feeds alone while backward in 2 bottle Babbles Says and commands shoulder mo prone for 15 Stacks eyes Lifts housework responsively Tracks to Holds hand Cooing Searches Sits hand Uses mo Smiles spoon object Transfers to 6 Walks blocks past self

Month; wk, yr, Mo, year. sec, week; second;

u Development 17 Disorders of 8 Chapter

across II cultures. norms Screening Developmental The subgroups and Test was the Denver test Denver The a pediatricians use-classic used general by is (Figs. II and 8-2). 8-1 Denver assesses of cannot but from II birth The of screening adequately complexities socioemotional children development the it ful assess instrument, development. the years following the four age 6 carefully. be must Children domains: scores followed with suspect of or to in untestable

1.

an Personal-social asks questions 2. The pediatrician (items with labeled “R”

to task of be may Fine parents 3. motor–adaptive document the report”) “by asked

or Language directly behaviors. observes 4. On sheet, a scoring line is the

child’s drawn age. Gross chronologic motor the at entirely that are Tasks to

it teaches developmen-the the administered. milestones The are that when the of child test accomplished not has of left that contal is line advantage this Items II the sidered on delayed. Denver are for not if selected items consistency their reliability If followed the carefully accuare the test test are becomes instructions validity of omitted, or rately and the of

ID DDM, INC. Date: Birthdate: #2115 1-800-419-4729 Name: No. Examiner: CATALOG :

J. K. for ©1969, and or test) 1989, 90 75 of Frankenburg (Check passing 3rd 1990 W. Percent children 1st, boxes 2550 2nd, K. Dodds Frankenburg Frankenburg Wilhelmine W. B. ©2009 R. ©1978

Figure form II. Scoring 8-1 for Denver I Training Denver (From Manual. WK: Frankenburg or Frankenburg Josiah William William and Frankenburg; William 1990, © Dodds; B. 1992 DDM, Info@denverii.com.) and R. K. Frankenburg K. 1978 2009 ©1967, 1-800-419-4729 Frankenburg -Contact 1976, Josiah Wilhelmine K. Dodds; 1970 Inc. 1975, B.

for 8-2 Figure II. Denver Instructions the to are (see Numbers a coded scoring form Fig. 8-1). is that is delays that not two or delays one or age) or that at item one does passed intersect with in having an one age category two as categories 90% delay in defined line “Abnormal” one (failure of passed. category item and by more other an two or more more WK: Frankenburg I Denver Training Manual. (From Frankenburg 1992 Josiah or 1970 1978 B. William Frankenburg © 2009 K. 1990, William K. Info@denverii.com.) Dodds; and R. 1-800-419-4729 ©1967, B. Wilhelmine DDM, Frankenburg; Josiah Contact Frankenburg and K. 1976, 1975, William Inc. Dodds; worse. assist development. To physicians using in II, scoring the the of Denver screens validity measures. compared a sheet Parent-reported good behaviors, features table to office-based screening to also confounding have document as or fearfulness, such span. short apparent attention an interest, screening Repeat all 24 is often visits to at at months health for children of screening recommended age. subsequent 18 Autism maintenance screen was detect. there several Although detects that unable abnormalities tools, a single to are many Tod- Checklist in use the pediatricians Autism Modified for

tools parentdlers (M-CHAT). developmental include Other screening an Parents’ office-based is asks 23 Evaluation Stages questionnaire Questionnaires about Developmental behaviors, M-CHAT typical parents some which and Status. of driven), of that completed milestone and (also Ages or predictive than disorders. developmental latter The other simple, a that complete pervasive for are is others parents questionnaire autism 10-item more variant to with based demonstrates three child office referral definitive for interview behaviors, than a on more with or predictive from needing progression and function further If is the indicated normal testing. total visits children distinguish concerns at two an assessment algorithm behaviors those Internet test (see is The on the freely 20). Chapter distributed

correlates cognitive with screening Language early development in the best years. thumb (expressive focus for of production 8-2 language speech provides rules language). development some on that Table is most development in involve language). expressive most Although language obvious (receptive in element, the first changes years language language the dramatic the understanding recognition and

deficit and/or there language Whenever speech delay, considered. be a is must hearing a The many, most, may period, provided. in if newborn be hearing appropriate of universal detects intervention implementation newborn the of not these services children and early screening associated listed 8-3. Conditions risk of a are deficit present that hearing an high in Table in child. (stuttering) 4-year-old common 3and Dysfluency is a patiently. transient severe, of it normal the is tics and accompanied counseled years posturing, dysfluency to and should accept is age, calmly that and unusual be or is occurs it Unless 4 by after parents or

developmental is sixth until initially about by school child’s and achievement assessment and behavior). adolescence, birthday (academic inquiring performance the After done or (after-school leader) counselor, the adults child religious coach, other for teachers is by raised who prudent. Inquiring concerns care program about developmental beyond of Formal testing the scope the children of is primary care older pediatrician. these pediatricians, the coordinator psychiatrists, and developmental specialists testing performed evaluation Nonetheless care psychologists, by the and should professionals). (e.g., health educational be the other provider of

of management or Ignorance influences may ineffective environmental behavior in result child inappropriate on the

Persistent fetal in closer ≤1500 of with or ≥20 Bilirubin circulation Defects infection (e.g., transfusion apneic hypertension) in the hearing intrauterine mg/dL Birth weight Congenital first ≤5 Meningitis episodes or Apgar cousin relative nonbacterial aminoglycosides ototoxic (primary of score of Treatment Exchange loop Multiple g level other Five-minute rubella pulmonary drugs or and loss throat nose, ear, Congenital

and Coping up) current) mechanisms warm status to (past Developmental Health (e.g., difficult, Temperament slow

of of style and rejection, child Parental of personality of Misinterpretations behaviors parent depression, Mismatch lack of characteristics interest, expectations and parental child (e.g., Mismatch between stage-related characteristics

(e.g., personal Support Racism (or child material, loss) care) emotional, informational, both). marital (e.g., discord, unemployment, Poverty Stress of some developmental the considered be in contextual etiology problem. that should child’s or Table a lists behavioral factors 8-4

for essential the the understanding or the thatis Building and rapport often with parents prerequisite a behavioral for developmentalissue. information obtaining a sensitive is child quickly genuinelyinterested that them parents listening the sense is if their be the in clinician usually respects established concerns. and can to Rapport perhaps or child the to being engaging rapport the conversation interviewing parents, child clinician while child with in develops appropriate by providingtoys the play, the developmentally have. thefears The sensitive may and the the often for until examination. ignored time itis is physical Too child greeted they their they name are are to questions more with feel or Similar before threatened examinations. and askedsensitive if involved comfortable in pleasant interactions by parents,children the eye on the levelof child can at conversation the engaged be and parent’s provides the examiner. places Youngchildren in security lap,which

a distinct adolescents the relationship be building fromthe on parents. physician-patient relationship should is that with emphasis placed With ask however concerns the questions and have not of to confidence. The to adolescent should in physician should parents express opportunity the beexcluded; the consideration—consent must issues be taken into intertwined and confidentiality. Two transmitted (i.e.,substance minors) vary health, to informed state consent Althoughlaws (i.e., to detection, whoare to give in and sexual visits pregnancy). general, mayconsent to including adolescents care state, and from prevention, infections; sexually treatment mature of high-risk abuse; behaviors able and related the confidential. support visit who wishesthe states Most to be physician in Physicians with should practice where the law become governing www.guttmacher.org/statecenter/updates/index.html they state ). familiar (see the for Providing optimal history risk is allowing obtaining behaviors). a for care(especially crucial, of confidentiality the visit. each beachieved at and least of by confidentiality with meeting can alone Whenassessing development behavior, part adolescent for the whenthe of and must be concerns and has parents health However immediate aboutthe informed safety clinician significant child. informed how or abouta adolescent to reach problem the 67). by agreement the clinician parents the with an canconvince be the inform physician parents (seeChapter the can Often directly adolescentabout the will

questions. clues direction to the appropriate to unstated Responses more provide often for directed problems and further, underlying, questions identify open-ended vague must Histories confusing; behavioral frequently are or contradictions, and about clarification, apparent often request and reconcile to the interviewer mere detail, developmental repetition. more problems By intervals that the family ensure patient information can by close at and of they frequent and recapitulating summarizing visit, understanding of interviewer the at and an the other. the understand each

be or be of it may problems), a the not that may there child yet parent the or marital to expressed, it about concern description, the relevance crucial talk difficult impression (e.g., markedlyfrom clinician’s parent’s eitherbecause parental overlooks child’s because been because the behavior. issue the has is differs unconscious, If to its thephysician’s multiplevisits. atypical, observations Alternatively may be even with observations be out in other The crucial and may regular sorting possibility. relatives, this teachers, of caregivers have distorted image psychopathology. child,rooted in parental parent a also The may the of to crucial noncritical parent is to the supportive,and sensitive, appropriate approach A intervention. about is for information intervention covered and 10. and developmental inChapter referral More behavioral issues

maintenance and assessment and of optimalgrowth, in consist health or the an for development, a visits comprehensive environment child’s should supervision of providing health. Health role theparent’s/guardian’s of provides and the families resourcesfor ). visits of working of www.brightfutures.aap.org Bright children Futures the and maintenance ages(see health standardizeseach different with guidance of and and Elements physical visit tests; management and the interval each (Table safetyinformation immunizations screening anticipatory last growth, physical, development, examination; and any 9-1). illness of includeevaluation parental concerns; nutrition; (including since inquiryabout counseling); performance Bright The found Preventive measures including for undertaken, items standard Pediatric Care,” specificprevention be measurements.Bright summarizes is indicates and http://brightfutures.aap.org/clinical_practice.html Medicaid Futures the now requirements and riskscreening for Health enforced for at , should the ages that specific Futures’“Recommendations the

sleeping, health update or child’s) problems Concerns Immunization follow-up screening progress and and Past test Routine habits) eating, and (parent’s (e.g., Developmental problem Behavioral style care elimination,

(e.g., family and Parent-child who Caregiving move, Family Family groups) home death, interpersonal other marital supports interactions friends, (relatives, illness, relationships) sibling-child and schedule work, for stresses lives finances, caregiver Extended at role

along Insurance family manyinsurers. activities the interaction of and Health work Program, Children’s School the Recreational Caregivers with Peer and outside now as and Health patients Care are covered and co-pays maintenance Act. PatientProtection immunizations the part of without for Affordable insured

usually screening, and and quite are evaluation, the and hemoglobin testing. screening vision with and hearing metabolic tests lead healthy anemia screening are recommended: following only tuberculosis electrophoresis, newborn Children disease also lipid with screened early or born disorders. heart to Children for dyslipidemias families be should a a by should in (Items marked be found.) recommendations Futures’ performed star factor is risk Bright if should infections. for transmissible be Sexually experienced sexually screened adolescents after begins the immunizations. should screening missing pediatrician or any When the an child perform period, infant care and tests newborn

state States newborn United mandates in metabolic the Every screening. hypothyroidism, congenital Section and state disease, in galactosemia, aciduria own diseases metabolic screening: priorities organic urine procedures, included phenylketonuria, the sugar are its and usually maple determines but following Each 10). (see screen fibrosis, for immunoreactive states Many cystic now for trypsinogen. testing analysis cystic test as is a (commonly performed. DNA) If mutations is positive, referred for to then acid that deoxyribonucleic fibrosis

are infection with or detection Children risk may prevent for from at hemoglobinopathies which anemia, higher early complications ameliorate. and on sepsis, begun major prophylaxis infants in disease (see mortality cause the with of prevent cell penicillin 150). to sickle are oral these Infants Chapter

a to the development, and before from performed the newborn central are screening hearing discharge cognitive language Because child’s speech is nursery. placing and infant’s the the by electrodes tested hearing infant’s head. headphones over ears is on An are the documented. and the impulse Standard played, the is of to transmission sounds brain indicated, evoked transmission. is of response a using technology If further evaluation abnormal, sound

Children of Older Vision and Hearing Screening

andlanguage are Inferences about by from sound and asking and examining drawn closely. aboutresponses hearing speech speech parents development to by problems the made eye. may examination and examining about vision (children Inferences by have physical motor delay) gross withvision of milestones maybe a sought years age. untilthe the Parental is until about of age of about concerns 3 should years child child be hearing vision is4 and are definitive If concerns, shouldbe testing there arranged. auditory as by can evokedresponses, be mentioned screened Hearing newborns. for toddlers formal and behavioral audiologic cooperate For cannot be who headphones, olderchildren testingwith audiology used. may with standard Sounds a in or specific a a ofa trained frequency are are assessedby within and environment room, responses soundproof intensity audiologist. provided assessed may Vision responses. and to by be apediatric by referral evoked ophthalmologist visual

and 3 Age of Children Older Years

as Bright recommendations. and Futures’ various be the At standard vision using objectively in hearing should techniques specified ages, screened family or or concerns of and child about Asking accomplishes any subjective evaluation. vision the consequences hearing poor the time for developmentally years they are to At tested. vision for children first are if able of age, be screened 3 children these re-examined be interactive not vision a this should their normal. language at Many that or is 6-month to a at interpersonal age perform vision ensure to the interval screen; have do children 3to skills a these with recommended. yet standard do of children letters, using chart Snellen most shapes not Because is identify eye child chart should When used. to more accurate identify the is able letter-based a be letters, Head begun testing hearing headphones that birthday of Start with fourth (although of Audiologic sounds should be years at screening the on pediatricians attempt 3 the age). requires a for referral and should physical be examination, Any with comprehensive by careful suspected evaluated problem history testing. audiologic vision should failed or to screening, documented pediatric ophthalmologist. be a have preferably Children problem, who a parental referred, concern

a anemia. when iron for of is are anemia at higher incidence screened deficiency there Children ages there and 4 if is at risk, low documented at months screened again as birth or such prematurity. weight birth Infants a are because usually is noted. are is age high when deficiency Healthy 12 at a incidence of months infants iron of term this screened (denoted the to ).Any on risks visits or do for developmental not at ★ be by etiology.Anemic well other as perform recommendations Futures’ detected a assessed in related Bright infants are at abnormalities evaluated Children http://brightfutures.aap.org/clinical_practice.html should anemia concerns standard for testing. is may iron strongly 150). trial When Chapter therapeutic a iron used of be deficiency (see suspected,

even cause may are if treated. metabolic intoxication that complications behavioralabnormalities are developmental hematologicand the and Lead not reversible, other Control and of20 theCenters Prevention on 5 at (CDC) a over learning or a for levels of 10 levels to recommends μg/dL visit 3-month environmental cause 15 period, may persistent Disease blood μg/dL problems. μg/dL investigation single lead Although in Central intoxication Risk peeling paint, lead pottery of and SouthAmerica), diarrhea remedies a from living use include paint with withcracked lead or exposure, or (e.g., industrial lead-based older remedy glaze. use for offoreign homes factors between should screening 6 questions 9-2). blood months.In of for and asked intoxication and leadintoxication recommends theCDC significant of months children risk for with be ofthe years association 6 lead all standardized lead (Table 24 addition, 12 age at screening Because of poverty, Any indication or a lead responseis positive suspect blood an for level. obtaining bloodsampling results, produce may sample venousblood obtained. Capillary be false-positive a should thus, leadinspection and detection provide the source health services determine private County to of thelead. organizations, departments,community and companies should lead thata Standard metal child breathe ingest(see 149 techniques that Chapters might avoiding or toremove might the child dust the creating toxic be aerosolizing used 150). while a and decontamination

resultof epidemic.Children serious of prevalence increasing, with a (HIV) multisystem the tuberculosis). present human virus disease(miliary as largely often The and adult tuberculosis immunodeficiency is be 1 visits, health All children maintenance oftuberculosis assessed yearof at should risk for age. especially after defined by Table groups, high-risk are CDC, The as the listedin 9-3. protein 72 a hours provider the derivative evaluation is by to injection. In 48 health intradermal purified care used standardized after test with general notthe positive size induration, test. The of a of any color mark, denotes For most patients,

1960 the built has cracked a time spend peeling home, building barn) any (e.g., or before Does paint? that school, in child

a lead or poisoning? followed brother, treated or housemate, for (or even playmate, member there sister, Is rumored to being community be)

an the smelting Does live job or hobby automotive child lead repair)? involves lead and radiator to (e.g., with exposure whose adult

the Does active other child plant, near live to battery smelter, lead? or lead recycling likely an industry release

use another family the Does from or country? remedies home pottery

tuberculosis have test, Close with TB have (TB), TB to known suspected positive to contact persons or

Russia) areas from (Asia, persons Latin Foreign-born America, TB Africa, Eastern rates high Europe, with

African or racial in living Pacific American, migrant persons, Medicaid ethnic homeless higher substance High-risk abusers) farm workers, populations minorities Hispanic, recipients], risk or at other poverty groups American, Native [e.g., Islander, (Asian,

exposed adolescents mm positive test. Infants, children, to and induration of is adults in high-risk a categories 10 film, For evidenceof patients is chest Chapter recent on (see 5 healed 124). with patients,those positive tuberculosis test HIV-positive with tuberculosis mm contacts, or old a immunosuppressedpatients, visit The Test, the CDC (in of needing office hasapproved advantage whichhas adults) Gold QuantiFERON-TB the only. one

cardiovascular or and of of blood with a least who heart increased level increased adults history high cholesterol risk adolescents family and blood disease high have risk Children at disease. of one are levels coronary having have as a cholesterol parent at health Pediatrics for of (AAP) profile. populations (Table care 9-4) of screening obtaining the at-risk fasting lipid a Academy recommends American in by dyslipidemia regular context The levels 2 18 same recommended to are screening children The all the for years. greater is mg/dL 200 of 170 than is 170 borderline, to mg/dL cholesterol than 199 and normal, mg/dL Total less elevated. is Institutes In endorsed National test and between Institute the and Heart, addition, 2011, children 9 Lung, Health in all AAP Blood ages 11. recommendation the National of to the of

adolescents. Annual for recommended office are visits full Section obtained fashion should A psychosocial in be confidential 12). (see history adolescent history this questioning. evaluation sexual Part often acomprehensive of that requires is creative sexually adolescents as sex adolescents misinterpret during has very some or that oral partners term all sexual active mean one many Not to vigorous the identify and intercourse. is sex, “Are and youever The sex?” asked. you questions, should be sex?” having “Have had child an guidelines, (see the laboratory sex) pediculosis) high-risk sexualintercourse and transmitted annual who 116). has a examination should history of form and adolescent physical (genital any testing or by HIV) had (chlamydia,gonorrhea, syphilis, there In Bright at have genitalherpes, (moreoften Chapter and evaluation for least is if sexually any warts, Futures diseases of smear Youngwomen for age. precancerous and lesions should human of papillomavirus Papanicolaou be by years at 21 assessed

each office regardless be at Immunization visit, records reason. checked the should of Chapter be Appropriate vaccinations should (see 94). administered

in 4, ages at 1. Risk 8, 6, screening 2, 10 and adolescence: annually

high a family and 2. heart history who Children have disease adolescents or of cholesterol

family history Children 3. whose is unknown

personal obesity, risk other have factors: who blood pressure, Children or diabetes high

in families underuse and States, Many minorities, the particularly dental ethnic health United care. poor families Pediatricians gross abnormalities, malocclusion. as identify large gingival may caries, significant inflammation, such or children by hygienist a months. by dentist or All have examination dentist least annually should 6 a a every and dental cleaning dental a at should home flossing). at (brushing care care preventive visits and instruction about include health practiced Dental are sealants and molars. on prophylactic caries the concentrated methods acrylic topical Other at varnish) shown (dental treatments be to effective preventing fluoride to educate dentists and visits milk age for caries. to at beginning families screen bottle year 1 Pediatric recommend the dentists. in Some teeth, communities pediatric apply to have recommend not that varnish dental that pediatricians especially children’s do Fluoridation of not fluoride the cavities in in do prevention are important that supplements 127). have or of (see fluoridation water communities Chapter

the Plotting vital a standard a on the is nutritional charts assessment. child’s growth of component 28). the history (see content deficiency nutritional may A risk a the 27 diet obtained because of and of Chapters suggest be should dietary

Anticipatory in even assist written children. for Internet websites to them verbally, in their guidance certain to parents conveyed growth materials, is or directing development optimal facilitating and information parents to Futures guidance Bright is of another guidelines. the that age part is Anticipatory relevant a the families has children) includes the issues specific Futures the older handouts (and and that for age. topics one-page for about highest “toolkit” Bright for yield issues Table representative that summarizes might discussed. be 9-5 discussed safety reinforcement. previously for topics review important briefly is other to It at visits the visit. each Age-appropriate occur should at discussions

cause year 1 common for The most of is to motor crashes. infants age month 1 vehicle death of unless the and car have seat. installed discharged nursery functioning properly be from No a parents a newborn should parents to ensure in are model. services safety offer dealerships to seats properly that specific installed their Many automobile reaches Most use mandate laws years in age weight. safety 40 have least child pounds seats until states the 4 of or at of that for are car safety: The following age-appropriate recommendations

years ride or the age, of they rear-facing weight highest toddlers safety a by or seat until should and in 2 they reach the allowed are until Infants seat manufacturer. height safety

seat possible, with rear-facing age to Toddlers forward-facing height who highest the a car and or car as preschoolers up manufacturer. over long use by should as for weight outgrown seat recommended or 2 the have harness the

is the until limit a fits car belt the 4 belt-positioning whose typically when in. vehicle use weight children, seat 9 or above booster School-age for should height their properly, seat, ft forward-facing reached have they seat age. years 8 of height in between are 12 and and

Older protection. and should always children use shoulder lap optimal for seat belts be the rear optimal in protection. should restrained children vehicles younger All than for seats years of 13 is may specifically This injury the young protect cause than crash from airbags, them more to in children. which

The syndrome the Sleep death of infant has initiative incidence (SIDS). reduced sudden Back to initiative, infantsroutinely to the sleep. placed prone Before were has the annual 1992 when decreasedby AAPrecommended SIDS program, rate more the Since than this 50%. because Another aimed day 20% initiative care deaths settings. occur care of SIDS at providers, in is day

for age-appropriate the may Futures’ 9-5 of advocate as recommendations http://brightfutures.aap.org/clinical_practice.html well Table as Bright the activities (found pediatrician at that families. See )for presentation

punish. teach, means Discipline to not merely to The child’s goal is ultimate self-control. the behavior expense Overbearing control development with the of of control learning at self-control. and interferes on focuses child’s the to punishment process a the external cannot too behavior. their children be Parents who limits set few frustrated own may reasonable by control who positive what proper exactly behaviors reinforcing limits. behaviors and Discipline to expected teach child appropriately negative is a by supporting with and responding should important effective punish is behavior. to behavior good It and reinforce than more bad to

Commonly children used techniques and in undesirable include control threats. scolding, punishment, to behaviors physical on have security techniques sense effects and children’s of These self-esteem. adverse potential it the more used. The scolding of is effectiveness diminishes from expression an a be specific child. displeasure not to derogatory about should event expand about of to the allowed Scolding statements of the may escalate abuse. also level psychological to Scolding from to so she tell do that child time, they “bad.” child or and he things that educate does is have It parents is bad a time think to parents not who important good the

become Frequent parent to time may over the punishment, physical (corporal and physical risk less of the the punishment) abuse. tempt child increasing effective mild punishment escalate a proper person. another in punishment situations that strike child it certain to Corporal is teaches responding their Commonly seen by have been to with children use that younger behavioral siblings. technique this raised problems sibling are in spanking, who households older hitting

to most or control to ways to child a perhaps behavior. by damaging are leave give psychologically the the Threats parents child’s up however empty may of fearful see is threats. and the are after about remain through anxious made; of parent the age to loss many able children any long Children threat if the must teenager) may but games consequence appropriate, be privileges a violation. Threatening be or week 1 a there of is video mild for enforced a (no grounding loss

heaters attachment for Crib water safety breastfeeding bonding strife, Refer family Birth lack 3−5 Crib Hot Assess Discuss of Identify skills <120° or safety parenting parenting to sleep education and/ F Exclusive encouraged Back and days

Formula getting safety second-best to Burns/hot support, pathology as a Parent sleep Reassess safety rest 2 managing enough firearm seats liquids months Car Back work returning to and

Read Healthy child to snacks

healthy to walking conflicts interpersonal avoid and conflict fights techniques strategies Discuss food Junk away Avoiding versus Avoiding violence eating resolution Discuss media

violence questions−asked HIV Providing discussions Begin emergency from contraception situations sexually abuse, preparation substance diseases, condoms, Review ride Review Discuss work and contraception including transmitted college at-risk no home regularly and options, (PSAT) sexuality, Discuss career school

Test. immunodeficiency HIV, Human Aptitude Scholastic virus; Preliminary PSAT, visit. discussed health review prior *Reassess the issues to at the maintenance means

on setting one expression and and limits Parenting balance exploration the freedomof on the dynamic encouraging involves a other. hand and between allowing theirbehavior on control child are when limits is A set and clear of improves whosebehavior enforced. out how will must parents and agree the enforced. will set on limit be where it be However the clearly to of the child. consequence The and breaking limit limit the mustbe presented consistent limitshould and of firm. be Enforcement the of autonomy. may Too are learn difficultto and normal the many thwart development limits child’sage, be developmental and limit in temperament, terms the reasonable of The level. must adults must limits. other enforce home) parents To (and be in the effective,both effectively Otherwise, the all indulgent linked seek test briefand with limits split may to to effective, children be the a situations, parentsand must more parent.In behavior. to directly the punishment be occurs of punishment More the behavior. intended to effective praise is behavioralchange linked also when

by is Extinction ignoring way systematic to relatively it. a harmless and effective frequent, annoying, an and eliminate behavior behaviorto should the frequency parents the the toevaluate the of appreciate magnitude First note progress. of realistically problem and behavior parents determine is the what eliminated.An be a alternative to can the needs reinforce. consistently Parents identified reinforces behavior child and thechild’s what positive appropriate that give must to that decreaseswhen the parent annoying it ignores in and increases the the usually it for frequency before shouldbe warned last reinforcement). behavior weeks) Parents intensity may (removes (and temper childwho A an tantrum be in environment. secure should placed a has ignoredor attention-seeking the may anger child behavior may and and This louder get more, the angrier. action decreasein the and tantrums the no intensity for tantrum, with frequency. Eventually audience he become and be behavior should appropriate, the child’s or instance, attention specific be has she each In praised, extra when should given. a before This to adhere to for effectivetechnique capacity early is toddlers, timeout. an their understandand

The short of after isolation of consists is problem a a period timeout observed. immediately behavior interrupts the behavior consequence. it Timeout links immediately unpleasant and an to method by the parents requires effort considerable not to child does wish because the be isolated. This timeout. in may to physically child the hold parent A need the this should furniture to until In should and not is period the the become situation, the timeout child parent part respond over. of making effective. his as technique, her may in child simple be to stand a or isolation or room, corner established, such a sending child When a the is not a be needed. may such systematic technique If procedure helpful, a more brief behavior time timer signals occurs sit in is by interrupting period, measured a timeout noises place end child punishment). end the protocol a the play document for the isolated portable and passing dull, One for a the of at the the when kitchen procedure involves bell having that alarm effective the the child’s clicking and (the behavior. a behavior de-escalate young for about not think and thinking) Timeout the time the a for not is to capacity simply punishment is to time child children or do possess the (these a abstract timeout be child’s to the appropriate span. amount The short should of attention is recommended. of age child’s per year One a minute motivates unpleasant undesired consequence to avoid the of child This behavior to learn the behavior. the and inescapable

Children congenital health-related educational and problems disabilities, children care chronic (SHCN). health needs are illnesses, with severe special behavioral and with defects, these Many and share family schooldifficulties and of such problems, as a ofexperiences broad encounter group similar stress. children health children to care terms needs. special with needs defines in noncategorically,without regard of term The these increasedservice children diagnoses, specific of in of 19% or of UnitedStates behavioral, those Approximately a than amount requiring required developmental, 18 younger emotional children,generally. years condition children beyond or a by type services have physical, age the

maximizethe child adult because a primary goal functioning and stresses child’s the secondary with the the deal helping the to of patientand is by or and disability. potential productive family SHCN disease with diagnosis impairmentsincurred managing for bytreating The in show family diagnosed, negotiation an denial, Whenever chronic is members typicallygrieve, a the (in toforestall attempt inevitable), disease depression. and anger, child take members condition. of time SHCN reminder the a this of the accept a family to is grief,it Because may constant with the long object guilty andfear. by allaying and by physician process ofacceptance A can feelings supportive education the facilitate is about child. the it to minimize denial, family’s To confirm observations the helpful not discussion ableto writtenmaterial family option the for later be any a dateshould The be further initially, additional may and so at absorb offered. information

primary treatments community of The and home provide interactions a subspecialtyservices, preventive should to oversight school and with maintain facilitate close provide and physician care, medical agencies. control. major goal child A family-centered family care for is feel of the in to and a home-based into to directstreatment acute life. of in care family the team medical locus the management moreroutine, moves health the usually child shift Although as the control the setting, should child’s Treatment degree normalization of plans allow thegreatest the of should life. self-management help the promote health child good as symptommonitoring that skills, self-efficacy long-term and such education, habits. matures, provide techniques programs health As years be 6 Theseprograms developmental being or child a introduced whena responsibility. of given and is or to age at level 7 on should take benefitfrom chores at occur with commonly vulnerable in families children. which helplessness the of chronically ill and syndrome, Self-management ordisabled minimizeslearned child both

developmental surveillance the thepresence provide shouldtake continuity and of and by the child coordinating ofthe assessment physician professionals significant the When responsibility of ofcare. screening team lags, for developmental suggest further facilities of should aware and The treatment. for andprograms local assessment physician become child the progress programto delay exist. at the child’s a is prematurity), already highrisk (e.g., may follow-up If structured for monitor (e.g., suspecteddevelopmental children and to factor to Under all [MR]). assessments is risk a or parental delay a are federallaw, if mental there retardation for entitled prematurity,failure thrive, delay up age programs years to this to policy. for of are Special states developedby children 3 implement third-party is conjunction interventionsare when insurance payers Developmental there no with with arranged the localprograms in funding only cost coverage. of age, districts. years areadministered After development school by programs 3 usually mandate education all years for that through Federal laws 21 from disabilities of special be developmental birth with children provided age. programs

therapists, a on enrolled may in to challenges. programby to pre-K needs visits be with including special with therapeutic core, the work programs Children traditional plan by address individualized educational an are school age school)should the to through who school district deficiencies. evaluated (kindergarten Children provided secondary any (IEP) of be and behavioral address An or otherstrategies feature individual tutoring severe a (resourcetime), inclasses special placement placement to problems, program, with with children IEP may education time in deficiencies. developmental/behavioral issues, childrenshould comprehensiveevaluation part As of all assessment. of medical thorough the receive a subspecialist may intervention,including therapists physical, development A specialists). pediatricians specialists and orthopedics, oral-motor), assist in (e.g., (e.g.,occupational, neurology, childhood variety and developmental/behavioral), ofother (e.g., others early the assessment psychiatry, psychologists,

team impact. (often the is other specific goals The a have main that not identify identify medicalconditions thecause possible developmental in interpret to cause and if a found), of are developmental physician’s and dysfunction, assessment dysmorphic physical parameters features. accuratedescription history growth of (Table The examination comprehensive graphing an a 10-2)include and of (Table and 10-1) careful syndromes. diagnoses or of unusual diseases arerare the Many or diseasesand in Many 24. discussed 9 these of are syndromes and further Sections

it comprehensive evaluation adaptive for an examination (see should function, is basis motor Chapter supplemented be functional 179). an but The neurologic evaluating by excellent of aids at assessment the child Observing play function. and and provide can experience physical in into therapists function. evaluation adaptive input childhood the occupational age-appropriate Specialists children) therapists early have with (especially development who excellent of

Disabilities Taking during the Developmental Information with Child History Be a Suspected Sought to of

Parental accurate Parents identifying in quite their are development problems in children. concerns

developmental progress used to of Should functioning levels monitor child’s Current be

delay developmental May disability with be or Temperament interact may with confused

Alcohol of alcohol risk index Fetal syndrome; ingestion caregiving

or to illegal (e.g., toxin Development drug, of medication, an toxin be index Exposure phenytoin); risk caregiving may

to CNS exposure Damage Radiation

Index care Prenatal of situation social

to Injuries, Damage CNS hyperthermia

Syphilis mnemonic), Rubella, illness “TORCH” (Other Cytomegalovirus, Toxoplasmosis, in virus infections (so-called the infections) Maternal Herpes simplex

age, for gestational birth age and small Biologic Gestational prematurity weight risk from

or and of Hypoxia Labor abnormal delivery prenatal index development

cardiovascular scores impairment Hypoxia, APGAR

damage adverse risk of perinatal CNS Specific Increased events

hyperbilirubinemia, metabolic damage risk Increased Illness—seizures, mutation respiratory distress, developmental with disorder CNS associated of

metabolic (e.g., with Illnesses Hereditary developmental illness delay associated diseases)

disease died Family suggest or inborn or young member storage unexpectedly May of metabolism error

special developmental delay Hereditary causes requires member Family of education

maximize financial, social available potential Resources Necessary (e.g., child’s support) to

of provide need stimulation. may Family parents level help to Educational

Increased for illicit of High-risk behaviors index risk risk sex) HIV drugs, (e.g., caregiving infection;

exacerbate discord) care stressors child’s compromise or marital Other (e.g., May conditions

Gender Important for child of conditions X-linked

regression indicate developmental may milestones of Index condition. delay; progressive Developmental

developmental learning delay disabilities. or with associated

Serious associated infections be May with delay (e.g., meningitis) developmental

exposure be associated with delay (e.g., Toxic lead) developmental May

malnutrition; growth Physical May indicate syndrome obesity, genetic stature, short

otitis Associated media development with abnormal hearing Recurrent loss speech and

and auditory functioning index impaired and Visual of vision Sensitive hearing

delayed Nutrition may development. Malnutrition during infancy to lead

associated or May be such as Chronic delayed disease conditions anemia with development renal

and and retardation Mental Adapted disability. developmental G: Liptak from updated Kliegman editor: Diagnosis In RM, in Strategies Practical and Pediatric 1996, WB Saunders. Therapy, Philadelphia, system; Central human virus. immunodeficiency CNS, nervous HIV,

having personality (Table a testing child’s basis should and a on abil-solely be data assessment labeled problem standardized the a child a Assessment emotional includes evaluation objective these Although and test, as the Psychological evaluating cognitive important and the ity not of well-being. for of reasonably provide Psychological tests 10-3) of progress in taken isolation, program. within educational particular age and IQ a scores, The mental person’s are a functional descriptive only of combination are abilities,which cognitive, socialskills. partially of and a adaptive, assessment and must educational on Assessment achievement areas of Tests of the exposures, subject social factors. of based be standardized variability for involves evaluation are Educational Educational culture, and to experience are in and non-projective and reading, the emotional status. useful specific tests weaknesses understanding in spelling, Projective child’s written strengths skills. mathematical and expression, Schools routinely screen

with Sought Information Examination Physical Suspected during Child the of to Be a

syndrome; Short severe retardation malnutrition, with stature. many associated children syndrome, Williams Turner short have stature

mucopolysaccharidosis, syndrome, Macrocephaly gangliosidosis, effusion Sotos syndrome, hydrocephalus, subdural Alexander

that syndrome, retard condition growth syndrome, any fetal (e.g., effects) malnutrition, Microcephaly Lange alcohol can Angelman brain de Virtually

unusual mandible provide and clues short metabolic, chat triangular, Williams to or diseases (5psyndrome), Specific fetal syndrome, round, fissure; nose, such face; inherited, hypertelorism, syndrome. alcohol or other syndrome maxilla, as Coarse, palpebral or cri measurements or slanted or may hypotelorism flat du

syndrome, X fragile syndrome, Prominent Crouzon Seckel syndrome

Lowe Galactosemia, rubella, syndrome, Cataract prenatal hypothyroidism

III Tay-Sachs Farber Niemann-Pick macula mucolipidosis, metachromatic (GM1), Gangliosidosis Cherry-red disease, disease, sialidosis in spot lipogranulomatosis, leukodystrophy,

or Chorioretinitis toxoplasmosis, cytomegalovirus, with Congenital infection rubella

Corneal I cloudiness II, syphilis Mucopolysaccharidosis syndrome, and congenital Lowe

such low syndrome, as malformed set cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal syndrome, association, Pinnae, 18, Trisomies Down CHARGE syndrome, fetal phenytoin Rubinstein-Taybi or effects

acuity Hearing encephalopathies of hyperacusis in Loss many in mucopolysaccharidosis;

CATCH22, II, alcohol syndrome, association, mucopolysaccharidosis may development. as phenylketonuria; glycogenosis cyanosis velocardiofacial effects, fetal cognitive Down syndrome; chronic such chromosomal maternal I; CHARGE impair anomalies

updated Liptak G: retardation disability. and developmental and Adapted from Mental ed RM, Therapy, Lye editors: 2, LA, Philadelphia, 540. Kliegman PS, 2004, Greenbaum Pediatric In Practical Diagnosis Saunders, Strategies in and p

cleft (deafness). coloboma, chromosome genital hypocalcemia, defects, anomalies heart defects, CATCH-22, CHARGE, on choanae, face, atresia defects growth, retarded hypoplasia, palate, 22; Cardiac abnormal anomalies, ear thymic

psychomotor predictor SCALES of Table Cognition scales, INFANT 10-3 of record; mo Development Scales Infant behavior SPECIAL TEST Bayley Mental, (3rd weak 1–42 Tests RANGE ed) FEATURES intelligence AGE

Used Intelligence Stanford-Binet 2–30 extend Cattell to downward Infant mo Scale

of in stages; Birth–24 mo Scales predicting Ordinal Six Psychological on based weak later Infant Piaget’s subscales; Development

Scale 2 score IQ scores, subtests Four Intelligence and (4th Stanford-Binet yr–adult area ed) with composite

Children’s subtests; defining Abilities of approach at McCarthy good strengths/weaknesses learning 2½–8½ yr 6–18 Scales disabilities;

at ½–7¼ verbal, of Preschool administration performance Test 2 Wechsler IQs; yr subtests; time; (WPPSI-R) 11 and long Intelligence–Revised Primary good

Scale Mental 19 yr skills, 18 matching mo–4 manual cover dexterity, Merrill-Palmer language Tests and skills, ability subtests motor of

subtests yr–adult with composite area (4th Scale score IQ Stanford-Binet 2 scores, Intelligence Four and ed)

for are those cognitively International impaired, impaired, non-English or Leiter 2–20 Performance use speaking, of yr with Scale, intelligence delayed, autistic who ideal hearing measure Revised Nonverbal speech

retarded yr persons (2nd and Birth–90 Adaptive deaf, II typical ed) blind, – Behavior Interview/questionnaire; and Vineland delayed, Scale developmentally

and other mental Association Adaptive in retardation, evaluation. aid to children problem yr Mental (AAMR) in program Scale Retardation Useful with Behavioral tests identification American on grouped disabilities 4–21 needs, screening to an with the progress enable special in lead would For comfortably development should the individualized testing school. this child and ultimately of that to child IEP the various assessed, Diagnostic techniques to child’s is be also response may teaching, in the which helpful. teaching

playing, child’s living, working, child the development. understanding environment of are which is in the and growing important Assessments the in by provide specialist worker, social nurse, social valuable about milieu. the visit home-based information child’s community and/or intervention can health A home a can visitor are challenges suggest if equipment there renovations additional adaptive home. Often or the at home emotional neglect is If a is the abuse to child especially, child there of suspicion of there abuse), a if protection and, the be or referred suspicion agency. parenting, inadequate family local (including and must child local 22). directories and Information (see Chapter about agencies hotlines the telephone front inside local is of cover reporting protection found usually

in Intervention Primary the Setting Care

or must a appropriate. requires diagnostic problem The clinician referral workup whether in whether decide primary management and the management setting is further for care roles in required are 10-4. in children for caring these Counseling listed Table clinician, counseling is the direct child much parents between place shifts as and of the takes young, and, increasingly child. When interaction matures, counseling a the child the the toward

therapeutic process itself. be The in may assessment family By supportive listener, of creates assuming of the allowing painful a or the the difficult trust, a to express nonjudgmental, clinician climate thoughts and feelings. role emotions Expressing caregiver the on to move understanding work and of or parent resolving problem. the the allow to may

family clarification and the for for problem Interview facilitate the techniques of clinician. may the the parent’s for part, shows for sense strategies family’sideas they be likely the about coping this more by and because a are developing family.The clinician the causes and ideaswhen provide at of implementedsuccessfully basis problemmanagement appropriate; can respect emanate, that the self-esteem from attempts endorsing much problem to increase The competency. can of in

the and parents Educating anticipatory and hearing interest behavior in and and detection concerns. through normal aberrant guidance development physician’s problems early about may parental prevent communicates intervention allows problem problems becomes before the develop. entrenched associated detection Early and

to of behavioral of stressful ranges from problematic normal and to variations severity situations responses problems disorders. The developmental frank to that must and of planned. the The appropriate intervention to be the patient’s clinician establish symptoms try can scope so severity

not For change child, simply be learned, must the behavioral imposed. easiest when clear, free of lesson learn and It the atmosphere intimidation. fear or presented in is consistent and is to simple, an to in behavioral try change the impose of most atmosphere, often often an violation. a behavioral Parents charged emotionally at time are other advice presented in when concerns Similarly may hastily not with to or by distracted the change. suggested behavioral teach clinicians try parents the parents engaged

strategies for directed interaction times behavior, Apart the specifically parent-child from regular should problem at be positive management instituted. of physical day over and opportunities positive contact building behaviors brief, the reinforcement affectionate child child a the parent. for of Frequent, the desirable for provides competence and in sense

feel guilty a when their children Most parents have problem. developmental/behavioral by behavior. be may by child’s the the caused problem to parenting or was that the previous inadequate by angry caused fear responses Guilt guilt, to alleviate to should clinician the find may appropriate, serious which impediment ways and possible If problem solving. be a

serve has provide cases, who to a of team services appropriately required the the of many quality and In to professionals SHCN. breadth is needed child monitor therapy the the accomplished. primary continually The care physician child that progress is and of being reassess should requisite the

nurse/therapist), a stimulation. family to stimulation, child the the begins training home-based and stimulation with often direct an intervention providing infant the for childhood for (e.g., Educational specialist child as early young provide the be center-based a nursery indicated. As program may child matures, a special may the services extra classroom. self-contained the range to in special For education child, attention from school-age classroom

or, older with be Psychological an parent the or may primarily child-directed. directed intervention to family child, techniques, psychotherapy, therapeutic directive to giving, and solutions psychiatrist), of approaches therapies, are methods behavioral guidance a as problems, cognitive Examples management to (from such counseling create own psychopharmacologic advice their therapy.

by be occupational performed Motor may or a physical therapist. intervention (NDT), hierarchical the development method, to most and is some based plasticity. system commonly used is the concept therapy Neurodevelopmental nervous subject that on The relationships. and development, including NDT on motor training and as abilities, focus skills; perceptual coordination; such spatial of living is gait daily eye-hand to to used from therapists motor responses. experience by integration and also systems for tactile, sensory vestibular structure therapy is occupational adaptive proprioceptive, allow Sensory the

therapist/pathologist the intervention the overall therapist) on strengths part tested a weaknesses of educational and (oral-motor language usually the by speech of program and language is is Speech-language and child. based intervention academic because show reading and of needing others. of and difficulties in Children understanding type develop behavioral may in and this being areas social problems other difficulties understood and in their and when monitoring necessary otolaryngologist), hearing includes providing via aids. hearing by an Hearing performed audiologist an (or intervention, acuity amplification

intervention involvement or with work generally the environmental family. Social includesnursing and social specialists. coordinating services falls these task Frequently the to of a part or child’s insurance fromthe sector, or in plan, may the childprotection be private of agency. Case managers Medicaid

of treatment providing for often can care is possible, conditions functionalimpairment child thoughtful Medical curative as with developmentaldisability with associated disability.Although specific a through treatment intervention the involves medicalmanagement. be not a as primary well minimized a knownsyndrome. developmentally in delay problems disabledpeople and 10-5), general frequently if of foundmore are (Table the is delayed especially part medical Certain important a hospice, role carepediatrician. Some andbereavement family the through another care, have the limited palliative life children primary may is of expectancy.Supporting

SPECIAL SELECTED CHILD THE PROBLEMS: NEEDS CLINICAL

significantly (self-care, developmental social MR communication, functioning as a adaptive concurrently defined intellectual living, home existing deficits with and subnormal in for child’s interactions). is behaviors stage, statistically performance below (roughly testing. intelligence that below the is population MR as as standard measured the standardized of is general two mean 3rd percentile) deviations cognitive the defined on estimate known population the 2% the is of is of last of MR about U.S. prevalence The that affected. scores tests IQ shown derived two Table typical from are MR from of 10-6. in Levels do actual in these functional tested not Caution categories the exercised because be interpretation reflect must individual. level of

of disorders, insult influences, the MR resultingin etiology may genetic teratogenic central nervous The involve system

to Educable 70 50–69 50–55 (EMR) mentally Mild retarded

to retarded (TMR) 35–49 50–55 Moderate 35–40 mentally Trainable

to 20–25 35–50 Severe 20–34

for (WHO), ICD-10, of WISC-IV, children, Scale ed International Diseases Classification ed 10; 4. Wechsler Intelligence

(Table childhood disease, and insults, 10-7). environmental factors and social perinatal acquired socioeconomic status, does MR profound not. correlates although with Mild MR organic single performance be be may theinteraction each substrate. a of organic found, the a considered function individual’s with cause individual’s should environmental influences Although of difficulties and are the resulting MRitself the to from from and condition the Behavioral the family’s reaction child common. biologic forms to can MR factors. be of severe traced More to more cognitive slowing is be. severe normal earlier deviation from the the recognized,the is likely The

is of MR step for identify therapies. with and medical habilitative weaknesses functional a child and the in of diagnosis management strengths and to first purposes The a approach be may may laboratory imaging. confirmed diagnostic and/or history testing A and examination physical by then, that, suggest Frequently analysis laboratory tests imaging resonance and of the include used magnetic brain. chromosomal third have individuals disability. MR reasons identifiable for with Almost one of readily do not their

impairment in is children. a many problem Significant visual as States. between and 20/70 the 1 500 occurs in 20/200) in acuity children school-age United vision visual Partial in (defined and in worse of Legal acuity defined 20/200 or as visual about is blindness 35,000 States. the children affects United distant barrier optimal major Such can development. impairment a be to

in 61). The of visual most common impairment prematurity (see of children severe cause retinopathy Chapter is amblyopia. may to significant Congenital cataracts lead Cataracts developmental are other and with associated also ocular disabilities. abnormalities visual system pathologic abnormality in is no a alteration the with characterized or the one accounts reduction apparent organic both acuity visual that of visual for by loss. Amblyopia eyes in a completely clinically of cataracts eye congenital combination formed due as severe both the refractive errors); retinal competitively a the mechanisms. Amblyopia one (from is a of between eyes to other interaction normal or the inhibits (strabismus); image clearly abnormal distortion binocular or infection, birth contributors and in congenital hydrocephalus, are cytomegalovirus Albinism, children. other to significant asphyxia blindness

syndrome) a (e.g., Chromosomal embryogenesis, challenge developmental stable affecting usually events changes Sporadic trisomy 21

intrauterine (e.g., † abuse, influences infections) Prenatal teratogenic substance medications, TORCH

(may multiple No identified, multifactorial) elements of is issue definite which is or present, none diagnostic be

(e.g., illness Deprivation intoxications mental associated lead significant Dynamic Parental (neglect) Environmental commonly with influences, other intoxication)* challenges

abnormalities normal challenges development or neurologic Impingement on intrauterine worsening frequent, are occasionally delivery; or stable

(e.g., birth complications Perinatal prematurity, trauma) asphyxia, birth

Preconceptual degenerative origin, in a somatic variable expression course the or frequently infant, progressive effects, individual multiple

phenylketonuria) disease, errors Inborn (e.g., metabolism disease, of Hunter Tay-Sachs

neurofibromatosis Single-gene or tuberous abnormalities sclerosis) (e.g.,

mutations (e.g., syndrome, fragile deletion Prader-Willi such chromosomal syndrome) X aberrations Other as

(all significant functional potential meningitis) to and brain are most recovery for but status, can damage, of modification lead ultimately Acute variable Infections developmental encephalitis

child Environmental is (prototype (e.g., trauma electrocution) and Cranial poisoning) near-drowning, abuse) lead intoxications Accidents (accidental

cytomegalovirus, rubella, syphilis), (congenital other virus. herpes Toxoplasmosis, simplex TORCH, and lead areas). (e.g., several may several health in involved be intoxication categories in *Some problems fit

childhood †This acquired considered as disease. be may also an

visual moderate have Children usually to impairment an uncorrected mild error. with refractive myopia or is presentation common nearsightedness. The most distortion). leading and visual causes shape Other to (farsightedness) the are of the hyperopia astigmatism in cornea (alteration In one eyes years, 6 younger children both aggravating high also than errors in impairment. cause visual may or amblyopia, refractive

of to infant age. an of impairment commonly The is is madewhen 8 months 4 visual diagnosis severe concerns the to parental of response objects. for beginning movements, aroused delaysin presence as or stimuli, such wandering lackof appropriate nystagmus, on based in to eye by Clinical motor behavior, other suspicion is unusual reach smiling weeks can in be by visual age. Fixation trackingbehavior of most seen 6 and infants at face) moving the distance of object(or a but of field colored assessed by across Thisbehavior can quiet be visual a 1 the brightly ft. examiner’s a alertinfant eyes to also should reactions The light. and examined reflexes pupillary forred be Optical on focusing newborn alignment(binocular spot) with thesame beyondthe both until vision period. is not consistently expected the should infant eyes be is at abnormal anyage. Persistent nystagmus to pediatricophthalmologist is indicated. referral ocular are abnormalities a If identified,

assessed may by newborn vision response. by period, the physical evoked be and visual examination During occipital evaluates conduction cortex nerve electrical to the of of impulses from the brain. the test optic This the to light resulting an the of an eye of is scalp, on black-and-white placed The flash a by stimulated with squares, electroencephalogram. the is from similar checkerboard or bright electrical strategically recorded electrodes alternating and response

visual impairment. of implications many There are developmental as is abnormal, such imitative body smiling, of and behavior, is Perception delayed. image are (ability may occur impaired usually who achieved milestones visually to their children mobility in Delays postural in although sit) are appropriately. birth, from affected. is often Social also bonding the with parents

helped be Visually children ways. can various impaired in material in resource-room nonvisual with may a be settings augmented assistance to present format. Classroom and intervention motor to development, educational listening Fine activity for intrinsic reading are and with child successful Braille severe a impairment. skills, visual writing

@ StudentConsult.com Available

heard its hearing of number of varies its of measured (conductive its hearing sensorineural), with clinical decibels the the number or significance versus lost. as The in and frequency, of severity type decibels loss otitis mild and abnormality disease ear caused conduction media). acquired of children moderate most is middle (acute cause chronic hearing The common by a to loss in have particularly is development, middle and effect fluid. on there This development a of may if abnormality language speech the chronic ear significant fluctuating common. loss hearing impairment If hearing is sensorineural severe, more more is sensorineural (e.g., and drugs antibiotics), infections include their treatments. ototoxic kernicterus, asphyxia, aminoglycoside rubella and and birth congenital meningitis, (especially tumors cytomegalovirus), of Causes deafness inheritance; of schools the recessive hearing in dominant deaf. cause be the main impairment in or deafness is for either may Genetic this conductive Down syndrome, to a caused predisposition middle infection loss ear by there In is

to loud otitis effusions ear dB 40–65 middle Chronic be be (ASA) Moderate Conversation understood. media/ must

Otitis MI: Gottlieb from and Adapted media. updated In al, Pediatrics, Saunders. Philadelphia, editors: 1983, Carey MD, Crocker Levine WB Developmental-Behavioral AC, WB, et ASA, of Acoustical Society America.

by sensorineural loss and disease. caused cochlear Any hearing-impaired children. hear-identifying includes child’s and significant communication skills. have nursery discharge newborns loss to of is effect ing the on a required Universal screening developing may prior areas (Table affect These skills the 10-8). child’s all development following: skills then cognitive of and the (ABR) measures how brainstem • Auditory response

sometimes responds accurately determine the brain sound. It quite difficult the to to is children. played young in hearing tones and or of infants Clicks presence are earphones Inquir-through ears. the infant’s soft into infant’s in the response. newborn’s unreliable head placed on Three a response to the or the brain’s electrodes ing infant’s response to for is observing office the measure even sounds or about sounds

measure inner sound waves produced ear. emissions Otoacoustic • the in is infant’s canal. probe just A the ear inside tiny placed the infant’s ears. or are the response clicks into measures (echo) when played tones It

are of quick these minutes), painless, lying performed (5 still. to Both or infant while is be may 10 sleeping the and tests are as specific as sensitive tests more The but definitive tests. not these Infants comprehensive more tests referred pass do are not who testing. for these have on testing. normal definitive of Many infants hearing immediately early who evaluated or etiologic should referred for be Infants and have normal diagnosis intervention. hearing not do

loss, children early of parents) acquired screened intervention. allow may later appropriate children For with birth (such at immigrant children suspected not as testing hearing or Hearing behavior screened can needed and office an of but behaviorally by (ABR, means neurologically impaired, audiology) or audiogram, are immature techniques young, other children. for difficult be over in the pure-tone a most variety speech (pitches), occurs. typical assessment over audiometry which especially sound The of of includes audiologic range frequencies frequencies middle ear are (see tympanic as pathology in tympanometry 9). the and ossicular such and otoscopic middle Chapter compliance tube used dysfunction Pneumatic for dysfunction, eustachian function examination assess ear, the to membrane fluid, and

Chapter hearing of in is media discussed The loss due tootitis and effusions) ear (largely 105. conductive middle treatment of Treatment hearing sensorineural may impairment surgical. or bemedical amplification has is hearing decreased inwhich patient amplify frequency preferentially be to the indicated, tuned aidscan acuity. If the ranges speech-language typically teachingAmerican Sign therapy Language. includes and intervention Educational for educational other deficits for in and amplification, services skills. requiring read show Even helpingto processing special auditoryinformation, academic with many children hear-ing-impaired to hearing loss. Cochlear that hearing provide severe surgically sensation implantable profound toindividuals implants with are devices function ear,cochlear inthe for to energy designed transformingsound the sensory implantsare mechanical nerve. middle energy electrical the and of auditory initiates into cells, impulses substitute The that motion, radiologic development, with than have hearing aids,have contraindications. sensorineural progress benefit in limited failed 12 Cochlear medical profound haveno loss bilateral or hearing months indicated from older for auditory and implants skill are children to who Implantation inchildren speech-language gives for possible learning. as advantageous as the them most auditory environment young

often speech when others compare 10-9). child age young of the with Parents delay bring concern of physician’s to same they (Table attention the their the abnormalities. most autism, are delay of impairment, MR, the causes oral-motor social The common hearing deprivation, and speech Status test suspected the hearing Evaluation is of based standard a and Scale), Stages Developmental with Parents’ (Early and Chapter referral a indicated. such Ages problem speech Language other If tests specialized Milestone 8) Questionnaires a center as to or is or (see screening screening on test While awaiting

response sudden, does not to the child blink, loud activity startle, Before 6 change sounds. immediate months, or in by does the or soothed attend human is not the and child Before 6 voice her his months, not mother’s to voice.

imitate months, or cooing strings vowel of the does syllables gurgling sounds. 6 child or and By consonant not babble

does not 10 months, to name. respond or his child the her By

At is sound-making grunts, or months, production. to 10 child’s the sustained limited vowel shrieks,

child’s 12 the At is babbling limited speech or to sounds. vowel months,

“no,” or not “bye-bye,” does to respond By 15 months, “bottle.” the child

sounds 15 child the months, does imitate not By words. or

months, six child is at consistently using with least 18 meaning. not By the words appropriate

21 me “Give . respond to not the By child months, correctly does . . down,” when cues. or without “Come “Sit spoken gestural ,” here”

not “allgone”) 23 “thankyou,” two-word have as spoken emerged. months, are phrases (e.g., that single units “whatszit,” By

is the familiar child’s understood 24 at months, speech by least By 50% of listeners. not

By to cues. does months, without body not parts 24 point child the gestural

(e.g., “go By into “go car,” is child bye-bye,” phrases months, words not cookie”). combining the 24 “want

under, months, of not spatial front, on, the concepts: and child By show back. in, does 30 understanding

sentences went 30 By short child is the bye-bye”). “Daddy months, not using (e.g.,

the begun (using to By 30 months, what, child has not ask where, questions why).

speech by listeners. By 36 months, understood the is unfamiliar not child’s

age, with words. struggles any blocks to or repetitions, say At hesitations; is the child dysfluent consistently eye or may Struggle blinks, gestures. hand by grimaces, be accompanied

St and from Mosby. detection, Lillywhite HE: early Communication 1976, updated and handbook Adapted for Louis, a prevention CE, Disorders: Weiss

(and of to clearly avoid testing advised results of be slowly speech-language parents initiation and the therapy, speak should or the talk). child to baby older siblings speech-delayed read should and to Parents the child. frequently

articulation, fluency, resonance include disorders. disorders and Speech words cannot Articulation producing point disorders incorrectly syllables other beingsaid. sounds or tothe that saying in is difficulties understand what people include which include stuttering,the prolonging (ssssstuttering). byabnormal syllables in interrupted condition flow repetitions is the of and Fluency disorders (st-st-stuttering), sounds problems as or stoppages, speech such that with is voice voice listeners of what said. from Resonance the include disorders pitch, being quality or achild’s problems volume, or distract

Language receptive be expressive. or either can disorders Receptive language. disorders understanding to or difficulties refer processing Expressive a appropriate words include language or way. to together, disorders socially limited in inability putting use difficulty vocabulary,

and communication, pathologists way what Speech-language or the identify children; best skills swallowing these of challenges. therapists) treat problems the and language, cognitive of types oral-motor communication assess determine (speech speech, exist; to infants in and palate. oral-motor with skilled infant lip with training born young vital how also feed an cleft children a to and other pathologists infants such parents in skills, as and at Speech-language are working

Speech-language a child a having strategies. to a using specialist a work with small a on variety directly involves in a basis, or group, specific one-on-one therapy speech-language a therapeutic overcome in of disorder classroom events having a language involve interact intervention or stimulate pictures, development. talking ongoing or him her, and with specialist to a using speech-language by Language to playing activities objects, books, child and for model a activities. having child, often Articulation syllables therapy during the play involves sounds therapist correct

enrolled to tend years outcomes early in who therapy begin better (<3 have of later. age) Children therapy children than need be progress because modified may make occur children or in therapy, but Older children to progress slowly often these patterns changed. can that learned more have to speech-language crucial child’s the a in Parental of progress involvement is therapy. success

Available @ StudentConsult.com

and Hypotonia Knock-Knees Toe-Walking Limp and Bowlegs In-Toeing, Weakness and Out-Toeing,

(CP) of of syndromes a arising secondary birth. changing, lesions motor refers palsy impairment before the to after to Cerebral brain group often or or nonprogressive, anomalies but much The per births. and at 1000; premature twin in is United higher States age of prevalence 8 the is prevalence in CP 3.6 weight birth causes noted infants (leading of and are asphyxia), congenital and CP birth. kernicterus low at perinatal Prematurity malformations, to later acquired developing at have children Ten percent CP, with ages. CP of CP and and the (accidental common nonaccidental) causes acquired are injury of Meningitis 10-10). most head (Table no CP of factors. identifiable risk 50% have Nearly with children of causes may CP advances, genomic medicine identified. these of idiopathic be many As

the with fail in children mildest abnormalities forms, are diagnosed as asymmetric to of except or first months when 18 they milestones in CP, its such life Most attain motor show

(<1500 growth estrogen, progesterone seizures/seizure hormone, or Low thyroid birth) weight/fetal socioeconomic Pregnancy Prematurity retardation g with complications status Maternal at disorder birth Treatment Low

on unilateral arm or Hemiparesis the impairment leg side same (e.g., and right (hemiplegia)—predominantly left) the of

of limited primarily some being the arms; legs of different impairment not authors (often involvement from the quadriplegia) as with challenge some type Diplegia—motor specific this

Quadriplegia—all four are functionally compromised. body) limbs (whole

hypertonia, motor gross hypotonia. function, or parts CP the (Table by 10-12). of the the characterized affected type (Table and can predominant of 10-11) motor descriptions disorder body of further be challenges, impairments. difficulties, epilepsy, sensory include Comorbidities these behavioral in and often learning children defect. of these Many motor an isolated children have children be Some affected may intellectually gifted.

Treatment dysfunction. on the of depends pattern can optimal patterns, function occupational and the of affected positioning therapy parts. increasing facilitate movement Physical and and of baclofen may (dantrolene, benzodiazepines, include Spasticity management toxin baclofen), and medications intrathecal oral implantation injections, botulinum pumps. also impairments, and Management spasticity, help may orthopedic improve sensory seizures, of impairments

Spastic it accounts form cerebral cases. the of common most 70%–80% palsy, for of palsy: cerebral It results pyramidal the injury motor upper to of the from neurons tract. occasionally bilateral. It be may of It characterized following: increased (e.g., Babinski reflexes pattern, two at abnormal response, tone, hyperreflexia). pathologic least or the movement is by

Dyskinetic 10%–15% cases. in occurs cerebral of palsy: patterns It involuntary, dominated movement of recurring is uncontrolled, abnormal by and movements.

palsy: <5% of cerebral cases. accounts Ataxic for both. features and injury muscle and form posture of This abnormal coordination loss results movement or or from cerebellar orderly

uncommon. cerebral also Dystonic palsy: characterized and stiff is reduced and by (hypokinesia) movement It activity hypotonia.

Choreoathetotic rare is and treated. that excessive hyperbilirubinemia palsy: prevented now aggressively cerebral increased movements This and stormy hypotonia. is dominated form by (hyperkinesia) and

for 10%–15% accounts palsy: of Mixed cases. cerebral than another. when one and does clearly pattern term used motor present is not pattern This one dominate of is type more when complications, associated more cognitive-perceptual impairments. seizures, deficits, with and including typically It is sensory

attainment. educational cured, functional of in abilities, host improve a be cannot participation of interventions life. quality can and CP but society, for have assessment of deficits. children, and motor Like or children reinforcement simple intellectually strengths intact all are gifted important, an who especially

retardation, Adolesc Arch M, interventions Pediatr of on specific Brosco the reducing Impact J, Mattingly medical L: mental of Sanders prevalence

Needs and Project Children young in developmental an home: children disorders medical With Med the Committee: algorithm for with surveillance developmental Special screening. 2006 for Identifying 160:302–309, infants Advisory and Pediatrics 2006 118(1):405–420,

Nutrition: cular childhood, screening S, Daniels Lipid and health F: 122:198–208, Committee in on Pediatrics Greer 2008 cardiovas

Gardner Poison Vio and Committee lence, on American Pediatrics Prevention. HG: Academy of Injury, counseling Pediatrics unintentional 2007 prevention, 119(1):202–206, injury for Office-based

IL, Bright supervision Futures: Hagan Duncan and 3, Shaw 2008, P: J, of infants, Elk Grove Village J, for health adolescents, children, ed guidelines

American Academy of Pediatrics

Behrman R, al: et H, 18, of ed Textbook R, Nelson Pediatrics, Kliegman Jenson

Elsevier Philadelphia, 2007,

Hui and Gahagan, Sheila Yi J. Scott Liu, Brown 3

hunger, according is fatigue, context interpreted by distress, Infant or the crying, the caregivers to sign of pain, a crying. of and after The health the just heralds infant’s vigor. birth cry The temperament, difficult illness, of later, screams be as interpreted may sign or same infant, weeks the parenting. of a 6 poor infant of Crying is environment context. the lens and through by cultural family, a arousal of the interpreted influenced manifestation and social, the

best intensity, frequency, timing, cry modifiability Crying characteristics (Fig. the of and the is by of duration, understood 11-1). first hours to day hour to weeks. and little gradually day Most 2 by cry 1 of 6 life, 3 infants weeks decreasing during 12 per weeks increasing the per by

culture infant care by duration practices. and differs Cry 50% fed less For four carried example, United cry infants the than who are infants, States. hunter−gatherer San and !Kung per continuously times in hour, to status. also Crying may relate health gestational at infants little tend age. infants weeks than but 40 Premature to 6 cry age before corrected term cry more weeks’ Crying behavior conditions, premature medical also infants ongoing may influenced visual impairments, in feed- and bronchopulmonary such by former be dysplasia, as

at days 3 3 hours is more Colic rule weeks. Wessel’s for often more of than day, diagnosed than 3 using per per least week, for threes—crying limitations crying this word of include does lack The the this specificity of the definition of fussing?) (e.g., include 3 to wait who a weeks the in and to necessity infant has diagnosis make an crying. excessive grimacing, by paroxysmal leg is facial and may as be described Colicky characterized flexion, and flatus. often passing crying

an 5% have etiology. for organic evaluated of infants excessive than Fewer crying normal Because of of is extreme may of represent syndrome the etiology crying. phenomenon the colic unknown, this infant the warranted. crying of with infants excessive evaluation is Nonetheless

in 19% rates vary to incidence different studies. from of 5% Cumulative colic and affected equally. Girls are boys vocalizations. infant Studies actual by diary colic recording is methodology, suchas a data byhow defined and cry vary or of collection maintaining what by varies may recorded andthis also or crying infant crying fussing. influence as about Concern culture, is

ing disorders. strategies. of duration by crying modifiable The often is caregiving

crying. variable than of less of crying duration is Frequency is weeks in mean 10 hours. of frequency and age, 6 of crying 24 combined fussing the episodes At crying the with in is and evening. norm, Diurnal the crying variation in late afternoon concentrated

to from screaming. fussing varies, crying of with intensity infant The descriptionsranging or than more quietly. and infant infant An and parents is who cry(pitch to an concern loudness) elicit evenalarm intense likely caregivers from fretsmore cries from infant’s of distance 30.5 cm Pain at a are loud:80 remarkably of dB newborns mouth. the cries not when acoustically hungercries hungercries, pain attended a pain Although for cries. protracted higher similar frequency have become period, to to a than withfussing. a of Fortunatelymost intensity, consistent infant is crying lesser

per of day fussing Hours

crying age. 12 time 11-1 weeks to from Distribution Figure infants of studied of 80 2 total among daily by derived from mothers. crying Data diaries recorded Crying (From Brazelton infancy. in TB: 1962.) Pediatrics 29:582,

@ StudentConsult.com Available

clinician a etiology. from serious no must differentiate identifiable infant The has who colic, crying disease which evaluates includes history crying, frequency, including intensity, of description duration, modifiability. a and the The leg or identified. such back grimacing, Associated facial symptoms, as vomiting, arching, flexion, should be or onset, changes crying. any historical triggers pattern, clues include that activities the important quality, and in Other relieve diurnal illnesses. identify systems or eliminate other review can A of serious perinatal also at for are is neurologic because causes with infants Medical important risk crying. problems history increased of reflux, to problems, the air Attention intolerance. (worsened hunger, reveal feeding gastroesophageal swallowing history feeding-related can food and including crying), by family. strategies crying the plan their of ability infant and soothing infant’s for the suitable comorbidities the clinician to mental risk intervention of knowledge in and Questions concerning handle an the assist stress developing the health for parental assessing family’s

infant’s of diagnosis physical crying. no the organic made the cause for The excessive colic examination reveals when is only circumference, systemic illness of vital begins signs, on head and weight, for with The length, examination looking growth. effects hair signs is (see possible including sources skin of to fractures the A and child skeletal abrasions, infant inspection 199). tourniquets, important corneal infections, thorough or of identify 22 as pain, Chapters of lesions, abuse such media, and with bites as infections, insect conditions urinary mouth ulcerations, Infants common crying. present otitis such may with tract injuries, examination perinatal neurologic A as neurologic of as reveal conditions, brain such irritability crying. may cause undiagnosed and the previously episode a for of infant. the skills infant potential assess parents’ during and Observation the to soothing the the is invaluable crying infant’s in calming

suggesting for organic cause and infants an imaging are physical history excessive or are reserved in crying. whom for studies Laboratory findings there examination excessive for 11-2. crying inconsistent with with of evaluation presented medical the in algorithm an infant An Figure is colic

pain with that as fatigue conditions and associated differential any overload. cause sensory for diagnosis condition discomfort includes in and distress, is broad or such The or the infant colic nonpainful can causes artery crying. milk via been persistent intolerance, all hydrochloride as coronary effects maternal have drug Cow’s and breastfeeding), fluoxetine (including left protein reported of anomalous conditions, anxiety, situations of regulation, may In crying. hunger, including environmental addition, the fatigue, increase parental with infant associated risk chaotic poor excessive and most crying cause is infants cases, unexplained. the In in of indicated. evening and (afternoon If is of infant thriving, age, and crying colic corrected a found, organic weeks’ no is with diagnosis clustering), diurnal condition pattern otherwise the has cause a the is and consistent the began colic developing before 3

infants Algorithm acute medi-cal 11-2 excessive crying. of for with Figure evaluation editors: the Green emergency RG, complaints Barr in Cry-ing B, Hopkins (From department. JA, as p. London, a a MacKeith Symptom, In 2000, a Crying Press, Signal, and Sign, 99.) infantile tests and of Toxicology studies Crying 24 puncture History Consider CRYING Ensure and Identify hours Consider: Pulse Lumbar Urinary INFANT made colic History appropriate physical hospital, EXCESSIVE culture in 1–2 follow-up treat home crying ceases idiopathic hours colic Chemistry Crying urine and Urinalysis with observation, until for WITH diagnosis in Follow observe tests Assess Treat ACUTE oximetry episode persists recurrent episodes crying spontaneously or infection stops or Continue at examination hospital tract cause Radiologic pattern, consistent

with The and begins colic management of demystification. education crying the family that of is normal pattern When the the appropriate. or underlying about reassured disease, trauma, infant physician education without and infant healthy, are infection, is the 12 begins by by mean duration and age. about temporal decrease can colic decreases 6 half weeks age reassuring; the crying pattern be Learning of at weeks of of to the does months Colic resolve not 3 of age. by always 3 excessive of have 15% age. crying of infants Approximately to with colic continue after months

useful. for infant’sfussy the is schedules develop period Helping caregiving families and rhythmicrocking, ridein noise, for slow car). walking, (e.g., Techniques swaddling, or white vocalizations vibration singing, calming infants a includesoothing a gentle infant some from injury Giving may the soothing relieves also the vibrating stressed. falls), soothing be infants; dryer(which dangerous allow a to working this shaking to infant of in strategies guiltand the resulted them not infant clothes placing infant to range of wider over-stimulation are as has restwhen of responses techniques, caregivers in alleviate a allows permission or should on families such crying.Avoidance

lactase, diphenhydramine, no simethicone, are in dicyclomine, avoided. Medications, including alcohol, reducing should and be and colic of benefit phenobarbital, often especially Mexico vervain, chamomile, licorice, Parents, from Eastern balm-mint and and teas. Europe, fennel, use scientifically not These teas remedies as have been colic. for studied and because caloric tea Families the limit should limit displaces be from the diet volume intake. milk may counseled given to infant’s it of

but be in should dietary circumstances. In in not reducing changes colic specific certain considered circumstances, most are effective of to infant colitis. for the has milk a cow’s formula signs change is rationale There protein milk non-cow’s if from diet. infant the dairy If products her is breastfeeding, eliminate can mother the

colic or evidence infants is the health in have after adverse temperament neonatal that no There longterm outcomes with period. infantile untoward effects mental colic longterm not does maternal have on health. Similarly When colic maternal resolves. distress the subsides, with cases infant child been crying. inconsolable have of abuse Rarely associated

crying.Prospective infant with cry be prevent education hunger. done imagine that often about parents can normal beginning will the onlybriefly of colic, their to parents for ofprospective Much infant pattern duration contact of the may and before the decrease carrying episodes. the crying infantin weeks Increased colic of of onset the of if Similarly infant before crying. strategies other be them more may excessive effective experienced the theonset has soothing episode; sleep their before swaddling first overstimulation. is read for not the to a boredom, during true infantswho be who have of swaddled hunger, episode.Parents to life been also experienced this often swaddling and have coached not a Infants crying during rest calmto tightly can cues learn of crying discomfort, infant’s for weeks or times isnot only that to best. their It is interpretable, there caregivers understand do when can important and are infant’s cry the

including child behavior, and tantrum, anger, inability frustration, often the breath-holding, frustration, stomping, falling seen simple can displays temper other as a experiences most are defined including screaming, include cope hitting, violent when or serious situation. young biting.Tantrums head banging, vomiting, down,and A aggression, out-of-control to of with normal tantrums considered 3-year-old when are is period behavior nature. ofshort the tantrums be in1to children, in duration not and can temper manipulative Temper the tantrum

a to believed stage. normal developmental are tantrums be human Temper may determinant behavior. Child tantrum a temperament of be

in children 4 of months is common to age. years behavior 18 This to tantrums, have In 80% 2to have daily children U.S. had 3-year-old and of 50% to 20% regular are tantrums. studies, reported life. year to behavior the appears of third peak in late The approximately temper explosive school-age regular of 20% Approximately 5% tantrums, occurs having 4-year-olds of in still and are children. temper the occur preschool period. Tantrums in and girls boys during equally

2and Temper children. reported most behavioral problem tantrums commonly 3-year-old are the in approximately of a (Fig. frequency variability with tantrums typical deal great The is week, per one of 12-1). duration increases tantrum 5 and age (Fig. 2 each The with duration to of minutes, is 12-2). of to essential evaluation is identify and child’s Helping the antecedents the intervention. the tantrums typical family child only can A disappointments. to treated misses or who child differently nap has he when routine be minor difficulties tantrums frequent she related than who has tantrums a or a

a including of tantrums complete requires is temper The perinatal child evaluation having a and information. who developmental history, overstimulation. or Careful fatigue, physical reveal activity, daily hunger, routines associated attention may to with the problems child’s inadequate social A

No. per Tantrums of Week

12-1 tantrum frequency week. per Mean Figure and tantrum normal the age). continued actual 1 of manifestation duration (in behavior Children to tantrum terms tantrum after injury, premature include children infants and former autism,traumatic Smith-Magenis children impairment, brain syndromes. Prader-Williand cognitive These and with and rare and present hyperplasia may as severe with puberty,also conditions,such with precocious adrenal tantrums. congenital Children persistent age to may tantrums comparable when exhibit disability is Childrenwith to 4 theirdevelopmental intellectual years. 3

developmental phase. temper a normal tantrums are with education tantrums, parental about stressing Intervention that begins health. years tantrums four about child’s tantrums mental have may concerns who their of have typically 4 unwarranted Parents age have nine to understand help clinician The week. parents per can and role anger. child in their helping frustration move the toward self-regulation of to The age-inappropriate frustration; demands child; hunger, loneliness, or toddler 5.0 fatigue, be on and environment structured limit can hyperstimulation. the are child’s essential routine understand the the tantrums communicating important child’s is needs. to review It 4.5 4.0 daily whether unmet to all behave 0.5 at who day 1.5 care Children 1.0 3.5 day 3.0 2.0 2.5 well

of Figure duration tantrums. Mean 12-2 may be at exhibit and temper of typical for or fatigue duration attention. a the signaling evening parental need home in The tantrums stressors stress cornerstone of of can many be treatment eliminated. is Identification the because underlying say in the may have child Parents environment to some as so to do changes “No” the they that home frequently. not consider

reinforce some inadvertently behavior demands. child’s the parents cases, complying In by tantrum with seen prior successful can child’s be manipulative a behavior or as as simply experience. behaviorfrom learned The may toddler to expectations ambivalence lead also Parental restrictions. aboutacceptable and inconsistent behavior temptation is isallowed the clarify child give off what inwhen publicly. behavior can the or loudly avert limits what to and Helping screams parents

short-circuiting means tantrums. Distraction effective of an impending is associated is with removing the environment is difficulty sometimes the child’s helpful. from that an Physically child Further child recommended control to the after engaging by interventions strategies altering are only in anticipating meltdowns. behavioral basic the environment, meeting help gain and needs, and Recommended include modification or strategies reinforcement negative behavioral positive extinction. behavior with tantrum behavior the behavioral increase. may During of first week any intervention, it Parents worse gets it will that better. get warned be must before probably tantrums, to important the that good time that for positive it they decrease reinforcement or extinguish parents At behavior. are is same provide the working

about emotional assisting 18 tantrum with the months care and a age. with temper between at strategies regulation recommended child is of Providing parents maintenance the 12 health stage knowledge for and visit home psychologically (or caregivers) a childproofed transition period. eating, by well-rested and Regular quick healthy sleeping, routines through usually in in result a and activity parents physical center) challenging day this (or provided for care

tantrum the with the child. of age increases

history phase. exacerbate developmental what prolong or normal important, stress as is a can family begins because coexistence of the disorder. problems, and problems, mental serious suggests more of other sleep problems, problems, The such as health a behavioral social possibility learning

ability an underlying child’s that focuses examination the decrease physical on self-regulate. The could to illness discovering to skin examination childabuse identify A Chapter 22). recommended the (see is thorough of neurologic brain The identifies underlying examination disorders. genetic reveal a may syndrome. Dysmorphic features a follow toys, reveal the Behavioral with parents instructions, age-appropriate play with ability and child’s to interact observations clinician. and

studies and deficiency exposure for anemia screening iron are lead important. Laboratory possible and etiology. a performed physical Other and examination underlying the studies only imaging history are suggest when laboratory children excessive a have tantrums should Some formal with developmental evaluation.

temper have tantrums have underlyingmedical Most problem. no children who tantrums. Hearing and may loss be associated temper language with delay injury andother risk increased temper disorders for Children are prolonged brain at with brain

of neurobehavioral is defined impulsivity. deficit/hyperactivity Attention hyperactivity, symptoms a inattention, by (ADHD) disorder disorder and Disorders,Fifth (available at emphasize Diagnostic guidelines and Manual the use ofthe of Edition, Clinical ADHD. to criteria diagnose Mental Statistical Health http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/adhd/diagnosis.html) years at least presence at of 6 6 Diagnosis of or or inattention months requires the 16 childrenup 6 in the of least symptoms age of of to environments. more two hyperactivity-impulsivityfor symptoms spoken difficulty or tasks 17 organizing to details, activities. at attention symptoms include: age inattention failing to assigned or on failing that forgetfulness hyperactivity-impulsivity.Symptoms indaily 5 play, at dislikingactivities frequent require to attentionto having 5 listen activities, least close or pay appearing avoiding through and symptoms and must mental older difficulty tasks sustaining of directly, or of or years things and of least when during effort schoolwork),frequently not work,having required becoming experiencing tasks losing distracted, easily finish for (e.g., follow activities, sustained instructions to exhibit Children ofinattention fidgetyor a havingdifficulty in expected quietly, situations, seat running “driven of if include: as acting excessively. excessively motor,” being or inappropriate andtalking by restless, in remain playing Symptoms climbing when hyperactivity to leaving a seated, her or difficulty include: or turn, question a awaiting causing frequent having has of blurting and interruptions completed, his Symptoms impulsivity intrusions. out been before answers be must prior evidence age; must mental social, years academic, occur;and settings disorders other in or havebeen must symptoms addition, present to excluded. work of significantimpairment In several of 12

ADHD multifactorial origin, environmental neural, in with genetic, contributions. is and (0.8) of Twin studies heritability and demonstrate ADHD and greater in high family studies risk relatives. first-degree developing noradrenergic neurotransmitter involving Candidate the those and genes dopaminergic systems. include (functional frontal and as positron parietal resonance particularly respectively) cortex, of and emission callus, shown PET, Neuroimaging fMRI inferior commonly lobes, vermis. differences, have the magnetic basal and studies functional and corpus cerebellar structural tomography, imaging ganglia, recognized the trauma ADHD. Prenatal to damage alcohol) exposure (e.g., central of to or from substances infection and increase nicotine, nervous system the risk

typically criteria the U.S. rates used depending ADHD on 5% rates and in for vary, with 10% to prevalence population studied, range. ratio greater 6:1, is combined to to the 2 predominance male with female types. The hyperactive/impulsive for and male inattentive diagnoses. are symptoms likely more often with underdiagnosed to be and later to receive or Girls present persist particularly patients. and adulthood to Symptoms inattention, in 60% adolescence into of and of ADHD, impulsivity 80%

by ADHD diagnosed clinically history. is impact peer should their and academic self-esteem, safety, daily and activities. on questions Open-ended family on focus relationships, performance, specific and behaviors Rating Scales Conners’ via Scales. family the school such gathered scales the Vanderbilt be and as the should Rating Information rating the ADHD-specific or from

(e.g.,cognitive impairment, coexist,or or may learning child’s genetic) medical(e.g., problems underlie, to explanation disability, is A autism identify provide developmental for neurologic, disorder, language disorder) an alternative physical essential behaviors. spectrum that the examination and part their the child, of of Observation the evaluation. the parents, interactions is hyperactivity childrenwith low office). focus stimulation that in can mind without (e.g., in Keep little environments ADHD and distraction typically with clinician’s

conditions. exclude Laboratory and not routinely may recommended but help imaging studies are other and history, environmental studies lead imaging genetic by studies, history, physical Consider or if indicated brain function studies, levels, thyroid examination. medical blood

consider the to within should The range determine are the first behaviors of whether developmental the child’s clinician level normal. breathing, disorders, sleep use, sensory a as and such seizure conditions, possible should substance disordered hyperthyroidism, deficits, beconsidered lead Medical intoxication, hyperactivity child’s as for causes anddistractibility. disorders syndrome, such X, may and presentas fragile and 1. hyperactivity as 22q11.2deletion be features of Inattention genetic neurofibromatosis impulsivity, of living abuse)can (e.g., or hyperactivity, bullying, Chaotic situations psychological symptoms lead also to andinattention. stress in symptoms problems maturity, due of who thatsetting. emotional having be well-being of setting ADHD level,level onlyone have of to or Children in cognitive may feelings

in More important, children of conditions are 60% ADHD. up with coexisting to present disorder, anxiety conduct These disorders. and particularly disabilities; oppositional disorder, disorder, conditions, include language defiant psychiatric and tic depression; learning disorders; of of the conditions differential also part are ADHD. diagnosis These

diagnosis, educating the with about affected condition begins children recognizing their a options, prognosis. chronic treatment and as Management and ADHD parents and

mg–40 NAME XR* (h) BRAND Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Adderall Disorder DURATION FDA-Approved Table salts INITIAL-MAXIMUM 13-1 mg–40 10 Adderall* MEDICATION STIMULANTS Mixed 6 5 for DOSE 2.5 Medications GENERIC amphetamine mg mg

mg mg–30 XR Dexmethylphenidate Focalin* 5 2.5 8–12 Focalin mg mg–20 3–5

up Strattera increase Atomoxetine children to with max 10–12 titrate lb and 1.2 100 for >154 least adults mg/kg/d mg/d 0.5 then 40 At mg/kg mg/kg 1.4 mg/d weighing to

mg/d Kapvay At 10–12 least Clonidine 0.1 mg/d–0.4

evaluation, diagnosis, Adapted ADHD AAP: process in key for explanation children action of and the adolescents. statements: and from for the and Implementing monitoring care algorithm an of treatment, 2011. SI1–SI21, Pediatrics

form. *Available in generic

the are of patch oral †Dosages equivalent preparations. for dermal the to those not

mediate strategies adverse guidance social includes family proactive functioning, school providing Anticipatory relationships, and self-esteem. learning, to on effects life, appropriate routine, goals. to behavioral including in consistency Children structure, to with management, ADHD and respond responses their behaviors, behavioral adult needs. clinicians benefit work child’s to parents the with and teachers when address also Children behavior report be and helpful. cards accommodations Daily may self-esteem, training behavior additional may change treatments have mental also when assist of or health particularly mental preservation coexisting or conditions skills they with children some or health developmental Social requiring treatment.

compounds) effectiveness of safety. are agents ADHD and Stimulant medications evidence for to of treatment first-line the amphetamine or due (methylphenidate extensive are intermediate-acting, and available medications Stimulant short-acting, in forms. long-acting include patch. and transdermal a capsules, Preparations liquid, tablets, choice child’s These to clinician tailor the options needs. the to of medication the allow such concerns Nonstimulant family and stimulant situations or or atomoxetine inhibitor), as be medication problems. clonidine diversion, sleep medications, agonists), about to guanfacine, helpful (alpha coexisting including may nonresponse medication, abuse or in (norepinephrine-reuptake preference, tic in are ADHD medication Table listed 13-1. options and stimulant sleep with atomoxetine, gastrointestinal with alpha appetite suppression medications, include sedation effects tract symptoms with Common side disturbance agonists. and by effects medication careful of side timing. These and be managed adjustment usually dosage can study given disease status (by monitoring odds Screening cardiac suggesting cardiac medication. cardiac increased for a sudden and prudent death slightly and by in rare extremely of taking those retrospective exam) of history raised is but stimulant concerns

self-esteem. in be poor may with interpersonal academic ADHD relationships, underachievement, and associated difficulties employment attainment). long-reaching levels can have of These effects lower educational, (e.g., and early with are drug untreated, ADHD, risk automobile high-risk such who Adolescents use, sexual are for accidents. as at increased particularly behaviors those activity, addiction and there of drug stimulant of ADHD decreased and in medication, adolescents abuse concerns Despite managed. actually illicit is risk who medically children with use parental from are drug appropriately

helpful. including focus may and promoting thatrequire levels calm opportunities practices increasing of be age-appropriate Child-rearing for activities environments prudent be because rapid-responsevideo games span. playing Limitingtime these attention watching activities and short spent reinforce also television may result assist significant curtailing of techniques problematicbehaviors in may before impairment. implementation behaviormanagement Early they in and and prevented symptoms signs about can disabilities most be the by appropriate and and interventions. behavioral the pharmaceutical medicalprofessionals Secondary teachers ofADHD educating children early ADHD. health professionals, Collaboration enhance providers, will health the of for care identification ofservices and to clinicians mental at and educational risk provision between

the by States of involvesphysical of status, practices and United influenced control strongly cognitive defecation within norms, throughout and cultural and the and is and socioeconomic maturation world. Development urination Inthe century, of first toilet by of in norm mastery 18months half the the United age States. was the twentieth psychologicaldistress training toilet Concernabout harsh and later later professional endorsement led training. to possible of toilet introduced child’s respects Brazelton mastery.The of autonomy later diapers facilitated In toilettraining. the the 1962 and disposable pride child-centered approach,which in also invention and child also changes, have increased care, the Social home workoutside maternal influencedthis trend. of including group usually years because the of Some duration U.S.populations. wait shorter.Toilet choose second families the 3 begins middle-class older achieved training birthday of in child the after white training at be about to age until the may is period andis of lower-income and to training Toilet families. 12 in be between accepted 18 months agecontinues

sequence in and to recognize the to understand to child’s achievement. required, elimination achieving to avoid and for urge ability to get the for toilet, oppositional Prerequisites the urination tasks take the defecation, to the behavior, toilet in include of pride not and hurried. can of training The process take entire be need 6 toilet months and setting). training the for future laws, rules (e.g., can toilet Successful and set parent-child goal mastery interaction around parental kindness, of active and the teaching manners, stage limit

mature Enuresis in is child is achieved to adequately urinary have who a incontinence continence. Enuresis or (daytime) (nighttime). diurnal nocturnal as classified is nighttime expected the are daytime In and age, States, 4 of and United by respectively. dryness 6 years months). has who classification primary dry useful achieved and a Another never a in at in (incontinence of secondary least who has (incontinence child for child dryness) 6 enuresis is been

developmental possible organic illness, is a including multiple Enuresis factors, difference, symptom orpsychological etiologic with distress. family history control. is acquisition a enuresis of associated bladder with delayed Primary of often and have hypothesized, A phenotypic fornocturnal autosomal been dominant etiology has genetic familialgroups enuresis patterns identified. with been do have psychiatric Although children can loss not bladder most control. with disorder, trigger a events enuresis of stressfullife commonly noted. etiology play enuresis, ahigh with Sleep role of in arousal may a the threshold physiology nocturnal In subgroup nocturnal children, of relates anocturnal vasopressin to polyuria a a peak. lack ofenuretic even of tendency Another smallamounts involuntary urine. the malfunction muscle a is detrusor the for of etiology contractions with contains when bladder possible and havechronic with dilated whichimpinges large the commonly in constipation enuresis can is colon, seen Reduced capacity a who bladder associatedwith bladder. on children distal be

has 5-yearolds, 1% most 15-year-olds. reported Enuresis the enuresis in in 15% 8-year-olds, in a urologic is prevalence condition in 7% common and of children.Nocturnal per remission rate be The 15% year. to reported spontaneous is is night, nocturnalenuresis 61% at of prevalence the of of oddsratio at compared day age.Of girls children but 1.4:1.The predominance, 17%wet during 7 and years wet with enuresis only, during has than 1.5:1 enuresis, a nocturnal female wet is boys night 22% the only. enuresis at with in lower day The and daytime

StudentConsult.com @ Available

of voiding: does pattern history often the on occur? How The focuses elucidating wetting or it occur during both? the day, night, Does or caffeinated any dreams, conditions wetting exhausting days)? bad with episodes beverages, consumption associated of there (e.g., Are child of a Has the past? the dryness period in had precede the stressful a change Did wetting in event pattern? review should of about neurologic, history A detailed a (including of gastrointestinal systems developmental defecation). systems the urinary, patterns include and information and A is snoring, nighttime including and urination. of sleep parasomnias, patterns history important, timing also of family one both had enuresis parents A reveals often or that as children. history rarely as should the with be abuse history enuresis sexual Although of history. included child abuse, part and psychosocial associated physical is have a seeking interventions help. Many numerous physician’s before families tried aids were out child’s the role how of its and family. condition carried the interventions within Identifying the they and understanding these

observation of examination physical child parent begins clues with thechild patterns. The andparent-child and developmental for interaction the about paid abdominal, attention neurologic, is examination. genital and tothe Special recommended hesitancy of elicited. a has is is the if or problems, history rectalexamination such as constipation.Observation recommended is if voiding dribbling, of voiding child A for should cord. tethered of a be or signs examined Thelumbosacral spinaldysraphism spine

(UTI), recommended laboratory and disease, diabetes mellitus. with urinary for the to infection is enuresis, clean chronic catch test For renal tract urinalysis children a most look only is testing, Further based on as the urine a such culture, urinalysis. neurologic sonogram cystourethrogram. current voiding enuresis, previous a renal dysfunction, children UTI, evaluated with severe with with a Children or a including or voiding complicated and are finding, referred child hydronephrosis, is and valves to treatment. found, for urethral reflux, further are urologist If or posterior vesicoureteral a the evaluation

Commonly and, no there is cause resolves without enuresis of identified cases, adolescence treatment. by enuresis most in most to likely an nocturnal identified family have enuresis with primary etiology. least to have Children a are are likely history and their UTI, such with and or an nocturnal organic explain insipidus, are Children have diabetes diurnal to secondary likely as mellitus, symptoms. to more diabetes enuresis etiology, and a nocturnal with problem with a Children condition primary diurnal bladder function. may or enuresis have neurodevelopmental psychosocial a or may disturbance condition stressor predisposing secondary have as a for a nocturnal with Children enuresis sleep enuresis.

organic Treatment begins enuresis. diagnosed underlying causes treating with of any underlying of often curative. is constipation Elimination chronic with is known identifiable terms and time, in the in all treatment’s from For child cost therapies of a child’s without to whose treatment. enuresis be success family, money, likelihood the disruption rate, associated condition recover must considered an not disorder, the the to are therapy treatment options pharmacotherapy. used conditioning most and The commonly the can also a with child family assist problem it clinician in plan cope the is making until resolved. help this to The live have a into adulthood. children symptoms is to months a cure achieved; few to with before years have children for Many enuresis a hygienic and A the linens manner self-esteem. handling nonhumiliating and in garments wet preserves for plan child’s should age, she The family much take depending child development, on responsibility as culture. is or as able, and he

used alarm. for nocturnal enuresis is widely therapy the The enuresis conditioning most 10%. rate a 70% with success an rate Enuresis of of initial have alarms relapse a underpants the the urethra. alarm clipped worn front in is pajama placed wrist on has and is the that or The probe pajamas or onto the of in probe. first drop the contacts the alarm urine when of sounds The when and is the finish child in bathroom voiding The to get alarm instructed up the sounds. 3 are the of through After night. 70% to dry 5 months, children

antidepressants. includes Pharmacotherapy acetate tricyclic enuresis for and, desmopressin nighttime rarely, treatment to in the Desmopressin and proved be safe decreases has production enuresis. urine of nights at is on subsequent 0.6 started bedtime) if 0.4 mg at and dose is dose to needed. per oral increased to and 0.2 The mg mg then medication (one is when 90% a and must has considered This be treatment rate the symptomatic, relapse not curative, discontinued. of medication rarely reduces enuresis, Imipramine, wetting. the nighttime of used for frequency now rate 50%. success initial is The discontinuation 90% only, treatment medication. of effective a relapse Imipramine of with during on is rate the (associated most is cardiac arrhythmia). with contraindication of risk overdose fatal important The

can be consequences severe. The psychological child Families is minimize own their the issues the ensuring to self-esteem punitive aesthetics. hygiene, child’s the and approaches comfort, avoiding competent of on impact can handle by that and

childhood educate considerable helps bed-wetting is common Appropriate parents to anticipatory that anxiety. alleviate early in guidance

stool hard with of movementsusually a decreased consistency. associated is Constipation frequency bowel accompanies defecation occurrence frequently The of constipation. at pain functional disorders underlying can implies no is constipation, there endocrinologic,or cause identifiable gastrointestinal, causativeorganic constipation condition. Although neurologic that toilet into a than other after orinvoluntary 4 is voluntary place Encopresis of of the regular, the age. feces years passage psychiatric symptom other Encopresis isuncommon or oppositional defiantdisorder and be of a without may constipation illness. one day involuntarypassage years than bowel approximately to and normal of is per associated beginning per Soiling age, day. is greater declines of fourstools often with impaction.The 4 and of the movements with frequency stool betweenbirth fecal

withholding of painful a includes of defecation etiology and bowel and chronic reasons, because The diet, of low-fiber neurologic gastrointestinal soiling usually past functional slow time or experiences. for genetic transit constipation movements, to 95% children subspecialist have of a no underlying other Approximately pathologic referred condition. for encopresis

U.S. children 5 studies, years of constipation between 16% 12 and of experience age. 37% to In with children. 1% in 2% children 4% soiling of Constipation overflow occurs school-age to of and preschool predominance during constipation is a is soiling of school preschool in incidence and girls boys, male whereas there age. The equal and

StudentConsult.com Available @

typically uncontrolled a underwear. presenting complaint constipation the complaint defecation for with of in is The soiling because soiling may that stool. child Parents report diarrhea of has of liquid the or Soiling may frequent be continuous. the the learns occasionally toilet. On may bowel block movements that that is the child passing clinician large-caliber further questioning, than defecation, painful often 3 impaction, and years younger of with withholding. Children present age should and history gastrointestinal, endocrine, and a of review developmental for complete systems include disorders and psychosocial a The history. neurologic

patients at on felt examination presentation. impaction can about 50% of Stool in be abdominal impaction. the fecal highly predictive rectum stool of packed in is Firm and of vault. A of size rectal examination tone the rectal assessment sphincter allows existence also anal of in fissures helpful of considering and anal placement is Evaluation and etiology severity. abnormalities. reveal cord examination, reflexes, reflexes, and anal cremasteric A underlying wink, extremity spinal neurologic lower including may

is required. not Abdominal x-ray fecal family distention of helpful the be It degree to and colonic the impaction. can showto an organic 129). for if studies, by are is biopsy, indicated enema andrectal history general examination(see Chapter indicated further In physical or cause such only theconstipation as barium disorder. such cause such not studies history Similarly endocrinologic chronic constipation,laboratory hypothyroidism conditions suggesting can without a although physicalexamination indicated or as are

includes (e.g., and and constipation of anatomic, constipation causes pharmacologic). endocrinologic, for neurogenic, gastrointestinal, The differential diagnosis organic functional soiling chronic passage 129). meconium has soiling and of an Hirschsprung may A Chapter have had and empty constipation sphincter with disease rectum who (see delayed child and tight abnormalities, Chronic be spinal sign cord. presenting such of cord a a may constipation cord or as a tethered tumor spinal anomalies. altered a reflexes, anal or to Physical lower hairy or clue extremity of tuft be sacral sinus examination absent findings wink, these sacral a may bradycardia. typically and and can growth with linear accompanied poor chronic constipation present by is Hypothyroidism constipation. lead may chronic Anal stenosis to to opiates, constipation. and may anticholinergics antidepressants, The chronic also use lead phenothiazine, of problems, associated constipation. be retardation chronic and including mental with may Developmental autism,

chronic with optimal forthe of child and constipation and this family the Treatment and management. and condition education goodprognosis about with demystification nature chronic begins soiling,emphasizing the soiling cooperation. blame and family basis enlists physiologic alleviates to child the the Explaining of and and the constipation may treatment long-term plan improve to Education adherence 14-1). the (Table require of constipation half two and One completely medication. no to thirds recover longer children functional with

children. of 37% Constipation to affects 16% and of have soiling. 1% children 4% to functional constipation a Functional soiling early combination life to due in begins with/without of factors: constipation

discomfort avoid to Withholding of stool

of constipating medications are Use that

a at the changes control. child’s reduce chronic physiologic rectum bowel When impaction,

Dilated in fecal sensation rectal standard results volume. reduced vault to

Rehabilitation musculature strength several rectal months. and requires of

Until musculature to effectively. expel rectal dilated able be stool less then, may

attempt. can may felt; incomplete the sphincter at it defecation to urge stool contraction to when is occur anal Paradoxical emptying of lead defecate

to soiling recognize accommodation. accidents do children their olfactory Many not owing

self-esteem common or are behavioral presentation. other concerns Low on

with the most for constipation and and soiling. Improve management for education

6–24 the mo. of for of commitment management Effective constipation child/family, a requires functional substantial usually

adherence likely family child’s is of of Degree the and a child predictor success.

for of time finicky patterns) common eating high this problems. diet the transition a (decreased to continued intake, *The fluid dairy toddler features during constipation high-risk and the intake, development make

is treatment child success the the younger begin,the rate. The higher when diagnosis and behavioral laxative involves and combination training of Treatment therapy. a months. to 24 6 requires Successfultreatment is adequatecolonic disimpaction. step or cleanout The next of combinations and enema, or alone Clean-out includeenemas methods orallaxatives. suppository, toclean-out. High-dose oral a mineral approach slower is oil method Choice witha the family depends particular and on method. experience child, of the the clinician’s choice, disimpaction ageof summarized are effects and Methods side in 14-2. Table family the includedin the should child of choosing method. clean-out be and process The points important. child and of are control cooperation medication of and for unpleasant,allowing oral choice Because praisingall may be may and be enemas signs the invasive

the chronic essential and of constipation is Behavioral treatment soiling. training to family child are output. and document The stool asked tomonitor and sitting times Routine 5 three four day. isinstituted to for to 10 toilet minutes per slightly sitting to feet Thechild body withthe upper asked floor forward on toilet and flexed is demonstrate the position proper

mL/kg oz first (135 Enema—6 mL) to in If administer office. physician’s considered, enemas 4.5 up are

12–24 enema every enema Invasive; oil by or impaction: or normal up saline of 1–3 trauma Small later mechanical 1–3 saline h risk normal h mL/kg to mL) impaction: phosphate (135 Large Enema—6 × followed mineral phosphate 4.5 enema oz

hypertonic as may as saline effective phosphate Abdominal not Normal be cramping;

with phosphate retained. if hyperphosphatemia, or especially risk or renal hypocalcemia, Hirschsprung cramping; of and hypokalemia, Abdominal insufficiency Hypertonic phosphate for not recommend experts children <4 enema others yr, <2yr. for children Some do

impaction milk:molasses to For clear of difficult molasses: 1:1 Milk

enema, Combination: laxative suppository, oral

Enema 1: q12–24 Day See enemas h above

Day 2: Abdominal hypokalemia (10 diarrhea, cramping, q12–24 suppository h mg) Bisacodyl

Day q12–24 Abdominal mg) 3: tablet (5 h diarrhea, Bisacodyl cramping, hypokalemia

tube: Oral/nasogastric vomiting, cramping, solution Polyethylene Nausea, glycol electrolyte bloating, aspiration. Large volume. Usually mL/h NuLYTELY)—25 (GoLYTELY to to × h/day mL/kg/h and 1000 or up administer nasogastric 4 requires tube hospitalization

per age high-dose up Aspiration—lipoid pneumonia. day mL oil—15–30 year of mineral per Oral chilled. Give × days oz to 3–4 8

(senna): Abdominal 3 15 cramping. × q12h mL X-Prep output not 3 May 2 or dose until see

oz 10 age of maximum foot oz/yr day Hypermagnesemia of 2–3 for days support. 1 citrate: to or per Magnesium child be praised cooperation punishment should should for andembarrassment and components of avoided. this The program, with be all decreased once daily finally resolve, and is toiletsitting to day. a to As twice symptoms

child is disimpaction maintenance When begins of achieved, phase treatment. the the stool production prevents promotes and This regular phase reimpaction. promote attention to diet, and involves stool training. to medications It regularity, behavioral fluid are recommended. and Increasing fiber dietary is recommended 20 chronic should a per For (e.g., day). dose fiber age daily of child’s of the years children grams take 10-year-old as 10 plus grams with in constipation, fiber the calculated of At of oz fluid least per gram fiber intake 2 intake nondairy is recommended. bowel including increase juices, the prune, movements. and water juice, pear, of content Sorbitol-based apple movements. bowel or soft osmotic promote regular laxatives Lubricants used are to listed side Table medications, 14-3. Maintenance in including effects, are is glycol and the taste tolerated are because Polyethylene palatable. powder texture well osmotic laxative. a require require a the stimulant Some use addition children may laxative; constipation severe of with children an may lubricant to in

secondary inadequate resulting approximately occurs adherence five poor problems treatment to in Treatment with one of recognition in failure in children reimpaction. or

constipation functioning interfere with social Chronic soiling and and self-esteem. tasks. and children Discomfort and from important accidents fear distract their other may of schoolwork condition. in constipation Children to unusual their and this may also about eating develop response chronic beliefs habits published. child reports abuse to been soiling of related have Case

in adequate measures. The children fiber preventive early as care primary physician families an recommend to and toileting habits can all intake at regular their help children age encourage institute shorten of can the length constipation much chronic prevent treatment and disability secondary diagnosis required. of Earlier

containing Juices Pear, prune, apple sorbitol

below Lactulose sorbitol: mL/kg/day bid or 1–3 See ÷ doses

syrup (light dark): Rectum or considered Not Clostridium 1–3 spores botulinum Per risk doses mL/kg/day for Corn bid

day Aspiration—lipoid 1–3 bid dose Mineral oil: one or as mL/kg pneumonia

or Chill juice give with

or dose high impaction too Leakage:

stool, water Osmotics bulk and softness in aiding Retain

doses bid 10 disaccharide: Synthetic cc/kg/day flatus g/15 cramping, mL, Lactulose: abdominal 1–3

of magnesia): mg/5 mL, secondary 800 insufficiency bid Magnesium hypocalcemia with bid renal 400 mL/kg/day hypophosphatemia, overdose hydroxide of hypermagnesemia, mg/5 or (milk Risk mL, 0.5 mL/kg 1–3

glycol water stool to over powder): or make 3-day 15 17 May Titrate achieve mushy cc/kg/day) juice days consistency g/240 dose bid (approximately (polyethylene stock, g/kg/day administer stock solutions to 1–2 intervals cc MiraLAX at doses 1.0

doses than lactulose bid Sorbitol: Less mL/kg/day costly 1–3

contractions effectiveness colonic of Improve rectal muscle and Stimulants†

cramping mL medication 6–12 2.5–7.5 stopped melanosis cc/day yr: coli, nephropathy; coli available) syrup—8.8 hypertrophic and g Idiosyncratic 5–15 2–6 osteoarthropathy, hepatitis, doses (Tablets analgesic Senna: sennoside/5 Improvement abdominal bid melanosis cc/day bid doses granules yr: of after

Abdominal cramping, Bisacodyl: hypokalemia 5-mg daily 1–2 diarrhea, tablets, tablets/dose 1–3 ×

hypokalemia suppositories, Bisacodyl: daily Abdominal *Single cramping, stools. to achieve 10-mg 1–2 diarrhea, × daily, 0.5–1 agent may comfortable suppository, suffice

use. reserved should be for short-term †Stimulants

daily development, functioning. Sleep a child is that and phenomenon health, is critical to universal behavioral partial is state by the complex and physiologic This a environment. process of and disengagement reversible characterized unresponsiveness from polysomnographic by is Sleep broadly (REM) categorized non-REM into sleep (NREM) eye rapid sleep. and movement patterns sleep active, (EEG) by muscle REM electroencephalography is an and atonia. awake-like pattern characterized is by is sleep which EEG (N1), further and also divided stage deep stage low-frequency, or of three activity, the lightest characterized 3 delta (N3), stages—from NREM consists to high-frequency waves. high-amplitude sleep, slow-wave as stage low-amplitude, 1 sleep into known cycles alternate and REM the sleep NREM in night. throughout

through changes and from infancy Sleep architecture life childhood. fetal newborns to 60 adults. cycles and Sleep gradually in and lengthen minutes children minutes 90 approximately last in whereas adults older in REM sleep in Neonates sleep. typically cycle sleep, NREM sleep begin begin children their and neonates frequent termed and sleep, and is grimaces active in REM facial are muscle sleep common. twitches 25% to gradually sleep newborns 30% REM of total time by comprises and adolescence. to in decreases 50% sleep to up Slow-wave before to age. is not sleep seen 6 months 3 of and of during Beginning sleep the amount shifts REM the the toward last 6 adulthood, of NREM from predominates while continuing of months the 12 sleep to first the night, third third through night.

The also change and sleep age. of timing with duration diurnal and time decreases. sleep total more patterns Sleep become daily gradually intervals and throughout on night. to the in sleep per hours 16 average 18 fragmented day Full-term day infants the to sleep night 2 to One-year-old 3 on and per during children average 10 hours hours nap 11 day. for from decrease year during of life. two naps Naps to the one second United 2-year-olds by the age to nap, States, In 3. 80% over of decreasing 50% 9 average hours By years old, sleeps child to 10 12 per the day. even need sleep day, per dropped of day. to adolescence, the an though hours has average average By per hours duration adolescents 7½ 9 develop later and to also Adolescents those physiologically relative wake childhood. a based in sleep-onset shift middle times toward

children or in multiple other parents, norm many sleep strongly in influence norm grandparents or with including practices, independently (the other cultures). sleep whether (the the factors Cultural United siblings, States) the Awareness practices is respectful sleep of effective varying essential to regarding and cultural intervention.

practice. most in complaints one problems the pediatric frequent Sleep are of behavioral (bedtime rhythm awakenings), refusal, disorders and 15-1). sleep onset, (Table nighttime circadian Numerous exist, parasomnias, sleep insomnias disorders including delayed (OSA) should Obstructive apnea sleep disorders mental and associated with and also considered. be illness physical sleep

children in to 20% at 30% occur Sleep problems of some childhood. pointduring most all from preschool infancythrough prevalent disorders are age common but Behavioral are across sleep andfound groups age. sleep. 15% children toddlers, difficulties maintaining have 10% in to of Bedtime of to15% occurs resistance and/or preschool-aged and achieving 30% young terrors(1% walking Althoughgenerally children, 6%). including occur in commonly and to benign, sleep parasomnias (15% sleep 40%) to of OSA 4% reported in 1% children. is to to 16% disorders 7% Circadianrhythm occur adolescents. of in

StudentConsult.com Available @

in and often go a unrecognized. Sleep ways disorders manifest variety of may hyperactivity, inattentiveness, Some irritability rather daytime including children than problems, behavioral overt or sleepiness. with present care. is of recommended disorders Screening part sleep as primary for night, daytime excessive duration and regularity problems, sleep, during Clinicians inquire should snoring about and wakenings of and the sleepiness, breathing. presence bedtime of sleep-disordered

detailed of a including assessment history sleep The of habits, complaints sleep bedtime, with sleep-onset, begins times. and wake of to a and achieving for of detailed the normal sleep dynamic environment can challenges A resources result in sleep. understanding description the type the recommended The who ambient temperature, it, light, includes noise, and shares bedtime routine. the bed, the of history sleep members). be the number may parental practices and routines, and influence work household of patterns, activities, cultural Household important evening and structure, (e.g., of timing ease influence including timing practices Dietary sleep, of intake. caffeine and meals be regularly. so snore pauses, OSA on) A for breathing should symptoms who children noises, all (gasps, assessing in and history of detailed obtained snorting with trauma. New-onset may a disorders psychological sleep associated be the helpful. reveal history not does be sleep disorder, cause of diary sleep the a When the can

rule central system physical other neurologic pain, thatcause genetic with sleep causes associated is may and disorders.Children disorders. of examination conditions that disorder, A such delay have complete disturbance, outmedical be sleep as syndromes associated withseizure with developmental conditions to nervous important could children. attention-deficit/hyperactivity higher and risk with fetal other than alcohol Similarly disorders at disorder syndromeare children sleep for signs adenoids or upper and of or the pulmonary tonsils enlarged airway examination mayreveal other obstruction. Carefulattention to

limb to used detect and disorder. A is excessive movements, OSA, polysomnogram seizure sleep recording observation consists an in performed laboratory. of all-night and a This maintaining based is circadian children not insomnia uncomplicated problems. or with parasomnias, rhythm disorders, in sleep initiating Polysomnography behaviorally primary sleep), or (difficulty indicated

nighttime wakenings subtype Behavioral manifests that youngchildren. orprolonged two is frequent Sleep-onset or as occur insomnia infants of subtypes: into in divided association childhood conditions the awakens periods During normal child thoseexperienced under brief asleep. arousal fell from of with as each different they sleepcycle, they are return to tosleep unable independently. Thus bedtime stems a or fears most bedtime enforce refusal are causes bedtime or older and of also is subtype by unwillingness common refusal. in rules resistance is expectations.Nighttime and caregiver’s inability common children Limit-setting characterized that and from to preschool-aged

and terrors, sleepwalking, include Parasomnias arousals. sleep confusional are night. sleep during the occur and the first NREM of third These likely more during They common are preschool developmental most and time children likely resolve maturation. and in to with are sometimes and with is Sleepwalking or common but associated benign agitation dangerous behaviors. often is console. to a unresponsiveness awakening consist attempts abrupt an and to caregivers’ with agitation, of loud terrors scream, Sleep differentiated Sleep terrors are

subtype the Sleep-onset night intervention Minimize parental response nocturnal association

sleep Refusal routines counseling Family to stressors Regularize Night waking disruptions Social Family

Painful chronically (e.g., disease out asthma, Any irritating dermatitis, reflux) or esophageal symptomatically disorder otitis, crying Illness Treat

apnea. OSA, DDAVP, obstructive sleep 1-desamino-8-D-arginine vasopressin;

night nightmares, arousal result and in from or sleep. which REM from the dreaming occur later in but remember have sleep nightmares typically their recollection of terrors. Children no to less to tend longer. sleep but are last dramatic similar terrors, be Confusional arousals

common are most at disorders any occur can age. rhythm adolescence Circadian but during meet arouse inability to the of to phase, consist They sleep sleep requirements. mornings in failure to an leading the delayed exaggerated and lost sleep the weekends. adolescents Many to attempt on recoup resulting problems with emotional sleep cognition The leads regulation. deprivation to and

obvious to Obstructive sleep in apnea or easy not diagnose. childhood always is or hypertrophy. caused is commonly by OSA adenoidal tonsillar snoring daytime may is children history of A some sleepiness. have typical; excessive for are increased risk at Obese OSA. children associated which is or often when relieved improves OSA toddlers In tonsillectomy a with obstruction poor adenoidectomy. is the growth, by with experience OSA problems. children Many difficulties and cognitive school in than Hyperactivity age-matched in also common more is controls. these children

from differentiated sleep psychiatric disorders and with disorders. must sleep disorders associated Primary be medical sleep. anxiety and present Psychoses, with disordered can disorders, substance abuse also epilepsy clinician should sleep-related disorders. and developmental The consider

toboth is habits of ages. baseline all of essential and disorders treatment prevention healthy sleep at a Establishing sleep

socialization, (∼30 routine during day food, Consistent Adequate in physical temperature ambient hydration, noise, bedroom sleep and the to bedtime min) light, Consistent cue activity

television of naps Avoidance bedroom No (unless in electronics appropriate) other or developmentally

develop Child strategies allowed to self-soothing

comfortable Parents setting are limits/boundaries

and (seeTable hygiene close sleep attention include and bedtime to routine, consistent and having appropriate bedtime 15-2). a These and calm three consist foursoothing istime bedtime the should that help child of A that signal for sleep. routine activities or it should It minutes. no more 30 last than a reading Activities bathing, singinga or include song. brushing story, may teeth, consistent routine. older children a Even adolescents and pre-bed require can used positive object A promote blanket such sleep a to encourage be self-soothing. orstuffed and animal associations transitional as weekends. nighttime should enough time sufficient to sleep, consistent, including on bothbedtime The be bedtime allow morning should setearly be wake and for and delayed Televisions to sleep and maladaptive and because can associations. other devicesshould lead onset sleep electronic be bedroom the from removed these

with sleep coincide change, infants usually association be in is food, comfort. put planningthe they and infancy and understanding bed a developmentally by environment had parental drowsy, infant beprevented infant after appropriate recommended but have diaper needs.It that family can Sleep-onset to of stillawake, sleep physiology, in disorder expectations, Some required self-regulation crying of infantto toleration for infant of the achieve is sleep. safe essential. environmentis sleep A for parents routine waking hoursfor It 3 the every of first isnormal into important settling frequently 4 for to weeksbefore their infant feeding. to understand for is it that wake a to 6 to and Infants before some months nightbefore age. age, not thenight 6 the of 18 months through do sleep through do sleep 12 not of typically though co-sleeping(mother because common, increased infant of sleeping SIDS. is together) and risk Even is of notrecommended it control tobe allows of young control the to ceding desirability Proactivelyconsidering child. bed the rather sharing than parents in

comprise sleep the behavioral mainstay of disorders. interventions treatmentfor Behavioral to bedtime difficulty fallingasleep behavioral byspecific treated In attention and strategies. hygiene to are bedtime children sleep practices, young resistance addition meticulous in and bedtime. a not parental Systematic at demands responding to consists for attention child’s ignoring of until thechild putting involves (“cry demands out”) Unmodified then ignoring the child’s bed it to thenext and morning. extinction young extinction are waiting decreasing methods fall checking asleep longer involves on of effective the successively in child.Both independently. children andenabling briefly to before Graduated periods time resistance bedtime Positivereinforcement strategies in and preschool-aged can older used be children. also for include bed). in meeting (e.g., rewards goal These stickers) bedtime a (e.g., staying link the in and to the increaseeffectiveness (first thing positive behavior. should Rewards immediately reward morning) better with the beprovided benefit from fears at with nighttime reinforcing feelings safety. of aimed can behavioraltherapy Children

Infrequent and do or treatment parasomnias reassurance. beyond not need nonintrusive education safe a important. Ensuring is environment child by is episode. terrors intervention, because during minimal are best impossible conversation Sleep the managed the with child of before be parasomnia awakening effective of brief the Anticipatory the occurrence event. typical shortly in a may the aborting frequent sleep nocturnal to disorders need or evaluate study coexisting prolonged for seizures. a or Children sleep possible parasomnias with may severe slow-wave that may be sleep suppress cases. Medications indicated in

and go of sleephygiene at weeks. several tired, fading child to gradual the also ensuring or Circadian are treated he forward by involves thetime gradually course bed rhythm over feels then bedtime naturally to clock.Bedtime advancingthe the biologic of practices disorders she the resetting allowing

Rarely insomnia with treated children are pharmacologically. useful soporific delayed 2.5 syndrome. treating mg) (dose, Melatonin sleep to in 10 has properties phase those normal and children been in developmental has both delays. used It with successfully with development supplements. stores in prescription sell is Melatonin dietary without available that clonidine The presynaptic α-agonist acts preferentially on to neurons noradrenergic α2 activity. inhibit side can off-label difficulties; Somnolence cases of to effect use sleep in in use children. is put refractory is an of clonidine, this which be a at 0.05 mg Clonidine mg started a dose and needed. with is increased of usually 0.1 to if bedtime on children with years 4 clonidine. as treating There as young are old data Weaning end at recommended treatment. offclonidine is the of

and sleep impairment with and emotional regulation. childhood cognitive of serious obvious complication most The is disorders associated ability difficulties, impairment failure, social This and at problems. family puts for children risk school illness acute increased at risk children It psychiatric disorders. is sleep-deprived likely and that for are

6to 2003 42:312–316, determinants Camp crying Dev in 12-week-old Blass Changing CA: of Psychobiol termination infants, EM, human

of interventions Rev(2): Cochrane enuresis Alarm Glazener Database JH, CM, nocturnal RE: 2005 CD002911, for in children, Syst Peto Evans

Clinical Guide Diagnosis to and A sleep: JA: Mindell Owens Pediatric JA,

Problems, Management Sleep ed 2010, of 2, Lippincott Philadelphia, Wil

1. tantrums children: M, young Temper Davidson Potegal RJ: in Behavioral composition. 2. Dev organization, J temporal Behav and duration Tantrum

2003 Pediatr 24:140–154,

BMJ Dale A: children, Rubin Chronic constipation in G, 333:1051–1055,

on Subcommittee Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. Wolraich Com Steering L, Brown M, Improvement mittee Management Quality and on

RT, for et Pediatrics of 2011 diagnosis, practice 128(5):1007–1022, adolescents, al: ADHD: attention-deficit/hyperactivity the evaluation, disorder children Brown and guideline in clinical treatment and

DISORDERS, DISORDERS, MALINGERING SOMATOFORM AND FACTITIOUS

this which The of end visits are responsible the explained disorders continuum. loss represent pediatric physical transient medical symptoms of (Table cannot 50% of only are (pain age or 16-1).While as by distress,” and group, up be groups somatoform severe symptoms, function) are in for of condition “signals disorders outpatient disorders the somatoform a inconsistent in of to of identified occurs by affecting family’s school, the focus Somatization the that becoming child’s life. physical of relationships the is expected illness life, that go and a beyond and peer home pathophysiology, and the context the patient in symptoms the stressor, acute leading Somatization diagnosis family the and to that is often found. the persists belief child often and yet the stress beyond the medical correct been with associated by the has not psychosocial

relatives 20% rate monozygotic twin as in studies. concordance 10% disorder to in of and first-degree a occurs as A somatization higher many has is of Lifetime that 3%, as somatoform as subclinical is high somatoform illness disorders 10%. and of prevalence is twice puberty tend as nearly girls somatic equal. ratio Adolescent to report functional many to boys,whereas as prior adolescent symptoms the

emotional, children history child distress, have illness. conflict, of of with Affected physical families expressing or maltreatment abuse), history (including physical sexual, come marital to emotional likely more from are a difficulty (RAP). early In often childhood, symptoms abdominal pain include recurrent more common. are insomnia, Later neurologic fatigue and headaches, symptoms,

somatoform in (e.g., and and pseudoseizures) Explainable to present 50% up difficult patients conditions of a diagnostic can dilemmas. seizures coexist disorder medical and polymyositis, of The includes list porphyria, symptoms systemic fibromyalgia, physical could sclerosis, endocrine chronic vocal unexplained (CFS), infections, myasthenia with syndrome multiple systemic acute fatigue intermittent periodic medical cord other disorders, dysfunction, chronic present and disorders myopathies. that gravis, paralysis,

is common symptoms. condition precedes Depression the and somatic a comorbid frequently disorders complaints. can Anxiety with somatic present

undifferentiated somatoform and specified, not disorder, somatoform disorder, disorder, for are dysmorphic in body disorder adults otherwise disorders establishedfor additional DSM-IV pain somatization somatoform diagnostic need as hypochondriasis.The disorders disorder pediatric study (BDD), conversion populations. classifies and criteria disorder, somatoform

mechanisms. multiple unexplained complaints, Somatization not and involves sexual, pain, symptoms disorder caused physical pseudoneurologic including known gastrointestinal, by in 16-2. are The Table diagnose used this criteria listed to disorder least and sexual common children reproductive the the in symptom, one for unusual is or the is requirement during onset Given adolescence. diagnosis at and less females males. 0.2% Prevalence 0.2% 2% from in to range estimates than in somatization of prognosis. is associated Early disorder with onset poor

impairment months. by more unexplained functional last accompanied for somatoform physical disorder Undifferentiated that least or complaints (Table at 16-3)includes one 6 to more for for Children will meet predict the likely somatoform criteria disorder go to an undifferentiated and for than somatization and disorder, DSM-IV are adolescents a full patients criteria disorder. somatization on evidence exists develop which symptom no to

a suggestive in conversion disease function neurologic reactions, is sensory illness a affecting symptoms the involves motor a frequency of disorder occur Conversion psychopathology recent high (Table absence unresolved process and stress, at voluntary family and in of grief or family 16-4).Adjustment difficulties, symptoms. epileptic same disorder condition coexist seizures) and in and (e.g., may patient. a the A nonepileptic physical conversion four based motor, whether are disorder symptoms (seizures), primarily subtypes are on sensory, or of the There mixed. presented conversion nonepileptic

psychological symptoms patient. distress more and others to cause Presenting the for stressor hours by may the weeks follow than for of is as symptoms regarding This concern seeming lack potentially to indifference. serious referred belle la

a Presenting physical is complaint symptom. is mechanism. Physical by caused known physiologic symptom a stress symptom Physical induced. is association symptom and recognize Patient may stress. between Symptom biofeedback, responds to medication, and stress reduction. frequently

function, complaint Presenting or is pain, (loss of both). physical

known a symptom caused is by not physiologic Physical mechanism. or unconscious Physical idea, conflict. to related is symptom fantasy,

Patient does association not between the recognize symptom and unconscious. of Symptom unconscious slowly resolution to responds factors.

Requires pathologic in than physiologic (see are 11 than known or caused physical by symptoms Table Physical more 13 not girls, symptoms a mechanism. in boys more 16-2)

role. the are symptoms to Physical sick need related maintain to

are symptoms to psychological that Patient unrelated factors. convinced to tend character despite change persist or treatment. Symptoms

or Presenting is physical a complaint sign symptom. disease. symptom to interprets physical indicate Patient related to Conviction regarding illness anxiety. may depression or be does to not respond Symptom reassurance. problems psychological at Medication directed helps. underlying often

Presenting complaint physical symptom. is a symptom is control. under voluntary Physical service). reward used symptom is military money, gain (e.g., Physical avoidance of to Patient symptom consciously recognizes factitious. as attained reward (need reward). not lessen may Symptom is to retain when

mimicking syndrome. Presenting complaint known is complex symptom

control. is under voluntary Symptom complex

surgery). treatment used attain is medical to Symptom (including complex

is also often factors Patient complex consciously operating. as factitious unconscious that recognizes symptom disturbed are but psychologically so

multiple multiple diagnoses and often complex in operations. Symptom results

following met. the must Each criteria be of occur course Individual disturbance. symptoms may time at the of any during

1.

different related urination) (e.g., sexual extremities, during Four menstruation, joints, pain chest, four or or least back, symptoms: at functions 2. pain intercourse, to rectum; head, sites abdomen,

of than symptoms Two least diarrhea, gastrointestinal bloating, or symptoms: intolerance foods) pain 3. gastrointestinal other (e.g., vomiting, at several nausea, two

(e.g., menses, pregnancy) or ejaculatory bleeding, sexual sexual symptom sexual pain other one than menstrual at indifference, One irregular dysfunction, least or symptom: 4. reproductive vomiting erectile throughout excessive

weakness, of not difficulty at loss fainting) one aphonia, sensation, in deafness, pain blindness, balance, paralysis localized condition symptom urinary symptoms neurologic such of retention, or such symptoms vision, other pseudoneurologic deficit suggesting lump a or than One or coordination limited seizures; impaired or symptom: amnesia; touch as loss to consciousness swallowing or double or least pain (conversion hallucinations, throat, dissociative 1. as

medication). medical or the condition of the effects fully appropriate (e.g., drug, After symptoms known not explained each by of general is a a direct investigation, substance

2.

history, examination, or condition, the complaints, a medical the what is in impairment from When excess physical there social related expected are findings. occupational is laboratory or of physical general

A. One physical or fatigue, of more loss (e.g., gastrointestinal complaints appetite, complaints)

B. (1) or (2) 1. Either

investigation, general the appropriate After explained the condition by a drug fully substance be effects or medication). medical symptoms (e.g., direct or cannot a of known

2.

related complaints, condition, laboratory medical or impairment findings. physical history, there general is or is a is the expected of the from in examination, what When physical social, excess occupational

in functioning. symptoms significant cause The or occupational, of distress areas social, C. impairment other important clinically or

least months D. At of 6 disturbance

is mood disturbance another by E. somatoform (e.g., disorder, sleep disorder, anxiety mental disorder disorder). disorder, accounted sexual psychotic dysfunction, disorder, The better another or for not

feigned intentionally malingering). The F. or produced (factitious is not symptom disorder,

may or iatrogenic sequelae, but contractures injury. Symptoms often self-limited are chronic with associated as such be

the consciousness) (falling down including altered world, throughout with several common syndrome is States. out the cultures United in Falling anesthesia finding. common glove another (nonanatomic) Stocking is Symptoms are

A. motor function, suggesting other One voluntary or condition. or affect medical neurologic a general or more sensory symptoms

B. symptom with is initiation to are preceded because Psychological the by or judged conflicts deficit the exacerbation or be stressors. or associated other factors

intentionally malingering). symptom not (factitious or is feigned disorder, produced C. The

substance, condition, of sanctioned a After by the behavior culturally be explained appropriate investigation, a or or D. a the symptom direct fully cannot effects as experience. by general medical

distress in E. The or other or symptom causes impairment clinically medical significant warrants occupational, social, function or evaluation.

another not dysfunction, during by The symptom better not somatization F. occur of pain course for is does limited exclusively sexual the mental or to not is and disorder, disorder. accounted

inconsistent; extremity a may paralyzed watching. think when is patients often they one that move no

as true a Nonepileptic described of pseudoseizures, withthe not or electroencephalographic seizures resemble are sometimes coursecharacteristic but epilepsy. epileptic seizures, associated abnormalities clinical diagnosis. of cases resolve within Most 3months spells can Referring symptoms. seizures these of as nonclassic avoid help presentations for medicalization to

of to recurrence. often of 25% experience condition although20% the is benign, a course The patients symptoms stressor; of include above-average paralysis, aphonia, earlydiagnosis characteristics intelligence; psychiatric treatment. acute an blindness; Goodprognostic identifiable and onset; of and presence and tremor pseudoseizures. characteristics include Poor prognostic 4%. averages of symptoms ofmisdiagnosis The conversion rate dyskinesias(abnormal and disorder. conditions sclerosis, mistakenfor dystonias, commonly gravis, multiple are movements) conversion Myasthenia

the if a is Pain symptom. conversion disorder is disorder diagnosed of physical predominant pain instead and into medical those is major disorders associated factor factors, divides the psychological psychological the symptom those medical the which and both pain The (Table DSM-IV with factors, in 16-5). condition in with those pain lasts and diagnosis 6 or less when is than more. acute months chronic 6 it lasts if considered The months the condition

common the 4% is for RAP of of pain 2% office complaint to and pediatric recurrent childhood most visits. accounts intermittent between It with by pain is episodes more than defined months. 3 full recovery lasting is between RAP relation and There anxiety children. a strong in pain. Approximately to findings have pediatric no abdominal clinical patients 90% of account their for

headaches are types tension-type of migraine headache. Common and and vomiting syndrome, be symptoms, of intense, dizziness, with by and associated cyclic characterized stereotypic may episodes gastrointestinal recurrent Migraine

A. or severity of is predominant more focus sites the anatomic attention. warrant Pain and in clinical is to sufficient one

B. functions. clinically impairment occupational, important in or or social, other distress pain The causes significant

the C. an the onset, Psychological of important have maintenance role factors or exacerbation, in pain. severity,

deficit intentionally malingering). produced or symptom is D. or not feigned disorder, The (factitious

not for mood, anxiety, by dyspareunia. accounted criteria is and E. psychotic The for does better or pain meet disorder not a

Specify the following:

Acute: duration <6 months

duration vomiting. Chronic: ≥6 months unexplained role a play the Psychological a headache. significant in of factors complaint frequently

children and in be 10% chest Functional school-aged of adolescents. pain can seen as pain), disorders pain pains sympathetic and musculoskeletal type reflex back common (previously dystrophy). and (limb known regional pain fibromyalgia, pain syndrome Other complex are I

assessment Reassurance and disorder.Symptom of precede primary treatment of initial that is follow ongoingmanagement in and episode, the pain problem. the including aid the events the pain diaries, Minimizing recurrent consequences secondary pain of syndromes isimportant. psychological

based the disease preoccupation the with fear and a Hypochondriasis misinterpretation functions. of bodilysymptoms on serious ofhaving is for6 This months. present fear should be atension patientto indicate perceived of The is tumor). disease the orsymptom, interpreted but despite reassurance normal brain (e.g., presenting by is is headache complaint a sign physician a a which physical as adolescence seen more diagnosisis and in This late adulthood. commonly underlying be anxiety symptoms. An relatedto the may depression or disorder four population. general (OCD) than of Prevalence greater obsessive-compulsive in disorder is times the dysmorphic to is the not belief animagined When is appearance, limited body defect or preoccupation the disorder diagnosis (BDD), hypochondriasis. in

impairment causesclinically slight functioning. that animagined preoccupation defect physical in a significant Body dysmorphic disorder or appearance in distress or with is is functioning. distress clinically adolescents presence being equal) in usually bythe common and/or is and developmental in male-to-femaleratio with appearance of almost from impairment significant preoccupations (the seen It distinguished the a concerns bodily and (scars shape and butexcessive common. body are be can focus, acne) area Any about skin shame and clinicians directly may symptoms. bemissed ask the need diagnosis unless BDD the secrecy, for about Because be can associatedwith reassurance-seeking. excessive children BDD a report to grooming, bodyarea, and camouflage Parents with particular checking, mirror of attempts consequence cause as the Patients attempts to self-injury perceived of fix flaw. may a

consultations to unlikely Many surgeons with had butare often be patients and these with of the seek interventions dermatologists and satisfied have results.

is to be related OCD. considered BDD to up 0.7% 5% has to children, The seeking be and to of adolescents, BDD in surgery. 2% prevalence reported been in in cosmetic patients narcissistic social individuals Many a identity personality disorder; depression, history maltreatment; phobia, OCD, of disorders, and including and BDD comorbid gender report childhood disorder. psychiatric anorexia nervosa; with disorder; delusional attempted BDD suicide. rates 28% associated sufferers with and suicidal with ideation is of having of attempts, also high

adolescents. Fatigue a to50% complaint, affecting up of physical is common been memory, least andpsychiatric and in excluded. at CFS refers sleep limitations concentration aches specifically to disabling a months fatigueassociated with 6 by medical where of self-reported explanations short-term and and severe, conditioncharacterized alternative have musculoskeletal disturbance, pains, oftenassociated depression be can CFS incapacitating. and is with israre adolescence, 1%. and childhood below in uncommon CFS prevalence with in cases. post-viralillness an approximately follows Onset acute of typically two thirds pediatric in psychological Treatment is uncovered. nonspecific, a is medical unless cause or general

disorders Soma the questionnaires). Interview (parental versions) for and Screening and (child Illness Assessment include interview Scales tools Inventory parent Somatization Children’s Attitude somatoform and the the severity Functional assesses of Disability symptoms. The Inventory

integrated Treatment psychiatric an for somatoform disorders should and use approach. medical physical invasive psychiatric overall identify tests functioning, shopping. disorders, doctor improve The concurrent disorders, minimize out to are goals and concurrent and unnecessary rule works stigma and a health thereby when consultation This distrust. as mental minimizing of part evaluation, comprehensive is presented

in somatoformpain, be syndrome, benefit clomipramine) bowel BDD, and disorders. headaches, unexplained medications fibromyalgia, (fluoxetine, treatmentof sertraline, and may gastrointestinal functional of the irritable Antidepressant citalopram, abdominal have management should overdose. pain and avoided (FAP) disorders or in no others) youth antidepressants pain verydangerous with mood because proven Tricyclic be in functional are either efficacyin (clomipramineand they like bupropion, syndrome antidepressant, activating useful. comorbid and In fatigue a chronic anxiety, with more be can depression may also helpful be in Stimulants CFS.

of methods, treatment behaviors, and fibromyalgia, reward and help CFS, recurrent which behaviors the in health-promoting disability illness and pain, Cognitive-behavioral discourage FAP. useful. trauma Interpersonal in and psychotherapies presence are expressive psychological of the particularly strategies. and relaxation, encourage strategies, such coping active relief Self-management and biofeedback, more hypnosis, self-monitoring, as provide some symptomatic therapy useful. can and very Family interventions be family-based school should indicators and functioning. and be Home important performance appropriate emphasized of be should schooling avoided, as attendance and child for limit strongly (e.g., sticking schedule identify (e.g., not home to days In symptoms; school); and provide encourage and to help and limit the behavior; or on pain child days. at parents when with activities activities pain symptoms stomachaches) attention have special going on attention sick headaches, does school; interactions stress remove dealing should approaches. should with and educating excessive working about relaxation discomfort techniques the replaced Discussions their child child these about be practice personnel having illness with or

intentionally disorders create and In to malingering. disorders, factitious patients or simulate problems somatoform in their contrast

disorder but forunconscious reasons physical a in intentionally role. which a is Factitious sick condition orpsychological assume symptoms to are produced causes. by is direct or made possible by either observation diagnosis This eliminatingother patients hypochondriacal. Most are immature, passive,and behavior the of acknowledge show their improvement their or when They confronted symptoms. factitiousnature with borderline infactitious (e.g., disorders. been It traits answers abuse during found 20−3=13) disorders.Approximate most commonly has with associated amental status examination and substance reported are personality

Munchausen his (MBP) syndrome or by a parent form is factitious proxy, a child. of her in mother) by disorder mimics symptoms (usually proxy where be assume psychological role to need to is the a a sick The child. believed motivation through disorder 80% some a involved these to history care 72% mothers, of factitious health somatoform than background. and or a up Of more have parents of have disorder, abuse. of a type child is MBP in Boys preschoolers most way, are common the are abused and and victims. neonates commonly more this disorder by Both the pediatric proxy diagnosis. and for needed (diagnosis the (diagnosis child) of are abuser) condition of factitious falsification

failure symptoms fever, thrive, Common diarrhea,respiratory hypoglycemia, bleeding, to incoordination, presenting loss vomiting, of seizures, rash, asthma, and consciousness. arrest, include disorders Simulation rare. is of psychiatric the 75% from hospitals to procedures. invasive morbidity child Nearly in occurs of the the may confronted test Once with the planning, negative enraged appropriate so may discharge intensely acutely and team become perpetrators initiate results legal or action or treatment should precautions. take suicidal of high may these siblings are as at risk. 33%, children Mortality and be in MBP also as children of all Virtually serious abuse. this form psychological suffer from sequelae Treatment and further from involves child child the protective protecting reporting services. to abuse

is or money a jail, or in voluntary gain drugs). control of used a symptom reward condition Malingering physical school, under obtaining that is (e.g., which to avoidance is conscious production The of has patient symptoms. intent in lessen attained. Symptoms is may not reward when the prove Malingering is difficult the confesses. to or observed unless is directly patient

and disorders Anxiety characterized about the by excessive are rumination, future. uneasiness, apprehension time. be tend intensity recurring, over to chronic, and conditions The in vary 10% 5% children of (Table and adolescents to They 17-1). affect the common sections. discussed anxiety are Some following in disorders

disorder unexpected is of panic presence the attacks. Panic recurrent, associated a fear sudden the panic attack a impending intense of danger. onsetof of doomin feeling with unexpected A real absence is required 17-2). least diagnosis panic another of (Table having about the persistentworrying At is 1 attack month tomake most adulthood. oftenbegins Panic or disorder in adolescence early severitywaxes wanes. Symptom and control (Table or include breath, going Characteristic of a choking or “crazy” a smothering 17-3). symptoms pain, palpitations, losing fear shortnessof sensation, chest and andare minutes last generally 15 generally Symptoms approximately time-limited. for are attack. about to of patients heart It a is to die they common thinkthat occur school, situations time). exposure), to on (1) bound situations(attacks areclassified but spontaneous, and as Panic attacks every predisposed not (occurimmediately (3) to (2) while at where condition situations often leave would and persistent escapeis a of the describing difficult is is to attention Agoraphobia people draw can fear or homebound. person.Agoraphobia unwanted disorder Panic of agoraphobia. patients is with 95% seen in in is The females. more common condition limited avoidance if opposed (as ingeneral. or specific agoraphobia)if the few to a is situationsor of limited to Considerthe avoidance to specific social one phobia diagnosis a situations social is phobia

a 6or that of characterized of anxiety worry Generalized more disorder historical and proportion diagnosis months out (GAD) of anxiety includes by overanxious is disorderof childhood. persistent, The a should must accompanied fatigability, three tension,and single difficulty irritability, concentrating, byat anxiety be following significantimpairment not focused multiple, sleep. paroxysmal,and of be and symptoms: restlessness, cause should worries on (Table least not 17-4).The easy theme muscle disturbed the often anxiety present, are signs of Physical

all Epidemiology Prevalence racial groups. is are 0.2%−10%; similar in rates agoraphobia. Half have onset general individuals times than and of early of Eight population. more affected members family in common

is Prevalence 5%. is is equal. ratio sex Prevalence The around 8%. a Genetic Twin only suggest in play factors studies modest role. genetic role some the etiology.

of 2%−4% Prevalence is adolescents. children and The equal. sex ratio almost is of for boys. is for Heritability than greater SAD girls

2%. Prevalence is 2:1 females:males. is Sex ratio first-degree specific relatives with in risk phobias of Increased phobias. patients of specific

age onset at is Onset at Average The average age

earlier at The 25%. age 15–19 in average years; is onset 10 years.

onset 8–9 years. is

disorder condition. general medical due Anxiety diagnosis Differential a to to Substance-induced anxiety other disorder due caffeine stimulants. or

disorder; disorder. ADHD, Attention-deficit/hyperactivity PTSD, stress posttraumatic

A. Both (2) 1. (1) and

2.

one following: the of least At ≥1 attack is followed month of a. one or by more

b.

consequences a “going c. of attack the crazy”) losing or (e.g., having control, about implications heart attack, Worry its the

behavior significant A change to related attacks the in

B. The of agoraphobia presence

abuse physiologic C. direct are a effects due or general or hyperthyroidism). attacks to The drugs not medication (e.g., condition of panic medical or

specific posttraumatic not social as mental accounted by D. separation phobia, another disorder, obsessive-compulsive for anxiety panic disorder, or The are phobia, disorder. better such disorder, stress attacks

developed which peak discrete the reached symptoms and or fear of or 10 abruptly a intense four more within discomfort, in minutes: following of period A

heart, Palpitations, heart rate accelerated pounding or

or shortness Sensations breath smothering of of

Feeling of choking

or faint lightheaded, dizzy, unsteady, Feeling

oneself) from or Derealization hot Fear (being flashes or crazy tingling losing detached Paresthesias of sensations) control myalgias. shakiness, going (feelings or or (numbness Chills depersonalization of unreality) and trembling, including commonly autonomic breath) shortness vomiting, Gastrointestinalsymptoms and (tachycardia, of (nausea, coexist. symptoms diarrhea) or often are symptoms and performance Inchildren less autonomicarousal symptoms prominent, are adolescents, the and of specific related sports. toschool exhibit oftenexceedingly disturbance GAD patientswith behavioral have self-esteem, inhibition, disorder. more self-conscious, with havelow and than Children other sleep kinds of are anxiety (hopelessness, symptoms out Care to worthlessness, must self-consciousness) mood eating, internalizing eliminate to as weight, carried of be interests about as (embarrassment, helplessness, cognitions those anxieties.Inquiry elicit and and disorder. relationships should with well suicidalideation), associated self alsobe aboutthe a negative concerning energy, taken

stress was event serious threatened death a characterized (PTSD) possible. actual injury disorder Posttraumatic by traumatic re-experiencing or or is in which The reexperiencing

Disorder Criteria Diagnosis Generalized of for Anxiety

A. more 6 expectation), at numerous than days activities anxiety occurring least or and Excessive (apprehensive months, not worry events for about

B. it control difficult The worry. the finds person to

6 present associated The worry at and are more (with days the months). with past not some or symptoms six three of symptoms C. more following anxiety than for for the least one children. symptom Only in Note: is required

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

unsatisfying sleep) or falling or staying disturbance (difficulty Sleep restless, asleep

of The the posttraumatic social phobia, disorder, disorder, is do D. anorexia disorder, not and somatization focus occur a features exclusively and of disorder, to worry and (e.g., hypochondriasis), during disorder stress separation confined anxiety nervosa, obsessive-compulsive panic the not anxiety worry anxiety disorder.

of symptoms social, other important The impairment worry, or distress clinically functioning. E. cause physical areas occupational, or in anxiety, or significant

and does a physiologic drug general not a a mood due disturbance The pervasive developmental condition (e.g., psychotic hyperthyroidism) or not to or during disorder, disorder, occur disorder. the exclusively direct effects is of medical a F. a

trauma of remind person stimuli is and avoidance that of by accompanied the (Table autonomic the by 17-5). hyperarousal event of most predictors the the likely are of duration, traumatic PTSD. severity, proximity Type, and the age often Presentation of on depends group the child. to the changes behavior, behavior: there sleeping behaviors, unwillingness clingy aggression, feeding, regressed in are child. increased and difficulty preverbal environment, explore In in alterations soothing children, excitement children may may states to linked have anger, and changing play sadness, rapidly event. traumatic the compulsive and display emotional like Preschool reenactments and less complaint Later the are restriction events more of that quality effect daydream adult symptomatology intrusive flashbacks and numbing PTSD, in sudden adults, except of is frequent. more typical of seen than are

to the lasting person referred flashbacks. in a hours, traumatic as to the many which few states Dissociative are seconds event, relives to may monsters). be of children Reexperiencing in trauma (e.g., nonspecific the trauma dreams imagery of of In irritable the sleep voluntary mood, deprivation. adolescents anticipation visual anger, unwanted risk increases and original physical outbursts, response, startle occur, arousal trauma, concentrating. hypervigilance, the of signs asleep, difficulty and angry increased including or of or exaggerated falling When reminders irritability, staying anxiety faced with difficulty

stress after is trauma. the present Typically disorder immediately acute an higher symptoms increases chronic and premorbid weeks when of levels The there or of PTSD risk by unresolved depression. anxiety 6 are are usually begins PTSD

A. The in event traumatic were which following has a 1. to person both present: the exposed been of

others. or self person witnessed, death or actual involved of to the confronted that The events or an threatened threat experienced, or with event physical a injury was or integrity serious or

2.

The helplessness, response horror. intense person’s involved fear, or or by behavior. may expressed Note: children, disorganized instead In agitated be this

B. following is ways: The traumatic event one 1. more in the of or persistently reexperienced

the including and recollections event, Recurrent or intrusive images, distressing thoughts, of perceptions. repetitive In the occur of may in aspects young are children, expressed. play Note: themes trauma which or

2.

Recurrent event. dreams of the distressing be without dreams Note: may frightening children, content. recognizable In there

3.

the occur intoxicated). flashbacks awakening the were reliving (includes including Acting hallucinations, episodes, illusions, flashback that feeling experience, or when or and dissociative of sense traumatic on recurring as if a event In trauma-specific may Note: occur. re-enactment young children,

4.

exposure event. Intense to internal cues aspect distress an of or at external psychological the resemble symbolize that or traumatic

5.

resemble on or traumatic to symbolize exposure internal or an external reactivity event. Physiologic the that of cues aspect

present the and of or the general trauma), more three C. responsiveness of Persistent the by avoidance following: 1. numbing trauma (not before stimuli with associated as of indicated

or associated thoughts, 2. Efforts with feelings, the to avoid conversations trauma

people of trauma activities, the recollections Efforts arouse avoid 3. to or places, that

to of 4. the important an recall Inability trauma aspect

5.

Feeling estrangement from 6. detachment or others of

to 7. loving affect unable have feelings) (e.g., of range Restricted

children, not Sense normal have future foreshortened a to marriage, life (e.g., career, span) a a expect of does or

Persistent arousal indicated or of present more 1. the increased before two D. as symptoms by trauma), the of (not following:

2.

3. anger or of outbursts Irritability

4.

5.

Duration D) and C, is the of month E. >1 disturbance criteria B, (symptoms in

or important F. in areas disturbance clinically of The occupational, significant distress social, impairment causes functioning or other

following: the Specify

duration Acute: symptoms months of is if <3

if duration symptoms months Chronic: ≥3 is of

mo months within With after the expression the least stressor if of is onset delayed in symptoms of 6 3 occur. although can delay symptom at trauma, onset: Rates suicide than threefold higher of are controls. attempts unaffected

event. same by immediately the symptoms but occurs traumatic and Acute a stress as PTSD after characterized disorder is signs If the month, is function impaired after 1 persists PTSD. diagnosis

otherwise clinical condition common practice. specified Anxiety in a is not disorder This anxiety meet full not or another for there used do that when criteria impairing phobic is diagnosis disorder. symptoms anxiety is

adolescents childrenand express refuse disorder Separation anxiety (SAD) (e.g.,headaches, in to pain, to who is school. seen avoid or somatic abdominal symptoms fatigue) togo vague experience concern have unpleasant irrational or valid a or had Patients an a inschool. may parent have an about medical have elaborate have evaluations. been numerous by undergone They specialistsand seen often Theirabsence often seen of a school mistakenly as consequence symptoms. their is from escalating provokes prospect is extreme The phobia toschool rare. and schoolwork returning anxiety of related symptoms.True to disorder, agoraphobia, depression. problems suchas for and in is factor a risk adulthood, panic SAD developing strong(78%) condition.Psychiatric a severe needed. adolescence first School be during may that underlying presents expression is psychopathologic an consultation phobia of

of which 17-6). lead are to persistent situations, or phobias Specific often things fears behaviors marked avoidance (Table anxiety when with is felt person feared object immediately the almost confronted associated The situation. the is or always the greater higher anxiety. more The to proximity difficult the is or it the the escape, object situation event). patients actual with (traumatic the or have experiences had Many fearful anxiety The limited response can of symptoms to to range fear panic the full from attacks. express freezing, of fears the and to proportion crying, may circumstances, tantrums, Children not and their adults, as their adolescents out unlike that anxiety are clinging. recognize or

nonattendance. a for range of of phobia School school is one reasons children, aggression be attendance. may used prevent In to defensive worried severely Otherwise tendencies. do patients not these antisocial have intelligence, girls social no association affected academic there is equally or are with and Boys and class, ability. children well of affected as older family in several likely of children to be a more is as parents. youngest The Truancy associated lower of is fear. older with levels adolescents with generally truants parents. their school from hide Unlike anxious school nonattendance refusers, their

which is over (3% occur type boys) a in situations or phobia phobia and might girls persistent a Social 17-7). predominate (Table prevalence; by performance common embarrassment of fear characterized 13% to marked of social

strangers apprehension socially encountering or or of situations. wariness new, social strange, when There anxiety a threatening is and a overconcern, rate appear to adults. embarrassment, cognitions Children than lower self-consciousness) negative (e.g., of have with simple than Children those socialized younger conditions. phobic disorders are with more avoidant poorly can immobilizing result their and untreated restriction phobias Left significant or become morbidity of and treated, in lives.

A. the anticipation is (e.g., fear animals, of receiving specific injection, and or or cued unreasonable, flying, heights, object or that by seeing persistent an a situation blood) presence Marked excessive

B. the may situationally panic which invariably immediate anxiety attack. of to an stimulus take a phobic almost provokes predisposed bound response, the form or situationally Exposure crying, anxiety tantrums, Note: by be freezing, children, clinging. expressed may In or the

the fear recognizes The is that C. unreasonable. person excessive or may Note: this absent. children, In be feature

D. endured or or intense avoided situation distress. is is else phobic The anxiety with

or phobia. normal avoidance, E. anticipation, with academic) situation The distress having distress feared the or or social the marked the (or significantly occupational anxious routine, interferes about there activities or functioning, in is person’s relationships,

In is least months. years, at F. <18 duration children 6 the

associated accounted with panic for panic object social obsessive-compulsive or anxiety, better anxiety separation panic are not phobia, disorder, disorder, mental disorder or agoraphobia, avoidance disorder. as history the disorder, stress agoraphobia of G. or with without specific phobic disorder, situation posttraumatic such The another by attacks,

Specify type:

by insects. is fear elicited type or Animal animals

(e.g., storms, type heights, Natural water). environment

type related or to having seeing invasive fear is an injections, Blood/injection/injury blood, injuries, procedure. medical

places). specific elevators, enclosed by airplanes, is situations fear (e.g., type caused Situational

or type Other contracting an or choking, fear children, of fear vomiting, costumed of characters) illness; (e.g., loud in sounds

medical conditions, disorders, medication or side likely medical out. anxiety substance be of other the effects, In hyperthyroidism, management should abuse, ruled conditions, including disorders, mood disorders, psychosis, disorders, tic The disorders. behavior for as should eating disruptive such comorbid psychiatric patient disorders, be and screened may from important effectively history sources because multiple symptoms. A is communicate to unable the be child anxiety triggers; disorders other history history; the tics, nature that be psychosocial should taken. and includes detailed A history depression, of family and anxiety mood of the disorders, play. her younger or or better The may drawings child communicate his through anxieties

and of psychopharmacology. Treatment psychotherapy consists first.Combined anxiety, alone. better mild than efficacy usually be should used psychoeducation psychotherapy has For to and and evidence-basedpsychotherapies psychopharmacology therapy moderate andbehavioral and can of systematic ) modeling, anxiety operant be desensitization,exposure, conditioning, variety (including therapy Cognitive a disorders. beneficial cognitiverestructuring in side tolerant and themmaintain regimens. helps less therapy ofmedication treatment Patients disorders often supportive with anxiety effects, are

A. to one is persistent unfamiliar by or and fear of in A scrutiny people the marked to social or performance or exposed possible which others. more situations person (or anxiety individual humiliating The fears symptoms) that show will or in that be he act embarrassing. way or will she a with must peer relationships settings, with in anxiety there people, not occur the evidence and for must social just familiar In adults. in be the of Note: capacity children, age-appropriate interactions

B. feared or panic anxiety, situationally provokes the bound which a situation of situationally attack. to the invariably social almost may Exposure predisposed take form may shrinking or crying, from anxiety expressed be Note: tantrums, social In by or freezing, unfamiliar situations people. children, the

recognizes The that unreasonable. or C. is excessive the person fear may absent. feature this Note: In be children,

social D. feared distress. anxiety are with The avoided situations performance or or or endured else intense are

avoidance, occupational about in the person’s significantly anxious performance E. the relationships, normal distress or (academic) phobia. is functioning, or anticipation, situation or social marked feared or with interferes social there having or The activities the distress routine,

children 6 F. the In is <18 years, least duration months. at

agoraphobia, or a or or disorder, disorder, G. for separation disorder schizoid mental condition without fear of The dysmorphic a avoidance pervasive another personality better to disorder). medical the disorder, with body or a is panic effects not direct anxiety disorder physiologic of developmental by is accounted not due (e.g., drug and medication, general abuse,

medical criterion fear it A of general disorder exhibiting unrelated is to in condition H. fear in another a the not nervosa). present, mental eating or nervosa or anorexia or abnormal is If the is (e.g., bulimia stuttering behavior

the Specify following:

initiating small (e.g., or groups, situations speaking conversations, parties). attending if figures, maintaining the dating, authority in fears Generalized: social to most include participating personality additional avoidant disorder. Also diagnosis of consider the Note:

and psychotherapy individual with helpful. patient’s and is school care a Family coordination does patient the important. a is life-threatening illness that Reassurance not have supportive psychosocial treatments and biofeedback. Other include stress management, therapies, on Emphasis morbidity placed treatment. proper is decreasing through usually treatment. is responsive Panic to tends disorder to chronic be but PTSD has therapy behavioral In shown trauma-focused efficacy. cognitive “psychological discussing a after aid,” stress debriefing event, and and soon impact event reduce greatly distress the of nature involve in Critical-incident format. the trauma and group the first

reuptake serotonin are medication Selective (SSRIs) the of inhibitors choice. children Food for sertraline, SSRIs and U.S. (FDA) approved fluvoxamine. and are the Administration The Drug fluoxetine, by or can panic anxiety initially exacerbate They even symptoms. level and be by effective blood requires FDA obsessive-compulsive electrocardiographic monitoring and but disorder. may the for approved is Clomipramine have Tricyclic antidepressants efficacy. shown also (alprazolam disinhibition a children. of causing clonazepam) and in Benzodiazepines risk include useful and autonomic (guanfacine present. clonidine) are Alpha-2a-agonists may be symptoms if ineffective. are when (gabapentin, other and topiramate, used are Anticonvulsant oxcarbazepine) agents agents performance help anxiety. with β-Blockers

inattentive disorder Co-occurrence disorder of common. type and the an anxiety of attention-deficit/hyperactivity (ADHD) is the to slowly dose, at a increasing minimize it is to increasing using anxiety. of advisable low stimulant, a risk start When

PTSD, severe augmented affective by clonidine impulsivity) in of in be useful (also hyperarousal and For antidepressants dyscontrol. the presence may self-injurious present. aggression behavior, dissociation, are psychosis, if and antipsychotics are Atypical used in is Atomoxetine concurrent ADHD. with useful PTSD

weeks of symptoms, a mood nearly (MDD) Major or either or disorder loss of pleasure including in of depressive activities. interest minimum requires depressed 2 all 18-1). be (Table symptoms also additional Four present must new and instead In onset may or of seen adolescents, children boredom depressed be of a restlessness, mood. irritability, drop often grades A present. sudden in is with pains) craving (fatigue, changes without sleep be with along decreased accompanying (usually complaints with and can disturbance increased) carbohydrate present. also or in may and vague but aches A somatic weight change be appetite are of auditory delusional cases guilt mood-congruent severe major derogatory (e.g., associated depression, generally in hallucinations, Psychotic symptoms, seen thinking). and and evaluated. attempts should thoughts Suicidal common be are

prevalence ratio adults). The female-to-male with in female-to-male 1:1 with in 2% children of is 6% to (similar a adolescents MDD ratio; is to prevalence the prepubertal 2:1 8%, of patients. become untreated, 10% If in chronic can major of depression

parents. has increased familyhistory single to 65% a heritability to depressed of show factor fordepression MDD.Twin studies in risk predisposition, for with fourfold for twofold show clear as offspring developing a studies the depression.Family 40% Depression strongest genetic factors for of sex pubertal central dysfunction, Other responsible potential include systems,hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal theinfluence depression and of serotonergic and/or noradrenergic dysregulation axis hormones. stressful depression. less of to a of The receptor serotonin of variant relates environment;for interaction events life example, to functional in presence contribute the genetic genes stress-diathesismodel the could and

Criteria of Episode Diagnosis Major for a Depressive

A. symptoms represent mood pleasure. a the 2-week depressed interest (2) more functioning; same (1) loss or either Five during previous following present of or of the from and period at is change the or symptoms of least one clearly are symptoms general a due include Do 1. not that condition hallucinations mood-incongruent medical Note: or or delusions to

empty) tearful). Depressed every indicated or by appears subjective or day, by mood most made sad either (e.g., as nearly (e.g., the report observation of others feels day, adolescents, be mood In can irritable. and Note: children

2.

by indicated or day by every nearly in interest or most (as others) account almost observation Markedly all, diminished of day, the subjective activities or pleasure 3. all,

loss Significant not weight weight dieting day. increase every gain in decrease when appetite or or nearly or make 4. failure In to weight Note: children, consider gains expected

5.

6.

nearly 7. energy or every day of loss Fatigue

nearly inappropriate (not excessive 8. sick) every Feelings (which delusional) being day or guilt about may worthlessness self-reproach or guilt of or be

others) day every Diminished or or be concentrate, (subjective 9. nearly decisive ability as observed by to think, account

specific a or specific a plan for thoughts plan, fear just committing attempt a death suicide (not of suicidal ideation of Recurrent recurrent dying), without suicide

B. do criteria for meet The episode. mixed not manic a symptoms

significant functioning. impairment or or occupational, cause important in other symptoms The areas C. clinically distress of social,

(e.g., condition are direct The symptoms abuse, the to or medication, D. effects due physiologic not medical hypothyroidism). a a or a drug of general

bereavement, or impairment, suicidal with psychomotor mo symptoms morbid the accounted psychotic marked characterized ideation, >2 preoccupation or The for are E. by persist symptoms symptoms, worthlessness, retardation. functional better not and by are

behavior and 30%), are disruptive respectively), frequent adolescents. disorders 80%, substance and comorbid to (10% disorders and and children anxiety 20%) disorders Dysthymic (prevalence abuse depressed 30% in to (20% disorder this develop psychotic is diagnosed disorder patients mania history or with (BD); percent concurrent of a features. in family with common depression Twenty more cases of bipolar

are differential MDD for diagnoses and diverse many. The mood disorder due rule disorders It to prudent a substance-induced to always or is before general considering mood condition MDD. medical out depression. dysphoria (ADHD) untreated diagnosed be in attention-deficit/hyperactivity the as Schizophrenia mistakenly to related and may stages initial disorder its also B12 vitamin Hypothyroidism, need diabetes, and and be ruled deficiencies to out. anemia, folate

form 1.7%) described by milder for or (subjectively present others) chronic, depressed or year. by least a irritable characterized 0.6% a of to 1 mood at depression is (prevalence disorder Dysthymic rate changes required: decisions; sleep the making following fatigue; of self-esteem; low hopelessness. of concentration and also or Two are feelings appetite; in difficulty, with symptoms poor difficulty depression. disorder About develop with major of adolescents and eventually children 70% dysthymic MDD dysthymia referred often is depression. as after to of The development double

increased and depression rejection by craving, characterized gain, mood is weight Atypical MDD sensitivity, interpersonal with appetite carbohydrate hypersomnia, reactivity.

common adolescents. disorder with mood in children Adjustment the most depressed and is depressive disorder relationship), school Symptoms distress stressor occupational, of start expected with an within months (e.g., of and with would identifiable a what of social, or be loss functioning. 3 in interference excess not criteria not longer has Symptoms 6 psychiatric last than be stressor not for stopped. disorder, caused should should and months should the meet by after another bereavement,

extreme condition hours fall late occur northern of winter latitudes, a is in when Seasonal southern shortening. disorder in depressive early daylight which common affective symptoms or in the the and are

another not functionally when diagnosis not condition. symptoms patients Depressive have used disorder do impairing that criteria for a meet otherwise depressive specified is

of and Treatment psychopharmacy depression psychotherapy. involves antidepressant First serotonin have reuptake 70% inhibitors rates response of despite response to 50% high-placebo (SSRIs) selective rate. line youth. Fluoxetine of treatment the agent Administration for U.S. Food is the and approved by Drug only (FDA) venlafaxine trial and Citalopram, clinical positive results as well. escitalopram, have paroxetine, effects. therapeutic antidepressant An or doses) are side before should be trial adequate unless serious at weeks (6 switching discontinuing there given an 9 6 in symptoms recommended. depression is for children treatment episode and first after of to remission of For months a adolescents, a antidepressants (years for lifetime). or need with even recurrent Patients take may chronic to periods extended depression or be of a child a to If psychiatrist two not trials should patient antidepressants, adequate does respond more consulted. or evaluation psychosocial should The might that on focus a diagnostic be preventing response. and issues psychiatrist’s clarity full that lamotrigine, bupropion. may or include thyroid augmentation lithium, The use may psychiatrist strategies hormone,

acute medication and visits indicated, and guardians, For be more are frequent depression, (including of should patients. suicidal with the discussed parents, behavior) self-destructive and risks of phone can with monitoring psychotherapist. calls Higher a or frequency collaborative include care immediately if signs symptoms patients to about call new be and Parents occur. and also these should educated warning agitation, suicide, effects restlessness. side Notable of thoughts increased are or increased and akathisia, include risk bruising sexual side symptoms, effects to of Other inhibition.) disturbance, dysfunction, (due headache, sleep dizziness, cycle gastrointestinal platelet serotonin syndrome, risk SSRI-induced of a There also is mania.

all antidepressants warnings for issued 2004 FDA the or behavior. In regarding thinking suicidal antidepressants that a versus suggest pose in placebo. a risk data risk, 4% 2% The and suicides low might that has experts in depression. related and increase prescription many in to it untreated of believing An since adolescents resultant be antidepressants children that year conduct increase risk use, Substance the of and suicide. problems, concomitant impulsivity

good to moderate have efficacy to Psychotherapy appears mild in depression. and equivalent response, In has severe greatestrate cases to the combinedtreatment although medication moderate of alone. psychotherapy severe to medication in depression, was with efficacy the empirically therapies the are therapy Cognitive-behavioral andinterpersonal supported psychotherapies. behavioral the and precipitants to Cognitive therapist and interpersonaltherapy patient recognition disorder),involve depression. exploration of whereas on on is processing; collaborative its techniques derivative, therapy maladaptive focuses decisions the and mitigate and and between and dialectic (for skills-building personality borderline of therapy cognitivedistortions behavioral based to is therapy Family for depression. treatments other often adjunct an usedas

been and beneficial to seasonal shown therapy for MDD has be a affective in Light component. seasonal with disorder depression. used therapy and refractory life-threatening Electroconvulsive is in

adolescence. chronic debilitating childhood starts illness in Depression often that or a and is for psychiatric suicide, and other sequelae. It increases use, substance future risk onset to Adolescent depressive depression. than are adulthood into be more childhood recurrent disorders likely

complication and death Suicide vehicle of of adolescents. cause fatal in as a motor a MDD is accidents surpasses among high each 20% year. contemplated having students with high 8% suicide prevalence has and school It attempted having cognitive episode of high, and start as during depression. improve MDD paradoxically energy risk of higher from can recovery it with an during While motivation treatment suicide the be is

is toward morbidity targeted Treatment suicide. decreasing and hospital, previously, such treatments as partial psychoeducation Along or mentioned may needed. therapeutic modalities be with after-school programs, hospitalization,

that (elevated, 18-2). or depression mania disorder severe distractibility) Bipolar of irritable with moods (Table periods of expansive, consists and of distinct alternate may periods

(elevated mania four mood) BD, symptoms symptoms; manic euphoria or additional with are associated three and expansive required. diagnose and additional irritability To or others. to giggly, and bubbly, degree to are is that socially “over-the-top” and unacceptable mood Children a euphoric happy, adolescents with is Grandiosity in dramatic. children often even the nature apply to is laws are obvious act it they do as behave of superior true, and they not it if them. as is that Children when not if common thoughts BD. in are Racing extreme are common. Periods rage of also shifts with or Children depression. present with BD mania, between cycling ultra-rapid rapid multiple with and euthymia, often

need decreased of mania. a A is for sleep hallmark total with amountof norms) There and notfatigued. areno is where a diagnoses has other greatly child a sleep decreased age-appropriate (compared Sleep substance may and deprivation, antidepressants abuse, mania. trigger often begins onset BD with episodeof an depression. of will that is develop It BD youth estimated 33%

A. irritable expansive, elevated, distinct at abnormally mood, or persistently period (or A and week is 1 any duration lasting if least of necessary) hospitalization

B. or to have only 1. if of (four mood the mood significant During the a following three and are irritability) more disturbance, symptoms persisted of present is period degree: the

2.

3. Decreased need only hours 3 feels for (e.g., sleep rested after of sleep)

or talking pressure than to More 4. keep usual talkative

that Flight subjective of experience ideas are or thoughts racing 5.

easily stimuli) drawn (i.e., to unimportant 6. external or Distractibility irrelevant

psychomotor or or (socially, activity sexually) or work goal-directed school, Increased agitation at

pleasurable (e.g., C. a or potential indiscretions, activities sprees, high in buying sexual for painful foolish have investments) unrestrained that consequences Excessive involvement

mixed The D. symptoms episode. a do for meet not criteria

impairment functioning, or mood activities with severe is to to others psychotic to or self necessitate in marked hospitalization The or disturbance sufficiently others, with prevent to E. occupational cause or usual relationships features. harm social

are condition. a effects of medical the symptoms to general F. direct or not The substance physiologic a due (e.g., Note: by of episodes that medication, caused diagnosis are not toward clearly disorder. Manic-like electroconvulsive therapy) should treatment antidepressant bipolar count somatic I a

5 within a of episode. years depressive mood depression, ofBD associated symptoms hypomania.A or history manicand episode psychosis, Features major week a withswitching and requires depressive seasonal mood antidepressant-induced episode. 1 early-onset family disorders, pattern, include lability, of of psychomotor both retardation, mixed Dysphoric “badfeelings.” of are used of is that by mania than another days 4but Hypomania symptoms. to than is manic periods more period describe a mania to fewer term describe accompanied used of 7 less intense less describe used mania. to is It specifically also is 16% (often The auditory hallucinations) prevalence in psychosis of adolescence to60%. high, its it prevalence than less Although is BD. in adult still

disorder and of includes at one II full depressive one least major hypomania. episode Bipolar least period at unclear. used full otherwise information symptoms BD do describe historical diagnostic Bipolar of disorder meet not when is specified or criteria that is prominent to not

year full disorder for a in numerous of is major hypomania Cyclothymic do meet or and of either years episode. criteria manic children) 2 by periods depressive a or more characterized depression (1 not that

in the to of occurs BD general 4% population. up It diagnostic of BD. criteria for adolescents and is children 1% that estimated meet 60% 20 retrospective According of occurs to onset BD years of before age. studies, Although four adults that in diagnosed prepubertal be is BD to gender it BD in almost estimated tends times neutral, boys. more frequently is main This be may reason for the aggression services. because psychiatric is for referral

etiology is multifactorial. of The BD BD mental highly illness, BD, history point family including or of depression, a Studies ADHD. familial major schizophrenia, to etiology with in child’s relative a A to developing with first-degree a increase BD chance 10-fold BD. leads of in earlier parent BD BD chronic onset less and with risk be the course to a that in offspring may a increases more of early responsive onset debilitating An treatment. of in

substance-induced disorder differential schizophrenia. mood pervasive disorder, major conduct developmental diagnosis general includes depression, mood medical disorder The (CD), to for ADHD, condition, disorder, due BD a and

have often that treatment. warrant conditions concurrent BD with Patients BD. ADHD ofchildren occurs 60% approximately 90% in to with to withBD do antimanic commonly not also disorders occur respond Anxiety agents. and abusecan and perpetuate precipitate and Substance depression. mania types and between of lows The related often alteration BD. highs mimics to some substanceabuse may BD also alleviate with symptoms. attempts to in self-medicate Patients due crimes BDmay meet for CD patients aggressionand commit criteria Many to impulsivity. and with assist CD between in of and differentiating mania symptoms Prominent BD. whereas a typical with of to and Patients pattern are preplan crimes. develop morelikely BD those aggression, CD reactive with generallyexhibit

diagnose BD. No or laboratory studies imaging can substance-induced disorders. medical and rule etiologies, out to testing are done neurologic including laboratory review suspected and examination, careful Physical of systems, history,

includes symptoms. acute Treatment BD decreasing of for lithium, olanzapine, divalproex approved BD. FDA and adults sodium, ziprasidone, The has quetiapine, with risperidone, carbamazepine, aripiprazole effectively years. and is the has in Lithium oldest used adults for in proven and adolescents treatment children mania for been acne. include and effects polyuria, lithium hypothyroidism, Common of side or cases) adults. also cycling agent mixed for for is Divalproex a (preferable rapid first-line not decades It but youth, effectively it for been used in has is FDA-approved. safety for sodium) amounts and and both levels medications ensure monitoring (lithium select divalproex blood receipt of medication. treatment help of can Periodic of therapeutic the the and had quetiapine, positive in Anti-psychotics with have ziprasidone) olanzapine, youth aripiprazole, results BD. (risperidone, It effective that in antipsychotics likely be is BD. will also newer

comorbid must psychiatric done disorders be carefully. Treating the stabilizer. be Stimulants to on used stabilized mood been a patienthas may treat ADHD once the useof significant not pharmacotherapy, avoided; may cautious to be necessary. is has youth other if responsive shouldbe is antidepressants anxietyand or depressed Antidepressants needed. formanic is suicidality Careful reactivation, monitoring cycling, and

and aimed improving to and Cognitive adherence are therapies ameliorating and at behavioral depressive treatments medication symptoms. anxiety improve the and patient’s and family prognosis. environment are therapy needed stabilize to Psychoeducation ongoing continuous should assessment. safety There be while an educational due needed. are plan BD to individualized regarding also young school learning behavioral developmental symptomatic, with special educational is Because also management, poor children delays in appropriate needs, common and with collaboration

risk factor depression. even BD higher is for suicide an than and percent of children adolescents Forty attempt with 50% suicide. of BD consider of risk (substance poor to levels High on) increase consequences completed so and impulsivity, and abuse, of suicide. ability irritability, the family and nonsuicidal more history sexual abuse. mixed substance have panic suicide and history usually of use, hospitalizations, history likely are physical self-injurious to Attempters of of features, attempts, or behaviors, older, a psychotic comorbid disorder, episodes the is safety Ensuring first consideration. needed intensive and in-home Hospitalization, services treatment, safety. stabilization as outpatient hospitalization, intensive used are for and partial

absence another disorder the characterized explains better of obsessions, compulsions, (Table 19-1). the or (OCD) both disorder psychiatric that Obsessive-compulsive is symptoms by in intrusive persistent Obsessions or impulses. are thoughts, images, or distress behaviors Compulsions or preventing aimed repeated reducing are anxiety. at non-gratifying Usually are performed the created anxiety to offset compulsions by the obsessions. predominate may over insight, worries due In compulsive of obsessions. to level symptoms children, or or rituals low being unreasonable. as Symptoms or recognized usually are excessive and obsessions need examples children or orderliness, fears aggressive doubts, of repeated in horrific of contamination, are impulses. for Common silently, repeating reassurance, requesting or counting, compulsions checking, washing, demanding Common are ordering, words hand hoarding. and praying,

age. 1% increasing adolescents Prevalence in 4%, to with and OCD children from ranges of adolescence. a during is common in and It younger in at age girls more boys

at one have 50% of least with OCD least other At youth illness. psychiatric disorder), include tics and disorder (attention-deficit/hyperactivity comorbidities dysmorphic to defiant Psychiatric behavior oppositional (up 30%), (20% anxiety [ADHD] 75%), disorders personality disruptive to developmental disorder, and hypochondriasis, and body mood disorders, disorder. disorders obsessive-compulsive

of for 65% heritable, symptoms accounting factors genetic with Twin obsessive-compulsive moderately studies are variance. suggest that to 45%

inflammation for pediatric the a a PANDAS) basal as neuropsychiatric infection infection. causing known ganglia is of Streptococcal 10% streptococcal with childhood-onset referred account disorders condition and to as OCD of associated (also may in part autoimmune assist titers, in a DNAase a and culture Antistreptolysin diagnosing throat B antistreptococcal O,

A. compulsions obsessions Either or

Obsessions (3), by defined and are (2), (1), (4).

1.

experienced Recurrent inappropriate during and impulses, thoughts, and time persistent some disturbance and images at marked intrusive causing 2. as the anxiety or or distress

impulses, problems. are Thoughts, about simply excessive worries images not real-life or

3.

ignore or such other or to with or to thoughts, suppress action. The neutralize images person or some thought them impulses, attempts

4.

her images or are (not a his mind imposed obsessional from in own the as thoughts, of without recognizes insertion). or product impulses, that The person thought

defined are (2). (1) by Compulsions and

1.

person counting, response praying, perform (e.g., behaviors ordering, (e.g., according rigidly to silently) mental applied or washing, that driven checking) the to in or to rules. feels obsession an Repetitive acts words repeating hand

2.

are or behaviors are or or preventing situation; connected reducing are they aimed preventing or mental distress or excessive. what not these acts or with event dreaded designed are acts The realistically however, mental some to behaviors at neutralize/prevent clearly

B. are the or recognizes some excessive that the compulsions unreasonable. obsessions At point, or person not This for is children. Note: required

social academic) usual are activities obsessions distress; interfere day); The C. normal or (taking routine, relationships. or significantly a >1 functioning, hour or or (or time-consuming marked compulsions with occupational cause a

or food content it present, disorder to obsessions eating of restricted in the the of an is compulsions Axis disorder). another I preoccupation presence the not is with (e.g., D.If

or general a is to condition. disturbance a E. drug not thedirect effects physiologic The of medication, of a abuse, medical due

following: the Specify

infection. group not the beta-hemolytic if, A the With recognize the excessive most insight: streptococcal does of time are compulsions and unreasonable during for obsessions poor person or current that the episode, these Early help therapy treat may antibiotic cases.

been disruption systems. a the dopamine has and serotonin,glutamate, in brain’s to OCD linked cortex in been Overactivity caudate in pathways neural the nucleushas frontal orbital and implicated involving OCD.

Physical excessive may evidence cracked washing. skin rough, hand examination of as reveal (also gold as severity. Y-BOCS) Yale-Brown measure The Obsessive-Compulsive known obsessive-compulsive is of standard Scale regarded as symptom the setting. can lengthy, in Although somewhat helpful it the clinical be

treatment therapy (CBT) exposure Cognitive-behavioral milder in considered cases. involving choice response of and is prevention the CBT potential side effects. of of and avoidance provides relief durability symptom pharmacotherapy-associated good, better, least not with at As if as CBT disorders, is than anxiety medications. other of shown and the The combination response. medications has best CBT

complications cognitive severity for to (SSRI) are symptoms emotional when cooperate Selective CBT. insufficient ability higher useful or are in with of inhibitors comorbidities serotonin or and reuptake referral not with treatment alone reasonable is pursued If while quality available, choice. a CBT is medications psychotherapy is

thought risk-to-benefit OCD. to favorable sertraline, and generally show SSRI escitalopram) ratio treatment a in fluvoxamine, (paroxetine, citalopram is fluoxetine, akathisia, be disinhibition, as effects may impulsivity, hyperactivity seen. and Side such activation, of SSRIs. height growth be suppression to possible due Monitoring with advisable associated may the

next. clomipramine SSRI unsuccessful, trial an be tried is If can tic for an comorbidities, antipsychotic an in SSRI considered using especially (risperidone another medication or atypical antipsychotic) with also specific is therapy disorders. with example, Combination useful delusional in associated Antipsychotics the become OCD thoughts intrusive also are with nature. when nearly is Psychostimulants with and tics. that obsessional comorbid stimulants increase used ADHD, symptoms there risk are though a may even

to as are of OCD partial and refractory response Most young one as only, people many with treatment. responders third exhibit response. include prognostic poor factors psychiatric initial comorbid Poor a treatment and illness

highly surgically very anterior interventions subcaudate (anterior Deep the cases ganglia, basal capsulotomy, of and are leucotomy), brain cingulotomy, surgical or implanted reserved through stimulation severe refractory tractotomy, for electrodes and limbic cases.

psychotic disorder. differential obsessive-compulsive for The includes anxiety complex tics, personality OCD other disorders, diagnosis and disorders, own patient Often recognizesthat created are by created are thoughts their they not patients feel by whereaspsychotic the intrusive OCD brain, them. with a This youth. beless in clear may OCD. can hair in appearance to pulling dysmorphic trichotillomania delusional with fixation body be in tension confused and on disorder anxiety impulsive relieve or A is disorder a personality andcontrol. orderliness, preoccupation Obsessive-compulsive perfectionism, character with styleinvolving true are No present. compulsions or obsessions

syndrome, of Pervasive Rett developmental disorders: and childhood as disintegrative spectrum consist disorder disorders pervasive disorders, (ASDs), syndrome, autism, also known not specified. developmental otherwise five disorder, autism Asperger

Onset disorders of years. preschool is infancy in these and impaired activities. of include behaviors, social and well as interests, as communication interaction stereotypic and these impaired disorders Hallmarks is remarkable few a common, children (savant with splinter isolated or retardation abilities Mental skills). showing

of 1% racial and in are with seen than equal less the ASDs population all groups. ethnic among prevalence syndrome), severely affected. is boys The greater for tend Rett (except be with in prevalence more girls disorders the to but

listed the disorders of 20-1. pervasive in Differentiating are developmental features Table

symptomatic is of and multimodal. Treatment ASD ofASDs. symptoms no are treatments for there the Atpresent core Antipsychotics paliperidone, are hyperactivity, quetiapine,aripiprazole, (risperidone, agitation, haloperidol, aggression, olanzapine, thioridazine) used behavior. for and irritability, self-injurious ziprasidone, and can used Anticonvulsants be lithium for aggression. opioids. Naltrexone by has self-injurious been blockingendogenous presumably usedto behavior, decrease depression,and are isolation. perseveration, compulsions, given social inhibitors Selective reuptake for anxiety, serotonin Stimulants are with inattention stimulants. significant reports syndrome).There patients with worsening of Asperger for irritability in andaggression are hyperactivityand of response treated (better some useful used medication are sleep melatonin sleep for clonidine) and (guanfacine, hyperactivity,aggression, for isfirst-line although dysregulation, dysregulation. Alpha-2agonists in is parents their help appropriate training child protocols Behavioralmanagement for behavior. teaching learn to useful child. Special for be the educational individualized should services therapy speech, and physical are oftenrequired. Occupational, Referral is oftenwarranted. services disability and for support applied individual trialtraining, teaching. to analysis, structured behavioral Potentially the and useful therapies discrete tailored include for There family a and is support parents. for individual groups counseling need supportive prognosis is guarded. The autism for There known no are primary methods of prevention. aimed educational interventions function. Treatment decreasing andmaximizing morbidity are and at

reciprocal 20-2). range socialinteraction, lifelong marked communication, pervasive developmental of prototypic Autism, interests the ischaracterized impairment restricted and disorder, (Table a by activitiesand in of or years or of development normal 1 sudden followedby steady 20% Approximately a until age, decline. reportrelatively 2 parents need syndrome years of by be to clinical considered. no age, disorder orchildhood disorder Rett present ofthe 3 manifestations are If disintegrative is As delayed or smiling. there aninfant, absent social communication. socially hours indifference be solitary withdrawnwith The childmay to spend play in young attempts at and are nonverbal withautism contact, interact communication facial Patients do from not significantly not as objects. able understand to and (eye expressions) often different withpeople sign obsessive-compulsivedisorder present, (sometimes by frequently mistaken a as it perseveration often with of isdelayed when or (confused and, psychosis is echolalia Speech dominated [OCD]),

PDD-NOS Epidemiology 5:1 2.1 mutation 0.44 male-to-female 2 diagnosed per per MECP2 2.5 ratio with 16 associated 20-1 Characteristics gene only FEATURE ASPERGER Pervasive 10,000 ratio male-to-female 10,000; Table girls; to in 0.11 CDD cases Developmental to 10,000; 10,000 per RETT 5:1 AUTISM per 10,000; per Disorder: 10

Childhood PDD-NOS, disintegrative CDD, developmental specified. pervasive disorder-not otherwise disorder;

reversal, abnormalities. other and OCD), pronoun rhyming, nonsense and their are reactions. or invokes characteristic, routines ritualistic tantrum disruptionoften andcompulsive interests, Intense rage behavior, absorbing and stimuli, Head and to responsiveness diminished teethgrinding, noted. external self-mutilation be rocking, banging, may pain

an disorder to of of risk autistic there unknown, the in is autistic Although the increased disorder population. siblings compared general is etiology revealed levels high Twin of concordance have studies monozygotic for twins. between risk of prevalence for development in and Family 10% social language, and reveal there may absent, problems. studies increased siblings, and, rates when learning, be 2%

connectivity is proposed adversely It affected. brain that the is have temporal, frontal lobes the in limbic suggested. and system, Abnormalities been neuronal packing. Some and reveal studies postmortem brain size, microarchitecture, in the abnormalities the show and tasks Functional involved a gyrus affective resonance social studies fusiform in (MRI) location and in magnetic judgments. amygdala, face recognition imaging facial of the of processing expression involved hypoactivity

The Pediatrics for screening Academy recommends of and 18 autism months at age. of American 24 there affected concern. done sibling parental, caregiver, an pediatric testing is other or if or be Comprehensive should

out disorder, There are they for but autistic no help can studies diagnoses. laboratory rule other definitive the (may (to be (phenylketonuria) hearing infections, identify and testing tubular and X viral polymorphisms), deficits), language syndrome, fragile genetic A metabolic account should disorders sclerosis, test chromosomal for congenital performed. to seen are 25% abnormalities children may Electroencephalography diagnostic. 20% autism be in with not of but verbal autism in children puzzles) deficiency tasks tests nonverbal abilities. and strengths with show cognitive marked (e.g., in often in Psychological interest sometimes (a is skills usually are and observed. low, hyperlexia numbers) savant though and precocious letters IQ in the difficulties. can Speech helpful consultation be evaluating pathology communication in

up retardation anxiety to seizure 80%), disorder. (in (in and disorder comorbidities are attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders, mental Common 25%), OCD, puberty. start of Seizures often onset around the improved language IQ Higher skills and related better to are prognosis. living group years a cognitive skills the structured and living the Good average by in age 6 predict less situation. or independently of nonverbal likelihood of communication

(1% number only 2%) of a to to individuals autism as suggested adults. prognosis, relatively function studies poor earliest of being able independently with a small The and early gains, diagnosis research cure, a but with reveals not major treatment. Recent

presents generally or adolescence adulthood. in Schizophrenia early of adults are the child 20-3). stage applied as in diagnostic in must (Table same interpreted The but terms developmental criteria of the be

and is (<1 in children) schizophrenia. form a severe Childhood-onset indicates a 10,000 schizophrenia more disorder of usually rare between frequency of 13 increases age. and The years 18 as as be Boys tend affected often about of to ethnic other girls, twice cultural factors. or regardless of The is etiology unknown. schizophrenia linkages and have shown predisposition genetic Numerous the studies for disorder. and compared risk family in addition, with siblings. consistently studies In twins monozygotic dizygotic twins show a higher with schizophrenia of have 10-fold relatives risk. higher a First-degree patients

The Positive broad hallucinations schizophrenia four typically symptoms include delusions. fall symptoms • categories: into of and visual or occur stimuli. that Hallucinations external misperceptions auditory without are are fixed false Delusions

A. (1) from (2) (1), (3), 1. from least more and one with (2), Six two from (3) items or and and each at in a. of as following: interaction, the least impairment social Qualitative by at manifested two

as the nonverbal Marked gestures expression, interaction and eye-to-eye b. social body use in gaze, facial of regulate such postures, behaviors, multiple impairment to

appropriate relationships c. to to Failure developmental peer develop level

people A to by bringing, lack out spontaneously (e.g., objects of enjoyment, share showing, interest) or achievements or seeking a d. interests, pointing lack with of of other

emotional of 2. or Lack social reciprocity of by in one communication following: a. the at impairments least Qualitative as manifested

(not Delay language b. spoken total alternative modes through accompanied of lack compensate communication, of the as or mime) development to in, gesture or such of, by attempts

impairment ability c. or adequate the in a initiate marked speech, In conversation with with individuals others to sustain

and idiosyncratic Stereotyped d. language or language of repetitive use

to play or Lack play imitative developmental appropriate of varied, 3. level spontaneous social make-believe and following: interests, at and the repetitive of of stereotyped as activities, patterns by a. Restricted behavior, one manifested least

interest stereotyped or with patterns either that restricted of is focus in abnormal preoccupation intensity Encompassing and b.

nonfunctional inflexible adherence to c. Apparently routines specific, or rituals

or or finger-flapping mannerisms handor complex motor (e.g., whole twisting and body movements) d. Stereotyped repetitive

parts with preoccupation of Persistent objects

B. of following yr least with in before at onset the or areas, functioning Delays abnormal one 1. age 3

2.

Language communication in used as 3. social

C. for Rett is by or disorder. accounted disturbance disintegrative childhood better The syndrome not

or norms. depending beliefs be can cultural and bizarre on non-bizarre,

effect. a and Negative social interactions motivation lack • flat include and symptoms of Negative frequent in later most symptoms childhood adolescence. are and early IQs with IQs. low Children high and show negative with than positive often more symptoms children fewer

cause of can thoughts Disorganization behavior significant and impairment. •

the social common is impairment. perhaps most impairment feature and functional causing marked is of and disabling schizophrenia, • Cognitive

A. (or of less during following, treated) 1. time for two a portion significant successfully present symptoms: each a if period of 1-month the Characteristic

2.

3.

Disorganized speech or frequent incoherence) derailment 4. (e.g.,

5.

symptoms affective flattening, alogia, (i.e., Negative avolition) or

A behavior one person’s or criterion a each voice voices Note: if a thoughts up with on keeping commentary required other. are bizarre or two or or the of running Only hallucinations consist conversing more delusions symptom is

B. are occupational the before dysfunction: achieve academic, such portion interpersonal, achievement). onset childhood of or interpersonal the (or the areas achieved onset adolescence, self-care, in below significant or of since or expected as functioning, relations, of the level work, time failure disturbance, level onset Social/occupational the when markedly major the of to for is a

meet periods and treated) symptoms active-phase continuous the successfully at C. symptoms) 6 if 1 include symptoms. prodromal or (i.e., residual of of may persist less of month months with Duration: for signs that A at least (or disturbance least criterion in by manifested present attenuated residual perceptual criterion unusual or During be an beliefs, negative listed A symptoms periods, only or in disturbance form of symptoms may prodromal signs odd (e.g., experiences).

mood of concurrently out Schizoaffective has (2) have disorder during if depressive, symptoms because the D. disorder brief manic, or been duration (1) active-phase with episodes occurred mixed episodes the mood active either symptoms, with residual relative duration total no their major mood schizoaffective ruled or occurred have have disorder psychotic exclusion: to features and been and the and active-phase periods.

medical is E. condition. general a or disturbance abuse, a a medication, due physiologic not The the drug to effects of direct

hallucinations additional also diagnosis another treated). disorder 1 at (or least history less If are for pervasive schizophrenia or made delusions of present if of if autistic only is developmental month is a there or F. the successfully disorder, prominent

(can longitudinal has the symptoms): 1 applied since initial Classification onset be elapsed after at least year active-phase of of only course

by if: Episodic are also defined of reemergence (episodes symptoms psychotic with prominent negative inter-episode symptoms); symptoms. the with residual specify prominent

inter-episode residual symptoms no Episodic with

psychotic are Continuous period prominent throughout with present also (prominent of if: symptoms. specify negative observation); the symptoms

paranoid, undifferentiated, catatonic, of and disorganized, subtypes There five schizophrenia: residual. are

with prominent cognition. relatively hallucinations Paranoid delusions type: normal and delusions of delusions The types occur. are also other may but often persecutory,

behavior, inappropriate flat or disorganized type: affect. and speech, disorganized Disorganized

abnormalities psychomotor prominent inactivity activity. may that motor include extreme Catatonic type: excessive or (waxy rare Cataplexy is children flexibility) and adolescents. in

case catatonic not Undifferentiated but patient which type. for paranoid, the schizophrenia a diagnostic criteria type: or disorganized, in meets

type: prominent, have previously Residual clinical but full symptoms. positive diagnostic met which criteria situation in been no current,

meet diagnosing least at present 6 schizophrenia, be for criteria clinical symptoms months. should for To than present disorder. is psychotic the called month, less condition symptoms 1 for If brief a are month are symptoms a for more schizophreniform than 1 disorder of made. less than but diagnosis months, If is present 6 not for not do otherwise as specified. meet symptoms criteria full clinically disorder that significant diagnostic Psychotic diagnosed psychotic are but are schizophrenia

schizophrenia. be are distinguished There several to disorders from have that following: include These the

clear is depression Schizoaffective a disorder when at of diagnosed mania. least active without symptoms schizophrenia for weeks person 2 of has or symptoms psychotic present. These are other syndromes affective at times, symptoms occur even when

when features with mania are and psychotic with course occur or features only. made psychotic depression of the disorder diagnoses symptoms depression Major psychotic during bipolar disorder psychotic condition to general due of be medical judged medical a direct condition. the to Psychotic that general are symptoms a describes result

related psychotic have alcohol to or psychotic drug disorders Substance-induced symptoms ingestion.

person. influence delusions, when another in occurs folie disorder, from deux, one person with psychotic delusional content, Shared similar à symptoms

(Heller the disintegrative syndrome), disorders childhood diagnoses Asperger Other are in brain organic and psychosis, syndrome, disorders. disorder differential drug-induced autism,

specific imaging tests are or studies No diagnostic forschizophrenia. exclusion. It a of clinical diagnosis is mental is illness critical. to family Obtaining with a attention history endocrinopathies.Evaluation epilepsy, physical metabolic screening temporal disease MRI, rule and lobe especially drugscreening, workup is indicated. out examinations, Wilson epilepsy), of to out schizophrenia and delirium also and for neurologic The includes (torule electroencephalography Psychotic bedifferentiated vivid abuse-related normal younger must symptoms of or fantasylife in manifestations symptoms. from children caninclude vivid posttraumatic disorder abuse are to with nightmares often less specific and other Youth have with nightmaresrelated stress recollections negative but topics. and sometimes helpful in be can processes. testing identifying Psychological psychotic thought

is multimodal on a use antipsychotic Treatment of including based approach, medications. antipsychotics risperidone, quetiapine, ziprasidone, First-line drugs aripiprazole, paliperidone). are (e.g., olanzapine, and atypical loxapine, haloperidol, are (e.g., medications and chlorpromazine, antipsychotics trifluoperazine, molindone). typical Second-line thiothixene, newer the likely approved also in that is work It youth. adults antipsychotics will for in However, approved Administration. not U.S. the yet are by Drug Food youth these and lithium be with stabilizer. augmented Anti-psychotics can or mood another or for generally electroconvulsive reserved cases. is therapy resistant Clozapine

are for as needed appropriate skills cognitive-behavioral and Psychosocial should modification, patients. and training, behavior be including psychotherapy, supportive therapy, treatments, individual considered all paid disease should the to parents child treatments. psychoeducation be the and about for and its Attention learning are ensure are needs interventions needed to that addressed. special School any

in The remissions schizophrenia of psychotic course illness symptoms. varies exacerbations for and of exists. years, age the symptoms The onset are poor at a premorbid present, schizophrenia function, negative is when if prognosis than poorest and marked family with of an 13 younger when is history seen

ton Association guideline ed disorder, Jan, American for 2, panic treatment Washing Practice the of Psychiatric (APA). American 2009 with patients (APA): (DC), Psychiatric Association

the Available PsychiatryOnline from website. http://psychiatryonline.org/content.aspx?bookid=28§ionid=1680635 at Available

Kaufmann RJ, in of the al: 123(1):378–390, Pediatrics Hagerman E, et WE, 2009 Berry-Kravis X treat ment fragile Advances syndrome,

a obsessive-compulsive neurodevelopmental Veltman Haan Huyser disorder, DJ, Paediatric E, de C, et disorder? al: Evidence neuroimaging, from

Rev. Neurosci Biobehav 2009 33(6):818–830,

PI, illness. Ibeziako J, Psychosomatic Shaw DR: DeMaso Kliegman In RM,

of J, 20, St. BF, Pediatrics, ed Textbook 19, et Geme Nelson al: Stanton

67–69 Elsevier, 2011, pp Philadelphia,

stress psychological treatments disorder: disorder acute and for adult SD: Ponniah a Empirically supported K, Hollon stress posttraumatic review,

Depress Anxiety 26(12):1086–1109, 2009

J Shattuck among PT, findings Am et Timing with study, disorder: 48(5):474–483, children Durkin al: Maenner Psychiatry of M, popu lation-based from Adolesc surveillance Acad an a M, identification 2009 spectrum Child autism

atr 63−64 Silber disorders: prognosis, quiz TJ: Somatization treatment, diagnosis, 2011 Rev 32(2):56–63, Pedi and

5 Cindy Nathan Blum W. Christian J. and

given young to to malnourished growth. who expected a infants thrive to of and term meet fail (FTT) is standards children Failure descriptive to FTT psychosocial environmental or related used describe malnutrition causes. most to often is importance underscoring of with and however, contributors coexist, medical, potential the nutritional, children cases. organic environmental In environmental and inadequate developmental, in growth, assessing contributors all many psychosocial,

by the weight the below for or the of growth decreases, chart of or 3rd crossing child. major the over two on diagnosed the less weight often than age; falls is lines is percentile time; height 80% remains percentile FTT for median that these definitions to Caveats exist. the to percentile. falls population growth 3% the of below According chart naturally standards, 3rd for weight short height). stature proportional constitutional delay who typically have are children, (normal growth, of These usually or percentile fluctuations children. in normal of life, can the years in in occur first few large Additionally position in relation weight Changes circumference. and in be assessed head height (length) should to

percentile causes a weight is disproportionately a decreases of that percentile to low one proportional to concern, that high decreases disproportionately Weight that concern. no is from but until be height of 24 18 needed prematurity; corrections made age, must age. months of corrections are 40 head months months circumference of for until corrections until age, Allowances weight and and the from some difficult FTT, be can distinguish growth in be growth Although cause. height-for-weight can distinguishing useful velocity variants to determinations results In wasting children in with (deficiency FTT, weight gain). in malnutrition initially is chronic, after Stunting in generally severe of circumference linear malnutrition. occurs spared months malnutrition, head except and with (deficiency growth) malnutrition, infection, exposures. teratogenic height/length, suggests FTT or (proportional abnormalities, head chromosomal weight, and circumference) is long-standing that congenital symmetric problem foster 5% affecting children of in to of is care. in to living common 3% 10% and hospitals, children, 5% a of poverty 15% young to children admitted pediatrics, and FTT

its oftenmultifactorial, and for begins diverse of possible a failure causes FTT 21-1). of management carefulsearch are Because (Table with growth etiology the ofFTT age, evaluation(Table vary by common in 21-2). should be the The which causes reflected to the as FTT. eliminate of or medicaldisease primary most cause In sufficient history are examination a and physical comprehensive cases, suggest the children in diagnosed outpatient 50% of for Medical fewer managed children in are hospitalized setting. growthfailure frequently in than less diseases and even problems. moreextensive a often manifestation failure of family Growth is increased clinically demand. or nutrient categorize absorption, inadequate to useful metabolic It of is nutritional into thecauses malnutrition inadequate intake,

Available StudentConsult.com @

Thrive Failure to

size prenatal A should medical (weight, travel history include head history birth and as family and prematurity, circumference), history. length, well as vomiting, Indicators fever, diseases, should medical respiratory and noted. diarrhea, of as fatigue, be symptoms, such history essential. careful A is diet growth causes infancy. Lactation preparation frequent failure improper in of in problems formula breastfed and infants are early and foods intake for crucial liquids of evaluate is older to solid and infants It children. have dietary others excessive juice, anorexia. fruit diets; some leading drink of malabsorption inappropriately children beliefs, to restricted to parental or Due amounts The child’s frequency, also schedule should meal daily be noted. (timing, location) that Mealtime growth. completing distractions can practices, with interfere influence meals, especially required. psychosocial of and the child assessment family complete A is mental (poverty, Child social growth factors isolation, societal to unemployment, may retardation, parental violence, failure. lead factors toxicity) (temperament, contribute substance development), domestic and factors illiteracy, (depression, and all environmental abuse),

should physical problems; indicators oral A or injury; assess complete pulmonary, developmental of and examination cardiac, gastrointestinal of signs inflicted screening dental or

malabsorption and Celiac Cystic reflux other Other causes of Gastrointestinal fibrosis pancreatic disease syndromes insufficiency

airway Dental pyloric caries Gastrointestinal abnormalities (e.g., Chromosomal immunodeficiency rings syndromes obstruction syndromes stenosis, genetic Congenital abnormalities, malrotation) disease heart Upper Vascular Congenital

tract virus Human infection, Urinary parasitic infection immunodeficiency sinusitis, chronic Hepatitis Tuberculosis

Galactosemia aciduria disease organic disease pituitary Thyroid Aminoaciduria, Adrenal or

features consumption may for or and age-appropriate Child that a Delayed cause teratogenic intolerance foods genetic Celiac dysmorphic neglect disease disease; Food introduction of suggest growth failure. Juice examination untoward reveal can complete hypotonia, neurologic or feeding effects on growth. A which and may have spasticity subcutaneous decreased cheilosis, malnutrition include hepatomegaly, or findings mass, fat, decreased to related Physical 30). muscle edema (see Chapter dermatitis, a gastrointestinal more respiratory, otitis variety of media, Additionally infections are malnourished risk and FTT children than severely have infections. at for controls; serious age-matched children with

laboratory physical guidethe findings examination evaluation. should and The history malnutrition. growth screening to cause problems search are illnesses common resulting identify Simple for medical failureand that to tests from recommended serum testing thyroid children renal ova a abdominal iron electrolytes immunodeficiency may count; pain, protein test infection tests ordysfunction; parasites a urinalysis,urine and function for toxicity; screen and stimulating also virus blood or indicated.For and sample malodorousstools, anemia culture, a purified may screening hormone; be to assess to with stool for tests;and culture indicated. Initial for lead include complete derivative diarrhea, deficiency tuberculosis.Human may and be liver screen the also review may A child’s bewarranted. newborn of preferences, and home disruptive feeding visitation, in Observation environment. problems, is of feeding parent-child diagnostic mealtime assessing the ifpossible, great distractions, unusual and during home or value food interactions,

of issues Treatment the requirementsand family. social the child’s nutritional must address the the the child family nutritional Initial treatment plan. and of should the management treatment the focuson in whileengaging medical children of of threatenedby malnourished FTT. feel Parents diagnosis responsible personally the may and be depressed cannot family child’s psychosocial may to maynot recognize or their and needs; themalnutrition. they Parents dysfunctional they so the on contributors focus be treatment, can issues and they a addressed. thesuccess of These need on effect to profound have

can malnutrition managed identified easily be and the cause with care is Children whose by primary mild family. physician pediatricians, improves developmental with including social multidisciplinary In outcome nutritionists, nutritional team, children in FTT. a specialists, more cases, challenging workers, nurses, and can FTT treated with outpatient children in be the setting. Most that in require hospitalization safety treatment, hospitalization. Children or diagnoses severe maltreatment evaluation is jeopardy of because with require underlying for whose or malnutrition, gain has induce for is social children or recommended contraindication evaluation circumstances and not are outpatient weight document intensive and the unless Admitting hospital to intervention a failed the outpatient to management. attempting

is of management of etiology. cornerstone treatment, the Nutritional regardless the Children expected their calorie the age and than protein 1.5 more require catch-up with intake growth. may times for FTT for volume picky who to calorically are dense and able consume in may amount and foods. require eaters not be Children anorexic with FTT this formula-fed appropriately adjusted formula can 21-3). (Table the concentration be infants, of For density cream, the of toddlers For changes adding foods. sour peanut oil, high-calorie caloric favorite include butter, foods butter, should dietary by other or increasing by often toddlers. oral tolerated supplements well cal/oz) High-calorie (30 are additives increasing used volume fat, cases, to without boost specific In increasing some by requirements. calories carbohydrate, or are protein calories and especially vitamin is Additionally mineral supplementation catch-up growth. during needed, least costly approach is dietary In warranted. the to simplest general and change

catch-up the malnutrition, of weeks. Depending initiation take of growth 2 severity may on the be growth three Initial normal seen. to two gain times can weight in stature. precedes improvement Weight improvement to trends many with severe in growth. are months For malnutrition, all chronic, children reverse needed problems. and reach FTT many with Although at developmental, learning, risk normal children they eventually behavioral remain size, for

defects in defenses. host causes Malnutrition 13 malnutrition-infection 5.5 kcal/oz concentrate 27 kcal/oz FTT liquid with formula oz suffer a scoops in 6 powdered which may 27 cycle, Children from 8

2000–2001. Formulary, Pharmacy Services From Handbook R, Department and of Jew Pharmacy editor: Ohio, Pharmacy Department 2000, Hudson, of

Services, p 422. are concentrations reached water. adding *Final by to formula powdered scoop one = of tablespoon. One formula measuring formulas are provide infants, to prepared kcal/oz. 20 healthy For

to malnutrition, infection. recurrent greatersusceptibility leading exacerbate to infections evaluated Children with closely. FTT and promptly infection followed be treated for must and

uses During the maintain slows metabolic need and processes of the to to its nutrients stores for and metabolic and normal protein fat, growth starvation, minimize requirements. glycogen, body normal also serum concentrations body homeostasis of and generally The maintains electrolytes. rapid starvation, be may after reinstitution With homeostasis the lost. and of fluid electrolyte feeding serum collectively the Changes complications syndrome. are associated refeeding the termed in electrolyte concentrations and life-threatening problems. calcium, These pulmonary, can cardiac, in neurologic potassium, changes result affect or and and magnesium typically phosphorus, Infants kwashiorkor, prolonged with at fasting had and nervosa anorexia syndrome. those risk children marasmus, for are and who refeeding have and be nutrition, syndrome by of of electrolytes during the of depleted electrolytes. of Refeeding avoided monitoring initial replacement close days serum slow feeding, prompt can institution and

deprivation psychological FTT stature. psychosocial stature in Occasionally or live with without short puberty, short concomitant who develop a or delayed syndrome children called polyphagia, of stealing bowls, notable toilet vomiting, and from drinking symptoms food, include signs The other and behaviors. gorging and and hoarding polydipsia, are and often Affected typically are passive and children withdrawn. and depressed socially shy may Endocrine exogenous growth children, decreased identified a muted have growth response to who affected and often secretion hormone. dysfunction is in hormone function endocrine improvement child. in adverse the in typically child and the results environment rapid subsequent from and somatic of rapid growth of pubertal the Removal the psychological of The and stature diagnosis short degree for on depends psychosocial the children prognosis at trauma. with age prognosis. environment a from identification portends and healthy Early the removal have growth reach prognosis. Those genetic may for diagnosed not their childhood a psychosocial poorer or adolescence potential and in later

problems children impact child as on an and Few neglect. of social have as profound the abuse well-being agencies. 3 are States, in to child year million of the Each United made welfare maltreatment reports suspected 1 reports Approximately (CPS). investigation by substantiated these Services Child of after million Protective are only a children represent maltreatment. of from the who These small suffer reports portion as that several and admit report many violence indicate physical surveys adults more their abusive experiences year, Parental adults million children. each against to children and laws child define state neglect. abuse Federal and abuse, of Each and inactions. protecting for investigating process the accountable state children, determines actions holding their or perpetrators childhood adulthood such and developing mortality. and events, adolescence morbidity the Adverse individual’s increase that the adult of predict early in behaviors abuse and as neglect, child risk health a the that great advocate influence child profound and to in child ability and can recognize effectively a is The of of future have maltreatment challenge a the and child. on pediatric for practice protection safety well-being a

development behavior abuse physical normal parental to the or emotional destructive Child child. a of is abuse upbringing, and CPS. experiences, individual have for Because abuse personal different cultural of to vary according beliefs, and suspected family physicians thresholds various reporting to definitions religious of identify and In report cases suspected are neglect. every abuse physicians mandated all state, by and child to law reports safety child. It suspected of abuse investigate to CPS of responsibility the is of the the to ensure ongoing cause laws a intentional that State or harm also as acts child to reckless crimes. define criminal physical a perpetrator. or possible and for as sexual serious Law crimes charges abuse investigates abuse against enforcement neglect such

and emotional abuse are categories neglect neglect. sexual in that broad include often Child abuse, physical abuse, abuse, and considered welfare child the of approximately common, to Neglect agencies. is accounting most the for made reports half being neglect from met. Child omissions defined that is basic a needs prevent child’s by nurturance. health needs These adequate food, clothing, care, and housing, education, include supervision, individual, abuse complex of result neglect and factors. risk and Child from family, interaction a societal as factors, specific abuse to such a neglect. factors violence, they and are potential maltreatment, some physician risk considered of than determinants domestic abuse, and better a alert maternal defined parental strong risk broadly markers Although risk, are substance rather for as to depression,

ability to and patient the maltreatment varies of child victims The sustained. of the by ageof the identify abuse type victims diagnosis sexual and isstraightforward. Childrenwho disclosure, brought for often medical the child abuse care makes a are are of after the of irritability lethargy, without or for trauma. may abused disclosure infants brought Physically evaluation a be medical of visible, injuries may be If are or diagnosis the the not missed. severe infant’s furtherinjury. trauma unsuspecting third abusive identified after head Approximately by physicians, sustaining are be initially one misdiagnosed only infantswith to of Although are of of possibility parents, awareness needed. physicians abuse the trusting is of aconstant inherently

Available StudentConsult.com @

all children of physical children of The parents affects by ages. abuse children 1500 that are year. that of estimated and 1% It injured are childhood approximately children is during to each abused physically fatally 2% as to likely abuse, boyfriends. abdominal the perpetrators physical Although frequently by be or mothers injuries, of trauma, more or head as are fathers maternal serious most reported are such inflicted abuse. be easily capable abuse The the injuries, physical child the made providing history obvious of battered, diagnosis a of is is can of external or if has is not diagnosis many the cases, In obvious. often unaware provided parent the the of is the history parent provide is the or to because by The abuse. nonoffending is history a who is parent unwilling correct inaccurate to too young provide a be The of the may assault. child ill or history or too to child sense scared of may An be a have perpetrator. may to strong older loyalty so do the

presentation initially history suggested (Table incongruent clinical 22-1). physical by of seems child ofthe with abuse A the that is a diagnosis physical systemcan from some are to injury abuse, occur any Although injuries more common. organ identified abused most among are also the findings ambulatorychildren in children. common but are injury in Bruises healthy universal as abuse slap are suggestive includethose on body Bruises cord on (Fig. extension such a patterned, marks that of orlooped mark the face the 22-1). Bruises

a denied, presents toddler. injuries, history an of A medical child trauma child is if for or especially significant and care infant is with the

identified. not the by explain caregiver The history provided the injuries does

time. changes of The history injury the over significantly

the of history developmental self-inflicted with abilities. child’s does trauma correlate A not

delay care. an medical is in seeking unexplained unexpected There or

including injuries are ages. Multiple organ various of injured, systems

The abuse. are for pathognomonic injuries child

Metaphyseal 3-month-old 22-3 Figure with hospital the a the distal admitted A, fracture infant injury. head to severe tibia in of periosteal a tibia, bone of previous perhaps There formation also is injury. new that from same of Bone scan infant. B, of single the Initial fracture right x-ray rib. a showed fourth chest posterior later performed unrecognized revealed radionuclide scan posterior lateral days of fractures bone and multiple previously 2 the A ribs. showed rib radiographs multiple 2 C, healing fractures. Follow-up weeks later pattern highly fracture for of abuse. child This specific is the violent chest. The usually injuries of of these mechanism squeezing is

should are occur or isolated over the torso, ears healthy an raise bony distributed unusual to in in children that as neck, concern. distribution, prominences; generally bruises such subtle medical clue toabuse for injury. only and of inless can occurring be Bruises infants external with seen associated a may unusual, the than infants internal nonambulatory care.Occasionally significant are healthy routine in be 2% bruise

(see preventable injuries 44). unintentional pediatric are usually Chapter and represent common Burns trauma are burns of hospitalized 10% of with abuse. children victims Approximately scalding (Fig. Inflicted commonly result injuries hot more radiators, the contact burns (irons, with or of can objects the result but of cigarettes) be 22-2). are water Hot infants and burns intentional immersion of which result toilet the tap sometimes occur injuries, often around training in toddlers

hospital the a marks untreated on the burns with Multiple cord feet. and who 2-year-old Figure multiple to arms, looped child 22-1 back, abused presented to

issues. have of characteristic depth, uniformity clear burn pattern. and of demarcation, burns lines These

fractures infants in young occur Inflicted and commonly more children. common for nonspecific Although are inflicted diaphyseal abuse, fractures most they are in injury. that or for abuse in occur fractures children; Fractures unexplained; bones. raise involve young, nonambulatory that should are multiple suspicion include unusual such fractures metaphyseal, vertebral, a have scapular, as rib, (Fig. high or Certain for fractures specificity other abuse, 22-3). differential should the metabolic be appropriate. in considered confused diagnosis with can diseases abuse Some when and be

of injury serious Abdominal form an physical uncommon is abuse. but infants toddlers injury, the to common mechanism and trauma Blunt abdomen of is primary the victims. the and most are or injury viscus as organs, than more such Injuries inflicted the liver accidental. trauma and commonly pancreas, predominate to solid with occurs hollow Even

brought with that she the hot 22-2 A a history to 1-year-old radiator. sat hospital child a on Figure a medical investigation, occult including and injuries such a for a full require welfare child Suspicious injuries look skeletal social survey as to evaluation. this skeletal and

infant. Acute an hemorrhage posterior Figure interhemi-spheric the 22-4 abused fissure subdural in in

there no cases the bruising of trauma, in may be severe wall. to abdominal cause along in delay The with history, trauma, the inaccurate usual lack diagnosis. can external of often A injuries. additional reveals careful evaluation survive is good assault. prognosis acute the generally from Abdominal physical of mortality second for leading children the abuse, although who cause is the trauma

trauma of the mortality and cause leading Abusive from head abuse. morbidity physical is young; Most victims infants are predominate. Shaking blunt cause impact injuries. and trauma The the boyfriends, fussy trauma to crying, typically intolerance commonly by is perpetrators infant. fathers and most the a are precipitated perpetrator’s and apnea, ranging lethargy irritability to seizures, symptoms with coma. neurologic and and Victims from present Unsuspecting of one than third infants, diagnosis. physicians are 25% approximately reinjured misdiagnose these, before and of more A cerebral presentation finding on common edema (Fig. associated with progressive often is subdural hemorrhage, 22-4). the to Hypoxic-ischemic contributor injury. pathophysiology of significant injury brain a is the in Associated not (seen skeletal victims) many, rib metaphyseal but retinal classic and trauma, hemorrhages include including and findings all, fractures. previous diagnosis, head-injured of infants have injury. evidence the of At many time sequelae. high at permanent risk neurologic are for Survivors

of extensive the injury diagnosis 22-2). type differential depends (Table abuse of physical on The present unwarranted. injuries multiple diagnoses with For pathognomonic medical exhaustive who organ is children an for search to systems, assessments careful, the been medical unusual emphasizing all abuse, incorrectly of diagnosed children. objective of need with have diseases victims as Children for present All young with who and infants toddlers suspicious

(with pain) Henoch-Schönlein syndrome diseases Familial Genetic purpura dysautonomia Vasculitis Ehlers-Danlos to congenital indifference

Dermatologic eruption Fixed syndrome dermatitis, bullosa diaper Severe Phytophotodermatitis ingestion Epidermolysis Stevens-Johnson including drug Ex-Lax

of the Hematologic (hemorrhagic disorders deficiency Hemophilia disease K Vitamin newborn)

syndrome kinky hair Glutaric type aciduria Menkes I,

Christian From Child abuse physical. CW: editor: 5-minute MW, Schwartz Consult, 2003, The Philadelphia, ed Lippincott Pediatric In & 3, Williams

Wilkins.

*The differential diagnosis of abuse type organ of involved. physical the system by and varies injury

fractures. for injuries survey or should undergo healing occult looking a skeletal may third with multiple injuries, have rib trauma. occult fractures head infants of facial One fractures, young or be these for imaging may Brain indicated infants.

unprepared developmentally that give Child and abuse which understand, that sexual involvement in activities they of cannot sexual are they taboos. consent the is and for children cannot to, societal violates but single abuse a can event, more it is commonly Sexual chronic. be Most the or who over have who adolescents or the are known power adults to are child. child and real perpetrators perceived physical coercion does manipulation involves not abuse Most and violence. involve sexual and infrequent. Although strangers are occur, they assaults by the other members of male relatives, are have and and Perpetrators children. access individuals include than teachers, to friends, often parents, family clergy, more who female and abuse do the to disclosing from All with often threats. so coercion or child keep perpetrators strive the

boys sexual underrecognized is the and abuse of Approximately victims of girls, 80% underreported. are although have come generally Children abuse. attention made of to they a disclosure after their teacher. nonoffending may a to or relative, disclose sibling, parent, They friend, disclosure commonly years has the after to perpetrator months, their Children child. for ongoing especially abuse, many or delay access the if weeks, have pathognomonic. considered Sexual behavior no be in is behavioral who should although problems, abuse children also by exposed some these witnessing with or of sexual abuse, sexual behaviors inappropriate Hypersexual on to should children videos are raise the activity. adult although behaviors possibility behaviors or television anal occasionally recognized the vaginal, a or infection. injury discovery discovery of or sexually is penile, of abuse the an by unexplained Sexual by transmitted

cases, of made by is sexual diagnosis the In abuse obtained the child. most the history from in and is the police medical physician’s In sexual complete, needed. interviewed to which the reported been been the has visit, or cases not (or abuse the a interview office forensic both), at the CPS before child has investigative abused quality systems have ensure in to children. communities sexually interviews Many place of professional the makes child to However spontaneous and the non-leading. other spoken be child about the a to the with has open-ended physician, should interviewed if the that abuse, no questions are or child disclosure related timing and pain). should genital of all (bleeding, the as cases, to the assault issues or symptoms In discharge, abuse, the child such be medical questioned about

complete, examination be and should physical anus. careful with the of The genitals inspection children a at medical Most of abused the genital evaluation. sexually the normal have examination time for they in injuries children 5% most their Genital 72 assault diagnosed in genital in sexually who hours but are are report only seen commonly and present abused of who care 10% of children children. medical more bleeding, recent to within (fondling, examination. genital heal vulvar injuries not tissue, the by do oral sexual genital completely rapidly that Many medical abuse genital the often mucosa heals and of so coitus, and contact) injure types of time For child. present 72 who identifying semen of the be hours of blood assault, recent presence given on to attention acute children should the within injury and or most the special oral Injuries not or the to overlooked. mucosa, be thighs should breasts, Forensic has when collection in yield and cases the greatest evidence needed few after assault. an collected is 24 first acute the a hours in of or unexplained posterior an sexual acute, or ecchymoses of anogenital findings lacerations specificity no diagnostic unexplained pregnancy the of other sexual history findings fourchette scarring, or with activity. of include in with complete adolescent assault, are hymen, Few anus, transection but the hymen, the most

evaluation age, The laboratory of symptoms. and child by is abused sexually the child’s history, a dictated sexually unnecessary for infections lowin risk infection of prepubertalchildren Universalscreening young children. for asymptomatic is because the transmitted is are of the transmitted the of and in known perpetrator, considered. communityalso the infections of identityand sexually type assault, medical epidemiology The history infectionsin excellentsensitivity sexually Many for specificity children maintaining acid and while tests STIs to amplification use for these sexually good testing clinicians nucleic have children in transmitted abused because screen adolescents. requires diagnosis sexually young 116). of infections Chapter an transmitted (see investigationfor abuse most sexual children in The

management medical documentation of of safety and child(Fig. child andongoing medical advocacy for infections, abuse verbal injuries the the includes health of for statements The careful findings, and and treatment 22-5). always and ensure the report and to thesuspicion of the to should child. informed the safety need CPS, well-beingof the to be need focusing of abuse Parents on by are childrenalso policebecome all, law enforcement, not investigated against involved some, but of in that cases Crimes are the suspectedabuse. committed so civil such in occasionally issues. called criminal dependency are custody, issues, regarding Physicians and or courthearings testify to as and the preparation to condition of child’s diagnoses. provide review aneducated, unbiased of medical medicalrecords court needed and for the account Careful are

partially primary is of few a prevention maltreatment The child programs. are prevention a great challenge.There successful Visiting through neglect. may risk programs and nursing childhood early during reducethe and pregnancy abuse home begin that continue of advocate has and mandates, risk vulnerable of these in child to need parents some cognizant maltreatment for in factors reduce be to willingto in supportive offamilies patients. aware screening and their Physician remain always thediagnosis, of physicians professional on behalf populations.Ultimately of shown training

of trauma? history there a Is

mechanism accidental? Is the of Are the diagnostic abuse? injuries Does the injuries? have child Is injuries? NoNo Yes history with Yes consistent

provide accidental adequate mechanism? Can caregiver in seeking unexplained medical Is there an care? delay workup? Consider by B) reporting Confirmed (see explain Do conditions findings? other medical

Was Yes injured parent child or No a by the caregiver? police Services child Protective Report Did result to of the serious or or reporting sustain Report to as injury needed illness abuse Child neglect? No a neglect? as sustain or abuse serious illness result of Did the or a injury child NoYes No Yes

needed to No further Report reporting police

the to 22-5 and abuse. of A, Figure suspected civil investigation initiating criminal Approach Protective or (CPS) B, or Reporting abuse both cases. law child in to enforcement Child Services the parent, a by as caregiver of when a CPS reports by parent, by injured child a child. is required a adult an or are acting children including person, parents by police other The investigate any crimes or caregivers. committed against abuse. CW: Christian (From Child 2003, Handbook MW, Baltimore, editor: Pediatrics, & 3, In Clinical Wilkins, ed Williams pp Lippincott 192−193.) of Schwartz

of a sexuality occurs life. development child’s The throughout sexual behaviors. gender roles, gender sexual identity, includes orientation, and Sexuality by It experience. and and social factors biologic influenced is individual to have are a if sexual development. their be consulted likely child’s about parents Pediatricians concern provides open an who questions behaviors, an pediatrician nonjudgmental and environment homosexuality, adolescent about may 23-1). valuable heterosexual identity be resource for or gender a A (Table with

behaviors throughout childhood. Sexual occur and lubrication. infants vaginal have can are erections female male in of Early infants capable life, During sexes. in period, masturbation occurs both the preschool but of 4 years Between of always boy not a years understanding as may a or is male age, children to and or one female a that 3 develop always girl, age. themselves identify the 2 5 until a sex the group. sex wants of Stating to member opposite this opposite age and the pretending not a be unusual member behaviors of that be a one to are in genitals their that others, or learn sexual in in begin to behaviors genitals show and public, private; genitals their to common Preschool touch are children it for to preschool is children need to undress public. behaviors. child highly It other for unusual adult be a sexual intercourse preschool would to imitate or should sexual behavior abuse sexual is to and If material evaluated Chapter exposure for this possible (see inappropriate be 22). child occurring, the

consistent show reflect gender a and behaviors roles) identity, school–age and elementary strong their Most (gender children this. is having If sexual a this engaging their sex gender and in child role child orientation. cross about homosexual may the concerned parents possibilityof age a be teasing behaviors, than engaged as a concern behaviors particularly This is if viewed in generally effeminate are a that less acceptable socially likely boy is

of male be opposite are sex girl a with the or Heterosexual same appearance sex attraction attraction opposite remains the and, attraction but a weak male members sex to as with oneself Homosexual uncommon, designed female members of theopposite the of others of Sexual common. as oppositesex age, Gender the as female “tomboy.” to of Sexual playing dressing being signal same role with members the Gender to member sex weak desire toys for By Behaviors Perception of identity acting a the stating particularly, this that sex to members attraction and sex opposite or to to of should concerns type aboutatypical consistency role gender be considered. behaviors, of the exhibitedand assessing In behavior its parental consistent repertoire is are andfemale typical a part Reassurance role of of behaviors. development gender that these appropriatewhen male flexible is behaviors thebehavior with if the Reassurance such an or as birth the opposite to sex occur is parents. infant of appropriate response a of in stress, the thebehaviors of divorce of the (GID) behaviors In would consistent roleopposite and ofnearly of interest gender typical exclusive identity these occur anatomic appropriate. referral the in that for be child’s gender behaviors disorder contrastif persistent a evaluationfor sex, as pattern

adolescence social, The a during biologic, sexuality. on changes place focus cognitive and the comfortable experimentation. and period likely include Becoming this with and developmental sexuality to of is questioning tasks one principal is of one’s sexual have half school had Almost of report students intercourse. high that they than experience, have at commonly Ten more reported one to with homosexual behavior by being this boys girls. 25% least only sexual Although adolescents have many a have partner, sexual adolescence. experiences by with late same-sex a homosexual orientation a few develop a different sexual When factors consistent adolescents many (societal, individual). probably by is family, orientation affected early are until certain teenage for the does orientation in adolescents they not report that their later. of Some this years, develop sexual whereas others their small age, of of being By 18 sexual of individuals report uncertain a years only proportion orientation.

characterized and with GID discomfort persistent and by intense identification one’s own cross-gender sex. is by preference that is cross-dressing, behaviors games, playmates. stating cross-sex may children and the sex, to or roles, for manifested wants a be and such be exclusive strong opposite one feelings these almost as In and the of The to these back can traced behaviors preschool period. be often onset and with later, it not do relationships. when transient evaluation typically school However begin for the age behaviors the phase, occurs behaviors referral or represent interfere social to becomes at a may clear that with adults. of will sexual as children 80% or GID bisexual have to Forty homosexual orientation a alter there predict or no behavior orientation, reliable is parental is that adult evidence homosexual would and to there developmental However toward heterosexual behavior. pathway no way the sexual

that by desire wrong the be and a opposite adults live may as a born GID sex. the was In persistent sex characterized belief by be treated to one and gender. procedures the they achieve who in but, done to when completed simulate sex, hormones Adults to individuals surgical often are procedures request may alter the or have these characteristics the puberty, desired fully sexual other fail appearance to of is dysphoria follow-up GID have likely that only that persist. puberty studies children to 2% but Long-term gender the GID with adults, of onset with as 20% suggest to intensifies of at more reversible the recommended GID hormone guidelines releasing considering the Society decide puberty 3 gonadotropin using hormone to that published for Tanner allows whether In with to cross-sex through individuals of 2009 Endocrine stages analogs begin treatment. time this adolescent 2 suppression because

separate twins if higher expected (even twins expected genetics chance sexual orientation families) determined rate would raised in alone, 100%, alone for Identical as would a be nowhere be but near show concordance sexual by orientation. than but are of have individuals, size homosexual regions findings the in brain studies the Some in found certain inconsistent. differences not adults. have and The been and homosexual levels estrogens found differ in of to heterosexual androgens it documented to treat well tend and these if, parents how, girls affect sexual boys is interactions or orientation unknown. that Although differently, is

currently 4% It that of homosexual. themselves adults as estimated 1% identify is about to physically the are for negative assaulted. verbally a prevalent negative often being attitudes being homosexuality, isolated, harassed, risk having toward these Given societal being high self-esteem, at and children high-risk human sexual risk determine not infection despite behaviors male immunodeficiency of infections, the (HIV). sexual from of orientation, behaviors, in Although virus the engage threat transmitted sexually adolescents homosexual discussing reasons, need 23-2). medical their provide and psychosocial an sexual comfortable (Table environment orientation care providers which to For in feel health adolescents

extremely and is stressful. homosexual one’s often Acknowledging one is parents that it disclosing to their come to may those homosexuality, their child. some reject parents accept Although as view many behavior immoral, who particularly this parents, child’s a high are youth risk homelessness. Homosexual for at upset the that expected accept or homosexuality need child’s of be had Adolescents to they well-being, come may initially their to be parents aware who loss their for made their the child. about fearful about adulthood shocked, eventually even child’s to may a not orientation. homosexual cause to they that be have child their reassured did Parents need therapies sexual to orientation they as to that be informed language partner (e.g., may only need Likewise change to designed are opposed husband/wife) not

families youth about Display Ensure Provide youth when that families concern other information questions their posters, issues gender-neutral show support and uses homosexual and sexual for asking important behaviors or groups homosexual resources and for one their to that and dating information brochures, about

Kluwer Sexual York, Perrin from New Orientation and Adolescent Care, EC: Academic/Plenum in 2002, Child Publishers. Health Adapted

self-esteem. having more lead feelings child of lower but unsuccessful, guilt and the often to also a have her these who groups provider issues information health knowledge when or with should the his not of adolescent offers is or and care provider health the parents discuss sufficient. counselors can the support care The

by youth homosexual how by other schools, peers, community is addressed and affected groups. in is The by homosexuality is are about jokes, and Unbiased not homophobic and violence homosexuality information teasing, in often common. these settings, available and mood are not It general in found is that disorders homosexual population. have anxiety and higher than youth the rates adults surprising of reported. Increased of suicide substance are and abuse rates detecting role in these providers Health an problems. care have important

safe certain education of should of homosexual infections. be that risk the providers increase behaviors part Although sexually adolescent care well-child of transmitted males all practices aware be types health certain sexual sexual visits, of should about B for intercourse Anal and an virus, efficient by HIV. route hepatitis cytomegalovirus, infection is by syphilis, Proctitis human simplex occur chlamydia, caused virus, 116). may gonorrhea, or papillomavirus (see Chapter herpes

of family or development. biologically, promote individuals; socially, is a unique to legally among dynamic and related with A interfere health a families power have interactions or system having resource an difficulty. emotional individual family functions the is of members, and as family who When all needs well, for interactions a member a physical serves family the support and in individual the emotional of from more the member family. interactions the prevent or harm needs members family or may may cause or, the worst-case of the the meeting family members one of scenario, or physical an emotional physical member Alternatively among a to or problems as are to often These situations dysfunction. family referred

socialization out categorized for and be support physical families carry can in (Table support, children emotional of education, that providing their needs, functions 24-1). as The broadly strengths have these categories, and Within weaknesses. families all of needs temperament, varies and stressors. with development, categories these The support child’s status, that personality, individual in health child amount an experiences, the Too little much support can with health interfere development. child too optimal and and provide to support of a the the involve the failure neglect, family for of for inappropriate and, cases safe development. of child’s environment cases the abuse emotional, or social physical, child child Most in as may excessive child care, overprotective and in parents seek syndrome. health limit growth-promoting friendships other the At experiences extreme, other occur may or vulnerable the children pressure that contribute intense problems Parental achievement related may perfectionism as such may to anxiety disorders. on create to

their The and children. of biologic and a consists family married traditional father mother family live United in increased the family. less diversity the in than nuclear States of The the the now half has dramatically; of children traditional in structure parents living unmarried families. and single live parents grandparents, with Today foster either or gender, may same-sex as of a couple, care parent stepparent, children parents, a a is evidence alone little of is development. family There predictor significant that child or a health structure structure, development. to Regardless emotional, a adult fulfilling presence parent physical, loving of socialization child’s committed the and of or and a health good needs is a or as parents predictor serving of adults best the family stresses. of structures create different Different family types family

any point in children of At more living unmarried than 30% approximately children 40% of are families, born parent are single one and in mothers. to time, woman’s a young results this choice, mother’s In unplanned the pregnancy. this often some cases but from times is parent of divorce because Children also 26). families or may Chapter single-parent death of in a the live (see children lived still in increasing families. single mothers, are parent 2009 single-father families 5% families in and by Although single-father most are of nearly headed

limited often supports. resources financial parents and social Single have for income families. the of and families single is 60% of headed it the of two fathers the only single households is by only mothers, income of median For two-parent income parent 40% families. poverty living is five in children the higher Thus times frequency to of single-parent three in child rely a extent to must on adults for care. These also parents other greater of the in confidence for support adults parent, decreasing may the Although sources may skills. also parent, be parenting they single criticize these make and parenting child consistent associated a raising with also Fatigue may difficult. working are life their less have may for which activities, time increase to parents isolation. a or likely social other Single more problems with parent being are and and are When in developmental the child increased likely. associated burdens exhaustion, the isolation, depression, a of single behavioral

is When 12). mother, the may (see parent parenting of be a further Section teenage problems exacerbated lower autonomy paying educational jobs associated parent teenage is attainment, lower without much opportunity or a self-esteem. and lower advancement, with Being for than child’s likely are father. any even less have support single mothers from other They the to delays, Children problems, risk of mothers difficulties and behavioral for high cognitive school. in at adolescent are to these Referral in Start services important intervention situations. Head is or programs early

be successful care When to resources, supports, collaborate likely sufficient able with has good has parent single financial a is in he a social child. other is she and or raising well providers, to parenting through development validation child behaviors. education confidence of improve behavior about and parental Pediatricians can and professionals. other the a of parent difficulties may to referral Empathetic for parent help of a a a need being or single understanding can the suggest that have effect discuss difficulties healing

Living with Children Homosexual Parents

heterosexual conceived the children parent a gay a context in were Many relationship. or with lesbian of homosexual. they whereas Some were as view they parents their the are or that themselves recognition time the may of at others homosexuality unaware despite married, marry that bisexual context established relationship partner lesbian insemination, with surrogacy. through on the also of their women men same-sex and Gay an or adoption, in parents become a or already own family living with homosexual encompass many parents may structures. possible Children

the disclosure the to will associated concerns these likely the homosexuality social are of child. families have and about affect Parents in how stigma especially children, homosexuality to of parent’s acceptance. associated disclosure general a better In with before earlier adolescence, is isolation the occur social experience by a keeping peers, the Most to stigma adults, lesbian homosexual with may and gay teasing homosexuality children disapproval related secret. a some stress having in parent’s or of of from associated parent; or form parents this

having cause the not a parent-child homosexual development. problems suggests Evidence the that or parent in does increased child’s relationship social-emotional child’s and age. gender typical are the Gender for role behaviors identity, from when secret strong. are issues related Nonetheless children, one’s parents peer distress may great especially and especially teasing sexual in acceptance, or to for of early adolescence the parent’s some separation be maintaining

process full to born membership is not family social a provides adoptive to that child and parents. a legal Adoption the are States of 2% the adopted. Approximately in United children significant and legal are or child. stepparents by relatives A the of adoptions of informal proportion U.S. parent). adoptions, single-parent diversity adopting United international ways which States of occur arranged but adoptions, privately and children, cultural surrogate the U.S. adoptions, in parents the the Most the trends in adoptions adoptions shifting (e.g., have involve a in use increased issues care health for adoption each types of providers. and These families unique raise parents parents create with the adoptive birth parent, adoption and parent, triad are occurring biologic increased adoptions Open the (biologic child). and for issues to frequency and new which interact in agree

adopted counseling the source issues may arise provide evaluate the through information, ideal the a from position and of that preadoption and needs child, medical is advice medical of Pediatricians an help consider obtain when the in and unique adoptive an adolescent. are period the parents to child the may information and medical the preadoption have as family the received visit social about parents history of and the identify discussion such A biologic medical the parents. information important of the missing history allow biologic and that child prospective educational of period preadoption be time able The is that families to to obtain this likely most information. are the poor history, exposure, with utero the substance preadoption discussed of be there inadequate care or in that adoptive on parents. infections, should Depending risks infant nutrition, be may

typical When age-appropriate adopted be the is screeningtests beyond considered. seen, first disorders should for the child screening medical tests. not need may the the the screening standard has these newborn had tests, If toobtain child pediatrician theneeded reviewed Documented if complete should 94). plan needed, a immunizations be to and, (see immunizations developed Chapter the syphilis, human on B, child hepatitis athigh including and the was which from or mother’s Children for country cytomegalovirus, adopted, infection parasites. socialhistory based be biologic the virus, infection may immunodeficiency with tuberculosis, risk count blood be foriron needed may complete A to deficiency. screen

support pediatrician sourceof A psychosocial issues. a advice valuable knowledgeable about also and be can help the that he The the child is understand should child helping while or thefact raise theywill how adopted. think adoptive she parents to pediatrician the about on focus of adoption nor the intense Neither denial is healthy. the the simplest term children around Parents their adoption years during the facts should andexplain use first. toddler answered questions shouldbe Children’s honestly. the adoption. it during the the preschoolperiod that meaning understand not likely Parents make orsimilar and child’s fully limitations thechild will same expect cognitive the repeatedly, should of questions be challenges there outsideof have child of get individuals may parents, as interact more older, to reunitedwith they may family. the the being Aschildren and begins biologic their new fantasies with created want by assignments by peers. Families difficulties genealogicchart a as teasing advice about or school such may creating his parents. teenage During desire or identity tofind have her the biologic the a her his childmay and years, or about questions these family her or rejectionof do may life. needreassurance desire Adoptive his desires represent the not child’s parents that adoptive about the understandmore but to deciding actively untillate about adolescentsshould butmost experts supported In children adolescence to parents. past, thebiologic search be encouraging to recommend adopted for efforts general learn to wait before their in

increase adopted and social much to school, be the a related children behavioral likely before this adoption. is of and problems, Although influences rate have learning, of biologic higher to important variations or recommendations other that intervention, distinguish families problems early can behavioral require may and for in role counseling, services. helping play an from developmental The pediatrician

abuse, protection out-of-home who child of a means parental is neglect Foster for providing or require placement, commonly or care homelessness, because of care children inability parental most substance the abuse. to child, for living half million decreased were by over number about children children a through 2010, 2005 1990s the foster between 2005, and in but of the 20%. late foster care From care, in federal promoted and stays changes support state and were to that families. associated troubled adoptions, more efforts decreases shortened expanded in care, foster with These emphasized have rapid policies in

children nutritional, health care and behavioral, 400,000 high mental for are extremely at The in developmental, problems. risk medical, foster medical of foster have care children time care, placement incomplete have most detrimental At received the in life these had multiple of and experiences. of half of chronic placement illness. acute Comprehensive many reveal the at problems, assessments the children untreated time nearly medical a have and delays Developmental or are and behavioral disorders emotional serious common.

foster Ideally leading reunification provides a service children families, care adoption. or these healing and for to the Too in system, relationship further a care multiple foster adult have placement may exacerbating often in forming the children within experience secure with caregivers. foster children changes problems manifest may to difficulty close Children attempts this by a parents’ develop relationship. resisting foster difficult perpetuate This may to cycle parent may endure, parent foster failures. placement of which be detachment foster from the the a for causes The foster that placements for with or led to the enduring instability difficulties. care in combination trauma neglect need of experienced long-term the disorders, stress times to of care posttraumatic alumni two substance that in abuse, anxiety report and than general population. higher disorder rates depression, are six Foster be of care years living to protections rarely the although foster successful Furthermore often allow and them end age, the maturity adolescents to have 18 of needed skills these the at system independently. youth to Thus done adulthood be to and Increasing in care. Success foster 2008 with mandates of effective Fostering transition Adoptions that Connections the planning Act

The challenges system are great. for the care foster care and academic from in a competent However children nurturing coordinated occur. placed professionals, achievement foster provided significant usually and skilled when status, parents child’s with development, are health and improvements

for nutrition family severe some of of forms results needs child’s Chapters protection a or the 21 in physical and dysfunction most to Failure meet (see 22). and There healthy other in child with are substance postnatal having a ways abuse. and many environment, can a prenatal behaviors as which parental interfere such safe fetus resulting disorders damage fetal of alcohol can as spectrum use the in (FASD). known alcohol spectrum Prenatal disorders this the the most facial postnatal alcohol severe appearance. (FAS) characterized microcephaly, a teratogen syndrome causes retardation, utero intellectual At dysmorphic disability, fetal spectrum, by end characteristic in growth and and of coordination, manifestations impulsivity, behavior. learning, defects Other problems and hyperactivity, birth with or FASD include of attention, be partial birth with defects, difficulties disorder, FAS. may neurodevelopmental Children these diagnosed alcohol-related alcohol-related with or

optimal. these the often not fact used, is but care are the than substances nutrition affect prenatal complicated Other by one that and is substance investigation and also more of effects may fetus, is during with and Cigarette smoking birth lower increased behavioral pregnancy weight child problems. associated been perinatal associated with in the has placentae. period and prematurity, Use abruptio of hemorrhages, intracranial cocaine Exposure in and withdrawal can in prematurity utero opiates result to a syndrome. neonatal and cognitive cocaine effects of results. development mixed on of the Investigations opiates have produced

family after increased and is substance work decreased family birth related and isolation, associated the organization, with to increased abuse marital child’s problems. conflict, Parental increased stress may more be Family violence frequent. their these children fact be to the competent they tasks younger and parents. that age a often variety expect a have than at difficulty structure, Despite of discipline at parents may providing non-substance−abusing children for increased depression, and of failure to contributes self-esteem. low and rates the anxiety, This up sets the parents’ chance toward to alcohol drugs that accepting increase The children their and more during use adolescence. will attitude substances seems

of to harmful death infant is exposure associated illnesses, cigarette of rates to media, which effects second syndrome. children otitis hand expose smoke, and childhood Parents respiratory with consistently substances, directly the sudden increased such also may other as these parents a Despite few only effects, in restrict their homes. smoking many not ways which parents physically protect their There in are other children. may immunize the supervision children, other adequately, examples. childproof and are home provide to to adequate to Failing

cause provide child can their protection much also for attempts Parents’ problems. too to as child early syndrome child ill fully is vulnerable vulnerable a this is that life recovered. viewed to has continues which be in child parents of One example who the the the by in despite parents difficulties limits. to and if are result set may fail Behavioral overindulgent to child reluctance anxiety. leave the Parental separation child the may contribute to having seek medical them particularly minor may leading functions, excess be to variations care. bodily to Parents in attentive may procedures. medical physician to be the If child this does the recognize unnecessary exposed not situation,

Education, Emotional and Socialization Support,

and impact behavior. development a educational and can meet severe child’s have to child needs emotional or on a enduring Failure negative needs adult food. who learns understand need well consistent meets signals a and Infants as attention to the infant’s their for as these caregiver appropriately adult rapidly more signals, to As he infant’s responds communication. the or she the and attempts learns at referred between develops. process, this attachment, Through the as relationship to and child often parent special and available, unusually or affectionate difficult angry, clingy, are not to explore consistently responsive less may environment comfort. are become the to often adults willing infants and When

cognitive is Appropriate also vital stimulation a for child’s development. tests them do to games do not them on more Children not developmentally lower and scores appropriate with problems. have whose school play read parents and intelligence to been skill early improving in intervention In development these and be particularly shown effective subsequent situations, performance. school has day. At provide and of much too extreme, other stimulation child’s the may the there that increasing concerns parents some scheduling are emphasis parental such children be that contingent is on There that love may to feel achievement. come achievement on self-esteem and contribute are There for with to of success anxiety may children. concerns some that this problems narrow definition

abuse, injury, social pattern of over stalking, physical deprivation, (IPV) coercive a the violence psychological include other partner aimed is purposeful intimidation, one establishing assault, of threats. at progressive sexual partner control and isolation, behaviors inflicted Intimate that may adults violence each millions children of year. between the of affects Such lives IPV the its hearing by or and violence Children aftermath. experience seeing and and school, ability peers. to with live IPV with function develop their often who that problems psychological interfere households normally in in Children behavioral home, at with outbursts, may to intervene They while during sometimes parent. behalf of violent attempting be injured a on abuse children of are Many victims themselves. It at concurrence rate is is and IPV there abuse. estimated least 50% a between child that relationships. in is grow that up in Children learn who intimate appropriate households violent violence predictor having A as for history witnessed becoming is of adulthood. child a batterer a in strong a IPV outbursts to child’s IPV the households addition In of affect in live sporadic experience violence, children subtly with disruptive overtly events that or development. can who partner between male perpetrators female and occurs it also occur better bi-directionally or as victims, be family Although may interpersonal-violence. often violence conceptualized and may period. may the Violence during escalate peri-natal

who behavioral specific disturbance is There that to IPV. witness no consequence or is children particular are Some and children for caregiver’s fear their helpless. traumatized feel by safety blame Others may for themselves the violence. Children or stress symptoms may hypervigilance. have disorder,depression, posttraumatic of anxiety, aggression, other performance, school conduct behaviors. disorders, self-esteem, Older poor nonspecific low children or have may are disrupted around sleeping. attachment and risk Infants and routines toddlers at for eating young and signs irritable may temper tantrums. show or of Preschoolers behavior, regression, children show school-age passive) During (withdrawn and externalizing and internalizing behaviors. (aggressive may disruptive) years, both or do have at isolation, to and children some extracurricular form participate not opportunity family school activities no Because friendships. in of have where in substance abuse, failure, present homes and school risky rates is sexual Adolescents of behaviors. higher IPV more to into likely dating peers relationship. than enter their adolescents These are violent a

the of and child the IPV violence for IPV part is Because of against high abuse, children. about of concurrence screening asking Pediatrics screening women universal IPV on endorsed importance be may setting practice, the of abuse. pediatric this of Recognizing has battered intervening of Academy of effective child that of preventing and the behalf screening in the most American suggests one in means IPV standardized prevalence underestimate screening, practices. in may Without pediatricians their the should screened be not Parents together. done family anticipatory about 25-1). the be in safety and and Questions (Table child nonjudgmental, direct, context should violence of guidance

IPV. Intervention is disclose who for needed caregivers show community available appropriate resources. and concern It to is to provide assess It of is and the victim the for important the to children. safety physicians report some states, In IPV. are to mandated for families helpful. about community resources details Information state laws provides is and that

Youth violence mortality is of leading pediatric a United cause the in States. second children to of Homicide cause of death years is age. 19 all the for leading 1 victims children, primarily are nearly 4000 and Each adolescents, 6000 homicide, year of

school? at How at are things and home with lives Who you? family get do along your How you with members? do like them? to with you do What something do if you do bothering is you? What safe feel home? at you Do home? fight at people Do about? they fight What do fight? How do they

Do fights into your get often? friends you? How about fight? When your was last physical ever a during injured been fight? you Have you injured killed? anyone know Has been or your have you to against ever forced been sex Have will? with been threatened Have a or knife? ever you a gun avoid in How fights? you getting do

you weapon a carry Do for self-defense? PARENT FOR THE

your have concerns Do about child? any you Who with children? helps your neighborhood? do your How feel you about home? safe feel at you Do at there fighting home? or Is any violence drugs? at anyone use home Does you your frightened partner? by been Have or ever you? partner threaten your you hurt Does

more suicide. commit rural suburban, gender. violence across a and is in urban, problem and affects race and Youth children communities adolescents robbery, report of aggravated show during and 15% childhood, to to rape, including homicide. committed of having or of violent assault, 40% 30% girls boys serious that offense 30% Surveys a is cases these crimes few arrested in police, a the are Most reported to only. perpetrator not the of and boys than has narrowed. this gap more commit Although crimes girls, crimes. arrested be much to for Boys their are likely more adolescents; for much not and their events arrested minority to Self-reported violent the crimes. between white more likely latter be differ do are

during early violent adolescence. begin violent Most their youth behaviors to exhibit Bullying, a harasses, intentionally of in child. and another middle intimidates, which form is which or a school, repeatedly child peaks harms aggression in physically become behavior concern. a cyber-bullying major bullying or Technology-assisted has depression suicidal bullied and consequences ideation. Psychosocial include being of Children such to be likely involved with who and use. other behaviors, alcohol are bully as problem more smoking others higher bullied associated rates fighting. Bullying carriage being and weapon and are both with of most Although bullies

to TV IQ Low violence Exposure

Parents’ parents of Antisocial evaluation peers Poor relations parent-child positive

Low neglectful Abusive, SES/poverty

Commitment school Poor Poor to School attitude attitude

general. Prevention Services From Youth Center for Health Injury Control, Substance of report National the Mental violence: Abuse a and and surgeon Administration: Human Rockville, Department MD, U.S. Services. of and 2001, Health SES, status. Socioeconomic = *Bold effect. with strongest factors

only. †Males

serious behavior not violent indicates severe the school adulthood. potential high years into violent continues into in progress behavior that do for violent offenders, at begins age. subset youth young very violent Another a of more be often children tend perpetrate crimes, These continue violence into and adulthood. serious more more to offenders, their Most by young adulthood. violence adolescent ends violent only intermittently Most youth violent. are are puberty. the by who committed of start violence violence commonly Frequent more onset of their youth acts before be or violent to cognitive These for mental need youth impairments illness. evaluated

coexists activity, Serious as but sexual and other use, risk-taking not drug behaviors, such is early adolescent ownership. dropout, an school gun usually problem isolated with and truancy violence youth for children compared adolescence. youth who different begin begin who in slightly early life during youth Risk with for are their violence violence factors and be tend risk factors to clusters, additive. these they exist Often in factors do developing whether violence violent. risk understanding for for prevention become Although predict particular crucial strategies, is will individual not the risk factors a violence childhood. in abuse early crimes the and strongest during who are serious For factors substance children (<12 life, their of years early risk perpetration begin age) nonviolent, of antisocial risk poverty, gender, behavior. include male Additional factors and important, to For peer factors during important. factors are individual are their most who begin groups children related risk adolescence, less violence whereas membership, having conventional antisocial (Table 25-2). ties unpopular with school, and peer risk to in are friends, for adolescent-onset associating delinquent weak factors violence important Gang being or groups risk and some is the only. factors uniform, of factors effect show a not The strength small listed to buffer that 25-2 factors. Table the seem lists effects factors risk protective also of important child class protective the child’s in as activities, level and is how factor such school’s involvement positively regards personnel. school One and connectedness, of the the extracurricular of close and the nonviolent family friends. support factor is Another members protective

efforts be need developmentally appropriate. protective factors Violence prevention that target to and risk onset should Education identification. importance programs the group dangers before the of of peer consider about begin puberty, substance the must adolescent whereas abuse of programs effects. long-term show fail Many prevention to violence Effective address strengths; on risk factors; implemented involve programs individual, other family and simultaneously (school, child’s prevention violence peer over family, and an supports; and social) be extended environmental period. must group, capitalize the

common. rape date Dating violence and are of relationship. It 40% estimated a have dating in that 15% violence experienced is adolescents to of rates higher Adolescent sexual experience age women assault other any than group. acquaintance victim sexual An adolescent most the of or partner perpetrates assaults. abuse or for age, past initiating Risk and sexual a activity, history factors include at rape a initiating of young early dating sexual date having victimization. A by child of abuse risk parents increases dating the or history of violence. siblings to believe she if are is jealous boys or appropriate intentionally it to embarrasses insults becoming risk who girl that him perpetrators. at him a or for strike Adolescent make tries factors teens put the risk who at paid. who date rape, which date, date drove, for Date-specific the initiated activities, some person including and

50% in occurring of adolescent in sexual of assault, is episodes cases. approximately use common Alcohol contribute. also as such may benzodiazepines, and cocaine, marijuana Drugs and implicated conjunction gamma sedation used especially hydroxybutyrate Flunitrazepam in when two alcohol. amnesia, commonly with that drugs are and cause (Rohypnol)

rape of victims enforcement. assault Relatively the few to report law date victim Reporting the perpetrator. knows are when the even rates lower more to assaults timely likely attention, medical and do consequences. to mental the adolescents medical Women care; assaulted that receive sexually at likely are receive them health who many risk putting not it report physical police is for perpetrators routine for adolescent resources or health (see adolescent of dating evaluation, screen sexually violence, provide able who Chapter violence should counseling 116). are care identify teens Routine and be dating infection transmitted to victims for

AND SEPARATION, BEREAVEMENT DIVORCE,

and education, meeting for resource needs emotional principal family protection, child’s is socialization. support, for The the variety the of be his different child from cause or her A to may parents. separated disruptions parent’s relatively but unexpected acute illness separations these may be or injury). brief a (e.g., At times context the occur occurs with divorce. as separation in of a may parental The often significant discord, a in death be anticipated may of permanent parent or results unanticipated. that a separation The the the significant consequences. child, for stress All of these cause adverse disruptions long-term for potential with the age, adaptation support to by child’s systems. these the stresses affected and is the for temperament, reasons The and separation available child’s

to marriages Approximately 40% in end 50% of first divorce. so the family About when there young divorce. of first in 10 the half marriage, of parents are occur in children years the divorces often these children or of the their divorce of At separation parents. 25% least experience for as dramatic events in divorce. challenging are child the and childhood as Few

is adjustment. behavioral changes accompanied be likely to emotional in by and Divorce many the children In depression. anxiety, anger, and exhibit noncompliance, immediate period, post-divorce with three more parents. psychological Children help to families married require children from two divorced than frequently times good stressors, difficulties. most years enduring divorce, demonstrate that the of some ongoing absence few children in the have but studies after suggest Long-term a adjustment

time. but occurs not that single is Divorce a process event, a over physical in before conflict marital the permanent the legal and cases, changes separation, most the about family or In long brings begins structure. divorce and are with discord Multiple including both for parents. and changes with living stressors parental in sometimes divorce, associated the location, child’s potential in the the relationship before divorce, and arrangements changes child after

by with the each parent child’s relationship changed is The divorce. or anger, sadness that parent guilt, burdens and routines. to the feelings skills and parenting of is family short-term, experience the disrupt may new In likely decline Contact noncustodial may the parent with greatly. distress divorce. the being of child’s Parents be their by the perceived of time the may as unaware around children reassuring can understand do things parents be that Pediatricians the help will they can to child. noncustodial the living, are and, and in the to in parents, divorce. where comforting both midst Maintaining routines the contact a the is of with seeing parent maintaining particular, familiar turmoil child separation of to school friends. interact with attend and The opportunities have continue child to should of distress, for to parents’ It parents family these the Given for pediatricians may this to family be helpful, offer helpful may “interfering.” assistance. not extended for fear help be encourage to but ask the can assistance members from should coping for maladaptive responses. Pediatricians look their respond parents by children they friends their Some to whom distress treating their with share burdens increased and distress. as may may the leave responsibilities Alternatively child or they of periods child on the excessive for unsupervised place longer time. these such increase the the as problems. emotional child chance or will develop Responses that behavioral

Different at Divorce Ages Reaction to

reaction the the child’s and age is child’s influenced developmental The level. to by divorce with need infants the daily secure develop attachment. to they a contact not and stable Although to relation and do because react a visitation infants considerations divorce, directly caregiver to in require regular routine primary special custody be should primary Separations from caregiver a brief. irritability signs may infant. infant withdrawal Increased of listlessness an be for or distress and characterized of view are children cause world. having beliefs and and about the magical Preschool egocentric an by effects be them caused the may upset. divorce, They that particularly they leading something to did believe they back behaviors They believe together the that engage in bring will unusual parents again. may the clear disagreements deliver could and At that that child a again. related would divorce, this back nothing the the to message do together parents child bring the the to did caused divorce that parents, need between nothing was parents the age, leave left the other Preschool that each might parents child. may if the they also reason children child’s To that will abandonment, will may that they fear reassured separated, be children to both although endure. with abandon parents parents not counteract child the and this need relationship the of

it caused concrete understanding and that a children effect; something bad School-age happened, of happen. if cause something have to they understand to they fully contribute multiple of idea or likely understand factors to the that conflict. parental not are However a subtleties the conflict caused this at worry that age did they the divorce. still may something Children often more rejected. may younger feel express They children than and anger one school-age parents. about Many worry or what children will happen to young both School often deteriorates. performance one Older elementary may children the parent believe wronged that school–age by was other. conjunction their belief, parent allows one co-opted against concrete of easily effect, cause to be sides This other. and the by with take children to understanding in to sides. support child need the this Parents temptation in understand resist taking vulnerability to and their

somatic acting divorce or out, the respond depressed, experiencing Adolescents symptoms. may to becoming by intimacy, lead for may previously beliefs. of to autonomy, and and sense a divorce Adolescents morality, of the held them developing question capacity sense a are may divorce and be they the means too will concerned their They marital what whether for failure. experience future about behaviors, set use. in truancy, and as conjunction decreased risk-taking supervision drug beliefs alcohol Questioning sexual stage the with of for previous behaviors, such may or

Divorce Outcome of

child’s the separation children’s the adaptation in with to parental physical predictors adecrease exposure of the divorceis of discord. to best associated One is whether must mostcases, andother parenting custody interact still otheraround child’s parents with In divorced and each schedule, the child support, issues. the issues exposure of create These to between significant types potential to child parents. ongoing the for discord have the one if sleep the the may parent much up child than tokeep at otherparent’s develop. bedtime house, problems tends the For later example behavior parents, likely. problems of are the middle When or emotional in conflicts childrenfeel muchmore ongoing theirdivorced caught between are other, shieldtheir child each angry how animosity. of counseled Regardless with they this parents parents should the must be that from decisions in she pediatrician only about can for also to his be to control or her Clear ofconflict actionsand ideal, or but is and helpful that aparent the child. accept can schedules,discipline, rules roles related parenting cases it he help other the parents be have resolving mediation may these helpful. When issues, trouble custody the poor pediatrician theminto to valid. to Pediatricians wary be claims knowledge recruit of substantiate concerns first-hand the need attempts has battles to that are of parents’ parenting,unless

mothers is emphasis is residence mother, with most has child’s preferring including in bias custody decreased, Although for and the physical the primary still on court’s life. in the decisions there parents children toward more both the their In no children 3 today contact fathers their 20% 1980s, no the to or of 25% early of had with after years divorce, contact 50% a father. with only children 2 whereas have allow now physical legal joint or states custody. Most amount decision of authority child In parent, share the joint custody, spends significant making. parents time and custody, with joint physical each legal in a in in through involvement promote may to their Although express the vehicle be other. each the continue arrangements child’s which of custody parents parents joint anger can also they both at life, a and severe arrangement together, working social an in psychological joint When deterioration have adjustment. with difficulty associated the inappropriate been custody and child’s parents is has

often creates difficulties. Divorce financial the in first after income divorce. declines Family usually the year amount, receive of child at all. about full have the half mothers awards fourth receive Only one no and money who support child. may These financial on affects the changes adverse have multiple disrupting the peer supports. to relationships new require potential to A move new attend may house and a school other child a child child one increase care if both The have more or parents to time in hours. may work spend

Pediatrician Role the of

may in years around confronted divorce, discord be may divorce, consulted family be manage of the be the time divorce. helping the issues before to with in may marital the the or after to issues related the Pediatricians involved voice needs meet and understand the parents pediatrician 26-1). important (Table The the helping be child’s in can an they Before may parents divorce, wonder what the their children. tell should Children the told the decision physical be of should parents’ before separation. occur. the marital The and a should child prepare will step in as changes should presented separation the for that be managing rational conflict months. expect repeated the questions will next the be children’s questions, be should they and over prepared that answer to Parents should confusing together that if parents the divorce. not told parents it parents have children may of separation, appear may and be the hopes false continue to will the Once to live the raise child to

Many had report thedivorce like the issue more some parents years feeling later. 3 for a their and years remains not to or stabilizeduntil 10 painful divorce, after 2 life forthemselves a help predicted adjustment emotionally get parents’adjustment by is are be struggling encouraged if emotional should after divorce. child’s the divorce so they to parents closely The to

General to a Pediatricians Close Help During 26-1 Relative for Recommendations Separation, Table of Death or Divorce, Children

support Acknowledge caregiver parent/ the is and experiencing. that for provide grief

parent/caregiver Help child’s needs. consider

parent/caregiver to to maintain the Encourage routines child. familiar

his between friends. Encourage contact and continued her child or

changes, objects, take toys, the familiar the residence transitional to objects If child important should residence. other and primary new

caregivers, in frequent spent primary caregiver. for the away brief and Minimize infants keep from times changes

that Have reassure parent/caregiver for. will to she child continue be he the cared or

preschool separation, parent/caregiver or that or child did divorce, the (especially cause the he children). she not death Have reassure in important

parent/caregiver discuss questions feelings the wishes. times to that rituals to if create or allow child and child the Encourage

Although mental to professional. adjustment most some to show a have depression health good acting-out thedivorce, behaviors ultimately significant requires children or referral that family or need the mediator tohelp focused stay needs. them on a assistance parents child’s Some of therapist their the may the need In a contentious situations, court. be to litem most appointedby ad guardian to child. mental family’sbackground a individual the be would as to This to power make a child interests the best the investigate and healthprofessional is with to the in thecourt of lawyer or and usually recommendation relationships what

variety their reasons. caregiver of from for primary separations Children experience a such activities, or as experience. nearly camp, separations, school, to attend are those Brief a other universal variety including for experience hospitalization. a business of longer or military trips, children Many service, reasons, parental separations length during as factors or and friends familiar was affected to child the for child unplanned; to of familiar reason the the the with such child and the toys such separation, the and whether by child’s factors to separation, temperament; caregiving factors, how Child adjustment routines. and the as and is the the separation, age related separation as related planned the such to is caregiver the separation access has child whether the environment and of

their 4 6 of adjusting Children separation age and 3 from to months years most difficulty between often a primarycaregiver. havethe to children adjust. skillsthat emotional and cognitive help have Older them the communicate feelings, time, They the their be for to separation, to andcomprehend understandthe better may return. anticipatethe passage allowing them able parent’s of reason or itmay the the in family case planned may difficult causes for period For particularly children, tension, significant be separation of a immediatelybefore military hospitalization older service. if thereason as the separation

separation concrete the the will they with possible, and, contact and information to home. for the about anticipate reason return the be give they explain parents they in a should when when extent separation, If child will likely familiar caregiver, If with this to help adjustment. at a child the responsive can home remain and is animal, children take they should remain favorite or stuffed encouraged to such be a important objects, If and objects picture as home, a of the them with parent. blanket as cannot at familiar toys, transitional such encouraged. with relationships should of be family friends familiar Maintenance and routines

experience. difficult a and member is family close sad of Death a it a loses When parent, child a experience. is devastating a not rare. is experience This children of the death experience United States By age, the years 4%of a of in 15 parent. the is This a the as secure and of view place. safe forever child’s likely experience world alter to along support separations, a affectthe and adjustment child’s of to temperament a cognitive available theother Similar after death the child’s development systems the with parent. ofthe recommendations Many are 26-1 Table helpful. in also someunique family parent brings up issues. The deathof member or a close

to Death Explaining a Child

with experiences 4). of death development Children’s and changes understanding cognitive (see Chapter their view permanent about Preschool do caused often death. as may children magical not and have what death beliefs represents may functions biologic concept the that they permanent children as and all fully become of but older, until appreciated the death bodily cessation As adolescence. cause a understand be has and inevitable, not death

the hidden should Death child. from be not consistent terms and explained honest be that should It in are simple beliefs. withthe family’s stopped the that person’s help will not return. dead body the functioningand explanation dead The person should child tounderstand that the Preschool that individual be the reassured childrenshould they to nothing caused did die. avoided. should helpdetermine prepared be body to the the or misleading where questions to information and answer the child is let what should questionsabout be child’s is prepared information hear.False One child. death Comparisons to inthe may of contribute sleep problems sleep to

possible of reactions children death There the a are close or relative. parent to many of a common. and relative the to with are Sadness yearning be dead canvisit might relative, express desire to he need Sometimesa child plan that or and but a the would a uncommon suicide to dead immediate so die or commit wish is evaluation. she in death, children most the and month not 6 lack activities, the to many the after their for but to12 reaction enjoymentwith and half have functioning, in death severe the death. appetite of academic do in of until severesymptoms A after occur.About 1 can sleep changes occur most decrease symptomsabout months

Funeral? Attend Child the the Should

the helpful to often funeral. attend Children it find opportunity help child to death that may It occurred to an good-bye. the the understand provide and say to Seeing others grief feelings. sadness express these and may express their help the child helps fantasies the having Going about funeral. prevent happened what at the funeral fears from or the child to is child funeral, will or what the should happen. to the she attend he going of informed be If a to child or not attend funeral, preschool-age attend. expresses she encouraged desire to not a If should he be the it For a funeral encourage to to strongly be to not appropriate older about be go the wanting but who feels not child may attend. to children, required attendance, should

Intimate M: Pediatr 31:145–150, partner Bair-Merritt 2001 Rev violence,

Lanham J: thrive: 83(7): an to Failure 2011 829–834, Cole update, S, Am Fam Physician

H, primary prevent Lane for Pediatric Dubowitz Safe Every S, care Kid al: Environment (SIIK) to maltreatment: child help W, Feigelman et the

Pediatrics Model, 123:858–864, 2009

Kellogg: and Child on Committee Neglect. the ND Abuse and in evaluation children, of The 2009 behaviors 124:992–998, sexual Pediatrics

2012 considerations, on Impact of C, Pediatr 33:147–155, Civitz children: divorce developmental Kleinsorge Rev LM:

Lang tobacco, opiate stimulant, Clin Sci Minnes implications, marijuana, and L: Prenatal and S, Singer A, outcomes Addict exposure: practical

2011 Pract 6:57–70,

CW, medical editors: and Reece Child Elk diagnosis Village, RM, 2009, American Grove abuse: 3, Academy of Ill, ed management, Christian

Pediatrics. of the pediatrician youth (Role in prevention. violence 124:393−402, 2009 Pediat rics

of neglect incidence child Mettenburg abuse and Congress. AJ, Basena to et J, national report (NIS–4): Fourth al: study Sedlak M,

Administration Services, and Children of Health Families. Human and Department U.S. for Washington, (website). 2010, DC,

www.acf.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/opre/nis4_report_congress_full_pdf_ jan2010.pdf. October 8, 2012. Accessed

for prevention, of a McEwen JP, building new and promotion BS: health biol W, Neuroscience, work health Shonkoff frame disparities: molecular the Thomas childhood disease ogy, roots and Boyce JAMA 301:2252–2259,

Violence, the Committee Poison and Prevention. Injury, GA Smith and on

Policy Statement. prevention. Role youth violence of in the pediatrician

Pediatrics 2009 124(1):393–402,

medical 129:418–425, a with gender Edwards-Leeper 2012 adolescents center, identity and Spack disorder referred pediatric al: Children et L, HA, Feldman NP, Pediatrics to

April L. Maria O. Marquez Buchanan and

health, and infections, development. long-term neurologic and growth, normal is optimal for cognitive resistance Proper adult nutrition in essential to infancy important nutrient growth the nutrition 5). and a body 6 of is high especially exceptionally relative weight period first Chapter requirements (see Healthy accelerated to months, during reduced mothers a with infants, is visit in risk (for more diseases Breastfeeding http://www.nutrition.gov/ and many associated children, of details

the and breastfeeding are for milk infant and normative standards feeding nutrition. ideal and Human of human as for Pediatrics The first continued as recommends the with and long the (AAP) American for the life, 6 desired thereafter. as Academy year, of milk first nutrition intake of sole months source Breastfeeding infant has long-term shortand for neurodevelopment. advantages providers “Healthy breastfeeding 2020”; its any political) 38%. 82% breastfeeding the work at of life, community, 23.7% care support People at should of 6 lactation and of infants goals with breastfeeding, of levels in infants with first health for social, include reach (individual, approach months exclusive Pediatric targets of the and to multiple and breastfeeding. the Control Prevention (CDC), facilitate for national and are hospitals asked UNICEF, In including Joint Commission, the collaboration World Centers Organization Disease the promote organizations, and global AAP, with (WHO), to Health and

may the The days of 2 the of perhaps breastfeeding. success of first and hour determine first breastfeeding, life, of The U.S. (Figure is for breastfeeding 75% 27-1). population the total initiation rate current Friendly” practices standardize emphasis is improve with breastfeeding greater hospital There programs “Baby support. to for and

society offers and of advantages countries. developing compelling Services Human recognize that industrialized breastfeeding in and Health theCDC Department The infants, mothers,and and otitis of decreases necrotizingenterocolitis. diarrhea, severity bacterial and meningitis, and feeding illnesses, milk incidence the media, respiratory Human bacteremia,

on preterm neurodevelopment long-term beneficial infants (IQ) There effects feeding with preterm are of in milk human infants. rate infants have in also lower of life. the year breastfed Preterm a first readmission

who longterm experience health Mothers both breastfeed benefits. shortand depression been and longer postpartum uterine of more rapid postpartum hemorrhages, Decreased observed. decreased period have risk involution, of amenorrhea, months Similarly, reduction long cardiovascular to all pregnancies) and of association mother. between lactation of a hypertension, in is 12 significant of hyperlipidemia, disease, 23 and the (cumulative diabetes there an a lactation more risk of than months cancer. with and ovarian correlates Cumulative of also reduced breast lactation 12

intake be stooling Adequacy of the can milk infant. assessed of by patterns voidingand well-hydrated day. times eight infantvoids A six to a voiding diaper, colorless. should should urine and a soak, notmerely moisten, Each be fourtimes loose least be to stools a days, should By5 yellow day. passed 7 at Rate provides intake. gain milk objectiveindicator most the adequate of weight of days. not Total exceed 7%, by10 after be loss and weight birth birthshould should regained weight 12 times the early frequency per to The during 8 day. mean is feeding weekspostpartum receiving infant adequately hydrated nutrient and to An enough energy intake. milk while be may achieveadequate not interim and monitor isvaluable during lactation. Telephone the progress firstdoctor follow-up to discharge visit between of the the of again A and of should weeks 5 2 scheduled age, by by age. to be days follow-upvisit 3

breastfed infants elevated period, (Chapter in in of more serumbilirubin concentrations In the newborn present are often infants formula-fed 62). than bilirubin; duringthe breastfed Feeding is meconium and of infants feedings of stool. frequent in first bilirubin of level the of life days stimulate 3 frequency passage relatedto the inversely excretion circulationof milk week have increase secondary intake poor exaggerated and an weight in gain life have Infantswho in may of enterohepatic insufficient thefirst bilirubin unconjugated to bilirubin. an as breastfeeding is known This jaundice. toward should be productionand intake. Attention directed improved milk not supplements levels The effect breastfed in and on is recommended. no of use water infantshas bilirubin

months initiation breastfeeding breastfeeding Rate 0 exclusive 6 of months of for any Rate of of of breastfeeding Rate 6

and and any exclusive breastfeeding, 2020 6 of Figure People the 27-1 of months Healthy States. current breastfeeding The 2012 the initiation, 6 of in rates United Targets breastfeeding months 2010 and

due absorptionof bilirubin. to of that may in milk in life breastfed enhances factor first intestinal the serum anunknown of bilirubin presence After a prolongedelevated week infant, be disease(Chapter biliary of exclusion thriving, jaundice, growth be only should metabolic breast is This with no atresia, is and and infection, otherwise 62). or infantis which if normal termed a made evidenceof milk diagnosis an hemolysis, jaundice 1 2 weeks. to usually Breast milk lasts no morethan American when monthsfor recommends supplementation and, (400 6 infants. needed, Academy The Pediatrics breastfed startingsoon after of after fluoride D birth), IU/day vitamin

breastfeedingmothers. encountered Breast nipples and by engorgement, cracked problems arethe most tenderness, common attention oflactation receive the of quickly causes adequately emptied. Engorgement, the can one breasts should decrease are because not common if failure, supply most milk prompt infant. easier to cold provide and or can and nursing Applying relief or grasp to mother before to the areola hand pumping compresses warm make expression milk thebreasts the by ofsome the and on nursing applying proper requiresattention Nipple of for infant.Supportive well lanolin less side, shorter drying sore the latch-on eachnursing the cream after session. tenderness air and after periods,beginning measures feedings nursing, positioning include to the nipples Severe latch-on. cracking and improper usually nipple pain indicate is pumping, which needed. Temporary may be well tolerated, lactation the and allow help consultantmay a problems breastfeeding. Meeting these with minimize of successfulcontinuation

should If a lactating woman reports considered. mastitis chills, be and fever, malaise, complete frequent breast emptying includes Treatment and antibiotics. the and of mastitis commonly because adverse not effects on stopped infant. should the the usually mother’s has breastfed be no Breastfeeding

to breastfeed; (active) may not milk expressed provided child. Tuberculosis be Should

to provided expressed may Varicella child. Should be breastfeed; milk not

milk influenza not breastfeed; Should H1N1 child. to may provided expressed be

may be the expressed not of Should milk child. provided breast infection simplex to breastfeed; Herpes

virus to (HIV) recommended are mothers breastfeed. not for breastfeeding developing with women 6 (ART) to countries antiretroviral recommended In are months. combine therapy

of to amphetamines affect of Recommended it or cocaine, Use can (PCP), use neurobehavioral infant as stop development. phencyclidine drugs breastfeed. encouraged enrolled Mothers to programs methadone are in supervised

body kg due of than to Limit 0.5 mg with development. ingestion alcohol association per less Alcohol to of motor weight

Radiopharmaceutical Express exposure agents feed before infant. milk to therapies. and during discard Express milk milk agent. in present days, on 14 be from 2 may depending Radioactivity to expert. with nuclear medicine Consult

Substitute and formula. Antineoplastic immunosuppressive agents

Modified RJ: from AI, Eidelman Pediatrics American of Schanler Academy

on Breastfeeding. Section the Breastfeeding of human milk, and use

2012. Pediatrics 129(3):827–841,

also breast to abscess. progress may Untreated a mastitis diagnosed, antibiotics, an of and abscess breast. If emptying incision and includes drainage, regular treatment is the infant. continued breast contralateral from be with the a healthy Nursing can the maternal If on continue nursing can side. affected comfort allows,

considered breastfeeding for with contraindication immunodeficiency human (HIV) in is virus countries. a infection developed Maternal the may varicella, syphilis, or restarting therapy after mother When tuberculosis, be active breastfeeding considered has initiated. is on has on should that contact be nursing and a avoided. her lesions breast, herpetic breast infant the If woman with Women breastfeed. herpes genital with can be should stressed. hand-washing procedures Proper

special disorders There for are modified with breastfeeding of phenylketonuria, or alternate galactosemia, and numbers medical limited pediatric with breastfeeding, although including such contraindications infants protein-free may formulas. latter with the infants metabolic as Maternal shown Table contraindications are 27-1. in

consumed ill effect. usually without drug via therapeutically prescribed Any milk canbe newborns breast to dosage, drug The pH, molecularweight, on nursinginfant of the administration, of effects route and that the the binding. therapy include protein determine factors maternal Few antithyroid including advised contraindicated; against drugs.The drugs and alcohol, be antimetabolites, radioactive therapeutic “street mother or nicotine, should are lithium, compounds, of include unprescribeddrugs, use certain the caffeine, these drugs.” absolutely

or a breastfeeding. use Maternal of is to drugs recreational contraindication illicit If to she discontinue should breastfeed. drug use, a unable not is woman acceptable. two a milk after is not use of drug feeding a of for Expression or taking effects. a as alcohol Breastfed infants generally ill have program drugs) treatment not mothers experienced of other (but or of part methadone no

are commercial majority the Cow’s milk–based formulas formulas. vast of iron-fortified formula formulas iron, added and health parents provider. by Most advised unless otherwise use should recommends, only theprimary have AAP which milk-based care the and formula quality infant ofnutrients of examine manufacturershave mimicthe of biological a breast composition adding benefits begun formula Infant to milk. to the to and variety factors fatty prebiotics, polyunsaturated includelong-chain nucleotides, and probiotics. These acids, which used milk. allergic who may sometimes Soy-based iron, newborns formulas, cow’s added have be maybe to for formulas. soy are some However, allergicto cow’s allergic protein milk in newborns to also the with can’ttolerate are formulas, There those the infants as or allergies hypoallergenic soy who proteins. such for tomilk basic formulas (Table their proteins in these basic andare components easier to The down to hypoallergenicformulas digest therefore are 27-2). broken lactose, lactose-freecow’s is for are are premature, generally Specialized low although birth weight babies.The formulas formulas designed carbohydrate available. milk–based caloric is human kcal/mL), 20 (0.67 thatof milk. kcal/oz formulas to of The similar density needed is (human densediet milk adequate or and formula) high-fat A relatively deliver calorically to

27-2 Composition Representative Milk Infant BREAST PASTEURIZING Milk, Formulas HYPOALLERGENIC AND Table FREEZING Breast MILK and AFTER Freezing BREAST FORMULA SOY Pasteurization, of FORMULA after STANDARD Breast COMPONENT and FORMULA MILK

1.5 dL d/L 1.9 1.1 Protein per per dL Reduced 1.7 per dL per

Fat per per d/L 4.0 dL 3.8–3.3 dL per dL dL 3.6 4.0 3.6 per per

dL Carbohydrate per 6.9–7.3 7.2 7.2 per dL dL 6.8 dL d/L per 6.9–7.2 per per

mg/L 8.0 mg/L 14 13 6.5–8.3 8.0 mg/L mg/L Sodium mg/L

some some Added formulas formulas some to to formulas Present Added Added Present Monoglycerides to

some Free fatty to some to some Present Added formulas formulas to Added acids formulas Added Present

Linoleic to formulas acid Present Added to some some to Added formulas some Present Added formulas

Alpha-linoleic 18 30 formulas formulas oz some (around some to to some per Added Present calories to Present Added acid to formulas day). Added childhood; regulation later at of volumes higher risk in are for infants. by newbornsand the self obesity infants to berelated this Formula-fed may ingested

is complementary 6 ofsemisolid foods suggested. months, approximately By feeding and including severalnutrients, requires By iron, exclusivelybreastfed protein, infant an of age, this sources additional zinc. formula, or milk, with Cereals commonly water are breast with mixed andlater fruits. foodintolerances are allergies possible starting tothe diet, may new arise or cereals. as are barley) added (rice, cereals that single-grain To recommended help identify when foods oatmeal, started natural bottle), to juice a daily of be 6 it months unsweetened 100% (asopposed to given in after and cup is limited juice. 4 age, a If only oz of shouldbe given, or be Early filled never (ECC)(see this result An infant with formula, Childhood put can milk, a should cup or in with Caries 127). tosleep bottle juicebecause Chapter

vitamin, vegetables Green micronutrients. minerals, bring and nutrients, should of three get vegetables. Children servings to two be family a allergic high as avoided. history potential, allergy, fish, tree food and foods eggs, peanuts, dairy of such with with probably For strong products, should infants nuts, be infant’s with airway age foods until in should years obstruct the older. main potential All 4 general to young of avoided the or should not of of be given honey risk infant of the before 1 year botulism, Because age.

of needs Commercially infant. or homemade foods prepared help meet nutritional the the aversion) (texture the oral is deficiencies may solid issues occur. delayed, and develop, If nutritional introduction of foods sensory and can oral track General of eating and eager (around weight), objects ability to double sitting up, foods, to the maturity a bringing to opening their of birth showing hold unassisted, the in signs head the interest the spoon. mouth, and readiness the ability mouths include wide, anticipation food to is of choice formula. foods for critical The less micro-nutrient needs meet

erupted. tooth have as infections (baby Caries teeth) that deciduous start teeth the early are when as sugar cavity in combination by the caused a A mouth. tooth and of bacteria is and control diet will regularly sugar healthy bacteria. Eating and a brushing a step with Rubbing gums hygiene. first the be wet can infant oral washcloth in There the for safe habit are tooth designed create oral and ergonomically their infants, and gums brushes, of hygiene. to comfortable rub also used of lead teeth feeding childhood dental and to of caries with as nursing habits causes and feeding A in problems that beyond health. adult can implicated bottle are variety healthy be prevented and can in food choices infancy. starting This habits infection by the different self-feeding process of are experiences neurodevelopmental infants. Exposure and to important for textures of the child’s for developmental child’s milestones to the diet advantage full and healthy is A well-being. recommended take first the 2 sleeping the important and between distinctions time. it is stage set making by For feeding months to is of actively beginning recommended. bedtime to from mealtime 4 to At months 6 separate age,

all early deaths the important an preventive such several eating (NCDs), of measure an Learning 60% diseases which for diabetes, as obesity, may diet healthy of of cardiovascular because and account approximately age chronic and worldwide. with at disease, association noncommunicable is behaviors modified can be such eating food physical increasing less as lifestyle These changes share activity. diseases factors risk and processed by that in factors. physical activity with high vegetables metabolic Diets improve fruits increased together and risk days The first an 1000 well-being. will important healthy promote life of behaviors that to in are time engage nutrition an should important underlying factor for be young prevention. causes infants identifying in Accelerated postnatal for aimed risk is and obesity; at growth early children interventions adolescents, and nutrient see for children discussion needs For http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines of a

year is The ideally approximately it until age of tolerated. not milk better cow’s of is 1 consumption introduced when years or which fat-free 1% Low-fat until recommended whole recommended. or after milk milk is is or age, 2 (2%) a intakes (more to toddlers solid milk foods the oz/day) intake intake iron in contribute good reduce in nutritionally excessive avoided of may also may intake. intakes and variety anemia; larger Excessive result of than be 24 large because caloric also should important deficiency

intake to and should oz, age children limited Juice young for should juice oz/day. toddlers intake 8 18 7 for of 4 be be children to to limited years and the are the and during day. recommended milk Water drinks

the for guideline on regular general parents by offered U.S. the foodsto with basis. types of Agriculture of a Department “ChooseMyPlate” be a canprovide should A three and eat snacks. child mealsa two healthy day the requests. offood child to tablespoon offer is a to for child given general with one quantity meal, per per rule more each the of age if foodprovided A serving. per thumb, adultpalm more of should than children be arule not an eating As snacks,and By with family, infants and to be year of meals should have foods. age, the self-feed schedule of eating be regular appropriate mealswith a 1 finger encouraged

Dairy (Figure divided Protein, Grains,Vegetables, and Table Fruits, five The 28-1; image 28-1). into is sections: “plate” “plate” proteins, the and and and fruits, the side. be vegetables with should on the other Halfof dairy halfgrains is “plate” The and guide eating. serves a for as healthy simple,organized, soup, A bread, free intake at instead suggestions whole meals; drinks. the and recommendation vegetable 28-1).Other sodium is such compare proportions; (Table avoid milk; orlow-fat water content; the weekly as oversize refined frozen insteadof of (1%) fat least sodium(salt) and grains; half of make lower choosefoods to grains drink following: switch sugary foods in provided with for also include it and be approximately that to calories. the lessthan 2 of not years, recommended 20% is reduced After gradually fatintake 30% mixof with meat legumes. a chicken, nuts, Replace red from and proteins fish, between toddlers. over eatingare parents and common struggles Power to of parent’s role what, when, is meals. decide and where the The the and to role decide how what, eat. child’s The if, much is to

3 inadequate be may 1 United in between some of years States. children the intake age and Iron in lettuce, beans, in iron exists some www.ChooseMyPlate.gov minority cauliflower, Significant low-income *Including zucchini. cabbage, or high-risk anemia green deficiency

Department by “ChooseMyPlate” Agriculture. of the U.S. guidelines developed 28-1 Figure of children. young www.ChooseMyPlate.gov populations (From deficiency. those at who iron little milk excessive green intakes for oz/day) are risk Toddlers leaves and/or or grains iron, meat, in rich consume with (>32

Teen be can challenge. nutrition a what and and should Ads conflicting thin for eat. they unhealthy provide about food ideas junk incredibly adolescents images of Girls anywhere 1800 day, depending need to of development. their level activity stage and 2400 on from 14 18 to calories per ages same of to group need daily. the 2000 Boys 3200 calories age may adolescence. develop Poor habits during eating breakfast), meals consumption (especially are and of common with alone, or Skipped dieting, friends nutrient-poor, binge foods problems. dense eating calorically to and needed fruit coffee may soda, of Excessive displace may as weight gain excess consumption decay as specialty and tea well nutrients. other sugar from drinks contribute drinks, and tooth during osteoporotic calcium predispose fracture. Poor the future adolescence hip adult may intake to problem. by poor in or Osteoporosis adolescents a calcium intake is (osteopenia) calcium caused absorption ingested of potential children D adolescence and vitamin dietary during poor or 1 calcium 10 teenage teenage get 1 enough of of Only girls boys every day. 4 and ages 1300 calcium 18 milligrams of 9 Adolescents to daily. need milk, tofu. include cheese, soybeans, sources orange fortified Good yogurt, juice, and

in of iron fatigue and symptoms Inadequate iron anemia. deficiency may intake results more deficiency growth is anemia. which teens are likely iron from Iron to increase during needs spurts, why suffer girls Teenage are especially anemia. prone to eating vitamin and vulnerable use patterns, are to nutritional supplements. restrictive Student iron severely and inadequate inappropriate of intakes, also athletes specific be counseled healthy should Chapter choices Adolescents and (see 70). dietary on

epidemic obesity in the States. is an Childhood United Data the obese that (body than adults 20 are States of children in United U.S. and ≥95th index mass indicate more ages of 17% of approximately percentile) are 2 obese. to 30% the degree and Many children become of increases obese risk obesity. obese with of adults, age remaining obese and in and influences. runs Obesity rarely to genetic is families related and prevalence of most and in children. in are overweight as obesity The African-American classifications largest ethnic seen the groups, severely increases certain Mexican-American in such the In $147 costs. obesity cost in 2008, nation medical the billion and areas urban influence observed obesity of the dietary versus rural between of the environment. television watching obesity intake as well excessive rates The and different as important associations in support risk obesity important is maternal pregnancy. during factor One in three times likely born more to five obese to be mothers Children are obese to childhood. more during BMI children Women who gain higher who than than recommended pregnancy weight in have much have normal a adolescence. newborns postnatal risks and weight for gestational abnormal small diabetes. for (SGA) age have higher some Also, gain

Available @ StudentConsult.com

children major adolescents can virtually in affect system. Complications of every organ and obesity important modifiable and is most diabetes. cancers; factor BMI metabolic risk diseases glycemia it and and risk cardiovascular the for of increases also the High some should with obesity 29-1), many examination screen associated to among potential The for (Table and 29-2). patients addition specific syndromes history (Table noted obese complications physical in degree the in weight often reduction. with or complications of related to resolve decrease and obesity Medical severity usually are of of with presence are associated in Obesity is already that 13-year-old children. 12and heart disease the evident coronary precursors is also 2 in increasing children. diabetes Type

measurement obesity the on diagnosis The fat. of excess depends of body composition situations. body most practical is in clinical of not Actual measurement

reduced job acceptance, discrimination, disorders eating Peer depression, reduced isolation, (binge-eating), promotion* teasing, Psychosocial college

menarche age, early Growth bone increased Advance height,

heart sudden cardiac arrhythmias, Cardiovascular hypertrophy, ischemic death* Hypertension, disease,*

Slipped femoral Orthopedic disease capital epiphysis, Blount

hypertriglyceridemia, mellitus, Insulin adulthood. Metabolic hepatic hypercholesterolemia, polycystic ovary unusual resistance, type gout,* disease, cholelithiasis steatosis, diabetes 2 *Complications until

wt in fairly = mass (m)) ÷ with strongly adults. that correlates (body body tool fatness children BMI index; screening Ht2 is (kg) and BMI a convenient at and percentile assessment online 2to allow 20-year-olds) (for an of percentile BMI gender-specific http://www.cdc.gov/growthcharts (available ). BMI curves age-specific 29-3 interpretation provides BMI Table guidelines. children younger greater 95th than years assessment. warrant may percentile measurements 2 weight-for-length overweight For indicate of further than age, and is factors. the above multiple and percentile is A risk associated cardiovascular age strongly associated fat BMI gender and disease for excessive with 95th with body

the weight recognition successful. essential children because of be they is Early interventions, are the more excessive or in of gain, likely to overweight, rates the earlier obesity

Hypogonadism, diabetes retinal Alström deafness, degeneration, syndrome mellitus

synostosis, cranial Polydactyly, retardation syndrome syndactyly, Carpenter mental

pancreatic hypoglycemia, Nesidioblastosis, syndrome Mauriac adenoma, Hyperinsulinism

hypogonadism, autosomal degeneration, syndactyly, recessive mental Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Retinal syndrome Biedl retardation,

dystrophy of Muscular onset Late obesity

and retardation, immediately normal hypogonadism; syndrome hypotonia, after of Prader-Willi mental small chromosome some have growth birth, 15 partial Neonatal hands deletion feet,

cutaneous calcifications hypocalcemia, Pseudohypoparathyroidism Variable

*These Turner dysgenesis, of diseases chromosome <5% neck; obesity. represent cases childhood syndrome of XO Ovarian web lymphedema,

www.cdc.gov/healthyweight

evaluation 1. include visits following: should at Routine well-child the

of weight, calculation Anthropometric BMI. height, including and data, BMI growth age-appropriate for should charts assessed be trends and plotted Table Data and (see 29-3). on gender-appropriate

2.

activity physical and history 29-4). Dietary (Table and Assess potential change. patterns behavioral targets for

3.

examination. Physical of hirsutism, and (central distribution comorbidities abnormalities), pressure, cases). fewer versus genetic hepatomegaly, blood 5% Assess a adiposity physical (explains of syndrome nigricans, orthopedic generalized), than of (acanthosis markers stigmata

4.

studies. Laboratory comorbidities, children These or both. percentile),who evidence reservedfor obese (BMI are are who > of generally 95th have the by be studies findings Other historyand in examination. should physical guided Academy for from2011, all which that cholesterol. bescreened recommend The guidelines ofPediatrics 11-year-olds American 9to the endorses government there increase include profile,fasting thyroidfunction weightthan liver testsmay lipid (if height). Other in hemoglobin A1c, laboratory a tests is and fasting tests, levels, glucose function faster useful

factors, age, risk and based well of aggressiveness ofoverweight including and and treatmentshould comorbidities, The be on therapy obesity, as to approach as support. and severity familyhistory all fast-rising eating and primary The withuncomplicated healthy patterns. for isto children achieve and goal weight-for-height activity obesity thecomplication important of is an a complication, For treatment goal. children secondary with specific Childhood in treatment to lossand programs can behavioral on adolescentobesity changes BMI when treatment and sustained decreases family centered. and focuses lead weight is activity provide patterns most are success to dietaryand 29-5). physical in changes likely (Table Concurrent

setting attainable. needs to specific Goal and be biking days to or the child suggest walking bike walk or week. school more a to two school, that or of Instead recommending Rather days. suggest a that on no television, less school than television watch recommending child watching a time. it goals at and important set two short-term or to one keep It simple is behavioral addition, fast hectic. avoiding family factors when as be to food gets life In identified, need such risk healthy important. alternatives the think Helping family of is

of the breastfeeding. beginning to patterns, Families with counseled need age-appropriate promotion on healthy be and eating and should importance table foods emphasized. snacks, infants, versus regularly behavior, scheduled the For transition complementary grazing to be and meals and of meals snacks Age-appropriate should encouraged. and for portion be sizes recognize should healthy and hunger food parents. choices by portions reasonable be guided taught Children cues, and by to satiety children bag eat never or box. bowls from directly a should and used, Smaller be should soda the rule. be No juices should or Children forced never be should

time hours yr games) TV child Limit for age) games/Internet, video (no (television, <2 per to computer screen <1–2 day of

and servings five per day of or Consume more fruits vegetables

of beverages Minimize sugar-sweetened consumption

per a □ to at family, table, as Eat week times at six five least FAMILY

behaviors feeding his her avoid restrictive or self-regulate child and meals to overly Allow

not drinks with children or food Do reward

is available machines what vending in Limit

healthy weight to nutrition about and good Speak patients

on eat access Increase healthy eliminate food as and should food to and deserts not be a avoided. when overemphasis willing, reward GOVERNMENT they to are food □ can on Agriculture of and for provide the Plate” a foods My dairy. a with protein, guideline of to by general offered U.S. the regular types be grains, Department including “Choose parents fruits, basis, vegetables,

of be The should emphasized. importance physical activity of walking, organized for fun, For and and active play activities vigorous provide sports be more whereas received. as may children, daily and using some school-based focus a activities living, better others on increased opportunities stairs, activity such for television limited. Time sedentary be behavior, such viewing games, should in spent video/computer as and practice of Television parents. rates in should with the and television associated discussed be risks children’s and with of more higher overweight, this rooms with time is may to families to activity, for unsafe deterrents sedentary of supervision as to identify activities, alternatives lack with or help neighborhoods after families school. especially such Clinicians need

responded More other those aggressive for interventions. considered only have are not to who therapies Treatment includes

Small serving bowls Decrease able size count to Be of (parent palm)

to behaviors Aim change

from eating Avoid box the

once consumption g fat, protein carbohydrates, of Eat of fish on a to fat Don’t week Decrease 20 focus

food junk fast less McDonalds to Eat Limit Eating to food once a week trips

juices fruits kitchen fruits bowl no fewer juices in refrigerator Buy the a the in eating Have of Increase Keep Fruits

in eating Have veggies bowl Vegetables Increase refrigerator the veggies of a

as interventions as a office-based obese a systematic of competition, weight. reducing veggies such brief, and building well for Cooperation, as interaction multidisciplinary promotes children house that approach social the expectations. have individual’s idea must in of Before a clear program, that clinician enrolling patient any weight-loss a be and not goals. unrealistic changed these to realistic expectations Patients with until attainable should are enrolled Using goals: guide the pneumonic the reduction patient SMART Realistic, clinician Measurable, to weight described, Specific, seeks the and create Timely. who Attainable, should

Surgical as and certain advocated and solution be a may children adolescents. for treatment preferred cost-effective is controversial. the of obese or in bariatric children adolescents treatment role The of surgery the surgery treat care. attendance surgery; and or effective; follow-up obesity services include healthy appointments to and through concerns with ensure postoperative whether support young to surgery are populations what long-term nutrition cost not compliance in for about how growth The is regimen; at to adulthood; after needed very growing There cost to available bariatric durability in limited is or long-term surgery adequately evidence of children. safety, estimate effectiveness effectiveness, surgery improvements severely adolescent results that comorbidities in obese in evidence of bariatric The significant quality life. in loss suggests and weight and existing problematic unavailable. and long-term effectiveness, data in on and psychological), safety, be adults, follow-up may remain cost physical than and (both Postoperative adolescents more complications compliance, largely and

be can health andsanitation; is utero supply, of inadequatefood age or 30-1). undernutrition usually to and/or utilization; inappropriate (Table 2.Various used of child access pediatric malnutrition Pediatric undernutrition practices.The through or greatest result feeding the in is access, poor guidelines care risk classify to references are z in that scores. established allow measures terms of of International normalization anthropometric measurements weight BMI, mid-upper Other height, and age,weight include arm circumference. and height for for exists survive. consequence but of Thegreatest and death, who significantintellectual in many undernutrition physical disability is

is and malnutrition spectrum calorie protein varying a Protein-energy deficiencies. (PEM) levels conditions caused of by of in a that of by PEM food. is social lack factors Primary result or caused economic caloric Secondary associated with PEM in requirements with cancer) increased occurs conditions various (infection, children trauma, (Fig. social increased intake intake 30-1), three or restriction, (malabsorption), variables. of reduced factors), a (anorexia, caloric oral loss these combination caloric cancer, and calorie malnutrition Protein may

energy U.S. for Statistics; Am National standard index; LC: Protein From Body Clin North HFA, Pediatr Center SD, Ee malnutrition, circumference; arm age; 56:1055–1068, mass Z, 2009 for BMI, mid-upper height MUAC, Grover Health NCHS, deviation;

Health for WFH, for weight Organization. WFA, weight age; height; WHO, World

35 Severe infection,

Increased energy with 30-1 needs Figure stress. Metabolic York, 1977, Publishing. Wilmore from Ill, The D: of Management the Plenum (Adapted Critically New and J, Revised Watkins Nutrition in in Basic Application. Clinical Science W, Pediatrics: editors: Walker 1985, Brown.) Boston, Little, with 30-2). (Table associated nutrient may examination other deficiencies, physical which be on evident be

StudentConsult.com @ Available

to Failure Thrive

and the weight head linear to is experiences in severe in United in circumference. appropriately to often or, cases, fails undernutrition gain describes failure which child more circumstances or Pediatric a growth failure in termed States thrive nonorganic maladaptive that The have in conditions and cause interplay failure terms organic thrive the underlying medical recognition to behaviors. frequent lost favor may between of poor that including be problems frequent associated 21), associated minor also initially feeding social with factors medical may behavioral (see Chapter with and illnesses. and been acute may Similarly, growth problems, have

inadequate physiologic to response and Marasmus results calories the nutrients. from body’s be quantified stores or muscle palpation anthropometric by mass inspection of confirmed and subcutaneous by fat Loss can measurements. and large appear length. may but head is the The generally to body proportional usually is absent. Edema and out. The skin and pulled and dry may sparse, be is hair thin, thin, easily the and be be weak, may when touched. apathetic, irritable Marasmic children may hypothermia Bradycardia life-threatening signify and and malnutrition. severe practices diarrhea common chronic and findings Inappropriate in weaning countries. inadequate or developing are especially linear growth) recurrent a infections. Stunting (impaired micronutrients, from combination malnutrition, and of results

fair protein intake. intake caloric thepresence of Kwashiorkor inadequate results to in good from increasing edema results The lower the ascends hypoalbuminemicstate in and extremities with pitting in starts severity. that is age; asacute nutritional major to because that are reflect oramino kwashiorkor of the acid normal such the contribute factors, near is not alone and specific does weight body edema. the weight accurately for clinical Other imbalances, etiology.The infection, possibly micronutrient status to of manifestation toxins, likely Physical

of Nutritional Signs Physical Deficiency Disorders

copper) easily dull skin Purpura E, vitamin hair, Alopecia vulval dermatitis Depigmented, Anemias pluckable and B12, Depigmented folate, Scrotal, (iron, vitamin

thiamine Protein,

B6, Calories, vitamin riboflavin protein, niacin,

acids, biotin Riboflavin, essential fatty

K C, Riboflavin Calories, Vitamins protein

Zinc, biotin, protein

Protein, copper calories,

xerophthalmia, (vision) spots, Bitot Color Adaptation dark discrimination Eye to keratomalacia

Vitamin E, zinc A A Vitamins A, Vitamin

examination mass. reveals a marked maintenance Marasmus C, riboflavin iron adipose relative B6, and K Vitamins muscle Riboflavin, of niacin, subcutaneous Vitamins tissue atrophy a of the minor of the dorsum appears to hair of dull easily edema scrotum.The involvement sparse; with of is is and a and Edemavaries or eyelids plucked; foot the red, yellow-white. brown, pitting from generalized restores with Nutritional repletion aband (flag altered normal a hair sign). pigmentation pigmentation by with of hair band color,leaving followed from Skin erythematous hyperpigmented macular trunk range and toan arecommon rash changes andextremities. the on (pellagroid) hyperkeratosis (“flaky of superficial kwashiorkor, occurs In over most a pressure paint”rash). the desquamation severe form surfaces and thetongue, of cheilosis, filiform atrophy Angular papillae of stomatitis the are monilial common. eating are kwashiorkor. facies; typical disinterest in edema in apathy moon of and result Enlarged facial parotidglands and of Examination

folate, B12 iron, vitamin Riboflavin, niacin,

Vitamins B12, folate B6, niacin, Iron riboflavin,

B12, Vitamins A, zinc zinc Protein A, Vitamin Iodine Fluoride

Ataxia, Ophthalmoplegia neuropathy areflexia Dementia, delirium Sensory, Neurologic Tetany Retardation motor

ataxia Poor position sense, Vitamins D, C

C, copper Vitamin

Vitamin D, C Thiamine, calcium Vitamin selenium,

B6, E, Vitamin Vitamin B12 vitamins D, thiamine Vitamin E, E Mg2+ Ca2+, Thiamine,

Vitamin thiamine niacin niacin, E, Iodine,

an may vitamin indefinite edge. an enlarged, abdomen with liver Thiamine, reveal soft the B12 tonsils and node are atrophic.Chest examination Lymph basilar reveal rales. commonly may tend abdomen and The bowel be to sounds hypoactive. isdistended,

and in often addition children concurrent wasting have stunting. to These edema abnormalities, features These and exhibit of liver. children fatty dermatitis, neurologic

and in immediate decrease nutrient basal of malnutrition. rate cases The metabolic needs themetabolic increasing anabolism stimulating rate increases, requirements. nutrient and are provided, When nutrients malnourished and deficiencies mayhave may of refeeding for micronutrient and the The unmask growth thesedeficiencies. rates, compensated with metabolic child body lower should rehabilitation be complications. minimize and Nutritional slowly advanced initiated these to indicated. therapy correction The anti-infective(bacteria, and parasites) if involves of dehydration initialapproach isrecommended or renal over intravenous load heart avoid failure. excessive fluid Oral and resultant and solute rehydration to fluid

the be recent nutritional above started 20% calories at is rehabilitation child’s initiated, can safely When intake. requirement caloric is 75% is the estimate available, If to of 50% normal intake energy of safe. no the or frequently powdered vitamins, of milk, (a ready-to-use peanuts, in mixture used solutions are sugar, High-calorie minerals) countries. oral foods therapeutic and developing which fluid rehabilitation can characterized by and hypokalemia. hypophosphatemia, hypomagnesemia, complicated refeeding syndrome, is Nutritional be by retention, with malnutrition severe essential. of laboratory is and values status monitoring Careful clinical

increased rehabilitation to intakecan imbalances, begun, When nutritional 10% day, or has feedingintolerance. 20% edema, per for monitoring electrolyte function, poor cardiac caloric be further status stabilizes. of occurs, until If made the increasesare any not child’s these caloric intake growth increased Caloric isinitiated. catch-up until is regrowth or appropriate age more percentile Catch-up to at calories and growth for require greaterthan well-nourishedchild. refers 50th an or recommended 150% gaining age-matched, ofthe for weight may kcal/kg general based provide of A for ideal rule to for on years weight is children age height. thumb up infants and 120 of to3 100 to also account is as age-appropriatedaily needs history, multiple intake increased to an are warranted to provided daily mineral vitamin, individual of increased is other accomplished by Protein and frequently studies. laboratory the in examination,or for provided recommendedintake by requirements;this are anabolismbegins giving the excess as in and micronutrientsupplements physical proportion with caloric the intake.Vitamin the levels ferritin for especially are phase, not often recommendedduring are childrenwith whom rehabilitation acute kwashiorkor, high. supplements for Iron with may Additional pose stress; mortality. higher iron iron morbidity supplementationis oxidative an and associated

and an most milk–based provide formulas of cases, nutrients. appropriate cow’s In tolerated mix are slowly. may digested easily the age, be appropriate introduced for Other also foods, occurs, If be intolerance lactose-free or feeding should considered. semielemental formulas

especially infection, pneumonia, are gastroenteritis. children sepsis, to and Malnourished susceptible more fasting a may Hypoglycemia periods but of also be of sign sepsis. common is severe after infection rate metabolic or, bradycardia, signify may Hypothermia to may signify conserve a energy. decreased with child which the cardiac loads. failure, malnourished poor or exacerbated Bradycardia solute heart fluid output is and acute by to predispose also can Micronutrient complicate deficiencies malnutrition. mortality. are in the important morbidity and Vitamin world immune and of and A common deficiencies zinc are an altered increased response developing cause and and permanent in and duration development adolescence) in utero, malnutrition the infancy, infancy malnutrition, of delayed or malnourished may have age on onset children (from or growth the adolescence). the malnutrition at stunting (from Depending the further the to cognitive impair function. interact Environmental effects with and malnutrition of deprivation (social) development may

and include Micronutrients elements. trace vitamins occur frank in certain In industrialized deficiencies unusual in and but do are children, circumstances. healthy high-risk they societies, clinical can are with exclusion the and Risk variety, factors syndromes, entire food limited that requirements. groups, physiologic consistently especially of conditions include malabsorption diets high causing in vitamin outlined common highlighted nutrient deficiency vitamin Table of 31-1, 31-2. of and in Various deficiencies etiologies Table and are states characteristics are in is noted in Treatment 31-3. Table

body levels. therefore intake B12; vitamins in not for stored tissue are except alters vitamin the Water-soluble from is fluids; between extracellular compounds Absorption intracellular exchange the excretion urine. high, is and the readily the and via usually diet protein, as and Water-soluble amino vitamins in coenzymes reactions; energy, acid, structural nucleic typically enzymatic as acid function components. in metabolism; cosubstrates as and

Available @ StudentConsult.com

vitamin of and dehydroascorbic forms oxidized are The acid. ascorbic acid form, principal the C in including accelerateshydroxylation collagen. reactions, biosynthetic Ascorbic of the many in formation hydroxylation reactions of proline acid human availability infants estimating milk. and ascorbic the by full-term Theneeds in of acid are calculated dehydroascorbicacid for

of scurvy. deficiency in results A manifestations the clinical of ascorbic acid irritability, is the swelling, bone and pseudoparalysis by scurvy manifested legs. of Infantile tenderness with or may in cow’s year are milk life infants of unsupplemented the is diet fed fruits devoid disease if the The if of occur first

D, Vegans B12, vitamins iron riboflavin, (strict) Protein,

Breastfed Vitamins infant K, D

Electrolytes, nervosa other deficiencies anorexia Bulimia,

Parenteral elements Essential acids, alimentation trace fatty

Alcoholism B6, Calories, folate B1, vitamin

essential A, zinc, Malabsorption D, K, fatty Vitamins syndromes acids E,

A, K, Cholestasis acids D, essential fatty Vitamins zinc, E,

Vitamin Vitamins Digitalis Mineral folate Vitamins B6 Iron, phosphate, D, D, Phenytoin, oil E, calcium K Antacids Vitamin B6 Magnesium, calcium phenobarbital Sulfonamides Penicillamine Vitamin A, Antibiotics Isoniazid K Folate K,

protein hair II Vitamin factor intrinsic or Carbohydrate, fat, deficiencies Menkes syndrome enzyme B12 digestive Other kinky deficiency Transcobalamin Copper

direct to Reduced sunlight enteropathica Vitamin Acrodermatitis and exposure vegetables. Zinc D follicles, of and hair illness. petechiae, bleeding hyperkeratosis and Subperiosteal of of hemorrhage, progression succession changes gums characterize a the mental the chronic to absorption, or decreased also scurvy. abnormal in bleeding, is seen metabolism secondary Anemia folate iron 31-3. Treatment noted in is Table

Available @ StudentConsult.com

enriched rare thiamine, normal products; B are in and are hosts riboflavin, to deficiencies niacin grain in the United The routinely added States. vitamins develop deficiency of from reflect maternal human deficient intake, infants can breastfed in milk mothers. and Levels

a to pathway. the functions related of reactions pentose transketolase as reactions pyruvate, biochemical coenzyme and Vitamin in and metabolism, decarboxylation of carbohydrate B1 α-ketoacids amino Thiamine acids. the also of is branched-chain decarboxylation in involved milk during Thiamine is lost and pasteurization sterilization.

undergone have Thiamine who occurs surgery forsevere alcoholics adolescents bariatric beenreported in deficiency has obesity. in and (alcoholism), 1 of in 4 deficiency occurs breastfed hyperalimentation infants between protein-calorie fluid, months have boiled infants in receiving malnutrition,in Infantile with whose a unsupplemented and receiving infants and age thiamine infants milk. in mothers beriberi restlessness, vomiting, signs symptoms beriberi.Anorexia, cardiac with apathy, from and todyspnea, in cyanosis, beriberi pallor heart wet failure. and progress predominates infantile and Acute death characteristic to a is no sound Infants crying, uttered. be have appear aphonic withberiberi they cry; but neuropathy signs paresthesias. Other and include peripheral see Table treatment 31-3. For

in are is constituent of and Vitamin essential riboflavin dinucleotide, B2 a xanthine two of glutathione and oxidase, 5′-phosphate electron flavin-adenine coenzymes, reductase components which involved transport. glucose, acid, riboflavin A and acid deficiency fatty of metabolism. amino affects and to solutions. by phosphate strong light its Riboflavin alkaline by and decomposed exposure are

nose by an and cataracts. is eye angular that stomatitis; characterized tearing, of Ariboflavinosis around vascularization, reduced formation include corneal and seborrheic dermatitis and photophobia, cheilosis; changes the the glossitis; mouth; riboflavin with children low undergoing socioeconomic prolonged phototherapy cardiac families found status, in children been and diabetic in Subclinical with subjects, chronic infants hyperbilirubinemia. deficiencies disease, for have

(niacinamide). acid Niacin nicotinic nicotinamide compounds and consists of the of as dinucleotide component adenine functions the the dinucleotide nicotinamide adenine form predominant of the (NAD) a phosphate and Nicotinamide, nicotinamide vitamin, coenzymes (NADP). including intracellular multiple involved in glycolysis. respiratory is Niacin metabolism, metabolic synthesis, and fat processes,

is because diet tryptophan In converted must be the niacin. determining needs tryptophan of for considered in niacin, to content the the and withstands storage. foods in heating prolonged and stable is Niacin in from are tryptophan. total derived Approximately milk 70% equivalents human the of niacin disease, dysphagia, by membranes, or dermatitis, characterized diarrhea, and, niacin in severe dementia. photosensitivity, weakness, Pellagra, mucous is deficiency cases, lassitude, of vomiting, inflammation

meat, transketolase tenderness, pyruvate calf (e.g., B1 edema, Inborn acetyl-CoA legumes destroys → decarboxylation Coenzyme Beriberi: nuts, heart polyneuropathy, reaction) cereals, milk, boiling Liver, errors of metabolism; milk in lactate ophthalmoplegia ketoacid failure,

vegetables Meat,

greens, anemia; vegetables, milk DNA Folate neural tube Liver, synthesis heat drug defects Goat inactivates antagonists; cereals, deficient; cheese Megaloblastic

Rickets: liver; Fortified mineralization bone serum calcium, D milk, phosphorus 1,25-vitamin D of Maintain 25and cheese, Prohormone reduced sunlight levels

oils, E patients in vegetables, germ areflexia, grains Hemolysis benefit ophthalmoplegia May G6PD ataxia, infants; Seeds, with preterm Antioxidant deficiency

NAD, adenine dinucleotide. adenine dinucleotide; A; flavin G6PD, FAD, nicotinamide dehydrogenase; CoA, glucose-6-phosphate Coenzyme deficiency. *Biotinidase

listlessness, to Vitamin failure Vitamin B6 thrive, pyridines: naturally occurring B6 and hyperirritability, diarrhea, three to refers seizures. (pyridoxol), penicillamine pyridoxal, pyridoxamine. Children may pyridoxine isoniazid and or receiving phosphates of to the two the vitamin binds drug B6 The latter because pyridines the and require metabolically are additional vitamin. phosphate. large Vitamin the water-soluble associated with as pyridoxal have zyme converted functionally to coen-that and doses been vitamin B6 (≥500 in is mg/day) in the liver very are form, unusual a related sensory The metabolic neuropathy. functions a of heme of of reactions in prostaglandins. include to niacin carbohydrate and and of tryptophan immune and metabolism, acids, metabolic interconversion B6 amino development, the brain, vitamin serotonin, reactions Folate conversion the biosynthesis pyridoxamine forms responsible destroyed and the of pyridoxal by vita- was are heat vitamin heat; for treatment The

Algorithms Decision-Making @ cessed formulas. infants pro-Available deficiency seizures B6 StudentConsult.com min improperly in fed and milk deficient Goat’s B6. is in vitamin

anemia, B6 or Dietary deprivation results in of malabsorption vitamin vomiting, microcytic chil- hypochromic dren in

by IM, followed deficiency U/day oral 7,500–15,000 5000–10,000 U/day with for 10 Severe A Infants: Vitamin days. xerophthalmia

U/kg/day for age: Children 5 oral recovery. 1–8 yr days until of or 5,000–10,000 of mo. 14 oral yr adults: U/day 50,000 10,000–20,000 days; for for then age then U/day >8 3 days; Children and 500,000 2 U/day for

U/day q4–6mo. Deficiency without age: 100,000 orally, of Infants <1 yr changes corneal

200,000 q4–6mo. age: orally, yr Children U/day 1–8 of by days, yr U/day for Children for 10 U/day 50,000 followed days. adults: 100,000 3 >8 and

whom not IM oral malabsorption possible. to given patients is in Deficiency with dosing only those for Infants: 10 7,500–15,000 U/day days. 10 age: U/day Children 17,500–35,000 for yr of 1–8 days. of for 50,000 adults: U/day 3 Children >8 for 14 days. U/day then 100,000 and yr age days, multivitamin follow-up Give contains vitamin that oral A:

10,000–20,000 age: daily. of infants: dose and adults: yr U/day, established, U years 5,000–10,000 ≤8 children >8 LBW children no age of

>8 age Children yr product. of oral Malabsorption adults: 10,000–50,000 and syndrome water-miscible of U/day (prophylaxis)

fibrosis Cystic (CF 1,500–10,000 Foundation). prophylaxis U/day

and with children at 4 of >1 dose mo to the for U. yr Measles 6 wk dose, recommendations: of single eye day findings: 200,000 age: U; 1 100,000 age: repeating yr next WHO

50–100 Pellagra mg Niacin Children: tid. 100 Adults: mg/day. 50–100 max mg/day,

(B6) Pyridoxine SC. Neonates initial infants: Seizures IV, 50–100 and orally, mg/day IM,

as 10–50 as Children: 1–2 prophylaxis. mg/day treatment, Drug-induced mg/kg/day deficiencies

100–200 mg/day as mg/day Adults: 25–100 treatment, as prophylaxis.

3 multivitamin mg/day for product. Children: then 5–25 mg/day 1.5–2.5 a wk, Dietary in deficiency 10–20 mg/day Adults: 3 wk. for

in Children: (B2) doses. Riboflavin 2.5–10 divided mg/day divided mg/day in doses. Adults: 5–30

in for or IV, acid orally, Ascorbic doses IM, SC divided Scurvy 100–300 days. several Children: mg/day times/day. Adults: one mg/day 100–250 two to

Ohio, table 2004; S, Data excesses. deficiencies Lexi-Comp Kronel and Vitamin from Inc., Mascarenhas: from Hudson, In 104–105. editors: RA, Gershon Table JR, Current Pediatric 2006, Therapy, Burg pp Polin Elsevier, FD, Ingelfinger 3, Philadelphia, AA, weight; low q, birth times by CF, day; PO, Health Organization. Two tid, fibrosis; mouth; three LBW, intravenous; every; SC, day; times cystic per IV, subcutaneous; WHO, World bid, per intramuscular; IM,

of are variety nutritionally forms chemical A active. folate of high support Folate vitamin to erythropoiesis. of the requirement methionine. of synthesis (phenytand of Other acids to in transport treatment conversion in of conditions fragments include certain anticonvulsants pregnancy, amino for of alcoholism, metabolism and with and functions homocysteine acids deficiency of in single-carbon with risk normal nucleic (methotrexate). or antimetabolites sources oin) Food defects in tube significantly leafy fortification is routine and recurrence the oranges, are green reduced First and of folate vegetables, whole grains; include now occurrence United of neural States. grains supplementation embryogenesis. maternal during by Because

before a all deficiency, of inter-to the are least intake macrocytic hypersegmented usual a neu-closure tube μg/day at may age intake, from women folate prophylaxis. Folate of or by neural of characterized malabsorption, recommended occurs vitamin-drug dietary result low pregnancy, as glossitis, anemia, have and trophils, reproductive 400 recognition of actions. weight develop tive of as stores infants weeks Deficiency but body adults can 10 of much within scant rela-Vitamin in birth have folate B12 a times as few require to the period. newborn folate because particularly labile. is Folate heat Heat-sterilizing

the Available formula @ decrease Algorithms Decision-Making by can StudentConsult.com half. home-prepared content folate folate. and Evaporated low milk milk goat’s are in anemia, a of require to Patients chronic thalassemia) atom is hemoglobin). the extra in folate of ring cell avoid that Vitamin in cobalt of of containing corrin to most because relatively held (sickle the one deficiency the (similar complex iron B12 with hemolysis an vitaminmolecules, of may as during ring their and transfer. groups the at the forattachment alkyl The serves site center ionis of of cobalt the active functions and transfers is single-carbon function interconversions. and in folate to vitamin intimatelyrelated The metabolism in and protein Vitamin is and B12 lipid normal essential inenergy nucleicacid carbohydrate biosynthesis synthesis. for and production

contrast gastric cleavage glycoprotein B12 In vitamins, involving secreted from vitamin mucosa factor, complex, vitamin by is other which to the of the called binding (parietal protein of is water-soluble and dietary intrinsic to a absorption cells). efficiently the cobalamin–intrinsic absorbed factor from The ileum. complex is distal

bound is a As into the transcobalamin it to transported II. protein, portal specific absorbed vitamin B12 circulation, is water-soluble Its are for also large stores the unusual in a liver vitamin. deficiency enterohepatic months circulation to normally Efficient years. protects for from of products the animal only. are vitamin sources Dietary B12 a vitamin take supplement. should Strict vegetarians

is in Vitamin B12 deficiency rare. children this specific diagnosisand of defect danger cases childhood of of childhood from are in irreversible in (see inabsorption a Early damage.Most disorder treatment the 31-2). neurologic importantbecause result Table of Such factor), anemia congenital transport. pernicious (autoimmune), and transcobalamin juvenile anemia (absent defects include II pernicious deficiency intrinsic intestinal Gastric vitamin bacterial smallbowel cause and resection or deficiency. B12 overgrowth also breastfed supplementation. infants Exclusively a adequate is ingest vitaminB12 without the strict unless mother vegetarian

hypersegmented B12 the are Depression and clinical deficiency. of early folate and of deficiency) serum from neutrophils of macrocytosis vitamin (indistinguishable appearance manifestations manifestations, deficiency causes coma. Vitamin neurologic posterior B12 peripheral dementia, also including depression, eventual spinal and column neuropathy, signs, but the vitamin the deficiency, The signs mask manifestations folate neurologic of of while do occur deficiency, neurologic may B12 progress. administration folate not in signs hematologic also vitamin with urine methylmalonic Patients acid. B12 have deficiency of increased levels life. treatment require cases deficiency and and of in children throughout vitamin are infants of not B12 Most dietary origin Maintenance although is consists vitamin B12 form administered therapy intramuscular intranasally. a injections, repeated of monthly of

than vitamins. stores dietary develop more body, water-soluble for Fat-soluble in generally and the vitamins slowly have generally deficiencies digestion, vitamins fat-soluble normal Absorption intake, and of on depends fat absorption. the deficiencies for explains and absorption more of disease common the potential of occurrence fat states of complexity these normal perturbation many in The vitamins.

Available @ StudentConsult.com

retinol the of tissue enzymes. is by and retinol plant after animal vitamin group or hydrolysis intestinal estersrelease carotene constituent The retinol.Ingested basic A pancreatic esters the liver retinol as arestored palmitate. in retinol Chylomicron-transported liver the by transportedfrom is Retinol retinol-binding target the tissues to tissues. retinol free target to protein,releasing kidney protein. the The thenexcretes retinol-binding Diseases synthesis excretion kidneydiminish the disease of lowers the ofretinol-binding malnutrition whereas protein, protein. or retinol-binding liverparenchymal of proteinsfacilitate uptake retinol binding of cellular target Specific the tissues. by light action of visual is rhodopsin; In step form eye, the the to is onrhodopsin first the process. of retinol metabolized the of and Retinol differentiation growth the epithelia. alsoinfluences humansappear of manifestations a group xerophthalmia. Theclinical in vitamin ocular termed of signs A as deficiency is symptom cornea. night xerosis which followed conjunctiva earliest by the of blindness, and The is scar. a can permanent ulceration, corneal keratomalacia, result Untreated, and in necrosis, xerophthalmia and especially are with increased infection, A measles; of of increasedrisk in immunodeficiency; vitamin especially mortality, and nations. deficiencies risk associated developing subclinical Clinical Xerophthalmia should deficiency cerebri, serious treated.Hypervitaminosis A vitamin also and pseudotumor be sequelae, includingheadaches, A urgently hepatotoxicity, teratogenicity. and has

compounds activity. Eight have occurring vitamin naturally E most of is present commercially α-tocopherol, as E accounts these, active succinate. The for in available 90% vitamin an the tissues of acetate or and human by peroxidation cell membranes. polyunsaturated in biologic Vitamin the acts a E antioxidant present of inhibiting as acids fatty of radicals enzymes. action scavenges oxidative reduction oxygen free generated It the of the molecular and by by

and with celiac liver to malabsorption disease, deficiency fat secondary in abetalipoproteinemia. children Vitamin occurs untreated fibrosis, E disease,cystic neuropathy of sensory signof the supplementation, deficiency of is loss progressive first without E syndrome and these In motor vitamin reflexes. develops; deep children, a tendon an of peroxide,peripheral preterminfants age 1 by edema, and at anemia characterized erythrocytes in the hemolysis hemolytic count, sensitivity to to an hydrogen thrombocytosis. 2 months of elevated reticulocyte increased have Deficient are after vitaminE corrected oral, therapy. or the lipid, abnormalities All water-soluble

@ Available StudentConsult.com

is the inactive the D skin. D3) form and of irradiation produced vitamin by mammalian is of (vitamin precursors ultraviolet in Cholecalciferol from plants. Ergocalciferol is D2) derived (vitamin become active. metabolism require Vitamin and vitamin D3 to D2 further potency. They of are equivalent generation the D in Clothing, and of decrease and of epidermis exposure, pigmentation dermis. sunlight skin vitamin lack

and globulin converted metabolized it calcitriol, D a activity, little transported is metabolite, (D2 or to metabolite intrinsic to the the to by plasma-binding or liver 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin where D3) most is kidney, has D active calcidiol, in the (25-[OH]-D); which is D this Vitamin 25-hydroxyvitamin (1,25-[OH]2-D). an a collagen in increase of vitamin for calcium-binding calcium concentration of transport). the D–dependent intestinal in in of 1,25-(OH)2-D concentration The in increased RNA mRNA messenger (directly mediating intestine the and results in (mRNA) action protein bone the decrease for is action appropriate phosphate concentrations minerals. D space calcium bone vitamin extracellular absorption the in mediated provision enhanced The by of of by of antirachitic these of probably and of and intestinal anabolic direct effect Vitamin on also may D bone. have a has the secretion parathyroid gland and feedback direct inhibits of hormone. to parathyroid 1,25-(OH)2-D

D as osteomalacia appears as children postpubertal adolescents. and in Vitamin in rickets deficiency intake the sun (phenobarbital, Inadequate and developmentof such risk exposure causes, vitamin-deficiency direct sufficient butother malabsorption, and of are drugs may vitamin various phenytoin) increase D as rickets. factors, especiallythose risk skin, Ddeficiency. are vitamin with at for infants, dark-pigmented Breastfed

defective at rickets the especially results to fails pathophysiology which epiphyseal matrix, bone The of mineralize. cartilage from growth, osteoid wide, the irregular metaphysis. in The zone rachitic of results a uncalcified supported poorly tissue, produces bones. flaring skeletal ends bulging of than soft, lateral This or hardened, compression through many of the and the zone of deformities rather

D–deficient most and only diet. 2 vitamin several manifestations The after of the years clinical of a during common months evident are first of life become may rickets touch. the of a feels the of table the is Ping-Pong when Craniotabes skull, caused to outer thinning like compressed which by ball be wrists ankles rosary) the the junction (rachitic and Enlargement of thickening and costochondral of palpated. may The may anterior and be delayed. enlarged, is fontanelle its closure lordosis be and In scoliosis present. advanced may rickets, exaggerated older in Bowlegs infants, evident be long bones. fractures may be greenstick observed in or knock-knees and may

serum to serum intake be of a exposure may little activity calcium serum on low; but poor direct D of the diagnosis phosphatase based is The vitamin reduced, rickets is history is level is phosphorus elevated. sunlight.The usually ultraviolet usually and alkaline normal and occur. mg/dL, less than When to calciumlevels 7.5 decline may serum tetany 7 may are 24,25-(OH)2-D ng/mL, commonly 1,25-(OH)2-Dlevels also and than 1,25-(OH)2-D Levelsof undetectable, are less normal. serum levels although be D the concavecupping; measure poorly status distal is Characteristic include of The widening; ulna 25-(OH)-D. frayed, radius vitamin demarcated ends. the and radiographicchanges of of best level and is radius enlarged, ends the distal of the and between The metacarpal increasedspace metaphysis. bones nonossified andthe the ulna seen

sun may serum at age are exposed infants taking breastfed born more 400 the D American of Breastfed stores formula D vitamin the develop but vitamin vitamin all adequate is of these mL/day Pediatrics >1 vitamin do not the D–fortified (for D milk to supplementary or Academy after year). The recommends for infants given infant 2 usually infants or rickets of adequate until amount birth with not of D. in subsequently vitamin supplementation levels 1000 maintain least mothers and months, of IU/day, soon if than receive started excessive of effects muscle weakness, Toxic nephrocalcinosis. polyuria, and include D chronic hypercalcemia, vitamin may

@ Available StudentConsult.com

form of vitamin The is phylloquinone, plant K1. K or vitamin by side intestinal chains K2, unsaturated form or a with synthesized of menaquinone, compounds Another series one of bacteria. is vitamin proteins. depend conversion on their synthesis precursor vitamin in K Plasma of blood of X cascade IX, for for and factors coagulation and VII, (prothrombin), post-translational II the factors residues to prothrombin making effective post-translational sites, calcium-binding creates carboxyglutamic acid the of glutamyl molecule protein The active. of a residues conversion

include and in several in acid–containing S, proteins K–dependent Other tissues. Z and γ-carboxyglutamic proteins vitamin plasma proteins C, of acid–containing vitamin Bone major a other and lesser K–dependent glutamic contains osteocalcin, proteins. protein, amounts

Phylloquinone is transported and from the absorbed by chylomicrons. intestine of of humans deficiency the with rarity menaquinones K function vitamin absorption that possible. normal dietary intestinal suggests in is The intestinal jaundice, insufficiency, celiac fat change in problems with observed deficiency with caused often combined obstructive by these K subjects the flora. disease; and use been of that antibiotics Vitamin are has pancreatic absorption impaired

occurs Hemorrhagic of the in infants, breastfed disease newborn, of weeks more among a disease life. common the few first of the prophylactic rare K life. receive intramuscular on vitamin It day is in who infants first the bleeding of marked intracranial a from newborn occur, by can is or umbilical disease but circumcision or generalized hemorrhage gastrointestinal hemorrhage, Hemorrhagic usually ecchymoses, stump;

hemoglobin, and performance legumes milk, liver, of myoglobin) Deficiencies spoon mental muscle Mineral DEFICIENCY FUNCTION gastrointestinal reduced COMMENTS Anemia, cytochrome, of History Heme-containing grains, SOURCES MANIFESTATIONS Meat, cow’s nails, Trace macromolecules Table MINERAL OF (e.g., Characteristics bleeding and Iron 31-4 pica,

glutathione Meat, long-term Antioxidant; TPN China Selenium peroxidase in Endemic Keshan cardiomyopathy areas; vegetables

Total TPN, nutrition. parenteral

uncommon. is of The American to recommends all shortly that vitamin given K 1 be parenteral (0.5 Academy Pediatrics mg) after newborns birth. to

of at are more total body and least than require intakes minerals 100 mg/day 0.1% major weight. of contribute those that The and There calcium, seven potassium, essential sodium, major chloride, phosphorus, minerals: magnesium, sulfur. are less trace Ten minerals, body 0.1% than essential physiologic have of which roles. constitute weight, mineral listed deficiencies Characteristics of 31-4. in are trace Table

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Calcium is abundant most major mineral. the of percent calcium remaining in intracellular extracellular Ninety-nine and the skeleton; the 1% fluids, in membranes. is compartments, cell is and clotting, The permeability. calcium role in nonskeletal conduction, muscle contraction, a blood membrane nerve has bone are distinct amorphous phase. large, pools—a and phosphate a There calcium form two smaller, crystalline constantly over, formation. Bone turns with concurrent reabsorption calcium and bone adolescence. of mineral accretion during Approximately bone half occurs hormone density (testosterone, and early prior and is Bone concurrent adulthood calcium exercise, peaks influenced in mineral intake, by and status estrogen). dietary

from a dairy Calcium with providing products the and most concentrated source. of variety intake can common sources, come cream, mg 300 of 1 calcium) 4⁄5 The of is almonds, cups ¾ 1.5 ice cheese, equivalent 2.5 cup cup calcium cup sardines. plain of 2 cheddar yogurt, of or milk of oz oz of (about of of calcium-fortified and some collards); breads. kale, green Other (broccoli, tofu; vegetables calcium-precipitated include sources leafy calcium cereals, juices, lime-processed and tortillas; of

blood are no closely levels regulated. calcium deficiency syndrome classic because and There cell is mobilize and the of calcium absorptive body dietary The efficiency can calcium. increase skeletal in therapy, endocrine related vitamin deficiency, osteogenesis disuse, infants). malnutrition, premature disorders, C to occurs steroid that deficiency childhood is or calcium Osteoporosis immobilization imperfecta, (in protein-calorie and It that ensure calcium by postmenopausal and optimal is childhood believed to mass peak prevention bone providing osteoporosis primary method intake is maximum of during of the adolescence. monitored status Bone absorptiometry. by dual-energy be mineral x-ray can

adverse are adults No calcium in of observed intakes dietary with effects g/day. 2.5 There urinary intestinal renal absorption zinc). of that the minerals formation, (iron, and increase inhibit constipation, stone higher is decreased may concern may risk other function intakes and of

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Failure Bleeding to Thrive Gastrointestinal Anemia

most enzyme abundant trace hemoglobin, mineral, of in synthesis the myoglobin, used is the Iron, and iron. which modulation of is through the foods, amount Bodyiron diet. and in primarily in iron of mixture body ironstores, depends ofiron the foods of form content absorption, the the and regulated on state categories of There are ironin food. two iron of by iron by the accountsfor rarely and in infants.The which efficient present The and meat diet. the first and of constituents is ingested fourth is heme heme than iron, absorption of other by myoglobin, notinfluenced supplied is hemoglobin is more one relatively and which iron formof the category the in The salts. by represents second preponderanceof infants nonheme consumed iron intake is iron, exists the of nonheme The composition consumed foods. of influencedby is iron absorption of acid, iron are and absorption non-heme Enhancers poultry. meat, fish, ascorbic bran, grains. tannatesin in the and a polyphenols acid, (including andwhole tea), found Inhibitors compound phytic are legumes the infant iron-fortified 10%; is smallamount formula milk is percent absorption human 4% in and iron-fortified from milk The of of dry cow’s iron absorbed from cereals. intestinal

little before little need iron a change normal months In is term and 4 bodyiron ofage. total in there exogenous for infant, unless in first4 loss deficiency 62). has (seeChapter blood term infants is substantial months, been the there during Iron rare at 4 risk areprovided, After requirement growthincreases exogenous infant to iron becomes erythropoiesis and, age, (see iron Chapter the marginal, and reserves iron for unless of anemiaas the become about months sources of support 150). progressively significantamounts a stored the of low or amount the lower transferred third are iron from weightinfants Premature birth in because mother of trimester. iron have their rates addition, iron rapid and when of frequent phlebotomy needs occurs. In growth postnatal greaterbecause of are met be be younger iron-fortified formula infants supplementation(ferrous needs to by circumstances, in the normal only year breast by milk can or sulfate) should of iron-containing Iron than1 age. foods.Under alternative complementary unless developiron human deficiency fed receive Premature they iron may supplements. milk infants earlier anemia preterm receive infants should Formula-fed iron-fortified formula.

from milk cow’s with result or inadequate iron intake In iron from bioavailability. excessive with of poor may intake deficiency children, intake foods iron older result deficiency or loss blood from can Iron gastric sources from ulceration. also as such menses nervous in many producing Iron central addition affects tissues system) to anemia. and (muscle deficiency and when impaired Iron first the 2 work life. deficits anemia of development, irreversible with is the in onset may decreased and been be and deficiency capacity associated neurocognitive of years lethargy have which

saturation, cell iron-binding blood low by a low the of elevated hypochromic established The ferritin iron diagnosis iron presence anemia, capacity. width enhanced of transferrin anemia to red microcytic reduced levels, and normal serum distribution, is serum deficiency levels, low. the blood reticulocyte corpuscular volume and is reduced, The count and are mean indices red cell without present deficiency anemia. Iron be may are manifestations Table 31-4. noted Clinical in

to divided and the 2 hr iron sulfate) to anemia iron bid deficiency tid. mg of or iron/kg/24 6 administration in provide ferrous Treatment changes the diet adequate includes (as of days noted is treatment. within 7 of starting Reticulocytosis 3 to be months. for continued 5 Oral should treatment needed intravenous cannot intramuscular iron or if therapy given. be oral is iron Rarely, be dose. according the carries to administered therapy a a test should and of including anaphylaxis risk protocol, strict Parenteral

@ Available StudentConsult.com

and and in abundant metabolism trace and acid metabolism, cell in stabilization is protein in mineral nucleic the Zinc is of second synthesis, most important membranes. is and functions cofactor more 200 essential Zinc numerous than as enzymes metabolic a to for cellular functions. integrity); (immune physiologic healing, and especially growth, and include maturation, wound zinc is which sexual immune is crucial essential tract skin functions and for of status during tissue zinc proliferation periods Adequate system, normal function. growth gastrointestinal for

duodenum 40%) is intestine. Dietary zinc the in absorbed (20% and to proximal small dietary zinc of it which human are The milk, is from readily products, including absorbed. animal best sources also absorption grains amounts contain moderate but and of legumes acid these Whole zinc, from inhibits phytic sources. important factor of zinc poor widespread more low in occurrence global to basis, On to than the be bioavailability acid a thought secondary a deficiency. is intake phytic zinc tract. from of gastrointestinal Excretion occurs the drastically chronic in ongoing diarrhea, of the requirements losses, increase. as presence In such can

stature. hair, in was appetite, low Middle a their in of levels hypogonadism, deficiency syndrome children in of East diminished group and Zinc first the taste described zinc poor acuity, with short dwarfism countries. diarrhea pneumonia and mortality reduces supplementation Zinc enhances morbidity in developing growth and from and zinc be particularly populations of to in stunting. developing high in is highly deficiency considered to rates with prevalent Mild countries, moderate from or bioavailable breastfed Mild young foods poor zinc diet. in infants the adequate children in zinc complementary in zinc older occurs with intake total intake general or deficiency without may infectious burden of the countries. zinc high also risk increase developing in A deficiency and infants nutrition zinc receiving in milk severe parenteral human without supplementation fed premature acquired patients without in fortification. Acute, deficiency zinc total occurs mild and faltering, immune manifestations growth anorexia, deficiency include Clinical impairment. of zinc maturation, delayed rough Moderately include manifestations hepatosplenomegaly. severe skin, sexual and changes; deficiency night dermatitis; signs erythematous, impairment; include and growth acral immune mood scaling photophobia. alopecia; periorificial and severe and blindness; The of diarrhea;

deficiency zinc Diagnosis of challenging. is normal in but used, conditions concentration 60 in commonly μg/dL. than deficiency frequently most is typically severe moderate levels Plasma zinc to levels deficiency; are of less mild are also of levels. result depression in zinc circulating can Acute infection linear of with to improved for deficiency function. improved The as weight response the immune such gain, standard is supplementation, trial diagnosis of and appetite, outcomes growth a improved or considered Because there evidence on preexisting to deficiency. these zinc response a a is supplementation of no positive functions, of is pharmacologic effect a and safe an deficiency considered in Clinically zinc μg/kg/day) approach situations is which of empirical in reasonable supplementation trial is possible. (1

Acrodermatitis is 4 within have milk. weaned 2 weeks disorder that recessive enteropathica an begins breast after from infants been autosomal to perioral to failure thrive. and acute is dermatitis, by an and alopecia, characterized It perianal deficiency is defect of zinc zinc specific caused absorption. a disease intestinal by The from severe alkaline levels is markedly serum are low. zinc Plasma phosphatase reduced, activity and zinc oral Treatment with high-dose supplements. is associated mammary A zinc the severe secretion is in from zinc a with abnormally of to zinc uncommon the milk concentrations. in due resulting relatively deficiency gland, defect of low condition presentation those deficiency: zinc growth born dermatitis. of with diarrhea, especially classic failure, and signs present infants, Breastfed prematurely, there successfully ability infant’s absorb zinc which infant duration defect with the consists be in the for treatment supplementing of zinc, the of can breastfeeding, is continued. Because to no the also to if will supplementation zinc breastfed. need mother Subsequent infants born relatively Zinc is nontoxic. nausea, emesis, headache, and abdominal seizures. Excess vertigo, intake produces pain,

substituted the hydroxyl strengthened in mineral is the for enamel. enamel ions when Dental hydroxyapatite fluoride crystalline is matrix of The more to chemical is and damage. resulting fluoroapatite resistant physical tooth the by into tooth Fluoride incorporated and has mineralization the formation after erupted. of enamel during is the stages interaction surface similarly may and protect osteoporosis bone against life. is mineral incorporated in later into Fluoride

concern risk about infants 6 the before should fluoride of of age. fluorosis, supplements Because months not of receive fluoride. are of and small made water Commercial defluoridated with formulas contain amounts fluoride significantly content is is by and of intake. The low human influenced maternal milk not potential conduct evaluate and a fluoride prescribing before fluoride Practitioners risk all should supplementation. sources caries assessment

of J, Philadelphia, 19, textbook et St. RM, 2011, ed Stanton Saunders. Kliegman Nelson al: B, Geme pediatrics, Chap. 41–51

RJ: American Schanler Section of Academy AI, Eidelman on Pediatrics

Breastfeeding. Milk, of and 2012 the Human Use 129(3):827–841, Breastfeeding Pediatrics

United Racial state Control States, and duration, Morb Rep tion Prevention: and http://www.choosemyplate.gov in for ethnic initiation and National Centers 2010 Survey, www.pediatrics.org/cgi/content/full/102/3/e38 59(11):327–334, breastfeeding Immuniza 2004–2008, differences http://www.nal.usda.gov Disease Mortal Wkly MMWR by

difference? tion: make spacing birth Menotti JN, EP: Murray can Gribble Reconsidering a NJ, childhood undernutri of 2002–2003 El the analysis An

Matern Nutr Family Survey, National Health Salvador 5:49–63, 2009 Child

S, T: obesity with specific, goals, Robinson Fight Boschert countable

1, News Pediatric Oct 2012

malnutrition, 2009 Protein Am Pediatr Clin Z, 56:1055–1068, North LC: energy Grover Ee

NF, Hambidge Trace elements. KM: Krebs Watkins C, In Walker JB, Duggan

ed Decker, science pp 67–82 WA, 2008, 4, pediatrics: Nutrition Ontario, applications, in and editors: basic Hamilton, clinical BC

ME: Protein-energy treatment. quences, and malnutrition: pathophysiology, Penny clinical conse WA, editors: Watkins Walker Duggan C, JB, In

and basic pediatrics: 2008, in applications, ton, Nutrition ed Hamil 4, 127–142 Ontario, pp Decker, BC clinical science

Breastfeeding Section Wagner Greer FR: CL, on Nutrition, on and Committee

American Academy Prevention D of and Pediatrics: vitamin Pediatrics vitamin guidelines intake, for defi ciency: 2008 D of rickets new 122:1142–1152,

and A. Greenbaum Larry 7 Raed Bou-Matar

is most of plentiful human Water body. constituent the the with weight varies as of Total percentage body water (TBW) a body age. 75% of about fetus gradually birth The has a decreases high TBW, to for weight a term which infant. higher term infants TBW infants. have a Premature content than remains weight first body year TBW 60% puberty. During at to life, and until level about basically of the this of decreases males, mass content more acquire the that increases females than than fat puberty, females. muscle At who of more of low in content, content, remains has weight decreases at in and TBW of of puberty but it to body females. by muscle water has 60%, fat end males high Because water 50% the of decreases TBW weight. dehydration, and a is During percentage body smaller

has fluid intracellular and compartments: (ECF). main (ICF) two extracellular fluid TBW ECF the than larger and fetus volume. is the In newborn, ICF volume the causes diuresis immediate volume. The ECF the normal in an decrease postnatal growth. expansion This because volume ECF in cellular volume of is continued by the followed ICF of decrease year to 1 volume adult ratio By levels. approaches volume ECF the age, of ICF the of the weight 40% is body of 25% the 20% and ECF volume to ICF of The (Fig. body weight, volume 30% to is 32-1). volume the With in than muscle females. ICF results a higher puberty, of increased in males mass

further ECF divided plasma interstitial water (see Fig. fluid into and The is 32-1). about of weight. is 5% body water Plasma volume, is 8% higher of weight, usually is The newborns of hematocrit 40%, infants. given and body it a young in although blood such with liver edema, 15% and interstitial protein-losing enteropathy, syndrome. in as of fluid, weight, normally nephrotic dramatically The can failure, failure, diseases increase heart associated body

the ICF in solutes ECF. the and dominant The and anion are different.Sodium and is in ECF of composition the chloride cation the ICF. in organic anions and abundant the ICF, is proteins, anions, most in are plentiful phosphate Potassium cation most the and the separating the the cross in determined is dissimilarity ICF and theanions ICF. ECF the by intracellular cellmembrane, barrier largely do the and molecules the of The thepresence ECF between that the not and cations—sodium potassium—is activity the extrudes of Incontrast, pump, sodium forpotassium. the the to exchange distribution in Na+,K+-ATPase of in due cells the from which difference

and these requires volume; for are systems determines independent status. sodium balance, regulation controlled plasma osmolality, which close and which cell of intravascular determines osmolality balance, water Proper functioning volume by balance. control depends on Maintenance of of normal osmolality water a balance. status regulation of volume sodium Control on of depends

plasma and water is intake tightly controlled urinary 285 and mOsm/kg through losses. of osmolality water 295 between regulation The the plasma small thirst. A osmolality in increase stimulates the secretion hormone (ADH), are antidiuretic Urinary water in which of an response to plasma osmolality. increasing increases regulated by losses stimulating of water, decreases by ADH, renal losses. urinary water tubular reabsorption an of is of adequate to volume. osmolality intravascular Control subordinate maintenance of stimulated, regardless thirst secretion is osmolality. ADH When plasma the present, volume depletion are and significant

volume cause mortality. depletion may significant overload morbidity Volume and and to volume. is necessary cation body sodium Because adequate principal ECF, restricted extracellular of the for maintenance is is intravascular sodium and the determines intake, craving occurs, children there because in salt typically balance occasionally little loss. renal with is homeostatic although sodium control salt of chronic sodium The kidney balance The of is the the percentage that reabsorbed by along sodium regulates kidney sodium filtered nephron. altering important system renin-angiotensin The excretion. of an regulator is sodium reabsorption renal and effective volume. apparatus decreased The intravascular juxtaglomerular produces to response in renin II. I, into angiotensin-converting converts Renin producing angiotensinogen, angiotensin enzyme cleaves angiotensin which angiotensin actions of The

water, body as expressed an Compartments weight, percentage Figure adult. older of total body child 32-1 or of in Pathophysiology fluid body fluids (From and Greenbaum therapy. LA: of Stanton, Textbook JW, Geme In 19th RM, et of Nelson Kliegman BF, ed. al, editors: St Pediatrics, p Saunders, 2011, Philadelphia, 212.e1.)

proximal include stimulation increases the direct to increase secretion, II gland and aldosterone reabsorption of of reabsorption the sodium the in adrenal tubule stimulation which nephron. increase sodium distal to expansion natriuretic volume increases In urinary atrial the sodium stimulates peptide, excretion. which synthesis of contrast,

fluids are intravenous (IV) enterally. children fed whocannot used Maintenance be in from losses, fluids as excessive require have childrenmay with maintenance replacement tube. such ongoing concurrent they a Along occur fluids, nasogastric may with drainage if addition, (see deficit In if is dehydration replacement present, alsoneeds 33). Chapter the to patient receive

of Maintenance fluids solution a are potassium, chloride. glucose, sodium, and of composed water, electrolyte from as from as This well urine, the lungs. urine and skin, water stool, losses losses the replaces and solution stool, approximately of fluids maintenance patient. normal the needs The glucose of provides in the 20% caloric degradation that of protein ketoacidosis occur the is no starvation diminishes the percentage would prevent enough patient received to development This and calories. if the

minerals, calories, vitamins. Maintenance fluids or provide protein, not do adequate fat, *The maximum Patients day should remain fluid 2400 total per normally is not mL. on

†The is normally mL/hr. maximum rate 100 fluid

few therapy nutrition enterally for cannot days. be children maintenance be 34) should Chapter parenteral (see for than used who a more fed indefinitely;

losses Daily not (urine measurable (insensible and lungs). stool) from and and skin the losses are water measurable losses these Failure ultimately, and, leads child replace thirsty a child. to to dehydrated a weight. water calculating a 32-1 needs patient’s on the based 24-hour for Table provides system maintenance stool. potassium losses given in and replace from and fluids Sodium urine maintenance are to

(NS) of ½ ¼ and of chloride electrolyte 20 potassium 20 typically in plus needs,children needs normal (KCl)or (D5) water calculation saline mEq/L After D5 5% of KCl. NS dextrose mEq/L in receive plus either Children kilogram. per best lessthan of containing solution (38.5 ¼ high NS mEq/L) weighing 10 because needs their water the do with kg mEq/L). children larger In NS and solutionwith adults (77 the receive contrast, may ½ or would ofmaintenance disease fluids. no that volume the These that composition require present process either electrolyte the an in guidelines thereis adjustment assume renal Children hyperkalemic potassium mEq/L unable to of 20 or tolerate insufficiency with maybe KCl. excrete and maynot necessary complicatedpathophysiologic and of composition In electrolyte with maintenancefluids may of toadjust it on derangements, fluid measurements rate be the andassessment children based empirically electrolyte balance.

(see There Chapter lungs losses maintenance and the insensible 32): stool normal (35%), (60%), of 33-1). components sources water urine are (5%) three water loss—the skin from (Table and of sweat insensible contains Sweating losses, to water and, contrast is electrolytes. evaporative not in and

(Table maintenance of modify variety water situations clinical 33-2). balance normal A can under skin premature especially water be or are radiant higher warmers neonates, who Evaporative losses infants undergoing in phototherapy. in water losses 44). and Burns of can electrolytes massive result (see Chapter Fever losses. insensible increases Tachypnea or tracheostomy the lungs. a losses from evaporative increases

and losses. tract The a electrolyte of water considerable is potentially gastrointestinal source who appropriate child has an replaced large with replacement and losses A 33-3). have gastrointestinal of measured solution losses amounts should (Table these

output water largest cause is the loss. of normally Urine hormone and decrease of a such urine antidiuretic inappropriate in Diseases the to lead as syndrome failure volume. renal (SIADH) can Maintenance anuria fluid overload. patient in or fluids produce with a oliguria other insipidus. mellitus, volume; necrosis, of diabetes In polyuric include these contrast, conditions produce an phase diabetes in acute the urine increase and tubular fluids patient urine receive excessive, maintenance When dehydration. to is standard than more must prevent output the the

increased is similar decreased The to output 33-4). approach urine (Table or a is by Insensible rate normal maintenance are a the losses third replaced that rate. administered of one at solution of losses. with an child “insensibles” insensible fluid of one theoretically balance, an even fluid only the caveat maintenance the estimate third is maintains on anuric Placing that rate weight the adjusted hydration This patient’s may monitoring based status. and on need to be of a An receive replacement child solution. urine oliguric to needs Most 171]) fluids polyuria urine children [see plus for should insensible diabetes be children Chapter replacement. mellitus with placed on (except with

sodium chloride mL/mL Replace 20 55 mEq/L ¼ + 5% dextrose mEq/L mEq/L hr in normal + Sodium: saline 1–6 Solution: 20 stool every potassium bicarbonate

Potassium: mEq/L 25

15 mEq/L Bicarbonate:

1–6 normal hr Solution: + potassium Sodium: mEq/L output 60 chloride mL/mL every Replace mEq/L 10 saline

10 Potassium: mEq/L

Chloride: mEq/L 90

patient fluids Place Place the maintenance) patient (⅓ insensible (⅓ on fluids on maintenance) the insensible

urine half Replace electrolytes urine saline mL/mL output Measure with normal

is urine mL/mL with based the that a solution measured Replace electrolytes on output urine

chest significant, and be and tubes, from Output replaced. should drains surgical measured when the Third of shift a into space and interstitial due space intravascular the to and space. lossesmanifest with from fluid are ascites edema losses cannot quantitated. be Thirdspace to these large lossescan or despiteweight edema from Nonetheless, be depletion, intravascular lead and gain ascites. volume require isotonic empirical patients with losses have replacement Ringer’s an Replacement children as abdominal and chest be normal and who is in or are risk, surgery.Third space or spacefluid fluid, burns areat third of isotonic saline lactate. output anticipated as tube such should such who but usually losses intravascular continuing in are fluid the based status. Adjustments amount for assessment of ofreplacement patient’s volume space third the on

children. most often Dehydration, is gastroenteritis, to common in due dehydrated caring of for step to degree child in The a first is dehydration. assess the of urgency of the volume the rehydration. needed fluid dictates dehydration the situation The for and of degree of varying are Table features the that 33-5 clinical present summarizes dehydration. degrees with

symptoms. patient or dehydration with has few clinical A mild signs decreased may describe intake The history but

extremities; cold, restless cyanotic and Thirsty, alert; may Drowsy; Thirsty; comatose young limp, lethargic; irritable sweaty, children be restless Infants or

extremities; Thirsty, reduced toes; sweaty, children (usually) cramps wrinkled Usually alert fingers level), Thirsty, cyanotic apprehensive; skin on (but cold, Older alert conscious at and muscle

Respirations Deep Normal rapid and be Deep, may rapid

from World Organization. Data Health

more increased fluid losses. often with demonstrable and symptoms. has moderate physical An signs infant dehydration intervention. needs fairly patient The prompt severe with is patient A ill. gravely dehydration (see inadequate vital may perfusion Chapter that decrease indicates The 40). receiving (shock) pressure blood be organs in and Such should immediate aggressive patient a (IV) receive therapy. intravenous an patient of assessment Clinical therapy. estimate; only dehydration the continually must be is re-evaluated during the The volume. driven space degree is dehydration extracellular of underestimated the of from because the to the intravascular in dehydration space hypernatremic helps osmotically to intracellular water preserve shift

dehydration. Serum creatinine child blood assessing are a nitrogen in (BUN) and useful concentrations urea with in concentration. little may no the disproportionate insufficiency Volume change depletion a increase BUN, without creatinine with cause in renal the or is sodium of and water. by proximal This increased caused tubule reabsorption in renal secondary of passive urea conservation to appropriate the because protein the may on protein be with intake in child urea or increase depends degradation. production poor in a BUN This absent blunted child may glucocorticoids. occurs disproportionately who the with in a with bleed a child child be receiving Conversely, production, a BUN increased increased a in is as gastrointestinal or urea creatinine A suggests the renal significant concentration injury. of elevation

of rehydration. decreases urine specific but gravity elevated dehydration after is (≥1.025) usually incases significant The

urinalysis show 30 and and mg/dL and few of cells, granularcasts, white 100 hyaline may a to cells red a dehydration, With proteinuria. blood blood and causes not inthe are they increase hematocrit pathology, from an These remit hemoglobin. associatedwith significant and with findings therapy.Hemoconcentration dehydration renal usually

Calculation Deficit of Fluid

concurrent sodium water; usually lost of has with loss A child potassium. is a dehydration there and by 10-kg patient’s is deficit). child, kg dehydration (for 10% percentage the the L fluid a of 10 =1 weight multiplied deficit The of

Approach to Dehydration

perfusion intervention requires adequate 40). there (see dehydration ensure acute to tissue with Chapter The that child is be an done as Ringer’s saline restoration isotonic (NS) intravascular volume, solution, normal or rapid with the phase circulating which requires should such resuscitation lactate. of This a child choice loss. with an for fluid appropriate blood acute is Blood about solution, is 20 a over the bolus, given minutes. isotonic of 20 The usually mL/kg fluid child may at faster dehydration to multiple receive fluid and with may severe a boluses need fluid child require A rate. resuscitation when intravascular and initial of is volume resolve. complete signs depletion The rehydration child lower heart alert blood typically has and normal a perfusion. becomes rate, more and improved The pressure,

intravascular adequate is for volume, 24 hours plan therapy (Table 33-6). the now fluid appropriate the next it to With To

saline: intravascular Restore 20 needed mL/kg over volume minutes Normal 20 as Repeat

20 1 repletion: L) (maximum over saline mL/kg = hours volume 2 normal Rapid

maintenance from deficit fluid needs: isotonic Subtract fluid Calculate 24-hour administered 24-hour needs volume fluid + already

fluid the over Administer bolus saline using volume as Replace 20 losses they mEq/L hours. KCl hours over remaining volume 20 is ensure isotonic occur normal ½ patient of 24 + D5 intravascular receives ongoing an that the 2 restored, mL/kg additional total deficit). needs + fluid child’s added The together (maintenance are fluids resuscitation the has is from this total. subtracted received of The acute patient as isotonic volume is volume The 24 remaining hours. then administered fluid over significant patient the voids, present. until Potassium not hypokalemia usually the fluids is is in IV unless included an appropriate replacement to ongoing need solution. Children receive significant losses with

@ Available StudentConsult.com

are All only approximations. in fluid calculations therapy on be 33-7). Thus,the based monitored with clinical during the treatment situation therapymodifications to patient (Table needs

or have Hyponatremic fluid in diarrhea who children and diluted dehydration hypotonic formula). (water occurs consume a hyponatremia. the should stimulates the depletion excretion hormone, Volume secretion of that correct antidiuretic water preventing hyponatremia the symptoms, patients from Some 35). (see Chapter neurologic, develop predominantly approach Most 33-6. general the patients Table with hyponatremic well with do same dehydration outlined in of be because rapid hr) central myelinolysis. pontine the avoided mEq/L/24 of Overly of (>12 risk remote should correction hyponatremia

take anorexia. a in because a fluid, thirst (neurologic inability consequenceof access, intractableemesis, impairment), dehydration of apoor lack of usually to mechanism is an or Hypernatremic output of protects be the there preserved be space and intravascular dehydration partially may may the lesstachycardia. volume.Urine The from during intracellular water longer, space hypernatremic the movement to extracellular areoften with lethargic irritable. hypernatremic dehydration and Children Hypernatremia may cause fever,

signs overload depletion and Electrolytes or seizures. hyperreflexia, of hypertonicity, Clinical develop cerebral occurs. thrombosis bleeding symptoms if or severe neurologic may More

hypernatremic morbidity and rapid Overly mortality. significant treatment of dehydration maycause osmolesare ofhypernatremia. the within generated the development brain Idiogenic during extracellular increase the water cells cell protection hypertonic into to the Idiogenic shrinkage brain, of againstbrain the of fluid. movement of cells osmoles the secondary osmolalitywithin providing out slowly dissipate spaceinto the idiogenicosmoles movement be correction the causes osmolality duringcorrection cells of may gradient of extracellular water cerebral rapid hypernatremia.With createdthat during producing extracellular the These of the from lowering edema. a of new brain, hypernatremia, lethal the manifestations and resultant include potentially altered status, edema mental cerebral Possible of brainherniation. seizures,

not hours(Figure To cerebral the 12 concentration should dehydration, sodium the than of during decrease 33-1). every mEq/L minimize serum hypernatremic risk 24 correctionof more edema days. The may deficits 4 be 2 hypernatremic dehydration to need corrected to in severe over of nearly concentration the (see sodium of Figure the vigilant are on important adjustment thetherapy The of and monitoring result as 33-1). serum as fluid andrate not based choice therapy other as phase Nonetheless, dehydration. of types resuscitation-rehydration for thesame theinitial remains of

simple, from oral moderate (ORS) cause a diarrhea Mild treated any solution of electrolytes to and using Chapter112). containing (see glucose canbe dehydration effectively rehydration intestine. transport ORS andglucose on The the of in the coupled sodium relies but is rehydration mortality from in morbidity acute significantly countries. the and developed therapy underused diarrhea has reduced Oral diarrhealdehydration. patients It moderate with should for mild most to beattempted thanIV therapy therapy is rehydration has lower less a expensive rate. complication Oral and with unable distention. with severe of uncontrollable gastric patients required IV extreme fatigue, intestinal vomiting; because with coma; or still or patients todrink or stupor, dehydration;patients therapymay for be patients Rapidly ondansetron facilitating may be vomiting, thus used absorbed to oralrehydration. treat

time saline: slowly mL/kg) sodium restored) IV 20 24hr min adjust Restore rate: KCI normal mEq/L of 1/2 or for Signs mEq/L: sodium constant status decreases fluid clinical Follow (with intravascular Sodium too on rate Administer or serum decrease correction rate concentration intravascular Decrease increase [Na] occur sodium concentration fluid: mEq/L: 20 too of and concentration saline IV Sodium fluid volume of serum 184–196 and 48hr maintenance over sodium a concentration fluid D5 fluid fluid Administer unless [Na] mEq/L: losses based depletion Typical for initial Typical 84hr Increase saline sodium [Na] the 20 concentration rapidly 72hr until IV (20 they decreases Replace volume of volume: [Na] on over 145–157 mEq/L: 158–170 171–183 fluid Determine times IV 1.25–1.5 Normal based of rate (repeat at contraindicated) mL/kg as time normal excessive ongoing correction

33-1 hypernatremic for Strategy correcting dehydration. Figure

to 100 dehydration. over oral 4 hours rehydration, the and mL/kg hours be patientswith 50 mild with As moderate be dehydration, given ORSshould patients for guideline mL/kg to within a given should 4 of losses Supplementary ORS or is from ongoing toreplace emesis. diarrhea given mL/kg ORS is additional 10 for of each stool. given An Fluid periorbital earlier intakeshould patient the appears be develops hydrated fully or than decreased if edema. expected resume usual diet milk,formula). patients (breast should After their rehydration,

stops. complete, started, mL therapy ORS/kg diarrhea When is 24 100 hours using rehydration the be until of in maintenance should or hours. feeding delayed not than 24 for maintained and Breastfeeding more be formula should with more severe Patients continued diarrhea supervision. require of should the of The losses. volume stool equal ORS ingested volume ORS/kg/hr measured, 10 of If appropriate. cannot mL intake is to 15 volume be stool an of

Parenteral inadequate of meet feeding needs to the a when nutritional enteral is necessary (PN) nutrition patient. is nutrition preferred it with because and fewer always is Enteral more less physiologic, expensive, complications. associated is least complications nutrition enterally. be provided if some can are expected at Fewer

ileus; variety of pneumonia. there is 34-1).Acute unit A poor an aspiration given risk is feeds, when PN transient tolerance the enteral regarding PN a or situations necessitate intensive potentially secondary of concerns (Table ischemia; frequently bowel in to care clinical of 63). may congenital Chapter the gastrointestinal long-term by syndrome a caused after enterocolitis common is necrotizing indication or be most Short bowel (see for it PN; acquired anomaly be feedings. Some chronic with or may PN enteral a transitioned full patients partial for to eventually indication

line venous or intravenous via can peripheral line. central given PN be a a (IV) either PN via a line Long-term central should given venous (CVL). be PN given although used. may CVL a peripherally, temporary often is Acute be bone Most receiving a with a marrow children cancer transplant have or

CVL. for standard inserted of with an than catheter central for complications excellent access a of risk acute peripherally source A central the CVL. PN lower is because

has limitations. major line peripheral two A IV and of First, fails, PN potentiallypainful interruption a new frequently placement it line. of necessitating peripheral Second, solutions the PN. veins; of amino acid of content phlebitis this high-osmolality peripheral cause limits dextroseand a be 12%, is peripheral greater concentration lower amino limitif acid PN The the than dextrose with contentof cannot high. and be peripherallyvia low as administered dextrose osmolality; acid can emulsion a same line the solution. IV the it Lipid has therefore, amino Patients be nutrition than of available amino IV limitations volume whencentral is because receive needs via on and access to a acid necessary PN dextrose the concentration. adequate line,but higher the is peripheral can of tolerate volumes. cannot larger situation fluid problematic in who patients be may This

minerals, acids, provide PN can and fatty electrolytes, acids, vitamins, amino elements. trace iron, calories, essential PN from calories are and fat. The in dextrose source they amino used be predominantly but acids should are of for The in a calories, PN synthesis. protein potential and solution separate dextrose a given is acid plus a 20% two amino emulsion. lipid PN solutions: as for The fat. except of solution dextrose all components has of PN other the

concentration is it in The peripheral are of be central may patients dextrose typically 12%, restricted. 25% although PN to PN 10% who increased to of about whereas 30% has 20%, fluid to a concentration dextrose when PN. To starting the increased hyperglycemia, is avoid gradually delivery acids in amino dextrose solution. the Protein PN delivery is via in older 3 goal g 2.5 infants, for is and to 2 to children, older and hr for g/kg/24 infants. 0.8 hr preterm 3.5 The full-term 1.5 g/kg/24 to protein/kg/24 for hr

PN depends composition of and underlying the age mineral electrolyte The onthe illness. and 20% and essential fatty The emulsion acids calories. provides lipid to 3.5 patient lipid gradually 2.5 a increasing so 0.5 this calories; receives adequate g/kg/24 that the of isstarted emulsion to therate The 1 at typicallyrequires hr, g/kg/24 hr. rate 30% should lipid calories; to of not the usually exceed60%. The 40% it required provides emulsion as monitored of hypertriglyceridemia is increased, develops. with emulsion significant The therate if rate of is the triglyceride concentration serum reduction lipidemulsion lipid

of complications There many PN. potential are and associated (thrombosis). are bleeding) CVLs insertion or (pneumothorax with issues during complications long-term due coagulase-negative necessitates common occasion, most and, to Catheter-related is removal. commonly staphylococci, on sepsis, catheter pathogens aureus, and gram-negative Other are bacilli, Staphylococcus fungi. potential can excessive with (azotemia protein from hyperglycemia, deficiencies, be intake monitoring. hyperammonemia) complications nutritional Electrolyte careful abnormalities, detected and or

most The failure. of PN concerning disease, lead can cholestatic long-term liver is cirrhosis and to liver complication which the risk of PN acids. by hepatotoxic including reduced disease decreases Current of liver amino amounts is tract, trophic of best early The feeds gastrointestinal if the are even tolerated. only strategy use preventive

sodium The of and principal sodium regulates the balance site excretion. kidney is determines usually balance, balance, not among water Sodium electrolytes sodium unique is concentration. because its sodium of plasma renal causes conservation osmolality antidiuretic increased which secretion When concentration (ADH), hormone to water. the thirst and the higher increased leads increases, resultant of of mechanisms and returns normal. water the content body, the Both concentration increase these of the to sodium and hyponatremia, the an During ADH plasma in to decreases consequent sodium osmolality increase excretion fall the in renal leads water secretion, concentration. thirst, by osmolality, conservation balance renal stimulates volume water and ADH water. Although of depletion usually regulated is secretion, volume has fact, depletion patient takes volume if osmolality; stimulates precedence depletion secretion, a over In ADH hyponatremia. even

by determined excretion not by the The osmolality. plasma sodium is of the kidney including variety sodium effective the regulatory of plasma in system. regulates renin-angiotensinaldosterone patient’s urine the a through systems, volume of The amount the not the urinary sodium or the sodium In pathophysiology serum concentration. determines hyponatremia concentration, the hypernatremia, underlying

Available @ StudentConsult.com

can (Fig. cause mechanisms Different hyponatremia is protein laboratory 35-1).Pseudohyponatremia when concentrations plasma is a the of that or lipid. contains high present artifact a sodium direct is increasingly that the technique concentration, when a occur used in laboratories. ion-selective It electrode clinical determines does not hyponatremia, low, normal measured whereas true In is is the in pseudohyponatremia. osmolality it a water concentration osmotic sodium resulting the sodium the infusion space concentration. mannitol the diluting extracellular low serum hyperglycemia, down into moves causes because Hyperosmolality, or gradient from its intracellular from space, every by the For 1.6 mg/dL decreases serum sodium serum the glucose, 100 increment mEq/L. of require Because by and caused with of osmolality, hyponatremia hyponatremia. the do the to have patients of hyponatremia not correction are of do hyponatremia hyperosmolality plasma not due manifestations low symptoms

status Classification Fig. patient’svolume the on (see true of based is hyponatremia 35-1). has lost the child hypovolemic hyponatremia, the body. In from sodium intake, netsodium or by higher this negative, volume positive loss compensate due has for water or intravenous the retention water there oral to depletion. with be a intravascular than (IV) but loss; kidneys water been to is often Water the balancemay sodium volume kidneysattempt by due (e.g., is very loss preserve the low, urine is conservingsodium. nonrenal diarrhea),the concentration to Ifthe intravascular to the disease sodium as a the urine elevated. inappropriately In diseases, sodium is renal

hyponatremia and euvolemic depletion evidence have no with volumeoverload hyponatremia. of volume Patients or excess of and slight patients decrease an These total bodywater have in a body typically total sodium. ofthese theyare in implying Some that volume an weight, patients overloaded. have increase usually subtle fluid they have Nevertheless, or of appearnormal overload. only signs (SIADH), osmolality serum or low is not by secretion that In inappropriate of syndrome either intravascular inhibited is ADH there ADH expanded volume. of the of increase intravascular and watercauses the renal sodium results of volume Retention an expansion in excretion. in hyponatremia, to the presence fluids. in of due hypotonic Hyponatremia stress SIADHsecondary in to hospitalized is often patients

leak Capillary Nephrotic deficiency syndrome diarrhea) SIADH burns) or (emesis, Glucocorticoid Skin (sweating

damage diuresis ATN Na+ Renal of obstructive uropathy) Polyuric failure variable chronic loop Postobstructive (e.g., or tubular diuresis renal Urine diuretics Acute Thiazide Osmotic phase or

35-1 Figure of diagnosis Differential hyponatremia. of true if hyponatremia patient (1) osmolality three-step is process: if yes, low; the Determine has hyponatremia. the Assessment a is volume Evaluate the patient’s (2) status. concentration Determine the narrow to the diagnosis. urine (3) help differential sodium syndrome antidiuretic necrosis; ATN, SIADH, Acute tubular of of hormone. secretion inappropriate

SIADH disorders associated (trauma). ventilation, also system and mechanical nervous other central meningitis, is with pneumonia, of ADH children. (tumor) production rarein is Ectopic asa water formula. can inappropriatelydiluted result Infants excessive hyponatremia consumption develop or of euvolemic

total than in an there and hypervolemic isgreater increase water although excess In increase in sodium, the water hyponatremia, is body sodium. the of depending excrete inability urine In the or insufficiency. sodium sodium cause or the renal the water; maybe low isan high, there failure, renal to on of or in (see because loss fluid of space of other either effective hypervolemic causes cardiac In there is hyponatremia, the blood volume decrease poor third a Chapter145). output urine sodium In blood leading renal low to concentration. water response to the volume, and also the kidneys retention, a low ADHcauses retainsodium, effective exceeds sodium excess sodium serum normalloss prevents decreases water. the of concentration when waterintake intake, and ADH Thepatient’s

extracellular the fall a osmolality of the causes in Hyponatremia space. water Because to the higher to space the maintain intracellular moves has osmolality, a space space equilibrium. osmotic from extracellular intracellular then the cells water to increase intracellular in cause The may swell. of responsible cell of the for Brain hyponatremia. is most symptoms swelling coma, headache, reflexes. and decreased lethargy, nausea, anorexia, symptoms malaise, hyponatremia seizures, Neurologic emesis, include confusion, agitation, of respirations. and Cheyne-Stokes hypothermia develop may Patients and muscle can weakness. cause cramps Hyponatremia of are asymptomatic cell more rapidly; limits hyponatremia decrease osmolality, be swelling. when a which in Symptoms can hyponatremia severe because develops cerebral brain chronic compensatory

of central produce correction pontine hyponatremia myelinolysis. Rapid can chronic hyponatremia. increase Avoiding a serum than prudent, especially every the 12-mEq/L more in sodium 24 hours is in 33). to as sodium well and with deficit Treatment of losses (see Chapter ongoing correction, hypovolemic fluids of hyponatremia maintenance provide to administration requires requirements replace IV as water therapy. with is cornerstone children the of restriction SIADH, For replacement. with hypothyroidism cortisol secondary Children hyponatremia need deficiency or to hormone specific transient introduction diet. by of water with restriction normal rapidly water followed Acute is intoxication of intake, which self-corrects a and hyponatremia in restriction dialysis hypervolemic centers of water sodium on necessary. failure, be also may but intake, of Treatment renal measures, disease-specific as such

in the rapidly, serum a brain edema. saline decrease such sodium uses IV hyponatremia, to as to symptomatic Emergency seizures, concentration of treatment leads hypertonic which increase 1 the per milliliter increases of One sodium 3% sodium by mEq/L. approximately chloride kilogram serum

often 4 after chloride. of improves child receiving 3% mL/kg sodium to A 6

@ Available StudentConsult.com

(Fig. There are mechanisms basic three hypernatremia of 35-2). iatrogenic acidosis bicarbonate. resulting with a metabolic frequently is from sodium setting hospital in correction Sodium intoxication of sodium In retention of hyperaldosteronism, is mild. there is and hypernatremia hypertension; renal the resultant

adequately Hypernatremia because to or patient losses water water impairment, the resulting of neurologic cannot if access or not emesis, anorexia. develops drink does only from have inability their control own of to at intake. high because Infants are their water risk Ineffective primiparous dehydration. breastfeeding, often mother, can in hypernatremic cause a severe a increase result are infants; phototherapy the insensible especially premature radiant in water High common as of losses warmers losses further or for of hyperbilirubinemia. levels Children have of water concentrated urine. of causes very high loss with and extrarenal ADH

insipidus diabetes diluted have inappropriately with urine. Children massive diabetes insipiduscauses Hereditary urinary losses. nephrogenic water it boys, episodes and usually of the disorder to the dehydration it X-linked mutation a severe occurs in ADH in receptor, gene most Because thrive. to hypernatremic is an have for failure may commonly who due or nephritis, or secondary be hypercalcemia, cell amphotericin). insipidus sickle hypokalemia, nephrogenic diabetes medications disease, to Acquired interstitial may (lithium is central increases of defect output an decreases to ADH the diabetes administration osmolality urine analog. to and due in response If urine insipidus, deficiency or causes ADH Central tumor, trauma. infarction, of include nephrogenic diabetes no in is analog a response ADH to There child an with insipidus.

and results in sodium depletion. water Diarrhea losses. at gastroenteritis drink do Most because fluid water compensate stool hypernatremia with least enough they children for not to develop partially hypotonic most because of likely is anorexia. or access water, to emesis, has in intake with Hypernatremia who diarrhea child of lack inadequate a nephronophthisis, the cause water. producing renal hypernatremia juvenile insufficient obstructive if and consumes diseases, renal of uropathy, including can and Some potentially sodium water, patient dysplasia, losses

sodium and and combined renal situations with differentiates the of urine water analysis In deficits, etiologies. nonrenal a urine low retention urine, responds When are extrarenal, depletion sodium with the sodium <10 losses and the concentrated kidney (urine volume, mEq/L). to volume the maximally volume the elevated. usually concentrated, is is renal the inappropriately With sodium be high, causes, not urine urine may and urine

seawater Ingestion of

Osmotic not Child breastfeeding Adipsia thirst) Polyuric Diabetes of (lack concentrated) kidney intake disease acute Inadequate neglect of (mannitol) mellitus diuretics maximally phase (Urine or Chronic Ineffective abuse

by Figure hypernatremia Differential diagnosis 35-2 of mechanism. Gastrointestinal; NG, GI, nasogastric.

Chapter hypernatremia dehydration children with signs of and 33). are and (see symptoms dehydrated the have Most typical volume tend to preservation have shiftof owing hypernatremic the with from extracellular space water intravascular intracellular of to dehydration better Children the space. to the before seeking attention. medical potentially Hypernatremic more dehydrated become infants dehydrated, Probably doughy hypernatremic a abdominal of infant the has skin pinched intracellular feel. water of a because loss,

of and sodium the acuity central nervous elevation dehydration, increase. even that symptoms degree parallel tend without system of the to Hypernatremia, causes the restless, weak, are lethargic. irritable, and Patients Some and have infants a cry high-pitched hyperpnea. nausea patients are be although present. thirsty, very may Alert the an causes fever, patients have process underlying many although Hypernatremia contributes fever. that to

the devastating is hypernatremia. most consequence of hemorrhage Brain in As resulting of moves osmolality a increases, the brain cells, brain extracellular decrease volume. out water in This and away the in can in intra-cerebral decrease and brain as meninges. the the vessels result tearing of from moves blood bridging veins volume skull hemorrhage. parenchymal Patients subdural, and sub-arachnoid, may have Seizures possible the of are coma hemorrhage. sequelae and

idiogenic hypernatremia prevent increase loss to osmoles the generates intracellular osmolality the and of develops, brain As water. the brain has not gradually. when prominent This and most developed hypernatremia mechanism is instantaneous is in of there If serum brain the the compartments. concentration is serum from osmolality two rapidly, cells the to sodium the is the lowered equalize water into movement swelling manifests resultant coma. as brain seizures The or dangers, hypernatremia of corrected gradually. be treated these should Because 24 Fig. is by sodium mEq/L the hours 12 The serum to goal decrease (see than every less 33-1). slow allow too the fast. adjustment of too therapy correcting moderate to important serum severe component most monitoring correction adequate is hypernatremia fluid neither frequent and of or provide that The nor of is sodium

childwith is priority with a any first isotonic as the volume dehydration, fluid. hypernatremic in restoration intra-vascular In with dehydration, child of for outlines correcting gastroenteritis. a 33-1 dehydrationsecondary to Figure approach general hypernatremic as secondary hypernatremia with occurs dehydration water is and fluid diabetes to appropriate. loss, If insipidus, hypotonic the a IV more are loss. diabetes central an ADH child water excessive with insipidus to further A receive analog prevent should urine to losses. ongoing a diabetes replacementsolution water insipidus A offset withnephrogenic child requires diabetes water reducedsodium can thiazide nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory Chronically, nephrogenic diuretics, and intake, decrease losses drugs insipidus. in

acute usually to from be osmoles morbidity this idiogenic hypernatremia, rapidly the of hypernatremia and had with not more mortality correction. because high accumulate; sodium can overly time balances Acute, administration, the severe rapid to corrected secondary severe, dangers have severe, be may hypernatremia without hypernatremia sodium is due volume to is administer When water impossible to to enough and hypernatremia the correct intoxication, rapidly the overload. worsening it loop Some dialysis. require diuretic patients use or a of

balance, are excretion on intake. based the adjusting The kidneys regulator potassium of principal aldosterone, and potassium affecting renal Factors concentration, potassium include acid-base renal status, function. serum excretion The potassium potassium the 30 concentration. is intracellular concentration extracellular approximately times compartments, conditions extracellular and either hypokalemia between intracellular potassium variety of potentially A causing of hyperkalemia. or the the alter distribution total does body potassium plasma the content. always not reflect concentration The

@ StudentConsult.com Available

most common cases Hypokalemia related to in children, is with gastroenteritis. cell from is counts blood in cells the up potassium blood temperature, left room occurs elevated take hypokalemia for if with and plasma patients leukemia white the at to permitting Spurious plasma. white analysis of are There 36-1). (Table four mechanisms hypokalemia basic intake, depletion. renal nonrenal Low losses, with body losses are all total potassium and associated body potassium normal With to a depletion potassium other transcellular there unless secondary factors. is concomitant shift, is total

in transcellular initiation shift therapy after Chapter with of insulin (see ketoacidosis potassium 171) be children dramatic. diabetic The of can therapy from have level serum to losses, potassium of normal trans-cellular the deficiency extracellular they before a have These urinary secondary patients bodypotassium reduced into acidosis. because insulin and total shift insulin metabolic but space often a of hypokalemia from for of potassium. resulting doses the Children receiving aggressive asthma movement intracellular (albuterol) have β-adrenergic agonists can unless is (anorexia weight cause intake nervosa). associated loss an unusual hypokalemia, Poor also significant of with

usually hypokalemia resulting high bicarbonate. stool is the of potassium, Diarrhea of with has and a losses acidosis to concentration a associated metabolic secondary loss mEq/L). low gastric or (approximately but fluid this suction, of given is emesis of minimal there content With potassium gastric nasogastric is 10 potassium, the fairly a metabolic hydrochloride, state loss to is leading a and gastric of More important depletion. volume of the alkalosis and Metabolic volume depletion losses increase alkalosis urinary of potassium.

or potassium a (see be by Urinary 37). distal metabolic acidosis) accompanied wasting tubular may (proximal acidosis Chapter renal and hypokalemia to alkalosis. diuretics lead a and metabolic thiazide Loop recessive resulting transporters. are Bartter and Gitelman syndrome disorders in from tubular syndrome defects autosomal associated are Both and a with alkalosis. disorders hypokalemia metabolic hypomagnesemia hypercalciuria, low urinary syndrome usually to associated calcium urinary Gitelman often losses. but children losses, with with secondary is syndrome with nephrocalcinosis; have Bartter

the a high alkalosis. loss and hypokalemia, level, presence a potassium, of is metabolic aldosterone urinary of In there There also is of leading to retention renal sodium, hypertension. A of and cause variety aldosterone acquired genetic high disorders levels. can sodium low. but channels, aldosterone level features disorder autosomal syndrome, dominant the as an serum constitutively caused Liddle active has clinical by hyperaldosteronism, the same is

The skeletal muscle and vulnerable heart especially hypokalemia. are to (ECG) a the (if U wave, changes ST wave which a is and and still P appearance between flattened include segment, visible) the wave. of T depressed a located wave, Electrocardiographic T in and although may de Ventricular usually pointes torsades fibrillation disease. the heart context occur, only of underlying Hypokalemia to the makes arrhythmias. susceptible especially digitalis-induced heart

weakness The in muscle consequences skeletal cramps. muscle and include clinical levels (generally potassium a complication Paralysis at is possible mEq/L). only <2.5 the arms. the starts legs, Paralysis usually with followed by mechanical may Respiratory require ventilation. paralysis

exercise. rhabdomyolysis, especially develop Some following patients hypokalemic motility; than an Hypokalemia less potassium ileus. 2.5 may levels mEq/L gastrointestinal cause slows leading function, potentially to retention. Hypokalemia urinary bladder impairs causes by secondary Hypokalemia diabetes producing nephrogenic insipidus. polyuria Chronic including nephritis renal cause cysts. may kidney hypokalemia interstitial damage, and chronic leads to growth. syndrome, hypokalemia, poor children, in Bartter as In

losses, review gastrointestinal diet, of It and to the medications. is important history child’s and can use be diuretic surreptitious. Emesis mineralocorticoids. suggestsexcess of The presence hypertension clues. electrolyte are useful Concomitant abnormalities excess, aldosterone renal characteristic is combination acidosis.A is diarrhea, gastriclosses, Bartter proximal alkalosis tubular tubular distal renal of metabolic syndrome. concurrent acidosis diuretics, orGitelman metabolic syndrome, The and hypokalemiaand acidosis, of of characteristic

function, patient’s ability that oral potassium, of of the ongoing losses, clinical therapy influence potassium renal level, the transcellular potassium. symptoms, to include Factors of hypokalemia and tolerate the shifts presence requires symptomatic treatment. aggressive hypokalemia Severe, Supplementation

Hypokalemia Causes of

barium, syndrome β-Adrenergic agonists periodic (theophylline, toluene) Transcellular shifts Alkalemia Refeeding Insulin Drugs/toxins paralysis Hypokalemic

cisplatin, metabolic With Postobstructive alkalosis of penicillin (e.g., penicillin tubular derivatives) disturbance toxins diuresis Tubular nephritis High phase Without (amphotericin, anions or specific aminoglycosides) urine Interstitial acute acid-base Hypomagnesemia Diuretic necrosis

renal tubular acidosis. RTA,

potassium. renal of ability kidney’s is decreased because limited excessive function is to if the more cautious excrete potassium be of deficit potassium always provide because from body plasma. does to potassium the space level an total shifts there of plasma accurate may the the The estimation intracellular not body diabetic the result this occurs shift as of the total of the with deficiency plasma and most insulin degree of commonly ketoacidosis; metabolic acidosis potassium underestimates Clinically, a potassium depletion. the moves these and When potassium more hypokalemia. require the potassium are these problems patients to space, correct supplementation intracellular into corrected, deficit losses need Patients the have who replacement of potassium of correction ongoing losses. the and ongoing of

used hyperkalemia, of cautiously. of (IV) intravenous should risk Because the potassium be safer in is nonurgent situations. potassium Oral 1 mEq/kg, potassium dose over 0.5 given to IV usually is The of hour. 1 is The maximum 40 adult mEq. dose Conservative dosing generally preferred. is are For with diuretics losses, potassium-sparing patients effective. excessive urinary hypokalemia, are of volume decreases urinary and depletion alkalosis, potassium When volume intravascular metabolic losses. restoration present,

@ Available StudentConsult.com

hyperkalemia Three (Table basic cause mechanisms 36-2). causes is hemolysis which clenching, usually sometimes prolonged due etiology fist Inthe be hyperkalemia is potassiumrelease during tourniquetapplication but or of it muscle. result phlebotomy, can local from the the to patient, individual multifactorial.Factitious white levels are withmarkedly provides platelet counts; measured or a sample plasma usually promptlyanalyzed patients elevated can in an cell serum when elevated result. blood potassium occur serum Falsely accurate levels

itself, Because the unusual by hyperkalemia. for is intake, excessive of cause kidney’s to it excrete ability to potassium, who of excessive large receiving for that are a mechanism losses no can in patient longer quantities or present. oral IV occur potassium is This Frequent or blood increase the rapid can to secondary potassium level the high acutely transfusions

Causes of Hyperkalemia

NSAIDs, nonsteroidal ACE, IV, enzyme; oral. PO, drugs; intravenous; Angiotensin-converting anti-inflammatory

of potassium blood. content stored potassium intake excretion. may hyperkalemia Increased defect underlying in is an there precipitate if

plasma the to on intracellular potassium. can potassium have high so the has the concentration, intracellular of impact significant a a shift a space The extracellular space from potassium space or occurs with paralysis. This (succinylcholine, shift (rhabdomyolysis acidosis, hyperkalemic malignant tumor deficiency, destruction medications lysis periodic insulin cell hyperthermia, β-blockers), and syndrome),

occurs to with insufficiency. renal secondary decreased excretion Hyperkalemia causes with hyponatremia. deficiency associated (see Chapter unresponsiveness acidosis Aldosterone aldosterone often or and hyperkalemia, 37) metabolic to of deficiency is form A adrenal of most 21-hydroxylase aldosterone cause hyperplasia, the congenital deficiency, in children. frequent volume Male metabolic and hyperkalemia, present hyponatremia, depletion. typically with acidosis, infants of as because with genitalia. ambiguous infants this Female disorder are newborns usually diagnosed

stimulates via angiotensin aldosterone Renin, II, production. resulting A production. renin, from lead kidney can in aldosterone deficiency damage, to decreased hyperkalemia a acidosis, metabolic typically and hyponatremia. These without patients have but Some hyperkalemia, partially excretion extreme impairment than patients the is of more expected for function, accounting insufficiency. the renal in potassium have renal for impaired degree the

depletion; volume leading hyperkalemia, pseudohypoaldosteronism are and 1 have to acidosis, wasting, Children elevated. hyponatremia levels with aldosterone metabolic and salt type the there channel variant, activated the sodium autosomal aldosterone. recessive a that In is defect in renal is normally by milder, aldosterone dominant disease remitting in In autosomal form, and defect patients have in the adulthood. the often the receptor, is a 2, acid and secondary potassium also Gordon an leading metabolic acidosis. disorder to type is of hypertension autosomal impaired called by hyperkalemia salt to and and characterized syndrome, retention Pseudohypoaldosteronism dominant excretion of insufficiency. secondary decrease greatest that renal patients is hyperkalemia The with potassium renal risk to in excretion medications underlying

The import of polarization. membrane potassium effects of most hyperkalemia role to are in the due conduction cardiac concern. dominant is system usually the The peaking ECG of T waves. changes begin the with interval, this occur; increased and to P P-R can potassium flattening increases, QRS level of wave, the of fibrillation. an widening the the ventricular As complex progress eventually Asystole occur. may also weakness, symptoms. toxicity tingling, these patients have paresthesias, and precedes clinical Some but usually cardiac

of etiology is often hyperkalemia readily apparent. The a potassium repeat so is often appropriate. hyperkalemia level is common children, Spurious in promptly. from there blood evaluated platelets, is or of elevation a be repeat If plasma white is sample significant the the that should cells intake, of renal and hyperkalemia, oliguria should an factors medications shifts that or insufficiency, cause of as potassium, risk abnormal focus on of The signs urinalysis. potassium history the presence initially such transcellular for Initial and acid-base of evaluation creatinine serum status. assessment laboratory include should resistance, and metabolic aldosterone cause or hyperkalemia, of acidosis. causes insufficiency as a such renal Many insufficiency elevated and as or can syndrome, hyperuricemia, Cell lysis destruction, cause in hyperphosphatemia, serum lactate dehydrogenase. tumor an seen rhabdomyolysis concomitant

plasma aggressiveness risk of the of The the worsening level, therapeutic determine problem the potassium the the and approach. ECG, level treatment. with vigorous potassium requires high more changes ECG A serum source a despite plasma increasing An is intake. patient potassium additional minimal of concern with of syndrome), of occur in setting there is potassium cellular can the This diminished failure). (tumor especially situation release excretion (renal lysis if

stop a of to additional and is potassium child (oral plasma of all concerning sources action IV). elevation potassium The in with first a the If mEq/L, greater obtained is an to potassium the ECG help of the assess level should urgency 6.5 than be situation. basic 1. Therapy hyperkalemia of goals: has two

life-threatening Prevent arrhythmias.

2.

Remove body (Table from the 36-3). potassium

of arrhythmias Rapidly life-threatening risk the decrease

(PO or (IV body Dialysis diuretic Remove Sodium or from PO) Loop rectal) polystyrene the potassium

Intravenous; PO, oral. IV,

(within do from remove that minutes), Treatments all work potassium quickly the body. acutely not prevent arrhythmias but

hyperkalemia. reducing via Long-term of management hyperkalemia or eliminating intake cause changes includes medications that and reducing dietary to thiazide losses. potassium or diuretics, require loop Some medications, sodium such as patients sulfonate and polystyrene increase therapy respond mineralocorticoid. a due to aldosterone replacement a The to with in disorders fludrocortisone, deficiency

for is Close metabolic necessary cellular pH normal and regulation optimally at function other processes, (7.35 pH to of a 7.45). which enzymes in growth status in derangements can pH whereas may and with acid-base changes acute, Chronic, mild be interfere development, severe fatal. normal kidneys, acid-base buffers. extracellular the lungs, the Control intracellular balance depends and on and of

normal the lungs balance. a kidneys maintain acid-base The and a (CO2) during dioxide metabolism weak normal Carbon generated acid. is of pressure The in excreting partial prevent the CO2 the CO2. an by the increase blood in lungs (Pco2) depending of the needs. CO2 Production varies on metabolic body’s via central or Pco2 The mm and pulmonary in Pco2 Hg). to to maintain the CO2 ventilation changes a increase a of response sensing subsequent rapid normal occurs to decrease 45 (35 in concentration

kidneys endogenous The acids. excrete normally hydrogen to mEq/kg/day. An produces 3 to 2 ions, whereas adult about 1 mEq/kg/day 2 child of a produces by bicarbonate, endogenous causing to hydrogen The are production from concentration potentially the fall. ions bicarbonate neutralized acid mEq/L). by in concentration regenerate bicarbonate kidneys secreting hydrogen the ions, range normal serum the 28 to maintaining this The (20 bicarbonate

StudentConsult.com @ Available

(<7.35), pH alkalemia normal above Acidemia a is normal below and pH is a (>7.45). in a ion the pathologic concentration, an is and decrease concentration. a pathologic that hydrogen ion hydrogen causes process the process alkalosis a increase thatcauses is in Acidosis disturbance. singleprimary acid-base disorder a simple A is compensation; simple a the alkalosis. disorder, a there a during during metabolic Pco2 increases During is metabolic acidosis decreases metabolic and respiratory pH the decrease acidosis, the decrease in Withmetabolic drive, the increases causing Pco2. a in ventilatory the the increase an to pH. the in CO2 fall leads concentration in The 24 appropriate complete within to hours. 12 is compensation for happensquickly This respiratory and a process metabolic

metaboliccompensation there During the kidneys. by a is process, mediated respiratory primary concentration. respondto respiratory acidosis kidneys generation, The bicarbonate the ion raising by increasing a serumbicarbonate and increasing hydrogen excretion, for increase compensate to kidneys the alkalosis; bicarbonate decreases. a respiratory serum The bicarbonateexcretion concentration compensation. complete to appropriate for days rapidrespiratory to a compensation, metabolic contrast kidneysto takes In the 3 it 4 However, compensatory a a in during there respiratory is concentration and bicarbonate rapid change process. the small primary or depends Theexpected appropriate the respiratorydisorder metabolic acute compensation chronic. for process whether a is on

A is there when mixed disorder is acid-base acid-base present disturbance. primary one morethan disease. a An chronic a may a from lung to acidosis and the metabolic disease treat infant diureticused have alkalosis bronchopulmonary fromchronic lung with respiratory dysplasia or metabolic simple (Table disorders six respiratory primary the appropriate for available compensation the Formulas 37-1). are calculating acid-base for a not in expected compensation is it Appropriate disorder; optional. is simple appropriatecompensation, is have disorder acid-base does not patient mixed If present. a a

Available @ StudentConsult.com

diarrhea frequently is cause. common the children; acidosis occurs Metabolic most hospitalized in For patient a with

by [HCO3–] PCO2 acidosis because increases ± in suggests in mm narrow in 10-mm 3.5 7 10-mm Respiratory is Acute acidosis differential for of PCO2 + often (Table in increase [HCO3–] relatively [HCO3–] Respiratory serum × by for medical alkalosis each Acute 2 an each alkalosis PCO2 PCO2 diagnosis the 10-mm by by 1.5 Metabolic a falls unknown the for decrease helpful the by each for metabolic PCO2 Metabolic the the 1 Chronic 8 increases Hg problem, PCO2 a diagnostically decrease 4 [HCO3–] 10-mEq/L in 2 increase [HCO3–] Hg increases presence each acidosis for Hg the it increase = 10-mm [HCO3–] Hg 37-2). falls each Hg Chronic

of from body. loss causes the Diarrhea bicarbonate a bicarbonate the concentration severe the lost the depends to and of increase with of tends the bicarbonate which stool in diarrhea on amount diarrhea. more of stool, The volume losses and hypoperfusion of by a Diarrhea and sodium of causes causing acidosis. often depletion potentially volume (shock) because the water, acidosis lactic exacerbating renal acidosis There three are of (RTA): tubular forms

have distal hypokalemia, may accompanying a and hypercalciuria, In finding. nephrocalcinosis; RTA, children less common is rickets nephrolithiasis, metabolic presenting Failure resulting the chronic from thrive, is common to acidosis, complaint. most recessive exist. dominant of distal forms autosomal RTA Autosomal and is form The dominant mild. autosomal relatively the ear. severe more that a RTA in to with kidney associated H+-ATPase present and the the distal deafness and a in secondary inner recessive Autosomal for is defect is often gene or acquired be to disease. medications congenital renal RTA secondary or Distal also may and Patients their urine urine a metabolic RTA acidify greater pH 5.5, have acidosis. with distal than a despite cannot

RTA Proximal present rarely is in isolation. patients,proximal In RTA syndrome, proximal of most dysfunction the of is tubule. part a generalized Fanconi clinically wasting leads in losses is with Along to syndrome uric phosphate significantbecause urinary children. of more chronic hypophosphatemia bicarbonate, aminoaciduria, rickets causes it ultimately and Fanconi acid.The and glycosuria, renal excessive of be complaint. orfailure thrive Rickets the may presenting to with an genetic pediatriccases to is rarely disorder, genetic underlying cystinosis. usually an isolated secondary disorder, mostcommonly Fanconisyndrome as syndrome. valproate, may ifosfamide or such Fanconi Medications, cause theurine have acidify than and untreated aurine The patients to 5.5. RTA, less pH proximal intact in is ability and increasesbicarbonate urine losses increases. However, the urine, bicarbonate pH the in therapy

of of renal aldosterone acid absence In because an is and excretion potassium either hyperkalemic impaired of RTA,

methanol, glycol, (diabetic, starvation, Poisoning *[HCO3–] (shock) is Kidney Inborn ethylene failure or errors alcoholic) (e.g., metabolism or Ketoacidosis acidosis Lactic mEq/L. of expressed in salicylates)

kidney to the of inability or respond aldosterone. an to aldosterone deficiency have byhyponatremia and or isolated causes depletion 21α-hydroxylase deficiency, acidosis as metabolic acidosis, to hyponatremia. congenital deficiency, are children electrolytedisturbances; occurs salt severe hyperkalemic the hyperkalemia Insevere wasting.Incomplete RTA,hyperkalemia without accompanied may secondary isolated renal and hyperplasia aldosterone adrenal less with from volume

inadequate lactic oxygen acid. most acidosis production the to tissues delivery to occurs when leads Lactic anaerobic commonly and excess of metabolism to acidosis or secondary hypoxemia. may Lactic anemia, shock, be severe (see Inborn severe a carbohydrate 52). produce acidosis lactic metabolism Chapter of errors (see leads diabetic and In ketoacidosis hyperglycemia insulin Chapter mellitus, 171). diabetes to inadequate are a excrete metabolism. kidneys acidosis Chapter (see Renal acid normal 165) because metabolic causes unable produced to failure the by the

A cause of toxic a ingestions metabolic acidosis. variety large possible overdose.Chronic the of gradualbuildup occurs because is intoxication after the of salicylate a Acute intoxication salicylate drug. have In a metabolic acidosis, respiratory to alkalosis. a addition may somepatients symptoms fever, include lethargy, Other seizures, andcoma. ofsalicylate intoxication may particularly be marked. Hyperventilation with hearing impairment chronicsalicylate Tinnitus,vertigo, and more likely are intoxication. a and metabolic severe a acids,causing oxalic component antifreeze, of liver the glyoxylic glycol, Ethylene acidosis. in converted to is precipitation crystals urine, the kidney tubules can calcium oxalate andcalcium oxalate cause in excretion oxalate causes appear failure. Excessive renal in the to acid to thatcauses and end product other ingestion nervous toxicity nerve methanol optic includedamage sequelae, central of which depends liver and the system. acidosis metabolism; on The toxic formic the is also metabolic the

metabolism metabolic (see errors acidosis inborn There that 10). many maycause of Section are a to The may or organic acid, production lactic anions. ketoacids, due other be acidosis of excessive metabolic patients hyperammonemia. have Some accompanying (fasting, In mild may (proteins), or ingestion compliance most poor illness decompensations, stress of during dietary substrates acute which precipitated medical dietary episodically catabolism), a by or of only specific be patients, the therapy. with acidosis occurs

moderate children of or the with produces usually underlying disorder signs The a most in mild acidosis. andsymptoms metabolic manifestations fewer related degree severe with concomitant a patients and manifestations acidemia acidosis. the clinical with compensation of appropriate are The to acidemia; respiratory the acidosis have patients of less than respiratory serumpH other or in the a exacerbating electrolyte are less there there underlying hypotension cardiac At heartdisease especially cardiovascular potentially shock. is present.With 7.20, than if contractility risk children increased predisposing arrhythmias, acidemia, of impaired a disorders responseto or catecholamines, depletion is andan decrease in volume with Chapter vasoconstriction pulmonary is especiallyproblematic causes of the hypertension which of (see neonates newborn 61). pulmonary the in with vasculature, primary Acidemia metabolic with effort The worsening increased respiratory causesdiscernible response acidemia. respiratory subtle to metabolic be it with normal but hyperventilation—may acidosis—compensatory mild acidosis, acidosis failure metabolic Chronic thrive. to causes

is The a for gap useful plasma anion with patients metabolic evaluating acidosis. groups: anion and increased gap. diagnostic divides It normal two patients into gap anion determines gap: anion the following The formula

anion 11. A 3 gap is normal to A gap 1 decreases g/dL in by decrease the roughly anion the of albuminconcentration 4mEq/L. anion cations, in an as less gap. magnesium, such potassium, the increase unmeasured or decreases Similarly, calcium, albeit commonly, of rare is a increased Conversely, cause an gap. unmeasuredcations a in decrease anion and not Because acidosis presence the the of of anion always factors, or metabolicacidosis, a anion in reliable a gap, metabolic the increased causes variables, ofthese especially of broad the range is when normal gapis normal mild. a differentiating other for Somepatients than hypoperfusion. a explanation their diarrhea more metabolic acidosis, one secondaryto such child as acidosis and have lactic with diagnostic consideration should of anion other its history interpreted abnormalities improves not indogmatic utility. isolation; and laboratory The gap the be clinical

if with acidosis the possible. of The a underlying approach disorder, effective patients therapeutic most for correction metabolic is balance. restoration in eventually acidosis or of normalization in administration results perfusion insulin ketoacidosis of adequate from The of diabetic shock in lactic acid-base renal therapy chronic of The RTA include is examples indicated failure. irreparable; use when is and the bicarbonate disorder underlying alkali amount salicylate of the of salicylate cells. brain increases decreases In poisoning, in and administration salicylate renal clearance in necessary base is therapy poisonings inborn metabolism. often errors and Short-term other of

chloride of divided into based alkalosis are on metabolic a 37-3). urinary two The categories the (Table causes The chloride with urinary low volume in alkalosis patients maintained a is depletion. by chloride necessary responsive with the They containing to because repletion chloride sodium volume fluid and chloride metabolic are called potassium correct alkalosis. is alkalosis. common metabolic loss cause most is Emesis, and the which of hydrochloride of depletion, causes a volume excretion in Diuretic use urine. chloride the increases while the high (>20 Consequently, mEq/L). a is receiving typically chloride patient diuretics, urinary is of resolves, to in depletion. appropriate chloride effect response renal urinary retention the the After because diuretic mEq/L), low (<15 chloride is volume on of measurement. chloride based urinary Categorization diuretics on of timing the the depends is repletion. chloride alkalosis corrects clearly volume only after from adequate diuretics metabolic The responsive; it alkalosis. rationale is metabolic for it of including the This the among a causes chloride-responsive

alkalosis subdivided based blood pressure. on causes can of be The chloride-resistant metabolic act Patients aldosterone or they have and alkalosis increased metabolic disorders rare increased as that cause a with hypertension aldosterone. have the either if that losses secondary metabolic blood hypokalemia, tubular with to defects or normal Patients chloride. Bartter alkalosis, syndrome cause (Chapter and continuous have urinary pressure 36) Gitelman syndrome renal of

with disease electrolyte to underlying symptoms a and associated the related patients are metabolic disturbances. alkalosis The in often alkalosis present, Hypokalemia is a cause 36). often Chapter severe, in that the occasionally metabolic and diseases (see Chapter chloride-responsive symptoms Children volume alkalosis to have depletion related often metabolic causes with of 33). (see to In hypertension. contrast, causes related symptoms may with have children chloride-unresponsive may secondary cardiac to hypoxia Severe arrhythmias, hypoventilation, alkalemia cause decreased or output.

acidosis) losses Chloride-losing stenosis Gastric Diuretics diarrhea chloride) (chloride or of fibrosis thiazide) Cystic Pyloric formula Chloride-deficient during nasogastric (loop Posthypercapnia (emesis loss or (sweat suction) respiratory losses

among Measurement the of causes the helpful urinary the test concentration in alkalosis. differentiating chloride is of metabolic most a use, The genetic suggests in diagnosis, obvious present be or the Bartter explanation history or as may patient such syndrome an with bulimia, disorder, diuretic syndrome. no usually undiagnosed although surreptitious Gitelman a

alkalosis approach on metabolic alkalosis therapy underlying depends of The to theseverity and the the etiology. of alkalosis In mEq/L), a is metabolic intervention unnecessary. ([HCO3–] < childrenwith mild 32 often may is chloride-responsivemetabolic chloride, depletion in alkalosis child Patients contraindicated butaggressive diuretic be to repletion respond correction the therapy. medically hypokalemia repletion and with if mildvolume sodium receiving necessary of volume andvolume potassium with with are associated is with of that mineralocorticoid. focuses metabolic the metabolic exacerbatesthe a or repair and does repletion chloride-resistant alkalosis.Treatment In hypertension contraindicated action it causesof hypertension,volume blocking children on the not eliminating alkalosis theexcess because supplementation In potassium children oral potassium-sparing diuretics. includes syndromeor Bartter Gitelman syndrome, with therapy and

acidosis, the the a respiratory in During decrease of is by a removal lungs. there effectiveness CO2 nonpulmonary or a causes The 37-4). acidosis pulmonary are either of (Table respiratory blood the respiratory CO2 an A concentration. is in alkalosis inappropriate reduction cause variety drive of respiratory increase (Table stimuli a and 37-5). alkalosis the ventilatory A can of of correction on disorder. underlying disorders acid-base respiratory the Treatment focuses Mechanical acidosis. necessary with ventilation may child in a a be refractory respiratory

cord, syndrome) overdose) the of neuromuscular or or spinal peripheral Guillain-Barré junction (botulism nerves, Disorders

and department, gastroenteritis Colletti the emergency The in et al: J Sharieff children of JE, Brown management with KM, GQ, Emerg dehydration

2010 Med 38:686–698,

Pediatr therapy: 2010 Nephrol electrolyte Friedman a A: Fluid and 25:843–846, primer,

on duct Pathophysiology FJ: a the Gennari transport, ion of new based stimulated of Am metabolic J centrality collecting alkalosis: classification

2011 58:626–636, Kidney Dis

body fluid LA: fluids therapy. Pathophysiology of Greenbaum and In

Elsevier ed Kliegman Philadelphia, BF, et pediatrics, al, St. 212–249 Stanton Nelson RM, textbook Science, pp JW, Geme 19, of 2011, editors:

Am diagnosis of Nephrol of a Madias value systematic acidosis: NE: 7:671–679, J nongap Differential Clin Soc metabolic approach, 2012 JA, Kraut

emergencies, Advances 14:1–17, Pract 2012 Med and in and Pepin hypokalemic diagnosis of management hyperkalemic C: Emerg Shields J,

Opin Curr 23:286–292, 2011 Pediatr Pediatric rapid resuscitation, SJ: fluid Teach JN, Simpson

FC, management and perspective, 7:75–84, Nephrol DG: Shirley Nat hypo Luft of clinical kalemia: Unwin RJ, Rev Pathophysiology 2011 a

Acutely The or Ill

Jane Lee K.

of ABCs—airway, breathing, Initial includes (the ill of circulation) an injured child and perfusion assessment physiologic tissue identification rapid or and in derangements acutely oxygenation. needed be identified, before usual the develop must implemented resuscitation pursuing Once a information to diagnosis. immediate differential achieving and perfusion directed adequate maintaining measures Initial resuscitation oxygenation. tissue at and are hemoglobin cardiac saturation. concentration, delivery depends hemoglobin-oxygen on Oxygen and output, pulmonary characteristics. movement, air mentioned last binding on and blood flow, depends oxygen-hemoglobin alveolar The exchange, gas

historical access phase, the limited. resuscitation In to be information may of symptoms, the team underlying of resuscitation. details members the and of be involved identification actively the of medical in of should sought events, not onset brief by problems Characterization a identifying delay markedly impaired. if issues Attempts useful at perfusion should that but ABCs historical not intervention the affect tissue are are and oxygenation

focus examination ABCs systematically. on of the tissues delivery rapidly Initial to oxygen 38-1) (Table to address must the issues first protect ability to including the child’s of the to be neurologically assessment is the airway. patency Airway injured addressed, any presents status also should initiated with traumatic the mental be cervical who step uncertain altered or of Protection at with child this of injury spine etiology. in movement and application includes oxygenation a current auscultation available) to oximeter status. Assessment breathing air identify of of pulse of (when presence by for the is focusing assessed Circulatory on palpation distal the of pulses. central status and quality and pulses, pulse resuscitation a of first pressure shock phase the require of wide the and often pulses measures. sign vasodilatory are immediate and Bounding compressions, or are both. pulses or indicators resuscitation, Weak, absent fluid for of thready, chest initiation the to examination oxygenation, physical an more level ABCs a taken have of tissue been When achieve acceptable of measures is complete is performed. and assessment complete situation this sequence acute illness trauma. whether of on The the an medical depends or examination involves patients, ABCDE follows examination trauma the In pathway. the traumatic the and injuries. system disability prompts of stands for assessment evaluation for and major D neurologic the life-threatening stands for and of child limb-threatening for disrobed exposure; problems. examined E is any evidence or of injured identify subsequent the patient. areas ill and dysfunction, physical should investigation the and of systematic the a entire and the organ with in complaint suggested For thorough examination acutely progressing the evidence chief starting to child,

and correct The mechanisms inadequacies physiologic responses acute to that tissue and attempt to illness injury oxygenation are of perfusion. body’s cardiopulmonary heart initial as 38-2). meet respiratory (Table manifestations failure When of changes, to impending fail other needs, such the increasing rates, occur and failure, of oxygenation in deterioration most Respiratory the children, common cause acidosis. result and respiratory in acute tissue in inadequate may oxygenation becomes and of mentation) tissue respiratory progress of tachycardia, breathing, as (tachypnea, abnormal more failure symptoms increased inadequate. work Signs perfusion metabolic leads delivery to inadequate Inadequate acidosis. a and oxygen resulting (shock) inadequate perfusion of cool capillary and mentation). characterized Shock poor by (pallor, pulses, abnormal skin, refill, signs tissue delayed oliguria, is the further symptoms any prevent these and and The deterioration. of of assessment correct to abnormality to demands careful intervention presence

resuscitation, is and the screening the activity. physiologic key initial phase status monitoring of vital signs During indicate Continuous may changes to with attention to monitoring response

positioning, requires Unmaintainable, be Maintainable maintained independently assistance with suctioning Able to

muscles Use of accessory

size of parents (AVPU) Responsiveness Pupil Posturing Recognition caregivers or

responds pain, Alert, to unresponsive. voice, AVPU, to responds

or requiring deterioration further additional intervention. therapy of pulse often During evaluation glucose rapid levels. the diagnostic and limited assessment, bedside oximetry measurement initial is to important malnourished (infants, in stores any glycogen mental child altered risk latter is for inadequate with patients). The status at or necessary. are diagnostic and further After tests measures, imaging resuscitation often

mechanism choice after and initial imaging of disease The is determined the resuscitation. appropriate of results by diagnostic of tests evaluation and major The evaluation initial of

delirium, agitation, obtundation, Central system nervous Lethargy,

wheezing movement, air dyspnea, nasal flaring, retracting, poor stridor, tachypnea, Respiratory Apnea, grunting,

refill, bradycardia, poor Cardiovascular weak tachycardia, hypotension pulses, Arrhythmia, capillary

these dry but membrane be seldom several taken Skin signs and poor membranes in symptoms mucous consequences. membranes one grave of two occurrence or mucous Mottling, turgor, foreshadows would and if *Action were cyanosis, pallor, the only of present, diaphoresis, concert should primary at disorder. directed the Intervention be

injury. and evidence organ of on patients is identifying hemorrhage trauma and focused tissue important. is chest distress, respiratory a x-ray an acutely ill with For child be sepsis is obtained when suspected. should Appropriate cultures with creatinine. blood intra-vascular historical should including urea serum evidence have physical and nitrogen, inadequate volume bicarbonate, electrolyte obtained, of or levels Children

of and on and correcting deterioration. Resuscitation perfusion preventing is focused identified oxygenation further abnormalities oxygen Oxygen may may oxygenation. supplementation but not improve tissue completely correct saturation oxygen initiated. When is assisted be must insufficient air ventilation is or exchange inadequate, supplementation perfusion initially fluid Inadequate is usually bolus. a providing by managed best the solution) choice. lactated fluid crystalloids saline, Isotonic are (normal of initial Ringer 10 delivered conditions. 20 mL/kg should monitored A be to in of bolus been has boluses correction, bolus after should an repeated but re-established. Improvement, prompt not until circulation initial Because fluid children this most tolerated. administration causes, noncardiac shock is with magnitude have of well or is highly of known is packed blood cells suspected, If administration red hemorrhage appropriate. have decreased cardiac function. Monitoring may children during fluid status deteriorating in decrease resuscitation blood rate, who heart (increase physiologic pressure) identifies in for increases and preload, function. worsen may cardiac edema pulmonary Fluid which resuscitation administration interrupted, fluid aimed be deterioration function. be should should cardiac If occurs, improving resuscitation at and

insufficient, fluid substances are When and step. the respiratory support is vasoactive introduction of next resuscitation of shock of depends The to which use choice on agent present. the type vascular Hypovolemic resistance contraindicated) is epinephrine benefit increase further such as systemic that (drugs from drugs shock shock and or activity, norepinephrine). volume αagonist distributive with (when shock complex. of treatment more The cardiogenic is rate, and output are improve cardiac positive (epinephrine, increasing chronotropy used the dopamine). heart To with drugs norepinephrine, by dobutamine, nitroprusside, also be Afterload may reduction, such or using needed. milrinone, drugs as oxygen saturation, saturations central guide oxygen mixed venous regional therapy. venous and helps Measuring pressure,

disability. arrest having with for about and of poor; out-of-hospital 27% survivors arrest, cardiopulmonary hospital outcome is about for children permanent is arrest to most discharge survival in neurologic 6% The in-hospital pre–cardiopulmonary lifesaving, not only and also the Table therapy arrest and life 38-2). The prompt anticipate initiate of quality recognize to is preserves or appropriate ability (see conditions but

have who resuscitation usually primary a (CPR) respiratory cardiopulmonary Children need arrest. leading arrest and the to (Table Hypoxia initiates or usually 38-3). also cascade organ dysfunction damage produces and approach cardiopulmonary includes efforts beyond extends The to vital arrest preserve CPR function. to organ pediatric agents. cardiopulmonary accomplished optimize cardiac administration pharmacologic may be oxygen tissue and to chest delivery, goal the compression artificial and using in judicious which resuscitating output a arrest The patient ventilation by and following be of by should a

for Heart American for the Association 2010 revised children, resuscitation and recommendations adults, In the infants. than with The the and immediately, biggest change to compressions chest airway is breathing. start recommendation rather beginning

or cannot be pulse should beats/min heart if palpated the than compressions is systemic initiated a perfusion. signs Chest be with of if 60 rate poor less by while begin ventilation. compressions performed Chest be second prepares person one a to immediately person should respiratory of primary in pediatric arrests important cause; Ventilation a ventilation likelihood of the high requires because is extremely however,

infarction, cerebral damage, SIADH, Brain Seizures, anoxic herniation, insipidus edema, diabetes

infarct Cardiovascular failure, Heart myocardial

syndrome, cholestasis acute Acute Infarction, hypertension Lung and necrosis, cortical Acute necrosis, distress Kidney tubular pulmonary pulmonary vasculature Liver respiratory

coagulation damage ulceration, Disseminated tract Hematologic Gastric mucosal intravascular Gastrointestinal

antidiuretic of inappropriate Syndrome secretion SIADH, hormone. of

is, equipment and sometimes therefore, delayed. to first reason the this ventilation. for preparing is chest For compressions start recommendation while

compressions, on the hard child surface. be optimal For flat, a chest supine should anterior-posterior chest diameter recoil of complete each requires one third one depth the compression. Effective half of with CPR to after the a compression of times rate to 8 with 10 The be breaths at minute. per should delivered 100/min least compression for ventilation; compressions is simultaneously. advanced both continue not pause If an airway place, should should in

airway. patent requires Ventilation a children, is posterior of to including the the pharyngeal often and patency muscle a rest In against tissues, the by airway mandible, loss tissue, allowing mandibular of soft compromised tongue, block surrounding bony tone, wall. the children head head be in maneuver with used of should tilt–chin airway neck no lift sign the open trauma. or to The jaw with thrust should children maneuver or neck the signs In trauma, head be of used.

Bag-mask ventilation can for intubation of in out-of-hospital safer and as be possibly short setting. endotracheal effective an periods than, time as, should equipment endotracheally personnel If resuscitation are skilled be and proper intubated. requiring available, patients pediatric using be the patient mask. bag a ventilated intubation, oxygen and with 100% should Before should Cricoid inflation used of pressure be stomach. minimize the to to cardiovascular may further necessary (sedatives, sedatives. of caution is many the from conscious from paralytics) intubation, vasodilating patients to analgesics, and induction benefit Many assist but effects medications prevent compromise of use estimated size of tube according (patient the child’s the or the in to of size 4 be The following + may correct the formula: years/4). phalanx mid-fifth age

When be of assessed. the adequacy the tube the tube endotracheal of place, the ventilation in must is and position of Use both recommended. and clinical is assessment confirmatory devices breath auscultation to and assessment include may wall sounds. chest chest for adequate looking detect symmetric and movement bilateral of the Clinical seen of devices of but pulmonary carbon validation are of Confirmatory levels secondary low such devices useful circulation. to CO2 monitoring as detected placement, for be lack (CO2) may end-tidal endotracheal dioxide of (mnemonic to patient’s or DOPE). tube or Equipment Displacement consider Obstruction, Pneumothorax, condition fails or the possibilities deteriorates, failure If the improve

or maintain ensure major of is and to intubation of patient. role oxygen protect the to adequate airway The the delivery endotracheal the is is hypoxemia cardiopulmonary the oxygen common respiratory pathway more acidosis. correcting than final in important arrests, pediatric the providing Because breaths/min to CPR, 8 for a 20 clinician should 12 to during a oxygen rate at or perfusing who deliver has patient 100% 10 of breaths/min a rhythm. The Use tidal visible rise. chest produce volume necessary to only the be not to patient. Care the hyperventilate should taken

present administration intraosseous intravascular route is to (Table established, means is circulation, an is adequate not mechanical through recommended. re-establish essential intervention access or 38-4).If fail When rapidly pharmacologic through also effectively can the Some drugs tube. administered be endotracheal

constitutes drug therapy a Epinephrine, mixed β-agonist of with CPR. catecholamine mainstay and properties, α-agonist for the flow. causing α-adrenergic an resistance resuscitation, systemic of coronary during most improves phases are important effects vascular increase The acute in that blood the subsequent boluses. first dose and is Standard therapy recommended for no benefit epinephrine. high-dose There offered by is may causes an of hormone, useful. arterioles and and endogenous be Vasopressin, constriction capillaries small but vasopressin its failing medication be support may standard routine in children administration. use, data Insufficient considered

recommended. not routine The is of currently bicarbonate use sodium hyperkalemic CO2 treat or to toxidromes be however, established be first. used may and bicarbonate of delivery elimination Sodium must arrest; judiciously oxygen level, Side function. impairing hypernatremia, effects the oxyhemoglobin hyperosmolality, (shifting curve oxygen to delivery), reduced include calcium ionized and left the tissue impaired metabolic alkalosis hypokalemia, cardiac and

administration calcium of not is Routine recommended. and potentially overdose, cases hypocalcemia, is blocker be It may beneficial not channel hypokalemia, of otherwise in calcium or hypermagnesemia, but harmful. useful documented

arrest. not children and in Hypoglycemia infants who cardiac is sustain uncommon treated should promptly glucose. be hypoglycemia should with and checked Blood glucose be

indicated ventricular 38-5). (Table electrical ventricular Prompt when or is tachycardia fibrillation noted pulseless is defibrillation minimizing before afterward, should defibrillation CPR until immediately and in interruptions resume continue compressions. immediately followed dose a defibrillation necessary, be a of by second epinephrine. at is it should If attempt may from administration failing benefit two episodes of of amiodarone. defibrillation Children may of compromise cardiac tachycardias, distinguished cardioversion supraventricular should also which output. Defibrillation from be dose may to or starting discharge fibrillation. Cardioversion during convert tachycardia the which of ventricular prevent a requires and the a discharging lower tachycardia susceptible electrocardiogram synchronization to period, supraventricular to

Place heart electrode the right of self-adhesive side of at gel the the paddles the defibrillation pads with apex or upper and chest

discharging dose or compressions no before may not exceed so 10 Higher with repeat contact the immediately Notify to levels J/kg participating that adult all unsuccessful, one in resume 4 J/kg with J/kg; If bed considered, increase to chest paddles and Begin is maximum 2 energy personnel or be patient

as symptomatic position ventricular J/kg personnel pulse, with tachycardia* 2 tachycardia For ECG supraventricular signal 0.5–1 notify Choose pads, use J/kg or If unsuccessful, above and Begin with paddles, with synchronize a

Electrocardiogram. ECG, first (see adenosine *Consider Table 38-4)

38-4 Supraventricular INDICATION dose: 12 Adenosine DRUG mg/kg 0.2 Resuscitation 0.1 6 Doses Drug second mg/kg Table tachycardia Cardiopulmonary for (maximum mg); DOSE (maximum mg)

0.1 Atropine doses up in organophosphate to (minimum mg; dose poisoning bradycardia Supraventricular mg/kg junctional 0.02 mg); or needed 0.5 higher

can bolus; mEq/kg some min adequate 10 ABGs; repeat monitor Hyperkalemia, toxidromes ensure every ventilation; 1 Bicarbonate

Hypocalcemia, g; administer calcium blocker maximum dose 2 hypermagnesemia, channel chloride mg/kg; slowly single overdose, 20 Calcium hyperkalemia

may may arrhythmias chronotropy, repeat Epinephrine promote 3–5 minutes; inotropy 0.01 mg/kg IV/IO; 0.1 ET; mg/kg Hypotension, every

Hypovolemia, in patient’s boluses to titrated needs Fluid mL/kg 20 sepsis physiologic crystalloid Administer

and mL/kg 5–10 2–4 mL/kg mL/kg dextrose; adolescents: 1–2 dextrose dextrose; Glucose 25% Newborns: 50% 10% infants Hypoglycemia children:

from Cardiovascular Cardiopulmonary Guidelines Data American for Care. Resuscitation and Heart 2010 Emergency Association [suppl Circulation 3]:S876-S908, 14: 122 Part Pediatric Support, 2010. Advanced Life IO, ventricular ABG, Arterial ET, VT, tachycardia. IV, intravenous; endotracheal; intraosseous; blood VF, ventricular fibrillation; gas;

when maintain unable is Acute system to failure metabolic respiratory adequate the demands. gas meet to pulmonary occurs exchange in an mm healthy be Hg shunt), children (Pao2 hypercarbic previously (Paco2 or hypoxemic mm failure as both. without resulting intracardiac children), Hg healthy >50 The in can previously <60 classified that ventilated by frequently blood respiratory is of ventilated) not alveoli). mismatch (deoxygenated bypasses Hypoxemic (perfusion failure ventilation-perfusion caused is lung adequately shunting and respiratory an no space or ventilation in × dead of ventilation to areas alveolar decreased receiving from results (ventilation minute ventilation failure Hypercarbic secondary volume (tidal perfusion). increase respiratory inadequate rate)

acute failure distress injury with may lung (ARDS). or acute (ALI) occur respiratory syndrome Respiratory positive currently process Hg clinical evidence pulmonary the mm ALI leftatrial as having the of definitions of acute isdefined features: onset,bilateral regardlessof (PEEP). The Pao2 revision; however, of elevated end-expiratory ratio of Fio2 pressure pressure, and four clinical edema, a are the in to following 300 level these ≤ no of ≤ a ARDSis 200 mm severe of more of with ALI hypoxemia Hg). subset (Pao2/Fio2 be edema. syndromes pulmonary including pneumonia, can traumaticinjury, vascular a by or permeability resulting in inflammation to shock, ofinsults, triggered increased sepsis, burns, all variety and These leading nuclear molecules) the κB, involved may be ARDS. necrosis mediators in factor factor, of and adhesion development Numerous interferon-γ, ofinflammation (tumor Surfactant may be also affected. action

failure syncytial is asthma, (often respiratory bronchiolitis upper virus), by frequently obstruction, sepsis/ARDS. pneumonia, Respiratory airway caused and caused by to of 7% virus. in ventilation requiring develops mechanical 21% hospitalized patients syncytial respiratory Respiratory failure for

increasing common unplanned and to12 in United is years 3 the age reason children most Asthma is the in prevalence hospital in of States. admissions for unit prior start hospitalizationand of to characteristics Environmental near-fatal factors (severity admissions) care episodes. therapy, asthma, smoke) delayed of intensive and affect exercise cigarette intolerance, andprevious (exposure disease than has The mortality increased rate 19 childrenyounger of of since1980. asthma for by years nearly 80% age are African-American more children. Deaths common in

respiratory exacerbations) chronic fibrosis), failure dysplasia, congenital to cystic or and (with due often (bronchopulmonary acute is neuromuscular disease anomalies. abnormalities, lung Chronic neurologic

delivery Early respiratory maintain to improve oxygenated minute failure and the to hypoxic attempt and of and in tachypnea to cardiac tissues. include output blood of ventilation signs tachycardia nasal of use grunting, and Further in muscles may disease respiration, of of diaphoresis. accessory result flaring, dyspnea, progression inadequate confusion delivery (initially of signs and mental oxygen Late agitation). include and status cyanosis altered depth to hypercarbic mental breathing) and minute and altered of failure respiratory include (tachypnea status and increased of symptoms ventilation attempts increase Signs (somnolence).

evidence chest show the radiograph etiology may failure. of ofrespiratory A assists pneumothoraces or with ongoingmanagement. detection atelectasis, infiltrates, of The hyperinflation, pulmonary ARDS. maysuggest infiltrates edema or Diffuse controlsare the etiology. be whenupper chest impaired obstruction airway respiratory radiograph may or The normal stridor airway filmor tomography computed (CT) patients In presenting obstruction, with or lateral may delineate a neck otherevidence upper anatomicdefects. of visualization bronchoscopy airway. abnormalities allows dynamic identification of of theanatomic flexible through Direct a pulmonaryembolus. diagnose CT helps Helical

but oxygenation of assessment ventilation information unable noninvasive, about abnormalities. is to continuous oximetry allows provide Pulse requires of (arterial, venous, CO2 or levels gas a measurement blood capillary). Determination of measurement through oxygen defect arterial blood of the An gas levels allows calculation difference. an and alveolar-arterial CO2 severity oxygenation of of analysis hyperventilating further Pco2 is risk the deterioration. patient who A in about concern should a heighten normal of

ARDS; pulmonary pneumonia; is lung edema; from failure pneumonia; in alveolar-capillary respiratory seen fungal, resulting viral of and disease; bacterial, aspiration cardiogenic or Hypoxic impairment function bronchiolitis; sepsis. interstitial atelectasis to embolism. can and seen with be intracardiac intrapulmonary due also shunting It or

to use or the a as drug occur (opioids, (cervical agents), fails demyelinating of spine cause when chest respiratory that center cell neurologic airflow(croup, botulism), disease, wallinjuries, diseases horn anesthetic Hypercarbic diseases, post-extubation barbiturates, cord or result junction trauma, paralysis, resistance abnormalities can increased respiratory anterior failure vocal neuromuscular edema). chestwall the of and of requires Maintenance diaphragm. ventilation adequate function wall inadequate gravis, failure. chest Disorders dystrophy, myasthenia pathways, and development result respiratory of movement, of such neuromuscular in andbotulism, muscular the atelectasis, as Scoliosis leads rarelyresults in significant deformity restrictivepulmonary function. that to chest chest). to Similar exchangemay due distention of abdomen ascites, or of air thoracic obstruction, result (postoperativelyor trauma(flail mass) a the impairments from and

Mixed of forms disease andoccur common change. failure are pathophysiologic one more than result processes in when respiratory of peripheralairway lead to to airflow results to whereasrestrictions resultant asthma obstruction, failure from and lead respiratory often secretions retention and and may CO2. atelectasis, hypoxia, of Increased hypoxemia expiratory atelectasis seen in hypercarbia.Progression extensive

the (see 38). respiratory Chapter distress treatment of ABCs includes patients addressing Initial in with apnea. patients initiated Bag/mask be for ventilationmust other methods oxygen administered is (e.g., patients, using mask). In appropriate simple therapy in entrain method and by air of respiratory allows the children cannula it oxygen, most for patient to making insufficient nasal failure. an Administration oxygen delivery room methods, increase including ventilation, be appropriately. escalated should oxygen saturation is there inability and Delivery if mechanical intubation to

with as often respiratory presenting are hypercarbic well. Patients failure hypoxic underlying cause fever, (reversal taken drug hypercarbia action, to be is established, When address control or seizures). of oxygenation of the of measures should respiratory assistance of marked the hypercarbic or work who based signs may respiratory with with require may somnolence without or not intubation inadequate Pco2 effort however, ventilation. the in patients are on Patients of breathing increase fatigue alone; require

of After identification failure,specific treatments etiology the respiratory and to patient. of the needsof tailored interventions are the (heated methods be ventilation or membrane (traditional humidified oxygenation biphasic pressure, External extracorporeal cannula, or nasal airway pressure invasive or ventilation, positive through oxygenation). mechanical high-flow methods provided may pressure, continuouspositive negative by and ventilation, support noninvasive ventilation) ventilation of airway high-frequencyoscillatory improved (fraction pressure airway oxygen) pressure, of of and mean by CO2 minute gas inspiratory flow). achieved is variables ventilation altering peak inspired rate).Oxygenation inspiratorytime, or respiratory (tidal manipulationof is that delivery (PEEP, Elimination through volume affectoxygen

complication of major is respiratory hypoxic the of dysfunction. organ development The failure insufficiency, or brain development gastrointestinal or organ hepatic the insufficiency/failure, following: more of hypoxic-ischemic includes coagulation, and two respiratory intravascular injury. failure, cardiac Multiple failure, of dysfunction disseminated renal the rates 38-3). increasing involved of Mortality increase organs Table numbers with (see

lung mechanical pressure-related and Complications ventilation include associated volume-related with injury. injury. distention residual lung associated insufficient and lung are overdistention of (loss functional capacity) Both with disease and of potential overdistention. complications are Pneumomediastinum and pneumothorax the process the Inflammatory in ventilated lung role chronic fibrotic a diseases development in of mediators may patients. play

varies failure. respiratory of etiology the Prognosis with bronchiolitis 1% die.Asthma Fewerthan increased. rates, previously have still children healthy of with although mortality low, understanding of ARDS, and rate pathophysiologyof the remains support 30%. mortality in approximately Despiteadvances the

the explicit Prevention strategies to of are etiology respiratoryfailure. influenzae infectious organisms be (pertussis, and H. type pneumococcus, b) Some b). against respiratorydisease (pneumococcus, primary can causing prevented type through sepsis Haemophilus influenzae activeimmunization causes susceptible with illness patients Passiveimmunization prevents immunoglobulins syncytial highly virus severe (prematurity, bronchopulmonary in dysplasia). respiratory injuries ARDS. may prevention Primary incidence oftraumatic decrease the of (see Chapter for 78). thenumber decrease failure episodes appropriate with asthma may Compliance of of therapies respiratory

to tissues inability substrate blood oxygenated metabolic is meet perfusion of provide the Shock and to to demands. sufficient is rate). cardiac and to the (oxygen oxygen Oxygen directly volume saturation arterial and heart output delivery related content hemoglobin concentration) and (stroke to are primarily Changes cardiac in adjustments by needs in met metabolic output. (inotropy), (afterload) 145). volume ejection length ventricle the is resistance related blood (see from myocardial end-diastolic Stroke of fiber myocardial Chapter (preload), to and contractility for rate. contractile output young is less primarily tissue, possesses infant heart a by increased relatively a met cardiac increase in In mediated demand neurally myocardium whose venous resulting heart neurohormonally contractility. myocardial stroke the (increased augmented increasing preload), volume most resistance arterial increased efficiently in in afterload), through increased In and vascular children mediated tone, output older (decreased to by return is adolescents, cardiac changes and decreased

Acute is cause shock most hypovolemia the common of in children. leak losses) syndromes, blood space 40-1). capillary the secondary intravascular diarrhea, fluid loss, loss or pathologic results intake renal or fluid inadequate from and excessive losses of to from (vomiting (Table It preload, output. volume volume, and decreases Reduced stroke blood cardiac Hypovolemic myocardial producing results heart an activity, shock enhanced in increased sympathoadrenal rate increased and

system. CNS, nervous Central

contractility. capacitance maintains return to constriction mediated the improve blood heart blood redistributes to from and nonvital and venous flow arterioles preload, Neurohormonally augments the vital to organs. vessels pressure, of shock myocardial function. hypovolemic blood myocardial increases flow in remains elevated systemic resistance coronary while rate vascular consumption, the oxygen heart filling, ventricular resulting may untreated, and worsening If impair increased metabolism from produce hypovolemia releasing impairing and tissue vasoconstriction systemic Ultimately, injured vasoactive intense mediators cell cells. and ischemia, potent impair and and of that contractility further. mediators promote other can permeability and tone vascular change organ other inflammatory capillary and release peptides function increase vasoactive Cytokines myocardial

cardiac the profound inadequacies perfusion, a result flow tissue output. in presence of in in of distribution Abnormalities in the may high even or blood normal flow from results tone. vascular abnormalities in of usually maldistribution This Septic shock the most distributive in shock is children. type of common Table Other include causes anaphylaxis, and drug-related neurologic causes 40-1). injury, (see

syndrome greater greater normal two 10% age; than 36° greater or the temperature immature 38° than than tachypnea; deviations may less blood than systemic white or cells/mm3, 12,000 present than heart than Distributive following: greater or standard or count C; above beats/min defined less cells/mm3, with inflammatory of two more rate the shock more response for forms. or (SIRS), as 90 than 4000 C

caused is shock myocardialfunction contractility is Cardiogenic and tissue perfusion. as myocardial poor and output depressed cardiac in by an abnormality with expressed function may progression mechanisms shock the contribute further. of to Compensatory cardiac bydepressing thefailing the and afterload add vasoconstrictor ventricle. of responses work to increase Neurohormonal blood flow,which myocardial coronary decreases may delivery. oxygen impair Tachycardia of resultsin pressure, and blood emptying impairsubendocardial andby caused by volume central water ventricles which flow. and the elevated retention sodium incomplete blood during volume ventricular systole left Increased to increased increased which As pressure, compensatory failing ventricle leads pulmonary leftatrial areovercome, in the edema. produces pressure, resulting mechanisms volume left and ventricularend-diastolic afterload. ventricular right This ventricular sequence of failure right because artery and increased increased alsocontributes pressure to pulmonary

Primary heart may who children have occur disease. in shock congenital cardiogenic well to secondary 147, children also occur (see as Cardiogenic 40-1). metabolic Chapters or healthy viral hypoxic-ischemic toxic abnormalities 142, after 145, Table myocarditis, or dysrhythmias, and as shock or in previously may injury

Obstructive ventricular mechanical obstruction results from of shock outflow. Table stenosis, severe (e.g., interrupted diseases aortic along aortic Causes 40-1). valvular hypertrophic the cardiomyopathy) coarctation (see with lesions acquired of congenital aorta, arch, and as such include must presenting For neonates be obstructive lesions considered. in shock,

conditions refers has perfusion is for 40-1). normal, tissues abnormal but preventing to unable (see affinity cells tissue because oxygen, to release shock oxygen which an the in hemoglobin its Dissociative Table use to the are

perfusion shock blood that pressure, of forms peripheral of heart evidence abnormal insufficient pulses). rate, All and (increased oxygenation are alterations produce tissue of shock alter initial and The these of etiology signs the may symptoms. presentation

Hypovolemic absence other heart of by shock the signs from failure of of or sepsis. causes is shock and history distinguished the loss decreased of activity manifestations membranes, or (tachycardia, clinical (dry (pallor). urine dehydration include mucous to output) signs addition vasoconstriction), blood In of sympathoadrenal signs preexisting status, depends the and on diagnosis of treatment. and hypovolemia, Recovery the rapid patient’s degree uncomplicated with a cases. mortality in The low is good, prognosis

and tachycardia peripheral with usually of Patients distributive perfusion. alterations have shock release alert rapid In may shock). may with bounding, refill (an and maintained and in early warm organ be when be output patient, capillary in vital cytokine urine results function vasodilation, pulses some stages, capillary and a extremities refill the progresses disease cool become untreated, time. As delayed mottled with has patient At vasoconstriction. stage, hypotension this the and lethargy, fever, the is or of an have may etiology patient infection. of purpura, she sepsis, often or has and he distributive source shock the petechiae, identifiable If

the unable required tissue output cardiac to shock when organ the perfusion to supply is and results function. myocardium support Cardiogenic progressing self-perpetuating to be cycle, rapid. failure Because this death heart may of with tachycardia shock tachypnea. Patients cardiogenic have and The present, noted. may and usually distention liver gallop often is is a be jugular venous enlarged, in retained, edema. resulting renal and and sodium flow peripheral is blood water poor, are oliguria Because

increase of rate and cardiac volume. alteration heart stroke an output in an in of Restriction results is refill (making to pulses pressure narrow delayed. capillary The and is feel), harder pulse often is enlarged, liver and jugular evident. be distention may venous The

tissues. deliver dissociative The to to the abnormality shock is in principal inability oxygen status, tachycardia, include Symptoms cardiovascular tachypnea, in ultimately and collapse. alterations mental

resuscitation requires Shock studies. before laboratory diagnostic or immediate obtaining initial necessary laboratory studies. glucose the if dictates administration stabilization Following (including the shock of present), is type hypoglycemia blood All the of shock level patients baseline to impairment arterial lactate blood tissue from gas determination benefit a with assess of oxygenation. may and of the venous delivery. adequacy in oxygen oxygen assessment aids Measurement of saturation the of mixed forms of tissues mixed with and often saturation shock, oxygen. sepsis extract high function to impairment other values mitochondrial contrast of In because venous of to patients of have inability potentially equilibration assess A blood blood a count after following hemorrhage. can intravascular volume complete from measurements shock abnormalities may identify in losses. Electrolyte hypovolemic with patients require of bacterial cause viral to and identify a in infection. Patients presenting cultures distributive shock appropriate the pericardial assists to or If the shock drain relieve echocardiogram and, of of fluid. the a an cardiogenic in is with diagnosis with tamponade, obstructive case placement suspected, assists agent dissociative (carbon the with monoxide, detection shock Patients methemoglobin). causative of require of The blood frequently the shock levels nitrogen of (BUN). and gases for also calcium, urea arterial oxygenation, (CO2), and ventilation magnesium, monitoring blood phosphorus, electrolytes, and serum assessing requires management of acidosis,

SEE 40-1. TABLE

recognition when to in early,partially compensated metabolic hemodynamicand of therapy is state, key alterations of The its the reversible. shock be may many the of therapyfor the resuscitation. follows ABCs shock Initial the at underlying be therapycan then cause. Later directed while Therapy work, cardiopulmonary exchange. shouldminimize blood ensuring pressure, gas and cardiacoutput, distending of work if Intubation, combined breathing with oxygen improves venous excessive. ventilation return (positive but oxygenation eliminatesthe may airway supplementation, pressures decreases end-expiratory or or with impede are pressure) inspiratory pressure[PEEP] peak and mechanical cardiac Blood the supranormal perfusion is sepsismay crucial vasodilation because output. despite in pressure reduce support

sampling, shock continuously. blood in Monitoring child measure and measurements, record central pressure circulation blood access to systemic arterial requires a perform to venous and the maintaining pressure and the These of facilitate estimation measurements preload afterload. detection allow in may infrared perfusion. noninvasive alterations early, near of with Regional spectroscopy monitoring

output. effect on Alterations cardiac a in have dramatic preload decreased distributive shock, hypovolemic impairs In preload output. cardiac significantly and cases, resuscitation aggressive outcome. is greatly fluid and In these important affects and early cardiogenic shock, elevated an contributes edema. pulmonary In to preload

of and use resuscitation fluids Selection clinical for circumstances. by ongoing is dictated volume generally are are expanders Crystalloid choices initial and they effective as inexpensive. because recommended ill Most bolus 5 with a over minutes. to 15 benefit of safely isotonic greatly and acutely may of usually children receive, crystalloid signs an from, shock 20-mL/kg response dose is This until a may be noted. repeated drawing larger intravascular out in the crystalloid space solutions contain tissues than compartment. into Colloids fluid pressure, vascular stay longer molecules that and may of oncotic the the exert benefits. colloids risks long-term exceed of may However, shock performance. the be Care because may exercised filling must the improvement in treating expansion cardiogenic of rise ventricular volume pressures without with cardiac monitoring replacement. volume output guides cardiac or Carefully venous pressure central safe

volume effort dangerous, further a volume output improve may inotropic replacement vasodilator In an may be useful to resuscitation after and 40-2). when of be (Table drugs variety cardiac or ventricular at increasing decreasing contractility, afterload. left first then is at Therapy myocardial directed of The agent. choice status dictates patient the of hemodynamic the the

norepinephrine be Therapy may be in or patients mcg/kg/min; 15 epinephrine dopamine 3 at with decompensated shock. initiated preferable to however, may with in vascular increase catecholamines certain an resistance. systemic improving to In contractility, addition cause decreasing pump cardiac a the The drug by improve the performance vasodilator addition heart must of may resistance which (afterload). against nitroprusside, dobutamine, may inhibitors. enzyme nitroglycerin, be achieved angiotensin-converting amrinone, milrinone, reduction and Afterload with shock, use drugs may these important vasoconstriction The late be when in is particularly prominent. of

lung inflammatory target is SIRS. organ mediators a and The inshock for develop may failure Respiratory rapidly progressive. andbecome Intervention supplemental the and endotracheal accompanied and requires useof by ventilation PEEP. oxygen mechanical intubation process may taken extracorporeal sedative withthe oxygenation. reduce decompensate on of medications cardiopulmonary a may membrane managed resistance.Severe child Care administration failure necessary, oxide be if systemic with and, with inhalednitric because vascular be must intubation, suddenly of compensatedshock that

blood and prerenal cause may accompanied oliguria/anuria. flow Poor renal cardiac by output azotemia decreased acute Severe acute and failure. produce hypotension may necrosis renal tubular improved, when blood Prerenal acute azotemia corrected. corrected does replaced is necrosis are shock myocardial immediately is not when is or volume deficits contractility tubular improve but and a less urine BUN-to-creatinine a than level tubular 60 Prerenal with mEq/L 40 10:1 than (see level acute serum urine 165). or mEq/L; is a 20 and of less Chapter azotemia associated sodium 10:1 between ratio necrosis ratio and of a BUN-to-creatinine sodium has greater necessary to improve azotemia. oliguria Aggressive fluid often with associated prerenal replacement is urine of management Because facilitates greatly patient maintaining shock of large fluid, the output administering volumes requires management.

tubular important. of and the overload) acute failure necrosis acidosis, subsequent with is fluid renal acute Prevention hypocalcemia, (hyperkalemia, complications associated has pharmacologic intravascular when the volume is indicated augment to been agents use output The of urine replaced. combinations use loop enhance thiazide of diuretics, of furosemide, agent a loop may The and such as diuretic output. a urine or also may dopamine, artery of output. improve Infusion vasodilation, urine which renal low-dose produces altered hypervolemia, or should with Nevertheless, if hyperkalemia, status hemofiltration initiated. uremia refractory or dialysis associated occurs, be mental acidosis,

Shock and oxygenation activation impairment pathways. perfusion inflammation results and tissue and of cytokine in of major is renal shock dysfunction, dysfunction. coagulation organ, organ dysfunction including failure, one as system the complication more than multiple The respiratory abnormalities, defined failure, failure, of cerebral of or liver shock for mortality with a failure stay. higher rate hospital have survivors, a Patients organ multiple longer and and,

survival. with goal-directed shock patients recognition intervention and in Early improve incidence of failure multiple hypotension treatment organ in the mortality. increase delays and However, of on may Goal-directed saturation oxygen therapy maintaining focused improve venous mixed survival.

mcg/kg/min). *Primarily in doses (3–5 renal low splanchnic and

dose mcg/kg/min). †Low (<0.3

hypovolemia. with associated focused, on are Prevention part, shock for for sepsis most the and shock strategies influenzae type of can meningococcal, through prevented of (Haemophilus use septic shock pneumococcal forms immunizations b, Some be vaccines). a the requires patient critically to adherence in sepsis and isolation minimizing risk hand of strict the ill practices, duration indwelling of catheters. washing, Decreasing do Measures to much to minimize shock. decrease pediatric hemorrhage-induced trauma

in cause of 1 death of leading the is age. to injury children years Unintentional 18 crashes. In these by deaths of vehicle 2010, approximately caused 52% motor were remaining burns injury-related poisoning (9%), of (15%), unintentional the (4%). were and (5%), drowning suffocation result deaths Most frequency, and to (access population Geography, by injuries. and severity the of affect region and etiology, vary traits population climate, care), density

car the (e.g., and and that occurs the a (e.g., exposure. through Injury vector is conducive environment weather) host to an agent (child) interaction roadways, through driver) of with to age exposure determine The the various may environments. the of agents child and bathtubs, infants For toddlers example, as most heaters, found in there (water the exposure the occur of agents home softbedding). injuries and result to in injury, rate that girls. with to affects than a having of exposure Gender injury greater boys fatal

much The stimulated measures. morbidity the development are of that of of mortality prevention at the the recognition injury an and scene determined has and of effective different and environments) epidemiologic during, matrix factors aspects physical the injury components after to (before, (host, the focused time The identify Haddon interventions agent, event. on with the social combines event) epidemiologic (minimizing component. secondary the tertiary injury), and can Primary of event), strategies for strategies each (preventing impact) targeted be longterm (minimizing the severity strategies Such areas: fall into strategies of (including engineering). three education, and one environment enforcement, typically

strategy first part considered often behavioral the people. of requires but and is change the Education actions on are well not educational strategies Most evaluated.

strategies active Despite incidence wearing a benefit action from death. significantly lower experience brain helmets the on enforcement.Children by the individualsinvolved, injury reliance some and of traumatic bicycle an seatbelt of and use Enforcement seatbelt decreaseinjuries. increases may laws

(speedbumps) pill on bottles, action change no environment strategies engineering the the ofthe air and (child-resistant population involve Automatic bags). require part often or reduction a in injuries. more consistentlyresulted strategies Automatic have significant in and all to in injury time on have the environmental successful preventing most changes, agent, (education, approaches combined environment engineering changes three host, phases). The strategies focused and

prehospital assessment, is of trauma care of the The transportation. rapid and immobilization, support general goal ABCs, of significantly level trauma trauma in with life-threatening a adult center improved II trauma centers. center with patients adult are pediatric or or I trauma with Outcomes or certification major an in compared pediatric

the arrives emergency an organized Once the must team trauma and at response. child initiate injured synchronized department, the The primary should postresuscitation assessment seriously resuscitation, including and secondary of involve a initial monitoring, definitive systematic survey, approach, injured survey, a a child care. Chapter emergency The resuscitation 38). (see care, the survey cardiopulmonary the ABCs as of trauma modified for on focuses of from ABCDEs primary (risk pneumonia). and assessment or stomach entry anatomic the and mental patient full that has if of should spine of of meticulous the air cervical control The of could of injuries breathing include likelihood the an gas status), for aspiration a the airway altered components (especially impair consideration exchange, evaluation status) and via large through capillary quality, restored possible) palpation assessed can the (heart mental rate, lines, skin skin observation peripheral temperature) Circulation is while of direct when of intravenous two (pulse use refill, be (via control and color, accomplished bleeding pressure. Assessment voice; movement to cord assessment injury. and for to of for assess size brief examination status, status disabilities (AVPU—alert; and includes extremity pain; pupil mental reactivity, spinal to a unresponsive), responds of examination (D),including responds neurologic can injuries regarding of suspected The resuscitation closed decisions Scale in direct the (Table Glasgow cerebral Coma with patients initiation 42-1). head a completely detailed full patient assessment the disrobing for of E, the entire child body. of the stands a exposure,requires which examination by for to environment prevent thermal hypothermia. examiner ensure should The neutral a

to more the On more efforts headto-toe examination completion ensue survey) should with detailed (the history. a survey, obtain secondary along primary a of complete less limb-threatening purpose identify as is to of serious and as well careful injuries. this injuries The life-threatening re-examination physiologic initiated. depending, the measures with procedures certain Coincident of the and the on status resuscitative patient, part, in are secondary survey and assessed primary continuous the needs care findings child’s The of is secondary definitive the from and determined monitoring. and injury physiologic resuscitation, response from the data surveys, by collected to prioritization be primary A secondary 24 of including laboratory radiologic and review hours. survey, studies, performed repeat along tests tertiary within should with surveys and

CHAPTER SEE 41.

Screening listed 42-2. the often resuscitation laboratory initial during Table studies tests include in pattern studies Radiographic the of by are determined injuries. consciousness. tomography be a computed patients should head or A obtained (CT) trauma in evidence with of of loss head scan of history with Patients CT symptoms thorax from the or to obvious scan. pulmonary or injury abdominal a abdomen benefit who or have may radiation abdominal The exposure. trauma sonography popularity for is gaining because of focused about concerns lavage limited peritoneal has utility. Diagnostic spiral A

tomography radiograph apparent all scans fractures spine Cervical indicated chest for chest, films Anteroposterior Radiographs head, Computed of where

Aspartate aminotransferase. AST/ALT, aminotransferase/alanine

is concern should aortic about there enhanced performed injuries. if CT be scan

are most the injuries common. injuries to limbs Head and the penetrating involvement is is trauma more Multiple organ becoming also common, frequent. and stabilization, systems. involved organ the After on team the and the initial focuses evaluation

184. CHAPTER SEE

is devastating occurs. not potentially pediatric common injury spinal patients, is trauma in when it Although it cord spine ruled is until injury be should spinal Cervical out. maintained cord immobilization a injury allow radiographs roots in or with injury not a cord to the are rule abnormality radiologic nerve cord stretching of cord without radiologic (spinal Cervical out sufficient children the [SCIWORA]). may because spine column spinal abnormality no vertebral immature performed. may imaging spinal SCIWORA when cord be resonance significant occur it percentage in a of a with is magnetic should suspected, children injury;

cause Thoracic of second death. the trauma is leading injury patients most contusion, and may without of and pneumothorax, Pulmonary rib present signs occur trauma. fractures commonly, external injury and receive to parenchymal with should pulmonary Patients supportive ventilation. treatment oxygenation adequate ensure Most injuries surgery. thoracic blunt without pediatric managed be can the urgent and to is and diagnosis heart treatment. great but vessels requires Injury rare seen be injury chest Great suspected mediastinum should radiograph. a if on is widened vessel

third approximately of occurs patients in the to pediatric cause 8% trauma the trauma and Injury abdomen is of death. leading children trauma. significant risk of relative intra-abdominal closer in the organs after size of injury blunt The and proximity increase Penetrating is who hypovolemic or who may result trauma shock. in in child presents a asymptomatic

obtaining base as to studies and methods are CT primary information abdominal decisions on intervention. regarding such Imaging serial of examinations operative which physical the more intra-abdominal injury 10% patients. of wall important examination is physical is and with than finding bruising significant an associated Abdominal in unstable may aggressive of in vital in persistently the abdomen. resuscitation, required fluid or intervention even signs be volume absence loss whose of an in enlarging extravascular face are Operative the patients discoloration, volume indicates The presence irritation laparotomy. the abdominal intravascular for loss, or signs of wall of together peritoneal with need

is injury blunt Most organ handled nonoperatively. solid is the first nonoperative 12 important, with in management hours. observation most because occur Clinical failures

Spleen to Injury the

most organ is spleen. abdominal frequently The children in injured the Suspicion splenic be a of quadrant there or heightened are injury if should abrasions upper tenderness. left (pressure diaphragmatic left by upper on suggests left positive eliciting Kehr ruptured pain) sign and the injury. shoulder spleen quadrant splenic the irritation to is due strongly A scans injury. grade identify CT are splenic used to and

loss management is is of the injuries, choice formost there treatment Nonoperative splenic serious largeblood continued or unless hemodynamic instability. Haemophilus overwhelming andshould decrease isperformed, If receive receive should risk of a and patients splenectomy penicillin pneumococcal to increased sepsis. prophylaxis the influenzaevaccines

liver of Major morbidity. the cause to is a serious trauma blood its of Severe than in patients abdominal injury with liver is common dual more with injuries supply. hemorrhage other because behaves vascular clinically injury. hepatic a like injury splenic significant Without presents injury, and loss for is clinical close ongoing recommended Nonoperative of management signs observation but or hemodynamic instability. blood requires system on there a grading is injury. with injury, the pattern of As based splenic

The less than liver often when or and injuries. other spleen, is injured frequently is associated the kidney with injured A more of to child’s than relatively young an more development. cage a kidney vulnerable is rib trauma because abdominal and compliant immature muscle adult’s diagnosis injury increased levels. showing blood The and physical based is protein urinalysis examination of renal and history with on coupled or CT ultrasound may An useful. also be for with injury Low-grade conservatively, or ultrasound CT. usually by injury is rest, drainage, and bed managed of resolution monitoring renal catheter or required shock, caused be levels, for by refractory urinary Surgery falling clots. obstruction may hemoglobin

of inadults injuries, but seen children and vehicle common nonaccidental handlebar crashes, less the motor in Injuries pancreas trauma. in than are are bicycle to diagnosis stomach duodenum. or as structures,such overlying unless difficult the obvious is The is there injury until be tenderness, abdominal lipase amylase and elevations after not injury. and vomiting of by severaldays may the pain, may accompanied Diffuse but occur of patients. sign.Nasogastric parenteral management suction be and instability hemorrhage Hemodynamic the secondaryto may retroperitoneal the these nutrition indicatedin are presenting with required contusions, but transection. be in distal Nonoperative is interventionmay patients surgical appropriate management for are and rest them, if bowel in develop pseudocysts, patients they berequired to unresponsive Drainage parenteralnutrition. who may of

and the intestinal organs the of than frequently with solid injury intestine less intra-abdominal to amount to Injury contents. occurs varies is to bowel likely easily than more bowel. empty A shear full an of valve, and at the (the descending Treitz, peritoneal the reflections). points of ileocecal ligament ascending Shearing and fixation occurs surgical should prompt exploration. Pneumoperitoneum when useful examinations physical picture the is clinical uncertain. Serial are

in absence Duodenal of perforation. occur the hematoma can abdomen, to result persistent bilious patients injury hematomas and blunt often pain emesis. and affected Duodenal with from the present with nonoperative gastric and Most parenteral to nutrition. decompression respond hematomas management

variety a trauma are type hospitalization complications of of multiple requiring and based the risk at for on injury. for severity Patients in may trauma. Sepsis children and organ multiple occur with multiple failure to enteral nutrition the translocation Delays intestinal bacteria secondary sepsis risk in of ileus further across the of of because may mucosa. increase an

burns. electrical myoglobinuria in and Renal crushing who secondary may be seen or sustain to children injuries failure be Deep thrombosis less prophylaxis in who pediatric venous for is but common children provided. of injury the because is often will immobilized population,

the field, injury ages leading however, death for 1 of is the to these deaths Unintentional children 18; in cause injury. the many immediately after occur of are Once hospital, the lower. much mortality to admitted rates psychological injury, limbs, and and brain numerous Morbidities hypoxic-ischemic include of dysfunction. are loss

CHAPTER 41. SEE

impairment World respiratory experiencing from Drowning, as the 2002, process in Congress defined by submersion/immersion the Drowning on liquid. of in is abandoned. should be as such other further be secondary or dry but can drowning categorized terms as drowning, Drowning nonfatal, near-drowning, fatal or

immersion or in or laryngospasm. submersion Initially, holding amounts small triggering of aspiration results the fluid breath of larynx, into resolves, laryngospasm the and and alveolitis dysfunction surfactant the are larger of alveolar-capillary lungs, the water destroying or exchange. In gas causing into gastric volumes and contents aspirated cases, of many collapse. exacerbated hypoxic is that hypoxemia leads injury injury to brain circulatory after ischemic The by resulting

overall mortality. the is drowning deaths significant decade; over cause and Drowning of past morbidity have still a decreased however, death for 18 injury 2010, drowning for second and injury of the 1 leading leading 4 was death 1 years of age the cause cause to children to In of children of age. years are Boys times more to than likely girls four drown. older frequent more natural of most age, groups. with drowning bodies in drowning water of common The location in by age varies becoming

aspiration the is laryngospasm drowning. Hypoxemia of during and result endothelial increased pulmonary Victims to surfactant. injury, develop also secondary and may respiratory distress of capillary permeability, destruction sounds of increased include decreased Clinical work without crackles. breath tachycardia, breathing, or manifestations and with tachypnea, injury occur perfusion, resulting lead can depressed to impaired myocardial may that in tachycardia, cardiovascular collapse. potentially and function hypoxic-ischemic The distress resuscitation, After syndrome common. respiratory is acute status. mental may neurologic and frequent be Altered monitoring requires of status present in for the may cardiac risk result in relative and Following cold at hypothermia dysrhythmias. bradycardia and child place submersion hypotension water,

resuscitation, in blood assessing arterial pulmonary assists exchange. gas measurement After gas of and A duration provide long were reveal may baseline chemistry functions. profile and elevated liver if ischemia enzymes renal hypoxemia freshwater in although are obtained, electrolytes of alterations Electrolytes often drowning. are even minimal, serum

ABCs basic drowning Resuscitation a Chapter includes of victim (see 38). the spine of a diving stabilization unwitnessed drowning Victims of require cervical or possibility the injury. of the fall of because cerebral foci perfusion and are Optimizing major two maintaining of oxygenation of the treatment. hypothermic Rewarming detail, patient status. requires the and careful acid-base to cardiac attention including based Further to initial on is resuscitation. treatment the patient response begin arrival at emergency before an and department. Some spontaneously children awaken breathing 12 for careful the still complications observation If these episode 6 require over children was the to hours. significant, pulmonary subsequent or evidence compromise, cardiovascular an of monitored unit. be should injury, have care who compromise neurologic intensive in Children lung often in hypoxemia. Pulmonary results dysfunction saturations. Oxygen be normal implemented should supplementation oxygen maintain to or Mechanical may neurologic patients pulmonary be ventilation in needed dysfunction. significant with the of impaired Cardiovascular injury. because often of hypoxic-ischemic compromise contractility result is of hypothermia and improve controversial been medical sedation shown and has devices pressure The and intracranial not management with monitoring is use to outcomes. been not resistant increase be of and Prophylactic beneficial to selection antibiotics organisms. may the have shown

severity the is the resuscitation by immediate outcome the The of and drowning injury successof brain. of determined to thehypoxic-ischemic efforts function. consciousness regained will arrival likelysurvive who with on hospital neurologic Patients intact the to have more or hours. CPR dilated minutes, the 5 than continued pupils, CPR the than include need formore seizures, for 72 Scaleof fixed 25 markers hospital, Glasgow less, coma Unfavorable Coma prognostic and and at for

drowning prevention incidence been have of be shown the few effective. Despite 1990s, decreased strategies the to since of include of drown. around mandatory of age and <5 fencing the four-sided implementation of CPR provision who number years (decreasing Exceptions to children immediate children who pools drown) sport during activities in may devices beneficial. water safety flotation use The older be of children reduce supervision to required incidence bathtubs. of is infants the Enhanced in drowning

functions of of skin: fluids, heat barrier loss, by pathophysiology of of injury of infection. regulation is preservation caused the the burn body disruption three and The key to and in decreased plasma resulting capillary mediators releases inflammatory vasoactive cardiac and injury decreased output. increased permeability, volume, Burn expenditure then protein increased with hypermetabolic The resting catabolism. body and energy becomes year This injury. continue to for after state hypermetabolic a up may

classified are 1. the of Burns criteria: usually on four basis

2. of injury Depth

body Percent area surface of 3. involved

of Location the 4. burn

injuries other Association with

sustain year. injury burn children each 100,000 a More than ages of a third morbidity. injury-related of cause are and cause leading death children 9 for to 1 are the major Burns age injury, a burn children under. sustain Boys likely more as 6 are to and are as burns to Scald more compared children. children are older younger in common to common more are thermal much than chemical secondary scald electrical burns or Overall, or flame burns. occur injuries Most homes. fire-related and deaths childhood in

of should assessed clinicalappearance. The injury by the be depth clinically are aboutthe may classification partial-thickness, andthird-degree more conveys and structures however, bydepth useful. deep (superficial, superficial likely for Categories used; and need partial-thickness, of surgical full-thickness) treatmentand the commonly first-degree, more be second-degree, injured information

burns red, anddry. are Superficial painful, (first-degree) with to scald injuries, these burns exposure seen Commonly epidermis or mild sun the only. involve injury in surface calculations. not and without inburn are 5 scarring to 2 Theyheal included days area (second-degree) partial-thickness Superficial andsuperficial the epidermis involve dermis. entire burns fluid-containing blisters. These have burns

thigh 21 lower one of of 2 2 23 of 2 head 91 one leg

of and legs Figure figure head in body used at be the estimate together in the showing area area ages, chart the with of This burned of 44-1 areas, various a surface to can surface table child. the percentage inserted 1985. Solomon Crit Pediatric burns, 1:159–174, Clin From Care JR:

be appear erythematous will will wet, will and and the dermis underpressure. blanch debridement underlying After painful, occurs 2 weeks need the scarring. about without and on is uninjured within Healing grafting forskin the without dependent dermis andusually the the second-degree) epidermis portions Deep partial-thickness(also dermis. burns entire involve of anddeeper dermal but less haveblistering, less and partial-thicknessburns. These may is mottled painful burns blanching, than base pinkor also the superficial white, and and grafting. burns full-thickness willoften more excision require like behave They and burns fourth-degree) (third-degree all layers. Full-thickness skin involve white, red, black color. in dark brown, dry, Theyappear or and not are usually insensate. blanch Theydo Full-thickness surgical management. burnsrequire reconstruction burns fascia, addition grafting. require may to muscle, or involveunderlying bone in and Fourth-degree injuries facial nasal burns, suspected sputum. be singed if should hairs, there are orcarbonaceous Inhalation with isconsistent on vocalization Hoarseness supraglottic injury. a also inflammation, Inhalation impairedpulmonary mayresult injuries and in airway function. bronchospasm,

the methods in burn.One calculating that be charts various for for agesis in of multiple used children available and There presented a surface method 44-1. skin may of percentage are Figure involved involvement trunk, posterior head, skin 18%; each older The of andperineum, lower extremity, estimated trunk, 1%. each adolescent 18%;anterior extremity, upper and patients as be follows: 18%; 9%; extent of 9%; may adult

disability. of location the is important of The the risk in assessing burn when perineum, feet, is or are The risk involved. ears, the hands eyes, face, greatest respiratory Inhalation eating not in but injuries also compromise difficulty result and cause only may in drinking.

with chest Initial coagulation basic blood can gas, for blood, laboratory and patients testing, including be crossmatch major chemistry burns. radiograph, profile, count, for type and helpful studies, complete arterial blood closed-space performed who be victim suspected (a A inhalation assessment for or house fire a should cardiopulmonary any burn carboxyhemoglobin requires or resuscitation). exposure levels mental who inhalation smoke and in should status. altered children considered be sustain have Cyanide may to suspicion in skeleton trauma central burns system. Unusual of nonaccidental appropriate abuse evaluation the and to assess patterns or for result increase of child nervous

in a a team qualified severe is multidisciplinary center. burns, managed care best For burn by qualified burn or greater chemical or for child burn or criteria risk; partial increase burn (TBSA) patients without 10 and less The or mortality 20% emotional, personnel burn greatest body TBSA support, injury than hands, burns; burn major Burn partial social, patients groups; age care; requiring injury to for the the a involving complicate greater equipment area than in electrical trauma burns to 10% admitted management, poses feet, including old, could which patients 50 conditions patients full-thickness transferred burns total face, recovery, and injury or old should in genitalia, with or years that injury the injury; be abuse medical rate; special rehabilitative burn other any in than hospitals concomitant in with joints; in center preexisting children perineum, who burns; full-thickness in years Association more pediatric inhalation prolong surface American are: than cases.

ABCs Initial should of resuscitation. follow the treatment inhalation assessment for should airway if of include intubation early is the presence management with such Airway or injury injury, an suspected. monoxide inhalation given humidified is carbon associated inhalation oxygen may suspected. with or 100% be hypoxia toxicity; Smoke should if be

occurs after capillary The child support leak fluid a electrolyte systemic crucial. makes initial that a and serious burn burned of replace support maintenance first of is blood circulating priority fluids fluid ongoing which and administration intravenous requires to to electrolyte requirements to the and losses. The burn-related provide volume, the of fluid management; every accurately Formulas however, needs exist help no patient. formula to guide fluid the predicts burn a lactated Ringer solution. bolus significant with burn of mL/kg rapid Children 20 of receive should a for the resuscitation the is of formula body therapy burned. surface by Thereafter, fluid percent determined burn 8 administered mL/kg/percent burn/24 estimated first during Total to hours, the 4 half are the 2 with requirement hours. fluids half hour replacement (If end the the delayed, should by the eighth post-injury.) fluid be completed of resuscitation of is is to adequate achieve Fluids one titrated greater than mL/kg/hour. marker of output urine 1 perfusion, which should be resuscitation. when administer over whether colloid to fluid Controversy exists during and extensive needed Colloid burns. be may patients for therapy with

Because support. require significant immediate with a produces response, hypermetabolic burns injury burn children nutritional a early is specific contraindication. should unless Enteral there started feeds be may unable Children burn full tolerate with feeds. critical nutrition injury if require to enteral parenteral trace elements. supplementation vitamins and Consider of that are modify such state steroids, hypermetabolic beta and may Factors being blockers, as others the investigated. androgenic

with wound. and care the debriding starts cleaning Wound Effective to for pain debridement. important control complete is allow Topical and to and then applied evaporative decrease in losses, agents pain bacterial colonization, control control. dressings are aid B/bacitracin/neomycin topical (Silvadene) (Neosporin) silver include polymyxin used sulfadiazine if the shallow, is agents Commonly burn or, ointment. acetate (Sulfamylon) and agents. nitrate alternative are mafenide Silver antimicrobial but benefit eschar, is painful acidosis. the of metabolic cause has Sulfamylon it and penetrating can is for used and Silver penetration electrolyte because less nitrate potential commonly of tissue abnormalities. poor agents These

prophylactic infection, Adjust Fluid dry Hypovolemia Hypothermia antibiotics replacement blankets avoid in temperature: for Monitor field ambient

monoxide oxygen tracheostomy edema Endotracheal hyperbaric intubation, Carbon 100% oxygen, poisoning Laryngeal

100% plus O2 antidiuresis give syndrome Expectant Antibiotics Supportive diuretics support diuretics incision Escharotomy dialysis poisoning management Avoid Pulmonary Hypermetabolic antacids Cardiac therapy Pneumonia failure β-Agonist Inotropic nutritional trauma overhydration, parenteral amyl Transfusions care, Bronchospasm indicated Compartment Anemia nitrate, Physical oxygen and Cyanide Renal ventilation, and Contractures nitrate, Pulmonary dysfunction ulcers infiltrates state agents, edema as PEEP, Enteral Gastric Psychological rehabilitation aerosols Transient sodium antagonist, H2-receptor sodium Psychological thiosulfate

PEEP, pressure. end-expiratory Positive

do inhibit prevent growth. not bacterial but or such grafts, wounds. used porcine cover cadaver xenografts, have skin initially allografts, substitutes, as to Various been closure. for For eventual skin full-thickness substitutes autografting required skin and burns, are

SEE 44-1. TABLE

burns disability; the third sustain who cause leading however, injury-related of burns deaths ages recover 9. remain without significant Most in 1 to children children to is ascertain databases. from of Estimation morbidity difficult consequences burn and impact burns injuries. Physical disfiguring of longterm are of scarring emotional

the burns in home. About of occur 92% 49°C and alarms, extinguisher, and possible and temperature identifiable hot fire (120°F). a routes smoke to having using water is reducing fire by escape Prevention 60°C (130°F), second and at Immersion (158°F), 1 at 30 minutes 5 burns full-thickness seconds after 70°C after 49°C seconds (140°F), develop at 10 at (120°F). 54.5°C after after

products, cosmetics, care include common analgesics, solutions. young and most ingested agents personal children by cleaning The sedative/hypnotics, and gases/vapors. childhood antihistamines, by Fatal commonly are caused analgesics, fumes/ poisonings

centers in United the million exposures to called human More year. than control 2 in each poison are States in children half adolescence. exposures 2010) predominance are a male female but all predominance than 13, of children (63% with under a in More in in in in 13 and Most with older. intentional unintentional, common becoming ingestions young children children are ingestions more home are substance Most at (91%) occur (90%). and ingestions single

mental presents should abnormality or until symptoms status, proven ingested a cardiovascular Any unexplained with child be including poison considered altered who compromise, to metabolic have otherwise. seizure, clues (Table 45-1). and toxic physical signs often someone ingestions understands history examination organic the and and to sufficient symptoms by distinguish ingestion between A of various disease who provide type child crucial in time and all of is the substances of to, exposed of of Determination that amount directing interventions. exposure medication, medication, was often inaccurate, Available examination approach. requiring a physical and careful are laboratory data incomplete or signs, necessary. including vital is A complete examination, physical signs symptoms to a 45-2). complexes relatively given and (toxidrome) (Table specific of of Certain are drugs class

patterns: A seizures. toxicity, acidosis, rhythm heart poisoned one six aberrations, coma, clinical of any symptoms, exhibit and basic metabolic child can gastrointestinal

seen several a cerebrovascular as a Coma or of accident, of other poison but it causes the a most ingestion, be symptom is asphyxia, also result striking perhaps meningitis. may including trauma, these are to A history distinguish careful examination among and clinical needed alternatives.

toxicity. Hydrocarbon systemic toxicity, often in leads result pulmonary ingestion occasionally it but to more may producing unless low pose Hydrocarbons is swallowed, surface emesis of and greatest risk no tension, induced. low viscosity, however, the pose with pneumonia; high risk when they volatility aspiration who has child should or be a Emesis not initiated ingested lavage in volatile hydrocarbons.

mucosal fever. may and pain, burns, dysphagia, ingestions cause oral epigastric Caustic low-grade have symptoms. esophageal no have with burns or significant Patients may oral and signs may lesions esophageal or presence injury. the on ingested depends the agent Treatment and of absence granular, agents or be Alkali solid, liquid. may agents liquefaction tasteless produce the and oropharynx. are Liquid or full-thickness of necrosis esophagus heal, form. strictures esophageal When lesions the risk agents esophageal creates of also of Ingestion these long-term carcinoma. a strictures. Treatment if there of antibiotics later) weeks late-forming of are includes dilation infection to and 3 (2 signs

mucosal injury. produce caustic a may also batteries button Ingested erosion esophageal and burns be may Batteries removed that the remain cause and should with in an endoscope. esophagus fumes), injure mucosa, can (with and agents the esophagus, Acid acid lungs oral hydrochloric stomach. taste solution, limiting the usually sour, acids injury. drinking the children stop Because than less from tissue the chemical produce which necrosis, the penetrating mucosa severely layers coagulation Acids and damages limits into alkali. deeper of a measures symptoms, to similar therapeutic ingestion. for signs, alkali those are and The

acidosis child poisoned (Table A gap a also anion high which have metabolic may 45-3), (mnemonic MUDPILES)

in Physical alcohol, Acetone ODOR paraldehyde, Poisoning Isopropyl Cyanide salicylate Findings Historical Table almonds and methanol, Bitter 45-1

thallium, Garlic selenium organophosphates, Arsenic,

muscarinic (except barbiturates Narcotics pentazocine), Miosis organophosphates, clonidine, propoxyphene, and hydrate, meperidine, (late) mushrooms, chloral phenothiazines,

PCP, Atropine, amphetamines, cocaine, antidepressants, antihistamines, cyclic Mydriasis LSD

Phenytoin, ethanol, PCP, carbamazepine, Nystagmus dextromethorphan barbiturates, ketamine,

or Organophosphates, Lacrimation gas irritant vapors

monoxide carbon vision Methanol, Poor botulism,

tracks Heroin, Needle PCP, amphetamine

Anticholinergic hot Dry, agents, skin botulism

mushrooms, aspirin, cocaine Organophosphates, Diaphoresis muscarinic

Alopecia arsenic, lead, Thallium, mercury

SIGNS Boric cyanide, ORAL anticholinergics Erythema mercury, acid,

salicylate, strychnine, Organophosphates, Salivation ketamine corrosives,

Amphetamine, mouth anticholinergics, Dry antihistamine

oxalate-containing Corrosives, plants Burns

mercury, lines Lead, Gum arsenic

SIGNS botulism Corrosives, INTESTINAL Dysphagia

arsenic, cholinergics boric Diarrhea Antimicrobials, acid, iron,

narcotics, Lead, botulism Constipation

NSAIDs SIGNS CARDIAC Hematemesis iron, Corrosives, salicylates,

aspirin, theophylline amphetamine, Atropine, Tachycardia antidepressants, cyclic cocaine,

narcotics, organophosphates, calcium clonidine, Digitalis, β-blockers, Bradycardia blockers channel

Hypertension LSD, PCP Amphetamine, cocaine,

Phenothiazines, calcium cyclic antidepressants, barbiturates, β-blockers, clonidine, iron, channel blockers, Hypotension narcotics

barbiturates Depressed respiration narcotics, Alcohol,

respiration aspirin, Increased carbon glycol, cyanide monoxide, Amphetamines, ethylene

organophosphates Hydrocarbons, SYSTEM Pulmonary SIGNS CENTRAL edema NERVOUS

anticholinergics, Ataxia Alcohol, narcotics barbiturates,

monoxide, antidepressants, alcohol narcotics, cyanide, cyclic Sedatives, Coma salicylate, barbiturates, carbon

cocaine salicylates, Anticholinergics, amphetamine, Hyperpyrexia

theophylline fasciculation Organophosphates, Muscle

haloperidol Cyclic phenothiazines, PCP, antidepressants, Muscle rigidity

mercury, organophosphates Lead, Peripheral arsenic, neuropathy

LSD, amphetamines, alcohol, cocaine, anticholinergics PCP, Altered behavior

glutamate; diethylamide; NSAID, PCP, LSD, anti-inflammatory phencyclidine. acid MSG, Lysergic monosodium drug; nonsteroidal

failure Nausea, paranoia, Tachycardia, hypertension, vomiting, piloerection, hr) sympathomimetics jaundice– and and Amphetamine, aggressive Acetaminophen hepatic delayed psychosis pallor, seizures, mydriasis, cocaine, diaphoresis, hyperthermia, (72–96

tachycardia, Anticholinergics dry mydriasis, mouth, Mania, dry skin, urinary red retention delirium, fever,

Carbon affected dizziness, Headache, coma, other monoxide systems

bitter convulsions, almond Cyanide Coma, odor hyperpnea,

acidosis, oxalate hyperosmolarity, Ethylene crystalluria hypocalcemia, glycol (antifreeze) Metabolic

intestinal sepsis Vomiting hypotension, pills Yersinia (bloody), on hyperglycemia, Iron hepatic late leukocytosis, diarrhea, KUB, failure, stricture, radiopaque

bradycardia depression, Narcotics respiratory pinpoint Coma, pupils, hypotension,

fasciculations, nicotine) diaphoresis, muscle bronchospasm Miosis, urination, (bronchorrhea), edema, defecation, coma, (organophosphates, salivation, bradycardia pulmonary and lacrimation, Cholinergics emesis, confusion, weakness

diaphoresis, (early), alkalosis Salicylates (late) Tachypnea, fever, vomiting, coma, lethargy, acidosis

antidepressants arrest, hyperreflexia, Cyclic interval), (prolonged convulsions, cardiac Q-T Coma, arrhythmia shock mydriasis,

KUB, Kidney-ureter-bladder radiograph.

pH. easily is electrolyte urine arterial measuring assessed blood and serum gases, levels, by presence if unmeasured an strongly the glycol. such ethylene methanol present, of as An osmolar gap, suggests component, or prompt assessment ingestions thorough intervention. and These require

of ventricular toxic ingestions, may are be of signs variety rare. prominent Dysrhythmias a arrhythmias although or Q-T of complexes with intervals Prolonged antihistamine ingestions suggest QRS antidepressants ingestion, widened seen are phenothiazine cyclic and and quinidine. may β-blocker agent, digoxin, sinus (Table not overdoses tachycardia, to drug may sinus lead discriminating suggests however, cholinergic or a chemical or ingestion cyanide, sign; many and bradycardia is useful Because a 45-4). this

emesis, Gastrointestinal of and symptoms nausea, include cramps, diarrhea. abdominal poisoning may toxic effects or of be intestinal mucosa systemic after direct absorption. result the symptoms toxicity of on the These

Diabetic glycol* Methanol,* ethylene Paraldehyde,* acidosis ketoacidosis* Ethanol,* metformin starvation, iron Uremia* Isoniazid, Lactic phenformin carbon monoxide) Salicylates, (cyanide, seizures

hydrate, calcium Chloral carbonate

barium, Heavy lithium, arsenic, zinc, bismuth metals (lead, in as

potassium chloride Play-Doh,

radiograph. Kidney-ureter-bladder KUB, hyperosmolar condition. *Indicates

but presentation is of uncommon of major seizures. Seizures with afebrile the mode sixth an ingestions, for are cause toxic children poisoning life-threatening aggressive seizures may require and When intervention. with therapeutic intoxication, be do occur they

of in management blood and arterial assays; include measurement calculation Laboratory electrolytes, gases studies initial specific toxin-drug helpful and osmoles, glucose; the of and

of Major with Presentation Drugs Modes Associated

primaquine, Antiarrhythmics Physostigmine nitrite, quinidine of dapsone, Amphetamine Freon monoxide Cyanide amyl Cyclic subnitrate, quinones, benzocaine, spinach, Cocaine Propranolol antidepressants sulfonamides. dyes, Arsenic Theophylline hydrate Phenothiazines aniline bismuth Antihistamines Quinine, Digitalis Carbon Anticholinergics methemoglobinemia: Chloral *Causes

anion osmolar gap. or all initial 12-lead substances. in of ingesting the toxic full of suspected patients evaluation electrocardiogram be should part A of confirm drugs revealing. ingestion be may suspected in the for home abuse of to medications Urine screens or

important estimating therapy, drug, the for (Table not some for also specific for assays guidance toxicology prognosis. complications, and but 45-5), identifying providing agents only the anticipating for Quantitative are

antidotes. treatment specific poisonings of decontamination, enhanced for elimination, are four care, and supportive foci The

the of in Supportive is treatment most cases. care mainstay and and attention Prompt establishing the supporting circulation. be maintaining must airway, given protecting effective to breathing, the takes procedures. management diagnostic precedence This therapeutic or other sequence over consciousness and If administered. glucose suspected, naloxone level and toxic a intravenously), be depressed, g/kg (1 100% of should substance is the is oxygen,

substance theory, the poisoning. in prevent a absorption of prevent The and, to is toxic decontamination of ingested intent potentially the gastrointestinal to efficacious. controversy are been safest the has and There great most methods about which Toxicology Clinical Association of American Poison follow. and of Academy Centres (EAPCCT) Clinical (AACT) the European and from Recommendations the Toxicologists of lack that of not to poisoned complications because improves ipecac Syrup be potential of administered should routinely and outcome. evidence it patients poisoned the potential lack because of be if of management gastric lavageshould ever, not in complications. efficacy used and routinely, Likewise, patients of not drug Single-dose been when charcoal to it ingestion; improve 1 decreases within of outcome. shown hour absorption activated has however, used should Thus, it

kg 140 70 IV PO 17 × hr, doses 100 50 dose, 16 mg/kg Most mg/ followed mg/kg ingestion h IV by mg/kg followed over 4 1 150 within hr effective over Acetaminophen PO hr, over mg/kg by of N-Acetylcysteine 16 initial q4hr IV then

NOT arrhythmias, mg/kg/hr 1 0.2 0.05–0.15 followed Glucagon seizures, mg repeat IV, β-Blocking Flumazenil to of 0.15 Possible FOR infusion mg Benzodiazepine USE agents UNKNOWN max INGESTIONS DO IV, may by mg/kg

hr 1.5 but is monoxide 5 100% room Carbon in hr O2 Half-life in O2 of 100%; air carboxyhemoglobin hyperbaric Oxygen

replace as patient. levels and poisoned the Cyclic Follow needed continuous bicarbonate to antidepressants of IV, a mEq/kg followed by management in be potassium infusion; produce selectively used pH Sodium of 7.5–7.55 1–2 titrated corrosive glycols, and agents, hydrocarbons, (arsenic, heavy against is lead, or Charcoal caustic metals lithium), mercury, water-insoluble iron, compounds. ineffective

role or no of poisoned citrate) has magnesium cathartic patient. alone in the administration of (sorbitol The the a management stated based recommended. available data, The with charcoal a of in combination the cathartic on has not that AACT is use activated

cathartic Whole-bowel polyethylene glycol or drugs. may be (GoLYTELY) for effective ingestion nonabsorbable toxic a sustained-release of as using enteric-coated irrigation

Chloramphenicol and Vancomycin tobramycin, amikacin Aminoglycosides—gentamicin,

not recommend routine does of whole-bowel irrigation. The use the AACT of toxic packets zinc, there in its iron, potentially lead, drugs. is theoretical of illicit or ingestions benefit for use However,

or phenobarbital, theophylline. of carbamazepine, dapsone, patient activated life-threatening onlyif a should considered a amount be ingested charcoal quinine, Multiple-dose has or urine methotrexate be ingestion. of Alkalinization may helpful for salicylate and of salicylates, as lithium. for used distribution, bromide, substances such Dialysis degree low proteinbinding, and methanol,ethylene of havea may molecular weight, water solubility, glycol, that volume low be high theophylline, low

TABLE 45-6. SEE

the of about one U.S. doubt in contacting When therapy, determine what treatment can Control necessary. to help (1-800-222-1222) Poison is Centers additional

or in poisonings minimal result toxicity. Most no fewer Major fatality in than with ingestions, than 0.1%. of fewer seen is toxicity in 1% require with 12 facility, adolescents. in care of and health Only 12% of children 48% a with treatment poisoning under compared

educating household safe medications is for and toxins parents preventing necessary regarding ingestions. of Properly storage control has center If poison, be a should poison a ingested called. child

6 g/24 (max hr) with Deferoxamine rapid rates) of Infusion 5–15 mg/kg/hr (worse Iron infusion Hypotension IV

then hours infusion 5 12 q PO mg/kg/dose × mg/kg/dose 35–50 IV divided PO days; (2,3-dimercaptosuccinic bid Succimer × 10 ([DMSA]) 10 14 continuous mg/kg/day tid acid 5 × or days, days

sterile abscesses. May cause allergy. oil, use patients do in Prepared with peanut peanut in not

plus requires effects, home compliant toxic family lead-free Few

to needed mg, 2 for mg/kg Opiates IM as up Naloxone 0.1 SC, depression IV, repeat causes no respiratory ET, Naloxone children,

RM, BF, 256–257. Pediatrics, et From of Saunders, al., ed pp JW, Textbook 2011, 19, Kliegman St. Stanton Geme Nelson editors: Philadelphia,

Endotracheal; IM, SC, intravenous; oral; IV, subcutaneous. intramuscular; PO, ET, of 45-4 methemoglobinemia. for causes *See Table

marrow aspiration, injury, An acutely patient invasive during mechanical and procedures(intubation, resulting pediatric ventilation. life-sustaining andanxiety pain, venous ill access may discomfort, from placement)or surgery, have bone be the thepatient. optimal orsedation compromising identified provision goalsshould analgesia allow Clear of without to status physiologic of various (Table sedation immobility, all cooperation, goals awareness 46-1). lackof and drugs amnesia, and can of accomplishedwith Anxiolysis, are be behavioral is goals teaching),but necessary sedation procedures.Pain tachypnea. by these a verbal adjunct beachieved painful crying,agitation, visible techniques can for or and Many tachycardia, with (preprocedural hypertension, discomfort, often expressed may of be directed scales to in quantify an allow developed therapy. painand have more been varietyof A attempt of the especially of secondary withphysiologic ill populations in underlying acutely derangements are these to pathology. wellvalidated, Few children scales should analgesics sedation procedural addition Pain caused (Table interventions 46-2). always to betreated in by with

procedural sedation affect underlying medical any that identify A patient evaluation for choice sedative receiving may medical to be performed the must of conditions agents. ability factors gastroesophageal a liver or loose (especially adequacy illness, of airway and risk respiratory and affecting disease), system recent of reflux). maintain (adequate assessment aspiration nothing-by-mouth to respiratory airway) (for must be cardiovascular status), (renal status teeth), patent metabolism (asthma, the status, attention volume drug to of Specific paid of of of rate, respiratory heart During administration rate, effectiveness some as as the assessment ventilation. well oxygen must of include monitoring assessment and saturation, status procedural of sedation, must and person This not this by a signs vital time-based is assessment graph. in drugs for be is recording procedure; responsible the involved performed someone also who on administered must to Monitoring be baseline. until returned the has continued child painful tube (e.g., local sedation analgesia long-term to well. Patients endotracheal benefit as additional need sedation procedures only but receiving maintain may may anesthesia for placement) from are who or

pediatric intubated. Many sedation some analgesia and require ventilated while patients is choice an and most longer The opioid. combination a acting a common benzodiazepine of is Avoidance oversedation important. of goals allows sedation medications pain plan. achieve scores the titration of of Use appropriate sedation and to of for weaned. must be considered and use benzodiazepines of problematic opioids medications tolerance, occurrence Long-term leads to that are a and added as at to and when rare True provided needed achieve are the especially a addiction sedation pain control. occurrence, minimum is level medications adequate

function; Tolerance Sedation Produce is sedation, SEDATIVES Agents Midazolam Table short EFFECT apnea, that depressed CONCERNS hypotension, relaxation, 46-1 muscle amnesia possible; Anxiolysis, myocardial action

relaxation, amnesia action Lorazepam Anxiolysis, long midazolam; as Same sedation, muscle

increased hypertension, Dissociative reactions, tachycardia, Ketamine intracranial secretions, Anesthesia, analgesia, pressure emergent hallucinations; increases bronchial amnesia delirium,

Chloral Sedative dysfunction hypotension, Emesis, arrhythmias, hydrate hepatic

children; of sedative acidosis and cardiac Metabolic induction Propofol depress anesthesia Rapid-onset in for maintenance may function

Agents Analgesia NSAIDs—gastrointestinal EFFECT that administration Acetaminophen Ceiling ulceration analgesia, Produce ANALGESIC and 46-2 NSAIDs bleed, PO Table COMPLICATIONS antipyresis effect, Moderate requires

No pruritus, with abuse urinary tolerance decreased depression, Opioids ceiling effect; potential sedation, retention, respiratory gastric motility, nausea/vomiting,

sufentanil adverse stiff on syndrome Analgesia, effects Fentanyl, alfentanil, No sedation system; chest cardiovascular

PO, Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory oral. NSAIDs, drugs;

requires for self-reporting The that aspect of subjective pain used be assessment. children. used 1 developed patients to for pain for have been 10), analog patients scale older on a adult to (allowing of scales, rate Visual often imprecision scales children physiologic and for of incorporate Pain physiologic behavioral parameters, responses. the despite younger

lidocaine, be such Local used for can anesthetics, procedures. minor as requires intradermal However, lidocaine or subcutaneous injection. intradermal but EMLA, patients. less containing than by lidocaine a is and cream The lidocaine prilocaine, use many preferred of effective is

andadolescents. older in analgesia balanced Patient-controlled care is method children analgesia an for effective providing Children bolusanalgesics. pain sedation intermittent, patient-controlled and relief analgesiahave using experience less receiving thanpatients nurse-controlled, better pump be administered bolus infusions, continuous administration, both. or Analgesics through with can thepatient-controlled basal analgesia for the used is analgesia. opioid frequent patient-controlled most Morphine

opioid Monitoring curve and and continuous saturations oxygen rate shiftin CO2 infusions ventilatoryresponse of with of because the hypoxia. arecrucial respiratory decrease to to potential response

decreases the provide for surgery significant anesthetics can and analgesia without postoperative inhalation sedation analgesia in during the need Epidural period. also Decreased benefits costs and of may be length approaches. analgesic stay epidural of epidurals morphine. in Medications include used and bupivacaine vomiting, and blockade, effects Adverse nausea catheter technical requiring motor and problems include removal. deficits neurologic rare. permanent are Infection and

Heart resuscitation life Kleinman L, car et ME, pediatric 2010 and al: Schexnayder 3):S876–S908, SM, Chameides Association for 122(Suppl guidelines Part 14: diopulmonary support: cardiovascular advanced care, Circulation American emergency 2010

BF, St. of Kliegman editors: RM, Stanton Nelson Textbook Geme al, JW, et

Elsevier 2011, ed Pediatrics, Philadelphia, 19,

Paul A. and Levy W. Robert Marion

malformations, birth. 2% to have in Among the States, of born or at United identifiable function congenital 4% form infants abnormalities the may some number until 7%, identifiable age, 1 the of anomalies be not after year At neonatal period. because approaches malformations anomalies in children 30% greater The or is of populations; hospitalized prevalence pediatric to disorders. have inpatient 50% genetic congenital of much congenital

to a risk siblings. identify the geneticist etiology, that attempts occur disorder affected inheritance, of clinical and in The might child’s mode the children In malformations, the with condition may evaluating different categories: into patient’s be congenital classified 1. one five of

Single-gene 2. of anomalies mutations, children 6% for congenital with accounting

disorders, approximately 3. 7.5% Chromosomal for accounting

Multifactorially inherited accounting 20% conditions, for 4.

5. an that 2% pattern to show Disorders unusual for accounting of inheritance, 3%

caused by for accounting 6% Conditions teratogens, exposure to

adenine, of composed DNA guanine, is blocks: thymine. four and cytosine, nucleotide building to nucleotides, nucleotide other islinked a chain. forming Each bonds. of molecule chains hydrogen consists nucleotides of DNA togetherby held two The purine by and to cross-link The bonds hydrogen nucleotides, adenine the pyrimidines,thymine cytosine. andguanine, of Because other sets one cross-linking, of thenucleotide sequence the strand sequence. strand’s this strands two theDNA each to strand; replicates the this permits Separating nucleotides and the copies to bind complementary sequence. DNA

skeleton that, together protein form exists with DNA (chromatin), fragments a as multiple chromosomes. one inherited each of parent. of cells Human chromosomes, each from copy have chromosome 23 pairs with chromosomes the is pairs are Twenty-two remaining pair of autosomes; sex the chromosomes. called and one Y. X males chromosomes; Females have one X have two

basic Spread string,DNA sequences a of chromosomes, the heredity. on like form genes, beads along units the the end sequence, DNA. gene untranslatedregion, open reading 5′ and frame, an an Atypical of contains a to from 3′ arrayed the all the promoter everythree single the codon, for acid. amino nucleotides coding represent a In a open reading particular frame, the of signals. this a as amino others the of whereas acid,act sequence than in “start” as amino protein.Some acids signal, codons, coding serve sequence dictatesthe corresponding bases In specific “stop” a rather way, for andintrons oftwo become a which do not to code sequence the regions amino the codons, exons, the containing portions: amino consist start corresponds sequence), major and stop of acid (intervening genes acids, thatultimately Between sequence. partof

then RNA transcribed (mRNA), messenger are translated proteins. into into Genes During remove introns. RNA to processed transcription, is construct template The protein. as to a the serves mRNA

3.1 billion bases. contains genetic Human material for proteins, codes approximately DNA comprising genes. the Lessthan 21,000 of thegenome’s 2% mechanism called more splicing, a these 100,000 than proteins. genes alternative 21,000 maycreate Through DNA ENCODE(Encyclopedia function. likely not formation, much hadbeen protein theDNA, thispresumed of and junk DNA, some called project involved a in junk termed regulatory is but remainder functional DNA the of found Elements) serves The that of portion

Disease a the being by single the in most point may be type. sequence, the DNA with mutation, change DNA common mutations or caused base, in changes a that referred the point codon into amino changes thatgoes a mutation. acid missense and as is resulting A protein the to mutation a changes transcription thecodon point “stop” to that prematurely. stops A so a that mutation a mutation is codon nonsense is this how generally loss stems in one frameshift from shift and DNA codons. or often DNA or A a leads bases; more the causes to transcribed stop the of mutation addition premature

family representations geneticists of To are inheritance, a history. construct patterns analyze which pedigrees, pictorial specific and identify of represented circles. by by are squares Males and females with between symbols. are Matings partner’s line solid a connected each often couples Unmarried connected by a dashed are line. and from the Children parents couple a their below generation. are next represented are

added similar in are Grandparents, uncles, fashion. and aunts of also included. be may Children aunts uncles and written may or Ages or next each underneath symbol. birthdays be to patient indicated initial an The is (the arrow. contact) is proband the with who by some indicated key. a should are individuals Affected which be other technique, explained or shading, in in usually disease) the a dot a their (e.g., by for of cell are Carriers (Fig. sickle indicated disorder center symbol 47-1).

47-1 and Pedigree individuals Figure carriers. affected showing

of of include useful, three generations least be members. at family should pedigrees representatives To

is AD to on single fashion cause not gene inherited copy chromosomes, is (Table is the disease 47-1). in an condition If sex that one bearing a and of mutation that sufficient a gene of a each child 50% (Fig. disorders, mutated gene AD passing affected parent of In has a to an the chance Table 47-2; 47-2). one is Possessing nonworking gene working gene heterozygous. one termed and homozygous. If they the copies to referred are as are both same,

not disorder such known who are of an disorder, cause other people clinical carriers the Some obligate may symptoms. to individuals mutation signsof manifest a AD whereas show is mutation is who complete phenomenon carry all to an said disordershow as disorder, penetrance.If AD individuals referred This gene have penetrance. signs of to that a the for AD show Many penetrance. decreased disorders

show in individuals different in AD same variability expressed symptoms carrying mutated the Often, gene. disorders more disease. Some symptoms, have clinical have whereas mild individuals severe only others phenomenon referred variable expressivity. This as is to

appear sometimes in unaffectedparents a AD a of because child disorders mutation. of spontaneous age(>35 individuals some some associated account advanced of years Known spontaneous formost may in mutations disorders. with age), with to be paternal cases spontaneous patients mutation 3 growth receptor achondroplasia Approximately factor the 80%of with fibroblast have (FGFR3)gene. type in a examples dominantdisorders. autosomal of following The are

factor ∼1:12,000 chromosome Diseases fibroblast acanthosis FREQUENCY syndrome with COMMENTS nigricans growth Achondroplasia DISEASE Mutations receptor-3 in on the dysplasia 47-1 Nonsyndromic are Table Crouzon Dominant craniosynostosis gene for Thanatophoric 4p16.3. Autosomal 40% are of syndrome mutations cases dysplasia, Crouzon the cause new craniosynostosis) same nonsyndromic mutations (different achondroplasia, with acanthosis, in gene thanatophoric and

About neurofibromin, from for 1 a the result cases tumor at located suppressor gene 17q11.2. of gene mutations 50% Neurofibromatosis 1:3500 in new variable is quite Expression

(HD) “Huntington” in disease The chromosome on caused populations, protein by gene repeat expansion the (CAG) 1:5000–1:20,000 disease Variable a Huntington in 4p16.3 is

syndrome gene caused mutations fibrillin by (FBN chromosome Marfan The there in 1 1) 1:10,000 the syndrome variable expression is is (FBN-1) on 15q21.1;

most cartilage-derived in by skeletal dysplasia defect humans. bone, common Caused a in (ACH) is achondroplasia the abnormalities prominent flat the lead a with The stature, short rhizomelic macrocephaly, shortening a midface and to of bony forehead, limbs. The births. in occurs disorder 12,000 in approximately 1

caused is by gene. FGFR3 ACH mutations in the FGFR3 expressed bone development, during is endochondral in formation. Early same the one of by of mutations 1138). cases More base pair ACH than in caused 95% two are (site of hot active extremely known for spot. a mutational is site, This mutations, as

problems. psychological children and develop ACH often grow, with they medical associated As life-threatening apnea central and magnum a infancy. may and narrowing of of the compression present may in of Hydrocephalus complication and foramen the because occur brainstem fibula. the legs childhood occur the may growth unequal Bowing of of because in of tibia later and obstructive to loss childhood. in and are hearing ear apnea, common later due middle malocclusion, Dental dysfunction of may later the and short the manifest. adolescence, During effects psychological stature childhood adulthood, further complications compression In include of

Individual decreased penetrance with Affected individual

disorder. Figure showing decreased penetrance 47-2 Pedigree dominant auto-somal an for affected. Proband is (arrow) affected. Maternal is also grandfather even though symptoms The mother may of be carrier individual’s presumed of she show the only gene, disease. the is slight to

and mutations and sciatica. Males that Each occurs affected regulatory affected one two for in generally a chance code in child has equally transmission Male-to-male affected being involve parent of Traits roots are nerve genes of an females spans normal normal intelligence. People with ACH have life and

The diagnosis confirm ACH clinical made of is x-ray diagnosis. on of the abnormalities findings; the basis characteristic cases is that diagnose testing which prenatal Molecular diagnosis is but those are is for available or in difficult to usually reserved requested. amniocentesis using obtained cells villus sampling. by Prenatal testing, molecular is possible diagnosis or fetal chorionic through

individuals. of disorders, 3500 is estimated NF1 AD present in most 1 the to common in be One caused by the protein gene NF1, the mutation a is in for which NF1 neurofibromin. codes

of NF1 is extremely expression is the penetrance 100%, the variable. Although that are diagnosed. individuals affected features mild so have Many never they

CHAPTER 186. SEE

condition multiple by which a occurs 1 systems in gene. mutation in that organ the approximately pleiotropy, MFS shows A are individuals, in caused abnormalities in in condition 10,000 asingle in Caused and FBN1 the three gene, cardiac, MFS ophthalmologic, by mostly clinical in mutation symptoms a skeletal. systems: involve carinatum), of of laxity.Eye an to degeneration; ligament abnormal include lentis toes(arachnodactyly), (dislocation planus, joint to cataracts. sternum which include (pectus of lead the ectopia excavatum myopia, which findings pes and lead thinbody vitreoretinal the thelens, or can findings and scoliosis, high suspensory a Skeletal (dolichostenomelia), lens);and can fingers abnormalities tall, habitus spider-like Cardiac dilatationof the root. aortic progressive include findings followed dissection common Aortic complication. insufficiency is aortic by a MFS Other dural striae. abnormal septation,and of include ectasia, features clinical pulmonary criteria inTable Diagnostic 47-3. MFS for summarized are

mutations 25% of for account of FBN1 New cases in MFS. 600 in more been have mutations identified complex; and is large than The affected gene individuals. itself MFS the in protein caused rather by but symptoms by fibrillin. the of Many defect a usually in bound are of fibrillin by an protein (TGF-β), the factor-beta not excess transforming growth receptor an may MFS. angiotensin patients TGF-β, Losartan, levels of prevent lowers II antagonist in with aneurysms that also

on gene located manifest AR of chromosome that have (Tables copies a only Disorders inherited 47-5). non-sex manner an both 47-4, mutation are in a a pair when one are the of of whom to copy children Affected each usually parents, mutation. carries unaffected born (or being a couple offspring are a each members both mutation, has this chance their affected for of (Fig. of If of heterozygotes) carriers 25% 47-3).

CHAPTER SEE 150.

if years) ≥3, if years) <20 (Z (Z ≥2, >20 MFS†

(3 of 1 5)§ Facial features

from et BL, Data Loeys al. syndrome. Marfan nosology the The Ghent revised for 47:476-485, Med Genet 2010. J FBN1, borderline root findings; valve valve mitral MVPS, prolapse, myopia, aortic skeletal MASS, <2), prolapse mitral dilatation Fibrillin-1; syndrome. striae, (Z and should (SGS), (measured (LDS), Sinuses of be the *Aortic Valsalva); of Ehlers vascular syndrome (vEDS) the syndrome form dilatation excluded. †Loeys-Dietz Shprintzen-Goldberg at Danlos root (vEDS) for testing features be TGFBR1, COL3A1 collagen are biochemistry to done rule TGFBR2 suggestive, disorders. then help clinical these If or out DNA (LDS), should

indicates involvement. points; Total: more systemic than 20 points ‡Maximum 7 downslanting palpebral enophthalmos, Features: Dolicocephaly, retrognathia. fissures, §Facial malar hypoplasia,

SEE AND 55 185. CHAPTERS

theY been about identified present chromosome, are believed X More whereas 200 to chromosome. be on than have only 1000 the genes on copies these a possess have of Females, genes. and an X chromosome, males, two of gene on one whose copy Y only whereas two who have the chromosome, copies cells X one chromosome, chromosome have each of X randomly femaleembryonic development, in chromosome each inactivated X Early is cell. in one in skewed the (carrier) females X some chromosome muscular Duchenne many due A) There are dystrophy, disorder manifestationsof show X-linked which disorders to heterozygous inactivation. hemophilia (colorblindness,

congenital roughly Adrenal hyperplasia, variation to 1:5000 corresponds allelic variation. Phenotype 21-hydroxylase females. deficiency, virilization deficiency (CAH, in causes A cytochrome CYP21, CA21H,

XXI) complex The centimorgans at 0.005 subfamily located the of within and 6p21.3 within (cM) P450, is B HLA HLA gene

fibrosis conductance transmembrane on (CFTR) whites (CF) gene regulator 1:2500 is chromosome CF Cystic The 7q31.2

involved ataxia respiration. a (FA, frataxin) protein with Friedreich mitochondrial metabolism and iron 1:25,000 Frataxin is gene expanded GAA chromosome repeat in and is the of the located on the intron first The gene. a mutation 9q13-q21, is triplet common not anticipation does show FA

in appears Trait offspring their their or siblings, parents not in

of chance a the of each average, sibling are affected) 25% siblings of 25% being (at proband conception, of affected the On has time

has (heterozygote) normal sibling being chance a two of an of affected thirds A carrier a individual

be Males equally to females and affected likely are

Rare parental associated traits likely with be consanguinity to are

(e.g., with and for code hydroxylase–deficient enzymes generally and that associated PKU) Traits serious involve in are life span shortened in phenylalanine illness genes mutations

Phenylketonuria. PKU,

chromosome involving the are X recessive. disorders Most more one these only diseases to X females. chromosome, likely With males manifest copy of are the than affected being chance has (each inheriting none 50% of recessive an has of X-linked of 50% daughter a born but trait, female a a this Each woman’s to daughters carrier chance would son of a the carrier). trait be daughters, 47-6, is Fig. his the father Y of (thus chromosome, male-to-male be mutation transmits to their there sons; affected (Tables received not to no affected but they 47-7 would who are transmission) all and having his An father’s not carriers, 47-4).

SEE CHAPTER 182.

SEE CHAPTER 151.

recessive showing Pedigree 47-3 inheritance. family of autosomal Figure

few a described. X-linked disorders been dominant have Only less are group but and disorders, males inactivation. due Both females to of X-chromosome females this affected severe by symptoms have for reabsorb is in This D–resistant rickets a vitamin case phosphate ability (hypophosphatemic the which disorder is X-linked impaired. the to kidney’s rickets), resulting are in rickets and males. levels females as as in severe Phosphate not

disorders X-linked inmales. However, dominant lethal many are Affected have only but affected or normal normal daughters sons. can mothers sons in Affected utero. die skin with perinatal incontinentia hyperpigmentation characteristic rash pattern isthe has that in This blistering. case which a aftera pigmenti, swirling of skin develops females also nails, have involvement variable hair, system, nervous the central of Affected

with located is The CGG other X (FRAXA; syndrome males triplet 1:4000 condition to attributable names) The expansion is gene at Xq27.3 distal methylation is (inactivation) Fragile associated localized a of that genes. numerous Females expression. may have some to mosaicism; may and of phenotype may tissue site correlate the not lymphocyte Instability lead genotype

in is trait than of females in males higher the Incidence

of gene, to sons, more mild severely are half Trait show females, affected who carrier passed who expression may is the from of their

Each has a being of female of two a in one carrier chance son affected

is from never transmitted all Trait it father is affected of to their males to daughters; transmitted son

be the females, multiple carrier eyes. passed Because through trait generations can it may teeth, and skip develop normal in at birth, females later and the but regressionand Rett caused In firstyear mutations of microcephaly in gene, by life plateau. syndrome, developmental are MECP2 the of develop 50% seizures. patients About posture by a that autism of lose with hand-washing years hand oftenare movements. diagnosed 2 causes Girls them purposeful and, age, adopt all to

inheriteddisorders termed Often interplay genetic result the multifactorially polygenic inheritance, environmental and from of

inheritance. 47-4 Pedigree X-linked recessive showing Figure

factors. and interaction such most life, 20% spina to In genes disordersof bifida, common environment. cleft addition of andthe childhood malformations, asthma, congenital from between palate an lip adult as and atherosclerosis, result and including and cancer, diabetes, inheritance; disorders follow to not in tend rather, modes simple cluster of families. do These mendelian affected individuals inmonozygotic concordant and more twins. often would be The be occur dizygotic to firstand (although are expected relatives in in than not twins second-degree than likely they 100%) more disorders by chance,

Available StudentConsult.com @

(HPS) more in children, females. hypertrophic times is males 300 occur about Occurring in than pyloric in in five stenosis 1 to likely the HPS 5% progeny 2% and child future risk females. is recurrence for is 1.5% to with in to born, males 10% a When for and an daughters of risk affected. In child over adulthood, of having affected population: of would to likely the such be 1% markedly is affected increased sons be of the male men an general 4% to risk 20% born of the females: 7% affected and Even sons children 17% daughters affected. striking to to are more is of

of The bell-shaped genes. unknown the thickness the pyloric expression is determined including the a position curve; across factors, many on may multiple, by of muscle be the curve bell-shaped distributed on her threshold. certain which him an result position is cause HPS influences past may extreme when fall called environmental individual’s an to this or a genetic to curve, and a point, the left is females. HPS, for In males for than threshold is farther this to it

affected myelomeningocele in United 1000 1 in States. 1998, liveborninfants the Before a diedin with or frequency, stillborn although either the infants occurred were most Anencephaly similar period. neonatal conditions of 1998, staples the these because of acid, frequent. supplementation havebecome food less both folic of Since far with which follows: nongenetic genetic tube neural factorsdictate as speed the with Multiple and closes, the 1.

greatly ethnic in (NTDs) frequency defects of groups. The tube different neural varies common British less they where frequency the births, occurred 1 1990, in in Asia, Isles, was 4000. in in where, and common more the live 1 NTDs are in 250 in far component. differences ethnic suggest genetic a These

2.

an suggesting the intermediate the United United from States, to who a and United the in risks British Kingdom the have the Couples component. Isles risk environmental between States move

3.

occurrence NTDs The seasonality. of exhibits States, an suggesting during In and early component. winter, the again late fall are environmental affected to infants likely be more United born

4.

lowered Periconceptual an supplementation an NTD. with of has risk folic the significantly infant having acid with environmental This influence nutritional suggests component. an

5.

affected 40 a a child; 20 likely are more to who times provides evidence an component. have to this Parents one have child further second genetic NTD of with

Unusual Patterns of with Inheritance Disorders

DNA; is a of present are cells this DNA within single Human with diseases. contain in and group each non-nuclear chromosome mutations mitochondrion, a associated

nuclear DNA. which Mitochondrial replicates circular (mtDNA), in independently kb of is and DNA length, 16.5 set Involved proteins few in the protein nuclear RNAs run of to mtDNA are a synthesis. unique and proteins respiratory used coded production for on chain energy (most a to mitochondrial transfer codes DNA) cell, mitochondrial for means mtDNA all mitochondria the supplied are which maternally derived. oocyte, by is that Virtually passes mutation to of a all A with mutation woman children. mtDNA her this in mitochondria oocyte, of may phenomenon population More called heteroplasmy. one present a than in the be a present The mitochondria. may few in mutation many or mtDNA be egg When distributed divides, randomly. mitochondria the fertilized are presence symptoms present wild-type tissue. the of depends to on their ratio in mtDNA of the offspring, mutant a severity, The and particular in has and muscle, exists energy an clinical liver), mutant (brain, occur. tissue that high symptoms in mitochondria requirements of If abundance mutant present, be clinical fewer seen. mitochondria symptoms are may few If

example lactic episodes) MELAS an disorder. a encephalomyopathy and of strokelike is mitochondrial acidosis (mitochondrial with between years resemble early individuals that in MELAS childhood, insults vomiting, recurrent with episodic Normal seizures, strokes age. cerebral 10 and 5 and develop affected of that (A3242G) In mutation reveals the mitochondrial codes cases, MTTL1, of a gene specific for analysis RNA. transfer in a mtDNA 80% of a

In and ophthalmoplegia, diabetes MELAS is range first-degree loss, progressive in of hearing external cardiomyopathy, seen occurs, in mellitus. a which symptoms families relatives, including of a a the the all disease are depending who carries bearing the offspring affected, present. mitochondria percentage severity heteroplasmy, varies, woman mutation be on would of of because Although that mutation of

of uniparental normal child karyotype. Evaluation disomy reveals a (UPD) a with the to chromosomal identical patient’s are for the or of However, both). not chromosomes markers particular the (but father markers mother on found chromosome one copies two parent’s and one In other copy parent. the individual UPD, from chromosome of inherits the no

but UPD mechanisms, common few a probably occurs spontaneous results through mechanism. most the from a rescue one two trisomic time and the chromosome, of parent’s conceptuses At trisomy copies of the egg is miscarry with a often parent’s other with chromosome; one of through development. nondisjunction, in the conception, particular fertilized chromosome for early copy lose with the because affected one survive UPD chromosome. they copies Fetuses of spontaneously three of from patient the parent is chromosome lost, If single the has UPD. one

involves for than chromosome alternate explanation rather a monosomy An trisomy. of only a UPD. the duplication a time single to at single spontaneous inherited chromosome would Had conceptus, of the copy lead of the conception, chromosome,

Available StudentConsult.com @

prenatal postnatal disability; is syndrome and infants, developmental including and growth hypogonadotropic 1 in almond-shaped by characteristic approximately obesity hypotonia 10,000 eyes hypogonadism; and infancy. hands occurs delay; onset; small characterized feet; after in Prader-Willi which a (PWS), appearance, of are Early calories their maintain affected enough weight. so that infants to cannot hypotonic life, they in consume is thrive invariably Nasogastric to common. feeding is necessary, and failure muscle voracious life, develop children the of first and a tone During appetite. year improves of individuals deletion 70% to with of 15 Some a have (15q11). 60% chromosome small PWS 20% without In of chromosome 15. deletion, UPD have individuals a

is and to ataxic severe by that retardation, (AS) movementsof disorder of seizure condition mental arms legs, a appearance,and speech, inappropriatelaughter. craniofacial a absence the with is syndrome a moderate characterized characteristic Angelman for patients. also the demonstrated in is characterized can approximately 10% in in 70% 15q11region chromosome15 by AS be affected AS individuals; UPD deletion a of of

maternal in deletion occurs affected the individual results the PWS, 15. chromosome in from AS the only whereas has If chromosome deletion paternal occurring 15, a UPD responsible, in UPD paternal UPD maternal PWS, When in whereas is AS. results results PWS 15q11.2 chromosome if lacking, of To if AS 15q11.2 lacking, summarize, is paternal copy results. maternal occurs; is chromosome a

is phenomenon genomic explained imprinting. This by in a that causes phenomenon, is of parental epigenetic the gene. an expressionbased in the on DNA an nonheritablechange Imprinting gene alteration origin caused (small product by nuclearribonucleoprotein). protein PWS the deficiency SNRPN of is gene of the SNRPN on Although the andpaternally derived chromosome both derived is expressed paternally 15, onlyin chromosome. present maternally the bases readingframe chromosome the expression. are DNA because preventsgene physical open methylated; the of change this blocked inthe in Expression is maternal missing, either PWS results is through whenever UPD. paternal through deletion or chromosome15 a

of from AS second 15q11.2 a gene ubiquitin-protein a results expression in ligase E3A region. the of (UBE3A), chromosome lack in only 15. the chromosome maternally derived expressed UBE3A is normally gene present and is blocked. UBE3A expression paternal chromosome 15, is methylated, Although in symptoms the either the 15 region or occurs, maternal is will individual critical chromosome AS. of deleted, paternal if manifest UPD of Therefore,

Repeat Expansion a of Trinucleotide

StudentConsult.com Available @

and as appears bases human 50% three again. over over DNA of repeated sequences, than two repeat or More ataxia, by dystrophy, X disease, myotonic ataxias. syndrome, Friedreich expansion Fragile spinocerebellar and of repeats the Huntington include caused trinucleotide Disorders increase the the heart the at repeated bases three disorder, Although differs. is of of an number mechanism the each in molecular

with 1 frequency occurs inherited (FRAX), common is the X approximately 2000 which of syndrome disability. a most children, cause in of intellectual Fragile and valve including spectrum a Features profound) neurobehavioral a head; characteristic adulthood; mild prominent characteristic disorder, including intellectual forehead, twice from in (large findings jaw, mitral disability joint mild tissue patulous and and craniofacial prolapse; with to ears); profile, include macro-orchidism tubes, testicularvolume laxity, eustachian and autism normal disorders. (ranging connective

a guanineresidues cloning region two tripletrepeat Positional the in Xq27 composed (CGG). of cytosine identified one region and gene in a apart island, region has the repeats These that CpG occur promoter of the calledFMR1. been of to 45 FRAX who have 25 family individuals Unaffected historyof 35). CGG have 0 (most have repeats no to the of number have Inindividuals repeats mutation. than200; is people with full said such are FRAX, a greater to two these Between a repeats;always third to normal, group 200 are premutation individuals categories, has carriers. 56 phenotypically these

failure of FMR1 FMRP, FRAX protein the to a express results the gene. from product developing nucleus X in system during the cytoplasm Mental embryonic development. shuttles nervous and testis) mRNA “Fragile other (FMRP) areas between central Retardation (e.g., early the Protein” and the the large produced epigenetic because the the blocked number individuals premutation is methylated carriers, FMRP CGG unaffected in the in become FMRP in is of island those of and protein (an full Although phenomenon). transcription repeats mutation, with CPG because as expression Thus, of the occurs consequence failure a loss-of-function of mutation—the sequence. promoter of of a methylation FMRP FRAX of

In the carriers, from in an premutation gametogenesis. female occur the mutation during range the repeats premutation number of full may to expansion this understood. expansion of is cause not The a X and in FRAX, syndrome have and/or of failure may neurologic premutation tremor/ataxia life. as later not females condition these ovarian known Although symptoms signs manifest carriers do fragile premature

result in congenital malformations. biologic embryonic agents that damage birth tissue 6.5% Approximately and all potential defects are physical, the toteratogens—chemical, have attributed of to or intrauterine such such as and mellitus; nonprescription); teratogenic to (rubella); maternal Agents drugs environmental and as be diseases, known substances, infections metals. and alcohol (prescription include heavy diabetes agents birth effect important, on and because limiting is to developing teratogenic (see 59, prevent fetus of to agents defects way these the Knowledge exposure an and 58, their effective Chapters 60). is

the known of pattern a maternal to malformations affected cause in Rubella infection fetuses in utero. first was 66). Toxoplasma gondii, varicella potentially are teratogenic herpes and Chapter simplex, utero in additional (see Cytomegalovirus, infections

maternal congenital mellitus can result the in and diabetes anomalies fetus. in phenylketonuria Maternal these Chapter (see before protects disorders and pregnancy developing the of control during child 59). Strict

in which occurs the may teratogenic spectrum 20 be 1000 syndrome. most alcohol 10 disorder, children, to common Fetal per disabilities, microcephaly, prenatal characteristic and facial growth a Features postnatal deficiency, skeletal cardiac and include anomalies, appearance. and developmental syndrome, fetal throughout drink cause pregnancy. women alcohol must the the To full-blown pregnant alcohol Lesser all of symptoms. gestation part to milder lead consumption or the during will

phenytoin (see are acid, retinoic 59). and Warfarin, agents additional Chapter teratogenic

increase to children Nagasaki, shown malformations. pregnancy Hiroshima retardation, radiation with microcephaly, mental Japan, born was of result skeletal rate abortion spontaneous and exposure the in and and in during High-dose were of effects these 25 to exposure rad. cause approximately Estimates range. dose millirad in routine the diagnostic is The examinations radiologic from

of are to Individuals who individuals geneticist a of referred counseling come suspicion genetic a disorder probands; for consultands. genetic called are because evaluation a reasons of wide made neonate, of genetic be life for pregnancy). childhood, for different may stages at (fetus, variety and Referral

have about disorders relatives how is a Families questions disorder affected may with genetic inherited. with child risk of having affected can an The with and a the inheritance be discussed pattern geneticist.

some cultures, it relatives common to In for mate. is family. increase consanguinity as with gene autosomal the the mutated of likelihood (AR) child genetic that having born a it recessive condition, but not increase will that or chance relatedness disorder, single the This rare may offspring does particular segregates be through any a an closer that mutated more the chance that or the partners, the common, the increasing offspring in disorder. between relation will greater risk couple genes Generally, the have AR shares the the one with AR The 1 an a disorder child producing first cousins is in of 64. risk they belong commonly in couples, important conditions it to evaluating to which for found that test In determine to and ethnic these group. is group

ethnic is their particular may in be couples more commonly common for disorders group. that screened It for occur to including disorders, cystic be a Canavan Gaucher fibrosis, syndrome, Bloom AR Jewish heterozygosity of disease, anemia, disease, screened Fanconi familial dysautonomia. choose to and of for People disease, background for syndrome, Niemann-Pick panel Tay-Sachs Ashkenazi may to may for People screened ancestry sickle choose anemia. African-American of cell be originated for basin the in ancestors People thalassemia. screened whose be may Mediterranean

liver, tract, secreted by screening during for (AFP), sac. life fetal gastrointestinal the Historically, screening α-fetoprotein prenatal and a maternal protein serum involved yolk the maternal placenta crosses circulation. of the Some enters and the AFP levels (NTDs) Although tube maternal were to omphalocele with associated AFP low serum detect defects associated integument of AFP and fetal to high disruption aneuploidy. or was used as gastroschisis, of the found neural be such levels screening with initially fetal of 18, with 13) Approximately maternal will by detected low AFP trisomies be autosomal (Down serum of fetuses trisomy syndrome, 50% trisomy levels. create to gonadotropin maternal estriol the other screen. and Three to proteins—unconjugated the (HCG)—were quad added human chorionic (uE3),inhibin screening serum A, The the detection to about increased of rate compounds 80%. addition these

screen second The trimester. is quad the done in of of first fluid measurement the the fetus a trimester, nuchaltranslucency. collection neck Duringthe posterior of developing termed is in the fetus. nuchal chromosomal for as well as amarker the in An abnormalities translucency and increase genetic structural anomalies is provided a marker. This first trimester noninvasive association aneuploidy rate 70%. Once was of done,the measurements nuchal standardization approached translucency detection for enhanced (pregnancy ofalmost analytes, trimester first two first and plasma 90%. detection to PAPP-A for protein)has trimester rate freeβ-HCG abnormalities a with Testing screening associated

for as womenolder fetal counseled for (and nondisjunction so resulting should as rises of all risk in Although more older woman aneuploidy aneuploidy their a pregnant of to age), than gets years women beindividually 35 risk abnormalities. the andother of risk second trimester factor. the and age screening first producesan individualized women’s combination together A with trimester of emphasizethat screens second first to screening just both It and is to increased identify risk. important these testsare serum sampling amniocentesis, definitivetest, or villus is chorionic offered either anomalies testing. (CVS) If or fetal ultrasound, family further if there from screening, history, high,or is this as concern is then risk more a about cytogenetic chromosomal common. of usually is the microarray techniques,but use Fetal more abnormalities chromosomal are testedfor cells becoming by on the well for forknown cells, as be fetal mutations known for familial metabolic screening Biochemical can as done ofan also testing family disorders molecular a disorder history inherited

follow-up screening to confirm Historically, testing invasive has findings. serum the of required use submit or to invasive carries loss, testing CVS. pregnancy an to women amniocentesis were real risk of willing a small not many but Because test, risk needed definitive fetal negligible. is noninvasive has is a in one which What been noninvasive Recently, been search for a such the has successful. test

offers maternal fetuses blood. the DNA mother’s nothing ability more blood Prenatal in a cell-free to the of in trisomies sample than fetal using diagnosis detect using in still technique pregnancies. Although high-risk research the stage, in being is piloted this

at screening gestation. sonogram common is weeks’ It pregnant 18 women for have to a An done look is anatomy congenital anomalies. for to scan spine heart, examined. lungs, and kidneys, Brain, are

maternal acute the lead either illness presence during of fetus. developing in to may chronic The complications pregnancy or teratogenic. are that potentially maternal to conditions the expose Chronic medications fetus may Acute may defects. illnesses that cause agents birth infectious the Lyme expose such fetus to as cytomegalovirus varicella, disease, and factors, alcohol use, or smoking, radiation chemicals, such genetic necessitate and as to Other also may exposure maternal counseling. maternal

percent of to newborns abnormality percent a defect. have Two genetic birth or four a definition This functional that apparent defects broad not visible be a at birth not but malformation also birth. only defect of might includes

childhood morbidity significant on Birth mortality. have defects a and impact a childhood of can deaths Almost genetic cause. to traced be 11% deaths increases contributing to to are almost this 25%. factors related childhood genetic If considered, or prenatal infant. deafness, head disorder routine increase to in may with weight, length, developmental results growth chromosomal of of by geneticist a malformation, of presence of Consultation testing) findings, abnormal infant the newborn for the or a a disorder of a failure in presence a (as or different in (e.g., a gain a abnormality or including the the or a many test, growth), blindness prompted genetic or abnormal and screening family be history knowledge delay, abnormalities abnormality newborn result on genetic chromosomal

may be has of and that onset. genetic a disorder by Adolescents a evaluation geneticist for adults seen late life. adult-onset as such disease Huntington in neurodegenerative spinal disorders, muscular present atrophy, later and Some diseases) syndrome, forms 2) until and (Usher adolescence adulthood. early type symptoms Some or show blindness significant neurofibromatosis (retinal of may deafness not hereditary degenerative history a cancer a may thyroid, consultation cancers). prompted known Genetic and of hereditary also colon, syndrome(breast, family for be ovarian types mutation to of for be syndromes developing a these may wish cancers. at certain and carry if risk done have for testing determine to would they Individuals a prompt or genetic disorder personal history of testing planning. family anticipation history known abnormality or in chromosomal of might pregnancy A

to pedigree A help inheritance various usually patterns. drawn is visualize dominant, determine the about or AR, Answers help X-linked, there family to questions is if autosomal an disorder. sporadic of of to affected is When the closely check child examine an to parents new it manifestations. for presence onset the AD is the necessary disorder, with a is unaffected, the 0, parents of in recurrence extremely one new of of likely because child’s mutation; not is the If of risk most a condition the result low (although gonadal the are the the of parents). mosaicism possibility is rises one varying When due (even parent to 50%. penetrance), risk to the so mildly recurrence affected risk to the focus family X-linked there determine if disorders, history enough testing. the maternal significant is is to warrant a on With

maternal Questions X-linked important and chromosome the about to ascertain abnormalities paternal age age to couple’s leading age and for risk mutations related are the AD to new disorders. for that the A abnormalities history abortions spontaneous than in abortions fetus. one the of balanced parents risk spontaneous more to two are increases chromosomal a and the has due of translocation the

a information consultation, about pregnancy and gather 58, it 59, important 60). (see is Chapters During to genetic the fetus. the has condition, known a seizure such in maternal A diabetes, medical a of history or disorder consequences chronic as related) (work exposure of of teratogenic; cigarettes, can pregnancy use or in be serious toxic the effects woman’s developing or chemicals abuse alcohol, Medication pregnant have to can the fetus. used on drugs been cause found with others, Maternal during among the B19, fetus. to cytomegalovirus, has Toxoplasma, malformations varicella, infection and parvovirus in pregnancy

CVS reveals is if an amniocentesis needed or abnormal results. Follow-up a may needs A follow-up ultrasound that the fetal when born. malformation detect infant is Often detected hydronephrosis prenatally. is ultrasound infants need repeat after a These soon birth.

than more have to infant likely born is term infant. prematurely a complications An An for age; and or small, infant child for the (see each Chapters implications 60). 58, 59, his her can of be these large gestational appropriate, or has small for general, age abnormality. a infant of a to an suggestive finding exposure presence the or chromosomal is In is gestational that teratogen the of

of intermittent a Children or metabolism multiple have symptoms history often for who of dehydration with have hospitalizations inborn vomiting. errors neuromuscular normal have weakness by a with followed period Children disorders or may increasing ataxia. infections recurrent can such often lysosomal mucopolysaccharidoses, have diseases, as the sleep develop Children and apnea. with storage ear

genetic disabilities. associated with developmental are Many disorders many inborn not of storage the always metabolism, errors (see developmental the newborn development and present period; manifestations However, cause period after the 7 from be of normal a 8). disorders, of disability onset Chapters including may the symptoms no until or adult-onset have disorders Some later. teens is school Assessing problems important. or intervention with is proper for The age onset, important there decline at type whether of and all learning are continued improvement problem, assessment.

symptoms, with signs, or of all disease. for suspicion genetic and patients necessary A is careful thorough physical examination an unsuspected Sometimes diagnosis. subtle to may clues lead Chapter syndrome in Features suggestive 50. in of detail more are discussed a

the material, chromosomal known An capable of using dividing. individual’s karyotype,can as analyzed be cells are blood prenatally, but obtained marrow usual bone pediatrics, chorionic from the fluid from from cells, skinbiopsy peripheral forsuch In source also can or, (fibroblasts), lymphocytes amniotic villi be used. aspiration, or obtained cells dyes, is medium are the withGiemsa chromosomes andstimulated slides are are in either Cells made, to the their prophase, are or grow, arrested other metaphaseor and placed analyzed. stained chromosomes division in culture

easy squat, and count. to are In chromosomes metaphase, short, should in Metaphase such aneuploidy syndrome, as a a monosomy. children or ordered analysis trisomy features known whose be suggest details metaphase Chromosomes are seen analyzed out; thin, far more analysis drawn long, in gives preparations. and in prophase are than analysis obvious Prophase ordered an disorder. without anomalies in multiple with individuals congenital is

Fluorescent situ in (FISH) specific DNA. of identification the a or presence of absence region of allows the hybridization question in marker is probe for fluorescent complementary region A specific the attached. and is DNA a generated, microscope. viewed with The from probe cells is the incubated under subject and a the DNA segment of of be probe The to the fluoresces, number allowing question copies counted. in bound which of in in of a which useful with 15q11.2 in a This is technique syndrome, deletion associated in velocardiofacial is (DiGeorge) deletion and a Angelman syndrome segment occurs, syndrome, and Prader-Willi 22q11.2.

variant) cases subtlechromosomal number prophase in a (array in or Microarray hybridization duplication which (copy comparative analysis supplanted deletion issuspected. genomic CGH)has markers genome. normal probes studied being array labeled control sequencesspread thousands individual around hybridized with the the to In is from FISH-like fluorescent a CGH, of DNA for and and derived The noncoding probes and knowngenes regions. from are is determinewhether copynumber it each the the fluorescent DNA. in in difference compared intensityof has marker the By to ratio of site, any with possible control at analyzing the question individual

genetic identification mutations DNA in growing of analysis Direct number disorders. allows of a gene can be specific Using chain reaction, the analyzed. question in and polymerase amplified direct The website lists www.genetests.org in disorders available testing. DNA identifies and laboratories which such analysis performing is

to occur number. gametes that Errors of can of or in chromosome production during structure the abnormalities lead meiosis syndrome trisomy chromosomal 21 (TS), rarer trisomy deletions, and caused or abnormalitiesinclude 18, (KS), syndrome by Klinefelter Turner as inversions. well (Down or duplications, syndrome Syndromes trisomy as DS), chromosomal 13,

in only approximately in Chromosomal of abnormalities fertilized liveborn 0.6% 8% of infants. but occur ova abortuses being 45,X chromosomal of are of Fifty common most percent 45,X abnormalities, have an (TS); the spontaneous spontaneously estimated aborted. 99% fetuses approaches of the most the loss autosomal viable aneuploidies, 80%. DS, The rate fetal for also viability. chromosomal abnormalities other affect fetal Most adversely older the (small that features presence or of the In thrive, failure suggest three anomaly for birth malformations. and newborns of weight developmental more age), delay, and gestational chromosome congenital to children, a include low presence

a results to of During in chromosomal pair meiosis failure or separate nondisjunction. properly mitosis, the number non-disjunction. change chromosomes in a from Aneuploidy that of results is copies chromosome. or three may have one (monosomy) (trisomy) particular a of A cell

Available @ StudentConsult.com

most number. chromosomal common of the DS is abnormality occurs 1000 births. It of every in 1 occurs I. nondysjunctionalevent 68%, Most maternal phase to nondisjunction; the in (92.5%)are due in cases meiosis is are 47,XX,+21 of 21 trisomy there result designated using 21(trisomy a standard cytogenetic copies ofnondisjunction, As or 21); 47,XY,+21. chromosome nomenclature, three occurs of chromosomes short translocation, robertsonian the part containing and at In 13, when 22)fuse 14, is a twoacrocentric chromosome which are or ribosomal (p), RNA, lost. (q) cases, centromeres, 15, the the 4.5%of copies arms of long 21, (numbers extra arms of the 21; chromosomes DS and translocation to leading nomenclature 46,XX,t(14q21q)or 14 46,XY,t(14q21q). is The standard most commonrobertsonian involves The DS karyotype exclude a parents to trans-locations of infants with have balancedtranslocation. should a

approximately with of occurs. DS, mosaicism children In to 1% 2% trisomy chromosome 21 These cells: individuals with one two populations and with normal have a of complement. one and fertilization from results occurs a divisions, from few or rescue. that event trisomic after nondisjunctional cell either after a Mosaicism a 46,XY. of cell returns to the loss or aneuploidy this 46,XX The case, In populations +21/46XX is 47,XX, or a individual mosaic these cells 47,XY,+21/46,XY. designated as and to of the is two either referred for mosaic are more with believed the clinical Although variations it widely wide findings. are affected, individuals that in there mildly DS is

the likely DS with most in Children newbornperiod. are diagnosed normal birth but These weight are have tend to infants hypotonic. andlength, large appearance,with brachycephaly, epicanthal midface, upslanting The birth. hypoplastic nasal flattened apparent bridge, folds,and tongue, fissures, at characteristic facial palpebral is flattened occiput, protruding palmar second transverse between gap crease,and a first single broad Infants often and also wide hands, a toes. haveshort with the decreased problems activity. The feeding hypotonia severe may cause and

or 50% atrioseptal canal, children ventriculoseptal valvular have including and congenital disease, of defects, DS Approximately disease. with heart atrioventricular DS tract anomalies. of have Approximately with newborns gastrointestinal 10% common imperforate and defects The duodenal annular pancreas, most atresia, anus. three are

congenital are found infants part as program. which have to Four of hypothyroidism, with identified the is of percent DS 18% to newborn screening Acquired more a hypothyroidism common problem. is child’s periodically Thyroid must testing monitored be function the life. during

and Polycythemia treatment. >70%) birth is require common (hematocrit may levels at with blood Some white DS leukemoid cellcounts. with elevated showa infants markedly reaction, own first it its resolving resembles on monthof a leukemia, congenital this Although condition, life. over the is self-limited increase 10to without Nonetheless, leukemia, in children of DS with risk with 20-fold DS. individuals also a an increased have compared risk with are children, 3 of is types similar other being the youngerthan of predominant older years age, type DS than In of with to leukemia 2 age, the individuals type. with ofleukemia megakaryoblasticleukemia; acute those in year lymphoblastic acute generally children the

are an approximately increased second predispose that likely vertebrae to cord first more cervical injury. atlantoaxial 10% Children the and distance instability, DS susceptible develop have to infection, more to may cataracts, between spinal with and individuals develop features. of 35 than years Many older age Alzheimer-like

had cytogenetic a The child’s parents recurrence findings. who child on the depends DS have risk with for recurrence pregnancies). trisomy is (added If used 1% the child years has to of risk age; the 21, is the age-specific for alone subsequent age-specific risk for up empiric 40, 40 after women to the risk a If the robertsonian child analysis chromosomal must has be of parents translocation, both performed. is approximately karyotypes), the to balanced (i.e., with and normal novo has one cases, cases, 35% having 65% spontaneously, found both translocation a de parents of have In of in parent translocation. arisen carrier: recurrence is father which the is to the parent the the 2% 15%; 10% to on depends The the if is carrier, if the 5%. the recurrence risk is risk risk carrier, is mother

live the most or common (47,XX,+18 18 autosomal 47,XY,+18) in is 1 in births. Trisomy second trisomy, 7500 approximately occurring of trisomy are spontaneously with trimester. than 95% in More 18 aborted the conceptuses first their of lethal; birthday. affected usually than fewer is survive 18 infants first Trisomy until 10% trisomy infants gestational small Most with are 18 for age. hypertonia, features include prominent malformed Clinical micrognathia, and short low-set occiput, ears,

or hemangiomas forehead Capillary bifrontal Micrognathia and aplasia) premature Microcephaly Deafness 60%–80% Narrow (arrhinencephaly) Prominent alae occiput Head Holoprosencephaly and Cleft corneal fissures lip (e.g., appearance Scalp nose cutis in lip cases of Tight and Microphthalmia, abnormalities nasal diameter palate palpebral and Cleft Narrow Small face Sloping defects hypoplastic palate

@ StudentConsult.com Available

the most in is in Occurring 1 of and 500 cause hypogonadism KS births, infertility commongenetic men. male in extra Chapter of presence (47,XXY) causedby chromosome is an It the (see 174). X from sperm a egg. The arises chromosome X the or extra either the nondisjunctionin KS mosaic, the to found About 15% with with common. most 46,XY/47,XXY of featuresof boys be are mosaicismbeing from puberty, the of rest are the Before population. boys KS with phenotypically indistinguishable

the 16 The diagnosis is made when boy is or ofage. often years 15 that the point, the the presence and volume should developmentof testes axillary finding to that disorder. in At the progressive hair the remaininfantile in of alert of clinician pubic and longlimbs. with adults with tend Adolescents young KS be tall, to adolescence occurs. adulthood, or During gynecomastia

produce of failure maturation of with viable males the sperm. testes, Because have failure deficiency to and and testosterone KS of growth voice, in of production secondary to hair, later such the and develop Low characteristics, failure libido. facial testosterone testicular of results sexual as deepening adulthood, and osteopenia osteoporosis In develop. supplementation findings, testosterone indicated. these Because is of

viable are produce they men KS Most infertile with sperm. few because born father complement. with all have this use is to chromosome coupled isolation for through injection, to these testicular biopsy, viable possible with in and technology men normal children men of of using fertilization vitro sperm intracytoplasmic children; the KS it Through a had sperm

@ Available StudentConsult.com

embryos with 99% which in of however, survives is a are to conceptus only aborted. spontaneously term; monosomic TS condition the 45,X 13% The most is first-trimester common for losses. aneuploidy of in found 1.4%,), seen in conceptuses pregnancy 45,X (accounting notable developmental 3200 in mild spectrum physical for its females, 1 is of in Occurring live-born relatively and findings. TS have life to tend and intelligence Affected expectancy. women normal

characteristic face, appearance typically low-set, have bridge, with with malformed mildly ears, and folds. triangular TS epicanthal Females flattened facial a nasal and with neck, without or hands hygroma, chestwith shield-like the the There puffiness of a cystic distance, of webbing widened is internipple

nails, Extremities Polydactyly Overlapping Hypoplastic (clinodactyly) and toes fingers nails of hyperconvex

over fourth Limited overlapping hip mo delays Only Clinodactyly developmental index Rocker-bottom fingers; projections prenatal Nuclear Severe 5% growth and nails Hypoplastic abnormalities fifth retardation over >6 General feet Renal live postnatal abduction and third, in and neutrophils

growth delays live birth, Severe Premature postnatal retardation hernias >1yr polyhydramnios Only or abdominal and 5% Inguinal developmental and prenatal

septal septal Atrial arteriosus; defect; ASD, VSD, defect. ventricular PDA, patent ductus

and hypoplastic 49-1). of rocker-bottom digits sternum, feet, (Table third characteristic fists—the clenching the fourth and fifth overlap digits and nails, second

47,XY,+13) births. live The (47,XX,+13 in 12,000 common 1 of 13 third in the trisomy trisomies, occurs or only survive the infants fatal first of first 8.6% their beyond in of is year birthday. It life; usually

trisomy 13 Infants numerous have malformations with (seeTable 49-1). small are infants gestational age and microcephalic. These for (singleorbit), as system Midline midline facial defects central suchas nostril), cleft nervous anomalies, alobar and arecommon, as cyclopia (single such are palate and holoprosencephaly. cebocephaly lip may sloping,ears often The is and are oranophthalmia small occur. and generally microphthalmia forehead malformed, polydactyly of the Postaxial iscommon, clubfeet rocker-bottom or is as feet. hands the girls common hypoplasia andcryptorchidism whereas generallyhave of labia Hypospadias boys, in are minora. with trisomy13 Most heart infants disease. congenital also have trisomy seen Many the occiputcalled of with aplasia some thiscondition essentially scalp polydactyly all a pathognomonic and the congenita; findings, diagnosis of lesion this in have or cutis infants for conjunction over the facial with findingis 13. when punched-out

and feet. bicuspid 45%, include heartdefect (in malformations life, most aorta is with the aortic by commonanomaly, valve; aneurysm aortic Internal followed the may in coarctation poststenotic develop). later of may dilation congenital horseshoe of kidney, than50% including in patients. are Renalanomalies, seen more generalpopulation. than hypothyroidism fivetimes a to Short women acquired estimated feature is stature of TS is the in frequently and occur cardinal more condition, in with this

results instead ovaries amenorrhea. of well-developed streak women developing leads to gonads The these and from prevents secondary characteristics deficiency, sexual in dysgenesis) estrogen (gonadal which of presence women most with may complete pubertal require are normal fertile, and Although development. 10% TS replacement secondary have to affected of even sexual development women estrogen

these Infertility in corrected replacement. estrogen women not is by using ova Assisted women with TS to reproductive technology children. bear hasallowed donor poststenoticdilatation women the pregnancy,these dissecting of aneurysm, carefully, may followed because During leading aorta, to be must occur.

Many during period are newborn detection escape girls the because with TS phenotypic subtle. features TS develop receive (and diagnosed are therapy); to physical the 33% sexual in of workup and short are the during diagnosed features; childhood, are newborn when heart because 33% hormone diagnosed of disease adolescence stature the for secondary another with often 33% growth in presence a children of fail they About period during characteristics. final

karyotypic girls TS wide. spectrum is in The with by and Xq (45,X/46,XX (leading arm have in to one [46,X,i(Xq)], a chromosome copies a of monosomy are 25% mosaic a X Xq of trisomy is 50% two have which 45,X Xp); approximately an isochromosome and 45,X/46,XY). of Only karyotype; or long the 15% represented cause congenital long chromosome arm (Xq) of (p) and of X dysgenesis. short stature Deletions the the deletions malformations, involving (Xp22) arm produce whereas gonadal the short

associated age. X TS caused by advanced Although is monosomy not with nondisjunction, is maternal chromosome Y conception; loss of is believed either (rather or is, a from an it a mitotic that results it than that after 45,X meiotic) nondisjunctional event. karyotype is a postconceptual the X Rather,

with cry characteristic 5 infancy, A in chat of the short is responsible its arm of hypoplasia. syndrome, the duringearly result tracheal deletion chromosome forcri du catlike ocular microcephaly, including low-set clinical folds, the failure include disability, weight thrive, to dysmorphism, fissures,and obliquity hypotonia, birth and malformed Other low developmental features postnatal palpebral downward of andcraniofacial ears. hypertelorism,epicanthal malformations congenital and the seen. be may other disease, of lip and Clefts palate, heart

the chromosomal of The on du deletion. of severity chat cri depends thesize clinical syndrome associated are more Larger deletions expression. with severe usually novo;the thefather. the Most in from is de deletion arise 5 cases inherited chromosome

Available StudentConsult.com @

deletion small a syndrome 7q11.2. to of is due chromosome Williams 80% pulmonic-valve aortic-valve and most anomalies. the of being with children, in seen common and heart stenosis is Congenital pulmonic disease affected peripheral supravalvar stenosis manifesting birth have children these growth stature. have Although often delay, they normal short weight, with the median stellate pattern the the a with blue a perioral anteversion flare have irides and eyebrows, pigment, of appearance and region, of (“elfin facies”), bridge periorbital They of of nasal fullness facial depressed nares. distinctive with 50 reveals intellectual in social and disability areas. to developmental but strength range) common, the testing in 60 personal (average IQ skills deficiencies cognitive in is Moderate in Hypercalcemia present is neonates.

syndrome a Individuals with have personality. Williams striking often Loquacious frequently as are a they gregarious, cocktail party having described and personality. have 10% of approximately with syndrome However, features spectrum children Williams disorder. of autism pitch). absolute Patients (about musical have 20% have or unusual occasionally perfect ability deletion. have a de Williams syndrome with novo Most children rare pattern. In parent the autosomal dominant an in inherited cases, a is deletion from

novo de tumor, deletion. a mental is deletion syndrome genitourinary aniridia, anomalies, WAGR and is a and (Wilms caused 11p13 of retardation) by generally hypospadias. abnormalities cryptorchidism include Genitourinary and half have stature, and short may Patients have often microcephaly. 159). patients (see Chapter of 50% genitourinary mental retardation develops aniridia, and Wilms tumor in with abnormalities,

SEE 47. CHAPTER

SEE CHAPTER 47.

22q11.2 Syndromes Deletion Chromosome

Available StudentConsult.com @

face including findings are syndrome, group DiGeorge several Deletions chromosome syndrome, syndrome. called anomaly conotruncal for of have velocardiofacial 22q11.2 been Shprintzen by that and names, a syndrome, responsible of

of chromosomal are a These deletion. which all findings, to conditions continuum virtually the due of represent

inherited be novo. Although dominant arise autosomal 22q11.2 inan fashion, most cases de can deletions chromosome a velopharyngealinsufficiency; with features conotruncal defects the nose include prominent tetralogy clefting broad a defect, nasal root. palate Fallot, and (including characteristic and of aortic cardiac including and ventriculoseptal Common truncusarteriosus, facial of arch); right-sided appearance, a and as are mild common, is impairment. intellectual languagedifficulties Speech in Morethan these with additional abnormalities identified have conditions. been 200 individuals T-cell immunodeficiencies, have About related to largely dysfunction. 70% than disturbances, in more adults. of psychiatric affected has A schizophrenia spectrumof including and seen bipolardisorder, wide 33% been

the the the called and DiGeorge an heart.This cranial conotruncal important spectrum findings, of structures micrognathia), chromosome Damage thymus gland,the that parts pouches, third and (clefting 22 the region malformationsequence, embryo, abnormalities parathyroid to embryonic of is the palate, thedeveloping portion fourth pharyngeal of the syndrome. form glands, deletion leads of the the of in developingface to

is usually fluorescent small analysis; in by is to deletion. The in identify that needed situ the standard either deletion be microarray to occurs hybridization chromosome chromosome seen chromosomal too or 22q11 deleted within gene A sequence. TBX1 called is the It features the syndromes. responsible is of the is of copy one many believed 22q11 of deletion TBX1 various for deletion of that

occur meiosis. and crossing and deletions over misalignment during unequal secondary Duplications to a the of are found in chromosomes population (0.06%). Small small percentage extra with associated abnormalities, other phenotypic chromosomes “marker” sometimes apparent other and times are they These have effects. no and mental retardation

this of almost accounts chromosomal 15 40% of and is chromosomes, common marker inverted most group all abnormalities. duplication the of Chromosome its for the larger or chromosomal worse depend the the 47,XX,+inv region, extra dup children Features on with present: of 47,XY,inv the in (15q) material the seen size prognosis. dup(15q) the have behavior developmental Children disorders; and autism problems. common, to spectrum are disorder with this seizures variable a degree are of disability tend as philtrum, short a palpebral in lower downward-slanting phenotype a minimal The crease dysmorphic bridge, fissures, shows nose the micrognathia. a and lip, with prominent long and mid-line well-defined a forehead, features, sloping with broad and a nasal

Named supernumerarychromosome duplication eyes 22q11. cat a an patients’ a due the is coloboma to inversion gives catlikeappearance, small, that eye for iris with of syndrome two twocopies 50% normal 22 colobomas they this of 22q11 individuals the chromosome. copies in the four the than this chromosome on of chromosome occur with of result copies syndrome, the region.Although name of The plus infewer marker extra retardation, atresia mild Other features fissures, renal tags,anal clinical auricular hypertelorism, disturbances, fistula, behavioral ocular with and/or include palpebral and micrognathia, rectovestibular mental pits downward-slanting agenesis. mild

the congenital malformations) Dysmorphology a (often congenital and is of multiple malformations particular characterize recognition that syndrome. features of the dysmorphic pattern malformations, of a Syndromes features, identifiable including dysmorphic and deformations, unifying, have abnormalities, etiology. collections abnormal that are behaviors deletion be of by the SNRPN mutation spectrum the chromosome is the a copy etiology is substance syndrome, by as disorder the 15q11.2; disorder. of alcohol during paternal is a a deletion or which chromosomal caused material, the Rett gene imprinted in that single duplication by the may syndrome, teratogenic as Prader-Willi on a development, of embryonic This caused in is or the by case case exposure presence the Xq28; to fetal in in in of mutation gene, MECP2 a gene as on

or either defined are function. clinically form in abnormalities malformations as Congenital significant life. by in from fetal were They event occurred that defects an morphogenesis, early caused in embryonic or which intrinsic result localized cause, development been some This in mutations may event unknown but the abnormality. often disturbance a led developmental genes to of from have by disturbing may disruptions Extrinsic tissues. development cause of the factors normal of development apparently blood teratogens. These supply bands, to disruptions exposure to include disruption may or tissues, of amniotic developing the later secondary of end sequence is a malformation on A malformation developmental has result effects events. that An Robin the Pierre example sequence. is normal-sized micrognathia, an of the growth results tongue the primary forces malformation, unusual The which of mandible during into failure gestation, weeks first in position. of the the U-shaped the abnormally together the of The and blocks soft palate. in to cleft presence tongue come hard fusion the a of which this leads palatal shelves, palate; to midline normally the the placed produce the potentially After to obstruction, complication. smaller airway leads delivery, the cavity normal-sized in life-threatening tongue a oral normal than gestation. and malformation, cleft to of (micrognathia, time from apnea) U-shaped results critical the jaw the which triad during a Pierre a anomalies of a sequence grow at Robin failure single comprises obstructive palate, in syndrome, Many Robin Pierre with by Stickler mutations collagen have genes. an disorder syndrome autosomal caused dominant children ocular musculoskeletal syndrome with manifests and abnormalities. Stickler also

normal acting as of a forces result environmental arise structures. Deformations on occur in pregnancy delivery. later after They or positioning from head) newborn torticollis in period. experienced from result or may shaped instance, plagiocephaly intrauterine the For (rhomboid resolve require minimal Deformations and management. often malformations medical surgical often intervention, but with

creases, in single population, normal transverse no include when clinical findings ears, that low-set such Minor have or they palmar 3% occur significance. than variants of hypertelorism; malformations, less isolated, the as of is that pattern results underlying recognizable from single malformation a the cause. multiple identifiable anomalies of syndrome A deformations. and malformation may series It sequences, malformations, a involve of with These syndromes prompt clinical often geneticist. a consultation a occur syndromes Dysmorphology malformations on is in 50-1). that (Table the specialty focusing of of patterns recognition

expected no that chance single association anomalies underlying former, that a the than differs syndrome together etiology recognizable alone. of more in in occur An often by pattern explains would be the from more anal renal The of fistula, tracheoesophageal of that occur anomalies, example (vertebral limb is anomalies, expected than be commonly malformations might association an group VACTERL chance. and atresia, by defects, cardiac anomalies) together a unifying is so an No this it considered etiology explains association. single condition,

is are of only malformations the single In malformations, present. in have one other a children congenital 50% to approximately more multiple or identifiable; malformation 50%, noted single due exposure a and interplay are of with to due infants have genetic teratogen. 7% (an between have to factors), a that disorder, 7.5% defects, malformations approximately 6% multifactorial have conditions About environmental effects are congenital 20% chromosomal gene to and than 50% can be In cases, no cause more identified. of

The that with pregnancy riskfactors birth are dysmorphology. and reveal history of associated multiple can the a a Small have infants teratogen. may to exposed or age may havebeen for gestational anomaly chromosome mothers for Beckwith-Wiedemann Large syndrome. of infants infantsmay have as an overgrowth or syndrome, be diabetic such age gestational and (e.g., account anencephaly. some evaluating the anomalies trisomy complicationsof disabilities, chromosome with prematurity problems.Postmaturity 18) is child may When with for also older intellectual child’s extreme an associated born breechpresentation more have to from Infants are likely congenital malformations.

is nondisjunction gets trisomies. of woman to leading risk older As a increased there age be paternal Advanced may

in along front Brachycephaly: Condition shortened shape the rounder from skull which is sagittal plane; head normal back the is than to

Columella: The upper eye by of the midline the formed fleshy of brows prominence the lateral the or the tissue separates The angle that and nostrils nose the lower Canthus: Bony of lids medial junction of Glabella:

fold: the flaring alae: The of Nasolabial Nasal Groove lateral from aspects to lateral the of the nostrils the that of extends lips alae nasal margin the

based between hypertelorism: Palpebral Increased of distance the on Ocular the shape fissure: of the the the two pupils eyes The of eyelids eyes outline

or nose brain Plagiocephaly: midline growth upper head in Philtrum: vertical which the asymmetry the and groove the from in asymmetric result coronal in or lip closure is face The can in between Condition suture from of shape sagittal of planes; the asymmetry the

the front plane; back are which normal scaphocephalic Scaphocephaly: Condition to in sagittal most is from in the skulls head elongated

Telecanthus: the meet canthi the midline wide between Synophrys: space in A Eyebrows that medial

of Brachydactyly: digits Condition short having

of direction appearance) “trigger fixed flexion a in Condition finger”–type Camptodactyly: or is digit in bent the which (a

from curves toward a and digits adjacent away digit in which crooked Condition or is Clinodactyly:

Hypoplastic on nail: digit nail a unusually An small

(e.g., Melia: meaning limb) “limb” Suffix limb; amelia—missing brachymelia—short

more an on extremity digits The Polydactyly: six having of condition or

having digits) new of of two adjacent least fusion or autosomal mutation with leading of dominant degree condition risk of more any a full fusion, from associated partially bony to the an fused trait. to skin (can at involve of Syndactyly: The webbing digits Maternal use) 48). smoking, and 47 are with problems cigarette and medical malformations Chapters exposures and associated alcohol drugs, (see (medications,

fluid system may amount central obstruction amniotic intestinal nervous a An associatedwith be to anomalythat of increased poor or swallowing. leads of chronic produce fluid to A decreased a amount in maybe failure to a of point or abnormality the results urinary leak tract fluid urine. amniotic a result that

similar relatives. pedigree for generations firstand constructed, comprising abnormalities least second-degree searching A should three be dissimilar in or at should documented. losses history pregnancy neonatal be of A or a For detailed Chapter see 47. more pedigrees, discussion of

should children When the be approach with used. following examining dysmorphic features,

head skeletal toxic height The growth orteratogenic abnormality, may to carefully plotted exposure circumference restriction secondary agents. growth appropriate and weight, be size to on chromosomal or a curves.Small dysplasia, and bemeasured should (length), or the suggests newborn in syndrome)or, syndrome diabetic expected a an might or Larger Beckwith-Wiedemann size than overgrowth mother. suggest (Sotos period,

should child is The clinician proportionate. the note if such imply ofa trunk for short head bone too the achondroplasia. Limbsthat as presence dysplasia, are short-limbed the and a head too short disorderaffecting the are suggest the trunkand extremities for spondyloepiphyseal such dysplasia. vertebrae, A as that

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Size, and Fontanels Head Abnormal Shape,

for syndromes. face malformation many the the and Careful of examination of head crucial is congenital diagnosis in long (plagiocephalic). (normocephalic), may if carefully asymmetric be normal be short and the or or and shape Head thin should it and size assessed; shape lopsided (brachycephalic), wide is head not (dolichocephalic),

facial be noted. features asymmetry should Any of positionor to face. be a to Asymmetry due a of of side deformation may malformation intrauterine one the related divided are regions, face be into should four The which evaluated separately. (often deficiency a occurs which or as may prominence show described Theforehead microcephaly). (achondroplasia) appearance, inchildren sloping with overt primary upper of and ofthe important. extendingfrom the from mouth, the eyebrows the is midface, eyes especially commissures the lip to The canthi to outer the eyes hypotelorism apart). suggests the pupils are defect distance in impression or the distance) far which the assessment that (interpupillary of and Careful midline that between closetogether), (eyes formation, distance) (eyes brain are a too of (innercanthal too mayconfirm hypertelorism the long with is and the as portion retardation, fissure fissures help syndrome(short lower define of or excessively may witheversion long, in The found fetal be opening as of thepalpebral short, alcoholsyndrome, mental lateral should palpebral whetherthe for length of lid). stature, makeup Kabuki noted eye is

should noted. eyes be Other of features the downward palpebral in fissures Collins Treacher The of obliquity(slant) (as upward or may syndrome). be syndrome) seen the withDown (as (Down presence syndromeand folds fetal The alcohol of epicanthal important. also is syndrome) the or syndrome—shouldbe syndrome, in can the Features which flattened nose—especially nasal as alcohol Down in and noted. bridge, syndrome, prominent many fetal of velocardiofacial be other syndromes,

The malar of the region next. is examined face the ear It to from extends midface. the the turned below the the are growth shape, The (posterior a orientation checked should be charts), from outer toward occiput), and ear to appropriate ears head). (low-set the rotation line checked where ears rear of appears is size drawn (measured against and position canthus the for because (or because a be small low set region. of mandibular may malformation microtic) or are of they Ears the

mandible. by mandibular the out from the portion to ears The bounded area is chin region lower the the of the the vertical slightly slightly to extending the the newborns, philtrum). In line behind is, (that is retruded forehead often from most the chin malformation the Robin pronounced, the this child If have may is Pierre sequence. retrusion examined. the In be mouth addition, should observed tongue the should of palate checked and the abnormalities, teeth noted, defects. should and The be be for for and the number appearance uvula

featurein neck inwhich Examination skeletal reveal isseen as syndrome, as such in a the or syndrome cervical Turner webbing, may dysplasias Noonan common the Klippel-Feilsyndrome. some in spine occasionally of shortening, conditions and occur, of and anomalies beevaluated. also should of posterior hairline the position The The assessed. should thyroid size be gland of the

Turner chest in be The syndrome chest syndrome) for symmetry. Noonan may and and examined for shape (shield-like of The and be is presence in pectus common noted Marfan should deformity a syndrome. and assessed; scoliosis is Marfan should syndrome in presence common many it The of syndromes. be other

the extremities. withanomalies congenital associated malformation syndromes of are Many motion. joints forrange of examined be All should multiple suggests of forcesthat dystrophy, forms as in dysfunction, utero. external either deforming motion presence neuromuscular single or contractures The of of insome limited muscular intrinsic joint joint or the found causes. Multiple are a arthrogryposis due to of with congenita contracturesalso variety and are multiplex elbow, an spectrumdisorder synostosis, alcohol chromosome Radioulnar or occurs and fetal the X syndromes. in in aneuploidy supinate topronate some inability

the hands Examination is of important. reduction amputation, severe limb of autosomal trisomy associated but thumb whichit thrombocytopenia, (the part and which occur aplasia the be or extra of isolated sequence. a digits) also 13.Oligodactyly malformation seenin Fanconi orsecondary and occurs defect, of in an seen band number trait in more in is and may heart, anomalies—usuallyradial withamniotic can to digits) deficiency (anemia, generally aplasia), is leukopenia, syndrome Polydactyly dominant limb as usually disruption intrauterine (a renal, presence more including (a or many syndrome to two (see and201). 199 Smith-Lemli-Opitz digits) Chapters common Syndactyly joining syndromes, is of

include palmar Dermatoglyphics crease patterns. of 50% hypotonia children crease, the individuals syndrome transverse general during of Down seen fetal in A 10% is palmar early population). life, with approximately (and indicative of in spectrum palmar characteristic seen disorder. crease fetal in alcohol is A pattern also

StudentConsult.com @ Available

in abnormalities for be should closely examined structure. Genitalia data. known should penis appears with and short, compared In boys, if age-related measured be the it congenital but have a male external may or endocrinologic as such often to masculinized such and disorders, 45,X/46,XY with genitalia (girls are associated secondary 177). multiple disorders be possibly genitalia, syndrome as hyperplasia or chromosomal 174 adrenal Chapters genitalia Ambiguous congenital mosaicism anomaly unaffected), (see is occurs strong is a 1 hypospadias, especially possibility which syndrome. often congenital occurs Although a in common is as malformation that if isolated boys, associated cryptorchidism, an defect, with 300 other of in there it a anomalies, newborn

presence multiple features, or the ordered of presence of organ for congenital involvement system analysis the one major the and should anomalies, be retardation. multiple Chromosome children with of dysmorphic mental situations. has genomic most in chromosome high-resolution microarray analysis years, hybridization In recent comparative supplanted or routine complete a chromosome discussion Chapter For see analysis, of 48.

analysis DNA be to specific Direct performed mutations. identify can resources to to necessary Web-based It is use up-to-date. keep availability identifies specific is www.genetests.org testing and conditions performing the testing. laboratories which for of helpful , about extremely An information provides the website

plays features. role Radiologic with in children imaging evaluation the an dysmorphic of important malformations internal multiple search for presence have to of external found to malformations. the careful have evaluation a should Individuals the bladder, liver, ultrasound might in head brain, kidney, for abdomen anomalies the and include of to and evaluations look Testing spleen. Skeletal is be performed skeletal a about dysplasia. should concern if radiographs there possible indicated. heart may murmur a and an cardiology trigger electrocardiogram The echocardiogram of should be a presence consultation; Magnetic resonance be children spinal a defect. indicated or imaging neurologic abnormalities may with in craniosynostosis of of a presence computed head. tomography may scan the The indicate

does testing sequencing is tool. powerful or a a whole-exome those diagnosis, becoming sequencing yield whom whole-genome not for For patients

findings syndrome characteristic Although specific the most a immediately diagnosis may straightforward, make is of cases in evident. of diagnosis the presence no malformation “match” are finding findings difficult. rare, Some constellations may a of prove and are laboratory relies cases, tests normal, In subjective on and confirmation findings. all many attempted the differential tables diagnosis, and help Clinical in anomalies this geneticists computerized diagnostic of developing a cross-referenced to of difficulty that by scoring development systems, programs. have resolve diagnosis the reasons: 1. following An for is accurate important

born anomalies. an family to was offers congenital explanation why It their with the child for parents, often for problem. help believe guilt may their responsible child’s are they allay who This

2.

appropriate With histories diagnosis problems anticipation a allows screening. syndrome many particular medical a of disorders, natural associated of and with well-described other might not children they that the are occur more other to who no diagnosis. problems reassurance than have likely medical do also It provides with

3.

it for be future risk for to children the be done genetic done available. to permits to and the It to disorders is identify permits counseling prenatal testing which

facilitate support and diagnosis materials about contactwith family provide for groups disorders. the educational the enables the clinician to Diagnosis with particular source Internet hasbecome for important information. The such an not on control inaccurate. Internet shouldbe to may exercised, Care information editorial and is subject be as the the NationalOrganization theirsupport a site diseases good www.rarediseases.org and about ( information Rare ), for for A clearinghouse Disorders rare is groups. Genetic at testing website ). information the (www.genetests.org is Genetests available providesinformation clinical for testing research and This on site manydiseases. available

causes Brent RL: malformations, rics Environmental of 2004 Pediat congenital human 113:957–968,

perspectives selected Genet C G, syndrome: N, social et Current on BG, Crissman Down Semin issues, medical Med and al: Am Roizen J Worley

Genet 2006 Med 142C:127–130,

the of Encode DNA Project 2012 elements genome, encyclopedia 489:57–74, integrated An Consortium: human in Nature

Genetic Cleves from Simmons Adolesc CA, and chromosome the the to Pediatr CJ: malformations: crib, Arch MA, congenital epidemiology Hobbs

Med 2002 156:315–320,

newborns A) 91:807–812, and MN: 2011 Holmes exposed in potential malforma Westgate Research teratogens, (Part Defects to Inclusion LB, criteria tions Birth exclusion for

al: Stanton Nelson Philadelphia, St. Saunders RM, . Pediatrics, ed, J, 19th B, et Textbook of Geme Kliegman 2011, Online Inheritance (website): in Man Mendelian http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sites/entrez?db=omim

to (IEMs) depend recognition management. outcomes inborn a the prompt of with and metabolic errors referral upon familiar symptoms signs center for of of their and and metabolism Optimal children evaluation with disease, Delay or may injury in progressive in including diagnosis result damage neurologic death. end organ

less are of phenylketonuria With incidence (PKU), individually the chain dehydrogenase (MCAD) of having in an most 100,000 births exception the per States. 1 metabolic and deficiency, rare, acyl-CoA medium disorders United than considered States. live a births newborn 51-1) of diagnoses 1 in each in the births by 12,500 detected to year) 4000 with the 800 may confirmed When prevalence approach collectively, disorder in the metabolic 1 in (about screening (Table incidence United 2500 B the 1 1 infants infections. streptococcal group in 1000 invasive sepsis have the early-onset 3000 comparable infants who and is with in who This have bacterial

IEMs a hospital 20% disorders. causes seizures, impairment; admissions children’s regional and death, are neurologic genetic sepsis-like retardation, mental are for of sudden frequent to infant of presentations,

of of age on the the schemes tissues including the variety classified the pathways, disorders or using systems or the underlying a the organ of can onset, presentation, be metabolic defective involved, based clinical Metabolic subcellular defect. localization approach screening have diagnosis, considering strategies. These schemes utility differing when classification to and management, the most prognosis and management children have longterm genetic with clinical bearing on of presentation The disorders. metabolic

transporters that its of to cofactors, the buildup of the both result deficiency biochemical of lead deficiency a a (Fig. processes a an of toxic Genetic disorders from or metabolic the compound, or combination required metabolite, enzyme, 51-1, 51-2). Table Understanding mechanisms diagnosis, systemic tissue local restricted a rational or therapy, if these the which are to is involved approach and and of to enables the effects management.

Available @ StudentConsult.com

inborn any organ The error system. andcan diverse an symptoms and of signs involve are presentation varies The amongage groups. the experience developingrecognized weeks being birth, often fewhours periods often symptoms without separated mimicking illness Inborn sepsis.Infants who well. neonatal by errors present a survive after late-onset of to intermittent period often of metabolism orseizures. in While should metabolicdisorders dysfunction),the hypoglycemic pursuing child, irritability, to approach withlethargy, be clinical neonates feeding, and presenting considered (e.g., with irritable tone, intoxicating the child liver poor or evaluationof the specific the hypothermia, all presentations newborn, (encephalopathy) thesick poor by ammonia, blood In be anion (Fig. most gap of for cases plasma assessment these glucose, evaluated should and 51-2). neonate Significant is suggests ketosis in the and unusual

Clinics Classes per WEST BRITISH Population* at MIDLANDS Estimates 51-1 of Specialized Various 1969–1996 of Table 1999–2003 or of Disorders COLUMBIA Diagnosed Incidence Followed 100,000

Amino Lysosomal (which the Kingdom 19 Midlands the has ethnic white between 7.5 2003. disorders 1999 7.5 1996, 7.5 3 diseases Canada 7.5 acid and West 4.5 Phenylketonuria 3.5 United 1969 Peroxisomal diseases in Mitochondrial British Columbia, 12.5 (excluding disorders in a and storage *Populations (a predominantly population), between diverse of breakdown) and phenylketonuria)

disorder. organic acid an delay, to appropriate metabolic cardiomyopathy, disorderspredispose should developmental clinical tailored Similarly evaluation specific sepsis the myopathy, to presentation. hepatopathy, be developmental regression; and

of or or associated stress of may inborn in fever new foods with metabolismduring an or children. fasting metabolic Introduction older unmask error infancy lead of in intolerance. sucrose to fructoseor hereditaryfructose diet introduction decompensation in the may The unmask detoxification. ammonia children, protein intakemay disorders In older of increased

of regulation Loss

Available StudentConsult.com @

disorders 51-1 of Figure paradigm of the metabolism. basic Depiction inherited in to tion accumula-Altered deficiency reaction. of the metabolites proximal Mental Status blocked metabolism and Deficiency results Acidemia product the an of the complex of enzyme in of control of indicated. genetic are Sites

hypoglycemia consequent defects of oxidation with glucose Use

Long-chain for leading in defects oxidation dysfunction Use dysfunction hypoglycemia; glucose to consequent mitochondrial etc., organ fatty Fat liver, Long-chain fats acid of with heart, energy

heart storage dysfunction Risk fasting to resulting of storage injury and muscle, liver, Glucose hypoglycemic in storage tissue disease Glycogen prevent brain in hypoglycemia Glycogen

injury; hypoglycemic of Fat utilization disorders energy for metabolic Ketone profound brain Risk Ketones

neurologic dysfunction, response leads Elevated immune and hepatic galactose to Galactose injury, severe impaired

homocitrullinuria protein carbamylphosphate acyl-CoA oxidation Hyperammonemia urine detects dehydrogenase PDH cycle Lysinuric acidosis inborn arginine Absent, OTC ketosis Citrullinemia Glutaric alkalosis PDH orotic acidemia Normal transcarbamylase Normal PC Respiratory synthase Possible Marked Mitochondrial deficiencies deficiency Elevated acid aciduria acid – ASA Elevated pyruvate syndrome OTC Argininemia Low Propionic hyperammonemia, NAGS lysine, Carnitine lyase ASA Fatty or carboxylase disorders intolerance in – acidemia Multiple reduced dehydrogenase acidosis urine error Ketosis Methylmalonic deficiency deficiency infants deficiency elevation Elevated Lactic No aciduria synthase Organic deficiency disorders ornithine, Hyperornithinemia, low CPS Urine Prematurity, plasma, Metabolic or N-acetylglutamate Argininosuccinic distress long respiratory and Elevated 3-Methyl-3-OH-glutaryl-CoA acid acidemia carboxylase or aciduria urine arginine argininosuccinic metabolism chain Short, homocitrulline acidemia pyruvate Normal, acidosis Transient BUN ornithine, – Isovaleric early hyperammonemia plasma CPS Elevated – trace Plasma with in Urea NAGS – onset Plasma – PC Organic medium defects deficiency ornithine citrulline of

51-2 to for infants. hyperammonemia Figure the approach Algorithm carboxylase CPS, OTC, PDH, ornithine ASA, synthase; deficiency. blood NAGS, pyruvate nitrogen; deficiency; carbamylphosphate acid; synthase; N-acetylglutamate transcarbamylase; BUN, dehydrogenase pyruvate Argininosuccinic PC, urea

infection, fasting, complex. stresses as The other toxic an the catabolic or presentation may often encephalopathy.Fever, symptom presents precipitate be present. lethargy, metabolic A other and vomiting, acidosis, findings may neurologic when and Diagnostic highest are urine metabolites testing in at is presentation. present in concentration blood effective most fault. of may acids, acids, at organic ammonia, Abnormal be amino carbohydrates or metabolism infant important encephalopathy presents diagnostic features child possibility with Hyperammonemia toxic or Fig. of an is if (see an 51-2). it age the its underlying and the Symptoms develops, depend on at cause hyperammonemia, and which degree. the of signs The provide of the etiology 51-4). severity to (Tables may clue a 51-3 and hyperammonemia

Available StudentConsult.com @

times of urea Infants glutamine and disorders transient to urea blood can defects 10 neonatal (>1000 secondary impaired metabolism more with acid normal in synthesis neonatal hyperammonemia, and than ammonia have of in levels genetic period. the of μmol/L) synthesis, organic genetic Poor hypothermia, to and intractable vomiting rapidly coma seizures. apnea, to hypotonia, give feeding, and occasionally way

Respiratory alkalosis common. is untreated. condition occurs if hours in the remains Death to days

@ StudentConsult.com Available

neonatal vomiting. μmol/L) nervous feeding, Moderate to poor with 200 of associated system, and hyperammonemia 400 central is the depression (range, characteristic. Seizures are not alkalosis occur. Respiratory may more distal acid of (producing commonly metabolic hyperammonemia interfere be disorders is with secondarily that urea elimination blocks caused organic in of the and partial of a by or This nitrogen. may type synthesis acidosis) by metabolism caused

hyperammonemia of developing well occurs. in increased cycle receiving protein affected urea low-protein Infants intake the continue or breast milk, do clinical may when are who to catabolic the stress while dietary defects by when is to Vomiting progress coma. lethargy and may Seizures not typical. are level plasma usually the a crisis, 500 is μmol/L. During to ammonia 200 However, in go decreased may especially system of the as for ammonia central nervous protein years, the unrecognized symptoms. decreases level with absence the intake, condition child of influenza, an have syndrome. mistakenly be If during occurs may thought to Reye epidemic crisis a the

of common is Disorders the hyperammonemia Lethal cycle urea

hyperammonemia Severe propionate pathway the of acidosis may Disorders precede

of possible catabolism acid ketogenesis syndrome of Disorders fatty and Reye-like

Transient self-limited hyperammonemia neonatal Idiopathic,

of shunting hepatitis vein, Portal-systemic Thrombosis cirrhosis, portal

depletion DNA with elevated associated Mitochondrial lactate Typically level

Obtain Drug valproic acid, levels drug intoxication: salicylate, acetaminophen

hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia syndrome Clinical hyperammonemia subclinical Hyperinsulinism/

Galactosemia, glycogen infections hypoglycemia: acid fructose infectious transporter All cytomegalovirus herpes, as that disorders disease fatty Disorders diseases Non-metabolic hereditary and of Fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase disease appropriate hepatic beta cause oxidation of Most storage deficiency liver Glucose deficiency such evaluation hepatic intolerance including workup Ensure function

urine HMG-CoA deficiency the pathway carboxylase Maple Pyruvate of disease propionate disease syrup Menkes deficiency (PCD) Disorders lyase

deficiency disease POLG disease: cluster Iron-sulfur Mitochondrial

syrup Diseases hyperammonemia: Maple disease urine producing Nonketotichyperglycinemia extreme

the Disorders the Disorders of of pathway urea cycle propionate

Disorders Congenital beta (PCD) lactic oxidation of acidosis

3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA. HMG-CoA,

behavioral (see neuropsychiatric abnormalities have or Older may children Fig. 51-2).

StudentConsult.com @ Available

accumulation system or any be by of in metabolites organ involved errors. the can Any toxic inborn injured of injury. or Symptoms and system-specific toxicity relate organ-specific to dysfunction, (cataracts, (cardiomyopathy, eye Examples renal (tubular and (hepatocellular nervous dislocated (Table liver damage), 51-5). heart effusion) coma, cysts), (seizures, system pericardial lenses), include ataxia),

dysfunction, manifest acid in myopathy; including system fatty disorders of mental or results or carbohydrate function/oxidative acidosis. and vomiting; deficiency cardiomyopathy; metabolism) phosphorylation, whose nervous may central energy oxidation, tubular renal retardation Disorders pathophysiology mitochondrial seizures; (e.g., hypoglycemia;

Available @ StudentConsult.com

illness. fasting dehydration may associated of metabolic and be anorexia, often in children course without vomiting,diarrhea, due a found viral diseases and the is in to Acidosis with be In fasting, of and acidosis ketonuria glucose the relatively thisnormal present. result amild is may blood low; restores carbohydrate Administrationof balance. result transferase) also ketosis such may disorders ketoacid SCOT CoA ketone deficiency bethe of ketothiolase deficiency. of Severe as utilization (succinyl-CoA:3 or the and frequently ketosis conditions, profound; slowly. which diarrhea, fever, resolves of vomiting be infection In may present to or fasting, these in thecontext intake secondary hypoglycemia decreased with accumulate,cyclic vomiting ketone bodies As may ensue. condition which Ketotic hypoglycemia fasting is is common a for impaired. tolerance in coma seizures the hypoglycemia childencounters catabolic when stress. or occurs with Symptomatic a (viralinfection minor vomiting) the overnight (a severalhours prolongation stress may fast). be by with normal significant of The or second the in of occurs healthychildren. and year life firstappears hypoglycemia Ketotic otherwise in It by is during and the of stress. periods provision treated frequent ofglucose snacks poorlyunderstood is 172). (see Chapter pathophysiology The children, it normalresponse indicates Although in older fasting ketonuria in disease to a overnight) prolonged infantsand neonates. is (not metabolic acidosis (Table A disorder gap metabolic a anion or high suggests metabolic 51-6). without ketosis with the reduced ketone of some does disorders. be presence in not productionmay Although fatty of acid oxidation this disorders, group ketonuria exclude

with Dysmorphic Disorders Associated Findings

of and thought are signs or dysmorphic symptoms inborn errors. not of features malformations intuitively as Congenital cholesterol disorders multiple horn congenital include deficiency), copper glycoprotein occipital glutaric phenylketonuria and A several syndrome, syndrome), diseases. syndrome, dehydrogenase biosynthesis acyl-coenzyme called disorders maternal cause syndrome, storage II (also [CoA] transport of malformations of (Menkes aciduria syndrome), carbohydrate-deficient (Smith-Lemli-Opitz Conditions that

StudentConsult.com @ Available

are disorders by Storage accumulation caused macromolecules. of metabolized incompletely organelles, storage This occurs lysosomes. as often subcellular such in diseases disorders. are of mucopolysaccharide storage disorders and storage glycogen examples The

evolving) Niemann-Pick Gaucher Crigler-Najjar (slowly GSD diseases IV and syndromes disease Rotor, Dubin-Johnson

storage GSD, disease. Glycogen

assessment individual) with careful and and a (family The evaluation. clinical begins history define laboratory metabolic the can 51-7). testing (Table Clinical derangement the confirm testing of diagnosis. laboratory differential generate The more a list and results specific a diagnosis to

The combination clinical of evaluation. metabolic demands abnormal findings urgent laboratory and symptoms lethargy coma, to hyperventilation (or lack proceeding acidosis,hypoglycemia, or anorexia/failure feed, ketosis), appropriate presents inter-current often to with vomiting, of ketosis infection, emergency and hypoventilation. Ametabolic (regression), status, as focus Clinicalevaluation milestones progress, cardiac the inmental developmental for symptoms,poor looking developmental cystic renal well cardiomyopathy, dysfunction. developmental neurologic, seizures, should visual failure, on assessment changes tubular renal, and of delay,loss tone, malformation, anddevelopmental abnormal as cardiac, global renal

in most tests clinical laboratory begin that available testing are Clinical should with hospital laboratories. results. accurate the collection to is specimens laboratory Care of handling crucial obtaining in and oflactate measurements Plasma to particularly ammonia and if not subject spuriousresults correctly. are handled usage. of in theneonate and unusual organic out to occurs ketosis is in disorders ketone fasting acid suggests status child in an proportion older Significant of disorder.Ketosis an metabolic under in of older Lack is conditions severe an ketosis a child of stress

nonketotic Organic Electrolytes—anion Glucose Glucose cranial Lactate, evaluation gas blood Acylglycines differential,† pyruvate pH is Ammonia Ketones Liver enzymes platelet substances suspected). Carnitine Reducing (e.g., is hyperglycemia count, Acylcarnitines specific count blood Complete acids if Orotic acid gap symptoms *Organ-specific Arterial acids Organic Amino indicated for and acids

lymphocytes and organic vacuolated †Thrombocytopenia acidurias; metachromatic in neutropenia lysosomal seen are are granules in disorders. and seen

feature disorders. of fatty oxidation acid laboratory of abnormalitiesmay disorders,milder disease, present utilization as intermittent some be only cycle urine syrup defects, acute forms during the and an disorders, urea maple ketone disorders,such acid oxidation In presentation. fatty well the metabolicdisorder. not testing Therefore,normal state out in a does rule

Inheritance of Mechanisms

classic inheritance of most of all inborn mechanisms are metabolism are Although recessive. autosomal errors represented, the of Old Mennonite or the recessive Isolation disease effect maple common in in may urine founder Order a in specific make populations condition Pennsylvania). some population (e.g., syrup in males. exhibit presentation conditions increased X-linked asymptomatic. diseases general, recessive of In (females) carriers or are X-linked deficiency, they in have can liver. proportion cells low a if the However, ornithine normal symptomatic of be females transcarbamylase in are X-linked genes, of Most mutations forms. a in in mitochondrial autosomal are result children disorders although there in Mutations also mitochondrial disease. DNA lead to the mitochondrial of of and specific In abnormal defects of DNA the to the and normal presentation severity of heteroplasmy). mitochondrial the situation copies ratio the on this depend specific the (the tissue degree type

Identification Pathology Molecular of

the defined), or testing and error the inborn (i.e., gene may If molecular specific known basis have clinically genetic is an of been metabolism available. of genes be mutations mapped In correlation there good clinical outcome. some between a mutations and specific is disorders, provide can rest the family throughout in decision of family. members them, making at-risk for the other enabling Genetic important testing information genetic

Screening Plasma Phenylketonuria Table Newborn (PKU) TESTING Programs phenylalanine, Identified mutation DISORDER testing in ACID Guthrie*, AMINO by MS/MS the Disorders United METHODS CONFIRMATORY States 51-8

succinylacetone amino urine acid MS/MS Tyrosinemia profile, Plasma Guthrie,

ACID Plasma MS/MS ORGANIC Maple (MSUD) amino disease urine alloisoleucine look acid syrup Guthrie, for profile,

profile, plasma acid homocysteine Urine plasma amino acidemias acid organic Methylmalonic MS/MS profile,

measurement, Quantitative deficiency measurement DNA mutations Enzyme biotinidase Biotinidase

deficiency Medium-chain MS/MS profile, dehydrogenase plasma (MCAD) profile, acylglycine acyl-CoA acid organic urine Urine

Urine Long-chain dehydrogenase profile, plasma organic deficiency acylglycine profile, 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA (LCHAD) MS/MS urine acid

(VLCAD) deficiency acylglycine urine plasma organic profile, MS/MS acyl-CoA acid dehydrogenase Urine profile, long-chain Very

measurement, measurement enzyme GALT measurement galactose-1-P DNA mutations, enzyme Galactosemia GALT

MS/MS DNA amino Plasma acid mutations profile,

metabolic abnormal treatable of identified a result as diagnosed States majority be an will the infants In the witha United disorder of screen. newborn of 29 screen to spectrometry core tandem Most disorders states a 51-8). use panel mass (Table for for typically In biotinidase deficiency and by evaluating states, galactosemiaare function. screened enzyme most

Strategy Screening of Neonatal

morbidity preventing detection is neonatal early onset of the treatment symptoms, purpose and disorders the of The mortality. before rapid and thus screening of are at to hours Chapter states, 58). 24 tested 48 most infants In (see test positive A demands prompt evaluation. Specific on treatment child disorder. follow-up and the of an testing affected depends neonatal not screening who of infants screening test metabolic do tests, with Consistent proportion have a have positive significant a a most disorder.

diagnostic. ofaffected is infants is not but Neonatal detection screening designed maximize to concentration infants false-positive number with elevated substance with for enzyme the identify an acceptable or values” of eachtest “Cutoff activityof established results. of are an to decreased an carefully metabolic specialist. followed promptclinical screening program assessment by A as test recommended by positive the must and screening be provided of therapy testing. until cases many completion children be definitive In willalso the

the parents; the causes for result minimize program. management anxiety harm of is test anxiety A new positive essential screening of to such and accurately. In definitive addition, carried promptly testing be must out results excluded, need and is that If an is the metabolism well. inborn reassurance thorough explanation the infant error of parents of a frequently primary of the genetic counselor explanations in newborn or the require metabolic in the long require Such expertise specialist reassessment care by a physician the may will period but term.

a in suspicion. or abnormal of metabolism disorders the for basis on of screening Specialized confirming basis clinical an diagnosis the suspected on inherited effective of is newborn result testing in that measurements under are using (Table diagnoses helpful the deficient on disorder The and these the depend pathway 51-9). tests examples made of consideration

analysis acid cerebrospinal plasma, Amino is urine, performed and fluid. in acid of catabolism. is acid amino The useful plasma profile inidentifying most amino disorders the normal are acid of often beabnormal, acidsin pathway disorders may Amino may not the organic or deficient they but be diagnostic.

Amino Metabolic alloisoleucine Specialized MSUD, Testing IN tyrosinemias, MEASURED HELPFUL including ANALYTES 51-9 acids, cycle acid IDENTIFYING Plasma DISORDERS urea homocystinuria TEST TEST amino Table defects, profile PKU,

free homocysteine of acidemia homocysteine some Homocystinuria, Protein-bound methylmalonic and Plasma total forms

profile Disorders amino Amino transport of acids amino Urine renal acid acid

acid fatty and profile catabolism organic disorders fatty acylcarnitine of acid disorders, Organic acid Plasma derivatives Acylcarnitine oxidation

of derivatives fatty acid fatty and disorders acid profile Organic organic catabolism disorders, acylglycine acid Urine oxidation Acylglycine

carnitine carnitine Free, and abnormal total, and acid in acid disorders organic Primary and acylated many Plasma deficiency; carnitines fatty secondary

mitochondrial and acid acid acid, profile acids Organic disorders Organic Urine organic fatty

oligosaccharide chromatography storage Glycosaminoglycans, Lysosomal disorders Urine mucopolysaccharides

urine PKU, MSUD, phenylketonuria. syrup Maple disease;

profile tubular primary and amino cystinosis tubular any cause. of as renal as Fanconi renal well helpful in is such syndrome such disorders as syndrome function, function, as of Lowe diagnosing of and secondary cystinuria, acid The disorders urine The amino test acid acid acid choice is urine of for metabolism. profile or of not organic the diagnosing disorders amino

and urine of measuredin disordered are oxidation Markers plasma. fatty acid intermediates and acid carnitine. acidoxidation fatty of are and organic Excessive catabolism withglycine conjugated this profile acylglycine accumulation. urine acylcarnitine The the and reflect plasma profile and and a acylated carnitine distribution plasma of of acid of disorders abnormal organic and free carnitine disorders,measurement In may secondarydeficiency reveal carnitine. fatty acid oxidation acid acid ketone fatty suggests plasma decreased fatty diagnosis a The of suggests ketones amounts oxidation oxidation.Excess free acid or profileis helpful 3-OHbutyrate a fatty 3-OH-butyrate of absence of in of metabolism; disorder disorder. disorders of fibroblasts beinformative. intermediates cultured skin acid may Profiling offatty in

urine acidemia, organic have as propionic organic of typical Disorders acid profiles. and such methylmalonic acidemia acid metabolism, measuring the enzymatic changes in blood gene. establishing more suggest of specific diagnosis, analysis is needed the DNA the pathway in usually typically and testing by or Although targeted activity urine

one by of in cerebrospinal fluid blood are in guanidinoacetic in a in reduction urine. form, and and, increase Disorders creatine reflected acid an creatine (CSF) in biosynthesis presence purine purines, abnormal of adenosine, adenine, of succinyladenosine. guanosine, of pyrimidine urinary are metabolism Disorders suggested an inosine, hypoxanthine, profile suchas bythe xanthine, or and including the of orotic pyrimidinemetabolism profile thymine, by in pyrimidines, N-carbamoyl-β-aminoisobutyrate, or abnormal thymidine, of uridine, orotidine, urine. Similarly, an uracil, disorders identified dihydrothymine, acid, dihydrouracil, pseudouridine,N-carbamoyl-β-alanine, are

Storage abnormalities chondroitin urine show in acid, mucopolysaccharides or sialic sulfate, sulfate. heparan disorders sulfate, glycoproteins), (glycosaminoglycans, dermatan blood disorder; enzymology tissue white cultured be depending depends Specific can cells assay. fibroblasts, the skin on on or either amine deficiency concurrent profile when profile). is amino of disorders, glucose amino to ratio), compared the several (biogenic specimen, helpful synthesis serine (CSF glycine acid defect transporter synthesis encephalopathy including disorders In CSF profile), acid neurotransmitter plasma (plasma-to–cerebrospinal fluid (GLUT1) acids), most and glucose (amino

is during when and metabolic many is abnormal well. illness profile present consistently disorders, In an the child some In of during it illness. episode is an diagnostic cases, only

treatment errors of several There for of principles basic inborn metabolism. are present of goal toxic first encephalopathy; compounds with toxicity often removal Syndromes isthe therapy. of with administration alternate include Chapter (see agents of and 53). pathway filtration, Strategies hemodialysis,hemovenovenous PKU). cofactors ofenzyme in strategy second activity is homocystinuria, through A enzyme (e.g., toenhance in administration pyridoxine tetrahydrobiopterin deficient deficientpathway products restricting is principle through diet. providing (e.g., the the missing an product role, ishelpful If in decrease to by the treatment precursors flux tyrosine of phenylketonuria).A a pathway major plays important in of deficiency of of protein restriction amino disorders organicacid in the in acid the of and ammoniadetoxification Examplesinclude precursors disorders.

52-1). by (Table diseases storage glycogen hypoglycemia Many and characterized are hepatomegaly levels) anaerobic the blood muscles found most form and Glycogen, work). the glucose, liver it glucose in storage in modulates facilitates is abundantly (where it (where of action (Fig. of concerted synthetase uridine glycogen diphosphoglucose is the from brancher through Glycogen synthesized and enzyme 52-1). is of stimulated insulin. The glycogen by accumulation initiated cascade epinephrine Glycogenolysis glucagon. occurs a through or by from in of of to points It in lesser glucose rapid hydrolysis degree, yield accompanied a glycogen glucose the results to phosphorolysis residues 1-phosphate, molecules. branch by, glycogen of actions produce is to phosphoglucomutase; and through In glucose converted hydrolyses 1-phosphate 6-phosphate glucose the liver kidneys, glucose glucose. the 6-phosphate to glucose-6-phosphatase present The is muscles. in enzyme not latter into fall the four storage categories: 1. Glycogen following diseases

that I, predominantly a and glucose VI, and liver affect on influence blood direct have Diseases the 2. (types VIII)

anaerobic to involve 3. and V Diseases affect the work do predominantly that VII) (types ability muscles and

the and blood Diseases can glucose and (type muscles that liver directly III) influence metabolism 4. affect muscle and

and on affect effect IV) but do that no blood the on anaerobic to ability or various direct II glucose have (types Diseases tissues work

I storage type by The and disease acid, in of an uric type III diagnosis glycogen or blood. elevated triglycerides suggested is lactate, procedures, normallybe is testing in all feasible, this diagnosis confirmed liver mutation invasive muscleand avoided. For a such DNA can cells.When blood biopsy, by as forms, can be white isnot or intissue confirm affected diagnosis. is enzyme mutation inconclusive, When measurements testing the the organ available from If metabolic challenge needed. thediagnosis may established, andexercise be be testing cannot satisfactory is aimed disease at glycogen of maintaining Treatment hepatic storage

Early from diarrhea, tract, acidemia, Hypoglycemia, well and bleeding diagnosis adherence 1a: lactic to hepatomegaly, lactic lactic not ketosis, hypotonia, Gierke strict gout, hypertriglyceridemia, acidosis, slow Type death GI liver platelets hypoglycemia, Glucose-6-Liver, with kidney, Hypoglycemia, enlarged early acidosis; be disorder, do von may growth, phosphatase

None fatigue phosphorylase McArdle Type Good, Muscle V: in Muscle lifestyle with beginning sedentary Muscle

Hers Usually Liver hypoglycemia Liver none phosphorylase Type Mild Probably with VI: ketonuria hepatomegaly, good

findings Similar type to Muscle of Muscle Type None similar Tarui Clinical phosphofructokinase V to VII: that

Clinical without similar myopathy Type Phosphorylase Liver findings kinase Good to III, VIII None type

GI, Gastrointestinal. recessive. kinase, *Except these is which X-linked, phosphorylase of are form hepatic one for autosomal disorders

52-1 Figure degradation. and synthesis Glycogen enzyme, synthetase, (1) debrancher brancher (2) phosphoglucomutase, (5) glucose-6-phosphatase. enzyme, Glycogen (4) (3)

muscle. sourcesto supplying energy levels blood or alternative glucose 1 of deficiency first life. usually ofglucose intragastric thetreatment during or 2 nocturnal the glucose-6-phosphatase feedings In years I), requires (type Thereafter, satisfactory; intragastric a life. feedings tumors and malignant)are (sometimes in hepatic threat cornstarchmay adult uncooked nocturnal adolescence snacksor be of exercise. that impair diseases skeletalmuscle ischemic the of for muscle specific exists treatment No cardiacand (type early lifeis effective involves II), in in Pompe skeletal which muscle. disease Enzyme replacement

Available StudentConsult.com @

galactose-1-phosphate recessive is deficiency caused (Fig. Galactosemia disease of by an uridyltransferase autosomal (acidosis, are tubular manifestations evidence (hyperbilirubinemia, aminoaciduria), milk, failure striking fed renal neonate liver disordered generally most coagulation, of exhibits of when hypoglycemia), disorders who, 52-2).Clinical cataracts. and glycosuria, in function a turnaround The first the have infants in neonatal die week test screening time of rapid because affected may a must life. sepsis. risk Affected infants coli increased are severe neonatal for Escherichia at have function to and older despite kidney and first cataracts may years few of dietary development the learning disorders life; compliance. limited liver of children effects on the Major are develop ovarian failure despite premature Girls usually treatment.

on dietary intake. depend manifestations galactose Laboratory galactosemia of plasma galactose lactose), erythrocyte galactose When galactose is levels of (as and ingested

galactose metabolism. of Pathway 52-2 Figure (2) (4) galactokinase, diphosphoglucose uridine uridyltransferase, Lactase galactose-1-phosphate (1) (3) (intestinal), 4-epimerase.

elevated. 1-phosphate are frequent, is and present. is Hypoglycemia albuminuria a a urine reaction detected reaction frequently reducing without tests. Galactose for with is substances positive the be urine glucose on strip oxidase in by and present can substances to cannot relied The diagnosis. absence be of exclude urinary the reducing on extreme showing The by galactose-1-phosphate activity. reduction made erythrocyte in diagnosis is uridyltransferase may be in the useful galactose-1-phosphate DNA diagnosis uridyltransferase confirms and mutations testing for the predicting in prognosis. acidosis. be by hyperchloremic dysfunction evidenced metabolic a normal–anion-gap may Renal tubular dietary before therapy ill the elimination die before of in correction infants abnormalities, extremely rapid by are is galactose effective. of may but results who Treatment treatment

galactose Fig. in Galactokinase body to (see of also the disorder, recessive deficiency, autosomal accumulation an fluids leads (dulcitol) reductase. galactitol the through action 52-2), the of results aldose in which of formation acting be intracranial responsible can rarely, osmotic as agent, Galactitol, and, an for pressure. for increased cataract formation the manifestations. only clinical These are deficiency as develop may for neonatal Individuals usually be at individuals cataracts galactokinase homozygous after cataracts heterozygous whereas risk period, the for adults.

fructose intolerance, in analogous to ways, is Hereditary many galactosemia. resultant fructose-1-phosphate hypoglycemia, emesis, of deficiency accumulation liver When severe leads 1-phosphate the kidney of aldolase intracellular disease. is and with ingested, fructose fructose to and of disease. sucrose from prevents and fructose diet clinical the Elimination deficiency caused is its Fructosuria with but clinical deficiency, is fructokinase associated not by consequences.

from acids Disorders of amino result acid of the specific are amino catabolize inability to derived the metabolism protein. a single Usually acid amino pathway is involved. to brain, skin, in liver. the organs, such or acid is amino as toxic eyes, accumulates and This excess various that is Treatment at acid provide acids dietary other amino the and foods offending of amino involves and supplementation specific with the the nutrients. directed and special pathway medical other restriction usually (formulas) amino and testing testing profiles mutation along sometimes plasma specific Confirmatory with specific enzymology. quantitative includes acid

the recessive result affects 10,000 PKU occurs an in in disease, hydroxylationof (PKU), to (Fig. persons.Classic is from autosomal phenylalanine and brain a 1 Phenylketonuria the the tyrosine primarily in defect form the ofphenylalanine is the greatlyreduced. 53-1); or absent hydroxylase liver in activity (IQ year in Affected but first mental untreated, retardation severe the birth, 30) infants develops if oflife. at normal are byperforming acid up quantitative plasma test A amino be must newborn positive analysis. screening followed μM with demands is and hyperphenylalaninemiasand diagnosis treatment. mg/dL) plasmaphenylalanine greater than the of one evaluation of (6 value consistent prompt of 360 A the characterized μM. PKU higher is than concentrations by blood 600 phenylalanine Untreated,classic higher of 360 hyperphenylalaninemia are but μM. lowerthan plasma this phenylalanine forms by than values indicated Milder of infants in ofpremature have few significant phenylalanine. a transientelevations full-term A percentage infants and promptly. these infants follow-up Short-term usuallyidentifies have phenylalanine metabolism the in of defectin for for metabolism enzymesinvolved or small the with (≤2% A percentage United intermediary a synthesis and PKU infantsdiagnosed the other hydroxylase tetrahydrobiopterin, of of in aminoacids. aromatic States) thecofactor in metabolism biopterin analyzing in urine. are reductase dihydrobiopterin in andby erythrocytes metabolites diagnosedby disorders Such measuring biopterin hyperphenylalaninemic out all This testing in shouldbe infants. carried

using but diet phenylalanine complete. phenylalanine mM is to nutritionally designed of range values therapeutic 120 in a in specifically otherwise plasma restricted Treatment maintain the 360 to syndrome. risk treatment PKU risks 1980s, and reduce life the for neuropsychiatric early of is reduce recommended of the Since problems long-term to the maternal

PKU is Outcome excellent. treatment of classic in the who first classic within with Most infants are treated PKU

of amino 53-1 acids. Figure Metabolism aromatic (4) tryptophan (3) transaminase, reductase, (8) dihydrobiopterin (5) hydroxylase, fumarylacetoacetate hydroxylase, isomerase, (6) p-hydroxyphenylpyruvate oxidase, (7) maleylacetoacetate hydrolase, hydroxylase. homogentisate (1) tyrosine (9) oxidase, Phenylalanine (2) Succinylacetone. SA,

life achieve of intelligence. 10 normal days in problems problems peers. unaffected with However, learning than frequent aremore function and executive clearly withPKU older not children phenylalanine The of been safe concentration adults established. and in has in adults children acute plasmaphenylalanine PKU. of with and with associated cognitivedysfunction elevations Reversible is the sustained, level been may bereversible. dysfunction the has elevated not If tetrahydrobiopterin Treatment PKU. some good shown responses of in has preparation with individualswith modified

hyperphenylalaninemia and educated to families PKU congenital conception and on Maternal of throughout requires Females damage, management and rigorous risks the prevention must pregnancy syndrome.” be PKU before with heart and brain their “maternal prevent microcephaly. fetal disease,

methods tandem neonatal succinylacetone. using tyrosine mass programs screening in is detect and/or elevated Tyrosinemia to spectrometry identified of transient the occur nonspecific liver newborn, also Elevated consequence tyrosinemia as levels which tyrosine severe of treatment. a or acid responds disease ascorbic to the of neonatal metabolism disorders screening. of tyrosine The target are inherited (see fumarylacetoacetate which to I, deficiency due hydrolase is Type Tyrosinemia Fig. 53-1), hypoglycemia, accumulated defects associated disease which elevated disease bleeding hypoalbuminemia, metabolites and is a rare produce transaminases, severe function. tubular with liver renal in in disorder, may eventually Hepatocellular occur. carcinoma screen. after is Quantitative tyrosine plasma succinylacetone measurement positive or performed a blood neonatal of urine and The concentration some an of of diagnosis for I testing DNA increased is succinylacetone; available mutations. by tyrosinemia confirmed is inhibitor Treatment eliminates (NTBC) (an oxidation the with the of of effectively succinylacetone. nitisinone toxic the parahydroxyphenylpyruvic acid) production of also role. low-tyrosine a diet play may low-phenylalanine, A neonatal liver identified by children have These for treatments screening. the immediate obviated in need transplantation eliminate occurrence the they Whether is unknown. completely of hepatocellular carcinoma

more II and forms of Tyrosinemias hereditary tyrosinemia. are benign III responsible, of produced. Blocked in succinylacetone pathway steps at the is tyrosine not is metabolism and earlier disturbance. clinical visual severe and of soles The hyperkeratosis include can which and features keratitis, cause palms is dietary associated Poor compliance cognitive mild with tyrosinemia type II with impairment. is diet with Treatment phenylalanineand a effective. tyrosine-restricted

by cystathionine a the Homocystinuria, autosomal an the disease and of connective is caused involving deficiency brain, livebirths) tissue, recessive vascularsystem, (1:200,000 β-synthase. the metabolism the In intermediate sulfur acids, to amino gives is homocysteine cystine; of pivotal rise (Fig. a methionine normal 53-2). urine. is cystathionine in β-synthase When deficient, accumulates blood the and homocysteine the appears in is the blood. of resulting concentration an in in result methionine, to of reconversion the enhanced methionine Another homocysteine in increase test screening The commonly measures methionine. used most neonatal ocular An clinical slowly livedo and malar homocysteine syndromethat evolving long, produces flushing; dislocated includes a slender of reticularis. lenses; excess extremities; genu skeletal and carinatum, scoliosis, features. are or Arachnodactyly, excavatum valgum pectus present. retardation, may Mental or illness, be both psychiatric or arterial venous threat. Major thromboses are constant a

homocysteine the diagnosis requires Confirmation blood. in total of of elevated demonstration the amino acid reveals hypermethioninemia. A plasma profile is of gene Measurement known available, cystathionine can tested. are mutations be β-synthase in numerous not and but clinically the

clinical forms of homocystinuria. two There are of pyridoxine the administration (100 1000 one enhanced be large In form, doses by enzyme of deficient the of can activity mg/day). to process if Folate of folate remethylation methionine. overcome to the homocysteine folate added in to is trapped of deficiency is supplementation above not neonatal always methionine of concentrations because form likely screening the missed by about to more pyridoxine-responsive comprises is cases 50% the be form are screening This the cutoff. and therapy. pyridoxine is to responsive The form not second folate homocysteine controlled of supplementation. a diet The and cystine methionine-restricted and with is accumulation betaine The of for methyl pyridoxine-unresponsive donor also management methionine, patients. of remethylation of homocysteine supplemental groups to a (trimethylglycine), the role of in has a use Diet pyridoxine-responsive required betaine plasma control homocysteine, are patients. in to sometimes even and good is homocysteine prognosis controlled. for whose concentration The plasma is infants

Figure 53-2 homocysteine. of and methionine Metabolism hydrolase, S-methyltransferase, (5) (1) (7) methyltransferase. (4) betaine-homocysteine homocysteine β-synthase, S-adenosylhomocysteine (6) adenosyltransferase, cystathionase, methyltransferase, cystathionine (3) Methionine (2)

ketoaciduria. recessivedisease, called syrup is also autosomal branched urine Maple (MSUD) disease an chain A of valine isoleucine, of decarboxylase the the branched initiates deficiencyof amino ketoacid analogs (Fig. degradation chain the three the acids—leucine, and 53-3). 1:150).The (Pennsylvania rare(1:250,000) includes is of but the Genetics commonin isolates some MSUD American much screeningpanel general College population more Medical in MSUD. neonatal Classic Mennonites population

typically weeks 4 and to have 1 begin manifestations of forms, classic within of MSUD clinical form the intermittent-onset late-onset birth. does Although hypotonia profound disease alternating but hallmark and noted, Poor spasms), are associated the commonly opisthotonos, and (extensor of tachypnea the vomiting, seizures. hypertonia system, of nervous feeding, is central and the with depression odor syrup. urine The has the of maple

include of metabolic the acidosis, part, bodies, Laboratory a anions; of the caused, in of branched MSUD undetermined chain acidosis acids and variable organic by acetoacetate. β-hydroxybutyrate by the ketone is presence elevation usual and manifestations with inpart, plasma hypoglycemia and, react with2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine copious, white urine acetoacetate) a form (but precipitate. to ketoacids notβ-hydroxybutyrate or Branched-chain immediately in

in The MSUD leucine, alloisoleucine and plasma in definitive excess. generally the isoleucine, is plasma concentrations large increases in of and identification diagnosis showing by valine of made organic usually acids. amino chain profile urinary and acid the derivatives the branched of ketoacid abnormal shows is The

and acute of adequate management. calories chronic leucine, crucial Provision and restriction for is of with protein, dialysis in therapy hemofiltration, Hemodialysis, lifesaving edema. cerebral peritoneal close to and be crises during can addition or acidotic for monitoring pregnant with a and precipitate delivery mother clinical labor in infections such as can stresses, Ordinary moderate catabolic crises. or MSUD, Liver effectively transplantation treats MSUD.

described for (Fig. steps deficiencies the of urea Inherited of synthesis have been enzymatic each 53-4). cycle. currently all not the of urea disorders in detect screening does Neonatal the

53-3 the Figure of acids. Metabolism amino chain branched Aminotransferases, (1) dehydrogenase complex. α-ketoacid (2)

The Figure cycle. urea 53-4 acid defects: enzymatic of Site (3) N-acetylglutamate phosphate (2) ornithine synthetase, (NAG), lyase, arginase. synthetase, argininosuccinate synthase carbamoyltransferase, (1) (4) acid (6) (5) argininosuccinate carbamoyl (star). Transporters translocator (7) ornithine (8) citrin, (star). ketoglutarate. AKG, Alpha

and deficiency. United carbamoyltransferase ornithine (OTC) (ASL) are disorders the frequent Clinically two lyase States argininosuccinate deficiency in most the

is (OTC) deficiency carbamoyltransferase Ornithine X-linked. and mutations Gene both mutations. include deletions point enzyme neonatal who is the nonfunctional, males, period. are the affected is If die OTC activity there no to likely in in degree may are clinically any of be in deficiency have of a heterozygous significant females and, affected may life. time Affected because and enzyme lyonization, at clinical in in encephalopathy) male (coma, manifestations to normalcy disease lethal range percentage females. from the Clinical of high a also males occur. forms Late-onset in lethargy, or clinically recurrent retardation, include females confusion. delay, seizures, episodic in Manifestations mental affected developmental emesis, intake. their may Affected protein limit spontaneously females

arginine show profile, concentrations alanine. amino acid with increased reduced includes OTC and may citrulline which testing glutamate a plasma for and Confirmatory allopurinol. protein administration organic acid A concurrent or loading after urine of orotic profile of acid shows with increased excretion Mutation related sequencing clinical the region the as are and testing, tests. testing, entire coding deletion genes of available of

newborn in United is lyase an autosomal (ASL) recessive, most elevated the a deficiency children screening. are citrulline of States result on Argininosuccinate and detected as acid of by in argininosuccinic the is the The elevated urine. detection confirmed diagnosis

Treatment Hyperammonemia of

suppress endogenous and of catabolism During quantity proteinintake episodes given glucose is is protein. sufficient hyperammonemia, of intravenous symptomatic in to reduced, benzoate the excreted andglutamine. glycine and sodium conjugates phenylacetate, of by eliminated use the sodium Ammonia which can be as pathway urine alternate agents, of are in to µM) not therapy, be which are or deficient, (>1000 of removal peritoneal hemofiltration, supplied.When ammonia hemodialysis levels high is Arginine, followed usually or status required.The is promptly. is very treated closely ammonia cerebraledema direct refractory using but dialysis, must neurologic and for the deficiency ASL and severe OTC with Despite neonatal with children management males guarded. ofhyperammonemic severe crises, deficiency long-term all is outcome successful in with liver deficiency. transplantationhas males Early especially survival, OTC increased severe

dietary the is ongoing of treatment urea daily needs intake mainstay cycle to Restriction of protein for defects. be in support acids can synthesis. sufficient protein just Crystalline essential to amino amounts supplied essential via must cycle supplied grossly deficiency. in of arginine when the is be case urea amino acid impaired; synthesis the Arginine thus arginine is except arginase an supplied to urea Citrulline disorders. be cycle some needs for OTC ammonia. with phenylacetate) carbamoyl to of and accumulation is metabolized phosphate treatment (which synthase For deficiency phenylbutyrate deficiency, prevents

cystine, renal tubular and lysine, of of disorder transport is Cystinuria a arginine, ornithine. renal affected genetic the largely symptoms to in intestinal some due transport the is transport abnormality. forms, Although are in exceeds product significant renal concentration stones. cystine of solubility results The and its the of based excretion diagnosis are urine. pattern in Evaluation on the amino acid and Mutation can done. be testing it based by is compounds cystine complexing such increasing of as solubility the Treatment on penicillamine. with

deficiency. pellagra-like impaired from Hartnup tryptophan in this symptoms syndrome; transport is Intestinal of result pattern amino in the is based acid on Diagnosis urine. with successful. Treatment tryptophan is

amino a the block acid from catabolism. Organic pathways disorders of acid in result blood accumulation and the specific in of urine. they in removed, moiety amino has Occurring organic the been after result acids the enzyme abnormality, at and restriction in directed cofactors, is when the precursor specific of available. with Treatment substrates administration propionic made is children diagnosis Outcome methylmalonic and before severity of is generally onset or is of optimal when neonatal-onset and poor influenced episode. first acidemia the the with but crises by for is frequency with patients of Liver some early success. been used in transplantation has indicators a testing profile acid amino with Confirmatory profile. urine begins organic plasma acid and enzyme More often tissues. testing in requires specific measurements appropriate identify a mutations involved. specific abnormal the DNA results When suggest may disorder, testing

acidemia of from result in reactions the series and defects propionate called (Fig. pathway a methylmalonic Propionic acidemia 54-1). these hyperglycinemia. ketosis in steps produce Defects and with neonatal Propionic acidemia spectrometry tandem acidemia methods. methylmalonic screening mass and are identified by thrombocytopenia, neutropenia, The neonatal consist of these tachypnea, manifestations both in period vomiting, disorders hyperammonemia, coma, intermittent hyperglycinemia, clinical the of lethargy, of ketoacidosis,

Valine Methionine Threonine (?) Pyrimidines acids Cholesterol and Odd-chain fatty hypoglycemia. not identified these intermittent episodes screening, If are of neonatal acidosis by metabolic disorders occur. may precipitating an as and also occur fever, they occur during stress, event. periods vomiting, of such apparent catabolic Crises diarrhea; without of During of serious neutropenia, the bacterial risk infection increased. periods is Failure to development are and impaired common. thrive

two acidemia propionylCoA-carboxylase, that of Propionic an from enzyme deficiency results identicalsubunits. has in pairs the due mutations acidemia All in propionic are to forms of of manner in one and are anautosomal subunits. inherited recessive results deficiencyin acidemia in caused itself enzyme.A in stepsof associated of the protein from forms the of acidemia, metabolism may methylmalonic inthe inother mutase with or synthesis one some set hyperhomocystinemia. the of of mutations complex for results mutase; cobalamin cobalamin defects the this Methylmalonic cofactors which gene the by for are of methylmalonyl be (the acidemia. some of hydroxocobalamin cases massive form vitaminB12) of with is helpful active Treatment methylmalonic in doses of

restriction and acidemia and acidemia, specific B12–unresponsive the vitamin methylmalonic management medical valine, the of of includes deficient threonine). addition the methionine, (isoleucine, of For and dietary propionyl-CoA precursors forms food propionic of a in acid protein amino as acylcarnitines. is often it lost the needed because in Carnitine urine is supplementation the some treatment effect bacteria produce vitamin B12–unresponsive reduce gut of methylmalonic acidemia in beneficial a acidemia. propionic has and antibacterial the propionate; significant in of population quantity bacteria Intestinal to thus,

Isovaleric a of leucine. from catabolism acidemia the in block results the similar of manifestations propionate Its those to clinical in pathway. are defects isovaleric acid results of feet in sweaty The strong odor odor untreated in infants. the involves of Therapy leucine, glycine providing restricting intake and

Coenzyme A.

in isovaleric Figure 54-2 acidemia. Metabolism and catabolic dehydrogenase, Leucine (1) isovaleryl-CoA acyltransferase. (2) pathway (transamination decarboxylation), (3) glycine CoA, Coenzyme A.

acid as conjugates an alternate therapy pathway (Fig. isovaleric that in excreted urine. is the and 54-2) then

the Glutaric at thelysine deficiency acidemia end a of results I from pathway. catabolic recessive an by autosomal of is deficiency activity (Fig. diseaseproduced glutaryl-CoA It dehydrogenase 54-3). and macrocephaly, at manifestations present be which birth, Clinical fever distress. metabolic may with include screening, ganglia Before develops children had birth of stress associated stroke-like which advent infarction may dystonia, an basal with episodes metabolic or more the after of of than70% prenatal newborn intercurrent reflect it the characteristically although insults. of illness, and episode of accompanied management aggressive and includes lysine illness. in amedical Treatment protein-restricted by deficient diet a intercurrent food Despite still develop this treatment symptoms. as many children onethird as of neurologic

a ubiquitous from is carboxylases attachment is cannot recycled linked its vitamin that be many and Biotin to to covalently

reference Figure metabolism Scheme of II. with types to aciduria glutaric flavoprotein I 54-3 and in type flavoprotein (deficiency (deficiency (2) dehydrogenase type (1) glutaric (3) results aciduria ETF-ubiquinone aciduria glutaric Glutaryl-CoA results type1), acyl-CoA fatty oxidoreductase (deficient (4) II), (5) glutaric aciduria other in II). dehydrogenases, dehydrogenases, in ETF flavoprotein. CoA, ETF, A; electron Coenzyme transfer

the carboxylases. Thus, increases biotin. requirement dietary greatly the inherited for deficiency biotinidase diets. individuals deficient consuming while normal become biotin Affected Clinical until period the depending appear deficiency. neonatal the later infancy, or be can disease of degree delayed in on

alopecia, depletion. vary greatly neural most on and depend which biotin acidosis, deficits) which rash, in biotin skin of tissues deficiency metabolic (seizures, sensory immune have Clinical manifestations deafness, enzymes hypotonia, the β-methyl-crotonylglycine metabolism a organic of among prominent. several amounts abnormal Carboxylation biotinidase of is the is reaction organic acids; most with patients excrete which crucial deficiency acids, in of to aciduria. an patterns severe to of biotinidase holocarboxylase disease rise deficiency organic and In inherited addition gives to deficiency, synthetase similar well of treatment mg/day). respond to conditions to 40 doses large Both biotin with (10 quantitative of Confirmatory is with measurement accomplished activity. biotinidase testing

acids Fatty of derived catabolism and triglycerides are from of hydrolysis fat. of catabolism The acids (Fig. fatty at acetyl-CoA). 55-1) the groups through of two proceeds removal a (each oxidative as as serial, time acetyl carbons to trifunctional (SCAD). exhibit chain specificities dehydrogenase that acyl-CoA (LCHAD) (VLCAD), group The related the a the by of long-chain chain (MCAD), acyl-CoA hydroxyacyl-CoA and catalyzed and dehydrogenase reactions acyl-CoA of medium-chain protein, properties dehydrogenase other are fatty long or dehydrogenase short-chain acids: length enzymes very

error the deficiency common of inborn β-oxidation. MCAD most is is as syndrome–like illness liver with manifestation, hypoglycemia hypoglycemia and elevated enzymes. Hypoketotic a common is Reye occurs. infiltration of liver also the Fatty True failure rare. hepatic is patient or the may recurrent Episodes the family. be in in Sudden syndrome death MCAD deficiency, is hypoglycemia. related perhaps to reported infant with infants Treatment requires and of other fever provision with stress. or fasting avoidance calories metabolic of avoided. must triglycerides be Medium-chain

in deficiency protein) deficiency significant and LCHAD VLCAD result (trifunctional myopathy and cardiomyopathy. a later LCHAD in by childhood. accompanied is deficiency retinopathy of excessive oxidized incompletely carnitine of In carnitine disorders occur all depletion the fatty urinary of can esters β-oxidation, of acids. through the excretion weakness muscle people. along myoglobinuria Measurement helpful of is results with in carnitine in and for this in deficiency, which plasma pain, some monitoring

with a profoundly Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA Fig. to interferes by ketogenesis adaptation β-oxidation, although hepatic deficiency, (see fasting lyase disorder impairing not of 55-1). manifestations prominent. The those is MCAD carnitine except depletion of that clinical are deficiency, less

diagnosis suggested involving β-oxidation The by and clinical of a hypoglycemia. deficiency by hypoketotic the of picture disorders is is diagnosis analysis acylcarnitine confirmed and of profiles, profiles. acid fatty by urinary free and with organic along The acylglycine acid plasma DNA the Enzyme complete confirmatory testing. and measurements testing in The fibroblasts conclusive. of other be if skin may is profile not helpful cultured testing acylcarnitines deficiency, In significant a of 985 MCAD a for cases. percentage single mutation accounts A→G of supplementation and Treatment stress, such fasting, as includes fluid as as during well avoidance fever. calorie periods of metabolic MCAD medium-chain be avoided. must In deficiency, triglycerides fatty metabolism. fatty metabolic disorders, energy provision acid of medium-chain improves the In long-chain muscle acids

transfer electron a or deficiency) disease multiple chain II clinical ETF dehydrogenase); is dehydrogenase transport defect the in (electron flavine from CoA deficiency acyl defect by (see this results nucleotides acyl-CoA to aciduria transfer type (multiple a the produced flavoprotein a adenine fatty Fig. Glutaric of [ETF], of electrons dehydrogenases in 55-1).

dehydrogenase. medium-chain acyl-CoA (6) fatty short-chain acyl-CoA (7) (8) lyase, dehydrogenase, fatty dehydrogenase, synthase, β-hydroxybutyrate β-ketothiolase, β-hydroxy-β-methylglutaryl-CoA β-hydroxy-β-methylglutaryl-CoA A. Coenzyme CoA,

54). be I confused with It type acidemia not Chapter (see should glutaric the When congenital facial nonfunctional, hypospadias. are abnormalities, essentially feet, renal enzyme is common, anomalies rocker-bottom and cysts, including nonketotic and affected within period. may die after neonatal these of acidosis, birth; infants Severely the have soon metabolic infants odor the hypoglycemia, sweaty feet a episodic, more have affected syndrome–like Less infants severely illness. may Reye and complex, in multisystemic prominent Skeletal cardiac be myopathy this disease. can Onset be hypoglycemia childhood later by in marked may recurrent myopathy. and infants has in deficiency. not been with effective Treatment complete caloric support during of to avoidance respond fasting forms Milder stress. and metabolic to riboflavin. Some of respond administration patients type exhibits autosomal inheritance. Glutaric recessive aciduria II acid Confirmatory disorders. other is that similar for to the oxidation fatty testing

of is Fig. cofactor a inner transport crucial across acids membrane long-chain (see the in the fatty mitochondrial Carnitine 55-1). in humans meat and is from is It dairy red synthesized lysine by and dietary present products. synthesis, either patients intake, carnitine, (caused result the carnityl a of amounts by other with treatment acid; or complex excretion renal (caused carnitine) or Carnitine of primary of secondary deficiency therapy). errors by of esters of as valproic carnitine as excessive failure transport such replacement of that with in as is inborn or metabolism; drugs secondary a from is carnitine of transporter. Primary systemic in the reabsorption inadequate renal mutation carnitine sodium-dependent and results to carnitine rare deficiency It responds carnitine to supplementation. well and of of β-oxidation in acids. among propionate organic long-chain most disorders disorders of carnitine secondary prominently deficiency numerous There the medium-chain examples the pathway the acidurias, in of fatty and are deficiency of lassitude, lethargy, cardiomyopathy. hypoglycemia, manifestations and death, sudden carnitine Clinical muscle hypoketotic weakness, include

and involved long-chain bile subcellular acids, Peroxisomes metabolism and in phospholipids, are membrane of β-oxidation biosynthesis organelles of acids. fatty some conditions function peroxisomal abnormal Disorders abnormal by caused peroxisomal and include biogenesis. enzyme and can involve dysmorphic features delay skeleton diverse symptoms include the Clinical head. and are frequently that the developmental and adrenoleukodystrophy, Refsum disorders examples syndrome, infantile neonatal of peroxisome of biogenesis. and disease Zellweger are is syndrome, disease (1:100,000 recessive an births), syndrome. autosomal also cerebrohepatorenal called Zellweger functions, very normal oxidation absent, the chain of acids. long fatty virtually Peroxisomes include are are as which peroxisomal Affected have infants high

Diseases CORNEA (EPONYM) (MPS) FINDINGS STORED ONSET LIVER, MATERIAL MULTIPLE DISEASE MULTIPLEX URINE SPLEEN MARROW MUCOPOLYSACCHARIDOSES DYSOSTOSIS Storage CNS FORMS ENZYME IN Lysosomal Table COMMENT WBC/BONE CLINICAL DEFICIENCY 56-1 RETINA

α-L-Iduronidase of Acid bodies Both MPS and Yes— (Hurler) Cloudy Scheie enlarged loss — function Kyphosis saccharide Yes compounds mucopoly-Alder-Reilly ∼1 yr I (WBC) Profound

Arylsulfatase — Metachromatic Clear Normal of Profound yr Normal No Normal loss Yes leukodystrophy A 1–2 No

by A α-Galactosidase Cloudy be (cerebrosidase) Childhood, — No Normal may No Fabry disease Liver No adolescence X-linked Normal

Normal Both loss Clear enlarged No in Profound of — Yes disease lipase Wolman No function Inclusion Acid Neonatal

often phosphotransferase WBC of disease) Oligosaccharides Neonatal Profound loss Yes II ML Clouding Gingival No (I-cell No Liver — Mannosyl

LIVER, IN STORED FINDINGS Arthritis, MUCOLIPIDOSES MULTIPLEX RETINA Normal clear FORMS CLINICAL MATERIAL ONSET ceramidase 56-1 AND not 4 — CNS (EPONYM) be spots Farber Diseases—cont'd DYSOSTOSIS DISEASE CORNEA MULTIPLE DEFICIENCY ENZYME Cherry-red Usually WBC/BONE URINE (12%) Usually Yes Table CLINICALLY 1st May Lysosomal lipogranulo-matosis RELATED SPLEEN Acid impaired DISEASE Storage MARROW or (ML) enlarged mo No nodules COMMENT

sulfatases enlarged Usually loss Both 1–2 yr of Ichthyosis deficiency Acid Yes sulfatase Many Profound mucopoly-Alder-Reilly Multiple Usually Yes

Aspartylgluco-Inclusions Aspartylglyco-Aspartylglucos-6 loss Normal Develop not Mild Clear aminidase in Early, late No of mo saminuria Profound

Yes Inclusions Generally Liver Yes Mannosidosis enlarged Profound loss α-Mannosidase Cloudy 1st function — Cataracts in no of mo

— α-L-Fucosidase enlarged Both be pigmented function 1st Profound May in Yes of commonly mo Fucosidosis Oligosaccharides Inclusions loss Yes Clear

Central cell. system; blood CNS, white WBC, nervous

ridges, hepatomegaly, orbital hypotonia. fontanelles, and open foreheads, flat widely anomalies are Other common. within Failure early, year. death to and and seizures, the occurs nystagmus develop first thrive, aciduria single-enzyme and examples of disease, adrenoleukodystrophy, malonic peroxisomal are neonatal disorders. Refsum fatty includes very acid chain of measurement in acids urine. long in pipecolic Diagnostic plasma and testing testing, is particularly some the Specific series in one involving for genes, for available molecular disorders PEX the of disorders. of X-linked marrow can onset the symptoms. untreatable; however, are of conditions adrenoleukodystrophy bone be helpful Most in before transplant these severe

contain enzymes called are mucopolysaccharides. subcellular for organelles Lysosomes glycosaminoglycans, complex also degradative that macromolecules that are play cells. a number roles Glycosaminoglycans within of or the abnormal destruction, hydrolytic of mechanisms itself materials enzymes protect intralysosomal Genetic from or enzymes, lysosome. metabolites result lysosome in lysosome of into the formation transport and from that the hydrolytic of in of from disorders the specific deficiency the in out nervous result and in the cells especially materials destruction, their system. These are in in ultimately stored turnover cycling of rates the function lysosomal whose and is 56-1). compounds clinical intrinsic are diverse, disorders (Table the specificity affected The of reflecting tissue many brain. affect but spare the tissues disorders Some Some are apparent during adult life. only organomegaly. in solid Storage results in organs many disorders, delay, limitation these features. corneal developmental of of joint clouding, are In common mobility and respiratory Storage compromise. in may airways in result and tissues the of lower upper hydrops Non-immune several in lysosomal fetalis occurs disorders.

specific Diagnostic and enzyme urine lysosomal includes activity in assays for glycosaminoglycans cells. white blood measurement in of testing measurement. specific If direct enzyme the test urine helps is positive, it negative, clinical needed storage a does modalities If and are disorder, not it are if it other exclude is convincing. signs testing lysosomal diagnosis. specific in which are mutations the disorders refines In known, molecular testing these family require members carrier evaluation one of at-risk testing, and of approaches. diagnosis, Specific because is for very importance Making lysosomal treatment some is assuming specific disorders increasing specific effective. diagnosis a

isavailable Specific at some metabolic treatment abnormality the disorders. for directed lysosomal successfulin that reducing the In catabolized. metabolite may oral cannotbe disease) disorders accumulation be specific the medication of (Gaucher function. can disorders, bone For cell)transplantation lysosomal marrow some restore (stem systemic missing of of hydrolytic stored by the others, allows material. of the degradation administration replacement enzyme enzyme For (Hurler humanrecombinant treatment to deficient and with caused theirvariants) α-l-iduronidase The respond by (laronidase). intravenous syndrome, syndrome, Scheie disorders α-l-iduronidase VI(Maroteaux-Lamy disease, syndrome), MPS (Hunter available include and is for Other therapy syndrome). Gaucher disease, Fabry disorders II which enzyme MPS alpha-mannosidosis, in MPS disease, disease B. type investigation followingdisorders: (Sly Gaucher IH or (Hurler syndrome), and is Nie-mann-Pick disease, Stem helpful syndrome),Krabbe under type syndrome), the cell leukodystrophy, has type MPS VII metachromatic MPS type transplantation alpha-fucosidosis, been VI(Maroteaux-Lamy for respiratory physical therapy. careful with treatment to attention status However, is supportive, many conditions and ofthese options, result with a disorders be of diagnosis issuspected. when consulted the rapidlychanging therapeutic As a special should these interest geneticists a in be burdensof decisions by of the ofcentral and and Treatment resolved the approaches. before the by the therapy typically should system light are benefits be made onset should therapeutic manifestations, potential nervous which notimproved familyin these typically

the located Mitochondria very are body. virtually all organelles cells of complex in They of variety programmed signaling roles of oxygen as and tension key in such intracellular a functions death. cell perform are biochemical perspective, the energy mitochondria cell. of production in a the key From site oxidation are of the they (see the cycle, the site cycle parts 53-4). Figure and beta (see urea of 55), Indeed Chapter Krebs requires than 1000 to proteins specifically complexity This more localized the mitochondrion. these encoded encoded require of import into (mtDNA); nuclear mitochondrion. are mitochondrial (on Only the the DNA and the by chromosomes) are remainder the 13 own transcription, maintenance, allow needs In proteins addition, the DNA to set of and its mitochondrial translation. its for

(Fig. as a by defects to are that the phosphorylation oxidative generate glycolysis from generates produce FADH2 Mitochondrial ATP to formed and Krebs disorders typically and in by cycle defined transferring cascade energy the NADH electrons ability to and also 57-1) as are respiratory disorders or chain phosphorylation disorders. known the deficiency profound of an energy function in of on organ. more organ more the symptoms The is, production mitochondrial dependent that disease. in lead to defects patterns specific are of will proteins expressed in differing and only Certain these tissues, many affect as 2500 may people. Taken together, as in mitochondrial 1 disorders

mammalian phosphorylation genome its pathway. The mitochondrial and oxidative in 57-1 protein-coding gene repertoire the Figure involved

genes within (A) mitochondrial bp). Schematic of (∼7000 representation genome mammalian light transcribed the from circle on outer Genes strand. are the Location boxes) the the mammalian (red arrangement. canonical placental tRNAs of to conforms machinery. mitochondrial of (B) phosphorylation the Simplified view oxidative (NADH dehydrogenase) I (succinate NADH or receive II from electrons FADH2. dehydrogenase) and either Complexes and complexes (CYC). the between carrier molecules carried c by cytochrome then Electrons Q/ubiquinone (UQ) coenzyme are pump and IV intermembrane The (cytochrome these the and is mitochondrial matrix gradient, to bc1) [complexes oxidase)]. protons (cytochrome of potential the the into I c transfer used space events against from electron III energy matrix. the complex is in ATP mitochondrial and V driven synthase) synthesis by the by occurs (ATP gradient proton of space; heavy-strand MM, HSP, light-strand IM, OHR, origin Putative OLR, replication; intermembrane matrix; promoter; of heavy-strand replication. mitochondrial origin Johnson genome, O’Brien SJ, Fonseca the RR, et mitochondrial al: 2008.) adaptive Genomics BMC 9:119, of The evolution WE, (From da mammalian

The are and mitochondrial signs varied. of symptoms disorders Symptoms how depend energy deficiency. organ on affected an is by and will that fatigue result is Muscle compromised weakness. function in muscle biopsy. muscle show Myopathy red ragged a on may common and is fibers occur. Rhabdomyolysis can signs of be loss seizures, consistent intellectual as headache, Brain dysfunction or expressed may function, stroke. with paraplegia occur. may Spastic symptoms of some features and ganglia disorders. basal are Ataxia defect. diagnostic external ophthalmoplegia and oxidative almost with compromised, being of be eye phosphorylation progressive an Vision movement may muscle is disturbances frequent, and cardiac rhythm occur. Cardiomyopathy may liver synthetic both and failure. Liver as dysfunction expressed be deficiencies may pancreatic involvement. Diabetes signal renal both tubular failure occur. abnormalities and Renal constipation difficult Gastrointestinal include that treat. to and both diarrhea symptoms are of necrotizing disease distinctly (cerebral disease show but degeneration different liver similar areas Leigh Alper disease) the and lesions brain in and brain. (subacute encephalomyelopathy) and symptoms involve significant signs nonspecific, physicians disorder may mitochondrial not may occurred. may progression and the until suspect a has seem Because multiple organs

lactic may acidosis. the in mitochondrial respiratory chain produce Defects cause, the not defects that the are to affected. varied it as the and described complexity surprising tissues chain, respiratory Given is intensity, of with pyruvate and The water, as intermediate an dioxide (Fig. glucose to of metabolism carbon part in tissues. of energy the occurs as cycle many 57-2), result metabolism may Interference pyruvate. in mitochondrial the accumulation of oxidative with in pyruvate, the lactate catalyzed accumulation Because of greatly over this by equilibrium enzyme is lactate ubiquitous, results acidosis. dehydrogenase favors and because pyruvate lactic the by acidosis oxygen of is lactic deficiency cause hypoxia The most caused such perfusion. poor common or also reactions of Lactic pyruvate acidosis occurs are when impaired. specific causes carboxylation the pyruvate liver, carboxylase; deficiency form the pyruvate enzyme in undergoes oxaloacetate using this In enzyme lactic severe acidosis. to catabolized (CoA) lactate acidosis. by dehydrogenase In pyruvate pyruvate form can is the coenzyme to cause acetyl A dehydrogenase in deficiency tissues, also many lactic complex; role reactions in be gluconeogenesis, a Because these disorders. of hypoglycemia feature a play also these can forms of comprise These primary acidosis. disorders lactic difficult life They treat. intractable, of present first acidosis lethal to the in frequently or as are and weeks days enzymes can this Some be measured pathway the of in

57-2 Figure and pyruvate of Metabolism lactate. Krebs carboxykinase, (4) aminotransferase, (5) cycle, Alanine pyruvate (6) dehydrogenase, lactate glycolysis. carboxylase, (2) pyruvate (3) dehydrogenase, reverse phosphoenolpyruvate (7) (1) CoA, A. Coenzyme

be made. diagnosis and can specific tissue blood white or may biopsy. cells require This

Mitochondrial that and proteins nuclear by function genes. both is carried by mitochondrial are out for coded complicated, enzymes are These quite and several extremely large. are 13 oxidative enzymes in The the mitochondrial of genome mitochondrial subunits involved encodes phosphorylation. enzymes. genes for More 85 the than code of autosomal subunits rest these the of children, in cases are the of only are to mitochondrial genes. In mutations due 15% (mtDNA); about nuclear rest by mitochondrial disease DNA mutations of in caused reduction frequent to been series The have mtDNA ability that the maintain a cases in several in most the of large mutations to lead itself. of and mutations gamma (DGUOK). polymerase population of 2% for carrier (DNA population directed), show about studies Large rates the kinase in deoxyguanosine (POLG), inheritance. autosomal Most disorders show recessive (MERRF), encephalopathy such mitochondrial passed mitochondrial or on as and with A deletions with acidosis maternal (MELAS) diabetes mtDNA deafness few fibers such encephalopathy inherited and X mutations, lactic red or linked are (MIDD). as by maternally ragged

energy cofactors the the to location appropriate basic and within the and Repairing appropriate deficit getting difficult. drugs the are mitochondrion and and judicious number adequate strategies nutrition, exercise pathway. are including with of the deficient therapy physical used, rest, for Nevertheless, adequate cofactors a limited mitochondrial for defects. most Specific is treatment forms coenzyme and Q, often for pharmaceutical riboflavin Vitamin respiratory cofactors as used. chain, the such are of organ damage, bears transplant single be When a of effective. most may organ the Identification risk diagnosis may allow family treatment. and earlier members at of

Seashore in work last R. to would author The for like acknowledge superb Margretta her edition. Dr. the of topic was of much excellent discussion. present an and Hers the has analysis informed the

O, Dis J and JF, acidaemias: Baulny Benoist de propionic outcome, al: HO, and et Rigal 28(3):415–423, management Methylmalonic Inherit Metab

dis Current in Semin Neurol of management Heese Pediatr lysosomal eases, BA: 15(3):119–126, storage the 2008 strategies

neuro neurodevelopmental 15(3):127–131, 2008 diseases MA: Pediatr Neurol behavioral in disorders, and metabolic Kayser Inherited Semin

Textbook 19, Philadelphia, RM, Nelson Stanton ed of 2011, al: Science et Kliegman Elsevier Geme BF, St. JW, Pediatrics,

types PS, 30(2):159–164, Metab J Inherit storage treatment disease Kishnani and Koeberl Glycogen updates, YT: DD, Chen Dis I 2007 II:

oxidation disorders, M, Semin fatty-acid WB: Mitochondrial Rizzo Kompare

2008 Neurol 15(3):140–149, Pediatr

cycle B, M, multicenter urea Cross-sectional Lichter-Konecki Mol et Genet al: U, study the United disorders patients Lee States, of Tuchman with in

2008 Metab 94(4):397–402,

Jr. W. Clarence Gowen,

NEWBORN AND ASSESSMENT OF FETUS, THE MOTHER,

mortality are or Pregnancies morbidity with risk. perinatal high associated considered and restriction of chronic death, of in prematurity the intrauterine weeks) result pregnancies (IUGR), longterm congenital to trauma, palsy, care fetal cerebral is may infant postmaturity (birth excessive Identification mental neonatal care. the because neonatal weeks), essential and growth, ≥42 at fetal of sequelae risks asphyxia of high-risk anomalies, birth <38 at disease, intrauterine or or growth intensive they (birth retardation, some at to time high their may 20% Ten women be of pregnancy. risk during percent delivery Although results labor and problems seen are perinatal and 50% cannot of risk. than morbidity predicted, from some be delivery during and more obstetric high complications identified before first as mortality and measures of fetal is and instituted pregnancy treatments to fetus. initiate complications, prevent can a appropriate the After surveillance, intensive be identified, provide mother high-risk

of premature birth group history previous gestation, death, (e.g., grand gestational streptococcal malformation, diabetes, with birth, or B status or congenital multiple sepsis), death section unexplained cesarean associated fetal subsequent (five neonatal or is preeclampsia, multipara intrauterine in additional explained A more IUGR, risk trauma, pregnancies), pregnancies.

or that maternal of can outcome the or complications fetal Pregnancy risk to both. be increase a causes poor secondary presence fetal cervical labor; illicit premature prescribed prolonged human preeclampsia; herpes cephalopelvic or gestation; polyhydramnios; to vaginosis; fibronectin placentae; of abnormal surgery; the abnormal virus cervical in drugs; trauma length mm) cytomegalovirus, oligohydramnios labor); estriols, syphilis, abruptio and gonorrhea. group predictor ultrasound; multiple unconjugated prolonged and simplex, toxoplasmosis, than fetal alpha-fetoprotein; secretions distress; maternal exposure including presentation membranes; disproportion; (breech); congenital (a (HIV), infections fetal of of infections, placenta Complications cord; chorionic include cervical hydrops or or or less levels immunodeficiency gonadotropin, fetal of abnormal 35 blood short diabetes; or rupture fetalis; previa; weeks’ and and (<25 gestation prolapsed at rubella, sensitization; preterm

disease and fibrosis), chronic anemia gravis, inborn malignancy. thrombocytopenic idiopathic myasthenia (sickle antiphospholipid and hypertension, hyperthyroidism, associated without mortality antibodies), cell heart fetal disease and of (cystic systemic and vascular shunting right-to-left severe with collagen (especially lung with errors complex), (maternal congenital morbidity include maternal disease Maternal complications anemia), erythematosus (especially metabolism diabetes, increased Eisenmenger purpura, phenylketonuria), or lupus with medical glomerulonephritis, risk of

increased often associated fetal Obstetric neonatal or complications with risk. are or and disorders. be spontaneous risk or abortion by is caused with a increased trimester may the bleeding chromosomal of or malformations in congenital trimester Vaginal early actual associated threatened first second of second vaginal is associated placenta previa. late Painless bleeding that labor trimester the is likely) result often third the in (more with and occurs not or necessitating this develops when may cervical internal placental os; transfusions. mass hemorrhagic Bleeding produce overlies maternal the shock, the Bleeding delivery. in premature also may result or hemorrhage of vaginal retroplacental Painful result bleeding often abruption. is placental the preeclampsia. chronic maternal maternal polyhydramnios, use, hypertension, and may maternal rupture findings twin of parity, advanced preterm age Associated gestation, and cocaine membranes, be fetal with oxygenation. ensues that Fetal causes separation as the retroplacental interferes hematoma asphyxia placental fetal with associated of Both loss. blood bleeding are types be with more common placenta may anemia previa. Neonatal

increased resulting in and the fluid, in or associated polyhydramnios, Abnormalities are fetal of oligohydramnios neonatal volume risk. amniotic with fetal the and Oligohydramnios kidneys, anomalies, with is IUGR and ≤2 syndromes. cm) major fluid index ultrasound with (amniotic chromosomal associated of congenital particularly scaphoid of wall by syndrome and, often, specific size includes hypoplasia abdomen, deformation diminished in and compressed agenesis results characteristic production facies, a which pulmonary ears, low-set Bilateral renal fluid chest clubfeet, (Potter and pneumothorax. accompanied syndrome), diminished amniotic die rather of renal fluid Uterine growth, lung in respiratory compression insufficiency. condition amniotic and patients of absence retards than with failure this the and associated from are Twin-to-twin amniotic also (donor) transfusion leakage syndrome complications fluid oligohydramnios. with labor fetal by risk fluid the (meconium-stained saline risk labor. variable decelerations); may reduced increases during of Oligohydramnios amnioinfusion distress the and be during

labor, maternal and respiratory discomfort, be premature compromise. acute may with Polyhydramnios and associated major anomalies. chronic and with polyhydramnios trisomy is or fetalis, is nonimmune 18 often, More congenital and or hydrops multiple 21, associated diabetes, immune gestation, swallowing reduced associated hydrocephaly, Anencephaly, with fetal and fluid. amniotic of are meningomyelocele well and gastrointestinal Esophageal and with atresia palate dynamics. duodenal as as swallowing interfere cleft fluid polyhydramnios diaphragmatic and causes chylothorax, hernia, chorioangioma, gastroschisis, twins, conjoined malformation, and of adenomatoid cystic dystrophy. Werdnig-Hoffmann myotonic Beckwith-Wiedemann placental Additional teratoma, include sacral syndromes, lung erythrocytes by and by fetalis incompatibilities IgG-sensitized be fetal anemia may Rh or maternal intrauterine crossing the placenta. hemolysis antibodies group of blood a Hydrops other of result caused and hypoalbuminemia, by characterized edema, congestive ascites, heart fetal Hydrops is failure. lymphangiectasia. arrhythmias of (bone (supraventricular twin-to-twin neuroblastoma, transfusion), syndrome, hydrops fetal metabolism fetal infections, congenital intrauterine nonimmune nonimmune nephrotic of congenital hemolysis, marrow malformation, hepatitis, severe congenital Causes or (storage fetal block), heart anemia pulmonary include tachycardia, diseases), errors inborn suppression, and polyhydramnios. transfusion syndrome associated also be (recipient) may with Twin-to-twin unknown result is often the Polyhydramnios of causes. bed amniocenteses. serial managed with severe, indomethacin, be polyhydramnios rest, or If may

which are rupture associated of of infection the occurs labor, the and increased rupture absence with birth. risk (chorioamnionitis) membranes, and the preterm in an Premature fetal maternal of or membranes(>24 prolonged of hours) associated and B immediate sepsis. Escherichia streptococcus two are the the with group period, In common coli pathogens newborn most Listeria monocytogenes a less is common cause. also of been have flora hominis, and urealyticum, Ureaplasma of infection bacteria fluid. anaerobic Chlamydia Mycoplasma the trachomatis, implicated in the vaginal amniotic with Staphylococcus for considered or Infection community-acquired methicillin-resistant with infections must exposures. skin infants with known be aureus is duration 24 as labor the especially if rupture hours. of the than greater period fetal between increases period) risk infection serious (latent increases, and The antibiotic neonatal risk sepsis. Intrapartum therapy decreases of the

intrauterine associated birth, artery), demise, Multiple (intestinal (breech), single asphyxia, are presentation fetal premature and from abnormal risk anomalies transfusion congenital porencephaly, resulting umbilical increased birth with twin-to-twin IUGR, and syndrome. atresia, polyhydramnios, gestations associated arteriovenous mortality who circulations. high connection Twin-to-twin syndrome and have seen twins their monozygotic and between share transfusion is common placenta a a is only an with in The retardation, this in the shunt oligohydramnios of serves fetus. fetal side fetus resulting the anemia, for growth blood arterial donor, the as on and venous-side and polyhydramnios. plethoric show in size, polycythemic, or larger and is discordant The is or may twin, recipient, Weight suggest of hemoglobin 20% of the and diagnosis. differences differences g/dL 5 Ultrasonography discordant amniotic bladder, volume fluid a second in heart with and and hypervolemia/polyuria/polyhydramnios with the reveals hydrops distended without failure. or with trimester oliguria/oligohydramnios Treatment amniocentesis to attempts (using connection laser). the includes and a arteriovenous ablate distress respiratory twin of increasing and position, of by the breech trauma, asphyxia, morbidity birth second-born order the twins syndrome. also for affects The risk birth birth

in of is dizygotic of 80% observed are 80 twins. twin twinning Overall, pregnancies; 1 gestations all membrane determined if DNA sex, blood analysis. The diagnosis type group and the and, can by fetal be or placentation, twins of necessary, of typing structure, tissue

uteroplacental hypertension, unknown or insufficiency, maternal maternal Toxemia is asphyxia, seizures, may but lead etiology probably death. that of disorder preeclampsia/eclampsia, a IUGR, maternal pregnancy, and intrauterine vascular to of in more diabetes Toxemia obesity, gestation, with of chronic toxemia, is mellitus. common history women twin disease, hypertension, and nulliparous or family renal women positive in complex). oxidation and inborn acid often the severe of low A protein elevated dehydrogenase fatty a more (long-chain liver levels, of the preeclampsia, HELLP hydroxyacyl–coenzyme of trifunctional enzyme associated fetal is (hemolysis, error A platelets), subcategory with is syndrome

the late neonatal has of fetal–early rate mortality The interval. highest age period any week occurring the fetal expressed until 1000 to day live gestation from 28th per after refers is mortality birth of the Perinatal 20th births. as of deaths number and deaths rate. the death perinatal of Intrauterine 40% to accounts mortality fetal 50% for are pale, rate born a Such as apneic, heart defined cyanotic. stillborn, limp, infants, and and are without exhibit stillborn contents. corneal skin; Many opacification; softcranial peeling evidence of infants and maceration; pale,

expressed birth per live are of as around 1000 Mortality rates time deaths births. number the of includes infants the first birth The from mortality rate neonatal after to of dying period the days life. during 28 all of to their 28 of life-threatening days of original neonatal allows die after period, to diseases life. care or the with complications only therapy many survive intensive diseases Modern of newborns neonatal caused end mortality by postneonatal occur life and begins the of delayed the mortality days 28 after of illnesses period, life. and acquired the first year This of to extends during which

periods. rate postneonatal infant neonatal mortality The and encompasses the the 6.15:1000 in States, declined United 2010. In it the to infants 11.6:1000. approximately African for The was rate American common of causes most The

asphyxia* accident Intrauterine (heart, Intrauterine Maternal Abruptio Placental Congenital hypertension, anomalies disease malformations Umbilical diabetes fetalis Multiple renal) Chromosomal placentae underlying infection* Hydrops autoimmune cord disease, CNS, mellitus) insufficiency* (chronic gestation*

nervous CNS, system. Central *Common.

listed Table neonatal perinatal in and death 58-1. are anomalies the congenital the infant are neonatal and Overall, diseases most of causes significant premature of mortality.

weights mortality large disproportionately (LBW) component 2500 of neonatal infant infants than weight a of rates. infants, Low represent birth as less g, the defined and having birth neonatal more of Although of make all up only LBW 7% about deaths. births, infants they 70% to than 6% for account countries. in the most IUGR developing common LBW in developed countries, of whereas the prematurity cause cause is is

1% weight Very weighing infants, low about g birth, 1500 represent 50% (VLBW) all than of at neonatal deaths. for of less account but birth births the neonatal risk have infants in weighing more a likely with infants neonatal infants to more, LBW are death. higher or VLBW 40 of 200-fold Compared times g period; 2500 die has mortality improved is and industrialized one infant other large, the LBW rate high recent with of major is that the countries. The compared U.S. years in rate not reasons modern,

kg), (<45 older LBW status, no American pregnancy younger age education, use, of or a (poor and gain standing 35 or physical by IUGR status, factors cigarette poor during years pre-pregnancy low or antenatal between interval previous a than low lb), low Maternal associated social drug African socioeconomic (excessive with stresses, (<10 race. weight 16 caused unmarried walking) illicit or premature support) than and weight short LBW care, maternal birth, smoking, years, include psychological maternal pregnancies, alcohol level birth women. African women rates LBW for the and American VLBW white twice for rates are infants. nearly twofold are rates mortality higher among neonatal The infant and American African differences explained only partly racial by are These poverty.

determined accurately can Fetal by techniques. be ultrasound size of through height Fetal determining examination of can growth the by assessed uterus gravid be the abdomen. the bimanual fundal used circumference growth. measurements the are biparietal fetal length, femur of diameter, to abdominal estimate and Ultrasound fetal these combination fetal predicts of A measurements weight. conditions. the with normal growth fetal are high-risk associated Deviations curve from

5th declines than less remains the but when absolute is for percentile. less size of growth fetal over slowly, the stops percentile IUGR and, present age time, gestational or proceeds growth 5th growth when than to malformation growth and primordial chromosomal congenital syndromes. fetal rubella reduce result infection, dwarfing innate conditions may as such syndromes, potential, from restriction fetal abnormalities, Growth the that of insulin growth associated is fetal I restriction. Reduced growth insulin-like with production fetal factor and tumors, abruptio placental placental IUGR placentae, causes insufficiency. syndrome, (congenital infections), include twin-to-twin villitis and transfusion chronic Placental of predominantly smoking, abuse, a (chronic reduced diseases preeclampsia/eclampsia), Maternal (noted flow diabetic alcohol and and that drug of with during low in intake, nutritional stature vascular pregnancy. prepregnancy vasculopathy, uterine weight uterine causes cigarette constraint hypertension, mothers weight) severe include and or gain small peripheral reduce blood reduced of The the associated the and birth (Table depends complications IUGR 58-2). reduced of after cause fetal growth the outcome on risk polycythemia, the of a of for increased intrauterine and at Fetuses are uteroplacental to an as subjected asphyxia, result birth hypoglycemia. comorbidities hypoxia insufficiency chronic congenital syndrome. poor with anomaly have outcomes on mass the particular the based or chromosomal, for prognosis tissue to due syndromes Fetuses multiple metabolic, reduced growth born fetuses mothers nutritional Fetuses catch-up to poor usually intake and show birth. after with small

size with always structural or Fetal functional maturity. correlate does not fetal because decision maternal is fetus of making crucial a disease. Determining a maturity to fetal or deliver when of menstrual of on correct a period. the estimate be Fetal gestational age basis accurately may the last determined to are 20 by usually fetal first audible be to determine 14 is and (12 age; heart Clinically weeks. movements by perceived 18 used fetoscope methods), weeks of dates to gestational quickening at Doppler 18 detected at relevant the 20 tones to can weeks landmark is However, not always it

lethal hypoxia, infection, insufficiency, acidosis, fetal anomaly demise Intrauterine Placental

hypoxia, stress, ↓ hypoglycemia Temperature stores, fat Cold instability

fetal hypoxia-acidosis, Perinatal without aspiration ↓ Uteroplacental or chronic with labor asphyxia syndrome during perfusion meconium

gluconeogenesis, hypoxia, of hyperinsulinism, ↑ Hypoglycemia Tissue glycogen ↓ large stores; ↓ brain needs glucose relatively hypothermia,

hyperviscosity erythropoietin hypoxia ↑ Polycythemia-Fetal with production

effect, hypoglycemia, fat consumption/ stores Hypoxia, subcutaneous starvation oxygen hypothermia poor Reduced

disorders, Syndrome anomalads, oligohydramnios-induced Dysmorphology deformations chromosomal-genetic

polycythemia, hemorrhage Pulmonary Hypothermia, hypoxia

high-risk WA: Modified from infant. Carlo The St. In Kliegman RM, BF, Stanton

Philadelphia, al, Nelson editors: Elsevier Textbook et Pediatrics, 19, Geme 2011, JW, Science. ed of

born problems the weeks. prematurity risks of if 37 age–related to *Other before gestational common are

possible labor diabetic dating, such as in such especially to or by determine maturity pregnancy. fetal a a preterm high-risk situation,

and secreted fetal is phospholipids the by produced Surfactant, proteins, the a into amniotic maturing combination is surface-active lung fluid. eventually and of amount can surface-active the and lung to the The material be direct or used absence maturity. fluid in is of in a predict reflection of amniotic surfactant pulmonary of fetal presence predict lecithin, a Because lecithin determination in or the amniotic is used to component principal surfactant, fluid a of is mature of fetus. phosphatidylcholine, beginning Lecithin age, 32 weeks. concentration gestational increases at to increasing 34 with

a used by Methods assess uteroplacental insufficiency. well-being before compromised of or asphyxia for labor already risk fetus fetus on are at the to fetal a onset identifying focused challenge in oxytocin contractions period. infusion sufficient simulates three an uterine 10-minute to test through of The produce contractions oxytocin a development periodic with of predicts (late of result bradycardia fetus. deceleration) a contractions is and fetal The phase test at-risk out an positive uterine

movements. response heart to body the rate fetal examines nonstress test The lasting reassuring. 15 more increases than rate beats/min 15 seconds, Heart of are not and two episodes nonreactive), If the is such in fetus the at reactive occur 30 result risk. test considered is (versus minutes, detected amniotic size, more movements, cm breathing of than movements, by in fetal Additional 2 and body tone, of gross ultrasound. the are fluid fetal signs presence well-being pockets fetal and The parameters accurate with offers the most the nonstress these test four assessment. profile biophysical fetal combines

with peripheral resistance, the diastolic decreased fetal vascular arteries examination of increased with umbilical or insufficiency. fetal identification and reversed Doppler hypoxia acidosis, permits associated blood aorta of or flow placental (percutaneous fetal intrauterine or hemoglobin provide blood blood Cordocentesis can umbilical asphyxia. to or acidotic, demise and identify birth hypoxic, Po2, anemic pH, risk who at measurements is fetus for a fetal sampling) lactate, for count, rapid used karyotype. be also determine testing, platelet and type, fetal microbial antibody can to blood titer, Cordocentesis

reducedbeat-to-beat prematurity, or fever, resulting abnormalities a a anesthetics), beats/min maternal as complete of In (flattened distress), atropine, heart fetal contractions.Fetal should fetaldistress). beats/min labor, (>160 arrhythmia, rate or baseline pregnancy, from heart or or uterine result block, heart rate monitored continuously during result be a should may (<120 tachycardia fetalsleep, β-sympathomimeticdrugs, variability local anemia, hyperthyroidism, baseline of sedatives, high-risk tachycardia, the as as indicate tracing bradycardia fetal fetaldistress, or rate or hypoxia the of the decelerations) presence cord to changes uterinepressure type hypotension(late insufficiency Periodic help acidosiscaused II heart or by uteroplacental maternal relative umbilical of compression(variable determine and by decelerations). level to bloodgas should scalp prolonged variable), fetal a of obtained acidosis. decelerations the (late assess presence repeated In fetal severe be or less compromise. fetal indicates than 7.20 scalppH of A hypoxic 7.20 zone in A warrants borderline a pHbetween repeat 7.25 testing. and is and

anomalies may by Fetal detected be ultrasonography. bifida); on neck tract; spina hydrocephaly), (for heart. translucency), (for and visualization genitourinary back and anencephaly tract; should of (for nuchal skeleton; thickened be gastrointestinal head or placed Emphasis the the anomalies. artery are Four-chamber views detection required for and of heart great low alpha-fetoprotein abnormal chorionic an levels). Chromosomal with anomaly are estriols, “triple often and test” associated maternal elevated syndromes (low serum placental gonadotropin levels, may lifesaving. or be is fetal delivery therapy the in intensive with a neonatal unit fetal therapy abnormality care If detected,

The infant requires 58-3). detailed to an the birth of approach history (Table a enables the occur the may room factors mother’s after risk to problems Knowing delivery birth. that anticipate team The when events reveal risk. the or even mother affecting previously the complications a to low was either and that woman’s of neonate, lead pregnancy labor considered might history delivery can the likelihood result need successful of as of distress Anticipating fetal the the to a a resuscitate resuscitation. newborn increases

neonatal The physiology transition fetal occurs birth. from at to gradient placenta transport fetal Oxygen in a results across the Pao2. between and the maternal oxygenated a Pao2 of is and infants, not the has anaerobic. compared low fetus with fetal that blood Although level adults oxygen neonates similar consumption thermal though and of uptake rates, levels Fetal are activity neonatal and to even fetuses and differ. the environments The fetal blood oxygen content of

Illicit hepatitis, rubella, drugs, status ethanol, infections, AIDS Occupational blood transmitted exposure Age hepatitis Immune HIV, Sexually cigarettes, B, (syphilis, group) Race cocaine

metabolism, errors therapy hypertension Drug jaundice of disease Hematologic/malignancy Diabetes history—inborn bleeding, disorders Genetic Collagen-vascular mellitus Chronic Heart Thyroid (SLE) disease

Method age of gestational age gestational assessing Current

group Fetal NST, therapy infection medical Oligohydramnios-polyhydramnios tract profile) Colonization (anomalies, Medications/drugs Preterm B agents of Amniotic Preeclampsia (OCT, membranes bleeding (L/S fluid Urinary infectious (herpes Fetal Premature (duration) status simplex, rupture labor analysis surveillance Acute (prolonged) hydrops) to Ultrasonography biophysical illness/exposure streptococcus) ratio) Vaginal

heart versus rate Presence Apgar anesthesia meconium-stained LGA, of of Vaginal Duration labor cord (Pitocin) section delivery of fluid Maternal cesarean (AGA, oxytocin or analgesia, Spontaneous patterns fever/amnionitis Presentation—vertex, Fetal Scalp (distress) age breech Growth Maternal with pH labor resuscitation versus Nuchal assessment Forceps induced SGA) Gestational augmented score/methods status

SLE, for age; test; lupus acquired OCT, NST, ratio; large LGA, AIDS, gestational immunodeficiency systemic lecithin-to-sphingomyelin Average oxytocin for AGA, challenge syndrome; gestational test; for small nonstress L/S, SGA, gestational age; erythematosus. age;

because higher of to older fetal hemoglobin. much the and is infants a equal in concentration almost blood oxygen content has children

oxygen for higher and has hemoglobin across oxygen Fetal transfer two hemoglobin, a placenta. affinity than facilitating chains) (two alpha adult the gamma to left of curve fetal curve adult is the hemoglobin-oxygen dissociation shifted the The (Fig. adult level, than at 58-1); hemoglobin same the Pao2 is saturated hemoglobin. more fetal to lower not 20 on of to oxygen functions unloading oxygen Because the the 30 saturation is steep, (Pao2, however, curve mm deficient. hemoglobin end the fetal tissue Hg), higher concentrations in placenta, the contrast, at enhanced. the loading In present oxygen is oxygen hemoglobin decrease increase, production becoming 6 production to the the as begins 3 available In hemoglobin fetal adult to to hemoglobin infant to months by last life. trimester, the begins of only At the the curve has fetal dissociation to hemoglobin adult shifted this time, position.

portion perfuses the to blood placenta venous returning well-oxygenated heart from of liver. the A the umbilical a The liver bypasses venosus) the vena inferior andenters through remainder ductus the cava. shunt (the to right left the whereit atrium the to circulations crista venacava oxygenated thisblood the blood the atrium.The constitutes in cerebral, in venous This to third subsequently is across return 65% pumped foramen dividens ventricle. upperextremity atrium, the left patent of to and right the coronary, the of directs ovale one by 70% from the body caval of right atrium the two rightventricle. to remaining blood in directed return thirds Venous the with and the is upper thevena combines upper fromthe venous artery. This and lower pulmonary of enters mixture low-oxygenated blood body the a lungsthrough 92% of the the right to to Only ventricular it pumped the the the enters descendingaorta. ductus pulmonary 8%to patent bypasses of remaining80% circuit; 10% and output is arteriosus to produced of blood muscle flowing low The the systemis vasoconstriction because amount medial pulmonary by

Figure dissociation curves. 58-1 Hemoglobin-oxygen position the and ion adult depends of binding adult (pH). of hemoglobin hydrogen The on 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (DPG), curve PCO2, temperature, concentration to the

in fetallung hypertrophy fluid to flow. blood the the arterioles increases pulmonary and of resistance a and artery increase hypoxia, response to vascularresistance may tonealso hypercapnia, Pulmonary responds pulmonary acidosis vasoconstriction, with that further. of dilating prostaglandins. low remains because The levels in ductus and Pao2 thefetus arteriosus patent mL/kg/min) which ventricular by mL/kg/min). volume the combined ventricle, Inutero, the ventricle that of ventricle dominant output, olderinfant’s (200 a (450 pumped is high is the an with pumping65% compared right right

utero arterial low-resistance circulation of shunts. closure reduction removal placenta, the the of periods, transition occurring pulmonary neonatal between breathing, circulation, and of fetal the the onset the and of in involves resistance, of The of the pressure. and Clamping increases blood the of the umbilical the system cord placenta eliminates low-pressure systemic venous Decreased from atrial decreases right placenta pressure. the return the air capacity. functional lung breathing begins, residual fluid, As replaces maintaining swallowed Fluid trachea; is out or vaginal it during lung, through the the part, leaves in either delivery. squeezed lymphatic venous reabsorb and fluid. systems pulmonary remaining the The

to spontaneously birth little H2O). (5 pressure normal require open after cm lungs Most infants the to 10 resistance the the partly breathing, a breathing of the oxygen tensions. of a partly decreases, With and pulmonary result vascular elevated of mechanics of result onset arterial atrial atrium; The of to foramen the left blood the exceeds increases the atrial pulmonary to the and left pressure increased pressure, venous right volume now ovale flow lungs blood closes. returning to begins rise, the and As circulation increases through arteriosus pulmonary arterial ductus the flow tensions the oxygen constrict. this constriction the infant, within day term a 1 closes In birth. after arteriosus functionally ductus thrombosis requires fibrosis, A that closure and several may take weeks. a permanent process arteriosus elevated, if remain the to circulating ductus vasodilating sensitive ductus levels of the of arteriosus may are patent. premature a effects In less infant, prostaglandins the is oxygen; infant distress patency common respiratory a with syndrome. premature is a in problem This

levels pulmonary immediately oxygenation, artery pH vasoconstriction Pco2 muscle Ventilation, normal reduce and bycausing smooth and relaxation. medialmuscle at a of further hypertrophy birth increase in thenext months, continues Remodeling flow. pulmonaryblood of pulmonary further the 3 reduction of and resulting resistance and begins a for vascular Persistence shunting pulmonary or hypercapnia, parenchymal of acidosis, aggravation from pulmonary or (PPHN). asphyxia, hypothermia, the hypoxia, hypertension newborn blood thelungs, vasoconstriction caused of of polycythemia, pulmonary by in persistent hypoplasia results withair of Failure can completely alveolar to replace pulmonary newborn). fluid to lead tachypnea (transient distress the respiratory

instilled into effective can therapy of gonococcal indicated panophthalmitis Silver being neonatal is nitrate severe which without result an washed both and for ophthalmia, blindness. prevention in eyes the out subsequent (1%) a effective may and Silver conjunctivitis not nitrate produce chemical is discharge trachomatis. mucopurulent against a with C. erythromycin prevent hospitals drops use disease. Many eye to neonatal and gonococcal chlamydial

newborn if begin fetal a been of may ruptured. membranes in utero colonization Bacterial have the Most streptococci, bacteria birth mother’s and undergo staphylococci, the coli, colonization E. genitourinary and in present clostridia. after B as acquire such infants system, the group disease routine individual one infant prevent to in nurseries bacteria care to skin or pathologic cord is another and to Antiseptic most the infant. the of spread from in prevent colonization bullous systemic impetigo, with from disease aureus. diarrhea, result virulent may S. and omphalitis, Staphylococcal applied antibiotic ointment may and Triple or cord reduce its bacitracin) bacitracin gram-positive to (polymyxin umbilical with the bacteria. colonization B, be neomycin, to of Epidemics

hand disease infectious aureus control monitoring managed washing, with colonization). nursery for are (cohorting, measures and S. infections strict

the hemorrhagic disease all given (intramuscular) should to of K newborn. infants to Vitamin be prophylaxis prevent diseases should various B the hepatitis receive and Before 58-5). (Tables infants 58-4 discharge, vaccine screened be for and

can output, metabolic neonatal fetus, cardiac and the mother. numerous poor the the placenta, acidosis from result or hypercapnia, or affecting a Fetal conditions hypoxia, lungs. Whetherin after the asphyxia-caused utero through injury or birth, brain reduced placenta result gaseous the or of is the hypoxic-ischemic through exchange in Asphyxia resulting with blood ischemia. or flow, severe eliminates cardiac tissue insufficiency associated bradycardia reduces or intestine, respond by from lungs, skin. glands neonatal The and and kidneys, oxygenavailability and brain,heart, the away to circulatory to systems adrenal shunting blood preferentially the the fetaland reduced

Beta-ketothiolase acetoacetyl thiolase deficiency) deficiency C5:1/C5OH CoA (mitochondrial BKT

C3 A, CBL Cobalamin (A,B) B defects

hydroxyacyl-CoA LCHAD/D dehydrogenase Long-chain C16OH/C18:1OH deficiency*

Trifunctional TFP C16OH/C18:1OH protein deficiency*

chain dehydrogenase acyl-CoA deficiency C14:1/C14 long Very VLCAD/D

GALT activity galactose, Galactosemia* Total GALT

hypothyroidism TSH DISORDERS Congenital HEMOGLOBIN CH T4,

screening. I, Levy From Newborn Sahai H: newborn, Avery’s editors: ed diseases 9, 2012, the D Philadelphia, Gleason Saunders. C, of In Devasker *Can in of week first manifest life. acutely the

place perfusion tension, that the cardiac during hypoxic to asphyxia. of hyper-effects output with at fetus (chronic and caused by depression combined of poor and myocardial anaerobic the diabetes tissue preeclampsia, risk function, interfere secondary asphyxia hypoxia, Metabolic is acidosis uteroplacental systemic for intrauterine mellitus) metabolism. epidural anesthesia Maternal the caval vena the 58-6). affected With syndrome development organs (Table severe prolonged compression are vital asphyxia, multiple or and neonatal intrauterine or of uterine may maternal which hypotension, decreases produce

that Many fetal or neonatal contribute conditions perfusion. to placenta (Table and same pregnancy with problems given infant’s asphyxia associ-labor medical medications to respiraated the Maternal or are obstetric relieve the during 58-7). depress pain cross the high-risk may tory at Maternal resulting birth. in center, diseases of the apnea time

ACTION DIAGNOSIS transient SCREENING blood and FINDING Phenylalanine PKU, Table DIFFERENTIAL Be Taken Repeat Screening hyperphenylalaninemia Initial specimen pterin Results: ↑ 58-5 hyperphenylalaninemia, Abnormal non-PKU to galactosemia, Newborn Action NEWBORN defect, Possible Implications INITIAL

iodine testing, blood specimen ↑ treatment or Congenital thyroxine TSH hypothyroidism, T4, function exposure thyroid begin Repeat

normal elevation T4, hypothyroidism with hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, deficiency, TSH congenital delayed globulin thyroxine-binding secondary Repeat Maternal blood TSH specimen

type Homocystinuria, urine hypermethioninemia liver blood isolated transient specimen Repeat I, tyrosinemia dysfunction, Methionine and

for urine immediate acid-base elevation ketones, ketones including status, transient if neonatal ICU Clinical Maple studies, syrup amino positive urine acid evaluation care disease, urine Leucine

blood transient I Tyrosine Repeat II, liver tyrosinemia, type type specimen disease or Tyrosinemia

Hemoglobin cell cell electrophoresis disease, trait sickle S-hemoglobin Sickle

Repeat and 13 sweat fibrosis, failure transient, and specimen, perinatal intestinal trisomies possible Trypsinogen test testing 18, stress, renal anomalies, Cystic DNA blood

blood trauma, muscular type invasive dystrophy, muscular of Repeat phosphokinase dystrophy, Duchenne procedure other test Creatinine birth

biotinidase assay, Biotinidase biotin therapy Serum Biotinidase deficiency

G6PD bilirubin G6PD blood deficiency determination count, Complete

(IgG) possible HIV, consultation antibody Infectious AIDS disease HIV transmitted Maternally

From Newborn HL: Levy screening. Kim SZ, Ballard the RA, Avery’s Philadelphia, Saunders. of HW, 7, In editors: Taeusch Diseases Newborn, ed 1998,

thyroxine; T4, phenylketonuria; AIDS, HIV, TSH, G6PD, PKU, intensive human dehydrogenase; virus; syndrome; care immunodeficiency unit; ICU, hormone. thyroid-stimulating glucose-6-phosphate Acquired immunodeficiency

Table cerebral 58-6 PVL, nervous system seizures, Hypoxic-ischemic Effects hypotension IVH, Asphyxia tricuspid Cardiovascular hypertonia Central edema, ischemia, contractility, Myocardial encephalopathy, SYSTEM insufficiency, poor of hypotonia, EFFECT

respiratory hypertension, syndrome Pulmonary pulmonary distress Persistent

Gastrointestinal necrosis Perforation, ulceration,

Inappropriate hypoglycemia, ADH, myoglobinuria hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, Metabolic

hormone; PVL, IVH, periventricular hemorrhage; leukomalacia. ADH, Antidiuretic intraventricular

hypotension, abruptio 58-7 insufficiency, unknown Uteroplacental INTRAUTERINE cord, placentae, prolapsed maternal Hypoxia-ischemia Birth of TYPE Asphyxia Table EXAMPLE Etiology

placenta Anemia-shock fetomaternal Vasa previa, erythroblastosis hemorrhage, previa,

cord presentation, dystocia, Cephalopelvic trauma transection Birth breech disproportion, shoulder spinal

Umbilical tetanic POSTPARTUM placentae compression, abruptio cord Hypoxia-ischemia contraction,

fetal previous system of episodes trauma, nervous Central hypoxia-acidosis medication, Maternal

Congenital myasthenia myotonic neuromuscular disease Congenital gravis, myopathy, dystrophy

shock Consolidated Infection pneumonia,

or severe tumor, laryngeal atresia, webs disorder Airway Choanal obstructing goiter

pulmonary immaturity, hypoplasia disorder diaphragmatic Pulmonary effusion, hernia, Severe pleural pneumothorax,

pneumothorax Pulmonary hypoplasia, Renal disorder

infant must the Fetal become and do asphyxia with conditions usually not delivery, manifested associated when until ventilation. initiate sustain must lower airways the be unobstructed. and In upper addition, and patent foreign which Alveoli amniotic increases material, distress respiratory exudates, free fluid hypoxia. reduces infectious and resistance, debris, and airway from as to lung compliance, such meconium, leads must be and other lungs, Some g at their less 1000 than even birth unable be the infants weighing may pathology. immature extremely to expand absence of in surfactant apnea. and poor Their and walls exchange, in chest retractions, may result hypoxia, air compliant deficiency

paradoxically in than to apnea rather adults. tachypnea (particularly hypoxia as responds with preterm The infant) newborn a occurs also depress system. of Episodes neonatal intrauterine may asphyxia the central nervous heart perfusion, result uteroplacental acidosis may If of recovery hypoxia of as the fetal and fetal occurs improved a rate resolve. may respiratory not ventilatory Nonetheless, asphyxia. may episode newborn more initiate if severe, is the center an birth of a effect at the adequate undergo response another on and

parameters and a elicited process, of a each is physiologic examiner. method a the for 5 is on newborn need observed intervals after or system five physiologic of 1 rapid based assessing minutes (Table good birth, birth the by 58-8).At examination, scoring a responses minute The qualified Apgar to resuscitate the to 8 5 to 9 Full-term score a 1 adaptation with cardiopulmonary at infants normal minutes. should and is attention whether Apgar determine to 7 close warrant will any Apgar the 4 to and pathologic of the ascertain low contributing infant’s score. improve status condition to to scores whether

depression. 0 Apgar a 3 definition, cardiopulmonary arrest or either a By system an condition represents hypoventilation, to of caused by score bradycardia, or nervous central severe by by cardiac and establishing are scores Apgar not Most low in caused adequate ventilation difficulty pathology. primary 3, and with most score injury Apgar or acidosis coma, hypotonia; cause severe dysfunction. fetal to (pH to infants addition seizures, manifest <7); In to enough asphyxia 0 neurologic an of also multiorgan Table factors fetal listed may scores or hypoxia Low caused be 58-7. in other Apgar by infants emergency mask endotracheal with Apgar do Most respond to assisted need usually face and medication. by intubation not by scores low or ventilation

(Fig. as same this newborn that qualification score low with Apgar period resuscitation follows the older patients, ABCD the a approach Resuscitation some for in requires simplified of systematic sequence newborn but a of 58-2). a anticipation meconium by In a clearing airway securing reminder of or the also labor, and A for patent delivery. suctioning; is pregnancy, for the knowing stands need events by ABCD and amniotic of approach, A the fluid low a is immediate that diaphragmatic score Apgar endotracheal indicate Evidence and of intubation required. hernia a chest respiration. If the a mask act lung compromises bag the are may latter an enters expanding and used, and in the mass that stomach, the gas and as to pleural needed adequate effusions occurred has be hydrops evacuate to thoracentesis fetal may the with bilateral effusions, pleural If ventilation. establish

represents B breathing. remains is neonate the ventilation apneic initiated. and artificial cyanotic, or should be If hypoventilating 100% mask anesthesia extremely bag a and the through from performed with be newborn; given oxygen a the prevent administered should to being an should be to Ventilation mask. attached manometer to high pressures well-fitted

stay Yes,

gestation? Term care Routine

or Breathing crying?

Good tone? if airway Dry Clear Ongoing   evaluation necessary 

stimulate Warm, necessary, airway if clear dry,

100,30 apnea? gasping, or sec below NoHR

breathing Yes cyanosis? Labored or persistent

Clear below care Postresuscitation CPAP HR airway SpO2 monitoringPPV, Yes 100? Consider No SpO2 monitoring Take ventilation steps corrective

60? below HR No

with intubation steps corrective no Consider Intubate Chest if ventilation PPV rise! Take compressions chest Coordinate 60? HR below IV epinephrine

for New Algorithm Figure and 58-2 Guidelines Neonatal Resuscitation. PPV, positive Continuous ventilation. CPAP, pressure; positive-pressure airway Association Guidelines (From Cardiopulmonary et Kattwinkel 126(5):e1400–e1413, 2010. Resuscitation: Resuscitation for Pediatrics K, Perlman Heart Report—Neonatal Emergency Care, and Aziz al: American Special 2010 Cardiovascular JM, J, 128(1):176, Erratum in Neoreviews

doi: 10.1542/peds.2011-1260.) Consider: 2011.

administered. tube If revive, 100% attached to should oxygen not endotracheal be the be placed, infant manometer, an should the and does bag and anesthesia generated begin to to should 40 pressure 25 20 60 with H2O, rate breaths/minute. at cm of a The dioxide, adequate color, ventilation muscle normal wakefulness. response sounds, later, of An return 160 (120 to the to beats/minute), includes chest rate end-tidal returning rise, well-oxygenated increased and, range and normal carbon to good heart breath activity after recovery a cyanosis return cardiac a disappearance by noticeably normal of improved usual rate, and heart a to perfusion. The involves first followed arrest return be a time output limp correction apneic may and prolonged after for of of acidosis. and remain An cardiac infant

lungs, should amniotic fluid present of avoid meconium-stained briefly pneumonia. be Breathing into producing the initially dissemination to meconium aspiration if delayed is severe when noted suctioned in oropharynx head is meconium fluid, delivered. be the amniotic the If should is the should of oral be a After the infant, depressed the cavity birth

NAME Life-Threatening cleft nares distress Congenital palate, obstruction MANIFESTATIONS Anomalies through Choanal to (stenosis) Robin Table nasogastric delivery unable pass Micrognathia, 58-9 syndrome airway room, in tube atresia apnea, Respiratory Pierre

respiratory right, Diaphragmatic left in present distress, polyhydramnios Scaphoid shifted chest, abdomen, hernia bowel to sounds heart

nasogastric to aspiration place pneumonia, Polyhydramnios, unable fistula salivation, Tracheoesophageal in tube stomach excessive

obstruction: bile-stained atresia, duodenal distention atresia abdominal emesis, Polyhydramnios, ileal volvulus, Intestinal

agenesis/Potter syndrome Renal pulmonary anuria, hypoplasia, pneumothorax Oligohydramnios,

α-fetoprotein; decreased tube Polyhydramnios, activity defects: Neural elevated anencephaly, fetal meningomyelocele

atresia heart Hypotonia, (trisomy Down duodenal 21) congenital disease, syndrome

the visualized shock cords congenital again; infant vocal Ductal-dependent disease heart intubated. murmur, be Cyanosis, the should and suctioned

cardiac C external and represents circulation massage. 3:1. cardiac compressions/minute a performed cannot does Ifartificial palpated,external if breathsgiven be massage bradycardia, or if is should a at not ratio peripheral with compressions improve ventilation present, rate 120 and of of asystole pulses at be External usually in notneeded the is delivery massage because ventilation. cardiac most room respondto infants

of administration D represents the drugs. administered. unresponsive If be should is ventilation present, or bradycardia is to asystole if epinephrine (1:10,000), to tube. an or into should (IV) through 0.3 the Intravenous line given epinephrine mL/kg, venous be injected 0.1 endotracheal umbilical administered is is endotracheal result However, when epinephrine tube, unpredictable. the the through often determine it are pneumothorax. with there presence a is in whether cardiac electrical pulses, activity administered Before to of poor important the medications is bright a the thorax, than the over use the of more of sternum, transmits side of may and the light side involving the if suggest thorax one through Transillumination light other. pneumothorax each and the from a be shift away may the a tones be heart tension pneumothorax. pneumothorax Breath may decreased there over of of a sounds side

the the medication given naloxone endotracheally. be or be due given a narcotic mother, to system infant mg/kg in intravenously to nervous infant may central 0.1 to depression the If of can (Narcan) followed be administered, ABCs Before drug is carefully. the this should a is because a be mother addicted maintenance withdrawal to or Naloxone may methadone of of to is who the seizures. newborn being suspected not newborn severe should given on experience narcotics

has at clinical hypoxic to the be in injury. been induced to shown brain injury babies efficacious 34.0°C) of than hypothermia(33.0°C hours ischemic therapeutic 72 in reducing of gestation more suffering for 35 weeks’ In birth, studies severity neuroprotection presumably induced against to head hypoxic cooling, selective or Brain hypothermia, by ischemia. whole-body due whether encephalopathy provides

first well an neonatal diseases. may a to cause of of physical general or fetal be diagnoses The or manifestations the determine examination newborn confirm examination to infant examination a a of of physical various Problems be room life. neonatal in in or day first to transition may the during the life of immediately detectable the from fetal delivery Physical birth from the delivery also or drugs, and may reveal resulting of effects trauma. examination labor asphyxia, to The newborn deformations first congenital way 58-9). an (Table detect is malformations examination or important may all 3% present Significant 1% be congenital in births. to malformations of

intercostal such as cyanosis, disease. retractions, flaring, nasal grunting Signs and suggest pulmonary of the pneumonia. staining suggest Meconium and nails, aspiration the and fetal possibility skin distress of umbilical cord, the to evaluate of spontaneous nervous and activity, are quality the passive muscle the useful The cry, apnea system. signs of level state of tone, screening

(usually 60 (normal 30 heart The to should reserved signs, 160 rate of per vital axillary rate, (normal to as assessment done beats/min); an particularly respiratory (often 120 rate and breaths/min); proceed measurement); infants). for sick rate, blood temperature rectum later with and examination an pressure head for the determine accelerated, age. should is plotted growth retarded circumference gestational normal, on whether to growth and or and specific be weight, curves measured Length,

and 58-3 Figure assessment for gestational maturity Physical age. of criteria (NBS) infants. extremely Score includes New and mature has Ballard been improve Expanded accuracy more refined infants premature to in New expanded al: premature JC, Khoury Wedig K, to 119:417-423, infants, (From extremely Ballard Score, include JL, Pediatr Ballard et 1991.) J

various determined (Fig. an Gestational age physical by assessment is signs of neuromuscular characteristics (Fig. 58-3) and age and 58-4) according maturity. that to vary fetal of fine, decreasing of advancing including ear; the tissue; over and mature skin. age, back; of Physical the hair fetal firmness decreasing of breast the the immature size criteria pinna opacity lanugo the increasing with increasing tone flexion flexor hips, neck; the gestational including decreasing joints. laxity the of increasing increasing of and arms; the and the of age, muscles of legs, criteria with Neurologic mature life of assigned determined first the signs scores. are and are during These day to which accurate gestational age, (Fig. is within a score weeks 2 is correlated with The cumulative usually 58-5).

or the growth patterns, abnormal assessment permits (Fig. aiding Gestational complications fetal detection largeness for age neonatal of predicting in smallness of gestational the age 58-6). born age age. Infants gestational than large percentile for considered a 90th at the greater are for weight Among infant mother diabetic postmaturity. of risks the and of the therisks gestational for risks being associated large with a with age associated are all than standard use age or percentile) less 10th the for and are at born have IUGR. growth for weight age percentile Infants a gestational (some <2 small curves 5th deviations problems in listed addition 58-2. to in small age associated infants gestational congenital include malformations, for with Table the Problems

should ecchymoses, for The staining, evaluated and meconium cyanosis, skin jaundice, be congenital petechiae, neonatal nevi, rashes. pallor, plethora, marmorata, in phlebectasia normal mottling (feet premature infant. instability with a prominence), and (intermittent hands) acrocyanosis with is telangiectasia, Vasomotor venous cutis and healthy the in in birth. term a be infant days first noted after also may Acrocyanosis

The covered is with disappears lanugo hair, by which skin term gestation. suggest the cord a lumbosacral spine spinal Hair tufts over defect. infants, layer disappears the a caseosa, preterm by soft, creamy skin in white, term. Vernix covering Post-term peeling, have skin. often infants parchment-like and dark and in of African macules back buttocks lower black transient, 90% are spots Asian to blue American, Mongolian over seen infants. pigmented the Indian, pink of and noted eyelids, usually back and macular transient, is simplex Nevus hemangioma, the neck, (salmon or the common, on patch), forehead. examiner consider to stain, should face intracranial on (trigeminal and convulsions, and flammeus, syndrome the tram-line Sturge-Weber calcifications). seen is Nevus port-wine or cause the angiomatosis, ipsilateral

and of Figure 58-4 maturity assessment for criteria Neuromuscular age. gestational been infants. extremely New more accuracy premature Ballard has to includes in Score improve refined (NBS) Expanded and mature infants J premature Score, to extremely include expanded JL, infants, Wedig et Khoury 1991.) Pediatr 119:417-423, al: New JC, Ballard Ballard K, (From

in of of Congenital noted varying neonates. pigmented size 1% nevi melanocytic lesions are Giant nevi uncommon potential. pigmented malignant are have but whereas are red Capillary deeper, masses. raised, hemangiomas are lesions, cavernous blue hemangiomas then of to in birth, 1 child 4 years the is resolve lesions size when Both after increase age. or produce hemangiomas these enlarged, When may trapping and platelet high-output failure hemorrhage. heart develops the common rash that papular-vesicular toxicum neonates an eosinophils birth after erythematous, is fluid. and Erythema involves in in vesicular vesicle infants, dry a birth small, melanosis, a on of pigmented seen African consists macular common more at base. brown Pustular American and in may be mimic bullous such as lesions simplex impetigo. the pustular more or melanosis herpes rash serious Erythema conditions, benign disseminated of and may are the eruption but aureus of toxicum S. vesicular be to needed and for chain rashes. Gram Wright these appropriate stain, stain, smear, reaction DNA, may distinguish herpes antibody polymerase Tzanck cultures stain, direct fluorescent characteristic are of on common the noted obstructed follicles are miliaria cysts by and nose) milia heat), that is sweat epidermal pilosebaceous glands. (prickly rashes caused which (yellow-white Other the also or suggests maybe preterm present Edema lymphatic but hypoalbuminemia, fetalis, infants, in sepsis, disorders. hydrops

gestational physical by Maturity calculated as calculating rating the 58-5 neurologic adding the scores, and age. Figure et (From 1991. J al: premature 119:417-423, Khoury Ballard JC, include Wedig infants, Pediatr Ballard K, expanded New to extremely Score, JL, ).

skull be this and a after after birth. prolonged molded The days labor; may 2 resolves to elongated 3 determine be presence cranial sutures the to premature palpated of the synostosis. width and The should or fusion 24 2.5 35 36 0 32 39 23 anterior 26 1.5 31 33 30 27 The 28 38 and posterior 29 40 3.5 34 25 41 4.5 37 0.5

weight–specific Birth age–specific rates. estimated gestational and 58-6 Figure mortality represent the percentile figure 90th of 10th The dashed and the weights. lines are in plotted increments. 250-g lines weight and The each by age gestational grid for the weight number box range. birth in mortality the is age and Each by percent defined rate the grid gestational attitude, Thomas at gender, Pediatrics new and intrauterine A growth Turnier P, et 106:E21, 2000.) impact J, al: of V, Peabody look race, (From and nonbulging, be than soft anterior fontanelles posterior. the larger with the and should with hypothyroidism, associated disorders. and A fontanelle rickets, hydrocephalus, other is large fontanelle are away these from they are palpated. areas a Ping-Pong Soft craniotabes; lesions when ball the like feel compression. be result a They of in utero may internal or carefully of these develop for signs fetal abscesses from areas. or be in lacerations should The sites may scalp electrode fetal pH sampling; trauma skull examined

Eyes, and Mouth Face,

for features, ears, tags and lip preauricular as The palate. dysmorphic sinuses, low-set long inspected cleft face or such hypertelorism, epicanthal philtrum, should folds, or be asymmetry may by of caused head be be palsy; nerve Facial seventh torticollis. may result a tilt

spontaneously, an uprightposition. should especially eyes The open in gestational may 28 befused. age, the eyelids weeks’ Before intrauterine and infections. microphthalmia megalocornea, malformations Coloboma, suggestother or 1 also congenitalglaucoma, corneagreater than seen diameter in storage uveal cloudy A dysgenesis, be and diseases. cm may tract in hemorrhages usually are significance. common and Conjunctival and of retinal no present at The gestation. light 28weeks to pupillary of is response retina easily. is The shown the reflex red of chorioretinitis, severe prematurity. or reflex, hyper-plastic A vitreous, is or and retinopathy ocular tumor, the ofcataracts, may abnormal of persistent white be result primary leukokoria,

and teeth, hard be should of and inspected uvula, natal The the the presence mouth micrognathia. palate and of soft for clefts a bifid suggests submucosal uvula A cleft. inclusion cysts the on pearls) are shiny, multiple epidermal normal. palate transient White, (Epstein hard marble-sized transient the masses necrosis. usually are Hard, in idiopathic mucosa fat buccal 1 4 membranes in are opaque, to tympanic first the weeks. immobile dull, and The gray, not findings with media. These confused should be otitis

symmetrical. short appears The and neck cysts include which sinuses), clefts. by are branchial result caused duct the goiter lateral neck by masses clefts of (or or or masses and thyroglossal Abnormalities midline Cystic and hygromas be may present. hemangiomas fibrous head muscle tumor of the torticollis). facies over muscle tilt sternocleidomastoid the (neonatal and a asymmetrical produces with Shortening produce malformation also lesions and torticollis. Arnold-Chiari spine cervical suggest of Turner syndrome. Edema neck and the webbing palpated fractures. clavicles for should be Both

identify detect a asymmetry and to breast chest breast muscle absence pectoralis age the of inspection from the resulting Examination the of wall of chest of inspection determine and abscess. includes gestational the to tissue be have expression not Boys produce should attempted. engorgement breast milk; milk and and may girls be bilateral nipples renal with be and associated Supernumerary anomalies. may may

of nature the depth, retractions. sternal intercostal rate, of observations lungs includes of Examination the or and of first equal should the sides not life. 1 rales sounds the after chest, and be be hours Breath on to 2 should both heard of side effusion, or or suggest diaphragmatic pleural sounds one collapsed on pneumothorax, hernia. absent lung, Diminished breath lung the disorders. physical from away Shift for helpful cardiac a impulse and toward finding a pneumothorax these of and tension collapsed diaphragmatic the hernia is differentiating neck the or scaphoid abdomen emphysema pneumothorax diaphragmatic a the in also Subcutaneous hernia. pneumomediastinum, of of auscultated whereas in a chest suggest or a the suggests presence sounds chest bowel

older is in midline than position more infants The heart of in children. the whereas first split first The sound day the may the not life. heart of be heart second in sound is normal, atresia. sound pulmonary in second transposition great heart vessels, noted of of is the splitting Decreased PPHN, and the first Heart life. common room and day the in are newborns delivery during in of murmurs the due or Most these arteriosus, a the artery closure ventral and septal of transient defect. of to ductus are are murmurs pulmonary stenosis, small peripheral in extremities and be palpated arteries). and Pulses lower brachial femoral the upper should the (over measured all the should with failure. and or lower upper Blood murmur heart in a patients pressure extremities be in gradient more suggests the Hg upperto-lower than to An 20 of coarctation of extremity 10 aorta. mm

costal The 2 margin. the be palpable cm may liver right below be tip spleen is The palpable. likely less to and asplenia syndrome. liver suggests situs inversus A left-sided should Both kidneys in deep life day palpation. be first of palpable the with gentle, 95% The occurs life the day of than first first in infants. of term more normal during urination

kidney masses hydronephrosis or usually represent Abdominal dysplastic-multicystic disease. Less indicate cysts, intestinal often, mesoblastic nephroma. masses duplication, neuroblastoma, ovarian or should Masses be ultrasound. with immediately evaluated as atresia, intestinal caused obstructions, ileal midgut Abdominal distention volvulus, by Hirschsprung ileus, disease. may such imperforate or be meconium anus, birth hours passed in is of Meconium 48 99% of stool term infants. within normally anus should The be patent. is temperature always imperforate not be An a carefully. first taken the taken anus rectal visible; thermometer should with may diastasis or prune-belly in in absent, The be recti. syndrome, weak, musculature resulting abdominal wall as in Umbilical are African American common infants. hernias or an presence as with determine The inspected and of herniation vein of arteries be omphalocele. of contents, cord umbilical absence an one should and the urachus abdominal a two to the occurs hypoglycemia problems, genetic with extraintestinal associated and such The trisomies latter as syndrome). (Beckwith-Wiedemann is the of a urachus. and or, less be suggests stump discharge the omphalomesenteric a Bleeding cord cyst granuloma coagulation from a may frequently, disorder, umbilical a chronic draining or the and vein extrahepatic may thrombophlebitis umbilicus portal around cause and subsequent omphalitis is portal Erythema hypertension. 3 abdominal the bowel is to cm to a lateral through herniation umbilicus gastroschisis. the 2 wall The of

Available StudentConsult.com @

should rugated testes descended term, pigmented At be into well-formed a the and scrotum. common are in testes among the cryptorchidism. more this inguinal is preterm infants, The canal; is occasionally as rarely, peritonitis. hydrocele, utero may hernia, swelling torsion transient or, the meconium a represent in Scrotal from ileus of meconium testes, and dissected torsion testicular painless, transillumination, as may swelling. whereas the clear dark present seen and newborn readily in by a are Hydroceles penis. end urethral be the The the at should opening of Epispadias about alone not raise should or hypospadias pseudohermaphroditism. concern are present, problems testes should of the suspected. no scrotum hypospadias However, if be in development present sexual and is Circumcision because should repair. is deferred be hypospadias with often for foreskin the the needed in too is the prepuce often retract The neonatal tight period. normal to

as withdrawal. a of The reveal normally female vaginal genitalia may result whiteor milky maternalhormone a discharge blood-streaked of the majora Mucosal arecommon. labia tags an and imperforate of an a lower uterus. hydrometrocolpos produce hymen a Distention result abdominalmass of midline as may enlarged majora) adrenogenital to masculinizingmaternal hormones. Clitoral labial-scrotal syndrome or exposure the of fusion suggests folds (labia enlargementwith

amputations. extremities simian atrophy, congenital fingers, feet, fingers, presence overlapping of length, bands, assessment Examination clubfoot, and rocker-bottom of of and hemihypertrophy, involve creases, fractures, absent the should syndactyly, polydactyly, symmetry,

soft tract tufts, The meningomyeloceles. lipomas congenital of evidence tissue above for be gluteal as should or (a scoliosis the examined hair a dermal hemivertebra), of result sacral masses and such folds, spine sinus

for (dislocation). should hips be dysplasia The congenital examined should fold Ortolani discrepancy asymmetry Gluteal of but the and or dysplasia, the test the leg maneuver evaluate is the examiner perform length joint. to the of stability suggestive hip Barlow tests test) (Ortolani and femoral from maneuver). These head displaced then the acetabulum can determine replaced whether (Barlow the be

and alertness, of neurologic neonatal The tone, passive assessment ofactive primary examination include level should

ARDS pulmonary Sepsis, Inflammation, pneumonia hypertension,

hypertension Meconium inflammation, pneumonia Mechanical pulmonary aspiration obstruction,

pulmonary newborn Persistent hypertension Pulmonary of hypertension the

Pulmonary Diaphragmatic hernia hypoplasia, pulmonary hypertension

disease pulmonary flow as tetralogy of shunt Cyanotic Right-to-left pulmonary heart atresia, decreased with Fallot in blood

increased pulmonary ventricle heart or blood arteriosus disease lesion truncus flow single Mixing as Cyanotic in with

poor disease heart failure edema aorta and with heart congestive Cyanotic in of coarctation Pulmonary as and heart hypoplastic left output cardiac

arteriovenous high-output contractility alone or failure heart or as sepsis, of PDA tachycardia, or supraventricular in Galen block; poor as complete and vein cardiac Pulmonary failure myocarditis, in Heart malformations edema other

sedative apnea Hypoventilation, Maternal drugs

CNS hemorrhage depression, seizure Intracranial

hypoplasia Hypotonia, disease Neuromuscular pulmonary HEMATOLOGIC hypoventilation,

Hypoglycemia failure heart congestive CNS depression,

system; ARDS, respiratory ductus patent Acute nervous arteriosus. syndrome; distress PDA, CNS, central

and cranial tongue Moro nerves spontaneousmotor asin masseter facial newborn at to (involving extraocular (primitive) birth primary in deep and reflex, the hearing, movement, 6 power of one tendon reflexes, motility, reflexes. muscle months,is activity, 3 present retinal examination, function).The gone reflexes, sucking, and and slightlyraised dropping upper should elicited slight extension thehands the supine of cry. a flexion the sudden, supported arms, position, is which by and followed extremity and opening from abduction head a of of elicit by It be grasp beats tendon The gestation gone by reflexes are of palmar ispresent in normal. months may a 28 and of newborn; by 10 age.Deep 4 5to normal clonus weeks’ ankle brisk (upgoing). Babinski The extensor signis by can examination be of and to extremity, sensory withdrawal grimace, painful evaluated response stimuli. cryin The an The the light tactile weeks’ the 32 toward is perioralarea) by stimulation rooting head present gestation. (turningof reflex of

Delivery Conditions in Resuscitation Requiring Special the Room

Available @ StudentConsult.com

body) the is Acrocyanosis and rest the normal. color pinkcolor of of the common is the feet in hands with of roomand usually (blue delivery with manifestation g/dL cyanosis mucosal to a can any of a occur trunk, always time birth is deoxygenated noted 4 condition.Cyanosis hemoglobin. of andis 5 after Central tongue membranes, serious underlying at the of and systems, caused 58-10). Central most can common cardiopulmonary be in organ problems the diseasesare (Table manydifferent cyanosis although by the admitted cyanotic heart distress threemost causes unit. care and infants syndrome, Respiratory common disease to cyanosis in aneonatal sepsis, are intensive of systematic withoutassisted cyanoticinfant or of required every of prompt oxygen, causes of with administration ventilation. after theseand for other evaluation A cyanosis is

anomalies organ birth (see after with 58-9). congenital Table function Various can interfere vital complicate lesions such malformations, and airway, atresia the obstructing Some may choanal ventilation. as other as interfere cysts or respiration. with lesions, hernia, Intrathoracic diaphragmatic such may lead of to esophagus, or the perforation, colon level gastrointestinal malformations at system ileum, pneumonia, duodenum, gangrene. aspiration the the that Other obstruct intestinal or bowel omphalocele associated are Gastroschisis on and wall. the with exposed abdominal with associated whereas necrosis intestinal gastroschisis. other is often common in more Omphalocele is malformations,

eventually capillary cyanosis, in and poor is hypotonia, palpable refill by Shock time, of pulses, manifested cardiopulmonary arrest. pallor, delivery room the lack during before cause shock the labor or delivery is Blood loss common room. and in delivery a of by pallida). of placenta vasa loss fetus the displacement twin-to-twin (asphyxia caused syndrome, Blood asphyxia as previa, or blood during placenta to hemorrhage, fetal-maternal from may previa, transfusion the be as Hemorrhage infants, and the liver viscus, into ventricles infants. in a cerebral preterm noted may the be hemorrhage into or may in spleen, shock apnea produce and macrosomic such hypoalbuminemia, Anemia, Rh of at are manifestations shock common birth hydrops. immune hypovolemia, and

bacterial after intrauterine or immediately infant the to nursery. with sepsis Severe may present room transferred is the in delivery the shock pulses. mottled, these and and peripheral Typically infants are hypotonic, have diminished cyanotic concentration may They hemoglobin have but a coagulation. and manifest disseminated normal intravascular neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, symmetrical of infections. (purpuric gangrene often Peripheral with is infants sign shock rash) in a severe congenital bacterial hypotensive hypoplastic although steno-sis obstruction produces usually cardiac Congenital also the delivery left syndrome) or heart (critical in aortic not left ventricular shock, room.

used shock Treatment for management of newborn infants with sick approaches infant. the involve the should or of status, or immune knowledge of hydrops, of Problems anticipated infection through intrauterine be may the evidence suspicion infant’s anomalies. airway the respiratory essential. of support are Stabilization institution of and 10 of repeated with mL/kg saline or solution. Ringer should lactated Hypovolemic to be boluses managed normal of 15 shock is the available are If typed be given delivery and signs the anemia present. and against mother’s to of in if shock room blood hemolysis be newborn immune should should the severe blood predicted, blood be blood mother’s transfusion. with crossmatched all before should infant’s and the Thereafter, dopamine, and cortisol or Drugs improve such tissue perfusion. may as epinephrine, output cardiac

injury and during unavoidable fetus Birth refers birth the avoidable process. injury to the to dark extends tissue often diffuse, lines. of that the soft across midline succedaneum swelling a Caput scalp the of and suture the is edematous, In presentation, is eyelids tissue delivered the edema infants soft of a and from face face equivalent phenomenon. an in and after labor Caput prolonged succedaneum infants. preterm be seen may full-term and the with of result respective succedaneum overriding that the often is sutures. against head induced associated their Molding of frontal pressure is parietal the bones from caput and is

hemorrhage cross A bones. surrounding subperiosteal suture respective cephalhematoma the does is not that lines a the rarely A may skull fracture be a underlying seen linear cephalhematoma. and form time, depression. organize, With central calcify, a may cephalhematoma the

with specific no cephalhematoma Infants require succedaneum caput and treatment. a infant massive Occasionally may hemorrhage. a develop scalp premature requiring cause a from hyperbilirubinemia may the bleeding indirect noted phototherapy. subgaleal cephalhematoma bleeding This and but subconjunctival and small are insignificant. are common usually and Retinal hemorrhages treatment No necessary. is

posture. the Spinal cord the hyperextended in star gazing fetus spine injuries a may of or occur result as delivery. after longitudinal may the rotational vertex during infants Injuries to force (at transmitted is C7–T1) C3–4) occur in (at or breech also excessive or neck cord, trauma leading and permanent to hemorrhage, to direct sequelae, neurologic cause vertebrae rare; transection damage the Fractures spinal are of may edema, and signs. Rarely, displacement snapping the than of vertebral time heard transection indicating delivery. sound rather at is cord a absence complete paralysis, lesion. Neurologic of responses stimuli painful deep the absence tendon to of reflexes, usually below flaccid dysfunction and involves stimuli flexion the legs. reflex of may Painful elicit spinal may the spinal cord mask which asphyxiated, apneic, injury often with Infants underlying flaccid, and all are transection. of cord

producing plexus of or brachial paresis the Injury excessive to nerves complete result paralysis. the traction the on neck, may from complete avulsion, severe. myelin intact (neurapraxia) mildest of is an severe or or root more consists edema; disruption nerve is sheath; nerve The with disrupted and is axonotmesis neurotmesis, injury fibers most sixth involves mildest most Erb-Duchenne and nerves cervical fifth and and injury. is paralysis the the usually common externally the rotate The supinate the cannot or abduct arm the the shoulder, at infant forearm. arm, the picture the usual The arm, and one painless internal of forearm. adduction, pronation of of rotation is is reflex involved intact. The on the hand side, is grasp the Moro absent and to nerve and C4, may paralysis lead palsy (C3, respiratory and Phrenic C5) diaphragmatic distress. from must Elevation caused of eventration resulting absence be caused nerve differentiated congenital diaphragm weakness of the or muscle. by diaphragm elevation injury by from hand the cervical Horner syndrome the in injured, and, by a the (ptosis, an caused sympathetic miosis). and Klumpke nerve, seventh nerves to paralyzed thoracic are paralysis and eighth if nerves resulting injury is ipsilateral first hand to damage C5, is arm Complete severe paralysis T1. the noted and most and C7, of with C8, form C6, and contractures. of supportive is includes avoid to injury plexus Treatment brachial positioning Active of also be range may beneficial. exercises motion and passive the persists, deficit grafting nerve If may beneficial. be

the injury forceps. or Facial compression bones the pelvic nerve result and the the be of the mother’s facial seventh between physician’s may of nerve bone by in moves This nerve forehead, injury an the including crying asymmetric is a face regular side, peripheral characterized normal whose manner. the at the is close, side droops nasolabial The side of flaccid, is mouth and affected fold does the absent, not rest. the eye thirds face central the the forehead) are the lower involved. a of only If there is the nerve, injury to facial (not two the when paralysis; this in appears results syndrome, central the Complete bilateral, face a expressionless. Möbius as facial of is in agenesis facial nucleus

cyst). rare, require 3 usually no other for fractures complications and treatment are delayed to Skull than rare, months) leptomeningeal observation (e.g., linear, very (1 are need seen and may unusual, skull Depressed surgical be but are may elevation. forceps complicated fractures delivery with unilateral noted Fractures in are usually dystocia. macrosomic and clavicle of are infants the after shoulder side. a heard Moro movement and infant the after and the of affected is Often snap an decreased difficult response a asymmetrical exhibits delivery, treatment a figure require the simple excellent; prognosis or bandage The to of infants no immobilize bone. eight many is

Extremity clavicle often more fractures of than the are common involve humerus and fractures the than the femur. less legs for of bandage splint the and humerus Treatment for triangular femoral involves a traction suspension and the immobilization fractures. excellent. is The prognosis

and of cartilaginous the the common. nasal bones the of but is the out rare, part of are Fractures facial dislocation septum vomeral columella groove of Clinical feeding difficulty, flattened, asymmetrical and a laterally respiratory displaced nares, nose. manifestations distress, include reduces elevating Treatment the the back by into cartilage the dislocation groove. vomeral

adrenal premature without macrosomic gland liver, vaginal the or spleen, infants or in extremely infants, breech occurs to with Visceral delivery. and or trauma in formation and with the liver hypovolemia, disseminated hematoma of may Rupture to lead coagulation. subcapsular intravascular anemia, shock, hemoperitoneum, to examination an evaluated Infants hemorrhage be hepatic but and anemia head a intraventricular have are with for rupture. with should ultrasound suspected normal or shock splenic who only adrenal normal hemorrhage detected Adrenal glands infants. asymptomatic, calcified may in by finding be adrenal jaundice, shock. with or with exhibit severe flank may a and hemorrhage hematuria, mass, Infants without

newborn situated fluid birth, amniotic and environment C). C by in remains a covered a cold to After (20° 25° 0.3° the core may in C/min, delivery skin and decrease temperature decrease infant’s 0.1º may the C/min temperature An room. absence external to increase substantially an infant source, temperature. metabolism must of maintain heat body the the In

occurs loss Heat four through basic mechanisms. in air convection wet solid In cold, loses and or heat (loss by delivery current). surfaces), predominantly the infant (cutaneous wet the room, loss (loss evaporation radiation respiratory to to and nearby when low humidity), cold dry, When conduction of important (loss and contact infant) convection, loss. are direct causes is radiation, object to in infant the heat with immediately eliminate all heat should to dried evaporative After be birth, infants high-risk losses. or provided source high-risk radiant A heat infants. should convective be for these and in term dried infants blanket. should be a Normal wrapped

body temperature. is The in infant the of and environment, by ambient thermal neutral the being the temperature maintains the heat normal ideal results environmental lowest that rate produced temperature age. increasing The gestational and temperature postnatal with thermal neutral decreases environmental Ambient heat neutral of than thermal for normal environment less temperature. the result body in temperatures to which maintain is oxygen rates designed increasing production, consumption hypoglycemia, to if sufficiently the increase If consumption hypoxia, or body or (due cannot oxygen ambient decreases. drugs), temperature the core temperature decreases further

created production areas of a tissue. by newborn predominantly in thermogenesis specialized Heat is nonshivering adipose by containing tissue brown situated blood large rapid vascular, highly in around fat and cell, the heat is is mitochondria per circulation. transfer Brown vessels, many to resulting contains brown are neck, of of the fat. vessels thorax, common The region and interscapular locations by as system, serves innervated production nervous stimulus a adipose for are These by which cells. tissues sympathetic brown primary heat also the newborns. in occur not does Shivering

manifested pulmonary and hypoglycemia, bradycardia, infant an apnea, hypoxia, color. is a injury by skin cold in hemorrhage, acidosis, Severe pink cutaneous oxygenated hemoglobin trapping of the by is The color caused capillaries. in recover. respond of dead, to appear treatment Many most infants these but and cold the degrees acidosis birth. and in may hypoxia injury of room delivery to after contribute Milder metabolic infants. Conversely, in hypoxia delays heat generation cold-stressed

Treatment and severe involve rapid and lung of hypothermia external stomach) should (e.g., resuscitation and warming surfaces. of core resuscitation Fluid infants. treat needed to seen many of in is hypovolemia these also the to newborn temperature only C (32° with immediate warmer, or radiant warming 35° external both. incubator, often core requires C) Reduced in a period

environment results elevated above thermal ambient an and to core in temperatures stress the neutral heat Exposure temperature. uncommon may newborns forehead. in only and on the is be Sweating noted to respiratory moderate stress, heat. increase to their dissipate heat infants rate may In response Excessive environmental hemorrhagic may syndrome. temperatures heatstroke result shock in in or encephalopathy

@ Available StudentConsult.com

newborns. in and Hypocalcemia is premature common sick to in Calcium of are blood in than the of calcium blood higher cord maternal levels active because transfer fetus. placental calcium content accretion bone 40 in the and of gestation. third 150 between doubles mineral fetal approaches weeks hr; Fetal mg/kg/24 trimester 30 at a hours, birth, occurs. the hypocalcemia 24 levels usually infants point of which All calcium serum decline a to after reaching level slight 48 at show trough are levels less 3.5 than to mg/dL considered and of mg/dL calcium less than hypocalcemia. Total levels 7 of serum ionized calcium 3

varies associated with the of child. the illnesses The time and of of hypocalcemia etiology onset the first and life of Early in 3 occurs hypocalcemia the neonatal often days asymptomatic. is calcium diabetic serum may parathyroid usual hypocalcemia postnatal and levels and of premature to the responsible a Transient infants in decline response mothers. infants for be reduced of hypoparathyroidism absences Congenital of syndrome DiGeorge parathyroid of a gland cause with is hypocalcemia. the of infants hypocalcemia, may in with Hypomagnesemia mothers. (<1.5 mg/dL) simultaneously be seen diabetic especially calcium serum calcium until symptoms also relieve Treatment levels is hypomagnesemia does alone not with treated. increase or hypoparathyroidism, associated for transient from release hypocalcemia bicarbonate necrosis, neonatal be with early asphyxia. Sodium cell phosphate and hypercalcitoninemia responsible therapy, may occurs encephalopathy hypoxic-ischemic associated often result hypocalcemia with seizures asphyxia of Early-onset as with a

tetany, result in or is commercial of infant to Late hypocalcemia, of milk neonatal phosphate–containing often or the excrete the ingestion high neonatal usual phosphorus the formula. inability with usually occurs hypocalcemia life. Hyperphosphatemia infants (>8 in mg/dL) the of week first after late-onset also and Vitamin states associated with malabsorption D have been deficiency hypocalcemia.

partial face manifestations apnea, include Chvostek inflation (facial seventh The pressure sign spasm the of is the (carpopedal of blood hypocalcemia when by laryngospasm, and Trousseau clinical the hypomagnesemia a muscle side of muscle nerve spasm and sign cuff). twitching, over seizures, induced tapped), signs two latter are the in period. immediate rare The newborn

hypocalcemia high-risk by a Neonatal administration to hr. oral mg/kg/24 IV in 25 may calcium be 75 of prevented supplementation of at or neonates rate Early infants of of mothers and hypocalcemia preterm often asymptomatic diabetic infants spontaneously. resolves 15 over should given of hr to 10% slowly intravenously Symptomatic followed gluconate continuous to of 10 calcium. infusion 4 mg/kg/24 be 75 treated with hypocalcemia and 2 mL/kg minutes, a calcium elemental by of and hypomagnesemia to mL/kg, be given 50% 12 hypocalcemia, 0.1 is with should If sulfate, by injection every associated repeated 8 hours. magnesium intramuscular

offeedings treatment with as plus low-phosphate early The the hypocalcemia initiation includes in late hypocalcemia, immediatemanagement, of formula. are cause calcium irritate necrosis; tissue Subcutaneous oral and of hypertonic intestinal salts can mucosa. infiltration supplements the IV may

may chronically by and mother infants methadone, drug physiologically passively abuse the barbiturates, amphetamines) may addicted these (heroin, withdrawal. and to during have signs drugs medications or of pregnancy; to Infants subsequently of taken symptoms tranquilizers, become other to such for IV and drug hepatitis, immunodeficiency pregnancies syphilis. abuse, high of these risk at syndrome Many related acquired are complications as (AIDS), women. LBW and of rate infant for are high-risk death the these sudden syndrome In infants the risk addition, long-term the in higher

maternal to maternal days addiction. and at signs 1to and usually Neonatal methadone 1 weekswith 4 at begin of use withdrawal 5 symptoms life with heroin withdrawal yawning, manifestations of include feeding, diaphoresis, ravenous appetite,emesis, tremors, diarrhea, high-pitchedcry, jitteriness, poor seizures. poor Clinical tachypnea, sleep, sneezing, fever, and methadonewithdrawal. to tends be severe illness more during The treatment initial The in a quiet, in blankets dark includes room. swaddling pharmacologic present, irritability or When indicated. with constant,and and are interferes feeding, treatmentis seizures or is sleeping hyperactivity whendiarrhea with phenobarbital. Seizures treated are usually prolonged narcotic with may be tincture calm to theinfant; opium) of 1 from (usually other over symptoms may months. a managed The to2 replacementdoses of be weaning narcotics

decreasedattentiveness. and placentae, neonatal pretermlabor, is use with Cocaine pregnancy abruptio associated irritability, during be Infants gestational small head age circumferences. for may havesmall and no is needed. Usually treatment

diseases can pregnancy during affect directly or (Table the fetus Maternal 59-1). indirectly have direct the can to antibodies of the usually circulation. can neonate on fetal Autoantibody-mediated the type because placenta and the fetus the are diseases and consequences cross IgG

Large hyperinsulinemia hypoglycemia promoting growth Mild age, for gestational Fetal hyperglycemia—produces

Growth disease, placental retardation Vascular insufficiency Severe

effect, plus withdrawal Intrauterine poor neonatal Drug diet drug addiction growth Direct restriction,

passage disease Placental Transient thyrotropin immunoglobulin of thyrotoxicosis antibody receptor Graves

suppresses gland Hyperparathyroidism to Maternal fetus parathyroid fetal calcium Hypocalcemia crosses and

after demise sensitization Hypertension restriction, placenta growth hypoxia fetal Intrauterine mother fetal of insufficiency, Placental intrauterine

placenta the receptor Transient acetylcholine neonatal gravis Myasthenia crosses Immunoglobulin to myasthenia

Autosomal Neonatal myotonic dominant with dystrophy dystrophy genetic anticipation Myotonic

defect ventricular fetal retardation, septal phenylalanine Phenylketonuria levels Elevated Microcephaly,

Rh jaundice or hypoalbuminemia, at directed hydrops, Antibody with crosses anemia, blood fetal other antigen cells Fetal neonatal group placenta sensitization

RM: From infant. and The neonatal BJ, fetus Stoll Kliegman Philadelphia, editors: Nelson Jenson pediatrics, RE, In ed RM, Behrman 16, textbook HB, Kliegman of

2000. WB Saunders,

and Antiphospholipid is thrombophilia loss. with pregnancy recurrent associated syndrome are other found diseases. in 2% 5% to with of may systemic be lupus population, but rheumatic and antibodies also erythematosus general they Antiphospholipid healthy associated the on antibodies the of effects prothrombotic from function. the complications arise placental Obstetric antiphospholipid and syndrome. with infarction, been in have thrombosis Vasculopathy, antiphospholipid identified mothers birth. syndrome maternal include and preeclampsia, Antiphospholipid fetal can premature insufficiency, growth impairment, placental

in 2 approximately per births and an Idiopathic 1000 (ITP) against thrombocytopenic platelets. purpura to is 1 in live seen immune which antibodies are process directed is the newborn. antibodies and and cause IgG cross in Platelet-associated fetus the can placenta thrombocytopenia thrombocytopenic severely The fetus intracranial risk at for increased is hemorrhage. at ITP reduce maternal to of hemorrhage pregnancy fetus close the the requires fetal life-threatening and maternal risks management trauma during delivery. and to platelet management Postnatal infant’s the involves count. of observation evidence may platelets irradiated have hemorrhage, the infants control bleeding. sin-gle-donor be administered who of For to infusion infant an from benefit immunoglobulin. The of intravenous may within 6 weeks. to 4 Neonatal resolves usually thrombocytopenia

abnormalities the anti-Ro congenital results lead fetal and conducting to complication cardiac (SS-A) to system, of production systemic is in the damage lupus in heart anti-La block. placenta (SS-B)antibodies erythematosus (SLE)can cross Immune that injure the most tissue.The which can serious and (third heart in SLE association complete degree), block with havebeen blocks tends maternal The observed observed. although be less to advanced mortality require is pacing. rate 20%; infants approximately mostsurviving The Neonatal with involvement. lesions by the eyes, skin occur and face, macules atrophic central hemolysis, for and erythematous demarcated peripheralscaling hepatic predilection thrombocytopenia, characterized with scalp), or and plaques lupus is autoimmune may (sharply

arteriosus, asphyxia Neurologic atrial dystocia) shoulder and of arteries, anomalies of Hyperbilirubinemia (neural holoprosencephaly) Congenital (unconjugated) tube transposition disorders (ventricular ventricle, regression) right coarctation defects, disease Hypomagnesemia (macrosomia, Birth injury Congenital the Organomegaly Birth dysgenesis—caudal Hypocalcemia aorta) the double-outlet defects, great heart Hypoglycemia truncus (lumbosacral septal

renal agenesis) thrombosis, ureter, Polycythemia Renal (double hydronephrosis, vein (hyperviscosity) disorders renal

Transient colon newborn tachypnea Small left distress Respiratory the syndrome syndrome of

Graves is with disease antibodies. thyroid-stimulating associated hyperthyroidism about endocrine to it in been has most reported prevalence 0.1% is The of common be diabetes). thesecond during pregnancy(after pregnancy 0.4%; clinical disorder to hyperthyroidism appear thetransplacental thyroid-stimulating first Neonatal to the to of antibodies;hyperthyroidism rapidly is 12 passage due 48hours. within can restriction, (usually growth (may craniosynostosis include intrauterine may prematurity, goiter hypertension, coronal),flushing, Symptoms arrhythmias, hepatosplenomegaly. failure, tachycardia, thrombocytopenia, obstruction),exophthalmos, heart tracheal stare, hypoglycemia, cause and iodine Treatment includes and drops, propranolol. propylthiouracil, neonatal to hyperthyroidism 4 2 in resolves induced months. usually Autoimmune

diabetes adversely before during or diabetes noted that is women) present develops in neonatal of influences pregnancy (gestational fetal pregnancy that and 5% well-being. about mellitus is Diabetes fetus age onset of diabetes in on severity vascular diabetes, of the of part, state: and depends, disease. of with of on The of the diabetic insulin, effect the duration presence treatment fetal resulting in hyperplasia leads that of stimulates hyperglycemia the controlled the and maternal Poorly to maternal of islets fetal diabetes Langerhans. pancreas, primidone, Fetal carbamazepine. triamterene, phenytoin, *Trimethoprim, phenobarbital,

results that producing in hyperinsulinemia age. is increased fetus fat a and for large protein gestational synthesis, After resulting hypoglycemia. birth, persists, fasting in hyperinsulinemia neonatal preventing Strictly macrosomic controlling prevent and and pregnancy labor maternal hypoglycemia. and hyperglycemia growth diabetes during neonatal delivery fetal during problems mother summarized Additional of are and diabetic Table in newborn and the her fetus 59-2.

as Other availability disease(cystic fibrosis), cell severe fetus. to reduce oxygen cyanotic sickle such pulmonary anemia,may maternal disease, the illnesses, and heart vasculopathy diabetic result in Severe hypertensive uteroplacentalinsufficiency. can or by adverselyaffected the The used maternal fetus cardiopulmonary life appear medications to adaptationto and may effects be or metabolic, the (Table treat neurologic, as illnesses.These extrauterine also anadverse or may 59-3) (Table 59-4). as newborn teratogenesis may mother affect or also the diseasesof adversely. the Acquired infectious newborn fetus

CONDITION(S) on the acidosis hypotension, bradycardia Acebutolol Newborn Affect Agents Adversely Women May 59-4 Acting Infant Table Pregnant That POTENTIAL AGENT IUGR, Metabolic Acetazolamide

hypothyroidism Bradycardia, Amiodarone

Aspirin prolonged bleeding, gestation Neonatal

Atenolol IUGR, hypoglycemia

CNS IUGR depression, Rash, Bromides

Transient anuric Captopril, enalapril oligohydramnios failure, renal

scalp mepivacaine apnea, Bradypnea, anesthetic with anesthesia Caudal-paracervical bradycardia, introduction (accidental of into of convulsions infant)

weakness agents (edrophonium, Transient muscle pyridostigmine) Cholinergic

(narcotics, during hypotonia benzodiazepines) depressants labor CNS CNS depression, barbiturates,

minor withdrawal, neonatal hypertonicity, Fluoxetine anomalies transient Possible

PPHN Ibuprofen Oligohydramnios,

intestinal Oliguria, oligohydramnios, perforation, Indomethacin PPHN

hyponatremia, solutions) during salt-free Electrolyte hypoglycemia Intravenous fluids (e.g., disturbances, labor

plug, meconium depression, Respiratory sulfate Magnesium hypotonia

hypothyroidism Methimazole Goiter,

and cyanosis, pallor, sweating, its and dyspnea restlessness, (addiction) diarrhea, stretching, Morphine and yawning and derivatives (poor tremors, symptoms fever vomiting, feeding, convulsions) Withdrawal

hyponatremia Hyperbilirubinemia, Oxytocin

Phenobarbital K diathesis long-term reduction IQ, deficiency), in Bleeding possible sedation (vitamin

apnea Hypoglycemia, bradycardia, Propranolol

Propylthiouracil Goiter, hypothyroidism

congestion, Drowsiness, Reserpine temperature nasal poor stability

with of of deficiency bilirubin; low protein Interfere with bilirubin, Sulfonamides G6PD at levels serum binding kernicterus hemolysis

fetus Kliegman The RM: and Stoll infant. BJ, neonatal 2000. ed editors: Saunders, HB, In Behrman WB textbook Philadelphia, of RM, Kliegman Nelson RE, Jenson pediatrics, 16,

intrauterine growth the PPHN, nervous pulmonary of dehydrogenase; glucose-6-phosphate system; persistent IUGR, CNS, newborn. Central restriction; hypertension G6PD,

determinants disease of and genotype fetal the include fetal in environment. The the utero principal thrive genetics the although environmental well-being, than as survive. a more in in determining significant a not fetal may plays or fetus rather fetal Variation factors abnormal overall role genetically well enhanced and through fetoscopy, blood genetic of development ultrasonography. a of The chorionic real-time is fetus sampling, amniocentesis, the assess mother’s greatly blood, ability testing circulating villus physically in fetal sampling, fetal to genetically, and biochemically, DNA the

SGA and a and having for fetal group abnormal terms (small growth growth restriction subjected (IUGR).The high-risk IUGR age) or placental, as notsynonymous. conditions restrain are that Fetuses maternal, to traditionally intrauterine are classified gestational a deviation from represents IUGR patterns. expectedgrowth fetal adaptation anddevelopment. with result metabolism, IUGR an permanent in to intrauterine is growth, unfavorable conditions growth in associated that The alterations decreased lessthan conditions variety associated statistically gestational below age. that weight is deviations birth occurs ofmaternal 10th a themean preterm infant are percentile birth with frequently most IUGR describes whose an two weight the for delivery.SGA with or standard 60-1). cause or small who (Table is but healthy an nonpathologic, as infant IUGR, in of SGA in may with infant The otherwise as an bepathologic,

and of ultrasound serial about volume, (growthrate, blood malformations, of uterine, conjunction velocimetry fundal maternal of height Doppler are fetal of in can fetus amniotic placental, assessment and IUGR delivery.Measurement aid anomalies, 50% before infants and identified fluid with detection. recording Only flow) the instituted fetuses monitored IUGR 58). (see needs and and well-being, appropriate be Chapter to for care and identified, be suspected When must SGA maternal fetal

normal infants birth, with subcutaneous decreased smaller are fat. appear moderately SGA who mildly to At than cord. severely muscle thin of size heads dry decreased (often nervous arms umbilical the thin widened skin, system More with may the including for infants decreased fat, (central small a subcutaneous fontanelles, and anterior findings, asymmetrical and meconium-stained) larger and present mass, abdomen, wasted appearancewith legs, body sparing), redundant affected often assess to and neurologic perceived advanced Gestational difficult appearance physical based maturity. on age is when Physical or suggest gross chromosomal abnormal features, examination detail dysmorphic underlying malformations, might or the exposure to presence of anomalies should teratogens. defects, that congenital extremities, ocular in jaundice, skin addition disorders, and Hepatosplenomegaly, to rashes

of during nutrition tissue advanced) (preeclampsia, Race and Illnesses Oligohydramnios Cigarette (African American) disease) Poor Age care prenatal connective weight) chronic (young (short pregnancy Lack hypertension, severe smoking stature, (intrauterine) good diabetes, Genetics Infections

infections growth nonchromosomal Insulin Multiple insulin-like Inborn of abnormality resistance and or or Congenital Chromosomal insulin reduced syndromes metabolism factor-1 gestations errors

such suggest inborn (morphine, and Narcotics or Antimetabolites cloudy presence of glaucoma, cornea, metals of cocaine) illicit Warfarin congenital cataracts, (methotrexate) as methadone) (alcohol, the a use lead) Heavy Hydantoin infection drug metabolism. Steroids chorioretinitis, and Substance (mercury, error (prednisone) hypoxemia, Infants with syndrome, and in distress, metabolic asphyxia, problems meconium severe the hypertension polycythemia, or hypotension, SGA, acidosis, may conjunction fetal newborn. include hypoglycemia, IUGR persistent of have that acidosis, pulmonary particularly with aspiration at respiratory birth

and SGA IUGR symptomatic and usually Management supportive. is infants of at directed birth diagnostic if evaluation of cause The the should the possible. IUGR and identifying at SGA, be retardation. The severity, of etiology, growth and the IUGR SGA of depend on and duration consequences to of infants age. mortality infants who The appropriate gestational are are are those 20 of who for times 5 affected severely rates and Postnatal intake, the on postnatal in and the part development environment. growth depend the nutritional social etiology, and abnormalities, syndromes infection, secondary constitutional chromosomal SGA congenital Infants small remain or life. to throughout IUGR who have approach placental Infants optimal or potential. growth in constraints, because late inherited insufficiency, have inhibited catch-up development poor environmental under uterine conditions, have and their who and, of growth gestation growth nutrition

@ StudentConsult.com Available

is Hydrops fetalis conditions. caused by and immune nonimmune a including the more sac, resultant and pleural cavity,pericardial or bodycompartments, is of andmortality. fetal placenta one space, clinical excessivefluid peritoneal or condition accumulation fetalis skin in high Hydrops other the with morbidity isoimmunization. Hydrops group initially blood was withRhesus in described association of use isoimmune of Rho fetalhydrops. The the incidence globulin reduced (D)immune has this hydropshas clinical as the condition. incidence a of cause of Concurrently severe nonimmune increased

interstitial an fluidaccumulation by the Fetal imbalance from results capillariesand fluid lymphatic of of system. removal decreased and hydrops lymphatic (hypoproteinemic failure, oncotic heart or can accumulation tocongestive states). decreasedplasma obstructed pressure Fluid be flow, secondary syndromes. affect many malformation fetus, Edema or processesthat genetic, hematologic, cardiac, fetal infection, pathway for formation metabolic, including the is final disease common the

should underlying focus the discovering fetus hydropic the workup diagnostic cause. of on The and thickened may may and and and placenta, scalp findings hypertension, tachycardia, findings effusion. gestation, pleural multiple pericardial polyhydramnios, whereas edema, anemia, wall include fetal body ascites, include Maternal indicated. may be testing fetal Invasive amniotic and samples alpha-fetoprotein, karyotype, metabolic provides for analysis. enzyme culture, fluid Amniocentesis and analysis intervention can blood for chromosomal blood fetal profound (fetal studies source Percutaneous a metabolic and for umbilical and sampling transfusion cord hematologic anemia). provide for and provide

and gestational the Management the depends on age cause the of fetus. underlying required. are at efforts Resuscitative often delivery remove ascitic improve ventilation. from often the is pleural fluid abdomen necessary to or fluid to It blood transfusion packed anemia Profound red with immediate cells. necessitates

with overall mortality infants The 50%. for nonimmune approximately is hydrops 6%. weeks 4% made delivery, gestation the rate approximately with diagnosis before of premature 24 survival subsequent If is is to the

Available StudentConsult.com @

is Respiratory serious expiratory by nasal air exchange, cyanosis, a illness. and becomes nonspecific tachypnea, to response that reduced flaring retractions, intercostal grunting, manifested distress hematologic, involve may differential cardiac, infectious, The of directly metabolic disorders lungs and distress indirectly. includes diagnosis or the anatomic, respiratory that pulmonary, cyanosis with by deficiency aspiration causes hydrops and hypertension; and Surfactant in interstitial lobar and or hypoplasia pneumonia, distress resulting or failure pulmonary heart hypertension causes and acquired fetalis infiltrates; chemical congenital hypoalbuminemia high-output syndrome results causes tachypnea; edema; anemia (RDS), produces a hypoxia meconium with pulmonary and and in pulmonary insufficiency. pulmonary pulmonary infection respiratory pneumonitis shown respiratory is distress to differentiate clinically gestational age causes (Table 61-1). of also It common the useful to according

the applied of supportive addition to disorder, individual the distress specific problems be the can the earlier respiratory (Table care and 61-2). evaluation mentioned infant therapy with all to for In general of respiratory interpretation key care. monitoring components are Blood gas and

requires Treatment of hypoxemia of knowledge normal values. 55 of life, term mm 24 Pao2 level to and mm 60 90 at In minutes at Hg 75 hours, at mm infants, hours. arterial Hg 30 the Hg 4 is Preterm infants values. have lower pH should and to 7.40. mm be Paco2 40 to levels the 35 7.35 should Hg, be respiratory blood perceived. distress, imperative or cyanosis It that whether analysis be performed with infants is arterial all in is significant not gas of the with 5 perception evident when hemoglobin; there Cyanosis cyanosis. interfere may of becomes g anemia is unsaturated interfere Jaundice with cyanosis. appearance also of may the level falsely useful readings. the but determining gas blood blood Paco2 Pao2 Capillary in pH determinations may low blood result in are and be through by or umbilical the levels artery. artery catheter a arterial in monitored blood peripheral gas may placed an indwelling Serial noninvasive for gas methods levels combine gas blood is capillary to used Another techniques method with blood monitoring

Meconium pulmonary pneumonia* neonate* of Primary Polycythemia fluid Amniotic aspiration the hypertension aspiration

congenital Pulmonary simplex, Inborn hypoplasia sepsis infection Viral errors pneumothorax lobar cystic hernia) heart Bacterial diaphragmatic herpes anomalies (GBS)* Congenital Spontaneous Transient (e.g., adenomatoid malformation, (e.g., Congenital CMV) disease metabolic emphysema, tachypnea*

streptococcus. Cytomegalovirus; GBS, group CMV, B *Common.

To anomalies life-threatening congenital radiograph pattern presence determine reticular granular Chest of cardiomegaly, to of determine RDS; pneumothorax,

hypercapnia type respiratory determine gas compromise, acidosis; To hypoxemia, severity determines and of blood strategy of treatment severity and Arterial

to DIC and anemia sepsis; count determine smear determine and neutropenia/ count determine blood white to Hemoglobin/hematocrit blood to Complete polycythemia; count platelet cell

distress; stress determine presence respiratory To which produce Blood occur glucose simultaneously hypoglycemia, may determine of or hyperglycemia to with

the cardiomegaly, to or refractory Echocardiogram, a presence of structural disease or PPHN hypoxia; heart murmur, In determine ECG

DIC, pulmonary PPHN, newborn; respiratory the syndrome. RDS, intravascular coagulation; hypertension ECG, of primary distress electrocardiogram; Disseminated

or oxygen to oxygen monitor diffusion). transcutaneous oximetry (pulse

normal a by a (<7.25) Metabolic by may level, reduced tissue defined by or Pco2 concentration low pH perfusion. hypoxia acidosis, caused mEq/L) (<18 accompanied as bicarbonate insufficient or be and may disorder the iatrogenic. hematologic, cardiac, renal, The pulmonary, infectious, of nutritional, or metabolic, origin be pathophysiologic acidosis cause to The and treat initial problem. is the determine to metabolic approach the end-expiratory the as airway increasing pressure the positive therapy ventilation applying pressure. include, mechanical of positive This concentration; nasally; continuous approach inspired may in for initiating or oxygen using sequence hypoxia, or fluids with by Patients need hypotension may hypovolemia and drug require produced support. vasoactive inotropic metabolic persists (1 infusion. may therapy, specific bicarbonate acidosis be If mEq/kg/dose) slow given by despite intravenous sodium bicarbonate or infusion. be Near-normal levels low sodium Pco2 documented before should Pco2 of bicarbonate The is sodium effect in maintained. results buffering levels, unless increased ventilation adequate

or by caused pH level reduction acidosis, the insufficiency defined central as a Pco2 Respiratory pulmonary be an in reduced and hypoventilation. concentration, elevated without bicarbonate may lead respiratory Most can disorders hypercapnia. producing distress to not sodium involves but ventilation bicarbonate. assisted Treatment caused respirations placental nervous depression is then central instituted system is narcotic depression the by of assisted of by first, nervous passage is system analgesics, ventilation If naloxone. central reversed

and onset occurs surfactant. breathing of an RDS after pulmonary the insufficiency of with is associated

and cells. lining type II alveolus cells The I of of 90% the consists type 10% of inclusion cells packages After the type contain weeks 20 lamellar gestation, (Fig. II vacuolated, are bodies, of which surface-active material osmophilic, 61-1). 90% surfactant lipoprotein and composed also neutral contains phosphatidylglycerol, This but lipid is lipids. predominantly is other and phospholipids, of phosphatidylcholine (lecithin), saturated and surfactant. SP-D, surfactant SP-B, body SP-A, the of and surface-active proteins, contribute properties packaged are The lamellar recycling to and SP-C, into diluted radius at decreases; volumes the increases. recoil alveolar increasing Surfactant lung lung by during expiration surface when at by when atelectasis prevents tension low it concentrated to alveolar as end surface surfactant is contributes the volumes larger at as reducing tension it is radius inspiration lung alveolus not during forces atelectasis the develops tension end and surfactant, collapses. are Without as expiration reduced, surface

and begins prevent depends on to sufficient cortisol weeks of quantities The timing atelectasis levels in 34 that between fetal increase in of 32 production surfactant gestation. an type into produced alveolar lumen, lung, amniotic the is and is in the by fluid. the sufficient surface-active into secreted to II material is 36 the 34 cells excreted By weeks, concentration of The

type II Figure surfactant of and secretion, 61-1 transport, cell. of pathway alveolar reuptake the Proposed synthesis, in are Phospholipids the reticulum synthesized (ER). smooth endoplasmic in glycerol glucose. or from lung may precursor derived The glucose/ be glycogen circulating migrate exocytosis packaged lamellar in liquid are and apparatus emerge as small the (MLB), lamellar apical below the air-liquid into are (GZ), membrane, the (SLB), the proteins hypophase coalesce interface. and bodies to Golgi surfactant Phospholipids released to by mature bodies phospholipid surface. figure alveolar the the tightly precursor the myelin monolayer to The lamellar immediate the (tubular) body (LMF), form coiled lattice at to unravels recycle that by surfactant. endocytosis multivesicular bodies Reuptake forms (MVB) the processes regulatory are proteins The by level surfactant and at transporters, receptors, enzymes, transcriptional (N). in controlled nucleus the regulatory Corticosteroid that ligands synthesis. hormones accelerate are and may surfactant thyroid development T, and Lung Corbet Hansen A: (From function. Ballard 465.) the Philadelphia, HW, 1991, p editors: Saunders, 6, ME, R, ed In Avery Taeusch Diseases of Newborn, in fetal maturity. fluid lecithin pulmonary indicates amniotic sphingomyelin with of Because increases ratio) is the amount to remains to the quantify, of (which is lecithin determined. lecithin difficult (which during (L/S constant ratio gestation) maturity) of ratio 2:1 maturity. indicates L/S An usually pulmonary affected reduces situations minor of by indicative the The such which also L/S may lung presence or is useful maternal maturity. as ratio borderline maturity and fetal lung is in phospholipids, possibly in be of which phosphatidylglycerol, diabetes, mature. of surfactant The that be absence phosphatidylglycerol suggests might not

prematurity) due (most residual atelectasis, often of hypoxemia, in functional capacity, surfactant respiratory results decreased arterial A to pulmonary deficiency distress. and hypovolemia, surfactant acidosis, synthesis. as result hypothermia, also a rare of of Surfactant disorders be and may reduced synthesis genetic hypoxemia, smooth These have arteriole also muscle produce pulmonary which to premature in vasoconstriction. RDS infants artery to larger may pulmonary factors developed who contribute vasospasm, produce sufficient hypoxemia. and Surfactant ventilated, a pulmonary atelectasis which to alveoli in not perfused deficiency–induced be causes shunt but results decreases. become atelectasis to difficult lung As lungs compliance expand, the and increases, increasingly overcome resulting retractions decreased the pressures, wall. wall to premature inspiratory increasing chest lung infant in of chest the very is the the Because with compliant, compliance infant attempts of leads air physiologic decreased hypoventilation, to and increased alveolar The and poor retractions compliance lung wall hypercapnia. exchange, chest an sequence dead space, of of hypertension. on some on infants, cells synthesis type cycle the to and and, acidosis hypoxia, hypercapnia, reduce in produce acts II surfactant to arterioles A pulmonary pulmonary

for immature premature RDS greatest an at and ratio. have Infants are risk L/S age. decreasing gestational RDS increases The incidence with of of of and 28 weeks between gestation. 60% in 30% to RDS 32 develops infants and a second-born delivery hypothermia, preterm with of twins, fetal white risk asphyxia, diabetes, include RDS, by Other labor. delivery being distress, factors maternal race, cesarean male sex, of without infant previous section the

infants delivery in may immediately weeks RDS gestation. at develop the extremely 26 room in immature to 30 of with initial after accompanied RDS gestation) surfactant Some weeks’ breathing mature inability surfactant may infants more at onset to 4 show not release owing stored birth, ongoing correlating to until to hours by replace of inadequate 3 the the stores. (34 the of signs the of and sternal retractions, intercostal cyanosis, grunting. of Manifestations and flaring, RDS nasal include tachypnea, lung to is maintain (decreasing closure the which glottis during exhalation. is atelectasis) Grunting effect the by volume expiration, of caused exchange of and during gas in which by examination ground-glass Atelectasis the lung air documented chest, bronchogram) well air-filled the (the surrounding radiographic is haze (Fig. bronchi shows a of 61-2). on may heart. lungs and an distinction RDS lung the the show atelectatic the radiograph, airless obliterating field even a Severe (whiteout) between

haveincreasing 72 hypoxemia. with During and hours, RDS the untreated distress first infants of with infants the and assisted necessitates development edema, respiratoryfailure severeRDS, apnea, In ventilation. show cases a edema. by a diuresis uncomplicated heralded of that resolution marked spontaneous improvement and Thereafter, oftenis and the of ductus development bronchopulmonarydysplasia Complications pneumothorax,a a (PDA), patent (BPD). arteriosus include RDS differential associated and respiratory with distress The 58-10). (seeTable of cyanosis includesdiseases diagnosis

to bed Strategies of preterm treatment of cervical prevent maternal infections, tocolytic include birth rest, medications. and administration cerclage, RDS. of hypovolemia cold and risk reduces neonatal In birth the asphyxia, prevention of addition, stress, to unavoidable, administration premature the of the betamethasone) delivery corticosteroids antenatal is If (e.g.,

syndrome. Respiratory Figure 61-2 distress (A). air infant show is reticulonodular with dense bronchograms and pattern a The the intubated, lungs to chest, left frontal (arrows). on are of the posterior the right rotation compared the lengths To from ribs evaluate rotated. is ribs supine, the side of the which the infant to side longer thorax Because indicates is the the this posterior radiograph is ribs and left view. case, In this longer, a oblique left are of was resulting the lung (B). in significant administered, improvement density Surfactant in the slightly the better The right aerated than is left. lung clearing common. distribution is Uneven of Edwards Pediatric D: 1994, Practical S, 2, (From Philadelphia, Hilton Saunders.) Radiology, ed mother lung for of (and approach production multiple this hours. to fetal fetus) least 48 doses the stimulates thus at surfactant; requires

After birth reduced severity surfactant hours prevented a intratracheal or RDS immediately or be by birth, birth. administration room delivery in the few may its within exogenous after of of is A mammalian-derived currently preferred. surfactant Exogenous oxygen of receiving ventilation, repeatedly be mechanical surfactant RDS course endotracheal can and administered during intubation, in patients therapy. the Table includes general 61-3. Additional care in ventilation presented supportive the and management

7.25. the and should (oxygen saturation Hg Pao2 The above and level maintained pH should between mm be 90%), be 60 maintained 70 by needed or oxygen infants. is a may and hood concentration administered that nasal of larger an cannula be warm premature oxygen all increased humidified An inspired for mm <50 inspired be continuous concentration needed If (Pao2 positive present, and pressure the 100%, airway oxygen is hypoxemia at should to nasal added is 70% Hg)

injury IVH, drugs, Central nervous system seizures, hypoxic

Pneumonia, pneumothorax RDS, prematurity obstructive (<1000 Respiratory laryngeal paralysis, reflex, severe nerve g), atelectasis, extreme phrenic airway lesions,

necrotizing Sepsis, meningitis (bacterial, Infectious viral) enterocolitis, fungal,

intestinal gastroesophageal reflux, Gastrointestinal Oral bowel perforation esophagitis, movement, feeding,

↓ temperature, PO2, ↓ acids, ↓ ↓↑ calcium, Glucose, ammonia, organic sodium, ↑ ambient hypothermia ↑ Metabolic ↑

vagal hypertension, anemia, tone Cardiovascular in heart Hypotension, failure, hypovolemia, change

airway sleep upper of state, Idiopathic respiratory center, collapse Immaturity

hemorrhage; Intraventricular respiratory IVH, syndrome. RDS, distress

to of 8 a cm distending pressure 10 H2O. 100% oxygen), mm If failure (Pco2 using ensues <50 Hg ventilation Pao2 assisted indicated. and a pH ventilator is Hg, mm <7.20, >60 with respiratory to RDS. breaths/min), high-frequency (25 600 Conventional to caused breaths/min) jet to have failure been rate severe and (150 60 (900 3000 breaths/min), by all managing in successful ventilators oscillatory respiratory cm are pressure, cm 25 to respiratory 20 starting Suggested 30 end-expiratory 1.0; inspiratory settings ventilator peak and conventional positive rate, pressure, H2O; H2O; on 0.60 50 5 to of oxygen, inspired fraction breaths/min. to a

increased. rate) space (tidal dead be × persistent − to alveolar volume In response hypercapnia, must ventilation pressure can or rate using pressure in volume end-expiratory an a (the between increased the positive ventilator). an by in increase inspiratory gradient and Ventilation increase tidal ventilator’s pressure-controlled the peak be inspired increased. In response hypoxia, may content the oxygen be to oxygenation pressure. of degree on Alternatively, depends the airway mean the pressure, end-expiratory Mean time. pressure is to flow, and positive directly airway inspiratory related oxygenation improve mean lung volume, improving ventilation-perfusion airway pressure by enhancing Increased may matching. in distinguishing and the obtained administered and RDS, recovery previously sepsis a for 72 48 from hours, gentamicin) blood an are culture. organism of from difficulty of (ampicillin pending broad-spectrum pneumonia the parenteral Because antibiotics to

@ Available StudentConsult.com

occurs weight low have PDA RDS. birth that common who infants many is complication in a to infant. incidence is the The PDA maturity of the of related inversely 24 birth. 48 hours closes after In to term the ductus newborns, within medical frequently requiring However, surgical or newborns, fails ductus to the in preterm close, closure. vasoconstrictive in to that stimuli, during to and pulmonary complicated may shunt when a systemic which, lead the infant preterm arteriosus is persistent a hypoxemia responsive The ductus with creates between less RDS, circulations. a PDA

to pulmonary vasoconstriction. acidosis lead and During acute phase the hypercapnia, hypoxia, RDS, of arterial pulmonary may The and systemic and the small flow pressures equal, may ductus be be through bidirectional. or in the left-to-right and arteriosus ductus resistance pulmonary increases through declines, a improves RDS When vascular direction. flow edema. systemic-to-pulmonary may heart failure shunting to pulmonary Significant and lead the symptomatic may fluid increase PDA. intravenous administration incidence Excessive of The increased because respiratory status of and lung hypoxemia. infant’s fluid, deteriorates hypercapnia,

a of apparent to life. of 2 usually Clinical manifestations day on PDA 4 become pulse one low-pressure peripheral circulation impulse, shunt pressure easily the Because widens; extremely an active inactive pulses palpable shows and become from bounding. left-to-right of high a previously the flow precordial directs and precordium pressure, a to component diastole, continuous be systole murmur in PDA may and of systolic auscultated. a usually the but only The is edema and failure pulmonary result rales Heart in hepatomegaly. and increased show edema; a studies shows ductal flow and two-dimensional radiograph echocardiogram through ductus. cardiomegaly pulmonary Doppler the left-to-right chest shows and A markedly patency;

and initial RDS a restriction Treatment involves PDA fluid diuretic during of administration. If no ibuprofen, administered. synthetase inhibitor, 48 or improvement hours, 24 is to prostaglandin is there indomethacin after a mg/dL, indomethacin 1.8 <50,000/mm3), more creatinine measuring include serum and oliguria. (platelets Contraindications to than using thrombocytopenia bleeding, and of 20% required patients. PDA some infants 20% do because repeat in indomethacin in 30% the surgical course ligation of not reopens or Because to to initially 10% indomethacin respond infants, of a is to

and localized positive end-expiratory with Assisted ventilation of areas high of peak lung. overdistention may in inspiratory cause alveoli pressures pressures the alveolar space peribronchial lining the dissects gas emphysema along the the interstitial interstitial and produce as may of pulmonary lymphatics. Rupture epithelial respiratory lung parenchyma reduces worsens into of compliance failure. Extravasation gas and the produces occasionally space around mediastinal dissection subcutaneous the Gas dissecting the into tissues into pneumomediastinum, subcutaneous a neck, the causing emphysema.

space pleural a rupture produces to (Fig. adjacent Alveolar the pneumothorax 61-3). to If the is the and under pneumothorax hypotension, tension, producing chest, mediastinum gas side hypoxia, opposite of shifts the the hypercapnia. the

61-3 Pneumothorax. Figure is pleural Right-sided air obvious. hyperlucent lung collapsed findings of are linear noted. air but the The resultant and interstitial non-compliant RM, Advanced newborn, Saunders, (From 1979.) radiology: in Heller exercises the WB SG: Kirchner Philadel-phia, diagnostic

be confirmed by of transillumination unequal may pneumothorax may chest the a based chest on and diagnosis of be The radiograph. Treatment tube connected of requires to to pressure chest drain. an symptomatic underwater pneumothorax insertion a negative of a pleural or exogenous Prophylactic or air of has the pulmonary reduced use incidence therapeutic of leaks. surfactant

aspiration Pneumothorax vigorous hypoplasia, diaphragmatic resuscitation, also pulmonary meconium pneumonia, after is observed and hernia. may and seen deliveries in is of than associated 1% Spontaneous renal pneumothorax malformations. fewer with be

findings and correspond a at36 radiographic clinical anatomic weeks’ and abnormalities. by diagnosis by clinical defined to is that BPD accompanied oxygen dependence characteristic postconceptual age lung. Oxygen concentrations greater neonatal the to toxic 40%are than lung oxygen Oxygen-mediated membrane superoxides, from compounding radicals, of disrupt hydrogen with highly effects and inspiredoxygen damaging the which free barotrauma, the of produces lipids.Assisted peak injuryresults ventilation high levels. generation peroxide, pressures pulmonary ventilationfor RDS develops interstitial In BPD PDA or after emphysema. by that may most complicated patients, been have major may role. pulmonaryinfections and ventilation repeated play prolongedassisted a systemic and Inflammation from 2 mechanical may RDS weighing need respiratory patients in than develops.BPD Failure in characteristic oxygen whom in prolonged develop less 1000 BPD weeks, 36 to of RDS postconceptual at required with of infants improveafter therapy of the g for ageare theabsence mechanical whorequire ventilation for drive ventilation,and poor also RDS. weeks’ Fifty 24 26 to of oxygen age corrected of 36 age. weeks’ weeks’ infants gestational require at percent

areas by by opacification development BPD and by The of is giving the initially cysts atelectasis, radiographic appearance. spongelike a lung of accompanied subsequently and of characterized lung appearance overdistention obliterative bronchiolitis, interstitial BPD necrotizing histopathology reveals The interstitial of fibrosis, overdistended and mucosal metaplasia, alveoli. atelectasis, edema,

are oxygen compensatory hypertension, The and of failure. pulmonary clinical of metabolic growth, a dependence, BPD heart alkalosis, manifestations right-sided poor development with hypercapnia bronchoconstriction agents. is Increased airway with treated bronchodilating also reactive noted is with and airway resistance draws into that pressure interstitial fluid negative Severe produce space. the interstitial retractions chest Together administration retractions the necessitating fluid diuretics. restriction cor these cause fluid retention, pulmonale, of with and chest

treatment months. many need may for severe BPD Patients withmechanical with ventilation reduce the may be a tracheotomy subglottic To indicated. stenosis, riskof toxicity reduced gases (50 Hg) infants and settingsare with mm of to levels slightly (50 lower ventilator Paco2 mm higher during barotrauma, oxygen 75 thanfor to phase and acute RDS. reduce Hg) blood maintain To the Pao2 inflammation, may enhance patients and from reduce of weaning pulmonaryfunction, Dexamethasonetherapy assistedventilation. improve However, increase palsy the abnormal or cerebral neuromotor riskof may dexamethasone developmentaloutcome. have hyperinflation, BPD delay. and developmental of Older reactive airways, survivors at against syncytialvirus. receive for infantsshould as are respiratory They and syncytial risk virus severe respiratory pneumonia prophylaxis

(Retrolental of Retinopathy Fibroplasia) Prematurity

Available @ StudentConsult.com

oxygen the vessels is toxicity chronic blood by prematurity infant’s effects acute of on of retina. developing the Retinopathy caused (ROP) premature and of the not vascularized to The completely infant ROP. retina of the term is susceptible (<1500 cause infants very ROP birth low blindness weight g). leading in is a of in disease. vasoconstriction of oxygen retinal immature of produce first stage tensions arterial this vasculature Excessive the is Vaso-obliteration duration follows are and the when hyperoxia prolonged time the beyond vasoconstriction extent reversible. if of hypoxia ROP. and to Hypercarbia contribute may characterized neovascular proliferation, forming retina, portions tufts. the between vascular by development are of The subsequent proliferative extraretinal a of the and the fibrovascular and by stages ridge avascular is at periphery mild of vasoproliferation the the cases, noted retina. In have they the behind entire resulting neovascularization retinal the proliferation Severe forward, involving as leave traction and optic disc, the glaucoma. cases from vessels retina, lens fibrous on may displacing leading synechiae leukokoria, the producing lens to detachment may are be involved, severity usually eyes asymmetrical. Both but

blood in levels patients The may oxygen. be of all by gas receiving careful arterial of reduced monitoring ROP incidence there is and between it level 50 is mm arterial oxygen keep Although premature to Pao2 in no safe wise level, 70 infants. absolutely Hg the age less (some 1500 who or are born screened comes age, before than weeks) Infants say 32 be weeks more corrected gestational 4 weeks’ should they of age g 34 are than authors 28 gestational first. or when who weigh whichever weeks’ progressive or vasoproliferation. often) used for or cryotherapy (less may hemorrhage for therapy Laser be vitreous severe, for Surgery detachment. indicated retinal is patients. spontaneously ROP severe stages most Less resolve without in visual and impairment of

of respiratory signs distress. usually of by mild tachypnea, condition and a the tachypnea self-limited hypoxia, severe is retractions, newborn grunting, occasional characterized Transient without present, when Cyanosis, 30% range oxygen the supplemental 40%. in of requires treatment to usually with the section by infants cesarean born is of prior labor. tachypnea noted term Transient usually infants newborn precipitous in delivery premature or and without larger in Infants are of placental of drive as a drugs poor respiratory passage analgesic mothers infants risk. at result and with of diabetic the retained slow be by tachypnea resorption fluid newborn lung or fluid. of Transient may of lung caused lung in prominent occasionally a overaeration, effusion. vascular small fluid central fissures, pleural and Chest the show markings, radiographs pulmonary their are RDS a seen; and or Air reticulogranular presence process, pneumonia. not such another suggests pattern bronchograms as

in predominantly Meconium-stained post-term is amniotic term deliveries. fluid and 15% seen of of in distress amniotic considered fluid all be the breech in born Although passage should infants common of is into a meconium-stained the meconium presentation, fluid sign infants. fetal clinically as in of hypoxia, meconium with the suggests amniotic presence asphyxia, distress utero in and acidosis. The fluid in

fluid into meconium distressed, is amniotic aspirated after may lung more particulate delivery. in in utero Aspiration fetus; often, a occur the immediately meconium gasping of contaminated with abnormal pneumonia chest radio-graphs, a pneumothoraces. have and Affected infants high of incidence showing

airway obstruction leaks. characterized a bytachypnea, and air air to Meconium ball-valve over-distention, hypoxia, and effect, causing trapping, hypercapnia, extra-alveolar small aspiration is leading pneumonia small airway obstruction atelectasis. Complete produces airway 24 the to chemical effects develops 48 obstruction. in Within to pneumonitis a mechanical hours, of addition in function part, be by through the surfactant. inactivation pulmonary of caused Abnormal meconium, may right-to-left hypertension the accompanies pulmonary increased shunting by newborn with Primary pulmonary aspiration, vascular resistance. (PPHN) frequently meconium caused of a patchy anteroposterior infiltrates, of pneumothoraces. and chest of overdistention, incidence increased diameter, and diaphragm, reveals radiograph flattening pneumomediastinum The high the asphyxia those meconium. of diseases with the associated in initiated include Comorbid passage utero that

meconium of assisted care includes aspiration and supportive Treatment general ventilation. a with Infants PPHN. treated be should for PPHN-like presentation (ECMO) ventilation, and inhaled If severe conventional high-frequency may not nitric oxide, therapy, subside extracorporeal oxygenation surfactant with does membrane or hypoxia beneficial. be

prevent meconium monitoring asphyxia. aspiration in syndrome Prevention utero involvescareful of to obstetrician rest When before fluid delivering suction meconium-stained oropharynx observed, should ofthe the infant’s the the is body. infant’s cords cyanosis, below If should from vocal area cords trachea. depressed tone,minimal is the visualized,and remove effort, suctioned, respiratory oropharynx the suctioned and the vocal infant’s to the poor anymeconium the with the infant be aspiration during andpneumonia. incidence reduce intrauterine labor may the Saline amnioinfusion of

near-term in occurs or infants. post-term, PPHN term, without disease. structural heart PPHN by evidence severe parenchymal hypoxemia, or of lung characterized is fluid. PPHN or seen meconium-stained often asphyxia with is may The chest normal that rather infiltrates the than and accompany usually meconium expected lung hyperinflation radiograph fields reveals aspiration. PPHN congenital hypothermia. hypoplasia, that Additional heart hernia, and pulmonary are congenital may pneumonia, lead hyperviscosity-polycythemia, cyanotic hypoglycemia, to problems disease, diaphragmatic congenital indistinguishable venous anomalous venous may produce initially radiograph and flow associated PPHN; a hypoxia engorgement picture however, involves chest return obstruction blood small clinical and a with pulmonary that from of a heart. is severe severe reveals that Total Echocardiography cardiac the diagnosis. catheterization or confirms

PPHN. ovale, Significant of intrapulmonary through channels and is PDA, right-to-left characteristic through through foramen patent shunting a a of pulmonary suggesting The the PPHN to result predisposition that began smooth shows a in periods process hypertrophied utero often or arterial wall of of fetal hypoxia. as vasculature previous muscle, and After pulmonary artery birth, hypoxia, vasoconstriction, hypercapnia, acidosis. and exacerbate to hypoxia leading further acidosis a have PPHN extrapulmonary Some asphyxia. of result manifestations infants as with heart and or muscle Myocardial papillary myocardial include transient injuries infarction. failure, mitral insufficiency, be noted. thrombi, Thrombocytopenia, may pulmonary and right also atrial embolism

right-to-left which by artery pulmonary echocardiographic is pressures examination, shunting. shows elevated of The confirmed and diagnosis sites disease myocardial heart rules congenital structural out and also transient Echocardiography dysfunction.

with of Treatment management anemia, care; and supportive of correction acidosis; general associated involves complications hypotension, and asphyxia. dopamine If dysfunction is or present, needed. is dobutamine myocardial PPHN is important therapy The for assisted most ventilation. to Reversible pulmonary mild assisted conventional hypertension may ventilation. respond conventional PPHN severe with therapy. always Patients not to do respond vigorous with to assist needed ventilation. be may a muscle Paralysis relaxant when seems PPHN replacement have no to the diagnosis. is Surfactant effect primary agent, pulmonary administered. vasodilating a If nitric oxygenation, ventilation selective should artery unsuccessful inhaled oxide, and in improving mechanical care be are supportive hypoxia may the ECMO. be patient If persists, for candidate a alveolar-to-arterial who ventilator rate mm and ECMO from if 620 marked settings, gradient high do Hg, respond oxide. to high require benefit mortality a nitric oxygen not an they have than by extremely greater Infants and oxide is guide In the the severity (OI) such inhaled as of addition, of nitric index hypoxemia interventions oxygenation to timing and used the assess to ECMO. × OI 100. = [(mean equation × of the pressure OI calculated is inspired The fraction using oxygen)/Pao2] airway failure. hypoxemic severe high OI indicates respiratory A

StudentConsult.com Available @

also apnea with of that preterm states be associated affect is infants presenting sign the control may immaturity other of Although Table it the or respiratory (see diseases pathophysiologic typically system, 61-3). possible in always of consideration increase bradycardia). especially of causes (or unexpected episodes warranted, the is the of with onset apnea frequency thorough A or

20 cessation the as time longer is pulmonary 10 to specific for usually airflow defined seconds. Apnea of than interval, a apnea. Bradycardia often prolonged accompanies cessation a airflow respiratory movement. Central to complete and chest of refers with efforts no apnea wall to continuation but apnearefers airflow chest wall noticeable with the Obstructive movements. of the of absence of apnea, is combination type. these a most frequent the events, Mixed two central a by followed as brief apnea. a episode It obstruction of begin may airway upper resulting central pharyngeal (passive hypotonia), produce apnea. apnea mixed closure in may Alternatively,

apnea. any to in be immediately the should cause determine A careful of evaluation apnea infant performed with decreases. apnea incidence of increases age as The gestational age). during age 36 of disease to birth first other resolves Idiopathic disease postnatal appears apnea, (gestational weeks postconceptual a premature of and states usually of week age in by at any 40 of the absence life the infants, + identifiable of to regulating infant’s apnea. respiration especially premature is process The vulnerable hypoxia paradoxically developing to rather as respond increasing apnea infants. Preterm infants in respirations by than by mature to lead of the of tone collapse may upper Poor airway, muscles also obstruction. laryngeal the causing also apnea a flexion premature as trachea. which head, the positioning infant’s of occur may the or Isolated obstructs lateral result soft obstructive extreme of

infants prematurity and anemic apnea. of hypoxic of stimulation Treatment involves infants, of of apnea for to transfusion administration infants, physical cutaneous mild oxygen with theophylline) (caffeine or the pharmacologic mainstay of of are apnea. Methylxanthines treatment depression hypoxic minute ventilation, therapy and sensitivity, carbon decreases increases periodic the activity, diaphragmatic breathing. of improves decreases dioxide Xanthine breathing, enhances therapy. usually Treatment maintenance a with is by initiated dose loading followed treating apneas; to stimulating High-flow nasal airway nasal cannula safe also mixed the relatively of methods continuous or cm they and therapy upper infant may are and effective H2O positive by airway. the of work obstructive 6 and splinting pressure 4 increases residual Continuous pressure also improving probably capacity, airway functional positive oxygenation.

as is day the gestationand in by Embryonic blood begins of yolk the sac. islands evidenced hematopoiesis 20th concentration trimester.Hemoglobin liver last 16.5 to occurs g/dL predominant increases in 10 the the at site to from erythropoiesis g/dL the In 18 spleen; bonemarrow becomes in the at12 8 weeks. weeks 40 to and midgestation, fetal red blood and hormone Fetal is this with increases to hypoxia production concentration cell(RBC) anemia. the of responsive erythropoietin;

increase 12 levels months. at transiently 6 to 3 11 to hemoglobin decline then 6 hours, to g/dL birth, 12 at to After months concentration premature birth. has (<32 infant postnatal more hemoglobin A hemoglobin of rapid nadir 1 weeks’ lower to achieves age) which 2 a decline a a gestational after and level, (70 higher and have adult 90 neonatal shorter days) to corpuscular volume a and mean RBCs span a than fL) Fetal to 120 (110 life cells. In two the alpha last the chains. gamma of trimesters two hemoglobin produces of F), pregnancy in two fetal (hemoglobin and composed synthesis hemoglobin chains fetus, chains the should synthesize alpha the adult term, beta two infant beta-hemoglobin chains; to term some chains). begins Immediately hemoglobin and (two have infant before birth. Fetal 60% at 90% hemoglobin of hemoglobin to term represents decline levels of The months less 4 by to age. levels adult of 5% than

volume 100 term and to 90 93 is a a mL/kg. For mL/kg, 72 to is infant, for preterm infant, volume blood blood of mL/kg umbilical if cord neonatal the transiently blood increase clamping birth. that and 30 for approximately additional hemoglobin 20 umbilical The placenta days volume to delayed at vessels can levels (stripping) blood first 3 of life is of and milking the contain or and improves polycythemia of the glomerular clamping jaundice, filtration. it but Delayed risk may increase less poor perfusion, clamping cardiac murmur, a lead to anemia, may peripheral tachypnea. and Early blood infant birth. at and Hydrostatic pressure affects the transfer the placenta between of the situated above level if the infant occurs An transfusion undesired the is placenta. fetal-to-placental

noted signs and that and of 2 not any months preterm result age infants process in is at illness infants in of age at in The 2 physiologic of a term 1 3 does months normal not to does treatment. to require anemia oxygenation erythropoietin and several condition believed levels. birth, tissue related to It increased experienced life including be factors, at RBC physiologic to low shortened span, a is

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Symptomatic in (Fig. period anemia newborn the blood RBC may decreased or 62-1) by loss. caused RBC production, be destruction, increased

of a production at caused bone of appears the reticulocyte and low marrow. absence birth by Anemia erythroid decreased with precursors in RBCs count, pallor, (protein, (congenital bacterial or Potential sepsis), failure [Diamond-Blackfan infection production iron, marrow viral acquired syndromes of nutritional vitamin (congenital infections [parvovirus, causes anemia]), and include deficiencies leukemia. RBC B12), RBC neonatal viral aplasia bone folate, decreased rubella], congenital

newborn. and fetalis, or to the erythroblastosis hemolytic lead in may Immunologically spared appear may in disease mediated utero hemolysis be may the fetus Hemolysis is differences erythrocytes between of the of maternal antigen of causes on directed result group a which fetal blood fetal cells. production against sensitized mother fetus, an antibodies and IgG

ABO if blood antibodies the mother a hemolysis has or develops group previous with antigens. A IgG from exposure to neonatal B only incompatibility cross placenta the IgG newborn. or the by fetus and active affect antibodies These transport antigens of to pregnancy fetal the Sensitization transfer transfusions by erythrocytes into have in that occurred or previous conditions of mother of by may fetal the result

internal Blood C, RBCs Low acid, or (> or Normal Hypochromic for specific gamma oxidizing Obtain G6PD reticulocyte isomerase twin-to-twin Alpha-thalassemia Drug-induced smear minor bleed Stomatocytes c, Aase kinase marrow syndrome obstetric (PCN) hemoglobin Duffy, ABO, Defects Galactosemia infections Blood Chronic infections KB sideroblastic Enzymatic Malaria morphology anemia external electrophoresis, elevated RPR/FTA Obtain Hexokinase Coombs reticulocyte (valproic antigen) stain positive negative due Syphilis blood RBC Pyruvate aciduria acute bone (D fetomaternal osmotic Transcobalamin transfusion Kell Poikilocytes Glucose or Normal to syndromes Alpha test 5−10%) Obtain histiocytosis dyserythropoietic Fragmentation fragility bleeding Other Consider incubated hemoglobinopathies count maternal Osteopetrosis IgM, phosphate Coombs RBC Obtain Orotic II count Others Bacterial morphology Congenital Infections complications, HIV G jaundiceJaundice Other assay Diamond-Blackfan E, Basophilic No Refractory anemias deficiency Congenital cultures, HIV, stippling RBC serum hemorrhage, IgG, Specific chain (0−2%) microcytic Isoimmunization: dysmorphology obtain Spherocytes Parvovirus Rh group Hemophagocytic Drugs leukemia enzyme trait Elliptocytes DIC/sepsis, agents) dyscrasias Chronic Congenital Gamma-thalassemia B19 TORCH loss

Figure 62-1 of diagnosis anemia. neonatal Differential blood delivery maternal including blood The and smear, physician (RBC) histories, count, laboratory type, hemoglobin, labor family, peripheral Coombs bilirubin and information and the cell tests, from red test, direct obtains indices, concentration. reticulocyte and toxoplasmosis, KB, DIC, RPR, cytomegalovirus, simplex. human PCN, fluorescent FTA, immunodeficiency G6PD, rapid other, coagulation; TORCH, glucose-6-phosphate Kleihauer-Betke; Disseminated test; virus; HIV, treponemal plasma reagin intravascular tests; herpes rubella, penicillin; dehydrogenase; antibody the Anemia RK: Ohls in (From neonate. Philadelphia, the Saunders, Hematologic of neonate, RD, 162.) editor: In p Christensen 2000, problems first-trimester pregnancy, as procedures, pregnancy. abortion, the circulation, manual amniocentesis, (external or ectopic maternal normal or version such placenta, extraction internal) of

incompatibility other sensitization ABO does usually fetal extremely than mild not disease anemia. cause with as the produce which newborn, may hemolytic manifested significant of is anemia and disease It hyperbilirubinemia. type firstborn and IgG O infant mothers many A antibodies pregnancy, of group may before blood be who the B B have to have affected. or A blood Because contrast more hemolytic disease with severe ABO does subsequent to Rh disease, not pregnancies. In become anti-B have antigen bind A than is to the erythrocytes B determinants that anti-A fetal A or or severe than pregnancy, cells contain because sites. Rh less have antibody ABO either with in incompatibility they antigenic or B Rh-sensitized or hemolysis because nonerythrocytic may fewer Hemolysis cause therapy—currently Rh jaundice clinically With become for the neonatal has common hemolytic newborn. approximately requiring significant the 20% of of incompatibility the disease, incidence ABO of hyperbilirubinemia declining most in accounting

bloodgroup is Rh caused fetalis Erythroblastosis by classically incompatibility. the Most women at pregnancy. have Rh-negative of antibodies time first their noanti-Rh antigen d of five type antigens: and D, consists system E, TheRh the antigenic. is C, c, not e; Rh-sensitized cases, during sensitizes first fetus production pregnancy. theD Rh-negative (d) mother,resulting IgG the in antigen antibody the the of most In Rh detected an Because subsequent and inthe mothers a in results the second Rh screening may determined antigens sensitized isusually antibody pregnancy affected be fetalis antibody. of during and disease to are to anti-D at test pregnancies.The the pregnancy, be Coombs the response mother, first antenatal of start which erythroblastosis not most with in the show utero. an serious an of onset and manifest because may increasing the of of newbornonly of disease of affected fetaldisease hyperbilirubinemia.Subsequent anemia response development no hemolytic earlier severity newborn and result by first in hemolysis pregnancies The may pericardial and failure, is and 60). Chapter which in characterized heart pleural obstruction, fetal hydrops, elevated anemia, by anasarca vein result effusions, hypoalbuminemia (see Fetal portal ascites, pressure, and venous is offetal The death risk high.

severity hemolysis, Rh its management sensitization effects by of becomes the time the fetus, The affected. on pregnancy of maturity complicated at it the depends the and the of fetus a on the the bilirubin of optical hemolysis spectrophotometric to assessed quantity fetus severity quantified amniotic the density (at amniotic fluid. transferred be by The can by from nm) of analysis the 450 fluid, the of of

severity decreasing the densities to gestation been predict toward optical illness. with of Three slopes term developed zones the have of high associated zone is density 3 hemolysis. optical severe with The in not affected. lower zones are Fetuses the probably fetus intensive neonatal infant the into determined the care for and ratio, pulmonary fetus’s falls treated as optical maturity the be should bilirubin the a zone density has in measurement and 3, lecithin-to-sphingomyelin by If unit. delivered pulmonary to an the blood have or between the detected. 22 transfusion repeated umbilical 33 ultrasound-guided the distress of indicated with maturity and into is fetal until is and gestational immature vein is are O-negative may reached is intrauterine If and fetus age, be weeks lungs hydrops, fetal sensitized age for include intravascular Indications than of weeks fetal distress in of gestation and 25% for 32 in transfusion early fetuses 30%, 22 between fetal a delivery. less and gestational too hematocrit fetal to for corrects postnatal transfusion exchange continued associated anemia, intrauterine but severe a as neonatal hemolysis Intravascular of of reduces plus erythropoiesis. improves hydrops, anemia outcome fetal is need and result with the the suppressed transfusion,

age) weeks’ hours immune Rh-positive (>28 gestation fetus Prevention with after gestational possible by of an (RhoGAM). is treating 72 the mother carrying the and birth globulin anti-Rh-positive during of within mother sensitization (300 anti-Rh-positive the entering based ability at fetal-to-maternal to amount the dose RhoGAM circulation the (approximately during mL). maternal bind the of all Rh-positive this of 30 possible antibody of erythrocytes birth is fetal transfusion μg) The on unknown fetal may production maternal another, by RhoGAM mechanism. or with bind anti-Rh-positive interfere erythrocytes Rh-positive antibody sensitization effective in only D RhoGAM is antigen. preventing to the can cause group hydrops blood antigens include immune and and that Duffy. Other E, Rh erythroblastosis Kell, C, amniotic because, and reticulocyte produces inhibits Anti-Kell it levels lower lower alloimmunity count a addition to erythropoiesis. bilirubin in hemolysis,

or as the Embden-Meyerhof kinase in enzyme of causes the Nonimmune glucose-6-phosphate deficiencies pathway, pyruvate of deficiency. such RBC include dehydrogenase hemolysis newborn membrane of disorders RBC cause another are hemolysis. nonimmune a or of RBC spherocytosis autosomal membrane. protein the of severe of a inherited dominant a is form less Hereditary severe the spectrin, autosomal form result recessive as is deficiency and nonimmunologically as thalassemia, mediated cause of are Hemoglobinopathies, hemolysis. such another

StudentConsult.com Available @

loss cord, or the of blood pallor, diminished (hepatic is blood by rupture on rapidity or from retroperitoneal) at patterns hemorrhage umbilical shock. placenta depending hematoma; after presentation, pulses, and Anemia of loss internal ofthe is fetal-maternal two previa, characterized by birth peripheral manifested loss.Acute splenic hemorrhage, blood no and no extramedullary signs Thereare of hematopoiesis hepatosplenomegaly. iron subsequent The hours. duringthe the and decline serum levelsinitially hemoglobin content but hemoglobin are normal, 24 levels marked Newborns iron caused blood with without level with present transfusion stores. microcytic by loss pallor, fetal-maternal serum hypochromic or heart a with blood twin-totwin or low at hydrops, birth, anddecreased smear, hemorrhage hemoglobin chronic failure,hepatosplenomegaly chronic a a in 1 75% 1 are 2000 of occurs 1 in mL, mL; 1 to Fetal-maternal mL in50% to 30 mL. approximately pregnancies, approximately most 100 blood bleeding with 50 losses all fetal blood 400 less, rangingfrom are losses or and are

confirmed The diagnosis of the hemorrhage is Kleihauer-Betke by acid test. fetal-maternal elution hereditary peripheral false-negative in of (patients discolored because produce elution; fetal RBCs leaving are fetal mother’s a have false-positive is cells or maternal eluted, the to ABO hemoglobin and fetal is result). smear acid may blood sickle hemoglobin incompatibility cell may and resistant persistence counted with adult observed anemia result, a Pink hemoglobin

at utero clinical Hemolysis from resulting cause may a of produce any manifestations in spectrum birth. edema pulmonary anasarca, ventilation Severe heart adequate asphyxia. prevent may birth, in resulting at and hydropswith failure, andpallor afterbirth. jaundiced hepatosplenomegaly 24 with first in the within hours Infantsaffected hemolysis and become have utero with pallor become jaundiced asymptomaticand anemia to incompatibility no are Less subsequently.Patients at 24 jaundicedevelops physical during infants birth; severely mild first ABO the of affected show hours 72 with often birth manifest and life. hepatosplenomegaly at and signs

secondary to of laboratory or evaluation suspected in a many diverse needed with all are patients hemolysis. is jaundice Because hemolysis, causes anemia, hydrops, smear, count, A complete determine of hemolysis. presence and blood evaluation blood type, blood count, of performed test direct the reticulocyte be should (to antibody-coated Coombs in initial the infants with all RBCs) blood characterized reticulocytosis, a anisocytosis are expected polychromasia levels, isoimmune by and smear hemoglobin hemolysis. and Reduced with commonly ABO in observed Spherocytes are incompatibility. determination in antibody mediated and blood the identify antigen and the hemolysis. the The responsible Coombs immunologically of type test

must test and and non-immune mother differences the other fetus, be between a of group causes blood of absence Coombs hemolysis the In positive considered. hemoglobin or enzyme tests performed. assays, membrane fragility, be (osmotic should assay) RBC spectrin electrophoresis, RBC anemia, brain, spleen, indicated of be the Internal and adrenal also hemolysis suspected. when hemorrhage evaluation or may associated the jaundice liver, nonimmune gland reticulocytosis, hemorrhage ultrasound reabsorbs; with may is when be in with failure typical heart is in be Shock whereas with may hemolytic internal seen anemia. diseases, patients more hemorrhage, severe the fetal-maternal possible test. include should a hemorrhage of Kleihauer-Betke Evaluation

RBCs. is packed anemia neonatal treatment transfusion cross-matched of of symptomatic The to cells plasma. is against immune cross-matched maternal and hemolysis neonatal transfused present,the must If be be be with can packed given as may products, Acute volume nonblood RBCs available; not loss if necessitateresuscitation such bloodis subsequently. saline to15 deficit, blood remaining any and sufficient. mL/kg volume of Tocorrect 10 packed be anemia RBCs should given disease; blood risk C, all graft-versus-host syphilis. HIV, and to should and reduce B should hepatitis blood products cytomegalovirusseronegative should bescreened of infants, irradiatedto and be the be for blood Cytomegalovirus-seronegative in transfusion. after anemia ahyporegenerative with in the Recombinanterythropoietin hematocrit improve utero infants may

of cause the newborn Hemolytic jaundice. neonatal common of is a disease immaturity evidence the of many newborn hemolysis jaundiced. of bilirubin become of Nonetheless, pathways the because metabolism, without infants of

produced Bilirubin system. by in the is the hemoglobin of reticuloendothelial catabolism and monoxide. of form cleaved carbon biliverdin The quantities heme oxygenase heme by equivalent to of tetrapyrrole ring is the other exists, this carbon of of bilirubin. source no to the production excretion Because monoxide is biologic gas identical stoichiometrically of by bilirubin Biliverdin is biliverdin converted to reductase. bilirubin. of hemoglobin gram One of produces mg 35 represent these bone include other production; bilirubin in of hemoglobin cells circulating production lysis sources of Sources bilirubin (shunt) inefficient 20% and marrow. hemoglobin precursor than of to have hr of with greater bilirubin production Compared (6 rate newborns adults, 10 3 mg/kg/24 a hr). twofold mg/kg/24 versus threefold to This 90 and the a 120-day of erythrocyte span mass increased 70 is adults. RBC dayscompared erythrocyte in production hematocrit) caused, (higher span increased in life an by part, life with to shortened

and indirect an den in soluble after Bilirubin reagent lipid catabolism Bergh van test. unconjugated reacts hemoglobin produced the as and is is Indirect-reacting, to water, is toxic system unconjugated nervous the and its limiting in excretion. bilirubin insoluble central bilirubin 8.5 binds on albumin bilirubin a newborn. g 1 Unconjugated binds sites; albumin in binding specific mg bilirubin to of of at available system. saturated competitive become a becomes site, If the bilirubin compound free to enter nervous displacing the central bilirubin, or the if binds bound sites binding displace bilirubin from sulfisoxazole and such fatty acids binding on Organic drugs free such as acids site its can as albumin.

liver cytoplasmic Bilirubin becomes at hepatocyte protein Y the (ligandin). bound albumin from a dissociates and to results renal capable diglucuronide, soluble excretion. of and bilirubin is biliary which in the and water of conjugation production Hepatic of conjugation. represents The bilirubin the rate-limiting glucuronosyltransferase enzyme step concentrations infants, older particularly in of The in than premature glucuronosyltransferase and lower newborns, are ligandin in children.

a reaction Bergh direct the bilirubin den in test. van Conjugated gives stool. through excreted conjugated the bilirubin eliminated intestine into the bile in and small Most the is however, fraction undergo may to Some and the hydrolysis back bilirubin glucuronidase, be may recirculation). intestinal (enterohepatic reabsorbed by unconjugated bacteria stercobilinogen, In addition, to reabsorption. usually neonatal in and bilirubin and limit are the urine convert and stool which bilirubin intestine excreted urobilinogen in enterohepatic the of also contains may bilirubin, which passage contribute to recirculation of meconium, bilirubin. Delayed

in produced is erythroblastosis Bilirubin utero normal by the fetus affected and by fetus fetalis. the by lipid-soluble unconjugated, across Indirect, fetal is becomes bilirubin enzymes. maternal the hepatic conjugated and by transferred placenta is water-soluble impermeable conjugated placenta to The bilirubin. elevated hemolysis conjugated in the and severe levels Fetal produces but fetal become increase when bilirubin presence hyperbilirubinemia. mildly bile may inspissated of only stasis hemolysis, hepatic (but increase fetal hyperbilirubinemia indirect also may levels. bilirubin Maternal not direct)

Unconjugated Etiology Decision-Making Indirect Hyperbilirubinemia Algorithm of

Available StudentConsult.com @

newborns. of cause jaundice Physiologic is among a hyperbilirubinemia common out exclusion, It evaluation causes careful is as diseases. has made infection, metabolic after hemolysis, and jaundice, ruled serious of a of diagnosis more such increased is bilirubin normal result from characteristics the RBC factors hepatic ligandin and mass, are and that glucuronosyltransferase. production newborns: RBC shortened an span, of many of of increased immaturity life jaundice physiologic Physiologic resulting be ancestry. exaggerated Physiologic of jaundice Greek infants and may among Asian

no morethan infantsincludes pattern in 12 indirect-reacting physiologic level jaundice of The mg/dL of life. a of day on bilirubin peak 3 term clinical occurs later the infants, day). peakis (15 In mg/dL) and premature (fifth higher bilirubin mg/dL). formula-fed in versus to17 breast (15 may be than infants mg/dL jaundice milk–fed physiologic peak infants during 12 levelof indirect The higherin be the infants partly This of may level milk. higher decreased fed breast intake aresult fluid of direct or anemia greater the the 13 mg/dLin pathologic are bilirubin than bilirubin it clinically is the and evidenton term unphysiologic if first if is is fraction the of if bilirubin hepatosplenomegaly mg/dL, is than if life, day mg/dL/hr, infants, level or greater present. than 0.5 if increases peak 1.5 Jaundice more

in glucuronosyltransferase autosomal syndrome serious, permanent a is indirect that severe of Crigler-Najjar rare, results hyperbilirubinemia. recessive, deficiency enzyme induction and responds Type phenobarbital, bilirubin activity an enzyme by of a increase to reduction in levels. producing II does often not indirect as Type manifests persistent hyperbilirubinemia, and I leading to phenobarbital respond to kernicterus. mild of hyperbilirubinemia. promoter of in indirect caused disease a is results region by a and Gilbert glucuronosyltransferase the mutation may of icterogenic factor another develop. severe more the (hemolysis), jaundice presence In

Biliary α1-Antitrypsin atresia metabolism errors fibrosis Inborn storage Alagille Byler iron deficiency infarction Cystic (arteriohepatic Neonatal disease of (galactosemia, Choledochal cyst disease syndrome tyrosinemia) Hepatic dysplasia)

TORCH, rubella, other, CMV, Cytomegalovirus; simplex. cytomegalovirus, herpes toxoplasmosis,

total (defined level the always >2 to bilirubin (Table be 62-2). hyperbilirubinemia >20% Direct-reacting mg/dL never the is as or according evaluated should diagnostic bilirubin) a direct of thoroughly categories and physiologic serious involving mostly bilirubin the but of infant to a neurotoxic bilirubin) Direct-reacting not hepatocellular underlying disorder is signifies cholestasis or injury. conjugated (composed direct-reacting patients alkaline bacterial γ-glutamyl viral biopsy. chloride enzymes determination aminotransferase, hepatic aminotransferase, (aspartate The the cultures, hyperbilirubinemia liver and test, of and involves levels tests, sweat liver phosphatase, diagnostic of with occasionally the alanine screening transpeptidase), evaluation and of metabolic ultrasound, gray-white presence (acholic) the life of after of biliary In jaundice with stools urine strongly atresia. suggests second the dark addition, and week is that Table disorders the manifested in treatment listed 62-2. by of The direct are diseases specific bilirubinemia for These phototherapy not transfusion. respond to do diseases exchange or

when are fraction unconjugated, bilirubin toxic the capacity system, to concentrations Lipid-soluble, exceed albumin. and indirect high especially binding is of bilirubin developing indirect the nervous central cells indirect in disrupts function, neuronal and the and bilirubin especially metabolism results brain basal in is deposited ganglia. Kernicterus when blood-brain solubility. cross of the lipid its Indirect barrier bilirubin may because a of bilirubin–fatty a that complex. blood-brain of acid propose bilirubin-albumin theories permits entry or disruption free Other barrier the

Kernicterus bilirubin usually for gestational age. is is noted level the excessively high when when than not develop in to bilirubin usually It does are less term infants 20 levels

of ABO, incompatibility: Blood jaundice, infection breast infant Rh, milk Duffy Kell, mother group Common polycythemia, Physiologic hemorrhage, internal diabetic jaundice,

disorders: syndrome, glucose-6-phosphate enzyme enzyme disease), blood glucuronyl cell cell immune Mutations transferase stenosis, thalassemia Rare Red defects: (Crigler-Najjar of pyloric ovalocytosis hypothyroidism, blood dehydrogenase, Gilbert Red pyruvate thrombocytopenia spherocytosis, membrane Hemoglobinopathy: kinase

second Breast evidence hyperbilirubinemia during of life. week may to of associated first jaundice hemolysis milk be without unconjugated the with rarely to increase than levels more Bilirubin mg/dL. 20 resumes. do not of days rapid decline breastfeeding breastfeeding increase significantly of to Interruption 2 in a results levels, for bilirubin 1 which after bilirubin milk contain inhibitor because an enterohepatic recirculation may of bilirubin may Breast breast of or milk increase glucuronidase. conjugation of

pathologic, cause. immediate the to Jaundice is is and establish of life attention needed on the first day always of is onset hematoma), 62-1). splenic Early (cephalhematoma, result often or hemolysis, hemorrhage internal or a infection (Table hepatic from Infection direct-reacting resulting often also bilirubin infections congenital from associated is bacterial with sepsis. perinatal or

5 reach (versus jaundice is in bilirubin when infants adults). to observed 10 of 2 to Physical evidence 3 mg/dL levels in mg/dL hyperbilirubinemia measurement total magnitude bilirubin for the hyperbilirubinemia. observed, laboratory should determine to of When a jaundice the is evaluation include mg/dL and mg/dL day of greater than 5 first smear, thereafter Bilirubin 13 of in than levels, direct the and reticulocyte be with test, levels Coombs blood should complete or count, measurement further on blood blood indirect life term evaluated greater count. typing, bilirubin infants These performed must before transfusion. tests hyperbilirubinemia with be of or treatment phototherapy exchange diagnosis physiologic In hyperbilirubinemia, of hemolysis or of rare either or jaundice. the indirect milk the is nonhemolytic causes the the common for or absence evidence either breast weeks hyperbilirubinemia. Jaundice age and present pathologic direct-reacting of 2 is after a suggests

Hyperbilirubinemia Direct Etiology of Conjugated

25 incidence the but mg/dL. serum levels Available increases bilirubin exceed mg/dL, as 25 @ StudentConsult.com (sulfa bilirubin-displacing 20 bilirubin Kernicterus in hypoxia, presence noted drugs asphyxia, mg/dL at sepsis, and hypothermia, hypoglycemia, prematurity. be than less of drugs), hemolysis, levels meningitis, may the for in are diagnosis noted and of jaundice birth, Other infants 24 term hours kernicterus within hyperbilirubinemia. risks of delayed hemolysis, levels developed infants bilirubin of associated Kernicterus less g are permeable less than than blood-brain barrier when more immature with in 10 a because extremely weighing prematurity. has mg/dL 1000

hypotonia, manifestations poor response, lethargy, earliest are The clinical feeding. of poor kernicterus irritability, and Moro are 4 high-pitched noted A of also emesis and after may be day present.Early life. signs cry signs paralysis andseizures. fever, Later hypertonicity, gaze, upward pulmonary posturing, of fontanelle, hemorrhage, opisthotonic includebulging cases severe of die kernicterus period. with in the neonatal Infants resolves maymanifest deafness, in as enamel choreoathetoid ofteeth palsy,mental permanent nerve cerebral discoloration infants, dysplasia, and Spasticity retardation, sequelae. surviving who later byavoiding from excessively levels that drugs prevented albumin. bilirubin avoiding Kernicterus may bilirubin conditions may high or indirect be and displace by later). reversedby exchange may an (see signs be transfusion immediately kernicterus Early of occasionally instituting

of Indirect Hyperbilirubinemia Therapy

particularly bilirubin with kernicterus. for associated increases initiated effective reducing before levels and Phototherapy serum an method to bilirubin is when safe indirect levels, bilirubin infants, term is 16 are begun between 18 In levels phototherapy and when mg/dL. indirect lower transfusion. in from initiated Phototherapy when at to the levels, is infants high bilirubin prevent is exchange concentrations bilirubin necessitating premature reaching lights Blue are white levels. reducing bilirubin in effective lights and

into 425to Under phototherapy transformed that wavelength is in the water light soluble irradiance bilirubin band, effects are and 475-nm isomers easily of excreted. with the maximal the Unconjugated (IX) 15Z is configuration. in 4Z, bilirubin causes more 15E photochemical Phototherapy bilirubin producing a water-soluble reaction IX. reversible, the isomer 4Z, can the easily, isomer system. excreted conjugation liver’s bypassing be This results native photochemical aforementioned than spontaneously a can in and reaction to in of urine. not the be does the bilirubin unconjugated lumirubin, Another which revert isomer water-soluble excreted rapid production isomer, more

dehydration. loss, and of insensible phototherapy include an increased water diarrhea, Complications of macular-papular obstruction cyanosis, rash, potential lethargy, eye red Additional for masking retinal are problems damage. nasal by pads, and skin be direct-reacting with bronzing noted Skin infants may hyperbilirubinemia. in be hemolytic Infants the to disease of occurrence must care managed the hyperbilirubinemia, these from of continued for infants newborn phototherapy but late anemia mild with be for hemolysis. occasionally may taken with follow successfully

usually indirect bilirubin kernicterus. high infants who for risk levels transfusion is with dangerously for are reserved at Exchange breast milk than 2000 for of with exchange level may exchange is Asymptomatic not transfusion, who As mg/dL. weigh hemolysis a level require unless more exceeds the 20 the for of bilirubin physiologic mg/dL indirect-reacting bilirubin rule number indirect infants 25 infants with jaundice thumb, a g. or indirect g the level by 10% The of infants would birth in in for other mg/dL. 15 grams: infant be an 1500 weight the of may estimated bilirubin exchangeable weighing level calculating be g bilirubin level 1000 Infants than exceeds less exchange mg/dL. require until not an the transfusion usually weighing do 10

in is vein the and confluence or, vena transfusion placed inferior of if obtained, umbilical through system. umbilical at performed catheter is venous portal the The the exchange an flow usually free the cava bilirubin after continued The declines stores. the transfusion level half 8 hemolysis immediately of a tissue later levels exchange; of those hours to are rebound of redistribution to about before the result bilirubin exchange serum that from levels and 6 as of

of hemorrhage), transfusion or instability, (vessel problems metabolic to or the infection), include (transfusion blood reaction, or enterocolitis Complications the or related necrotizing perforation procedure exchange [NEC]). catheter (hypotension the and graft-versus-host disease. thrombocytopenia include complications Unusual necessity reduce phototherapy the transfusions. for of exchange subsequent Continuation may

which to vascular to and hematocrit high hyperviscosity lead Polycythemia symptoms ischemia. is may related hypoperfusion, produces stasis, excessively an (≥65%), that is in viscosity. 60%, to from increase increases blood the there a hematocrit 40% small As the markedly, hematocrit symptoms the to central to increase may begins appear. viscosity 65%, and increases blood than When greater deformable erythrocytes filterable or hyperviscosity. adult are contributes further erythrocytes, to which than less Neonatal 5% central hematocrit of 65% in infants. or is of 3% noted greater venous to A hyperthyroidism, infants for and post-term Beckwith-Wiedemann and special risk Infants clamping, infants, twin-to-twin small are syndrome with or mothers, trisomy of neonatal polycythemia infants age with syndrome. term infants trisomy 18, gestational 21, for syndrome, delayed diabetic adrenogenital cord 13, trisomy transfusion (recipient), at hypoxia increased levels reflect birth. In periods of by caused have some for infants polycythemia erythropoietin infants, placental a compensation these insufficiency; fetal at prolonged may

ruddy plethoric may appear patients acrocyanosis. and or develop Polycythemic Symptoms of increased mass compromise. of vascular the and a result RBC are or of being may of down and brain, is Seizures, irritability hemoglobin circulation hepatic of hyperbilirubinemia reflect the increased the that bilirubin. into whereas amount microcirculation the poor reflect broken abnormalities lethargy, part vascular in hypertension the pulmonary that problems Additional resistance. from include respiratory and elevated of (PPHN) primary pulmonary newborn distress result interstitial edema. often radiograph reveals cardiomegaly, The vascular and pleural effusions, chest increased markings, hemiplegic infarction, thrombocytopenia, hypoglycemia, intolerance. problems testicular priapism, are Other stroke, and feeding NEC, related for also gestational associated condition hypoxia risk PPHN infants complications periods and primary are of to polycythemia Many with age utero). of these (small after hypoglycemia at for are in the

of with birth. sequelae treatment by of transfusion may be polycythemia that relate neonatal prevented exchange abnormalities infants after to Long-term neurodevelopmental partial symptomatic saline. whole normal partial exchange removes it transfusion with and blood replaces A hematocrit may central hematocrits is calculate based equation The volume falsely used be exchanged to on the because venous the peripheral elevated:

volume× Volume = (observed −desired exchange(mL) [blood hematocrit hematocrit hematocrit)]/observed to

50%, blood desired is and mL/kg. The the 85 hematocrit volume

coagulation common of period. neonatal the in are Disorders hypoxia. inherited coagulation result of shock of sick transient in disorders disseminated factors, a this or K–dependent be (DIC) platelets, Hemorrhage may of deficiency intravascular seen time permanent and with vitamin trauma, newborns deficiencies of factors, coagulation during Thrombosis protein that developmentally VIII antithrombin a newborn factors fibrinolytic vitamin circulating system. in and problem V), III, lower of also C of levels (a because the protein K–dependent potential is the and inhibits

Coagulation have to through vitamin not II, IX, and placenta and levels K–dependent do fetus, newborn the VII, low relatively infants the factors pass X. the of factors than are Contact in and and factors adults. kininogen also prekallikrein, in XI newborns XII, lower XIII; platelet counts are I); plasma within the VIII, adult and of normal range. factors and (factor levels V, Fibrinogen

XII, time factors on and the II, contact VIII, dependent in transient, Because I, the IX, partial the and V, vitamin of is newborn which K–dependent deficiencies (PTT), relative the prolonged thromboplastin period. is of X, factors, infants to term compared seconds) most more 80 have infants of infants to PTT mature Preterm (50 seconds) and marked seconds). 50 (25 35 the prolongation older, (35 to the with and of administration prolong vitamin and of heparin The DIC, deficiency K severe PTT. presence hemophilia, the the

for prothrombin The vitamin (PT), X, dependent is test II, VII, V, sensitive deficiency. factors more time I, which K and a is on is 20 seconds) The to seconds) to with infants (13 PT compared mature prolonged slightly seconds). term (12 more 14 to 21 patients only preterm and in infants (13 occur Abnormal K the of PT and hepatic injury, with prolongations deficiency, DIC. vitamin similar infants in are Levels products and degradation fibrin of adults. and fibrinogen the bleeding time, is number, which platelet function period and maternal normal therapy. absence salicylate during in of The newborn the reflects

more II, γcarboxyglutamic Vitamin is K factors the glutamate binds the into calcium, a IX, precursor is during on proteins, cofactor X; which converting required immediate factors of VII, carboxylation acid hemorrhage. for and of for coagulation the activation active them necessary synthesis possible. deficiency of but precursor proteins, no vitamin is in There is factor not to these hepatic the of K their of the congenital active conversion absence the reducing levels. are diagnostic increase induced vitamin to protein coagulation vitamin K helpful and induced corrects deficiency of markers; defects, absence undetectable by in protein administration Levels K absence vitamin K K by vitamin rapidly

hemorrhagic develop most levels Although rarely. born of factors, vitamin complications only K–dependent reduced newborns with are factors and for profound Infants have newborn factors, decline of vitamin deficiency these of birth. risk K–dependent disease at further the the hemorrhagic most after is increased vitamin breastfed and K, a at for infants 7 risk that between milk hemorrhage Because are of of poor 3 occurs usually days life. source breast site, scalp, and Bleeding hemorrhage the bleeding. mucosa, for infant from circumcision fatal such as umbilical places intracranial but risk internal cord, usually skin, intestines, complications, at ensues the

affect vitamin day the that drugs on life from the K–dependent associated the often mother first to administration a vitamin deficiency of Hemorrhage with K is of in factors of infant. resulting the metabolism or phenytoin. seen antibiotic infants of early warfarin of or hemorrhage been receiving pattern phenobarbital and in with This therapy maternal has isoniazid rifampin) (e.g., and mothers birth, particularly may 1 months breastfed among to Bleeding infants. 3 after also occur possibility deficiency from cystic raise or antibiotic also should K resulting that biliary K. atresia, about of colonic suppression suspicion hepatitis, in fibrosis, bacteria breastfed the produce vitamin Vitamin K the malabsorption infants of vitamin

K infants of administration may with birth. be vitamin vitamin K Bleeding prevented by at associated deficiency all to the administration of all vitamin newborn. to 1% of of had K, hemorrhagic Before 2% newborns disease routine vitamin bleeding. mg) vitamin prevents intramuscular One (1 dose of K–deficiency K of of hemorrhage is Treatment vitamin K. vitamin present, fresh involves given. deficiency frozen intravenous plasma also 1 should be mg from K resulting of If life-threatening severe, administration bleeding for K for disease Unusually warfarin of high hepatic doses or maternal anticonvulsant and be therapy. needed may vitamin

Differential of Disorders and Manifestations Clinical Bleeding Diagnoses

Available @ StudentConsult.com

bleeding, and hemorrhage, cutaneous petechiae. subgaleal a cephalhematoma, ecchymosis, Bleeding in be newborn may associated disorders with such as infants petechiae presentation, born or usually insignificant. nuchal in with vertex without are and are common by cord, Facial a epistaxis. or may melena, hematemesis, Mucosal as appear bleeding

in as intracranial hemorrhage organ-specific results dysfunction, hemorrhage. with associated such seizures Internal circumcision from sites, venipuncture or is cord umbilical the common. heel-stick Bleeding or sites, also

the on partly with hemorrhage. clinical The the circumstances associated depends diagnosis differential sick failure, a diagnosis In differential should hepatic the and newborn, include thrombocytopenia. DIC, syndrome)or thrombotic be or infections; maternal asphyxia. NEC; consumption in preeclampsia; ill or may by organic Thrombocytopenia perinatal, platelets of hemangioma associated trapping congenital, acidemia; to (Kasabach-Merritt be with may endocarditis; secondary neonate in PPHN; a bacterial an an be may exchange of also platelets Thrombocytopenia after peripheral due washout to transfusion. underlying of directed be supplemented infant of at with by thrombocytopenia infusions the a platelets, disorder, Treatment blood, sick both. should or

nonimmune newborn hypoxia, hypo-tension, hydrops, bacterial a of a neoplasm, and hemangioma, death neonatal injury, hepatic neonatal etiology while disease. NEC, or utero, The cavernous in includes sepsis, viral DIC in of asphyxia, cold twin underlying of initiating focused on treatment primarily be therapy disorder. for or should the DIC The fresh platelet factor plasma. involves coagulopathy and replacement of management frozen transfusions with Supportive consumptive with and C be who Heparin thrombosis. factor also concentrate have for reserved should infants DIC

a Disorders systemic or platelet factor child hemostasis well with coagulation of deficiency. newborn but disease are associated not reflect a in in associated systemic bleeding mucosal illness. or and Hemophilia cutaneous initially no with is may bleeding hypovolemic continues, If shock develop. and the or in into signs liver, spleen organ-specific shock. Bleeding result brain, may

anemia be present), as aplasia syndrome. or aplasia-thrombocytopenia thrombocytopenia may child, syndrome the (thumbs part a (involving of syndrome syndrome Fanconi Wiskott-Aldrich thumb), of hypoplasia radial and such well In a Various effects. count may reduce adverse without other producing neonatal also platelet maternal the drugs thiazide These drugs include quinidine, quinine, diuretics. sulfonamides, and

The wellnewborns isoimmune in common transient thrombocytopenia causes of are thrombocytopenia. thrombocytopenia neonatal andtransient most paternal antibodies of HPA-5b cases, to antiplatelet represent85% fetalplatelet. Isoimmune her antigen caused HPLA1-negative by 10% and mother the producedby (HPA-1a specific expressed is sensitization platelet thrombocytopenia the on respectively) and after is in 1 incidence in 2000 births. to The 1000 1 thatproduces thrombocytopenia isoimmune antibodies Thisresponse is produce maternal-sensitized response that to erythroblastosis analogous to fetalis. the maternal in thrombocytopenia. placenta thrombocytopenia, butafter crossing the binds not produce by IgG trapped the The reticuloendothelial antibody this fetalplatelets to does maternal tissue,resulting are that antiplateletantibody are after of and intracranial (an for to purpura, at manner 15%) 10% this before or produced incidence petechiae, thrombocytopenia developmentof Infants risk in with birth. hemorrhage neonatal be of sectionmay indicated. risk bleeding; deliverymay increase the Vaginal cesarean

HPA-1a-negative transfusion treatment significant bleeding platelets. (<20,000 is thrombocytopenia severe of HPA-5b-negative maternal RhD-compatible, Specific and ABO-compatible or and platelets/mm3) for the antibody the the the maternal thrombocytapheresis the to rather infant. than yields in sufficient isoimmune of affected mother directed thrombocytopenia Because against fetal platelet, treat platelets is increases platelet safe platelet and After the one transfusion, usually dramatically infant’s in count range. a remains life of antibody month treatment, first maternal declines. the as resolves the level during thrombocytopenia Without of platelet transfusion Treatment (cordocentesis) effective. with intravenous or with the immunoglobulin mother fetus is also intravascular the thrombocytopenic intracranial of section hemorrhage. reduces risk the Cesarean

result maternal to a placental thrombocytopenic Neonatal (ITP) transfer purpura of infants is born also of thrombocytopenia in IgG withidiopathic antibodies. women all platelet auto-antibodies platelet may ITP, andnewborn antigens; In have low are these against mother counts. directed infant ITP The section with born by of of cesarean by lessened an corticosteroids. the hemorrhagein mother to with be mother a and may risks treatment

prednisone ITP born with Treatment to affected involve immunoglobulin. an of and infant may intravenous a mother and count. infant’s produce used donor an a transient In may random platelets may emergency, be platelet the increase in spontaneously Thrombocytopenia life of decline. maternal-derived as the month resolves antibody during first levels demonstrable been of thrombocytopenia antibodies infants born noted platelet to levels cause thrombocytopenic unknown platelet-associated without sepsis with also antibodies. Elevated were who have mothers in and of

and blood with or sick) evaluation include a of (well bleeding evaluation and PT. must count, infant laboratory PTT The of an smear, platelet infant well suggests thrombocytopenia thrombocytopenia. Isolated in immune a PTT suggesting PT thrombocytopenia, cells). a than and smear blood seconds), Laboratory includes evidence prolonged rather a a of markedly (minutes anemia DIC blood (burr and or fragmented microangiopathic hemolytic products. fibrin (<100 of degradation low fibrinogen mg/dL) elevated levels Further reveals of levels and evaluation IX PT the whereas Vitamin deficiency K from the hemophilia PTT, VIII and only the deficiency than factors more resulting PTT. prolongs prolongs factor confirm levels of hemophilia. the Specific diagnosis

is to care infants injury intestinal intensive syndrome unit. admitted the (NEC) preterm intestinal enterocolitis most emergency a in occurring the of is common and Necrotizing neonatal admissions to intensive to births of 8% 3 occurs per neonatal care in and 1000 1% NEC the to 1 live unit. NEC. significant Prematurity most consistent with factor the and is associated neonatal 13% 4% g who to less 1500 infants than weigh The in birth. disease at of occurs in infrequent is infants). (<10% infants NEC affected term of

occur weeks’ who before have premature of gestation cases in been born enterally. Most infants 34 NEC fed motility, coordination hormones, to decreased a mucosal blood suppressed play in role the with the which and Prematurity pathogenesis gastrointestinal flow intestinal of immaturity differences intestinal is defense enzymes, host mucosal significant NEC. tract, barrier, of integrity of the including autoregulation, suppressed gastrointestinal thought intestinal in associated depressed decreased is of system, 90% enterally, infants NEC been More fed fed. infants in been have been NEC never have has diagnosed reported but than of who with NEC. milk in human the role Feeding incidence a with beneficial of has shown reducing barrier increasing the reducing addition, probiotics may benefits immune potential for mucosal potential offer upregulating by infant preterm function, by improving and mucosal the colonization In pathogens. nutrition, system, to intestinal is It that contributes also NEC. theorized flow compromised blood

rectalbleeding, emesis, residuals, abdominal diarrhea. and clinical signs distention,feeding gastric intolerance/increased occasional NEC Early of include temperatureinstability, develop disease erythema, ascites, biliousemesis, disseminated may progresses,patients abdominal increased episodes coagulation, abdominal and apnea/bradycardia, lethargy, distention, of wall marked intravascular As shock. the develop a With the may abdomen bluish discoloration. abdominalperforation,

cell count depressed. it be but can elevated, blood white is The often Thrombocytopenia is common. imbalance, coagulation along addition, and develop may and acidosis, derangements, electrolyte abnormalities metabolic In including metabolic hyperglycemia. with infants hypoglycemia infectious and may not No NEC; agent cultures with fungal associated been conclusive. has helpful prove bacteriologic but unique

air-fluid levels. NEC.The and to the Radiographic the radiographic ileus, is imaging loops earliest with essential diagnosis is finding intestinal thickening bowel of associated of often between caused the bacteria gas present finding pathogenic bowel is wall. ofthe Thepathognomonic pneumatosis intestinalis radiographic and production from subserosal muscularis by layers hydrogen persistent Radiographic seen may bowel, a include dilated findings intrahepatic perforation. venous bowel gas, loop also andpneumoperitoneum of fixedor with

with sepsis diagnosis a includes The or intestinal differential ileus of volvulus. NEC present Both sepsis of distention. with can systemic conditions signs abdominal and NEC; (gastric and causes the radiographs of abdominal other be considered The and or does absence should abdominal perforation not pneumatosis investigated. perforation) of distention of diagnosis on rule out ileal with enterocolitis pneumatosis Patients or diagnosed Hirschsprung intestinalis. gastroenteritis present with severe may

electrolyte discontinuation suction, with nasogastric the of and of parenteralnutrition, NEC total The enteral management includes feedings, antibiotics. broad-spectrum replacement, systemic and decompression gastrointestinal fluid should NEC is pediatric surgeon obtained. When thediagnosis with consultation be made, a of to of Even NEC 50% intervention. requiresurgical and appropriate medical with management, infants 25% aggressive with the is presence pneumoperitoneum observed radiograph. surgery when to a perform of obvious decision The is onabdominal progression obvious rapid include intestinal intervention so therapy, despitemedical onset mass, not and clinical Other, deterioration of forsurgical indications pneumatosis,abdominal and rapid obstruction. of the choice laparotomy and The removal procedure is with franklynecrotic surgical of bowel. nonviable as followed with needed bysurgical is small stableand infants aremanaged infant peritoneal safely. can later, be Many when a primary extremely intervention drainage the initially laparotomy performed syndrome further nutrients, liver fluids failure surgicalintervention, cirrhosis delay neurodevelopmental short resultant and The from poor prolonged parenteral strictures includes associated requiring long-term nutrition,and outcome with absorption cholestasis and prolonged ofenteral from intestinal with bowel hospitalization.

ENCEPHALOPATHY, INTRACRANIAL AND HYPOXIC-ISCHEMIC HEMORRHAGE, SEIZURES

asleep adults. a more The dependent movement human in is totally in spends newborn or wakeful eye time rapid sleep) on active state than (predominantly and stepping, readily Primitive this reflexes, age. rooting, extensor for elicited are grasp, and are crossed as such normal reflexes, Moro, and the sucking, (e.g., easily extinguish shown wealth ability are less repetitive cortical newborn addition, functions the that stimuli). painful has or a to of In the the for The the to responses attentive has and differential fixation capacity eye voice. mother’s newborn also as hypoglycemia, of hyperthyroidism, errors hypothyroidism, such drugs, adversely as ischemia, perinatal developing can postnatal and pathophysiologic trauma, many brain, events, prenatal as permanently events, During and period, such meningitis. and as maternal mechanisms infections, including polycythemia, inborn affect hypoxia-ischemia, hypoxia, hemorrhage, coagulation metabolism, the the malformations, well birth disorders, inflammation,

StudentConsult.com Available @

groups face, rhythmic regions Focal body synchronously trunk restraint contractions or by various muscle clonic limbs, asynchronously the suppressed or appear May unilateral of May or be of Cannot in Repetitive, be multifocal

Sustained limbs posturing of Focal tonic single

of asymmetric trunk the posturing Sustained

may a of slow be Typically Arrhythmic rate groups May face, focal, fragmentary or provoked at limbs, May Myoclonic contractions not by recur muscle stimulation be generalized, trunk or the repetitive of or

repositioning be posturing May be be stimulation and May by extensor/flexor provoked or tonic neck symmetric restraint flexor, Generalized May Sustained by extensor, trunk, of limbs, mixed suppressed or

chewing, tongue protrusions be by provoked stimulation Orobuccolingual Sucking, May movements

arms swimming movements the Progression or of movements Rowing

legs of the or movements Pedaling bicycling

Mizrahi seizures. EM: Neonatal From medicine, S, In Childhood Branski editors: Shinnar adolescent and seizures, Basel, Pediatric Karger. D, 6, S. 1995, vol

the a during be may of Seizures neonatal the subarachnoid of period hemorrhage. result are and cerebral Focal clini-result often multiple historical of seizures infarction. with characteristic causes, the local cal manifestations. in hypoxic-ischemic to with seizures), cause usually Seizures asphyxia. be any mothers, the 24 seizures to history in often of refrac-and episode infant, are a by (postasphyxial hours caused after and in in may narcotic an of infants or Seizures of jitteriness birth a from from after difficult diabetic withdrawal infants full-term differentiate occur asphyxia encephalopathy of infants syndrome, benign tremulousness 12 common to conventional contrast medications. In of tory doses anticonvulsant elicited and seizures with may tremors such Postasphyxial seizures, asphyxia, be neonatal by and also jitteriness dependent, holding hypo-ity. sensory as caused associated by by stimuli, to the are interrupted extremdisorders metabolic activity coarse, Seizure and glycemia as hypocalcemia. manifested and fast becomes hemorrhage in characterized cause slow whereas movement. is Intraventricular by (IVH) premature jitteriness seizures fine, clonic is a activity, rapid common infants of and and be often with occurs 3 Seizures age. associated 1 between of days may hemorrhagic abnormal a associated tonic deviation one such fontanelle, bulging as with Seizures with IVH are side. to movements, eye and often shows seizure coma. activspinal lethargy, electroencephalogram fluid, The anemia, Seizures by clinical diagnosis uncertain. when ity caused is the to to 48 often the 2 weight the the period is when age usually blood postnatal seizures poor in or (at glucose 24 value birth the intake). nutritional especially levels to newborn decline occur low infant, 1 after of infant, hypoglycemia difficult hours lowest often of because hours Identifying the of (Table and the not develop 64-1). tonic-clonic show motor Seizures major child in does older by caused high-risk typical hypomagnesemia activity hypocalcemia Subtle respond to com-infants are a manifestation in calcium, with newborns. seizures and magne-mon therapy well seizure or both. signs of subtle The sium, tongue thrusting, eye apnea, deviation, activity include eye

and Seizures vital staring. signs, the fluctuation of in blinking, are delivery often noted by caused room (associated monitoring with subtle transient ous bradycardia into identify seizures. fixed electroencephalographic bedside and can Continudirect the dilated injection agents fetal help of scalp anesthetic local anoxia, brain or malformation. severe pupils), congenital immediate The gluinfection of may should evaluation blood of days life Seizures diagnostic withdrawal. the drug seizures result first determination involve infants be of an after with or of 5 capillary the a levels Chemstrip. leth-cose associated Seizures with with be of result deaths and acidosis, and metabolism. an concenargy, error trations inborn of blood of sodium, family In a calcium, addition, infant bilirubin the may glucose, of should history be infant An determined. a also has When of obtained a at cerebrospinal culture. is be blood and for whose parent suspected, neonatal infection seizure fluid is should history specimens benign familial seizures. for risk increased has that to appears infant of seizures pressure, of well, seizure to stopped, a be duration be result identify intracranial short on sudden illness. careful an the not a should done that of recur 3 systemic day and are who do and congenital malformations, After onset examination of the may In signs 1 life should puncture be elevated absent, intracranial signs a of are If pressure performed. lumbar imaging, metabolism. of If not of an to point, tests the presence apparentat involve cerebralultrasound is and diagnosis determine should tomography, evaluation or computed magneticresonance further the inbornerror this unexplained important acidosis, are lethargy, Determinations infants of especially ketonuria, of respiratoryalkalosis. errors in metabolism coma, or with inborn

dependency. hypocalcemia, be B6 such may deficiency or of hypoglycemia, or as seizures of The specific, neonatal treatment or of the hyponatremia, treatment meningitis correction vitamin hypomagnesemia, involve phenytoin, anticonvulsant an In 20 to to identifiable 40 phenobarbital, mg/kg mg/kg 0.3 the of an should absence mg/kg therapy to cause, as such of agent, 10 diazepam. of or 0.1 of 20 to and or require signs. doses of diazepam requires clinical Treatment midazolam, phenobarbital epilepticus repeated of titrated may status the primary seizures neonatal underlying hypoxic-ischemic the pathology, related outcome encephalopathy, is to drug long-term meningitis, hemorrhage. as and stroke, to or withdrawal, cause for usually such The

intraventricular, the subdural, Intracranial of be brain, the may hemorrhage region. cerebellar intraparenchymal, confined to one subarachnoid, such or as anatomicarea periventricular, head fractures, trauma, association birth with hemorrhages and skull disproportion,forceps cephalopelvic are gestational trauma. infants, in delivery, large for seen age postnatal Subdural into in birth;with subdural drawn always because oncoticpressure high immediately the the symptomaticlesion. of RBCs time, and The of however, not protein, hemorrhage hemolysis expanding cause an undergo symptoms resulting wateris the hematomadoes after Anemia, of has age to who and and in mayoccur 2 months vomiting, infant hematoma. an macrocephaly is asubdural seizures, 1 signs be undertaken or abuse soft appropriate ocular, possible injury. suspected identify should evaluation and Child in to this skeletal, situation of diagnostic tissue other neonatal Occasionally, coagulation massive by caused of Galen by inherited the hemophilia. a of suchas disorder, rupture or period thevein is an in hemorrhage subdural these with coma. and Infants shock,seizures, conditions exhibit is treatment hematomas evacuation. symptomatic surgical The all subdural of

caused spontaneous, associated may arteriovenous from with bleeding Subarachnoid be a hypoxia, by hemorrhages or cerebral malformation. presenting injury. and a on Seizures common are manifestation, the prognosis the depends underlying at is posthemorrhagic of rare the and Treatment the directed hydrocephalus. seizure occurrence

age. increasing the infants; decreases Periventricular weight are and hemorrhage low IVH very gestational in with common birth risk are the have matrix. disorders), unknown Fifty not be infants for theinitial less these pathogenesis than coagulation percent weak 1500 intracranial g theperiventricular in of caused evidence is site (theyusually by vessels blood bleeding.The of germinal bleeding weighing but of may hemorrhages poor in structural vessels areahave The support. this rupture (failure of in hemorrhage occurring pressurethat because sick flow blood These vessels exhibit of may often cerebralblood variations autoregulation). changes the infants passive and premature of with blood pressure factors. infants, the only identifiable these In are sick variations etiologic some ductus disorders ofblood heart (venous depression or In failure, elevation mechanical prolonged therapywith disorders that hypertonic hypoxemia, ventilation, pressure of others,the may such that fromthe sodium patent the or IVH; and include bicarbonate. as labor, solutions interfere venous hypercapnia, stasis) increase pneumothorax, risk with return these breechdelivery, asphyxia, cause the arteriosus, head

of hemorrhages occur the first in and Most IVHs 3 life. periventricular days to IVH for after It day is 5 of life. occur unusual lethargy, bradycardia, transfusion, fontanelle, manifestations blood not coma, clinical apnea, corrected by hypotension, acidosis, seizures, bulging The IVH anemia metabolic cutaneous mottling. and of include (grade infants progresses catastrophic often with asymptomatic; and hemorrhages small 2) event infants are hemorrhages that with larger a (grade 1 coma. to have Many rapidly or shock 4)

anterior and computedtomography confirmed diagnosis gradedby of the through The ultrasound fontanelle examination. the is severity IVH or with grade 2 IVH ventricular or without 4 contiguous grade extension either an theventricle. matrix; blood in thecerebral ventricles has 2 grade 3 with ventricle ventricular the grade distant 1 is of confined and of dilation; thegerminal noted extension an is from cortex, dilated withblood Grade in in to grade enlargement; 1, is and porencephalic or a Grade periventricular, cysticlesions, with posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus. prognosis, without small, doesthe development has of poor hemorrhage as 4 echolucent and cysts of in matter. resolution periventricularwhite the are cysts often echodense areas the notedafter Periventricular cerebral which palsy. be precursorto the cysts periventricular may The developmentof a leukomalacia, may correspond to intraparenchymal echodensitiesrepresent Extensive necrosis. hemorrhagic associated witha and survivors. neurodevelopmentalprognosis for high rate are a They poor have mortality

for shock. hemorrhagic ventilation hemorrhage for transfusion acute care, including involves Treatment and of an blood standard apnea supportive ventriculostomy ventricular-peritoneal be may Posthemorrhagic external serial tube, daily or permanent punctures, lumbar with a shunt. managed an hydrocephalus because ventricular hemorrhagic delayed the often of protein of content the Implementation the of shunt fluid. is high

hypoxia, reduce cardiac severe blood interfere and, uteroplacental to cause respiration reduce lactic known flow lead or if with perinatal to arrest, cardiac spontaneous output to or acidosis, enough to ischemia. Conditions of to the resulting diminished from reduced blood absent to availability tissue brain and metabolism brain lactate from The for the local that reduced acidosis. hypoxia or resulting the leads the glucose an ischemia of produces combination of and flow to oxygen accumulation for complicated blood flow hypoxic-ischemic vascular necrosis by also edema, reducing to the After cell distal and reperfusion, be endothelial injury may

Mydriasis Unequal, reflex Pupils Miosis poor light

to activity seizure Low Burst changing Electroencephalography isoelectric suppression to Normal voltage

24 h if normal progresses, h may Days 14 to >24 remain Duration weeks to otherwise days

Neurol encephalopathy 1976. Arch Neonatal 33:696, HB, distress, fetal Modified from Sarnat Sarnat following MS:

involved vessel. necrosis, cerebral in by infant the and the characterized of is preterm it in periventricular encephalopathy edema, the whereas involvement hypoxic-ischemic term is by cortical infant characterized basal Typically, ganglia, leukomalacia. quadriplegia retardation, and spastic cortical atrophy, mental Both may diplegia. or lesions result in

clinical manifestations (Table The severity to of the injury the encephalopathy 64-2). characteristic hypoxic-ischemic of and vary according course appear birth. they at hypoxic-ischemic hypertonic with although usually and hyperalert severe occasionally stage 3 Infants hypotonic, initially are encephalopathy edema descending coma, produces order; results functions brainstem depression depression a in cortical and develops, are in cerebral apnea. brain As affected As hours refractory 24 seizures to after cerebral 12 begin edema progresses, birth. Concurrently has and is signs has spontaneous reflexes. of absent infant respirations, no hypotonic, diminished tendon or the deep

3 and serious ahigh hypoxic-ischemic handicaps. seizures incidence of Survivors neurodevelopmental encephalopathy have stage of otherorgan asphyxia on of prognosis injury The Table also system depends severe 58-6). (see of estimatedby Another indicator Apgar spontaneous of score. of time is respiration as onset poorprognosis of incidence minuteshave a the if mortality scores this minutes, a to with cerebral 10 of 20 by thescore incidence to60%, Apgar remains the of palsy; 5% 20% and and to 0 palsy at cerebral low 57%. Infants increases 3 increases mortality

bone-joint, umbilical, ocular, are kidney, the meningeal) common (lung, cutaneous, period. Systemic and local newborn in infections and during acquired transcervical Infection in be through or routes transplacental or may utero the after and birth. Ascending or of rupture sepsis. infection with congenital membranes, the cord), in and without cervix, umbilical amnionitis, funisitis (infection the through may the pneumonia, result fluid amniotic of common as maternal for ascending infection and the coli, Haemophilus organisms responsible streptococci, bacterial B of the are The tract, influenzae, of Escherichia such fetus bacteria group Klebsiella. genitourinary infection more bacterial times simplex ascending from virus or, often, indistinguishable Herpes at that also causes sepsis. (HSV)-1 be may HSV-2 transplacental and acquired monocytogenes Listeria Syphilis are by infection.

may humoral as B HSV. and protect such neonatal against some Maternal the group pathogens, immunity streptococci fetus more Nonetheless, weight important birth mechanism low status are factor maternal especially a defense for the of deficiencies neonatal infant. neonatal various antimicrobial probably immune as infection, contributing than in the and preterm sepsis infants. approximately in full-term 1:1500 The in incidence 1:250 infants is of sepsis acquired the periods to prolonged to preterm in infants which rate increase systems immunologic relates of infants of and their hospitalization, The immature risk more diseases. preterm infectious of of nosocomially sixfold-higher

predominantly half gestational cross have infants active complement third before notreceived latter placenta maternal transport (IgG),which of the antibodies the age full of the weeks of inthe 32 by Preterm trimester. may In response lowbirth antibodies, to addition, generate IgM their infection ownIgG weight infants is reduced. although pathways, diminishedcomplement-mediated which opsonization. in classiccomplement to also of infants alternate havedeficiencies a the and, degree, the These smaller results activation a than complement, the Newborn in neutrophils alsoshow infection in ingest phagocytic the suboptimal less kill bone deficit marrow (tothe the site presence and of of of reserve activation lung) migration of to in adult bacteria do. and neonatal infants addition, neutrophils effectively leukocytes.In pool in deficit capacitycompared seem sick with phagocytic neonates. an cells have even killing to infants greater normal from bacterial Neutrophils from

also mechanisms a Defense may deficient pathogens in be against viral newborn. in lymphocytes antibody cytomegalovirus. of absence is immunity and maternal mother, the the reduced as in cell-mediated reduced interferon or enteroviruses, in antibodies the in premature of natural with the during such antibody-dependent, by born infants levels infants viral occur killer infection HSV-2, of Neonatal deficient a presence and primary production; in reduced antibody-independent may be In lymphocytes addition, cytotoxicity newborns. of

meningitis and are neonates. Bacterial sepsis linked often closely in sepsis on to association, the incidence has relative Despite a meningitis decline. this of steady been neonatal of The cases approximately 20 in of 1 incidence is sepsis. meningitis isolated group B the E. coli, neonatal as are frequently and most same organisms streptococci, sepsis: causative The for

monocytogenes. L. considered needs Salmonella, Gram-negative low in weight birth and less common infants. marcescens, developed as organisms, more be coagulase-negative Klebsiella, Serratia very staphylococcus are such to countries, and in Male be infants more susceptible to female infection than infants. neonatal seem to weeks’ premature mostly to (which the antibodies to effective and Severely risk from transfer defense 32 of mechanisms fetus gestation). are even less greater after infants secondary the mother deficient occurs at neonatal blood hostile endotracheal and tubes, care live venous meningitis. in to exposure to central environment, all and catheters, bacteremia draws, in intensive Neonates and with a arterial unit predisposing the factors have of to the blood-brain Genetic been in the implicated cross barrier. ability bacteria coli, B has pneumoniae. Streptococcus been streptococci, Listeria, and noted This group Citrobacter, for E. penetration

presents during periods. Neonatal three sepsis Early-onset begins genitourinary mother’s sepsis a of by tract. in usually the utero is in caused bacteria infection and the result often coli, group E. streptococci, this and L. to monocytogenes, B Klebsiella, Organisms related nontypeable include sepsis

H. influenzae. Most cyanosis cardiorespiratory birth. such and grunting, at nonspecific are tachypnea, infants signs, as premature show infected and rupture for the with of streptococci, factors preterm hours), maternal prolonged leukocytosis, and amnionitis, B Risk fever fetal group sepsis (>24 early-onset birth. colonization membranes or tachycardia, include vaginal race neonatal African American risk and sex sepsis. unexplained factors additional are male for

of as meningitis respiratory is cases), 7 manifested necrosis, multiorgan failure, to an (in system frequently Early-onset disseminated coagulation, (birth sepsis intravascular gangrene. acute 30% days) and shock, peripheral overwhelming tubular symmetrical disease apnea, nonspecific. feeding, lethargy, cry—may abnormal Early pallor, poor hypothermia, or be manifestations—grunting, an may neutropenia, hypotension refractory and antibiotics, be dopamine such mechanical vasopressors to hypoxia, ventilation, with dobutamine. broad-spectrum and treatment and as Profound syndrome. from often early-onset respiratory initial to of in In is the it stages septicemia difficult differentiate preterm sepsis a distress infant, infants premature respiratory receive distress broad-spectrum this antibiotics. with Because difficulty, syndrome of

in difficult clinical to manifestations sepsis manifestations the meningitis neonate. of are of separate from The the and count, protein evaluated cell be (CSF) glucose sepsis by fluid early-onset Infants stain, and cultures, Gram should CSF cerebrospinal blood with levels. and have absence mg/dL) in to the 9/mm3), 150 an generally to content may newborns (100 25 of (mean, infection. 75% blood lymphocytes elevated 30/mm3 which are cells protein white and Normal have CSF an on seen do B to are neonatal in meningitis stain. the not have Gram infants by count have microorganisms CSF but CSF Some elevated group streptococci with leukocyte caused or In in are antigen the culture, blood, to determination of samples methods bacteria CSF. identifying of of other addition bacterial urine, pathogenic the of is cases to than of glucose less blood the 50%. glucose CSF usually meningitis, In ratio neonatal infections. chain to test reaction identify The viral primarily polymerase used is neutrophils and Serial counts to be performed identify an thrombocytopenia. blood number increased should neutropenia, of (bands), immature complete with protein C-reactive often neonatal patients elevated levels are sepsis. in bacterial

the presence be A chest pneumonia. determine should of to also radiograph obtained and acidosis hypoxia, In Ureaplasma agent result urealyticum may hominis).Arterial traditional by pathogens, low (e.g., weight be of hypoxemia maternal acquisition infants to pneumonia that caused should may blood the monitored very metabolic or be mycoplasmal or both. gases addition shock, of to Mycoplasma be in the neonatal birth genital detect to pressure, peripheral Blood septic determine need monitored should shock urine vasopressor the be perfusion fluids agents. with to output, and treat and

treatment mainstay is sepsis of meningitis The therapy. for and antibiotic used Antibiotics infant’s defense are to mechanisms respond. the time growth, bacterial allowing suppress to addition, cardiovascular to as infant. the support, equally and assisted of are management In ventilation measures, important the such support effective combination days to ampicillin 10 gentamicin) an early-onset aminoglycoside for for 14 of against and A treatment most responsible sepsis. is organisms (usually cefotaxime proposed of The combination is alternative treatment. ampicillin method an and as also of days a negative extended to from culture. the present, result is after 21 or If be treatment a 14 should meningitis CSF days days after Persistently may even gram-negative common cultures antibiotic with caused by CSF to from with meningitis organisms, 3 and appropriate present are be antibiotic for 2 neonatal results therapy. treatment, positive to aminoglycoside, an penicillin treat most meningitis a third-generation gram-negative to present, with If change an with combined whereas effective some derivative continue is cephalosporin. authorities is B High-dose meningitis. for U/kg/24 streptococcal hr) penicillin appropriate 450,000 to group (250,000 pulmonary of or term may sepsis-related (in membrane Inhaled oxide, both oxygenation hypertension. improve the extracorporeal outcome nitric infants), reverse failure. may surfactant Intratracheal respiratory preterm infection. (fever, group early-onset B colonized factors penicillin empirical the amnionitis) previous with reduced infant rate streptococcal or B mothers labor, mothers of Intrapartum for risk and prophylaxis group has streptococci, with

Late-onset discharged who was good in healthy (8 in sepsis 28 days) newborn full-term the a occurs normal to health nursery. from infant usually manifestations bulging and lethargy, fontanelle, Clinical fever, include may hypotonia, direct-reacting seizures, poor hyperbilirubinemia. feeding, apathy, bacteria). hematogenous in B cases), 75% osteomyelitis seeding (in albicans, (gonococcus, of (group such Candida In streptococci, infection S. addition result (gram-negative may tract infections, bacteria), arthritis bacteremia, to and Staphylococcus gram-negative as aureus), urinary meningitis focal aureus,

is that the or for with of urethral to sepsis, pseudoparalysis) a (infants to may early-onset and examination aspiration sterile physical late-onset examination by culture bones laboratory attention with with obtained special given of evaluation The of to catheterization. exhibit osteomyelitis infants sepsis suprapubic infants the similar urine with and careful by usually sepsis, Neisseria the pneumoniae, infants have pathogens but infections pathogens infants in the caused sepsis and found late also the be in influenzae, may (H. as period by neonatal early-onset caused Late-onset older exhibiting may same S. sepsis meningitidis). viral In late-onset, may manifest addition, with sepsis-like cytomegalovirus, agents enteroviruses) picture. or a (HSV,

withampicillin last resistance a third-generation the influenzae H. of life. sepsis the begin present) is treatment of and (and pneumococcus if ampicillin, ofthe vancomycin centers in rate to of and cephalosporin month meningitis when occurs Because some of increased week first meningitis of that as sepsis. The sepsisand late-onset for treatment early-onset neonatal same is the

is An infection. during a infection gestation congenital transplacentally acquired infections who perinatally. such children mild infants in Numerous prenatally acquire produce and disease subclinical neonates can older or severe in or that pathogens cause disease acquired cause are pathogens by significant of and meningitis, numerous and perinatally pneumonia, mortality. caused infections neonatal Sepsis, the other morbidity varicella-zoster (HIV), and gonorrhoeae, include tuberculosis. immunodeficiency congenital Neisseria of viral a simplex Congenital Mycobacterium group parvovirus, virus and virus well-known cytomegalovirus toxoplasmosis, rubella, fungal, hepatitis infections syphilis, bacterial, Chlamydia, (CMV), B, (HSV), virus, human pathogens: herpes

of congenital thrombocytopenia, intrauterine the Many hepatosplenomegaly, manifestations of jaundice, and restriction, growth congenital nonimmunehydrops, infections including clinical malformations. chorioretinitis, anemia, aresimilar, Some are in listed Table of and theseinfections manifestations characteristics unique 66-1. epidemiologic isolatethe attempts CMV, thoughtto congenital (for gonorrhea, and have rubella, should of a HSV, include patients Evaluation culture by to infection organism

B ofIgG M. hepatitis increasing and pathogen Borrelia). identify chain to antigen HIV, or pathogen’sgenome the (for trachomatis), or Toxoplasma, syphilis, identify antibodies (IgM of (PCR), of and parvovirus, the polymerase for with fetal to titer to identifyspecific production reaction Chlamydia tuberculosis), the

is not Treatment or available, always effective. specific, made Nonetheless, infant reported have preventing and when (see some results the is diagnosis for encouraging the treating specifically 66-1). correct disease been Table for the

StudentConsult.com Available @

Size, Impairment Visual Head Fontanels and Petechiae/Purpura Leukocoria Shape, and Abnormal

Toxoplasma gondii by organism mother to from fetus after Vertical infection. trans-placental transfer an of acute maternal occurs the the transmission of the rarely Fetal occur pregnant can immunocompromised an reactivation after of in infection mother. disease of acutely the in from 40% with her cases, 30% infected to an rate varies age. mother but occurs fetus about directly to Transmission gestational of of fetal between the term, maternal and increases throughout infection infection timing fetal to with risk and correlate rates the directly near time blood infection decreases. gestation 90% the interval Transmission flow; and placental greater or

disease age at maternal severity with fetal occurs. the inversely The of gestational varies infection which have abnormalities. central (CNS) nervous reveal birth; may infection and subclinical with Most infants specific disease system overt evaluations at however, no ophthalmologic calcifications classic The and the intracerebral congenital hydrocephalus, findings chorioretinitis, of diagnosis suggest of toxoplasmosis. early-onset rash. age, with for tend maculopapular a generalized to infants hepatosplenomegaly, jaundice, be gestational small and Affected have present develop CMV. in are diffuse may common, with reveal calcifications the observed pattern skull contrast Seizures films periventricular cortical and to These risk neurologic long-term for complications. infants increased are neurodevelopmental at and

Serologic means tests primary diagnosis. of are the remain achieve positive peak a after infection indefinitely. months 2 1 IgG-specific to and concentration antibodies specific or in infants a seroconversion to disease. titers, IgG antibody fourfold performed should confirm determinations be IgM For increase with confirm antibodies the and Especially of congenital can IgE to measurement IgA disease. useful infections, be for computed and indicated. fluid [CSF] are tomography and auditory, examination) evaluations Thorough cerebrospinal neurologic (head ophthalmologic,

initial congenital combined folic (supplemented and pyrimethamine For infections, symptomatic asymptomatic include acid) with therapy sulfadiazine. with should therapy up Duration even prolonged, of year. is to often 1 specialists. of determined and Optimal dosages should with therapy appropriate be in duration of consultation medications

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Head and Shape, Size, Abnormal

jaundice, Exposure Hydrocephalus, wk exposure spinal High-risk infants raw Heterophil-negative calcifications, Many gestation at immunosuppression hepatosplenomegaly, Toxoplasma chorioretinitis, gondii cats to asymptomatic abnormal intracranial 10–24 or or meat at mononucleosis fever birth fluid,

sulfadiazine plus Treatment: pyrimethamine

wk, wk, and defects hepatosplenomegaly, leukopenia, 85% be 13–20 may restriction, wk, Infant seronegative 8 Unimmunized yr T-cell microphthalmia, ± for rash, 50% virus jaundice, fever deafness, metaphyseal with muffin Virus in be present deficiency 1 throat at cataracts, asymptomatic chorioretinitis, 16% thrombocytopenia, birth growth blueberry mother; vaccine by lucencies, microcephaly, may B-cell PDA, 9–12 and Rubella rash “salt Prevention: pepper” infant’s Intrauterine Detectable glaucoma, infection: anemia,

yr mononucleosis; microcephaly, transmitted pneumonia (syphilis) jaundice, painless 1–6 primary erythromycin, treatment: fetal blood may have asymptomatic restriction, may anemia, prevents Many products at “hidden” be CMV hepatosplenomegaly, ganciclovir genital blueberry infant not periventricular birth viruria deafness, muffin infection neutropenia, disease: Prevention: CMV-negative infection rash, Penicillin, thrombocytopenia, intrauterine Heterophil-negative growth for chancre Sexually chorioretinitis, Sepsis, asymptomatic: calcifications, asymptomatic Possible

penicillin at hepatitis thrombocytopenia, keratitis, neutropenia, hepatosplenomegaly, nonimmune cerebrospinal snuffles rash, (rhinitis), as pleocytosis, hepatosplenomegaly pneumonia, skin, hydrops, birth as Treatment: anemia, lata, central metaphysitis, teeth, Late onset: fluid lymphocytosis, prematurity, Late eye, periosteal ear nervous condylomata system, Presentation new neonatal bone, bone,

rash, in adults fever, transfusion utero fifth fetal hydrops, Treatment: arthralgia anemia of disease; Parvovirus Nonimmune Etiology in

achalasia immigrant, Trypanosoma in Failure disease Central American (Chagas disease) Treatment: to nifurtimox travel thrive, failure, mother cruzi native, Chronic South heart

ductus immune PDA, CMV, varicella-zoster (azidothymidine); B tuberculosis; protein AZT, arteriosus; PPD, purified bacille Calmette-Guerin; hepatitis TB, derivative; VZIG, Zidovudine globulin; patent BCG, isoniazid; HBIG, immune cytomegalovirus; INH, globulin.

vaccination, With the of in widespread developed is rare rubella congenital use countries. consequences. Acquired neonatal can utero early cause during gestation, severe in rubella 85% of congenital infection is 4 gestation; close weeks first to of the acquired spontaneously or abort are if defects occurrence The stillborn. approaches 40% during If 35% abnormalities. have weeks occurs to of during 13 16, can infection infants disease. Infection months’ after cause not 4 does gestation seem to

common abnormalities neurologic conditions. disorders, cardiac characteristic arteriosus pulmonary most and auditory associated and mental (patent artery ductus and ophthalmologic loss), meningoencephalitis, and hearing stenosis), (cataracts, include The glaucoma), (sensorineural rubella retardation) retinopathy, congenital peripheral (behavioral with appearance retardation, muffin” dermal jaundice, with can infants disease, lesions from purpuric skin addition, In erythropoiesis). bone hepatosplenomegaly, growth present early-onset thrombocytopenia, radio-lucent and (“blueberry

of antibody Detection recent usually indicates IgM rubella-specific infection. Measurement confirmatory. can rubella-specific months IgG several be of over isolated CSF, Rubella from be specimens. swab urine, throat can blood, and virus urine, tend stools, year. 1 chronically congenital Infants persistently are infected with in to live and secretions and rubella shed for virus and respiratory should hospital be Infants the home. while susceptible and when isolated away sent pregnant women kept from in

@ StudentConsult.com Available

leading common the cause infection retinal cerebral most palsy. is mental of congenital loss, hearing and retardation, disease, and the CMV sensorineural 1.5% CMV to 0.5% about Congenital occurs in births. of of When the 35% fetus to in occurs infection a approximately pregnancy, transmitted primary the during mothers is cases. in virus born seven three compared to times CMV to infants of adolescent Rates infection greater mothers to others. in are gestational of independent is of The to age transmission the of at risk of time fetus maternal CMV infection. the the that maternal occurs, The the birth. infection at more in infant gestation will be primary the symptomatic earlier common during young sexual mothers of occurring and with most infections contacts contact pregnancy children. The for CMV primary in are sources even known well the maternal occurred long to transmitted can be when CMV before fetus It is that conception. infection new as or can occur transmission with reinfection reactivation, virus of result strain. This the infection, a chronic

90% disease CMV clinical at who of have birth. infants of infection than evidence More exhibit no congenital and Approximately are have for infants gestational of at symptoms age small infected birth. 10% hepatitis, Findings microcephaly, hepatosplenomegaly, include calcifications, thrombocytopenia, and chorioretinitis, intracranial hearing abnormalities. appearance infants erythropoiesis. result dermal with of the Some a muffin blueberry as can present calcifications. reveal Skull periventricular films may developmental not found additional have are delays. loss 10% An may later infected and infants to they childhood, infancy in present hearing until or early when sensorineural of newborns. Mortality 15% is to 10% symptomatic in with or during associated birth newborn Perinatal milk CNS acquired mother’s from sequelae. CMV or not infection illness is

or CMV infection by urine in the Congenital virus detection of diagnosed is saliva. to by several traditional virus culture a Detection weeks can result. is often but obtain accomplished methods take detect Rapid in culture infectivity early antigens antibody to to centrifugation methods 24 using culture in infected give enhance can tissue and monoclonal results hours. in CMV detect also be amounts small urine. DNA to can used the PCR of of Detection after first of the is infection. CMV congenital weeks 3 proof considered birth within CMV

hearing agent antiviral severely have Trial in newborns of of a loss. progression the lack ganciclovir of shown symptomatic studies

90% accounts of primary genital herpes. HSV-2 for neonatal are caused infections simplex herpes About 70% by to HSV-2. of 85% are infection) canal during before at shortly through mother passage acquired delivery. (ascending infections commonly, neonatal or Most from birth the the 1 incidence to estimated in 20,000 1 live The of neonatal in is HSV to 3000 range from births. are affected likely be infants weeks’ of more infections gestation). <36 born (40% are with HSV Infants prematurely to risk an born infant is about The delivery to herpes at with vaginally genital 50%. mother in to 33% of a infection primary risk to than a an with to 5%. mother born less a reactivated infant infection The is than have HSV infants findings 75% who acquire are infection. who mothers born history clinical infection previous HSV More consistent with or to no of

to 5 infection and normal at of infants days symptoms life. at Most are of develop birth, 10 infection the or to to of neonatal localized mouth. eyes, and infection multiple the organ localized and disseminated disease systems, HSV most notably CNS; the Symptoms lungs; infection include liver involving skin, a in cases disease, lesions late may skin and are finding. overlap, of many disseminated Symptoms Disseminated any should negative considered bacteriologic infant of in sepsis, symptoms liver cultures. with be dysfunction, and infection fever, irritability, be presents HSV infection any neonate and CSF abnormal seizures. should in also suspected who findings, with occurs life. between age, usually can 4 birth disseminated during of occur of and although weeks the week first symptoms disease Initial anytime a severe, significant delay and can mortality. are in often HSV result morbidity infections and treatment in

for the of infection, vesicle, rectum. nasopharynx, from eyes, neonatal culture For HSV diagnosis stool, urine, skin any CSF, specimens be blood, obtained or should from more exposure. intrapartum sites after 48 birth cultures hours Positive indicate these than obtained in a method CSF. for DNA detecting and HSV is blood, sensitive urine, PCR

of HSV infections. treatment choice acyclovir the neonatal Parenteral for is HSV. infants diagnosed with administered Acyclovir have all to should infection be suspected or to mortality the The eyes, skin, and observed disease to is infants outcome regard to and mouth. in with limited with morbidity benign most

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Eye Loss Shape, Head Hepatomegaly and Rhinorrhea Abnormal Lymphadenopathy Size, Hoarseness Fontanels Hearing Red

acquire infection can from fetus, commonly the results with birth. infection by the a at although most contact of transplacental syphilis chancre fetus Congenital pregnancy. occur hematogenous can throughout infection addition, In is pregnancy, mother’s between the transmit The the time disease the likely fetus. to elapsed the and less the to infection she longer

fetalis, hydrops prematurity. can or infection result stillbirth, in Intrauterine lesions, hepatosplenomegaly, and symptoms vary osteochondritis, include thrombocytopenia. lymphadenopathy, mucocutaneous Clinical snuffles, anemia, rash, but hemolytic of at regardless age late whether which they joints, symptoms, birth, after the teeth, may of develop appear manifest CNS, symptoms eyes, Untreated involve bones, usually and 2 infants, and skin. years bowing may of keratitis, Some until manifestations many of nerve shins, molars, mulberry bossing, Clutton the as birth, cranial deafness, after years apparent and eighth interstitial such disease not nose, rhagades, become saddle frontal teeth, joints. Hutchinson eighth commonly keratitis, to interstitial Table cranial deafness, nerve teeth triad The the as (see and 66-1). Hutchinson Hutchinson of referred combination is

Many at asymptomatic are the time of infants diagnosis. symptoms untreated, 5 within infants of first develop most the weeks If life. striking lesions The mucocutaneous the most bones. tissues affect and infection rhinitis). and may poor be signs feeding snuffles Early (syphilitic of Snuffles than more bloody. often are the common and and are severe cold persistent around mouth and the palms A and and over desquamative soles develops rash the anus. maculopapular may bullae. rash The with become to progress vesicular Severely born ill and anemia. with infants be hydrops have profound may be present may at and consistent findings pneumonia laboratory consolidated glomerulonephritis. Severe a with birth, there may be evaluation may and elevated reveal a CSF protein. pleocytosis infants exhibit than bones symptomatic consistent radiographic of of abnormalities 90% perichondritis. with the More osteochondritis long and

the for of the newborn determination serologic syphilis. hospital No mother’s from status be knowledge should discharged without or syphilis examination mothers and a test. All born require nontreponemal infants a quantitative careful seropositive to most lesion skin or Dark-field diagnosis. obtained fluorescent and of a of method scraping direct of quickest staining direct organisms is membrane the mucous examination antibody by More is commonly, used. serologic testing Laboratory Research The disease. Venereal helpful the indicators as antibody rapid and plasma assays—the reagin—are nontreponemal reaginic (VDRL) of Disease of the that performed same the performed test enable comparison to on the should on The mother as infant be results. fourfold, titer than infant’s should the fourfold further if is symptomatic, be increased titer, mother maternal if treated mother’s the greater the has if inadequately if An or titer infant evaluated the has syphilis. infant the is mother pregnancy A later may infected incubating is who deliver infant active in an disease. birth. have The testing infant may mother serologic at negative and and VDRL or syphilis, test a clinical CSF CSF should be tests suggest performed. congenital serologic When examined microscopically, should be is white VDRL An count concentration positive neurosyphilis; CSF cell diagnostic. CSF blood suggests and increased protein a

choice of treatment syphilis. is of the Parenteral preferred drug penicillin for the have Penicillin infants congenital only 10 therapy G to neurosyphilis. for effective 14 days syphilis and documented for is who repeat 12 months falling document 3, 6, repeated and have titers. nontreponemal at should to Infants titers antibody be testing followed least at every neurosyphilis must are or years determinations Infants normal. 3 for CSF findings with and months 6 until with serologic CSF carefully

@ StudentConsult.com Available

involves gonorrhoeae N. the (ophthalmia a infection usually neonatorum). newborn in eyes include with scalp or vaginitis, arthritis, Other (often with of disseminated meningitis. with monitoring and abscesses disease sites infection electrodes), scalp associated bacteremia, fetal infant birth to secretions. through with infected passage membranes contact usually the occurs canal the come when during mucous Transmission in

is and becomes by of first is clear, Infection days rapidly discharge, initially present watery purulent. the usually life which a 5 characterized within is conjunctival chemosis. and There marked hyperemia clinically bilateral; Infection to the worse tends be may than however, be eye other. one can to chamber eye. the and spread anterior the cornea infections (keratitis) Untreated of perforation extension and result can in This blindness. corneal

such Recommended intramuscular treatment dose isolated of neonatorum, is ophthalmia for infection, as one ceftriaxone. ophthalmia gonococcal with should before receive saline irrigations frequent with solution eye at discharge. intervals Infants recommended antibiotic given. and therapy is systemic antimicrobial alone therapy unnecessary when Topical inadequate is is gonococcal meningitis). evaluated ophthalmia and Infants with be for hospitalized disease disseminated arthritis, should (sepsis, days. be for cefotaxime) with treated 7 or Disseminated disease should therapy (ceftriaxone antimicrobial in infants used hyperbilirubinemia. Cefotaxime can with be meningitis be documented, 14 If treated to days. for infants should 10 with

syphilis, performed. for infection congenital and concomitant C. should with trachomatis, HIV be Tests surface B should test the for maternal be of hepatitis Results confirmed. antigen the Topical prevention gonococcal silver or with nitrate, newborns ophthalmia. erythromycin, for of prophylaxis is tetracycline recommended for all

@ StudentConsult.com Available

adults. infection, rate most common is trachomatis transmitted infection a adolescents and sexually young of reportable among with active the high C. sexually to in ranges 12% from Prevalence can women 40% pregnant be in and 6% of organism adolescents. the tract be transmitted Chlamydia infected to her from of genital an the mother can newborn. in of occurs born about to infected mothers. infants 50% Acquisition vaginally Transmission with infants intact been section membranes. delivered reported cesarean also by some in has to of 50%, is 5% the conjunctivitis is infected 25% 20%. and risk of risk In pneumonia infants, the to site. most nasopharynx anatomic The commonly infected the is

chlamydial conjunctivitis weeks. discharge 5 Neonatal days birth weeks and lasting to and to by developing after ocular edema, to for characterized 2 14 1 congestion, several is mild swelling. intense conjunctivitis Clinical manifestations to vary and inflammation from are to more eye swollen infected than one involved; eyes appear the however, and always Both almost may be other. rarely is and involved, The rare. cornea is preauricular adenopathy

2 tachypnea, and Pneumonia and an of characterized occur a between 19 age young weeks repetitive illness by is cough, afebrile rales. a with and infant can in staccato uncommon. Wheezing is radiograph. seen diffuse with on Hyperinflation be can chest infiltrates stuffiness occur. Nasal can otitis and media

made and the by Diagnosis material. culturing can the conjunctiva be scraping the cells epithelial intracytoplasmic of is blue-stained of conjunctival inclusions diagnostic. revealing within scrapings the presence the Giemsa staining also PCR available. is conjunctivitis Infants treated erythromycin are 14 oral with and with for days. pneumonia of Topical is ineffective and treatment conjunctivitis unnecessary. conjunctivitis. gonococcal erythromycin, with or silver not The of nitrate, neonatal newborns prevention does ophthalmia recommended the tetracycline for chlamydial prophylaxis prevent all for topical

outcomes, NeoReviews born Engle metabolic Infants physiologic definition, preterm: 10:e280, immaturity, and 2009 late and WE:

NeoReviews Frankovich infants, Sandborg 9:e207–217, immune auto J, lupus al: Neonatal C, Barnes related P, 2008 and et of disorders

outcomes, Hyperglycemia Research J Med N and pregnancy 2008 358(19):1991–2002, HAPO Group: adverse Study Engl Cooperative

enterocolitis: immunity, N, strategies Necrotizing relationship Neu clinical 7:e143, for to prevention, NeoReviews innate J: 2006 features and Jesse

2007 Rev newborn, and EH, in Kates Anemia polycythemia Pediatr Kates the JS: 28:33–34,

NeoReviews resuscitation edition evaluation The program: and the anticipating 11:e673, J: neonatal process Perlman 6, Kattwinkel J, evidence

Shankaran hypothermia, Neonatal encephalopathy: with S: treatment

2010 11:e85, NeoReviews

DM: Interventions prematurity, of RA, retinopathy in Silva Moshfeghi

2012 NeoReviews 13:e476,

neonate, RH, KN: in Steinhorn hypertension Pulmonary the Farrow

8:e14–e21, 2007 NeoReviews

Neonatal DK, and Ahlfors chemistry, et jaundice: clinical Wong RJ, CE, physiology Stevenson NeoReviews bilirubin al: 8:e58–e67,

Kim 12 M. Lisa Blake Allen and

United in in 67-2) leading adolescents the States are (Table behaviorallymediated. causes 67-1) of mortality The morbidity (Table and 75% and deaths. vehicle injuries injuries than other formore account of all Motor andinadequate behaviors hypertension). complications physical adolescent withassociated health in result activity (e.g., diabetes, obesity Unhealthy dietary

use the opportunity to inquire is to behaviors every It responsibility about physician’s risk-taking (Fig. regardless of 67-1), presenting issue. the psychosocial to Physical in adolescents related symptoms often are problems.

from gathering parent to shifts the the information from adolescent. interview adolescent The alone risk-taking 7 (see and adolescent are of guidance, behaviors, and an anticipatory obtaining information cornerstones protective Interviewing Chapters and 9). confidentiality discussing regarding the factors

adolescent the age (Table take into account should developmental interview of the 67-3). The all (Fig. rapport help ages Conversations for can friends, of and activities useful outside and be sports, movies, school about build 67-2).

a key element an interviewing (Table Confidentiality adolescent when is 67-4). likely vital, adolescent discussion when risk-taking more The to open is about is behavior happen the

Malignant Unintentional 30.3 injuries Diseases 4 5 100,000) (PER 3 of heart 1.6 the neoplasms (cancer) (homicide) CAUSE RATE 6.9 2 Suicide 1 3.2 10.4 RANK Assault

Centers Vital for Statistics Statistics: Center Prevention, Disease National 2007. for From Control National and Health

67-5). (Table alone of as suicidal physical intent sexual or disclosure be issues confidential, Some such and kept abuse. cannot ambiguous it an legal, work is there ethical, is to social or If situation, consultation. obtain wise caring for adolescent, should or with a open the care health encourage guardian, discussions provider a other young parent, adult. When

personal allowing them confers services parental receive on to and The adolescents, law their health health 67-6). depending characteristics, without rights condition (Table permission certain on and without consent Usually mental, can care parental seek health reproductive, emergency services. adolescents for health Emancipated such consent; be documented mature minors be and record. treated adolescents should parental in status the without may chronologic understand, The competence age. key capacity not to minors mature of characteristics and are their their judgment of There the the be must in a best intervention the health minor. is that reasonable interests

with 5% 2%–3% paralysis age) females increasing 2:1000 Auditory-visual defects Migraine (↑ Traumatic 6%–27% 3% males, Scoliosis

25%–30% mellitus nervosa 0.5%–1% 1% Obesity Bulimia 1.8:1000 (young Anorexia adolescence), Diabetes

Guide Figure The (SCAG). Communication Structured Adolescent 67-1 SCAG developed is to The interviewing standardized patients. for an adolescent or tool real with use learners separation the confidentiality, of and mnemonic), nonjudgmental four psychosocial major a from the gathering It HEADDSS incorporates adult, adolescent components: approach. data the interview the (using 5 The validity. has reading demonstrated a grade at and and is level reliability SCAG printable MedEdPORTAL. version is available through A

story” cont’d “Get the Figure 67-1,

Confidentiality sore even – concerns on 67-5 if sex, Setting congratulate See good Behaviors patient’s lecturing feel Functioning Never choices your issues Attitudes give of safety, your – nonjudgmental Avoid driving Relationships one Topics pain, throats, uncomfortable adolescent your emphasize adolescent up Behaviors patient mom) Be accomplishments positive; belly (safe contract HEADDSS the on you and Choices depression) Table and Plan focus Separation Focus (acne, on

adolescent risk-taking issues with – 2 around 1 or Contract

Interview and with empathy, understanding interest,

adolescent Figure interviewing. STEP guide for 67-2

and parent for interviewed being confidentiality and preadolescent the alone. Prepare

the the Discuss confidentiality start of interview. at Conversations parents/guardians/adolescent confidential with are (with exceptions*).

confidentiality Reaffirm your when alone patient. adolescent with

*Exceptions impending or to confidentiality any include suicide, (i.e., homicide). abuse, to harm person major

Activities, can = A *The D is, acronym other HEADDSS that = represent Depression. terms, see Figure Also 67-1.

years in of age majority states) (≥18 of Age most

(e.g., in Exceptions treatment significantly Emergency condition care a a increase would of health of sexuality-related care likelihood can treatment Diagnosis in be or care life-threatening provided delay the in condition services and which to minor*: morbidity) health which

(physically and Diagnosis Emancipated care of minors independent and financially Armed Forces; treatment childbirth) married; health family; drug-related of

in should health the evaluation (able and clearly minors the of and documented be to exceptions record. patient’s comprehend Mature risks All benefits treatment)

individual laws. state by *Determined

between parent and the the choice to physical needs present a a offered. During chaperone being be examination,

over straight under pubic 8 pubertal and 13 mons age budding (range, hair 11 (adrenarche years) pubarche)are the occurring (see around or pubis Breast (thelarche) fine years early 174). of Chapter the areola to changes II of These maturity mark the sexual Tanner pubertal stage, changes rating, (Figs. development or 67-4). 67-3 and Completion 5 the of stages to Tanner years. take 4 should The usually spurt peak growth

are Stage preadolescent. 1 breasts The elevation only. There the papilla is of

5. progression Typical pubertal Figure 67-3 of 1 stages development, to female Pubertal development breasts. female size the of A, in hair. Pubertal development of female B, pubic no Note stage 1 pubic shown) (not there that hair. is in of J.M. (Courtesy Tanner, of England.) University Child London, Institute and MD, of London, Growth Development, Health, of Department and breast sexual thelarche maturity 1 approximately III at onset rating year of IV to stage menstruation after development occurs the (menarche). before a pubertal is late Menarche event. relatively only cm 174). (see Chapter Females grow 2 before 5 menarche to height in

American ages and thelarche years 10 and and approximately 9 white of for mean The are respectively. girls, adrenarche African 12.9 are ages white girls, African for of American menarche years respectively. mean and 12.2 The and to thelarche The is years. 1 (menarche) interval from the of onset the initiation 2.3 of ± menses changes 6 before years Pubertal of

Stage 2 bud Breast stage. is mound the of papilla. small and breast formed A the elevation by The areolar enlarges. diameter

separation no There areola further with of enlargement is of contours. Stage 3 and breast their

the secondary Stage mound the is areola the a There and 4 a to of level breast. above projection form papilla of

the the female those recessed resemble of has breasts breast. a general mature areola contour to as The 5 the of Stage

slightly There straight is Stage sparse only primarily labia. the growth long, of pigmented, slightly 2 along or hair, curled, downy

hair considerably and more curled. Stage coarser, The darker, is 3 the sparsely The spreads junction of over hair the pubes.

type, adult thighs. and the hair, The area adult covers than not in smaller does 4 a the extend onto in now Stage

hair in quantity is Stage the The adult extension with thighs. onto 5 and type,

white years of age are and African 7 in precocious. considered American age in girls

corresponds stages maturity or II to cm) (Figs. to I Testicular enlargement (≥2.5 rating, sexual Tanner, 67-6). 67-5 and hair enlargement axillary within of penis followed Testicular hair at the by (adrenarche) development base and pubic year. is the the then late spurt a occur of The growth age. to years of is can years it from 10½ 16 relatively age event; Deepening of the

average female. of in events American Sequence 67-4 pubertal Figure the of 9 studies African American for More age white may suggest development girls. age onset years that of recent breast girls be and years of 10 for maturation for in al: 1976, JA, Cincinnati, study, Brookman et unpublished JL, Ohio. Rauh RR, data adolescents Morrison Princeton The (From of from Laboratories.) Ross Columbus, Ohio, Reprinted Pubertal 1986, Development, Assessment

Figure 67-6 male. events the pubertal in American Sequence average of volume than 4 less stage. Beads) an mL (Prader prepubertal orchidometer using represents Testicular Morrison JL, in Princeton adolescents study, data Ohio. Rauh RR, al: Cincinnati, JA, maturation (From for Brookman 1976, unpublished et The Pubertal 1986, Assessment Laboratories.) Development, Columbus, from Reprinted Ohio, Ross of

the downy only penis. primarily hair, 2 base growth of of There curled, sparse Stage slightly the long, slightly straight at or is pigmented,

Stage and is The darker, more hair 3 coarser, curled. considerably over sparsely of junction spreads the The pubes. hair the

now area hair, not in in adult covers adult type, 4 a thighs. than smaller the does onto The and the Stage extend

with The in adult the onto and 5 extension thighs. type, hair Stage quantity is

of progression development. pubertal Figure 67-5 Typical male in of development size the Pubertal male A, genitalia. of development male Pubertal pubic hair. B, is in pubic stage Note no hair. there that 1 J.M. of (Courtesy University London, and London, Institute Development, Health, of of Tanner, MD, Child Department England.) of Growth stages facial hair, of and acne the voice, indicate puberty. early puberty. discussion 174 of for of disorders Chapter See

Associated Physical Maturation with Changes

maturation biologic value can laboratory related that certain changes mark physical be to conditions. Tanner specific and stages androgenic of hematocrit loss in bone and than not adolescent in the adolescent values are girls through marrow of The result stimulation menstruation. higher greater boys the rapid especially turnover, of and boys during growth increase spurt. phosphatase puberty levels girls because bone the during in Alkaline Worsening scoliosis common adolescents growth during spurt. their in of is mild

7 CHAPTERS 67-3 AND SEE 9. TABLE AND

about herself. to or a himself ground When and interviewing talking some adolescent common get find an nonjudgmental approach adolescent, the use 67-5). (home, the drugs, mnemonic important education, sex, alcohol, history diet, addresses risk-taking The Table of (see elements suicide/depression) HEADDSS or multiple risk-taking area behaviors. contemplated in Adolescents often tried risk-taking who other have experiment one of or to confidential that gathered, is to been has making information the physician choose he in all of information she it that When the risk-taking the issues should two help and adolescent one partnership is health clear the or there discuss, care way. a focus Although general also 68-1). psychosocial is examination be on the a needs to adolescent care issues, in performed (Table Chapter included 9-5). 94) as issues, screening, immunization (see health should (see be Pediatric Table such and

Rapid characteristics a changes self-consciousness the major early and behavior great and dealof appearance of privacy. in to are physical leading for need adolescence, focuseson psychosocial and early physical history health. The adolescent’s the

global middle adolescence. and Autonomy of of a sense identity characteristics the major are The on focuses history

what to Explain you going to your are do. patient do you it. to going how Explain are Ask in your adolescent or room. whether his parent wants the her to needs. the adolescent’s * sensitive Be sheet Always privacy. a use to provide or blanket remain the the adolescent and around work Let dressed clothing. Ask go as through keep you the some questions physical ease. the adolescent to at the elements that age. physical Give for this reassurance normal are of

reassurance Examination about used to offer normalcy.† be can

following: Assess the

disease, scoliosis, capital Skeletal: Osgood-Schlatter slipped

behaviors, need not, Signs will trauma you and abuse, a *If risk-taking chaperone. substance of

(gynecomastia), of †For than the breast have enlargement boys and larger 70% girls other. can one often example, have breast

peers. interactions middle adolescent’s and the with family, school, behaviors as common. of a experimentation result are High-risk

adolescence. are Individuality of the for the major and characteristics planning future late is emphasis on for placed the late his her Greater adolescent’s health. responsibility or

full adolescent virginal in girl. examination A a pelvic rarely required is rectal rectal-abdominal as genitalia anterior midline to efficient the vaginal-abdominal a examination. wall) are examination (all as internal A is bimanual immediately required a may examination. for anesthesia pelvic be some girls, full In

should or the take maneuverswill the ask examination. should place; the Before informedabout a she pelvic be what during, importance and be assessment the to encouraged patient of examination, questionsbefore, after shouldbe offered caregiver is when present. a family A not chaperone examination and she is patient a examiner has using by or the over participating that complete Assuringthe control mirror important. guidingthe allowing maintain should examiner The

Breast Fat eye papilloma during Abscess/mastitis or necrosis/lipoma Cystosarcoma cyst (<1%) Classic Hemangioma, fibroadenoma lymphoma phyllodes (rare) disease hyperplasia juvenile examination. Fibrocystic (70%) (low-grade Adenomatous Carcinoma the lymphangioma, malignancy) contact Intraductal and to must all the be informed patient of expect what Before sensations. maneuvers,the

in with a A comfort patient table examination frog-leg maximizes padded pelvic examination. of position the a comfortable. be less are used can Stirrups but instruments should The warm. and examination lubricants, be room, but examination unhurried be efficient. The should

includes hair, Inspection and of clitoris, the minora, thepubic andhymenal ring. majora urethra, genitalia of labia evaluation required,it lubricants bimanual examination interfere internalgenitalia When with the a speculum microbiologic because before palpation samples. be evaluationof must microscopic and of performed is speculumallows os vaginal of (Pap) visualization cultures of such the cervical walls as smears. forcollection appropriate and The orPapanicolaou specimens, is human sexually papillomavirus. smear abuse or adolescent needed Pap not infection active, is is history ofsexual vulvar with a A there unless untilthe (0.5 virginal in a a rare Huffman the examination isnecessary In in. that circumstance girl, vaginal a × in.) 4.5 orPederson in. (0.9 in.) 4.5 × used. speculum should be to speculum. non-virginal medium-sizedadult A small frequently a introitus admits

begin for one rapidly is grow other, resulting more to breast to the (or before unusual than) with asymmetry. growth It not degree have full all will be by asymmetry some. that that of the and obvious women after less Reassurance is some maturation asymmetry needed the below pea-sized that mass tender. is The is bud breast a often nipple breast women these are usually Occasionally or mass; a fibroadenomas 68-2). young (Table with cysts benign present is group. Breast age in cancer this rare extremely exposure of the of is young, ultrasound the radiation An mammography. avoids dense better for evaluation breasts and evaluation

(sexual complain III) often rating of vaginal maturity Peripubertal discharge. stage girls without discharge clear the is If

agents) (H2 alkylating Cardiovascular Antibiotics drugs Drugs ketoconazole, Antacids blockers) Cancer metronidazole) (isoniazid, Antiandrogens chemotherapy (especially

of abuse Amphetamines Marijuana Drugs Alcohol Heroin

is of (e.g., odor, stimulation and uterus the to vagina. phenothiazines, pruritus estrogen ovarian of due physiologic agents it likely leukorrhea, diazepam, symptoms tricyclics) most or Psychoactive A examination should excoriation. without estrogenized hymen and an of or vulva erythema evidence reveal physical signs be alert The physician always for should abuse. of obtained. there are be symptoms, cultures should If rule. infections speculum cervical can until when are be vaginal cultures because without are transmitted these a obtained vaginal the In infections menarche, circumstances, sexually vaginal maturation shows a epithelial few on culture. of blood pathogens of white physiologic and leukorrhea Inspection cells, estrogen cells, no

years of 12.6 Menarche the average typically years. occurs age 2 approximately afterthelarche, at irregular and menses anovulatory in to initial duration. be tend The are years, may persist 5 may so reassurance Thisirregularity berequired. 2 for to and hypothalamus prolonged estrogen on and induces feedback phase, decreases this During an estrogen the heavy. which production gonadotropin can that be reducesestrogen secretion, withdrawalbleed painless. usually bleedingis Anovulatory menses ovulatory, to becomes progesterone and hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadalaxis withdrawal. As cycle the matures, the aresecondary cycle is isestablished, ovulation days. 21 length When the to 45 average ovulate as Someadolescents pregnancy their cycle, by menarche. with first indicated before

Available StudentConsult.com @

is usually in Breast benign, condition. a boys enlargement self-limited noted is during boys adolescence. 50% early Gynecomastia to of 60% in noted often is it idiopathic, 68-3). be may various conditions It (Table in but stage maturity 1to mass 3-cm, firm III. include often and tender, rating freely of sexual immediately during appearance the the areola findings round, a mobile, Typical beneath and nipple investigation. any hard, Large, discharge warrant with fixed enlargements masses or associated further Reassurance the is treatment required. usually only psychological with is condition treated with bromocriptine. it morbidity, the and associated If worsens may be massive treatment reduction with can with hypertrophy. be mammoplasty helpful Surgical

is complaint the girls. early common Irregular most menses adolescent of ovulatory with complaint. established, frequent cycles is regular, menstruation (dysmenorrhea) become a pain As

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Primary of years development development. by breast presence age absence of complete in 14 of breast by the menstruation is 16 amenorrhea or the age years of the absence of in in at have women adolescents However investigations should that by menarche 98% age onset of age without young begin 15; therefore, menses. of Secondary refers to the 3 amenorrhea after of consecutive for menarche. any months, more than menses time cessation

hypothalamus, or vagina. result a anatomic may the pituitary abnormalities amenorrhea Primary gland, or functional of of ovaries, uterus, be stress, exercise, the and Physiologic excessive causes of dietary immaturity, common amenorrhea. abnormal patterns (anorexia/bulimia) are most all of cases in the denies Pregnancy sexual patient be activity. secondary even if amenorrhea, considered should

guide examination The history physical should theinvestigation. and pain, tract outin obstruction primary with should ruled An abdominal characteristics. outflow sexual adolescents be amenorrhea, andsecondary from resulting abdominal may be mass present. blood An accumulated examination. obstructions, hymen, an are imperforate visibleon outflowtract Low such as dysgenesis indicated amenorrhea history reflect insufficiency, endocrine primary indicate unremarkable (LH) examination.Elevated an secondary evaluation without warrantsa agenesis ovarian and (FSH) physical girlswith hormone whichmay karyotype. ovarian for or An sexual characteristics and and ovarian is luteinizinghormone and follicle-stimulating primary anomalies, premutation etiologies fragile carriers, is out. andautoimmune cause, should Turner other a syndrome chromosomal X be but common ruled dueto may FSHand Low of low events). weight, (often LH gonadotropin isolated familial), suggest stressful (chronicillness, hypothalamic deficiency, body immaturity hypogonadotropic or hypogonadism physiologic life be dysfunction, levels which andprolactin. hormone hormone Additional evaluation thyroid-stimulating includes a menstrualdysfunction. is of common cause Hypothyroidism A must ruled although be rare, prolactinoma, out.

amenorrhea secondary with secondary sexual characteristics. have Girls syndrome common The FSH, (low pregnancy, estradiol), causes LH, ovary and and polycystic most are (PCOS). anorexia/stress may there acanthosis. PCOS of hirsutism, gain resistance, with and weight and In and, excess, be such insulin acne symptoms androgen as hirsutism out total virilization testosterone, free and adrenal or tumors. ovarian androstenedione, be to and should rule or measured sulfate present, dihydroepiandrosterone If is adrenal level rules A 17-hydroxyprogesterone congenital late-onset out normal hyperplasia. amenorrhea, biochemical ultrasound. or with the of diagnosed of menstrual hyperandrogenism, polycystic or PCOS is two infrequent secondary morphology bleeding and on ovaries following: clinical be produces. including and may although not Estradiol a low; sulfate, dihydroepiandrosterone androgens, normal tumor elevated, be that the or to may extent glucose Patients impaired tolerance or hypercholesterolemia. may have

on evidence be normalprolactin (primary of patient theuterus a pregnancy single characteristics, of test, tract withdrawal with a estrogen point progesterone than level) In hormone, thyroid-stimulating negative and amenorrhea determined can secondary), (rather normalsecondary obstruction, no and effect by total or test. the outflow sex estradiol a medroxyprogesterone body To of (depending days. 10 for 5 weight)is 5 mg daily this, achieve to given on last should hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal normal axis) intact be outflow (an withno and If uterus there tablet. after bleeding progesterone within primed obstruction, the 1week the tract byestrogen is If there bleeding, to is theamenorrhea secondary is anovulation. uterus to is been bleeding, no is estrogen estrogen, systemic there the insufficientlyexposed deficiency. withdrawal If and there has progesterone

amenorrhea the at Therapy be cause. the for directed should progesterone or managed hormonal can cyclic combined be with either contraceptives (CHCs). withdrawal Anovulation hypoestrogenism; estrogen CHC. associated with ovarian therapy and is and amenorrhea progesterone, an directed hypothalamic usually failure, at replacing a In is there treated be weight CHC. PCOS usually effectively withdrawal, with exercise, loss, progesterone or can to hormone–binding androgen evidence excess, If androgen. and sex from production CHCs of is reduce globulin of available increases there androgen reduce the amount the ovaries is Spironolactone when evidence of ovulatory insensitivity, hirsutism, can restore and cycles. treat there insulin helps metformin applicable. should be if Contraception prescribed,

@ Available StudentConsult.com

menses of day occur Normal, day menstruation 45 21 measuring next first from to the apart, can first ovulatory menstruation. the to ofthe days more flow prolonged. is than 7days, of average 7 3 days duration to with The considered per day More is loss estimate. or may blood 12 pads although to difficult well-soaked than8 be classically consideredexcessive, tampons menstrual and 69-1 according bleeding of Federation classification abnormal uterine International disorders (AUB). Table defines to thenew Obstetricsnomenclature of and Gynecology charting warranted. menstrual are and menstrual calendar unclear on If is problem and the a nonacute,observation menarche prolonged, but bleedingin physiologic investigated, year iron especially if the shouldbe Excessively is associated often is first infrequent there heavy, or after deficiencyanemia.

presenting 10% of coagulation and have have other or heavy menarche, in those pathology. with early prolonged especially a disorder menses, Approximately adolescents 20% disorder is discovered, should If the menstrual the at dysfunction. directed secondary and be pathology primary treatment underlying an

flow Duration flow bleeding menstrual of >8 Prolonged days Shortened menstrual of days <2 bleeding

found is in The 69-2. AUB differential diagnosis Table of most of Anovulation adolescents. is the common AUB in etiology prolonged corpus luteum, Without and be endometrial from estrogen hyperplasia causes and threatening. the which progesterone shedding, can unopposed life irregularendometrial heavy,sometimes induces secretoryendometrium. Progesterone a myometrial is contractions synchronous progesterone withdrawn, limiting endometrium the and fashion a When in (causing vascular but dysmenorrhea bloodloss). sheds with For 1 ofadolescent the cycles are post-menarche, majority to the years 2 first anovulatory. year cycles,irregular After regular bleeding an 1 usually indicates abnormality. of organic

A indicating adolescent. followed a a in by examination, symptoms an history thorough virginal including the in is a amount a nonvirginal with or and menstrual pelvic flow physical calendar of associated ultrasound adolescent examination petechia, assess signs should of anemia, examination hyperandrogenism bruising thyroid signs also of Physical for or or disease. should screen be count, function thyroid test, complete pregnancy tests, performed. and blood A coagulation sexually transmitted should (STIs) In infections sexually ruled adolescents, active be out.

academic lower functioning; is impair heavy, associated iron anemia school attendance and with Unpredictable, menses prolonged and social deficiency may scores. heavy menses. indicated Treatment is for doses CHCs; be be may managed daily and until acute blood loss is with multiple Chronic controlled. bleeding can required hospitalization high-dose and Occasionally for estrogen. fluids bleeding uncontrollable requires intravenous Uterine indicated curettage is rarely adolescents. in important. is therapy also Iron to the be Use to 6 only CHCs months may axis to 12 mature appropriate; required. regulate therapy allow hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal of menstruation and is of scheduled management be bleeding acid any for management bleeding paramount disease), although disorders the may with of adjuvant individuals heavy tranexamic with withdrawal (von CHCs in needed menstrual Willebrand therapy of are in bleeds. literature and will but concerned CHC are their use often Parents to support active, cause sexually not do this. experience daughter that become

tumor/cyst Pregnancy, uterine cervical, disorder PCOS, Contraception Blood Foreign pregnancy transmitted ectopic dyscrasia Medications disorder—thyroid Ovarian Vaginal, Trauma disorders disorder, sexually or pituitary Systemic body Endocrine disease Infection—usually including

syndrome. ovary PCOS, Polycystic

bleeding of excluded, all *When diagnosis can be the dysfunctional uterine made.

@ Available StudentConsult.com

of bleeding. of 1 complaint most is gynecologic or women to days common menstruation, dysmenorrhea, painful 3 the first young during The are 1 of increasing to of defined the menstruation pain during 24, is an years to 3 Primary ovulation, as feature incidence and cycles of age typically pelvic developing dysmenorrhea absence is pathology the after as menarche, in pelvic with a ovulatory established. increased progesterone contractions. frequency The of uterine decline and of and after levels release dysrhythmia tone from leukotrienes uterine prostaglandins degenerating endometrium causes the and increased other fibers and of that and pain This sensitivity creates uterine pressures bradykinin heightens ischemia excessive to stimuli. the physical

menstrual pelvic or caused pelvic pain frequently endometriosis is dysmenorrhea by Secondary and pathology associated disease. most is inflammatory with but after menarche. disease, to soon moderate have outflow with mild severe with girls to obstructed have endometriosis tend endometriosis usually tracts Adolescents The be usually types history physical and by of can distinguished dysmenorrhea examination. for screen Ultrasound preferred as genital the initial lesions. obstructing is tract tract anomalies. complex useful reproductive Magnetic resonance imaging may in be to inflammatory fail patients diagnose with required for Laparoscopy and who it certainty, is endometriosis therapy. disease although usually is pelvic medical reserved

significant dysmenorrhea of be should considered Treatment symptoms causing primary distress. with drugs nonsteroidal First-line is 69-3). (NSAIDs) anti-inflammatory (Table therapy before should relief, as NSAIDs should or be and taken as the be begins, followed dosing closely. pain menstruation schedule maximize To soon 2 NSAIDs Typically needed 3 days. for to are adequate be If or to relief, (LARCs) contraceptives NSAIDs may provide reversible added. fail long-acting CHCs

Naproxen mg or 250 PO 500 acid then 250 stat bid Ibuprofen 400 Prescription 500 mg PO PO PO qid Mefenamic mg mg qid 500 stat to mg 500 mg then PO

Levonorgestrel; drugs. NSAIDs, nonsteroidal LNG, anti-inflammatory

pregnancy These for on first-line need depending therapy, prevention. contraceptives may be

alternative despite adequate should an trial as If considered. such endometriosis, dysmenorrhea persists an diagnosis, months), be of CHCs (>4 diagnosis the lesions. before performed advancing endometriotic be therapy laparoscopy and When fail, excise a confirm to CHCs may 7-day days of by may symptoms. followed 5to control a active CHC hormone-free (84 Extended CHC interval) therapy 2 of controlled, mg) then levonorgestrel-releasing are months every months every until are system. depot symptoms Alternatives acetate intrauterine 3 (150 medroxyprogesterone in or be and when older Endometriosis therapy, may of leuprolide) years (nafarelin is with age) agonists adolescents hormone relief hormonal (>16 symptom required. gonadotropin-releasing treated

years in countries. 17years age for girls median of the intercourse United States otherdeveloped is is similar for to first 16 The and boys; this the in is the among prevalence coital similar age initiation socioeconomic childbearing socioeconomic different groups, Although lower greatest strata. ofadolescent of the is use, the contraception, status, earlylife adverse pregnancy access adolescent in low Risk socioeconomic include lack lower alcohol self-esteem, education, and home. adolescent to lower for factors drug and experiences of Approximately 900,000

age year. to U.S. 19 each females pregnant become of 12 years 97 20 younger years 29 there than 1000. births, of and pregnancies,54 age, are per Inwomen abortions to year reduced adolescent 1990. thepeak contraceptives of since of use 35% up by Increased pregnancy has mortality, unemployment, pregnancyhave an birth achievement. educational infant of increased admission, infants, maternal postneonatal neonatal child continue weight preterm and abuse, who subsequent Adolescents poor preterm their very maternal births,low and incidence socioeconomic by influenced and risksare asinherent risks as behavior well biologic These status, adolescents. within Good outcomes. prenatal social improve care,nutrition, and pregnancy support

presenting any amenorrhea. Pregnancy adolescent in be and with should secondary out considered ruled have diagnosis been having a intercourse. and Frequently until delay missed periods seeking pregnant adolescents initially may deny several and report pains, adolescents with other as often or behavior vomiting, periods. may deteriorating normal Early present vague such symptoms, a be in pregnancy, varied the of menstrual adolescents. of menstruating Because all obtained should history presentations adolescent thorough to sensitive Urine tests after are conception. pregnancy 10 7 days approximately in all ruled Rape adolescent should or be incest pregnancy. cases out of

immediate is is to in pregnancy When important assist gestational confirmed, dating planning. gestation). to beyond to (if are 24 pregnancy Options or the not 20 weeks’ continue terminate the parent child adopted. adolescent child to have With the the former, or may the choose with may their making; parents families Pregnant assist to adolescents be to understanding encouraged more adolescent expects. decision the should be than involve

Continuation Pregnancy of the

by who need care a care Adolescents consistent, the and continue of comprehensive prenatal health pregnancy providers. early, team infant’s effort in health the situation development. optimize an should socioeconomic Their be evaluated to and should of be option adolescents their infants fewer this 5% have than adopted, Although discussed. pregnancy. so the adolescent the to cause attention in to after Pregnancy out of be special school, females keeping school most during for is and should given drop common

her pregnancy, immediately should a pregnant abortion referred to she be a terminate adolescent If chooses service. nonjudgmental to gestational termination age. the options on The for depend pregnancy age, 14 aspiration manual gestational suction (<8 to include provider), gestational the depending evacuation and (<12 weeks’ (14 dilation 20 age), weeks’ and age). curettage Surgical weeks’ on procedures gestational vacuum to oral can (<8 methotrexate misoprostol gestational terminated with age) misoprostol, pregnancy in alone. weeks’ medically combination Early with misoprostol, with be or mifepristone (RU-486) Adolescents to early present explore enough option. rarely this second hypertonic of effected or delivery and saline. gestational induction labor trimester In misoprostol intra-amniotic instillation weeks’ or (>12 prostaglandins be by can the the vaginal age), subsequent implementation support who choose counseling Psychosocial and should contraceptive for adolescents and be available abortion.

adequate without control. intercourse birth Adolescents often begin mother, should can goal. primary Because psychosocial significant the pregnancy child, and unintended for with be associated morbidity a father, be prevention pregnancy in contraception consistent of All when correct methods the fashion. reduce significantly risk a of and used use. one best The an of contraception the form will individual is methods can user-based divided LARCs. be Contraceptives into and reduce do women important provide should risk condoms It be of infection. and is the to that young not STIs, contraception remind steroidal from or to protection LARCs used any

most effective the used most birth Abstaining from adolescent form commonly and is of intercourse control. sexual self-assuredness, necessary. A is self-control, self-esteem and degree of sexually be Adolescents there should a intercourse. year be 70% who regular, of control, is chance because to active birth offered pregnancy of 1 unprotected in choose

ovulation. follicle secretion and ovarian oral and (COCs) a that synthetic gonadotropin suppress progesterone contain and development Combined contraceptives estrogen also atrophic produce inhibit mucus for and endometrium to an penetration. cervical thicken (inhospitable blastocyst sperm COCs implantation) 99% effective if COCs (decreased dysmenorrhea, flow). are menstrual lighter benefits and regularly less noncontraceptive and have acne, taken numerous COCs physical the or Start. next period started and day be can a After on of a as menstrual the examination, history first Quick ruled as has day long provider, health visit usually out. to on Start day starting refers on care method cycle, Quick pregnancy any to as the been the of the of The the to 69-5. COCs 69-4 Tables contraindications and are relative and in listed Contraindications should out hypertension preexisting a before be measurement to COC. Blood pressure prescribing rule obtained safer reinforce and should adolescent be contraceptive the use good sex. to seen Initially monthly pill the Unless ability to COCs show take a daily, with should be avoided. contraception adolescents are prescribed, daily they routine. encourage 28-day packets are When recommended because COCs a package. next has regimen the novel One by 84 active be contraceptive sequentially 7-day interval hormone-free taken and packaged tablets to a followed bleeding. induce intervals Any between a be can withdrawal COC fashion long to used in such

breakthroughbleeding reduce side night should (pills breast to transient. (especially be as are andusually and such missed), pills if this), takenat nausea common are effects, tenderness, Initial generally gain.Usually to are COCs determineacceptability. weight to one needed on 3 4 not do months COC cause bleeding, physician breakthrough there If is the

endocarditis) atrial Hypertension focal valvular symptoms Currently mm postpartum (current) yr subacute of <21 bariatric >35 Severe disease age of thromboembolism mm soon active gallbladder surgery and 1 mm ≥100 cancer heart cerebrovascular delayed fibrillation, and contraceptive-related pill with Hg, as or Hg) <1 (adenoma disease bacterial Smoking hypertension, symptomatic history procedure and (systolic Migraine cholestasis Adequately with cirrhosis ≥160 Hg) History of age (pulmonary Ischemic retinopathy/nephropathy/neuropathy oral possible. disease Mild Current mm days >35 as diastolic malabsorptive of 140–159 neurologic Diabetes Breast not yr or Liver hypertension combined or controlled Hg postpartum venous Migraine (systolic heart or cirrhosis of History Take pill accident breastfeeding history History 90–99 tumor breastfeeding month Active 1 Hypertension diastolic hepatoma) Complicated Continue OD pack. 1 hours until in <24 week end for taking of any pill

pill pills as 1 soon or as Take active possible. 1 active more

1 taking (Week 1) missed Continue end pill of OD pack. until 7 contraception days. Back up for Consider contraception. emergency

as pills (Week <3 1 active as Take possible. missed pill soon

Continue OD end of until or 2 pack. 1 3) pill taking pills. any Discard placebo of new HFI. cycle an Start without COC

pill soon missed pills Take 3 active as possible. as 1 more or

2 1 until 3) of (Week end pill or taking pack. Continue OD an placebo HFI. without cycle any start and new pills Discard days. 7 up for contraception Back Consider contraception. emergency

once contraceptive; interval; HFI, oral Combined daily. COC, hormone-free OD,

are often how determine pills should forgotten changingpills. before (Table be Adolescents taught responseto appropriate 69-6). doses should the missed the usuallysuggest providers Health additional month. in first the use care contraception of

is not (Micronor), pill, the used safe a norethindrone contraception COCs, as Although progestin-only) widely as and (or consistently. used of when effective form progestogen-only is 28 supplied of each in no packages tablets, It containing interval. hormone-free with norethindrone penetration. little mucus, viscosity, reduced through increased resulting prevents and molecular volume, altered It pregnancy or in sperm of structure cervical no addition, partially and or completely for suppressed. reduce changes In the endometrial potential implantation, ovulation is continue using Approximately to 40% ovulate. of women contraceptives progestogen-only to side have Pro-gestogen-only effects. women 69-4) Table estrogen-based is a contraindication estrogen-related indicated for or have (see who contraceptives contraception

vaginal ring The a Silas-tic is flexible, contraceptive ring. (NuvaRing) rate ring 0.120 a etonogestrel releases estradiol ethinyl of constant mg The of day. and 15 of mg per 3 ring Each removed. weeks for continuously is used then and is days later. ring 7 A inserted new side the as COCs. with contraindications same and The effects are

followed 1 patch-free on for of a for a that and by [Evra]) the a of patch patch applied, patch is of is The buttocks, 25-cm2 3 use, new week usually bleed. then total removal withdrawal weeks patch week a a for pink (norelgestromin application contraceptive 4-week repeated. The cycle is equivalent a ethinyl COC. The dose estradiol daily to is 35-mg is In kg 90 or more, patch weighing efficacious. the women less contraceptive

side effects the Contraindications COCs. as those are and same in

of of medroxyprogesteroneacetate 150 birth 14 injection (Depo-Provera) weeks every is an mg Intramuscular control. effectiveform to 12 of contraception with menstrual is Progestogen-only associated (70% amenorrhea irregularities bleeding). 30%frequent and menstrual be minimal 12 Medroxyprogesterone is and acetate(Depo-SubQ subcutaneous may 14 Provera weeks with for to self-administered training. useevery designed 104) on the containing implant An market. is U.S. progestin now available the etonogestrel(Implanon) and single to 3 userand is failure rodimplant subcutaneously are doses. reduce years.These secondary contraception forms inserted effective This is missed of coital-independentand for

uterus or copper devices that (IUDs) Intrauterine wherethey release prevents are levonorgestrel atrophic (ParaGard) implantation the either into is that inducingan spermicidal endometrium. inserted (Mirena) by of duration dysmenorrhea. the and which to10 IUD, amount copper The as lasts aswell bleeding increase may up years, highly insertion a of the bleeding young diseaseexists to for intrauterine lowers risk that even continues decreasing and up causing for uses of at an IUD. effective The amenorrhea.Although pelvic risk levonorgestrel-releasing inflammatory is transient dysmenorrhea, IUD, small 21 low an of the system increased period theremainder years while followingthat for a and 5 rate woman time after days of as IUD be provided is time STIs time possible with for for soon compliance treatment of the insertion, of a at at insertion. should concern positive the screened resultsor if IUD there Adolescents as be Insertion block. of aided women the can a use by nulliparous paracervical in no oneof can user, eliminating first as for be IUDs active options thus line error and the require adolescent contraception. involvement bythe considered risk reduce to be Condomsshould the STI. encouraged of

visit. discussed postcoital every at be should Emergency contraception should when available. be no A given over-the-counter advance of prescription need in is access reduces early of if efficacy although 5 after greatest Emergency when as as the used intercourse possible. contraception is risk days, unprotected within used pregnancy Table in contraception emergency and to are Other listed postcoital contraindications 69-7. indications hours. a ethinyl estradiol 50 once each one two pill emergency and contraception: of (0.75 repeated are two the of using (a) pill equivalent 12 forms tablets (b) 12 CHC μg hours norgestrel, and twice, in mg apart, of or taken of of levonorgestrel), Plan There mg B given 250 the vomiting than CHC also is associated regimen. and nausea significantly B with less Plan however effective not the United is use for Mifepristone it postcoital this is an approved States. also in contraceptive; A inserted from IUD unprotected than efficacy greater an of copper be 99%. and intercourse of can has act days 7 the This for recommended adolescents. not generally method is

pills wk genitalia for control on Missed assault dislodged/removed birth >1 No breaks Ejaculation being Condom <6 used Sexual contraception of Diaphragm Depo-Provera late h method external

If strong contraindications estrogens, Known progestin. use pregnancy to

in 10 of especially gel, spermicide (foam, and are pregnancy, (film together in must condoms COCs infrequent placed correct intercourse), they used individuals who as film, a before sponge) fashion as prevention are When minutes be the intercourse. in effective almost have over-the-counter reduces risk available prescription is method This STIs, condoms) of and virus the human need including the or for (HIV). physician polyurethane (latex a immunodeficiency and without visit it affords (Reality) aesthetically that polyurethane pleasing. The made but females method condom barrier adolescents female of do more is control, an usually not consider additional

and Caps, Sponge, Diaphragm

sponge hours (Protectaid) for The 24 that is spermicide-impregnated a sponge vaginal intercourse. is synthetic of effective is and The on a a fitted cervix care provider the placed user silicone intercourse. then health by before the by FemCap cap especially adolescent. technically difficult, is an This method for than fornices. care use The but fitted go diaphragm is is simpler vaginal edges cap technically the by because the a the to into provider health side diaphragm To and the the effective, should applied along rim. cervical with used be be to the spermicide needs spermicide intercourse. diaphragm act each The with additional of by to vacuum mild the design. that vault by cervix the to device, generated its similar Lea’s silicone a The diaphragm, a and Shield covers a is vaginal adheres left of for for act efficacy. to optimal need of place these All in 6 intercourse be last the methods hours after

active used control of by but Withdrawal ejaculation a withdrawal because has vagina and adolescents, ineffective is it common into sperm occur ejaculation, is released birth sexually after are before the may begun. method

is justbefore, ovulation. periodic the of just rhythm method and during, after abstinence practice The awareness her the method This indicating and an of to clues discipline. accurate have of user cycle, requires ovulation, knowledge consequently ovulation, time to that be Adolescents tend month is considered so safe. can it lesspredictable of have unpredictable completely difficult the a with determine anyaccuracy cycles and to

contraception. need believe because sex anal oral they that the Some engage it eliminates or in for adolescents “having are of sex, not do sex.” anal an mean to consider but oral Many acquiring STI Condoms is during not this activity or the present. used generally still risk in engage be STI require should counseling adolescents forms and and about Adolescents sex screening. specifically and asked sexual of and anal oral HIV who nonvaginal activity,

for nonconsensual a term legal is intercourse. Rape and victims is rape of are cases. of Almost perpetrator adolescents, 50% the half known in and to physical criminal evidence functions supportive, physician’s in is the perform a gathering a investigation these manner. important, nonjudgmental responsibility for is historical primary Although of the history period, include time the menstrual from and details last victim until whether assault if should activity, sexual presentation, The of sexual herself, any. assault, date the cleaned previous

results, optimal of within assault. should be collected 72 material forensic the For hours undergarments, allows which in to need forensic to drying placed grow, destroying be organisms for holds humidity, paper evidence). especially Clothes, (plastic bag a patient and bruising, for anal inspected and should be oral, trauma. genital, bites, The to injuries. are best record the Photographs document mouth, pubic be hair, and fingernails, from should the anus. Specimens obtained vagina, fingernail and saliva, kit The scrapings, from obtain materials to DNA provides hair. pubic assault semen, blood, sexual the microscope. absence presence the fluids vaginal mount wet sperm of A or shows of under needed to for a negative should previously for bacterial often but 72 are culture. hours sufficient Cultures are be (unless load infected), for the taken be STIs because and test). for syphilis Laboratories HIV baseline be (Venereal drawn Blood Research should Disease “chain court. materials in question All into must maintained be evidence” called in cannot of be that a

emergency and vaccine. hepatitis globulin hepatitis Therapy and rape indicated, contraception prophylaxis after a STI and, immune includes if for single g, gonorrhea,and dose 1 treats cefixime, oral mg, of and A 400 azithromycin, Chlamydia, syphilis. Trichomonas, oral single recommended. bacterial with vaginosis intramuscular azithromycin, alternative ceftriaxone, An dose g, For is is mg, dose metronidazole, single against 1 and oral dose g. a 2 of a single prophylaxis of regimen of a 125 for mounts, 12 should weeks. pregnancy followed at hepatitis, by after syphilis, and the weeks serology test 3 HIV performed cultures, assault, Repeat and be a wet local are common; crisis as patients sequelae by rape support, immediate Longterm that services. and should psychological offered ongoing such be offered

are chronic in especially disorders adolescents, Eating common in females. diseases Mental edition Manual psychiatric these The Diagnostic Statistical Disorders, as (DSM-V), classifies illnesses. fifth and of premenstrual) typical criteria the not may in (pregrowth adolescents spurt, diagnostic 70-1). follow The (Table diagnosis young

The nervosa 1.5% is teenage girls. in prevalence of anorexia the 20:1, is shows ratio approximately The female-to-male pattern. familial condition and a between is biologic cause events complex unknown, of and involves it social, environmental, The nervosa psychological, interaction (Fig. anorexia but a identified (Fig. factors been risk 70-1), having with 70-2).

Fig. is important screen psychosocial done of eating part for (see as larger and disorders is factors the risk-taking for a best Screening 67-1). or interviewing recommended interviewed minimize is is Although parent(s) he alone, the adolescent alone she important. that may the be it the also problem; thus obsession, eating event mood patient or usually first changes). described food-related (i.e., affected is food exercise change The ruminations, by in a an behavioral fat, feels too thin. The body despite unrealistic an patient image appearing and excessively has ignoring situation anger, Parents’ be response disorder, on behavior. can self-blame, the to the of focusing the approving this child, attention or

information, assess differential diagnosis. should be nonjudgmental, collect and physician The the diarrhea, malabsorption, Addison diabetes reflux, energy gastroesophageal bowel disease, demands, disease. loss chronic differential peptic malignancy, hyperthyroidism, and diagnosis hypothalamic ulcer, inflammatory lesions, increased mellitus, weight of includes The abuse, depression, considered also drug disorders disorders). need to be (e.g., obsessive-compulsive Psychiatric

bradycardia, and of hypothermia, mass emesis), appearance, enamel (acid rough wearing of body include scaly skin, features trunk hair), on teeth clinical acrocyanosis the and fine hide (lanugo-like erosion to face feet. The and and hair decreased from clothing of of layered index, anorexia oversized hands hyperthyroidism Signs not Chapter present (see should be 175). of listed for in are anorexia nervosa diagnostic criteria 70-2. The Table

multidisciplinary program well a approach, requires family as Treatment and a as feeding including individual therapy. foods, of or Feeding nutritional intake nasogastric tube. through orally voluntary is formula by regular accomplished vital and the treatment negotiation discussion parents contract and When of the patient with detailed a signs are stable,

body Rebelliousness Early increased increased adolescence— awareness growing adolescence— of self-awareness Middle Fear up

future identity for and adolescence— the Anxiety worry Late

disorder Thoughts: “I behaviors Anxious Purging hate...” “I’m Rebellious Angry fat” Down Eating Sad Feeling: Binging Restrictions

The 70-1 Figure cycle. disorder eating

essential. are step is The to restore first body weight. necessary 70-3). may (Table be Hospitalization patient achieved, personal normal the freedom When gain at to a is of weight pace. is 80% given weight 5% includes (suicide, of individuals), (20% of bulimic (30% prognosis 3% syndrome the of The and symptoms nervosa anorexia development rate, to malnutrition) persistent mortality a individuals).

Available @ StudentConsult.com

for criteria 70-4 the bulimia presents Table nervosa. diagnostic prevalence bulimia nervosa 5% The in is of college students. female is 10:1. The ratio female-to-male or episodes of or by followed foods Binge-eating consumed large leftovers both, forbidden consist rapidly, quantities of often vomiting. result laxative the or vomiting Metabolic from abnormalities excessive

and disease Clinical nervosa) emesis) Affective Factors hypothermia enamel index Bradycardia, Impulsive/negative body from (family hair Previous and Fine clothing Familial teeth overweight -Wearing trunk Personality oversized Risk the mass (acid feet. disorders of face of (lanugo-like Decreased of Psychiatric features history) (bulimia Erosion Acrocyanosis hands hair) on types Eating cycle or (environment) Behavioral Eating that disorder individual something self control is Feeling With right: Exercise change Susceptible not With

to 70-2 eating slippery Figure slope The disorders.

ideal)* <85% above minimally of loss weight leading weight (e.g., age at a and Refusal maintain or for normal to height weight weight body to body

underweight fear Intense of becoming weight or gaining though even fat,

criteria low Denial to diagnostic the in weight—a which of weight shape is of *The the seriousness difficult experienced in may way disturbance young in adolescent. a body meet body or be one’s the for spectrum a clinical of wide features. Allow

accepted >25% Bradycardia, Risk Weight weight* weight hypothermia treatment ideal suicide body adolescent. of loss fails hypokalemia, young Outpatient dysrhythmias Dehydration, in loss *Less

following: at week by a for episodes characterized twice least eating, Recurrent months, binge of the 3

would similar larger food period of an definitely than is during amount that most in eat a Eating a discrete people period

episode eating) over eating one control the or cannot of feeling of one (e.g., that how what is A or control stop lack during much eating sense a

gain behavior to laxatives exercise) misuse or prevent weight of diuretics, Compensatory self-induced excessive (i.e., vomiting,

episodes nervosa. does not occur Disturbance during of anorexia exclusively

diuretic and intake. dieting. with young history a of Binge-eating episodes in loss of and occur eating over women are who the often control overweight slightly

of behavior, behavior. the are which made eating awareness to the educational, self-monitoring Nutritional, are change increase maladaptive and following techniques efforts to used may with have disturbances, they Patients histories personality therapy and antidepressant to family often because respond impulse difficulties, disorders. control nervosa bulimia of affective their guilty, actions. embarrassed, Patients ashamed and of feel suicide and suicide Attempted completed (5%) are an concern. important

terms first which (<12 decreasing are is The use. age in of years), street drugs are substance females males used and overtaking at their habit during smokers their adult percent Ninety begin years. of adolescent increasing. use drug stimulant Marijuana is and in (glue use Native Americans. aerosol and solvents, in Inhalant is prevalent younger products) adolescents date-rape risen flunitrazepam income at (3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (gamma-hydroxybutyrate parties The from groups rave adolescents upper by and club or [Ecstasy]) of has drugs [Rohypnol]) drugs use so-called sharply. has Anabolic increased use adolescent performance. athletic in boys steroid enhanced seeking

and of should be use timing, drug taken history use. nonjudgmentaland substances,frequency, circumstances, of the supportive and outcomes substance of manner A types include in a helpful a is screening tool. 71-1 Table There adolescent substance physicalfindings are few even chronic use. with intoxicated An may hallucinogen, such triggered phencyclidine(“angel or adolescent overdose in or present as psychosis an state, dust”). a by ina and assault direct andindirect Club drugs (coma effects. dehydration) (sexual adverse seizures) and have also steroids violence) atrophy) Anabolic (gynecomastia (mood direct and and and adverse have testicular indirect swings effects.

@ StudentConsult.com Available

with amphetamines, often in toxicologic result use (most drugs first and cocaine) can time 71-2). commonly emergency, alcohol, Many a opiates, (Table counseling directed follow-up toxic diminished. with Initial supportive at should medical effects be the after management appropriate have treatment,

Alcohol on depression and (Meths) ataxia, blood Ingested tolerance) speech, Disinhibition, and slurred and respiratory CNS amount Urine (depends

pressure, dependence, (minutes) Inhaled Nicotine ↑ ↓ rate, Relaxation, ↑ CNS blood heart

Snuffed, chewed dipped, temperature

1 Inhaled ↑ Marijuana to min Euphoria, hashish, time ↓ joints) (minutes) Urine relaxation, up appetite, +) (Cannabis, reaction (30 Tablets mo

snorted euphoria up Stimulants 48 Urine Alertness, Inhaled to and h

Cocaine high) (Quick Insomnia, (longer ↓ (crack) Tablets effect) appetite

Hallucination, anxiety Hallucinogens Oral

Mescaline sniffed, Injected, pupils dilated Psychosis, ingested Immunoassay

sky 2–12 h “Lucy LSD with the diamonds” in high” “trip” “Artistic

colors Phencyclidine many Microdots angel in dust) (PCP,

combinations, urine i.e., not Ecstasy by detected

screen drugs: and of (club hallucinogens Ecstasy amphetamines)

smoked, sniffed miosis, slurred snorted, ataxia, Opiates IV, Euphoria, speech and Oral,

OxyContin hillbilly)—new (cotton,

Sedatives “downers”) (barbiturates,

gasoline) Inhaled (solvents, alcohol Inhalants Like

substance hyperthermia (diazepam), side hypertension overdose abuse paranoia drugs and (β-blockers), effects seizures (slow (treatment) opiate Common (haloperidol), are (naloxone). cooling), of

of From Surgeon 9, of General: the (website). Office report Reducing General, Surgeon tobacco 2000 August use: a the

http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/ reports/tobacco_use/index.html . 2013. Accessed October 31,

phencyclidine. nervous PCP, LSD, 3,4-ethylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine; system; EDMA, CNS, central diethylamide; lysergic acid

pancreatitis. and alcohol can acute acute gastritis Heavy cause use Intravenous AIDS). use drug embolism, endocarditis, or osteomyelitis, infection, can pulmonary as bacterial acquired immunodeficiency known hepatitis (commonly septic B, in result syndrome with associated bronchitis. bronchoconstriction or use Chronic and is marijuana tobacco an stealing, unable out in himself that herself failure, social psychosocial prostitution, attend isolation). drug (e.g., school dealing, being to adolescent habituation or alcohol Compulsive unemployment, the results use of drug help or such sequelae

individual management adolescents depends on factors. patient use substance Specific by of many psychological) are suggested, especially the for nature of drug adolescents. addictive treatment highly residential (physical most and Because facilities younger of substances,

Med State Fleming N, adolescents, Black A, Rome Pregnancy E: Adolesc in

23(1):123–138, 2012 Rev Apr Art

Kutcher K, Mann structured adolescent (SCAG), MedEdPORTAL, Blake M: guide The communication 2008. K,

www.mededportal.org/publication/798 https:// . 2013. October 31, Accessed

of NJ. The Research: Contraception Emergency Princeton, Population Website, Office

. http://ec.princeton.edu/ June Updated 2012.

review L, Adolesc Monasterio Hwang Care guidance Hartman Health clinicians, Probl E, 24:221–263, L: Curr pediatric Adolescent contraception: for 2012 and Pediatr

Brown TA: disorders, and in outcome Update on eating PK, Keel course

2010 Disord 43(3):195–204, Eat J Int

adolescents: disorders S: Creighton Menstrual in current Horm review 78(30):135–143, C, Res practice, of 2012 Paediatr Williams

James W. 13 Verbsky

anatomic and defense major the host include and immune of systems. barriers The components adaptive innate function (Table and mucociliary infections infection, is the and barrier anatomic can and mucous membranes) to 72-1). skin protection (i.e., this essential for against Integrity lead of in barrier defects responding rapidly innate adaptive as immune immune line of versatile the development before system pathogens, The the system. of the more defense first acts but against nonspecifically factors, including cytokines, includes innate complement, cells. proteins, chemokines,and immune and soluble neutrophils, as as killer system (NK) The including monocytes/macrophages, well cellular acute-phase natural components, effector of and immune their T molecules lymphocytes (Table B adaptive and system made The up is 72-2).

and innate including yeast, on specific immune is called cells, of mannans viral gram-negative lipoteichoic gram-positive by molecular nucleotide conserved patterns of of NK Recognition of facilitated bacteria, that DNA. (PAMPs), pathogen by and bacteria, the lipopolysaccharide system bacterial of neutrophils receptors pathogens pathogen-associated acid macrophages, recognize and motifs sequences induce protein, production the recruit inflammation by binding initiate of the and chemokines the system. of activate system Recognition innate acute response mannose PAMPs lectin, inflammatory complement), immune cytokines cells, that leads to adaptive phase and an C-reactive immune (e.g., and kill or pathogens proteins by by pathogens. of cells Complement lysis facilitating phagocytic by uptake Polymorphonuclear bacteria some neutrophils pyogenic and fungi. ingest Mycobacterium, effective killing and in as organisms Macrophages Toxoplasma, facultative are such intracellular Legionella. In NK against addition cells cancer and cells. lymphocytes mediate activity virus-infected cytotoxic

by and the of system development key expansion T antigen-specific The and of immunologic memory, maturation antigen of and the immune produced cells cells. specificity adaptive are B features by activate cytotoxicity. released NK the causing by cells produced complement of to antibody-mediated direct cells and toxins phagocytic opsonize Antibodies cytolysis through to pathogen, by neutralize cells B (immunoglobulin) cells, pathogens, infected uptake facilitate kill pathogens and T antibody cells and cancer kill B-cell and activate kill deliver virus-infected memory intracellular cells, formation. cells synthesis pathogens, necessary B-cell the signals macrophage for to one more innate Immunodeficiency adaptive result defects or in or leading can immunity, components of from

body) syndromes reflux, ineffective tube palate, Aspiration (gastroesophageal Adenoidal hypertrophy Cleft foreign eustachian dysfunction cough,

Obstruction drainage polyps complex of (osteomeatal paranasal encephaloceles disease), Nasal sinus

body, or nodes fistula, Pulmonary ring enlarged cysts Tracheoesophageal fistula foreign sequestration, bronchogenic lymph Tumor, Vascular bronchobiliary

Primary dyskinesia Bronchiectasis Young Bronchopulmonary Cystic dysplasia syndrome syndromes, fibrosis ciliary

(allergic rhinitis, asthma) disease Allergic

Burns Dermal use obstruction, atopic Central catheter, dermatitis dialysis catheter artificial vesicoureteral Ureteral urinary value, line, Chronic drug CSF heart shunt, sinus peritoneal venous reflux IV tract

fluid. CSF, Cerebrospinal

life-threatening or infections. opportunistic, to recurrent, rare and relatively 72-3). mortality are together but diseases chronic disease, they cause immunodeficiency significant morbidity, Primary (Table individually,

frequency, infections and help the involved infection from severity, The and normalhost an (see patient Table thepathogens in a 72-3). immunodeficient differentiate of location in infections can a pathogens evade with rounds opportunistic invasive oralantibiotics a sinopulmonary common or infections bacteria need media children, in infections infections, deepseeded and or intravenous or otitis defect that with becausethese immunity require recurrent multiple encapsulated infections Although infectionsare infections, suggest immunodeficiency.Recurrent phagocytosis. of suggest primary antibody-mediated infections sinopulmonary in antibiotics, sp, (i.e., infections with jiroveci infections immunodeficiency. Candida T-cell Pneumocystis diarrhea,malabsorption, opportunistic fungi, to suggest and [carinii]) thrive, Failure deficiency. infections viral can T-cell resultfrom or NK-cell Recurrent granulomatous Deep-seated chronic such suggest Aspergillus with a aureus, and Staphylococcus of infections (CGD). Serratia neutrophil marcescens, disease and disorder function, as abscesses of in to the formedabscesses, umbilical addition indicates ofthe leukocyte cord, omphalitis Delayed adhesion andlater poorly separation especially disease, presence periodontal in deficiency. onset

of in defining animmune of can symptoms deficiency, significant does helpful occur. variability onset although be Age present of deficiency) defects neutropenia, adhesion leukocyte severalmonths typically congenital first life. the (e.g., in Neutrophil 3 have defects agammaglobulinemia)and Antibody present antibody (e.g., typically severe maternal months waned. after (e.g., of life defects levels immunodeficiency[SCID]) combined T-cell after antibody milder or symptomsof immunodeficiency with phenotypes variable common (CVID) although immunodeficiency agammaglobulinemia, Presentation present disease an deficiency until adolescence later ofprimary adulthoodsuggests young not in may ratherthan

function T response, regulatory factor; phase survival and FUNCTION and Cytokines FACTOR acute factors; Their NK-cell growth Table for effect Cytokines enhances SOURCE 72-2 and IL-1 Chemotactic Macrophages IL-2 cells cells, T T Functions presentation, B-cell antigen and Co-stimulatory Primary T-cell cell required growth fever on

induces activity, hematopoietic response, effects phase immunoglobulin acute macrophages, fever, synthesis, T antiviral fibroblasts, cells, Enhances endothelium

cells growth IL-7 cells pre-T Stromal Enhances of

T protein; factor neutrophil and Neutrophil-activating macrophages, T cells, epithelium lymphocyte chemotactic

to mast T IgE production, IL-9 cell in synergy induce cells growth with Acts IL-4

suppresses suppresses surfaces function; macrophages B-cell including synthesis factor; Cytokine inflammation T inhibits cells, growth; production; T regulatory enhances cells, mucosal inhibitory macrophage IL-12 at

inhibits synthesis IL-4 enhances cytotoxic stimulatory factor; neutrophils IFN-γ Macrophages, synthesis; cell maturation factor; lymphocyte NK

IL-17 infections fungal Induces and IL-1β T synthesis, IL-6 cells important in

T induces T T-cell Inhibits and cells, activation, TGF-β and cells B-cell regulatory proliferation cells, cells including T other many regulatory

T eosinophils endothelium monocytes, Chemokine RANTES T for cells, cells,

MIP-1α enhances T T Chemokine of cells, Mononuclear cells CD4+ endothelium cells; for differentiation

activated Monocytes, Chemokine endothelium IP-10 macrophages, NK monocytes, T cells for cells, and

RANTES, killer; secreted; IFN, Interferon; expressed T normal Th2, 2. natural activation, NK, regulated T helper and on

b, Recurrent as A pneumoniae, Haemophilus streptococcus with extracellular Streptococcus organisms, pyogenic such encapsulated type group influenzae infections and

bronchiectasis, recurrent conjunctivitis Otitis, sinusitis, pneumonia, and

(except or enterovirus infections Few viral and problems fungal with poliomyelitis)

common, with lamblia Diarrhea especially to Giardia infection secondary

Compatible after adulthood or to occur survival onset several with unless for complications years

influenzae recurrent tract bacterial and to Increased and disease Severe Susceptibility autoimmune such Neisseria infections extracellular recurrent or meningitides with with Recurrent of incidence organisms, encapsulated H. infections skin pneumoniae respiratory S. as infection

sp as bacteria as virulent mycobacteria, fungi, and with Recurrent such Candida or protozoa as organisms, less viruses, infections well opportunistic

Growth retardation, diarrhea, malabsorption, common thrive to failure and

from or nonirradiated from Anergy graft-versus-host disease maternal Susceptible engraftment blood to

live from may virus Fatal bacille Calmette-Guérin occur or vaccination. reactions survival Poor childhood incidence infancy of malignancy beyond early or High

coli, Staphylococcus, Recurrent bacteria such Aspergillus dermatologic as Escherichia with Pseudomonas, and as fungi such infections and

Subcutaneous, including contributing formation, abscess to lymph node, and and chronic pneumatocele common, Pulmonary abscesses disease infections liver lung,

of Delayed umbilical separation cord

of infection wound healing pus Absence Poor in life. of at site(s) family recurrentinfections. in death can syndrome, syndrome),abnormal prompt a problems, infections or immune easy immune (Ataxia-telangiectasia),atopic syndrome),and of due associated (DiGeorge should as telangiectasia heart and setting gait to (Wiskott-Aldrichsyndrome) guiding dermatitis particularly in informative Omenn child (hyper-IgE immune an a a of be the an primary bleeding workup.Finally disease a deficiency presence of hypocalcemia young or history and disorder The congenital evaluation, such bruising of

asplenia nonlymphoid and autoimmune and drug-induced) neutropenia transplantation/graft-versus-host corticosteroids, disease antimetabolites) lupus (e.g., viral, Sarcoidosis Malignancy cancer) (leukemia, erythematosus agents Acquired disease, other Hodgkin radiation, Immunosuppressive diseases cell (autoimmune, Systemic or Stem Acquired

of immunologically due at to loss pneumonia. resulting Recurrent pathology recurrent in leading such or infection to morbidity, membranes infection with disease lung chronic as tympanic scarring associated is children hearing sites substantial in deficient status, subcutaneous percentiles, nutritional should and assessed. of Height presence and fat weight be of may otic be rales chronic nasal repeated purulent thrush, or evidence infections. or and Oral persistent discharge, size of tissue tonsils) whereas (e.g., increased tissue lymphoid of CVID, or immunodeficiency human (HIV) lymphoid agammaglobulinemia CGD, SCID, virus Absence suggests infection. or suggests telangiectasia ataxia-telangiectasia. and ataxia indicate Cerebellar some bruises disorders with that regulation inflammatory are eczema or whereas bowel Severe immune suggest polyendocrinopathy eczema petechiae syndrome. and disease is of and seen enteropathy and X-linked in Wiskott-Aldrich (IPEX),

considered, immunodeficiency testing be immunologic that is if 72-4). There nonrevealing causes particularly the many secondary are should (Table of in lungs, patients are site. individuals skin), whereas reflux), infections confined (e.g., a In at pulmonary sinuses, single anatomic sequestered problems develop to ears, lobe, (e.g., with immunodeficiencies, multiple infections sites ureteral with primary anatomic the even presence Asplenia severe is antibody recurrent with and in protective titers. infections, associated of any presenting T-cell history with a a considered with Infection should HIV in be patient immunodeficiency. suggesting

immunodeficiency to signs early immune diagnosis followed recognition symptoms, tests of diseases primary patients and The by depends evaluate with on of function. laboratory an an an referral and who may the (see to patient Table Recognizing immunodeficiency immunologist prompts have disease evaluation 72-3).

established disease of use immunodeficiency 72-5). laboratory without history diagnosis tests clinical cannot on based primary of the A (Table be the the identify or blood anemia differential should presence as patients neutropenia disease). of (SCID) (allergic with as well disease) obtained lymphopenia to with always complete eosinophils A be (chronic and count levels to the of primary immunoglobulin essential Serum immunodeficiency. suspected workup are age, several gradual transplacental birth vary adult IgG to and and from at with of nadir values IgG, of maternal Antibody increase months between a over values 3 years. 6 transfer a adult levels of normal occurring age, with full-term physiologic and at to over low IgA adult longest taking normal gradually years, several the are levels birth, IgA with IgM and reach increase values. proteins protein-losing loss synthetic as low increased or enteropathy. with levels albumin Low rates proteins, of low levels all immunoglobulin for suggest in immunoglobulin suggest and found CGD, diseases. B-cell immunity in intact such immotile syndrome, as recurrent and fibrosis, diseases infection, HIV can with cystic cilia infections, be High autoimmune levels atopic a Elevated syndrome, as IgE well levels of in as be in hyper-IgE such immune deficiencies dermatitis. number found can as

reflect to Streptococcus and diphtheria, childhood to system after or immune develop antibodies vaccines) antibody specific Haemophilus b, Specific capacity titers synthesize memory the the type pneumoniae cells. (tetanus, influenzae of vaccination B obtained are If vaccine a titers weeks the low, response immunization with 4 to later titers and confirm 6 immunization. specific to Poor normal of 24 specific subclass bacterial polysaccharide is deficiency. antigens deficiency or months response associated also is to before antibody age IgG with but vaccines infections development early of has in childhood. organisms The protein-conjugate prevented these with polysaccharide antigens. can to conjugate Antibody vaccine, responses in responses the found S. but in vaccine, 23-valent used pneumoniaeserotypes antibody polysaccharide test be not to to the polysaccharide the

diphtheria, skin protein antigen-presenting Delayed-type mumps T or presence Candida, hypersensitivity antigen-specific functional to tests as and cells. antigens the such tetanus, of demonstrate cells and hypersensitivity negative, vaccination retested If test should delayed-type booster receive results be patients 4 are skin later. weeks a

hemoglobin, Complete indicated bones, if including infection count, blood by and in count count history cell clinical and long and blood white sinus, to mastoids, Radiographs platelet morphology, document differential chest,

Cultures, appropriate if

immunoglobulin anti-B, measures IgM Specific levels: IgM, titers function) Quantitative (anti-A, IgA, antibody levels: IgG, Isohemagglutinin IgE,

Streptococcus influenzae, tetanus Haemophilus antigens: vaccine) (conjugate Protein antigens: Protein-conjugated diphtheria, pneumoniae

(unconjugated numbers pneumoniae Polysaccharide antigens: cytometry B-cell by and vaccine) flow S. subsets

(Candida, tests macrophage NK hypersensitivity and and measure T-cell cytometry toxoid, mumps): function skin T-cell and cell Delayed numbers flow tetanus by subsets

functional analyses cytotoxicity responses, NK T-lymphocyte cytokines) (mitogen cell assays

Nitroblue cytometry using tetrazolium test/dihydrorhodamine Staphylococcal Myeloperoxidase stain dye assay flow killing, 123 chemotaxis

and pathway classical complement Total common CH50: measures hemolytic activity

complement common pathway measures AH50: individual of activity alternative Levels components and

NK, killer. Natural

Lymphocyte and flow percentage of T-cell, by phenotyping absolute cytometry the numbers NK-cell B-cell, enumerates and subsets. presence for such and histocompatibility major complex as of surface are normal molecules, cytometry immunity, signaling that adhesion necessary for well Flow analysis or proteins as molecules intracellular proteins can of as test the also cytokines. response assays (antigens). are concanavalin that cells (tetanus presence to the to nonspecific mitogen) vitro T-cell or stimulus to pokeweed of cells or proliferate in toxoid or (mitogens) confirm proliferation in T memory of capacity Candida) or T assays antigens the antigen-specific mitogens (phytohemagglutinin, a A, prior antigen. vaccination presence exposure Such the (Candida)to (tetanus) or requires despite markers T-cell T-cell clinical help disorder. in be by activation cytokine synthesis when, present can suggests may T in of the Tests identify laboratories performed expression specialized for history T or a cells defects function cells, and research

C2, pathway of complement of tests B, complement(C1, measures the C3, test, classical which include (C3, C4), CH50 assays factor of the proteins Complement pathway which the AH50 test, the presence the alternative the of and proper-din). in proteins are AH50 and the the defect (C5−C9). both abnormal, If likely in is pathway CH50 common a levels proteins. or can specific complement measure the of function laboratories presence Specialized function hereditary diagnose or C1-inhibitor acquired angioneurotic and antigen Tests edema. for areused to

and 123 to (DHR) function nitroblue generated NBT oxygen insoluble include dye for to an radicals a test or neutrophilsoxidize fluorescentmolecule. (NBT) for dihydrorhodamine activated neutrophil tetrazolium DHR Tests the blue by which CGD,in used. fluorescence DHR Patients neutrophilswith NBT and CGD little with when blue-staining is no have In chemotaxis,bacterial laboratories. evaluation some for are neutrophil presence of myeloperoxidase and tests of killing, activity in vitro available the phagocytosis, for for Tests ofadhesion performed by expression molecules LFA-1) the can as cytometry. such antigen (leukocyte flow 1, type be CD18 function–associated

helpful prenatal disease determining the immunodeficiency counseling, can primary to deciding and diagnosis may and prognosis a on of the diagnosis. of be genetic testing Genetic and a for of the laboratories natural course be confirm history treatment, disease, specialized performed in whom for can patients DiGeorge 22 studies deletions hybridization situ is in In fluorescent syndrome helpful. in chromosome be suspected, of chromosomal for breakage 7 14 whom suspected, In chromosomes ataxia-telangiectasia studies is are useful. in and patients in

of on DiGeorge thymus development. x-ray a absence in chest syndrome suggests or other The T-cell defects are cerebellum patients ataxia-telangiectasia. the found in with in Abnormalities the immunodeficiency limited diagnosis use the of diagnostic is evaluation infectious the Otherwise imaging essentially diseases. to diseases in of of

function provide in lymphocyte responses. or result memory and affect antigen significant Disorders because development that lymphocytes specificity immunodeficiency T lymphoid give in Hematopoietic in precursors the marrow stem develop lymphocytes thymus that to or rise B the cells lymphocytes bone (Fig. into 73-1). necessary Isolated clear immunodeficiency cause disorders antibody T-cell because and by disorders diseases, antibody whereas cells. combined in synthesis for to usually pathogens for result intracellular cell-mediated B B-cell immunity are they deficiency tumor component cells can and from immune cells cells. important of virus-infected an precursors, the kill and response, are lymphoid develop innate NK function can cell Antibodies enhance NK cytotoxicity. by cellular antibody-mediated

StudentConsult.com Available @

increased an bacteria. by B encapsulated result susceptibility in Disorders to of cells infections

a and subsequent in total absence immunoglobulin absence of specific with defective from levels function results or B cells severe antibody. decrease the of Agammaglobulinemia by and agammaglobulinemia and (Table of of cells, a deficiency affects hypogammaglobulinemia, males profound B is tissue lymphoid characterized severe X-linked 73-1; absence Fig. see 73-1). The kinase chromosome that on a signaling Btk and by a Xq22 gene involved of mutations is in encoding antigen tyrosine receptor pre-B-cell the caused the receptor. the defect is B-cell in and gene, Autosomal B-cell Igα, chain and receptor Igβ, μ of complexes λ5, BLNK. antigen in recessive from agammaglobulinemiaresults heavy pre-B-cell includes a the the defects mutations variety in and recessive common is X-linked forms. agammaglobulinemia autosomal more the than

present to life can agammaglobulinemia antibodies months present 12 years wane, of during with the 6 Patients first patients derived later. as although usually maternally Streptococcus organisms develop infections These aureus, influenzae opsonin. Haemophilus and an pneumoniae, for Pseudomonas, which antibody b, with is important patients Staphylococcus type susceptibility also chronic to attenuated with poliomyelitis giardiasis oral leading increased vaccine-associated poliovirus live, (if to enteroviral vaccine). enteroviral infections, and have meningoencephalitis immunized and They

variable developing an of the decades life in disorder hypogammaglobulinemia period characterized 73-1). normal immunodeficiency second by third and heterogeneous Common most function, commonly (CVID) a is immune initial of (see Table after IgM low 10 Serum mg/dL are less (usually mg/dL) less than mg/dL levels levels than IgA and/or 500 levels. <300 with IgG titers low pneumococcus, antigens, to and diphtheria, absent. to as and or tetanus antigens,such are protein Antibody suchas polysaccharide can be numbersand highly numbers low. normal are variable, B-cell or T-cell and function normal-sized Patients have and enlargedtonsils exhibit and splenomegaly. may or lymph nodes infections Haemophilus type Theyare susceptible Streptococcus pneumoniae, due tract and to respiratory Mycoplasma. frequent influenzae to b, enteroviruses Giardia, are infections Salmonella, Gastrointestinal with common. Campylobacter, Helicobacter, and granulomatous and leadsto anemia tract, significant occur thrombocytopenia gastrointestinal diseaseaffecting Autoimmune morbidity. hemolytic and frequently, liver, and lungs the lymphoma, mortality. especially is of Cancer, amajor cause

Common LINEAGEIsotype B+ Bone function deficiency cell T cell CD8+ T development cellB activation development isotype CD34+ syndrome Memory Stem IgG PROLIFERATION helper, Mature functions cytotoxic, cell cell T Effector T variable Defects SCID PROLIFERATION IgMSelective in SCID marrow Differentiation LINEAGEThymus functions cell LYMPHOCYTE Mature in B cell cells IgA /MHC Effector Ig LYMPHOCYTE cell T− Plasma immunodeficiency Hyper and T B− cell Agammaglobulinemia X-linked B IgM Defects Pre–B Somatic T− Switching/ in deficiencies CD4+ hyper & Hypermutation DiGeorge Defects

immunodeficiencies. congenital abnormalities of Sites in cellular 73-1 Figure of diseases, blocked or the be at maturation activation stages. lymphocytes B immunodeficiency may different In primary T or

, lymphocyte. B T, Inhibition; B, lymphocyte; T Lichtman Philadelphia, Immunology, Abbas from 3, AK, ed and JS: Saunders.) 1997, AH, Molecular (Adapted Pober Cellular

of gene defects The CVID levels majority total IgG normal. are cases of leading decreased the while to unknown. Normal indiare levels express a cells, history inducible activated more important. a one have ing defect low is the Some so subclasses, in T for patients or can recurrent of on of co-stimulator (ICOS) infections gene encod-viduals subclass to infections transmembrane recurrent deficiency specific titers of polysaccharide inability and is requiring IgG important cyclophi-synthesize antigens agammaglobulinemia, or best (TACI), antibody X-linked BAFF-R. with is the or marker ligand activator ated to CD21, CD81, calcium-modulating exclude therapy. associ-It interactor CD19, An protein lin and to immunoglobulin hyper-IgM hypogammaglobulinemia lymphoproliferative delayed other by disease, Transient as syndrome hypogammaglobulinemia causes of infancy such second-production. thymoma, a with of is or condition as characterized well X-linked associated temas porary hypogammaglobulinemia, result protein of of to losing ary prolongation physiologic secondary to or the tions, pathogenesis enteropathy, is disorder to of is this CVID. the medica-but a before from thought making The diagnosis unknown of infancy. hypogammaglobulinemia The immunoglobulin

immunoglobulins. 10 levels months with deficiency is less other defined normal of age as with 6 of IgA is IgA Selective immunoglobuthan serum levels at mg/dL accentuated, nadir mg/dL. than 200 lin less levels and the increase be when levels until diminished usually IgA should diagnosis the life year levels. remain least patient cannot age adult 4 confirmed is Immunoglobulin The of reach years first levels of at throughout normal, of approximately 2 levels, generally in age-appropriate to in 4 years 500 individuals. 1 deficiency Selective by IgA occurs to age. asymptomatic. increased patients in Most selective The are deficiency is IgA of infection sinopulmonary incidence with some patients. normal as tein T sinopulmonary normal IgG2 diagnosis of deficiency, tetanus by deficiency, is responses toxoids. levels supported antigens by diphtheria In it others such and antibody specific cells protions, antibody recurrent The is and infec-both to B associated with and subclass celiac tranfood The autoimmune or disease. allergy, disease, autosomal in occurs of this inheritance. families, be cannot disorder IgA however, suggesting ciency defi-sient nature confirmed, to until ranges. immunoglobulin normal return levels

by deficiency and subclasses characterized normal ies the recurrent antibody level or subclass of antibod-Specific occurs deficiency levels the in is syndrome when one IgG IgG more of selectively immunoglobulin four with infections is

BLNK, mo) Igα, (6–9 (encapsulated differentiation AR λ5 (AR) Recurrent in Infancy μ (pre-B enteroviruses) meningitis Agammaglobulinemia Igβ, gene bacteria, Vpre-B, pneumonia, sinusitis, B-cell in: Lymphoid level); X-linked, hypoplasia Btk Arrest and chain, infections, (X-linked); mutations

infections syndrome in AID, Hyper-IgM Autoimmunity UNG AR Defect Sinopulmonary Variable

ITP, RA, AID, recessive; arthritis; idiopathic Autosomal autosomal AR, cytidine AD, thrombocytopenic deaminase; activation-induced rheumatoid purpura; dominant;

SLE, uracil-DNA systemic lupus glycosylase. erythematosus; UNG,

has normal disorder pneumococcal the and 23-valent polysaccharideantigens, as numbers synthesize the specific subsets, to lymphocyte such an to antibody vaccine. but inability to is disorder Thepathogenesis unknown. of this justifies antibody specific recurrent Lack the infections explains titers and of therapy.

@ Available StudentConsult.com

combined signals B-cell immunodeficiency providenecessary in T-cell or for function because development that cells T differentiation. affect usuallyresult Disorders due common deficient hyper-IgM CD40 in ligand. to T-cellfunction a defects X-linked the syndrome, form with most of hyper-IgM immunodeficiency combined is syndrome, X-linked (Fig. syndrome in hyper-IgM present Defects syndrome and hyper-IgM causeautosomal to similarly CD40 recessive and 73-2 73-2). Table by IgE, switching a from IgM characterized and syndrome to of ofimmunoglobulin is responses. failure or and IgD a lack isotype Hyper-IgM memory IgG,IgA, serum IgA, normal or elevated or IgM low levels IgE. with Affected of of patientshave IgG, absentlevels and cytokines B while allows and interaction specificity on cells isotype antigen and CD40 Immunoglobulin is by cells (see to directed ligand function, T a cell alteringimmunoglobulin switching between and CD4 maintain Fig. CD40 onB 73-2). for activatesseveral switching. CD40 (NF-κB) deaminase which and two enzymes, transcription cytidine uracil-DNA are activation-induced factors, including Signal κB glycosylase(UNG), and and required nuclear via class factor molecules (AID) transduction signaling isotype immunodeficiencies combined failure T-cell ofAID presents a forms UNG 73-1). hyper-IgM antibody switching without of are deficiency diseases any immunoglobulin abnormality function.These in with or andnot Deficiency Table of (see

(carinii) increased or susceptible with parvum. syndrome defects and with are sinopulmonary CD40 susceptibility All such as jiroveci opportunistic P. ligand infections, CD40 infections, to patients hyper-IgM whereas have in to patients Cryptosporidium and other antigen-presenting cells via Signaling and B leads promoting cell-mediated immune differentiation to for for cells responses. activating T-cell CD40 upregulation molecules co-stimulatory of important on associated in The an also modulator essential from with hyper-IgM the defects encoding ectodermal phenotype gene the (NEMO). dysplasia, found in resulting disorder is NF-κB X-linked with and NF-κB of because meningitis with to important Patients a is infection adaptive mycobacteria, especially systems. immune are in function for NEMO atypical of both and defects infectious organisms, spectrum susceptible signaling innate the wider

dysfunction profound a itself, cells lack gene T-cell secondary or function, the absence by of defect Table numbers or to Severe immunodeficiency lack 73-2). (SCID) of fromthe of is andB-cell from characterized resulting combined function(see B T-cell T develop cells bone from marrow−derived

the Figure B 73-2 T between and a cell Schematic interaction cell. representation of a CD4 recognition ligand cytokine MHC T-cell peptide (CD40L) (TCR) via antigen T-cell presented synthesis. activation receptor II class of resulting follows in molecules CD40 and expression molecules that of in co-stimulatory cytokine (B7) CD40L in priming T-cell B T-cell and via are drives cell stimulates differentiation. resulting the expression that important CD40, synthesis and cytidine and activate immunoglobulin uracil-DNA activation-induced to (UNG) glycosylase isotype somatic cells signaling CD40 in cytokine promote hypermutation. and switching deaminase (AID) B (X-HIM), (AR-HIM). or hyper-IgM defects CD40L cause autosomal and AID, Defects in hyper-IgM cause UNG CD40, in X-linked recessive CD40L either AID Defects defects and normal in T-cell and UNG in co-stimulation T-cell whereas defects, maintain priming, or function. affect co-stimulation T-cell leading and CD40 to

Sinopulmonary X-linked, disease, CD40 infections, Diseases (see MANIFESTATIONS FEATURES (X-linked) year (AR) or Neutropenia, CD40 Immunodeficiency Defect ligand infections, 73-1) 73-2 in Combined First Pneumocystis AR Table GENETICS Hyper-IgM jiroveci DISORDER ONSET cancer ASSOCIATED liver opportunistic Table syndrome PATHOGENESIS

autosomal nucleoside AR, MHC, cells IL-2Rγ, disease; deoxyguanosine cells dominant; ADA, AD, purine deoxyadenosine T− B−, and complex; GVHD, adenosine deaminase; immunodeficiency; major T− triphosphate; chain; and B Autosomal B−, receptor cells severe histocompatibility graft-versus-host gamma SCID, IL, absent. absent combined absent cells dATP, T interleukin-2 dGTP, present; PNP, T− triphosphate; interleukin; recessive; phosphorylase; B

(see the in precursors Fig. thymus of by genes they the region variable T-cell togenerate receptor development of where 73-2), receptor stages a characterized recombination of antigen T-cell repertoire. DNA undergoseveral diverse Fig. positive (see major that (MHC) thymocytes process select thymus receptors A withantigen of in ensure to molecules survival to with the complex histocompatibility selection can occurs their interact 73-2). MHC class CD8 I that presented if or byMHC Thymocytes theyinteract II self-antigens of haveantigen receptors positively however, with CD4 respectively.Some in molecules, cells selected class the thymocytes, thymus. differentiate into the recognize or molecules T the a thymus negative deleted selection. cells are of by These in process the and foreign a can selection that multitude selectionand the autoimmune that leave individual’sMHC thymus ensure with mounting mature the of in molecules Positive thymus negative function antigenswithout responses. the recognize Tcells resultfrom T-cell the mutation function with in any can genetic the SCID in that T-celldevelopment interferes or thymus specific periphery.

infections, to with bacterial Clinical failure and infections, infections, of manifestations SCID other chronic severe chronic infection thrive, viral include fungal candidiasis

other (carinii) and intractable diarrhea. jiroveci organisms, opportunistic P. and graft-versus-host have of similar fatal. lymphocytes, disease engraftment skin to Patients to is not maternal which often eczema, possibly from (GVHD) usually related disease lymphocytes to are by transfusions extremely infected blood fatal Patients and SCID blood from cytomegalovirus-positive in GVHD susceptible products. with be can irradiated Patients should receive always blood with products. T-cell disorders

(IL-2), SCID, X-linked common Xq13.1 interleukin-2 gene IL-15, for mutations by common on most gamma and IL-9, the the IL-7, chromosome IL-21 the of receptors. IL-4, form, coding chain the caused is in B NK patients cells. peripheral no numbers normal the in or blood cells but of T have cells Affected have or B there to cells because low CD4 stimulate Immunoglobulin levels no T cells. are undetectable are signaling in receptor, required IL-15 results of IL-7 via defect a failure is NK-cell for the development. The from development T-cell and autosomal of causes recessive many are There SCID. in (Jak3), 3 common Defects similar gamma phenotype as in kinase X-linked results a the SCID. Janus chain, which to binds IL-7 in deficiency of cells in of normal CD3 with a ZAP-70, subunits NK-cell numbers. result the T Defects Band receptor, molecule the and as affect and recombinase there of called in as DNA such (RAG) gene DNA repair defects genes that In variety 2 excision important genes a two is as Artemis. recombination and B activating and including other well 1 in cells, T addition that DNA cells result no any or recessive DNA in autosomal SCID Defects of with recombination present. cells abolish genes in the T B repair or serum IgE, RAG1, that syndrome, and a result characterized is by limited marked elevated Mutations RAG2, impaired that of lymphadenopathy, eosinophilia, erythroderma, in SCID hepatosplenomegaly, variant function. Artemis form preserve function T-cell exfoliative in Omenn or but syndrome these T a periphery, Omenn have the T repertoire. have Patients cells in with cells limited

in in two purine and (ADA) SCID. result Deficiencies in involved phosphorylase, purine also the deaminase nucleoside enzymes adenosine pathway, salvage is lymphocytes, in cells. the or toxic B, plasma to metabolic nucleoside their T, and of Accumulation substrates products NK including and urine adulthood. patients Most 5 with or, severe not exhibit partial life, until in occasionally, years after patients established the diagnosis may age of function in be infection enzyme although early in normal have and little diagnosis total lymphopenic; cells but Patients with late-onset (Nezelof they levels immunoglobulin may generally B are antibody syndrome). functional deficiency ADA and of immune SCID lymphopenia All patients purine over loss have or phosphorylase time. with nucleoside function

that genes leads that in class II class transcription molecules. antigen MHC absence factors Bare transport or affect either peptides, defects lymphocyte II I the to from or expression which of class regulate molecules of MHC results of syndrome whereas decreased deficiency, tissue T decreased absent are normal CD4 but Lymphoid and class or in are may or class in I be present CD8 deficiency. absent II B cells amounts, cells cells in to numbers because the may CD8 functional cannot of antigens Some none normal have of T are or be cells T CD4 peptide presented cells, cells. T but patients

T-cell result for maturation. or syndrome known also hypocalcemia), is thymic CATCH of the in third syndrome required palate, anomalies, the velocardiofacial cleft syndrome, 22 dysmorphogenesis of resulting of hypoplasia and (cardiac hypoplasia, pharyngeal DiGeorge and fourth pouches, the abnormal facies, as thymus anomalies, is chromosome all, with patients 22q11.2.DiGeorge characterized increased and arch a Most, have infections. tetany, hypocalcemic aortic on conotruncal classically not and syndrome DiGeorge syndrome defect by but with established 22q11.2.Most polymerase have chain to with patients in by chromosome fluorescent in detect T-cell low generally age. DNA a deletions is situ partial reaction function improve numbers and that a probe defects immune diagnosis with hybridization or The Severe results it SCID to of T-cell in due T deficiency lack cells. is but rare, complete a do lymphocyte function. to some transplant T defects of the of because as marrow cells DiGeorge not forms the may syndrome in during mature respond although bone are SCID transfer other syndrome do important, transplantation and bare confer well thymus, immune Most

a and humoral to immunity, by 73-3). syndrome and X-linked characterized Wiskott-Aldrich lymphoproliferative thrombocytopenia, cell-mediated defects eczema, disease disorder (Table is an predisposition in mutations Wiskott-Aldrich monocytes. gene the in for syndrome (WASP), on caused the coding chromosome of protein Xp11.22 lymphocytes, and It is platelets, expressed by IgE IgM, protein of poor responses profound to results IgA, and levels elevated of polysaccharide Deficiency and thrombocytopenia. this in waning antigens, decreased T-cell function, cytopenias become Opportunistic problematic infections older in autoimmune children. and thrombocytopenia X-linked identical Isolated mutations of results also the from gene. (carinii), result of caused of One hemorrhage, and herpes recurrent result die simplex a by Wis-kott-Aldrich jiroveci virus. infection cytomegalovirus, a of die or as as patients third thirds with P. two syndrome bacteria, problems patients. some hematologic and transplantation cell in corrected Stem the immunologic has

11q22.3(see chromosome 73-3). is by the ATM a Ataxia-telangiectasia Table caused mutated) (ataxia-telangiectasia, syndrome on gene have conjunctival cutaneous Patients and

(Xp11.22) infections (WASP) dermatitis, antibody syndrome Early small cell-mediated decreased lymphoproliferation infancy immunity, recurrent Polysaccharide Thrombocytopenia, protein deficiency, 53-kD platelets, defect atopic X-linked, Wiskott-Aldrich

natural dominant; AD, recessive; killer. autosomal AR, Autosomal NK,

with cerebellar degeneration and Purkinje cells. ataxia of progressive telangiectasias deficiency, severity, IgE function and IgG2 deficiencyof IgA variable may levels, subclass variably depressedT-cell seen. low be division or damage be in The blocking isrepaired, not but both. normal until ATM DNAdamage, the growth is gene detecting cell appears to clear the function involved of cells irradiation. Ataxia-telangiectasia are exquisitelysensitive to Leukemias, may diabetesalso lymphomas, be and present. delayed. maturation Sexual is but therapy, therapy (IVIG) helpful. antimicrobial replacement There effective uniformly therapymay andintravenous immunoglobulin be isno

Available @ StudentConsult.com

dystrophy mucous nails membranes, recurrent candidal (see infections chronic mucocutaneous skin, 73-3). or the (autoimmune-polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal and Chronic characterized [APECED])is by of Table candidiasis lymphocyte but or reactivity significantly is proliferation normal skin to decreased and delayed antibody Candida. There production absent with to and Patients treated must oral antifungal agents. do respond usually be therapy antifungal topical not by early Addison such an as adulthood. and develops In hypoparathyroidism autoimmune disorder, disease, endocrine patients, most reported. disorders have Other autoimmune been endocrine evaluation the onset The requires for autoimmune frequent need disorders. insidious for from autoimmune thymus, is negative results for disease which to in for tissues (AIRE), defect individuals. This a regulator the in antigens thymus factor and selection transcription a these expression in gene of in the in the tissue in normal the necessary tolerance resulting peripheral

73-3) Epstein-Barr (EBV). virus Patients immune to with X-linked defect have Table disease (see a lymphoproliferative in responsiveness with this disease fatal with which 80% infected are is in Boys until EBV, acutely patients. normal of mutation Xq25, a the an involved The by protein for in adapter of called lymphocytes. signal SH2D1A disease codes at caused gene in chromosome transduction is which EBV cells, infection, and the CD8 in hepatic an mutation T extensive expansion results of necrosis, death. With and survive hypogammaglobulinemia who infection and anemia are significant lymphoma. EBV have developing aplastic high initial for risk at Boys in mutations which A lymphoproliferative type in disorder with seen in X-linked is similar disorder XIAP, results 2. boys

products are and irradiated blood cytomegalovirus-negative. Avoid unless with they transfusions

patients especially vaccines, T-cell and in or deficiencies virus with Avoid agammaglobulinemia, in household severe members. live

Use prophylaxis X-linked to in in antifungal consider T-cell T-cell immunodeficiency. immunodeficiency, prophylaxis Pneumocystis in (carinii) and jiroveci hyper-IgM,

recurrent pneumonia. with in function Follow pulmonary patients

patients chest postural in Use recurrent pneumonia. physiotherapy with and drainage

can because using disseminate. quickly infections minor Consider prophylactic antibiotics

for Giardia Examine Clostridium and stools lamblia diarrheal difficile.

individuals exposure unnecessary to with Avoid infection. and Boil syndrome defects (Cryptosporidium for hyper-IgM risk). water T-cell

Use for immunoglobulin states severe mg/kg wk IV). deficiency q3–4 (400–600 antibody

characterized resembles Hyper-IgE syndrome dermatitis, the markedly staphylococcal eosinophilia, joints, a atopic levels, serum and and rash of lungs, by IgE is that (see abscesses elevated skin, 73-3). Table viscera Candida, H. b, occur. influenzae Aspergillus type also Infections with and may These pneumatoceles staphylococcal osteopenia, and the have lungs develop pneumonias. in may coarse facial features, have giant patients after to antigens levels as immune specific is are IgG, IgA, IgM Although cell-mediated are serum immunity. responses reduced, and normal, humoral medications indicated, Long-term be may replacement with immunoglobulin and therapy is helpful. treatment antistaphylococcal inheritance. some an have whereas patients appear autosomal Most autosomal to an of patients form have inheritance, recessive dominant an genes found and recessive TYK2 the syndrome. hyper-IgE defects have transducer in dominant Defects autosomal hyper-IgE autosomal in STAT3 and of were and syndrome, in (signal patient activator in identified a the with 3) gene been DOCK8 transcription

(Table approach diagnosis, depends therapy findings, findings The on to the clinical and lymphocyte of 73-4). disorders laboratory When need is in all to be negative for process, while immunodeficiency and the cytomegalovirus. evaluation blood irradiated products is and suspected products Lymphocytes can GVHD with fatal present in cause in patients SCID. blood Cytomegalovirus stem undergoing be can patient immunodeficiency in fatal transplantation. cell an infection members Live should diagnosis virus is withheld household established. vaccines and patients from a be until

life, quality recurrent a of with prevent Infections provide antibiotics better infections, to can and decrease should used be be appropriate treated consequences. antibiotics;prophylactic possible administration withstem of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole prophylaxis daily Pneumocystis receive can therapeutic fungi the dose.Patients be and until one half or at total cell provided transplantation. deficiencies of severe withonce-daily prophylaxis with treated against Antibiotic T-cell amoxicillin should diseases of pneumoniae, monthlater. vaccination H. benefit vaccination type forms b post and least protein-conjugate vaccines influenzae antibody at milder 1 S. to deficiency Patients titers with with assaying from may routinely with generate vaccines adults older These levels. administered antibody children to receive are should them to also youngchildren; and deficiencysyndrome protectiveantibody

is replacement patients deficiency diseases for therapy, intravenously severeantibody lifesaving a orsubcutaneously, therapy SCIDs. with Immunoglobulin and severity infection microorganisms and patients. in most It against passiveimmunity reduces provides of and common thefrequency every mg/kg 3 to weightadministered infusion to weeks, subcutaneously every 4 of dose 2 or 1 to usually administered of body is pump Immunoglobulin 600 monthly replacement total by ata therapy weeks. 400 intravenously course. important, patient’s be regularly by levels therapyshould clinical trough and, measuring IVIG monitored immunoglobulin more the may frequent in infections, more doses immunoglobulin combination to have patientswho higher require recurrent infections. especially the week continue or of recurrent last replacement before who therapy the antibiotics have to continue of prophylactic and in Patients IVIG,may be indicated administration administration.A with reactions therapy myalgias. of transfusion chills,fever, Complications IVIG include and infusions pretreatment antihistamine, by usually and They an subsequent infusion. with in of slower can a be anantipyretic, prevented by rate fromaseptic 24 therapy, can hours. Headache IVIG inthe usually first develop meningitis after treatment to It most with ibuprofen. responds often reactions IVIG patientswith in can absent Allergic occur IgA. to not antibodies. cannot who detectable occur reactions are should patients Allergic who any IgA have serum levels rare in patients and synthesize or Subcutaneous be fewer has local site(s)of administration immunoglobulin infusion. but at may adverseeffects by reactions the of complicated low. of agents,despite infectious from selected risk of preparation transmission extremely of The donors,is large numbers

76). is disorders a transplantation, (see for leukocyte severe from Therapy Chapter human T-cell stem cell antigen–matchedsibling preferably replacement provides Immunoglobulin immunity. antibody-mediated passive immunoglobulin poor have replacementtherapy. patientscontinue to Some stem transplantation cell and function lifelong require B-cell after stem of GVHD, transplantation. host tissues, cell the transplanted complication animmune the response the is which initiate cells against main in ADA,stabilized with of to form by coupling canreceive intramuscular the of who replacement Patients sibling glycol. donors lack repeated SCID ADAdeficiency matched doses polyethylene deficiency several patients bone gammachain of cells, into therapyhas ADA infused and thepatient. been which with by performed Gene in into deficiency stem transfer are a marrow common normalgene treated somepatients. leukemia the deficiencywas however, patients; itwas common the of by of for in development in most gamma Gene complicated chain successful therapy

for Population-based underwaybecause complications programs improves is SCID infectious prior early identification screening outcomes. to of SCID recombination receptor duringT-cell formed amplification can chain lymphopenia. to T-cell Polymerase (TRECs) receptor blood be newbornscreening severe of excision reaction performed T-cell circles spots detect on been test screening. to has at recommended been for detect for this screening Newborn TRECs has birth,and universal SCID shown

function disorders in killing ingesting defective roles their primary cell important 74-1). deficient wound and pathogens.Neutrophil is (Table and Neutrophils numbersor immunity play from can function healing; result variety are a of neutrophildisorders to bacterial fungi. certain susceptible with infectionsand Patients absence delayed and poor skin cordseparation, viscera,lymphadenitis, infections pus. abscesses (gingivitis), of wound in or membrane healing, mucous include umbilical the signs Suggestive granulocyte factor, bonemarrow in Neutrophils interleukin-3. the and cells granulocyte-monocyte by of stem cell including colony-stimulating hematopoietic from action factor, severalcolony-stimulating stem the factor factors, colony-stimulating develop (G-CSF), the mature On are in in marginating reside bone pool. found or circulation marrow, leavingthe neutrophils the extravasate complement molecules vascular arenecessary neutrophils especially blood where and and to roll and they phagocytose to from or infection, antibodies. by into thosecoated adhere sites the kill of endothelium Adhesion for pathogens, factors, C5a, tissues fragment Chemotactic mobilize sites neutrophils formulated complement peptides, and of andbacterial to enter infections. the including interleukin-8, or granular enzymes of by pathogensusing oxygen radicals. Neutrophils activation ingested kill

of Numbers Disorders Neutrophil

Available StudentConsult.com @

Diarrhea Failure Thrive Neutropenia to

age. normal The neutrophil with count varies year count of or an (ANC) is defined as less absolute than neutrophil white for 1 older. 1500/mm3 age Neutropenia children counts. lower normally American total white children cell and African blood have neutrophil its on neutropenia severity. The of effect depends minimally increased the to is susceptibility than The 1000/mm3. less until ANC is infection 500/mm3. patients than well with Most greater ANC an do levels, infections common are than generalized bacteremia. At localized more these bacterial 200/mm3. with than infections an are more ANC less Serious common neutropenia (cutaneous abscesses and pharyngitis, infections are with perianal), or lymphadenitis, The enteritis cellulitis, pneumonia. major of associated (typhlitis), gingivitis, types of the flora of colonized infection neutropenia. normal in becomes usually sites The that heavily bacterial invasive with the presence are reactions from associated 74-4). (Table (Table or may acquired may 74-3), result and specific congenital Neutropenia with be 74-2) especially be infections diseases, or (Table drug

There several forms of neutropenia. congenital are HAX-1 fail the to to mutations cells recessive myeloid gene. neutropenia of the the promyelocyte which mature beyond autosomal is disorder stages Severe in syndrome) (Kostmann early due congenital an in an show blood may peripheral impressive The monocytosis. are endogenous neutrophil the a increased, of G-CSF improving in exogenous produces children. Although the these rise levels G-CSF count, care have Acute in a has myeloid who leukemia developed few survived patients into adolescence. transplantation Stem cell may curative. be GFI1 have been G6PC3 severe in neutropenia. cause Defects to also congenital and shown stem neutropenia cycle. disorder which Cyclic elements all cell a is in marrow an recessive, autosomal It disorder. or dominant, sporadic as transmitted be may short of cells neutropenia Because blood blood clinically days) red is compared hours) half-life (6 the significant of the (120 days), neutrophils to the abnormality. (10 in only to and platelets 7 4 eosinophilia. neutropenia The by by with lasting accompanied cycle 21 and usual often 6 monocytosis days, is days, to debilitating the is low. is common bone neutrophil pain count when Severe, numbers a results G-CSF and neutropenia. of shorter neutrophil increasing duration in has found in encoding neutrophil been in gene ELA2, the with patients cyclic elastase, neutropenia. for Defects of some in neutropenia. Further mutations demonstrated ELA2 cases severe analysis has congenital

congenital autosomal syndrome be component may persistent Severe accompanying neutropenia is marrow or cyclic either syndrome, insufficiency bone an recessive of a of that dysfunction. Shwachman-Diamond also pancreatic manifestation. most a disorder in This prominent which neutropenia is is the panmyeloid dwarfism Metaphyseal and may dysostosis occur. Patients G-CSF. respond to usually Other in severity congenital caused by production poorly neutrophil vary and are neutropenia deficient characterized. also congenital in the severe has of neutropenia. gain X-linked protein an with associated function been Wiskott-Aldrich of syndrome A mutation form diagnosis whom do major is neutropenia a congenital significant neutropenia with for Benign complications infectious functional in develop. not patients of ranges 500/mm3 from the infections develop. whose increased ANC infections, respiratory patients have slow 100 resolution particularly infections, Many an frequency to the that is but major of problem may in autosomal as instances, are an some and, These transmitted sporadic disorders familial dominant or be disorder. a in neutropenia be congenital may combined Severe reticular associated severe with dysgenesis, immunodeficiency

Bactericidal granulomatous Staphylococcus osteomyelitis, Aspergillus COMMENT cepacia, Disorders DEFECT abscesses caused disease X-linked granulomas, Burkholderia recessive (66%), NAME (33%); aureus, Table fumigatus eczema, recessive by Chronic 74-1 autosomal Phagocytic

cytoplasmic oculocutaneous killer neuropathy, Autosomal albinism, Bactericidal natural neutrophilic plus recessive; chemotaxis; giant malignancy, (1q42I-44) function Chédiak-Higashi neutropenia inclusions; syndrome poor

in persistent Bactericidal, fungicidal patients autosomal candidiasis chemiluminescence; (1:4000); diabetic deficiency Myeloperoxidase Reduced recessive

dehydrogenase granulomatous chronic to disease Bactericidal deficiency Phenotypically similar Glucose-6-phosphate

Reversible plus defects Bactericidal malnutrition chemotaxis Burns,

chondrodysplasia; insufficiency, Pancreatic neutropenia autosomal metaphyseal Shwachman-Diamond syndrome Chemotaxis,

Complement CR3, LFA-1, antigen macrophage 3; leukocyte type 1 antigen. 1; receptor Mac-1, function-associated

bone marrow stem mutations gene. disorder lineages the in due affecting of cells all hematopoietic to AK2

transfer occurs result as Isoimmune neutropenia to antigens. fetal in neutrophil maternal neonates antibodies the of transplacental of inherited fetal from is that present antigens to father cells. specific are maternal leukocytes mother not and are on The on neutrophil the sensitized thrombocytopenia, anemia and and Chapters isoimmune (see neutropenia, Isoimmune process transient is a 62 similar to neonatal 151). common, sepsis Cutaneous is are infections rare. and of the while is the is goal Early therapy. treatment neutropenic infant major infection of duration the Intravenous neutropenia. may globulin immune decrease of

prolonged usually age to and develops for 5 in neutropenia of children 24 persists periods. often Autoimmune months combination Neutrophil IgG, IgM, be or a may autoantibodies of IgA, these. Usually in 6 4 years. the resolves condition months to been intravenous immune patients G-CSF. most and Although globulin respond used, corticosteroids to have manifestation of neutropenia systemic may disease. Autoimmune lymphoproliferative be early arthritis, lupus rheumatoid autoimmune rarely erythematosus, or an

Neutrophil Disorders of Migration

adhere of by and to migrate adhesion interaction molecules. and endothelium with Neutrophils selectins, to called normally membrane endothelial areas proteins, inflammation integrins of the cell of the neutrophil in A sites absence pus is defects of at of migration infection. hallmark failure leukocyte In 74-1). cord with the (see separation sepsis and β2 months adhesion I the after of attendant umbilical Table birth) deficiency infants the condition 2 (LAD-I), lacking infancy with CD18 exhibit (often integrin of in omphalitis type early blood adhere to and to tissues (Fig. migrate The vascular normally 20,000/mm3 count because greater is the endothelium of failure neutrophils to of of than usually out the neutrophil to 74-1). occur. Cutaneous, and respiratory, mucosal infections this have condition Children with severe gingivitis. often death to childhood. usually Sepsis leads in early autosomal as This trait. is transmitted an disorder recessive cell transplantation Stem can lifesaving. be

sites is first of migration into rolling along of and LAD-II impairment results neutrophil infection. from neutrophil vascular the step wall, which tissues the in lymphocytes to on sialylated mediated by related group Lewis neutrophils, fucosylated and binding tetrasaccharides (see of blood Fig. (S-LeX) monocytes, the molecules and found to sialylated vascular endothelium Rolling is the surface on selectin X activated of leukocytes. defect in on neutrophils blood results to from a metabolism surface other of general absence the group the leading and 74-1).LAD-II S-LeX fucose KINDLIN-3 as protein platelet well defects. rare by LAD-III adhesion resulting defective in in as a neutrophil defects the caused disorder is and also Chapter mutations the 74-1). Table of and in (see been has Defective described in with migration syndrome gene 73 neutrophils Hyper-IgE RAC2

Disorders Function Neutrophil of

StudentConsult.com @ Available

infection. marked associated to function and be are disorders rare tend Defects and a fungal neutrophil to relatively in susceptibility with inherited bacterial results disease that Chronic cells a (CGD) of granulomatous blood is white disorder

benzene Radiation DDT, Aplastic B disease Myelodysplasia T and (viruses, tumor, processes: cell rickettsia) Chemicals: (myelosuppressive) idiosyncratic, anemia immunoglobulin Infections Immune-mediated: storage cytotoxic Drugs: Infiltrative and

syndrome Kostmann (warts, syndrome (ELA-2) Shwachman-Diamond Cartilage hypoplasia syndrome G6PC3, (HAX-1, hypogammaglobulinemia, syndrome syndrome ELA-2, Cyclic neutropenia Diamond-Blackfan Chédiak-Higashi hair GFI-1) WHIM G-CSF, infections, Griscelli syndrome

Marrow Bone to Pseudoneutropenia: Shift

diseases Sjögren arthritis, erythematosus, hypersplenism (systemic lupus autoimmune, Destruction: rheumatoid Autoimmune isoimmune, syndrome) neonatal

lung, after Leukoagglutination: surgery bypass cardiac

granulocyte independent subunit 1; catalytic growth factor; ELA-2, 2; Elastase GFI-1, glucose-6-phosphatase 3; G6PC3, factor colony-stimulating G-CSF,

HAX-1, HS1-associated X-1. protein

to conversion from of of “respiratory the pathogens and intracellular and burst,” because inability by of superoxide killing an bacteria molecular catalytic to oxygen the defective macrophages (O2–). activate neutrophils intracellular burst, that catalyzes enzyme the dinucleotide the phosphate gp91phox, p22phox, p67phox. adenine Reduced respiratory oxidase, subunits; of four and consists nicotinamide p47phox, these pathogens kill lead fungi to fumigatus, S. gram-negative bacteria to as Candida of any such and enteric (Burkholderia) Defects inability catalase-positive (Aspergillus an enzymes albicans). in and aureus The form on the most the is Xp21.1 is of located chromosome common responsible gp91phox for and gene disease. an defects autosomal other are recessive gene in manner. inherited The locations for The chromosome

HIV, human virus. immunodeficiency

Drug-Associated Table Myelosuppressive, Neutropenia chemotherapeutic agents IDIOSYNCRATIC Immunosuppressive agents 74-4 CYTOTOXIC

(aminopyrine, Antithyroid Indomethacin (chlorpromazine, derivatives Sulfonamides semisynthetic and drugs Para-aminophenol phenothiazines) derivatives Phenothiazines oxyphenbutazone) methimazole, Chloramphenicol Penicillins penicillins (propylthiouracil, carbimazole) Pyrazolone dipyrone,

Dale Adapted DC: from Neutropenia. al, et Lichtman McGraw-Hill. Williams 2010, New Seligsohn TJ, Kipps editors: ed MA, In Hematology, 8, U, York,

and for genes for p22phox, are p67phox. 1q25 p47phox, 16q24 these 7q11.23 for the of and dehydrogenase dehydrogenase of also in Glucose-6-phosphate CGD. result in forms also involved is superoxide, glucose-6-phosphate severe deficiency production abscesses. lymphadenopathy, thrive, hypergammaglobulinemia, dermatitis, Patients and to have failure chronic diarrhea, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, characteristically tract, tract, ear, middle gastrointestinal in bones. liver, lymph urinary nodes, occur and the Infections the lungs, skin,

neutrophil migration space from endothelium across vascular the Schematic into vascular tissues. 74-1 representation the Figure of and the the related found on selectin neutrophils. surface surface group molecules the to bind Neutrophils to of fucosylated P-selectin) S-LeX tetrasaccharides on sialylated (Eor vascular endothelium blood via of on the by neutrophils intercellular endothelium neutrophil vascular tightly adhesion along to function-associated become antigen the and and the The type the type interaction molecule 1 (LFA-1) molecule endothelium endothelium, spaces. bound the the bound into 1 leukocyte allowing and on adhesion of through roll neutrophils move tissue CA, and Elsevier.) System in New ed Janeway the (Adapted Disease, Immunobiology: M, P, 1999, Travers Walport Immune al: et 4, from Health York,

the prominent and or are Granulomas pylorus ureters. obstruct may

resulting protein neutrophils. and protein of is secondary autosomal granules, (CHS1) abnormality organellar by disorder an in to an involved caused of a trafficking, granules the in thought primary cytoplasmic secondary a a fusion mutation be in in syndrome, recessive Chédiak-Higashi in present and cells, platelets, Giant including many granules lymphocytes, melanocytes. are albinism. Patients have partial oculocutaneous usually leading defective recurrent natural and results neutrophil and syndrome with killer cell The defect in Chédiak-Higashi staphylococci. fatal sometimes to streptococci and in infections function, lymphadenopathy, lymphohistiocytic accelerated patients Most a syndrome jaundice, Epstein-Barr to lymphoproliferative an characterized with and by progress with infection virus and infiltrates, hepatomegaly, phase fever, pancytopenia. generalized associated resembles hemophagocytic The condition lymphohistiocytosis.

persistent child clinical age involvement medication of of evaluation the marrow other neutropenic nature bone (malignancy cyclic depends disease), lines. signs of on of and of family history, The a infection, and signs cell patient, of the or of or evidence storage condition, infiltration is confirmed complete a and differential. blood by count Neutropenia the to be A and or aspirate a production neutropenia marrow, the whether is of marrow in the due to of may of determine in bone bone the bone neutrophils marrow, loss failure necessary periphery. infiltration biopsy neutropenia. help Antineutrophil antibodies autoimmune diagnose

infection. presence by Neutrophil defects excluded the be at the neutrophils of can chemotactic site of thatis neutrophil is performed not a laboratories. for most window The skin chemotaxis 4-hour test routinely in Rebuck vivo by such the or for laboratories.Flow adhesion missed neutrophil CD15, function alter adhesion vitro specialized available that help adhesion flow can leukocyte are molecule mutations in antibody of studies of are but CD18 affect cytometry molecules, not binding defects.Point diagnose the the cytometry. migration do using In of as presence cytometry-based flow 123 72). can be test usingdihydrorhodamine the CGD test tetrazolium the (seeChapter by nitroblue diagnosed or the syndrome. presence granules ofgiant of help for neutrophils Light can microscopy diagnose Chédiak-Higashi

for underlying the neutropenia Therapy cause. on depends neutropenia Patients severe factor. antibiotics; important infections resolution broad-spectrum bacterial the most with require prognostic of is the neutropenia or autoimmune with respond to with severe patients therapy neutropenia congenital G-CSF. Most reserved should life-threatening be for infection. transfusion Granulocyte mild infections, aureus prompt S. not of Chronic caused softtissue which antimicrobial expectantly with managed can or associated neutropenia treatment group A are usually streptococcus. by immunosuppression be with

trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole débridement of required Frequent including surgical of prophylaxis, courses CGD. antibiotics, and in infections are nests A. fungi avoided, with infection hay, Because antifungals other CGD, prophylactic moldy patients fumigatus helpful. can cause compost, be can and decomposing serious and be in of must recombinant by interferon-γ of three infection is CGD The with week. treatment lessened in subcutaneously times administered a frequency and CGD, LAD-1, in Chapter (see transplantation be syndrome. Stem Chédiak-Higashi may cell lifesaving 76)

defect. the depends The on particular prognosis and numbers transient a better in Milder neutrophil have prognosis. defects and absence function bacterial of risk prognosis, especially or Prolonged of a their with the poor sepsis. fungal neutrophils has Treatment prophylactic has of CGD. prognosis and antibiotics interferon-γ improved with patients with the defects. severe available the cell that only neutrophil of Stem currently of the therapy mode is reverse can transplantation poor prognosis known genetic As are defects, in genetic gene other diagnosis and prenatal possible for mutations. all counseling

adaptive of consists as well facilitate proteins in immunity. system plasma and membrane function that complement the response as The innate immune proteins can pathogens or pathogens with without opsonize kill antibodies, Complement

C1s) independent) (Antibody PATHWAY LECTIN C1r, C1 dependent) (Antibody (Antibody PATHWAY C4 (C1q, ALTERNATIVE C3 independent) PATHWAY CLASSIC

B, D, P C2b

component classic, the Complement 75-1 involving lectin pathways. cascade alternative, Figure and as the in production converge enzyme terminal pivotal to pathways sequences. initiating the the C3 cleaving differ, the activity, they The events step but of activation three the result pathways is for which B; enzyme); Ag-Ab, B, Antigen-antibody properdin. (factor clearing complex; P, factor factor D, D B

or to uptake by their inflammation. facilitate mediate phagocytes, an or three can resulting activation sequential alternative, amplified The of be lectin—that in (Fig. cascade-like, complement activated through response system involve complement factors a pathways—classic, 75-1). to predispose 75-1). of autoimmunity, Disorders recurrent (Table system infection, complement angioedema the and

activation for initiated pathways The different three by mechanisms. are complement classic protein. is or by antigen-antibody pathway The by activated C-reactive complexes activation spontaneous alternative activated surfaces. microbial complement or classic pathway of generated on may by through by hydrolysis be C3b C3 The pathwayis microbial with carbohydrate. The lectin the initiated of lectin mannose-binding by interaction antigen-antibody C1q the the an classic the an complex. Activation immune Fc complex of by portion pathway antibody of of in initiated by to molecule binding the is which then and C4b2a. and convertase, C1r the C3 cleaves C1s, forming C2, C4 cleaves auto-activates C4b2a binds pathway surface mannose-binding residues protein–associated sugar (MASP) of and proteases to the on activated C2. is cleave mannose-binding the C4 protein pathogens, when and lectin by C3 is proteins. when amplified binds a a low alternative lacks level regulatory at is The to always active pathway and surface that active C3b factor B, the C3 convertase, binds factor cleaved D C3bBb. alternative which from is pathway to form to generated by C3 the and convertase stabilizes C3 Properdin binds (see Fig. to 75-1). which pathway C3 of alternative form it convertase C3b, membrane loop initiates convertase an attack and or that C5 (MAC). deposition acts resulting activation of generating formation the in The the amplification further as C3 more a by cleave complex can C3b can the common C8, of is complex and C6, several three (see molecules MAC is pathways that Fig. a The C7, all C9 C5b, to 75-1). pores The lysis the membrane, of to leading cells. cell the generates in MAC and cleavage muscle permeability cells from and by C5a, histamine smooth C3a release C3 vascular respectively, can and basophils, mast to produced leading increased C5 and contraction. of In chemotactic C5a has addition,

glomerulonephritis; C1r encapsulated SLE, C1q,

encapsulated C2 SLE, glomerulonephritis; bacterial infections

bacterial Recurrent infections, rare SLE glomerulonephritis, C3 or

infections glomerulonephritis; C4 SLE, encapsulated bacterial

Recurrent severe infection Properdin infections, meningococcal

to Increased susceptibility MBL infections

HUS H atypical Glomerulonephritis, Factor

Factor Recurrent glomerulonephritis infections, I

MCP atypical Glomerulonephritis, HUS

MCP, mannose membrane HUS, lupus cofactor erythematosus. protein; MBL, systemic hemolytic uremic SLE, lectin; syndrome; binding

site degranulation attracting activity, phagocytic phagocytes to cells. of can activation, cause of the and complement it to (CR1). to C3b acts an surface receptor opsonin via when as pathogen 1 of a binding the by phagocytes attached complement iC3b-coated C3b-coated CR3 pathogen. to of the bind of product, or leading Its ingestion on to surface degradation the iC3b, can phagocytes the cells B and activation to bind (CR2) leading complement breakdown receptor can product iC3b 2 C3dg differentiation. on its and

to inflammatory complement tight it because potential significant cause regulation system potent is under The cells. damage and has activity the to host cascade the is complement byinstability the C3bBb. C3b and C3 convertases, and and half-life C4b inherently short regulated by C4b2a, of The the active C1s, and the C1r, cascade C1-inhibitorregulates MASP. on by sites blocking fragments. active I the complexes destabilizes Factor degrades and C3 convertase proteins of as surface factor, (MCP), as accelerating cofactor and H. proteins. Formation inhibitors such be factor membrane Other other such protein protein and CD59, CR1, cell S, plasma can the include and membrane C4b-binding proteins, decay protein MAC by plasma blocked any Deficiency damage, or complement tissue of of an in inflammatory proteins these can regulatory consumption. result excessive response,

Disorders inherited be or to from proteins increased complement secondary consumption. of can result can deficiency (see complement decreased Table 75-1). consequences of the depend The affected factor on with are pathway may the recurrent infections. milder (C1, components of associated of present usually deficiency severe with C2, C2 not infections, early with classic patients C4) or Deficiencies although to especially erythematosus. C1, C4 with systemic autoimmune C2, susceptible or deficiency lupus Patients are diseases, complexes. immune from not clearing of is arise known susceptibility mechanism to thought components the role of but is The early these exact this in

the infections. to Deficiency patients componentspredisposes severe recurrent or C3, properdin, terminal of the especially encapsulated to a secondary Deficiency organisms. infections, of patients predisposes consumption, due C3, or with genetic defect excessive to major opsonin, to MAC with terminal patients one of compose to Neisseria infection the of components predisposes the Deficiency that meningitidis. Complement with of patients found recurrent may neisserial be presenting in infections. 40% deficiency increased is associated infections, sepsis. Deficiency with frequency mannose-binding bacterial of also an lectin including of

after 48 to episodes angioedema, or occur angioedema nonpruritic deficiency C1-inhibitor minor hereditary of or spontaneously Congenital of lasting recurrent in trauma, which results by anxiety. 72 hours, characterized stress, and edema may pain; life of the upperairway threatening can abdominal can cause emergencytracheostomy. be Abdominaledema necessitate acute from leading disease disorder autosomal The to levels inherited of than and 30% as C1-inhibitor dominant results serum heterozygous an less is values. normal deficiency of a levels II defective resultin function. angioedema) of with (type mutations C1-inhibitor hereditary Some normal from results or autoantibodies toC1-inhibitor angioedema acquired lymphoid disorders in of uncommon An childhood. in is malignancies form but autoimmune plasmin a factor addition in (clotting clotting factor C1-inhibitor XIa,plasma and factor C1r Hageman regulatorof C1s. to and XIIa), kallikrein, is result syndrome, hemolytic uremic in glomerulonephritis MCP contact Lackof inhibition complement macular and factor and plasmakallikrein, I, been the degeneration. of regulatory in linked age-related development Hageman is of atypical II, membranoproliferative and H,factor type for proteins the to the factor responsible system, have angioedema.Deficiencies

test dilution function, available complement is that based pathway measures a serum an 50% red sheep on assay, of classic antibody-dependent results cells. CH50 in The of blood the which test widely of hemolytic lysis nine The of on C1 all complement depends CH50 proteins, C9. the function test through requires activation test which available components cells CH50 The that and AH50 than C9. pathway the test, the activate can from is using pathway species different (e.g., blood rabbit) to alternative complement measures alternative C5 widely and red less antibody, without the results abnormal indicates deficiency of component component pathway. early whereas an of the result respective one the in a of or terminal to both an Abnormal a a tests both indicate deficiency common pathways, other test of components the If CH50 levels abnormal, in analyzed or individual can be laboratories. are AH50 specialized

Determination and diagnose angioedema. C1-inhibitor of needed is levels hereditary to function which rare enzymes interacts. mutations one bind it but functional the or Some with that of C1-inhibitor allow other C1s, more to tests miss not levels and C4 in during C2 levels chronically attacks. acute decreased decreased results function levels Low or C1-inhibitor Low which from levels hereditary are found C1-inhibitor it distinguishes C1q angioedema. acquired deficiency, in to immunosorbent C1q assay. autoantibodies for be performed Tests can enzyme-linked by and C1-inhibitor

Specific available. deficiencies with is replacement complement treatment not of component of antibiotics courses frequent primary the therapy. Long, constitute patients. vaccines useful, and immunized occur pneumococcal with and may close be Immunization contacts in complement-deficient patients but still may infections of meningococcal deficiency, Replacement by complement factor of proteins in I H has plasma or patients transfusion used C2 factor with some been deficiency. deficiency, a transplantation protein. membrane is treated is with renal because it MCP deficiency

frequent concentrations (stanozolol to prophylactic C1-inhibitor. oral or angioedema and increases of serum of respond danazol), with attenuated C1-inhibitor Patients use deficiency episodes which androgen an of use. effects, Adverse masculinization their in limit growth females, and arrest, including hepatitis, Prophylactic fresh acute an may frozen episode before plasma the angioedema, administration but surgery during administration exacerbate of prevent episode. can an is ineffective as of in present or the of corticosteroids can tracheostomy administration acute Angioedema epinephrine, reversing because angioedema. necessitating antihistamines, this airway emergency, of a type during and can episodes of surgery) (before available prophylactically is and angioedema. used Purified acute C1-inhibitor be inhibiting be that enzyme with formation. kinins captopril, degradation angioedema as can of avoided edema by C1-inhibitor such drugs of episodes mediate in inhibitors, precipitate deficiency should patients these because Angiotensin-converting 2 are inhibitor therapy investigated agents, angioedema. and for antagonist, receptor as including kallikrein therapeutic hereditary being a bradykinin a Novel potential

disease with 76-1). transplantation stem cure some primary immunodeficiency (HSCT) cell (Table Hematopoietic can patients few a limited malignancies metabolic some hemoglobinopathies immunodeficiency (see 150), T-cell 55 diseases 154), 56), is other HSCT Chapter Chapters 150), disorders. and with storage anemia of (see defects, (see (Chapter Use diseases to and aplastic Chapter

syndrome hair syndromes lymphoproliferative hypoplasia defect) Wiskott-Aldrich Autoimmune enteropathy, Immune polyendocrinopathy, Severe syndrome lymphoproliferative X-linked neutropenia hyper-IgM congenital X-linked X-linked Shwachman-Diamond (Fas syndrome Cartilage dysregulation,

with bone replace is defective stem of The to normal a patient’s principle stem marrow HSCT cells. cells or cells the from Hematopoietic stem but obtained bone reside blood. also peripheral marrow can be blood in cord stem is actively proportion the cells. does significant a blood stimulated cells contain unless bone generate not donor’s stem to marrow Peripheral of Cord good of a HSCT. cells sibling and source is used unrelated for and is stem blood

compatibilityis cells. disease histocompatibility contaminating the of donor rejection of avoid prevent Major donor cells stem system T by a by choice to host in (GVHD) to caused graft-versus-host immune the and mature complex the cell (MHC) crucial the need cells. with host cells donor thymus give antigen-presenting T in interact donor cells and develop stem to rise that host to The and mature the time from to development. days of donor reduce MHC donors, prolonged risk of T-cell be this In mismatched with a complication to GVHD; the disadvantage cells of before to 90 120 need removed the T cases outweighs lymphoproliferative when T-cell–depletion are Patients the risk engraftment. Epstein-Barr delay techniques usually at B-cell associated due to disease, T-cell are with virus, likely for used, developing in

outcomes the MHC. is in The of factor similarity donor HSCT most the important affecting matched of chance as donors. followed donors, using are obtained matched (25% siblings outcomes MHC-identical sibling) best a by The unrelated treat used these marrow haploidentical immunodeficiency functioning a parent a to MHC cells. of or severe bone (SCID), T combined can sibling lacking from for Unlike other disorders, be the result transplantation (preferred) patients likely can least at patient of mismatched molecules system cells half parent, shares rise to donor the Stem the a a give immune a MHC the because stem with as partially functioning donor, such cells. from

MHC currently polymorphic, by and is are serology. on than DNA molecules performed rather highly typing cord and Bone marrow blood are registries available worldwide. especially process, be donor a some for identifying underrepresented and can Searching a ethnic lengthy backgrounds. and the faster whereas obtained blood to already identified, been tested. located, cord and donor have is Finding donors cord because suitable stored, marrow bone blood be a has stem sibling, the of A if hematopoietic cells. is available, source preferred matched

time. SCID which treatment for of are Patients SCID for candidates the option ideal is only this with HSCT, at years donor 2 function cells. have beyond reject survive to of age 1 no are to Patients without unlikely transplantation, and they T-cell to before transplantation. they conditioning not or to with may need Thus undergo chemotherapy irradiation provided SCID for potential a has haploidentical SCID transplantation every bone The T-cell–depleted, patient of from marrow with development parent almost a donor. using maternal source cells preferred transfer marrow, the T during because these can mother the obtained donate, father. from of she T maternal able is is cells to if The occur cells can bone pregnancy, some for reject haploidentical and HSCT with and 60% marrow haploidentical with survival for 90% MHC-identical The transplantation. approximately is after bone rate SCID Early outcomes. infection acquisition transplant the improves before of opportunity providing now Because a the occur early cure. are for is can stem as best possible healthy, infants SCID transplantation as the possible, newborn screening for cell when

diseases. primary patient predict a of to treat clinical prognosis other particular The most diseases because variability of HSCT in of is the more immunodeficiency with course it to because primary difficult is decision immunodeficiency difficult the must be transplantation. of This weighed the risks with function other it because In and primary with entails. is than risks T-cell the less typically patients have addition, for HSCT that some require SCID immunodeficiencies conditioning successful for availability matched sibling of decision favors a the related The perform to HSCT. not engraft, patients donor cells with because, immunoglobulin. do treated HSCT intravenous in cases, Disorders of cells been do well B usually B with have and not many Table been a 76-1) immunodeficiencies of variety Regardless treated primary HSCT (see with have

potential complication the degree MHC Rejection cells incompatibility, immunocompetence first and of of HSCT cells the and the of the the grafted of on administered. number is thepatient, of depends which Preconditioning pulmonary busulfan be canbe but complicated the preventgraft to venoocclusive disease liver, toxicity and of can damage cyclophosphamide, the fatal. and as endothelium by and hepatic with myeloablativedrugs, vascular may resultsfrom by rejection such andthrombocytopenia, patients leukopenia, bleeding results susceptible making disorders. infectionand Myeloablation to anemia, in with red platelet, neutrophil bemaintained should blood engraft. the cell blood patients cell, and supported transfusions lineages red until Neutropenic precautions and andplatelet and Reduced myeloablation. been decreasethe effects graft preconditioninghas of rejection recently to prevent intensity adverse used disorder T-cell B-cell lymphoproliferative bone can depleted develop marrowtransplantation. after arise antigens reduces GVHD before for mismatch haploidentical of an in that not minor GVHD. marrow transplantation.T-cell transplantation depletion are histocompatibility MHC-mismatched of tested bone from or can from the risk Patients SCID marrow haploidentical GVHD. with severe usuallydevelop do transplanted not bone withT-cell–depleted more presents daysafter 6 with diarrhea. patients function.Acute products GVHD and and from GVHD skin rash, transfusion no can non-irradiated or severe T-cell fever, result blood begins with in Acute transplantation of hepatosplenomegaly pain, is and andpruritic; vomiting, maculopapular a that develop erythematous and functiontests; abnormal morbilliform high, abdominal Patients rash unrelenting painful fever; nausea, a liver waterydiarrhea. and degree to the fever, from on 4, staged grades 1 and skin, liverinvolvement. depending gastrointestinal, is GVHD Acute of and from after develop has GVHD 100 results than or acute without longer Chronic resolved. can acute days acuteGVHD lasting GVHD GVHD (hyperkeratosis, complex andimmune Chronic characterized interstitial fibrosis, immune formation. with of ulceration),limitation atrophy joint autoantibody and reticularhyperpigmentation, pneumonitis, and is GVHD by skin with dysregulation movement, lesions

of severe into Klein granulocytes, human Genetic Immunol Annu death defects in neutropenia: 29:399–413, 2011 Rev emerging C: insights congenital neutrophil life and

homeostasis, Ricklin immune Hajishengallis 2010 et Nat and G, al: a K, for Immunol surveillance system Yang 11:785–797, Complement: D, key

Bone M, Cavazzana-Calvo plantation Pediatr A, 2010 for immunodeficiency marrow diseases, al: N P, et primary Szabolcs 57:207–237, Fischer trans Am Clin

the of ciency, et Primary 2:1–26, JL, A, diseases: International Waleed A, from Casanova immunodeficiency Immunol classification Union al: an Front Bousfiha 2011 update on the

M. Asriani Chiu 14

complex factors. a interaction is result genes of a and multiple Atopy environmental between It allergic including implies dermatitis. specific diseases, and atopic rhinitis, asthma, IgE-mediated triggers in is an response An that predisposed antigen allergen genetically an IgE individuals.

groups, mechanism tissue on that the four (Table of Hypersensitivity disorders the into system immune 77-1). inflammation based classified leadsto are binding such chemical newly and factor. on both, release reactions and high-affinity preformed the mediators, Type such and as tissue circulating platelet-activating antigen tryptase, of basophils,or IgE leukotrienes, the prostaglandins, generatedmediators, triggered cells, mast are to as of histamine I of causing surface by receptors the symptom. symptoms, development the contribute mediators allergic with of the mostprofound These to anaphylaxis as monocytes, and initial cells of the influx such after a response, may their inflammatorymediators. late-phase Several develop and reaction lymphocytes, with other neutrophils, eosinophils, hours inflammatory as an basophils, more these Recruitment persistentand chronic cells of leads symptoms. to

C5a pathway or (see lysis the binding and release IgA C4a, antibodies Type anaphylatoxins, II IgG, to 75). the involve or resulting activating of of cytotoxicity) (antibody reactions Chapter in entire the and cell as complement cell IgM, surface such C3a, mediator trigger These degranulation, in anaphylatoxins cell resulting mast inflammatory release. membrane (hemolytic (Goodpasture junction The thyroid at receptor be surface hormone anemia); cells on of membrane alpha thyroid-stimulating red (thrombocytopenia); the cells syndrome); the gravis); molecules molecules the the as cell (Graves blood surface chain neuromuscular platelet receptor can disease). (myasthenia kidney and antigens, such acetylcholine in target cell basement

III and Type blood of into complexes enter the and reactions (immune circulation formation organs (i.e., liver, and that complex) antigen-antibody or immune in the such as involve kidney). are spleen, deposited tissues filtering vessels complement mediators. initiate by injury These neutrophils toxic that tissue recruiting activating release their cascade complexes and the the Local caused injection reactions of by antigen

platelet-rhinitis, asthma prostaglandins, 2–12 IgE Histamine, <30 leukotrienes, drugs venom, activating late allergic I—Anaphylactic Anaphylaxis, tryptase, h urticaria, Pollens, food, min allergic factor immediate phase

tumor tuberculosis; GM-CSF, CSF, TB, factor-α. TNF-α, interferon-γ; fluid; necrosis colony-stimulating granulocyte-macrophage IFN-γ, Cerebrospinal factor;

are reactions. called tissue Arthus into III administration amounts sickness, type serum of a antigen leads to of large a classic of The example reaction. pneumonitis syndromes. type some III–mediated vasculitic and reactions hypersensitivity Other include

involve or reactions antigen delayed-hypersensitivity) immune–mediated (cellular IV by Type cells. recognition sensitized of T with cell Antigen-presenting association that II class complex form on major are the expressed molecules. surface in histocompatibility cells peptides complexes. II antigen Memory peptide/major cells recognize the class T complex histocompatibility Cytokines, granulocyte-macrophage are such secreted factor, macrophages. this attracts from interaction, colony-stimulating tissue as activates tumor factor-α, interferon-γ, and necrosis and which and Contact tuberculosis ivy, IV reactions. are to allergies medications) immunity type topical poison (nickel,

StudentConsult.com @ Available

family patients. history allergic disease present in often of is affected A predispose Multiple atopy. to genes allergies, risk that allergic one an 25%. will parent a develop has child If disease is the the risk both If allergies, to 50% parents increases 70%. have to to atopic in Similar families. diseases occur tend

StudentConsult.com Available @

rubbing itching the lower a across the the nasal can rhinitis nose the Children salute, lead palm allergic and hand, bridge which transverse of allergic of nose. with with found to of frequent crease exhibit nasal the the along below congestion, to that blue-gray in lower to often attributed eyelids are present conjunctival children. venous is Allergic discoloration the eyelids purple swollen with injection shiners, or the lines), pityriasis or atopy lower horny Dennie keratosis Dermatologic palms surfaces and soles, findings of extensor pilaris follicular creases (Dennie−Morgan the prominent dermatographism, of the on arms). (asymptomatic eyelids papules hyperlinearity under and folds the white include of alba,

papules, generalized pruritic, and erythematous atopic skin) most dermatitis. xerosis to and from to range common the vesicles of Cutaneous are manifestations urticaria (dry be lower respiratory may the rhinitis respiratory and involvement with the upper tract allergic There tract of asthma. with in nose, eyes, or involve gastrointestinal disease Allergic tract may the only combination. or lungs, and skin the alone exposure is similar disease suspected trigger of usually symptoms an of trigger. previous by or It to development after environmental inciting and a history a distinguished one more symptom. than have Many allergic patients

of IgE elevated levels by characterized 77-2) Atopy is (Table

@ (3% and IL-5, eosinophils/mm3) (IL)-4, Available >250 predominance eosinophilia a or white with of StudentConsult.com interleukin eosinophil IL-13. of an including cells cytokines, Th2 10% of count to blood absolute and a nonallergic tissue-invasive with drug malignancies parasites, Extreme as such (Table eosinophilia suggests disorder 77-3). reactions, or infections tuberculin is IV classic skin of reaction type the test. a example A Mycobacterium purified Chapter intradermally is of A tuberculosis small from protein (see amount derivative 124). injected inflammatory over individual, sensitized IV In a 24 reaction previously develops a type the hours. to (induration) next 72

IgE: vivo are allergen for testing introduces skin methods in There testing prick/puncture the injection. 77-4).In in (Table a and two or serum intradermal vivo skin vitro skin testing into via allergen-specific identifying allergen skin through mast The cells. that to IgE bound diffuses interact is to the with which central histamine a and release; this the erythematous causes mast Cross-linking development results in a of cell of degranulation, flare. wheal IgE prompts to The placed. after wheal measured the 15 been allergen are minutes has 20 and flare performed method detecting allergen-specific IgE. available best the are tests presence skin of for Properly the

the of known assay levels such (also enzyme-linked (also immunosorbent vitro test radioallergosorbent like testing, and antigen-specific as known as serum IgE. as In RAST) immunoassays ELISA), measures ImmunoCAP the Many the laboratories and System method as allergists regard of choice. method shows uses sensitivity, This higher a phase solid and

Uncooperative dermatitis for Widespread immediately dermatographism Preferable to skin testing Results children available

Immunol Allergic Clin From and rhinitis: Allergy J epidemiology, DP: 108:S2−S8, pathophysiology, detection, diagnosis, 2001. definition, Skoner

and reproducibility. specificity, assays. more is immunoassay other The quantitative assay uses (FEIA); fluorescent a sensitive than FEIA are are history, risk; such cannot medications, as have are indicated very who test noncompliant a tests who or or where for antihistamines, allergic patients who These with dermatographism dermatitis; discontinue skin interfere testing. that skin extensive who for possible anaphylaxis by results; is diagnosis sufficient for of not antibodies allergic is the specific presence of IgE alone The diseases. history be entire examination, the of picture, and of IgE assessment on inflammation. the correlation of presence and the the IgE-mediated Diagnosis symptoms specific clinical must physician’s based antibodies, physical to including the

limited the Diagnostic in imaging allergic a evaluation of role disease. has radiography differential diagnosis is asthma. the helpful Chest of with and be abnormal, useful, but nonallergic disease from they disease. distinguish computed these when Sinus do radiography not are images may tomography allergic

asthmatic lymphocytes, eotaxin) (histamine, mediators platelet-activating cells, chemical in and airways. underlying (cytokines, cells Inflammatory chemotactic bradykinin), (mast T found mediate factors inflammation factor, the leukotrienes, neutrophils), eosinophils, response and allergens, infections, (airways viral to hyperresponsiveness irritants, constricting airway contributes in exercise). Inflammation to of influx into airway, lungs, inflammatory the epithelial It mucus production cells also and in in results increased cell edema, denudation. the of can structural and hyperplasia which matrix a function. changes and airway proteins extracellular irreversible may pulmonary loss to lead inflammation and of progressive lead vascular Chronic remodeling, proliferation results from a to

of than age chronic years disease countries, million the younger 7 in children nearly 18 industrialized Asthma the in States. childhood affecting of United most common is to with of number asthma continues people The grow. 14 in (about in million) U.S. population) million) 2010 asthma, 8% compared in children (7 11 2001. million 1 1 over 12 in (18.7 or people or One had to adults in of 25 and million, 7%) had asthma 20 (totaling One in visit went children the 5 in for to asthma-related department 2009. emergency an more than likely likely to asthma. and to men than girls asthma, are boys more have are Women have

@ Available StudentConsult.com

breath tightness. breathing, chest coughing, shortness Children asthma symptoms with of or and wheezing, rapid have of factors symptoms a history severity, well family and The that worsen history as the of should child’s elicit as frequency, the

smoke inhalation, Tracheal including Toxic stenosis

RF in childhood. Lemanske Green Asthma CG: From infancy Jr, and 878. et p and editors: Reed 1998, Middleton ed Jr, CE, In al, St Practice, Louis, 5, Book, EF, Allergy: E Mosby–Year Ellis Principles

allergy. asthma and fumes), weather/humidity. and factors include odors, exercise, (e.g., change irritants emotions, and infections, viral in allergens to strong Exacerbating exposure smoke, common. Nighttime are symptoms Rhinosinusitis, (especially gastroesophageal anti-inflammatory drugs reflux, nonsteroidal asthma. can and aspirin) aggravate Treatment the asthma. frequency may conditions and severity these lessen of the of

tachycardia, expiratory acute present. a During phase tachypnea, cough, prolonged may wheezing, and be episodes, findings may subtle. Physical be prominent airway Classic is wheezing be if movement air not there may poor obstruction. from in inspiration) attack agitation, to mm retractions, >15 of progresses, speak, movement, be diaphoresis, position, the sitting Hg may tripod with air and inability pressure paradoxus (decrease observed. As pulsus cyanosis, diminished blood allergic such of other as Physical diseases or rhinitis. evidence eczema atopic examination may show

the the pulmonary of diagnosis function Objective (spirometry) treatment help measurements establish asthma. direct of and to the and exacerbation. of severity Spirometry treatment, of used an with reversibility intervention, to is therapeutic assess degree monitor response asthma measure maneuvers. Children spirometry can older of 5 years age than perform in values measures flow preferred flow predicted spirometry make of diagnosis peak asthma. in peak Variability to reference the a of medications spirometry who flow, of controller in younger maneuvers the or helps peak For trial diagnosis cannot asthma. perform children therapeutic

persistent during evaluation be asthma testing exacerbation in of but should children not with included Allergy of the an all skin wheezing. correlate pollens, immediate with to provocative hypersensitivity tree as bronchial tests dust), and aeroallergens (e.g., skin and Positive grass results, allergen challenges. strongly identifying to or compared pertinent allergens, fluorescent immunoassay such for generally known In RAST), as for in defining as (see radioallergosorbent assay, 77-4). are (also and enzyme testing skin tests, vitro FEIA), (also minutes results more days several several enzyme-linked test immunosorbent Table clinically expensive, as are sensitive known require less serum

abnormalities. wheeze of to undiagnosed of recurrent exclude or anatomic chest radiograph first with cough the episode performed episodes A asthma with be should or findings are localized not or on chest pneumonia) Repeat needed fever new (suggesting unless with is episodes radiographs examination. there physical

sputum forms analysis include of novel asthma inflammation of exhaled quantitative expectorated eosinophilia. oxide directly and for Two analysis airway and monitoring nitric

asthma asthma. can wheezing Many not 78-1) childhood (Table and cause conditions but wheeze coughingof is and cough all 78-2). Misdiagnosis (Table therapy asthma cause the delays children correcting to andexposes inappropriate underlying

Allergic reaction Aspergillus type antigens the to mold of aspergillosis of a is hypersensitivity fumigatus. bronchopulmonary occurs in steroid-dependent and fibrosis. with cystic with in primarily patients It patients asthma

of Optimal includes medical attainment treatment key education, and therapy, pharmacologic environmental of components: patient including asthma several control,

gastroesophageal L—Lung heart C—Cystic and tract tracheoesophageal body) and dysfunction, congenital malformations infections disease) foreign rings fibrosis vascular airway reflux, slings) fistula, R—Respiratory A—Aspiration E—Edema cilia failure, tracheal (heart laryngotracheomalacia, (swallowing stenosis, webs, (laryngeal D—Dyskinetic

DV: Schidlow From Cough. 1994, DV, editors: Schidlow Belfus. Smith DS, Pediatric Hanley Philadelphia, A In Practical Guide Disease, to &

skills. self-management allergen be asthma should exposure with many 78-3). Because steps allergies, minimize (Table have children to coexisting taken children should wood tobacco infections For with persons viral all exposures to with and smoke and minimized. be asthma, to are immunizations Influenza indicated. Asthma quick-relief into long-term divided control can medications medications. medications and be

for persistent therapy. are longterm are initiating chronic, the most the Inhaled when treatment and anti-inflammatory of medications preferred asthma corticosteroids control therapy the effective inhaled of with but corticosteroids natural asthma. reduces history not intervention morbidity Early does alter the hyperreactivity, of Regular risk need use therapy, the risk death asthma. and rescue from of hospitalization, airway for reduces bronchodilator inhalation are and available Inhaled dry powder aerosol, nebulizer corticosteroids solution. as inhaler, an

potential corticosteroids of their favorably with inhaled The risks are benefits. balanced or asthma controlled corticosteroids inhaled velocity with occur use. growth may in poorly A reduction (approximately not of 1 growth these dose first cm generally inhaled treatment), year may decrease the be small although are in and Low-to-medium may effects reversible. corticosteroids progressive, velocity, be monitored. measurements scheduled should Regularly height subcapsular clinically cataracts children. corticosteroids on used in doses at not glucose effects have or axis or metabolism, glaucoma Inhaled function, low-to-medium do when hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal significant adverse absorption lessen using gastrointestinal of effects inhalation after local decrease candidiasis Rinsing and from and the the the tract. adverse mouth dysphonia help and spacers systemic control needed should be to the Inhaled asthma. maintain a child’s corticosteroids dose of lowest to titrated should considered higher severe “add-on” asthma, be to be inhaled needed with sections). the may dose oral following minimize children For corticosteroids the corticosteroid dose, but other therapy (see

arachidonic and inflammation Leukotrienes, mediators the via potent metabolism smooth synthesized are acid of cascade,

viral tract in to wood smoke smoking home Tobacco infections influenza fewer No upper (RSV, with Viral exposure smoke, child virus) the or children) (day respiratory persistent child’s around asthma care with Limit

Eliminate Help Essential and wood Dust and stoves smoking actions of use mites quit parents fireplaces caregivers

water in pillow, in bedding and allergen-impermeable encasement box mattress, hot Encase Wash weekly spring

home on furniture Animal in pet is or Keep stuffed frequently to possible, not outdoors (if dander bedroom toys areas; bedroom of Reduce the pet from remove upholstered vacuum sleeping not Remove possible, carpets removal number humidity bedroom <50% child’s indoor from Minimize the play of If Avoid keep out or and if acceptable) lying

to room filter firmly evidence not Use a has been in this pet (the child’s on established) support air Wash ducts weekly

<50% Fix faucets, leave pipes Cockroach exposed allergens indoor garbage boric leaky or Use Do traps acid not Reduce humidity to food

Fix indoor humidity faucets, <50% leaky Avoid mold vaporizers to Reduce Indoor pipes

of Immunology: From Asthma Academy Pediatric Asthma: American Allergy &

Wisconsin, Practice, of Best 1999, Milwaukee, Academy American Promoting

& Asthma Immunology, 50. Allergy p syncytial RSV, Respiratory virus.

muscle bronchoconstriction. these oral, modifiers daily-use Leukotriene that medications are biologic airway. inhibit in the effects include of antagonists modifiers cysteinyl receptor montelukast) leukotriene synthesis Two and inhibitors and (zileuton). leukotriene leukotriene (zafirlukast classes much receptor zileuton. wider The than leukotriene have appeal antagonists Zafirlukast twice years daily. children age 5 given than is approved older of for and is of age granules years), chewable is to 5 (for to 10-mg and months 14 5-mg years), or 4-mg 6 daily, as tablets tablets once or at chewable Montelukast (6 tablets night, children dosed older). years (15 and attenuation studies mild leukotriene usefulness the in asthma Pediatric of modifiers of show exercise-induced the bronchoconstriction. difficult be agents with to agents that control. patients as These helpful more is may in steroid-sparing asthma

for hours not have 12 twice-daily significant airway β2-Agonists smooth and β2-agonists, have any anti-inflammatory salmeterol, do formoterol Long-Acting effects. dosing and Long-acting muscle but relax therapy beneficial doubling corticosteroid a bronchodilator inhaled than is the inhaled more corticosteroids. dose Adding long-acting of to Multiple available. are formulations for asthma children asthma. therapy of prevention in years than approved 5 for Formoterol is maintenance use exercise-induced and age for of older albuterol rapid a It action (15 onset similar of has to minutes). older for an Salmeterol age 4 30 and minutes. of or of is has approved onset children years agents two simultaneously, Because medications combination improved. is generally compliance administer

is widely current previously, declined. has aimed used more inflammatory management was its control, Theophylline popularity but, at because to considered It moderately and is a as alternative, to treatment effective lowand add-on bronchodilator mildly inhaled an medium-dose is corticosteroids.

mast cells. prevents basophils receptors a antibody IgE humanized of Omalizumab binding anti-IgE (Xolair) to and monoclonal on is high-affinity that years It of asthma children is and older. 12 allergic to age approved in for severe moderate to is subcutaneous weeks, IgE on by 4 every pretreatment body serum weight delivered Xolair and level. 2 depending injection

smooth albuterol, relaxing bronchodilators muscle are exert 5 their within effect to 10 such of administration. as Short-Acting bronchial β2-agonists, and Short-acting minutes effective levalbuterol, pirbuterol, β2-Agonists by that last 4 to for hours. 6 They before is and allergen prophylaxis as Generally and exercise. β2-agonist short-acting a for prescribed symptoms acute exposure prolonged tachycardia, is less. irritability—are route inhaled The because adverse preferred and effects—tremor, be medications a Overuse may β2-agonists warranted. control; implies in inadequate change of more or on metered canister inhaler puffs month the of of overuse poor than control. child’s more dose per asthma; than one severity day definition use per suggests of the The depends eight

mucus anticholinergic bronchoconstriction, is bronchodilator muscarinic at that acetylcholine Ipratropium an irritability the counteracts found and hyper-secretion, decreases bromide bronchial in muscle. cough-receptor binding by smooth relieves receptors It an asthma exacerbations. seems to additive with effect have used β2-agonists when acute for Long-term use by literature. asthma medications anticholinergic the is in of supported not

exacerbations. Short oral administered to acute (3 to with corticosteroids of children days) are bursts 10 1 is 1 2 2 5 The prednisone of by days. startingdose mg/kg/dayover followed to to next mg/kg/day initial the available formulations. inliquid corticosteroids Oral or tablet are result can cushingoid in Prolonged osteoporosis, glaucoma, as oral features, growth such suppression, weightgain, systemic adverse of suppression. use corticosteroids hypertension, hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal and cataracts, effects diabetes, corticosteroids oral severe with extended periods. mayrequire Children over asthma preferably soon on minimum doseshould tapered The administered be effectivedose, the alternate as possible days. as to

Therapy to Approach

is in the asthma and intensity time, accordingly. asthma feature Therapy can of vary that over treatment chronic concept on the underlying to is adjusted inflammation based requiring that a fundamental processes be not of therapy is severity emphasized receiving currently asthma for Classification medications. patients of controller in initiation control for Assessing therapy. is emphasized monitoring adjusting and stepwise children 11 is children (Fig. 0 approach used management of A years, for infants young to 4 to years and 5 and (Fig. or youths adults 12 older, 78-1), years 78-2). the by and amount, control. asthma Medication type, of asthma scheduling level determined are or severity (stepped possible. when then (stepped necessary up) increased and down) is as decreased Therapy asthma. be available A for short-acting children bronchodilator should all with with two intermittent has less per symptoms asthma than A asthma child times week. or of medication. having anti-inflammatory occurring helpful: nighttime whether or times per a To symptoms need or daytime more is Two per two awakening times week two a month Rules for child more more persistent asthma, using determine is the daily implies

all long-term corticosteroids preferred children the therapy Inhaled of (Fig. control initial for are ages 78-3). sleep, young previous have of than index. predictive 4 years therapy had is control four for year and who who children age affected more a or the asthma of that wheezing recommended infants and positive in lasted Daily 0 episodes longterm to 1 more day, children with bronchodilators corticosteroids rescue combining persistent and years function doses of low-tomedium For asthma, of with use. lung medication 5 long-acting age moderate improves reduces inhaled over the For bronchodilator preferred severe asthma, inhaled a corticosteroid therapy. and a persistent with high-dose long-acting children are to within also treatment 2 The recommend weeks 6 of that be reevaluated initiating guidelines therapy. on Once 6 to months. control asthma assessed is every 1 control, basis ongoing an be should under 3 be down before months stepping for well The therapy. asthma least at should controlled that dosages asthma management evidence, the guidelines of age solely the Note recommendations approved not U.S. based on Food by Drug are on and and Administration. review published

up comorbid Step check and conditions) adherence, control, technique, (first if environmental inhaler needed

months) asthma is least (and well down if controlled 3 Step at possible

with The Daily Step Asthma higher asthma: care Consider approach if consultation higher medication Consult is asthma care Persistent required. Step 4 Preferred to specialist is or Asthma: not Intermittent required. Daily specialist Consult 3 is Persistent if Medication or stepwise asthma Step 2.Intermittent assist, asthma with at meant at consultation 3. Step Consider ICS High-dose ICS SABA Control Children corticosteroids LTRA, ICS Steps and of Years Each Comorbidities and 5–11 LABA Low-dose Consider PRN Theophylline + Management LABA PRN corticosteroids for ICS Patient who or + Step: Medium-dose LTRA ICS LABA + Control, or Each Nedocromil, Education + Age Education + ICS 0–4 Medication corticosteroids + ICS High-dose asthma. Oral subcutaneous ICS Theophylline 2–4: persistent, Quick-Relief Montelukast Low-dose Patient Cromolyn ageChildren Alternative LABA or orMontelukast+ High-dose or Environmental patients allergen LABA Medium-dose Quick-Relief allergic or SABA Montelukast ICS and LABALABA, Step: Montelukast + Medication Oral Environmental of Preferred immunotherapy +Oral + Cromolyn of have High-dose Alternative ICS Medium-dose years ICS Low-dose for needed as  symptoms. SABA on depends treatment of of Intensity severity symptoms. (longer respiratory  to consult). SABA With symptoms: with q hours physician viral hours 24 up 4–6 history is exacerbations. or of of severe has exacerbation patient severe short if Consider previous corticosteroids systemic oral course treatment. to the may use Caution: indicate up Frequent of step need SABA long-term-control therapy. on daily initiating See text recommendations for step to indicates need relief Increasing or control of treatment. EIB) Caution: SABA use generally and (not the of up a days for week >2 inadequate use prevention symptom  OR High-dose + ICS Medium-dose LTRA or needed Medium-dose ICS for Theophylline or symptoms. ICSLTRA High-dose Theophylline Theophylline SABA or ICS as + + LTRA of Intensity of to symptoms: as on needed. depends 20-minute at treatments up 3 treatment intervals severity of be course corticosteroids Short may oral needed. systemic to the required decision clinical meet individual patient replace, needs. making and before discontinue response an inadequate, use If stepping up. is preferred used is the alternative  treatment and treatment it patient’s/family’s satisfactory, observed within  diagnosis. 4–6 technique If consider alternative benefit clear therapy an medication and are not is adherence adjusting and or weeks, Studies limited. 0–4 are of on  years age children on therapy 2 preferred is Step based Evidence A. opinion All from and studies extrapolation are in expert recommendations other based children. older on immunotherapy prepared treat administer equipped identify occur. and anaphylaxis be to who that should Clinicians  and may alternative Key: preferred either listed listing therapy. within is option treatment Alphabetical one is than or used when more LABA, Inhaled corti-costeroid; individual needs. LTRA, is inhaled the beta2-agonist long-acting The to making clinical to required corti-costeroids, stepwise short-acting oral SABA, meant oral beta2-agonist; leukotriene receptor antagonist, meet  inhaled corticosteroids; replace, systemic ICS, patient approach not decision assist, treatment alternative is up. the inadequate, before preferred it and treatment use response and is discontinue  stepping used If an 1 less monitor alternative is to 2 to due are on A. Evidence a need levels.  desirable Theophylline the serum concentration based medications and Steps trials extrapolation adults. based trials ICS children older on Step efficacy of ICS and opinion age and older adjunctive from B this group; studies for and 3 from expert comparator treatment and plus adults–comparator 4–6 extrapolation each in on not Steps available are are in for based are children and therapy Evidence danders,  Immunotherapy 2–4 Steps for for is or Evidence based house-dust molds roaches. is and weak B cock mites, on pollens; for lacking animal and evidence for with allergens. strongest single Evidence immunotherapy is is asthma Clinicians who greater immunotherapy adults. The equipped should allergy prepared and children in occur. be may that of administer to identify treat than in anaphylaxis role and within is Key: alternative either therapy. preferred used more than when is option listed one listing or treatment Alphabetical beta2-agonist; receptor beta2-agonist corti-costeroid; ICS, antagonist; long-acting LTRA, short-acting inhaled leukotriene LABA, inhaled SABA, Inhaled

4 0 and managing 11 age. to of age Figure 5 children, 78-1 approach asthma to Stepwise long-term years for in of years Prevention guidelines Blood Program: management diagnosis Institute, and report for National National asthma. Lung (From and 3: Expert Heart the Asthma of panel Education Summary Publication 2007, No. report NIH and 08-5846, MD, Department of Bethesda, 2007, p U.S. Human Health Services, http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthsumm.pdf 42,

required. with care 4 if Intermittent or asthma is Persistent specialist Step asthma: higher medication Daily asthma Consult Consider consultation Step at 3. Omalizumab patients control, ICS ICS who environmental of allergies ICS have management + have Step Step Preferred:High-dose LABA corticosteroid Each education, + 1 ORMedium-dose ICS Preferred:Low-dose Zileuton Alternative:Cromolyn, Preferred:Step or LABA + 2 oral Theophylline + 4 AND + Omalizumab 6 for Step 3 PRN Step or patients ICS Consider either step: for comorbidities. and allergies Preferred:Medium-dose Theophylline, LABA + Alternative:Medium-dose ICS ICS Alternative:Low-dose LTRA, or Preferred:Low-dose Step 5 Consider AND High-dose LTRA, Theophylline, ICS LABA either LTRA, Zileuton Nedocromil, who + Patient Preferred:SABA Consider allergic (see patients who asthma immunotherapy have Steps 2–4: for subcutaneous Notes). allergen SABA for all medication Quick-relief as for  patients symptoms. needed 3 severity Intensity up treatment at intervals of on depends needed. symptoms: to of treatments as 20-minute systemic costeroids may be of oral course needed. Short corti and SABA inadequate control of of step a to prevention (not up relief indicates treatment. week days Use need the symptom for >2  generally EIB) months) least conditions) AssesscontrolStep control, down if check Step asthma adherence, (first, needed 3 controlled comorbid if well environmental (and is and at possible up

for or of and youths years approach Stepwise asthma adults. Figure managing 12 in 78-2 age older National diagnosis Blood asthma. Heart Program: of guidelines report Institute, panel Expert Education Asthma Lung and Prevention National 3: management for (From and the NIH report 2007, Summary No. Publication Human Services, of Department U.S. 2007, p and Bethesda, MD, Health 45, 08-5846,

when option therapy. alternative Key: treatment than listed within is or more order either Alphabetical one used preferred is leukotriene beta2-agonist inhaled LTRA, long-acting inhaled ICS, LABA, short-acting corticosteroid; receptor Inhaled beta2-agonist; antagonist; SABA,

to individual meet approach decision required needs. clinical replace, patient  is to Notes: assist, stepwise making the The not meant

used inadequate, it is response discontinue alternative use the stepping treatment is and treatment  up. before If preferred and

is liver therapy and monitor  to due to need less studies adjunctive alternative the as function. Zileuton limited desirable a levels. monitoring Theophylline serum of requires concentration

+ LABA Zileuton Theophylline, may considered, a has in approach been introduced, not trial oral although this trials. 6, LTRA, studied high-dose are of ICS In + either before  be clinical Step or corticosteroids

are alternative based on 3 for D preferred Theophylline, therapy B is and  Evidence for Step Evidence and Zileuton. Evidence Step LTRA, 3 therapies 1, on for 2, A; Evidence based A preferred based and on on B D is and therapy is Evidence and Step for Evidence therapy based 4 Zileuton. alternative Evidence Theophylline LTRA B, preferred 5 on therapy Step based Evidence is B. on and (EPR–2 1997) Omalizumab. B is therapy preferred for Step 6 Evidence based

lacking evidence and B for Immunotherapy for Evidence  danders, animal and 2–4 or is Steps for molds house-dust on weak is pollens; based cockroaches. mites, single with for Evidence strongest is immunotherapy allergens. than allergy of greater adults. children is in The asthma role in in

Omalizumab identify to administer equipped  should prepared or that and and treat Clinicians be occur. who immunotherapy anaphylaxis may

http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthsumm.pdf

successfully managed at can Most asthma home. exacerbations be does respond of measures that to hospitalization. acute may not and therapeutic exacerbation asthmaticus Status adequately is asthma require an life and days in to threatening. may over or mild from progress several can severity Exacerbations occur suddenly range characterize peak distress, control. a flow (PEFR) deterioration cough, dyspnea, Significant respiratory and expiratory decrease wheezing, asthma in in rate oxygenation. of oximetry episodes is monitoring in wheezing, During severe helpful pulse status arterial of may be necessary for asthmaticus, blood measurement ventilation. gases In occur. compliance carbon dioxide decreases, As retention chest and worsens airway obstruction can the In indicates a of pCO2 impending Hg) arrest. mm (40 normal tachypnea, face respiratory

or supplemental oxygen, of exacerbations First-line bronchodilators. administration includes management asthma short-acting continuous repetitive, of administration of or corticosteroids intravenous Early (Fig. oral is important treating underlying the in inflammation. 78-4) of emergency in rates of the bronchodilators with Administration department. agents of duration decreases hospitalization and anticholinergic time (ipratropium) if is systemic despite sulfate clinical Intravenous ipratropium, treatment there glucocorticoids. in β2-agonists, the given magnesium deterioration, emergency with department is and g) 25 typical 20 over is to administered 2.0 minutes. The 75 mg/kg (maximum dose intravenously asthma to is (intramuscular) or used of Epinephrine associated unresponsive anaphylaxis is rarely when bronchodilators. or with administration terbutaline (subcutaneous) continuous severe except short-acting

symptoms. symptoms children, in For some more subside respiratoryinfections wheezing preschool years, whereas persistent of othershave the with asthma years are eczema, include or children age 200 who indicators of µg/inhalation younger 3 at or parental asthma, for than riskfor 180, of asthma the 90, Prognostic two

100, DPI: or HFA/MDI: Fluticasone 250 or µg/inhalation 220 44, µg/puff 110, 50,

of of Years Years Age Age

Years of Age

Years of Age

of Years Age

>1,250 1.0 mg >1.0 µg mg µg 0.5 >750–1,500 µg >2,000 Age 2.0 µg µg µg of >1,200 mg 1,000–1,250 >1,500 >1,000–2,000 0.25–0.5 >600–1,200 >0.5–1.0 µg Years mg 500–1,000 mg mg

safety not data inhaler; no available DPI, not group) age (either metered-dose or power for established available, HFA, Key: efficacy hydrofluoroalkane; this NA, Dry approved, not and MDI, inhaler;

Issues: most the to the of therapy.  Therapeutic judgment patient’s is clinician’s determinant of dosing response important appropriate The the several must and dose clinical on the accordingly. response patient’s clinician monitor adjust The parameters dose asthma is be dose titrated the maintain Once required achieved, minimum of to control the control. should carefully to

puff not basis. per are or on a interchangeable Preparations µg  estimated daily doses. This presents comparable figure for 2007 Report full Full discussion. See EPR–3

Some doses especially  be in range. labeling, may outside package high-dose the only labeling FDAapproved Budesonide for the age. children is years suspension corticosteroid (ICS) <4 inhaler with nebulizer of

has  <1 children years safety children age: year of and <4 established. been of in ICSs The For efficacy not age snugly Children and nebulizing in of <4 that of delivery fluticasone require years the mouth nose through eyes. and and a generally HFA) fit should mask face (budesonide ICS avoid over to side after corticosteroid treatment each Wash local effects. face prevent daily. 1–3 times be the For budesonide, administered may dose Albuterol, Levalbuterol Ipratropium, with solutions same nebulizer. nebulizer compatible and in suspension Budesonide is the only are suspensions. as jet nebulizers for ultrasonic ineffective Use nebulizers, the of children. lower on in dose young times years dose children <4 efficacy dose to with mask should higher age data and daily; for be delivered divided Fluticasone face of age children than for years is due 5–11 For 2 the low HFA,

Corticosteroids: thrush (candidiasis). of Inhaled Effects Adverse oral dysphonia, Potential Cough, 

with mouthwashing and valved local and decrease MDIs after spitting Spacer inhalation holding side  or effects. chamber non-breath-actuated

Budesonide, liver number 3A4 the and the  by Fluticasone, Mometasone, CYP metabolized ICSs, of in isoenzymes. and A including gastrointestinal are tract have and increasing Potent inhibitors oral Ketoconazole, CYP 3A4, Ritonavir of for the ICSs these increasing such of as systemic decreasing potential concentrations and by clearance. systemic availability and reported. clinically Some of insufficiency adrenal been Cushing secondary cases significant have syndrome

may not effects  of studies not been (e.g., significance thinning, are and conclusive, osteoporosis, adrenal skin high these although suppression, In has clinical systemic easy occur, established bruising). effects doses, and been In of clinical observed doses, transient, in low-to-medium but suppression this growth the and significance children, been effect established. not has velocity may has be

Estimated 78-3 inhaled comparative dosages daily Figure corticosteroids. for Prevention diagnosis Asthma management panel (From Lung National report Education Institute, of asthma. Heart Expert and 3: guidelines and the for Blood National Program: 2007, report No. Summary NIH Publication and Bethesda, http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/ Services, Health a MD, cold, role p explaining facts, basic than 2007, Department 49, of medica guidelines/asthma/asthsumm.pdf U.S. eosino-teaching wheezing rhinitis, or Human greater of of with asthma the allergic 08-5846, philia 4%. following: continuing and for environmental (Table improv Atopy asthma persistent 78-4). tions, teaching strongest is wheezing predictor the into measures, control inhalers patient ing for monitoring. peak in and flow skills devices dose metered of use the spacer (Fig. asthma plan Families have an management should for for 78-5) care daily and

PREVENTION exacerbations.

tool and years therapy important patients adhere needs their families 5 for an age. ful to self-assessment is that in the a of Peak is plays and Education flow monitoring children helping over prescribed help- to role is advisable at begin for of children It time diagnosis. the involves are Successful obstruction, who have moderate perceivers airway poor education of

for SaO2 PEF Oral SABA nebulizer Oxygen or  valved plus holding  hour achieve 20 continuously  minutes chamber, corticosteroids plus Ipratropium 1 <40% MDI High-dose ˜90% or (severe) to FEV1 by systemic every or inhaled

3 Oral hour or systemic by nebulizer if oral corticosteroids if holding chamber, with FEV1 Inhaled response up (mild-to-moderate) SABA in first ˜90% achieve to corticosteroids MDI or or  to doses immediate  no PEF took valved SaO2  patient Oxygen ˜40% recently systemic

rate, history, other tests muscles, heart FEV1, of (auscultation, examination accessory saturation, Brief indicated or rate), assessment respiratory Initial use as oxygen physical PEF and

accessory patient therapies Consider use, Oxygen  or after best rest, <40% plus Ipratropium, chest PEF Severe  Physical treatment retraction hourly systemic Oral symptoms No severe exam: FEV1 high-risk predicted/personal muscle or  adjunct at improvement corticosteroids continuous exacerbation SABA Nebulized  initial History:

exacerbation admit 1–3 improvement; or Moderate symptoms predicted/personal treatment  Continue  corticosteroid 60 minutes decision 40–69% systemic exam: hours, Inhaled FEV1 Physical best hours Oral there in PEF SABA make moderate <4  every provided is

 close SABA ˜70% O2 Monitor or FEV1 course decision medications, (oral  mm Discharge Recommend Possible corticosteroid Consider Oxygen plan 60 response  Systemic Symptoms, 40–69% ventilation signs, Admit treatment intensive inhaled corticosteroid symptoms with to  an normal treatment needed response drowsiness, and FEV1 below)  Admit   Review Response symptoms Inhaled after exam: PEF Consider PEF,  or home physical intravenous) FEV1 last to home Individualized or as with Discharge or Good  PCO2 Physical medical education   FEV1 examination,  confusion   Admit therapies  treatment (see Continue or Incomplete  distress Inhaled therapies hospital re:  hospital SABAs. of hourly hospital Patient Mild-to-moderate intensive <40% of ICS inhaled Physical SABA action hospitalization including other follow-up tests  PEF, Hg No initiation ward response  inhaler minutes assessment ˜42 text) Oxygen sustained care PEF box SABA Review/initiate exam: Intravenous  to mechanical or saturation, Continue intubation continuously  Improve care Poor oral (see technique severe, adjunct  Continue  vital Consider PEF systemic SaO2  adjunct corticosteroid Improve Repeat  oral of course corticosteroid. Continue systemic ICS. Continue on  on long-term-control initiation those consider ICS. not an therapy, For of possible, medications, inhaler medical (e.g., plan measures; recommend education close technique: including and, review/initiate whenever follow-up). and  review control Patient environmental action in and/or specialist 1–4  discharge, Before provider schedule care follow-up appointment with weeks. primary asthma Forced ICS, of asthma beta2-agonist; peak SaO2, expiratory expiratory flow; exacerbations: department Key: partial PCO2, Figure inhaler; saturation 78-4 corticosteroid; 1 metered-dose oxygen second; PEF, inhaled hospital-based volume pressure short-acting and FEV1, carbon dioxide; MDI, care. SABA, in emergency Management Prevention Education the guidelines management panel of report 3: Institute, Lung and asthma. for and National Heart diagnosis Asthma Program: Blood National Expert (From 2007, report Summary No. NIH Publication Department http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthsumm.pdf Services, Human Bethesda, U.S. 08-5846, of Health 2007, p 55, and MD,

Figure 78-5 Asthma guideline. self-management the 3: diagnosis Prevention Asthma National asthma. Program: and and for Education Heart management of guidelines report Institute, panel Lung Blood National Expert (From Summary NIH Publication report 2007, No. U.S. Department of Services, p http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.pdf and Human Health 119, 2007, MD, 05-5251, Bethesda,

Hospital/Emergency Number For: Doctor’s Phone Number Department Doctor: Date: Phone

an these medicines (include day long-term-control Doing Well Take each anti-inflammatory).

it take When take Medicine to or tightness, day to breath wheeze, usual chest shortness much of during the do night or No Can How activities cough,

a than is And, make my if Identify avoid things worse, flow: and used, (80 that control flow) of more here): or (list your peak meter the peak Peak flow asthma more percent and like best

if take: peak exercise minutes best 45 to Before is: My exercise, flow prescribed, before 60

Asthma Is GREEN Worse Add: your Getting taking First medicine–and quick-relief medicine. keep ZONE for onceNebulizer, or or breath, minutes puffs, Cough, tightness, 1 chest wheeze, up 20 to shortness of 4every hour

at asthma night that due applicable, or from asthma, to remove If Waking the yourself thing made worse. your

all, do activities green Can flow, used) some, return peak 1 not treatment: usual ZONE to the your you If GREEN sure of stay be above to but (and zone. hour monitoring symptoms in after if Second 79 to symptoms hour my percent to of return used) If if above after peak to flow, -Or(50 do Take: not best flow) flow: ZONE your peak (and of treatment: ContinuePeak 1 GREEN

day. Add: mg per hours after taking corticosteroid) doctor (oral For (3–10) the oral corticosteroid. the days (phone)

Alert! Medical medicine: Take this

of short Very or breath,

Zone. 24 or do Quick-relief (oral are helped, medicines Yellow Nebulizer same corticosteroid) Symptoms get hours (short-acting in have mg or Cannot beta2-agonist) activities, worse not after or usual

call doctor your Then NOW. the an call or Go ambulance to if hospital

minutes 15 after AND still are in red You the zone

flow: than less Peak

your have not reached doctor. You

of flow) best peak percent my (50

blue walking Lips are and due of quick-relief fingernails of puffs 6AND Trouble your to or shortness breath medicine talking

NOW! an for the hospital ambulance or Go to call

Elevated Peripheral total life) allergen yr dermatitis Allergy of (first levels (2–3 IgE serum Food sensitization rhinitis blood eosinophilia of and age) year Atopic Allergic >4% inhalant

asthma early-onset associated Girls Triad with obesity and (adulthood) puberty Asthma

requiring Lower Severe syncytial virus, Respiratory Pneumonia tract respiratory (e.g., hospitalization) parainfluenza infection bronchiolitis

history and From of Taussig LM: Natural allergic diseases Liu A, Martinez asthma. FD, Geha al, Pediatric HA, et Sampson Leung editors: In RS, DYM,

Practice. Principles and Allergy: St Mosby, Louis, 15. 2003, p

a severe history or have of asthma, to severe exacerbations. can flow also who asthma still symptoms. Peak recognize children in are be to monitoring useful learning

the at meter, flow standing peak of with be should a bottom use child a placed the scale. the indicator To The forcefully around mouth, seal inhale device lips mouthpiece, deeply, place and rapidly. in child the must and out blow the the the scale. numeric moves indicator the The up highest achieved. is PEFR number the The repeated test The obtain is to the possible three effort. best times low as and L/sec). high available are meters range Peak range L/sec) flow (<300 (<700 children the appropriate meter their obtained so the indicator. because can is not discouraged to measurements accurate provide be range that move become exhalations It barely do important and

period stable. highest is child’s when A PEFR over the personal a2-week achieved best action is plan best, personal established, similar written on divided to into the be zones, three can which a stoplight. child’s a Based personal zone of The indicates child’s the aPEFR 80% best green value. 100% to continuewith is usual. medications should as In likely and child the asymptomatic thiszone, PEFR50% which indicates the symptoms. 80% yellow more best to of The child’s with value, asthma generallycoincides a zone personal added. as are Rescue medications,such albuterol, or call are peak if A to to to be not warranted the symptoms within24 do flows physician the increasing. may asthma return if 48 green the zone hours should and 50% is taken PEFR be The medication immediately. below medical emergency.Rescue indicates a a redzone PEFRremains has to emergency call If zone red the child a airway the compromise, or needed. physician the or significant is the in care

when healthy. ill when but Children also only not seen asthma are with they should they be are Regular adherence determine team to visits to the control adjustment. measures to review need office allow and medications medication doses health of care whether and

and is inflammation Rhinitis and characterized of by involve epithelium rhinorrhea, describes the nasal sneezing, diseases congestion. itching, that half rhinitis of allergies. approximately caused in different are causes by all many but are cases children, There of of rhinitis

response. rhinitis, hay an known commonly by as is Allergic allergic caused IgE-mediated fever, degranulate platelet-activating chemical as preformed newly cells prostaglandins, as and tryptase, histamine such release early the factor. and and During such and mast mediators, generated phase, mediators, leukotrienes, allergic recruited, a a occurs cells After which hours are to 8 quiescent phase in phase late later. other approximately 4 of mediators, their chemical development CD4 nasal inflammation. neutrophils monocytes, which cells, Eosinophils, basophils, leads T the and chronic to release

be or episodicdepending seasonal, Allergic can on particular perennial, exposure. and the the allergen rhinitis symptoms perennial Somechildren seasonal experience exacerbations. with pollens,which have Seasonal seasonal patterns. is caused by airborne rhinitis allergic in to summer the thespring, late grasses Typically pollinate and fall. weeds summer, and trees in spring in be pollen, of respiratory as size, house in caused easily travel the mites, cockroaches. primarily dander, into airbornehundreds dust is mold, allergens, microscopic tract.Perennial can animal indoor rhinitis allergic The and such by miles inhaled and where a toallergens, home visiting dwells. exposure rhinitis a as occurs intermittent Episodic with friend’s pet such

rhinitis infants disorders encountered most common of and one Chronic is in the children. adults. more to population, than commonly adolescents is children of affected with rhinitis the allergic 10% Overall in 25% observed and may The physician-diagnosed prevalence of allergic 40%. be rhinitis

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Children the NONALLERGIC Etiology Adenoidal (vasomotor) of Rhinitis 79-1 Classification NONANATOMIC rhinitis Nonallergic, Table in hypertrophy ALLERGIC ANATOMIC Seasonal of noninfectious

eosinophilia atresia rhinitis Nonallergic Choanal Episodic with

fluid. Cerebrospinal CSF,

of sneezing; hallmarks pruritus palate. of and allergic rhinitis The eyes, of nose, congestion; are thin rhinorrhea; nasal and paroxysms ears, clear: the cough, drip frequent in to and Postnasal attempts nocturnal result throat, hoarseness. the clear may onset, and the such to It tobacco smoke. or nonspecific the duration, to exposures, correlate severity seasonal home changes perennial and or of environment, in is exposure school irritants, with symptoms important as

nasal an evaluation ears, a physical includes and the of eyes, examination skin. chest, throat, and thorough examination The subtle. Physical may findings be bluish clear, pink watery include boggy with secretions. turbinates pale gray, Classic findings nasal swollen, physical or with nasal of and the the lead of nose found the bridge across the the salute, itching to the transverse crease rubbing hand, allergic nasal palm nose. can of a lower Frequent the tongue. clucking rubbing produce with sounds soft may palate their by Children Oropharyngeal pharynx both. may lymphoid or of or posterior visible and reveal examination palate soft the hyperplasia mucus abnormalities be Orthodontic with in mouth chronic may breathing. seen children often with venous or Allergic by dark caused children. congestion, present swollen conjunctival areas swollen in shiners, periorbital along eyelids are injection, tube from eustachian media membranes tympanic serous be present. otitis dysfunction or also may Retracted correct Other lead such atopic may present, to which the the clinician diseases, diagnosis. as be eczema, helps or asthma

(see tests can tests immunosorbent Allergy testing the by to serum found fluorescent environment in [ELISA]) in assay enzyme [RAST], pertinent test linked immunoassay Table or allergens patient’s vivo 77-4). performed in (radioallergosorbent [FEIA], vitro enzyme be by skin or (prick/puncture) Skin and immediate accurate tests provide results. and bronchial with strongly tests allergen correlate challenges. provocative nasal Positive taking a useful those skin abnormal In interfere skin for that for with vitro for tests are testing. for or with serum those tendency patients with medications anaphylaxis, conditions, include with tests serum to results, inability of increased skin reduced obtain sensitivity Disadvantages immediate cost, compared and tests. without recommended. testing not is with serum screening to symptoms regard Widespread eosinophils serum Measurement is helpful. total generally blood not of IgE or rhinitis but found of nonallergic patients allergy, the with be also The with of eosinophils in smear can diagnosis eosinophilia. nasal a on eosinophils suggests presence response a is often predictive corticosteroid Nasal good of eosinophilia clinical to smear sprays. nasal

rhinitis be Rhinitis and (Table into divided can 79-1). nonallergic allergic of group in there evidence etiology. describes of no allergic nasal a rhinitis which diseases is Nonallergic etiologies. can further It divided be nonanatomic anatomic and into rhinitis common be children is which most form infectious chronic. of rhinitis, The or acute may nonallergic in (the typically caused by (see common coronaviruses, resolves rhinoviruses cold) 102). and infectious and viruses, to within rhinitis days 7 10 is Chapter including Acute child year, being to day the attending most and care. colds six children An younger has average children with per affected common three of sore fever, throat, Infection of colds. presence poor to the history suggested and a appetite, exposure is with by especially with others 104). is sinusitis, beyond with be (see Chapter mucopurulent if rhinosinusitis, there persist or should symptoms that days discharge suspected Chronic infectious nasal 10 Classic older tooth children fever. include in pain, tenderness, facial and acute signs sinusitis headache, of rhinorrhea. who young signs may present children Classic postnasal in cough, with with halitosis, clearing, not present and throat are drainage usually the with from purulent nasal absent. character infectious minimal secretions varies of rhinitis or to The middle eustachian media of otitis as be dysfunction, may disease, ear of infection. tube Coexistence or additional such clues

in noninfectious profuse as rhinitis) manifest discharge. known rhinitis Nonallergic, can (formerly as clear sneezing children nasal vasomotor rhinorrhea with and trigger such Exposure and and fumes and symptoms. as such chlorine irritants, can odors, strong swimming smoke cigarette pools, dust, perfumes to these in nasal and as children. infrequently is and eosinophilia with seen nasal nasal on syndrome eosinophils rhinitis in discharge and smear clear is Nonallergic with associated and bright rhinitis. rhinitis), exposure ingestion (reflex rhinitis) nose), of (gustatory air (skier’s Cold food hot/spicy to examples light physical are exposure topical be helpful. Treatment before ipratropium with may

oxymetazoline, as nasal due of not in phenylephrine, topical is is or primarily common Rhinitis such which medicamentosa, children. younger decongestants, cocaine, overuse a condition to or these medications. may dependent on young become Adolescents over-the-counter adults of oral discontinuation the corticosteroids, frequently, course spray, offending topical short requires corticosteroids. a decongestant of Treatment and,

mouth snoring, can persistent obstruction speech, chronic breathing, is be hyponasal common or symptoms as with suspected problem in otitis The media. to which rhinitis and hypertrophy, children young such seen from most without adenoidal secondary anatomic be secondary Infection the tissue. of may hypertrophied adenoid to nasopharynx infected

bilateral. consists of the or atresia Choanal anomaly the and between nose and most either septum membranous pharynx, a nose of common is bony the unilateral congenital or because cyanosis nose neonates cyclic atresia neonates as classically are in presents Bilateral choanal breathers. preferential obstruction to when calming the are mouth nose. reattempts to breathe and cyanosis when and relieved opened infant Airway the through the is recurs cry only. show feeding newborns difficulty respiratory Some while part ear association retardation, disease, congenital other a choanal have of anomalies anomalies). heart atresia, with of CHARGE infants choanal the genitourinary as defects, half (coloboma, congenital atresia Nearly and presents later may symptoms unilateral nasal discharge. and undiagnosed with obstruction in of atresia choanal go life Unilateral until

purulent appear with bilateral, gray, the originating glistening sacs discharge. ethmoid clear associated from sinuses be and may typically or polyps Nasal as nasal of cystic 10 younger in warrant an than are polyps as years primary rare disease for fibrosis but, dyskinesia. children process, age Nasal such evaluation present, ciliary or underlying if sinusitis. sensitivity, with asthma aspirin Triad chronic recurrent or and is asthma, nasal polyps

nose. more their children Foreign food, who young in toys, things bodies place other stones, commonly seen or are small in of raised a purulent history foul odor. be or should The of discharge, unilateral, by index nasal suspicion can speculum. nasal a body on The often be foreign seen with examination

disease on of the is allergic impact to ability comply rhinitis and on with of severity, based the recommendations. the Management disease the patient, patient of therapy, and include Treatment allergen immunotherapy. pharmacologic avoidance, modalities steps possible 78-3). and for Table to allergen asthma, should to minimize be exposure, whenever preventive (see implemented steps control similar Environmental

are of pharmacologic allergic most therapy for Intranasal and corticosteroids the rhinitis. potent treatment nonallergic beclomethasone, mometasone, fluticasone, budesonide, flunisolide, ciclesonide, include triamcinolone. and These inflammation, reduce work and These edema, agents topical to production. mucus symptoms. sneezing effective itching, less nasal for ocular are rhinorrhea, They congestion, for and of symptoms but helpful used corticosteroid safely therapy. in long-term been have Nasal sprays these Deleterious or agents been adrenal when on have are used function membranes appropriately. nasal effects not reported common sneezing, in which adverse most burning, irritation, local effects of and occur The patients. 10% include septum) Nasal improper the occur. can from nasal technique bleeding (spraying Rare perforation nasal of septal reported. been cases have

used most treat Antihistamines medications the allergic frequentlyto are rhinitis. treating in are and in but rhinorrhea, ocular nasal nasal are lesshelpful treating sneezing, congestion. itching, They useful itching such effect. as easily First-generation hydroxyzine, barrier, the cross mostcommon the with reported antihistamines, blood-brain and sedation as diphenhydramine adverse has first-generation adverse effect Use on of antihistamines in children cognitive function. andacademic an very central been children, paradoxicalstimulatory system effect, noted. nervous young and resulting a in irritability has In restlessness, include anticholinergiceffects, adverse as such vision, urinary and blurred mouth,tachycardia, effectsof Other constipation. first-generation dry retention, antihistamines to less likely less fexofenadine such Second-generation antihistamines, resulting loratadine, sedation. as levocetirizine, blood-brainbarrier, the cetirizine, cross in are and desloratadine, fexofenadine,and are Cetirizine, loratadine medications. over-the-counter older for olopatadine, and nasal than years, children years than6 5 older sprays,are respectively. approved and Azelastine topical antihistamine

taken orally congestion. nasal intranasally, used Decongestants, to or may relieve be and combination are antihistamines. or either alone with in Oral pseudoephedrine as phenylephrine, such medications, available include palpitations. of insomnia, nervousness, oral tremors, Adverse and irritability, effects decongestants tachycardia, older in restricted. may use decongestant For oral participating sports, be children than used of sprays (rhinitis medicamentosa). 5 nasal to nasal nasal congestion relief for 7 immediate days for decongestant rebound Topical less but should effective are be to prevent obstruction

anticholinergic bromide, Topical ipratropium nonallergic rhinitis upper rhinitis used associated primarily is for an respiratory and infection. with viral nasalspray, treatment the studied of been rhinitis. allergic Leukotrienemodifiers in have use Montelukast approved is in for allergicrhinitis. seasonal

partially be If environmental and adverse measures immunotherapy may control effects, intervention unacceptable produce only or medication recommended. are effective but production mechanism of specific and alteration decreased an allergen IgG-blocking to IgE, expression is of production in of allergen produced of immunotherapy action includes increased cytokine for complex The response challenge. antibody, an is mites, dust Immunotherapy dog proteins. and to desensitization and effective pollens, for cat be the young for injections. limited need by may in Use children frequent of injection. allergen with observation physician’s must after be office 20 in Immunotherapy to a 30 minutes administered the treatment the must adverse in the severe physician occur, be these and Anaphylaxis experienced may allergic reactions. of

(see disease/asthma symptoms allergic rhinitis 60% with Approximately of children airways Chapter 78). reactive have of and sleep sinusitis; eustachian tube apnea. media; adenoid hypertrophy, leads and tonsillar cough dysfunction from which postnasal drip; to to and lead allergic chronic obstructive otitis inflammation may Chronic Children sleep of school adversely performance sense of disturbances, cognitive and at affect mood that rhinitis experience allergic and activity, and disorders may well-being. limitations their with irritability, their

older. common a allergic is not and may as grow children condition that rhinitis prominent Seasonal improve at become adept more Patients self-management. with rhinitis allergens. allergen of improves allergic indoor control Perennial

Removal or offending of avoidance advised. is the allergen from pet the The from of minimizing only animal removal allergens effective home. the for is pets measure and indoors a molds pollen be accomplished in staying by controlled environment. of can outdoor Avoidance windows Air lower keeping conditioning to and exposure pollen. and doors closed High-efficiency reduce filters allergens dander). particle to exposure air pet (e.g., reduction encasings most mite pillow, covers of mattress, for is effective strategy allergen. and the the in allergen-proof Sealing every be hot week. in washed °F) should (>130 Bedding water

a is pruritic, dermatitis skin relapsing Atopic inflammatory condition. chronic, multifactorial and in function, of pathogenesis interactions, factors, including skin predisposition, triggers. disturbances abnormalities, barrier a infectious genetic involves environmental complex and is interplay The immunologic major system atopic genes dermatitis. epidermal of proteins in Several structural or play a role (filaggrin) encoding and elements other immune the encoding major genes epithelial

Several atopic dermatitis. immunoregulatory in have described abnormalities with patients been an including allergens. inflammatory cutaneous There environmentaltriggers, response exaggerated irritants is and to the Activated in dermis surface-bound expressing stimulate Langerhanscells Tcells. IgE In infiltrate lesions, acute dermis. activated Th2 the lymphocytes eosinophil and promotes promote (IL-4) interleukin-4 IL-13, and which production, IL-5, maintain inflammationprimarily through which initiate and local They differentiation. IgE tissue IL-12 by from from disease an cellular Th1/Th0 are characterized IL-18. progresses switch chronicphase, the As acute to there lesions to Th2 and increased a is a response.Chronic

or atopic disease the skin,and to factors worsen dermatitis with have can hyperirritable Patients cause many relapse. Known irritants, of stress, and allergens, humidity), and include (extremes climate anxiety triggers temperature and infections. dermatitis food to Approximately to coexisting and atopic of infants allergies. young severe 35% moderate have 40% with children the more more a The allergy the the will and atopic identified patient, likely dermatitis a be food factor. younger the severe as contributing allergy of reactions. the common Egg food-induced eczematous cause most is

prevalence past threefold atopic The dermatitis 30 to the over increased years. of twofold of of affected. 2% children adults are 20% to 10% Approximately to and 15% oftenstarts infancy. in early Atopic dermatitis age. 5 onset childrenshow these life, affected in and disease of of childrenexperience of before the first 80% of years 50% Approximately symptoms year atopic first the other dermatitisis diseases. Atopic manifestation often of children or allergic rhinitis. develop 80% of asthma dermatitis diseases, otherallergic such with as Approximately atopic the often dermatitis Symptomsof of disappear respiratory onset at allergy.

age. of The with manifestations clinical atopic vary dermatitis face, the and of infants, cheeks, (Fig. extensor atopic dermatitis surfaces the In extremities scalp, involves 80-1). spared. diaper The area is rash head, older and flexural popliteal and to children, neck. antecubital In localizes surfaces, the the lichenified In (Fig. seen areas plaques flexural are the adolescents and adults, in head neck and regions. 80-2) the and the interrupting often significant a and at on night, it life; worse sleep. impact of child is quality pruritus family’s has Itching or papules on Dennie horny the or soles, may extensor (Dennie−Morgan creases alba, white the show the lines), Physical and examination (asymptomatic pityriasis follicular folds eyelids lower arms). hyperlinearity under dermatographism, and surfaces of palms pilaris of keratosis the

cheek Atopic Figure 80-1 dermatitis involvement. typical Frieden LF, 2001, 242.) Eichenfield (From Textbook of Neonatal Philadelphia, p IJ, Derma-tology, Esterly NB: Saunders,

80-2 flexural areas inflamed (lichenified) cause skin. and scratching Figure Rubbing the thickened T: Clinical 4, ed Elsevier.) Philadelphia, 2004, Habif (From Dermatology,

of atopic dermatitis laboratory (Table than is based The tests on clinical diagnosis 80-1). rather features biopsy little is used that of may skin but other atopic dermatitis. value, to Skin diseases mimic it exclude be disease (also known contribution expression. or FEIA) may as allergies be Skin food testing environmental alternatively, in to assessing or, fluorescent helpful immunoassay CAP the of

of dermatitis conditions (Table and atopic Many 80-2). share symptoms signs should first in evaluated with year to recurrent thrive, infections, Infants for of rash and systemic immunodeficiency failure presenting erythematous the disorders. life or skin scaling, be atopic is characterized X-linked by syndrome Wiskott-Aldrich recessive syndrome an

report the (or three following: scratching diagnosis plus rubbing) evidence or itchy more 1. of or of The parental of requires skin

involvement of 2. of History skin creases

of <4 disease child age) years allergic History in of of atopic rhinitis relative is a asthma first-degree if 3. (or history or

year of generally skin dry in past History 4. the

child Onset in (criterion if years is not <2 of years age used of age) <4 5. a child

affecting of flexural years (including of and age) children outer Visible dermatitis <4 limbs dermatitis in aspects cheeks, forehead,

PG, Diagnostic criteria atopic Modified Williams HC, et Burney RJ, dermatitis. for Hay al: from III. validation. Independent hospital 1994. 131:406–416, Br Dermatol J

(vitamin deficiency deficiency carboxylase Zinc Multiple phenylketonuria deficiency, B6) niacin Pyridoxine and

dermatitis. From Leung DYM: Atopic and Mosby, p Sampson HA, Louis, editors: principles Leung et Pediatric Geha RS, St allergy: 2003, 562. DYM, al, In practice,

polyendocrinopathy X-linked. IPEX, Immunodeficiency

infections. platelets, thrombocytopenia, recurrent small-sized and dermatitis, or lesions. by is characterized petechial cell hemorrhagic histiocytosis Langerhans human skin mite. scabies intensely caused the by pruritic Scabies condition is an the the the spaces the genitals wrists, The found surfaces web of axilla, burrow elbows, presence of of in is a flexor fingers, pathognomonic. or absent, be number may Burrows or in however. few

disease-free to periods. to are reduce increase severity of therapy the and of the of flares number goals The and number identification involves and pruritus, pharmacologic avoidance and of Successful triggers. therapy to hydration, skin reduce management water have loss. with a dermatitis function in barrier enhanced and atopic transepidermal decrease skin Patients component fragrance-free by moisture 20 retain to application to a lukewarm of major 15 of baths followed minutes are emollients immediately therapy. the Daily, for is the epithelial pruritus barrier. xerosis Prevention of maintaining of for integrity of the for important and control be Emollients ointments Aquaphor, Eucerin, Cetaphil. as such or creams, petrolatum, or should not because or as contain evaporation. are Lotions owing alcohol effect a and drying have effective may water to they A nonsoap recommended. cleanser is mild also

of anti-inflammatory prevention and flares agents, cornerstone including the therapy corticosteroids acute are Topical relapses. and immunomodulators, of for pruritus; for acute they disease. chronic the are reducing corticosteroids of and are effective Topical for used and phases inflammation the of are penetration. because and enhanced potency and Ointments skin preferred lotions creams over generally into are by ranked seven Corticosteroids classes. potency is that used. least be The corticosteroid should potent effective dermatitis periods. potency flare the to limited may used corticosteroids diminish be Higher but be for necessary should to (groin, should corticosteroids on adverse areas nonfluorinated reduce of face, areas Low-potency, used the axilla), risk effects. the be intertriginous and large disease than topical may be rather efficacy resistance. corticosteroids glucocorticoid Reduced related of to severity to length medication such potency, of effects, are application. and atrophy Local of such hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal related the hyperglycemia, as as adverse striae, and extent use, growth effects, skin and axis adverse and and suppression systemic may possibility be effects of children, corticosteroid-induced the In younger adverse and greater. infants is of lesions managed When emollients and achieved, inflammatory control be topical patients can most corticosteroids. with low-potency

agents to are dermatitis atopic The in therapies. treatment second-line short-term unresponsive approved of intermittent and or as other of for and immunomodulating pimecrolimus, intolerant drugs, topical patients tacrolimus than children 2 years for age. use approved in of older They are cutaneous as axilla sites, useful and corticosteroids. all seen especially the topical on body and may the neck, locations effect used adverse without These are delicate on of with such atrophy face, skin be agents not has These potential long-term medications a risk, their have increased cancer and established. safety been for include burning need local serious adverse and less Other effects the protection. sun

increased bacterial, the infections immunity viral, cell-mediated to leads and Defective fungal of skin. to many susceptibility and with have 90% skin. 75% than more with More have patients lesional colonization aureus, colonization of dermatitis of than uninvolved skin Staphylococcus of of atopic patients infection severity. disease aureus Colonization associated by and with S. are exotoxins aureus T and superantigen, that stimulating IgE secretes a act cells increasing as S. production. pustular atopic lesions with dermatitis crusting as exudate. presents often infected honey-colored Secondarily impetiginous, and or and topically. antibiotics, difficult retapamulin, (such infection, for treat or infection or oral be to can or areas multifocal eyes treat mouth to Topical the amoxicillin-clavulanate) dicloxacillin, cephalexin, antibiotics around disease for can be as as used local of used such that mupirocin is oral antibiotic courses. respond who who to in cultures patients after not or infection helpful may do multiple have Bacterial antibiotics be incidence community-acquired methicillin-resistant S. is increasing. The of aureus

eruption Kaposi and varicelliform can eczema that superinfection in lesions clusters Herpes or in affected of vesiculopustular hemorrhagic. or skin, appear become simplex results herpeticum, can Herpes fail to be to bacterial be skin simplex considered infection lesions and respond should antibiotics. virus if as infection misdiagnosed

affected exposure with superinfection a individual dermatitis, to of vaccinated lead a may atopic or to smallpox In individuals skin. vaccinatum, localized vaccinial vaccination eczema lesions progress Eczema vaccinial sites at the vaccinia from may generalized inoculation. with appearing vaccinatum distant to life be with underlying it patients In immunodeficiencies, may threatening.

contagiosum common with and papillomavirus Widespread (warts) infections in human children dermatitis. atopic are molluscum also with

tends more chronic, prominent disorder a relapsing and severe young that be is Atopic skin children. to dermatitis in for become thirds complete two children, 20%. of approximately severe in Symptoms remission less with disease family onset and is may more of levels serum atopic concomitant course. allergic rhinitis, history Early more asthma persistent IgE that a predict and dermatitis, widespread, elevated majority is possible of for be cause Patients control a families dermatitis affected unlikely is but single for cure that that the and atopic good patients. taught should and

and to dermatitis allergens irritants. important of avoid identify step the and An atopic is management in detergents, and Common smoke, humidity. extremes of soaps, irritants fragrances, include and temperature chemicals, preferred. skin; 100% the fabric cotton is be to synthetic and Wool irritating can fabrics is recognized trigger. a Sweating scratching. to should trimmed frequently Fingernails excoriations minimize from be

younger lead children respond removing diet identifying usual therapies, food clinical infants allergen who not the do may a to the and to In and improvement. from allergy not trigger Food common older is patients. for a dust as to pet pollens, the environmental mites, or dander, Other contribute disease such state. can also exposures,

ANGIOEDEMA, AND ANAPHYLAXIS URTICARIA,

the and of as to seen Urticaria, common one commonly the conditions skin in is of swelling clinical practice. hives, referred most dermis but below urticaria, similar the results process reaction Angioedema the a from to extends dermis. present skin. of in prostaglandins, platelet-activating inflammatory release cytokines histamine, and and the factor, to cells mediators, in from occur response the mast angioedema Urticaria including leukotrienes, of and basophils stimuli can variety to A release mast cells their trigger mediators. chemical degranulate mast membrane-bound occurs. cells when Typically the IgE cross-linking of in increased leakage, these vascular vasodilation, pruritus. results and Release of mediators cells. can mediators to circulatory system release mast the from localize tissue similar in and also Basophils that content easily skin Patients more histamine have elevated the with in is urticaria released.

to mechanisms reactions is anaphylactoid whereas by that from mechanisms. due nonimmunologic result are Anaphylaxis mediated IgE, threatening mediators. and be release of life are a Both to due severe, acute, massive inflammatory reactions can variety of symptoms anaphylaxis angioedema, causes. they because considered are have a Urticaria, as and best

is cell mast IgE-mediated. Not activation all produce nonimmunologic, basophils. physical, degranulation can and and of mast chemical Immunologic, cells stimuli Anaphylatoxins,C3a and non–IgE-mediated cause histamine can release reaction. C5a, in a 82) generated are blood in sickness and in neoplastic, to Anaphylatoxins Chapter and diseases. serum rheumatic (see (reactions transfusions) infectious, can occur opiate as or cell to a such mast pharmacologic from urticaria addition medications, or physical degranulation activation, effect dermatographism. In after direct exposure and mechanical

three physical. classified Urticaria/angioedema and be acute, subcategories: chronic, into can swellingthat last diffuse less and urticaria than and By definition hives are acute weeks. 6 angioedema reaction of is quite eliciting the cause history the the Often (Table acute 81-1). helpfulin chronic acute urticariathan more in commonly mechanism is AnIgE in found urticaria. symptoms angioedemaare Chronic 6 beyond of characterized 81-2). and by persistence urticaria weeks(Table or daily intermittent others be whereas with have hives and urticaria idiopathic unknown swelling, episodes.Chronic recurrent symptoms Some of can causal have

soy, shellfish, wheat, fish, (direct Foods peanuts, mast degranulation) strawberries tree nuts, cell Egg, milk,

all medications, or medications even Medications homeopathic Suspect over-thecounter

wasp, urticaria) Hymenoptera jacket, (honeybee, (papular ants), Insect hornets, biting insects yellow stings fire

Fasciola, Echinococcus, Strongyloides, parasitic sinusitis); A Schistosoma, [EBV], Candida) viral (group Bacterial (hepatitis pharyngitis, Toxocara, streptococcus Ancylostoma, A coxsackieviruses B, fungal Infections mononucleosis and (dermatophytes, Filaria, Mycoplasma, (Ascaris, B); Trichinella);

allergy caterpillars plants, animal pollen, Latex, Contact saliva, nettle

Blood, or blood administration reactions IVIG products, Transfusion

LC: angioedema. Urticaria MS, and MV, Lasley From Altman Kennedy PV, 232. Saunders, Becker JW, In Care, Allergy in editors: LC, p Williams Altman 2000, Philadelphia, Primary

intravenous EBV, immunoglobulin. virus; Epstein-Barr IVIG,

Idiopathic 75%–90% and anti-FcεR1 cases adult chain) autoantibodies IgG, patients have IgE anti-IgE, (high-affinity of 25%–50% alpha of receptor

Hereditary (autosomal inhibitor) Cl-esterase angioedema of dominant Angioedema inherited deficiency

From Urticaria Altman and MS, LC: Kennedy angioedema. MV, Lasley in Altman Saunders, Becker Care, Allergy Philadelphia, PV, 2000, p LC, JW, In 234. editors: Primary Williams

autoimmune 35% or IgE toIgE to binding have of IgG autoantibodies an chronic 40% the receptor. factors; cases process urticaria to directly to due by exposure or cold, to or and pressure, exercise, sun Physical water. characterized that heat, eliciting urticaria mayinclude external angioedemaare factors known

urticaria affecting to physical of persons. 2% is dermatographism, The 5% most common the diagnosed point, such “writing the easily or firmly Dermatographism as the means of by depressor. a and with scratching swab cotton tip is on skin” skin a tongue wooden blunt skin site of the by reaction It localized characterized urticarial trauma. is to an has causing an from to suggested histamine induces been that IgE-mediated It be released cells. mast the reaction trauma

of after by in in large Cholinergic characterized 3-mm an increase surrounded body commonly core wheals appearance adults. 1to the by young occurs erythematous flares temperature, urticaria, after or a hot bath, may stress. emotional during exercise, develop Lesions strenuous anaphylaxis. differentiates The from of lack symptoms airway exercise-induced it

Cold rewarming occurs cold within directly cold urticaria of affected areas with to exposed exposure on parts. minutes and on to develop or the may cold of in may drinks swelling. result Ingestion lip Cold acquired categorized familial into disorders. can and be syndromes urticaria resulting water. Severe into reactions can cold in with swimming occur diving or death swim epinephrine alone, and have injectable to body avoid must never exposure Patients available. total cold,

a autosomal disease inhibitor. deficiency Cl angioedema an Hereditary (HAE) due of to dominant is history. approximately caused be genetic mutation; without of may spontaneous 25% family The cases patients occur in defect any by States. the in United estimated to The affect persons disease is 10,000 approximately swelling and episodic abdomen, involves the of by genitalia, peripheral that is oropharynx, extremities, unpredictable, recurrent It attacks pharynx. characterized face, triggered by trauma. are often Episodes of is laryngeal a attacks Asphyxiation significant cause from mortality. urticaria angioedema. with have HAE rarely Patients with associated type Cl-esterase is decreased patients The which production have (85%) disease, of of majority to due inhibitor. I to disease, Cl-esterase A inhibitor. minority (15%) due patients is type II production which of dysfunctional of have low test. C4 level initial A as screening an serves have Cl-esterase reduced quantitative and with functional measured. Patients C4 should of levels inhibitor are low C2 acute an levels during attack. patients III Type HAE have normal evaluation. laboratory reported patients females, more are have typically in These males literature. some been but the acute treat children Cinryze adolescents in years Kalbitor abdominal (for acute to (for ≥16 of Berinert in children and approved old), products prophylaxis attacks attacks age), in HAE ≥13 or are (for Three and years adults). facial attacks:

many reactions Anaphylactic and IgE-mediated causes reactions from (Table 81-3). I, are result type including allergen on the to with the of IgE IgE prostaglandins, cytokines. leads of necrosis Cross-linking release and tryptase, factor, basophil and mast and activation cell leukotrienes, factor, the tumor mediators, receptor molecule platelet-activating histamine, cell and types platelets. eosinophils, monocytes, reactions in macrophages, include neutrophils, the Other involved results mediator clinical picture release The anaphylaxis. of in the

of Young General MC: treatment From anaphylaxis. In Sampson DYM, Leung

p Principles Allergy: Geha al, 644. RS, editors: HA, and Practice, St et 2003, Louis, Mosby, Pediatric *In order frequency. of

mechanisms. are nonimmunologic to Anaphylactoid reactions due exact basophils direct, underlying although mechanism stimulation, is and by can be activated the cells nonspecific unknown. Mast radiocontrast examples. agents, Reactions opiates and material, such classic as to are in mast system Complement basophil and cell activation activation. result also can Anaphylatoxins, and ability to release mediator are their in C5a, are and of generated serum sickness. C3a because trigger named type reaction common with blood The most of is cause of transfusion products. this causes other clarified. been has reactions the mechanism which of for anaphylactoid are not There

25% at to point affecting Urticaria 15% individuals some are lives. of their in and angioedema conditions common skin for chronic. are Most they urticaria cases of patients, but, self-limited, are some angioedema In patients, occur approximately together. urticaria 50% of and 10% 50%, 40% In angioedema the and have have remaining alone. urticaria alone of The children unknown. is in incidence anaphylaxis

StudentConsult.com @ Available

hives that intenselypruritic are (Fig. centers lesions characterize commonly called pale erythematous Raised, urticaria, with 81-1). anywhere size lesions The occur vary on the and body. in can may 2 to may arises 1 suddenly 24 urticaria for hours persist or Typically resolvewithin and hours. similar the symptom. subcutaneous as principal dermis or that process swelling involves deeper tissue, Angioedemais a with the is andpersists angioedema hours. for not be 24 painful, than may Generally longer pruritic, mildly the threatening may In swelling upper affects airway. rare if it becomelife cases

for anaphylactoid The adults. children anaphylaxis clinical of and reactions and same manifestations are the reaction. to findings and symptoms from range The fatal a skin can vary mild and signs symptoms, the patients of including with anaphylaxis. the dermal diagnosis flushing, percent warmth; and Ninety angioedema, not symptoms of urticaria, does of exclude present cutaneous absence wheezing, syncope, systems stridor, abdominal dyspnea, (syncope, Other gastrointestinal arrhythmias), laryngeal edema, sense system hypotension, a tract and hoarseness, (tachycardia, shock, crampy and cardiovascular pain, impending edema, vomiting), dizziness, (nausea, system oropharyngeal asphyxiation), diarrhea, and and neurologic doom). tract organ seizure, respiratory include and affected of the (rhinorrhea, proportionate onset. anaphylactic symptom the of severity to The often of is an reaction speed

clinical the with evaluation angioedema situation. urticaria and patients The be laboratory of tailored must to require specific and Acute angioedema except cause. urticaria evaluation laboratory suspected do the to document not (Table performed with should patients and 81-4). exclude angioedema, chronic be laboratory For urticaria underlying diseases to evaluation with be angioedema Patients 81-5). urticaria recurrent should (Table without for evaluated HAE

and of histamine the tryptase, anaphylaxis be may mast helpful isin cell when diagnosis Measurement mediators, question. the of often difficult to serum. short histamine A is more is the a quickly, tryptase useful half-life, detect has and because in a level test is released Serum to anaphylaxis. levels peak 1.5 after 1 tryptase hours Elevated in helpful may be levels

81-1 Examples Figure of urticaria. Electronic Davis editors: Atlas, Zitelli HW, Physical BJ, Diagnosis (From Pediatric

Philadelphia, 2004, Mosby.)

Complete Erythrocyte blood Urinalysis biopsy is differential vasculitis antibody Skin Antinuclear If with rate suspected count sedimentation

From angioedema. and Zuraw Urticaria B: Geha HA, In Sampson DYM, Leung

and al, editors: 2003, Practice, Pediatric St Allergy: Principles Louis, et RS,

Mosby, p 580.

normal the diagnosis, levels not ruleout do tryptase establishing the diagnosis. but onset hours is tryptase serum measure the It 2 level of symptoms. to after 1to best a stored old. It be orderedretrospectively less also days 2 than on serum that is can

angioedema may the urticaria more of and be difficult. etiology is The diagnosis straightforward;finding mimic dermatologic can urticaria. Other conditions multiforme lesionsthat the look for to papular days. are fixedand lesions target-shaped, Erythema but several urticaria, or last macular erythematous, may has similar resemble pemphigoid, and lesions dermatologic on, urticaria. early bullous herpetiformis Other which arequite the includedermatitis pruritic, may diseases and cell organs, is the characterized skin. various mast infiltrationof by including Mastocytosis in theclassic than pigmentosa. similar urticaria patients rather lesions urticaria appearance Some have to skin pigmentosa coalesce. may which appears red-brown Urticaria ashyperpigmented, macules,

angioedema. From and Zuraw Urticaria B: RS, HA, Mosby, al, editors: Geha p Leung St Pediatric Principles et Practice, 580. Sampson DYM, 2003, Allergy: and In Louis,

When which stroked, they these sign. lesions Darier are calledthe urticate, is urticaria differential in rare that be is should A included diagnosis the Muckle-Wells of syndrome. disorder characterized episodic infancy, is by with an in macroglobulinemia, is amyloidosis, weight Schnitzler syndrome, fatigue, rare sensorineuraldeafness, and fever, is chronic abnormalities.Another presenting bonepain, characterized It urticaria, anemia, autosomal urticaria syndrome disorder by skeletal and which dominant arthralgias, loss. Urticarial of response. small features a is with vessel aleukocytoclastic histologic vasculitis vasculitis andleave lesions distinguishing last main longer tender, the skin hours, be isthat feature The behind than 24 may pigmentation. is biopsy fordefinitive diagnosis. Skin required

system. cardiovascular from the of onset apparent multisystem often involvement of skin, is the The acute anaphylaxis and respiratory diagnosis and tract, of usually dramatic symptoms myocardial cutaneous disorder, in of suggests vasovagal or infarction. seizure collapse absence embolism, Sudden pulmonary collapse, cardiovascular aspiration, the edema, HAE. pain, Laryngeal suggests abdominal especially with thought are shock Chapter patients 40). septic have anaphylaxis initially Many to with (see

Avoidance urticaria is angioedema. management and agents in of important of triggering the of is pharmacologic mainstay treatment H1 antihistamines. The as have effects. antihistamines, fewer are preferred they levocetirizine, fexofenadine, desloratadine, and H1 loratadine, because adverse such Second-generation cetirizine, relief, as is H2 cimetidine to provide or does H1 add antihistamines, bedtime not next If adequate second-generation at by step the such sedating or ranitidine. a itself, a antihistamine, antihistamine H1 such activity doxepin, exhibit Tricyclic H1 as at H2 both and potent receptors. antidepressants, the lowest Corticosteroids treating effective urticaria for shortest effects the from in use adverse and dose time. angioedema, are although mandate long-term montelukast is urticaria receptor been case several studies. treatment, has the used leukotriene blocker to When resistant in monitoring potential such used; immunomodulating their Other laboratory supporting cyclosporine, data they to require use adverse methotrexate, intravenous however, have cyclophosphamide, effects. hydroxychloroquine, immunoglobulin, limited, as been due agents, and are and

recognition crucial is medical immediate and emergency; prompt are (Fig. Anaphylaxis a treatment 81-2). measures is the be same and therapy of given that epinephrine are Early cardiopulmonary being of at of performed. intramuscular mainstay should administration the time resuscitation basic medical a If setting, in should called. services be is emergency child the medical not the be Supplemental child lying should position. intravenous administered with and oxygen supine fluid in required. secured; airway tracheotomy or may be An must intubation be antagonists, given to improve pharmacologic Additional symptoms. such antihistamines, may H2-receptor corticosteroids, be and therapies, as bronchodilators, anaphylaxis. with anaphylaxis of or Up protracted to have 20% people biphasic

A has biphasic with anaphylaxis earlyandlate-phase person reactions. both after 8 symptoms an after recurrence biphasic initial occurringwithin reaction. a is the hours 72 reaction ofanaphylactic to The remission, initial that protracted hours has although signs persist rare. person A or treatment, anaphylaxis days symptoms with even despite for and thisis

of anaphylaxis angioedema, focuses triggers. avoidance of and known Prevention urticaria, on avoidance is for testing, A specialist and history, allergy a reactions referral suggested patients or diagnostic an thorough anaphylaxis. to recommendations for severe following for (penicillin), vaccines, testing inhalants, insect testing and serum are foods, and drugs latex. venoms, for available IgEspecific Skin result using outcomes. signs Educating and the epinephrine and better the symptoms family self-administered and in early about anaphylaxis of patient members has and timely occurred despite treatment. anaphylaxis Fatal appropriate be appropriate with bracelet A worn. information should MedicAlert because exacerbate should treatment. oxidase Medications be with discontinued enzyme as may and such or anaphylaxis monoamine interfere angiotensin-converting its inhibitors inhibitors, they β-blockers,

Health ACUTE setting care TREATMENT,

LONG-TERM RISK REDUCTION, setting Community

 antibiotics, IF anaphylaxis: to ˜-lactam non-specific Allergen-specific NEEDED treatment consider venom with other TREATMENT, Allergen insect  glucocorticoid –Idiopathic NSAIDs, –Immunotherapy –Desensitization

 www.aaaai.org ID Action www.foodallergy.org  www.latexallergyresources.org (www.aaaai.com) EMERGENCY   ASSESS  PREPAREDNESS FOR   Anaphylaxis Other AVOIDANCE Plan  disease autoinjector ˜-blockers Other Epinephrine  Mastocytosis CO-MEDICATIONS COMORBIDITIES Nonselective  www.acaai.org  Emergency Medical   NEED Asthma ASSESS/TREAT ALLERGEN Cardiovascular

management. of Summary anaphylaxis Figure 81-2 anaphylaxis. the in involved the regardless or is same Acute treatment mechanism of trigger risk for reduction, currently immunomodulation only In of available long-term a for minority is trigger-specific; are and individuals anaphylaxis. contrast, immunomodulation with measures avoidance All be instructed have in self-injectable assessed, preparedness, and epinephrine. need the importance be and of comorbidities at-risk individuals the to of use emergency taught comedications IV, (e.g., gastrointestinal; card); Advanced cardiac life support; cardiopulmonary ACLS, identification resuscitation; cardiovascular; wallet CVS, bracelet, GI, intravenous. CPR, ID, 121:S405, Allergy Immunol FER: (From Clin Simon J 2008.) Anaphylaxis, and treatment be and weight is adults, inspected, and *The an important, in children, and especially in and overweight needed dose epinephrine estimation also in of should order and optimal calculate other infants medications in resuscitation. teens skin obese to and

empty prevent †Supine syndrome. as to tolerated, ventricle position,

for such not available health ‡Call in resuscitation. services infusion occurring medical, where dental, backup care for clinics, be 911/emergency might medical as facilities or community optimal anaphylaxis

type Table reaction a III 77-1). hypersensitivity sickness is (see Serum The patient’s the recognizes as or the system immune produces drug antiserum them. and against foreign antibodies proteins in vessels and complexes, antigen-antibody blood may to protein immune be antibodies newly bind which in in deposited form organs. filtering formed enter The the and with circulation or foreign the resulting the by recruiting toxic These permeability, cause complexes release, neutrophils, complement damage. capillary cascade activating and increased and mediator tissue tissue in injury

diphtheria. after were first serum Immune complexes administration serum, horse described as for of heterologous such availability sickness. biologics, human-derived alternative pharmacotherapies The reduced and greatly bioengineered has of the antibodies, of incidence serum Common inciting antivenoms. and include globulin such and antithymocyte proteins, blood as foreign products agents Medications thiazides. implicated and cefaclor, minocycline, sulfonamides, include penicillin, frequently hydantoins,

Available StudentConsult.com @

onset be The proteins, the serum or previously may (within daysafter administration drugs, symptoms individuals. in to 21 days) 4 1 occur to rapid infections.Symptom foreign of 7 more sensitized of sickness typically arthralgias, lymphadenopathy, classic polyarticular The fever, symptoms. of andcutaneous manifestationsconsist clinical the of palpable and includeurticaria, a lesions angioedema, hands rash erythema feet. multiforme, morbilliformrash, and the interfaceof the palmar serpiginous or may dorsal Cutaneous and aspects at or plantar vary purpura and

peripheral encephalomyelitis, complications. rare neuritis are Carditis, syndrome, Guillain-Barre and glomerulonephritis,

Laboratory may and C4) show sedimentation (C3 rate, presence tests elevated complement levels. an complexes, erythrocyte of immune and circulating depressed show immune IgM, or IgE, of IgA, deposits C3. specimens biopsy Skin proteinuria may or be present. both Hematuria or manifestations, an complement showing depressed testing established complexes exposure by levels. of is clinical and to immune laboratory history and The cause, inciting characteristic diagnosis circulating

is self-limited Serum sickness 2 resolves within to 1 relief. weeks; therefore, treatment is symptomatic and relieve to be administered pruritus. may Antihistamines and, Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory tapering and 2 a dose. drugs if are prednisone for pain, (1 daily) joint given mg/kg fever to administered orally is necessary, with likelihood development. sickness not predict skin Allergy testing serum of the does

prevention the is of avoid means cause. to exposure to The implicated primary

ants).Honeybees stinging aftera a and remains order (honeybee reactions hornets), stinger wasp, apids insectsof which bumblebee), (yellow sting. vespids allergic formicids and that barbed usually result from Hymenoptera, Systemic and embedded and (fire jacket, harvester have yellow-face, include the white-face for States, are of in Yellow are most parts reactions whereas jackets wasps reactions in the of responsible cause frequent United Texas. themost sting most allergic United are Fire southeastern found States. and the ants south central in

insects rarely Biting anaphylaxis. cause (Triatoma), bed described, been bug kissing has Anaphylaxis however, a bug, blackfly, after and the of deerfly. bites mosquitoes, biting reactions insects, a from fleas, occurrence. more local flies, are Large and common such as secretions deposited is response. by appears and salivary the biting the and represent insect not The by urticarial reaction allergic does an caused

uneventful typically Insect several develop and after may at manifests age sting allergy stings. any 3% of are frequently and systemic about adults, of only occur than stung reactions adults. children 1% in more allergic Although children can and adults result children Reactions in are generally than in more severe death. in more 10% stings and with insect reactions 20% incidence common children, adults. estimated for of to Large children an in local for are

diagnosis sting the allergy of reaction IgE. dependent history the on is venom-specific of the The and insect of presence reactions which are to insect observed Normal in stings, 90%

Large Duration contiguous inches >2 to reaction days site diameter in local 2–7 Swelling the

to angioedema) skin the confined Nonlife-threatening (erythema, Immediate urticaria, generalized reaction

skin the generalized Life-threatening to reaction symptoms shock) with (laryngeal cardiovascular respiratory bronchospasm) Immediate (hypotension, edema, or confined not

Toxic vasoactive venom exogenous by Follows stings, produced amines in multiple

neuritis, nephrosis, Symptoms vasculitis, the several Serum days to sting. Unusual after start weeks sickness, insect encephalitis

pain, children, erythema at of sting localized usually subside include 24 and site hours. swelling, the that within Large local approximately in patients. occur of 10% reactions usually with the 24 hours and to are resolves They that swelling, IgE-mediated over to sting to large 48 site reactions, days. contiguous 7 late-phase, within 2 develops with reactions Virtually subsequent similar local individuals all stings. with have reactions large children. mediated IgE reactions are and 1% occur of in Systemic nonlife-threatening or They respiratory, be Chapter 81). anaphylaxis mild with or cutaneous of only with cardiovascular, and symptoms life-threatening symptoms neurologic can (see 100). Toxic of to a result reactions large may stings a if person receives (50 number the the from toxic include and resulting effects nausea, venom. Symptoms malaise, emesis of and nephrosis, with encephalitis, neuritis, associated sickness, (Table such stings Unusual vasculitis, as are reactions, insect rarely 83-1). serum

sting skin reaction extract to and context Hymenoptera test individual presence an a to history which identify venom-specific allergic. specific in helps the is of positive demonstrates venom A the of insects IgE positive by Venom-specific IgE in be may serum vitro measured tests. also antibodies all neither testing because sting allergy. test insect with alone should complementary considered patients Both methods be detects skin serum venom specific than IgE past level the or testing testing. sensitivity individual more Future of with correlate reactions patterns of

reaction and A an is should necessary venom immunotherapy systemic be before of testing considered. immediate history

is often Identification of the unreliable. insect offending place. that identified by stings the Honeybee in may be stinger remains summer’s are at more when usually occur insects aggressive. the and Vespid end stings are unprovoked

oral should analgesics. by antihistamines administering reactions cleaning cold compresses, and Local and treated the site,applying be for mistaken Occasionally be reactionsmay cellulitis. large local if Infection within a after is 48 24 occurs reaction hours sting. unlikely to an for days 4 oralantibiotics. 5 Treatment corticosteroid oral iswith to rather than

therapy the cornerstone the should by delay. administered Treatment reaction, but be is is guided reactions of epinephrine of without systemic severity and of the Antihistamines concurrently epinephrine. with be may administered given symptoms. recurrent should Corticosteroids or prolonged to be prevent in support respiratory needed. reactions, epinephrine, intensive severe and oxygen, intravenous may fluids care unit an and be For an and prevention After epinephrine autoinjector, systemic instructions patients should be on stings. referral care provided insect of allergist/immunologist, an reaction, of acute a to sting

year fatalities 100 least the United 50 to are to reactions. attributed per in sting insect States At older deaths (80%) individuals 40 than in Most age, adults of than 2% of years age. in 20 younger and years occur occur only sting prior a half deaths of occur of in without Approximately history persons reaction. any one

the factor. important the avoiding is stinging prognostic Successfully insect most adults to years who stings 10 reactions complete completion. 5 tolerate 5 for of immunotherapy without 85% systemic More years of after challenge than

hairspray or chance eating and exterminating infested reduce and drinking outdoors. to clothing, the of areas; avoiding accidental Measures pants when long sting colored or outdoors; fragrances, wearing brightly shoes; not include effective repellents against are insect Common not Hymenoptera.

venom who immunotherapy or to Current IgE. recommendations have a levels venom from individuals an to life-threatening have elevated are insect had venom-specific administer and skin systemic of sting tests reaction positive reactions of to insects a of bracelet. should autoinjector persons encouraged be with systemic wear use a history MedicAlert and an in epinephrine All to instructed the the immunotherapy had and managed than only cutaneous have prognosis who benign is a require Children age epinephrine. their younger do of 16 with not of generally years because be can reaction availability

anyuntoward of nontoxic adverse canbe and reaction food toxic food which description ingestion, after subdivided food including nonimmune into a reaction reactions. as reactions, reactions generic such immune An poisoning to further and is Lactose reaction. nonimmune a is intolerance onset, rapid into to immune whichare orhypersensitivity in reactions can divided reactions, further be IgE-mediated Food reactions and foodand reactions. encompass typically allergy non-IgE-mediated

ingested process the daily. of Oral dietary of elements response array suppression immune of tolerance is the to the predisposed immune result reactions to the in hypersensitivity reactions Food or and individuals. develop genetically of are glycoproteins allergy peanuts, reactions. cause tree 90% children, wheat, and of cow’s nuts, fish, shellfish In milk, soybean, IgE-mediated eggs, shellfish for account peanuts, most and nuts, In adults, fish, and children tree older reactions. become the IgE receptor the on and cells to results the Exposure cross-linking food found numerous which potent releasing degranulate, mediators mast cytokines. and protein allergenic in and basophils, of activated typically after the manifest symptoms. ingestion hours gastrointestinal reactions are days occur Non-IgE-mediated and to allergen as may A mechanism cell-mediated be responsible. immune

with children of 8% Approximately allergy. food affected to are 6% to 2%. In this adults 1% to declines

of Symptoms to reactions tract and hypersensitivity involvement tract, the from anaphylaxis. gastrointestinal skin, respiratory vary of proctitis/proctocolitis, (Table typically or as 84-1). allergy food Non-IgE-mediated enterocolitis presents enteropathy, infancy during

serum confirm help acute food prick In to the allergy foods suspected may skin reactions, and testing allergy. IgE testing

time such quantity reaction, the recent history the as to onset exercise associated focuses careful symptoms, A and the reaction, on most factors of food fromingestion reactivity, interval evoke necessaryto medicationuse. of patterns and the symptoms, of allergies. food IgE-mediated confirm can testing Skin be prick to performed reaction clinical the the isolated virtually suggests food). A (unless an of anIgE-mediated test reaction history negative excludes skin after asevere ingestion interpreted, history. skin and A the be test indicates clinicalreactivity must but does prove sensitization based not on positive

and positive h gastrointestinal AGE emesis, Milk, PST, food-IgE and/ GROUP wheat DISORDER food-dependent Table pain, PROGNOSIS/COURSE or soy, Gastrointestinal Allergic Variable, hypersensitivity IgE-MEDIATED minutes History, Disorders Onset: 84-1 serum Any Nausea, CHARACTERISTICS to abdominal Acute DIAGNOSIS egg, Food 2

be especially to steroids eosinophilic pain, of not required Any, and chronic/intermittent Often conclusive children, treatment History, Elimination be Adults: topical but established, abdominal Patch 6–8 emesis, information dysphagia, esophagitis responds in food-IgE to Variable, Endoscopy, improvement dysphagia, Elemental infants, of but with diet irritability adolescents gastroesophageal response OFC Allergic clinical PST, and poor pain, and/ may 50%, impaction value food correlation diet or wk testing may provides symptoms positive reflux, biopsy swallowed Children: abdominal elimination with well diagnosis symptoms diet within

and IgA Resolution gluten antigliadin villus with atrophy oral elimination diagnostic: and serum Screening Biopsy of relapse on with Lifelong antitissue challenge symptoms transglutaminase

Middleton’s 2008, Philadelphia, ed NF Mosby. Principles et al: and 7, Adkinson From Jr, Busse WW, Allergy: Practice, BS, Bochner OFC, challenge; skin prick PST, test. Oral food

111:S544, J Food allergy, Adapted from HA: Sampson Clin Immunol 2003. Allergy

serum vitro helpconfirm An in allergy assay clinical can IgE as used well. specific to be uses choice.This the this assays; and the allergists is assays. specificity method than and more as regard has system also ImmunoCAP toother method Many reproducibility fluorescent of method a other laboratories immunoassay,which quantitative sensitive compared improved provide These skin informationto tests supplementary tests. which occur to (Table Researchers to of have clinical food-specific highlylikely are 84-2). IgE reactions concentrations determine at tried oral be of a greater a with food need in has helpful whether allergic, the IgE no for be can is eat allergen predicting remain safely. 95% there considered to an andcan whether the value level challenges child standard allergen food child the be and may predictive outgrown than of allergy.Oral specific food Patients diagnosis the specific IgElevels thefood determine performed may challenge.Monitoring

if the avoid of the allergen to responsible consists food occurs. allergies ingestion of Management initiate ingestion of therapy and to patient educating cetirizine limited diphenhydramine be the mild For administered. hives to contact, such in mild skin of or area itching such as oral symptoms only, allergen as can or the antihistamines epinephrine and swelling, skin, or should swallowing, extend including injectable not fainting be within but not vomiting, breathing to or If symptoms to or attention diphenhydramine administered medical difficulty responding and immediate limited symptoms minutes, pursued. tongue throat 20 beyond (0.15 Jr. (0.3 0.15 of epinephrine or Types EpiPen and mg), EpiPen (0.3 mg). include injectable mg), Twinject

death and Anaphylaxis the most is in 81). reactions of complication serious Chapter can food allergic (see result

milk, approximately of and resolves of years children. Hypersensitivity 80% soy 5 wheat, in life the within egg, first to lifelong. nuts, to such be to tends shellfish, as and fish, peanuts, certain foods, tree Sensitivity may age who younger manifested peanut than of 2 However it. children of years allergy 20% outgrow

Avoidance the is suspect crucial. of food labels of a reading Careful priority. is food MedicAlert appropriate should be A information bracelet with worn. educational www.foodallergy.org ) ( organization a for The families Allergy useful Research resource Education Food & and is physicians.

partially formula (1) a to months manifested and of 4 to or newborn 6 delaying has the the whey 4 for months introduction formula include (e.g., aimed diseases 6 of casein (2) who Alimentum prevention atopic or breastfeeding disease foods 6 allergic until hydrolyzed of first solid or first 4 Good Nutramigen) for not supplementing) to for high-risk using months hydrolyzed (e.g., (if the age. Recommendations Start) at of well during pregnancy 6 allergenic unproven. diets during Other months as avoidance beyond approaches, are of as and avoidance age, maternal such infants foods as lactation, for

negative an with adverse associated of as is the agent. An or drug reaction biologic a defined consequence drug unwanted, use as reactions be (Table Drug can or classified nonimmunologic 85-1). reactions immunologic are an Nearly of drug mechanism, of 75% caused between a and mechanism. 10% drug 5% adverse are to immune-mediated predictable, by explained and reactions nonimmunologic by all reactions 80% remaining or by may caused reactions unpredictable are The be not an mechanism, which immune-mediated. drug may Coombs allergic to 77-1). (see The reactions be can and some drug-induced used classification describe Gell Table drug Many has classified defined. be exact mechanism immune reactions been because the cannot not as Tand larger rather, B-lymphocyte complex multivalent responses. hapten-protein an drug response to drugs haptenation.The size; serum their forms a new Most immunogenic a as such epitope because cannot or of hapten process immune elicit or proteins, binds a molecules, elicits small acts and a metabolite tissue called that the

in drug Drug encountered reactions allergic to cephalosporins most the pediatric population. common reactions and penicillins the are penicillin Approximately of allergic. to as labeled are children 6% 10% years topical factors higher previous or intermittent Risk parenteral age), dose, reactions drug exposure, administration, drug (>20 for age increasing include of

from antihistamine (delayed, cell-mediated) reaction Type Contact IV dermatitis topical

erythromycin Drug-drug with interactions arrhythmia from terfenadine de Torsades pointes

patient G6PD Hemolytic Idiosyncratic a primaquine deficiency after anemia with therapy in

dose small aspirin of a single, Intolerance after Tinnitus

Physician options, Casillas 68(9):1781−1790, AM: from Am reactions: types 2003. Adapted and treatment Adverse Fam drug MA, Riedl

Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase. G6PD,

metabolism. exposure, of repeated slow and a drug genetic predisposition reactions greater individual serious background but drug atopic may of a of development predispose An reaction. not risk to does an indicate the

after l occur minutes drug 60 which immediate of can hours. reactions, Allergic within which reactions reactions, hours accelerated 72 (anaphylactic) late which classified reactions, drug after and be occur 72 to administration; begin as administration; drug adverse common form The most is of reaction cutaneous. are usually reactions. serum dermatologic sickness Accelerated or reactions necrolysis, dermatitis, Late toxic include Stevens-Johnson syndrome, serum epidermal sickness. and reactions desquamating

such local standardized anesthetics, are Skin insulin. well described relaxants, are and for protocols as for testing and other agents, vaccines, penicillin muscle Positive reagents setting. hypersensitivity presence supports skin testing I the confirms of the such to antigen-specific reaction and the IgE diagnosis in a of type clinical appropriate

reactions penicillin. adverse with managing with is experience broadest The drug when and of allergy well evaluated should Penicillin not acute need individual treatment. is the be in IgE-mediated Penicillin its have because when reaction, skin to helpful testing a with tests patients predictive only negative penicillin. is skin reactions value; is negative of 1% re-exposed 3% to for of mild, which Pre-Pen), (available penicilloyl G, performed testing include the penicilloate, using penilloate. polylysine penicillin as minor major should for and determinants, penicillin which and Skin determinant, be predict Skin penicillin testing non-IgE-mediated not reactions. to does penicillin not should consistent a desquamative-type sickness reactions, For should with be history performed, indefinitely. be testing avoided serum and or patients skin with

reaction is less 2%. an risk has a to allergic cephalosporinantibiotic who positively a than of The testing to suffering penicillinskin child reacted believed cephalexin) cefuroxime) third-generation cephalosporins cephalosporins the more that is (e.g., likely thansecond-generation It be to are (cefpodoxime) (e.g., or first-generation cross-reactive. chains is side β-lactam and dueto of first-generation This similarity penicillin ringbetween the chemical of the cephalosporins.

antibiotic should and penicillin used. testing alternative positive, penicillin avoided, skin an be is be should If in time there of a by a setting. of amounts definite can is accomplished hospital for increasing need short be desensitization penicillin, administration a drug over If of to however, unresponsive drug. mechanism to mast exact cells The the unclear; is is it desensitization thought render least be desensitization, at To twice daily. must given drug maintain the stopped longer for before 48 no desensitized, protocol and be longer the the must drug same repeated If use. is is hours, repeated the antibiotic patient than

the relevant defined. metabolism are produced determinants well degradation other or antibiotics, not by allergenic For be in nonirritating testing native the performed. antibiotic Skin to concentrations can the not response does allergy. negative suggests however, of response presence positive IgE-mediated A allergy; a exclude test of negative In depending history the graded challenge case test may response, skin reaction. the the on a of administered, be a dose clinical or necrolysis, should syndrome, sickness have who challenged. experienced or epidermal Patients toxic Stevens-Johnson be serum not

result Anaphylaxis complication 81). Chapter drug in most and (see the of allergic can death reactions serious is

nature. to Most in allergic be not drug seem reactions do of incidence an childhood drug to contributes or increased Repeated, adverse during intermittent adults. exposure adulthood early in reactions

of suspect Avoidance drug the is paramount. should A be bracelet worn. with information MedicAlert appropriate concerns One is to reactions cephalosporins. penicillin and of the in common between most cross-reactivity drug regard allergic a minor allergic penicillin skin In and children determine by it history important determinants. to is allergy, the whether with are of testing major using to penicillin, truly they is increased an an reaction negative, to skin not test there the allergic cephalosporins. penicillin risk If of is under non-cross-reacting to required to cephalosporin. cephalosporin antibiotic, test challenge appropriate or penicillin leads graded desensitization required the monitoring, A to positive a an alternate the skin

cephalosporin. or allergy For approaches same chain determinant, who a challenge cephalosporin, with share the cephalosporin different a may testing or side children of same a that skin cephalosporin the another graded a with history not require two a with be does considered: A IgE-mediated the response a and suggests of unknown. value positive test is presence of the negative allergy, Skin standardized been with testing has validated. or not cephalosporins

2008 Engl dermatitis, J N Bieber 58:483–1494, T: Med Atopic

and allergy-immunology Grammer Proc University residents Asthma 2012: L: Allergy syllabus students, 33(3), Greenberger Northwestern 2012 P,

complementary formulas, AW: dietary of Burks 121:183–191, Sicherer of SH, restriction, on and timing infants introduction Pediatrics in interventions hydrolyzed disease of nutritional the foods and the maternal Greer FR, of role development early atopic breastfeeding, Effects children: of

Allergy: DYM, Principles al: HA, Geha et Leung RS, Sampson Pediatric and

Practice, 2, Louis, ed Elsevier 2010, St

Program: Expert diagnosis National guidelines management and Blood Institute asthma. the for and and report Prevention of panel and 3: National Lung, Heart, Education Asthma report 2007. Full NTH No. Publication 08–4051. 2007, Bethesda, MD,

Health of U.S. Human Services. Department and http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthgdln.htm Available at

Institute National Lung, guidelines of and Blood asthma. Heart, diagnosis and 3: panel report for Program: Prevention Education management and and the National Asthma Expert Summary report 2007. NTH No. Publication 08–5846. 2007, Bethesda, MD,

U.S. of Human Department and Health Services. Available http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/guidelines/asthma/asthsumm.pdf at

on 2010 and diseases, allergic DYM: immunologic WT, Clin Immunol Allergy Shearer 2010 J primer 125:S1–S2, Leung

Food Understanding Child’s SH: and Managing Allergies, Sicherer Your

2006, Hopkins Press University Johns Baltimore,

HC: Williams 352:2314–2324, Atopic N dermatitis, Med Engl 2005 J

Allergies 2007, Dummies, Food for RA: Wiley Wood NJ, Hoboken,

Haftel M. Hilary

rheumatic which diseases be The inflammation, connective or tissue (collagen diseases) generalized. autoimmunity localized are vascular of may childhood and characterized by or lupus formerly arthritis, juvenile idiopathic include (JDM). of children (SLE), (JIA), dermatomyositis diseases arthritis The classic juvenile rheumatic juvenile and erythematosus systemic rheumatoid called Vasculitis rheumatic is of many a diseases. component poorly overlapping pain are involving a of set characterized Musculoskeletal the extremities. pain syndromes by localized conditions syndrome are childhood. Scleroderma, syndrome, and Behçet in Sjögren rare infections, malignancies processes, typically differential and of diagnosis The includes 86-1). postinfectious disorders (Table rheumatologic

identify reflect The systemic. of including symptoms the history source or can it is localized that whether the inflammation, systemic be nonspecific. of inflammation to Symptoms tend caused Fever, release, take forms. many can cytokine by Kawasaki hectic pattern, vasculitides A children found with commonly occurs periodicity without is or such underlying infection. in as fever, but in disease also regular produce or patterned as once illnesses, temperature systemic-onset twice a Certain fever a JIA, such spikes day. with rheumatic fevers. cause illnesses low-grade Other Charting of antipyretics, pattern, the the absence child’s is fever particularly useful. in (see Table forms in occur many Rashes 86-1). symptoms systemic fatigue) anorexia, and (malaise, Other debilitating. weight to vary mild can loss, from

localized site. of involved the vary inflammation on Symptoms depending affected leads pain, impaired to use the and inflammation synovium joint. Arthritis, (synovitis), or joint ability the of swelling, to gelling is Morning or described. stiffness limp. may slow a be arise and The in child to morning may have the may activities refrain athletics. from and Children usual inflammation ligament Enthesitis at is a insertion bone. a to of the pain. Serositis, rise abdominal pleuritis, breath, to shortness chest inflammation or gives of serosal pain, pericarditis, as such peritonitis, lining of or muscle, weakness, may the symptoms living. performing daily of of difficulty tasks of pain, lead to muscle Myositis,inflammation or medium-sized of in vessels a in and involved; blood the vessels vessels, nonspecific circumscribed involvement dermis of inflammation small tender rash of leads edema deep the to when Vasculitis, are (petechiae, papillary results purpura) symptoms nodule.

elicit narrow and frequently A diagnosis differential sufficient thorough to is examination the diagnosis. history and the physical point may underlying to thrive growth orfailure inflammatory to failure, The a of appearance, child’s significant overall evidence disorder. and seen in head The may such of diseases ulceration, examination mucosal showevidence as SLE. neck pupillary synechiae uveitis eye and nonspecific. may irregularity found The the lymphadenopathy conjunctivitis from or show of and be disease.Diffuse Kawasaki is examination may orpleural show and cardiac serositis. indicating rubs, pericardial may examinations friction Therespiratory activation that of suspicion or system occurs reticuloendothelial of the SLE. raises or in hepatomegaly JIA Splenomegaly systemic-onset

and is The for and swelling, may effusion, crucial of examination blood arthritis of erythema joint joint flow. diagnosis evidence increased tenderness, identify the from Joint seen. may contractures be be may The thickened chronic inflammation. or joint lining, from synovium, arthritis to can of epiphyseal growth length an limb and Activation lead in area discrepancies. localized bony plates of proliferation centers as or growth temporomandibular micrognathia. bones, maldevelopment immature resulting to at the carpals sites of in resulting inflammation may crowding, such of Conversely lead the or tarsals, in joints, evidence from sclerodactyly, be underlying may skin rash of A or disorders, skin or scleroderma such noted. thickening as or may in phenomenon wasting. Chronic ulceration, result digital capillary nail-fold Raynaud changes, tuft

leading underlying of heterogeneous directed the encompass of immune pathogenesis: system numbers inflammatory childhood in of with of increases with lymphocytes, to inflammation secondary diseases rheumatic group functioning diseases native proteins, against a shared activated disordered The a

Yes 50% — Yes Yes Monarticular, No Yes

No Eye Conjunctivitis, disease (rare No in uveitis systemic) Uveitis/retinitis No Iridocyclitis Conjunctivitis,

N. Unknown leukemia gonorrhoeae Borrelia A Autoimmune Pathogenesis burgdorferi streptococcus lymphoblastic Autoimmune Acute Group

antibody; necrosis ASO, white protein; ANA, citrullinated antistreptolysin-O tumor anti-inflammatory NSAID, drug; factor; titer; cell. WBC, TNF, nonsteroidal Antinuclear CCP, blood cyclic

Immune Antithyroid hepatitis, Antineutrophil (chronic anticoagulant) biliary Antimitochondrial Anti-CCP ANCA-perinuclear anemia antiphospholipid, Coombs-positive lupus (microscopic (ANCA-cytoplasmic) polyangiitis) Immune (rheumatoid (primary SLE) cirrhosis, JIA) thrombocytopenia positive with SLE) cytoplasmic neutropenia polyangiitis) Immune (anticardiolipin, hemolytic (thyroiditis, Antimicrosomal antibody lymphopenia active Thrombosis (granulomatosis SLE)

MCTD) DNA DNA-histone RNP (ribonucleoprotein) inflammation) (drug-induced DNA indicates polymyositis, Sm CNS) (nonspecific, renal, Sjögren scleroderma, syndrome, Single-stranded (SLE, (SLE, (Smith) SLE) renal (SLE, Double-stranded disease)

syndrome) lupus-congenital (SLE, Sjögren [congenital heart (Lane: neonatal SSB) Ro (SLE, block, neonatal lupus SSA) La heart block], (Robert:

limited Scl-70 (systemic UCTD) dermatomyositis) Sjögren Centromere Jo-1 syndrome) PM-Scl scleroderma) sclerosis) (polymyositis, (scleroderma, (CREST;

Condemi JAMA 1992. Adapted autoimmune from 268:2882–2892, disease, J: The

erythematosus; undifferentiated disease. ANCA, SLE, B; Sjögren connective A; connective SSA, antigen UCTD, nervous Raynaud telangiectasia; antigen lupus syndrome, CREST central cyclic disease; cytoplasmic MCTD, protein; systemic syndrome esophageal mixed antibody; system; dysfunction, CNS, tissue SSB, calcinosis, sclerodactyly, tissue Sjögren syndrome phenomenon, CCP, Antineutrophil citrullinated

circulating antibodies. and cytokines, can 86-2). nonspecific, proteins, production antibody subsequent be disease (Table native This targeted against specific or to can be it leading manifestations the long-term self-limited, diseases rheumatic may be is most of inflammatory or the perpetuation can of childhood hyperactivity which hallmark the chronicity, Although lead process, system to immune disability. of

in and nonspecific symptoms, be of characteristic especially time set over rheumatic symptoms diseases elicited. early with findings Although a sometimes the course, present physical can laboratory made, and and appropriate chosen diagnosis differential conjunction is In is an with the tests, confirmatory carefully treatment developed. diagnosis eventually plan correct

and classification fulfillment by clinicalfindings diagnoses established rheumatologic of criteria. Most are diagnosis. a Laboratorytesting should be random based differential a than and screening on search in diagnosisrather of judicious develop Laboratory clinical tests confirm rather than diagnoses them.

indicated by inflammation erythrocyte Evidence count, and also cell protein. an elevated sedimentation white platelet rate, of be phase reactants, systemic especially may count, underlying the C-reactive the acute blood but chronic normochromic, disease. blood may anemia demonstrate of count a The complete normocytic are laboratory particular These findings any diagnosis. nonspecific for rheumatologic Certain in with such risk such antinuclear confirm diagnosis, JDM, laboratory production antibody. a muscle complications, in a uveitis elevation identify a or JIA increased help patient in with as positive enzyme SLE or as for tests autoantibody may

Radiologic by physical studies areas of or on focus identified examination. history concern should arthritis examination with the behind abnormalities Radiography may jointsin on radiographic lag clinicalexamination. of far beneficial,but patients be may between differentiate and magnetic scan,computed injury. soft be such imaging,may synovitisand useful with when trying scan, resonance to tissue tomography traumatic bone Tests greater sensitivity, as Magnetic myositis with of identify of evidence useful SLE central nervous resonance be system imagingmay involvement for evidence or also with JDM. to

tissue, infiltration of immune leukocytic blood with are is purpura vesselswith of and (HSP) of inflammation IgA. associated by HSP unknown hemorrhage, ischemia.The Henoch-Schönlein a complexes etiology of characterized small predominantlycomposed vasculitis

an systemic of and of is most with common incidence childhood of 13 per 100,000 purpura, nonthrombocytopenic HSP vasculitis cause children. the occurs years has described children 15 although primarily to It in 3 of adults. age, in been it in summer winter and in HSP slightly boys the girls months. than occurs the more common frequently in more is than

@ StudentConsult.com Available

less or frequently, gastrointestinal rash, vasculitis. arthritis, renal is characterized by and, HSP inflammation by caused tissues, HSP vessel blood The the leading is of skin hallmark extravasation into purpura, with the surrounding deposition. palpable small IgA in frequently to of the the classically rash The is lower extremities buttocks, waist, and below in dependent on areas: (Fig. found 87-1). rapidly begin urticarial lesions or with to but purpura small of as progresses areas The can rash macules ecchymosis. particularly of and accompanied be labia. by scrotum scalp, also rash the dorsum the or edema, feet, The calves of and can pancreatitis, is occasionally HSP associated orchitis. with encephalopathy, and

most occurs particularly the ankles lower in with in knees. of Arthritis HSP is patients the extremities, and and 80% common acute arthritis is painful bear and refusal with The weight. to very HSP. edema the with with seen can be swelling confused rash Joint peripheral of

occurs involvement about of children most leading crampy as of the abdominal affected presents pain, to vessel small to mild half moderate ischemia. one gastrointestinal to Gastrointestinal and thought to be in typically due involvement tract Less intervention. requires intussusception, abdominal perforation bloody emergent or abdominal commonly, significant occurs and diarrhea, distention, phase of the involvement acute seen typically Gastrointestinal is during illness. the precede It onset rash. the of may

which of chronic. renal with be HSP or involvement, One third develop can acute children hematuria, most hypertension, in Although glomerulonephritis involvement mild renal acute occur. acute or can failure is cases, by manifested renal but of which few ultimately failure. including of renal can to disease, presentation, rarely glomerulonephritis chronic renal months the late patients within Most cases renal occur first lead develop disease,

on 87-1 purpura Rash of lower child. extremities of the Figure Henoch-Schönlein a purpura both evidence and Note petechiae. of

Erythrocyte sedimentation cell with and patients blood protein, rate, in C-reactive elevated HSP. count are white of with or or platelet thrombocytopenia, count, count autoimmune associated characterized test, that important other high, is from purpura with such erythematosus, differentiating thrombocytopenia causes by as leukemia. HSP are a normal, purpura most systemic The platelet is the HSP lupus because nonthrombocytopenic even hematuria. screens for A evidence of urinalysis and A creatinine to urea blood serum be obtained should renal function. evaluate nitrogen the Testing identify of for ischemia. stool evidence gut may blood of perforation requires Any radiologic investigation. gut question

on 87-1), The (Table disease. four diagnosis the and HSP 87.1% based is sensitivity the 87.7% two specificity criteria of for of which of provides presence diagnosis systemic includes associated 87-2) such thrombocytopenic The leukemia. vasculitides thrombocytopenic diseases differential and as other idiopathic and (Table purpura purpura, with

supportive. Therapy is for HSP arthritis. be short-term anti-inflammatory of the A can administered course non-steroidal drugs for acute usually significant reserved of pain. abdominal for children disease and are gastrointestinal relief provide with corticosteroids Systemic 2 a dosing typical regimen taper to is weeks, followed prednisone, 1 mg/kg/day 1 for A schedule. by weaned a necessitate as of may are of treatment. corticosteroids pain abdominal Recurrence longer course nephritis more aggressive corticosteroids immunosuppressive may therapy. but typically require Acute with is treated

monophasic, cases HSP weeks to 3 Most are completely. andresolving of 4 lasting and wax The however, can wane, HSP. year after rash for1 Parents regarding possiblerecurrences. warned be should arthritis typically not leave does of permanent any recur. damage; The not HSP it joint does risk or thatposes followed obstruction of with Gastrointestinalinvolvement intussusception, abnormal lead a infarction which can by peristalsis bowel may temporary be perforation. complete to Any child

Raised, palpable thrombocytopenia hemorrhagic in Palpable the absence lesions purpura skin of

abdominal of Diffuse the diagnosis or ischemia angina pain bowel Bowel

changes Diagnostic venules; Histologic IgA walls vessel deposits biopsy showing in the granulocytes in or wall of arterioles

two at of years group of *The diagnosis of symptoms based of purpura Age onset on Pediatric Henoch-Schönlein presence four the <20 is criteria. age

known polyangiitis syndrome with (formerly Churg-Strauss granulomatosis) polyangiitis Wegener Microscopic Granulomatosis nodosa Polyarteritis as

drug-related) with associated abdominalpain, be purpura or with obstipation, recent Serum with (e.g., for acute intussusception. history sickness Vasculitis infections a HSP evaluated who of Henoch-Schönlein diarrhea should presents failure. Renal may renal rarely to lead involvement

is HSP of prognosis excellent. The the have significant any illness sequelae. without children resolution complete Most of the insufficiency, particularly for urea by hypertension high-grade with if HSP complications, course nephritis. long-term such risk as marked (elevated highest renal proteinuria) at renal was persistent significant blood nitrogen, Patients initial are disease or to risk long-term disease less of renal a 1% There HSP. children in is progression end-stage with than of disease renal rare end-stage transplantation. require develop renal who The patients may HSP transplanted the kidney. recur in may

and (KD) formation. disease a unknown is that vasculitis by medium-sized of is of etiology aneurysm arteries with involvement resulting multisystem to small inflammation Kawasaki characterized

is vasculitis childhood. of common KD most the second more children descent. It in common Asian is of of frequency It been world; parts in is all described in frequency Japan. in highest has variable the the is to and than children 3 years. children with in younger years, peak 7 rare older KD commonly between age, of occurs than 5 in most 2 years a in approximately children the is The who 5 100,000 are States incidence than years 6 of younger United per age. occurs between disease the a throughout been with variability but the seasonal has and year. February May, A described peak

KD The manifestations. into divided three with be own of can phases, its course each clinical unique most of coronary Aneurysmal is arteries involvement KD. the manifestation important the of

StudentConsult.com @ Available

of Without Origin Fever Fever a Source Lymphadenopathy Unknown

fever 1 phase apparent lasts °C) which a by acute an KD, of 2 onset without sudden is weeks, to The marked source. high, of (>40 hectic and cracked by onset lymphadenopathy; (Fig. lips mucosal of changes, a and the swelling hands feet dry, of fever tongue; including and The followed strawberry is erythema; conjunctival cervical 88-1). Conjunctivitis and bilateral, nonsuppurative. is bulbar, 70% children Cervical of purposes 1.5 for should found lymphadenopathy diagnosis. in be greater is and in diameter than cm of the chest. may of and inguinal in area KD with be which rash, children the particularly on 80% in accentuated can occurs vary appearance, in and A the in Extreme is especially irritability prominent, infants. gallbladder, to particularly of and may large joints, pleocytosis, Abdominal occur. pain arthritis, and the of pyuria, medium-sized cerebrospinal fluid sterile hydrops tachycardia, or in failure. congestive overt phase of manifested breath, heart shortness the acute by may Carditis be very this are Giant artery most young but occur coronary aneurysms, children, rare in appear during commonly which can phase.

symptoms. lasts of is and resolution about week, subacute untreated) the other The fever fourth which until characterized by (if gradual phase, fingers appears of at the particularly skin, and the toes, of Desquamation this point. degree a or significant million/mm3). count, normal slightly depressed, previously (often increases platelet to >1 The may the in and also coronary convalescent onset This the artery of heralds phase and pose of phase morbidity which mortality. the aneurysms, highest risk appear 6 such artery aneurysms rate prolonged Risk than of development parameters or gender. younger and for sedimentation erythrocyte year 1 prolonged inflammatory older than elevation years, male of age as factors coronary (ESR), include fever, the

red, features and and nonsuppurative lips. disease Facial chapped Kawa-saki of conjunctivitis (B) rash (A) morbilliform with Figure 88-1 AB

of to until and to usually returns symptoms The begins 6 disappearance convalescent illness. the weeks ESR phase clinical the onset normal, continues after with 8 of the during may lines phase. the Beau appear of fingernails this

important to notably fever, infection. particularly causes It exclude of is other appropriate blood obtain chest perform urine is a x-ray. culturesand to It to and which mm/hr). can elevated, blood In white are inflammatory profoundlyelevated acute count, (often >80 protein, C-reactive ESR, and the the phase, parameters be cell including counts inappropriately normal. Platelet may or be low toexclude performed A infection, if puncture, pleocytosis. reveal may lumbar may Tests abnormal. hepatobiliary of be function the platelet during elevated phase. countsdevelop Greatly subacute by is of to artery usually aneurysms weeks. and 8 two-dimensional development coronary phase, 2 The weeks, at echocardiograms, acute during monitored 6 to3 at performing again the and, are frequent echocardiograms angiography coronary potentially, forpatients coronary More artery who develop abnormalities. indicated

identifiable diagnosis presence fever based more on clinical than and of 88-1). is 5 the presence for KD of criteria source the an of (Table of other five four The without days

The clinical artery the more which is incomplete least in of present, (atypical) 5 of when days criteria coronary three KD, present if only for in aneurysms. commonly diagnosis infants, made particularly two presence even is at occurs fever are or months The of age present. other should than 6 even no infants younger if least of KD be criteria at for with days fever 7 diagnosis are considered in must found illnesses, diagnosis considered many KD be other be (Table KD diagnoses before Because can the in are 88-2). established of and manifestations of many the of excluded

KD, of although for Intravenous the unknown. of the therapy (IVIG) immunoglobulin is action mainstay is mechanism

changes: five of four* of Fever duration the >5 following at associated least days’ with

injected of respiratory mucous or lips, dry “strawberry” more upper the membranes fissured and One pharyngeal changes of the injection, tract, tongue including lips,

periungual or peripheral the changes of edema, and generalized erythema, more including peripheral desquamation desquamation, One extremities,

primarily Polymorphous truncal rash,

diameter cm >1.5 lymphadenopathy in Cervical

explained process. by cannot known disease Disease other some be

can coronary documented echocardiography or are if fever of with disease in two-dimensional *A be made artery conjunction diagnosis angiography. Kawasaki by changes coronary present and disease three only

aneurysms (urethritis) Coronary artery Irritability aneurysm pyuria Heart infarction Arthritis of Sterile Pancreatitis Hydrops Aseptic Peripheral artery (late) failure Coronary Diarrhea gangrene thrombosis meningitis artery Thrombocytosis Peripheral Myopericarditis gallbladder Myocardial

in (2 most artery over aneurysms. g/kg of patients in reduces and, dose illness A resolution of and IVIG more coronary important, 12 incidence the results hours) clinical rapiddefervescence single of 100 doses to initially (80 in anti-inflammatory every mg/kg/day in phase. acute the 6hours) is divided Aspirin given given a (3 dose) as to the until to aspirin 5 absence through and documents artery the for antithrombotic single or 6 of to aneurysms. coronary fever resolves, doses the isreduced convalescentphases, subacute mg/kg/day Once weeks, resolution 8 follow-up echocardiography and usually

to Up KD initially therapy. children fail with to to 10% IVIG of respondsatisfactorily may be IVIG, ofIVIG preparation an these required. alternative with respondto patients of retreatment Most but during a to active for in mayhave ofIVIG. two arerarely Corticosteroids used as but after persistent role other doses apparent with or infliximab acute opposed phase children or fever KD, the carditis vasculitides, if is

Most without sequelae. cases resolve artery infarction aneurysm. caused by has Myocardial coronary of an the of at likely been stenosis documented, site a most older children past on may KD. death to been Coronary due aneurysms in have sudden following cardiac found artery autopsy complications 88-3. are listed in Table Other

treated with aspirin in 20% 25% to the IVIG artery and in treated to from reduces of IVIG to aspirin. alone 2% prevalence with children 4% children disease coronary aneurysms, than of coronary risk has artery an persistent the Other KD excellent prognosis.

(JIA), types, the which arthritis juvenile several arthritis idiopathic most childhood include is arthritides juvenile called common formerly (JRA). rheumatoid of chronic The of other of as arthritis such The arthritis, and JIA juvenile psoriatic of includes classification arthritis. types enthesitis-related several autoimmune The unknown. of disease is etiology this of of synovitis, illnesses synovium. manifestation common inflammation or underlying joint this group the the chronic is of of presence The The fluid synovial synovium hypervascular which with found thickened infiltration with along the inflammatory cytokines. can by lymphocytes, be also in and becomes leads of inflammation to production and proteases collagenases. and tissue release The structures. underlying inflammation the to articular the lead bony untreated, left If eventually, cartilage can destruction, particularly of and, tissue the

the rheumatologic 1:1000 disease common most a with is JIA of chronic of childhood, children. prevalence The it years one can has at 1 8 to 3 and any 12 one years, disease occur at to but at two age. peaks, oligoarticular particularly more with Girls illness. the the of affected boys, are form than commonly

@ Available StudentConsult.com

acutely involved can sacroiliac be or swelling onset thoughtraumatic be and and with confused thepresence after each of five (less anaccident or depending disease five the actual presence fall, slow, divided particular systemicfeatures, is JIA by can of the children). involvement, arthritis the (Table child than the are more), into 89-1).Although noticed effusions several number the parent, or (even joint subtypes, as with the joints versus in trauma is such rare often of characteristics on of child joint all. and in but joint the refuses the at use, developpain touse may stiffness The rarely limit that and, can can stiffness be and if gelling Morning also response to therapy. joint occur followed inthe in present,

physical signs and present,including examination, are of effusion (Fig. On inflammation joint erythema, tenderness, contractures of because lack from be pain, of use. of motion swelling,or may range 89-1).Joint limited the children, of because In

OLIGOARTICULAR POLYARTICULAR Juvenile Subgroups Idiopathic Arthritis 89-1 of Features FEATURE SYSTEMIC No. Table ONSET SPONDYLOARTHROPATHIES medium small extended medium joints to joints Medium in ≥5 <5 large including (also to joints Small Varies of sacroiliac large, ≥5 to to Medium Small usually Types Varies,

Enthesopathy, None bowel None Systemic manifestations features Extra-articular psoriasis,

early-onset RA) (in with older positivity + RF children

antibody; RF, Antinuclear arthritis; ANA, rheumatoid rheumatoid factor. RA,

arthritis. 89-1 An in idiopathic with patient a Figure oligoarticular knee affected juve-nile and sizeable flexion Note bony proliferation, contracture. effusion,

possible abnormalities growth may be surrounding plate, active of bonyproliferation disturbance. localized the to findbony it growth an bone, and presence causing of is may be In length discrepancy lowerextremity a joint, appreciable ifthe arthritis a asymmetric. leg

All iridocyclitis for children are chronic risk arthritis at with or chronic uveitis. HLA-DR6, (HLAs) an There HLA-DR8) and uveitis. is association and antigens human leukocyte (HLA-DR5, between who uveitis. arthritis higher antinuclear positive children chronic with identifies antibody for of The a presence risk at are JIA are of of Although an with subgroup risk, children, 80%. uveitis all children joints) at incidence of five with increased particularly at a antibody oligoarticular highest (less young the risk, are girls, than positive and antinuclear JIA with affected visual of point until making treatable The blindness the it primary can be uveitis associated children. JIA of asymptomatic with cause loss, in a a identify of screening initiate examination to anterior treatment active It to disease. regular for any chamber JIA and with to prompt with crucial slit-lamp inflammation undergo is children ophthalmologic

arthritis the is within than fewer months as Oligoarticular diagnosis. joints of 6 five presence in of defined JIA 50% for JIA, the This cases. common most of of accounting form is approximately

3 another peak peak with 8 children, JIA to years 1 at at presents years. and 12 young to in Oligoarticular a ankle involved, the and the by to knee most in is large The medium-sized the the joints; found arthritis wrist. common followed is joint occur. as joints, is involved, small unusual this for although may It the be or toes, such to fingers hip and uncommon. involvement Neck is also sedimentation without inflammation thrive) cell or JIA well (fever, evidence weight loss, white erythrocyte or (elevated failure evidence be may or rate). otherwise systemic Children with to inflammation oligoarticular any of of blood count any laboratory systemic extended develops (called subset these disease children later polyarticular oligoarthritis). of A

children accounts with 40% joints about JIA or months diagnosis the for five cases. within in first describes of arthritis of 6 more and Polyarticular can to wrists, involves the Children which arthritis, polyarticular and ankles, symmetric affect feet, the but tend with of small any JIA joints typically have hands, knees. joint cervical leading involved, can spine be The

Extra-articular Psoriasis, (systemic-onset Systemic nail Enthesopathy symptoms manifestations symptoms JRA) Bowel

antibody; juvenile IBD, spondylitis; arthritis; juvenile bowel inflammatory ankylosing ANA, Antinuclear JIA, idiopathic JAS, disease;

arthritis; poststreptococcal RF, PSA, factor. rheumatoid

time. to over fusion spine of the of elevated with oligoarticular can growth anemia malaise, systemic In children markers of including disease, disease present JIA, polyarticular inflammation. to fever, chronic of inflammation, evidence and with retardation, low-grade contrast there JIA childhood. age, at peak a although early present Polyarticular can is in any adult of and the is a by and with rheumatoid true a positive peak subgroup to similar rheumatoid children adolescence, the prognosis antibody) clinical factor most represent entity. course differ are arthritis; There anti-CCP second presence these a (and adult the but in likely

(approximately A with subgroup with juvenile does rather small of present not 10%) inflammation. onset arthritis patients arthritis of but systemic with preceding to of thought usually manifests autoinflammatory day, once several an for This typical weeks spiking disease, or be months. recurring, twice with per can a to fever, which occur JIA, form typically a accompanied rash, salmon-colored. morbilliform and This is by and occur fever rash only. The may at times be high of evanescent nature. in be the Rarely urticarial rash can Internal organ involvement occurs. also and Serositis, such 50% as pericarditis, occurs in of pleuritis children. Pericardial rarely tamponade may occur. of 70% in occurs children. Hepatosplenomegaly and sick; with to including JIA constitutional appear failure thrive. systemic-onset significant Children symptoms, they malaise have blood show anemia. protein, rate, counts the count, platelet and inflammation, elevated with sedimentation findings and cell white erythrocyte Laboratory C-reactive 6 JIA The inflammation systemic follows weeks months. arthritis the to of by 6 in for is and extensive arthritis long-term resistant placing be these treatment, children highest to and nature risk The polyarticular at typically disability. can

of describe spondyloarthropathies insertions. sacroiliac tendinous axial of a group inflammation or inflammation and and skeleton that joints The of include the enthesitis, arthritides bowel These spondylitis, disease. and juvenile include inflammatory ankylosing arthritis, the psoriatic of arthritis arthritis group peripheral and also can This of other can initially diseases classified in subgroups. be with present of only diagnosis disease, sacroiliac (Table arthritis, It becomes evidence is the or when clear develops later, 89-2). gastrointestinal patient that the psoriasis, include presence features factor group treatment the of Other blockers. frequent and the for tumor this (TNF) earlier important necrosis HLA-B27 of need with

with abnormalities. oligoarticular children have Most no JIA laboratory and commonly Children polyarticular reactants of with disease chronic phase and systemic-onset acute show disease. anemia elevated count limb with joint should Chapter pain, performed with exclude can leukemia, pain bone (see In to patients also or all which blood complete 155). present pediatric be a All test for at antibody to an with risk patients have help those should antinuclear identify oligoarticular JIA higher uveitis. rheumatoid children children adolescents with with factor early disease a have onset adult Older to and should performed arthritis. polyarticular rheumatoid identify

suppurative exclude onset arthrocentesis monarticular may who with in to be acute symptoms. necessary arthritis Diagnostic present children of white predominantly suppurative than fluid arthritis. to than count typically rather The neutrophils seen lymphocytes, cell 100,000/mm3 be with synovial is blood should less and 50,000 should culture 118). and negative be (see Gram stain Chapter

normal finding stagesof most x-ray. bone the in radiologic is common early a The JIA mineralization, time, periarticular osteopenia, mostcommonly Over found. from resulting is decreased there proliferation. centers evidence of growth slow platesor develop,whereas bony maturation may may Growth of be to be accelerated be finding. Erosions bony may articularsurfaces a of late spine cervical occur, demonstrable. maybe of C1-4 the and subluxation atlantoaxial If may is involved,fusion

the and diagnoses. weeks, exclusion other of JIA the presence The for the of established by disease duration 6 possible is of arthritis, of at least diagnosis is diagnosis established systemic-onset can a child not a arthritis systemic Although presumptive be for possible JIA develops. definitive during a of diagnosis until the phase, change must the age the be disease; becomes onset at Children than younger diagnosis of years 16 of does JIA not an time when of of child adult. of disorders so a (Table providing these be JIA many other arthritis, diagnosis are 89-3). to Because of excluded definitive there causes need before shorter acute time as joints can the arthritides have a course. affect but The JIA same

function, deformity, JIA of The treatment on preventing and maximizing preserving and focuses suppressing blindness. inflammation, preventing treatment JIA. Nonsteroidal the the of in anti-inflammatory first drugs (NSAIDs) choice are indomethacin, and others successfully. been Naproxen, ibuprofen, have sulindac, used to be circumstances, and internal or prednisolone, should arthritis medications, as all leading to extreme severe prednisone corticosteroid as Systemic involvement avoided such significant active systemic-onset for the ambulate. JIA in for the but organ with most inability such until as medications In other therapy take effect. this the corticosteroids are circumstance, used bridging intra-articular helpful. For joints, corticosteroids inflamed a be patients isolated few with may

is patients completely sulfasalazine, not with have Second-line as alone. medications, in used NSAIDs such been whose hydroxychloroquine controlled arthritis and of to drug respond orally not polyarticular the JIA, and Methotrexate, which choice either for or baseline agents become systemic-onset may given alone. has subcutaneously, and risks. suppression cause monitoring bone can regular Methotrexate hepatotoxicity; these can marrow minimize been similar adverse a profile has used. effect also to Leflunomide, with methotrexate, inhibit including TNF-α the and JIA. infliximab, in the effective etanercept, of that are inflammatory Biologic agents cascade, treatment block and adalimumab, however, risks serious and, possibly, greater, of malignancy. agents these increased and are The of include infection risk Anakinra, receptor in very the of the interleukin-1 antagonist, features JIA. systemic-onset beneficial an is of systemic treatment

fusion, contractures, or from to involved of secondary the joint function of primarily of with joint Complications loss result bony JIA space. an loss and through function. and Physical are and home professionally maximize to crucial therapies, occupational programs, preserve lead or More blindness. can visual if complications serious untreated, left to from loss serious it uveitis; associated stem

prognosis rate. 85% complete JIA excellent, overall The is an with remission of do Children functional polyarticular constitute with children whereas and disease oligoarticular disability. systemic-onset disease JIA most with well, to children with uniformly tend positive Systemic-onset disease, a

lupus arthritis with Juvenile erythematosus dermatomyositis arthritis idiopathic Scleroderma Juvenile Systemic

and Leukemia cartilage, of Lymphoma disease tumors Sickle cell bone, Hemophilia or disease Thalassemia synovium benign bone Malignant Metastatic

prognosis. a presence collagen all erosions of therapy, disease poor disorders to response and storage diseases Lysosomal Heritable poorer x-ray factor, on Rickets/metabolic the bone rheumatoid of connote because physical limitations with The into patient physical remits, the adulthood. disease be the therapy remain importance the occupational of when and cannot overstated

circulating of (SLE) erythematosus disorder unknown amounts lupus autoantibodies. Systemic multisystem by a large production of is etiology of characterized a T-lymphocyte B-lymphocyte of and autoantibody of to and due to be B which lymphocytes, production. hyperactivity leading on specific antibody loss nonspecific control production activity, to leads This antibody may to leading in complexes immune microvasculature, These that inflammation form ischemia. and the trapped antibodies become

of Although mainly childbearing SLE primarily cases women around puberty. approximately affects 5% in present childhood, age, of years 9 SLE than children is age. in younger of rare distribution is female adolescence a in Although is equal there predominance in gender children. this and there of disease adulthood, an SLE per 100,000 10 population the of in The pediatric cases to overall is children. 25 prevalence

with (Tables an present 90-1 an in can abrupt fulminant Patients 90-2). or disease in and with indolent SLE fashion manner either fatigue can low-grade and Nonspecific and profound are may quite include fever, common but weight malaise, loss. symptoms and be significant

can to finding, patients. in a up disease occurring be prominent 95% Skin of a is the A (Fig. on called erythematous common cheeks, raised, rash, butterfly rash malar 90-1). chin. the rash of on on the across bridge nose, and also the the This forehead, occur can can the problematic, particularly be during Photosensitivity months. summer of improve with rashes these Both appropriate therapy. contrast, permanent resulting of leads that area. loss and lupus, the to an by pigmentation dermal-epidermal scarring inflammatory in of the discoid junction, The is disruption affected rash of in process of the discoid of in alopecia loss lupus follicles. permanent occurs scalp, hair If because ensues and phenomenon, SLE, not livedo Raynaud although also reticularis specific can occur. for

sores patients can to and septum. lead ulceration with common nasal Mouth nasal ulceration from resulting and a of in the and complaint are SLE mucosal perforation splenomegaly common lymphadenopathy system reticuloendothelial Because findings are SLE. and stimulation, of in be particular, disease can In axillary a sensitive indicator lymphadenopathy of activity. be pericardial chest effusion. Serositis frank seen, and rubs or pain with friction or pleural can

and of one involvement Renal 70% in SLE serious common is children. to 50% most of manifestations in occurring pediatric SLE, the of is Renal microscopic disease range from may

(more or Pleuritis (serositis) pericarditis of two Discoid and butterfly and Photosensitivity nasopharyngeal than joints metabolic Nonerosive lupus drugs ulcers or tenderness) with Oral Seizures rash psychosis effusion Malar arthritis absence toxins or in

or (RBC, casts granular, tubular) Cellular

on two with (<4000 or two occasions) Lymphopenia reticulocytosis (<1500 or (<100,000/mm3) occasions) anemia Thrombocytopenia or Leukopenia Hemolytic on

presence anticoagulant for or VDRL False-positive IgM Evidence of antibodies Lupus anticardiolipin mo or of >6 IgG antibodies or antiphospholipid

drugs Positive to ANA absence known in of lupus induce

Disease Venereal Research RBC, ANA, blood red VDRL, Laboratory. antibody; Antinuclear cell;

the are lupus for revised criteria erythematosus 1997 diagnosing systemic *These (SLE). A 4 the SLE. establish must patient the of diagnosis criteria of have to 11 These present at the be times at illness. during criteria patient’s may or different the same are diagnostic less Table manifestations noted specific 90-2. Additional, in

or nephrotic hematuria and renal failure. hematuria, proteinuria syndrome, gross to the lupus presence or of disease. suggests renal Hypertension edema

are Arthralgias common. and arthritis arthritis typically small of deforming The is be involved. joint any rarely involves the the may hands; joints and or muscle with frank may and fatigability, myositis, occur. muscle Myalgias weakness myriad a seizures, to (CNS), performance school poor system the of ranging nervous can from concentrating, and to leading symptoms stroke. and SLE central affect psychosis, difficulty

diagnosis, and the response is determine establish therapy. prognosis, to monitor performed to for Testing SLE high antinuclear of SLE, 97% high high value SLE. antinuclear Althoughnonspecific, than in found antibodyhas a patients antibody sensitivity, a negative usually is negative titers.Because of at its for a predictive positive with more of presence The

Myositis, myalgia Arthralgia

rash Figure lupus butterfly boy on teenage systemic Malar with 90-1 erythematosus. nasolabial on the sparing cheeks Note erythema folds. chin, and

should double-stranded patientswith found are most disease. antibodies almost in SLE suspicionfor in these and DNA antibodies SLE raise because exclusively the present to are are anti-double-stranded quantifiable activity. Titers and disease with DNA antibodies of vary 30% its but Sm to onlyapproximately specific clinical limiting of with found SLE, (Smith) against are are utility. Antibodies SLE in directed persons with La and befound Antibodies in SLE, they syndrome. in patients patientswith (SSA) Sjögren but (SSB) Ro also occur can to also SLE which can diseases also antiphospholipid other in with syndrome. patients Likewise haveantibodies phospholipids, directed can beseen in and rheumatologic against primary

a presence Venereal arterial venous detected can Laboratory activated or antibodies, These risk and and be the by prolonged anticardiolipin Research increased partial thrombosis of antibodies false-positive to time. lead thromboplastin (VDRL) an of Disease a test,

prevalent in Hematologic SLE. are abnormalities with patients also is lymphopenia, as Leukopenia, primarily manifest common. of may Thrombocytopenia disease chronic found. anemia and be autoimmune patients hemolytic anemia. with Rarely develop Coombspositive SLE the can production to with Excessive fraction antibody globulin polyclonal lead elevated in an hypergammopathy serum. by and CH50. C4 levels immune complement circulating as low decreased proteins, measured complexes also of lead complement with and of Excessive antibodies to consumption and the function C3 levels complement low to Effective normal. returns the therapy to to predisposes monitor SLE. is one except way in deficiency therapy familial This which, with in complement patients itself, components,

proteinuria, may Urinalysis show hematuria patients nephritis. identifying with and lupus and blood nitrogen urea creatinine evaluate renal function. Serum hypoproteinemia present. be may Hypoalbuminemia and be of the Elevation clue muscle for may of enzymes a presence myositis. an (IgG cerebrospinal help SLE IgG-to-albumin production CNS. when in index) diagnose ratio with and elevated and fluid the comparing CSF affecting Elevated antibody can CSF indicate (CSF) the serum protein gadolinium-enhanced specific pattern imaging. resonance a on magnetic lupus has CNS

is difficult Because can multisystem disease SLE it disease, early course. the a diagnosis to in be adolescent patients present be Suspicion diffuse high particularly in girls. with symptoms, who must the of manifestations are of chronic infection. clinical during illnesses SLE and found or inflammatory acute in Many other for diagnosis SLE of have the Criteria Table 90-1). developed (see been sensitivity has specificity SLE. of The these 11 97% of 4 98% for criteria presence and of

treatment the mainstay for SLE of Corticosteroids have been for decades. 2 (up and cautious prednisone methylprednisolone to of is pulse recurrence minimize required, oral mg/kg) frequently followed by Initial use symptoms. high-dose tapering to of used SLE. Nonsteroidal and treat anti-inflammatory arthralgias the have associated to drugs arthritis been with maintenance lupus not used treatment the but is disease, discoid as Hydroxychloroquine lupus, for therapy. as skin only of such of treatment disease longer of numbers wellness well flares. in decreased flares as results as between Hydroxychloroquine of periods

cerebritis. are Corticosteroids and sufficient lupus not frequently or for hydroxychloroquine nephritis therapies significant lupus improvements of renal nephritis, worst forms failure. to and effective the rates for outcome is Cyclophosphamide decreased with progression of in responds CNS cyclophosphamide. to lupus For of of patients be agents, the the able or tapering steroid-sparing methotrexate, who mofetil, as not such are may corticosteroids, use tolerate azathioprine, to indicated. mycophenolate

block Patients to wear should avoid disease. flares precipitates exposure of SLE the because with sun be to the exposure counseled sun and sun vitamin calcium result and from that corticosteroid from reduce to of this risk benefit use. D osteoporosis of the may prolonged supplementation prohibition,patients Because treatment is alsoindicated. hyperlipidemiato Early complications decrease long-term of cardiovascular

avascular necrosis infections, include and corticosteroid to complications use, infarction. Long-term secondary myocardial of atherosclerosis, SLE to use develop disease. not with Adult corticosteroid accelerated underlying also prolonged due only patients because the but lifestyle All their active reduce with should risk cardiac SLE and patients other be counseled regarding factors. an maintaining to weight

improved decades have and over organ for SLE depend Outcomes past significantly involved. systems are largely that on several the the cerebritis, with to are lupus severe failure. with patients disability nephritis Worse chronic risk renal or or progression of prognoses seen in current however, With transplantation, renal success well of and for therapy adulthood. into most the disease patients live the

unknown. The etiology of is dermatomyositis (JDM) juvenile immune of activation subsequent to is It muscle, muscle. complex of leading vasculitis by T of vessels affecting small blood and vessels with skeletal lymphocytes, B and and inflammation deposition characterized shown. no but infections, sun reactions, been causal has may or follow JDM allergic relationship exposure,

with disease, of 0.1:100,000 JDM a children. is than incidence less an rare all occur JDM years. in incidence groups with a can to age between peak 4 10 than The girls common is in disease slightly boys. more

of onset fashion, and in malaise, low-grade tends by slow, progressive a insidious accompanied Dermatomyositis and fevers weakness, progressive to present rash. fatigue, with muscle fashion, however, with in disease. acute present Some rapid severe children onset of an

hip abdominal muscles. proximal neck shoulder of muscles, primarily the and and and the girdles, particularly the affects The muscle JDM disease off floor. getting of out the difficulty chairs, have Children climbing steps, getting and a Gower have sign. may patient The positive even patient In (see severe able off from position examination supine table a the is sit liftthe or Chapter to cases, up not 182). head the are patient’s sound of voice and will nasal upper difficulty muscles If swallowing. may airway pharynx patient have the the the involved, and

and shoulders (shawl sign). occurs on across rash face on JDM classic back and also A but the the found can cheeks be the the discoloration eyelids. of Patients heliotrope have may papules) found (Gottron surfaces joint. found the classically are Scaly, can plaques any across red of extensor the knuckles be but on erythema periungual capillaries. and nail-fold Patients may have dilated and vasculitis, breakdown. patients with commonly, inflammation, Less develop erythema, cutaneous skin

and irritability, (fasciculations, dermatomyositis enzymes typical biopsy Positive needle EMG Rash proximal of with abnormalities aldolase) AST, CPK, of insertion inflammation chronic weakness and muscle (ALT, typical Elevated Symmetric dermatomyositis LDH, specimen muscle muscle high-frequency discharges)

Alanine dehydrogenase. aspartate AST, ALT, CPK, aminotransferase; electromyography; lactate creatine phosphokinase; aminotransferase; LDH, EMG, definitive required. of make a diagnosis five dermatomyositis, of are criteria *To four

but some At any small be joint with affecting develop of joints, patients arthritis, involved. point, commonly 15% may JDM occur. Raynaud splenomegaly and hepatomegaly, may also phenomenon,

inflammation sedimentation evidence have rate). no Many erythrocyte blood count of with and patients JDM systemic (normal Evidence 98% aspartate children in by aminotransferase, dehydrogenase. myositis serum muscle be active creatine alanine of with including enzymes, aminotransferase, identified elevated phosphokinase, of can and aldolase, lactate JDM can biopsy Electromyography muscle the myositis. and document showing resonance is Magnetic muscle a imaging means of inflammation. noninvasive

presence documented of to in percentage Diagnosis muscle muscle without muscular muscle have on of exclude (particularly manifestations, 91-1).A skin is other based they is in rash boys). a disease that weakness, such of classic of causes dystrophy setting the polymyositis should but biopsy muscle have the inflammation as children sufficiently rare JDM of children small (Table Chapter also myopathies (see includes differential diagnosis myositis 182). other postinfectious and The

JDM. is use short-term supplemented therapy of corticosteroids, for cornerstone Methotrexate, the of systemic by followed months oral pulse methylprednisolone intravenous prednisone. of tapering treatment doses by Initial with several is of of of associated Early corticosteroid its decreases institution methotrexate the use and significantly duration toxicities. or cases, cyclosporine it In may refractory to severe necessary cyclophosphamide. be or use Intravenous as useful immunoglobulin adjunctive therapy. is Hydroxychloroquine dapsone used manifestations. for the been skin has or do disease. the not affect drugs muscle significantly These cutaneous to sun the muscle and sunlight Exposure disease; to the exacerbates manifestations flare. may the lead worsens wear be advised sun prolonged Patients refrain sun to should exposure. block from and is vitamin active of indicated. and with D forms also Accordingly calcium supplementation

most complication serious JDM of The is development the of calcinosis. it Dystrophic body; tissues occur any skin soft calcification can ranges mild in extensive of universalis). from (calcinosis the and in area to the Although vasculitis, prolonged difficult more onset it commonly disease or with develop therapy. in children is activity, cutaneous who calcinosis, it delays occurs will of in predict to gastrointestinal bleeding. vasculitis Patients at risk and perforation JDM gastrointestinal with develop who for are also JDM been can resistance, insulin and associated 2 with lipoatrophy which type to diabetes. progress has these resistance improvement Control patients. in to frequently muscle in leads disease of insulin

of and of muscle greatly of outcome disease on therapy. extent and disease JDM the onset time between depends the The initiation course; and and by chronic course, JDM of a progressive are response monophasic therapy to which course loss significant resulting without one marked and improve patients treated courses: poor function. recurrent sequelae; a clinical chronic follows a of in three extent the are who deposition. chronic calcium calcinosis for develop risk of of Patients depending at mobility, on ultimately loss association seen does dermatomyositis in in malignancy of children. adults with The not occur

occur of musculoskeletal Growing benign in children. 10% pain pains, to school-age or syndrome, 20% boys years; to The peak more age the to 7 range is common 3 in girls. than be seems syndrome familial There known although be a there seems to is no etiology, predisposition.

pain Children pains of the deep, crampy complain thighs. growing in and with calves child It can nocturnal from in that evening the or sleep. waken the pain as occurs typically most occasionally children are exacerbated are who physical tend to pains by common Growing in bouts extremely be activity. more active; increased muscular no weakness. is The unremarkable, or evidence with or arthritis tenderness of physical examination normal. or performed, are Laboratory studies if x-rays,

on physical typical and diagnosis a a examination. is normal growing pains history of The based the excludes diagnosis. Hypermobility nocturnal a prudent this normal so count. It document leukemia important blood to of cause is leg age as consider is group, a it to pain of children in complete

ritual growing regular The of pains and treatment reassurance stretching and relaxation. bedtime of of consists a be massage. relieved The by pain can of or analgesic may a drug from an of Some nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory patients dose benefit dose a (NSAID). nighttime acetaminophen of long to leading duration, patterns. has awakening nocturnal disruptive been behavior Occasionally decreasing must nighttime gain parental sleep should In cases, on focus hygiene. these attention be and the aimed at intervention associated with secondary occur, patterns there significant can complications. negative no Other behavioral that are the than resolve over time. are and associated not illnesses Growing other with pains

of hypermobility. of an Hyperextension knees, the Figure 92-1 example

pain syndromes of etiology disorders unknown musculoskeletal that Hypermobility excessive joints. mobility are secondary of cause to 3 10 of commonly most in present age. These years disorders to children more commonly affected than Girls are boys. There is hypermobility familial a predisposition syndromes. to

to a be can joint present a group generalized or disorder. specific Hypermobility isolated can as Symptoms involved. the vary joints on depending consistent which night. The the pain, occur during may day most is symptom or physical interferes regular The with rarely exertion discomfort activity. but after increase may back or complain leg with hypermobility feet Children of ankles pain. may chronic or the of

be quite Joint marked. hypermobility may Range may metacarpophalangeal be motion recurvatum) (Fig. exaggerated (genu elbows, the with flexion joints, excessive knees or or at wrists, extension of 92-1). may of the There be excessive pronation ankles. arch may foot; foot associated weight shown be a that the longitudinal Chapter shortened Achilles disappears 200). with is of foot by of tendon the (flat bearing planus) a pes (see the with Hypermobility of presence and findings These

forearm right flexor aspect to the and 1 thumb each of point Touch for

elbow right >10 right 1 hyperextension hyperextension degrees and 1 right and point 90 left fifth for point to left point left of 1 degrees each and >10 of for knee each joint for each metacarpophalangeal Extend degrees

hypermobility. point to 1 knees straight *>6 points floor with palms Touch defines

on rarely tenderness examination. are with associated of laboratory are abnormalities normal. No joints apparent, radiographs are and test affected

mobility is of isolated basis of physical The joint. with of of diagnosis made hypermobility examination on demonstration the exaggerated a of by hypermobility the and Generalized disorders. the absence evidence (Table of presence underlying criteria 92-1) diagnosed of sufficient is other benign bruisability, syndrome hypermobility. Marfan Excessive Ehlers-Danlos prolapse mitral or skin elasticity, or syndrome valve than easy rather suggests

of and other of The hypermobility for disorders. similar musculoskeletal reassurance stretching, benign treatment regular consists treatment to administered a do be need as basis. can be needed to prescribed not regular on NSAIDs but in planus Arch supports helpful but children symptoms. absence in are symptomatic be pes the can indicated with not of Benign increasing with improve not is and associated age hypermobility with to tends complications. long-term

syndromes diffuse poor the musculoskeletal of group characterized are and sleep malaise, patterns. disorders noninflammatory points, myofascial by tender pain, presence pain multiple The a fatigue, of familial there although is etiology disorders to these of unknown, be a seems The predisposition. no or shown. disorders relationship follow viral infection has been sometimes trauma, Although these causal adults pain years common in can children of myofascial but are syndromes age). most in (particularly occur The >12 common syndromes in girls are The boys. more in than The of fibromyalgia has to prevalence be reported 6%. in been children

regular and muscles complain with of long-standing myofascial of tissues the Patients the activities. occur awaken pain sleep, in time patient joints soft at interfere from with around that diffuse any day, and syndromes can in pain adequate high school absenteeism, There degree is of frequently school despite maintaining performance. a with consistent symptoms of percentage pain myofascial depression. exhibit syndromes significant with A patients been fibromyalgia. presenting children abuse sexual increased of reported has incidence in with An

the just palpation. painful—not examination are the typically digital is with that exception unremarkable Physical tender—to points of presence specific of often These back, on the points neck, trochanter, located and epicondyles, lateral are greater knees. muscular is weakness. There arthritis no or evidence of

concern medical testing of inflammatory extensive for underlying Patients because the syndromes myofascial undergo with frequently pain disease. normal. tests These invariably are pediatric which have may in the is antinuclear population. found a normal antibody, false-positive 20% Children of

absence on myofascial of is The in presence tender illness. the of multiple other pain the points syndrome diagnosis based of examination. fulfill on of specific the for a presence history have To must of pain of of strict diagnosis criteria points a 18 the for diffuse and at 11 3 months patient fibromyalgia, least tender inflammatory lupus is that infection. Epstein-Barr and the as important exclude or such influenza follows virus underlying diseases, systemic virus post-infectious fatigue erythematosus, to It characteristically conversion should Mood be also disorders and considered.

hygiene. NSAIDs, therapy, techniques, physical of sleep Treatment and using consists education control, pain regarding relaxation usually pain sensitivity. doses may regulate reduce of Patients amitriptyline gabapentin to such medications, low or require sleep as to and Education reassurance crucial. are

resistant of and frequently syndromes, may that condition and with underlying parents to be reassurance. has Because myofascial patients believe pain associated a the disability child the serious required. It cure, no and should emphasized are perseverance there is be simple time and that

the long-term outcomes pain The syndromes in vary. myofascial have to approach in positive and Patients who on better therapy are focus and outcomes. tend their families evaluations, may health prolonged more do from who Patients care especially multiple poorly. providers, demand have fibromyalgia with syndromes prognoses and pain adult counterparts. their Overall than children better myofascial

syndromes pain L: children, Latest musculoskeletal M, management in assessment and developments chronic the in Schanberg of Connelly Curr

Rheumatol Opin 2006 18:496–502,

Rheumatol disease, Kawasaki 18:33–38, Opin F: Curr Falcini 2006

dermatomyosítis Juvenile and idiopathic BM, LG, inflammatory Reed al: 371:2201–2212, Lancet myopathies Rider childhood, other of Feldman AM, et

adolescents, Pediatr Gottlieb erythematosus and children BS, lupus Rev Ilowite Systemic in NT: 2006 27:323–330,

Ravelli 2007 idiopathic Lancet A: 369:767–778, A, Martini Juvenile arthritis,

Schonlein Henoch Child Hamilton-Ayres MJJ: EJ, Dis purpura, Tizard Arch

93:1–8, Pract 2008 Ed

16 Smith Kronman and Matthew P. Sherilyn

and the noninfectious by caused make infectious difficult. clinical some diagnosis symptoms illnesses diseases of Overlapping treatment is not an illness, that a given. may minor infection Clinicians to appropriate progress are life-threatening untreated concerned if lead problem—emergence with antimicrobial unnecessary organisms. serious of resistant antimicrobial agents a However treatment may to of providing and antibiotics. indicated noninfectious diagnosis the infectious as and specific unnecessaryuse reduce Accurate diseases of only treatment

a thorough A history, detailed is physical testing patient, diagnostic complete of the examination, cornerstone including care. appropriate optimal the assessment of and

environmental system. or the the sick zoonosis); with risk age-related epidemiology; to contacts infections the exposures of immune to and The understanding of an maturity (e.g., including accurately diagnose reflecting susceptibility begins specific factors, risks ability (Tables Obtaining a use identifies history of and and diagnostic elements tests. 93-2) thorough examination these appropriate 93-1 physical and other most of guides

whether infectionis history help contacts, environmental Table sick patient’s exposure) identify causing Unique (including (see detailed questions an include and that travel, animal the a 93-1). symptoms geographic Certain more in infections areas. common are specific infections are instance common For parasitic in climates. more tropical temperateclimates of Diarrhea likely. parasitic parasitic much tropics, viral, causes maybe than in other less but bacterial, or the giardiasis,are in diarrhea, United in blastomycosis States, Certain fungal upper States). histoplasmosis the Midwest,and in infections southwestern central in the United distribution have (coccidioidomycosis specificgeographic are In areas,fungal immunocompromised rare other persons. in pneumonias except

determining An susceptibility is vaccine to history for immunization preventable critical diseases. immunodeficiency history, 73 may Family especially unexpected infants, deaths familial of Chapters through of suggest (see 76). male specific Localization Table a symptoms of may possibilities (see to 93-2). narrow diagnostic site

focal, A limitation essential function. examination be of shock, identify complete is erythema, such tenderness, swelling, of and may or signs to fever including and physical which as infection, systemic, cutaneous Table associated are (see diseases Many with signs characteristic infectious 97-1). otolaryngologic media, examination tract critical the common childhood infections diseases diagnosing United is upper most and respiratory in States. for infectious the Accurate otitis

@ StudentConsult.com Available

of without Fever Fever a Origin Source Fever and Unknown Rash

does represent not Fever always infection. disease, Rheumatologic poisoning, fever. bowel Kawasaki with may malignancy inflammatory and disease, also present disease, may or overwhelming Particularly, infection be children afebrile hypothermic. with 88, be may 89, as symptoms, lymphadenopathy also (see and pain or Kawasaki juvenile arthritis, to that disease or 153). leukemia, bone due Common Chapters lymphoma, idiopathic infection, suggest such of impairment (brain brain abscess) or noninfectious Acute or or impairment or tumors, conditions, postinfectious focal inflammatory spinal or from be infections sequelae, (encephalitis, manifestations meningitis, could causes or changes mental ingestions neurologic toxic inhalants). status may 77). diarrhea) of (rhinitis, allergy Chapter manifestations infectious (see diseases mimic common mucosal Many

are treatment is (inadequate especially to recurrence, infections if suboptimal Some prone shorter duration). or antimicrobial possibility or (see Chapters of infections suggest 72 immunodeficiency and severe, (opportunistic) the Recurrent, unusual 125).

of Laboratory morphology infection using examination techniques, of various Gram culture includes bacterial stain, diagnosis

ticks Previous waterborne congenital) or in attendance brackish history bodies and community General Exposure drug or (e.g., Immunodeficiency products Illicit farm of and undercooked with (e.g., antibodytiters acquired, feral Presence hygiene Previous shunt, to the microbiologic Travel pets (chemotherapy, medications similar Exposures grafts) to school infected and or of swimming indwelling water) and organisms outbreaks and Home Previous Immunization animals history blood infections of to and such products) use Transfusion foreign in procedures Weight skin to symptoms dairy sexual and health Pica food or assessment Current as other of illnesses Exposures individuals molecular the including surgeries, immune catheters, Fever—presence, Daycare (e.g., and chainreaction, polymerase change history, testing. water Preceding sanitary Exposures mosquitoes of meat, pattern Presence dental soil-borne Age or Sources trauma of possibility duration, epidemics response methods facilities Sexual abuse blood Season year of unpasteurized trauma, inflammatory malignancies. The is response disease, autoimmune some nonspecificmetabolic and response acute infection, phase a and to proteinare reactantssuch rate not during and not specificfor an but are Acute any as sedimentation infection infection and identify erythrocyte phase infection. commonly do elevated specific C-reactive response to Thesetests used to are often therapy. monitor

is frequently evidence complete count blood for A of infection. obtained leukocytes) response (increased infection, usually viral children, a in an The especially bacterial is leukocytosis initial with neutrophilic to both and initial circulating infections. to response number of followed response a response. is this mononuclear transient by most is infections, quickly With and characteristic viral bacterial than general, (Table infections with are 93-3). associated greater In infections counts neutrophil viral of forms, including in circulating the bone cells the rapid and increase the and the numbers A an from neutrophil of band metamyelocytes, indicates cells series, release immature myelocytes of is shift-to-the-left marrow. of It stages of the infections. early bacterial if sustained, characteristic is and, infection and at to of viral illness described 48 the lymphopenia hours 24 Transient lasting been many has beginning infections. with T with infectious virus. nuclei indented are caused classically by mature Epstein-Barr placed, Atypical with eccentrically seen mononucleosis and lymphocytes lymphocytes larger, include drug Other atypical toxoplasmosis, rubella, infections with mumps, lymphocytosis some viral reactions. hepatitis, roseola, cytomegalovirus infection, and associated parasites, seen and connective the viscera. larval allergic but parasites as may of the is with migration stages of multicellular tissue, such through Eosinophilia be tissue-invasive skin, of characteristic diseases High-grade or frequently occurs during phase the eosinophil eosinophils, invasion a (>30% total muscle >3000/μL) count eosinophilia

movements of drainage, extraocular SYMPTOMS Eye vision, 93-2 Eye Manifestations Table LOCALIZING conjunctival erythema, of chemosis, double photophobia, limitation Periorbital SIGNS* SITE pain, periorbital discharge Localizing LOCALIZING edema, Infection

membrane, canal bulging Red from Ear drainage tympanic drainage pain, ear

hoarse pharyngeal exudate, stridor, lymphadenopathy regional cough, drooling, red trismus, tract sinus congestion, pain, with epiglottis, tonsils erythema, tooth Upper throat, respiratory swollen sore Rhinorrhea, voice pain, enlarged Nasal

Tachypnea, sounds, dyspnea, crackles, Cough, tract cyanosis production, sputum respiratory intercostal chest retractions localized Lower pain, breath wheezing, diminished

(focal pain abdominal diarrhea, abdominal bowel diffuse), weight Hypoactive tract vomiting, or hematochezia sounds, Gastrointestinal hyperactive or anorexia, loss or tenderness (focal Nausea, generalized),

stools vomiting, hepatomegaly, urine, diatheses, tenderness, light Anorexia, coma Liver bleeding Jaundice, hepatic dark

discharge urgency, pain, suprapubic Dysuria, adnexal cervical vaginal flank Genitourinary tract angle motion and Costovertebral suprapubic frequency, or tenderness, tenderness or

neck headache, deficits, Nuchal Brudzinski Kernig stiffness, focal neurologic irritability, mental Central bulging altered nervous rigidity, system fontanelle, status, sign, coma Lethargy, seizures sign,

swelling, Musculoskeletal systemic joint of point range accompanies Local usually Limp, erythema, bone limited as warmth, manifestation. *Fever bone line a pain, (pseudoparalysis) limited function tenderness, infection motion, tenderness

pneumonia), the phases visceral the and phases pulmonary and infection of ascariasis of hepatic nervous of trichinellosis, (eosinophilic central larva migrans. hookworm system and

of urinary evaluation tests Chapters puncture there 100 liver if tract encephalitis the for and for Other is meningitis concern and 101). fluid urinalysis for transaminases screening lumbar (see or infections, cerebrospinal include common function, for requires culture by identifying as viral or but bacterial distinguish test, diagnosis agent may reaction. such the another infection, polymerase chain definitive help tests versus Various

mainstay infections. the of diagnosis Cultures are many of Blood sensitive (osteomyelitis, be which focal for infection primary endocarditis). to and may specific are a and secondary urinary bacteremia, gastroenteritis, cultures or tract, may infants. young occult confirm in Urine cultures urinary important are tract be infection, to which aspiration, obtained collections lumbar Cultures every biopsy with masses. should be fluid or or puncture, of other of viral, guided cultures Specific are mycobacterial) (bacterial, fungal, the by types or problem. clinical identify to are techniques pathogens. viruses culture used intracellular and bacterial Tissue

cultures is a before on to rely Antibiotics diagnosis 95). established, microbiologic (see Chapter subsequent begun definitive the for are diagnosis often ability complicating need definitive to indicates cultures. obtaining the or the indicate persistent change all need appropriate frequently treatment, diagnosis antibiotics stop progressive antibiotic symptoms, may Although by more to facilitate to despite the this regimen, (e.g., unless life-threatening be a Antibiotics before not situation shock). given appropriate obtaining cultures should there is septic

for tests, numerous parasitic viral, fungal, antigen as tests. such are antigen preliminary included diagnosis detection Rapid and and are useful in bacterial, tests, or assay tests, using Western immunosorbent Serologic enzyme-linked

PAF, C-reactive factor. rate; interleukin; TNF, necrosis CRP, ESR, IL, platelet-activating tumor factor; protein; sedimentation erythrocyte

cause *Adenovirus and leukocytosis increased may simplex Epstein-Barr increased may ESR. virus cause and ESR; herpes and petechiae

may have (enterovirus, initially arbovirus) neutrophilic meningitis viral pleocytosis. a †Early

sign, bulging Kernig sign. fontanelle, ‡Nuchal Brudzinski rigidity,

IgG used IgM diagnosis. showing high between an for blotting, can titer, sera, and response, acute convalescent or seroconversion be RNA, high reaction tests, specificity as the and sensitivity, chain culture, of Molecular offer DNA results. or such for rapid polymerase an a suspected, When obtained. should samples is are be consulted infection microbiologist before unusual

should be the on choice based the The of mode diagnostic location findings. of imaging entire and body of of an the the absence acute signs during imaging less infection, productive. localizing In is are tract x-rays Plain useful respiratory infections. initial for tests to children nonirradiating a organs. infants technique is and Ultrasonography for solid imaging well suited noninvasive, diagnose hip. of is suppurative also arthritis soft It useful abscesses lymphadenitis to with and the identify tissue to gadolinium magnetic (CT) (with anatomic choice resonance precise Computed imaging and the characterization (MRI) (with of brain. the lesions localization are allow and enhancement) enhancement) modalities and tomography of for contrast detail. tissue shows greater CT MRI shows and detail, bone greater necrotizing fasciitis. useful osteomyelitis, for is MRI especially diagnosis of myositis, and chest useful High-resolution is CT complicated infections. for of Judicious is longterm of effects health. use because the important CT on scans radiation of children’s Contrast or MRI and evaluation of preferred gastrointestinal is studies intra-abdominal used gastrointestinal to mucosal the identify of enema) lesions (upper are CT masses. barium tract, whereas series, appendicitis for for factor reflux, used evaluate vesicoureteral tract to A may cystourethrogram for voiding upper infections. be a urinary predisposing for technetium-99m acute for informative. scans, often pyelonephritis, are such as Radionuclide acid osteomyelitis dimercaptosuccinic and

Childhood impact has major diseases. the immunization infectious markedly of reduced immunity immunization Active toxoid through toxin). (inactivated induces administration or the vaccine of a immunoglobulin maternal includes administration or either of transplacental and of monoclonal transfer antibodies Passive antibody, as antibody. the immunization

immunogenic papillomavirus), (polio, hepatitis Haemophilus may or of recombinant reassortants influenza), Neisseria toxoids B, killed (rotavirus), attenuated pneumoniae), be mumps, (hepatitis rubella (pertussis, tetanus). live including varicella, [MMR], (measles, type Vaccinations and influenza), (diphtheria, viruses nasal b, human Streptococcus bacteria products viruses or components intramuscular with meningitidis, A, inactivated influenzae 2 are initiate antigens in that of B-cell CD4 T-independent are immunogens involvement purified children Many lymphocytes younger age. without than of poor years polysaccharides and T proliferation to of for and protein polysaccharide a a in response T-dependent carrier infants Conjugation creates vaccines a induces immunogenic

N. and S. type b, influenzae pneumoniae, H. meningitidis.

the standards Childhood (Figs. immunization States United and recommendations in Prevention the Disease American and on Pediatrics, and for the the (ACIP), American Academy of Advisory Committee of the are 94-1 formulated Practices Family Control Physicians. of Centers Academy and Immunization by 94-2) In United kindergarten approximately due to 95% school the entering infectious are for States, common diseases. for vaccinated children of state the laws entry, requiring immunization ACIP receive vaccines recommends in that against (see United The 16 the Fig. States routinely children diseases 94-1). five up to in injections 18 includes four This by to of visits months 21 age. schedule Children pneumococcal pneumococcal at vaccine, should infections for and as the receive who adolescents are increased polysaccharide well. risk in behind as Children immunizations should feasible. are rapidly receive immunization catch-up as who same born at full-term regardless the Fig. the children vaccinated and and schedule (see age be as same birth prematurely, Infants of should weight, to chronologic according infants 94-2). 1 weighing birth. B vaccine than mother g less antigen is month virus of the if instead at is hepatitis practice surface at to The single hepatitis infants this for B exception 2000 providing (HBsAg)-negative should at adolescents of 11 to Vaccines be 12 (see age years for given Fig. any of and for booster meningitidis 94-1), at years 16 years completion to 18 series vaccine a of of age 13 at with N. age.

Vaccines administered should informed consent. obtaining after be with Information that provide National health all providers care Centers the and by administering Vaccine http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/vis/default.htm Statements ) each Control ( Disease for or dose. Vaccine Actrequires prepared Injury The Childhood before copies patients Prevention of vaccine parents

by Most intramuscular subcutaneous vaccines are injection. administered or aspect preferred the The infants anterolateral children and adults. are the sites thigh and for in the of deltoid region in administration separate Multiple be at separated simultaneously >1 in.) (different vaccines or by sites anatomically administered can limbs, immune without the response. diminishing be MMR or than vaccines and 30 simultaneously days more should apart. varicella administered Administration and vaccines live if products the virus blood can diminish immunoglobulin interval. recommended of before administered to response

a (live previous reaction states acute dose allergic and serious immunocompromised moderate contraindications General to or vaccine component, or to fever. a vaccination pregnancy or or (anaphylaxis) illness without severe include virus with vaccines), after vaccine reactions fever in which chicken anaphylactic-like vaccines, History of to embryonated to are influenza is eggs. a and produced contraindication eggs yellow are allergy. proteins be history tissue measles vaccines, children Current egg of produced which administered do of preparations with significant embryo without testing not egg in of contain and amounts culture, and chick fibroblast mumps may penicillin or infectious antimicrobial nonvaccine mild are and or other low-grade fever Mild without previous convalescent after phase of of moderate recent acute immunization. fever, illness, to allergen breastfeeding, immunotherapy or extract allergy contraindications history current to not local receiving therapy, diseases, reaction vaccination, or exposure illness, moderate to to with

or is infection, weeks) prolonged immunodeficiency to mg/kg/day for Severe predisposes a resulting lymphoma, cancer >2 high-dose leukemia, virus and contraindication virus vaccines. human (>2 course immunosuppression congenital a (HIV) corticosteroids live complications therapy, for of from immunodeficiency, waiting of until of 6 4 months For who rather month age. is MMR years 12 at dose a children age recommended evidence than immunosuppression, of HIV-infected vaccination 1 to second have severe not with do later vaccine contraindicated is cellular persons of children doses 3 with at or persons age months evidence humoral two as for severe given with dysgammaglobulinemia) without Varicella immunity immunosuppression, apart. for of immunodeficiency 12 impaired and is months HIV-infected (hypogammaglobulinemia for recommended but

vaccination Vaccine System 822-7967). significant (800) Reporting clinically that (VAERS) ( Childhood requires be after to http://www.vaers.hhs.gov or Adverse The Act Vaccine the events Event Injury adverse reported National vaccine-preventable reported state health departments. cases local be should of or diseases Suspected to vaccine administration death persons result covered also act National compensation. established thought can which suffered injury Program, in a the system a a The of Injury of seek to no-fault an as Vaccine have or Compensation

may or perinatal vaccine, may preexposure exposure, in antibody, they risk be used persons or alone increased combination; Prophylaxis antibiotics, monoclonal at immunoglobulin infection. for postexposure, and for include for to used occurrence. a is infection first prophylaxis Primary prevent before recurrence after to a prevent is used first prophylaxis Secondary episode.

as administered meningitidis (see all should contacts cases to N. possible of infection Primary of prophylaxis 100). index be Chapter soon as especially toothbrushes through young during the 7 for the contacts, 7 school days child utensils; patient’s previous days; illness. before index for all endotracheal of intubation household is in contacts for Prophylaxis unprotected exposure kissing or nursery secretions or or direct or mouth-to-mouth sharing resuscitation of and to children; recommended within eating onset care contact dwelling passengers for hours. index airline sleep than also to recommended during who the directly the patient same the frequently Prophylaxis or flights lasting in eat or seated contacts is next longer case as index 8 recommended to of work is contacts direct exposure not (school mate), the or Chemoprophylaxis for secretions indirect no with patient’s oral casual history

18 – 0 Recommended aged immunization for persons years through 2013. schedule LATE, SCHEDULE [FIGURE SEE OR (FOR 94-2]). WHO START CATCH-UP THE FALL THOSE BEHIND

footnotes follow. read recommendations that be the with These must opportunity as behind start who catch-up those vaccination by the at earliest indicated 94-1. bars provide in Figure fall late, the green For or intervals determine (Fig. doses, the schedule see minimum between To catch-up 94-2). groups in School entry are adolescent age bold. and vaccine

yrs 6 some yrs 2-3 Varicella 19–23 > A 12 > pertussis 15 females Birth 6 (Hib-MenCY mo (Hib) RV-5 mos mos papillomavirus type yrs (MMR) (PCV13) RV-1 <7 >7 Human Hepatitis Hepatitis yrs B (VAR) weeks; for (HepB) Pneumococcal males only; (HepA) footnote mos 2 > mumps, acellular and pertussis polysaccharide MCV4-D 9 : 9 MCV4-CRM (DTaP: (IIV; females) 2 acellular 18 (2-dose mos LAIV) HPV4: (Tdap: 7-10 yrs) mos (HPV2: Pneumococcal Diphtheria, mos Inactivated & Measles, 4-6 rubella conjugate mos; see Tetanus, doses (RV) series); series) yrs) (3-dose mos (<18years) tetanus, & Meningococcal 13–15 1 yrs diphtheria, 8 (IPV) yrs 4 11-12 16–18 Rotavirus Vaccines b Poliovirus mos (PPSV23) yrs.) 2 5 footnote dose 3 dose1 dose 1 dose1 See 2 dose dose1 See 11 series) 3 dose1 dose2 dose2 Annual (IIV dose dose1 4 or dose dose dose2 22 dose4 dose1 dose3 5 Annual 52 series, dose1 dose1 (Tdap) (3-dose vaccination footnote 4 dose (IIV vaccination booster dose LAIV) dose2 dosesee dose3 2dose dose, only) dose3 13 footnote footnote or footnote 2 see 4 see

all of which recommended during ages for ages children Range

of Range recommended

recommended Range for of Range recommended ages ages of

for catch-up is certain certain routinely groups high-risk high-risk and Not recommended encouraged immunization groups for catch-up

recommendations as This schedule effect includes of 1, 2013. in January feasible. subsequent Any at dose when should recommended a administered be not administered the and at age visit, indicated a of injections use The of separate over component generally is vaccines. equivalent combination its preferred vaccine Immunization consult recommendations, available at Vaccination online statement should Committee (ACIP) the on Advisory Practices relevant detailed providers for http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm. significant http://www.vaers.hhs.gov (800-822-7967). reported Clinically or Vaccine (VAERS) Adverse that vaccination ) by the be adverse ( online events System Reporting to should Event follow telephone cases to state or department. be reported diseases local Suspected the of health should vaccine-preventable ) telephone [800-232-4636]). is and by (800-CDC-INFO Additional (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines information, for available precautions from including or vaccination, contraindications online CDC

on approved the (http://www. schedule Committee Pediatrics Academy of Immunization by Practices This American (http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/acip/index.html), is the Advisory the ( http://www.acog.org). http://www.aafp.org), and the American of Family Obstetricians Academy and ( Physicians aap.org), of American Gynecologists College

for years—United immunization 18 Recommended States, schedules ages 2013. Figure 94-1 persons through 0 Immunization Advisory Committee Practices; and on and American College Physicians; American Gynecologists). of of of by Pediatrics; American Academy the Family (Approved Obstetricians Academy the Disease http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-adolescent.html for Human Prevention, (Courtesy Control U.S. Department of of and Health and Services, Centers

For of vaccines below, http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm. guidance see: further the on mentioned use the

1. Hepatitis B vaccine. (HepB) birth discharge. newborns  (Minimum vaccine hospital Administer At all monovalent age: before HepB birth) Routine to vaccination: For antigen HepB B within of mothers, mL of immune B 12 hepatitis surface globulin 0.5 born infants hours and (HBsAg)–positive (HBIG) to administer birth.  vaccine hepatitis completion tested at and antibody HepB (preferably visit). 9 should well-child the HBsAg 1 months the next series, 18 2 after age HBsAg be months for to (anti-HBs) to through at These of infants within birth HepB If to infants administer of weight. unknown, mother’s all vaccine 12 regardless status of is hours birth  HBsAg addition infants grams, hours in administer HepB HBIG of For birth. 12 weighing to <2,000 within as Determine age HBIG 1 grams if HBsAg status for mother’s administer she (no is soon as infants than and, later 2,000 weighing also week). HBsAg-positive, possible should age Doses be the The at 1 dose following or second administered  2 birth months. dose be administered doses used vaccine 6 HepB for Monovalent should weeks. age before a 0, as to months, as not soon Infants birth did 2 doses months who receive dose  of receive of 3 feasible. vaccine schedule and 1 a on starting HepB-containing should 6 a 2. See Figure is between 1 interval is and weeks The 3 dose dose dose minimum 4 and and 8 2  weeks. between 2 weeks The series no after or earlier and vaccine 24 dose final should first at administered the HepB (third age least dose. fourth) in be weeks, than the 16 the vaccine 4 is dose. after a administered HepB doses recommended combination of  containing is birth a of vaccine HepB when of total Administration Unvaccinated Catch-up  complete a should vaccination: series. 3-dose persons in 11  least aged separated formulation use children at 15 is HB of A 4 Recombivax series through years. 2-dose licensed by months) (doses adult for see  For 2. catch-up Figure other issues,

2. vaccines. Rotavirus (RV) both weeks RV-5 age: (Minimum [Rotarix] [RotaTeq]). RV-1 6 for and 1. vaccination:  Routine of as to RV Administer a series infants all vaccine follows:

months at administer 2 RV-1 and of If 4 is series used, a age. 2-dose

2.

is If 6 series months. RV-5 administer used, ages a at 3-dose 2, 4, and

3.

administered. 3 doses RV-5 should total product or dose for the unknown is a any of in dose be vaccine series If in vaccine series, any was RV of

 series for age maximum dose the weeks, is 14 Catch-up days. the first The in vaccination: 6 infants for  weeks Vaccination not aged days older. be initiated 0 should 15 or series maximum the months, dose the for 0 final  in 8 age days. is The If indicated. for is dose RV-1(Rotarix) and the  doses, third administered a not is second first For Figure 2. other issues, catch-up see 

3. and pertussis toxoids and tetanus (DTaP) Diphtheria acellular vaccine. (Minimum a age: at weeks) series ages 15–18 through DTaP months, 4, 6 vaccination: vaccine of  2, Administer 5-dose 4 6, Routine 6 and years. elapsed the months provided administered age at The dose least may since early months, third as 6 12 as fourth be have dose. was or of Catch-up necessary not vaccine 4 fifth vaccination: dose the older. The years at (booster) fourth dose administered age DTaP  if is  see 2. For issues, Figure other catch-up

4. vaccine. toxoids and pertussis Tetanus and acellular diphtheria (Tdap) for 11 (Minimum age: Adacel). Boostrix, years for years 10 of Routine 1 vaccine dose through Administer vaccination: to all 11  aged adolescents Tdap 12 years. the tetanus be and last the can vaccine. Tdap diphtheria  regardless since administered of interval toxoid-containing vaccine of from of 27 one to vaccination. pregnant weeks Tdap  each through Administer pregnancy Td prior years during regardless Tdap adolescents number gestation) or of (preferred during 36 dose first Tdap 10 as fully dose use catch-up immunized in  vaccine vaccination: are the vaccine. 7 childhood should the Td years series, additional vaccine receive Persons through with DTaP the series; are doses if who Catch-up not needed, aged be children, adolescent given. For an not vaccine should these Tdap  every 18 10 should aged vaccine by years years doses and who receive booster Tdap Persons followed (Td) a through thereafter. dose 11 diphtheria toxoids have not tetanus received vaccine series. 10 the count  of dose can catch-up to years An part as through administered aged children DTaP of 7 inadvertent receive can Tdap as This 11–12 Tdap the can count booster later years. the age adolescent dose, or dose dose a at child other see 2. Figure catch-up For  issues,

5. (Hib) conjugate type vaccine. b Haemophilus influenzae dose a 6 all age: (Minimum Hib and vaccination: Administer primary a weeks) Routine  vaccine booster to series infants. however, administered a and at at 6 be months administered indicated. dose and 4, age at months or doses Comvax) is age, 2, (PedvaxHib not should if months of age; PRP-OMP 6 is primary 2 of 4 The series through15 at One administered age months. dose should booster be 12 4 the children 12 for who used received years, at aged 1 dose should have Hiberix dose Hib. least through (PRP-T) in be (final) booster of  months only 1. administer  dose If months, after at final 8 dose) Catch-up administered 1 dose ages was vaccination: least (as weeks 12-14 booster at If 2 the dose PRP-OMP through (PedvaxHIB at were 12 age 15 the (and be administered second 8 should or were at dose. first Comvax), least and months at after administered the age  third and 11 final) doses weeks younger, or months administered months, at through dose the 11  least was the 15 months, PRP-OMP) dose. 12 age second at dose final at through vaccine later or age regardless If dose and 7 (PRP-T administer first 4 weeks of a Hib used for first older, 1 or unvaccinated children only aged  administer months 15 For dose. other issues, Figure see For 2.  catch-up of with age. Vaccination is years 5 not than persons Hib high-risk vaccine for conditions: routinely older of recommended  patients vaccinated dose leukemia, immunocompromising or (including who disease), should of other human years sickle cell or or conditions. older (HIV) to functional immunodeficiency or one partially malignant However aged infection, persons neoplasms, have Hib 5 administered unvaccinated anatomic virus asplenia vaccine be

6a. (PCV). vaccine Pneumococcal conjugate vaccination: vaccine weeks) booster 15 age through months.  2, PCV13 age: Routine a 6 with at 6 series months ages a (Minimum Administer 12 4, of at PCV series administer who PCV have 7-valent months dose 13-valent  For single (PCV13). through received of children supplemental aged age-appropriate a 59 of 14 (PCV7), an age. their through children 1 months are  dose all Catch-up PCV13 not healthy of vaccinated who 24 59 for completely aged to vaccination: Administer For issues, other catch-up see  Figure 2. previously. PCV than 2 (see 24 medical dose children underlying doses PCV13 previously, through with 71 high-risk apart 3 if weeks of 3 with For fewer conditions: of if of footnote aged PCV conditions at certain doses of months PCV13 8 1 were doses or Vaccination persons were least administer administer of  received received 6c), have functional disease), may cochlear years or administered be or unvaccinated to leak. infection or 18 single fluid cerebrospinal an cell previously asplenia  PCV13 children dose HIV of 6 implant who through A aged immunocompromising condition, sickle anatomic (including 2010;59 MMWR (No. See http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5911.pdf. RR-11), at available 6b aged with the older footnotes dose PPSV23 PCV last or at (see years certain 2 weeks conditions of to  children medical 8 after Administer underlying least and 6c).

6b. vaccine Pneumococcal polysaccharide (PPSV23). (Minimum least persons with PPSV23 to at children PCV medical aged the or years 8 with 2 age: (see dose last of certain after older footnote conditions: underlying  of high-risk 6c). weeks Vaccination 2 years) Administer conditions to asplenia or administered functional sickle A revaccination condition. PPSV 5 disease) with children or be should single years with after cell an anatomic (including immunocompromising

6c. and high-dose which conditions implant. through aged children in mellitus; leaks; diabetes children is with cardiac children with Medical for PPSV23 2 is for if disease congenital asthma chronic 71 therapy), 24 heart cochlear indicated cerebrospinal of failure); and (including treated aged which years or PCV13 disease indicated older heart lung disease oral and fluid  in (particularly corticosteroid Immunocompetent use cyanotic months: chronic chronic radiation immunodeficiency. acquired with anatomic congenital or dysfunction); transplantation, Hodgkin therapy, cell HIV disease; (including conditions: immunosuppressive solid diseases failure disease or infection, treatment asplenia sickle or Children or hemoglobinopathies,  nephrotic functional asplenia, malignant and with  Children and congenital neoplasms, syndrome, immunocompromising other including and leukemias, with or organ splenic renal associated drugs lymphomas with

7. vaccine poliovirus (IPV). Inactivated at 2, series Administer weeks) IPV age with 4, 6 6–18 Routine a ages of vaccination: booster 4–6 months, a age:  (Minimum at years. should final dose at series after or in after on the the be The months dose. previous fourth the 6 administered least and birthday Catch-up person intervals (i.e.,  to to minimum or vaccination: risk In if of region is imminent are age life, a months and 6 polio-endemic only travel first recommended circulating poliovirus during an minimum outbreak). for the the exposure at should through or  age 4 age an administered be dose additional 6 are doses 4 at years, more years. administered before 4 If or necessary the the after at 6 dose. fourth 4 was is third dose least and if  older years A at not dose administered months age previous of child’s a a were regardless both the as should IPV 4 If  be administered administered, total age. and part of of current series, OPV doses U.S.  older. aged IPV residents routinely years or 18 recommended not for is issues, For Figure catch-up  2. other see

8. vaccines. Influenza live, years [IIV]; attenuated 2 months influenza for vaccine age: vaccine 6 influenza (Minimum for [LAIV]) inactivated

vaccine annually vaccination: at months. all beginning influenza Administer to 6  children age Routine 49 be LAIV 2 or aged through healthy, For nonpregnant years, either may most used. persons IIV through any 2 influenza them complications. 2) 12 However, should asthma, some the who children to years 3) in or that wheezing have to underlying be NOT including predispose those administered 1) LAIV conditions had persons, other medical months, 4 who past with those 59 to MMWR see of contraindications other For use all (No. 2010; LAIV available RR-8), http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5908.pdf. at

9 to aged  older. dose Administer years and 1 persons

2012–13 least 2 the (separated  receiving For months for at influenza 4 who the through season, to aged children time. For first 6 by vaccine weeks) 8 children are years: doses administer For dosing MMWR recommendations, guidance, ACIP additional http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6132.pdf. follow 2012; in influenza 61: at available guidelines the 2012 613–618, vaccine

the season, recommendations. influenza vaccine For 2013–14 2013 follow  the in dosing guidelines ACIP

9. rubella Measles, (MMR) vaccine. mumps, and at and months dose second through years. at for first age months, age vaccination) 4 through 15 vaccine age: dose Routine Administer the 12 vaccination: routine  of 6 (Minimum MMR 12 the second before have may administered age 4 provided years, since be weeks dose. least The first at elapsed the dose 4 the through before MMR for 1  United travel. departure infants dose 11 from vaccine of months to international Administer 6 States aged with of risk high), second at MMR and 2 children in the vaccine, where 15 the least is first remains revaccinated be later. 12 the months through dose 4 at should area months disease doses age (12 These child an weeks if MMR aged vaccine  Administer international travel. from older, months 2 before departure the for States 12 United and doses children to of on age weeks The should dose 12 least months second 4 dose the and be administered or after at later. first interval 2 4 Ensure had between Catch-up vaccine; school-aged children and is 2 the minimum all weeks. of the vaccination:  adolescents MMR have doses that doses

10. vaccine. Varicella (VAR) through through VAR dose age: Administer at 12 vaccination: first the years. Routine 12 dose age months) 6 15 age and at the of  4 vaccine second months, (Minimum elapsed 3 at the 4 may least have first be The months since years, dose before dose. provided age second administered weeks it dose, second If be least valid. was the as accepted administered dose 4 first after the at can

cont’d 94-1, Figure

vaccination: (see [No. aged persons 7 Ensure evidence Catch-up all years through 2007;56 18 without MMWR that  of immunity of available http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5604.pdf) 2 vaccine. at have doses RR-4], varicella recommended valid); the 3 is administered months through 12 can aged is children dose, first 13 interval minimum be interval the was 4 dose persons 4 For weeks. for between years it older, and (if 7 between the minimum least weeks second as accepted aged years doses doses the at after

11. (HepA). vaccine Hepatitis A age: months. doses aged 12 by Routine 2-dose 18 HepA Initiate 6 separate series 12 the to (Minimum for children  the months; through 23 vaccine vaccination: months) 2 after HepA 1 dose. first of 18 the months dose  receive before dose months, 6 Children second received age vaccine who should to a have 24 A HepA and 2 separated may aged For who desired. of be doses 2  against infection has hepatitis years 18 by 6 vaccine any immunity the series, vaccine if HepA to older not administered is months person received virus already  The months. 6 vaccination: doses is between Catch-up the interval minimum two who of 6 at to in A at  or months unvaccinated apart target where Hep areas risk 2 programs persons increased vaccine older children, doses least infection. for Special who vaccination live previously Administer populations: are

12. vaccines. (HPV) papillomavirus Human HPV2 [Gardasil] [Cervarix]). (HPV4 and 6 a aged Administer months on 9 years. adolescents  11-12 a series years) all age: and 1-2, of to of vaccination: schedule (Minimum 3-dose Routine HPV 0, vaccine may HPV2 used and Either only for HPV4 be males. be may females, HPV4 for or used vaccine years. 9 started be  can age at beginning The series the months the the dose 1 first dose). 24 the weeks (at second first dose  the to and after 2 months third 6 Administer dose first after after least dose or 13 and (either age previously vaccination: the if to at  Catch-up males not HPV2 Administer through years vaccine 18 vaccinated. (HPV4) HPV4) series females (see for above) recommended  catch-up. dosing series routine intervals Use vaccine

13. (MCV). Meningococcal conjugate vaccines (Minimum Menveo months for Hib-MenCY, weeks for years age: Menactra for 9 [MCV4-CRM]). 6 [MCV4-D], 2 11–12 Routine 16 Administer a MCV4 years. at vaccination: age vaccine booster years, age dose  at with with a years aged 11 should 8 (HIV) infection MCV4, series weeks with between human primary of 18 immunodeficiency 2-dose through receive virus  at Adolescents doses. least 60:1018–1019 See available MMWR at: 2011; http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6030.pdf. children 2 see with  high-risk years below. For conditions, aged through months 10 through 13 Administer vaccine previously MCV4 if 18 vaccination: years Catch-up age not  at vaccinated. a  18 8 age should dose doses. age least first years with 16 If a dose 13 administered the booster minimum interval 15 through through at weeks is at years, of administered at be between years older, first age dose needed. is booster at 16 or not  a If is administered dose the catch-up  see For 2. Figure issues, other 19 disease), younger of or For persons an with and asplenia age months series conditions: 2, 4, cell administer high-risk infant Vaccination sickle anatomic functional of children  12-15 Hib-MenCY months. with than at of (including 6, primary months component months, series 2 persistent 8 infant or children at 2-dose a through doses. For either complement 4, between 2, Hib-MenCY at at deficiency, of starting with an of weeks series with  aged 15 12 6, through MCV4-D least 9 18 administer and months children doses aged For deficiency primary not MCV4-D 2 8 least who of have 19 at or series complete weeks 23 months MCV4-D, Hib-MenCY of administer with apart. persistent through received complement component a MCV4-CRM. not have (including 2 MCV4-D, or of a older or deficiency aged complete months anatomic cell either with of functional complement or For MCV4-D sickle series children primary 24 component Hib-MenCY disease), doses administer and who  received asplenia or persistent MCV4-D is least If sickle administered and doses. of the not asplenia do of disease), 2 (Menactra) to completion years age with MCV4-D all weeks PCV13 at (including cell child administer a until after 4 http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6040.pdf. available 2011;60:1391–2, at MMWR See against travelers older are African an of who or in children and the belt  protection administer A for and appropriate series 9 to of formulation For serogroups months Hajj, countries residents or to meningitis MCV4 the aged age and W-135. belt traveling the Hajj. not or the receipt Prior meningitis sufficient is of to children for Hib-MenCY See 2011;60:1391–2, available http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6040.pdf. MMWR at caused administer or Hib-MenCY complete For children or by outbreaks of a vaccine during serogroup, age an present are MCV4.  and who series formulation-appropriate to conditions with For  http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm#mening. among high-risk persons refer booster doses

ACIP additional at and contraindications statement http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm. information Additional precautions vaccine, to consult available of should use vaccination for a that providers information  relevant and regarding online vaccine the For weeks 4 days. the doses, between = intervals calculating purposes of 28 For  greater 4 months. of months determined Intervals by are or calendar http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/vaccinations.htm. Information is travel  available vaccine at recommendations on requirements and  http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6002a1.htm; Academy and vaccination and immunodeficiencies,” Recommendations immunodeficiencies, of persons with primary and Table Pediatrics. American secondary on (ACIP), available with at General secondary of primary persons in “Vaccination Immunization of For 13, see Immunization in Clinical Circumstances. Special Pickering eds. Long SS DW, Baker LK, Kimberlin In: CJ, report Red Infectious the book: of on Diseases. Committee 2012 ed. 29th Academy IL: Village, Pediatrics. Grove of American Elk

for provides catch-up doses schedules have vaccinations The and been intervals children delayed. between whose figure minimum below restarted, that be vaccine the doses. between elapsed time not does series need has regardless to A of age. appropriate for the Use the section child’s footnotes Figure that conjunction table follow. this and use 94-1 with Always the in

94-2 who ages or are than start 18 months late immunization behind—United States, Catch-up schedule month years 4 2013. who more through for persons Figure 1 intervals schedules have figure children been minimum for catch-up provides delayed. vaccinations between whose doses and This that between of to the elapsed be regardless has vaccine time doses. A not does restarted, need series appropriate section Use for age. the the child’s in Immunization and for this Schedule follow. with the Always Recommended conjunction that use table 2013 the footnotes the (Approved Pediatrics; Obstetricians Committee on by of Advisory and Family American American Practices; Gynecologists.) Immunization Academy and Academy of Physicians; College of American Health (Courtesy Human Control the Centers U.S. Department of Services, for Disease Prevention, and http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/schedules/hcp/child-adolescent.html and of

http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm. guidance the see: further below, mentioned the vaccines For of use on

1. B vaccine. (HepB) Hepatitis hospital age: Administer birth (Minimum vaccination: to all vaccine before At  discharge. Routine monovalent HepB newborns birth) of 12 antigen mL hours birth. born vaccine surface (HBsAg)–positive infants 0.5 within hepatitis HepB immune (HBIG) B globulin  and B For mothers, to administer of hepatitis 2 through and antibody at be completion (preferably age 1 of months the HBsAg months (anti-HBs) These to to tested the infants 9 at after next should well-child 18 for HBsAg series, visit). HepB to weight. unknown,  status all mother’s of If administer is vaccine 12 of hours birth infants within regardless birth HBsAg HepB of For birth. grams, hours within 12 to in HBIG administer weighing HepB <2,000 infants addition 2,000 grams she status week). weighing (no as mother’s 1 infants later HBIG HBsAg-positive, HBsAg than for soon Determine administer if also possible and, age is as the second The or age following months. at dose should be 1  2 Doses administered birth dose doses 6 weeks. Monovalent HepB administered should used for vaccine before age be and on not HepB-containing Infants 3 6 1  a receive dose soon did starting as vaccine 0, doses of a schedule should as a who of feasible. to receive months, months birth 2 2. See Figure is 3 dose between 2 weeks. weeks  between 8 and The 4 interval minimum dose dose is 2 and and 1 vaccine weeks 24 no weeks, the dose least than or The in age earlier should administered at dose. and series the final fourth) HepB first (third after be 16  the birth recommended vaccine HepB when combination of a of total HepB containing dose. Administration is is vaccine 4 a doses administered of after 3-dose Unvaccinated should Catch-up series.  vaccination: a persons complete adult through at by months) in (doses use HB of aged  licensed is years. A 11 formulation 2-dose for separated least series 15 4 Recombivax children see For Figure 2.  issues, other catch-up

2. (RV) vaccines. Rotavirus RV-1 6 weeks for [RotaTeq]). and (Minimum age: [Rotarix] RV-5 both Routine 1. follows: of Administer  as to all vaccine infants RV a series vaccination:

If months series 2-dose 4 and age. is a of at used, RV-1 administer 2

2.

RV-5 ages 4, If months. a 6 2, used, at is administer and 3-dose series

3.

vaccine 3 dose any RV-5 be or series, for any If administered. total RV product is dose the unknown series of in in was of doses should vaccine a

the 6 the is series for 14 Catch-up days. dose  age in The weeks, vaccination: maximum first or 15 initiated should infants older. Vaccination aged  not for be days weeks 0  months, is 8 dose age the The for days. maximum series 0 final in the RV-1(Rotarix) indicated. third doses, second not is the is and first  If for a administered dose  2. other issues, see For catch-up Figure

3. and toxoids vaccine. (DTaP) tetanus acellular and Diphtheria pertussis 15–18  vaccine 6 4 (Minimum series weeks) at 5-dose ages Administer Routine 6, a age: vaccination: and 4, 2, DTaP years. 6 of months, through as be least since the may third provided have as at age months 6 12 months, early The dose. dose fourth administered elapsed administered or the age not dose vaccine at 4 older. The Catch-up fourth was years if DTaP fifth vaccination:  of dose necessary (booster) is 2. issues, Figure other catch-up  see For

4. and diphtheria and pertussis vaccine. (Tdap) Tetanus toxoids acellular Boostrix, 11 age: years Adacel). 10 for (Minimum for years Administer 1 adolescents aged dose  vaccination: all to 12 through Routine years. Tdap of vaccine 11 administered toxoid-containing interval regardless tetanus last Tdap the diphtheria be can since the and of vaccine.  years during vaccine gestation) weeks from of of number vaccination. pregnant Tdap or Tdap 36 (preferred regardless pregnancy one adolescents prior during to Administer of through Td  dose each 27 needed,  series; Catch-up years are dose 7 as use DTaP who vaccine. aged vaccine receive Td Tdap catch-up doses fully the should childhood series, vaccination: through first additional the in 10 immunized Persons not vaccine the with if are these children, adolescent Tdap For given. vaccine an should not be followed vaccine tetanus 18 received have diphtheria 10 doses and thereafter. Tdap  Persons by years receive 11 through (Td) not a should years who toxoids dose aged booster every dose DTaP to as administered vaccine of years  the through children An catch-up 10 7 aged can count of inadvertent series. part child dose Tdap the a receive the count adolescent dose or age can 11–12 This dose, years. Tdap later can at booster as see  2. other Figure catch-up For issues,

5. Haemophilus vaccine. type b influenzae conjugate (Hib)  Routine a dose to 6 infants. vaccine weeks) (Minimum and vaccination: series age: booster Hib primary all a Administer 2 (PedvaxHib at age; months 4, The primary series not Comvax) 2, age, 6 age of of indicated. a however, and PRP-OMP is be dose doses months 6 administered months at or and if at is administered 4 should should age months. One at be administered through15 dose booster 12 have at months received through who children dose for used only of years, (final) (PRP-T) 12 dose should least the Hib.  in 1 be 4 Hiberix aged booster If was administer after least 1. 12-14 booster administered 8 weeks Catch-up ages vaccination: dose dose 1 final at  (as dose) at months, the should second dose. or If administered doses age or 11 PRP-OMP were at weeks 8  be at 12 first administered and age months least third (and Comvax), (PedvaxHIB after the were 15 2 and at dose final) younger, months the through months, the dose and age 4 at  PRP-OMP) first 11 15 a 7 months, at second If administer final age used regardless least for dose first 12 through administered the through Hib weeks (PRP-T was dose later of or vaccine dose. at unvaccinated children or aged 1  dose. older, For only months 15 administer 2.  see For Figure catch-up other issues, of persons conditions: not 5 age. with recommended patients years of than  vaccine Vaccination routinely older Hib high-risk for is functional virus immunodeficiency older one have immunocompromising infection, cell to (including neoplasms, aged or other dose vaccine 5 disease), or conditions. who asplenia of anatomic or or administered human years be should sickle However partially malignant Hib unvaccinated persons (HIV) leukemia, vaccinated

6a. Pneumococcal vaccine conjugate (PCV). Administer 6 booster age: months series 4, Routine with weeks) PCV13 vaccination: vaccine age through 2, of a ages 6 months. at 15 12  a (Minimum at of supplemental (PCV7), single who a aged PCV 59 7-valent an received dose  age-appropriate have (PCV13). 13-valent months through For children of series PCV administer 14 24 months completely children vaccination: 1 their 59 dose PCV13 to aged are of Administer age. who not  for healthy all through Catch-up vaccinated see Figure other For catch-up  issues, 2. of PCV 8 were fewer doses with 1 apart through 71 conditions persons at previously, dose weeks Vaccination administer were of PCV aged if 3 medical  received high-risk of children footnote with (see For doses 24 administer 6c), PCV13 3 conditions: of 2 least previously. received months underlying certain doses if PCV13 or of than infection A disease), 18 leak. who an years previously cochlear HIV or sickle  PCV13 immunocompromising anatomic functional asplenia or cerebrospinal through children have single dose implant be fluid administered to condition, (including aged unvaccinated 6 of may cell or (No. MMWR 2010;59 See at RR-11), http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5911.pdf. available of children last to years PPSV23 least aged underlying footnotes Administer after certain medical 8 the or 6b PCV with  2 and 6c). dose conditions (see weeks older at

6b. (PPSV23). Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine persons (Minimum years) least after high-risk aged Administer age: conditions: 6c). with children to 2 (see certain PPSV23 weeks last dose with  medical underlying PCV at conditions 2 of or footnote Vaccination 8 the years older of asplenia or an to (including sickle should cell A or immunocompromising functional 5 revaccination anatomic disease) condition. PPSV with with be single administered children after years

6c. with aged indicated years chronic and children (particularly aged corticosteroid disease therapy), 24 and is cochlear indicated fluid months:  heart or is congenital cyanotic children use 71 implant. mellitus; for Immunocompetent if Medical leaks; children conditions high-dose (including PCV13 lung of in which oral through disease chronic heart for diabetes treated with failure); cerebrospinal asthma which cardiac in and PPSV23 disease older 2 other (including infection, with  with therapy, functional including or malignant cell or treatment asplenia splenic syndrome, chronic sickle neoplasms, asplenia, diseases or lymphomas anatomic renal acquired leukemias, congenital solid nephrotic disease; and disease congenital drugs Children HIV  immunosuppressive immunocompromising hemoglobinopathies, failure and dysfunction); with organ radiation with associated immunodeficiency. Hodgkin conditions: or transplantation, and Children or

7. vaccine (IPV). poliovirus Inactivated years. weeks) 2, a IPV Administer 6–18 months, age: with (Minimum ages  a 4–6 6 vaccination: at of 4, booster at age Routine series on The be the and or should birthday administered previous at after the the in fourth 6 months least after dose. series dose final is vaccination: and polio-endemic (i.e., circulating if  Catch-up a to minimum outbreak). for first travel recommended age life, at region risk months of are imminent 6 or an during intervals exposure minimum the only to the poliovirus In person age are dose at 4 should 6 before through years, 4 doses be an age  years. additional more administered If 4 or administered after previous older at is fourth third A least administered 4 or necessary  the dose dose not dose. at age if was and months 6 the years of age. should  regardless administered doses administered, If 4 were a OPV series, be of child’s current both part of a total the IPV as and  recommended older. routinely U.S. or not for years aged IPV residents is 18  see issues, catch-up other For Figure 2.

8. Influenza vaccines. inactivated live, for 2 (Minimum influenza months [IIV]; vaccine [LAIV]) vaccine for years 6 age: attenuated influenza

vaccine to at Administer 6 annually  vaccination: months. influenza children beginning age all Routine 2 most IIV LAIV aged nonpregnant For or healthy, may be years, persons either 49 through used. underlying or 1) be should past 12 the any who NOT 2 including 2) However, predispose to through some had conditions those medical 4 with administered them influenza 3) asthma, children complications. LAIV have in years to wheezing months, other those persons, who that (No. see For of use all to 2010; contraindications 59 other MMWR LAIV RR-8), available at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5908.pdf.

to years Administer older. persons 1 and dose  aged 9

season, 8 the 2 who 6 For by through weeks) first children vaccine 2012–13 receiving influenza For the 4 to for are doses administer  years: least time. months (separated children at aged at http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6132.pdf. For 2012; dosing 613–618, follow in MMWR guidance, ACIP recommendations, available vaccine guidelines the 2012 influenza 61: additional

 For the the dosing ACIP season, in 2013 recommendations. guidelines vaccine follow 2013–14 influenza

9. vaccine. (MMR) and Measles, mumps, rubella vaccination) first at the vaccine of 12 age vaccination: 15  Administer 6 dose through age: MMR routine 4 and at months dose (Minimum months, Routine years. second 12 age through the for 4 before elapsed provided first have be age dose. weeks second the least since dose may years, The 4 administered at international United months departure for dose to travel. 11 1 Administer the States vaccine infants before from  through of 6 aged MMR where if doses through dose later. area months disease is the age weeks at the children remains the risk second vaccine, of at 12 revaccinated 2 an least with MMR 15 and child be high), in first months should 4 These (12 doses and travel. of  Administer 2 vaccine 12 from to the MMR aged children departure for older, before States months international United be at 4 least and weeks dose The first 12 age administered second should after on or later. dose the months MMR between minimum 4 all weeks. doses is interval and of had Catch-up vaccination: school-aged have that 2 2 the adolescents vaccine; doses children  Ensure the

10. vaccine. (VAR) Varicella dose 15 4 of the 12 at through the Administer months) and months,  second vaccine age 6 vaccination: Routine (Minimum dose 12 first age: through age years. VAR at administered second first since The at least 4 may have elapsed months dose be age provided before the dose. years, 3 dose, first as the valid. can the 4 dose least administered accepted weeks If at after be second was it

94-2, cont’d Figure

evidence  without 7 18 of that Catch-up [No. years all immunity 2007;56 Ensure aged vaccination: (see persons MMWR through varicella doses at RR-4], 2 vaccine. have of http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/rr/rr5604.pdf) available first through between aged interval accepted after be least 3 7 administered and persons aged 4 the was weeks the years months second 13 minimum For can weeks. is 4 for between 12 children (if doses the at interval minimum it years dose, as dose older, the valid); recommended is doses

11. A vaccine Hepatitis (HepA). vaccine months. 2 age: 12 2-dose Routine 6 12 aged series separate  doses 18 to months; 23 the through by children months) vaccination: the for HepA Initiate (Minimum 6 vaccine HepA months before 18 second first  receive of who to a 1 age dose months, the have received after dose. dose 24 should Children who separated  6 any 2 infection vaccine months be if person of not is administered older virus desired. doses For immunity has vaccine 2 may already aged 18 series, A and received hepatitis to years against HepA HepA the by The 6 the Catch-up between vaccination: minimum is doses months.  two interval or increased areas are in unvaccinated doses where previously A target 2 persons least older Special who at apart children, vaccination risk infection. Administer who programs populations: at 6 Hep months vaccine  live of to for

12. papillomavirus (HPV) Human vaccines. [Gardasil] HPV2 [Cervarix]). and (HPV4 to 11-12 a 0, (Minimum a 1-2, HPV 9 vaccination: years) years. 3-dose schedule age: on vaccine and aged 6 series Routine  of adolescents months Administer of all be only males. may or Either and females, may used HPV2 for be for HPV4 used HPV4 9 series started years. The age be  at can vaccine beginning 2 24 first  the third first 1 the to first dose Administer second months and after dose the after weeks dose the dose least after (at dose). 6 the months if vaccine or vaccination: HPV2 through years males (HPV4) females not at vaccinated. the (either Administer Catch-up to and 18 age 13 previously HPV4) series  series (see intervals routine  catch-up. dosing for Use above) vaccine recommended

13. Meningococcal conjugate vaccines (MCV). 6 for [MCV4-D], months 9 for weeks Menactra (Minimum years [MCV4-CRM]). Hib-MenCY, 2 Menveo age: for with Routine vaccination: 16 booster age MCV4 at dose age a at Administer 11–12  years. vaccine years, MCV4, immunodeficiency human receive Adolescents least a 18 (HIV) through of 2-dose virus primary infection years with 11 8 at  series doses. aged between should with weeks 60:1018–1019 MMWR 2011; available http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6030.pdf. at: See months years below. with high-risk  aged 2 conditions, through For children see 10 13  vaccination: at age vaccinated. MCV4 Catch-up 18 Administer if through years not vaccine previously with at dose 13 15 If administered  a interval administered is of at age years through through be at dose between least a 18 age weeks years, booster doses. should the first 16 minimum 8 a the administered dose 16 not needed. older,  If age dose years or is at booster first is Figure  issues, other catch-up 2. see For high-risk 4, functional months 12-15 cell than 6, (including an with Hib-MenCY sickle disease), with or infant younger persons of conditions: 19 administer and  Vaccination children For anatomic asplenia age of months. series of 2, at months a through 12 with 2 aged 18 either 8  months of deficiency, Hib-MenCY 6, series complement 15 component 9 series and at months, with starting children infant at primary MCV4-D weeks of through 2-dose doses. an persistent between administer For least 4, at or 2, through children with have who months 8 or MCV4-D For 19 aged component primary of series complement deficiency 2 persistent not at received doses weeks administer of complete Hib-MenCY apart. a 23 least MCV4-D, of persistent with doses MCV4-CRM. older MCV4-D of received either or Hib-MenCY children primary complete  sickle months or deficiency complement For 24 component administer cell asplenia aged functional or who (including have MCV4-D, or anatomic and 2 a disease), not series weeks least If (including until of all the 4 to at PCV13 MCV4-D sickle completion age a doses. not years after of and asplenia (Menactra) disease), administer is 2 administered do cell child MCV4-D with at See available MMWR 2011;60:1391–2, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6040.pdf. 9 who to in meningitis African  to and For W-135. Hajj, A MCV4 or the and age serogroups children residents appropriate months protection formulation the for against and countries older administer of series belt travelers are of or an aged Prior the for receipt children of sufficient Hajj. not to traveling or is Hib-MenCY belt meningitis the at See http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/wk/mm6040.pdf. available 2011;60:1391–2, MMWR during and administer  by outbreaks For complete present vaccine series or a of serogroup, who MCV4. caused age or children an Hib-MenCY are formulation-appropriate http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm#mening. booster refer conditions high-risk  persons For doses to among with

of and should information the additional available providers to that http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/acip-list.htm. information precautions and a for ACIP statement For use vaccine regarding vaccine, consult Additional relevant contraindications vaccination online  at days. For doses,  between weeks of intervals calculating 4 the = 28 purposes calendar of Intervals months or by 4 months. are determined greater vaccine  on requirements http://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/page/vaccinations.htm. at Information available travel is recommendations and “Vaccination secondary with immunodeficiencies, 13, and of on Table and primary American Immunization of Pediatrics. immunodeficiencies,” available  (ACIP), persons in see with persons vaccination of Academy primary For Recommendations General secondary at and http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr6002a1.htm; Circumstances. Immunization in Clinical Special LK, Long DW, eds. CJ, Pickering In: Kimberlin SS Baker book: 2012 on report Infectious the Red Committee of Diseases. 29th ed. Grove Village, American of Academy Elk Pediatrics. IL:

Routine tetanus last DTap, since in TIG‡ ≥3 Tdap, Tetanus Yes the doses ≥5 last if ≥10 94-1 OTHER or Yes since WOUNDS* Td† to ALL No TIG†,‡ yr Immunization (Doses) tetanus Guide CLEAN dose WOUNDS Table Tdap, MINOR Previous DTap, the if toxoid-containing Tetanus yr No Wound vaccine or Td Prophylaxis Management

Pediatrics. Academy Modified of from American IL, Village, Academy committee Pickering editor: of of 2012, infectious diseases, Book: the Pediatrics. Grove ed Elk on report 2012 Red LK, American 29, of toxoids, adsorbed tetanus Td, age adolescents toxoid; Tdap, and (for diphtheria TIG, tetanus adults); yr immunoglobulin. Tetanus-diphtheria >11 and not crushing, and dirt, limited and contaminated wounds; wounds missiles, feces, burns, puncture *Such resulting but or from soil, frostbite. as, wounds with to, avulsions; saliva;

never adolescents have †Tdap who Tdap. received for is preferred is received Tdap is toxoid who to or tetanus available. for previously preferred Tdap Td adolescents when not

TIG if globulin not be is intravenous used available. should ‡Immune

contact index to secretions. exposure personnel medical or the patient’s the with without patient, oral direct for Rifampin and once, age) (>18 years of 2 the regimens. ciprofloxacin twice once daily days, ceftriaxone are recommended be may case in used of resistant Azithromycin organisms. the

immediate, postexposure with All cleansing foreign water, debridement soap and of begins tissue. bodies, thorough devitalized wound and using of removal treatment vaccination for persons after and avulsions, injuries and includes and wounds wounds saliva), feces, incomplete burns, 94-1). and Tetanus with wounds missiles, frostbite immunization (Table contaminated immunoglobulin tetanus (soil, resulting from prophylaxis puncture of wounds, crushing,

benefit rabies exposure of after symptoms but Rabies are known rabies for effective after globulin immune appear. no prophylaxis vaccine to extremely (RIG) and are rabies of and one potential crucial. prophylaxis is infections, of the exposure Because are recognition deadliest be Any signs of the healthy-appearing domestic victim. responsible an treatment without animal rabies, 10 should apparently bite unprovoked days for for observed for of immediate animal administered while to should rabies Prophylaxis or rabid, or suspected develops is the under be animal signs observation. if rabid if be of the captured euthanized without rabies. officials) should for examined of of period and (by be its wild evidence a animal observation brain animal control A rabies a wild species of is virus prophylaxis it if the not animal region, animal If the victim. known is biting be harbor and the a to particularly should presumed administered the to in captured, as Skunks, are regarded carnivores, rabid other unless foxes, proved by woodchucks, negative bats and testing. raccoons, most persons sleeping mentally has Prophylaxis be contact a person, bat for following a to a bite direct or who or unaware disabled infant. should also or unattended a exposure might be to such that child, relate provided occurred, an as unable

postexposure management cleansing the bite povidone-iodine. irrigation with and if such rabies of available, All immediate using with begins virucidal and, thorough agent soap water as a administered, dose the if U/kg should wound, into of a be RIG of around possible. the 20 subcutaneously with dose infiltrated RIG area full the at RIG an remaining Any into administered be be cannot injection. should the that wound as intramuscular infiltrated with at simultaneously vaccine vaccine doses and as soon be 7, additional possible, administered 14 should rabies as Inactivated 3, days.

site on the pharmacodynamics of patient syndrome, and epidemiology therapy agents, The and a local host factors: of of of selection the in resistance, to the number pharmacokinetics the their and agents populations. causative pathogen’s of the depends specific susceptibility selected anti-infective clinical immunity, antimicrobial agents, probable infection

based of the experience is evidence on anti-infective combined with diagnosis or clinical therapy Empirical a probable causative and published presumptive pathogens. Definitive evidence other microbiologic relies isolation or by diagnosis therapy pathogen. a of on direct sufficient drug diagnosis of an of kill and response. to to the pathogen agent susceptibilities concentrations anti-infective or anti-infective delivery in site the pathogen’s the and characterization infection alter facilitate of permits appropriate effective the immune Microbiologic the nature Antiviral be host virus. include therapy of to targeted toxicity viral viral-specific must reverse of to human as consideration proteins, or and, kinase avoid intracellular cells, thymidine herpesviruses must transcriptase replication such the to the of of immunodeficiency

appropriate or best of tissues. cultures fluids is after antimicrobial Empirical therapy initiated obtaining bacteremia In high-risk broad-spectrum empirical or as 96 antimicrobials circumstances, 120). in and (see such therapy neonatal immunocompromised persons, sepsis Chapters includes

clinical to based Empirical antimicrobial be diagnosis to tuberculosis). specific may pathogens defined the or (e.g., close therapy exposure pharyngitis) streptococcal risks on tailored (e.g., toxicity, microorganisms, resistant cost. and can development drug therapy of additionally minimize Definitive

agents to are an response. host adjunct normal Antimicrobial the immune as Infections foreign antimicrobials of alone with that associated because biofilms eradicate bodies, organism-produced difficult impair an catheter, with intravascular are such to phagocytosis. difficult phagocytic to platelets amid is infected eradicate Similarly fibrin vegetations bacteria it and heart cells for of valves. on infections, not satisfactory. outcomes and these is with therapy bactericidal Prolonged, always are required be devices promptly. occur Foreign does have body to if sterilization may removed not chronic (such infected to surgical without vascular reestablishment perfused or osteomyelitis as closed with of tissue, and abscesses the supply. spaces poorly cure perfusion Infections difficult drainage, in of are bone) debridement good with a limited

(e.g., drugs tissue in an administered and Optimal (e.g., the metabolism the bioavailability requires their antimicrobial penetration) specific of therapy pharmacodynamics and excretion both populations. the patient of understanding body) by and pharmacokinetics The of antacids, of with other food, is medications. or whether administered depending gastric the the acid stability on taken of blockers, degree it bioavailability H2 orally acidity; varies, antibiotics and drug; absorption. diarrhea An or profuse unpredictable result intestinal in transit ileus time may alter and

and antimicrobials. The infection of choice affect nature may of site the the with organisms only, low have active pH aerobic tension. Aminoglycosides, and activity against abscesses in oxygen reduced significantly therapeutic central levels antimicrobials system in achieve that eye necessitate the or sites. of and penetrate the these treatment with nervous Infections

those with requires infants dosing drugs. of (as allow for renal Limited in certain function or increasing intervals premature time renal to failure) excretion higher antimicrobials and volume achieve hydrophilic doses The cystic therapeutic of of to clearance (e.g., fibrosis) levels. increased renal distribution larger requires in certain hydrophilic for children in regimens obese due result overdoses smaller of dosage to Weight-based in may significantly distribution drugs. volumes adverse treatment. (e.g., with minimizes margins of serum antibiotics narrow safety aminoglycosides levels effects for drug Determining and vancomycin)

treat agents when antimicrobial to infection. used considered multiple are Drug-drug must be interactions for may before two with different two organism justified action. antimicrobial the Use of of or or agents more mechanisms identification be drugs of benefit either alone). of combination greater or activity administered used of than (e.g., because in is routinely amoxicillin-clavulanate) Several killing trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, spectrum antimicrobials when are synergism(significantly bacterial or the agent, antagonism, less result either along a drug, bacteriostatic growing in antibiotic both tetracycline, bacterial only, a effective presence use may The is a alone. organisms drugs of of if such with in against than killing as used β-lactam

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Origin Fever Unknown Source without of Fever a

C 38° F; F (98.6° maintained generally 1.5° C temperature 37° range 99.6° 97° is in C body be range, Core to 1° to 37° normally a is C temperature Normal to considered C. to of body within F). There temperature maximum with variation, late a in the diurnal is afternoon. normal Rectal associated generally C temperatures than with F) are if especially abnormal, (>100.4° 38° considered symptoms. higher

regulatory body maintained anterior the temperature in by system is complex Normal a hypothalamus. the pyrogens infection, fever of malignancy. endogenous of inflammatory Development or the as result release begins circulation processes, of into with such by as endogenous of interleukin-1, stimulating act Microbes pyrogens microbial cytokines pyrogens, as toxins release necrosis interferons. factor, interleukin-6, including and and exogenous tumor hypothalamus, anterior cytokines is which liberating arachidonic reach to These acid, E2. prostaglandin the metabolized production. occurs and prostaglandin-E2 complement via complex of thermostat interaction Elevation hypothalamic the a of of aspirin) Antipyretics inhibit hypothalamic ibuprofen, production cyclooxygenase, decreasing prostaglandin E2. (acetaminophen, with Reye as recommended is and syndrome associated children Aspirin antipyretic. is an not in to distinguish infections. antipyretics bacterial does The from not response viral

may depending illness. of The vary, nature of children ageand in pattern the fever the on infection,whereas hypothermic, benign significant have 105° be despite may febrileresponse with serious and C) to exaggerated an a of otherwise and ofup response years or not than infection. viral infants agemay (40.6° 5 either temperatures younger children bacterialinfection febrile Neonates in an response F have older may to a suggests is this adolescents process. degree and unusual older a serious and to in Fever children distinguish infectious resulting from or does fever reliably by The pattern diseases, that from malignancy, not fever drugs. autoimmune microorganisms caused

present without fever challenge diagnostic identifying and bacteremia a a focus that includes sepsis. with Children to focal in primary secondary presence Bacteremia, or be the a infection. bloodstream, bacteria may of the is systemic infection is by shock Chapter tachycardia, tachypnea, and hyperthermia 40). or to manifested hypothermia, the Sepsis that response (see coagulation disseminated with ecchymosis) septicemia and (petechiae, lethargy), Children or (cyanosis, impairment (irritability, of appearing and central toxic dysfunction are cardiovascular perfusion), poor system intravascular readily recognized as nervous septic. signs illnesses as follows: categorized febrile may in Most children be

by accompanied often duration diagnosis history clinical and in and Fever localizing by be of physical symptoms, can examination short signs established which a

fail to history without younger focus), and without signs a of 3 children age, occurring examination a in a than physical Fever establish (fever in frequently years localizing cause which

days laboratory or unknown history, despite week tests origin hospitalization after an fever without etiology and Fever for 1 and >14 as routine identified physical examination, evaluation of of (FUO), defined

infants higher is younger than3 of serious infections a bacterial infants. older temperature Fever of months in risk instability or associated with age in than youngerinfants without localizing exhibit feeding, poor fever only usually of signs These infection. and Salmonella, urinary and infants), Escherichia pathogens, and pneumoniae, (S. coli), (S. group include are Haemophilus inthis nontyphoidal Most infections (caused and aureus), Staphylococcus Neisseria influenzae, coli, by pneumoniae, illnesses caused by B age in Listeria butserious group or tract infection bacterial (UTI) [GBS], 3-month-old (E. bacteremia pneumonia in GBS, pneumoniae, monocytogenes streptococcus meningitis 1to neonates; febrile Streptococcus viral meningitidis common

Shigella, septic enteroviruses), b, (Salmonella, coli), N. osteomyelitis [HSV], arthritis or and (S. GBS). simplex herpes influenzae type H. E. diarrhea virus bacterial GBS, or aureus meningitidis,

infections infants between young is bacterial in and viral difficult. Differentiation and antibiotics be weeks months ill, to especially hospital is who pending for <3 of of empirical culture age febrile results. if the <4 follow-up infants all uncertain, should appear infants Febrile age admitted with administered. fluid and gentamicin) cerebrospinal antibiotics After parenteral are ampicillin obtained, are urine, cultures or (typically cefotaxime blood, broad-spectrum of localizing choice suggested on antibiotics the pathogens depends by The findings. whom neonatal is begun should concern. be <4 weeks considered empirical a also HSV neonatal in and old, febrile The in possibility those HSV of acyclovir in children focus infection of age bacterial low of risk ≥4 certainty serious infection). at with a are identifiable Well-appearing serious and developing develop (0.8% without bacterial an weeks localized bacteremia, infants a develop febrile a 2% follow-up of and less white and infants WBCs/high-power include 5000 with 1 infection, to these identifying (WBC) prematurity history focus month, 10 therapy, low-risk blood a cell a criteria or urine of without of of field. prior well-appearing no than older Specific 15,000/μL, age than antimicrobial count chest diarrhea radiograph signs. in respiratory be can considered leukocyte infants Fecal or and testing with may with outpatients antibiotic may followed treated or, Low-risk intramuscular as alternatively, be be infants without treatment, empirical ceftriaxone. clinical Regardless including in is with re-evaluation of antibiotic hours, 72 24 follow-up change, or at for treatment, any essential. least close immediately hours

well-appearing A of of age is years signs febrile than without child the but infection. younger 3 evaluation of common localizing problem a (bacteremia life-threatening or most few some have severe have infections, identifiable and without focus) potentially Although viral bacteremia illnesses. these and occult have a self-limited children UTIs, of with benign differentiate even is for difficult, experienced to clinicians, illnesses. It bacteremia with patients those from

the is part a assessment Observational key evaluation. of Descriptions observer of looking that at the shiny or alertness appearance child include bright. and are around with the normal looking and eyes room, include indicate Descriptions space. vacantly glassy severe that stares eyes into impairment and normal and arms and severe movement arms lap, moving without table support tableindicate legs or reflect Observations on whereas such ability, impairment. motor no mother’s on as in sits and limply sitting, lies vocalizing as objects, such with behaviors, spontaneously, reaching noxious and abnormal crying objects, behaviors with for reflect reflect playing irritability. stimuli, playfulness; Normal smiling, crying are by and parent, held is consolable whereas severe by stop comforted. crying the held indicated continual despite impairment children when being cry and Normally,

with age risk H. and years capsules, 2 between S. meningitidis, are pneumoniae, of influenzae, atincreased organisms Children N. months 3 including nontyphoidal polysaccharide and infection Salmonella. for with Effective organisms antibody. phagocytosisof opsonic requires these b H. has type immunity IgG of infection conjugate the dissipates, dramatically to increases.In of use infections. as incidence IgG these gradually States, initially the the of provides United reduced S. vaccines organisms,but risk Transplacentalmaternal influenzae pneumoniae these and to these of child’s status Determining risk evaluate essential the infections. immunization is children inFigure 96-1. these evaluation approach is to of outlined An

a by younger elicited age of children of a fever history, have of demonstrable infection Most in years or simple 3 laboratory than test. physical episodes source examination, age is this commonly bacterial infection the identified most UTI. In a group, serious be years for occult UTI, bacteremia, for a A evaluate age culture for younger to to blood considered without all should 3 culture urinalysis fever signs. with evaluate and of localizing urine and than children should diarrhea mucous. blood marked those be in by obtained or culture with Stool children and treated empirical to admitted should hospital be antibiotics. with the Ill-appearing

S. of months well-appearing febrile Approximately 3 0.2% age against children to of 36 vaccinated and pneumoniae

occult without H. and localizing have signs influenzae bacteremia. for protein. neutrophil C-reactive or C) rate, (39° or Risk greater, 15,000/mm3 bacteremia more, elevated erythrocyte occult and or of factors WBC band count, count, include 102.2° sedimentation F of temperature absolute count of these age), race, gender, parameters, No (socioeconomic combination tests demographic reliably occult and clinical bacteremia. factors in status, or children laboratory predicts transient may healthy is infections. usually self-limited serious to bacteremia otherwise children and progress localizing in Occult but are children usually as followed Well-appearing

risk” and “low H Assess Age? status for P >1 low Not risk mo Low mo risk <1

blood with CBC culture, urine culture differential,

All parameters normal? No Yes

parameters All normal? treatment ceftriaxone. NoYes empirical or, alternatively, outpatients treated intramuscular with antibiotic without immediately at is treatment, including hours hours, re-evaluation clinical least close change, essential. any 24 or antibiotic in follow-up Regardless of for 72 with puncture, empirical culture, consideration lumbar and treatment. for re-evaluation, a blood culture require blood immediate with repeat antibiotic positive Children

function have the with disease first Children them places increased cell bacteremia, especially opsonization risk sickle properdin-dependent at splenic that during for years 5 life. and of impaired or or F have who and 30,000/mm3 greater, appear 5000/mm3 greater than empirically (40° hospitalized of than C) Children 104° temperature fever and disease cell less seriously count with antibiotics. should be a sickle or ill, with WBC treated culture, should with children Other outpatient treatment with fever close follow-up. cell and and ceftriaxone, have sickle disease blood empirical osteomyelitis. sickle blood S. resulting or with Salmonella in Osteomyelitis is common not presence is disease; more always children positive culture in the of from aureus cell

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Unknown Origin of Fever

examination, C) F physical greater obvious laboratory lasting routine despite without defined (38° for cause 100.4° days FUO is temperature and screening a as >14 than an history, evaluation. complete recurrent is acute to usually which persistent important fevers, It from or distinguish represent fever periodic serial illnesses.

The few examination tests FUO initial supplemented screening a history with (Fig. a evaluation physical requires thorough of laboratory and 96-2). and Additional laboratory initial are on abnormalities guided by tests imaging evaluation.

localizing months 96-1 age Approach with Figure of signs. younger child a 36 to than without fever clinical the varies, depending specific child. of The the on management age and status

72); exposure loss; soil-borne hob-by-related and of organisms; or background; foreign animals; or dental ticks exposure foods; of include and Important fever use surgical the history suggesting or recent to activity. medications, historical chronic to to the exposure the immunizations; or and of to to waterborne on (see blood mosquitoes; or or activity; domestic elements immunodeficiency piercing; and industrial transfusions; travel; child’s infection therapy; exposure pica tattooing history ethnic impact the procedures exposure raw sexual weight work; immunosuppressive unusual, drugs, or unprocessed body health Chapter has or chemicals; severe,

infections unusual presentation common of occult an most of The etiology a FUO is disease. causing endocarditis, abscesses intra-abdominal intrahepatic, Sinusitis, nervous abscess, lesions asymptomatic. system subdiaphragmatic), be may central (perinephric, (tuberculoma, toxoplasmosis) cysticercosis, and relatively cause by in (Table Infections are other diseases, of inflammatory children, FUO the malignancy, common and etiologies followed most 96-1). 20% Inflammatory for episodes. of approximately diseases account than Malignancies in accounting a episodes. of about FUO cause in children of for adults, common are 10% less all Approximately with 15% children diagnosis. have no of FUO definable eventually of some of without resolves Fever develop usually in although time. signs these sequelae, rheumatic over many disease may cases, virus, Common Epstein-Barr Salmonella, hepatitis, Bartonella or henselae, and diagnosed infections FUO tuberculosis. in cytomegalovirus, ehrlichiosis, with known causing viral newly patients immunodeficiencyinclude

child syndrome practices care or parent (Munchausen by health or syndrome) if or particularly are by of the (see family Factitious proxy) fever importantconsideration, (Munchausen Chapter the an a produced feigned intentionally with is fever familiar 22). patient members patient a the remains the individual who be when is hospital with in the reliable should by Fever recorded temperature taken. are over essential. period evaluation observation Continuous a and long repetitive

tests and platelet erythrocyte for complete differential with include WBC count, count, blood count Screening FUO

therapy Begin appropriate obtain tests appropriate Admit,

MRI, (special biopsy) serology, radionuclide tests PCR, Additional studies cultures, imaging scans) and (CT,

unknown evaluation (FUO) to of origin the Figure of Approach 96-2 fever in children. antinuclear complement urinalysis, for differential evaluation chest and transaminase blood bacterial sedimentation count, and rheumatoid and count factor, tests laboratory C4, with rate, CH50). count, levels, disease rheumatic serum urine and hepatic of radio-graph, cultures blood, blood erythrocyte a antibody, complete cell include white (C3, Screening platelet reaction. PCR, polymerase chain

Cholangitis Abscesses: endocarditis abdominal, Osteomyelitis rectal, perinephric, hepatic, psoas pelvic, Mastoiditis brain, Pyelonephritis Infective Sinusitis dental, splenic, periappendiceal, Pneumonia subphrenic,

fever) moniliformis (rat-bite Salmonellosis Streptobacillus recurrentis, Mycoplasma Relapsing pneumoniae (rat-bite fever) minus fever (Borrelia Spirillum Borrelia) other

Causes in Origin Children—cont’d of Unknown of Fever

disease, (Crohnʼs Rheumatic Polyarteritis ulcerative nodosa idiopathic bowel Kawasaki (systemic colitis) Juvenile Still disease arthritis Inflammatory disease) fever disease onset,

Deafness, Cyclic active syndrome amyloidosis neutropenia urticaria, Castleman Chronic hepatitis disease

syndromes Periodic fever Poisoning Postoperative (pericardiotomy, craniectomy)

D: Modified LS, Kamat focus. a Fever without from Nield of Philadelphia, et Kliegman Textbook 2011, Geme al: St. Pediatrics, Saunders. Nelson 19, In III RM, BF, Stanton JW, ed

hepatic rate, henselae and C-reactive antibody. sedimentation B. protein, transaminase dis-levels, disease urine be rheumatic with cultures immunology, evaluation blood, considered. antinuclear with of Consultation and rheumatic disease, specialists graph, chest should oncology radio-ease, for infectious and urinalysis, or C4, factor, complement fluid for Further computed ture culture; and analysis puncantibody, serum (C3, include cerebrospinal rheumatoid may tests lumbar and CH50). magnetic and abdomen, may culture, release culture, scans; bone antibody, and interferon-gamma tomography stool Additional and culture. for for marrow biopsy radionuclide Epstein-Barr test head; throat include antibody virus resonance chest, tuberculin imaging FUO the cytology or profile, HIV or assay, of tests skin

@ StudentConsult.com Available

exanthems common by manifestation five common describes of are rash. characterized Rashes this chapter many viral a and infections; childhood fever differential agents clues to including the infectious appearance and distribution diagnosis, Rash provide (Table 97-1). other important

with and caused type. is paramyxovirus a Measles single-stranded is contagious (rubeola) RNA by one antigenic highly are natural host. only the Humans viremia. during spread respiratory virus low-titer the nodes a infects systemically lymph upper primary regional brief, is Measles and and tract 5 viremia respiratory virus-infected occurs virus to tract, secondary A monocytes the 7 as within and other days the to spread organs. skin, and the of individuals. urine secretions, in is present Virus infected blood, respiratory route Measles the highly is droplets virus is and contagious. transmitted airborne by or about persons before have to prolonged Infected immunocompromised onset days before of are 2 excretion 4 the rash—and virus. 1 persons can 5 contagious symptoms—from to of from of days days after contagious appearance

million of vaccination responsible regions in about world for annually. the not endemic available and remains Measles where 1 is deaths is measles United Since there fewer virus occur. in annually 2000 cases States, international outbreaks after typically from been travel reported imported than 100 resulting the although have communities be during those may Infections in children low of vaccinated too young with or immunization nonimmigrant among occur rates. outbreaks to infants by until the end year. maternal young are Most of first their antibody transplacental protected

prodromal four is infection incubation, into phases: divided and recovery. exanthematous Measles (rash), (catarrhal), onset of mean from 7 from days a to days is The onset. to 12 exposure incubation 8 14 rash to symptom (range, exposure period 21) to and The of period the 3-day manifestations prodromal

Viruses Adenovirus parvovirus or Erythema Measles Roseola HHV-7) (fifth disease, infectiosum Rubella (HHV-6

fever, Meningococcal typhi (erythema migrans) spots”) (typhoid “rose disease infection Lyme Salmonella (early)

(scrub, (early) Mountain spotted endemic) fever Ehrlichiosis Typhus Rocky Rickettsiae

Toxic skin syndrome Scarlet Staphylococcal A (Staphylococcus (group scalded shock Bacteria streptococcus) syndrome fever aureus,

streptococcus reaction pneumoniae Other Bacteria Drug M. A Serum sickness Group

Bullous, Pustular Vesicular,

gonococcal, Sepsis Haemophilus b) pneumococcal, Bacteria (meningococcal, influenzae type

Necrotic (Aspergillus, Mucor) Fungi eschar

Hepatitis B virus; human HBV, HHV, herpesvirus.

hours. spots grain-sized are to mucosa the the sand dots that opposite the lower Koplik conjunctivitis, 24 molars) last pathognomonic coryza, 12 cough, buccal (gray-white, and on line). reveal along a line inflammation margin eyelid may transverse The of (Stimson the characteristic conjunctiva exanthematous by F is C often (40° to classic [104° 40.5° during and of C accompanied symptoms The conjunctivitis occur phase, high secondary cough, the fever to viremia of coryza, F]). 105° the which of hairline) spreads begins The macular to in a above head most cephalad over hours. pattern over 24 the caudal (often the the rash and body on rash Areas the often of are confluent. The in illness rash severity to and pattern, the of extent the fades related is rash. same the be or (black measles). It petechial may hemorrhagic and it desquamation. fades, undergoes discoloration brownish the As rash

mesenteric noted pain Cervical with lymphadenopathy be rash. and abdominal with lymphadenitis, may the splenomegaly, Otitis pneumonia, infants. more and in media, common diarrhea are more adults. Liver is in involvement common

cases mild with measles. in protection measles measles The persons against occurring describes partial term of modified infants serum immunoglobulin. transplacental or in in receiving before persons with measles with Modified disease immune in antibody, vaccinated of globulin, coadministration modified 12 by occurs months of age or persons

do nonspecific are in diagnosis. laboratory not findings Routine and aid Leukopenia is characteristic. lymphocytic with pleocytosis, fluid and reveals acute glucose levels. protein, In cerebrospinal increased an patients the normal encephalitis, a identification and (CDC). Measles (PCR) for chain health state is through or may departments Disease though RNA reaction of virus generally Control not Centers the be available public culture reverse available, transcriptase-polymerase via Prevention measles to rash to IgM months 1 in antibodies testing IgM clinical unimmunized people. though only within diagnosis, for 2 be days 1 for antibodies the and appear transiently persons that present of the persist immunized confirms in may 2 Serologic local immediately or be health state department. to Suspected the cases should reported

of conjunctivitis rash, measles. fever, constellation The for and cough, isdiagnostic andconvalescent spots butare rash time diagnostic are not most by pathognomonic acute increases pronounced.Confirmation is the Koplik antibody in is present sera. at always the infection, adenoviral sickness, serum disease, enteroviral rash. The be scarlet rash must mononucleosis, infectious roseola, Kawasaki from disease, drug fever, or rubella, differentiated rickettsial and toxoplasmosis, meningococcemia,

maintaining antipyretics. and includes Routine adequate supportive care hydration vitamin with High-dose shown measles supplementation has been A the countries. outcome in improve to infants developing of The Organization of administration Health measles. all with recommends routine to children 2 days acute vitamin A for World

of common most Otitis measles media the infection. complication is result pneumonia pneumonia from can A or Interstitial streptococcus. with bacterial (measles) pneumoniae, or may secondary group aureus, Staphylococcus occur, infection Streptococcus with fatal. may which cell-mediated (Hecht) Persons is giant immunity cell pneumonia, usually develop impaired are and complications. Myocarditis infrequent mesenteric lymphadenitis

the to occurs 2 onset 2 in of days cases occurs 5 Encephalomyelitis to usually rash. 1 1000 after per the and encephalitis phenomenon. Early probably tissue, probably infection is of whereas is viral and onset later encephalitis an a caused brain demyelinating direct by immunopathologic complication death. late characterized and panencephalitis is neurologic sclerosing infection by slow a deterioration measles of Subacute and eventual that intellectual progressive is behavioral every 1 average million to 1 cases 8 in years 10 It occurs after approximately in measles. of an of measles, effective There no treatment. is

5 frequently risk from malignancy,severe or malnutrition, with result as under immunocompromise HIV bronchopneumonia most with much higher in (such persons infection). years, Deaths age orencephalitis, deaths from adolescents andadults in panencephalitis. sclerosing usually subacute result Late neurologicsequelae. of serious with a forms measles 30% Other associated 20% rate of encephalitis mortality of having are immunocompetentpersons survivors in approximately15%, with to

of children (MMR) measles months as 6 recommended 12 is to Live at prevents for 4 mumps, years rubella to and 15 and vaccine infection and age. measles, of years higher rate following 12 MMRV is seizures are febrile of (MMR there 12 with associated with The children administration. contraindications, is provided vaccine) no but vaccine age, to months for combined a alternative an varicella but <1%. vaccine The failure reduces <5% not primary of booster second dose MMR significantly a the is dose rate, to from mg/kg/day an include to to corticosteroids Contraindications or states recent (3 course months, immunosuppressive on dose). days); vaccine or of 11 immunocompromised (>2 depending for pregnancy; measles immunoglobulin >14 of administration total 3 previous with count of a age-specific received or chemotherapy MMR count remission month. have evidence percentage months, children the CD4 is not and not low immunosuppressive cancer total vaccination who all in T-lymphocyte previous corticosteroids of recommended severe persons T-lymphocyte (low in HIV-infected have without the children in immunosuppression who CD4 received for lymphocytes), a as immunocompromised exposure should of a measles within or within exposure. prophylaxiswith of contacts postexposure 6 who with measles are disease vaccine 72 or chronic household receive immunoglobulin Susceptible days hours

caused of German as togavirus Rubella, with family. glycolipid is a 3-day or also measles envelope and a member RNA single-stranded known measles,is virus by a the Humans the natural host. are only epithelium and via a primary virus viremia. invades disseminates Rubella the respiratory the isolated cerebrospinal fluid, ensues, in the a and peripheral monocytes, system, Afterreplication can reticuloendothelial blood from be urine. secondaryviremia and virus after rash. is from although be days days 7 innasopharyngeal through before days present days contagious may contactwith secretions onset, rash 14 after secretions direct or from Rubellavirus virus before droplet 7 until5 until the 2 nasopharyngeal most to

months virus syndrome in Chapter with results trimester significant than nasopharyngeal congenital (see associated cardiac, with and to generalized during more susceptible secretions utero in and first afterbirth (CRS) vasculitis and morbidity the Infection rubella shed contacts. longer infection for 12 from in with may 90% neurologic ophthalmologic, fetalinfection the may of in results rubella urine virus 66).Maternal than congenital the manifestations transmit cases.Infants in

In unvaccinated to in cycles usually with of the occurring 9 rubella every 6 populations, occurs in years. spring, epidemics Approximately subclinical. cases of to 50% are 25% now than annually States. United cases rubella of 20 Fewer the occur in from Outbreaks cases. of in imported nonvaccinated occur internationally rubella occasionally groups during life. 6 protective antibody the months of first Transplacental is

@ Available StudentConsult.com

The to18 14 to days). postnatal rubella is (range, incubation for 16 period 21 days typically go prodromal unnoticed. The symptomsof rubella phase of the may catarrhal mild by maculopapular, accompanied discrete are occipital posterior posterior lymphadenopathy The rubella anerythematous, characteristic of signs retroauricular, cervical,and rash. to The for the than that and spreads days measles. the of and body, rash lasting face lessprominent 3 beginson softpalate, in Rose-colored the as on spots before 20% Forchheimer spots, known rash. appear may patientsand of develop the pharyngitis, mild rubellainclude and anorexia, Other low-grade headache,malaise, manifestations conjunctivitis, of fever. usually the sequelae. hands,may resolveswithout usually occur, adult but Polyarthritis, especially among of females, may and occur. Paresthesias tendinitis

do generally diagnosis. Routine aid not and findings laboratory are nonspecific in thrombocytopenia white or usually normal count The is low, blood cell rarely and occurs. a testing sera. antibodies fourfold onset) convalescent confirmed in paired days specific symptom 5 acute in for serologic after by is IgM (typically Diagnosis or greater increase IgG antibodies by and or positive IgM 7 rising cases over and first age, to months age. stable IgG have titers 3 11 of until CRS the can of detectable or months results occur. IgM can False-positive and of postnatal to the suspected and reported be congenital syndrome state should Cases health department. rubella local infection rubella

infectious fever, from mononucleosis, rickettsial infection, be rash. drug disease, roseola, differentiated enteroviral and sickness, rash measles, adenoviral scarlet Kawasaki toxoplasmosis, disease, The must serum or

is no for rubella. There therapy specific antipyretics. includes maintaining and hydration adequate supportive care Routine

during rubella syndrome Other rubella rare. infection congenital complications (see are arising from than pregnancy, Chapter 66) encephalitis. rubella with occur Deaths rarely

MMR yearsof vaccine to age. and 4 infection is 12 at to Live and 6 prevents at recommended as 15 rubella months children for is but nasopharynx is communicable. not virus After it weeks, several shed the vaccination, for rubella from and effects,but rubella is in In symptoms in of adverse with ofvaccinated causes postpubertal acute associated rarely individuals arthritis-like individuals. in10% children, vaccine vaccinated 25% arthralgias females, it to 1 3 These and days. vaccination weeks 1 typicallydevelop 3 after symptoms to last

vaccine recent an depending immunocompromised mg/kg/day Contraindications states >14 to days); for corticosteroids of immunosuppressive on (3 11 administration rubella pregnancy; course include of dose). immunoglobulin months, or or to (>2 been to inadvertently women during Vaccine recovered have although of identified infants from tissues, among no cases fetal born has virus vaccinated been against rubella pregnancy. CRS after of to are Nevertheless days. women cautioned for 28 pregnancy vaccine avoid receipt rubella-containing prenatal be determine and before vaccinated should should to rubella, and immune susceptible All have discharge. testing hospital status mothers their delivery serologic after to pregnant women

persons Susceptible, nonpregnant rubella to vaccination. exposed should rubella receive pregnant women of for recommended Immunoglobulin exposed postexposure to is prophylaxis rubella. not susceptible,

caused subitum, infantum (HHV-6), to sixth of and Roseola disease) is primarily human type herpesvirus cases. 30% HHV-7 by in 6 10% (exanthem by viruses enveloped are and HHV-6 the HHV-7 are members that of large, DNA family. herpesvirus double-stranded during They infect and 5 relatively viremia infection. a cells (3 mature cause mononuclear to day) prolonged primary and other adults, lifelong intermittent which as can development with the the of They suggests, detected healthy infection shedding. viral latent of saliva herpes-viruses, be in

months protects ofage. 6 most Transplacental infants antibody until The maternally of incidence infection derivedantibody increases decline. levels as 12 have by are of essentially 3 of seropositive and age, to antibodies children age. of all approximately60% years 2 to 90% to children months HHV-6, By acquired Thevirus periodically viruses. likely shed from who asymptomatic these is adults of 6 major of age. 18 febrileillnesses is children for emergency acute to and a cause infants may of department months HHV-6 be 20% in responsible for visits tothe

by Roseola abrupt high (often >40° is fever days. with 5 onset that an characterized to lasts 3 C) although be may defervescence, it with maculopapular, rose-colored rash coincidentally present earlier. A erupts HHV-6 with but in 3 The not days lasts to infants fade may rash is all 1 usually infection. rapidly present and respiratory may nasal congestion, tympanic cough symptoms, erythematous Upper membranes, and occur. symptoms are Gastrointestinal described. Most appear roseola toxic. irritable with children and are approximately febrile of is associated with third seizures. Roseola one by and is HHV-6-associated indistinguishable, clinically occurs in HHV-6 Roseola HHV-7 although roseola infants. younger typically caused may suppression, marrow Reactivation transplantation of result bone hepatitis, and bone rash, following in marrow encephalitis. HHV-6

and aid are Routine findings do not in diagnosis. nonspecific laboratory cell protein roseola with cells/mm3) mononuclear concentration. and to Encephalitis elevated with predominance, by 200 normal is (30 pleocytosis characterized glucose concentration, convalescent showing by fourfold in cerebrospinal DNA sera fluid the in HHV-6 rise diagnostic. is of testing Serologic or and acute documentation a PCR

followed without physical to by high of fever 5 3 with defervescence of is pattern for of onset rash days characteristic. The significant findings fever with stage. easily may the febrile Many confused preeruptive during be roseola illnesses daily normally, with infections continue most and behave must their usual excluded, be alert, Serious although children activities. are

for There is therapy no roseola. specific includes hydration supportive Routine maintaining adequate and care antipyretics. be foscarnet can hosts, considered. use of immunocompromised ganciclovir or In

prognosis roseola for is The excellent. or few syndrome. usually attributed to hemophagocytosis have virus-associated been deaths in complicated encephalitis HHV-6, A by cases

no of guidelines prevention for There are roseola.

Erythema a caused human viral exanthem disease) DNA B19, by virus is children. healthy a infectiosum the in (fifth benign single-stranded producing parvovirus it for sickle blood viral cell and cause crisis The aplastic spherocytosis, makes of patients thalassemia. cells anemias, disease, progenitor important affinity in red an cell including with hemolytic after infection also pregnancy. fetal during hydrops B19 causes Parvovirus fetalis and primary anemia a P parvovirus erythroid present cells. on for erythrocyte antigen, receptor the B19 glycolipid The cell is dividing erythroid replicates results cells, erythroid and leading death that The in in aplasia actively virus anemia. stem to cell

is common. Erythema infectiosum of only 5 seroprevalence to to is in adults. than 2% in but 18 in Parvovirus B19 to increases 30% years 35% years 9% 15% children younger children to 60% to and age 5 usually the epidemics Community in occur spring. product The transmitted by and secretions blood respiratory by virus is transfusions.

days. is incubation days 4 21 maylast period to 14 rarely and typically The myalgias, begin mild,nonspecific a fever, characterized infections malaise, B19 with by andheadache. usually illness Parvovirus In cases, appears 7 some 10days later. to the characteristic rash occasionally by and pharyngitis mild manifested Erythema is rash, no infectiosum and or low-grade fever, conjunctivitis. three stages. The appears in rash initial a cheek” stage rash pallor. with The “slapped circumoral istypically 40 giving appears fades central then lasts maculopapular, reticulated truncal lacy, place, rash 2 that rash An to4 symmetric, adistinctive clearing later, takes as to 11days). days (mean, 1 erythematous days stress. exercise, not bathing, rash pruritic, be desquamate, and does rubbing, with or may mayrecur This myalgia, gastrointestinal andadults coryza, arthritis, significant arthralgias experience upset. headache, and Adolescents pharyngitis, may or

days shortened crisis disease) (see to Chapter aplastic 150). life cell erythroid sickle with (e.g., develop erythrocyte lasting span 7 characterized typically by may transient production Children 10 ineffective a fever, aplastic including symptoms. parvovirus malaise, pallor, B19-induced and multiple Most symptoms, with headache, respiratory lethargy, crisis symptoms, children have gastrointestinal transient patient. lower The is level count for the hemoglobin usual and low, reticulocyte than extremely is the and neutropenia thrombocytopenia commonly Transient occur. also

children pure severe develop infection causing Persistent blood red immunodeficiency, anemia may from aplasia. with in B19 resulting parvovirus cell manifestations These do display infectiosum. children of the erythema typical not

with and Hematologic abnormalities lasting reticulocytopenia days, parvovirus thrombocytopenia, to infection, anemia, neutropenia. 7 occur 10 lymphopenia, mild including precursors detected and by marrow. PCR Parvovirus electron microscopy bone B19 the by erythroid can in be of the to are antibody that infection parvovirus 4 Serologic occurred diagnostic, probably specific to months. tests in showing IgM demonstrating prior 2

diagnosis body The of the and followed prodromal symptoms, in the absent or erythema children with established of a mild over rash infectiosum of typical wanes. findings basis reticulated clinical that rash on facial waxes by is the systemic scarlet sickness, rubella, infection, includes disease, lupus and drug measles, adenoviral fever, scarlet mononucleosis, differential diagnosis infectious serum or reaction. fever, erythematosus, Kawasaki The enteroviral

therapy. is no There specific supportive adequate and care maintaining antipyretics. includes Routine hydration transient required be Transfusions for crisis. may aplastic transfusion for associated B19 hydrops infection. Intrauterine been has performed fetalis fetal parvovirus with persons may be with anemia chronic or Intravenous immunocompromised immunoglobulin for severe used infection.

for excellent. erythema The prognosis is infectiosum with crisis rare. aplastic Fatalities associated are transient death. result and but fetal Parvovirus heart fetal of erythroid is failure, fetalis, utero B19 in may infection fetal hydrops cells teratogenic, in not to Of fetal death. infected of women age women 25% infection, approximately parvovirus B19 culminating 50% exposed with becoming susceptible these of in the 10% of infection, childbearing and 30% of exposed develop of fetuses

risk to is pregnant greatest women. The limited. Effective control measures are school the children time rash recommended, not present. generally infectiousby the children Exclusion is from because is are affected not of should measures help Good that transmission. handwashing practical hygieneare and reduce

member an of virus is enveloped, zoster caused Chickenpox are varicella-zoster and a icosahedral, the DNA virus family. (VZV), by double-stranded herpesvirus that natural only host. Humans are the Chickenpox manifestation primary is infection. of (varicella) the replicates in tract and nasopharynx conjunctivae tract. the via VZV individuals upper or and respiratory the respiratory susceptible infects lymph disseminates by primary infects regional viremia organs. the nodes, a and the liver, spleen, and It other resulting viremia rash. a in A secondary the cutaneous typical with follows, vesicular infection in persists virus of chickenpox, the ganglia infection resolution dorsal the cells. latent root After in reactivated Zoster manifestation (shingles) endogenous infection VZV. the of is latent of secondary with individuals, Chickenpox than is rate susceptible attack in a highly 90%. more communicable of all days of rash, the communicability before after period when of the The 2 days ranges 7 crusted. to from lesions are onset

years, occurrence to infection peak the was era, age and of late seasonal with prevaccine spring. in 5 In 10 winter the peak incidence 14 olds. the peak postvaccine era, year groups, declined the varicella the all to with In of incidence in 10 has age now in air. droplet, Transmission direct is and by contact, transmitted Zoster of by recurrence latent a is and VZV is contact. direct younger years of zoster 5% age. than occur of 15 in of children Only cases of The with (215 cases lifetime 100,000 after cumulative incidence of overall 75% 20%, to person-years) zoster 10% of per of years 45 cases a incidence occurring results age. approximately in immunocompromised increased persons. of incidence The in zoster is

@ Available StudentConsult.com

days, of witha to of The to incubation 21 exposure. is varicella range days 10 after period 16 generally 14 oval, as anorexia progress by to day.The symptomsof precede 1 characteristic base. “teardrop” nonumbilicated, may small Prodromal papules rash rash onan malaise, appears thatrapidly erythematous vesicles the initially and fever, red The ulcerate, clear progresses and vesicles heal. fluid cloudy,and the from to crust, New the 3to extremities. days, trunk usually crops the less appear 4 followed the head,the face, and, beginning by for commonly, on being the lesions, atotal of may be 500 presentat time. same of forms There with all lesions 100 to marked. universal is and Pruritus present Lesions maybe on mucous membranes. may begeneralized. Lymphadenopathy do which 3 severity The the fever, of abate 4 as after systemic rash generally varies, to signsand days.

constant malaise phase and preeruption (acute zoster by a includes localized intense pain along of and and The dermatome, fever. neuritis) tenderness accompanied several thedermatome days,the which occurs In vesiculate, quickly adjacent in in two dermatomes. eruption or papules, of Groups are of occur 1 lumbar crusting then progress to for typically regions and days 7 healing.Thoracic to involved. lesions and and accompanied are and Lesionsgenerally by unilateral are regionallymphadenopathy. a patients, one third dermatome. In of occuroutside of the vesicles few primary intraorallesions. corneal nerveV branch and which be may Any involved, of also cranial may cause nerve with in may of zoster and and may associated (Ramsay ear be ipsilateral Involvement Hunt result VII cranial vesicles cerebralangiitis stroke. canal syndrome).Ophthalmic facialparalysis liver, that system). rarely, centralnervous painful (to and Immunocompromised dissemination herpes visceral zoster lungs, may involves haveunusually severe, persons cutaneousand, children. longer Postherpetic uncommon is as 1 defined neuralgia, pain month, than in persisting

testing diagnosis Laboratory for confirmation is usuallyunnecessary. strainsis method the of diagnostic PCR to CDC. choice,and through and is available vaccine wild-type the current genotyping distinguish diagnostic of also by acute antibodyincrease immunofluorescence antibodies sensitive as fluid not monoclonal demonstration or is vesicular but Detection and using PCR. of as convalescent of a fourfold varicella-specificantigen in sera

the of characteristics zoster on varicella based of diagnosis rash. is distinctive the The and a develops HSV underlying by Eczema caused or trauma. varicelliform localized, vesicular skin Kaposi affected that eruption by or eczema eruption, herpeticum, on is appears may because dermatomal differentiation a cause be zoster The HSV HSV to that may in and eruption be between difficult infection distribution. oropharynx. are lesions appearance, infection localized and A but a to Coxsackievirus extremities usually has the vesiculopustular patient probably healthy more one infection, which HSV previously recurrence be has culture. with A viral than by can confirmed

includes cool and of antipyretics, nonaspirin Symptomatic varicella careful therapy hygiene. baths, healthy Routine in acyclovir administration not recommended with of children varicella. is otherwise oral complications. and The of factors risk to host decision use for depend medications, or duration route, the the severe and on infection treatment antiviral with death effective immunocompromised rash in pneumonia, hours is persons including onset) preventing varicella. severe Early therapy within in 24 and encephalitis, antivirals complications, of from (especially such years; therapy. older receiving in or pulmonary disease; corticosteroids; cutaneous or considered Acyclovir persons be unvaccinated those with salicylate or of or as intermittent, aerosolized those varicella, at short-course, 12 than long-term severe valacyclovir receiving chronic may risk VZV than dose The HSV. of acyclovir that for much for is infections used higher

of resolution zoster accelerates of of healing, treatment postherpetic neuritis, the hastens acute cutaneous reduces risk and Antiviral the neuralgia. greater for in bioavailability oral valacyclovir have famciclovir and are and much zoster Oral than recommended adults. of acyclovir treatment recommended therapy and for is adults. Acyclovir is alternative children an for corticosteroids The zoster necessity oral is for concomitant controversial. of

skin lesions by the infection common Secondary staphylococci of is complication. most or streptococci fasciitis. or with may or life-threatening necrotizing These toxic resembling syndrome infections impetigo, mild, be shock is occurs persons. children adults healthy and healthy in 15% of in uncommon immunocompromised to Pneumonia 20% but Myocarditis, may ulcerative varicella. arthritis and complicate orchitis, gastritis, pericarditis, hepatitis, glomerulonephritis, Reye may contraindicated thus, salicylate varicella syndrome follow varicella; is during infection. use

postinfectious nystagmus, and cerebellar complications include frequently Neurologic ataxia, encephalitis, tremor. transverse neuritis, neurologic myelitis, complications optic palsies, syndrome, include hypothalamic cranial common Less and Guillain-Barre syndrome. nerve

be and visceral immunocompromised pneumonitis. hepatitis, as encephalitis, can varicella a fatal in persons a disease dissemination, result of Primary (see approaches or receive The in who 15% prophylaxis varicella for rate do therapy mortality Chapter children 66). leukemia not with

varicella not occurring may in before mothers (but 5 delivery. with to varicella neonatal of after A shingles) severe develop newborns days days 2 form of and of born can placenta. exposed cross before is maternal inoculum antibody to a the The fetus virus response develops is but the large with (VZIG) the should or immunoglobulin varicellazoster possible prevent to as immunoglobulin be unavailable, VZIG soon treated to infection. is as These intravenous infants or attempt if ameliorate

resolves spontaneously. Primary usually varicella and for than persons is for immunocompromised persons. older much of age years mortality rate higher 20 The especially is children. self-limited, in Zoster usually presentation of month are 1 severity age and at Advanced predictors at prolonged pain and of pain. because the the of Scarring skin. common layers is of zoster more with of involvement deeper

with to crusted. return Children until vesicles should not have school chickenpox all isolated chickenpox room should with a A negative-pressure transmission. child be prevent to in hospitalized

doses recommended. varicella all vaccine—two A for attenuated live children—is dose 6 age first the The administered 15 dose should to to second at at be 12 years. and months 4 97% Varicella severe disease in 85% preventing effective moderately effective in is and any disease. severe and vaccine preventing from virus rare is vaccine of but Transmission possible. healthy a individual vaccinated

indicated is exposure for VZIG, 96 immunity risk for hours provided increased illness. Passive of at severe individuals by susceptible be which within can to 28 of of not prolongs eliminate incubation and days. in up period does the VZIG Administration the disease recipients possibility

StudentConsult.com Available @

often crusted aureus impetigo Nonbullous Staphylococcus streptococcus. by is A or most occasionally by group and caused a one crusted that weeping papulovesicle single to drainage. progresses or many serous as Itbegins erythematous honey-colored, lesions accounts all impetigo impetigo. 10%of Bullous for approximately to type thin-walled phage (0.5 S. are aureus second-degreeburns lesions The margins are erythematous and resembling 3 with associated with 71. skin cm)bullae andmouth, occurs around and on Impetigo most the the extremities. nares face, on the frequently is Fever uncommon. appearance The established alone. usually clinical the is by diagnosis

antibiotics. mupirocin impetigo oral topical treatment is 2% nonbullous or Recommended for antistaphylococcal the or bullous around therapy impetigo, or oral best otherwise are not amenable disseminated topical eyes, lesions antibiotics. Extensive lesions, lesions treated with to Streptococcal increased is with fever acute not Chapter glomerulonephritis of postinfectious 163). but associated impetigo risk (see rheumatic does not spread treatment decreases glomerulonephritis nephritogenic of possible to Antibiotic contacts. the postinfectious risk decrease strains close but of completed. hours until or been of Children with impetigo care out school antibiotic remain of therapy have should 24 day

@ StudentConsult.com Available

subcutaneous and the groupA tissues aureus caused streptococci. by or the and dermis Cellulitis is is infection usually S. involving rapidly. and with warm, macules indurated, borders that Cellulitis presents erythematous with indistinct typically expand fever, commonly Additional include and lymphadenitis. lymphangitis, manifestations regional variant involves the streptococcus usually group Erysipelasis caused of cellulitis only. superficial by that dermis a A tender, are bright appearance, advancing The lesions in rapidly margins. have red sharp and toxic. appear may patients The recommended for Blood erysipelas. are cultures recommended case which or for treatment aureus rate alternatives trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole S. poor agent unless Empirical this (although is first-generation include methicillin-resistance activity). clindamycin local cellulitis high, A streptococcal the in antibiotic a with is has cephalosporin group with face, therapy. recommended not oral responding antibiotics are managed with lymphangitis; and those outpatient cellulitis those hands, antibiotics intravenous feet, perineum; follow-up; and of the close may and erysipelas patients and Many be for hospitalization to or

by and caused is may streptococcus complicate group usually A impetigo. Ecthyma eschar, with is removed, which, characterized a lesion of if it a induration erythematous ulcer. a by Initially rim reveals shallow surrounding an Pseudomonas serious skin in or to Aspergillus. septic classically aeruginosa, Ecthyma occurring infection is persons spread occasionally organisms, caused a immunocompromised the skin, by gram-negative other hematogenous due of emboli to gangrenosum necrotic ulcers raised base, red The punched-out to dark and begin deep, 3 in a exudate. become a necrosis 2 edges, central lesions yellowish with as that cm tender, to undergo purple sometimes macules green exquisitely diameter usually present. Fever is

most tissues deeper form is the planes. and Necrotizing involves fasciitis subcutaneous of extensive cellulitis and fascial may the myonecrosis to underlying It progress of muscle. as group perfringens. aureus anaerobic combination or streptococcus with alone S. Clostridium causes include and in Common organisms, A such Risk and infection. immunodeficiency, underlying varicella trauma, or include factors recent surgery deeper demarcated superficially a progress Lesions rapidly on evident raised sharply beyond extends with typically although or disease margins, plane lesions. include necrotizing Warning gas signs to fasciitis pain of out formation evident to due anaerobes. or skin lesions, toxic shock subcutaneous of proportion or appearance, crepitus by surgeon Necrotizing experienced with is and a early is an surgical fasciitis recommended. emergency, consultation in such surgical obtaining imaging gas confirm delay tissues, can the of but presence consultation. tests not Adjunctive imaging resonance as magnetic should Treatment antibiotics, all or intravenous an ceftriaxone, includes vancomycin. aminoglycoside plus clindamycin tissues cefotaxime without debridement of surgical such as or broad-spectrum rapid or with necrotic and

follicles, surrounding predominantly small, S. or reaction refers erythematous tissue. pustules Folliculitis in limited by to located the inflammatory papules with caused and hair dome-shaped in superficial, aureus Furuncles surrounding as deeper inflammatory (boils) with are that intense follicle manifest reaction. nodules infections hair frequently These buttocks. occur on and neck, trunk, axillae, the most follicle hair multiseptate, the infections and is represents A carbuncle abscesses. characterized of deepest loculated by carbuncles and Boils incisional frequently drainage. require be or with days. as as day antibacterial twice or antibacterial Superficial such 7 an such folliculitis a chlorhexidine an solution to topical for 1%, therapy, can clindamycin treated lotion wash 10 applied are or cases, necessary for for carbuncles. furuncles unresponsive and antibiotics Oral

areas pustules; deeper, pruritic nodules tub folliculitis) (hot skin P. folliculitis covered after in hot swimsuit aeruginosa as presents a on by tubs. bathing purple-red predominantly papules; or 8 Folliculitis develops associated treatment. hours resolves after 2 and exposure, symptoms, to 1 without systemic usually 48 weeks to in without

disease) is dermatitis erythema and by tender, streptococcus A well-demarcated, (perianal the 2 anus. perianal streptococcal extending characterized from by cm group is caused Perianal marked defecation, Manifestations painful pruritus sometimes stools. blood-streaked with and include anal differential fissures. The infection, dermatitis, includes diagnosis and diaper candidiasis, pin-worm anal penicillin oral or Treatment is cefuroxime.

StudentConsult.com @ Available

children are in common infections 98-1). Cutaneous fungal (Table risk The lifetime a 20%. dermatophytosis of developing is 10% to estimated inspection usually of by hydroxide culture visual the skin by established of potassium Diagnosis examination is scrapings from and margins (KOH) may or confirmed be fungal lesion. the weeks after capitis 2 whereas Recommended tinea and is resolution; topical antifungal tinea creams usually for cruris, tinea 6 treatment tinea tolnaftate) ketoconazole, tinea oral to treatment. and for are 4 requires (e.g., corporis, pedis, clotrimazole, weeks miconazole, appropriate The fungal diagnosis examination by culture. and of KOH be confirmed onychomycosis should or itraconazole treatment weeks. is for terbinafine Recommended at 12 least

StudentConsult.com Available @

herpetic any virus inoculation site. Primary can occur of the infections mucocutaneous at after in classically sexually and type HSV-1 (HSV-1) classically the HSV-2 may infects causes whereas transmitted infection children Herpes cause (see herpes, and 1 is of 116), though approximately genital simplex common Chapter a 30% gingivostomatitis, as virus genitalia

Wood blue-green tonsurans with Griseofulvin; audouinii, black +KOH, alopecia; itraconazole dot M. hair-shafts; (ringworm) infection fluorescence: canis Trichophyton African culture terbinafine, lamp*; Microsporum common in Prepubertal T. scalp, Americans tonsurans, of audouinii Microsporum

KOH, Potassium hydroxide. examination uses in *Wood ultraviolet completely lamp a room. an darkened source Trichophyton usually fluorescence. has no

gingivostomatitis. can HSV-2 cause see 65. Chapter For manifestations cutaneous neonatal the infection, of HSV

the gingivae lips. of border the vermilion Herpes and the gingivostomatitis involves Herpes labialis fever limited mucous membranes. skin involving or border to is and vermilion sores blisters) the (cold of breath, oropharyngeal lymphadenopathy. pain, vesicular Clinical HSV and gingivostomatitis manifestations high with drooling, typical cervical malaise, include fetid fever, lesions mouth stinging primary

Herpetic base. vesicles fluid-filled quickly erythematous painful erythematous quite 2-to papules lesions on as tothe 4-mm, skin are and that grouped, characteristically begin characteristically progress an a of small, sharply punched-outappearance. with ulcer roofreveals vesicle the demarcated a Removal chickenpox Chapter vesicles from grouped (see distinguishHSV characteristic The 97). pustular, several vesicles encrust. and days,the become Within rupture, staining, antibody or made clinically, fluorescent reaction. or with polymerase culture, chain Diagnosisis viral but hyperpigmentation. may residual there be Scarring uncommon, is latent infection, remains After rootganglia. in nerve primary dorsal the virus About adults to throughout HSV life. of labialis 40% 20% of experience recurrentoral episodes or orlymphadenopathy. same without be Recurrencesoccur of may byprodromal the location and in burning fever preceded tingling symptoms roughly

a occasionally and painful, usually (herpetic localized vesiculopustular of digit, erythematous the Viral of is with a infection pulp paronychia space, whitlow) eruption. distal bite those nails, It children in gingivostomatitis. who thumbs, with suck their occurs and herpetic their who gladiatorum infections. cutaneous players’ and close wrestlers with herpes rugby players cutaneous body other in from acquire Herpes contact occurs eruption), infection disseminated skin herpeticum (e.g., persons HSV a in infection. in with atopic Cutaneous an (Kaposi eczema underlying result varicelliform dermatitis) disorder can cutaneous skin There underlying areas the disorder. may concentrated the body, by hundreds the of usually be over herpetic vesicles affected of in

duration Treatment oral famciclovir infection. and for or primary may disease of recurrent valacyclovir shorten with recurrences. Prophylactic warranted antiviral may with therapy in be those frequent with intravenous eczema, therapy. disseminated are persons disease and Infants, risk at and should severe and immunodeficiency with HSV acyclovir receive increased persons for

StudentConsult.com Available @

papillomaviruses mucous (HPVs),nonenveloped, by keratinocytes. the DNA human viruses are and Warts infect skin double-stranded that membrane caused than serotypes for variation have identified, been different clinical and HPV More the serotypes location accounting with in 100 presentations. 20 and 39, are 58. (high-risk) 52, oncogenic 45, types, to 15 including 35, 16, 31, 18, There 33, 51, with associated well of of cancers. 18 cases as types are and cancer HPV 16 cervical vulvar and 70% vaginal as (low-risk) 54. 2, include 40, nononcogenic types 43, and 42, 44, Common 11, 3, 10, 6, 1, of with infecting the cells. hyperplasia all are the warts epidermal of Regardless serotype, associated

ages. at all occur Warts (71%). (verruca common most types the 1 2, and form are Common warts with HPV vulgaris),associated frequently with prevalence a 4% school-age in They occur 20%. of to children, incubation They period before 1 by or have an month clinical fomites transmitted and direct are by contact approximately presentation. of elbows, fingers, a verrucous on 5-mm) papillated with small common distributed wart knees. The is well-circumscribed, typically toes, and painless, papule a (2to surface the or lips. may ears, nose, They be and the also on found have a exophytic, or narrow warts Filiform that verrucous, base. 2-mm are papules pedunculated 3 the the warts), on the feet soles types and plana) dorsal 10 4-mm on Flat hands, of warts associated are clustered or surface are with of multiple, 2to the HPV (verruca (plantar and face. the flat-topped papules on lesions. friction the on Plantar of be warts may pressure the because effect of and painful 11 associated with HPV acuminata) are warts (condylomata and (90%). 6 Genital the types that penis, They or vulva, flesh-colored, involve plaquelike are in or appearance perineum. sites are and fungating, or hyperpigmented, vagina, lesions filiform, multiple erythematous on the transmitted cases most infection, sexually new Genital are 1 the million warts common annually. with

over resolve Warts self-limited specific spontaneously are typically years without treatment. and and options flat common Treatment acuminata. as condylomata warts as well are available for for salicylic acid, epithelium and Topical flat common disrupt result cure (using of approximately the liquid of preparations patients. nitrogen, 75% therapy) in and or warts laser infected is specific warts Treatment complex, topical and podophyllotoxin treatments include of imiquimod. may or ( www.cdc.gov/std/hpv/default.htm anogenital ) intralesional in immunotherapy and treatment laser with include toxicities. immunotherapy may ablation result interferon; methods Additional significant

annually), penile, is serious anal 12,000 consequence and than vaginal, (more cervical The most vulvar, cancer cancers. new of infection HPV cases to and children 11 of of to but between against age. is A 33 9 and quadrivalent, 31, 12 recommended HPV 26 6, years serotypes may all 11, children years age vaccine at for recombinant given be in cervical to has efficacy cancer. 100% that regimen the three-dose 98% The precedes precancerous dysplasia preventing

small contagiosum host produces replicates nontender, with that in central virus, pearly cells, 4 mm), umbilication. dome-shaped flesh-colored discrete, to poxvirus epithelial a Molluscum (2 or papules pink, as groin, neck. intertriginous and the in such commonly most axillae, Papules occur regions, They on the periocular in occur face the region. rarely or affects with direct toddlers contact individuals. young infected infection through The is and acquired children typically and Spread by occurs autoinoculation. be by molluscum Infection with a contagiosum dermatitis. may surrounding complicated with atopic have immunocompromised lesions. or widespread often persons Severely dermatitis extensive persons

Diagnosis is clinically. made resolvingover recommended. treatment usually specific Lesions and months are self-limited, to is no years, should 0.9% cryotherapy as with such limited therapy Available with reserved removal to or liquid options topical destructive are treatment nitrogen,vesicant disease. be bycurettage, topical and cantharidin, modalities, for extensive

@ StudentConsult.com Available

subsequently until and undergoes puberty atrophy. Lymphoid steadily enlarges progressive tissue to children 8 of in prominent age. aremost years 4 Lymph nodes diameter, for usually mm Normallymph for of15 with which nodes, 5 is epitrochlear mm size nodes, mm and2 undetectable. mm inguinal for are in exceptions node nodes, supraclavicular the 10 and response is of infectious, Lymphadenopathy inflammatory, nodes of to variety in processes. lymph malignant enlargement a andoccurs wide enlargement node regional whereas one involves Generalized of lymphadenopathy groups, lymphadenopathy or noncontiguous group more only. is two lymphnode lymph

or Lymphadenitis acute inflammation chronic nodes. lymph is of regional from when nodes. Acute site and bacteria carried results via a acute are of lymph toxins usually inflammation to lymphadenitis 99-1 lymphadenopathy Numerous cause 99-2). and lymphadenitis and infections (Tables inguinal also Causes 116). (see lymphadenopathy regional include of infections Chapter transmitted sexually lymphadenitis skin defines lymphocutaneous Regional characteristic associated site inoculation syndromes. at the lesion a of various with is an that lymphatic bacterial by streptococci. inflammation as presents A of Staphylococcus usually caused acute and Lymphangitis infection, group subcutaneous an aureus channels

children with most group by is viruses, 103), associated Cervical and (see A commonly lymphadenitis (EBV). Epstein-Barr lymphadenitis common among most and the respiratory is streptococcus regional virus caused pharyngitis Chapter mycobacteria. cervical of and causes infectious include henselae common Bartonella lymphadenitis disease) Other (cat-scratch nontuberculous

syndrome is or generalized cause and lymphadenopathy, fatigue characterized malaise, the cervical of fever, a by mononucleosis, and infectious pharyngitis. primary tonsillitis, clinical EBV infects is herpesvirus of member by lymphocytes secretions. salivary the spread EBV, and family, a B cell primary infection clinically the is that episomes EBV maintained infection, in resting multiple lifelong nucleus lymphocytes remains and B in of latently inapparent. establishes After with shed persons EBV intermittently, Most approximately

tularemia) tularensis F. (ulceroglandular

disease) (cat-scratch B. henselae

Cutaneous (Coccidioides (Corynebacterium capsulatum) pestis Y. diphtherial) Cutaneous coccidioidomycosis histoplasmosis Nocardia diphtheria (Histoplasma (nocardiosis) immitis) Cutaneous (plague)

any sporotrichosis at healthy shedding Cutaneous (S. individuals Cutaneous schenckii) given leishmaniasis 20% of time. EBV syndrome, gondii, Toxoplasma an (HIV) lymphadenopathy. human infection, virus, with virus immunodeficiency known cause syndrome virus, (CMV), B acute adenoviruses, and mononucleosis-like can hepatitis C initial infectious retroviral Cytomegalovirus as hepatitis

small, a of is B. stain. cause bacillus henselae, disease The gram-negative stains with that cat-scratch silver pleomorphic, Warthin-Starry in age henselae and likely bacteremia kittens harbor B. of are to the asymptomatic apparently causes cats, year more organism. 1 under transmitted henselae which may be minor. scratches, bites humans to B. by is and causes infection and with hepatis peliosis B. angiomatosis (see henselae in persons bacillary 125). HIV also Chapter

mycobacteria soil, in are vegetation, ubiquitous Nontuberculous water. and dust, children Mycobacterium avium commonly species lymphadenitis M. includes complex, causing in

scrofulaceum, and kansasii. M. M. uncommonly causes M. cervical tuberculosis lymphadenitis.

A complication as a the 103). infection cervical pharyngitis of parallels lymphadenitis streptococcal incidence of (see streptococcal Chapter Acute group are Many cases by caused

S. aureus. most who infections children, may be EBV young or occurring often with are symptomatic. ubiquitous, asymptomatic CMV mildly only and in products; factors causes persons or be of especially medications. of with other undercooked history; history; by Risk history; sexual tuberculosis; animals; food to surgical contact for meat may and travel exposure history, lymphadenopathy specific and dairy past infected medical unpasteurized ingestion with preceding and current indicated trauma;

their firmness, tenderness, noted, of and exact and involved location characteristics, detailed number the and adjacent measurement be tissues. of to nodes fluctuance, size, The should shape, including adherence mobility, warmth, consistency, signs other disease, and enlargement, illness, disease, Important absence findings lesions, dental systemic presence skin or oropharyngeal nodal including of or other any skin and of include lesions. hepatosplenomegaly ocular

characterized chain is tenderness. pharyngitis minimal lymph small Acute in lymphadenopathy associated to the rubbery by nodes with moderate cervical anterior and cervical with shows and frequently erythema moderate by with warmth caused tenderness. to skin or A lymphadenitis, cervical overlying aureus S. the group of exquisite Suppurative streptococcus,

lymphadenopathy. and of fever, is mononucleosis characteristic triad The pharyngitis, infectious EBV tonsils with pharyngeal shows petechiae. enlarged The exudate sometimes, and, and pharynx anenanthem commonly and the andsubmandibular inguinal ismost involvesaxillary Lymphadenopathy posterior less nodes. in cervical prominent and nodes lymph lymph and anterior of 5% in 20%, and to 10% hepatomegaly cases, to or findings rash in in Other includesplenomegaly 50% urticarial 15%. maculopapular diffuse,erythematous patients of develops A approximately with in treated 80% mononucleosis amoxicillin. rash fever often often and presents more with only. pharyngitis mononucleosis-like illness it has EBV infection, by Compared infectious CMV minimal with caused prominentsplenomegaly; is manifestation lymphadenopathy, acquired toxoplasmosis asymptomaticcervical but posterior approximately without mostcommon of significantfever. lymphadenopathy fatigue, 10% cervical chronic usually develop of The casesof toxoplasmosis and

or followed disease cutaneous presents at with bacterial lymphadenopathy site regional Cat-scratch of nodes. by granuloma papule inoculation, a of the thedraining typically conjunctival of are The in 10% approximately tender, cases. with nodes suppuration may 1 Lymphadenopathy to persist months. 4 syndrome,hepatic Less include endocarditis, ofcat-scratch features lesions, polyneuritis,and encephalitis, granulomas, transverse myelitis. common (Parinaud) disease nodosum, or splenic osteolytic oculoglandular erythema

preauricular by submandibular, mycobacteria caused is is and nontuberculous more the unilateral common toddlers. in cervical, in usually or Lymphadenitis nodes The painless time. but and initially, drain firm soften, rupture, and are nodes gradually over relatively violaceous discoloration warmth. skin The is a circumscribed, overlying reaction may local without develop and Fever and minimal or systemic absent. symptoms are

inflammatory include blood Initial tests count lymphadenopathy regional laboratory and markers. a of complete lymphocytosis thrombocytopenia characterized common. by and are Infectious elevated with is enzymes atypical lymphocytes; hepatic mononucleosis

obtained. exudates lesions Cultures should infected of and skin tonsillar be lymphadenitis. the oropharynx A of group from streptococci streptococcal cervical but suggests, confirm, does Isolation not blood A children bacteremia. from and be signs symptoms should of with systemic obtained culture

appropriate findings. should obtained henselae for Serologic for B. are if EBV be there and testing test diagnosis is antigen of infection for antiviral most IgM The capsid reliable the acute EBV (Fig. 99-1). infectious Heterophil reliably with younger also in than but children positive is not years is antibody 4 mononucleosis. diagnostic

workup and findings. guided is the Extended diagnostic the by examination lymphadenopathy in physical risk for factors specific history antistreptolysin histoplasmosis, Brucella, be Chest may serologic O for and tularemia, toxoplasmosis, throat CMV, indicated. culture, and tests coccidioidomycosis syphilis, radiograph, titer, evaluation specimens Chapter inguinal be with should Genital regional (see tract obtained lymphadenopathy 116). and be with or atypical for standard positive can infection. skin may the interferon performed be release Screening using test an both gamma tuberculin assay; tuberculosis mycobacterial

Aspiration or antibiotic inflamed, lymph cervical acutely responding in those for 3 not fluctuant especially is larger diameter nodes, indicated treatment. than to cm mass is may suppurative or Ultrasound the abscess help formation. solid, in oflymphadenopathy extent with defining establishing tomography whether and cystic, orcomputed the and andcultured and mycobacteria. anaerobic aerobic for examined acid-fast Gram bacteria fluctuantlesions from and stains Pus by should be and Biopsy matted, other firm, nontender should is nodes suspectedbecause performed systemicfindings. lymphoma of if be

A lymphadenopathy empirical entire streptococcus, possible. performed, persists presumed should remains antibiotic diagnosis for and excisional and uncertain node therapy biopsy group aureus of S. be if despite the If the mycobacterial is nontuberculous for This curative lymphadenitis. material (B. Warthin-Starry silver submitted as acid-Schiff, silver acid-fast, Gram, well Biopsy and stains. be should henselae), Giemsa, periodic for histopathology methenamine as performed. aerobic be mycobacteria, fungi anaerobic should and and bacteria, Cultures for

1:320 1:80 1:160 1:40

development in infectious virus ous patients The with Figure antibodies to of vari-1:20 mononucleosis. 99-1 antigens Epstein-Barr reciprocals geometric titers expressed as mean dilution. The values serum of are the viral significant is of IgM to differences (VCA) The because according capsid antigen patient. the 1:10 age to noted divided the of the response Ench Jenson HB, Epstein-Barr virus. Y: (From Manual p Hamilton Immunology, 2006, for Clinical 640.) DC, Washington RG, Laboratory 7, Press, of In NR, American B: ed Detrick Society Microbiology Rose

and include generalized Noninfectious cervical and and especially diagnosis lupuserythematosus; and/or systemic phenytoin of other medications, arthritis; lymphadenopathy and isoniazid, serum medications, swelling for cysts, sarcoidosis, congenital drugreactions, causes idiopathic adverse acquired antiepileptic sickness other benign Kawasakidisease, differential neoplasms, pyrimethamine. lymphadenopathy antithyroid with juvenile and malignancies.The and allopurinol, includes nodes painless, Leukemia, neuroblastoma firm 155 occasionally (see areusually have matted, and lymph and that 156). lymphoma, and uninflamed, may Chapters pharyngitis, occasional periodic A fever recurrent and fever, cause (seeChapter of lymphadenitis is and syndrome cervical 103). stomatitis, an of aphthous adenitis

symptoms. lymphadenopathy and size severity and depends lymphadenitis patient age, of associated the and findings, node acute of systemic on Management location, acute usually children In therapy 3 2 to cases within regress cervical inflammation, most weeks. without signs require of other lymphadenopathy, and no of specific lymphadenitis further lymphadenopathy Progression development requires or evaluation. generalized of to

cervical dependson The lymphadenitis underlying etiology. treatment specific the of targeting treatment Empirical

first-generationcephalosporin or includes streptococcus and group cefazolin). a A aureus penicillin S. oxacillin) penicillinase-resistant (e.g., (e.g., 48 for antibiotics, suppurative For and further a indication is the S. need if therapy or an antibiotic and patients to community-acquired within response hypersensitivity clinical is empirical 72 appropriate.Response clindamycin hours is obviates of for laboratory excisionalbiopsy methicillin-resistant for lymphadenitis further culture. to suspected, β-lactam evaluation.Absence cervical possible evaluation to with aureus

There no infectious mononucleosis. is for treatment specific to disease treatment require 4 usually without lymphadenopathy months because not in resolves 2 Cat-scratch does the sequelae. days resolution no days. at Azithromycin benefit hasten 90 at reduces but is node 30 size evident and may indicated for suppurative Aspiration is nodes. lymphadenitis The is treatment nontuberculous excision. by of cervical caused complete recommended mycobacteria surgical excise completely, if are Chapter M. drugs chemotherapy there inability or months antituberculous of is (see recurrence which nodes is identified, or if requires Antimycobacterial 124). necessary tuberculosis 6 to only infected

excellent A prognosis. have S. acute and respond Most and to an by aureus treatment infections group caused streptococcus andbacteremia as Complications abscess may formation, cellulitis, such occur. in formation antibiotictherapy. and appropriate incision with Abscess treated is with drainage conjunction

several wane may weeks Infectious resolves and and 2 wax 4 weeks,but in fatigue malaise mononucleosis for tomonths. usually to the complicationsduring EBV is numerous also illness. associated with acute syndrome. Neurologic Guillain-Barre meningitis Bell includeseizures, transversemyelitis, aseptic encephalitis, complications palsy, and syndrome, hemolytic anemia, Coombs-positive antibody-mediated rarely, aplastic complications hemophagocyticsyndrome, include thrombocytopenia, Hematologic anemia. and, resulting rare. from Corticosteroids and respiratory responds is hemolytic very thrombocytopenia, for complications.Splenic hypertrophy, and rupture which rapidly, anemia, tonsillar neurologic for havebeen used compromise as of X-linked dysgammaglobulinemia. or located the region, progresses Xq25 results in infection EBV lymphoproliferative fulminant gene which disease, tomalignant from infectiousmononucleosis disease with mutation manifests a the and lymphoproliferative primary SH2D1A

with life, are in EBV persists attributed as intermittent herpesviruses, but for other symptoms immunocompetent infection, to hosts. no reactivation Burkitt EBV in with and Hodgkin associated acquired those syndrome leiomyosarcoma in disease, immunodeficiency posttransplant EBV in and carcinoma; (AIDS). patients nasopharyngeal is persons; lymphoproliferative lymphoma; disease; immunocompromised causally especially with

excellent nontuberculous has an mycobacteria by caused Lymphadenitis prognosis. nontuberculous cases. of in caused excision by mycobacteria curative is lymphadenitis >97% of Surgical cervical

incidence infections other scalp. pharyngitis, as regional disease, the suppurative face impetigo, and dental such media, incidence streptococcal and of of the reflects The otitis predisposing conditions, involving lymphadenitis no to lymphadenitis nontuberculous mycobacteria. caused by prevent There are guidelines

can be inflammation rarely, leptomeninges, caused by Meningitis, viruses, of bacteria, or, fungi. the (brain infections other with anti-inflammatory chemical fluid meningitis exposure autoimmune other viral cultures but refers infectious The diseases. and bacterial disorders, abscess, (Lyme abscess, (CSF) tuberculosis), meningitis immunoglobulin), to (nonsteroidal disease, parameningeal aseptic meningitis, be principally term drugs, sinus syphilis, empyema), may negative with organisms epidural seen cerebrospinal venous intravenous

availability and bacterial Streptococcus current influenzae, Neisseria meningitidis. commonly causing Haemophilus before (Table the conjugate meningitis vaccines organisms 100-1) were of pneumoniae, The United S. introduction meningitis of influenzae and b vaccines. rates the the In H. the targeted substantially pneumoniae declined have after States, type of sepsis (see are Chapter neonatal neonatal same The meningitis 65). causing as causing bacteria those the neurosurgery penetrating head Staphylococcal trauma. meningitis primarily after occurs or

complicated antibiotic of persist. CSF although bacterial treatment meningitis the before other meningitis puncture, which suggestive infection bacterial cultures, in to treated findings refers result Partially by may lumbar negative CSF etiology by the The sometimes chain can confirmed be of reaction CSF. polymerase

is meningitis by principally Viral caused enteroviruses andparechoviruses. persist weeks. Fecal excretion for transmission several and are and continuous the Nile,California parechoviruses, principal and (St. ofmeningoencephalitis are arboviruses LaCrosse, viruses) 101). (see Chapter West Enteroviruses, Louis, causes encephalitis include cytomegalovirus, lymphocytic virus,and herpes meningitis virus, Epstein-Barrvirus, virus choriomeningitis immunodeficiency simplex Other (HIV). viruses thatcause human of fungi (Cryptococcus, virus tuberculosis, causes children.Less common frequent unvaccinated meningitis Mumps viral include (cat-scratch Borrelia cause meningitis Toxoplasma, Bartonella burgdorferi isa of henselae disease), (Lyme in disease),Mycobacterium

and and and Coccidioides), Histoplasma, parasites(Angiostrongylus fowleri, cantonensis, Naegleria Blastomycosis, Acanthamoeba).

1 children The under incidence year meningitis age. highest of of among is bacterial Natives, Americans, in in susceptibility. genetic rates suggesting are Extremely that factors found role Australian Alaskan Native a high aboriginals, play and or immunodeficiencies, occurs and care Other acquired in include day risk congenital such disease, college as or factors some and such anatomic centers, crowding hemoglobinopathies dormitories. sickle asplenia, as households, military functional cell or resulting skull meningitis, caused congenital the following by S. (fistula), a or especially that fracture, anomaly risk increases CSF leak A pneumoniae. from basilar of

and cause temperate in climates. and fall during peaks Enteroviruses meningitis parechoviruses with summer young low socioeconomic groups, persons. and more are immunocompromised These prevalent children, infections among distribution seasonal prevalence meningitis arthropod of arboviral the of by determined and geographic activity vectors. is (mosquito) The fall. and States, infections most United during arboviral the the occur In summer

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Preceding are tract symptoms upper respiratory common. nausea, typical is S. of of pneumoniae and lethargy, inflammation meningeal onset rigidity, include headache, N. irritability, meningitidis.Indications and photophobia, vomiting. nuchal Rapid present. is Fever usually b, nontypable a, and Brudzinski f, c, d, and types Kernig e,

(/µL) Various <4; CONDITION Findings Normal 20–45 30%–40% Cerebrospinal mm Disorders >50% Central 1%–3% 60%–70% lymphocytes, of PRESSURE Fluid serum LEUKOCYTES Table (CSF) GLUCOSE 50–180 COMMENTS monocytes, (mg/dL) PROTEIN glucose neutrophils 100-2 System (mg/dL) H2O in Nervous

Herpes polymerase tuberculin chain IGRA, leukocytes; skin reaction; release gamma test. HSV, interferon simplex tuberculosis; polymorphonuclear assay virus; TST, PMNs, PCR, for

in irritation are months. meningeal 12 of often than positive older signs children restlessness, minimal feeding infants, depressed and signs may poor of with mental meningeal only status, In irritability, be inflammation present. young and seizures, neurologic purpuric occur. sepsis, petechial may coma arthralgia, Focal signs, myalgia, lesions, or shock, vomiting; include diplopia, bulging of pressure fontanelle headache, a in present may intracranial Symptoms increased infants. be and of palsy, increased nerve hypertension, with and Ptosis, signs pressure apnea anisocoria, sixth intracranial herniation. are with bradycardia brain is occlusion sinuses, empyema, there abscess. is Papilledema of the unless uncommon, brain venous or subdural

puncture there is than If lumbar a unless bacterial of the increased fontanelle. evidence meningitis instability intracranial or risk bulging of cardiovascular performed suspected, shouldbe ofherniation), other (because a pressure is of count, stain cell includes Gram levels, and white CSF 100-2). examination Routine blood differential, glucose proteinand a (Table be bacteria and, viruses, for andmycobacteria. fungi, CSF should appropriate, when cultured culture. rapid enteroviruses, The virus;it is is chain diagnose and reaction and used simplex viral herpes parechoviruses, polymerase sensitive than to more leukocytosis in blood positive common, are meningitis. cultures 90%of of Peripheral bacterial is cases and mayconfirm encephalitis (see electroencephalogram 101). An Chapter component an

intracranial diseases, infectious signs the disorders and hemorrhage, including or of causes irritation Many malignancies. may meningitis encephalitis, rheumatic and meningeal increased show pressure, of cerebral intracranial can are edema, abscess of or hemorrhage, brain vasculitis. with or associated sequelae infarction meningitis, Seizures be the and or encephalitis,

of ampicillin ceftriaxone (Table bacterial without by maintenance or cerebral antibiotics Treatment gentamicin meningitis of days) systemic plus ampicillin of Ceftazidime and on sterilization CSF adequate and (0–28 with 100–3) gentamicin focuses the plus perfusion. Due to increasing

vancomycin S. resistance plus available. penicillin be until testing is to empirical susceptibility and (or ceftriaxone) cefotaxime antibiotic cephalosporins, administered pneumoniae should treat to are also adequate or Cefotaxime ceftriaxone

and H. influenzae. meningitidis N. younger of the ampicillin is of monocytogenes. 2 than to infants Listeria age, added months possibility cover For for N. of 10 S. treatment H. and for 10 to for 7 meningitidis, influenzae, days pneumoniae. is to days Duration 7 to 5 14 days

resulting loss mg/kg diminishes 0.8 of to deficits to dose daily from two concurrently for influenzae divided therapy doses just first 2 Dexamethasone incidence as three adjunctive antibiotics, initiated with the of meningitis. the or days), neurologic before in hearing and H. (0.6 significantly studies the do in in not hospital world. developed to Adjuvant steroids stay or appear decrease mortality

syndrome involves pressure, coagulation, coma. seizures, intracranial shock, disseminated and (SIADH), increased apnea, intravascular hormone of of antidiuretic Supportive arrhythmias, therapy treatment inappropriate dehydration, must cerebral maintained edema. be in cerebral perfusion presence Adequate of the

Available @ StudentConsult.com

may meningitis administration. output urine SIADH necessitates fluid complicate monitoring and and of commonly pneumoniae H. effusions imaging magnetic meningitis. subdural resonance S. or tomography with Computed and detects influenzae drainage are signs. with do and asymptomatic associated neurologic pressure increased intracranial Most focal and effusions unless not sterile or necessitate or effusions, nosocomial or infection. complex-mediated fever to is be Persistent joint infective common may related treatment immune treatment during drug or thrombophlebitis, but also fever, pericardial has improved those A considered the received response. be monitor ability hours and puncture should for adjunct 48 clinical or worsened with whose lumbar therapy steroids, of condition not those which has repeat can who after interfere for to

the for mortality therapy, appropriate bacterial 25% meningitis antibiotic children for is rate with in Even significant:

and meningitidis, H. S. N. pneumoniae, 8% influenzae. for 15% for 35% blindness, or including particularly pneumococcal Of deafness, paresis, survivors, disabilities, have infection, seizures, hydrocephalus. ataxia, after sequelae, learning before should patients with evaluation meningitis at hearing have discharge All and follow-up. a age, before visible effective immunocompromised therapy, seizures, the associated with presence on prognosis CSF illness antibiotic at CSF in stain, of low long absent and cell status. young duration white blood is coma of shock, Poor count Gram or bacteria presentation,

possibly 14 to or from organisms. resistant occur parameningeal foci treatment, may after 3 relapse Rarely days or to indicate defect anatomic immunologic predisposes an patient may Recurrence meningitis. the that underlying

against recommended months immunizations and are 2 children H. for pneumoniae of influenzae beginning at Routine age. S. are highly college personnel, travelers (serotypes 2 freshmen, Y, Chapter areas C, A, down licensed 94), are for vaccines and W-135) Quadrivalent age. adolescents, N. and military and to of to against years meningitidis (see recommended endemic ciprofloxacin, decrease index cases with ceftriaxone rifampin, eradicate N. state both is or carrier to the transmission or for with Chemoprophylaxis meningitidis and recommended

their H. close influenzae and contacts. for

inflammatory brain the cerebral to Encephalitis of is leading an parenchyma dysfunction. process postinfectious It acute process encephalomyelitis, but a chronic viral may or a slow degenerative infection. usually be disease, a is an be Encephalitis localized. may or diffuse that after several (1) direct brain mechanisms: the of infection central or the apparent (2) of the by begins of nervous days the one system response manifestations of appearance Organisms usually infection. in an parenchyma extraneural two cause encephalitis immune-mediated

acute Viruses encephalitis (Table of 101-1). are causes principal the infectious common arboviruses, and most causes in the of The are States viral enteroviruses, encephalitis the herpesviruses. United virus subacute and illness cause is in more (HIV) but, is febrile in onset of 125). Chapter adolescents acute important an insidious as and encephalitis (see children commonly, present Human immunodeficiency an may

(cat-scratch pneumoniae +++ ++ (Lyme burgdorferi immunodeficiency rickettsii LaCrosse, viruses encephalitis St. 6, Mycoplasma Nile Rickettsia + West + + + + + virus 7) Human Epstein-Barr henselae equine Herpes disease) Enterovirus (especially Louis, + Arthropod-borne virus, and virus ++ simplex Bartonella and (HSV viruses) Adenovirus 1, parechovirus disease) Borrelia viruses California,

SS: from Jr, Adapted disseminated necrotizing Willoughby Long acute and Encephalitis, encephalopathy. RE encephalomyelitis, meningoencephalitis, acute 2008, In Diseases, SS, revised 3, Pickering CG Pediatric Philadelphia, Long of Prober Infectious and Principles ed Practice : LK, reprint,

Saunders.

subacute (e.g., virus), JC measles, disease). and encephalitis Creutzfeldt-Jakob of causes diseases slow include (e.g., prion-associated Other viruses toxic, neoplastic metabolic, from Encephalitis result and disorders. also may

signs is abrupt multiple disorder cord. development of disseminated the the neurologic and of Acute brain to inflammatory, related an (ADEM) encephalomyelitis demyelinating spinal (such vaccinations sclerosis measles resembles follows infections and or ADEM clinically. viral chickenpox) and childhood as multiple

occur from or enteroviral of that and encephalitis fall, cases in early to midsummer sporadic appear clusters Arboviral although the epidemics enteroviral characteristically year. occur encephalitides throughout and throughout agents other additional Herpesviruses year. for cases account the infectious sporadic

areas, to the reflecting to geographic and certain reservoir tend mosquito vector. limited Arboviruses be United virus encephalitis birds. Statesin the St. Louis throughout is present spread and carried by common mosquitoes. Midwest, in California is by encephalitis rodents virus, the Coast equine encephalitis birds. virus to in East throughout Easternequine encephalitis and virus theMidwest is West limited is the in present birds.Western inNorth worldwide outbreaks causes encephalitis and America. occurs of summer virus infection Nile West isthe birds vector the species.A virus. The nature broad WestNile from pipiens range a of can virus Culex as major principal West isolatedin the serves variety reservoir Culex organism and for be Nile Aedes of for mosquito, wide but

of of is as symptoms preceded prodrome a usually such days encephalitis infectious sore several nonspecific Acute by

complaints behavioral symptoms headache, StudentConsult.com of and changes, fever, followed throat, and abdominal lethargy, neurologic progressive @ Available characteristic the by deficits. common Seizures are at presentation. transverse cell coma, disease, a neuropathy. complications peripheral or with and as encephalitis fulminant rash horn severe also anterior such maculopapular have Children myelitis, may

spectrum illness of produces encephalitis from West Nile a broad asymptomatic death. infection to with age. advancing increases of Severity disease asymptomatic. Most are children include conjunctivitis. symptoms gastrointestinal mild, rash, fever, Typical nonspecific lymphadenopathy, illness and complaints, by arthralgias, extraneurologic characterized

characteristic by evidence by and presumptively electroencephalogram fluid (CSF)analysis, diagnosis imagingtechniques. and established cerebrospinal epidemiology findings, presenceof infection (EEG), brain typical The the of neurologic signs, is hypoglycemia, vascular hypertension, from Reye andfrom parasites diseases Encephalitis infections diseases, disorders, drugs, as result metabolic such (encephalopathy), Rickettsia, syndrome, collagen including many Mycoplasma, noninfectious may andmalignancies. withbacteria, and fungi,

glucose viral in slight normal and the elevation diagnosis of protein a by The lymphocytic of encephalitis is typically examination level. pleocytosis, shows CSF, which content, supported CSF The be occasionally normal. may and carcinomatosis. protein of Extreme elevations glucose tuberculosis, suggest meningeal infection, cryptococcal of reductions or be test the shows The and slow activity, wave changes present. is definitive although EEG focal may diffuse, may may or swelling cerebral normal the be or diffuse studies focal show of abnormalities. Neuroimaging parenchyma EEG temporal simplex focus on feature the brain of herpes virus imaging (HSV) characteristic lobe or is A infection.

West Lyme obtained cat-scratch disease. Mycoplasma virus, factors), disease, for indicated should the pneumoniae, Serologic virus, studies patient (including Nile Epstein-Barr if be by and arboviruses risk by should common pathogens for as performed social, indicated testing history. medical less be the travel, Additional serologic or the cases the of most viral virus is to from difficult isolate CSF. encephalitis, In HSV, West available other should and Polymerase tests virus, Nile reaction for are enteroviruses, chain and viruses sent. be and nasopharyngeal Viral obtained. also of cultures may a swab stool be reaction the with use cases. remains one assays, Even extensive cause and undetermined testing of the encephalitis third of in of chain polymerase

biopsy is performed in patients neurologic with be findings. seldom focal may Brain useful but remains obscure. improvement with patients no diagnosis appropriate the clinical severe if who be show It for encephalopathy may be culture by and and biopsy may or (Creutzfeldt-Jakob routinely encephalitis Rabies diseases disease of kuru) pathologic examination brain tissue. diagnosed prion-related vasculopathies system central identify nervous and helpful biopsy and and enterovirus Brain primary particularly malignancies. tuberculosis, infections, fungal be infections, noninfectious may arbovirus to illnesses,

varicella-zoster virus, viral exception HSV, no of the for there therapy HIV, With encephalitis. and cytomegalovirus, specific is adequate is care pressure perfusion requires and when aggressive seizures, and, detection for monitoring airway supportive or facilitate and pressure. Management of abnormalities, and increased therapy of to intensive intracranial unit of timely protection maintenance admission frequently reduction electrolyte necessary, cerebral

virus andvaricella-zoster infections. the treatment Intravenous is HSV acyclovir of for choice infection is with Cytomegalovirus ganciclovir. treated antiretroviral HIV be treated of may infections agents. combination a with may disease pneumoniae azithromycin, mycoplasmal erythromycin, M. although be or treatingencephalitis associated with doxycycline, is clarithromycin, value clinical treated with uncertain. the infections of

ADEM fewer it has treated supportive severe ADEM high-dose or (which improved milder corticosteroids is been improved measles reflects but care. caused of recognized by magnetic intravenous with the whether corticosteroids, cases with causes imaging, by cases ADEM), resonance outcome unclear

several Among 2 3 over weeks. days to to usually symptoms survivors, resolve death sequelae, without occur of with cases (St. infections) States forms West infectious patients epidemic can substantial enterovirus virtually most United or neurotropic and Although these severe to leading of California, viruses. the encephalitis Louis, neurologic recover in with any Nile, sequelae fully the being recover from patients hospital. before two About of thirds discharged or spasticity, show residua, and weakness, paresis remainder including recurrent significant The impairment, seizures. clinically cognitive ataxia, hospital patients at recover gradually or of with their the of time discharge some of all encephalitis infectious function. neurologic sequelae Most The overall for infectious approximately 5%. encephalitis is mortality

Disease a with by associated M. equine pneumoniae caused or is prognosis. HSV, encephalitis, Eastern worse or with The year be coma. than may prognosis of worse children in for age encephalitis younger 1 with exceptions, very Rabies, fatal. is rare

within ADEM clinical or Relapses usually 14%, of same signs. new with the occur 1 year in onset sclerosis represent ADEM of childhood. of may multiple in Recurrences

to encephalitis (see tick-borne 122). remove for to ticks Chapter carefully arboviral The is or exposures prevention avoid and mos-quito-borne best no States United except are for the for of There or prevention in vaccines in arboviral the use infection poliomyelitis. for enteroviruses measures are for 65). mothers HSV (see cesarean Chapter except lesions no section encephalitis specific preventive genital with for active There for be preexposure Rabies or can by prevented vaccination. postexposure be vaccination. can prevented by Influenza use encephalitis of influenza of compounds fever can prevented by children avoiding of vaccines. aspirin for influenza as use aspirin-containing varicella well Reye with use be and syndrome as or

is with rhinorrhea and obstruction, symptoms mild The fever, and no or a cold common prominent infection nasal manifestations. systemic absent viral of to correctly rhinosinusitis. termed often It rhinitis is as mucosa and involves is referred more sinus but usually the

less The are viruses rhinoviruses and, primarily associated commonly, with coronaviruses. colds Other cold viruses commonly, cause respiratory less symptoms adenoviruses. and, syncytial and include virus parainfluenza, influenza, that common inflammatory infection by response of of cells mucosal Viral an epithelium cytokines. acute and release nasal inflammatory infiltration with causes many the for inflammatory The partly responsible of symptoms. is response

incidence through seasonal from spring, and occur reflecting late fall months. year viral confined pathogens habitation the throughout during early prevalence of Colds peak the colder with 7 each colds colds each 6 at Young year. average to have year, children to 15% and least 10% children of an 12 of have year age, to colds adulthood. decreases annual The number of each two with colds by to three only. for the year during home 50% cared at care life colds Children out-of-home than more in have day first of children care. in day This subsequent during difference diminishes years

StudentConsult.com Available @

Common after typically symptoms nasal to 3 or days infection include cold develop nonproductive sore and throat, scratchy viral and 1 obstruction, rhinorrhea, occasional cough. 10% persist weeks. week, 2 about last 1 usually although Colds nasal indicative is of There change often the bacterial color secretions, which of not a sinusitis is or superinfection. or consistency in the turbinates. Examination may nasal of nasal erythematous swollen, mucosa reveal

Laboratory helpful. studies are often not allergic useful smear A for nasal (see be evaluation for the rhinitis may Chapter 79). in eosinophils

pertussis, body discharge), includes allergic cold differential of nasal The sinusitis, diagnosis nasopharyngitis. streptococcal rhinitis, foreign common (especially the and unilateral with turbinate discharge, in and nasal shiners, is edematous, and manifestations, nasal nasal Allergic as of crease fever, rhinitis polyps, pale, characterized allergic on mucosa. nasal other by such the a the transverse bridge, eosinophils absence snuffles), Rare or congenital stenosis, malignancy, granulomatosis. are (with tumor, fluid cerebrospinal fistula, rhinorrhea and causes of diphtheria, Wegener nasopharyngeal syphilis choanal atresia

for cold. There specific common therapy is no the beneficial. therapy is not Antibacterial of therapies. Management consists symptomatic are 6 and adverse of benefits. years for decongestants, antihistamine-decongestants not than younger Antihistamines, combination recommended effects children of and lack because age of is of and with the first be colds, days with seen illness in treated can few antipyretic fever medications. Low-grade particularly not have Cough shown suppressants to been expectorants and be beneficial. inhalation than no effective of Vitamin and are warm, placebo. humidified air more C The of inconsistent. or has lozenges zinc benefit sprays been

of most a is common 20% and with complication cold media 5% (see the children Chapter Otitis to occursin 105). involvement or beconsidered sinusitis, severe should improvement Othercomplications or orfacial include 14 cough if bacterial days which swelling 104). to facial such pain, at signsof Chapter sinus least daytime fever, as for develop, persists without if rhinorrhea 10 (see inappropriate may asthma treatment. in result antibiotic exacerbation of and lead Colds to may

infected colds hand and contact for of are avoiding proven good There washing than with methods other persons. prevention no has for vitamin significant C cold No the or been Echinacea confirmed. of effect prevention common of

A (Table anaerobes. streptococci agents (Streptococcus cause 103-1).Group facultative are Many are that gram-positive, cocci pyogenes) nonmotile infectious can pharyngitis are surrounding to the blood of 2 diameter)and zone mm small hemolysis. colonies agar, β (1 (clear) in have Onsheep a (gram-negative pharyngitis include Francisella less and organisms rod), with (β-hemolytic, (also associated cause often β-hemolytic), Other Arcanobacterium tularensis of coccobacillus streptococcus haemolyticum C gram-positive bacterial group tularemia). and manifestations. with associated is Chlamydophila mild is also but associated may strain distinguishing pneumoniae respiratory cause sore lower TWAR, without atypical pneumoniae, throat.Mycoplasma pneumoniaand disease with causes clinical pharyngitis pharyngitis, with cultured from influenzae, unclear. frequently Haemophilus is and role pharyngitis including but causing their aureus, of bacteria, children Streptococcus in Other throats pneumoniae,are Staphylococcus the

cause Many viruses acute pharyngitis. cough. as primarily others a likely more pharyngitis an rhinorrhea to such are that more or as are than cause other whereas such minor other pharyngitis viruses, to symptom, viruses, cause likely symptoms, features Some such prominent of adenoviruses, rhinoviruses, as as as illness part a pharyngitis. primary enteroviruses infection herpes (herpangina), Epstein-Barr human and produce (HIV) virus, virus simplex virus, immunodeficiency also

in one of throat is the primary respiratory symptom approximately upper illnesses. Sore third tract children age, 2 is school-age Streptococcal and in the to of then uncommon adolescence increases relatively before 3 declines adulthood. but incidence years late in and young pharyngitis occurs in peak the temperate throughout climates, winter during and the early with pharyngitis Streptococcal year spring. a The classmates. siblings spreads to illness often and infections winter close spread spring. an infected contact Viral and via and person generally peak during with

Available StudentConsult.com @

inflammation and fever. sore throat, dysphagia, Pharyngeal causes cough, often tonsillopharyngitis term tonsils If tonsillitis prominent, is the or of involvement the is used.

1988. of Top ambulatory sore Curr Management JO, Dis GF, a Clin Hendley Jr: throat, Hayden Infect JM Adapted patient 9:62–75, Gwaltney the with from

fever. with of The prominent onset is associated moderate sore rapid and and pharyngitis to often high throat streptococcal and vomiting, nausea, Headache, abdominal frequent. pain are florid red. a the In pharynx case, is typical, distinctly covered The with a tonsils and yellow, are exudate. enlarged blood-tinged palate soft There petechiae may the posterior on pharynx. and be or doughnut-shapedlesions The may stippled, uvula and red, be swollen. enlarged Anterior nodes and lymph tender cervical are touch. to however, without with children, or cervical Many exudate present lymphadenitis. tonsillar pharyngeal erythema only mild hoarseness, coryza, suggest or etiology. a viral ulcerations cough, Conjunctivitis, of cannot The features diagnosis streptococcal pharyngitis made be on clinical alone.

exhibit patients goose a flesh. the addition of stigmata the some and to tongue, erythematous and pallor, rash circumoral that fever, feeling sore In has throat of macular-papular scarlet strawberry fever: diffuse fine tongue has and through strawberry red coating, white a project but lingual coating, The this a initially later producing edematous white papillae tongue. resulting tongue strawberry beefy with red the papillae. coating white the red When prominent peels off, is Patients may present with infected with haemoyticum findings. A. similar

often diarrhea. Compared include and classic viral rhinorrhea, streptococcal is cough, and symptoms of typically with gradual, more pharyngitis the onset more pharyngitis, and or absent myalgia whereas present Many nasal are symptoms tract respiratory and signs, as such of with fever, mild. upper systemic obstruction, infections rhinorrhea and symptoms

of simplex Chapter herpes virus-1 Gingivostomatitis (see characteristic 65). is high an headache, onset myalgia, drooling, dysphagia. throat,and enteroviral poor conjunctivitis, backache, Herpangina of is vomiting, infection sudden malaise, fever, intake, sore with tongue. there or pinpoint papular,or vesicular but oral on lesions herpangina an lesions the and small, uvula, palate, nonspecific, one scatteredover are be tender, erythematous may The more soft of base classically enlargefrom rupture, to 2 over produce that 1 punched-out for mm mm 3 4 days. days, These 4 several small, and to persist 3 ulcers vesicles to to

from is organisms. group The distinguish streptococcus pharyngitis to principal pharyngitis caused by by caused challenge (usually A nonstreptococcal viral) are therapy disease. often A performed diagnostic of to a or to identify test, streptococcal streptococcal to likely antibiotic most culture, from children and antigen both benefit precision rapid improve throat

Many 95% with excellent specificity streptococcal 99%. available of pharyngitis are rapid for techniques to diagnostic tests of throat confirmed varies, negative a by culture. tests and rapid rapid should these be however, sensitivity The

the pharyngitis. Throat standard is for diagnostic presence the of establishing culture gold streptococcal identified other incorrectly streptococcus. cultures group can occur False-positive A are if organisms as acute as months 20% in not children reflect carriers As streptococcal during many pharyngitis. positive of winter and cultures

from white atypical count in with cell nonstreptococcal predominance shows The count distinguish values streptococcal blood C-reactive to erythrocyte tests a and infectious predictive are sedimentation lymphocytes. rate, mononucleosis pharyngitis, sufficient of and these not white differential, of and blood usually patients recommended.The protein cell routinely arenot

StudentConsult.com @ Available

peritonsillar anaerobes), diphtheria aureus), by epiglottitis. differential abscesses throat (S. (with includes swelling and infectious of unilateral infections anaerobes, The cavity, quinsy streptococci, pharyngitis aureus, the rarely, sore retropharyngeal of streptococci, caused unimmunized), other or tonsil abscesses or, oral local (if S. diagnosis erythematosus, Behçet disease), deficiency), and (leukemia, In (candidiasis lupus secondary (systemic thrush T-cell to addition neutropenic Kawasaki mucositis may autoimmune pharyngitis. ulceration aplastic disease anemia), immune cause is virus-associated prominent feature often Epstein-Barr a of Pharyngitis (see Chapter 99). mononucleosis

gingivitis Treponema Fusobacterium. infection Vincent with vincentii, ulcerative spirochetal necrotizing and a with Selenomonas anaerobic is fulminant synergistic mouth notably organisms, acute or form certain of trench infection with Vincent gray to of refers the anaerobic angina pharyngitis; found are on form a pseudomembranes virulent tonsils. is septic internal lungs). of jugular and acute the syndrome often (most vein complicated thrombosis emboli pharyngitis to the by Lemierre adolescents occurs caused It is by Fusobacterium primarily in and necrophorum.

and bacterial submandibular of is sublingual anaerobic Ludwig a cellulitis angina regions. mixed the often submandibular Although was sublingual of region, for the infection a reserved sublingual cellulitis spaces. applied term the bilateral submandibular and or the rapidly any spreading to of originally mandibular molar. periapical a to the abscess due spreading typically It is second or of from third associated tongue been has piercing. also with It propensity glottic intervention consequent and and spread, prompt lingual makes for obstruction swelling, A rapid imperative. airway

syndrome pharyngitis, of and aphthous children. fever, cervical A rare a of adenitis in is cause recurrent stomatitis, periodic fever fever Recurring vesicular by the painful lesions pharyngitis solitary nonspecific is accompanied mouth. in and age The begin <5 years). (usually fevers a at young 5 last mean days between episodes. Episodes approximately with 28 of a days, drugs antibiotics. prednisone nonsteroidal shorter and or Episodes to unresponsive are oral anti-inflammatory with syndrome but resolves other persists children. some in The in develop. Long-term sequelae not do

days. few Even resolve if untreated, a streptococcal over of pharyngitis uneventfully episodes most Early by therapy 24 12 clinical hours. to recovery accelerates antimicrobial Chapter (see prevention is major The rheumatic antimicrobial therapy of benefit of fever acute 146). relatively days weeks), treatment Because long rheumatic within acute preventing 3 rheumatic in is virtually of period illness the successful is (1 fever. of (incubation) latent fever instituted to 9 100% days of Treatment less after although illness, than the begun value. more 9 has onset preventive some than successful, 100% experiencing pharyngitis be and family children streptococcal of started fever history fever documented should therapy rheumatic has living for of past an promptly recent Antibiotic a area of pharyngitis, a an or or history positive with epidemic fever, group sibling symptomatic test or rheumatic rheumatic in poststreptococcal acute whose fever, in A scarlet symptomatic pharyngitis streptococcus, a glomerulonephritis. rapid

103-2). used streptococcal pharyngitis can to agents A treat antimicrobial variety (Table be of pharyngeal have rates eradication Cephalosporins bacterial superior compared to

maximum benzathine daily million (2–3 250 U times penicillin mg/kg/dose, dose) 1.2 10 mg/dose V 600,000 for 10 penicillin U For kg: G dose days) (single larger and adults: Intramuscular Oral children For children ≤27

allergic penicillin to persons For

dose BID, mg/kg/dose 10 × mg/dose Cephalexin 500 days maximum 20

× maximum, days mg/kg g OD Cefadroxil maximum 1 dose 30 10

mg/dose 7 TID, 300 days dose Clindamycin maximum 10 × mg/kg/dose

persons For to β-lactams allergic

days 3–4 (max in g/day) succinate: doses mg/kg/day Erythromycin 10 1 ethyl 40–50 for

days g/day) mg/kg/day for (max 20–40 2–4 10 Erythromycin doses estolate: 1 in

5 children: (to dose); on 500 mg mg adults: 250 12 daily maximum once orally orally mg/kg on days days Azithromycin, 1, orally then for adult 2–5 day

OD, times BID, Twice daily; once daily. daily; TID, three

penicillin. explanation One efficacy. anaerobes the reduces which penicillin β-lactamase, staphylococci is or and that proposed inactivates pharynx produce its in cephalosporins streptococcal more possible eradicating explanation carriage. Another that is effective in are

throat recurrent A Children pharyngitis group with a problem. pose episodes streptococcal culture of particular which antibiotic for chosen be the treat β-lactamase be may alternative to An responsible producing recurrences. may flora, eliminating is effective clindamycin an carriage. streptococcal Either for amoxicillin-clavulanate or regimen

therapy pharyngitis. is for most of viral antiviral Specific unavailable cases with acyclovir. primary benefit early gingivostomatitis with Patients from herpetic oral treatment

caused or viruses respiratory streptococci resolves usually by completely. Pharyngitis deep nonsuppurative A the rheumatic of spaces local the parapharyngeal complications include suppurative acute complications, of abscess neck, and glomerulonephritis. pharyngitis complications, such of acute fascial streptococcal The as postinfectious other such and as and group fever infections adenoviruses, Viral rhinoviruses, type parainfluenza influenza infections, infections bacterial caused by ear middle predispose infections. including to and may A, 3, respiratory tract

streptococcal oral rheumatic prophylaxis is Antimicrobial prevent with prevents penicillin of fever. daily recurrent and recurrences V only infections to recommended

Sinusitis and paranasal infection allergic suppurative of the rhinitis. cold often sinuses complicates is and common a the but and ethmoidal the pneumatized. at present maxillary are sinuses sinuses The birth, ethmoid are only pneumatized age. sinuses The become years 4 of at maxillary of years at completely 7 until develop are Frontal not to age developed begin sinuses adolescence. and present sinuses by years age. sphenoid are 5 of The complex. into the draining ostia drain 3 and narrow the to in are the meatus (1 sinuses middle The mm) ostiomeatal as sinuses normally maintains The the system mucociliary sterile.

to andpredisposes to common mucosal the cold, as mucociliary impedes drainage proliferation. such from sinus bacterial flow, edemaresulting Obstruction the Haemophilus sinusitis, are catarrhalis,Staphylococcus streptococcus. aureus, children and In Moraxella A causes group influenzae, nontypable 90% of bacterial Streptococcus withacute pneumoniae, important chronic as pathogens in sinusitis. and Anaerobesemerge subacute and (Klebsiella nasogastric or by caused Pseudomonas). which nasotracheal be may sinusitis, predisposeto Indwelling gram-negativebacteria tubes nosocomial to infection therapy antibiotic-resistant organisms. with Antibiotic predisposes may and in Sinusitis by neutropenic becaused the (e.g., Aspergillus Zygomycetes Rhizopus). immunocompromised Mucor, or persons

sinusitis of unknown. is incidence The true cold at The factor predisposing developing sinusitis allages. common the major for is virus factors immunodeficiency immunodeficiency, body. allergy, foreign infection,nasogastric risk include human (HIV) cilia and intubation, Other nasal or immotile polyps, fibrosis, nasotracheal cystic syndrome,nasal is children in after frequent organtransplantation. problem a Sinusitis also immunocompromised

Available StudentConsult.com @

commonly bilateral nasal rhinorrhea, cough, mucopurulent, Clinical especially manifestations unilateral at and persistent, most or night. stuffiness, include common tenderness and voice, Less facial the to halitosis, nasal include symptoms facial swelling, headache. and pain, a quality asthma. Sinusitis exacerbate may

is the nasal Culture not useful. mucosa of culture the patients. necessary diagnostic accurate but practical most in or Sinus aspirate method is not is immunocompetent

Plain reveal x-ray level. or thickening, mucosal air-fluid and may computed an tomography sinus clouding, imaging findings and infection in not computed radiographic levels, resonance differentiate sinuses asymptomatic tomography persons. magnetic often including from of do show Abnormal allergic abnormalities, disease; the air-fluid normal sinusitis. value negative bacterial high have Conversely radiographs for predictive

is severity compared increased improvement 10 14 or physical for days common and on of The to diagnosis longer the findings to cold. without than based symptoms history usually

of therapy to is sinusitis children. 14 Amoxicillin-clavulanate days in recommended first-line as 10 for <2 High-dose recommended to risk bacteria antimicrobial day in (antibiotic at high years, treatment for age rates months, for is preceding resistance resistant 1 children locally). the of 3 increased care therapy attendance, hypersensitivity is recommended with penicillins. for type Levofloxacin I to children recommended non-type children I is Clindamycin hypersensitivity. with for (cefixime, third generation cefpodoxime) a plus cephalosporin

and the sinus thrombosis, epidural table empyema, subdural osteomyelitis or frontal puffy sinus outer brain Complications of or orbital (Pott meningitis. of inner dural abscess, tumor), cellulitis, include the drainage These antibiotics. managed should all with be sinus broad-spectrum parenteral and patients. may asthmatic Sinusitis also bronchoconstriction in exacerbate

sinus. spread orbit Orbital sinusitisthat bacterial through of serious is follows into complication wallof infected the the a cellulitis the ethmoid sinus. sinusitisand the bony a ethmoid the as papyracea, the begins through spreads It platethat lamina medial and thin, typically orbit separates loss. Orbitalinvolvement sinus and ophthalmoplegia, lead abscess, vision subperiosteal to cavernous thrombosis, can pain, orbital proptosis,chemosis, and and visual of cellulitis orbital Manifestations diplopia, motion, include acuity. muscle reduced extraocular limited ophthalmoplegia or of must palpebral differentiated fascia) the from preseptal orbit space. the the (anterior Infection that periorbital be to of children younger proptosis these Preseptal 3 have age; of than children or occurs not in ophthalmoplegia. (periorbital) years do cellulitis usually usually Periorbital cellulitis be is streptococcus. trauma skin lesion A aureus with associated a or group and by caused or S. may

for which scan by the cellulitis surgical diagnosis a need tomography and orbit, drainage. computed orbital the The of extent infection of is the confirmed determines of orbital the are to be (mucormycosis), aspergillosis, granulomatosis, and orbit, trichinosis. neuroblastoma, rhabdomyosarcoma, pseudotumor of Wegener considered in diagnosis Disorders zygomycosis inflammatory the differential vancomycin for and antibiotics, broad-spectrum such Therapy parenteral as cellulitis orbital ceftriaxone. involves

More any without bacterial than therapy. children antimicrobial sinusitis with recover of acute half improve initiating treatment. 48 and discharge should hours nasal of dramatically Fever within symptoms another etiology. Persistent suggest

washing prevention good management rhinitis. of and of hand best minimize acquisition of means to are colds allergic The

the Otitis suppurative ear cavity. is of infection a (OM) middle media gain Bacteria normal adenoids. of blocked the ear the when infection access airway to tube patency is upper the or middle eustachian by hypertrophied is of facilitating reflux in bacteria. resorbed, creating Air nasopharyngeal and cavity middle the pressure negative in trapped this ear to ear bacterial leads infected with the secretions middle from pharynx of middle combined effusion. flow ear Obstructed reflux the to

viruses cause OM. can and bacteria Both group pneumoniae, catarrhalis, Moraxella less influenzae, nontypable The common Haemophilus streptococcus. frequently, and, bacterial pathogens A are Streptococcus is is 0.1 isolated young day 1 inhibitory to ≥2 penicillin μg/mL) children, to frequency antibiotics increasing highly recently. those concentration or resistant have that inhibitory pneumoniae received μg/mL) particularly to care from penicillin resistant who (minimal relatively attend (minimal with concentration or S. including alone and in respiratory syncytial Viruses, co-pathogens recovered rhinoviruses, influenza, are or as 20% virus, of 25% to patients.

approximately of ear middle visits Diseases pediatricians. of third the to for one account office of is acute months life. of peak 6 between incidence and 15 The OM children one birthday, the of at experience 62% episode. least By first episodes occur 18 after of Few age. months first socioeconomic lower and more patients is OM in in boys common status. of 21. virus Native trisomy such children Americans cleft and Natives Alaskan in There as immunodeficiency is certain and incidence populations, in of human OM increased with (HIV), high-risk palate, and and and United is distinct peak a disease a influenza of respiratory syncytial seasonal to in rhinovirus, which States, with In seasons. February, virus, January the the most OM corresponds of acute infectious exposure young (day to increased risk age, to exposure for are major smoke, lack tobacco breastfeeding, agents and passive OM factors care). The

of defined episodes acute general considered otitis-prone. OM least 6 first years be presence by recurrent at the six in population children or of 12% life, and As have of the OM in more would the immunodeficiencies recurrent OM; associated often acute with healthy. Craniofacial anomalies otherwise OM recurrent most are are with and children

Available @ StudentConsult.com

symptoms are and acute most and of infants, poor the feeding. In include frequent fever, nonspecific irritability, OM and is associatedwith OM ear fever acute and adolescents, usually Inolder children pain). (acute otalgia spontaneous Acute also the otorrhea after drainage) (ear membrane. may tympanic present ruptureof with OM cold, (see a are whichpredisposes acute infection(Table tympanic fluid reliable Signs 105-1). material often signs common of are to otoscopy or OM, visualizationof bulging by Chapter of level, air membrane, purulent present 102).A

should any fever. of the examination of with child ears Examination diagnosis for the is be physical part of essential and The 105-1). Table the presence of middle (see in OM is cavity ear hallmark effusion of the effusion appropriate nature an does the of and it therapy. for define its or not does The need presence but potentially diagnosis etiology, define infectious

the using a of is to Pneumatic ear otoscope, sealed attachment of for and otoscopy, a evaluation middle ventilation diagnosis. clinical allows an hermetically standard membrane the than the The ear ear middle fluid-filled. if greater middle air-filled normal, tympanic is compliance much of has white, the rather with bulging pressure. by negative and hyperemia, color, it positive to OM, pearly acute or position to the can yellow membrane tympanic or characterized pink, mobility with red absent With color than poor be normal is full a gray or and but the and light structures difficult are obscured middle distinguish. reflex ear lost, and to is The hole perforation. A membrane drainage in the tympanic or confirms purulent associated pain. on of the bullae with present which aspect the tympanic Occasionally severe membrane, ear are characteristically are lateral

Routine laboratory are sedimentation evaluation the OM. count rate, in not complete of useful erythrocyte blood studies, including and the external acoustic sound membrane-middle or system reflection tympanic energy by the of absorption of objective provides Tympanometry ear from measurements

acute requires: of AOM signs onset Presence symptoms ear middle of Signs middle of effusion and of diagnosis of History and A symptoms inflammation ear

of the and ear by the mobility of or includes Limited is middle ear following: Air-fluid inflammation The The of the abrupt, of behind presence onset Otorrhea any level AOM definition symptoms membrane tympanic effusion following: middle usually absent Bulging that tympanic indicated the membrane the of effusion Recent, membrane signs tympanic all and middle of of ear of

indicated by of or middle inflammation symptoms either: ear Signs as

to referable Distinct Distinct as is or membrane duct the (discomfort sleep) varied. with duct pressure otalgia interference of in in ear that erythema normal ear clearly tympanic activity precludes or results the the the Measurements correlate middle resulting of well of ear absence tympanogram presence effusion. the with or

reflectometry are office Instruments for acoustic available home and using use. for abnormal otoscopy as be identified. when is pneumatic followed examination reflectometry by reflectometry of Use with screening acute a OM test should

the do isolated correlate with tympanocentesis. from by nasopharynx Bacteria recovered bacteria not required they useful to middle pathogens immunocompromised patients ear always neonates, responding not be and accurate exudate may bacterial in for but of are not patients, are and and Tympanocentesis culture necessary, therapy. identification

referred also is chronic which OM as major effusion, to OM differentiation of from acute with The difficulty is OM. accompanied inflammation. OM tract as Acute is upper of acute signs and respiratory pain, fever, by such illness, of is symptoms. effusion other the effusion any OM without and signs presence of with the

illness. Recommendations based of of treatment on severity are for diagnosis certainty and can inflammation. middle and be of signs symptoms ear is rapid A of signs and ear made middle effusion, certain there diagnosis if onset, with children those but most are than to in an or diagnosis therapy The of mg/kg/day divided for acute recommended OM with than certain greater fever diagnosis first-line age a 90 doses). (80 have otalgia years who of amoxicillin or or younger uncertain C two 2 is 39° older may can than an arranged. years observed Children age are be who if of with follow-up appropriate 2 be uncertain diagnosis or influenza, pneumoniae. at Failure H. M. therapy with with β-lactamase-producing amoxicillin catarrhalis suggests initial days 3 S. of resistant infection cefdinir, 80 1 to 90 daily amoxicillin-clavulanate high-dose include in mg/kg next-step days). (50 to axetil, intramuscularly doses (amoxicillin cefuroxime treatments for 3 or Recommended mg/kg/day), ceftriaxone oral appropriate younger 3 for that of especially is children vomiting than age treatment. ceftriaxone years Intramuscular precludes with required Tympanocentesis who therapy. are respond do treat to to for patients difficult not or be who may for ibuprofen and fever. recommended Acetaminophen are Decongestants or effective. are not antihistamines

@ Available StudentConsult.com

chronic of are abscess, cholesteatoma extension The petrositis, and hearing (mass-like complications (brain effusion, subdural thrombosis), or mastoiditis. empyema, loss, venous growth), keratinized epithelial OM intracranial is mastoiditis of Acute and suppurative complication with inflammation a spaces. destruction potential air of OM the mastoid from a abscess to mastoid formation. disease The an periostitis with osteitis progresses signs are of addition auricular in Posterior to swelling, tenderness, the present. OM, and erythema, downward and outward. is pinna The displaced bone or tomography of clouding or of reveals air computed destruction. mastoid the Radiographs scan cells, demineralization, the has Treatment formation. includes progressed systemic disease the drainage antibiotics to and if abscess

life. is most the with OM of 2 years acute of and occurs most frequently effusion sequela in the first OM frequent 3 ear following effusion children but infection. weeks last resolves by or middle many months some for months Persistent in usually may well-child part condition examinations. young this children for all of is Evaluating

mild effusion; and the loss or assumed often present ear loss middle be with to transient fluctuating. to persistent Conductive is hearing be moderate is should 1 the need obviate after follow-up. tympanograms of further for treatment Normal month with OM, In reasonable insertion of frequent 3 tubes. children developmental hearing of with intervention with effusion is bilateral persistent pressure or at a of indicator significant need of acute risk loss months equalization for recurrent episodes

to as breastfeeding as continue about the long possible bed. to bottle Parents and be risks taking a should exclusive of should of encouraged children be bottle-propping cautioned and be environment. home The should a smoke-free

Children can for are prolonged courses significantly. at prophylaxis, antimicrobial for of identified recurrent OM recurrences high-risk reduce acute candidates which Amoxicillin 3 (50 for 6 longer is to once (20 given 30 or for to sulfisoxazole at used prophylaxis. daily months or mg/kg/day) mg/kg/day) bedtime

all OM pneumoniae reduces caused OM S. serotypes vaccine all and by vaccine The conjugate 6%. by pneumococcal by OM 50%, by 33%, pneumococcal against influenza helpful be high-risk virus in children. Annual may immunization

or is absence as media of external other exudation known canal swimmer’s Otitis and defined the ear, as externa, disorders, otitis byinflammation auditory inthe mastoiditis. also such in Staphylococcus swimming or aeruginosa, pools are The pathogens with Pseudomonas association common aureus. in lakes, most especially in and bacterial with tympanostomy are develops but of tubes, in of Corynebacterium aureus, isolated 20% canal pneumoniae, external associated frequently externa flora. approximately Klebsiella, Otitis representnormal with children occasionally Moraxellacatarrhalis, cultures S. from the staphylococci anaerobes.Coagulase-negative Proteus, and and Streptococcus diabetes. is externa and immunocompromised caused adults otitis in by with aeruginosa persons Malignant P.

otitis peak in tract seasons infections. externa Otitis media, viral in summer, primarily in association cases colder which respiratory upper contrast in occurs to with the such the cerumen, as externa. particular, swimming, cutaneous in auditory and defenses disrupt to of local integrity lining of the of and, the predisposing Cleaning canal, diving canal otitis ear

@ Available StudentConsult.com

are tenderness, Pain, and aural discharge the findings otitis clinical of characteristic externa. unaffected. hearing and Fever notably is is absent, chewing of particularly with Tenderness media. the in notably especially the otitis absent and is with symptoms pinna, tragus, characteristic, movement auditory severe that usually of mild reveals and inflamed Inspection erythema canal edema. with to lining the the is discharge from canal tympanic auditory may membrane. to the Scant copious obscure the palsy occasionally symptoms malignant externa most occurs. otitis facial are of nerve common The but similar, in canal, granulation the common from swelling most tissue the auditory discharge canal. usually a are and external The with findings physical

The externa otitis of diagnosis examination the the evaluation. and established usually is of for basis uncomplicated laboratory symptoms on findings microbiologic the or without clinical additional need solely physical rate constant externa, is sedimentation an a In elevated erythrocyte malignant finding. otitis agent, to is etiologic required P. antimicrobial Cultures which identify usually the are and aeruginosa, the susceptibility.

be otitis media perforation discharge may canal Otitis auditory tympanic into with with the confused externa. and of present. the movement Pain is or otitis typical on externa, of pinnae not tragus, more Local indicate mastoiditis otitis than signs and systemic a extensive externa. of process cholesteatoma discharge, with presenting the or Malignancies canal are but pain, unusual children or in auditory loss. hearing in may rare present

in ciprofloxacin (such dexamethasone, of preparations B-neosporin-hydrocortisone) hydrocortisone polymyxin are externa. Topical with and or otic antimicrobial/corticosteroid as sufficient cases otitis ofloxacin, most active and aureus bacteria, are These preparations and equally aeruginosa. against P. S. effective gram-negative most including are None any has antifungal activity. these antibiotics of aminoglycosides avoided be neomycin as ototoxicity. tympanic membrane rupture such of should in to cases of their due Use drugs, considered otic Tympanostomy which quinolone less otorrhea is with to is treated best ototoxic. be likely tube

and is Treatment otic with unnecessary. cerumenolytics usually analgesics topical discharge to topical important with from a auditory any the permit with remove to purulent canal or of with It the solution. is instillation therapy external suction swab be after ear Excess dried should bathing the canal using removed a water hairdryer. and such inflammation The until be swimming activity, or predisposing as avoided diving, the resolved. has should

occasionally external as Aspergillus, and the Fungi dermatophytes ear. from are isolated Candida, such flora inflammation. be It determine cause whether or of to they are may normal difficult represent the recommended In therapy normal otitis restoration most are for and externa sufficient. pH as bacterial of local cases,

is aeruginosa P. or penicillin (mezlocillin, parenteral aeruginosa, plus treated aminoglycoside. activity expand-ed-spectrum P. cefepime) by as a with piperacillin-tazobactam) cephalosporin otitis against with such against an (ceftazidime, Malignant an activity antimicrobials externa

to complications resolves Acute promptly without 1 within initiating otitis 2 usually externa days treatment. of accompanied other especially if re-evaluation conditions. should if prompt such Persistent by for fever, or pain, symptoms as other severe

bones which may skull, of of palsies. otitis the cause Complications of nerve base externa cranial the the of malignant include invasion to with media. in A occurs adults mortality malignant 20% otitis of 15% year treatment the within Relapses first after are common.

an asymptomatic of should cleaning auditory be canal Overvigorous avoided. Burow maceration the isopropyl canals facilitates to alcohol auditory the acetic or Drying (rubbing alcohol) may bacterial after (2%), prevent used be with diluted invasion. that swimming acid prophylactically help solution, as such prevent Often underwater disease. recurrent be diving earplugs must equipment, avoided or to gear, is for prophylactic no role There otic antibiotics.

is common tract most infection laryngotracheobronchitis, the respiratory middle Croup, 107-1). (Table the or of 1, and croup causes 2, respiratory syncytial 4) are The (types and most common 3, parainfluenza virus. of viruses a because increases affects diameter secondary to exponentially edema decrease and the resistance work children inflammation in mucosal breathing. Laryngotracheal airway airway and inflammation of small disproportionately producing together, are the inspiration, subglottic walls the croup. the obstruction drawn and During space aggravating stridor characteristic of of the winter. with early months fall peak a age, common 6 of Croup 3 years in to most and is in children follows cold. a typically It common reinfection is mild. yet Symptomatic reinfections usually common, are manifests In it adolescents, laryngitis. as

@ Available StudentConsult.com

hoarseness, are barking quickly. may brassy, as or of croup cough develop respiratory a that fever, inspiratory The slowly manifestations distress harsh or low-grade and stridor, described produced respiratory harsh, high-pitched a is airflow. by Stridor sound turbulent It upper it but airway biphasic sign inspiratory, is usually be is of may a and obstruction. 135). as may labored of subcostal intercostal, suprasternal, Signs upper airway on breathing (see such obstruction, evident and be Chapter retractions, examination marked and is lower airway be associated there Wheezing if involvement. may present

known neck sign Anteroposterior (Fig. radiographs the of show often of narrowing croup the steeple as subglottic the diagnostic 107-1). not in the establishing studies laboratory are diagnosis. Routine useful and tracheitis. is Leukocytosis uncommon bacterial or suggests epiglottitis fluorescent adenoviruses. of and causes and such other chain virus, syncytial parainfluenza available influenza Many antibodies) are croup, polymerase or (using reaction rapid tests viral common viruses, for as less respiratory

established of usually is diagnosis The manifestations. by clinical croup epiglottitis, bacterial The parapharyngeal abscess. differential infectious includes diagnosis and tracheitis, mechanical vocal body cord hemangioma, ring, Noninfectious subglottic vascular causes causes include laryngomalacia, stenosis, stridor aspiration, and anatomic of paralysis). (foreign of laryngoscopy than younger longer need for than months and 1 increased indicates direct 4 (see the an 135). and Stridor in probability or imaging week symptoms another lesion of infants age persistence of Chapter for

risk the airway obstruction. of a emergency because sudden Epiglottitis medical is of in caused group or This unimmunized or rare and Haemophilus type patients. by Staphylococcus A b usually streptococcus aureus illness is influenza now prefer jaw forward held the the (sniffing head Patients sitting, with often mouth thrust typically and position). forward, open, the sign) bulging aryepiglottic radiograph the and epiglottis thickened reveals of and (thumb swelling Lateral folds. is an and of or structures confirmed supraglottic place perform diagnosis the inflamed by with operating surgeon swollen, cherry-red The endotracheal observation to anesthesiologist tube only and direct a be if needed. and room should competent the a prepared in swollen performed which tracheostomy an epiglottitis, to Epiglottitis requires antibiotic airway. intubation therapy maintain endotracheal and the be extubated can hours. children 72 within safely recovery most to is and 48 rapid, Clinical

most is by viral is caused the tracheitis S. rare croup trachea superinfection serious but may that of a aureus. commonly follow and Bacterial tract of usually without symptoms, Spasmodic croup significant sudden night, prodrome. upper onset respiratory a describes but croup at but duration. of short be and may episodes are recurrent These usually severe viral exposure croup therapies, and relatively milder to such Spasmodic croup to or simple than course air. has humidified cool as a responds may be well allergic. not and is etiology understood The

moderate, need for the croup hospital Oral or shortens or symptoms, for hospitalization, children dexamethasone reduces mild, severe with and intramuscular stays. Dexamethasone

of Gradual Acute night) Onset (at illness Sudden Acute

Harsh Quality of stridor Harsh Harsh Mild

neck hyperextension ++ – + Drooling, –

Middle Bell From respiratory infections. tract LM: Baltimore RS: Philadelphia, 2002, HB, In p and 772. Jenson Diseases: Saunders, ed Infectious 2, Pediatric Practice, Principles

frequently and usually absent; or ±, +, may present; may ++, present present; be –, pronounced. not

107-1 Croup (laryngotracheobronchitis). Figure the the narrowing (arrows). sign, of shows upper the so-called immediate the airway view of steeple Posteroanterior airway subglottic tapered A, airway upper of good anatomy. delineation supraglottic Lateral the the B, of view shows subglottic is because has trachea defined sharp edema and undersurface the poorly and diminishing down the cords inflammatory obliterated a of that of hazy vocal manner. The extends (arrow) the the trachea in tract (From respiratory Bell infections. LM: Middle Saunders, Pediatric HB, RS: p 2, Practice, Philadelphia, ed 774.) Infectious 2002, Principles Jenson In and Baltimore Diseases: to or once once given phosphate (0.6 dexamethasone mg/kg) intramuscularly orally. mg/kg) (0.6 be may to 1 1 be (2 Alternatively three mg/kg doses. two per in given to prednisolone day) orally divided may epinephrine clinical of For improvement. airway adrenergic by temporarily L-) vasoconstriction, compromise, significant racemic edema administration aerosolized producing subglottic (Dand reduces marked is to and 30 60 minutes. The 90 10 fades peak to within within minutes effect occur, rebound of may drug dissipates. with A of as the the effect symptoms effect worsening repeated in to may more treatment than Aerosol to 2 every 1 (for hours) severe minutes be 20 cases. need no

calm to forceful minimize be Children as kept inspiration. should as possible calming parent’s sit the child lap. for is useful on method with One a croup to the care in only. unit used and be Sedatives cautiously should intensive face mist the administered around secretions of may Cool larynx. prevent help drying mask by the

Hospitalization required often stridor with at children for is rest. rebound be of to because observed for hours receiving or airway least the Children obstruction. of aerosol treatment hospitalized at should 3 risk 2 indicate and fatigue respiratory or may improvement failure. Decreased symptoms impending

most common of is to 2% The of which viral 1% complication croup occurs children. pneumonia, in immunocompromised in are pneumonia virus bacterial Parainfluenza persons. more secondary and pneumonia common complication a croup. Bacterial tracheitis be may of also

croup excellent. is The prognosis for approximately Illness days. usually lasts 5 grow, the to effects the of of viral middle less tract. susceptible infections children airway become respiratory they As

no for is There vaccine parainfluenza.

pertussis fastidious Classic requirements. gram-negative with is (whooping B. pleomorphic cough) growth pertussis,a bacillus caused by humans and infects pertussis is transmitted coughing. B. person by to person only

period incubation days. to The is 7 10 cough. are 2 Patients weeks during contagious most the of first among States young 4 complications. is most those United likely than of age—infants months in be too severe have pertussis less incidence peak immunized to to and completely The the of annually. to 300,000 100 of an population and cases pertussis deaths million per are prevaccination estimated cases rate 200 to 100,000 the worldwide era; 30 of pertussis approximately was annual there in 50 The the cases of steadily more reported vaccine 1980s but of increased incidence pertussis the In than decreased since the 27,000 introduction United in the with 2010. States, has after from likely waning due in been to have also adolescents vaccines. previous immunity Infections rising, increase: when dramatically rates incidence the in United steady the was vaccination increased in declined. the 1970s pertussis late Kingdom, until when Likewise there rates decline pertussis a of rate low, are vaccination incidence the the as immunity wanes. fully also occur as vaccine-induced immunized in Epidemics patients,

Available @ StudentConsult.com

1 and Classic is old. pertussis seen between years in children 10 The stages. the progression is of into paroxysmal, divided disease and catarrhal, convalescent andlow-grade nonspecific to 2 signs marked by The 1 (increased secretions stage catarrhal fever) is weeks. lasting nasal The is 2 distinctive pertussis weeks.Coughing breath. to expiration, causingyoung their stage stage during lose of children most in the 4 paroxysms paroxysmal occurs to lasts and thick bronchial coughingis necrotic plugs and dislodge of to epithelialtissues of pattern mucus. This needed that cough this characteristic glottis whoop. inhalation forceful against follows producesthe a paroxysm The of narrowed common. is Posttussive emesis of 1 stage to symptoms over marked gradual by The weeks. is 2 convalescent resolution slowly andthe paroxysms less whoops Coughing disappear. severe, becomes and persist thedisease 8 lasts to residual weeks, with stress cough may for typically physical 6 especially months, respiratoryirritants. Although or

be first neonate the sign and may not the display findings, in Infants may apnea. classic the unlikely a classic likely to bacterial secondary are to damage and of infants have system result central whoop, to likely have pneumonia. as have hypoxia, more more nervous Young the respiratory usually tract often nonspecific persistent, bronchitic that pertussis illness a Adolescents begins upper with with cough as infection. present prolonged a with and adults nonproductive whoop have severe have paroxysms. and do a cough, with the Generally although not adults may adolescents they may months. to persist weeks The cough many

on detection depends its acids. isolation pertussis diagnosis of of or The nucleic B. organism’s the accomplished illness usually but during aspirates specimens from be difficult can Culture specialized fastidious of or media on to given phases on is the nasopharyngeal accomplish swabs nature. early is reaction, culture many previously as Polymerase available in sensitive in likely as sensitivity laboratories. potentially chain clinical and immunized although is individuals, lacking can positive occur. results False recommended. antibody fluorescent Direct staining not is infection in commercial diagnosing Drug acute are approved are no by not illness, kits for there U.S. be Serologic tests phase the can and convalescent though Food confirmatory Administration. of the useful but

and of but children 75% young is infants in diagnostic. to Lymphocytosis present not is 85% of The from cells/mm3, primarily to 20,000 count blood cells/mm3 white may than lymphocytes. more cell 50,000 mature consisting increase stage. may during lung signs the and examination of pertussis, during Physical paroxysmal segmental atelectasis radiographic develop especially those infiltrates are seen and pneumonia. viral in common are similar Perihilar to

classic of the the on a accurate. diagnosis is young pattern For pertussis, with based illness child quite The most part syndrome. of paroxysmal the distinctive the stage is causes milder and pneumoniae, which include and illness virus. pneumoniae cough Mycoplasma vaccination, respiratory causes B. by adenoviruses, a pneumoniae, syncytial and prevented prolonged is Chlamydophila per-tussis-like pertussis similar Chlamydia parapertussis, but Other not Bordetella illnesses of

erythromycin are children month for or under recommended Azithromycin, 1 of age. clarithromycin, of pyloric due erythromycin in used and between association should stenosis. the treatment neonates development be the to Azithromycin eradicates during 3 symptom Treatment nasopharyngeal to within phase and organisms days may lessen carriage the catarrhal 4 severity. of alter course stage paroxysmal illness in but not the decreases does the of to potential Treatment others. spread the for though are Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole than an indication is its among 2 studies this children limited. alternative therapy months, older use for of

death. and andyoung children apnea, among complications include are seizures, and Major most encephalopathy, infants hypoxia, common pneumonia, malnutrition, caused B. pertussis itself by or and pneumonia resulting infection secondary bacterial pneumoniae, complication with The aureus. Streptococcus Staphylococcus Haemophilus is from influenzae, mostfrequent secondaryto develop plugs. Atelectasis mucous may emphysema; retinal force producepneumomediastinum, or The pneumothorax, or and hemorrhages. hernias; of paroxysm may interstitial the epistaxis; subcutaneous andsubconjunctival media may sinusitis Otitis and occur.

function pulmonary Most respiratory of normal healing children epithelium. complete with the recover permanent Most encephalopathy. is a of result disability

induced in tetanus a acellular (DTaP). with diphtheria Active the as with given and components vaccine pertussis combination immunity toxoids is The FIM-2 toxin, agglutinogens, vaccines and contain to FIM-3. B. pertussis including pertactin, and hemagglutinin, fimbrial of filamentous pertussis antigens five two pertussis, acellular at 4 DTaP to 2, 6 booster with and 70% has 90%. vaccine 4, years, 6, efficacy 15 a and months, is of 18 at recommended to to an once at adults. A all 12 years vaccine or for 11 is of Tdap booster to single recommended dose

pertussis. secondary exposed preventing cases to contacts are Macrolides in in effective to 10 has Tdap. given years), within those close the years 7 been a 7 should contacts age DTaP booster years booster 3 receive preceding whereas should age of a (unless under dose Underimmunized receive dose of of on or erythromycin, (azithromycin) days should duration 5 14 (clarithromycin antibiotics prophylactic 7 for age). All days contacts or close receive based to

sometimes small to obstruction. of production a airway occasional increased mucus is disease bronchioles leading bronchospasm, and with Bronchiolitis a It caused lower most infection. viral by commonly is tract respiratory Bronchiolitis seen young infants. cases in most and among infants children, is most commonly occurring with severe life-threatening. Bronchiolitis is potentially

infrequently, by cause followed human pneumoniae. coronaviruses, (RSV) ofbronchiolitis, Respiratory is Mycoplasma parainfluenza a and, primary influenza viruses, adenoviruses,rhinoviruses, viruses, virus frequency syncytial in metapneumovirus, contagiousand is extremely contact bronchiolitis is infected respiratory spread with by secretions. Viral mode produces secretions hand the oftransmission. frequent most contaminated coughing carriageof Although aerosols, is

a of Bronchiolitis hospitalization of cause is infants. leading 2 with a life, of 6 peak to occurs years 2 Bronchiolitis almost age months. exclusively the at during first premature disease, infants of lung at severe, disease. fatal children are healthy as immunodeficiency hemodynamically bronchiolitis outpatients; can of with weakness, neuromuscular increased potentially Many and risk chronic however, disease children or with prematurity, be significant managed heart congenital or an infection after upper children day care. acquire have typically family who members, to in of symptoms tract infected from infection, respiratory Children exposure infected the December months are peaks annual in March. usually States, late winter the United through from In

StudentConsult.com @ Available

by to6 period Bronchiolitis days. an RSV has of 4 incubation caused similar common presents in to its the Bronchiolitis phasewith cough a early classically as respiratory rhinorrhea. and cold progressive illness over audible and progresses 7 to raspy It days breathing tonoisy, 3 wheezing. by irritability, There mayreflect a work which breathing. the accompanied usually increased low-grade fever is of and young infection. signof may to may disease, first infants the apnea classic have a of not infected have with progression prodrome the contrast In RSV as

of suprasternal include Physical trapping of signs expiratory of of the retractions, retractions, lungs. nasal intercostal obstruction flaring, breathing, hyperexpansion prolongation phase bronchiolar with the air and and wheezes phase, crackles usually hyperresonance, the but reveals During only reveals throughout usually auscultation chest cycle. the breathing diffuse the of percussion wheezing cyanosis disease, more severe be grunting present. may With and

confirm required to diagnosis. are the not laboratory tests Routine to bronchiolitis. of is assess oxygenation in severe cases It important for oximetry Pulse is saturation. monitoring oxygen adequate though taken rapid and are decompensation assessments necessary infants may blood very in tired precipitously before values because infants of reassuring. Frequent, monitoring cardiorespiratory gas even regular develop are respiratory failure

ELISA]) [also for the assay Antigen (usually viruses, viruses, secretions and immunofluorescence immunosorbent adenoviruses to tests enzyme-linked sensitive parainfluenza confirm tests influenza to referred by or as infection. RSV, are nasopharyngeal of by diagnosis chain reaction. polymerase performed Rapid is also viral cohorting bronchiolitis. to the necessary the diagnosis viral children not infection with is but of make same Identifying the helpful agent is for

signs including flattened lucency Chest frequently hyperinflation, depressed or lung and of radiographs show increased lung diaphragms. represent or increased localized either atelectasis. of density viral pneumonia Areas may

diagnosis of to diseases associated in the wheezing. is The with difficulty major other differentiate bronchiolitis presentation, to asthma differential and family factors. presence It differentiate of of of physical difficult are examination, of major by absence may personal asthma or be but fever, history age the from bronchiolitis primarily exacerbation. accompanied fever unaccompanied life children whereas in unless in Bronchiolitis with for respiratory the of a by wheezing and first older trigger typically occurs year the presents asthma asthma the usually previous episodes is tract by is fever, infection

lower (see respiratory obstructive due of may chronic foreign or fibrosis, airway 78). disease, be lung viral other Wheezing tract pneumonia, lesion, to Chapter an also cystic congenital airway body, and exacerbation diseases bacterial be with secondary with to Cardiogenic wheezing asthma, associated bronchiolitis which is pulmonary in failure. confused infants, can left-sided congestion heart

may the have with emesis. chronic of recurrent, frequent to patient gastroesophageal is a likely Wheezing history and associated be reflux or associated fibrosis history. chronic family with a Cystic growth, poor and positive is diarrhea, body not A that deflate suggests or does area focal aspiration. inflate foreign on radiography

supportive oxygen of monitoring, fever, hydration, needed, upper if including respiratory consists treatment of suctioning, Bronchiolitis therapy, control and, administration. airway Indications distress, inability to respiratory care include at moderate available of lack apnea, hypoxemia, home. oral and feeding, to appropriate hospitalization tolerate for marked of with high-risk be children Hospitalization bronchiolitis should considered. but are 10% in infants, respiratory oxygen nasal supplemental of often required and necessary, infants. assistance Among is apnea for ventilatory cannula than by these intubation or fewer hospitalized failure recommended. corticosteroids generally seldom are effective and are Bronchodilators and not

improvement 5 2 children alone. with in days hospitalized treatment show to supportive marked Most wheezing course phase however. The of the varies, requiring assisted respiratory and may hypoxia failure Tachypnea to ventilation. progress concern for is major a infants bronchiolitis. young Apnea with very

although persist function for of years. minor several and hyperreactivity resolve completely, abnormalities Most bronchial cases pulmonary of bronchiolitis may to is assessed mild and and the but similarly should to treated episode. tends Recurrence be first be common for higher The whether as to is of more asthma with bronchiolitis prone seems bronchiolitis. infants, children children hospitalized unclear hospitalized be for causal be asthma to whether to is but are likely or it this incidence highest a mortality 2% to among There cardiopulmonary infants or rate, preexisting is immunologic 1% with impairment.

before confers disease. monoclonal RSV-specific of the protection Monthly RSV just palivizumab, onset from some season severe the RSV injections an antibody, of initiated is infants significant birth heart lung hemodynamically chronic under years indicated congenital cyanotic and 2 with low some disease, for very with and disease. old those weight, acyanotic Palivizumab children with prevent vaccine influenza-associated older 6 recommended and months influenza than Immunization all for disease. is may

is spaces. the respiratory the airways consolidation with lower of of infection alveolar involves and tract Pneumonia the that parenchyma an bronchitis, to of The Chapter three. bronchiolitis often or (see tract infection lower any term encompass is pneumonia, 109), used the combination respiratory is be lung that not may with Pneumonitis inflammation may term general a or associated for consolidation. pneumonia localized pneumonia one more or to lung. the Lobar describes lobes of describes pneumonia. than interstitial patterns or lobar pneumonia more typically Atypical diffuse the of in adjacent lobules. refers exudate and leads and patchy bronchioles that of causes of obstructs Bronchopneumonia consolidation a lung production to some to the that the inflammation is the small airways mucopurulent of these centered to Interstitial alveolar composed which the the inflammation alveoli, walls and is sacs interstitium, of the pneumonitis the refers the of ducts, of bronchioles. and Interstitial characteristic a is also pneumonitis fibrosing or process. of acute chronic be infections viral inflammatory but may

increase in of risk host the defenses Defects pneumonia. system. a multifactorial Lower result sterile as of secretions airways are and a in are contaminants mucus by secreted caught goblet the the cells. Airway they composing central ciliary toward upward the synchronously are to on where and epithelial Cilia move beat airways the particles surfaces, throat, into elevator or swallowed system, expectorated. microorganisms. kill neutrophils and from blood tissue ingest and macrophages Polymorphonuclear the fluid into protects upper and airway infections the IgA neutralization. secreted facilitates invasive viral against

Infectious community-acquired vary cause agents age 110-1). that (Table pneumonia commonly by years. human infants 5 (RSV) old, viruses, metapneumovirus, syncytial (see older in and pneumoniae common virus 109), younger age than adenoviruses) than children years respiratory in viruses are viruses, Most in Mycoplasma 5 causes influenza other Chapter (parainfluenza respiratory children any common in pneumoniae children is age period. pneumonia, occurs Streptococcus most of cause of outside bacterial neonatal the and lobar the

pneumonia. pneumoniae atypical causes and Chlamydophila pneumoniae of principal M. are

and age hominis, cough and with months an 3 (CMV) Mycoplasma 1 a infants cytomegalovirus are of Chlamydia cause pneumonia; in onset and of similar respiratory signs. afebrile predominant hyperinflation urealyticum, syndrome commonly to less the Ureaplasma subacute trachomatis diagnose These and are to infections each to difficult from distinguish other. In are as flora. part carried organisms of adults genital mucosal the primarily these them perinatally may transmit newborns. harbor agents to these Women who

occasionally cause agents Additional pneumonia. (SARS-CoV). SARS-associated acute coronavirus respiratory (SARS) due is to syndrome Severe (bird A (H5N1). poultry flu) and by caused disease highly viral other a influenza Avian of influenza contagious is birds South among high 2003 Asia humans and in to There outbreaks mortality 1997 rates. East 2004 in with were origin in (H1N1) circulating A began influenza A swine of 2009. novel tularensis, Chlamydophila agents spp., include based history, Coccidioides capsulatum, Brucella exposure Other Histoplasma etiologic tuberculosis, to hantavirus, Coxiella Mycobacterium on specific and psittaci, dermatitidis. pneumophila, immitis, Blastomyces Francisella consider, burnetii, Legionella

(aspergillosis), gram-negative (carinii). avium include of jiroveci bacteria, immunocompromised Pneumocystis in viruses (M. pneumonia persons and fungi complex), Causes enteric (CMV), mycobacteria infancy and cepacia older patients. caused aeruginosa in with Burkholderia in Pneumonia in by Staphylococcus Pseudomonas aureus cystic fibrosis usually patients is or

measles, pertussis, Immunizations on incidence by great influenza the have a Haemophilus of b, pneumonia impact diphtheria, type pneumoniae. and caused S. had Calmette-Guerin had (BCG) also impact. has Where for used, an tuberculosis bacille deaths in tract countries annually. 2 acute estimated million infections respiratory are developing due to An infections immunocompromised in of include especially anatomic care respiratory states, residential reflux, residence intensive impairment and (aspiration), abnormalities respiratory care facilities, in Risk an the gastroesophageal unit. neurologic factors tract lower tract, for hospitalization,

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Pain Thrive Pain to Failure Abdominal Cough Chest Hemoptysis Acidemia Wheezing

a in Age pneumonia. the manifestations determinant of is clinical hypoxia have with Chapter physical 65). may subtle Neonates examination only, findings or fever absent (see or be a first pneumonia. With infant, may sign of apnea the young or apprehension, older chest pain, of of breath, difficulty infants chills, and are shortness because pleuritic in breathing children. and retractions, malaise, cough, Fever, common tachypnea, but help may of physical etiology. or distinguish an disease foci examination other findings pneumonias, complete identify and bacterial findings viral to cannot examination suggest reliably Physical associated

with pneumonia. associated wheezing, viral is cough, or prominent fever general are often bacterial more stridor; with than In pneumonias less inflammation viral upper a Mucosal and airway suggest congestion infection. higher are associated typically dyspnea, with cough, Bacterial pneumonias of lung consolidation. chills, and fever, auscultatory findings is may cough, and crackles by (infants) concomitant pneumonia (chlamydial) be infants young in present. conjunctivitis tachypnea, Atypical characterized auscultation, on distress nasal and subcostal intercostal signs and retractions, respiratory grunting. Other flaring, include of

may breathing be pain. to due splinting from Asymmetry shallow or a common diaphragm liver. lower but cause viral in low or infections, respiratory asthma frequently Hyperexpansion, accompanying may also or or for a effusion. large inability consolidation due indicate to an may Poor lungs diaphragmatic expansion excursion hyperexpanded percussion segmental pleural Dullness or lobar may infiltrates to to due be or fluid. the or pneumonia. early localized very detect in wheezes rhonchi, focal be normal may locate may and crackles, and help presence of Auscultation but pneumonia, one sounds pleural of breath fluid. indicate area poorly large, may consolidation Distant a ventilated or

(10–14 OF AGE 3 PATHOGENS* without History 1 TREATMENT) OF Agents to Therapy Recent OF Antibiotic of PATHOGENS COMMON LESS COMMON and OUTPATIENTS† (7–10 Pneumonia DURATION INTENSIVE TREATMENT) DAYS OF Therapy 110-1 APPROXIMATE DURATION DAYS Patients ORDER PATIENTS DURATION in REQUIRING CARE*,‡ Antimicrobial TOTAL FREQUENCY) TREATMENT) (IN months Table TOTAL Etiologic PATIENTS DAYS (10–14 TOTAL REQUIRING GROUP Empirical for HOSPITALIZATION‡

and age or if immunized b. for Amoxicillin pneumoniae S. H. for fully type ampicillin influenzae if or cefotaxime or local immunized ceftriaxone Alternatives: fully not

human if vancomycin metapneumovirus clindamycin, months clindamycin viruses, 3 respiratory with adenoviruses), nafcillin, syncytial significant, suspected Cefotaxime viruses, plus 5 S. pneumoniae, pneumoniae ceftriaxone influenza oxacillin, other virus, MRSA years or S. viruses Respiratory (parainfluenza resistance or penicillin to is

clarithromycin or without group if Staphylococcus Amoxicillin with fully erythromycin pneumoniae, Mycoplasma atypical or aureus, Alternatives: Chlamydophila Ampicillin or plus trachomatis, (type not pneumonia Mycobacterium suspected or local tuberculosis plus erythromycin, cefotaxime if or clarithromycin A azithromycin, immunized ceftriaxone influenzae ceftriaxone Cefuroxime pneumoniae, nontypable) H. C. b,§ azithromycin, or streptococcus,

clindamycin suspected significant, or clindamycin pneumoniae pneumonia MRSA azithromycin, vancomycin penicillin or is S. if Add clarithromycin with erythromycin, suspected; atypical resistance if

aureus. Staphylococcus Methicillin-resistant MRSA,

requiring *Severe admission pneumonia, S. an pneumoniae unit. M. care to from A intensive pneumoniae, aureus, or group S. streptococcus, H. influenzae, Antipseudomonal be suspected. added should if Pseudomonas is agents

†Oral administration.

orally. given for administration and are (erythromycin, the ‡Intravenous except macrolides inpatients which azithromycin, for clarithromycin), §H. universal type influenzae type infection influenzae b b H. immunization. is uncommon with pregnant contraindicated age 18 years women. than ǁFluoroquinolones are children for of younger and lactating or younger for 9 Tetracyclines are not years. recommended children than

upper accurately the respiratory of respiratory reflect from children. flora sputum do in high-quality is obtainable infections, tract tract present rarely flora and lower Bacterial not children invasive obtain not secretions procedures lower to disease, are without indicated. healthy tissue usually In otherwise or life-threatening respiratory pneumonia. the for bacterial causes not of tests most common are Serologic useful

with The elevated with predominance viral cell of predominance the often is WBC bacterial a mildly or neutrophils. with white with count pneumonias elevated, of whereas a normal is blood (>20,000/mm3) lymphocytes, (WBC) count pneumonias eosinophilia characteristic of trachomatis Mild is pneumonia. C. infant of on attempt diagnose be should Blood cause to pneumonia. to a performed cultures hospitalized children bacterial of are bacterial respiratory in of considered positive Blood 20% for pneumonia be if positive are of confirmatory cause 10% to pneumonia and the a pathogen. to recognized cultures Urinary useful for tests especially disease). antigen are L. (legionnaires’ pneumophila

rules detection, rapid (PCR) reaction can diagnosed using respiratory be neither pneumonia. pathogens but antigen polymerase or viral Viral bacterial chain out concomitant are agglutinins be M. pneumoniae should suspected confirmed and cold be samples peripheral can by PCR. present in Mycoplasma if blood and cultured from bronchoalveolar fluid. nasopharynx, CMV can or lavage the be urine, enterovirus culture, detection, The release sputum diagnosis is tuberculosis gastric test, by by serum of PCR. or aspirates or analysis or interferon-gamma M. assay, skin antigen of established tuberculin

therapy. ill The establish need with patients, an pneumonia, unresponsive are for greater patients immunocompromised of require patients to to empirical or with pneumonia to patients is who pneumonia etiologic recurrent hospitalization, diagnosis enough microbiologic of material these and methods needle diagnosis. For biopsy lung bronchoalveolar aspiration of and biopsy, mucosal lavage obtaining with lung, brush open the patients, bronchoscopy are for

is When pleural or diagnostic a pleural empyema, can a to fluid obtain effusion thoracentesis and therapeutic. there be with effusion parapneumonic between empyema sterile Evaluation a pneumonia. irritation contiguous and by pleura the of differentiates caused the bacterial Gram may or microbiologic lead to stain, culture, broad-range PCR diagnosis. and viruses. cultured mycobacteria, be for The fungi, should fluid pleural bacteria, removal grossly associated and recovery. is rapid the facilitate discomfort the fluid more patient’s reduces toxicity purulent, may If and the of improves impairs the pulmonary is of If to removal lung and large the mechanics gas ability and exchange. accumulation expand, fluid the

to retrocardiac are visualize outpatients. children, adequately in well-appearing and infiltrates localize to for confirm disease and radiographs diagnosis among necessary the not diagnosis are they Frontal are hospitalized required recommended and but lateral findings microbiologic a of characteristic radiographic there cannot alone Although diagnosis. are provide pneumonia, definitive radiography pneumonia 30% shows characteristically in to consolidation, pneumonia, pleural round cases of or effusion 10% lobar a with Bacterial (Fig. shows diffuse, characteristically (Fig. streaky pneumonia 110-1).Viral bronchopneumonia infiltrates of hyperinflation. 110-2) and with and pneumonia, such pneumoniae as M. Atypical

Figure and high in the with lobar child chest Acute pain. pneumonia a 6-year-old fever, of lingula cough, 110-1 consolidation, which shows airspace heart of border obliterates the Frontal radiograph on silhouette left. the chest the elevated splinting. The as result is hemidiaphragm of a left mildly Diagnostic (From Markowitz RI: imaging. editors: In Jen-son Principles RS, Baltimore Practice, p 2002, ed 2, Diseases: Saunders, and Infectious Philadelphia, HB, Pediatric 133.)

110-2 and in bronchopneumonia cough, with Diffuse fever, boy 12-year-old Figure viral wheezing. a chest perihilar, peribronchial thickening, and shows Frontal bilateral, shaggy radiograph infiltrate. present airspace consolidation upper the lobe. Focal of or atelectasis the portion right representing is medial in disease bronchopneumonia. typical The are findings of Markowitz (From Diagnostic imaging. RI: Practice, 132.) and Infectious Philadelphia, p HB, Jenson 2002, 2, ed In RS, Pediatric Diseases: Baltimore editors: Saunders, Principles

interstitial bronchopneumonia pneumoniae, or shows (Fig. markings increased C. 110-3). with hydration in Chest pneumonia, restored. normal during as be may appearing early radiographs treatment is infiltrates histoplasmosis, pneumonia lymphadenopathy bacterial uncommon neoplasm. be sign a tuberculosis, an Hilar malignant may is of underlying with but or whether be or size Decubitus views and are assess effusions should used freely mobile. of ultrasound pleural they to

for shortness boy malaise, week. infection pneumoniae 1 Mycoplasma of with cough, in mild (atypical breath dry 110-3 pneumonia) and 14-year-old Figure a diffuse chest Frontal radiograph shows of lines. including Kerley interstitial markings, pattern a increased are is focal there heart infiltrates. normal, and The no markedly responded erythromycin. the agglutinins Cold were and to patient elevated, This 30% Mycoplasma of patients disease caused observed radiographic of pneumonia interstitial to by reticulonodular 25% is in pattern with pneumoniae. (From Pneumonia. Baltimore RS: Baltimore 808.) In ed Practice, Diseases: 2, Jenson p and editors: Principles Philadelphia, Pediatric RS, Saunders, HB, Infectious 2002,

tomography used effusion evaluate bronchiectasis, serious to is characteristics. (CT) disease, Computed and pleural abscesses, or require 110-2). pneumonias (Table special etiologies Unusual considerations recurrent require empyema pneumatoceles, Lung abscesses, and management. all special

heart erythematosus. as Pneumonia and edema differentiated from lupus other and such diseases, be by must as cardiac acute diseases, certain pneumonitis, pulmonary allergic pulmonary and caused including such failure; asthma, cystic systemic vasculitides autoimmune fibrosis; diseases, differentiated inflammation. due lung body hemorrhage, must pneumonia foreign and sympathetic effusion be trauma aspiration, Radiographically subdiaphragmatic from to contusion, and

@ StudentConsult.com Available

specific agent and causing Therapy degree pneumonia knowledge includes likely and pneumonia. of on the the treatment infectious the illness, of supportive complications, for depends and on be of outpatient managed can basis. an children pneumonia Most healthy cases in to moderate severe or However with adequate respiratory maintain hypoxemia, be to inability should hospitalized. hydration, distress children child 6 concern care when considered ability pneumonia, with Hospitalization exists under a those symptom or there (e.g., virulence to family’s concern pathogen in whom the in months to for about bacterial methicillin-resistant suspected be should and assess for a a with increased infants is Staphylococcus aureus), progression.

Because require for antibiotic pneumonia. most treatment children young cause empirical in all viruses not community-acquired children, pneumonias in those without antibiotic Table Recommended in exposure recent are listed 110-1. therapies to (Table pneumonia, severe with and Exceptional nosocomial pathogens infections response opportunistic of empirical 110-3). presentations, include children therapy, situations unusually lack to susceptible immunocompromised presumed penicillin resistance. to high-level be with pneumococcal In pneumonia can meningitis, pneumococcal high-dose contrast therapy treated cephalosporin with even pneumonia old the resistance patient infants Vancomycin the macrolide For if can shows be isolate weeks by afebrile a severely and with ill. is trachomatis, to likely caused used C. high-level most 18 treatment. recommended is 4 the within influenza onset. symptom identified be Oseltamivir or if of is 48 should ideally or used hours zanamivir suspected,

pneumoniae cefpodoxime, for Streptococcus levofloxacin†, cefotaxime, PO vancomycin for ALTERNATIVE clindamycin Ampicillin Ceftriaxone, Caused amoxicillin Table PATHOGEN with TREATMENT Pneumonia MIC by ≤2.0 Pathogens* Antimicrobial PO RECOMMENDED IV; 110-3 or penicillin μg/mL TREATMENT or or penicillin Cefuroxime, Therapy IV; Specific linezolid

Ceftriaxone or or Ampicillin, MIC Streptococcus IV; for clindamycin with linezolid penicillin PO pneumoniae levofloxacin†, μg/mL ≥4.0 levofloxacin†

PO ampicillin IV; or PO or amoxicillin Penicillin penicillin clindamycin Ceftriaxone, vancomycin streptococcus A cefotaxime, clindamycin or IV; Group

or amoxicillin B ampicillin vancomycin Ceftriaxone, clindamycin Penicillin clindamycin streptococcus PO or Group or PO penicillin IV; cefotaxime, IV;

or PO Cefazolin, (MSSA) methicillin PO vancomycin Clindamycin or oxacillin, IV; aureus, IV; clindamycin susceptible nafcillin cephalexin Staphylococcus

PO resistant Linezolid clindamycin PO IV; methicillin IV Staphylococcus or aureus, Clindamycin (MRSA) or vancomycin

Intravenous; inhibitory os PO, TMP-SMX, per (orally); concentration; trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. MIC, IV, minimum mild may for therapy be used outpatient *Oral illness. Intravenous inpatient for be should illness. severe moderate therapy to used

levofloxacin, gemifloxacin. fluoroquinolones and †Appropriate gatifloxacin, moxifloxacin, include pregnant or Fluoroquinolones than of age contraindicated and are women. younger lactating years for children 18 than 9 Tetracyclines not years. younger for are children recommended

concentrations steady dosing been guided a ‡Aminoglycoside by has should state after antibiotic serum be reached.

empyema. cause to the purulent, an pleural or, in parapneumonic collect if inflammatory grossly frequently Bacterial pneumonias adjacent causing a space, effusion fluid not therapy. require Small any effusions special may effusions breathing require restrict may Large and drainage. within pneumatocele. in tissue results lung dissection Air a recurrent bronchiectasis the may increased airways for and lung resulting Scarring and leave bronchi, of tissue dilated infection. in risk

causes abscess. tissue lung Pneumonia of may into evolve lung that a necrosis is is obstructed and in or bronchus, Lung uncommon aspiration, by organisms. certain abscess behind infection virulent children an problem an caused usually bacteria usually coli, pneumoniae, with Anaerobic Klebsiella along predominate, Pseudomonas Staphylococcus various aureus. and Escherichia aeruginosa, streptococci, scan level, an lesion, reveals by often Chest a with CT parenchymal radiograph surrounded or air-fluid inflammation. cavitary organisms cavity bronchi, from sputum. If communicates isolated be may the with the obtain body indicated specimens. may a bronchoscopy to microbiologic exclude foreign be and Diagnostic appropriate antimicrobial respond or therapy ampicillin-sulbactam. penicillin abscesses Lung G, with to clindamycin, usually

radiographic Most return take to to from and recover to normal. pneumonia may completely, rapidly children 8 abnormalities although 6 weeks a children, month be longer 1 may pneumonia persist may recurrent. or In than few cystic the be anatomic chloride barium foreign gastroesophageal fibrosis, determination such immunoglobulin and reflux. further, to identify bronchoscopy or swallow possibility body, underlying skin tuberculin must In determinations, serum for investigated for abnormalities and sweat cases, as with IgG test, subclass of such disease

are volume compliance. scar by resulting in subacute bronchiolitis lung Severe small a a and which lung may in pneumonia in tissue, reduction inflammatory process the adenovirus replaced result obliterans, airways in pneumonia of lung of to sequela which radiographically; severe all adenovirus is increased in it lung, been linked a has syndrome, hyper-lucent a or translucency or necrotizing type Unilateral part has Swyer-James focal 21.

over influenza for Annual children of is recommended Chapter vaccine 94). (see age all 6 months vaccine 6 to beginning for licensed of 2 Trivalent, months attenuated can inactivated for influenza vaccine use 49 persons at of used be age. years live, age; is has vaccination with vaccines H. pneumoniae incidence S. of conjugate diminished these for greatly type influenzae and the b childhood Universal pneumonias. palivizumab use of reduced (see Chapter in be 109). The high-risk patients severity infections can RSV of by

Reducing administering of the antibiotics incidence of judiciously ventilation reduces and the pneumonias. mechanical ventilator-associated duration and the head raised all aspiration, of risk 30 equipment suctioning bed be The degrees for to 45 to of patients sterile. should and should intubated to be minimize saline infections. after are gloves and for of contact important invasive and nosocomial of washing before measures procedures use Hand patient to prevent every transmission certain organisms, are Hospital who with of such or methicillin-resistant as carriers respiratory staff illnesses

control policies patients. should prevent organisms comply infection to transfer S. aureus, of to with sources Treating as coolers, prevent of Legionella such air aerosols, can pneumonia.

Infective including infection is endocarditis heart, of an endothelial heart the surface the valves. on the infections of very similar. is on the The endothelial vessels of surfaces management blood in lesions, extends the are a occur usually fibrin mesh into called and microorganisms that bloodstream. leaflets trapped of composed vegetations, endothelial on valve Infectious the

111-1). causes principal only few there to reported are a cause children been endocarditis, in microorganisms have (Table although Many Viridans heart streptococci children previous in diseases principal with causes without the congenital surgery. are cardiac and are aureus surgery following of presence in coagulase-negative endocarditis, prosthetic materials. staphylococci Staphylococcus of endovascular the cardiac causes important and especially and

among valve. endocarditis children congenital cardiac native previously primarily Infective although occur of normal heart it disease a a surgery, is and can in complication are prior have lesions. with develop cyanotic material, children repair near valvular of who infective unrepaired defects prosthetic at site cardiac infective or or prosthetic for include residual Patients heart high patients 6 transplant months who valves risk endocarditis; of or at within or prosthetic material; disease, using have those endocarditis congenital a or tract. procedures respiratory gastrointestinal tract, The the after surgical oral is risk increased tract, or and genitourinary instrumentation of dental or procedures but uncommon. a heart is risk Rheumatic is disease factor central use Neonatal catheters of associated the endocarditis vascular and with surgery is

at most causative ages)* streptococci (the organism common all Viridans

elderly), A, Hemolytic C, neonates D G, groups (in streptococci: and B

kingae) actinomycetemcomitans, Actinobacillus and corrodens, Cardiobacterium hominis, Kingella HACEK Eikenella aphrophilus, (i.e., organisms Haemophilus

fever) (Q infective culture-negative common Coxiella causes Agents of children. of endocarditis burnetii endocarditis in *Most Chlamydia

in neonates. disease a little with in or children. and no socioeconomic predisposition predisposition Endocarditis geographic is sporadic gender

@ Available StudentConsult.com

are of loss. and most early symptoms nonspecific and fever, malaise, The include weight common endocarditis infective findings. common changed murmur Tachycardia and new are a or heart nonspecific heart cultures surgical or suspected, illness subtle blood congenital endocarditis underscore with obtain the and need procedures. is for disease The unexplained children findings if for especially after and to dental progressive sepsis. resemble Endocarditis is aureus usually often process, S. to subacute, slowly endocarditis is may due and acute but a spots, and petechiae, Heart be nodes, Roth may splinter lesions, splenomegaly, present. Janeway hemorrhages) phenomena embolic failure, (Osler and

by diagnosis culturing key continuous confirming or is fungemia The blood. to the bacteremia blood cultures initiating therapy. antibiotic are before Multiple performed with have treated antibiotics. near-maximal sensitivity blood Three venipunctures who patients among not been 95%) for achieve (about recently culture separate cultures receiving have or recently antibiotics who antibiotics currently are who should performed. serial been Patients treated with additional have culture-negative confirmed as Despite to the microbiologic of cases, adequate in blood not endocarditis. known 10% techniques, is culture 15% diagnosis

often rate protein elevated. Erythrocyte C-reactive are and sedimentation hematuria laboratory findings. common are and Leukocytosis, anemia, be may also or rheumatoid seen. antibody antinuclear positive A factor

Echocardiography valvular vegetations mm greater. endocardial visualizes measuring and or 2 prosthetic echocardiography Transesophageal more but in with for adolescents valves and unnecessary children. for sensitive patients adults is echocardiography is and often transthoracic than

from other the endocarditis 111-2). endocarditis the or causes for must other the of bacteremia Criteria be differentiated strength Modified (Table Infective diagnosis categorizing using of Duke conditions cardiac clots be and vegetations of associated with must and causes lupus excluded, such endocardial Noninfectious vegetations rheumatoid disease sterile erythematosus. as malformations, infected surgery. by infectious associated trauma, venous and heart, endothelial caused congenital foci the bacteremia can vascular vascular often be Prolonged thrombosis, with an of outside previous

145). ill Chapter failure, Severely be and must cardiac for edema, stabilized supportive (see cardiac patients therapies with pulmonary output low therapy be Empirical ill acutely persons cultures blood started antibiotic obtained. after may for are of isolate. recommended awaiting to the disease, according results confirm the With is cultures susceptibility therapy direct of to diagnosis the subacute to blood fibrin weeks). the passive extended period to 8 (4 doses must antibiotics diffusion of of antibiotics for required treatment organisms Because mesh, through reach high an by are the bactericidal 4 for viridans be from susceptible monotherapy treated carditis penicillin Infective can G with streptococci weeks. of is an 2-week in aminoglycoside effective plus penicillin G adults. regimen A disease. annulus acute or (fungal heart difficult refractory persistent embolic unsuccessful, an Surgery serious a rupture or is valve endocarditis), prosthetic with or failure, of pathogen treat or to unusual with insufficiency myocardial medical valvular valve if abscess, complications, treatment refractory bacteremia, is recurrent leaflet, valve indicated

emboli endocarditis septic valves complications and sterile are to direct vegetations. infective complications of The major and and damage the distant from heart to secondary heart the from vegetations Damage the the actual include tissue, heart resulting may with valves the abscess embolization regurgitation or of heart defects to of leaflet in valve leaflets and

injection or Criteria blood (major (glomerulonephritis, cultures condition valve or Roth and Criteria drug positive of use Criteria Active heart by or vegetation, lesions) Two endocardial positive cultures or IgG A Vascular Histopathologic cultures Positive culture timing positive Positive 4 of on nodes, infective spots, criteria factor) regurgitation) findings infarcts, >38° Microorganisms or than burnetii abscess Two criteria F) hours Major C drawn Predisposition—predisposing of examination or Two shown abscess, Evidence lesions >1:800 Criteria for three examination culture pathologic apart blood irrespective on for endocardial major more obtaining positive histopathologic hemorrhages, more mycotic Fever—temperature Coxiella 12 typical minor emboli, with hemorrhage, (>100.4° supporting a valvular positive arterial septic organisms (vegetation criteria) intracardiac or Immunologic endocarditis aneurysm, in separate emboli, titer one of specimen echocardiogram Minor blood major on rheumatoid Osler conjunctival or Janeway more five intracranial phenomena new blood minor or structure, cultures Clinical involvement phenomena or pulmonary

serologic meeting but infection consistent evidence criteria, or endocarditis) (positive result, with major Microbiologic active infective with organism blood evidence culture not of

alternative or diagnosis of for manifestations Firm endocarditis

therapy of for days or antibiotic manifestations of Resolution with endocarditis <4

or autopsy days surgery does at criteria for evidence or >4 pathologic No of endocarditis after not therapy meet possible antibiotic endocarditis of

of Tissieres diagnosis Value e467−e471, and from the Beghetti in M, Adapted Gervaix Reyn, criteria of Duke, and modified infective van et 112: limitations endocarditis P, the Pediatrics al: for A, Duke 2003. children,

ring, or abscess. myocardial examination by and monitored echocardiography. These complications should physical be picture. a stroke-like cause can or aneurysms abscesses Cerebral cause bleeding. can fatal Splenic abscesses

The of infective endocarditis caused outcome organisms the good. common by most often is to a 60% to with valve, S. streptococci synergistic caused in severe aureus 75% endocarditis combination antibiotics, viridans for greater cure 90% 90% an by treated of The Enterococcus 75% endocarditis rate acute, on by presentation. is uncomplicated natural endocarditis and for than a organisms is and gram-negative poor. for The by prognosis endocarditis caused rarer bacilli has the of cure about with poorest rate replacement. valve with Fungal endocarditis a even prognosis, 50%

tract, required procedures as manipulation as prophylactic well or the invasive all before during and dental antibiotics respiratory muscle. skin, high-risk or infected tissue of of involve are region gingival that procedures periapical patients, In the 50 minutes the procedure most to mg/kg 30 oral 2 dose, cases, 60 g) recommended is taken (maximum In regimen. before the amoxicillin allergic to most are indicated or for azithromycin alternative regimens β-lactams. Clindamycin patients continuous or prophylaxis antibiotic recommended. not is Prolonged

frequent, fecal is or abnormally and of discharges. liquidity enteritis which acute to gastroenteritis Acute diarrhea, refers processes that functions. absorptive different enterocyte secretory in caused is or Diarrhea affect directly intestine the and infectious by inflammatory parasitic Enteritis causes many and 112-1). (Table has viral, bacterial, monophosphate by toxin). increasing (Vibrio levels processes act adenosine of these coli Escherichia cholerae, Some heat-labile cyclic processes 112-2). by toxin) diarrhea by unknown (Table secretory (Shigella Other cause ion channels affecting or mechanisms

in a a and of is Diarrhea cause the morbidity in United leading States. children common disease is fatality. a major it cause the childhood world, of In developing on organisms. The of the depends epidemiology gastroenteritis specific person are organisms food human. or are to person, animal spread spread are via contaminated from and water, some Some others spread to by routes. spread organisms Many multiple spread, The organisms disease. mode infect cause an and minimum to number the of ability to ability colonize relates of to tract, gastrointestinal the organism required to of

of children causes enteric 40 the include adenoviruses gastroenteritis noroviruses), 41). (serotypes Viral caliciviruses and astroviruses,and rotaviruses, (including in most diarrhea Rotavirus during the cause frequent is of wintermonths. the 7 maylast 3 diarrhea 4 may last to to Vomiting days, 10 and days. is common children. Dehydration in younger in infancy in Primary with to but moderate rotavirus infection may disease severe life. less later cause is severe infants much in is rotavirus areas less Thisillness vaccine. where the receive common

microvilli (noroviruses) Caliciviruses lesion Rotaviruses Mucosal Astroviruses Mucosal Enteric lesion Mucosal Damage lesion to adenoviruses

Campylobacter Cytotoxin, difficile enterotoxin jejuni enterotoxin Invasion, Clostridium

(EPEC) Enteropathogenic effacement Adherence,

enterocolitica labile) Shigella (heat-stable cytotoxin (ETEC) cholerae Enterohemorrhagic Adherence, (includes diarrhea) (EHEC) Vibrio cytotoxin parahaemolyticus Invasion, Enterotoxin O157: or cytotoxin (EAEC) Adherence, Salmonella causing Enteroaggregative mucosa heat(traveler’s Yersinia enterotoxin, Enteroinvasive HUS) Invasion, damage Vibrio H7 Enterotoxigenic enterotoxin Invasion Enterotoxins (EIEC) of mucosal enterotoxin effacement, Invasion, Invasion,

cyst Entamoeba destruction cytotoxin Invasion, physical histolytica enzyme resistant production; and to

Adheres physical Giardia cyst to destruction to mucosa; lamblia resistant

(Enterocytozoon intestinal intestinalis) bieneusi, Encephalitozoon inflammation Spore-forming protozoa Adherence,

Hemolytic HUS, uremic syndrome.

and, Salmonella Salmonella is fever occasionally, typhi caused Typhoid by paratyphi. million 600,000 resulting of cases annually, Worldwide, deaths. in 16 typhoid estimated are an fever there bacillus only. The infects humans typhoid infections fever manifestations, distinguished inconsistent are extraintestinal despite diarrhea. prolonged of These by and presence of approximately each States, year. the cases In United fever occur 400 typhoid countries. travelers from Most in other returning occur usually (range to days of 14 to 7 incubation The fever period typhoid days). is 3 60 carriers, symptoms, chronic without spread. serve Infected sources reservoirs continuous or persons of as and have often cholelithiasis. Carriers

produces Nontyphoidal intestinal diarrhea mucosa. invading Salmonella the by are transmitted through organisms The

× osmolality; ETEC); fasting; 112-2 secretion: osmoles difficile, + electrolyte MECHANISM PRIMARY EXAMPLES malabsorption STOOL DEFECT also of Escherichia COMMENTS 2 Persists increased water secretion; Secretory normal Diarrhea = toxigenic (Na+ Cholera, during K+) Table Clostridium may EXAMINATION salt Watery, Decreased bile Infectious intestinal transport (EPEC, absorption, coli Mechanisms carcinoid, increase

symptoms and signs disorders. Major R: of Wyllie tract digestive From Behrman Pediatrics, Kliegman RE, of RM, 18, editors: In Nelson ed Jenson HB, Textbook

Table Philadelphia, p 2007, 303-7, 152. Saunders, to also may WBCs, cells; White blood increased infection contribute motility.

or animals (chickens, infected eggs, poultry. products, contaminated food dairy products, reptiles, turtles) pet contact iguanas, other and from as such with organisms, by is large killed 10 because billion acidity. of A gastric is Salmonella to inoculum, 1000 required 24 6 period less The for ranges incubation to from but is hours. gastroenteritis hours 72 usually than

by cause tissue toxin, combined alone producing may Shiga disease invasion. either or dysenteriae with Shigella 7 1 period is days. incubation The to organisms 1 shed month. for Infected may adults food or organisms. is contaminated spread with 10 of to ingestion contact by Infection by person-to-person 100 the The affected. selectively colon is to diarrhea. may fever and High seizures febrile in occur addition

E. Only produce coli strains of diarrhea. certain enteroaggregative enterohemorrhagic the diarrhea: (EAEC). classified with (EPEC), enterotoxigenic (ETEC), are mechanism E. strains associated enteropathogenic (EHEC), (EIEC), enteroinvasive or of by enteritis coli strains (cholera-like) enterotoxin, heat-labile ETEC enterotoxin, heat-stable produce both. or causes diarrhea. of 60% 40% ETEC to traveler’s cases of the adhere to the absorption. intestine that toxins intestinal in upper produce cells and liberating ETEC small and secretion induce disease by epithelial limit coli E. is thrombocytopenia, (see a O157:H7 Chapter EHEC, and is especially toxin hemorrhagic a uremic renal microangiopathic which colitis produce a failure hemolytic with that the most diarrhea hemolytic cases of syndrome anemia, syndrome 164). responsible and for Shiga-like associated (HUS), of strain, associated especially, food, unpasteurized undercooked and, fruit beef. is including EHEC juices with contaminated a endothelial blocks vascular gastroenteritis, affects diarrhea, is with protein the synthesis of this but and cells EHEC usually and cell toxin clinical associated form HUS. in bloody with host production of self-limited of resulting manifestations glomeruli, the similar mucosa, inflammation, to mucosal acute producing invades widespread with EIEC Shigella. damage colonic is responsible the epidemics newborn day many of EPEC for in of care centers. and in nurseries diarrhea

and food, and cheese. poultry, water raw person-to-person by especially is by Campylobacter and contaminated jejuni milk, spread contact organism ileum, the The and invades jejunum, colon. the mucosa of transmitted by food, chitterlings. Yersinia is enterocolitica and especially pets contaminated older of disease, have young Crohnʼs Infants acute or lymphadenitis ileum appendicitis diarrheal whereas children acute characteristically mesenteric and a the lesions have mimicking children terminal disease. or usually may arthritis, rash, and spondylopathy develop. Postinfectious

antibiotic-associated toxin. difficile Clostridium diarrhea, secondary C. diarrhea to causes its difficile-associated or spores spread person person. produces organism that The from to

diarrhea C. follow difficile-associated exposure may any to antibiotic.

Cryptosporidium America lamblia, Important found includeEntamoeba enteric in Giardia (amebiasis), North histolytica parasites parvum. and whereas among infants common endemic United care centers. the climates, in in day is Statesand giardiasis is warmer throughout Amebiasis occurs brain. bowel pass colon; infects amebae the liver, walland lung, through the the and may E. histolytica invade Diarrhea onset,is contains of is bloody, and leukocytes. acute from or with water of or ingestion well freshwater from infectedindividual G. infected an with lamblia transmitted is or through either food feces. contaminated contact cysts, of The adheres the the epithelium. jejunal micro-villi organism and to duodenal Insidious anorexia, intolerance, onset giardiasis. gaseousness, watery nausea, abdominal lactose is secondary and weightloss ofprogressive distention, of diarrhea, characteristic resolveswithout persons that diarrhea immunocompetent Cryptosporidium treatment. mild, in causes watery syndrome produces prolonged Chapter It diarrhea severe, acquired inpersons immunodeficiency with (AIDS)(see 125).

Available @ StudentConsult.com

and Gastroenteritis be by fever, lethargy, pain. suchas findings, accompanied abdominal systemic may syndromes. Patients often clinical presentwith diarrhea stools, no Viral mucus. characterized is or blood with bywatery may Vomiting infantsand may prominent, be be dehydration children. present, in younger and especially is low Fever, when present, grade.

enteric is fever precede phase. final and characterized fever Typhoid by the bacteremia usually that the over 72 pain over and hours constipation to with 48 headache, abdominal appetite, week. nausea, first worsen and Fever, decreased loss by marked for melena. or to weight persists and, disease untreated, the If hematochezia significant 2 weeks 3 occasionally, rare in perforation in is a complication is common children. but adults Bowel chronic as sources of or symptoms, continuous Infected persons and carriers, reservoirs serve spread. without

foul enteritis involving the is possibly rectum, smelling with colon fever. and Dysentery blood stools, and mucus, and nontyphoidal enterocolitica, with C. from dysentery), Shigella EHEC, dysentery, infection prototype histolytica of cause the Y. E. jejuni, which Salmonella. must EIEC, (amebic be differentiated and is Gastrointestinal significant. bleeding and blood loss may be

V. caused and that such by Enterotoxigenic ETEC. produce is enterotoxins, cholerae disease as agents low Fever grade. is or absent with 4 involves the day. to per lasts usually stools usually blood to mucus days with loose four without ileum five stools 3 Diarrhea watery and or

of degree daily dehydration of the clinical 33). in is to and symptoms, evident Chapter A requirements(see assess as signs with management and from diarrhea consideration losses, chief child ongoing a dehydration moderate usually with situation treated (IV) needed intravenous usually the rehydration to severe dehydration of volume urgencyof requires ICU dehydration admission. and dictates be fluid and the of the require for can The oralrehydration; may degree rehydration.Mild

laboratory diarrhea an urinalysis and includes indicator moderate gravity Initial for urea evaluation severe of of nitrogen, specific creatinine, hydration. blood to as electrolytes, be for indicate and response diffusely colonic as colitis in that which bacteria blood, should Salmonella, the Stool mucus, examined specimens invade such to Shigella, leukocytes, mucosa,

and coli. E. invasive jejuni, C. Shiga generally leukocytes. infected and Patients toxin-producing fecal E. have E. with coli histolytica minimal

test should be winter. in especially rapid rotavirus A stool for performed, the diagnostic during fever, patients anddehydration pseudomembranous or suspected. for or diarrhea, if recommended with colitis HUS is Bacterial culturesare stool profuse test there history no food negative result to is stool and likely. is the ingestion, aviral suggest for leukocytes,and If etiology blood is contaminated most identified. be diarrhea acute whichno of agent especially parasitic and cases inreturning considered agentsshould in protracted evaluation illness, bacterial in travelers, for dysenteric Stool for is diagnosis in on the stool. histolytica is identification the based of E. of The organism extraintestinal abscess. Serologictests are amebiasis, of amebic diagnosis for including hepatic useful choice. can trophozoites stool tests or fecal be immunoassays in specimens.More but Giardiasis the sensitive identifying diagnostic diagnosed and require cysts by specific three of are

and cultures very S. Salmonella, E. young infants. typhi enteritis coli are bacterial uncommon enteritis blood fever), in except Positive with (typhoid for nontyphoidal are stool bacteremia. fever, disease, the in cultures become blood only after early cultures whereas positive secondary Intyphoid positive the

Available StudentConsult.com @

to Vomiting Pain Abdominal Thrive Failure Diarrhea

celiac proteins), inflammatory defects, enterocytes. or or to (including bowel gastrointestinal allergy soy to disease, Diarrhea by disease, can any caused malabsorption allergy injury toxins, be infection, milk necessary. reaction other stool of differentiated are tests, from enzyme-linked Specific infections or when chain by immunosorbent and assay each cultures use polymerase the identified which are as appendicitis, mimic best diagnostic enteritis Acute such acute diseases, may other by intussusception and imaging. acute diarrhea noninfectious causes days. chronic diarrhea, for than of produce persistence more Many with 14 may chronic invasive tests diarrhea (see for and endoscopy require 129). or Persistent studies, Chapter biopsy or including malabsorption small bowel

associated ingestion contaminated diarrhea Common-source of is usually food. with the are Shigella, cholerae. States, monocytogenes, most of and Listeria V. United frequency) common coli order Salmonella, nontyphoidal causes E. bacterial (in Campylobacter, In the food-borne Yersinia, O157:H7, parvum causes parasitic common most The Cyclospora Cryptosporidium cayetanensis. food-borne and are

Bacillus fish, ingestion as such shellfish, by contaminated multiply enterotoxins includes such cereus, preformed and nonbacterial which toxins also from foods, mushrooms. of bacteria, Common-source in and S. diarrhea as aureus and produced and period, present. short diarrhea may incubation and may or not be cramps symptoms, prominent vomiting a After are metals drinks and gastric food that Heavy may infectious of enteritis. into acute or mimic leach symptoms causing irritation syndromes canned emetic

children Most are causes diarrhea self-limited. of infectious in secondary electrolyte deficits and most fluid ongoing bacterial from primarily viral dehydration correcting and managing consists and of resulting is of complications and injury. supportive diarrhea and Management mucosal of causes

is Hyponatremia hypernatremia less common. is common; stool, results acidosis of in Metabolic results results from losses retention phosphate lactic insufficiency. acidosis shock, prerenal-renal from and from bicarbonate transient for diarrhea. hours for effective is 24 with viral rehydration therapy oral solutions Traditionally alone severe involves and Therapy for electrolyte losses hydration. IV fluid dehydration containing excessive Less oral absence with glucose or vomiting rehydration severe and managed degrees be in solutions (<10%) the electrolytes. may of shock of may when reduce administered Ondansetron to persistent. be emesis

younger or typhi(typhoid S. foci, therapy necessary with nontyphoidal months with sepsis only with of salmonella. systemic is signs those or fever) patients bacteremia Antibiotic for with toxicity, and infants metastatic than 3 of treatment after disease. in of reducing the 80% bacteriologic the Shigella a Antibiotic spread patients produces cure of 48 hours, Many the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. sonnei strain amoxicillin children, isolates, to resistant Shigella affecting and predominant are 18 older. an Recommended and fluoroquinolone cephalosporin children a for for years treatment is oral third-generation or patients

and, metronidazole colitis) severe, the Treatment diarrhea vancomycin. of oral of or (pseudomembranous includesdiscontinuation is antibiotic C. difficile if as by dysentery such luminal a histolytica agent, E. treatedwith metronidazole is iodoquinol. followed metronidazole, of or G. quinacrine. lamblia treatment with is furazolidone, The albendazole, can treatment children the usedin than of age younger be 12 Nitazoxanide months for ofCryptosporidium.

hypovolemic shock. is gastroenteritis dehydration complication of and The major Shigella. with may with Seizures high fever, occur especially fever, form perforation, life-threatening especially Salmonella typhoid with and Intestinal a infections, to can intestinal abscesses complication. Shigella leading tears aspiration or with can vomiting cause esophageal associated pneumonia. Severe gastroenteritis

electrolyte of and problem of the reflect imbalance, homeostasis, to from leads which dehydration, disruption principal and Deaths fluid resulting instability, shock. vascular diarrhea electrolyte children from of 75 1 under year in to annually diarrheal United deaths disease, primarily the occur 150 age. approximately In States, seasonal in These rotavirus occur with October between the concurrent and pattern a deaths season. February,

and have become 10% about At shed carriers. chronic of typhoid typhifor fever patients S. 3 4% who months, least low carrier becoming The of chronic a is risk in children. Ciprofloxacin is persistent with carriers excretion. for recommended adult Salmonella

important provision preventing is diarrhea the growing, collecting, uncontaminated preparing hygiene The in means water and and childhood most clean, foods. proper of of soap of with Good most gastroenteritis. person-to-person hygienic and organisms are spread especially water, controlling washing the means best measures, of causing hand good should with Similarly poultry and cooked should considered be handled products and be contaminated appropriately. Salmonella potentially

all 8 6 infection weeks days weeks last is by recommended Immunization the dose by 14 against age, of dose rotavirus and months beginning Chapter 94). the 6 (see for with at first children vaccine 6 typhoid are persons and a capsular and States: administration oral intramuscular polysaccharide children attenuated (Ty21a) for United in for and licensed live 2 (ViCPS) the older. an Two older, vaccines for years years vaccine travelers of are S. or typhi for These chronic developing of carriers. for countries recommended contacts endemic areas household to

Families from aware household salmonellosis of be acquiring the pets. reptile of should risk hand reptile Transmission of handling can cages. reptiles thorough Salmonella water be reptiles prevented washing and after soap with by or from and age immunocompromised contact years should reptiles. 5 avoid with under of Children persons

by drinking traveler’s minimized The diarrhea, primarily water. uncooked for risk by untreated avoiding caused and ETEC, may food be or is be bismuth with a prevention recommended for day) Prophylaxis for orally children. (2 four times may not for but tablets subsalicylate oz two effective adults (Pepto-Bismol) for recommended least with at children loperamide of Symptomatic years and oral for rehydration age and adults. mild solution (Imodium) WHO diarrhea self-treatment is 6 Self-treatment fluoroquinolone of 18 of moderate with adults at is in and a years diarrhea recommended old. fever least or days, evaluation indicated Prompt moderate vomiting, persistent especially 102° is fever dehydration, to stools, or than 3 bloody (38.9° children. in F severe C) for more above disease chills, medical persisting

infectious reduces for incidence other and in probiotic with treated diarrhea of antibiotic-associated and children a antibiotics community-acquired diseases. the acidophilus oral is Lactobacillus

six There (HCV)Hepatitis virus hepatotropic primary (HAV)Hepatitis virus (HEV)Hepatitis (HDV)Hepatitis virus C viruses:Hepatitis G (HBV)Hepatitis D virus A B E virus virus (HGV) are

transmission, their risk 113-1). hepatocellular of of severity, differ in and virologic characteristics, They (Table carcinoma likelihood persistence, subsequent coinfection requires chronic with the a HBV antigen) causes B superinfection either HDV, and is that also spread in agent, virus (hepatitis or carriers. surface as defective delta for HBsAg known HBV carrier can spread. in HDV hepatitis, a facilitates and or infections HCV, chronic HBV, result chronic state, which is The cases 15% acute cause unknown. 10% hepatitis of to of of

causes cases of of approximately half United States. the in viral HAV all hepatitis hepatitis children, all approximately 80% 15% HAV, 5% viral HCV. caused of new by 5% by cases are and to 70% U.S. Among 30% to by to of HBV, for factors HCV The major use, exposure frequent drug HBV are injectable and risk

50to 27–34 HGV circular 30to 30to Viral Viral virus virus virus particle TTV, HAV* 113-1 ssRNA 36-nm Acute 60-nm with 27-nm Causing ssRNA HBV HCV† HEPATITIS 50nm ssRNA ssDNA HBsAg SEN-V VIRUSES hybrid virus ssRNA ssRNA 42-nm FEATURE HDV Agents dsDNA virus of 100-nm nm Table Hepatitis coat virus Characteristics HEV‡ structure

dsDNA, immunoblot chain assay; No HEV, A Yes virus. HBV, Yes hepatitis reverse recombinant of HCV, reaction; virus; transfusion-transmitted virus; B virus; virus; chain ssDNA/ssRNA, HGV, G Increased TTV, PCR, hepatitis DNA; HDV, E reaction; polymerase RIBA, virus; hepatitis Double-stranded hepatitis hepatitis No stranded Unknown hepatocellular DNA/RNA; risk D hepatitis HAV, carcinoma C transcriptase-polymerase virus; single- RT-PCR, No *I.e., enterovirus 72.

posttransfusion non-B virus. †Formerly non-A,

virus. non-A, enteral ‡Formerly non-B

infection. from maternal blood and to transmission products, prenatal HEV outside United travel following to States. the endemic areas of occurs persons. prevalent HGV HIV-infected is in HBV which chronic hepatocellular a risk may to and of cause lead represents is and persistent cirrhosis and carcinoma significant HCV for factor transmission. risk infection, a

@ StudentConsult.com Available

HCV There HAV, characteristic (Fig. clinical is HBV, of considerable and the courses in overlap 113-1). by 1 which detectable week, preicteric characterized and phase, malaise, abdominal lasts approximately The usually disease. discomfort, onset the of nausea, vomiting precedes headache, is clinically and anorexia, of complexes Infants may before acquired have and accompanied urticaria icterus. by the onset arthritis immune perinatal with HBV findings and tender are characteristic Jaundice and the the are hepatomegaly phase. of most physical icteric common the during children, symptoms, in Prodromal icteric particularly phase. abate may common HAV, especially icterus and HCV, mild, children. nonspecific in without with Asymptomatic HBV, illness young is or 20-fold. may 15to increase enzymes Hepatic weeks. the to the 6 Resolution of and of normalization 8 may hyperbilirubinemia take transaminases

Alanine generally aspartate elevated reflect parenchymal the and aminotransferase levels inflammation. degree are of and aminotransferase direct and (conjugated) results cholestasis, bile and damage. 5α-nucleotidase, total levels from bilirubin degree duct hepatocellular the Alkaline phosphatase, which of and indicate good prothrombin time is The a predictor

antibody B antigen; B, associated surface hepatitis 113-1 B virus; core course hepatitis HCV, HBeAg, C hepatitis virus; hepatitis PCR, antigen; and to hepatitis hepatitis A anti-HBe, hepatitis ALT, anti-HBs, aminotransferase; findings antigen; antigen; hepatitis Alanine reaction. with anti-HBc, Clinical HBsAg, hepatitis surface and laboratory antibody B HAV, polymerase A, C. Figure to early early antibody antigen; to B hepatitis B chain

Chapter to progression severe failure hepatic of and hepatocellular injury (see fulminant 130).

113-1 viral diagnosis is (see The Fig. by testing of and serologic hepatitis confirmed Table 113-1). is of of absent presumptive with or antibody IgG The HAV HAV. to to low presence IgM-specific antibody HAV evidence carrier is state no There of chronic HAV. of HBV. chronic acute The or presence HBsAg signifies with infection is Antigenemia is infection. transient characteristic usually in chronic early of appears and but illness the is determined infection HBsAg should likelihood because when of HBV than of Maternal in 1 be age of vertical the transmission. younger status year always children diagnosed Hepatitis antigen with (HBeAg) the in HBV. acute appears early serum B antigen is and that ongoing transmissibility risk absence associated of of in viral continued antibody presence (anti-HBe) e of indicates The high HBeAg replication. HBsAg the to with Clearance by of the immunity surface is precedes followed HBsAg the of from antibody serum a window indicates and antigen a the of of period lifelong emergence development (anti-HBs), immunization. marker which variable to also before (when recognizing appearance is marker anti-HBs). antigen during but HBV useful the has infection the Antibody HBsAg core phase a window for disappeared of (anti-HBc) to Anti-HBe carrier a infectivity useful in degree of the during state. predicting is low Seroconversion 6 after infection. may occur after HCV months infection with immunoblot detects assay, antigens. should HCV be confirmed antibodies more enzyme-linked specific HCV which of result positive assay immunosorbent multiple the recombinant A to (PCR) be by HCV test a RNA inoculation. and chain infection, positive 3 of may is polymerase reaction for results active sensitive marker after this of Detection days

simplex of viruses may cause including varicella and Many adenoviruses. infection, zoster as (chickenpox), virus, cytomegalovirus, herpes hepatitis systemic virus, Epstein-Barr virus part other that and infections may Escherichia cause sepsis Bacterial include coli hepatitis leptospirosis. Patients jaundice. and present cholecystitis, symptoms cholangitis, with may and acute with choledocholithiasis metabolic liver childhood shock, disease Chapter tumor, oral poisonous disease tyrosinemia), disease, include (galactosemia, toxins deficiency, (ethanol, valproic Other and disease Wilson acetaminophen), of mushroom), phenytoin, (see acid, drugs (isoniazid, anoxia, acute in contraceptives, 130). causes α1-antitrypsin graft-versus-host carbamazepine,

rest, is nutrition. hydration, of hepatitis The treatment andinvolves largely and acute supportive adequate prolonged signs dehydration,a indicated encephalopathy. for severe persons time, hepatic with vomiting and of Hospitalizationis prothrombin or should is toward its the established, diagnosis viral to preventing directed spread When closecontacts. of attention hepatitis be contaminated hygienic For and clothing, hand other careful blood-contaminated washingand measures of needles, HAV, include disposal excreta, diapers or items.

with interferon be combination Chronic alfa with ribavirin. HBV may infection treated be or in or HCV usually alfa-2b with and treated interferon may alone lamivudine, experience these Mostly regimens. adults treatment viral decision therapy, The stage patient’s age viral during and HBV development mutations is at infection. the on based to current treat of of age, acquisition, of immune interferon or which infection in tolerant often early is chronic vertical in by transmission Transmission life in results HBV not phase, an effective. HBV infection in usually

eventual of HAV up an undulating course or in to adults, relapsing may before months 15% course of 6 clinical A resolution. lasting protracted with develop to cases in 10% with or encephalopathy, a from uncommon associated is varices esophageal bleeding with and is Fulminant rate. hepatitis high coagulopathy, mortality jaundice gastrointestinal but profound

0.1% hepatic less of fulminant acute specific progressing to necrosis. viral cases than Most therapy, resolve of hepatitis with without cases HAV acute infection and only. cause HEV chronic HCV, fibrosis, cirrhosis risk with and inflammation, hepatocellular persist carcinoma. HDV the infection as chronic and associated and may of HBV,

who with From compared children HBV perinatal infection, of than for blood 6 10% with of to transmission. HBV develop months, adults persistent defined more in 90% acquire HBsAg by the by of persistence 5% HBsAg of unless usually HDV. with is Chronic hepatitis, HBeAg-negative carriers are evidence clinical, serologic there superinfection biochemical, no have or and active 10% Approximately 15% HBsAg. eventually clear HBsAg carriers to of

which infected Approximately Fig. infected, levels of (see transaminase persons HCV chronically with is 85% by remain characterized fluctuating 113-1). correlation damage. symptoms There with of poor is ongoing liver and infection persons develop cirrhosis, of with hepatocellular approximately chronic 25% develop of Approximately those carcinoma. 20% progression. and risk the use HCV ethanol of increase HIV infection

risk fecal-oral transmission HAV. reduce practices of of the significantly Good hygienic blood-borne the donors of significantly hepatitis transmission. risk for evidence reduces of Screening blood measures prevent persons. in are susceptible to cases Specific postexposure recommended secondary

vaccine children prophylaxis and 2 routine targeted of last for in as vaccination for immunization unvaccinatedolder should as programs.Unvaccinated persons receive children HAV postexposure and exposure. at soon of and is contacts sexual 12 with household beginning the recommended of within areas weeks months all possible withHAV is dose HAV A forpersons months 40 the single years 12 vaccine age. of to doseof age-appropriate at preferred persons. (0.02mL/kg) of for years immunocompromised under12 and preferred age, given months Immunoglobulin persons age, over children 40 is intramuscularly of departure. to of endemicregions at HAV Unvaccinated a time before administered dose any vaccine receive should travelers single

adolescents immunized infants years through vaccine immunization have age who is and for children HBV of of birth routine been not beginning all recommended at and (see for all previously 18 Fig. 94-1). for as recommended recipients is to detention persons increased including correctional for at of workers. sex persons, children exposure disabled of preexposure and other clotting who inmates juvenile injectable care and facilities, drug institutions undergoing hemodialysis, developmentally concentrates, and men factor men, adults health staff a have vaccination older and users, HBV, of with It risk also of residents has already in effectiveness the high-risk HBV shown reducing hepatocellular incidence of carcinoma vaccine populations. in for States. the women screening all in for prenatal pregnant is recommended Routine HBsAg United within for to mL) vaccine 6 age. subsequent testing doses Infants and of age hours to with 12 receive B vaccine anti-HBs mothers birth, at and followed HBV HBsAg-positive by 15 should (HBIG) at born months months 1 HBsAg immunoglobulin of of hepatitis 9 month and (0.5 birth. status hours should unknown receive of HBsAg to is mothers within born 12 Infants vaccine whose maternal receive should the positive week than HBIG of HBsAg, possible is infant later If soon testing 1 for age). as (no as and vaccination of combination HBIG effective transmission The vertical in HBV. of is preventing 99% 95% approximately of prevent HBV cases and of Vaccination transmission without HBV of perinatal childhood alone 75% infection. symptomatic cases of HBIG may

needle forhousehold partners. recommended blood including persons patient vaccine following and stick and intimate with sex members contact, of unvaccinated Postexposure HBsAg-positive is from with an usingHBIG injuries prophylaxis

be pelvis), (UTIs) and intrarenal pyelonephritis of infections perinephric. localized calyces, bladder), renal may the which and to Urinary the parenchyma, include abscess, or cystitis renal renal (infection (infection tract and are The urinary sterile. urine tract normally infections. accounts recurrent from and coli, flora, infections 75% of first Escherichia ascending of 90% for bowel to cells of coli binds possess group nephritogenic antigens. fimbriae P Over that uroepithelial P and 90% E. blood UTIs. P1 expression pyelonephritis are to with Individuals group antigen recurrent well and blood as of predisposed as high-level bacteremia, infection and causing Proteus, bacteria Other Klebsiella, Enterococcus, commonly Pseudomonas. include adolescent some UTI saprophyticus with sexually children and is associated girls. active in Staphylococcus in occur typically coli syndrome, E. to after and the are trachomatis, acute of causes or hours S. postcoital sexual 12 the 72 chief urethritis, which saprophyticus, Chlamydia intercourse. urethral

a boys of UTI 8% 11 by and Approximately 2% age. of years have girls of compared females lifetime in 1% UTI 30% The males. only in incidence to about is of 75% of 10% Approximately age 8 male 3 than age. of only between with with compared younger infants bacteriuria months are months 3 and of 12 girls. healthy usually After seen is age, of in months in UTI children

A to girls UTI. short urethra predisposes at for male 12-fold infants. maleinfants are UTI risk increased compared Uncircumcised withcircumcised 5to and risk factor junction obstruction, flow indwelling from urine may result Obstruction compression, urinary pregnancy. the renal nephrolithiasis, tumor, is megaureter, ureteropelvic anatomicabnormalities, major and and extrinsic stasis urinarycatheter, to Vesicoureteral infection to chronic scarring. predisposes urinary reflux, and (70% renal cases) secondary to whetherprimary of obstruction, tract or the Scarring reflux. develop also may absence of in

@ Available StudentConsult.com

The vary age. of symptoms and markedly UTI with signs consistent symptoms. to problems, fever the failure have and Few high most with feeding positive predictive thrive, in values as neonates, to gram-negative secondary endotoxin. Direct may develop hyperbilirubinemia 2 1 fever. to old Infants thrive, feeding problems, vomiting, diarrhea, with unexplained to years may or failure present month The illness irritability, colic, gastrointestinal with as masquerade symptoms and may screaming periods. such age, of abdominal or and to signs dysuria, the begin pain. classic back as urgency, UTI years show frequency, 2 children of At tract. of all The fever young anomalies all in and infants ages and unexplained suspected be should in presence congenital fever UTI patients of urinary with the children with of and

and pathogenic single the pyuria 50,000 and least UTI a organism. young of CFU/mL at children in The requires presence infants diagnosis of both of and CFU/mL children indicates >100,000 older adolescents, infection. For minutes) should refrigerated samples examined urinalysis cultured. or (within for 20 Urine promptly until be are which started. the obtained midstream, antibiotics children for technique Urine in is clean-catch appropriate by and transurethral is appropriate children catheterization and younger older collection adolescents whereas method being for method, an infants contamination for for not culture. are Perineal urine are to for prone collection bags urine and collection recommended If there

>10 suggests urethritis, is infection, pyuria nephrolithiasis, nephritis. showing blood of cells interstitial glomerulonephritis, white vaginitis, [WBCs]/mm3) also Urinalysis consistent (leukocyturia with but and positive combine and for that the tests dipstick esterase specificity for UTI. 70% 99% have and and both leukocyte a sensitivity esterase of nitrite leukocyte (or of microscopy positive detecting bacteria) Urinary sensitivity. has test poor Either alone used

for Ultrasonography exclude recommended UTIs kidneys structural infants of or abnormalities the with and bladder is to febrile detect hydronephrosis. obstruction to scarring, findings the indicated or is congenital (VCUG) Voiding if abnormality). or ultrasound (hydronephrosis, cystourethrogram is suggest other abnormal abnormality found (complete is V is ureter grade I to gross most anatomy) (see Chapter grade of and (ureter caliceal dilation from and pelvic ranked the obliteration Vesicoureteral the reflux of only) 167). and common technetium-99m acute pyelonephritis can late of useful UTI. DMSA a scarring is identify most and renal define scan to A as effect

is not of by this UTI tract culture, between a positive but upper The urine distinguish a confirmed does infection. andlower diagnosis tract associated UTI is importantbecause of a uncomplicated and is cystitis. with than upper Localization anatomic abnormalities bacteremia with is more UTI frequently of clinical The neonates, of in notreliably UTI site toddlers. do infection manifestations distinguish the infants,and involvement.DMSA abdominal acute rate, lower scan although UTI, upper occur with costovertebral or sedimentation and is commonly Fever leukocytosis, fever, tenderness, not pyelonephritisbut bacteremia high each either detecting tract upper pain may erythrocyte for sensitive suggest and used. high

children of manifestations mesenteric young in of signs overlap UTI seen and appendicitis, The enteritis, with children. with pneumonia sepsis and older lymphadenitis, in sexual detergents, may or abuse and infection. or hypersensitivity soaps vaginitis, indicate pinworm Dysuria to infection,

Available @ StudentConsult.com

UTI. be a should urine symptomatic initiated and therapy culture for for Empirical confirming all children children with For oral positive should but ill culture, initiated. not does antibiotic be appear older therapy has an a child urine who or dehydrated, who toxic, suspected For be be parenterally, appears and appears a is should with unable fluids, UTI retain to antibiotic administered initial should oral considered. hospitalization child therapy

convenient is UTI antibiotics collected treated or UTI rate are to because enteral in can method with for higher Neonates the of with most urine a be of bacteremia. diagnosis 14 uncertainty the days about of younger by par-infant, 10 child are infection, treated suggestive with Older for to 14 urine days. 7 urinalysis and UTI children by for collect if of prior antibiotics. Initial catheterization to starting with status. treatment determined antibiotics is clinical parenteral by 48 continued to improvement should antibiotics hours). 24 (typically clinical Parenteral there be until is of patient’surine and should increasing antimicrobial results the the guided local by cultures patterns susceptibility antimicrobial related be of because problems Specificantibiotic therapy resistance. the to include gentamicin. antibiotics Commonly parenteral used or ceftriaxone clavulanic Oral regimens acid, sulfamethoxazole. or acephalosporin, include trimethoprim amoxicillin plus startingantimicrobial for imagingpromptly. clinical undergo response of be 2 do children notshow expected should and therapy within Infants days and who have obtained culture, specimen anotherurine the re-evaluated,

assessed fluids intake carefully. toxicity, and of of ability dehydration, The oral should be degree retain to vomiting hydration, including oral electrolyte often important. of intake, or associated correction poor adequate is abnormalities are maintaining Restoring or with that

than occurs is 5% children. to older more pyelonephritis of episodes 2% and in infants of in Bacteremia in likely an are renal abscesses Focal complication. uncommon

of to rate 40%. UTI The approximately is 25% relapse within of occur to 2 treatment. relapses 3 Most weeks fevers for evaluation to Parents evaluate subsequent for a up should be counseled of follow of recurrence for possibility UTI. the to (VCUG) a 167). of Chapter are the is vesicoureteral imaging possibility If indicated (see studies to UTI diagnosed, recurrent further reflux evaluate

is constipation, UTI, risk urinary for suchas underlying prevention Primary and managing daytime encopresis, promoting nighttime chronic and by achieved perinealhygiene and incontinence. factors good although is symptomatic recurrentinfections, is small. that severe effect may prevent antibioticprophylaxis the evidence There more sole not renal at urine UTI risk. preventing to the scarring of as recommended children cranberry of is unknown.Acidification prophylaxis The secondary with in is high impact of prevent the means juice

vagina problem or the common gynecologic Vulvovaginitis, both, is the or which the vulva is inchildren. of most inflammation thin, atrophic to bacterialinvasion. that vaginal result epithelium susceptible levels Low is of in prepubertal estrogen more puberty of the vagina and acidic. increases, At pH the becomes estrogen (see herpes Trichomonas are and several such sexually as 116). vaginalis virus specific causesof vulvovaginitis (Table infections simplex 115-1), transmitted Chapter There including from hygiene. associated aerobic of Nonspecific overgrowth is vaginitis normal that poor vaginal with flora results Peptostreptococcus. Bacterial Mobiluncus, Bacteroides, caused is including Gardnerella synergistically anaerobes, vaginal which vaginosis vaginalis, interacts with and by

is the in girls. common vaginitis most vulvovaginitis cause young Nonspecific of is preadolescent the girls vaginal common active. are sexually who in is as vaginalis often more present but of G. girls normal flora in part in in girls is Candida women. preadolescent common less much than

StudentConsult.com Available @

symptoms and primary are pruritus. erythema, discharge, vulvovaginitis vaginal The of 115-1. are specific etiologies Characteristics of outlined Table in

appearance. culture be mixing normal with and solution, used that granular saline a confirm microscopic and cells by G. a Wet 115-1).Clue (see may epithelial mount Table specific covered are vaginal vaginalis examination, vaginal with secretions to diagnosis prepared cells have are Vaginal for cultures

vaginalis not G. useful. are by or wet Candida may saline be identified mount by culture.

dermatitis, vulvovaginitis (foreign psoriasis). seborrhea, skin (bubble (atopic body, and chemical include causes physicalagents disease sand), vulvar agents of detergent), Noninfectious bath,soap, menarche. cells before girls in at for normally lasting 1 andmucus soon week, appears Physiologic 12months birth, discharge and of to desquamated vaginal discharge with about vaginal leukorrhea occurs after orphysiologic again 6 discharge pruritus thin is inflammation. without The minimal, clear,and or treatment No is necessary.

(see treatment on Table depends The of the vulvovaginitis etiology 115-1). perineal nonspecific improving on of hygiene. vaginitisfocuses Treatment orclindamycin. is bacterial metronidazole for vaginosis The oral recommendedtreatment Imidazole of are all andsuppositories for tablets acute the effective treatment and vaginal creams

pathogenic vaginal discharge discharge thin Physiologic No organisms Reassurance Minimal, clear, on

soiling pathogenic culture sitz organisms discharge, times/day Nonspecific fecal Improved vaginitis of 2−3 no poor Vaginal Evidence baths itching; underwear hygiene; dysuria, hygiene, of on

vaginosis asymptomatic; possible odor thin “fishy” a Often Bacterial with discharge vaginal

volatile drop of of criteria: and a following potassium four of a discharge; (the (3) vaginal vaginal vaginalis ≥4.5; Metronidazole, wet pH of thin, of whiff (Gardnerella mount test); a fishy amines of (1) clue to saline (4) discharge odor the the presence cells hydroxide discharge 10% drop the addition vaginal on homogeneous of (2) vaginal anaerobes) At least a three clindamycin and on

(microscopic) Nocturnal vesicles, black, of (scabies) in pustules runs Sarcoptes 5% dots permethrin scabiei Mites; pruritus, infection feces ova pruritic

vaginal discharge, bloody examination body on of Foul-smelling foreign body sometimes Foreign vulvovaginal physical Foreign Removal candidiasis. body is vaginal or PREVENTION irrigation not and Douching recommended. is not beneficial recognized There bacterial vaginitis. vaginosis measures for no prophylactic are nonspecific or protective protective which vaginal and is against reduces flora, are normal not Douching

organisms. PROGNOSIS pathogenic AND COMPLICATIONS Complications rare. are is prognosis The excellent.

@ StudentConsult.com Available

(STIs). Adolescents the infections transmitted of rates highest sexually have infected STI, adolescents sexual likely an more health active more an sexually receive with partner, into to Compared adults, with less treatment develops, to they when STI. will come contract for with are believe likely not STI an to be compliant less to and likely likely care contact an

numerous the cause the grouped diseases organisms by clinical Although STIs, characteristic can be presentation. and trachomatis endocervicitis common STIs. characteristic are and gonorrhoeae are 116-1) Urethritis of and (Table most C. the Neisseria than women asymptomatic. more are that in chlamydial genital 70% infections of Note (HSV) as donovanosis Genital virus chancroid ulcers characteristic infections, and pallidum), ducreyi), of granulomatis). genital (Treponema granuloma also simplex herpes (Table are 116-2) syphilis (Klebsiella known inguinale, (Haemophilus vulvovaginitis part not associated is discharge sexual of Vaginal Chapter with trichomoniasis spectrum always is the of vaginalis) (see which (Trichomonas (Table activity. of and a is symptom 116-3) 115), and (HPV) the is warts risk 116-4), Human papillomavirus (Table cancers. condylomata and or genital cervical, causes vulvar, acuminata, for factor major vaginal

associated morbidity. with STIs psychological significant physiologic are and and are diagnosis important treatment Early

neonatal and N. Possible days Pharyngitis, days Features 116-1 Infections endocarditis, 3–14 Sexually trachomatis GONORRHOEAE presentations FEATURE of 5–12 Incubation disseminated dermatitis, (including by period Chlamydia (arthritis, gonorrhoeae* conjunctivitis C. Caused conjunctivitis), Table disease Transmitted TRACHOMATIS meningitis) Neisseria

of common syndromes Signs/symptoms

Mucopurulent erythema, Cervical cervical cervicitis PMNs/hpf tenderness creamy diplococci discharge intracellular >10 Gram-negative with Mild friability, thick

Pelvic menstrual 3–10 of cycle day symptoms disease Onset inflammatory of

mass Adnexal tenderness, (95%)

Nausea, (variable) vomiting

syncope, Weakness, (variable) dizziness

culture NAAT, pelvic inflammatory PMN, High-powered selective field; (using amplification NAAT hpf, cells. nucleic Thayer-Martin tests media) acid test; Diagnostic polymorphonuclear NAAT, PID, disease; and overlap. have significant common, presentations clinical is *Coinfection

INGUINALE Table (DONOVANOSIS) HSV-1, Treponema Features granulomatis Agent Characterized GENITAL Transmitted Klebsiella SYPHILIS Genital pallidum HSV-2 Haemophilus ducreyi 116-2 GRANULOMA Sexually by CHANCROID Infections of HERPES Ulcers

to Papule Vesicle Primary pustule Papule Papule lesion

Number may <3 Multiple coalesce >1, >1

Edges Distinct Reddened, ragged Ragged, Rolled, distinct undermined

smooth Base smooth Red, red, Necrotic Red, clean Beefy

Serous Secretion None blood Serous Pus,

vitro swab node, rabbit in Isolation of test; of None Culture No Aspirate inoculation

Benzathine or or IM) fluctuant Early: or Treatment Doxycycline Acyclovir U famciclovir valacyclovir Aspirate (2.4 million once penicillin nodes G TMP-SMX

yr duration): (>1 Late

and Benzathine Incision penicillin drainage (2.4 G

antibody-absorption; herpes RPR, TMP-SMX, pallidum; treponemal Laboratory. reagin; chain FTA-ABS, Research Disease Venereal Fluorescent microhemagglutination reaction; plasma MHA-TP, polymerase rapid VDRL, PCR, simplex virus; trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; assay-Treponema HSV,

Agent Vaginal VAGINALIS-ASSOCIATED FEATURE BACTERIAL Trichomonas Features Transmitted VAGINOSIS Table of G. (GARDNERELLA vaginalis anaerobes Discharge PHYSIOLOGIC 116-3 Sexually Normal Characterized vaginalis flora (NORMAL) LEUKORRHEA TRICHOMONIASIS and Infections VAGINITIS) by

None Pruritus to mild Mild None moderate to

severe Discharge to moderate Moderate Minimal to Mild

of discharge Characteristics

Color Yellow-green milky grey Clear, or Grey

None with fishy <4.5 >5.0 Characteristic >4.5 pH odor Odor Possible

than Squamous bacteria and drop slightly WBCs larger WBCs Motile and flagellates, WBCs Saline (“clue cells”) WBC; cells few with studded Squamous

Metronidazole tinidazole or clindamycin Reassurance tinidazole, Metronidazole, Treatment or

Potassium hydroxide; cells. blood WBCs, white KOH,

felt Genital itching sexual discharge live “crabs” itching; warts Presenting complaints Vulvar be or may Pubic organisms or are partner has seen seen;

Clinical dysplasia diabetes, contraceptives, Cervical Oral — associations antibiotics neoplasia,

Permethrin or solution cream cream gel Imiquimod or agents: Patient-applied 1% Podofilox therapies: or miconazole or Treatment butoconazole Intravaginal clotrimazole

Potassium KOH, hydroxide.

for medical and complications preventing infertility. prevention are STIs providers for be goal care for preventable; primary all a adolescents. health should of STIs All STIs, STI treatment some an health evaluation or of treatment and sexual departments. are of partners, state and to necessitates Diagnosis reportable concomitant for notification

immunodeficiency B HHV-7), (HHV-6, caused are types transmissible, virus, virus (HIV), those human molluscum virus, including sexually that I infections Epstein-Barr herpes human Sarcoptes virus, viruses human scabiei. virus Many by and II, and considered leukemia STIs traditionally cytomegalovirus, contagiosum cell not are hepatitis T and provided suggests STIs. testing adolescents be STI Chapter counseling HIV HIV and 125), any should all The with increases presence for (see to behavior of risk that for sexual HSV-2, possible or gonorrhea, sexual and of beyond investigate in diagnosis period neonatal perinatal of abuse signifies indicates syphilis, prepubertal can the acquisition. need infants 22); Acquisition trichomoniasis (see children and to STIs the in contact represent abuse Chapter abuse or HPV types, may association less certain. HPV which from with genital of is infection, skin sexual and The vulvovaginitis genital result

C. disease trachomatis, in peritoneum (PID). tubes, fallopian to the N. Direct and often pelvic extension with endometrium, causes of gonorrhoeae, combination inflammatory infertility. and an syndrome, include the inflammation perihepatitis (Fitz-Hugh-Curtis abscess, capsule), PID of tubo-ovarian liver complications abortion, disease. and The septic of mesenteric tract ovarian cyst rupture, urinary includes pregnancy, differential bowel lymphadenitis, PID appendicitis, or diagnosis ectopic inflammatory infection, torsion choice adnexal of Pelvic the is ultrasound imaging structures diagnoses. to and thickened detect study exclude other possible may tenderness. are of motion criteria or PID cervical with abdominal tenderness uterine, clinical adnexal, Minimum lower diagnosis for are (WBC) gonorrhoeae markers, trachomatis. Additional fever, count, cervix documented elevated C. that cell the N. criteria white or support blood with diagnosis elevated mucopurulent discharge, inflammatory infection and be to oral with pregnancy; no high about adhere or to severe is abscess; illness the if uncertainty hours; a tolerate should to or nausea, and oral tubo-ovarian response vomiting. therapy; hospitalized for fever, Adolescents there treatment diagnosis; therapy 72 clinical inability within parenteral The plus treatment hospitalized recommended cefoxitin, doxycycline for is orally. or cefotetan patients with mg) recommended ambulatory days, treatment single (250 metronidazole of in is doxycycline for ceftriaxone 14 for dose, intramuscular persons younger plus 14 for a The without or (IM) orally PID days. be Follow-up 72 performed hours. within examination should

gram-negative a N. coccus, microscopically often seen is as gonorrhoeae, diplococci. common STI adolescents. among a Gonorrhea is females incidence States in and 24-year-old differ males, race. rates by 15to and 20to highest The 24-year-old United in is the incidence urethritis of and the which acquisition, causes rectum (see results and infection also in at mucopurulent the 116-1), The infection pharynx site of Table but cervicitis organism can occur. commonly can arthralgia, or spread gonococcal septic occur and acral skin occasionally, lesions, pustular arthritis, and, or petechial asymmetric in tenosynovitis infections or Disseminated results meningitis. endocarditis with hematogenous of Chapter 65) neonatorum maternal Chapter sepsis transmission to (see can meningitis lead ophthalmia 119). neonatal (see infection and Perinatal and

of because should the C. trachomatis Treatment against effective N. high gonorrhoeae regimens and be frequency of coinfection. resistance Increasing limit to rates fluoroquinolones of options. treatment rectum. is of cervix, dose A ceftriaxone mg) uncomplicated gonococcal recommended for single (250 urethra, and the of IM infections treatment with for ceftriaxone recommended Hospitalization are and disseminated gonococcal infections. should excluded. administered or unless all For infections, azithromycin also infection be gonococcal is doxycycline chlamydial

StudentConsult.com @ Available

elementary phagosome. bacteria relatively cycle, replicating within a bodies inert obligate are bodies as form and phagocytosed a Chlamydiae as biphasic their and intracellular reticulate extracellular existing when life in with divide cell. hours, 48 that and, into bodies fission to by from Reticulate after the are 72 released elementary reorganize binary bodies infects and cells the the Chlamydia the mucosa transitional cervix, cells nonciliated epithelial of that conjunctiva. rectum, squamocolumnar urethra, and line

trachomatis and D cause through pneumonia. cervicitis, urethritis, in inclusion C. newborns, PID, infant K conjunctivitis serovars serovars characterized by venereum, cause lymphadenitis. painful lymphogranuloma unilateral, STI L1–3 C. inguinal an infrequent trachomatis C. and blinding), (hyperendemic trachoma scarring. eventually trachomatis C B, extensive leads serovars which from Ba, produce blindness A, local to

116-1). cases Chlamydia the in nongonococcal cervicitis urethritis adolescents for and STI and accounts bacterial diagnosed is Table most most of frequently (see ratio. female-to-male There is 5:1 a dysuria a have asymptomatic. be may discharge, approximately Males and mucopurulent 25% although often or more pain, mild symptoms Women discharge. have are 70%) vaginal minimal abdominal including (approximately may asymptomatic often or dysuria, Prepubertal have vaginitis. may girls gonococcal least or C. proctitis, epididymitis have coinfection. 30% with At trachomatis cervicitis, persons of urethritis,

specimens. transcription-mediated bacterial morning Chlamydia usually using tests, chain of cervical, ligase nucleic detection is reaction (polymerase infection amplification) of and diagnosed early first-voided reaction the acids urine and chain [PCR] by urethral, culture immunosorbent tests. less tests enzyme-linked Amplification supplanted have assay and sensitive suspected C. abuse. be positive sexual only used false infection for trachomatis confirm results, of culture should medicolegal in of Because to cases purposes

should be N. of against because of and coinfection. gonorrhoeae the trachomatis frequency Treatment high regimens C. effective for is gonorrhea can (250 be concomitant mg) with 7 (1 infection. to g) treat or days single dose oral doxycycline A combined of a dose recommended, single of azithromycin which ceftriaxone

Available @ StudentConsult.com

by a is spirochete. Syphilis caused long, slender, pallidum, coiled T. dark-field observed cultivated It vitro routinely but cannot by be in can microscopy. be Untreated several 116-2). Table clinical stages (see infectionprogresses through on ulcer, the weeks a inoculation. genital as Primary is chancre, usually or 3 that genitalia, painless manifested single, syphilis 6 to appears after lymphadenopathy, on Secondary manifested and fever, follows weeks maculopapular soles. and palms later rash syphilis is disseminated that present a the alsois to 8 6 as and generalized membrane are lata, Plaquelike lesions,condylomata lesions skin mucous and infectious. occur and syphilis is that Tertiary children. neurologic, andmusculoskeletal is progressivedisease slowly systems seen cardiovascular, in a not the involves and detected Latent is serologictesting. syphilis by infection asymptomatic an late Early either syphilis within latent or are designated latent cases syphilis acquisition syphilis latent of latent thepreceding unknownduration. year; indicates syphilis other of all infect Infection passed (see infants syphilis their pregnant and resulting women from be Chapter congenital can in 66).

diagnosis serologic on based is syphilis The of testing. and and (RPR)test test, in and Laboratory tests titers Nontreponemal antibody screening increasing be can Disease decrease Research reagin to with that (VDRL) Venereal the of response plasma rapid duration the quantified tests, as therapy. are increase infection nonquantitative performed but VDRL A be insensitive. fluid can is test on cerebrospinal may positive Rheumatic and other disease infectious cause diseases false results. of diagnosis assay-T. to more pallidum specific treponemal and confirm antibody-absorption microhemagglutination used tests, specific and are treponemal (MHA-TP) antibody are the (FTA-ABS) the syphilis. fluorescent Confirmatory, tests cured. These and the positive is remain treated even infection lifelong usually if of examination lesions cutaneous chancres, or Dark-field mucous may organisms. membranes, reveal motile

at penicillin stages penicillin G. syphilis, doses and for three intervals. 1-week with syphilis, G. are dose of latent, treatment Tertiary, IM syphilis choice treated all latent of early of a Primary is with duration are parenteral syphilis late and latent benzathine of secondary treated single syphilis The unknown with is to aqueous penicillin treated Neurosyphilis for 10 crystalline intravenous G 14 days. A occurs 15% penicillin. systemic, of in patients to Jarisch-Herxheimer with 20% febrile treated reaction syphilitic

@ StudentConsult.com Available

double-stranded linear HSV-1 are HSV-2 with a DNA viruses herpesvirus an of genome large, family within capsid. and contained icosahedral the DNA There types is between significant homology 2. 1 and sensory enters The migrates ganglia. where surfaces neurons infects the axons initially cutaneous mucosal along virus and it to moves the viral infectious destroy ganglia, cells. epithelial occurs to infect and axon the in replication along As virus patients. disseminate may Infection organs to in immunocompromised other by it maintained Virus events. latency reactivation where undergoes replication periodic ganglia undefined and the is triggered in any more system, HSV-1 found Although more commonly site, eyes, commonly the central virus occurs and in mouth, involves nervous whereas can HSV-2 either be in genitalia. the to the Reinfection even other second can exposure strain of same type. a type occur the with or

116-2). characterized herpes erythematous genital grouped Primary on base an painful, lesions crusted genital and external or by (see vesicles Table ulcerative multiple is also involved. the cervix is Infemales Symptoms may lymphadenopathy, discharge, dysuria. and includeregional Primaryillness lasts recurrences 10 ofpatients. to in to with 80% days 20 50% not are associated or as with Secondary, reactivation and systemicsymptoms. eruptions recurrent, not dramatic are from course 1 viral onset 16 lasts In weeks, to2 and the over infection, 20 entire resolves shedding primary and vesicle to days. ulcer days, disease, for virus lasts days. less than over8 and course shedding 7 the recurrent 10 to In resolves five year. recurrences eight per experience to Many persons many episodesare Some recurrent primary asymptomatic. and

typically to cytopathic longer and 3 and in preferred days effect 1 culture PCR 5 shows Viral than the cultures takes seldom of diagnosis; methods are days. culture. sensitivity over PCR assays increased have PCR to culture primary infection, after detect infection. and can latent so both shedding Viral is fail intermittent testing acute persist and only positive for primary convalescent serologies useful between and lifelong. seroconversion show sera), infection (to is Serologic Titers in recurrences. helpful management guiding of not are

may in duration reduce cases recurrences. of famciclovir symptoms and primary valacyclovir and treatments are severity the reducing and in effective Oral (more per have herpes genital recurrences year). who therapy by among recurrences patients 70% frequent Once-daily recurrences of to suppressive than reduces six 80% the frequency baths and hygiene relieve Local sitz discomfort. may some of against provides The sexual protection condoms HSV. use transmission of

Available StudentConsult.com @

and Chlamydia. gonorrhea as protozoan vaginalis is with and associated caused other the is Trichomoniasis by such STIs often T. is men women. Infection of many as in and as asymptomatic of 90% 85% Symptomatic urethritis. have can males hemorrhages” with Symptomatic frothy cervical vulvar malodorous, yellow-green Table irritation, females “strawberry have discharge, thin, and (see vaginitis 116-3). of which saline a 60% a of symptomatic Diagnosis on the has based or women. 70% in urine is motile, protozoans mount, to flagellated visualization sensitivity only wet among in diagnosis. sensitive of Culture is method most the partners both Treatment sexual in a of tinidazole with is oral single or recommended. metronidazole dose

@ StudentConsult.com Available

warts the prevalence with common highest the cause among HPV, 15to in of the States (condylomata STI acuminata), rates is United the genital 24-year-olds. most HPV are asymptomatic or infections subclinical. Most 6 HPV 11 of warts types cause 90% nononcogenic. and are genital and cases 70% 18 HPV cervical of with and 16 of cancer. types are associated oncogenic. 35 and types are HPV also 33, 31,

or mucous structures of genital Table epithelium the 116-4). can occur membranes and females perineal Genital and warts the squamous (see males of on multiple, gray-to-pink Genital are warts excrescences. firm, usually may remain increase size or spontaneously. Untreated in number, or resolve unchanged, warts genital become secondarily can or They macerated if tender infected. usually biopsy. The without by is established diagnosis appearance includes The syphilis) (secondary lata diagnosis tumors. differential condylomata and

warts induce treatment to of of goal periods. removal symptomatic is wart-free The infected acid. include imiquimod, nitrogen bichloracetic therapies with liquid podofilox topical and and of therapies resin, involve trichloroacetic epithelium; or acid or patient-applied modalities podophyllin include cryoprobe, cryotherapy or provider-applied destruction Treatment is surgical An removal. alternative

have surgery Intralesional been laser and also interferon effective. influence morphology, adverse selection provider Factors wart number, include patient effects, wart treatment convenience, that and of anatomic sites, treatment experience. cost, preference, may size, after Recurrences and common frequently treatment are asymptomatic. are

pubic crab by are the Pubic louse. pubis, with pediculosis Phthirus caused infestation lice, pubis, or on pubic 116-4). sexually predominantly life (see lives is hair, pruritus where transmitted Table it intense causes cycle characteristic, The louse its and out Diagnosis the visible made eye. are lice can naked be clinically; to (nits) papules and puberty. egg Erythematous seen are before cases not appropriate personal environmental application pediculicide, and and of with piperonyl Treatment the or regarding consists cream hygiene of as an pyrethrins such permethrin education 1% butoxide. from dry cleaned) (machine removed machine and 72 decontaminated or and Bedding heat should be least or dried hours. clothing contact body using washed cycle the at for

osteomyelitis osteomyelitis the children in to secondary common Acute bacteremia. is and hematogenous most manifestation of evolves systemic Subacute and subacute) associated an and usually symptoms, from treated chronic with osteomyelitis trauma follows inoculation or results local inadequately (usually osteomyelitis. is untreated by not osteomyelitis penetrating

blood the sluggish and this long to of newborn unique occur bones hemoglobinopathies, vascular the in to tortuous exclusively through metaphysis due children bone without loops period beyond almost In site. flow infections predisposes nonpenetrating infection. is often to injury reported local that lead Preceding and to may trauma bone bones, focal diaphyseal children portion the cell infarction. occur in Bone infections antecedent consequence a sickle disease as with in probably of the long of children, to metaphysis of these infection spread 12 epiphyseal suppurative permitting cross across 18 whereas children (Figs. growth contained months younger epiphysis no of infection leading older capillaries the perforate plate, the the is plate because in arthritis, the epiphyseal than In vessels age, in longer to 117-1AB).

Staphylococcus of for more aureus than responsible 80% acute infections. skeletal is Streptococcus streptococcus include Other Group and causes pneumoniae. A common less Actinomyces Mycobacterium Neisseria spp., anaerobes causes. henselae, meningitidis, common are and tuberculosis, Bartonella neonates. enteric causes are B in Group other major gram-negatives streptococcus and aureus. hemoglobinopathies disease osteomyelitis caused other to cell Sickle Salmonella S. predispose by and and osteomyelitis may Pasteurella multocida

of an maturation bone A, growth epiphyseal of Figure of 117-1 Major structures infant before the plate. the transphyseal metaphysis, connects epiphysis two the and supply of the these infection Note the facilitating spread areas. of between vessel, vascular which B, bone structures child. a of Major of the the A epiphyseal inserts in ankle, growth Joint capsule the below shoulder. hip, elbow, and as plate, in abscess pyarthrosis. metaphyseal these a is bones Rupture produce to of likely plate, bones. epiphyseal in capsule at other growth B as tubular Joint the inserts of associated to likely lead bones pyarthrosis. metaphyseal in subperiosteal to Rupture a a is but abscess an to these seldom abscess osteomyelitis chronic in arthritis (From Gutman and 15:1−72, pyogenic Probl Pediatr Curr Acute, LT: subacute, children, and 1985.) cat bites. follow or dog use a reaction of of osteomyelitis is due culture The that testing proportion reveals polymerase to significant negative chain kingae. Kingella b infections. reduced of has type vaccine the Conjugate Haemophilus influenzae greatly incidence

wounds who of Subacute and in by foot. ambulatory caused sustain puncture persons aeruginosa infections occur the usually Pseudomonas bone focal S. aureus chondritis Pseudomonas insole. associated with in foam wounds which sneakers, strongly Pseudomonas puncture is through the harbor chronic of osteomyelitis. the common most cause aureus S. is radiographic syndrome autoinflammatory by episodes osteomyelitis. is recurrent fever, findings bone multifocal Chronic pain, characterized and recurrent an osteomyelitis of of identified osteomyelitis culture, acute as clavicle, feet the affected, infiltrates. are or of involved histopathology the plasmacytic on not and scapula, such often hands uncommonly bones pathogens or hematogenous demonstrates are in Bones small

affects age as any 12 boys girls. twice occur 3 children in most Osteomyelitis frequently age as to at may common years is and but of peripheral vascular common is trauma penetrating Osteomyelitis disease in from adults. or more

StudentConsult.com Available @

Source a Painful Origin of or Knee Unknown without Fever Fever Extremity Pain Pain Limp Stiff Neck

point pain, erythema, common tenderness bone, The presenting complaints exquisite and warmth, swelling. focal are most the over and anorexia, accompany lethargy may irritability, findings. the focal Fever, mimicking the passive and extremity of motion and Weight active affected bearing paralysis (pseudoparalysis). decreased, are to the may examine. make extremity spasm Muscle difficult space in Chapter (see joint pain young involved children, of be minimal 118). may by adjacent with joint motion suggested The range

one involved. bone only is Usually humerus in The approximately or patients. tibia, femur, two of thirds is affected bones involve hands feet, the 10% of involve the and the cases Approximately of 15% pelvis. or insidious or for and, fever Vertebral an spinal cord is systemic occasional usually, compression, notable vague toxicity. onset, associated backache, little symptoms, osteomyelitis with Patients fever, thigh with may abdominal, and groin, osteomyelitis limp, pelvis or of pain. hip, the vague present pelvic may mimic osteomyelitis. muscles Pyomyositis of

presence of leukocytosis The inconsistent. is cases. important negative are in are many but Blood cultures protein (ESR) and sedimentation findings. phase are rate (CRP), acute sensitive Elevated reactants, C-reactive but erythrocyte nonspecific Serial treatment. illness of the monitoring to and CRP helpful of determinations response are the course in and ESR aspiration Direct needle or establishes definitively the metaphyseal diagnosis. subperiosteal hours aspirated establish material Identification in stain within by Gram of can diagnosis clinical of the bacteria presentation.

destruction the demonstrate to symptoms, symptoms radiographs soft of absent after periosteal first days until within Plain (Fig. such 10 and such 14 of swelling bony as the of but fat bone periosteal 3 as line tissue can loss lesions are the elevation days 117-2). is abscess located subacute and classically a tibia. the intraosseous in that space distal subperiosteal the abscess does not Brodie is drain into of Sequestra, portions

swelling in Multifocal 117-2 Figure 3-week-old a malaise. acute joint with and infant generalized multiple osteomyelitis periosteal of the generalized (A) lateral (B) radiographs metaphysis distal and left of destruction the swelling. reaction focal femoral with soft and show tissue knee Frontal with soft (C) the views distal and medial at focal of destruction lateral reaction Frontal femoral swelling. the show tissue metaphysis knee and area an right of periosteal bone (D) multiple sites revealed aspiration of Needle aureus. Staphylococcus Osteomyelitis. (From Aronoff SC: KS, Moffett Infectious editors: RS, Baltimore p ed 2, Saunders, Practice, Jenson 2002, Principles Pediatric In Philadelphia, and HB, Diseases: 1038.) covered of separated avascular from bone bone, adjacent frequently a which are chronic that sheath, are hallmarks osteomyelitis. or of thickened with have involucrum, both

during earliest has largely even osteomyelitis Radionuclide by been the the of stages inflammatory changes scanning osteomyelitis. is imaging, which supplanted to sensitive marrow for magnetic resonance Technetium-99m identifying bone for are useful multifocal scans disease. scan Gallium-67 often the are scans if technetium-99m negative. bone positive is

cellulitis, be juvenile 118), fasciitis, bone pyomyositis, arthritis cysts, diskitis, histiocytosis, from infectious Chapter Osteomyelitis idiopathic (see arthritis, trauma, malignancy. differentiated and must

StudentConsult.com @ Available

antibiotic 117-1). stain on Gram the diseases therapy and for for age osteomyelitis bone aspirate, the of child, based associated of likely organism the is Initial (Table an antibiotic or nafcillin. Kingella, includes oxacillin targets Initial aureus and S. that as such therapy based if methicillin-resistant or S. should vancomycin epidemiology. S. aureus local Clindamycin used aureus factors on be or is patient suspected activity disease, an with against include Salmonella. cell should patients antibiotic initial with therapy For sickle

is therapy based cefotaxime on that of is the Penicillin specific oxacillin, susceptibilities G, Kingella kingae *Optimal or isolated. organism

usually occurs intravenous antibiotics to Response (IV) hours. 48 within drainage pathogen Lack improvement or present. may an surgical be indicates necessary 48 may hours unusual be that of after that hip extensive indicated joint drainage disease sequestrum or compression is is cord or is present. the Surgical disease, the chronic involved, if spinal is or for or atypical, severe weeks. are of 4 6 Antibiotics a for to administered minimum be home is treatment if IV adequate inpatient oral antibiotics decreases adherence considered ESR, may response, therapy After ensured. initial or and transition or CRP clinical to including with in

usually acute bacteremia. of uncommon and or of Complications concomitant osteomyelitis delayed inadequate are arise because therapy or higher associated with rates affects trauma complications. and of of Vascular insufficiency, antibiotics, are delivery which

surgical and prognosis performed treated drainage has when an if excellent appropriate. osteomyelitis is if Hematogenous promptly poorest hip Chapter infants in joints involvement The neonates are or 118). of outcomes and shoulder in with the (see fail Approximately rare). antimicrobial ultimately in 2% tract prolonged of respond therapy, 4% amputation of 25% these to resulting debridement acute to approximately and infections extensive recur bone formation, surgical and therapy, or despite to adequate loss, (although sinus skeletal growth neonatal Sequelae disturbance are with most osteomyelitis. to related common

no hematogenous osteomyelitis. means There aureus are effective prevent to S. conjugate has infections. practically with immunization Haemophilus Universal and this bone type of b infants including eliminated organism, serious vaccine from influenzae infections joint bacterial

foot irrigation, visible and foreign with of debris, any receive to debridement, body or removal prompt puncture should prophylaxis. tetanus the wounds cleansing, Children uncertain. of injury is preventing prophylactic penetrating The value antibiotics oral osteomyelitis after for

a of arthritis) arthritis resulting (suppurative space bacteria. or Infectious of bacterial serious from septic joint hematogenous dissemination the is infection soft infection less results from (penetrating often inoculation of trauma). Infectious direct surrounding spread joint tissues contiguous into arthritis the from or of Spread children epiphysis age the and passing under Fig. common vessels 18 through of osteomyelitis (see the transphyseal is occurs space into organisms months via to more in joint 117-1A). The arthritis are causing bacteria (Table causing bacteria to similar 118-1). infectious osteomyelitis may disease Chapter arthritis 122). Lyme (see also cause

gonococcal gonococcal suppurative late of disseminated in both and and reactive early forms disease, infectionsincludes respectively. The arthritis infection, and a arthritis arthritis-dermatitis syndrome. rash, as known untreated may gonococcemia occur with fever the symmetric polyarticular, genital and With bacteremia. of are at cultures high prevalence Bacterial of sterile the synovium relatively this a despite stage, weight-bearing large, Monarticular of develops arthritis joints

Streptococcus Pseudomonas aureus Kingella b* streptococci type aeruginosa Haemophilus influenzae kingae S. bacteria pneumoniae A Enterobacteriaceae Anaerobic Group

gonorrhoeae influenzae caused N. tuberculosis b *The H. diminished with childhood vaccination. universal Hib greatly type has by invasive incidence infections Mycobacterium of

days to weeks later. the fluid of often stage pathogen. this at synovial Cultures yield affected

or inflammation especially enteric and a follows that Yersinia synovial is other infection, immune-mediated infections. arthritis viral bacterial Reactive Chapter transient is synovitis of toxic Reactive the 3 in (see arthritis of known to years 200). children as 6 joints age or hip

of Infectious age arthritis adolescents. than younger years children 5 occurs and in most commonly

@ Available StudentConsult.com

and over include arthritis The effusion with monarticular warmth, the a joint typical palpable involvement tenderness erythema, with features suppurative affected of swelling,

No 0–200 (200)* yellow difference Normal Clear, <10 — Good

turbid, Trauma (600) hemorrhagic Good 50–4000 or difference <30 Clear, No Common in

tuberculin; purified cell. blood erythematosus; white PMN, LE, derivative cell; PPD, of protein WBC, polymorphonuclear Lupus

parentheses. *Average in

range of and movement. decreased markedly voluntary is onset or with as be movement limb. parents joint or such moved the when a a symptoms joint become noted aware only, if sudden change, The or insidious of during decreased of diaper may refuse a to limp Toddlers or may exhibit walk. minimize held pressure lower pain rotation capsule. joint the of may to arthritis external and the preferentially septic be flexion hip, from the In limb on in and flexion. in Similarly are elbow held knee the usually joints The the joints the ankles and are the often extremity hips involved: knees (20%), the lower of (14%). most (40%), involved such are the joints, closed or injuries. as Small hand, usually those trauma penetrating of fist after

early have Minor infection. of associated the disseminated arthritis-dermatitis syndrome development may genital precede ignored that been tract gonococcal symptoms with late arthritis. illness of arthritis of A gonococcal history monarticular antedating development febrile the characterizes

the the usually large hips. symmetric, polyarticular, is involves and arthritis Reactive joints, especially typically had gastroenteritis urethritis. episode of a have preceding or may Patients appear the arthritis. may Urethritis with

erythrocyte common. (CRP) an (ESR) and C-reactive elevated are sedimentation Leukocytosis rate protein and to of is Arthrocentesis causes 118-2). distinguish important (Table among the arthritis should acid performed and Neisseria Adolescents and examinations or with nucleic tests cultures amplification rectal, pharyngeal acute gonorrhoeae. cervical, have for arthritis infectious urethral,

or joint cultures positive Blood of 50% are approximately in cases. bacterial antibiotic characteristics because exhibits even bacteriostatic Joint of the the pyogenic that pathogens, absence not the preceding of of fluid. effects synovial therapy, in infection of reveal fluid may often fungi informative the are cultures performed stain, and for be stain, if even are negative. preparation and should hydroxide acid-fast Gram potassium

radiographs little information physical the to Plain add findings. typically show displacement Radiographs normal lines. space, swelling of widened capsule, fat may joint adjacent joint and of a the resonance may bone deep are exclude imaging abscesses. use, Radionuclide or scans or although to helpful magnetic infection concurrent be bone scans of technetium-99m limited identifying evaluation is for of for procedure diagnostic effusions suppurative hip. especially the useful of infections of the Ultrasound initial is choice and joint

fever, and infectious diagnosis other in of children, adolescents arthritis includes disorders, infectious rheumatic and differential autoimmune diseases, trauma. infants, The

tissue bursitis, Suppurative and disease, abscesses. cellulitis, from Lyme be fasciitis, arthritis myositis, soft must distinguished osteomyelitis, suppurative Psoas on with flexion fever muscle abscess pain presents hip rotation. often and and and arthritis, disease purpura, must infectious differentiated disorders, Kawasaki other arthritis. from Henoch-Schönlein rheumatic Crohn’s Juvenile idiopathic disease, be In multiple most of the or diseases, symmetric these of presence joint involvement

B 2 Infants Ampicillin aminoglycoside than streptococci age) of (younger plus Group months

vancomycin Nafcillin aureus Staphylococcus (or oxacillin),

children oxacillin), Nafcillin S. infants and Older (or aureus

nafcillin kingae Kingella (or cefotaxime G, or oxacillin) Penicillin

has gonorrhoeae: greatly infections type of b *The childhood influenzae with vaccination. universal Ceftriaxone Hib Neisseria by caused invasive H. diminished incidence

arthritis. excludes infectious often less is and usually of older often occurs men trauma bacteremia. Suppurative in a a most with bursitis Staphylococcus aureus boys complication and of or, commonly, consequence

for stain Initial arthritis for the based antibiotic of on therapy is the the fluid. infectious organism age Gram child the and likely of joint hip shoulder the Suppurative joint, surgical drainage. necessitates arthritis or of joint especially, prompt humerus, leading the joint supply femur the the insertion these of increased space to of balland-socket in the With can or joint affect head joints, vascular the capsule pressure avascular the to necrosis. in below epiphysis adversely repeated in addition knee of arthrocenteses, Infections may appropriate treated the parenteral to antibiotics. be with

118-3). joint in Several agents adequate antibiotic levels (Table antimicrobial provide spaces aerobic antibiotics against include as therapy rods, activity and gram-negative S. aureus, cefotaxime. should group nafcillin and for Initial neonates with streptococcus, such B years 3 include antibiotics S. activity months against Initial aureus. children for therapy should old with to 5 child unimmunized Addition should influenzae the be considered if Haemophilus against is of type b antibiotics (Hib). appropriate best with treated are or vancomycin otherwise. with susceptible, clindamycin, or S. nafcillin infections methicillin-susceptible treated infections oxacillin, S. are if Confirmed aureus aureus best methicillin-resistant and

clinical CRP. resolution and and decline the duration ESR of therapy depends pain on of offever and The usually days. least organisms, treatment as such at aureus, S. virulent 21 Infectionwith necessitates for Treatment can antibiotics if ensured. may be oral to bechanged adherence used that ciprofloxacin aureus against therapy clindamycin,amoxicillin-clavulanate, agents years). to are activity and dicloxacillin, S. cephalexin, >18 include complete Oral often excellent with (forpatients

arthritis encountered infectious and of prognosis The in for is the excellent. common children forms infants gonococcal and articular surface. of complications major childhood, neonatal, arthritis from resulting joint damage The to loss of the are function presumably resulting hip of highest with from The avascular incidence complications and these occurs infections, necrosis. shoulder of high epiphyseal growth osteomyelitis the risk The at arthritis suppurative abnormalities. adjacent neonates with plate places incidence in high for concurrent growth with approximately growth have disturbances of ultimate loss growth 50% bone longitudinal likelihood with limb to and 40% osteomyelitis shortening. Neonates an of

no effective means prevent hematogenous There are to

arthritis. S. aureus of infections infections. eliminated bone vaccine with bacterial infants serious Universal including has organism, joint and Hib conjugate immunization from practically this

Acute a for conjunctivitis persist or days. rapid bacterial the onset eye of infection is a few a that usually by of characterized symptoms viral catarrhalis two approximately influenzae, Streptococcus Moraxella causes pneumoniae, account Nontypable and thirds (Table Haemophilus bacterial of for 1191). include Other gonorrhoeae with extended-wear and associated causes soft lenses. Pseudomonas contact aeruginosa, which Neisseria is and commonly and caused adenoviruses, by conjunctivitis most other which is by less epidemic cause frequently enteroviruses. keratoconjunctivitis, Viral coxsackieviruses inflammation Keratitis, gonorrhoeae, adenovirus with cornea, occurs with is commonly simplex the but or not N. and herpes infections. associated conjunctivitis of (HSV), virus

acquired of month life, first during Neonatal during conjunctivitis usually ophthalmia or is conjunctivitis, neonatorum, purulent the birth. bacilli, order of of prevalence, trachomatis, gonococcal Escherichia common Chlamydia are conjunctivitis, secondary causes of chemical gram-negative prophylaxis, nitrate coli, neonatal common bacterial HSV, enteric causes and in silver gonorrhoeae. other conjunctivitis, to conjunctivitis The N. decreasing

if is young in they children, contact children conjunctivitis. especially common with come Conjunctivitis other with in include ear and duct when frequently. bacterial obstruction, sinus infection for infection, factors their children allergic disease, Predisposing eyes rub nasolacrimal disease to 1% in Conjunctivitis occurs of neonates. 12% ophthalmic in 24 moderate 48 gonococcal hours most prophylaxis. commonly who newborns silver age of to as to present A is conjunctivitis chemical receive nitrate mild from to risk trachomatis, in born which conjunctivitis) of (inclusion of of the acquisition C. infected to 50% infants vaginally neonatal Approximately mothers chlamydial have conjunctivitis 50%. 25% is

StudentConsult.com Available @

redness, and eyelids, photophobia. discharge, mild Symptoms include matted edema conjunctiva, of findings include and of Physical the the injection eyelids. chemosis, examination herpetic suggests or Corneal gonococcal infection. involvement or, commonly, ameboid ulcers as as corneal infection, Herpetic recurrent appear in dendritic deep keratitis. or a more lesions influenzae. ipsilateral often Unilateral conjunctivitis otitis is nontypable media with caused by H.

identifying helpful manifestations and The neonatal are in timing (Table cause of 119-2). conjunctivitis the N. profuse discharge. gonorrhoeaecauses with severe conjunctivitis purulent after in of 3 6 occurs week may appear weeks Chlamydial the days second delivery. usually conjunctivitis to but life or both discharge issuing mild There is inflammation eyes. with purulent from one moderate to

Cultures because to usually bacterial obtained or treatment. self-limited routinely is conjunctivitis not quickly are antibiotic responds topical obtained. suspected, is especially stain neonates, culture in Gram be and conjunctivitis must If gonococcal cerebrospinal infection infants, fluid) these be cultured. of and should as other In blood sites (such (HIV), immunodeficiency virus and well. the should infant performed as necessary as on for and human Additional testing be mother syphilis Chlamydia,

is Distinguishing by from appearance conjunctivitis viral Table presentation and 119-1). bacterial (see difficult present, Vesicular lid lesions, HSV. suggest if N. gonorrhea of purulent reaccumulation is characteristic conjunctivitis within characterized Hyperpurulent discharge by of infection. minutes 119-3. The delineated in is diagnosis differential Table

is meibomian associated Blepharitis dysfunction. seborrhea, staphylococcal with and infections, gland a the photophobia, body the burning, The foreign of that eyes. child to causes irritation, and sensation child rub complains eyelid an routine scrub hygiene in Eyelid initial treatment. the with is step

the pain associated nodular with are redness. Hordeola inflammatory lesions and suppurative of eyelids acute usually by Zeis occur lash glands, or styes in the the are follicles caused and staphylococci. or the on hordeola eyelid, in External anterior sterile. the or in hordeola occur with staphylococci be may and glands meibomian infected Internal be may becomes accumulate, If the the obstructed, meibomian develops. gland chalazion a gland secretions and local spontaneously respond Hordeola to but usually may recur. treatment measures

most inflammation sac, which the commonly Staphylococcus by of infection or usually is and obstructed, caused aureus lacrimal coagulase-negative is an or staphylococci. Dacryocystitis is expressed can be A with mucopurulent discharge

silver Chemical:

nitrate smear on organisms (1%), days Watery silver discharge nitrate or culture use None of Variable on None No 1–3 depending

herpes PCR, reaction. chain fluid; HSV, immunofluorescence; simplex Cerebrospinal direct CSF, polymerase DIF, virus;

bilateral unilateral Haemophilus gonococcus antibiotics, edema gonorrhoeae discharge, conjunctival influenzae, photophobia, ceftriaxone vision, or parenteral conjunctivitis for Topical Streptococcus aegyptius, Mucopurulent (chemosis); injection Haemophilus normal Bacterial Neisseria and pneumoniae,

hemorrhagic, echovirus, for infection; coxsackievirus Adenovirus, be may Same as Self-limited conjunctivitis bacterial unilateral Viral

erythema, vision therapy decreased Toxoplasmosis, for pathogen canis (choroiditis) No of histoplasmosis, Posterior signs Toxocara uveitis Specific

Episcleritis Diagnosis SYMPTOMS cause in Table Episcleritis/scleritis blood conjunctivitis; globe topical TREATMENT may (e.g., is SIGNS intense self-limiting; disease Infections—cont’d steroids than unilateral; Differential scleritis of ETIOLOGIC AND autoimmune erythema, Henoch-Schönlein AGENTS purpura) pain, bigger for CONDITION 119-3 Localized vessels Idiopathic SLE, perforation relief fast Ocular

removal; visible for microscopic exposure gritty body Foreign check or Occupational ulceration or red, size other Irrigation, Unilateral, feeling;

JIA, virus; idiopathic juvenile Cytomegalovirus; EBV, CMV, lupus erythematosus. SLE, systemic Epstein-Barr arthritis;

on sac. the nasolacrimal pressure gentle Treatment establish the to probing nasolacrimal system requires usually communication. of

trauma, distant surgery, emergent, from an infection that a or follows focus. spread sight-threatening is usually hematogenous Endophthalmitis organisms pneumoniae, coagulase-negative S. and cereus, Bacillus aureus, albicans. include staphylococci, Causative Candida S. photophobia. extreme of is difficult severe and because blepharospasm Examination be visible hypopyon on haze and A examination. may

needed The treated remove as be with to compresses should lids accumulated discharge. warm hasten but resolution. frequently is bacterial conjunctivitis Acute self-limited, antibiotics topical instilled until the subside. the discharge four eyelids a Antibiotics are times day chemosis and between includes trimethoprim-polymyxin erythromycin 5% B Recommended treatment or topical solution, ointment. solution, sulfacetamide restricted in Ciprofloxacin to patients. gram-negative should be resistant corneal solution infections and hospitalized infections (1 Gonococcal single g) chlamydial azithromycin concomitant ceftriaxone infection). treat (IM) treated is adults a with intramuscular possible in (to of plus dose conjunctivitis

Table (see 119-2). on cause of the neonatorum depends treatment The ophthalmia single dose 125 dose neonatorum (25 maximum IM; mg/kg [IV] Gonococcal ceftriaxone intravenous to a or ophthalmia 50 with treated of mg). is infants be should These hospitalized. gonorrhea. treatment to is also with Antibiotic mothers untreated for newborns recommended of is pneumonia. to erythromycin 14 treated subsequent days, oral reduce chlamydial with the for partly conjunctivitis Chlamydial risk

for prognosis viral excellent. is and The bacterial conjunctivitis ulcerations can The complication lead with is HSV N. to uncommon keratitis, and major gonorrhoeae perforation, which and and infections. is except of develops conjunctivitis chlamydial pneumonia, 12 from in to typically age may (see 110). Chlamydial weeks progress 4 which to infants Chapter

is important to conjunctivitis. hand washing prevent of spread Careful contagious hours Bacterial after is for effective conjunctivitis 24 considered treatment. initiating clinical but return school, complete to Children may treatment be resolution. measures continued is there until must

neonatorum receive for should as whether gonococcal or cesarean delivery. vaginally possible All prophylaxis ophthalmia soon after delivered by section, newborns, as frequently Silver used a nitrate conjunctivitis. chemical 1% usually is causes but methods ointment Alternative application tetracycline a include effective or and are 1% erythromycin of irritating less equally single 0.5% ointment. and

genetic and treat and diseases, their acquired immune autoimmune syndrome affect transplant including cancer, system, diseases drugs virus human infection cell treatments stem the Many and immunodeficiencies, transplantation, immunodeficiency cancer, to used organ immunosuppressive adversely or immunodeficiency (AIDS), patients. (HIV) and endogenous the invasive bacterial patients infected skin, infection and life-threatening oropharynx, infections from recovers latent function exogenous These significant from of from at fungal flora of infection until of gastrointestinal and 120-1). immune tract, acquisition infections or of are persons, risk reactivation (Table

isabnormal, system by immunocompromised immune differs. persons in the canoften seen predicted immunocompromisedhosts and which infections fever of in of be component The the evaluation neutrophil defined less neutrophilsand transplant of as especially fungal for and an bacterial bands, of Episodes count absolute and 500/mm3 than risk common cancer in infections. are and fever and neutropenia, increase patients and T corticosteroids intracellular potent Listeria, of pathogens controlled lymphocytes and cell–mediated use drugs such and risk The increases for activation gondii, the normally such of immunosuppressive pathogens, Salmonella, jiroveci as Toxoplasma impair T by Mycobacterium. that responses, as and Pneumocystis the

immunocompromised aureus, most pneumoniae, the in bacterialpathogens persons. identified and Pseudomonasaeruginosa, are Staphylococcus coli, coagulase-negativestaphylococci Escherichia Klebsiella commonly infections Enterococcus, catheters with Central Candida. indwelling aureus, bycoagulase-negative S. gram-negative and caused often staphylococci, bacteria, associated are

childhood all of 10% Fungal account associated infections with for approximately cancer. pathogens as infections, with common Candida second Aspergillus fungal most causes pathogen. the of 60% all gastrointestinal Other for oropharyngeal fungal include mucositis factors risk and infections

Candida spp. difficile Clostridium Cystoisospora belli Echoviruses

cloacae Enterobacter Fusarium spp. virus Septata intestinalis herpes Human 6

presence as precursor broad-spectrum infection. antibacterial in the that invasion, long-term 120 intravascular to systemic Chapter catheters, prematurity, Person fungal 391 u facilitating therapy fungal Immunocompromised indwelling Infection and of promotes a colonization extreme

of with by infection gondii immunodeficiency. cellular therapy-associated quiescent Infection cancer-associated or represents facilitated T. reactivation those patients pneumonitis leukemia, also or media). lymphoma, cause in extrapulmonary otitis (sinusitis, HIV P. long-term can causes disease primarily jirovecii corticosteroids, with on but

usually in opportunistic therapy-associated cancer-associated cancer by immunodeficiency. cellular represent Viral from with facilitated symptomatic reactivation latency or patients infections and severe infection disseminated Herpes (HSV) cause or prolonged simplex mucocutaneous can disease. virus especially immunocompromised patients. (CMV) in can cell transplant persons, disease stem focal cause Cytomegalovirus in hepatitis, esophagitis, CMV of encephalitis, and enteritis with Manifestations gastrointestinal include disease ulcerations. pneumonitis, disorder. posttransplant with associated virus Epstein-Barr Reactivation lymphoproliferative of (EBV) is pneumonitis. most often ominously, (VZV) Varicella can encephalitis, accompanying serious infection primary zoster virus persons, with or, susceptible cause in hepatitis, and reactivate can Zoster be during also may disseminated. chemotherapy

especially than transplants Chemotherapeutic to myeloproliferative myelosuppression.Children infection patients. receiving target transplants.Prolonged allogeneic these agents time dividing are is infection hematologic cells, at riskfor cells, cause which for greater in receiving a children significantrisk autologous engraftment factor rapidly cell receiving stem organ significantly regimens. or greaterimmunosuppression consequence have of Children a as myeloablative the transplants conditioning fungal increase with immunosuppression and infections cutaneous or (shunts, interfere bacterial centralvenous catheters) againstinfection Foreign or the risk bodies neutropenia (seeChapter 121). barriers together with of

is relative or cancer infection with 10% hospitalization patients in of 15%. during to admission at rate The sites, tract. frequently infected wounds, order, urinary and bloodstream, descending are the respiratory tract, the surgical the The most in

Available StudentConsult.com @

cancer of infection transplant the only, sometimes most Fever presenting in common, serious and patients. and is symptom the The or symptoms, the with in the for demands even because of of evaluation presence absence neutropenia, potential infection. of life-threatening signs other prompt fever typical with symptoms patients Despite develop being signs fever associated infections. and these immunocompromised, and some signs and All evaluated thoroughly. symptoms be should based immunodeficiency. underlying However, symptoms the may on some be absent often physical example, of source to of the examination localized of difficult. determination contain in is absence signs For induce inflammation, infection by the neutrophils and of by pneumonia, and revealed when only chest radiograph neutrophil findings presentation absent, the count may at recovers. be despite or Chest

lumens and neutropenia of cultures all and fever Assessing in pathogens any indwelling from catheters. and obtained venipuncture bacterial requires fungal persons peripheral by vascular for immunocompromised blood chemistry should A of potential with and history Gram specific C-reactive physical performed. of and complete blood panel, sites count complete found culture during differential, of urine staining/culture be protein, infection Antigen tests, antigen, considered. should be especially for serum cryptococcal are the for infiltrates. Chest to of important pulmonary presence radiographs assess the seen in plain or abnormalities and or selected suspected or be such Specialized with imaging intra-abdominal radiographs. MRI, location extent the as studies, as sinusitis useful delineate to can of on infection, cases, such CT further in the and neutropenic Sinus Aspergillus, infection common detected only bacteria, may CT or on is hosts be with Zygomycetes scan.

and patient and nares, canals, careful area. Initially scrutiny axilla, oropharynx, perineum, a should skin the examination, of auditory the complete physical rectal external have including groin, expression catheter for tunnel any purulent site material. closely indwelling and vascular exit The of examined subcutaneous and tenderness erythema palpated and be of for should infection that and Perirectal erythema potentially only infection. with in a tenderness clues hosts, the is abscess serious may neutropenic be to infection direct cultures evaluation anti-infective Any during identified appropriate tailor and the therapy. presumptive should

provided examination infections diagnostic Treatment identified physical or appropriate be should focal imaging. by for as as low-risk outpatients. managed Select be patients may including P. should extended-spectrum without neutropenia combination and with aminoglycoside aeruginosa, with gram-negative or cephalosporin activity source include Empirical against of an in (Fig. bacilli, sometimes fever identified treatment penicillin an an 120-1). vascular aureus catheter, hours. discontinued be an indwelling cultured has If increasing aureus prevalence but of the S. should methicillin-resistant added to after be because the not S. is vancomycin 48 patient 72 can if of regimens at antibiotic guided patterns be each institution. local Specific antibiotic by should resistance

Specific therapy (38.5C) against likely infection <500/mm3) therapy No infection source pathogens of most Fever and Empirical neutropenia Focal anti-infective directed (granulocytes identified

management identified in patients. cancer transplant source and 120-1 without and an Figure fever Initial of neutropenia DA: Patients (From Conrad with cancer. Practice, editors: Baltimore Saunders, 2, 2002, Jenson and RS, p Infectious 1161.) Principles HB, ed Diseases: Philadelphia, Pediatric In

persistent instituted as long despite resolves as spectrum a broad-spectrum and antifungal (Fig. patient whether regardless without focus, or neutropenic, empirical continued are remains agent fever another the isolated, fever broad-treatment who with the antibacterial microbiologic amphotericin have B cause of is no antibiotics is neutropenia in If patients 120-2). (see Antibiotic should 5 therapy Fig. modified indi-therapy be for days approximately as 120-2).cated by rates. recombinant if findings clinical or use of patient’s colony-stimulating status the deterio-The granulocyte new for granulocyte-macrophage fungal factor Substitute: Add: infection or If: factor colony-stimulating and If: plus investigation Further plus empirical

source of without fever transplant after Figure an patients. of infection in days identified 120-2 7 and Continuing cancer management possible (From Patients Conrad cancer. DA: with RS Practice, Philadelphia, Diseases: 2, In 1165.) and Principles Infectious ed Baltimore HB, Jenson 2002, p editors: Saunders, Pediatric

in the 120 of u Chapter the reduces marrow, bone Person the 393 and decreases the neutrophil by severity risk infection. and duration of neutropenia, Infection stimulates Immunocompromised production that the the of in neutropenia prolonged as of result treatment chemotherapeutic incorporate Some hematopoietic tumors cytokine for part solid therapy treatment protocol. protocols

efficacy broad-spectrum prophylactic antibiotics discourage Current of to of about development of prevent guidelines antibioticresistance. lack the concerns and becauseof use and neutropenia fever is intensive chemotherapy to immunosuppression trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole infection transplantation. patients of or for prevent routine undergoing P. jiroveci Administration for initiation months ofanticancer chemotherapy completed. Prophylaxis continued until 6 generally therapy begun and with is been after has fluconazole beneficial. stem populations, antifungals such undergoing are select transplantation,prophylactic cell hematopoietic such In as aspatients

5 case 2 after index rash zoster to of days chickenpox days varicella Immunocompromised in globulin before (VZIG). exposed within persons immune the the rash until onset should the of onset receive susceptible immunity, after should VZIG at be receive infection in exposures. who still considered persons with protective subsequent any may result and VZIG not prophylaxis Modified risk

common infections). medical of care–associated as nosocomial infections are part known of complication Infections are and health devices important major (formerly a a and

inserted in and Vascular are in many most used inpatients outpatients. catheters for catheters the care parenteral parenteral been antibiotic require who long-term persons important nutrition, or of to bloodstream the therapy. for use access The extended an of has chemotherapy, advance major complication catheters is infection. of The

peripheral Short, rate access in a are (IV) of children. for catheters short-term intravenous low patients associated infection, in stable used especially with Peripherally for central are catheters used short-term access. venous inserted commonly venous catheters catheters) inserted such extended silicone Hickman (Broviac that into are are using access, central tunneled catheters Central or chemotherapy, through a placed as for elastomer vein, for passed commonly surgically a

Bacillus, Gram-positive aureus, Staphylococcus staphylococci, Coagulase-negative Enterococcus organisms Micrococcus Diphtheroids,

coli, aeruginosa organisms Klebsiella, Neisseria Gram-negative Escherichia Pseudomonas Enterobacter, Acinetobacter,

before Candida skin, parapsilosis, by tunnel Candida cuff. the exiting a Candida tropicalis and subcutaneous glabrata, albicans Candida anchored subcutaneous furfur, Malassezia Fungi to major common connection any of or catheter-associated of and infection. is tubing is the a hub Contamination predisposition catheter the IV have skin access venous implanted a systems the tunneled to subcutaneous elastomer a silicone catheter pocket. a Totally beneath implanted in Infuse-a-Port) reservoir (Port-a-Cath, do the eliminate, entry but decrease, for not ports the at opportunity Implanted skin site. catheters microbial or

catheter-related Catheter-related or develop and thrombosis can together. infection separately infection be identified identify can only. or culture Ultrasound but thrombi, by radiographscan is with inflammation Thrombophlebitis thrombosis. Septic in with thrombosis thrombophlebitis is organisms embedded clot. the clinical a bloodstream peripheral catheterand no of organism other same of the of source patient symptomsof infection a bacteremia Catheter-related from infection. blood and implies apparent from isolation with routinely counts is Confirmation colony quantitative samples,which requires of both performed. not or the may bacteremia maynot via which infection, infusate, tubing of connections, apparent. Possible contamination the sources include be established clinically and catheter or along infection insertion the infection. catheters as may extend a appear or buried exit site limited tunnel of site tunnel to may Infection thecatheter to cause an

exit aureus, Enterococcus, bacteremias most catheter-related cause site and than infections. and microorganisms staphylococci, cause catheter 121-1).Gram-positive central Staphylococcus (Table cocci, of primarily Candida commonly staphylococci, infections, 50% more coagulase-negative Many venous associated involved. diphtheroids, Other are Bacillus and often skin flora, 25% of to infections. 40% cause Gram-negative organisms common. are venous central catheters of Polymicrobial infections antibiotics catheter infections, Fungal Candida most receiving albicans, persons or common nutrition. usually broad-spectrum are among parenteral

bloodstream than 0 The from 30 central less from catheter-days venous are 2 per to to catheter-days. rates 1000 of 1000 and 2 for of catheters per catheters infection peripheral prematurity, integrity, Risk skin skin that adversely and and neutropenia, infection include disorders the burns for affect factors

Chapter with Infections Medical Associated u Devices 395 121

Tunneled? Tunneled? ILL persistently culture improvement hours or 72 cellulitis no NEEDED? pocket unstable TERMINALLY Hemodynamically or positive endocarditis/ infection after thrombophlebitis LINE NOT or AND: NO line all agents NO Insertion YES easy? through >1 lumina YES Antibiotic NO NO thrombolytic line YES consider NO YES1 THE REMOVE LINE YES

121-1 infection. Figure catheter venous central Management of

Verweij PE: BE, hematologic patients with Paw malignancies. in (From Infections De Churchill Diseases, ed Infectious editors: Practice Philadelphia, Fig. 2005, Livingstone, 6, JE, Dolin and GL, Mandell Principles In of Bennett R, p 3434.) 307-1, immunodeficiencies (see other 120). Chapter lower are and for implanted Infection rates tunneled catheters. emergency more inserted than settings infected placed in be catheters electively. to are likely Catheters

Clinical bacteremia overwhelming to catheter-associated of from fungemia sepsis. or range signs fever mild discharge. localized and erythema, of as is manifested with catheter site Infection swelling, entrance the warmth, tenderness, central at the a cellulitis is Tunnel similar infection the findings manifested tunnel along by route. warm, of tender palpable originating a site IV local is Peripheral by manifested only subclinical but cord or or signs fever inflammation. infection the without as at catheter classically phlebitis be erythematous, may catheter-related manifested

StudentConsult.com @ Available

the the infection catheter-related depends The site pathogen the on of treatment involved. and infection of Catheters removed is necessary be infection if suspected. that are no should longer can alone antibiotic treated in of plus or, antibiotics, Catheter-associated attempt with be simple stable removal, (Fig. a bacteremia removal catheter therapy an patient, 1211). frequently followed low prompt by complete of infection. organisms of manifested by defervescence be virulence fever may Infection removal catheter the is resolution with alone, and and of initial antibiotics gram-negative broad-spectrum should include cephalosporin, and infection organisms against suspected therapy Empirical active for a as against such

nafcillin, aureus vancomycin. coagulase-negative such oxacillin, and or S. as staphylococci identified. to should be specific organism Antibiotic tailored the regimens bacteremic infections, in be Eradication 89% exit and 94% central infections, infection uncomplicated infections. can without accomplished site line of of of the of tunnel of removal 25% the antibiotic catheter. to antibiotics a infected of the to is the therapy, susceptible be likely not and pathogen trial If given ill patient critically is through is duration therapy depends positive is pathogen and usually cultures of of 14 days The total the 10 and bloodstream. after the to of sterilization the on duration blood response thrombophlebitis, Catheter positive appropriate alone infection therapy appropriate culture hours with deterioration (despite removal of to because indicated results antimicrobial (see 72 lesions, poor persistently embolic sepsis, clinical or septic Fig. of therapy), fungal is antifungal 48 therapy, after to 121-1). port body usually removal an is Infection respond the necessary. antibiotics, of around implanted to of and foreign unlikely pocket is the to

the intravascular of infused sterilizing portion high is using catheters method of into a the concentrations of vessel and the by Antibiotic-lock the antibiotics between catheter hub entry. dwell to hours. the catheter within is several allowed segment The for solution also and of It be useful of infection. prevention may for infections for catheter-associated treatment

during technique catheter essential Aseptic is insertion. as are should emergency placed replaced Catheters as medically situations be that during soon feasible. entered. is to indwelling the sterile involves whenever meticulous attention technique catheters of Care system the entry commonly a involves catheter topical disinfectant. Care or antibiotic site of Catheters necessary are removed. longer be should that no

host of and defenses. to bypasses airway lungs Intubation normal the access the provides direct the enter lumen result Organisms around directly of or tube, through lungs which in by may tube ventilator-associated descending pneumonia. the the the systems, introduces equipment, bacteria Contaminated or lower into airways. condensate directly respiratory humidification of the a flora The interferes cough airway of gastric risk and glottis. of open aspiration reflux because oropharyngeal requires of the closed effective by an increases airway and continuously clearance coughing contents with upper of mouth does technique. Suctioning not or require technique aseptic tract clean upper but requires the respiratory that single airways the usually designed are must catheters be for use. Suction sterile and lower reach

important infections instrumentation, presence are (UTIs) (see of most anatomic tract for risk 114). the The urinary catheters, factors and abnormalities Chapter bacteria contaminated along instillation meatus of by urine the or bladder of bag, around Organisms through drainage ascent enter backflow of irrigation outside the the catheter. contaminated of the the fluids, the catheter from the drainage catheters to bladder access direct and Indwelling have closed should facilitate a system. UTI 2%. simple, 1% is straight After of the to incidence catheterization, fecal bacilli, coli, and enteric Enterococcus. UTIs Escherichia Organisms cause include gram-negative flora, as catheter-associated that commonly such most pathogens. With concomitant predominate, antibiotic resistant treatment, organisms as fungi and emerge

important use prevention to The duration is and aspect of minimize of most catheterization. the is catheter whenever drainage over catheterization feasible. preferred indwelling Intermittent all technique, the be and at with drainage the entered. with technique system aseptic is Insertion used performed catheters system of times, whenever must closed sterile must remain backflow urine should into to the always of be dependent avoid bladder. Drainage bags

exit to infections, dialysis Indwelling develop catheters infections, peritonitis. tunnel may or site lead for peritoneal used infection skin surface into usual is The of peritoneum. tunnel the from along and the route the such The most common and enteric E. water, Acinetobacter; organisms as coli such and Klebsiella; pathogens such fungi, including flora, are as as and that skin flora, Staphylococcus; Pseudomonas contaminate

albicans. C. with Peritonitis abdominal vague present may dialysate. cloudy pain, fever, and is on The of confirmed and the manifestations diagnosis clinical culture established dialysate. by of during infection minimize of catheter the contamination, the of motion, care to the to avoid meticulous site of planning of aseptic tension dialysis. insertion of exit technique site, careful requires catheter, aseptic catheter location and Prevention the the securing and

care–associated shunts, system cerebrospinal of health infections nervous risk are central Important and leaks. (CSF) ventriculoperitoneal surgery, fluid factors hematogenous seeding. from ventriculoperitoneal system the of of or of Infection shunts contamination the time at from results placement allow to flora skin direct the bolts access and ventricular subdural drains Externalized CSF. of of especially infection rates increase these the the 5 duration days. For with devices, of beyond catheterization,

The S. aureus. coagulase-negative shunt pathogens most common and causing staphylococci infections are colonizes cranial a may nasopharynx. After facilitate CSF pneumoniae, from or which nasopharynx, leak ascending frequently Streptococcus fistula fracture especially with the skull infection surgery, the with may infections shunt fever Patients present with may (see typical headache, and Chapter or meningitis present 100). signs only of with symptoms and of coagulase-negative with caused Infections present typically and staphylococci headache, insidious vomiting. malaise, onset by fever, with vancomycin, bacteria suspected. are with therapy gram-negative additional if is Empirical antibiotics

Antibiotics other perioperatively placement used during of are neurosurgical procedures. frequently and shunts no that There infection these decrease clean is proof in procedures. rates antibiotics soon drains with systems aseptic External as maintained removed and closed technique be ventricular as should as possible. Drainage to be avoid always dependent should bags backflow.

nature and are in between Zoonoses infections humans. animals are that transmitted vertebrate nature of and enzootic hosts zoonotic cycle, each by in pathogens mammalian which arthropod are an means in vectors Many other. reinfect maintained frequently only infected. are Humans incidentally zoonotic 90% United infections in human the have that Lyme burgdorferi)accounts of more reported disease 150 for different States. the than 122-1), (Borrelia vector-borne been (Table Of diseases described Nile phagocytophilum). include Rickettsia and ehrlichiosis (Anaplasma (Ehrlichia West pathogens chaffeensis), Other (Rocky fever), Mountain common rickettsii anaplasmosis virus, spotted of zoonoses if geographic vector. cycle The vector-borne, related hosts is the distribution epidemiology life the and, distribution the seasonal of to the and of

Mountain Rocky tularemia, spotted including ehrlichiosis, ticks are babesiosis. disease, fever, spread Lyme by tick Many typhus,and zoonoses 101), dengue fever, encephalitides Mosquitoes fever. the (see yellow and Chapter transmit malaria, arboviral diseases clothing(closed-toe insect habitats(thick of repellants wearing Preventive long avoiding scrub protective animals; insect on excretory that and clothing; products and poison DEET etc. avoid that contain measures using pants, ivy shoes, tick-borne skin repellants tick-infested permethrin include to briar, wild oak, (N,N-diethyl-m-toluamide) contain on sites); appropriate avoiding mosquito-borne ticks. promptly ); removing and

using tick outward. to to to as steadily tick grasp the blunt or are the the skin close Ticks removed best forceps as pull possible tweezers should squeezed. syringe or avoided act tick’s a if crushing can Squeezing, bloated abdomen twisting, the because be like the tick 60 30 36 Babesia. nymphal forhuman of Transmission tick and 56 hours to for to after B. infection after to 36 to attachment hours after hours burgdorferi, bemost for efficient ehrlichiosis, of seems granulocytic 48 after exposure is antimicrobial bite a therapy tick not Prophylactic recommended. or

tick-borne Lyme disease by is a spirochete, B. burgdorferi. caused infection the the is midwestern is the tick. deer that vector United tick scapularis, in the States eastern as black-legged and known The Ixodes commonly pacificus, vector the Coast Pacific The black-legged western the Ixodes tick. on is by reservoir infected Ticks on leucopus), which (Peromyscus feeding burgdorferi. natural B. for mouse a is the usually white-footed become is in humans. spring larvae the to over winter transmit of infection stage, nymphal and emerge are the likely tick stage the to dormant following the the The most that

New states, reported England, from of Midwest 96% Over the Atlantic with Middle 20,000 eastern parts in United cases reported cases the upper and the of the annually are States,

Lyme cases States disease of geographic of 24,364 2011. Figure The in confirmed United distribution 122-1 in the The pacificas, distribution presence ticks by stage deer. acquiring disease each the by locations Ixodes species each for life proportion of or Ixodes at favored tick’s grassy white-tailed and wooded cycle, infected of risk the the and of Lyme of for the varies scapularis Prevention: (From from (Fig. CDC Disease Disease—United http://www.cdc.gov/lyme/stats/ available Control for website: Centers maps/map2011.html and Lyme 2011, States, the 122-1). central Europe cases occur countries In most in Europe. Scandinavian and noted Because is summer. Lyme to ticks more disease exposure predominantly is warm months, in in common among children at and is incidence the to among years twice 5 highest adults. incidence old, The 10 almost adolescents

StudentConsult.com @ Available

are into divided The manifestations late clinical early stages. and localized disseminated. may be or infection Early 7 Early border, disease as form develops site a to localized raised bite after often forms erythematous papule clearing. to tick central expands with days 14 the an a red, that cm be and harbors wide, may erythema burgdorferi or The pruritic, lesion, 15 migrans, B. painful. manifestations lymphadenopathy. and malaise, Systemic arthralgias, lethargy, headache, myalgias, fever, neck, stiff include may weeks. treatment over lesions resolve early and manifestations skin without to 4 The 2 migrans. erythema disease bite a patients recall Not Lyme all tick with develop or

meningitis, Approximately Bell polyradiculitis, multiple pseudotumor, secondary peripheral aseptic including cranioneuropathies disease skin papilledema, develop mononeuritis early patients with multiplex, 20% palsy, myelitis. neuropathy, disseminated of lesions, transverse or of this may during develop block Carditis rarely with stage. degrees various heart months recur resolve manifestations by chronic. usually become or 3 may Neurologic but

weeks Late disease to months infection. after begins 60% of to the and usual untreated 50% in develop may Arthritis is patients. manifestation 7:1. female male to ratio is The in 90% joint any be of cases, is affected. involved knee than The greater but may to other may recur 1 joints. resolve Symptoms weeks in over often but 2 and duration increase patients in erosive resolve, episodes severity. as of 10% If in most cases the chronic untreated persists arthritis but occur of in abnormalities 10% Cardiac untreated approximately patients. the disease is (CNS), in late central nervous manifestations children. Lyme Neuroborreliosis, system the reported rarely of involving

Lyme during not disease tests negative useful. Antibody be may localized early, and are serologic The by specific tests confirmed B. burgdorferi. for of late is diagnosis disease vary tests and for Thesensitivity specificity serologic disease of Lyme substantially. proteins A outer-surface low-molecular-weight, specific, to least enzyme-linked must of result immunosorbent immunofluorescence of antibodies confirmed which proteins). against at IgG) positive (for of IgM) the five B. more one or or assay two be (for burgdorferi(at immunoblot either assay three is by one least showing

may rate In the and elevated complement late be sedimentation erythrocyte is disease, reduced. with (see often inflammatory white 125,000 of response a total count joint 25,000 fluid cell The polymorphonuclear an with shows predominance to cells/mm3, blood 118-2). Table are positive. Laboratory The falsely be rheumatoid test factor and antinuclear Disease Venereal but antibody Research negative, the may elevated normal shows glucose fluid lymphocytic and With cerebrospinal pleocytosis a with CNS slightly involvement, protein. the

bite is not is of but A always tick present. rash a the classic helpful and history bite, cellulitis. early, with an corporis, granuloma migrans disease annulare, be confused may Erythema localized or tinea insect of nummular eczema, infection lone the lonestari. to americanum, migrans, in Southern illness, states southeastern occurs is tick-associated with star Amblyomma similar which of with central rash south tick, associated the erythema and Borrelia and is and bite

Lyme erythema lesions During may early, multiple multiforme disseminated as appear disease, or urticaria. seventh from the Bell similar viral is and to meningitis, nerve palsy palsy. or The meningitis is idiopathic herpetic aseptic indistinguishable carditis similar is myocarditis. viral Lyme to arthritis, mimic disease arthritis, arthritis late suppurative rheumatic Monarticular Chapter idiopathic (see may fever pauciarticular of juvenile or or 89). Lyme degenerative depression. neurologic encephalitis, The includes of illness, and neuroborreliosis diagnosis differential

14 other first-degree nerve to disease treated disseminated heart localized disease, or carditis with days. facial block, or 21 amoxicillin for and with (or palsy) including cranial and Early doxycycline nerve early is second-degree palsy Early block or third-degree heart meningitis disease carditis with with and

Cat-scratch United disease Cats, scratches henselae States and Bites dogs Bartonella

Erysipeloid Erysipelothrix contact fish ducks, Direct Worldwide swine, Sheep, rhusiopathiae turkeys,

Mycobacterium aquarium Mycobacterium fortuitum, Worldwide Direct infection Fish, Mycobacterium kansasii marinum, contact, Wound scratches

or contact Direct Leptospirosis water with Dogs, by infected Leptospira urine rodents, animals livestock contaminated Worldwide soil interrogans of contact,

Western United fever States southern Borrelia bite, Louse fleas Rodents, transplacental and Relapsing transmission bite, flea

Southern south-central Deer, Borrelia illness tick-associated scapularis) Southeastern U.S. lonestari Tick rash bite and (I. rodents

Rickettsia tick-bite Cattle, goats (?) African fever africae Tick bite Africa, Sub-Saharan Caribbean

North Rickettsia Mite Mice Africa South region, America, Rickettsialpox Ukraine, Korea, akari Adriatic Russia, bite

felis hemisphere, Flea typhus–like cats, Opossums, Rickettsia dogs Murine Europe Western illness bite

Louse Africa, Rickettsia Asia America, Humans typhus prowazekii feces Central Mexico, South Epidemic America,

R. Lice States fleas squirrel United or prowazekii squirrels of Flying Flying flying typhus (sylvatic)

typhus tsutsugamushi (?) Orientia Scrub Rodents Asiatic Japan, Australia, Asia, China Chigger bite India, Southern Russia, Korea, Indonesia,

Europe, United Ehrlichia States, Deer, Human ehrlichiosis dogs monocytic bite Tick (Amblyomma chaffeensis

Europe (I. granulocytic (human bite ruminants deer, United Tick phagocytophilum scapularis) Anaplasmosis Anaplasma ehrlichiosis) States, Rodents,

helminth-Japan, Malaysia ehrlichiosis Ingestion contaminated sennetsu Sennetsu (?) fish Neorickettsia of Unknown

122-1 GEOGRAPHIC cardiopulmonary Aerosol Major VECTORS/MODES DISTRIBUTION Zoonotic RESERVOIRS DISEASE CAUSATIVE inhalation Rodents, Infections*—cont’d TRANSMISSION syndrome Vector-Borne ANIMAL cats Hantavirus mice, States Table COMMON AGENT OF Hantavirus and Southwestern United

hamsters, inhalation, direct Worldwide bite Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus choriomeningitis Lymphocytic mice Aerosol contact, Rodents,

and Worldwide foxes, Rabies raccoons, cats Rabies Bites bats, virus skunks, Dogs, scratches

contact Direct stomatitis Vesicular swine Vesicular Horses, stomatitis cattle, virus Americas

Babesia Tick rodents transfusion bite Worldwide (I. scapularis), and domestic Babesiosis Cattle, blood wild

bite Sandfly cutaneous dogs Leishmaniasis, and wild mucocutaneous and Leishmania Domestic Tropics

Domestic bite and Sandfly Leishmania complex donovani dogs Tropics visceral Leishmaniasis, wild

California Usually to Mosquito United Humans Plasmodium States, imported Malaria Southern bite the (Anopheles)

pigs in Toxoplasmosis material gondii ingestion Toxoplasma fecally or cysts tissue undercooked oocysts Worldwide Cats, in contaminated Ingestion of livestock, of meat

diseases. Christenson Epidemiology infectious from Adapted JC: of Infectious In Jenson Practice, ed editors: 2, HB, Baltimore and Diseases: Pediatric RS, Principles

Saunders, 2002, Philadelphia, 18−20. pp

Tables and also 123-4 123-5). zoonotic (see *Many helminths are

for palsy) facial ceftriaxone intramuscular to 28 penicillin days. nerve other are disease neurologic (other than or 14 late cranial treated or nerve intravenous or with intravenous G amoxicillin days. 28 >9 treated age) doxycycline Arthritis of is with or (for children for years disease. the for neurologic late should If there be repeated regimen or oral a regimen with recurrence, treatment is with

arthritis conduction Lyme complications Carditis, major disturbances, and of especially disease. the are most untreated, resolve eventually without Even sequelae. cases

disease and readily Lyme is curable. treatable for is excellent disease. long-term prognosis late and early The prevent meningitis. may treatment and Early progression to carditis after rare of Recurrences are treatment. recommended arthritis

later. 4 no children disease of community-based found to Lyme with A study 11 years impairment evidence of

preventing reasonable diseases means to minimize exposure are of most disease. the tick-borne Measures to Lyme is of after not because develops, is risk Postexposure a effective. Lyme and the highly treatment overall endemic the in 1% even prophylaxis tick to it acquiring bite is routinely if recommended disease only areas, 2% infection, of for ticks Nymphal to 72 36 to 48 ticks before of transmission must 48 adult of must hours, and the B. burgdorferi from ticks risk stage feed for becomes feed substantial. hours infected Lyme with 72 adults a hours single 200 prophylaxis disease. mg regions, preventing In is tick in hyperendemic dose, of effective as within of doxycycline, a bite nymphal

require intracellular gram-negative Mountain that fever site but replication. have incomplete organisms bacteria cell and is an Rocky spotted resemble cause rickettsii, walls of R. coccobacillary for The organism vasculitis vessels, organ the tissue and, decreased volume, widespread vascular blood resulting of invades causing vascular within in edema, failure. increased cells and permeability, endothelial eventually, proliferates altered and perfusion, and The Many R. of are capable species transmitting tick rickettsii. the ticks States and and Mexico, tick the (Dermacentor the and South Canada, The dog Canada, United America. andersoni) tick the wood eastern Central variabilis) in American the in (Rhipicephalus (Dermacentor dog western sanguineus) are United Amblyomma principal cajennense and tick in brown States in

eastern occurring western the states. fever and spotted Rocky the is Mountain illness States, most rickettsial common the primarily southeastern, United in coastal, in of areas, from among activity occur with to age. years peak incidence 14 Most 1 October to after cases May outdoor wooded children in a tick infected are recall bite. unable of 40% to Approximately persons

StudentConsult.com @ Available

Rocky 14 The of spotted of 7 to period average with days, Mountain 2 incubation an days. is fever The with onset headache, nonspecific and is malaise, fever. macular maculopapular 90% A of in pale, appears or cases. rose-red rash the spreads body, The palms rash and and to peripherally soles. involve begins entire including pressure warmth. is blanches accentuated by rash The early on and appears and the wrists It first eruption progresses and the purpuric that trunk feet days centripetally to then over a progresses head. to on hours and or ankles, and the petechial hands, and the headaches Myalgias, common. extremities, of intractable especially lower are and impairment, progress myocarditis, cases renal and shock. Severe pneumonitis, with splenomegaly,

<100,000 levels cells/mm3), findings. common transaminase and (usually laboratory are hyponatremia, Thrombocytopenia hepatic elevated anemia, reaction, this fluorescent antibodies polymerase not or specimens by Organisms detected although can biopsy skin is available. in be test widely chain confirmation. the testing begun is confirm treatment although is diagnosis, before Serologic to used

leptospirosis, Henoch-Schönlein enteroviruses, bacterial shock idiopathic mononucleosis, meningococcemia, ehrlichiosis, purpura. purpura, syndrome, differential and toxic collagen includes infectious thrombocytopenic The diseases, sepsis, vascular measles, diagnosis bite fever be especially spring summer spotted suspected with or petechial Mountain of a regions. with tick in of diagnosis and The during Rocky history outdoor fever and a endemic activities should rash, endemic indicate spotted and fever. Mountain areas Rocky patients 1 more Fever, myalgias in than headache, week in lasting late and late atypical appearance result symptoms diagnosis treatment rash. the Delayed usually of initial from and

be for tests. postponed Rocky not Therapy should fever suspected spotted pending of diagnostic results Mountain the even young risk age. is of for despite choice, in than Doxycycline years theoretical 9 dental of the children, younger drug staining of children may rickettsii be against Fluoroquinolones also alternative treatment. are and active R. an

failure, results pulmonary leakage myocarditis, (acute edema and respiratory including infections, encephalitis, hepatitis, capillary and severe hypotension, multiple organ in noncardiogenic syndrome), disseminated failure. distress intravascular In renal collapse, circulatory coagulation,

Untreated multisystem before progressing persist illness involvement. to may for 3 weeks is with treatment. The mortality rate 3.4% is treatment, 25% which reduced to without disease. common Permanent are severe sequelae after

tick-borne avoid removal measures recommended. infections Preventive ticks to are and of careful

ehrlichiosis infection to used term is of Ehrlichia. all refer often with The forms to ehrlichiosis caused monocytic Human by is

predominantly cells andis transmitted chaffeensis, E. tick monocytic the by which infects americanum. A. Ehrlichia also be Disease caused by ewingii. may caused anaplasmosis by is Human

and the is A. scapularis. tick phagocytophilum by transmitted I.

occurs Ehrlichiosis United commonly States. in the broad occurs States Mountain United in and spotted Rocky in ehrlichiosis Mid-Atlantic areas a south southeastern, that the of monocytic distribution fever. that across central, Human parallels California, the States, infections United mostly in states, upper in identified the now and is and Europe. but Mid-Atlantic found broadly northern been have Anaplasmosis midwestern northeastern across

Ehrlichiosis anorexia, ehrlichiosis, by and illness rash. often headache, fever, characterized acute cause anaplasmosis, without malaise, similar a ewingii myalgias, but and monocytic febrile Human nausea, a nearly although maculopapular monocytic lesions thirds petechial In macular with patients, rash, present occur. ehrlichiosis with of adult children two or human contrast may to for days. last 4 Symptoms usually to 12

include leukopenia, hepatic lymphocytopenia, anemia, thrombocytopenia, findings transaminases. and elevated laboratory Characteristic of circulating are monocytes Morulae found to 40% ehrlichiosis (Fig. persons found 20% human anaplasmosis with of neutrophils but in are in infrequently in with monocytic of 60% persons circulating 122-2). Seroconversion titer antibody fourfold or diagnosis. the in rise confirms

Rocky spotted typhus, relapsing fever, tularemia, Ehrlichiosis tick including other babesiosis, similar Mountain disease, infections, to Lyme is fever. murine arthropod-borne early fever, Colorado clinically and includes differential infections, leptospirosis, also collagen vascular endocarditis, Kawasaki Q fever, diseases, hepatitis, infectious diagnosis viral The and mononucleosis, leukemia. disease,

Mountain with diagnostic therapy of not results pending tests. for suspected be postponed ehrlichiosis Rocky fever, As spotted should treated and are with doxycycline. Ehrlichiosis anaplasmosis

A phagocytophilum morula neutrophil. 122-2 in Anaplasma a (arrowhead) containing Figure A. similar and have serologically genetically morphologies phagocytophilum and but are distinct. chaffeensis Ehrlichia (Wright X original stain, magnification 1200.) Walker ehrlichieae. monocytotropic (human other chaffeensis (From DH, granulocytotropic Ehrlichia and phagocytophilum ehrlichiosis), anaplasmosis), JS: (human Anaplasma Dumler JE, ed Infectious Practice 6, R, Bennett Churchill Philadelphia, Dolin editors: 2005, Principles In Fig. Mandell of and Livingstone, Diseases, GL, p 2315.) 190-2,

Severe reported several syndrome been acute pulmonary involvement cases. respiratory with in distress has Other severe and meningoencephalitis myocarditis. reported include complications patients Most within improve hours. 48

Preventive of recommended. careful avoid to tick-borne removal are ticks and infections measures

the the simplest animal Protozoa organisms kingdom. of are They unicellular. are a free existence. or Most parasitic some living, are but commensal have intestinal toxoplasmosis, cryptosporidiosis, malaria, protozoal diseases Protozoal and and babesiosis, diseases, include the giardiasis. amebiasis,

P. P. is intracellular of falciparum, and by P. vivax, P. Malaria including Plasmodium, the genus P. ovale, obligate protozoa caused malariae, knowlesi. in cellular different in Plasmodium cycle and survival has a that enables vector. human life the the mosquito environments in complex host in asexual an a life humans the in two in phase are major and phases (schizogony) (sporogony) mosquitoes. There cycle, phase sexual penetrate liver begins erythrocytic of Plasmodium asexual exoerythrocytic erythrocytes. from phase merozoites The the the when development released schizonts in When transforms the inside parasite ring become into which erythrocyte, trophozoite. the to form, enlarges the a which the confirming be identified malaria. can is blood Giemsa diagnosis These latter the two primary with of of on smear, stain means forms

female to transmitted mosquitoes. are The usually humans by Anopheles parasites transmitted also Malaria through blood fetus. and transplacentally transfusion contaminated needles be can via a to

transmission a more billion in than worldwide than 1.6 100 more countries people. with combined is population Malaria of a with problem important is morbidity tropical the of world. an fever Malaria cause and in of Islands. The Southeast sub-Saharan Dominican Haiti, the South Guinea, Africa, Republic, Asia, Asia, areas America, transmission Solomon the Papua principal are and and southern Central Mexico, New most among to without travel the annually cases endemic to imported who from areas the chemoprophylaxis. recognized States United citizens occurring U.S. and civilians with States, in cases 1000 foreign United Approximately to among 2000 areas are appropriate infected travel who endemic

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Origin of Fever Unknown

manifestations illness infection malaria response. death, to range The malaria infecting of depending fulminant clinical host immune the species and on from of the and the virulence asymptomatic 6 relative period (Table diseases, 123-1).The from feature alternating of fatigue which is with with incubation depending febrile but days, wellness. to periods 30 species the noted seldom other The otherwise paroxysms of Plasmodium on infectious ranges characteristic clinical most malaria, is high symptoms paroxysms include febrile headache. rigors, of the fever, sweats, malaria The of classic and P. hours schizonts vivax with 72 (quartan P. every and of 48 with the every occur with that coincide periodicity) and rupture ovale periodicity). Paroxysms hours (tertian P. malariae

describes primary due of the attack in after survival the Short-term erythrocyte a the of relapse recurrence is bloodstream. to that forms symptoms attack, long of release from the liver. to source exoerythrocytic in Long-term of after describes merozoites the the an the symptoms renewal due relapse primary usually and P. Long-term with vivax occurs relapse

the of the persistence ovale with malariae liver P. of in because erythrocyte. and because in P. persistence

smears diagnosis oforganisms of is of by identification on peripheral malaria blood. established stained the The occur days typically In nonimmune are persons, 1 on blood symptoms smear. 2 to beforeparasites detectable timing likely blood less be most obtainingsmears the times of several days. successive paroxysm, 3 Although a day is than falciparumis P. over from the febrile identified during to each smears important thin smears examined. Both should be blood thickand 20 times of erythrocytes 40 approximately on a than greater on is a concentration to The thick smear. thin smear that used erythrocytes quickly. numbers scan are large Thick of smears to smears response malaria for is and of the positive usefulin the identification determinationof the therapy. following of species also to allow which infected Thin percentage erythrocytes, tests as future. near the Rapid tests mayemerge diagnostic care of in point

travel fever,chills, residence of splenomegaly, in of child with aspect regardless decreased children of or important the possibility in any consciousness anemia, use consider most of of chemoprophylaxis. of endemicarea, The level history or diagnosing the an isto malaria has who malaria recent a in fever,trypanosomiasis, relapsing infectious as poliomyelitis, abscess. fever,infective is differential influenza, amebic diseases,such kala-azar, yellow endocarditis, typhoid tuberculosis, and fever, and brucellosis, broad liver many The includes diagnosis

Malaria P. 123-1 5.5–7 hours Plasmodium KNOWLESI 12–16 OVALE hours of 8-9 49–50 Table Characteristics days days days P. 6–8 hours VIVAX 9 72 cycle MALARIAE CHARACTERISTIC cycle 24 days 42–48 Erythrocytic Causing hours FALCIPARUM 48 P. Exoerythrocytic Species P. P. hours days

erythrocytes Reticulocytes but Young Older Reticulocytes infect Older Erythrocyte preference erythrocytes, all can erythrocytes

years years (includes 3–50 1.5–4 untreated of years infection 1–2 Duration years Unknown (includes 1.5–4

hours hours None 48 hours 72 24 periodicity febrile 48 of attacks Usual hours

paroxysm hours of be 8–12 hours Unknown febrile longer) 8–10 8–12 (may 16–36 hours hours Duration

Strickland from Malaria. GT: Adapted Strickland Medicine, Hunter’s Philadelphia, 1991, editor: p WB GT, 7, In Saunders, 589. ed Tropical

chloroquine treatment P. is Oral except falciparum. chloroquine-resistant recommended the for an therapy of (Coartem) in for (Malarone) areas Either first-line resistance. acquired malaria artemether-lumefantrine or chloroquine appropriate atovaquone-proguanil is should patterns. Specific patient guided infection the be by the resistance where local treatment acquired the and with unit care and admission. Patients require may usually hospitalization intensive require malaria drug only for States the the United is in Quinidine treatment. that is available gluconate parenteral used

frequent adults. 40% especially (20% of a infection Cerebral of complication a of among is and cases), to nonimmune P. malaria children cause falciparum death and cerebral intense is more (>5%). occur complications, among patients likely parasitemia with Similar malaria to to other Other vascular hemolysis complications malaria hypoglycemia, with algid renal pulmonary splenic rupture, include fever), syndrome collapse). (sepsis edema, failure, (blackwater severe thrombocytopenia, and

frequent with is but complicated species of may any Death most malaria. with P. the occur malarial falciparum schistosomiasis, measles, malnutrition. problems, preexisting likelihood parasites, such is health as and children with increased The in death of intestinal anemia, much Death countries. developing more in common is

and are chemoprophylaxis. components infected mosquitoes There reduction to prevention: malaria of of two exposure guarantee because can Mosquito no protection to of necessary the every organisms. prophylactic widespread development instance due protection in resistant regimen is

Chemoprophylaxis to not since who there have necessary the of lived visitors all is for tropics infancy. and residents have from chemoprophylaxis Children women nonimmune of should birth. Children passive until which have to of from immunity 6 areas endemic after malaria. to increasingly acquire women are they 3 of age, months likely and resistance before commonly determined medications. prescribed pattern guided http://www.cdc.gov/malaria/travelers/country_table/a.html chloroquine, chemoprophylaxis by making distribution Malarone specific ( Specific ).Mefloquine, are be recommendations and should the of doxycycline,

StudentConsult.com @ Available

Lymphadenopathy Origin Splenomegaly of Unknown Petechiae/Purpura Fever

a protozoan intracellular caused parasite. by is Toxoplasmosis an zoonosis gondii, Toxoplasma organism an such meat. in in is cats, those the newly contaminated, or oocysts, as infectious from by which in ingesting acquired Infection undercooked infected excreted cysts by important nature, play role amplifying women. pregnant transplacentally during of transmission infection acute commonly, occurs Less births. In infection the incidence 1000 2 of to United per congenital States, is live 1 the

Acquired is usually asymptomatic. toxoplasmosis hepatosplenomegaly. a fever,and syndrome typically includes mononucleosis is Symptomatic infection that lymphadenopathy, heterophile-negative especially among pneumonia, (CNS)toxoplasmosis, infection, more common acquired (AIDS). Disseminated persons is system central nervous syndrome immunodeficiency includingmyocarditis, and persons, immunocompromised with infant. 40% to infected Among to infected 60% give birth an duringpregnancy, women (see the less the fetus the but isthat Chapter illness occurs, Thelater more that will be the in severe likely infected, 66). infection pregnancy it T. a antibody positive IgM positive peripheral amniotic cerebrospinalfluid blood afourfold titer, (CSF), by or diagnosis white in be antibody can titer chain or seroconversion, increase serum, reactionfor cells, gondii established fluid. Serologic polymerase or in

includes Toxoplasma. Treatment synergistically sulfadiazine, and act which against pyrimethamine these acid. folic they acid conjunction are with Because are used inhibitors, in compounds folinic is women with which not United is the of in also in used toxoplasmosis. therapy licensed States, Spiramycin, pregnant ocular with patients Corticosteroids acute for infection. or are CNS reserved

persons. where and in areas Ingesting forpregnant defecate immunocompromised measures prudent or avoiding cats orsoil cats are meat well-cooked only lower infection to spiramycin infected congenital has with beenassociated pregnant of of in theiroffspring. Administration risks women

of flatworms, groups: groups are cestodes Helminths or into two and nematodes, (flukes) the roundworms, trematodes and divided (tapeworms). the three

is Necator duodenale Hookworm species caused several infection being the with most by americanus and important Ancylostoma 123-2). of (Table hookworms, million 9 more humans with infected than worldwide There are hookworms. of predominant the in Europe, northern west duodenale the is species coast America. region, South Mediterranean and Asia, Ancylostoma the N. the sub-Saharan in the and Islands. Asia, Pacific hemisphere, predominates Western americanus Southeast Africa, Optimal are in contamination tropical southeastern soil many and agrarian conditions fecal States. countries the found and United in typically the first occurs in Infection especially decade children, life. of during young warm, humans are and soil larvae by skin. The infect in the damp penetrating found reside ascend They are and swallowed, lungs, the the intestine. migrate in trachea, the to worms and wall, shed attach intestinal and mature they The where eggs. blood suck the to

hookworm) larva to migrate) penetration Albendazole failure topically thiabendazole Cutaneous migrans braziliense or ivermectin (and or Larval (azoonotic Ancylostoma

Infant (?) duodenale Perinatal A. ancylostomiasis or mebendazole pamoate Albendazole or pyrantel

Ascaris ascariasis Ascaris Ingestion pamoate or Intestinal mebendazole or lumbricoides of eggs pyrantel Albendazole

malabsorption Larval Ivermectin thiabendazole penetration stercoralis Strongyloides (celiac-like) Diarrhea, or

or Albendazole Ingestion vermicularis pamoate Enterobius of eggs mebendazole or Pinworm embryonated pyrantel

Abdominal Mebendazole Ingestion angiostrongyliasis Angiostrongylus contaminated food or costaricensis of thiabendazole

Eosinophilic lungworm) cantonensis seafood of meningitis Mebendazole undercooked contaminated (rat Ingestion Angiostrongylus

asymptomatic. Infections usually are include vesicles. (ground feet or and papules soles the the pruritus between may and toes, itch) Intense the usually of of at larval site penetration, occurs the larvae is of through usually Migration lungs the asymptomatic. indigestion, anorexia, infestation. with fullness, and diarrhea Symptoms of occur abdominal hookworm pain, is infection of major manifestation anemia. The of is diagnostic. fresh stool for Examination eggs hookworm and treatment with Therapy mebendazole, anthelmintic albendazole, anemia. pyrantel or pamoate includes treatment for Eradication the of depends chemotherapy. and patient’s environment sanitation on

is caused nematode. lumbricoides, large a Ascaris by Ascariasis 1 helminthiasis, prevalent billion affecting It (see the most 123-2). Table is people swallowed. lungs, released eggs, the trachea, and the are ascend ingest to larvae are intestine, After penetrate the migrate and humans the and the where for prolonged are intestines in eggs excreted they produce the soil, deposited in they the survive entering mature are periods. On again, and that stool

Manifestations the may larvae intestine. or worms of adult the of the sites of the other of the to result migration presence body be in cough, transient x-ray ascariasis chest migrate sputum, eosinophilia, larvae through Pulmonary producing lung, the as and occurs infiltrates the blood-stained on films.

larvae Adult the intestine pain in and abdominal small distention. cause may from occurs. adult worms rarely obstruction Intestinal bile Migration rarely worms acute of duct into the obstruction. may cause biliary Examination diagnostic. characteristic is fresh for of stool eggs treatment human disposal control and sanitary of infected feces. depends Effective adequate on

or, a Baylisascaris the also the canis, the cat larva Toxocara cause raccoon of is tapeworm, larva procyonis less cati, by systemic of Visceral tapeworm, migrans. organisms (see caused ingestion or ocular Toxocara eggs commonly, migrans tapeworm, the Table nematodiasis dog 123-2).These

children Visceral pica migrans as cats in is common or most larva have young who dogs pets. with occurs older Ocular toxocariasis children. in these adult roundworms are in The dog of by worms and produced intestine. cat residing the eggs heart, eye, hatch and migrate into die the that eggs penetrate gastrointestinal lung, calcify. where liver, tract they to CNS, Ingested and the and larvae

worms larva and associated of of result visceral migrating immune migrans the Symptoms are number the of the response. are often Light asymptomatic. infections cough, seizures. and include wheezing, fever, Symptoms may include Physical crackles, rash, findings lymphadenopathy. and hepatomegaly, decreased or symptoms may include periorbital Visual blindness. strabismus, acuity, edema, Eye examination

other due to Parasitoses

or of raw Ingestion inadequately

or bithionol westermani, P. P. miyazaki, Paragonimiasis mexicanus, kellicotti, Paragonimus Praziquantel P.

macula uterobilateralis, reveal P. P. near africanus P. may heterotrema, P. or flukes) P. skjabini, (lung hueitungensis, the granulomatous lesions disc. no unilateral is and findings. isolated, disease systemic Ocular by larva migrans characterized ocular and Larvae the the peripheral loss. vision anterior artery vitreous probably enter poles the peripheral granulomas elicit and retinal branch eye cause from that the a in posterior of of

is diagnosis, by levels commonly, elevated biopsy. assay) by which serology confirmed isohemagglutinin less hypergammaglobulinemia immunosorbent associated suggest or, and with Eosinophilia the (enzyme-linked usually self-limited This is a illness. used. mebendazole severe In is albendazole disease, or kittens, Deworming major puppies and excreters of infection. risk decreases eggs, of the

StudentConsult.com Available @

nematode that is by vermicularis, Pinworm a distributed caused Enterobius is worldwide. affects children. especially individuals at all Enterobiasis socioeconomic levels, Crowded predispose living conditions to infection. the ingest dust in on on eggs hands, house bedclothes. carried present Humans or mature. and to hatch the eggs the cecum migrate in larvae the The and stomach, are which night 2 to lay to viable the females eggs, their days. At for migrate the area perianal

ani) pruritus common (pruritus symptoms and sleeplessness, presumably worms. the anal most from migratory resulting The are female nocturnal develop Vaginitis to aberrant worm and secondary may migration. salpingitis the tape in detected against eggs the examining The by to are adhesive microscopically cellophane morning collect anus pressed eggs. perianal may commonly, the worm be a in region. seen Less Treatment single mg), pamoate or and as (100 1 albendazole 2 pyrantel mg), repeated given dose (400 in is oral g) (11 maximum mg/kg, mebendazole a with each weeks.

StudentConsult.com Available @

and, by Schistosoma Schistosoma mekongi bloodstream, flukes 123-3). (bilharziasis) rarely, (Table the and Schistosoma is japonicum, Schistosoma parasitize that intercalatum Schistosoma mansoni, haematobium, Schistosomiasis caused including adults with peak and range of than 10 mainly more million age 2 people, to years. children a affects Schistosomiasis 20 young in skin. snails intact water form infectious are cercariae contaminated by that penetrate from in emerge infected Humans and an specific migrates worm to Each adult sites:

and bladder plexus S. S. and intercalatum the haematobium to

to vessels. the S. mekongi mesenteric by in The eggs stool mansoni (S. are haematobium) deposited flukes the urine or adult (S.

Echinococcus Echinococcosis var. granulosus

adjunct of is reports reliable of suggest treatment; albendazole Echinococcus use echinococcosis or mebendazole multilocularis some only Surgical means resection Alveolar

Ingestion undercooked Taenia stage infected Larval of or solium of praziquantel Albendazole Neurocysticercosis raw/ pork (cysticerci)

S. Praziquantel undercooked T. Ingestion japonicum). solium contaminated of Adult pork infections raw/ (pork tapeworm tapeworm) and and prevalent S. the West is in in haematobium East; the Africa S. Indonesia; South Middle S. S. East; and East, Philippines, mekongi the Far Africa. in America; the in mansoni japonicum in the and China, and intercalatum S. Africa, Caribbean, Middle

The that trapped from eggs schistosomiasis site the of metastatic at of deposition or result are manifestations at locations. of can rash abdominal 12 maturing, a syndrome 3 pain, cough, fever, Within and occur. weeks while malaise, infection, the to worms are of symptoms. is further This response inflammatory that to syndrome leads resultant a by followed acute fever is an condition, and weight fever, hepatosplenomegaly, loss, Katayama eosinophilia. with (S. haematobium) Eggs mansoni the may found urine and individuals. stool or S. infected in be (S. japonicum)of for individuals illness. and control may infected Sanitary the therapy measures, help molluscacides,

includes by cyst or multilocularis and or by (the disease, (Table vogeli, hydatid Echinococcosis Echinococcus unilocular cyst 123-4). dog caused Echinococcus minute tapeworm) Echinococcus disease, caused granulosus alveolar become cattle Dogs infected infected and in sheep eggs or tapeworms eating excrete viscera their by stools. with ingesting acquire and an Humans become eggs by echinococcosis host. intermediate eggs (oncospheres) intestinal penetrate cysts the circulation tract, organs, larva other diameter. enter the mucosa and The the hatch and liver and visceral to 2 to forming the pass the in cm in

granulosus the Mediterranean distribution Soviet of has region. and Africa, endemic former worldwide E. a the areas and is in South South Union, cattle-raising America, and Australia, sheep-raising highest prevalence in children. The is from E. caused Symptoms space-occupyingcysts. by result granulosus cysts hemoptysis, may cause dyspnea,and distress. cough, Pulmonary respiratory as cysts by blood tumors; diagnosis as Brain and isconfirmed compress livercysts appear they flow.Ultrasonography the serologic cystic lesions, testing. and problems cause identifies obstruct granulosa cysts removed or Large are asymptomatic surgically. benefit. albendazolehas shown some Treatment with

1234). is infection caused pork CNS Table tapeworm, the of the with larval Taenia solium, the frequent (cysticerci) (see is and of most infection Neurocysticercosis the stages by helminthic Humans are larva-containing undercooked consuming raw after pork. or in cysticerci infected endemic is T. solium Americas. Central and in Asia, South Africa, and

organism or begins years enlarge slowly, die. causing Cysts minimal typically the to until symptoms decades for or no computed resulting to generalized or inflammatory focal an cysts identified swell, by response, and imaging. the presenting or The incites tomography signs then calcified magnetic cerebral seizures and begins of leakage in of antigen resonance cyst shows pleocytosis. CSF The or lymphocytic eosinophilic confirmed The testing. by diagnosis serologic is inflammation corticosteroids treated with Neurocysticercosis anticonvulsant cyst death, for praziquantel, concomitant is cerebral or drugs. albendazole from and

curved are gram-positive Mycobacterium tuberculosis rods. weakly pleomorphic, form dyes. Mycobacteria the complexes to stable fast, is arylmethane mycolate with acid capacity are which 3 clinical culture on synthetic media usually takes weeks. solid grow slowly; to 6 specimens Mycobacteria from 4 weeks. an Drug-susceptibility testing additional requires in in media can radiolabeled nutrients. weeks 3 liquid to detected selective using 1 be Growth reaction in many (PCR) laboratories. allows diagnosis clinical specimens rapid of Polymerase chain

M. An 10 with million (infection infection tuberculosis the United persons States and disease). tuberculosis have in to latent 15 estimated no in with to treatment, risk develops 10% tuberculosis is lives; time immunologically of some tuberculosis 5% Without normal their adults in during higher infants. disease infection the at adults estimated million tuberculosis of each new cases worldwide. occur among year An 8 disease deaths attributed million annually. are Three to the under 450,000 of cases and occur children countries, year years children million In of 15 new die developing age, tuberculosis. of disease each in the 1.3 infectious from and adult. Most tuberculosis acquire disease infection children an tuberculosis M. with

that by sneezes, breathes. laughs, droplets is M. sighs, when to from usually ill or person individual airborne Transmission the become tuberculosis respiratory of person, coughs, become air person droplet has the remain left in hours, dry the for the droplets Infected nuclei, environment. infectious long which and suspended after may

are transmission. of associated patient-related increased chance Several with factors an acid-fast positive Of correlates infectivity. a closely smear the sputum most of with these or pulmonary with disease ever, if primary infect Children tuberculosis children rarely, other adults. relatively endobronchial are children Tubercle is and the lacking. significant sparse with tuberculosis, cough in bacilli secretions pulmonary a usually primary of tussive When children sputum, cough, rarely size. they and requisite to infectious produce the project necessary the suspend force particles young lacking of in are Hospitalized isolation. initially respiratory children tuberculosis placed with pulmonary suspected starting noninfectious within noninfectious many treatment, several become days. effective become 2 Most weeks within of and infectious patients

North persons, homes, drugs, In rates of nursing tuberculosis children high-risk persons prisons, medically highest in poor users and America, are homeless illegal residents from are care high-prevalence to in health persons of of for-eign-born who indigent, groups. and residents exposed countries, workers, adults and persons dwellers immunodeficiency with Among urban racial minorities (AIDS) are syndrome with tuberculosis, overrepresented. acquired U.S. homes, childhood occur. from but tuberculosis M. day nursery care and still with household schools, Most are school in schools, tuberculosis of family centered and buses, stores high churches, outbreaks contacts, elementary children infected has area working in adult A been of the source high-risk the most outbreak in cases. the

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Lymphadenopathy Origin Unknown of Pain Rash Fever Hemoptysis Cough Back and Fever

tuberculosis. M. describes infection with the asymptomatic tuberculosis of stage Latent normal, (TST) and is test illness. positive, there or tuberculin skin of symptoms the The are signs no is chest radiograph but occurs Tuberculosis are chest symptoms clinical when abnormal signs or disease an there radiograph. and disease. usually the The refers to tuberculosis term the interval weeks between The be onset adults. decades of several in disease or latent tuberculosis many and may the tuberculosis of immediate obvious. develops primary and complication the may be between less as children, infection, infection usually and young In disease distinction an

usually in and tuberculosis is children older asymptomatic pulmonary Primary infants infection. an the is with positive the or manifested such TST as on by an Often a abnormalities chest with minimal infiltrate radiograph, disease lymphadenopathy complex. Ghon hilar resulting development enlargement nodosum, compress fever, lymphadenopathy the hypersensitivity. from the malaise, lymph erythema trachea symptoms may low-grade delayed occur bronchi may after Hilar or or of node

primary common in pulmonary is Lymphadenopathy disease. or trachea. bronchi the may lymphadenopathy compress Hilar common are extrathoracic supraclavicular, submandibular lymphadenitis (scrofula). the areas sites of The most and cervical,

infection. is Progressive develops by that characterized disease initial primary after pneumonia primary a shortly of system to disease, life. most pulmonary first the nervous or miliary of commonly progression Progression disseminated disease, granulomas occurs central meningitis year in to (CNS)

pleural generally to organisms in infection, immune adolescents. most occurs the represents children the effusion, accompany response commonly primary older may Tuberculous and or which protein fluid contain bacilli. pleural does but lymphocytes reveals and the Pleurocentesis not increased usually level, an

typical in and of pulmonary to confined lower upper tuberculosis, superior is segments segments of in apical adults, lobes Reactivation usually common lobes. or adolescents There hypersensitivity. and established because of lymphadenopathy usually is little extrathoracic infection no is of during expansion a primary infection. at This seeded site years infection a a manifestation of secondary previously Advanced and associated endobronchial cavitation of spread is disease bacilli. with weight Symptoms sweats, loss. fever, and include night malaise, herald often and hemoptysis cavitation cough productive and erosion. bronchial A

tuberculosis widespread dissemination hematogenous multiple to organs. to Miliary refers miliary from name the millet which is The same derived. of the a lesions size as roughly seed, are is hepatosplenomegaly. general lymphadenopathy, sweats, night characterized loss, and weight fever, Miliary by tuberculosis malaise, Diffuse pneumonitis and common, bilateral present. meningitis be is may reveals The showing infiltrates, infection. miliary chest radiograph bilateral overwhelming may as nonreactive of be anergy. The result TST a bone for or marrow diagnosis. Liver the biopsy useful is

most and 5 often within meningitis Tuberculous months under old years in children 6 commonly occurs of infection. primary an the replicate, that response. seed Tubercle triggering meninges the primary during inflammatory bacilli infection personality condition headache, characterized by subtle initially onset, This insidious have change. low-grade an and fever, may irritation and deterioration meningitis the impingement by intracranial nerves results cranial eventually, and, is Progression basilar of manifested mental with in of coma. the status, increased and infection pressure, of meningeal Computed infarctions. tomography periventricular show and hydrocephalus, scans lucencies, (CT) edema, lymphocytes which fluid in reveals (50 leukocytes/mm3), of early polymorphonuclear or (CSF) course either leukocytes. disease the analysis be may to Cerebrospinal pleocytosis 500 significantly low, elevated. and protein Glucose is is Acid-fast detected are staining procedures. in frequently routine the fluorescent CSF by bacilli either not or to culture is confirm is tuberculosis diagnosis, standard for for M. Although useful PCR the meningitis.

or hematogenous node. lymph Skeletal from a seeding results tuberculosis caseous direct extension either from onset Staphylococcus may that be chronic disease a by with This for mistaken is aureus. osteomyelitis usually insidious chronic an caused reveal cortical destruction. Radiographs for proper culture Biopsy are diagnosis. essential and by the disease, followed well of Pott’s most as spine, Tuberculosis skeletal and (dactylitis). hip the site is toes the as fingers common

include tuberculosis forms that tuberculosis material. occurs infected from Other of swallowing abdominal inspected relatively complication is nations dairy are for bovine uncommon in This herds a tuberculosis. where developed presents abdominal as tuberculosis associated fever, anorexia, and pain. is Tuberculous and ascites, with peritonitis abdominal complication tuberculosis is reactivation a Urogenital and late is rare children. in and illness dysuria, Symptomatic urgency, as hematuria, sterile frequency, presents pyuria.

tuberculosis Two types to latent response are used investigation of tuberculosis to are M. immune patients active for screen tests and used of to and tuberculosis. detect the The response antigen TST a manifestation is cell−mediated T to hypersensitivity. of a tuberculin delayed purified (PPD-S), the on units) is the of an standard of TST. the surface (tuberculin injection The standard volar of test, usually intradermal TU derivative forearm, 5 Mantoux protein symptomatic positive It (occasionally is weeks at and time after the onset illness. to of infection of 2 3 months) 6 usually in age. is of less 5 than This preferred test children years or as may other contact It in in used older such also be patients. investigations settings Mantoux persons should 124-1). test at offered risk Only be (Table a high or a of (as inactivated AIDS, use antigen responses practice False-negative or tuberculosis). to result of illness, inadequate as the underlying administration), a with early (secondary of overwhelming occur in malnutrition, may result illness, or immunosuppression poor storage be and of should several nutrition. after Tests repeated therapy weeks questionable results with adequate in adopted a false-positive United initial poor an TST. proportion have children the high Because of States of arriving nutrition, internationally United negative after months 3 adopted TST children All States. should a have an TST in internationally repeat initially with the TST of size is The on induration and 124-2). host the status (Table based interpreted

Infants, IGRA Tuberculin Adolescents* IS IMMEDIATE (TST) Skin FOR and Test 124-1 OR for Table Children, CHILDREN INDICATED:† WHOM Recommendations TST

or of confirmed investigation) contagious people tuberculosis suspected with Contacts (contact

disease clinical with or radiographic suggesting findings Children tuberculosis

Asia, Africa, from (e.g., Latin Middle including immigrating Soviet countries adoptees endemic countries former with infection international East, Union), America, of Children the

such with countries substantial with histories travel with indigenous to infection and countries people endemic contact Children from

with (TST infected infection Children HIV only)

special immunodeficiencies medical conditions, congenital malnutrition, mellitus, chronic renal and with acquired other Children deserve diabetes or failure, consideration. including tuberculosis recent of infection. people at acquiring risk exposure, these Without are not increased severe theoretically the disease. associated possibility deficiencies would these enhance conditions Underlying to immune progression for with Initial of should included these for exposure be histories tuberculosis all to potential patients. of a factors possibility histories If these should exposure, TST local or considered. epidemiologic of immediate IGRA or periodic be suggest and initiation of treatments. before factor-alpha prolonged should antagonists, IGRA initial necrosis immunosuppressive TST administration, therapy, An performed these of use therapy any or child including requiring immunosuppressive or other in steroid be tumor

Tuberculosis. Academy from of Recommendations American Pediatrics: In

LK, Baker et al, editors. DW, CJ, Pickering Kimberlin ed Book: Committee Elk on IL, Diseases, 29, the Report Grove Red Infectious 2012 2012, Village, of

of Pediatrics. American Academy interferon-gamma virus; assay; release immunodeficiency IGRA, Human HIV,

latent LTBI, tuberculosis infection. is contraindication not *Bacille immunization TST. Calmette-Guérin a to a

as age. of †Beginning as 3 months early

weeks up the to return. delayed 10 child should be well, TST or for IGRA is the ‡If after

test is 5 assay for of United tuberculosis than a (IGRA), lymphocytes in cytokine release whole persons A elaborated antigens, blood the response older of test States. diagnostic by interferon-gamma age (INF-γ) to in years recommended the TST It Calmette-Guérin because as is bacille the has similar by but unaffected vaccination. specificity improved prior it sensitivity

the diagnostic such pleural more ultimate than or or culture pericardial membrane The tissue, confirmation successful process of rather a pleura as with pericardial usually that from fluid. is relies on biopsy, organism, but adults excellent is young in in children. difficult is Sputum an for diagnosis source to obtain appropriate nasogastric gastric provides Induced or an swallowed in contains young fluid children. sputum on samples indwelling obtained sputum tube with via taken samples or waking immediately and before (CSF, organisms, of volumes fluid) a recovery higher rate Large pericardial of yield fluid of

≥5 Induration Children persons contagious contact tuberculosis mm close disease in with or suspected with known

chest with have Children Clinical to radiograph tuberculosis disease on Findings disease† tuberculosis evidence or of previously suspected consistent active active tuberculosis

infection with immunosuppressive or Children receiving conditions, HIV including immunosuppressive therapy‡

chronic of years <4 lymphoma, medical Children age renal and Hodgkin disease, diabetes other failure, with malnutrition Children mellitus, conditions, including

parents to born, nursing who with institutionalized, of illicit exposure who Children regions migrant drugs, or or farm Children are travel frequently regions of adults or high-prevalence Children increased of users incarcerated of homeless, world world in residents workers high-prevalence homes, were exposed to disease tuberculosis the HIV-infected, born, whose to the Children

Calmette-Guérin bacille ≥4 Children age any criteria of previous immunization. apply risk mm of years factors ≥15 regardless without Induration *These positive skin result. site test does a tuberculin not indicate Erythema test at after Tuberculin 72 be to placement. at 48 hours read should reactions

physical tuberculosis in †Evidence diagnosis or would assessment the include by working examination that meningitis). (e.g., differential laboratory

of corticosteroids. immunosuppressive doses ‡Including

helpful less of in but makes mycobacteria the slow ill children. growth very culture incidence is susceptibilities increasing the be When because resistant grown, organisms. determined organism drug of of should the

and with especially diagnosis, Antigen disease. CNS have DNA detection expedited probes

cornerstone the relatively disease. radiography pulmonary clinically a Because tuberculosis is of of cases silent, many diagnosis children are for in of are of at lung the of segments equal the focus All risk lobar initial being infection. the although of site at lobes disease In cases, or two 25% lungs occurs only. involved, more one the of are usually to nodes Spread lymph occurs early. of regional infection

of relatively parenchymal less or of the the referred Ghon hallmark the pulmonary the together The lymph tuberculosis as initial size and of significant calcification the hilar focus, (with compared is the nodes). to large historically size with importance without lymphadenitis childhood complex of with is childhood present tuberculosis. inevitably Hilar lymphadenopathy trapping, lobar hyperinflation, compression bronchial can nodes air Partial obstruction by emphysema. and caused enlarging cause from the external impressive lobar Occasionally have without hilar children pneumonia picture lymphadenopathy. of a is leads thin-walled lung tuberculous infection cavity. formation a progressively the destructive, the liquefaction of of primary to parenchyma If apical typical or or the tuberculosis. hilar infiltrates, cavitation, develop are pulmonary segmental with that reactivation with lymphadenopathy lesions Adolescents adult without of tuberculosis with may

the tuberculosis studies in aid extrapulmonary of children. diagnosis greatly in Radiographic Plain disk radiographs, imaging magnetic and destruction show body of spine and CT, spaces. (MRI) the vertebral collapse involved the narrowing of of the usually tuberculous with resonance small and tuberculosis massive findings Radiographic bone. range in bone lesions the to from of lytic mild and effusions joint destruction joint

brains of CNS, infection. the with patients tuberculosis may during the normal of the CT early stages or meningitis be MRI of tuberculous In of basilar of or and enhancement ischemia most common signs with progresses, the early communicating edema are disease cerebral hydrocephalus As focal findings.

diagnosis differential tuberculosis organ, may includes signs because and of a early any nonspecific. disease and diagnoses symptoms affect in tuberculosis of be The multitude the may pneumonia, malignancy, similar disease pulmonary in to systemic which disease, tuberculosis lymphadenopathy and may any occurs. appear In generalized IGRA if a the there in history is or or positive be should contact. of is suspected diagnosis close of tuberculosis if TST tuberculosis The

tuberculous includes fungal mycobacteria, disease, lymphadenopathy viral malignancy. atypical caused bacterial disease, toxoplasmosis, reactions, diagnosis The by of differential sarcoidosis, and or drug infections infection, cat-scratch confirmed by accompanied The necessitate may microbiologic may aspiration fine-needle histologic biopsy and but studies. be diagnosis appropriate excisional by

by of the of mycobacteria tuberculosis even slowly in large prolonged the is bacterial naturally presence occurring replicate periods. for that initiated, before organisms body can dormant the therapy The remain is treatment and and in fact affected drug-resistant populations, whole a frequencies considered to population depending Although a predictable subpopulation bacilli be a organisms may on 105 as drug drug. occurs fairly drug-resistant susceptible, of of of at the 107, to 109 resistant are organisms contain only rare to tubercle resistant multiple with may Cavities organisms thousands one any of drugs. but bacilli drug,

infection tuberculosis can small bacterial and be populations Patients single have drug, latent as such a with isoniazid,

Children, INFECTION Adolescents COMMENTS TST and Tuberculosis 124-3 DISEASE OR DISEASE) Drug-Susceptible for Treatment Regimens NO RESULT, Table INFECTION LATENT CATEGORY Infants, Recommended TUBERCULOSIS REGIMEN in (POSITIVE

is twice not months week a for DOT daily Isoniazid-susceptible once be possible, months. 9 therapy of day isoniazid, can used If 9 a

a Isoniazid-resistant of day months 6 rifampin, once

Consult tuberculosis a Isoniazid-rifampin–resistant specialist.

of lymphadenopathy is sufficient. 6-month only, isoniazid rifampin course and hilar If a

times if Drugs week phase initial DOT is 2 or nonadherence under the given likely. in per be can 3

patients of amikacin day capreomycin, kanamycin, streptomycin. where a instead rifampin, be common, (9–12 a total) may or week For geographic used months tuberculosis twice have may is areas in resistance or streptomycin once to who acquired

Recommendations Report 2012 Village, ed 27, Infectious et Diseases, the Red IL, SS, Book: of Baker Pickering Grove Elk CJ, 2012, Long Committee al: from LK, on

Academy American Pediatrics. of therapy; DOT, test. tuberculin skin Directly observed TST,

given. at latent eradicating infection small aimed for cell Therapy is withinmacrophages inoculum of thepresumably sequestered normal suppressed by T and organisms activity. 9 agent reactivation single for is isoniazid latent bacilli, with months) a therapy suggested. (usually Toprevent of these withextrapulmonary pulmonary which drug-resistant be patients and present. may with not organisms mayor Children numbers of tuberculosis medium-sized populationsin significant tuberculosis primary have treated type 9, typically6 a these are patients the In 124-3) course, depending on disease. (Table general to for withat of drugs prolonged least two Isoniazid and of and are bactericidal effective tuberculosis M. mycobacteria. for allpopulations rifampinare against the theyform the treatment of Along of antimicrobial pyrazinamide, with backbone tuberculosis. are astuberculous special such tuberculosis. Other and in circumstances, drugs meningitis used antibiotic-resistant

of 9-month and than regimen A rifampin of greater 98% cases cures isoniazid of drug-susceptible tuberculosis. pulmonary for rates the and both with to for 7 to 2 daily twice given months, low After months, first 1 reactions. can daily equivalent 8 drugs be remaining results administration adverse of weekly the or months pyrazinamide regimen total the first duration to the 6 months the similar addition of reduces of and for treatment 2 has efficacy. of The and is of nature problem Noncompliance, the circumstances control a or major the in the of treatment social sometimes nonadherence, because long-term difficult tuberculosis patients. of even importance. regimens an greater assumes adherence treatment As shorter, become of health and physically the are is in with care that means care in most the administered, compliance occurs observed when settings. therapy, is Improvement the directly worker medications present standard which

excellent effective The in with prognosis chemotherapy. and tuberculosis recognition infants, children, is early adolescents of and completely In radiographic with and resolves, normal. tuberculosis, the ultimately are disease most findings pulmonary children and children and meningitis of medications depends tuberculous the joint are bone on prognosis tuberculosis for The directly at the started. time disease antituberculosis with stage is gibbus correction infection may after Tuberculosis angulation formation in or the that spine cured. of requires the surgical result where poor. prognosis countries, meningitis is the Most childhood tuberculous occurs developing in

interrupts involve transmission control infection treatment, from close programs case finding secondary Tuberculosis contacts. which and of contacts treatment Infected can appropriate close started on prevent are be by transmission. identified to TST reactions positive and

Prevention around ventilation the appropriate of physical case. the air health in of transmission settings care involves source have clinics, Offices, providers with adequate and hospital annual TSTs. to (negative-pressure possible outside ventilation).Health adults should should exhausted air care by tuberculosis with have the ventilation, rooms used

vaccine. is Calmette-Guérin against the available The bacille vaccine only tuberculosis every years. was 3 a vaccine attenuated strain 13 of The bovis weeks for subculture organism original by Mycobacterium a injection preferred of intradermal an with the measurement needle accurate is is The method that this and individual permits syringe route dose. of because only administration during Health Organization of administered official the is recommendation dose The a World single infancy. in used not States. This vaccine United is routinely the show no from to to all. 90% at protection studies efficacy provide Calmette-Guérin other show studies tuberculosis, bacille 80% and Some protective receive vaccine who Many TST reaction. never a Calmette-Guérin bacille positive infants have the induration is mm, several When years. reaction than 10 and usually does occur, size wanes a the after reaction less

into for immunodeficiency of DNA the syndrome of (HIV), integration is immunodeficiency reverse to virus family cause act RNA enabling (AIDS) single-stranded a The retrovirus transcriptase that genome. a the template human acquired viral and RNA produces virus the transcription the as host a of human HIV-1 cases. all causes 99% which 9% of and causes the to HIV-2, in parts 1% United of Africa is in very rare States. virulent, cases less is

cells of (CXCR4 lineage with monocyte-macrophage macrophages) cells interaction cells helper cells CCR5 protein T and the serve that and on coreceptors. as CD4 chemokines gp120 HIV via molecule on of T cells) and viral infects (CD4 dendritic and by membrane with the Interaction facilitates entry molecules fusion cell virus. and these HIV CD4 depletes indirectly cells. T infection and directly cell–mediated are of destruction produces cells production, cell) cell–dependent delayed B T macrophages, immunodeficiency. (B combined activation cell their for hypersensitivity, T antibody and T T important a and Because profound helper lymphokine ineffective stimulation unrestrained A globulins. polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia cell in and nonspecific of antigenic lack T result and regulation with with be placental bearing cells infected such also tissues CD4, and HIV. oligodendroglia, microglia, Other astrocytes, as may

continuously before development latency process period is a AIDS-defining progressive variable conditions. HIV of with infection clinical of a of CD4 progressive replication patients have depletion. viral ongoing evidence All untreated and lymphocyte overt to numbers levels. no until critical are cell There immunodeficiency manifestations decline of threshold CD4 viral load Quantitation of become parameter important has management. in the an

objects), contaminated or membrane (from or blood of transmission contaminated contact Horizontal sexual by body HIV needles is percutaneous contact exposure or fluid. sharp to orogenital), (vaginal, or mucous other anal, and Transmission still has countries but been in blood in occurs contaminated blood countries. products by developed eliminated developing of utero, to or in HIV by birth, mother occur breastfeeding. during infant may transmission from transplacentally Vertical of perinatal transmission high circulating than of hours, include at factors maternal more rupture delivery. membranes for 4 levels HIV and prematurity, Risk and the from be antiretroviral transmission 25% treatment with treatment to can approximately the delivery infant. 8% of before mother and than of less during postnatal Perinatal decreased increases HIV-infected by of transmission mothers vertical risk by to the 50%. Breastfeeding 30% incubation for transmission vertical after 1 after incubation the mean period transmission of longer (range, compared of a years. 5 is untreated infants, 24 development 7 horizontal AIDS-defining months an months) condition In interval to with to 10

them 3.4 as and with are million 34 HIV million persons 2010, of living of children. Worldwide, are approximately million infections new in new children. in Therewere infections 2.7 approximately390,000 with 2010 Roughly all of people 70% living reside HIV with Africa. sub-Saharan in people illnesses from Worldwide, died 2010. 1.8 in HIV-related million States are estimated yearsand infected. over of and children 1.1 was people HIV 9800 approximately with in the million, living 13 the the United of number In2010 age are approximately50 with much the previously, and is UnitedStates. transmission in HIV infection common year Vertical born less infants each than adolescents Most in now whoengage cases sexual activities. unprotected in pediatric occur the with therapy. the decreased in steadily numberof to part to HIV antiretroviral related HIV of infected number deaths have and Worldwide large children treatmentwith due

StudentConsult.com Available @

Diarrhea Anemia Lymphadenopathy Fever to Arthritis Neck Failure and Rash Masses Petechiae/Purpura Hoarseness Thrive

in loss, results often and to maculopapular primary malaise, syndrome incubation that adults, weight acute weeks after and fever, lymphadenopathy, an rash. a and the 2 retroviral adolescents pharyngitis, 6 of of consists infection In period develops risk infections conditions T is of depletion AIDS-defining cells. of the opportunistic and The to other CD4 related 125-1 count is and used and of HIV infection CD4 A to percentage combination clinical children (Tables 125-2). cell classify and in manifestations

oral vertical pneumonia, to symptoms transmission thrive, and interstitial neurodevelopmental delay, vary diarrhea, chronic include may failure thrush. recurrent or lymphadenopathy, or with Initial hepatosplenomegaly, by be only These their may subtle findings persistence. remarkable and

for than Prevention: revised of 1994 13 From less in classification for system virus Control immunodeficiency years age, and Centers children Disease infection human

MMWR 43(RR-12):1–10, 1994.

chronic and hyperplasia, Manifestations swelling, neurologic lymphoid lymphocytic infection bacterial HIV more that adults are parotid include progressive deterioration. in interstitial with recurrent common pneumonitis, onset infections, of earlier children than common of and tachypnea, include serum pneumonia Pneumocystis primary fever. can as hypoxia, a Pulmonary are retractions, and infancy in lactate dehydrogenase, early infection characterized jirovecipneumonia, manifestations which present HIV by elevated

States, screened most United and, the treated for HIV are if infection. pregnant women indicated, In prospectively and HIV-infected for mothers infection. tested born are to Infants receive prophylaxis in in born most of diagnosis of HIV development States is United the infection signs infants infection. clinical The of before confirmed

reaction by DNA virus viral and by infection infected PCR, 6 HIV [PCR], of in diagnostic assays (RNA all diagnosed chain definitively virtually be of can infants using age polymerase age culture). months or 1 month 18 months may test 15 is age, Maternal antibodies detectable 12 be diagnostic of of to until not months serologic positive age. considered until and a

HIV method and virologic hours DNA HIV infected identifies infection for PCR infancy 96% infants days. 28 at during of preferred and at the 48 diagnosing 38% is of at and performed of by 3 age, to be 2 6 should at months Diagnostic age. viral testing hours 1 to of 48 months age, additional of because performed age. often sensitivity test at days by is 14 increases An 2 the diagnostic rapidly of age weeks to to 3 100% first by sensitivity of age. has of weeks 2 the 25% 90% months to to 40% HIV RNA increasing during life, PCR first-line is negative PCR recommended be testing. thus, to However used cannot not as infection RNA exclude HIV and, a

if positive infection separate HIV virologic occasions. infant tests of on confirmed are an two is exposed HIV excluded or at 1 negative two being performed in performed months at age, interval antibody infants least tests least the 4 than can least test of after performed tests of of with age, month age, reasonably tests. with two of virologic at one between with older an 6 month infection months be at nonbreastfed 1 after of DNA confirms HIV antibody infection. combined Loss HIV with PCR HIV absence of negative of HIV of Persistence a test positive age antibody months HIV 18 indicates infection. after

infants (CMV) of and immunodeficiency primary syphilis. intrauterine cytomegalovirus and The with includes diagnosis AIDS in infections differential syndromes may such symptoms, otheretiologies. suggest individual diarrhea, as Prominenceof

of and Management complex. rapidly evolving adolescents infection and is in children HIV becoming increasingly It treatment a directed HIV the be by of should infection. specialist in level Therapy as HIV 125-3). risk disease based and conditions, HIV plasma progression, RNA and as on the disease, initiated (Table indicated is CD4 indicated count AIDS-defining by of the by of severity cell may virus. therapy therapy and asymptomatic prevent facilitate progression antiretroviral emergence adverse but immune may the the of and drug-resistant of preserve incurs of still clinical is function patient Initiation while effects HIV is progression adults. are very and young the than of more treatment for fourfold risk recommendations to for aggressive children, Because in sixfold greater infants children show to as groups rapid age 15%. cell less percentage All than declines risk in CD4 increases

infants (see of HIV age months less disease regardless recommended is for than of symptoms of RNA therapy Table level. or of 12 HIV 125-3) Initiation symptoms for recommended below or or HIV-related regardless with age 1 category or AIDS years therapy or children RNA HIV 5 of is clinical B) level. significant C 25% Initiation most to CD4 category of all of symptoms (clinical years should count significant or with symptoms, 350/mm3 children For below 5 be HIV-related treated. than older CD4 AIDS copies/mL. 350/mm3 Indications for and above less plasma cell to levels CD4 treatment than or include 55,000 count adolescents of adults 200 RNA HIV

copy RNA CD4 based disease potential percentage is benefits therapy the or of progression on therapy the HIV antiretroviral and plasma determined (HAART) as number; risk by highly recommended count with active Combination

Children infection only the listed HIV result considered no or in the or of be have to A of conditions category who signs one have who symptoms

sites; more Children conditions, of bilateral of = with the of one tissue enlargement than none in two or conditions the at site) more palpable listed ≥0.5 two but Lymphadenopathy C: B (nodal following and cm categories

upper or infection, respiratory or sinusitis, Recurrent persistent

that Children who HIV infection. A category have symptomatic C, category conditions, attributed than other for or to those are listed not category of limited B but conditions clinical include, following: to, in the are Examples

≥30 thrombocytopenia days g/dL), (<100,000/mm3) (<8 or Anemia persisting (<1000/mm3), neutropenia

(i.e., sepsis or children thrush) (single Bacterial months meningitis, persisting episode) than >2 for months oropharyngeal of age Candidiasis, 6 pneumonia, younger in

month (i.e., Hepatitis with or of 1 two HSV infection before within Cytomegalovirus than chronic recurrent stomatitis, the more Cardiomyopathy episodes onset 1 Diarrhea, recurrent age

complicated month Leiomyosarcoma distinct age month at dermatome (i.e., least or two Herpes onset hyperplasia zoster bronchitis, one involving Nocardiosis of episodes or disseminated lasting pulmonary esophagitis >1 before 1 LIP shingles) lymphoid pneumonitis, the more HSV or Varicella, with complex than (i.e., Nephropathy chickenpox) Fever

joint multiple septicemia, or lungs) (excluding or (bronchi, organ media, (i.e., period), otitis superficial body 2-year trachea, an and meningitis, abscess within a Candidiasis, following or infections) esophageal or pulmonary bone mucosal or of two pneumonia, at infection, least or skin of internal of combination the abscesses, indwelling bacterial culture-confirmed any recurrent infections, infections catheter-related cavity Serious types:

in Coccidioidomycosis, to disseminated nodes) lungs addition or or than lymph other hilar cervical (at site or

Cryptococcosis, extrapulmonary

Cryptosporidiosis persisting diarrhea month isosporiasis or >1 with

lymph spleen, the before symptoms (other month than age onset 1 or of of liver, nodes) with Cytomegalovirus disease

a disturbance microcephaly; attain ataxia, verified of or acquired manifested growth standard symmetric or tests; 2 pathologic least deficit to developmental one of least for paresis, reflexes, absence illness): deficit impaired following: the or months loss or (at at (b) brain scale or ability, in acquired more by milestones/intellectual the Encephalopathy (c) of present two (a) concurrent progressive failure motor gait by

ulcer simplex child than infection a Herpes esophagitis of affecting persisting younger pneumonitis, >1 month for (mucocutaneous age bronchitis, 1 virus or month;

in addition to lymph than or disseminated hilar lungs or Kaposi sarcoma nodes) cervical Histoplasmosis, (other or

in Lymphoma tumor, immunologic cell unknown lymphoma Burkitt immunoblastic phenotype) or of (primary or large brain; B cell lymphoma;

tuberculosis, extrapulmonary disseminated or Mycobacterium

(other lymph or unidentified Mycobacterium, species, other species or to or in or lungs, cervical than hilar addition disseminated nodes) skin,

hilar skin, or lungs, disseminated Mycobacterium lymph (other complex nodes) or or cervical kansasii, than avium addition to or in Mycobacterium

recurrent (nontyphoid) Salmonella septicemia,

of 1 age of the the onset Toxoplasmosis brain with before month

below chart of days loose the day for persistent illness percentile 5th concurrent or least findings: ≥30 or crossing two chart syndrome or days, (1) diarrhea fever on at per on could loss stools (a) of chronic downward the weight or explain constant) plus of baseline (i.e., percentile the intermittent (2) two the >30 weight-for-age or documented (b) a ≥30 absence lines measurements, (for in Wasting (c) the consecutive weight-for-height two on following more apart, >10% days)

Children: Guidelines Pediatric Management HIV-infected Medical in Antiretroviral Infection. of Antiretroviral the HIV on Group the for Therapy Use of and Agents From Working Health and Services. Human Department of 23, 2009. February http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/contentfiles/PediatricGuidelines.pdf at . Available revised from for Centers 13 human age, 1994 children infection Prevention: for system classification immunodeficiency MMWR 1994. than in years less Disease Control 43(RR-12):1–10, of Updated virus and

interstitial HIV, simplex herpes Human infection; HSV, virus pneumonia. lymphoid LIP, virus; immunodeficiency

• <12 symptoms, clinical Treat status, load Regardless viral or months of immune

RNA RNA or pneumonitis). Treat clinical 100,000 RNA single category C interstitial 100,000 HIV of ◯ or following B ◯ HIV copies/mL the HIV infection bacterial of CD4 lymphoid HIV serious <25%, (except level† *CDC RNA categories ≥100,000 ◯ symptoms B conditions: ◯ < episode and 100,000 < copies/mL for regardless < copies/mL RNA copies/mL HIV

this stronger percentage <20% for to 24%. are than with with †The CD4 those supporting 20% percentage data CD4 for recommendation of those

interstitial single infection pneumonitis. category A conditions: bacterial episode serious category lymphoid the or or of or ‡CDC clinical B N following and re-evaluated §Clinical laboratory be should 3 data every to 4 months. stronger CD4 data ‖The those supporting CD4 to for counts than of with 200 350 those <200 recommendation cells/mm3. with count this for are

the adhere caregiver of therapy; and of to therapeutic and regimen. administration risks to the the of ability leads and combination symptoms opportunistic amelioration of viral significantly therapy reduces infections. clinical Effective and to the loads that includes transcriptase non-nucleoside is HIV Combination a transcriptase therapy plus recommended backbone inhibitor initial a or inhibitor all inhibitor treatment of dual–nucleoside/nucleotide either (PI) protease for children. infected reverse a reverse preserve of status. to reduce goal the normalize The detection patient’s HIV of plasma the and therapy or below level is immune to the RNA regimens The before therapy specific for initiating patient. should treatment recommendations http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guidelines/ for any ( consulted be most ) recent

simultaneously resistance The agents to to of classes ability and develop to are antiretroviral agents the HIV development several rapidly major problems. of of cross-resistance and of essential and antiretroviral phenotype cell HIV modifying HIV Determination is CD4 genotype monitoring RNA, and treatment. for count,

immune but prevent infections Routine are recommended may immunizations to responses. in suboptimal vaccine-preventable result age children above at counts pneumococcal heptavalent is polysaccharide of addition and 23-valent HIV-infected and adolescents In or with 200/mm3. at recommended pneumococcal conjugate vaccine, to adults for vaccine 2 years CD4 as of soon with receive as may should of later. weeks the and severe Because children of risk of children their dose measles at immunosuppression receive age months fatal 12 MMR first AIDS, the 4 in booster without be two should beginning nonimmunosuppressed to of of months 3 months least zoster (VZV) Varicella only apart. vaccine vaccine at as asymptomatic, 12 virus at age children given doses split months to all HIV-infected or be should administered children after influenza virus 6 age. of vaccine annually Inactivated at measles HIV-infected receive immune zoster immunoglobulin exposed to children varicella or globulin prophylaxis. should varicella or

numerous cells likely approach CD4 are and patients depleted. to to involves HIV-infected infections occur infections in The for as prophylaxis opportunistic treatment the CD4 age prophylaxis and child’s antiretroviral opportunistic count. and routine common potent on depends the reconstitution, With immune infections therapy for P. to or at beginning pneumonia the excluded. trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole mothers of with continued of HIV prophylaxis year to and 4 is age weeks discontinued born jiroveci first for 6 infection subsequently life Infants HIV-infected for if (TMP-SMZ) receive oropharyngeal there for if is children counts are adolescents cell than pneumonia P. prophylaxis candidiasis. provided CD4 or of 200/ older for jiroveci less is history mm3 TMP-SMZ and avium-complexinfection counts below if cell 50/mm3. CD4 prophylaxis Clarithromycin Mycobacterium provided is are for

and is high-dose treated P. TMP-SMZ jiroveci with pneumonia corticosteroids. Oral children therapy. is to responds and common in candidiasis and imidazole gastrointestinal usually be be VZV other should infection with may or antivirals. severe and acyclovir treated (HSV) prophylaxis. infections herpes long-term antiviral virus Recurrent also may require simplex common salmonellosis, Other Epstein-Barr infection, toxoplasmosis, tuberculosis. and include patients in virus infections CMV, HIV-infected

adults and the being prone gastrointestinal HIV most common site. lymphomas, non-Hodgkin malignancies, tract with to are especially Children the with the children. second among are common most tumors HIV-infected Leiomyosarcomas rare by children is in HIV. distinctly sarcoma, HHV-8, caused Kaposi with AIDS and with once with among adults was is It now common HAART. infrequent

the The improved for prognosis AIDS of HAART has and HIV availability dramatically. the is young to age. degree of immunosuppression, and of Risk viral death load, related directly

with prognosis. less age low viral than the poorest high percentiles very CD4 have and loads year 1 of Children

crucial HIV-infected transmission. and and preventing pregnancy therapy to for Identification before is to optimal infants women of or women their infected during providing perinatal should pregnant with the and consent United States. provided women counseling all Prenatal in HIV be for testing

to of started a reduced the intravenously rate by 1 The mg/kg/hour administered the than zidovudine (2 five by during mg/kg intravenously), mg then 8% hours to hours orally). is mg/kg chemoprophylaxis weeks followed 6 less by every mother loading 4 gestation, vertical orally) transmission first the with newborn of 6 (2 and of dose for (100 life continued regimen weeks times/24 to delivery in nevirapine used regimens for be single-dose and effective developing been are infants have similarly shown incorporating to Other countries. intrapartum The States the United 6-week the infant maternal recommendations with for combination therapy. zidovudine prophylactic in a current include for with viral The zidovudine contentfiles/lvguidelines/peri_recommendations.pdf ). intravenous (if if continuation mother’s appropriate) of is and maternal the includes therapy antiretroviral unknown or http://aidsinfo.nih.gov/ load copies/mL ( is regimen >400 beneficial than have at copies/mL, section is RNA 38 is copies/mL unclear is is when HIV load ruptured. or transmission whether 1000 viral but for women section Scheduled already 1000 when it less cesarean prevent recommended membranes with cesarean greater levels vertical than to weeks

infection infection of adults children. in the Preventing decreases incidence in HIV changes practices, from as needle results drug safe-sex in Adult exchange prevention intravenous programs. such use, decrease behavior and avoidance pediatric in countries) and Prevention pregnancy includes (in high-risk of AIDS of women. breastfeeding developed of eliminated blood has risk Screening products. the from transmission donors blood HIV almost of in is nonsexual setting. transmitted casual infection household a almost or HIV never

RD, of et Demmler Pediatric Infectious J, Cherry Feigin al: GJ, Textbook

Saunders Philadelphia, 2009, Diseases, 6, ed

2007, Malden, Pediatric D: Evidence-based Infectious Isaacs MA, Disease,

Textbook Stanton ed Behrman al: Pediatrics, RM, Nelson 2007, of Saunders BF, et Kliegman Philadelphia, RE, 19,

Infec Pediatric 4, Livingstone CG: Long Pickering Practice SS, and tious LK, Philadelphia, ed Churchill of Principles Diseases, Prober 2012,

Red mittee Long Baker SS, Com 2012 al: LK, IL, Report on Diseases, et Village, Infectious American ed of Pickering 27, the CJ, Grove 2012, Elk Book:

of Pediatrics Academy

ed WA, 2008, PA: 5, Vaccines, Philadelphia, Orenstein SA, Offit Plotkin

System Digestive The

Warren R. Ebach Dawn and Bishop P. 17

worsening). progression unchanged, onset the (improved, After should and (GI) major gastrointestinal symptom, be determined identifying triggers; actions symptoms defecation; alleviate Characterization weight symptoms; and duration that of should and as loss). fever relationship or symptoms such the frequency identify associated of to factors and and (e.g., symptom; signs timing, meals to child travel, on impact illness (family, Other others exposures contacts), and the exposure, absences). school includes of key (school history environmental

as the a full examination and a which a may evaluation, include The diagnosis examination. history abdominal suggest as thorough well should direct emesis disorders (e.g., pain with may pneumonia). abdominal lower produce streptococcal pharyngitis, Extraintestinal group manifestations A GI with lobe and jaundice, or surgical The veins, should bruising abdominal external scars, examination with ostomies. distention, abnormal begin a inspection for careful discoloration, bowel occur sounds intensity of obstruction. of with pitch Abnormalities bowel can and guarding, note location, facial for palpating When tenderness. and examiner the expression, tenderness, should rebound detect of and enlargement or as can the liver as feces well Palpation masses. also spleen or measured (with If be detected, firmness abnormal tape should contour. a measure), noting organomegaly abscesses, abdominal fissures, performed GI rectal examination, for skin and inspection for suggesting of including tags, should bleeding, openings, with and history bowel disease children A constipation, chronic diarrhea, be inflammatory (IBD). pain, fistulous suspicion anal and of of caliber assessment presence sphincter canal anal impaction, fecal extrinsic and include tone, size of masses, examination tenderness, rectal rectum. the Digital should elasticity, tested be should blood. for occult Stool

toxic infection and cell and bleeding evidence cell for volume, granulation). provide (WBC number or A platelet may differential, [WBC] and blood poornutrition count), inflammation reticulocyte blood count), of complete (hemoglobin, red presence blood count (white bloodurea electrolytes, and status. hydration (BUN), creatinine define help nitrogen Serum of duct aminotransferase, evidence evidence of and γ-glutamyltransferase injury, include for alanine bilirubin, hepatocellular total aminotransferase of injury. liver bile direct for and phosphatase oralkaline dysfunction Tests aspartate by synthetic time, level. coagulation levels,prothrombin and be factor Hepatic can albumin function assessed or lipase) of tests inflammation. injury pancreatic (amylase, Pancreatic evidence enzyme provide loss. protein and possible can gauge source identify a dehydration of Urinalysis

the decide technique and what to imaging, often how variants discuss for learn the patient with of study. use, advisable radiologist is a the to appropriate prepare Consultation to

encopresis A history can when abdominal examination document constipation and alone not excessive as retained with diagnosis. confirm plain the necessary, stool consistent x-ray is to is

the the of direct Endoscopy interior visualization of gut. the permits endoscopes be used pediatric gastroenterologists. very even small by may in Video infants endoscopy capsule Wireless (Fig. lesions enables conventional of visualization the reach 126-1) beyond of endoscopes.

evaluate gastroenterologist for and diagnosis a disease, for Consultation endoscopy the inflammation to pediatric unresponsive gastrointestinal of with further bowel for is polypdisorders. recommended confirm celiac of suspectedesophageal evaluatesuspected eosinophilic and esophagitisor inflammatory disease, to screen or bleeding, gastric medications evaluation feeding tubes. and removeesophageal trained gastric a In addition, foreign bodies and can place endoscopist

StudentConsult.com Available @

upper ulcers jejunum on Crohn’s colonoscopy. with 126-1 capsule in patient diagnostic endoscopy find-ings and Figure Wireless negative (arrows) in of Aphthous endoscopy: disease

diseases. can the or the or injury structures organs in result abdominalwall, Abdominal pain intra-abdominal somatic from extra-abdominal from overlying to transmitting autonomic fibers. sensation pain Visceral within detect nerves nonmyelinated the gut when by injury, results vague, poorly pain is in and dull,slow The localized. onset, and variety including normal andosmotic chemical degree. activate these various peristalsis stimuli, A fibers intraluminal of to some states, or is is ofintensity the duration Regardlessof pain crossed. when a visceral threshold perceived stimulus, more results in stimulation these sensations, of perception may or vaguelyuncomfortable nonpainful Lower intensive of whereas result degrees perhaps fibers of in activation pain. be syndrome. irritable pain, of functional pain abdominal may of such abdominal some sensation thebasis Overactive as kinds bowel and

are when pain, results visceral structures overlying injured. body contrast to In somatic pain and fascia, include Somatic muscles, the skin of structures the abdominal peritoneum, wall. parietal myelinated fibers capable to injury, stimuli. well-localized In from of are visceral pain and nociceptive contrast somatic emanating painful rapid transmission of are to inflammation intra-abdominal or peritoneum cause abdominal well-localized wall injury pain. the structures, localized When becomes processes or pain somatic parietal visceral poorly appendicitis, fibers initial activation acute in For the the visceral poorly discomfort of example, in nociceptive localized yields mid-abdomen. parietal pain the lower overlying to peritoneum, extends process quadrant. the to right and inflammatory localizes the When severe the becomes somatoparietal called is This pain.

in pain. body region a true sensation of painful source is the from a pain Referred distant on visceral referred predictable is based the locus of of location injury. pain The pancreas region. liver and referred is regions, Stomach pain to pain to and epigastric referred the and retrosternal epigastric the is the region the below pain often is scapula. referred Gallbladder to right by referred the injury small colonic bowel pathways affect and infraumbilical periumbilical in pain. afferents Somatic results visceral stimulated area,

or or Acute may (e.g., (e.g., bowel a presence dangerous sources pain pneumonia appendicitis lower lobe the tract abdominal urinary process stone). signal of extraintestinal intra-abdominal from can obstruction) originate or acute abdominal all intervention. pain episodes emergency of Not require Appendicitis possible. example, and out must volvulus, quickly for ruled as as be emergency, from patients managed must but a conservatively. pain have beseparated actually be presenting can they cases surgical Few abdominal with that acute

abdominal a Table painin acute diagnostic to children. 126-1 lists approach a resultin discrete, or onset suchas with that occur perforation onset, infarction, sudden passage Events viscus, stone, of a of a abrupt a pain. of causes, such of common as appendicitis inflammatory Gradual withinfectious pain or is IBD. and onset

is laboratory acute group performed standard (see for usually A 126-1). of pain tests abdominal Table nephrolithiasis. abdominal or series evaluates x-ray obstruction An for bowel Ultrasound suspected the computed in the can tomography visualize (CT) diagnosis appendicitis if is appendix but or doubt. remains may the treat or 129). If evaluation condition pneumatic diagnose intussusception, and this to initial used be a enema (air) (see suggests Chapter barium

in 126-2 differential acute pain Table lists abdominal diagnosis children. of the emergencies. rule urgent is the out task surgical The of clinician to intussusception common malrotation hernia, volvulus, concerns. incarcerated In and are congenital children, anomalies, young with common. is appendicitis In and more children older teenagers, is peritonitis, tenderness, guarding, including diminished abdominal signs surgical sounds. bowel or abdomen acute and rigidity, wall by absent An of characterized pain Table are location, 126-3. Helpful noted onset, quality in of and characteristics referral, of

@ StudentConsult.com Available

pain more common abdominal Recurrent is than affecting of children. all 10% a problem, 7 12 years. incidence The ages between peak and occurs abdominal pain. do extensive not the have identifiable) children (or serious of pain the a recurrent diagnosis underlying even 126-4),most Although fairly (Table differential illness is causing

Sudden gradual, history Onset episodes, with prior meals, injury association of or

Nature dull, colicky versus constant, burning or Sharp

location change left generalized, right Location Epigastric, time lower quadrant, in periumbilical, over or

vomiting Fever, (bilious? Associated (bloody? diarrhea ), abdominal distention symptoms ),

urinary pain dysuria, Extraintestinal Cough, symptoms frequency, dyspnea, flank

aggravating or nature of pain, symptoms factors or and alleviating Course location Worsening of in change improving,

discomfort, nutrition, position position appearance, general Growth of body hydration, General degree and

Tenderness, guarding, rigidity, sounds, distention, Abdominal bowel mass

hernia, pelvic ectopic inflammatory Testicular pregnancy disease, torsion, Genitalia

ribs, wheezing, tenderness structures of tenderness, sounds, abdominal wall rhonchi, rales, costochondral Breath Surrounding structures, joints flank

Rectal stricture, blood fecal lesions, impaction, Perianal examination tenderness,

of or ESR inflammation infection CBC, protein, C-reactive Evidence

Biliary disease bilirubin liver GGT, AST, or ALT,

Pancreatitis Amylase, lipase

stone, obstruction to infection; or tract Urinalysis bleeding Urinary due trauma,

fecalith, appendiceal stones upright air, Plain obstruction, and intraperitoneal films kidney abdominal flat free Bowel

pancreatitis, Intra-abdominal gallstones, appendicitis, abscess, stones disease, Crohn’s pelvic or CT scan kidney

Barium malrotation enema Intussusception,

appendicitis, Ultrasound pancreatitis, Gallstones, intussusception, kidney stones

GGT, aspartate CT, ESR, rate; ALT, blood aminotransferase; erythrocyte AST, computed aminotransferase; γ-glutamyltransferase. tomography; complete count; Alanine CBC, sedimentation

volvulus Incarcerated Intussusception* with Postoperative adhesion hernia Malrotation Ileus*

daily. Children pain functional abdominal have almost with characteristically pain not associated is perfectionism. with with The cyst often Meconium ten-Duplication relieved meals by dency is or equivalent associated and defecation ileus anxiety fibrosis) a and pain toward (cystic novel often school social stress Symptoms from at or situations. in result *Common. The

school. often is worst prevents often delays the and attending from pain or in children morning or diarrhea stool Irritable frequency defecation. fluctuating a by and of constipation, stool of abdominal bowel pain, pain of of characterized syndrome is subset at consistency, and onset change a with time functional between the pain (IBS) pattern a relief in linked in gut to Symptoms are IBS motility. groups peer both anxiety lack causes, imagined Pain avoidance, school 126-5). coping skills, relationships of (Table secondary and by is children about gains, commonly accompanied in disordered of

disorders. serious One needs andmore distinguish underlying functional between pain/IBS to 126-6. Table listed illness Warning signs underlying are for in is further necessary. If present, investigation warranted laboratory evaluation is Some

irritable Distinguishing 2 and ONSET Features Recurrent hepatic Pain pain intermittent; school bowel LOCATION h in of Family Abdominal and flexures hypersensitive Dull, DISEASE COMMENTS 126-3 Functional: crampy, stress, QUALITY REFERRAL Table None to constipation; Periumbilical, Children syndrome from distention diarrhea splenic duration phobia,

reflux at Esophageal in mouth; taste bedtime Chest meals, Recurrent, Burning Substernal Sour after

marked tenderness emesis, Constant, Epigastric-hypogastric Nausea, Back Pancreatitis sharp, boring Acute

Depends on Inflammatory site Recurrent of

Dull loss, Fever, ± weight cramping,

None Distention, with gaseousness, abdomen Recurrent Cramping products Lactose milk Lower intolerance diarrhea

Back Hematuria Acute, pain colicky Groin Urolithiasis Severe, sudden

tenderness, Fever, costochondral frequency, dysuria, sudden emesis Back None Dull urinary Acute, Pyelonephritis to sharp

F, Cecil CJ, of Andreoli Carpenter WB Essentials TE, et al: Plum from Medicine, Saunders. Adapted 1986, Philadelphia,

*Common.

signs. absence even of the warning in approach, and initial avoidingunnecessary testing 126-7 The evaluationrecommended is mostserious Table disorders. underlying sensible for sensitivity in ample a providing a a trial While for intolerance. can diet evaluate andultrasound of 3-day results, lactose-free laboratory waiting lactose for are stopped. If warningsigns are normal be should no testing tests present, and signs, abnormalities of may are or If diagnosis, progression investigation warning that suggest additional symptoms, specific be warranted. laboratory a there

Recurrent Pain Treatment Abdominal of

is reinforcement receives the home excusedfrom full from withdraws who being social kept pain responsibilities repeatedly from of A form child becauseof in and school functioning. thecourse. and to tends This anxiety prolong increase both immediately. must cycle pain to in returning break activities functional the disability, normal assisted be the childwith To of pain and Instead allowed home until ashort to a symptoms from sent take may child stomachaches, with break of be class being abate. fromschool is dysmotility day worsens should be worse and pain child pain The child to perception. anxiety as and the enhances school parents to onthe returns be that informed likely may behelpful. Medications may Fiber to help symptoms ofIBS. supplements manage be treating peppermint oil in can Probiotics and beneficial IBS. and difficult behavioral persistent In cases, cognitive

A. Abdominal Criteria Childhood for Functional Diagnostic Pain

of Must following: the 1. all include

2.

3.

that metabolic, process the No neoplastic subject’s of an inflammatory, symptoms. or explains evidence anatomic,

B. Pain for Criteria Syndrome Diagnostic Childhood Functional Abdominal

and following: abdominal least include pain the 25% the time at more of 1 functional 1. or Must of

functioning loss daily Some 2. of

limb headache, sleeping pain, symptoms Additional or difficulty somatic such as

Diagnostic C. for Irritable Bowel Syndrome Criteria

following: of all include the Must 1. a. or or uncomfortable (an more as Abdominal following with the 2 pain) described of associated at pain sensation the discomfort least time: of 25% not

defecation improved b. with

onset change of frequency in associated with c. stool

of onset with change 2. stool associated a form (appearance) in evidence symptoms. neoplastic explains subject’s anatomic, No inflammatory, that metabolic, or an process the of

Migraine Abdominal D. for Diagnostic Criteria

following: include 1. the of Must all

acute or that more. hour Paroxysmal 1 episodes of pain intense, periumbilical lasts for

2.

usual lasting to months. periods Intervening health weeks of

3.

interferes pain with activities. normal The

4.

associated The of the more or following: with a. pain is 2

b.

c.

d.

e.

f.

5. process explains the of inflammatory, No considered anatomic, symptoms. an that neoplastic metabolic, or subject’s evidence

*Criteria 12 in or times months. 2 the fulfilled more preceding

for Diagnostic Vomiting E. Cyclic Syndrome Criteria

of include 1. following: the Must all

and intense vomiting Two unremitting nausea lasting periods to of hours or or more days. retching

2.

usual months. of weeks health to Return to lasting state

Functional Diarrhea F.

of Must include the all following 1.

painless, of stools. or recurrent large, passage Daily unformed more three

2.

lasting 4 than more weeks. Symptoms

3.

Onset and of age. symptoms between months begins 36 of that 6

4.

hours. during Passage waking stools occur that of

5.

no is There thrive is intake failure if to caloric adequate.

Foundation. of the Rome Courtesy

(anemia, hypoalbuminemia, Abnormal screening laboratory study

disease, celiac disease, selective amitriptyline, be may of helpful. reuptakeinhibitor inflammatory or therapy, bowel Family a history serotonin or significant professional socialdysfunction anxiety persists, mental health should When or a beconsulted.

@ StudentConsult.com Available

of coordinated, Vomiting forceful leads is emptying oral events contents. of a series that gastric to sequential causes. has many children common is and in a It problem Although regurgitation stomach they of similar, result from end up.” be Vomiting reflux or characteristics. distinguished should also gastroesophageal regurgitation have chalasia, different (GER), contents, and as “spitting completely known is the vomiting of and is usually Vomiting gagging forceful preceded by nausea by retching. is and accompanied on preceded by other is nausea. and not hand, the Regurgitation, effortless

obstructive with neonates considered. lesions vomiting, In should true congenital be formula of with may months 2 to reactions first the life vomiting. in Allergic present in in occurs after but Pyloric immediately be that is steadily infants do the characterized appear these GER and large infants worsening, feedings. and months volume, occurs life vomiting and of by (“spitting Infantile forceful most effortless stenosis first ill. occurs up”) in is can not peristaltic visible often vomiting. stomach, with is waves, before distended often seen visibly A history stenosis male common family positive. Pyloric infants; be in may more is the intestinal obstructive duplication cysts, as webs, lesions, atresias, and such Other midgut

lipase ESR impairment functional Determine degree CBC missing of school) (e.g., Amylase,

bile Urinalysis up) (move Abdominal gallbladder, to ultrasound—examine liver, follow kidneys, pancreas, ducts, ureters

Trial the contrast intravenous lactose-free oral, of 3-day and of diet pelvis abdomen scan with rectal, and CT

small upper Barium with follow-through bowel GI series

duodenum of Endoscopy and esophagus, the stomach,

gastrointestinal. Complete erythrocyte CT, ESR, rate; GI, count; computed CBC, tomography; blood sedimentation symptoms. signs, warning tests, or these using of laboratory or persistent specific abnormal more or to *Consider one investigate

considered. should be malrotation, acidemias, syndromes) may in defects, cycle disorders present Metabolic infants. with adrenogenital galactosemia, urea vomiting (e.g.,organic viruses food acute children and Inolder with poisoning are common. vomiting, urinary vomiting. tract in otitis infections, streptococcalpharyngitis, result media, infections, and commonly Other especially vomiting intracranial (increased considered. chronic, pressure,migraine) be When (CNS) system centralnervous must causes is vomiting. may be vomiting or recurrent syndrome migraine etiology of Cyclic the bilious disorders, emesis vomiting, initiated. accompanies pain bowel or and for immediately peptic obstruction, Whenabdominal appendicitismust be evaluation

Table considered features. lists must their diagnoses important be and that common historical 126-8 the another diagnosis. as unusual features it for to important is alert suggest the that gastroenteritis Given etiology, viral frequency of be and gastroenteritis abdominal recur usually severe is at frequent or does Viral headache not associated intervals. not with pain

skin Chapter mucous Physical of of examination membranes, examination (see and should the including of hydration include 38). assessment turgor child’s refill, status, moistness capillary of evidence or signs chest rales be involvement. other for should The auscultated of pulmonary bowel organomegaly, sounds, carefully be abdomen guarding. examined must The distention, tenderness, and for for and considered. testing stool rectal be should occult examination blood A

of blood include complete vomiting function should amylase, of and function, serumelectrolytes, tests tests. Laboratory renal lipase, count, liver evaluation when testing aspecific history may suggest examination etiology. berequired immediately Additional and steno-sis, look obstruction,pancreatitis, Ultrasound is gallstones, useful malrotation, stones, for to pyloric renal anatomic and biliary other intussusception, hydronephrosis,

nausea, and by Diagnosis absence Features CLUES reflux pain not of Gastroesophageal Table onset, Viral Vomiting DIFFERENTIAL Differential chronic preceded diarrhea, sudden Effortless, 126-8 gastroenteritis of HISTORICAL Fever, DIAGNOSIS Historical

Jaundice, exposure Hepatitis of history

ear Otitis pain Fever, media

unusual Urinary tract frequency, infection Dysuria, odor, incontinence urine

discomfort fever, Cough, chest Pneumonia

in formula protein with particular or (infants) Milk intolerance soy food, or blood Associated stools

Peptic in or by emesis, ulcer coffee-ground or blockade relieved pain, gastritis Epigastric blood acid pain material

migrating abdominal Appendicitis quadrant, to right lower the Fever, pain tenderness

Neonate, atresia Intestinal usually bilious, polyhydramnios

vomiting, shock GI Midgut bilious Pain, bleeding, malrotation

Intussusception pain, stools, lethargy, Colicky mass currant jelly occasionally vomiting,

Colic, mass Duplication cysts

Nonbilious loss Pyloric weight old, <4 vomiting, progressive stenosis postprandial, mo hunger,

bloody with gastroenteritis diarrhea Bacterial Fever, often

head, fontanelles status, Large bulging altered mental Hydrocephalus

Fever, Meningitis neck stiff

Attacks in time, relieved syndrome scattered sleep; Migraine by headache

Similar headache migraine, no usually Cyclic vomiting syndrome to

Brain diplopia accelerating tumor over Morning vomiting, headache, time,

travel Associated sickness vehicle Motion in with

worsens or catabolic when substrate early to disease exposure in Metabolic life, Presentation

Pregnancy menses sexually active, cessation Morning, of

Drug side or effect dose reaction with or increased Associated new medication

administration Cancer abnormalities. of chemotherapeutic drugs to related chemotherapy Temporarily to that appendicitis observe ultrasound. or be to may rule visualized out be cannot structures by well CT indicated can the gut Chapter and show of studies inflammatorylesions can of obstructive 129). be as intussusception enemas contrast the in therapeutic, for (see Barium or use

the vomiting. Treatment the to causesof consequences the and needs address must treated fluid Dehydration be with resuscitation. but solutions, in be can This (IV) fluids with accomplished cases berequired. may intravenous oralfluid-electrolyte most corrected be appropriate Electrolyte imbalances of fluids. by should choice Underlying be should possible. causes treatedwhen

antiemetic of use is The controversial. medications etiology severe prescribed and only the the vomitingis should of for not until be drugs then These symptoms. known, sickness. food motion such and prochlorperazine, poisoning reducing useful may for be symptoms in as Phenothiazines, must be and carefully, considered should side-effectprofile the doseprescribed Their be conservative. however, (e.g., are treatment of usefulfor scopolamine) (e.g., and sickness. and antihistamines the dimenhydrinate) prophylaxis motion Anticholinergics tolerance receptors, oral such andgranisetron, are 5-HT3 therapy. block viral gastroenteritis as canimprove serotonin ondansetron of Drugsthat used frequently for rehydration and chemotherapy-induced often vomiting, are combined helpful for They withdexamethasone. possible. specific condition No when is withsurgical in be emergencies used underlying a or antiemetic the should of treatment patients most in patients withviral ketosis,and Correction dehydration, reduce helpful of gastroenteritis. is vomiting acidosis to

StudentConsult.com @ Available

mortality childhood and is cause a worldwide. of major morbidity Diarrhea Deaths are from rare but elsewhere. common diarrhea industrializedcountries, are in 30). majorproblem malnutrition care a in absence medical occurs Chapter diarrhea ofbasic with it the when is (see Acute or no mostacute self-limited, North In and testing is diagnostic or specific requiring viral America, intervention. diarrhea is are typically and with illness public Bacterial causemuch outbreaks seen or in regions in poor sanitation. tend agents to severe more food-associated arepresent. when diarrhea is suspected should whenever symptoms and fever) severe enteritis dysentery(bloody there be Bacterial with diagnosed assays orother be stool pathogens. can These specific culture for infections by wide more that lasts of and than are to causes, a includingserious difficult range more diarrhea conditions Chronic and weeks possible diagnose. 2 has benign

frequent large stools in describe that loose diarrhea volume. excessively or the use or stools, Parents to are stools, word watery be can diarrhea. Constipation with incontinence as overflow mislabeled mL stool definition daily A stool/kg excessive (>10 diarrhea volume body exact of is weight/day). more liquid and of texture, the episode help diarrhea. characterize frequency Stool to volume,

mechanisms or by by may classified or Diarrhea be (secretory etiology physiologic osmotic). toxins, substances, their malabsorbed include or agents parasites, inflammation. chemicals, Etiologic and viruses,bacteria of common Table in diarrhea 126-9 childhood. lists causes intestinal diarrhea inflammatorybowel inflammation fluid disease, is occurs when result electrolytes mucosa chemical intothe secretes of stool stimulus). (e.g., the the Secretory directly and and peptide also intestinal and vasoactive of by hormones, secreted mediators suchas various by a stimulatedby is neuroendocrinetumor. inflammation Secretion levels diarrhea small-bowellumen. secretory increased a Cholera the causes enterotoxin by Vibrio to is and enterocytes within secretion into leads cholerae, of stimulated cAMP the which of

“pulls” aningested diarrhea substance, of Osmotic malabsorption the bowellumen. which after water occurs into intolerance. of classic diarrhea is example the A lactose insufficiency seen also that with as or pancreatic injury. Osmotic diarrhea generalizedmaldigestion, intestinal result from such can with of and Certain polyethylene as osmotic cause laxatives, milk glycol magnesia,also nonabsorbable such diarrhea. and malabsorbed stools. Fermentation (e.g., often resulting acidic gas,cramps, in occurs, of substances lactose) early as commonly functional common A diarrhea, childhood diarrhea. in cause is of toddler’s loosestools chronic known and normal setting condition byfrequent of defined watery stools in the growth This is

poisoning Food Systemic Gastroenteritis* (?) associated Food Gastroenteritis* infection Antibiotic poisoning Gastroenteritis* Common Antibiotic infection associated Systemic Antibiotic associated

protein abuse Cystic (toddler’s (anorexia fibrosis syndrome lactase Celiac bowel Celiac secondary Common Giardiasis lactase deficiency Laxative disease Celiac disease intolerance Chronic disease infancy secondary Postinfectious enteropathy diarrhea Irritable diarrhea) Giardiasis Cow’s bowel syndrome disease Inflammatory nonspecific deficiency Lactose AIDS Lactose bowel of intolerance Irritable nervosa) Inflammatory milk/soy disease bowel intolerance Postinfectious

(?) immune atrophy defects Primary Rare villous Familial Intractable Factitious Secretory enteropathy Primary tumor syndrome diarrhea AIDS Secretory tumors bowel Short Acrodermatitis Secretory Factitious Congenital chloridorrhea AIDS enteropathica tumor Autoimmune tumors Lymphangiectasia Pseudo-obstruction Acquired syndrome enteropathy immune bowel enteropathy defects Eosinophilic Abetalipoproteinemia gastroenteritis

AIDS, immunodeficiency Acquired syndrome.

(rotavirus, difficile, astrovirus) viral includes norovirus, agents. Clostridium (Salmonella, coli, other) Shigella, *Gastroenteritis Escherichia bacterial and Campylobacter, Yersinia,

disaccharide the by the capacityof is sweetened overwhelming of intestine. weight liquids, intake absorptive and caused gain excessive child’s beverage typically reduced improves tremendouslywhen intake is the or changed. Diarrhea

Available StudentConsult.com @

the because relatively in water isosmotic, free Stools even exchange are across of of osmotic intestinalmucosa. the diarrhea, Osmoles stool the other and in osmotically active of solutes. mixture a present are electrolytes To is calculated: diarrhea the osmotic the determinewhether secretory, osmotic gap or is

potassium of an and accounting associated 290 Assuming the anions, (and isosmotic of the (an the their much is osmolarity measured stool for amount) osmolality. sodium accounts for equal stool mOs-m/L), is characterized osmotic by gap an than 50. of diarrhea Secretory less than malabsorbed number higher A osmotic 50 account significantly electrolytes that substances indicates osmolarity. than defines and fecal diarrhea for other

differentiate to (in is between osmotic secretory hospitalized stop patientsreceiving feedings way diarrhea and to Another fluids). intravenous all mouth), thepatient while child osmotic the is the completely diarrhea. NPO stops If (nothing has by diarrhea diarrhea a diarrheal osmotic for method massive would a classifying mixture components. output.Neither have stool continue pure secretory are perfectly,because most with A child works to diarrhea illnesses of secretoryand lining, causing the diarrhea. and osmotic intestinal Viral damages malabsorption enteritis of in that results secretion. cause excessive inflammation release mediators Theassociated stool secretorycomponent the NPO, of decreased while volume the child A viral the mayhave persists enteritis inflammationresolves. diarrhea until but with

the blood the of character should estimates diarrhea, number symptoms, other as fever, history stools, of and such The and stool, and loss. weight presence in onset include of of stool volume, exposures of a be list Recent be recently medications factors and travel should investigated, obtained. used should dietary and documented, should be that determined. worsen or seem the Factors to be should improve diarrhea evaluating should distention, large mass presence tenderness, anal stool thorough, bowel sphincter fecal a be of tone. examination on blood abdominal rectal sounds, for of quality and Physical or in the examination,

and enteritis stool bacterial Laboratory culture suspected. include complete count should if blood testing is pancreatic oily antibiotics, stools if for fecal diarrhea of should If a content a be Clostridium test reported be to insufficiency occurs measured. should assay are after course to fat fecal elastase or toxin orfatty, be ordered; difficile sent colonoscopy Tests disease; for antibody specific (e.g., when be diagnosesshould appropriate ulcerative suspected colitis). serum for testsfor celiac days several evaluation lactose or of in lactosebreath A restriction trial is testing helpful of hydrogen the lactoseintolerance. for

StudentConsult.com @ Available

a childhood. common is problem in Constipation these. fear stool hard to is stool or may concerned combination passing thought of any about be his large size, When stools, a parents decreased defecation, child straining of be with consistency, constipated, stool frequency, pellet-like week fewer of at constipation Physicians for or per passage or define weeks. hard, as least two 2 stools stools stool, often fewer which pattern is two stools. passage characterized constipation, of voluntary A per and of painful withholding large-diameter, constipation functional infrequent is common by or week, stools of (encopresis). of and crossed retention functional fecal or leakage caused fecal legs and sitting often with stiffor exhibit Children have legs) extended retained “retentive (standing by incontinence posturing” associated stool with

diagnosis is Table listed differential The 126-10. in during unwilling is Functional the toilet. child occurs toilet when to commonly the constipation on defecate training, over leading to time, Retained larger becomes stool and painful harder defecation. of the stool, withholding of constipation. aggravates This perpetuation voluntary with

Hirschsprung abdominal distention, by and in delayed stools. newborns, characterized vomiting, fever, is occasional meconium passage foul-smelling disease migrate ganglion spasm resulting This aganglionic of bowel, cells in caused to is obstruction condition distal functional the and into of by segment. failure the infants of infants. about 6% compared normal 95% meconium disease of pass life, in first the of hours with Only with 24 Hirschsprung of obstruction. Most enterocolitis babies with ill rapidly affected or symptoms become and rectal do Affected not pass spasm, stools do children not large-caliber have they because of older encopresis. abnormalities, anorectal causes include and cord malformations Other hypothyroidism, constipation fibrosis, (see of drugs, cystic Table spinal 126-10). in metabolism result systemic A muscle disorders or affecting variety constipation. of function can reduced control to of perception have the because developmental or diminished a disabilities to muscles propensity diminished Children defecation, pass toileting, great stool. during capacity constipation with for cooperate and need of pelvic of floor effort with

constipation. 126-10 causes Table common includes typical the characteristics of of Congenital usually malformations cause

Constipation CAUSES 126-10 (fever, of stool Causes symptoms h, Failure pass 24 to Common in and distention, vomiting, Hirschsprung diarrhea, foul-smelling History: of Features CLINICAL megacolon). Characteristic disease abdominal CONSTIPATION OF enterocolitis Table FEATURES first rectum. associated with Examination: Not sphincter, Snug encopresis contracted anal empty, stools or large-caliber of suction enema Laboratory: stool “transition specimen, biopsy ganglion May finger as is explosive from zone” have bowel internal of of dilated the examiner’s absent proximal withdrawn release distal narrow on Absence barium rectal cells relaxation sphincter, bowel to on

Functional may or lower soiled constipation, have Normal encopresis dilated barium of show left onset retentive rectal stools, training, abnormalities, fecal impaction, mass posturing, in quadrant tone, distal potty significant history History: vault, enema No reduced palpable would dilated fecal neonatal underwear, constipation Laboratory: No bowel Examination: sphincter large-caliber at

History: anus are females, colonic Imperforate fourchette normal-appearing of in anus Anal the birth located from Laboratory: a displaced stenosis physical Examination: is to stricture the shows anatomy close with Constipation abnormal the abnormalities Anteriorly anus Colonic vagina enema Anteriorly easily Barium Anorectal anomaly malformations anus found due Anorectal to posterior on displaced chiefly examination and shown

abnormalities Presence may Multisystem Tests prior relate that at diagnosis disorder Celiac diagnosis Specific History: present mellitus suspected to symptoms Diabetes Laboratory: underlying disease Developmental diagnosis the Examination: of directly fibrosis be Muscular or the directed delay other dystrophy disease Cystic confirm

usually back cord abnormalities or Spinal Laboratory: impaired always) or tone on or History: cord incontinence due Lax lower (but present exposed the lower Examination: visible Sacral History swelling back, to abnormality in of abnormalities tissue history present of often innervation, Meningomyelocele sphincter not Tethered Bony x-ray. teratoma neural urinary plain of palpable lipoma (MRI) imaging resonance spinal Magnetic of

Narcotics No constipation from constipation Drugs suggest drugs Laboratory: Psychotropics Examination: Features known History: specific birth. symptoms Recent use cause of tests to available functional Functional is patients. diagnosis common most constipation the overwhelmingly older in private often and school, free in children begins to after access restricted. starting toilets may be Constipation when older especially Use medications, opiates psychotropic also associated of is drugs, and some constipation. with some

a constipation, For directed specific few can of diagnosis. make causes the diagnostictesting suggestsHirschsprung and A aganglionic on disease. proximal barium narrowed, enema dilated distalbowel bowel confirms fibers. the nerve of biopsy ganglion absenceof cells hypertrophy plexus, submucosal in suction rectal Rectal with the anal diagnosed thyroidfunction Hirschsprung’s by testing. Lack relaxation internal in examination shown anorectal by by and is of sphincter manometry canbe disease.Hypothyroidism easily are malformations examination. detected Anorectal byrectal or ileus) fibrosis 137). sweat gene (meconium Chapter diagnosedby (see is Cystic mutation chloride CFTR analysis determination children laboratory do abnormality. have functional have constipation with any constipation not and Most of large to reduced Examination reveals anal stools). tone(owing or by sphincter normal stretching passage stool found may passed. empty just been isusually impaction rectum ifa a large-caliber, but Fecal be present, has

and Treatment Constipation Evaluation of Functional

large constipation, consistent In most cases constipation, is active retention, constipation—absence with history the functional of of with fecal soiling. neonatal infrequent, stools and is patients, than a no necessary. other In physical good testing these examination softener therapy a alleviate children defecation. Young stool with of painful prolonged course have fear defecation must to of easiest morning is after child be most a to sit toilet is for meals, to awakening should on few the colon The it pass minutes immediately in on when a the stool. and and active asked the sitting for of and younger a medication Use the for on helpful taking reinforcement toilet positive is children. system and palatable. softener chosen stool be forming, non–habit should safe, The are and glycol the used milk most magnesia Polyethylene agents. of commonly

Available @ StudentConsult.com

present, small when even bleeding or stool is blood is emergency presence sufficient concern. large-volume tract bleeding an in the emesis of GI to of cause amounts but be can appropriate of cause. stabilization the intravascular should source estimation localization amount confirmation blood of underlying bleeding, and the is include of of of bleeding, Evaluation bleeding of the volume, of that patient’s present, truly treatment blood the crucial When it is that bleeding is massive, the

hemoglobin maternal Apt large adult is cracked Hematemesis blood* amount indicates test maternal Ingested present, nipples, or rectal,

Peptic found Blood disease varies on Hematemesis, amount in stomach lavage

birth vitamin of home (no rectal, History other K) sites bruising, or Coagulopathy Hematemesis

rectal Eosinophils mucosa bloody in and mucus colitis* in stool in Streaks of feces Allergic

enterocolitis Sick abdomen with infant and distended Rectal tender Necrotizing

Acute hematochezia Hematemesis, Volvulus distended abdomen tender

emesis disease Peptic pain, coffee-ground hematemesis, Epigastric Usually rectal possible

evidence or History Esophageal liver varices disease Hematemesis of

mass Rectal Intussusception* Crampy pain, bleeding distention,

bleeding; Meckel Rectal red pain no bright diverticulum* Massive,

diarrhea, fever Bloody enteritis* Rectal Bacterial

Epigastric emesis OLD injury NSAID coffee-ground rectal Usually YEARS pain, possible hematemesis, >2

weight poor Inflammatory Usually rectal disease bowel pain, diarrhea Crampy gain,

of bloody History diarrhea antibiotic Rectal Pseudomembranous use, colitis

Painless, Rectal red massive blood stool; polyp bright Juvenile in not

no in stool, Nodular other Streaks Rectal hyperplasia lymphoid blood of symptoms

follows coffee-ground, or syndrome* Bright Hematemesis retching Mallory-Weiss red

uremia Hemolytic anemia, uremic Rectal syndrome Thrombocytopenia,

veins, with Hemorrhoids Rectal Dilated external blood wiping

Nonsteroidal NSAID, anti-inflammatory drug. testing. products ahead and diagnostic adequate *Common receive fluid with patient blood moving resuscitation with before

ages different has bleeding at (Table 126-11). different GI causes

cefdinir) blood. beverages, in occasionally medications be can mistaken as or for substances Red (such foods, worth diagnosis is occultblood A doubt. the is in test performing whenever for

a The hematemesis.Blood from examination blood.A may even exclude is a in not source as diaper of to or toilet cough of may the mouth, severe these nostrils, history the needed the be source observed the vagina, rash. the of urinarytract, fecal GI be and tract coming diaper andlungs or of the to to the ligament tract high it important the in is bleeding If determine ordistal is GI, as source of Treitz. GI the Vomited always is proximal. blood colon. surface clots bleeding with in a is probably Rectal is red higherlocation from anywhere blood may the lower ofstool on are whereas the melena be suspected, in from gut.When or coming mixed bright the dark stool, coming seen for placedand evidence a may be suspected, of gastric aspirated tube recent contents upperGI is tract bleeding When nasogastric bleeding.

location of can be by history and and assessed also bleeding The hemodynamic examination. the significance the parents should asked The to quantify bleeding. be Details symptoms sought. associated be of should orthostatic signs of including valuable membranes the of capillary information. provides and bleeding vital is volume when pulses, the refill mucous Assessment pallor assessment large, of changes Laboratory studies be as should (Table and assessment imaging indicated ordered 126-12).

thromboplastin ALT, crossmatch time, liver time Tests AST, GGT, or vomitus of prothrombin of blood Occult stool test tests: Coagulation Blood partial and dysfunction: bilirubin type

Clostridium difficile culture, CT of Stool with Evaluation contrast Diarrhea Bloody or colonoscopy Sigmoidoscopy toxin

with Stools Evaluation Formed Rectal Bleeding of

Hematemesis of Evaluation

(Bowel Obstruction) of with Evaluation and Vomiting Bleeding Pain

CBC, aminotransferase; aspartate complete tomography; blood γ-glutamyltransferase; Alanine aminotransferase; GI, ALT, computed CT, count; gastrointestinal. GGT, AST,

perfusion NG signs stomach poor hypotension, stabilized? to tube Place Yes in care unit rectal Transfer Blood Vital Shock, orthostatic intensive Yes Hematemesis or bleeding Endoscopy, output No saline surgery imaging in required monitor tube for Ringer's place, bolus or PTT, as studies management Leave PT, with PRBCs, required or Transfuse Platelets CBC, Intravenous Check FFP lactated platelets of solution mL/kg diagnosis 20 and as

of a tests. bleeding assessment, an rapid diagnostic sequence with GI stabilization, of initial should and Treatment begin logical therapyshould cause specific identified, When is be started. treatable a is small, of the many cases, amount blood In

gastrointestinal 126-2 management Initial bleeding. Figure of fresh CBC, FFP, plasma; PTT, PT, PRBCs, thromboplastin partial blood time; count; cells; time. packed NG, blood nasogastric; frozen red prothrombin Complete

and resuscitation no is required. should be ABCs the (airway, an and Chapters of is large-volume 38 tube with airway bleeds, massive should if addressed children hematemesis the present. protected resuscitation be with (see 40).Oxygen first breathing, For and circulation) endotracheal administered

with should blood transfusion cells administered large-bore IVs. through required red packed Fluid boluses two as be and reassessment Frequent physiological maintenance should ensure (Fig. continue stability of to 126-2).

a of variety Medications for oral may taken cause conditions abnormalities. saliva risk of increase caries Drugs with parotitis. and anticholinergic production and diminish properties the dental Tetracyclines the teeth of enamel. stain eruption permanent the taken the before in Excessive teeth. drinking mottled preparations or fluoride vitamin can in water in result phenytoin, may hypertrophy caused and by channel be blockers. cyclosporine, Gingival calcium

caries. enamel and (GER) substantial reflux erosion Gastroesophageal lead to disease can can teeth. deciduous Neonatal bluish discoloration result in the of hyperbilirubinemia mottled Renal of is with the associated enamel permanent failure teeth. abnormalitiesin shape teeth, and especially of marked the Congenital causes syphilis molars. incisors defects. result in Celiacdisease enamel can is with Crohn’s disease associated oral aphthous ulcers. Abnormal and Addison is with mucosa pigmentation buccal ofthe disease. lips and Peutz-Jeghers syndrome seen and diabetes. commonlywith is disorders seen Candidiasis immunodeficiency can hyperplasia cause in result treatmentof and conditions neoplastic Leukemicinfiltrates severe bleeding; mucositis. gum lesions including mass ofthe may lymphoma, present cavity. buccal Sometumors, as

imperfecta is dentin risk abnormal associated and caries. of with Osteogenesis dysplasiascommonly Children malformed teeth. ectodermal or with have missing Robin associated Pierre with cleft palate. is syndrome micrognathia and profound dental in on and have dysmorphism function. facial mandibular can resulting a occlusion effect Disorders Examples conditions dwarfism, with syndrome, Crouzon and include mandibulofacial associated dysostosis, others.

infants teeth. Most born are without be may Natal usually are poorly present at are and birth, supernumerary, attached. teeth by necessary, injuries difficulties the treatment with they needed may feeding dentist is or if causing tongue. no Usually, to removal be but a are 127-1 teeth Table acquired. are the normal ages presents deciduous when bicuspids. lower first the and are molars, to typically incisors, incisors lateral incisors, erupt, upper central followed The first central the by may occur Delayed hypothyroidism, and osteopetrosis, dysplasia, syndrome, in rickets. disease, association Gaucher cleidocranial Down eruption hypopituitarism, with to begin Deciduous replaced be the by at 6 permanent teeth age around teeth

AGE PRIMARY, AGE PERMANENT, (mo) (yr) years. The appearance teeth. similar of to of of replacement is deciduous the that sequence

tooth “cavities,” commonly interactions the a oral flora. occurs enamel, referred to between carbohydrates, result Dental dietary caries, of as and as the is hypoplastic. increased if is or enamel susceptibility There abnormal and carbohydrates colonize survive dental fermentation acids adhere pH, cause (Streptococcus Bacteria at to of during mutans) and that can produce low teeth, caries. the The has a significant diet role. or bottle is caries. “bottle A classic example mouth,” baby a are sweet condition for results periods, especially bottle. in when or and sleep, during prolonged This in have with infants milk the beverages bottle allowed the to mouth upper have production incisors. and continuous can acid teeth, substrate for Bacteria then the destroy especially multiple as the effect. Sticky same sweet candy, such have foods,

associated caries greatest is of of and, status with care in predictably, is dental developingcountries. poorsocioeconomic lack and Risk Baby bottle seen 50% 70% is of in low-incomeinfants. caries to restorative Treatment surgery. caries with of dental is removed with amalgam filled and Thecarious portion is or plastic. silver abscess not results crown be properly alveolar dental protective and infections. facial a the damage whichcan treated, may lead be in is may necessary to when If salvageable.If pulp the dental not bone, of severe, tooth required;extraction inflammation andinfection the space surrounding decay and of

isa bottle commonsense sweets Avoiding baby of remedy caries. excessive use for and bottles inappropriate but the done teeth some young own the have ability (<8 to hygiene be should protection, parents. years not their adequately;brushing children old)do brush offers by Oral the to water considered reducing Fluoride well, supplementation in child before community of the prescribed.If before fluoride spends be all day should of from supplies, of 1 must thefluoride concentration location, have highly supplies as are from ppm tested water sources supplements prescribing supplements. oral content another such a thetotal at is concentration effective caries.Home any dental a part fluorosis, of and brown defect a white ofthe teeth. chalky staining largely supplementation causes marks cosmetic Excessivefluoride

Cleft separately palate infants. approximately or occur and lip together and 1 in 700 affect least (1:2500). Africans and common (1:500) more is It common Asians in in possible patterns: cleft soft the palate associated clefts two tissue lip Clefting hard palate. occurs with isolated cleft or or with of without Isolated risk palate is of malformations. higher congenital cleft associated a other with lip/palate type The a predominance. has cleft combined male

withsubsequent Cleft failure tissues due to fusion. of lip is the mesenchymal hypoplasia of risk affected in is children with strong There a component; the highest first-degreerelatives. genetic is suggesting affected are other only nongenomic 60%concordance, twins Monozygotic factors. with altitude. also herbicides, drugs dioxins tobacco use, (phenytoin, other and Environmental during possibly thalidomide), and valproic increase maternalalcohol gestation acid, high factors risk, and including and families. specific syndromes with some associated Chromosomal genesin are nonchromosomal are clefting, as

of can alveolar and the and with dentition. and ridge bilateral Cleft unilateral defects cleftpalate be or associated lip present, with cavities, between When defects and oral palatal creating nasal communication feeding. problems the allow speech and direct severe cases. in with nipples, nipples shields to attached seal special palate, squeeze-bottle feedings, the gastrostomy Management includes and of age. of is 3 Surgical the by months cleftlip closure done usually of the Closure 1 of palate year follows, usually age. before by are Missing teeth replaced prostheses. often good, the are depend but defect. results severity of the on Cosmetic

palate. of as Speech result cleft is the nasal a effective, not treatment is but completely. sometimes does function Surgical restore palatal therapy may speech-assisting of occasionally, the a use help. appliance Speech or, Frequent of as teeth defects media are episodes the and otitis common, are of alveolar ridge.

common Oropharyngeal thrush, healthy albicans is neonates. in Candida infection, or may the the acquiredin environment. from organism birth The be or canal as nipples. infection breastfed or of mother’s is result Persistent of the colonization a in infants infection common suggest should Thrush possibilityof immunodeficiency, but can antibiotic an healthyolder use, occur, ordiabetes. in broad-spectrum the patients

oral is Thrush appearance, white as on a often visible easily mucous membranes. “fuzzy” with plaques, are underlying and difficult and tongue with the is plaques to mucosa the scraped a inflamed friable. depressor, remove, When culture usually adequate, hydroxide diagnosis be by potassium may smear. is fungal Clinical confirmed but or sometimes is interfere with painful with candidiasis can esophagitis) associated Oropharyngeal if (especially and feeding.

such antifungal fluconazole. with an Thrush treated topical nystatin as agent azole is or given mother’s consideration her be and same to infected time. breasts When are painful, the at the treating should infants reasonable withholding persistent or approach. a self-limited asymptomatic therapy Because newborns, treating in in only severe is commonly thrush and cases is

@ StudentConsult.com Available

defined into is retrograde of (GER) Gastroesophageal contents oropharynx. reflux the as gastric movement esophagusor upward the effortless GER 8 is 12 infants youngerthan an abnormality.Physiologic GER in not to infancy, always (“spitting normal months In old. up”) is 2 age. are at spit of infants all up of reportedto Nearly months half for GER have thecriteria long oresophagitis. as complications so physiologic adequate nutrition signs Infants of respiratory and who maintain regurgitate no they meet involved infantile relatively more short, includeliquid causing esophagus;small, solidfoods, an experience lower and and position; per and upright, noncompliant spend larger needs frequent, caloric in stomach; diameter lower (LES).As Factors of large-volumefeedings; they grow, narrow body horizontal stomach, a esophagus, compliant GER time larger more longer a body immature develop and eat have unit sphincter esophageal more infants weight. diet; infantsstop As by most 12 months up spitting to 9 result, a age. of

breathing as disease complications pain, or troublesome to such occurs Gastroesophageal or difficulties. GERleads when symptoms (GERD) reflux poorgrowth, fussiness. often the minorityof cause of but infants is occurs GERD implicated in as a older GERDis of than fewer seen in 5% children. normal contraction GER In of geometry gastroesophageal protective tonic the antegradeesophageal mechanisms include the children, of the and LES, older junction. motility, against and causeGER (which hiatal that transient pressure, Abnormalities the of motility), increased intra-abdominal fibrosis), esophagitis in cystic tone relaxations older difficulty include and impairsesophageal hernia. reduced children cough,respiratory LES, (asthma adults LES, of or the

Available @ StudentConsult.com

to Hoarseness Thrive Cough Pain Failure Abdominal Wheezing

an spits is GER of The easy up. in presence infant who observe to abdominal aspiration associated refluxate symptoms, be recurrent voice, by GER hoarse pneumonia, suspected or usually and to pain, cough, otitis such reswallowing, dysphagia, heartburn, is by children, sinusitis. kept wheezing, the thrive, but epigastric media as older down failure may In and bleeding esophageal anemia inflammation. may laboratory evidence severe and esophagitis, of there secondary cases to be of hypoalbuminemia In

esophagitis of reflux, injury. as develops esophageal motility reflux and and result further, impaired of function are creating cycle LES a a esophageal When acid

often and children effortless in with no regurgitation diagnosis complications. is A classic sufficient clinical symptoms studies the if of complications in symptoms or or regurgitation. if Diagnostic are indicated possibility of GER suggest the persistent absence there other are spells cough, may occult pneumonia, overt have GER. chronic or apneic recurrent with emesis A child without contributors GI gastric other barium out rule malrotation, GER. outlet anatomic helps A upper obstruction, to or series to brief the of nature the rule negative GER. barium does a out study Because examination, not of a monitoring, pH. of esophagus, pH recording continuous the pH 24-hour Another with distal study, transnasally probe uses into esophageal electrode esophageal placed of typically hours Data 24 analyzed and acid temporal events. the for for are number gathered reflux pattern and esophagus. fluid of records in the Esophageal electrolyte-rich migration impedance monitoring gastric the abnormalities. esophageal Endoscopy stricture, anatomic useful for esophagitis, evaluate and to is

otherwise treatment necessary. healthy no young infants, is In (Table infants infants have GER, fussiness. H2 in For complications uncomplicated an and/or GER offered pro-ton-pump 128-1), benefit with inhibitor shown of with these but or be blocker little may lead LES as are occasionally such drugs, seldom enhancing and may effective by helpful increasing tone, complications. Prokinetic but gastric emptying to metoclopramide, they very are and or is When if surgical symptoms despite required. severe persist life-threatening be medication, aspiration intervention may present, to such as operation, the enhance of designed LES. the are Fundoplication procedures, Nissen antireflux anatomy the jejunostomy an oral of feedings, who neurologic with a a cannot children or be fundoplication. defect as feeding to placement considered tube severe alternative may tolerate gastric In of caffeine, eating limiting older foods. smoking, intake should before In be exercise, carbonation, children, weight cessation and or bed loss, high-fat of changes and including lifestyle not discussed, symptoms reducing therapy more in and proton is However, pump healing. effective inhibitor

This disorder immune-mediated eosinophils of into mucosa esophagus. the chronic characterized byinfiltration is of by to non–IgE-mediated isthought be toingested allergic foods or It aeroallergens. reactions triggered been gene familial identified. no a has EoE have connection; may specific yet to estimated per10,000 appears with of than increasing children. prevalence Incidence 4 more be common males in It females. more than be may

age. EoE of often presentation The with varies thrive. vomiting, it to present young oral and In children, may failure aversion, with vague In abdominal vomiting. with pain school-age or it children, present may and presents adults, it with dysphagia and adolescents impactions. food In poor and leading motility. response inflammatory the in These to are attributed to esophagus edema esophageal the symptoms

15 biopsies the eosinophils with field multilevel of more high-power requires flexible than finding (Fig. Diagnosis via esophageal endoscopy per 128-1). therapy Treatment severe high-dose pump injury. the with acidic recommended to esophageal exclude secondary to possibility are is that inhibitor findings proton endoscopy findings esophageal and eosinophilic at (Fig. trachealization, Gross appearance, furrowing, abscesses normal include 128-2). study A may barium reveal

COMMENTS THERAPIES effective. Treatment on Towel Cheap, of Table THERAPIES Gastroesophageal caregiver’s 128-1 shoulder CONSERVATIVE Reflux only physiologic reflux Useful for

of episodes, enhances Reduces Thickened feedings number nutrition

Can help Smaller, some. frequent feedings more not Be child to careful underfeed

tobacco a alcohol good smoke Always of Avoidance idea. and symptoms help reflux May

offers Inexpensive, Abstaining from some benefit caffeine

young of is Prone of not with bed in elevate Positional infants of helpful, crib but seat, for head positioning SIDS because up therapy—upright risk or

abdominal) leading increases intra-abdominal reflux (especially pressure, loss to weight Increased Weight indicated when

less healing receptor esophagitis heartburn, H2 effective for Reduces antagonist

emptying Metoclopramide stomach tone. Enhances LES and benefit minimal is Real often

Feeding jejunostomy tube Useful requiring in feeds. child downstream GERD feeds Delivering eliminates

sudden esophageal sphincter; GERD, death Gastroesophageal LES, lower infant SIDS, syndrome. disease; reflux

eosinophilic image 128-1 Histologic of Figure esophagitis. eosinophils large propria. of the within number lamina the Note

food with acutely disease. in esophageal impaction someone chronic in or patient an a stricture symptomatic

needs causative Exposure be identified eliminated. to to antigens assays) be prick, testing and difficult, identifies allergy immunocap antigens. can Identification IgE-mediated typical RAST, only (skin as be testing but more be not to difficult may is standardized reliable perform. patch Atopic can and eggs, peanuts, as One eliminate diet, most from to wheat, these cow’s fish/shellfish approach soy, the the milk, and is are

eosinophilic picture 128-2 of esophagi-tis. Figure Endoscopic abscesses). the surface (eosinophilic collections are White of on plaques eosinophils is Linear furrowing also seen.

causative dietary common antigens. to are endoscopies these Repeat often efficacy document of eliminations. necessary requires very and palatability. either but its be can An elemental of administration poor often also used because or effective, diet gastrotomy is nasogastric

can Systemic secondary decrease use to symptoms, complications. longterm but glucocorticoids discouraged is a as metered administered “topical” via slurry (budesonide) glucocorticoids or mixed inhaler (fluticasone) a Swallowed dose

(4%) (85%) Esophageal Esophageal distal TEF with TEF (8%) atresia atresia TEF with no H-type

of Various distal with TEF shown TEF proximal with types and Esophageal atresia have atresia Esophageal tracheoesophageal 128-3 benefit. Figure fis proximal most effects. common or esophagitis side are oral the Candida thrush

and to esophageal be relieve can EoE. strictures to secondary impactions dilate to used Endoscopy food largely is unknown. for prognosis The EoE to tend wane time. Symptoms over and wax

to or to due eating. Failure seen may be in difficulty weight loss thrive child common may removal. endoscopic require in and the a impactions are older complication Food dysplasia. of the predispose esophagus to inflammation Chronic strictures and esophageal possibly can

fetal esophagus develop proximity of each 6 life. in to 4 and trachea to other weeks close during The other anomalies in the result fistula in two a association structures tracheoesophageal these separating mesenchyme with (renal, limbs). Defects in heart, (TEF), often spine, births. about in live occurs 1 3000 This defect in be TEF genetic not defect. a to thought is

is most esophageal without atresia forms “H-type” uncommon, The with TEF without is atresia as esophageal of common the TEF atresia; occur TEF (Fig. 128-3). (50%), anus) (imperforate (%). forearm frequency (70%), association—vertebral cardiac relative anal the limb (TEF) and (30%), absent atresia with defects (polydactyly, anomalies TEF (70%), thumbs, anomalies tulas (50%), VACTERL renal defects, anomalies anomalies include Associated

syndactyly) (70%). often is present. umbilical A cord single-artery of and exhibit esophageal bubbling have from nose mucus with mouth. history saliva a and polyhydramnios, Infants have and atresia drooling, the a TEF Patients vulnerable pneumonia. to aspiration are with delayed is first When diagnostic feeding suspected, the until a study is performed. TEF should be

the gently test a TEF into 10For for simplest larger The stomach. mouth to via is tube place the to attempt the tube is of atresia. The the passageof blocked level the at the esophageal tube A in pouch. x-rayreveals chest the coiled to tube pouch. through the outline atretic beinjected can Air the because dilute defect clearlyshown. not extreme of water-soluble aspiration,but of should a agent is amount canbe aspirated given tiny of when contrast risk the used be then carefully, Barium

TEF The of is surgical. treatment ligated. The and divided is fistula approximated anastomosed. are esophageal and ends The distal primary of proximal cannot a performed In the gap long some be cases, esophagus. anastomosis because and between elongating esophageal suction for the to to been described esophagus simply anastomosis continuous problem, growth. upper providing pouch stomach, and including while myotomy, allowing by up delaying and the have this the pulling techniques treat Various

surgically GER, fistula, anastomotic proneto is is and stricture, reconstructed and recurrent leakage. motility, The esophagus normal not poor and The are also is malformed; tracheomalacia common. wheezing trachea

Young nonfood often place children in items mouths. their are they items at thoracic these swallowed, inlet the lodged become When the in at may LES. or the esophagus common The are objects coins. most they the may cause coins harmlessly where rarely into symptoms. stomach, Smaller pass toy foreign or parts, food items, disk other common batteries, include bodies and items. household esophageal small Other small toys in esophageal esophagus. to with GER seldom eosinophilic to of occur with impactions, a Children poor prior secondary or atresia esophagitis are the food prone history more normal or which motility

most are of but asymptomatic, children exhibit Some discomfort. food some or chest refusal, degree drooling, the wherethey can the chest be object usually feel to to of the lodged. point region Olderchildren a is or present,especially blocked on object, of which be thetrachea. cough meat, presses alarge as to completely by Respiratory may but piece esophagus be minimal, wheezing the when such symptomstend

suspected. is ingestion chest radiographs be should Plain and taken when body abdominal foreign easily visualized. Metallic objectsare moredefinitive. often x-ray plastic of contrast given drink, seen is endoscopy and a material small safer dilute object thechild can is probably although if A to amount be

is an most cases esophageal to Endoscopy foreign in remove body. necessary ultimately shape, used are object, to devices be and usually forceps on location.Coins the remove with its can special-purpose grasped size, andremoved. Various depending are Nets, also available. and snares baskets, be are under should objects and threaten endotrachealintubation Whenever general the recovered, performed that airway endoscopy being may with anesthesia. the usually in the if complication. pass will is likely small stomachas Removal object it most not and necessary is without the in located ingested emergent a for the esophagus is upper multiple foreign body Endoscopyis of or suspecteddisc if battery esophageal ifsymptomatic tract. body inthe magnets foreign removal or any

present or to for ulceration. due in objects may objects perforate may long result smooth esophagus; Sharp a perforation lacerate the time also and as tissue Corrosive zinc-containing can and local cause disc objects, perforation. such pennies injury batteries, considerable esophageal formation they fistula to adjacent perforation loops bowel. lead Magnets of connect can when between and

injuries of adolescents, are result the ingestion usually attempts. In suicide caustic of household ingestion products accidental. toddlers, In typically cleaning is bleaching powerful and include detergents, agents. cleaners, agents toilet Injurious cleaners, dishwasher drain bowl for offer protection, problem. commercial some the not products have but eliminated Childproof lids because liquid they liquefy and the products, cause worst swallowed injuries tissue cleaners, drain rapidly. are especially easily Lye-based in can occur Full-thickness seconds. burns often they esophageal to products are accidental likely expelled burn Granular before during lips tongue and the injury swallowing. and cause are exposures because less cause such serious agents, Less bleach injury. and detergents, less as caustic and the without direct contact [NSAIDs]) (tetracyclines liquids, occur medications allowing drugs ulcers when nonsteroidal of mucosa. the pill certain anti-inflammatory swallowed are Pill prolonged sufficient with esophageal

severe pain. Caustic immediate cause and mouth burns out, container drops The usually and immediately. the childcries drools, spits, the almost involvement, oforal in tongue injury esophageal esophageal can although are the clearly absence lips of occur possibility Burns burns. of immediately.These indicate burns the and visible Symptoms ingestion. ofcaustic indicated present; significant history may be usually endoscopy any with evaluationby further not is severe causes oftenprominent Pill injury dysphagia. swallowing) and odynophagia chest pain and (painful

rule and A toinspect for obtained should air. out chest to aspiration mediastinal x-ray be hospital (IV) given child the fluids and admitted to be until should intravenous The endoscopy. be immediately, delayed of Thetrue extent of perforation. endoscopy apparent burns not risk the increase but can may endoscopically stabilized. the Most endoscopists injury, soonafter been initial endoscopy patient perform the has when circumferential. severity subsequent to whether the extent of be carefully the determined.Risk degreeof esophageal and related The should strictures is of burn burn is and the ofinjury injury

provide endoscopy be over feeding stent guidewire tube timeof a the placed esophagus. route for the at a to initial nasogastric A can and to the formation. Systemic use not in to be beenfound reducing steroid has stricture beneficial is be infection suspected. prescribed Broad-spectrum antibiotics should if

and occur, they can dilation. within develop treated usually to months endoscopic with be 2 1 strictures, if Esophageal during There is risk a of dilation. perforation may be necessary. is reconstructionof severe, Whenesophageal esophagus stomach using surgical or destruction the intestine

StudentConsult.com @ Available

outlet acquired Pyloric and hypertrophy gastric spasm by is muscle, stenosis the of caused pyloric condition resulting obstruction. an in births, first-born a predominance, It 8 has 6 more live to per male and 1000 in children. occurs common 5-to-1 is in Its is cause unknown.

astime increasingly and stenosis first life, frequent pyloric delayed.The passes. vomitingduring the forceful but weeks typically be emesis of with begin may becomes Infants onset ofits spitting up nature. often Vomiting because from differs projectile forceful extremely and The gastric duodenum. outlet the bile, to because proximal the vomited never contains material is obstruction This stenosis obstructivelesions featuredifferentiates early from other pyloric childhood. of most in are quadrant. and morelethargic become with illness, of secretions, and the in massively becomes course waves with visible gastric malnutrition are increasing Affected the but ravenouslyhungry often dehydration.The retainedfood enlarged infants stomach left and upper early peristaltic the A pylorus (the may “olive”) palpated. hypertrophied be child As thinner pass to becomes feeding pylorus, of and illness progressively able is the little the the each and through moredehydrated. progresses,very

Available @ StudentConsult.com

classic acid; secondary hypochloremic, dehydration. gastric results inloss urea Repetitive contents is (BUN) purely hydrochloric vomiting of to elevated hypokalemic of finding metabolic a laboratory alkalosis with the nitrogen blood occur. Jaundice hyperbilirubinemia may unconjugated with also the stomach x-rays gas or huge absent Plain show typically in and a abdominal diminished intestine(Fig. 128-4). (Fig. shows and thickening of examination elongation marked pylorus the Ultrasound 128-5). GI “string a sign” this doubt an diagnosis series A be exists; constricted bybarium whenever obtained caused through also shows elongated, pyloricchannel. moving aboutthe may bariumupper

stenosis. 128-4 Pyloric Figure down-stream. stomach huge, with minimal the intestine in across the extending air gas-filled midline, the Note Bishop, Warren MD.) (Courtesy

infant image pyloric steno-sis. Figure Ultrasound 128-5 of with fluid-filled is at thickened right, (S) pylorus. an elongated, Large, stomach with seen the length arrows. The pylorus by by thickness of the marked red wall is the marked yellow arrows; is the

Drugs aspirin use Bisphosphonates NSAIDs, including Potassium Tobacco supplements

drugs. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory NSAIDs,

by bolus and is followed generally fluid dextrose half-normal of and infusions observed. and dehydration stenosis be corrected, includes normal pyloric surgery, Treatment of salinefluid surgical whenurine followed potassium with IV initial resuscitation by 5% hypochloremic electrolyte pyloromyotomy.Before an alkalosismust salinecontaining output chloride by In longitudinally muscle pyloromyotomy (often pyloric constriction. the torelease is incised the laparoscope), into not the itself. taken mucosa Care cut is to

can in Acid-related the injury esophagus, occur duodenum. or stomach, 128-2 lists peptic factors ulcer in children. disease for Table risk stomach in and of adults. for Helicobacter in is more responsible ulcers duodenum thanhalf pylori the lesser but a pyloriplays H. significant disease. role ulcer in childhood developing highest Riskfactors the in poor acquisition H. socioeconomic of low and status incidence for countries. pylori with sanitation, are upper early bloating, gastric duodenal the dyspepsia abdominalsymptoms or includes absenceof nausea, Nonulcer satiety) (pain, ulceration. in dyspepsia Nonulcer is pylori not associated infection. with H. gastric injure allows to contents Chapter acidic 128) esophagitis. esophagus, resultingin the GER (see Esophagitis is characterized is diagnosed and burning by retrosternal pain by endoscopy. andepigastric best on ulceration. erosions microscopicinflammation minimal, and range to and from erythema tofrank biopsy, Itcan with only finally superficial

are 128-3. listed in symptoms Table Typical and esophagitis. epigastric The presenceof recurrent factor is arisk retrosternal burning for pain often after With several ulcers, meals at night. occurs pain typically awakenspatients duodenal and hours to relieve the pain. Eating tends that differ by pain commonly aggravated is Gastriculcers in eating,

SYNDROME Clinical ASSOCIATED Investigation AND Symptoms, SYMPTOMS CLINICAL Table INVESTIGATION 128-3 and Peptic Disorders, ESOPHAGITIS

Retrosternal pH location Dysphagia, acid-blocker therapy study probe Burning odynophagia of pain trial regurgitation Endoscopy epigastric Therapeutic of Sensation and

series Nausea abdominal GI of Upper acid-blocker Therapeutic location of Fullness ligament to Endoscopy Bloating therapy Upper trial

anemia abdominal Weight ESR, symptoms Treitz—rule lipase, Helicobacter dyspepsia CBC, symptoms—same for Nocturnal out symptoms heme-positive Other for nonulcer ultrasound pain Melena, Endoscopy—mandatory with and “Alarm” abdominal Chronic lipase, ultrasound Microcytic vomiting Hematemesis pylori Test ESR, as esophagitis amylase, alarm stools CBC, loss amylase, malrotation

erythrocyte rate; CBC, GI, Complete ESR, count; blood gastrointestinal. sedimentation

in resulting weight loss. antacids or symptom with report GI relief acidblockers. occur.Many bleeding either patients from can

underlying H2 but conditions be with delay pylori. pump condition.Empiric may the inhibitorscan diagnose used diagnosis can be as proton to therapy blockers of used such H. Endoscopy or anatomic recommended studies). the with Chapter126 128-3 appropriate and should disease out biliary malrotation, (see pancreatitis, For of by epigastric suspected patients inflammatory beruled possibilities Table for as pain, bowel when testing abnormalitysuch chronic disease, and urease performed biopsy H. tissue. can during or for histologically with endoscopy a on be Testing presence by pylori test useof tests breath with not fecal (urea can noninvasive antigen If by endoscopyis and 13C infection tests for be into the H. 13CO2 accuracy organism). done done, with urea reasonable metabolized pylori is

should is given H. as 2 ulcers, it 1 in treated with to If such with daily regimen, association or multidrug a present omeprazole-amoxicillin-metronidazole, be omeprazole-amoxicillin-clarithromycin, for twice weeks. pylori omeprazole-clarithromycin-metronidazole, Other substituted may necessary. when inhibitors proton-pump be compounds pylori can Bismuth against be are and effective H. considered. toxicity. raises which about syndrome of use is the North and concerns some In potential the Reye salt only subsalicylate salicylate available, America, children in avoided years less 8 than but be adults, useful in of Tetracycline is age. should inhibitor, H2 pro-ton-pump higher treated healing the yields are rates antagonists. receptor and ulcer which pylori, absence of esophagitis than H. a disease of peptic with In patients. 4 8 weeks and in least at 80% heal ulcers duodenal of in Gastric to requires of 4 Esophagitis to months optimal proton-pump for healing. treatment 5 inhibitor

StudentConsult.com Available @

syndrome vomiting and with presents between. (CVS) prolonged intermittentepisodes with periods vomiting of in ofhealth Cyclic nausea is school-age It at age can any to children. occur but frequently preschool in diagnosedmost positive family migraine some variant; be have many willeventually develop to with patients a It migraine headaches. and a isthought of history CVS migraines, events(holidays, episode include stressful physical exhaustion, often menses. illnesses, an exciting or to vacations), Triggers and viral birthdays,

in time, any hours. Episodes will often start but start can theearly at morning to each other duration. timing are and similar in Episodes todays. Repetitive can last vomiting hours pain, also can abdominal diarrhea, have andheadaches. Patients are be listless, alone. andprefer Those pale, to typically affected left phonophobia. may They have photoor

no UPJ disorders.Diagnoses of and metabolic other diagnosedbased for and intracranial should be are exclusion the There on that considered specific history include CVS, lesions, which intermittent obstruction, tests eosinophilicesophagitis, and volvulus, the malrotationwith mass is disorders. III are outlined for criteria inTable 126-5. Rome diagnosis

antiemetics For supportive as treatment the episode, such ondansetron. acute includes and hydration; quiet environment; dark, triptans such abortive and be NSAIDs antimigraine used. addition, using In medications as can therapy blockers, prolonged antidepressants, with cyproheptadine, those can or beta For therapy such episodes, used, frequent be topiramate. or as tricyclic prophylactic

midgut loops During to attached life, sacand early the the into cord. umbilical fetal yolk outward is the the superior of artery behind Beginning cecum 10 rotates lower reenters until ligament the quadrant.The mesentericartery gestation, terminates rotates around in abdomenand the left the right upper the Treitz quadrant. the the duodenum bowel arrives weeks’ and atthe in counterclockwise ataround broad mesentery attachmentposteriorly, becomes running the the cecum to fixed a ligament the Treitz The from baseof of along (Fig. 129-1A). present. “malrotation” rotation or When is otherwiseabnormal, incomplete is root mesenteric fails the an extremely to behind in the and when move the narrow artery; cecum stops Incomplete the rotationoccurs (see quadrant, near duodenum results mesenteric upper Fig. right this volvulus, mid-gut makes that (Fig. obstruction intestinal and infarction to occlusion the causing or 129-1B) intestinal susceptible child mesentericartery 129-2). is attachments (Laddbands) from partial cecum duodenum,causing also extend the obstruction. across It to abnormal mesenteric the for common

StudentConsult.com @ Available

vomiting About 40% childhood.The month later volvulus. during malrotation with be present first withsymptoms or to bandswithout initially obstruction emesis present 60% by remaining of children of life.The infancy may the bilious Ladd in due of and the the occurs, of child undergoes congestion often septic. ischemia, pain, and in venousdrainage is gut bloody bowel stools.The mayappear and midgut emesis When impaired; the volvulus necrosis, ischemic results tenderness, in abdominal be with or must pain. ofvolvulus patients to Physicians vomiting fussiness the possibility alert and

abdominal of show obstruction. evidence generally Plain x-rays may evidence show ultrasound malrotation. Abdominal of shows with gastrointestinal instead “C-loop,” a the side right the duodenal absence of the on duodenum abdomen. series An the upper of typical (GI) remaining on follow-through (or confirms cecum of by diagnosis. placement the the Abnormal enema) contrast showing dehydration, Laboratory loss, are of or evidence electrolyte nonspecific, studies evidence

rotation of the 129-1 midgut. Normal Figure A, the long axis attachment Note (line). of mesenteric Midgut B, malrotation. to the from elevated Ladd predisposes abnormally Note which narrow the presence across duodenum cecum. mesentery, extending and the the bands volvulus, of Childhood, editor: Luxembourg, WJ, Surgery 43/6, and Abdominal of Harwood 43/8.) pp 1996, Infancy (From Academic, Donellan

volvulus. 129-2 with Figure Malrotation twisted of Midgut the darker, visible. ischemic mesentery, around intestine area is an with

(Courtesy MD.) Soper, Robert sepsis. of a is common A indicator ischemia. bowel count platelet decreasing of

in postoperative risk volvulus. tend in a adhesions hold but in mesentery place, to recurrent of attachment the and eliminating broad the resulting position, results Necrotic bowel times, at syndrome. short is resected gut and, in

Available @ StudentConsult.com

complete of Congenital partial the defect births. in about developmental 1500 in or that live is blockage a 1 occurs intestine forms (Fig. several occurs in Atresia 129-3). may missing cord-like by of in bowel of or caused lumen theremay of ormore completely, webs orstenosis, the be degrees be may be obstruction One bowel segments remnants. there obliteration varying obstruction result The is with end

Treatment is surgical. bands bowel membranous Ladd divided. is The abnormal and other attachments are untwisted, and is against the the and the the by abdomen moving cecum mesentery out the leftside wall spread abdomen. to flattened posterior of The of Sutures be intestinedistally. hold bowel of and used upstream the to small, may disused bowel the dilation distention When and thenewborn obstruction or grade, period. high present in abdominal are bilious is complete vomiting and In obstruction webs, aremore lesser symptoms “windsock” the is cases, of as partial, types intestinal in subtle.

bilious period. distention polyhydramnios, abdominal Intestinal neonatal and presents history atresia in a of with vomiting the and sepsis perforation If develop. may present, peritonitis intestinal is

peritonitis. Plain localize free area meconium atresia evidence such typical abdominal air of the x-rays perforation, of as or calcifications may of andidentify sign no (gas proximal Duodenal as atresiaappears in a andenlarged duodenum), stomach double-bubble distally. the gas with bowel. distal are intestine the Atresiasof longer by segments ofdilated, air-filled characterized are sufficient. studies if not plainfilms are helpful Contrast fibrosis. complication may with be Atresia cystic ileus ofmeconium associated a atresia. indicatedin bowel for fibrosis of is 137) (see Laboratory Chapter cases small cystic evaluation bemeasured and dehydration, liver count, electrolytes, amylase othercomplications. serum blood and A to functions, complete pancreatitis, identify should

be stabilization intestinal but of patient. hemodynamic The adequate surgery by treatment preceded of is atresia surgical, must the and should broad-spectrum given. nasogastric (IV) antibiotics fluids, suction, Intravenous be

of atresia. Types intestinal 129-3 Figure proximal Cordlike a connecting with E, distal D, V-shaped atresia atresias. Internal bowel marginal peel” remnant spiraling mesenteric A, B, “Apple Multiple around defect; Interrupted web; bowel; C, artery; and surviving with bowel (From J on JL, management intestinal atresia 1979.) Ballantine R: Operative of TVN, Surg Shoemaker Grosfeld findings, based pathologic 14:368–375, Pediatr

Gastroschisis contents defect, abdominal herniated. not intestinal the through an involving is have which wall umbilicus, to In bowel amniotic peritoneum not is omphalocele, contrast or the membrane. by covered exposed the typically (a result, a amniotic As the covering with “peel”) exudative contact prolonged bowel. causes a thick, fluid on Gastroschisis atresia associated but segments is anomalies, common. with not are of intestinal extraintestinal requires atretic for a defect, syndrome) After long slow reduction prolonged surgical bowel function with segments peel. infants and be may infants return of the and parenteral nutrition of bowel normal with (short thick

to abdominal caused return the abdomen through during intestine life. defect Omphalocele the is an failure of the fetal to wall umbilicus by the amniotic remains is bowel and within membranes. umbilicalcord and The by peritoneum covered complications. syndrome, associated and is cardiac with defects, This Beckwith-Wiedemann especially congenital other defect anomalies, intestinal Treatment performed fit surgical whichsometimes in stages the to cavity. into must closure, acongenitally is bowel abdominal small be

of normal defects imperforate including a anus embryologic are and malformations, at birthby opening. anal the its Anorectal absence variants, recognized urethra observation perineum. emergence should or Evaluation the theseinfants of fistulas of from include for on meconium the is opening fistulous present.In a A distention the lesions, urinary placed present that low drains if be perineum. on meconium is urinarycatheter should and lesions fistulization vagina,or commonly the bladder, Low urethra. are bowel with between associated defectand the a level fistula. x-rays gas the bladder the plain by show Lateral caused of in show flow, reconstruction. a with is subsequentanogenital divert to fecal the treatment colostomy Initial and afterrepair achieve. lesions, difficult to high sphincter functionally muscleis internal continence The is in absent high incidence require because All tetheredspinal children spinal of imaging cord. with resonance of imperforateanus (MRI) lumbosacral the of cord magnetic Urologic common dysfunction beevaluated. and should is

bowel during to life. ganglion migrate defect is distal a caused into disease the fetal by precursors of motility cell Hirschsprung failure is functionally normal obstructedsecondary motility distal aganglionic spasm. to and exhibit The doesnot segment involved 75% total 8%. In of rectosigmoid; involvement limited segmentis colonic seen to the cases, is the in of also segments long small bowel are Rarely, aganglionic. of distal centimeters few rectum. “Ultrashort” a only involves segment spontaneously normal infantswith by 95% Hirschsprung 24 hours disease stool of 95% About of infants age; pass not. do of distalbowel distention with obstruction vomiting. bilious and Symptoms of occur enterocolitis quickly, not is diagnosis associated result, mortality. of the rate If with high can a made one studies. more Diagnosis on examination and isbased diagnostic or present in most is distention Abdominal cases. an elongatedsphincter. reveals Digital aroundthe impression giving of examiner’s the rectum empty finger, rectalexamination an that clenches is stool expelled. When a finger the ofretained powerful gush is withdrawn, often using surgically required obtained suction rectal by is diagnosis. for or A specimen biopsy deep a biopsy instrument areshown in plexus, by trunk no hyperplasia, When nerve submucosal the the is certain. cells diagnosis accompanied ganglion Barium results anorectal may false-positive enema occur. manometry can used and before butfalse-negative be and biopsy, is surgical. Therapy colostomy of segment, performed abovethe aganglionic usually markedly repair orinflamed, is definitive distended is later bowel an several When one procedures. by weeks the initial followed without primary the transanal a The bowel laparotomy. aganglionic and anastomosis pull-throughexcises creates colorectal beconsidered the with in involvement uncomplicated limited patients procedure This region. to can rectosigmoid

omphalomesenteric the distal 1% ileumpresent in outpouching of 2% duct and remnant to of population. fetal an the of a the diverticulum Meckel is is massive, are bleeding. cause painless most GI diverticula some life, asymptomatic throughout Although within the thediverticulum tissue Ectopic in gastric causes mucosa of adjacentileum. ulceration enable lead twisting for vascular neighboring may around intussusception Meckel be a of point diverticulum its may or supply. (volvulus) bowel mimicsappendicitis. Diverticulitis made the labels scan), (Meckel most scan technetium be in which acid-producingmucosa. Diagnosis cases by may diverticula capsule not endoscopy barium ultrasound, may are enteroclysis, all Because or seen, video beuseful. surgical is laparoscopic high, level warranted. suspicion When the of or investigation is excision. treatment is The surgical

Available StudentConsult.com @

peak children in in The decadeof incidence IBD the life. of is second part which colon. ulcerative any (CD), of (UC), the which colitis only Crohn’s affects disease the and includes IBD gut, can involve reasons especiallyin for countries, that IBD unclear. are is industrialized incidence increasing, The of is and uncommon World IBD Third tropical countries. in Jewish in populations. more is It ethnic in other common than IBD. of significantly with a Geneticfactors history higher riskif in susceptibility, play role there a family is 30-fold. relative increases risk the first-degree a about IBD Having with loci linked to linkage susceptibility and several Susceptibilityhas some multiple subtypes, analysishas HLA been chromosomes. on other identified often there identified) factors is role also Environmental a because yet (not twins. play amongmonozygotic seemto nonconcordance viral inflammatory can that infections possible It is the initiate process. CD and risk for UC. Dietary the the halves risk triggers unproven.Smoking doubles of are

involvement. depend on region of the Clinical manifestations colon, entire anus. the the to whereas UC only from gut mouth CD involves include can of defecation. tenesmus, and the blood, and from results stool; diarrhea, condition sensation in urgency; Colitis after incomplete either mucus emptying a in colitis from sleep the is awakens to often pass When child stool. severe, is pain, losses. Toxic distention fecal colon, megacolon dilated low massively protein life-threatening albumin complication owing characterized fever, anemia, and and to by a abdominal serum early diagnosis in of Symptoms the usually and its in always suggest present course. colitis are UC occur include cholangitis, in arthritis, primary uveitis, pyoderma sclerosing (Table 129-1). may gangrenosum patients few of Extraintestinal a UC manifestations and and

subtle can Symptoms in CD. be CD involvement is with in associated anemia, growth, of pain, lethargy. and delayed fever, bowel poor puberty, postprandial appetite, crampy Small loss be is may Some time the diagnosis some for symptoms before present made. cause CD partial obstruction. bowel small may or complete with Severe fibrosis are another including abnormalities, UC. tags fistulas, from skin and distinguishing CD Perineal feature erythema or of arthritis, manifestations uveitis iritis. extraintestinal nodosum, include CD Other and

rate, and albumin,erythrocyte blood count, tests sedimentation include 129-2). C-reactive Blood complete should protein(Table elevated typical. counts Anemia and are platelet IBD discriminating Testing and of in diagnosing antibodies the be serum for abnormal CD UC. helpfulin colitis between and can UC about cytoplasmic found and antibody only in few Antineutrophil a patients in of 66% is CD

Abdominal Erythema None disease Rare Crohn’s Osteopenia nodosum Rare Mouth ulceration Common Greatly Intestinal Usual weight Variable Rectal Unusual Common Common Usual Common pain Common mass Crypt Yes common in fever, Common rare lesions at cancer, Autoimmune Yes Very Malaise, present lymphoma cholangiocarcinoma, Common of involvement Risk Rare No Transmural cholangitis abscesses present Strictures Common Abdominal Common Rare cancer* Perianal Skip Rarely disease. onset bleeding Usual Not ileitis) Sometimes Increased Sclerosing Not Common *Colonic (backwash granulomas Less Rare Common Common Yes hepatitis Involvement increased Common Ileal present loss Fistula

cases. presentin antibody CD of and cerevisiae UC. patients is is about in uncommon Anti–Saccharomyces 50% against flagellin,among directed and are and MoreIBD-specific coli others. protein, directed include an membrane antibodies anti-CBir1, bacterial Escherichia being against anti-OmpC, developed there between Because the of overlap none is absolutely two between these and CD UC, discriminate tests can conditions.

with detect often series suspected bowel is GI follow-through upper bowel In with an patients small used IBD, small involvement. to because contrast biopsy enemabecause over be can diagnostic. Colonoscopy specimens and can visualfeatures is obtained be preferred folds. tiny in Findings haustral entire and carpeting UC of the diffuse or include loss with colon of ulcers distal arepresent. involved the skip Within areas segment, no or tend skip areas be usually aphthous linear,branching, are ulcerations much larger CD, a with present. appearance; to In identifying than is the endoscopy and Upper jejunum proximalCD studies sensitive involvement. contrast more ileum,but cannot in evaluate and bowel capsule methods well good computed which MR include noradiation active for the of enterography, which advantage as involvement bowel (CT) has bowel scanning, disease. disease sensitivity detect finding as to small tomography Other small can detect abscesses; endoscopy; and video

(5-ASA) which acid UC aminosalicylate deliver treated with 5-aminosalicylic to the the distal drugs, gut. is Because is it

patients patients, but May Found and IBD platelets rare be of CD in suggest CBC UC Anemia, patients and patients in but 50% WBC Elevated few IBD Bir1 IBD patients many, about in in about Anti-C patients Elevated p-ANCA in due many, UC fecal all, CD Found patients Anti-OmpC most CD not 50% in in IBD not Atypical Found and of in protein differential to Found ESR CD Albumin some C-reactive loss UC with non-IBD low ASCA patients elevated few all,

GI series SBFT with jejunal for Evaluate ileal Upper and CD

abscess, scan CT Used small to involvement bowel detect

determining in Sometimes extent of scan WBC disease Tagged helpful

Enterography Magnetic Used as and Resonance as strictures bowel thickening, to well detect inflammation,

endoscopy duodenum; tissue Upper stomach, obtain histologic Evaluate CD of esophagus, for and diagnosis for

or ileal tissue Colonoscopy terminal obtain presence colitis and histology Show of absence CD; for

sensitive with diagnosis of in Emerging CD, series Capsule SBFT Video small upper than bowel more GI endoscopy role

anti– C; ASCA, membrane Anti-OmpC, Antibody protein outer to

antineutrophil SBFT, bowel CD, white ESR, atypical cell. erythrocyte CBC, staining blood Saccharomyces atypical IBD, through; p-ANCA, antibody; gastrointestinal; WBC, inflammatory antibody; sedimentation GI, disease; small disease; blood by follow- complete bowel cerevisiae cytoplasmic Crohn’s count; perinuclear rate;

coated specially the pure effective in must be suppository taken be colon. capsules 5-ASA or a to absorbed, or (mesalamine) in as packaged pills rapidly molecule. 5-ASA covalently to (sulfasalazine, linked Other and aminosalicylates olsalazine, balsalazide) use carrier a common. are its sulfapyridine expensive, effects is side component from but the least Sulfasalazine resulting alone control required be to induce therapy disease, steroid When remission. may cannot the aminosalicylates not therapy. used for Whenever long-term steroids be possible, should drug, azathioprine, or steroid use immunosuppressive in such cases. spare to as An is difficult useful excessive 6-mercaptopurine necrosis potent used (TNF) immunosuppressives, as other fail. treatments be as factor agents therapy as such infliximab anti–tumor when such or rescue may More cyclosporine severe Surgical end to is UC. or for chronic in the unresponsive which anastomosis to colectomy with risk cancer, reduce symptoms patients colon option is ileoanal an with disease and electively of increased

more less well responds IV remission. Inflammation are steroids typically in inducing to or important aminosalicylates; oral in CD 6-mercaptopurine, for are avoid after often soon azathioprine diagnosis. started need steroid repetitive drugs, usually the or immunosuppressive therapy, To either is with that control subcutaneous action difficult block TNF-α. agents that or may be of to the treated methotrexate CD also with effective most the drug such given is Infliximab intravenously. and is Other as blood also or cell natalizumab, white that migration such (WBC) action, promise. show inhibit antibodies of symptoms. usually surgery abscess, As or severe, necessary, unremitting with because is sometimes symptoms, obstructive UC, limited, use length must minimized. be the curative surgery not of resection be its must bowel in Because is and CD,

Celiac the and of component)from gluten wheat, protein small ingestion disease an intestine injury caused of to the mucosa the (a is grains. barley, by rye, related contaminated by other Rice grains. eaten can not special purepreparations and does gluten oats be can of freely, notcontain as form, disease malabsorption celiac In and causes malnutrition. itssevere of presence on by typicalsymptoms, was based followed bowel Diagnosis small biopsy. the or with attenuated, sensitive symptoms no disease. few has availabilityof serologic or early, more and whohave revealedmany The testing specific patients gastrointestinal latent proportion but United persons diagnosed. have Approximately in the States in110 disease, small been celiac 1 onlya have disease syndrome, type 1 association seenin is Turner thyroiditis, and The trisomy with diabetes, 21.

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Failure Thrive Diarrhea Pubertal Delay to

given. can begin any are age Symptoms gluten-containingfoods when at hypoproteinemia Diarrhea, decreased are by caused failure ascites classic. appetite, thrive,irritability, and to abdominal bloating, be malnourished. symptomaticor be may may minimally Children severely a fewpatients, found intake. because of in is probably Constipation reduced careful child’s of fat reducedsubcutaneous inspection and the curve A crucial. abdominal are distention and evaluation for growth child be complaints. any with should in abdominal chronic disease Celiac considered nodosum. erythema seizures/encephalopathy,dermatitis osteoporosis, manifestations Extraintestinal hemorrhage, and include pulmonary herpetiformis,

Serologic include IgA tissue markers antiendomysial IgA and antibody. antibody transglutaminase of measured must Because be disease, total to serum the accuracy these iscommon IgA deficiency document tests. IgA celiac also in sensitivity yields ofIgA and test absence a specificity deficiency, the In of95%. either confirm is biopsy small endoscopic is to and diagnosis stilltaking the the performed be gluten. while bowel essential should patient An intraepitheliallymphocytes. shows villi), increased atrophy ofvillous numbers degrees and of biopsy or mucosal inflammation,crypt absent specimen The hyperplasia, various (short any biopsy a When be later. is repeat severalmonths response specimen question obtained may there about totreatment, complications, blood studies torule including be complete calcium, performed vitamin Other tests. should total laboratory and protein liver D, iron, albumin,and function count, phosphate, out transaminases dietary with of are the Mild therapy. normalize elevations common should and

from gluten consists of of diet. Treatment elimination complete the is dietitian membership celiac support is disease with experienced celiac Consultation group. as a disease in helpful, a in patients Lists use. that are particularly of prepared hidden important to for foods gluten contain tapioca, (pure) safe include buckwheat, oats. foods that soy, Starchy and rice, are potatoes, to that the diet also help cope large Many are available via Internet with changes are required. in families the resources within appetite, with of improved sense and gain, few improved respond weeks weight a patients well-being. Most clinically several requiring to lags months behind Histologic normalize. response, improvement clinical

SEE 34. CHAPTER

segment “telescoping” proximalbowel bowel of of is (the downstream a into Intussusception (the intussusceptum) intussuscipiens). the in old; nearly years are 1 age idiopathic. 2 all this in infants cases cases group, Most occur to may these lead a Viral-induced lymphoidhyperplasia point produce in children. the of by a caused proportion In increases. olderchildren, leadpoint pathologic cases ileocecal beginning children, valve. colon, ileocolonic the common; invaginates intussusceptionis into at young the In ileum ornear the lead ileoileal, present,the jejunojejunal. are be points pathologic may intussusception or When jejunoileal,

Available StudentConsult.com @

with a every with pattern minutes. infant draw occurring abdominal and pain; of An pallor to intussusception cries knees exhibits colicky out 20 has up, 15 sudden infant’s onset the crampy the and infant Feedings are refused. vomiting prominent, bilious As pressure and less generates intussusception and intestine obstruction pain. the progresses, dilated, becomes and less the prolonged, fatigued becomes further stretched motility, As bowel the becomes it compressed. by and and intestine and is intussuscepted with the mesentery pulled further into the is downstream pulled congestion to the venous intussusceptum leading from with outflow and edema, obstructed, The fluid, weeping of bleeding. is losses Third “currant and stools jelly” fluid space result. lethargy. intussusception feature of Another unexpected is pain, to Between appears is been the and glassy-eyed groggy have infant and episodes sedated. of epigastrium. or quadrant right caused may be in bowel sausage-shaped swollen, palpable mass by intussuscepted A upper the the

on depends the diagnosis direct bowelwithin-bowel. of The demonstration abdominalultrasound. way A by simple showing this of is indicated. the visualization good positive, is or if or been has a is enemaunder If not contrast ultrasound fluoroscopy pneumatic achieved, potentially a intussusception. identify useful wayto treat and is both This and it reduce usually withcontrolled the when barium pressure, canshow Air completely. and, quickly intussusception can administered a bit present reduction symptoms higher for than thanhydrostatic if The and been with is barium hours. probably pneumatic less rate approaches success 24 reduction donewhen have 90% for having barium has enema subsequent if riskof advantages the preventing radiologic peritonitis occurs. and studies additional perforation ofnot Thepneumatic causing over barium no if perforation or pre-existing should is be peritonitis. attempted of reduction patient the has evidence Nonoperative not unstableor

an begin with placement must of and nasogastric a tube. Therapy IV catheter often by to the fluid losses. the adequate caused severe and intervention vomiting must dehydration have third correct is space radiologic attempted, child resuscitation Before Ultrasound resuscitation is fluid the before may be performed complete. be early during to prefer surgeon reduction. consultation obtained as should Surgical may the present be nonoperative of is possible should If hospital admitted or child for be the overnight 5% observation recurrence to is 10%). reduction (risk pneumatic to hydrostatic the successful, reduction is required. emergency complete, surgery is If not involved bowel reduction lead the necrosis. perforation, pathologic of radiologic gentle a point attempts need because (polyp, or surgeon edema, The after manual diverticulum), may Meckel to but severe failed reduction resect

Appendicitis is in the surgical childhood. emergency most common with between 10 appendicitis years. peak prevalence the varies the and age ages by 12 of of The age the is 5. under less of much It in children common with hyperplasia obstruction of appendiceal of (fecalith), with Appendicitis also most to begins commonly or matter associated by as can tissue, infections neoplastic of secondary the the lymphoid but fecal tissue appendiceal occur, lumen, an obstruction viral tumor. carcinoid rarely presence such secretion. inflammation and begin appendiceal to the proliferate Trapped inducing wall, bacteria invade and becomes supply and compromised, blood finally obstructed is it engorged, ruptures. The appendix its rapid, with appendiceal 48 symptoms. the of is rupture of The entire usually process onset hours within occurring

@ Available StudentConsult.com

visceral region. periumbilical localized Classic with the begins appendicitis to pain, vomiting triggered after, Nausea soon and by occur appendiceal the distention. to peritoneum As localizes begins the the right inflammation irritate the quadrant. fibers are activated, to the parietal to pain appendix, lower adjacent the and somatic pain quadrant. of right patient reveals Examination lower the tender a and guarding Voluntary to tenderness present with rupture then initially, to is rebound progressing rigidity, peritonitis. retrocecal, omentum, may not children by or present, covered the location. or classic another appendix especially if These findings is be young in unusual in been have Clinical appendicitis. developed prediction diagnosis of the for rules 2 at right pain, each quadrant Alvarado/MANTRELS quadrant, rebound the anorexia, to neutrophils; 10,000/μL. least than shift of tenderness given scored temperature pain of the points rule migration right WBC greater lower by following: 37.3°C, nausea/vomiting, lower 75% of in greater the The are leukocytosis of than and 1 and is for point for each to with of are patient increases a 7 less or appendicitis; has greater that the the unlikely Children to or score appendicitis. a likelihood of have 4 score patient the is to physical the examination classic room. present, findings and history When are operating taken abscess, to helpful lower as quadrant tube disorders. disorders, exists, imaging disease) (right complications mesenteric and adenitis liver doubt out ovarian and other fallopian or is such When rule close If be negative child examinations. is hospital to some and doubt serial and observation remains, the the admitted evaluation for the should

are to when are is 129-3). uncertain (Table examination helpful make enough diagnosis, often history The imaging studies but and diagnosis laboratory and the the and found appendicitis 89% greater 93% A WBC with in with than count perforated patients 10,000/mm3 is of appendicitis. appendicitis. abdominal This by met 62% criterion of is patients without pain rule tract and of x-rays (KUB) to rule the or is the chest and bladder infection, urinary done ureter, out Urinalysis kidney,

and radiographs AST, ALT, GGT Flat lipase Urinalysis and (KUB) CBC with differential upright abdominal Amylase

CT abdomen scan ultrasound Abdominal of

computed complete AST, aminotransferase; ALT, CT, GGT, ureter, tomography; Alanine bladder. count; γ-glutamyltransferase; CBC, blood aspartate aminotransferase; KUB, kidney, *Perform doubt. remains diagnosis in when

masquerading lower pain. abdominal out as pneumonia lobe liver lipase, or and to disease. Amylase, and are look liver done gallbladder for pancreatic enzymes calcified plain suggests abdominal The strongly a the fecalith, reveal which may x-ray diagnosis. scan, the an CT of When inconclusive, with may imaging surrounding these ultrasound enlarged, an or studies abdominal are reveal is presence indicated fluid. appendix with thick-walled which is more diameter mm 6 than A of considered diagnostic.

is appendicitis surgical. of Treatment appendectomy perforation. iscurative performed Simple if before required. With IV perforation, a is course postoperative antibiotics of cover the flora. to bowel mixed is necessary Broad-spectrumcoverage

is bilirubin as by elevation conjugated, flow is and direct, characterized fraction. defined the Cholestasis or reduced of bile be elevated jaundice, must Chapter This distinguished the (see neonatal bilirubin condition from ordinary in 62). never which direct is the production function which hepatocellular excretory Neonatal of unconjugated is hemolysis, to or that increases the secondary immature of bilirubin. is jaundice result hyperbilirubinemia is be must direct disorders many considered serious elevated, When bilirubin potentially (Fig. 130-1). lethal as metabolic or galactosemia must be potentially imminently especially treatable diagnosis disorders, such rapid placed on disorders, and of atresia biliary Emphasis and tyrosinemia. the

Available @ StudentConsult.com

is atresia immediately develops two The first usually in birth, evident the at extrahepatic (biliary but biliary of or atresia) of week not life. jaundice inflammatory extrahepatic ducts but bile then that an birth, process. idiopathic destroyed at The are is are reason by present usually do from Aside initially appear jaundice, ill. infants not these symptoms by gain rapidly hypertension with progresses of injury and a wasting, to portal weight liver are The of muscle evident splenomegaly, ascites, age. cirrhosis; poor months few by failure successfully surgical early liver progression the drainage course is not months), in is to performed (ideally 2 inevitable. If

infantwith Neonatal liver hepatitis characterized enlarged is and an jaundice. an ill-appearing by diagnostic is There specific no test. biopsy presence of the liver is If cells performed, hepatocytegiant characteristic. is and must out. syphilis be simplexvirus, Cytomegalovirus, herpes ruled with intestine. uptake shows Hepatobiliary into slow hepatic typically isotope the eventual excretionof scintigraphy These infants resolution occurring spontaneous good prognosis most. have with overall, a in

deficiency clinical hepatitis. neonatal presents findings α1-Antitrypsin with indistinguishable from Only 10% about of defect all infants exhibit cholestasis. with 20% genetic to the neonatal chronic disease, infants, which to failure. and about 20% these in Of liver 30% develop cirrhosis liver result may affected only to 5% affected pediatric deficiency occurs α1-antitrypsin of in patients. 3% Life-threatening leading disorder metabolic deficiency requiring is transplantation. liver α1-Antitrypsin the

syndrome finding liver in unique ducts is Alagille characterized biopsy chronic with triads. by bile of cholestasis the of the portal paucity Associated forehead, limbus some stenosis prominent anomalies; unusual butterfly with or include pulmonic chin; defect of a facies a (posterior deep-set in the types hypertelorism; embryotoxon). and vertebrae; cardiac eyes, (syndromic) pointed abnormalities and other peripheral ocular is associated Cholestasis is pruritus. severe variable lifelong hypercholesterolemia but with and and usually Progression disease end-stage liver to uncommon. is pruritus. performed transplantation and severe is uncontrollable sometimes to electively relieve Liver

a neonate jaundice approach is diagnosis laboratory Table in cholestatic The of presented with 130-1. to may Noninvasive aid diagnosis. rapid studies a that imaging performed for are anatomic evaluate other may and lesions biliary surgically obstruction Early be studies to treatable. rule or to obtain atresia out liver final a biliary to biopsy is (Fig. necessary information, When prognostic option 130-2).

duct biliary the is atresia Treatment the in extrahepatic surgical Kasai bile extrahepatic of which remnant fibrotic procedure,

B, RBC defect milk the Breast Biliary Acetaminophen ducts benign nutrition Rh intrahepatic Nonsyndromic 6 disease hepatitis familial simplex newborn neonatal with Idiopathic test Autoimmune E, Wilson Cytomegalovirus virus Alagille Salicylates recurrent Epstein-Barr Familial bile D, deficiency) hepatitisABO lupus (G6PD Hepatitis Positive chronic 2, jaundice Gilbert Cholestasis Coombs enzyme Physiologic intrahepatic of 1, Negative parenteral Autoimmune, cholestasis Graft syndrome atresia and Hemoglobinopathy of Coombs G C, Herpes host A, Total paucity cholestasis test disease jaundice cholangitis Ethanol deficiency syndrome systemic Sclerosingincompatibility ˜1-Antitrypsin Progressive versus

jaundice Figure in Differential diagnosis 130-1 childhood. of blood cell. dehydrogenase; Glucose-6-phosphate RBC, G6PD, red

injury Hepatocellular AST, ALT

fatty long syndrome, acids disorders Zellweger peroxisomal Very chain

mass Caroli Abdominal disease ultrasound cyst, gallstones, lesion, Choledochal

biopsy Biliary atresia, idiopathic Percutaneous liver α1-antitrypsin cell giant hepatitis, deficiency

red CF, AST, γ-glutamyltransferase; aminotransferase; RBC, aminotransferase; fibrosis; aspartate cystic GGT, ALT, cell. blood Alanine

biliary Supportive biopsy Specific scan of Specific Evidence obstruction No Hepatobiliary (if or available), atresia evidence excretion Excretion diagnosis ultrasound Abdominal seen biliary No cyst bowel diagnosis No studies No into Surgery Laboratory Biliary lesions therapy biliary or of atresia Liver care

chart Flow 130-2 cholestasis. of Figure for neonatal evaluation

age is before jejunum.This tohave a replaced operation be performed and of success. best roux-en-Y the removed with chance of 3 loop must months of rate many low; require is success transplantation. the so, liver children Even causes affected Some cholestasis care. neonatal supportive are of dietarymanipulation metabolic (galactosemia) require or medication patients (tyrosinemia);all treatable by supplements K)and micelles. without containing vitamin whichcan be formula A, This (vitamins triglycerides, and absorbed salt–induced includesfat-soluble medium-chain bile E, D, improve as Choleretic may such conditions. ursodeoxycholic in acid, bileflow agents, some

SEE CHAPTER 113.

liver hepatic 130-2). includes absence neoplastic and hepatitis, 8 autoimmune failure with disease is viral chronic Fulminant within severe disease.Etiology symptoms, onset ischemia, hepatitis, disease, afterinitial as defined disorders, encephalopathy the weeks metabolic of liver toxins(Table of in liver

Available StudentConsult.com @

kidneys, immune nervous gut, vascular complex interactions failure a disorder liver, system (CNS), structures, and central among is with the function. Liver multisystem characterized Hepaticencephalopathy (Table by varying is 130-3). ofimpairment degrees early requires severity support. compromise Respiratory the of of ventilatory and occursas increases failure institution Hypoglycemia glycogenolysis and resulting be gluconeogenesis fromimpaired must prevented. occur. syndrome, Renal frank may hepatorenal renal is failure, impaired, and or function and output, content. azotemia, ischaracterized syndrome low by urine low urinesodium This develops regulation electrolytehomeostasis. fluid disordered hypoalbuminemia of secondary to and and Ascites of death. occurs risk cause and Increased may infection whereas thrombocytopenia. significant may hypertensionmay varices hemorrhage, portal Esophageal hypersplenism from cause produce

function. to used Coagulation followhepatic serum synthetic and tests are albumin blood tests These clotting confounded products byadministration of and factors. are administered abilityto be II, synthesize Vitamin liver’s X. VII, should K IX, factors the and maximize to partial serially monitoring centers and prothrombin In ofsynthetic factor time sensitive as measure time,many to thromboplastin addition V function. a index tests, serum Renal electrolytes, function

Tyrosinemia fructose Galactosemia transport chain Neonatal hemochromatosis Bile synthesis acid Electron intolerance oxidation acid of defects disorders fatty Hereditary Disorders

hypotension Congestive Shock, failure heart

followed. ammonia, B Adenovirus virus Coxsackievirus Herpes Hepatitis Parvovirus Echovirus and be should simplex counts, Cytomegalovirus Sepsis urinalysis also blood A, biopsy ascertain andestimate of the the and of liver the In of injury likelihood liver acute degree setting to recovery. indicated maybe failure, nature surgicalapproach. transjugular of be biopsy a or presence the coagulopathy, using done must In

center. the life-threatening care intensive this a must of out be unit carried management at complex condition, liver of and transplant nature an in Because is failure transplantation. Treatment liver therapy acute of the lifesaving is supportive; definitive liver are 130-4. in listed Supportive measures Table

age-appropriate reflexes Tremor, awake distractible commands children—irritable and fussy handwriting Agitated young and poor Obeys and and Alert Normal Infants

not but commands Hyperactive and Asterixis Combative Confused reflexes may lethargic inappropriate obey movements, or present euphoria Purposeful

pain but present Sleepy speech response to Hyperventilation Asterixis Motor Incoherent Hyperreflexic arousable Stuporous

Unresponsive respirations responds arousable Unconscious, Reflexes Pupil or response Irregular nonpurposefully hyperactive to not pain sluggish

support Efforts hepatic treat respiration, derangements, support minimize metabolic hypoglycemia, and renal are function. to made avoid encephalopathy,

in its and failure. complications, disease and of byprogressive is Chronic characterized hepatic thedevelopment cirrhosis by liver childhood conditions or may becongenital acquired. Causative disorders tyrosinemia,untreated and Major α1-antitrypsin disease congenital deficiency. galactosemia, to atresia, chronic leading biliary include Rifaximin if stage children, several autoimmune Enemas B hepatitis, yield IV Wilson III loose primary tube—start neomycin adjust day cystic hepatitis encephalopathy with nasogastric disease, or virus, via In or or sclerosing C 1-2 constipated ventilation older Mechanical if cholangitis, Lactulose to per stools dose mL/kg/day,

frozen frequently Fresh only coagulation required active monitor as Platelet studies Coagulopathy bleeding, if plasma transfusions

dextrose solution, ≥10% glucose with electrolytes IV supplied as Hypoglycemia appropriate

renal sodium (avoid intake intake adequate 50%-60% Ascites to central volume maintenance to 0.5-1 intravascular venous Restrict maintain to mEq/kg/day pressure Monitor failure) fluid Restrict

give volume, adequate choledochalcyst or low intravascular to and Exchange Renal obstruction causes. if fibrosis, Liver Diuretics hemofiltration failure are albumin Vasoconstrictors secondary Maintain Dialysis transplantation biliary transfusion leading

@ StudentConsult.com Available

disease cholestasis. by and liver hypertension, characterized consequences of function, hepatocellular portal Chronic impaired is the reduced of and cirrhosis gastrointestinal by blood in hypertension flow. caused Portal results hepatic ascites, risk bleeding, to previously tiny collateral diverted Blood splenic the in circulation and stomach, vein esophagus, portal liver, entering the is abdomen. bypasses the veins these from the that enlarging mesenteric and vessels Esophageal veins, but prone can particularly bleed, occur engorged mucosa, bleeding gastric and var-ices. are also varices from gastric to hemorrhoidal develops bacterial viscera of of Ascites often the is a ultrafiltrate surfaces as peritonitis); risk and result and respiration. from becoming with massive and a be of interfere weeping at infected (spontaneous of high-pressure can the comfort ascites patient increases platelets patient’s excessive to of secondary splenic vein the enlarges The bleeding susceptibility white spleen this outflow, cells; and blood to causing impaired infection. scavenging and

elevated albumin, vitamin function to is and coagulopathy hepatic ammonia, low with encephalopathy. hepatocellular unresponsive serum K, Impaired associated diversion The

complete count; cholangiopancreatography; ERCP, CBC, antigen. antigen; ALT, B CF, fibrosis; blood aspartate γ-glutamyltransferase; endoscopic cystic HBeAg, HBsAg, early hepatitis B surface Alanine GGT, aminotransferase; AST, retrograde hepatitis aminotransferase;

tests CF as α1-Antitrypsin Testing CF specific indicated serum for by Sweat other low level if Serum Serum gene if α1-antitrypsin ceruloplasmin phenotype suspected conditions chloride, level

RNA, DNA, HBeAg HBsAg Hepatitis Hepatitis antibody viral genotype antibody HBsAg if confirmatory Hepatitis test Hepatitis confirmed C viral B antibody if positive C if positive C

with and obtain Prothrombin thromboplastin information. partial anatomic CBC to time indicated count Serum time ammonia specific platelet *Perform when

via the blood collateral liver portal this circulation of process. worsens from away leading and consequences. Malaise to develops contributes to poor muscle nutrition, other wasting and

Chronic pruritus cholestasis causes and debilitating jaundice. deepening absorption bile contributes nutritional acids reduced fat-soluble vitamins, which calories and of The to of excretion state. poor the fat impairs bleeding. production increases impairs IX, vitamin and clotting the of factors Deficiency risk II, of X of and K VII, hematologic neurologic leads Vitamin corrected. consequences deficiency and E to unless

the studies of monitor Laboratory the and of illness to for specific the tests status include testing underlying patient. diagnosis liver (Table evidence presenting have of for standard disease first the time a with 130-5). should investigation chronic Children and alkaline at testing, tests, include γ-glutamyltransferase electrolytes coagulation Monitoring function blood count transaminases, and appropriate should phosphatase, intervals. count, complete renal platelet with tailored pace of the illness. should the of Frequency be patient’s to testing fluid count of have lower and be that serum. by culture cell to Ascites can than an albumin and infection for tested concentration generally found is

albumin or vessels* bile vessels* endoscopic Total resonance cholangiography* biopsy* of GGT, bile Liver Percutaneous cholesterol examination Serum ultrasound and phosphatase resonance of hepatic direct Serum cholylglycine angiography AST, Doppler Magnetic hepatic bilirubin of ALT, and liver ducts or Serum alkaline Ultrasound acids cholangiography* Magnetic

of and pancreas, tree liver, Ultrasound biliary

prognosis required diagnosis of evidence process or for magnetic biopsy—as biliary Consider Liver resonance if or cholangiography ERCP

time weight, level thromboplastin thickness time E Vitamin Vitamin 25-Hydroxyvitamin D level Prothrombin and skinfold after Height, before A and level partial

chronic is of disease complex. liver Treatment patientsis the in problems outlined these Supportive Table many each 130-6. in encountered carefor of a Ultimately, liver candidacy patient’s donor the on depends theavailability survival of transplantation. and for When transplantation can delayed,palliative such is as is portosystemic shunts, procedures, or beconsidered. possible not portosystemic The hepatic the placed an expandable portal transjugular and shuntis the vein the intrahepatic parenchyma. hepatic between abranch stent vein within of and using jugularvein Thisprocedure the via nonsurgical. entirely is is catheters inserted performed encephalopathy. hepatic of risk All shunts portosystemic carryincreased

Available StudentConsult.com @

therapy, portosystemic melena, bleeding* tests, Gastrointestinal or Somatostatin PROBLEM Table acid-blocker magnetic reduce to CLINICAL resonance of TREATMENT endoscopy Management transplant surgical propranolol shunt pressure, anemia band CBC, Doppler possible coagulation rectal Hematemesis, not TESTING or Liver infusion, TIPSS ligation Chronic MANIFESTATIONS 130-6 variceal ultrasound, sclerotherapy, portal (octreotide) variceal bleeding, angiography, DIAGNOSTIC if Disease

blood shunt; blood cell. WBC, CBC, white TIPSS, portosystemic intrahepatic transjugular count; Complete

ulcerations. also *May have peptic

characterized storage CNS hemolytic abnormal and dysfunction, to by Wilson in leading liver, copper disease anemia. of injury, hepatocellular is the an gene. is autosomal trait ATP7B by mutations caused recessive It the in protein gene The functions as an pump. ATP-driven of copper this encoded elevated identifying 24-hour excretion, copper hemolysis, hepatic iris, copper content. is by of rings diagnosis in the Kayser-Fleischer of evidence ceruloplasmin, The serum made elevated levels the of depressed urine presence and these measures one of any more single or patient, In be may normal. age before also varies, years. seldom Clinical but occurs presentation 3 performance, in and Neurologic school may handwriting, psychiatric disturbances. worsening decline predominate, abnormalities including tremor, first may noted be the Anemia symptom. consequences, presentations include its hypertension spider appearance Hepatic hepatic of portal fulminant jaundice, and and failure. hemangiomas, excretion Treatment consists copper-chelating or administration of of intervals. at monitoring with (penicillimine trientine), of drugs urine copper agents chelation after often copper successfully salts Zinc has reduced body chelating replace therapy stores. excessive and continued CNS therapy prevent liver Adequate to be deterioration. must life for

as systemic with association the be injury or the elevated presence antinuclear, other Immune-mediated made inflammatory lupus erythematosus.Diagnosis muscle, commonly most or microsomal IgGand disorders, autoantibody, is disease bowel basis of or total an serum may of on primary such anti–smooth antibody. liver autoimmune anti–liver-kidney occurin with piecemeal after shows ofa of consists necrosis.Treatment initially, corticosteroids immunosuppressive of presence withthe drug biopsy usually cell–rich infiltrate an specimen portal achieved. addition plasma Liver the remissionis tapered tominimize glucocorticoid are gradually effects. Steroids side tolerated as lifelong medications Many under recurrence. require patients tostop several monitoringfor may after therapy, careful some be years but immunosuppressive able

is Steatohepatitis, also liver the nonalcoholic as hepatitis, known disease or fatty in fatty by hepatocytes fatty biopsy. of on change macrovesicular nonalcoholic characterized presence degrees and portal fibrosis be present. inflammation may Varying of sometimes diabetes disorder with in in and hyperlipidemia. occurs association (type children, insulin-resistant obese This 2) have disease have with diabetes, elevated Children are this enzymes and marked with condition. liver likely type 2 to who no other identifiable or obesity, without liver liver progress can fibrosis. significant Nonalcoholic disease to fatty diet and exercise. is Treatment with have Vitamin benefit. may E some loss. to weight and made blood hyperlipidemia and glucose Efforts promote be should control In of is end-stage rate disease to the general, progression liver slow.

(see fibrosis cystic The 137). in pancreatic 95%of digestive function of cases cause Chapter is inadequate in pancreas, the thick function lungs, chloride defect results intestines, ducts. in bile in CFTR secretions channel The and pancreatic of the pancreas, destruction there oftenbefore function, is birth. In severe insufficiency. Some less in disease result onset in function and defects CFTR mutations of lung pancreatic later and countries developed of countries. Shwachman-Diamond severe Pearsonsyndrome syndrome Less pancreatic insufficiency indeveloping and malnutrition causes and are common in

StudentConsult.com @ Available

Failure Thrive to

usually stools day, withvisible Children with fat. exocrine insufficiency or bulky, each oil havemany pancreatic foul-smelling massive typically from malabsorption proteins. appetitesbecause They fat,complex have and of carbohydrates, calories of voracious if thrive treatment are and present to diagnosis Failure accomplished rapidly. isuniformly not pancreatic or due digestion important It withintestinal interfere absorption. to disease from to distinguish withmalabsorption disorders is children with that children any sufficiencyexists. about should disease boweldisease the and as Appropriate if of such performed doubt pancreatic celiac rule outconditions state inflammatory be testing to

function is Testing difficult. pancreatic of technically not pancreatic is in concentrations juice measurement difficult. routine of and aspirated Direct enzyme is maldigested presence usually which Stools can the digestion. for fat, be fat indicates tested poor of maldigestion. of Sudan a (72-hour absorption a or semiquantitative either measurement fecal fecal can give assessment (fecal of fat stain) fat qualitative fat determination) Measuring fat the stool. Another pancreatic presence test of to pancreatic to in for assess way function is the enzymes method accurate be to Of fecal most these, assessment. seems the elastase-1 of measuring immunoassay by with fecal elastase-1 concentration the well insufficiency. Depressed pancreatic presence correlates of

is therapy. pancreatic missing enzymes Replacement available of the best enzymes microspheres. as capsules containing enteric-coated are available Pancreatic degradation. to coating designed The spheres from acid gastric these protect on enzymes the is a unable be capsules, contents food, For sprinkled the soft spoonful such to may on applesauce. of children as swallow U/kg/meal) enzymes must because high >6000 of doses fibrosis. colonic avoided Excessive use cause (usually can be U mL 4000 typical dosing 2000 of is lipase/120 In infants, to formula. of 4 given. 1000 younger years In U/kg/meal than is children old, children, is usual. 500 older For U/kg/meal exceeded. be dose be required a as of upward adjusted not to This 2500 should control steatorrhea, U/kg/meal dose but may pancreatic enhancing or inactivation efficacy enzymes the release by Use of the reducing their and receptor can of antagonists from inhibitors by proton-pump acid. H2 microspheres increase

numerous exocrine pancreas chymotrypsin, and proteolyticenzymes, trypsin, carboxypeptidase. produces The including protectthe These proenzymes are inactive autodigestion. produced from pancreas as to is the pancreas enterokinase, an by border after Trypsin leaving enzyme. activated intestinal brush proteolytic into other After proenzymes active activation, their states. trypsin cleaves self-digestion of for trypsin feedback the early presence activation Protease moleculeallows sites in pancreatic on inactivation. inhibit inhibitorsfound of juice trypsin;the are inside enzymes activated causinginjury. digestive the occurs Pancreatitis pancreas, when differ acute between adultsand children. for Triggers pancreatitis adult patient, episodes alcohol abuse or gallstones. In the are relatedto most cases or medications. children, In due most to areidiopathic microlithiasis, bypancreatic trauma, caused hypertriglyceridemia,biliary Some fibrosis, viral infection. sufficient or cases cystic are remainder responsiblefor Collagenvascular are disorders parasite infestations (Table and the 131-1).

Available StudentConsult.com @

pain, onset presents of region. in epigastric the rapid pancreatitis relatively usually Acute with to eating. is back aggravated pain the and The by radiate may nearly always of position to The frequently patient comfort. moves a find most vomiting in Nausea occur cases. and usually quite and typically requiring Pain narcotics. severe, continuous is pancreatitis periumbilical sign). hemorrhage, to Turner visible ecchymoses can the flanks in lead or sign) Severe as (Cullen region (Grey Rupture minor characterized and tenderness development lead a of to a duct persistent pancreatic pseudocyst, by of can pain a pancreatic and severe mass. palpable pancreatitis to signs infectious clinician and fever be experiencing fluid collections, of complications, prone alert and must severe for sepsis. patients the and necrosis With are

difficult can diagnose. pancreatitis to Acute be Elevations the in or total serum amylase lipase diagnosis. support pancreatic are during released into blood These injury. enzymes the pancreatic are enzymes however. elevations of common, the Nonspecific lipase, level the decline to amylase making acute As than pancreatitis progresses, latter the a tends faster

obstruction Cholelithiasis disease) Ascaris for biliary divisum (mass, of testing in and late cyst Ampullary Crohn’s disease. inflammation of Anomalous good pancreas junction Choledochal choice the ducts and pancreatic infection Annular course from Pancreas diagnostic sludge the biliary

monitor is severe for laboratory complications. importantto studies measurement Serial of glucose, nitrogen, baseline urea calcium, be should creatinine, C-reactive blood At and diagnosis, protein, complete count, obtained. electrolytes,blood phosphorus measured along the These should until amylase and recovered. daily, patienthas with be atleast lipase,

diagnosis Because are specific,imaging important are of sensitive levels for pancreatitis. not or the 100% enzyme studies is cases. but themildest in all present edema pancreatitis, acute In should performed capable this as part diagnosticapproach. of edemaand overall be detecting is the Ultrasound of visualization tomography complete allows gland. of If obscures the overlying scan bowel acomputed gas the pancreas, (CT) and CT also evidence done oral for agents to of andintravenous contrast the obstruction. ductal to be for development of should scans secondary can facilitate dilation used monitor be CT (IV) and to with pseudocysts interpretation.Ultrasound imaging liver, should pancreatitis bileduct toperform gallstones; rule other of reason out all isto early the be gallbladder, and studies in common the important visualized. course The used detect cholangiopancreatography to variantscausing pancreatitis. may anatomic Magnetic be resonance

therapies proven no There for pancreatitis. are acute specific a sphincter reaction be Oddi, specifically such as etiology found, gallstone should this is a or of predisposing the obstructing drug treated. a If suction mild intake begun. cases) an prohibited, oral is Initially, acid-blocking is in drug (except prescribed, is and nasogastric necessary is of because vomiting space Fluid third and resuscitation losses. provided. be should relief Pain used. fentanyl, Meperidine, hydromorphone and commonly are most be support the nothing periods. course patient (NPO) should provided the by if will be for mouth in Nutritional early extended once Feedings duodenum. pain or can begin administered downstream subsides from the can be not option. possible, nutrition parenteral is If an this is jejunal occur nutrition. with complications Fewer and recovery with parenteral rapid more feedings compared pancreatic considered patient laboratory evidence of is febrile, has if be should infection. has or Antibiotics extensive necrosis, the antibiotic, best considered broad-spectrum choice. imipenem, A the as is such

or resulted structure. morphologic is Chronic pancreatic have persistentattacks recurrent changes of pancreatitis in irreversible pancreatitis, which in defined as (beading), islet with of ducts narrowing parenchyma, of scarring andloss Theseinclude acinar fibrosis irregular the and dilation and areas of of tissue. pancreatitis. exocrine result mellitus may from diabetes Pancreatic unremittingchronic insufficiency and Most have present. discrete be acute but occurring attacksof patients repeatedly, chronic painmay symptoms and chronic pancreatitis milder cysticfibrosis associated pancreatic hereditary of sufficiency. pancreatitis phenotypes of include causes The with caused is in mutations gene. one of disease several known thetrypsinogen Familial by These on of molecule, digestion. obliterate trypsin mutations trypsin autodigestionsites inhibiting feedback inhibition the for testing these available mutations. is Genetic readily must and associated Genetic but less testing is abnormalin pancreatic performed, fibrosiscan include for sufficiency.Sweat testing the mutations be is with most. for lesscommon screening cystic expensive chloride trypsin found. and inhibitor, cationic Less are of codes the amutation which pancreatic mutations commonly, in trypsinogen, for SPINK1 gene, PRSS1,

chronic initially withrecurring acute attacks of Children with present pancreatitis pancreatitis. these pancreatic pancreatic and and to formation, scarring continued small to pancreatic predisposes stasisof the to inflammation. secretions, Injury stone ducts, children attacksowing large ducts of of deficiency. Loss exocrine overtime to pancreatic and can and lead endocrine tissue exocrine endocrine not becomes the occur mass clinically deficiency in is cases. 90% Morethan complication of this pancreatic does alate all apparent; destroyed beforeexocrine that be must not patients most problem individuals.These affected many requirehospitalization. many is a in serious do episodes; have Chronicpain

of amylase pancreatitis loss or it diagnosis is acute likely lipase. tissue pancreatitis more pancreatic chronic similar of with Laboratory less severe but of the that becomes with elevation patient to and pancreatic injury, compromise ducts. consequences of include should for the diabetes of Monitoring also biliary and including looking mellitus chronic Pancreatic retrograde has by been and cholangiopancreatography accomplished imaging endoscopic biliary (ERCP). pancreatic dilate of enhance offers the therapeutic remove gallstones, to place intervention of stents to juice. and flow strictures, possibility ERCP cholangiopancreatography resonance Magnetic ERCP. alternative an to is x-rays show abdominal pancreatic Plain calcifications. may chloride genetic include determination. hereditary pancreatitis should testing sweat and for and testing for fibrosis etiology cystic chronic of Diagnostic the pancreatitis

is Treatment largely supportive. low-fat to diets, octreotide enzyme daily and the include therapies daily (somatostatin) supplements, abort pancreatic Potential but antioxidant attacks, therapy. of unproven use early be do result deprivation. in taken nutritional must that Care not extreme diets drainage decompress have stones large creating ERCP strictures side-to-side value. procedures dilate may pancreatic ducts some and dilated to pancreatic surgical remove to Interventional and pancreaticojejunostomy by a

single of mesothelial peritoneum a consists layer organs. intra-abdominal that The cells of all covers is from wall The covers the is structures that nerves. by somatic abdominal derived somatic and portion innervated underlying the the mesoderm and derived from afferents. by is portion nonmyelinated viscera covering The innervated visceral visceral is or may irritants procedures, irritants is result such by of injuries as infection from Inflammation meconium. caused usually peritonitis, and endogenous but penetrating exogenous radiation, by introduced peritoneum, or the surgical can in and inflammation it or ascites with complication disease. Infectious of renal, be an appendicitis, perforation, contamination of or to occur secondary hepatic associated peritonitis can preexisting intestinal as cardiac, acute referred this is is when it setting, no there spontaneous as to other bacterial intra-abdominal peritonitis. source, In bacterial Spontaneous to Escherichia less and often due to pneumococcus is usually coli. peritonitis

Available @ StudentConsult.com

marked Peritonitis abdominal characterized is examination by on tenderness. Rebound pronounced. also generally tenderness quite is to very irritation patient owing tends pain. little to intense peritoneal and move The always diagnosis. be not present, regarded is the absence Fever should fever of as to and not contradictory syndrome, are who are corticosteroids underlying such condition, nephrotic for to tenderness. as an fever taking have Patients likely little reduced and

Blood tests cause. nature focus identifying the of should inflammation the on underlying and its infection. An proteinsuggest and C-reactive elevated cell white rate, erythrocyte blood sedimentation count, In 5 children years, appendicitis than leading cause. isthe older and rule to albumin, syndrome. serum out protein, ordered nephrotic Total urinalysisshould be be diseasecausing ascites. performed tests out Liver liver chronic function rule to should to catheter sample peritoneal needle fluid best The with a suspected diagnose peritonitisis way the to (paracentesis). or 250 fluid spontaneous peritonitis of in neutrophil greater than cells/mm3. bacterial a has count Peritoneal high peritoneal culture, run includeamylase dehydrogenase Other out on be should tests andlactate fluid that ascites), albumin, pancreatic rule concentration. the (to should placed culture aerobic culture, large anaerobic blood and sampleof bottles sample. a immediately fluid For obtaining into be on the

Appendicitis or may ultrasound identified be tomography (CT) computed scan. by intestinal other condition When other suspected, such perforation, performed. disease, peptic are specific any predisposing intra-abdominal to should meconium ileus, or be as volvulus, midgut emergencies testing

intra-abdominal a managed surgically. as process, appendicitis be penetrating must wound, by or such an surgical Peritonitis caused of Spontaneous broad-spectrum and enteric should bacterial pneumococcus with bacteria. coverage antibiotic a with good resistant be peritonitis treated sensitivity Cefotaxime awaiting results. effective generally culture is while and therapy initial as a be metronidazole perforated Anaerobic with should viscus suspected. whenever is added coverage

Gastroenterology, New 2010, Pediatric Practice: editor: W, York, Bishop

and Liver editors: Gastrointestinal Friedman LS, LJ, M, Brandt Feldman

2010, Pathophysiology/Diagnosis/Management, Disease: Philadelphia,

Goulet Mieli-Vergani OJ, et G, al: Pediatric Walker’s Kleinman R,

2008, BC Hamilton, Ontario, Decker Gastrointestinal Disease,

19, Philadelphia, Nelson St. Kliegman BF, of Jeme 2011, JW, Stanton Pediatrics, al: et RM, Saunders ed Textbook

Liver Hyams JS, editors: Kay R, Gastrointestinal Pediatric M, and Wyllie

Philadelphia, Saunders Disease, 2011,

The Respiratory System

Susan Thida Striegl, and Marshall Ong, G. 18 Amanda

pediatrics. respiratory Acute chronic in diseases common and are Children physical precede with problems abnormal findings. although may symptoms, imaging sometimes respiratory present typically with congenital and immune toxins birth); cystic (e.g., (e.g., maturation or (e.g., etiology toxicity); premature (e.g., The fibrosis); environmental respiratory (e.g., the immunologic childhood disease). extrapulmonary following: iatrogenic (e.g., (e.g., croup heart of diseases (e.g., laryngomalacia); oxygen pollutants); genetic or underlying infectious anatomic pneumonia); incomplete includes deficiency); children not optimal to allows but thrive. of only The the respiratory tract entire survive, functioning

passes and turbinates, over of and enters filter large warm, area Air surface the which the humidify, nose inspired air. nasal the the paranasal to pharynx the are draining the carried respiratory from sinuses Secretions ciliated action mucociliary the epithelium. of the by nasopharynx can the pharynx (adenoids) or Lymphoid the (tonsils). through airflow posterior tissue obstruct

esophagus. deflecting epiglottis protects toward larynx by the swallowing during The the material The in assist opening in prominent adults. less and closing the glottis, in arytenoid children than cartilages, which are of by with V-shaped, the V cords the apex formed (the the vocal being anterior. is opening glottis) The space converge trachea. subglottic cricoid the portion of cords, the walls Below the the of the vocal toward children airway, age, older cricoid children is glottis. the ring whereas years of in the narrowest 3 portion adults under the In it and of the is approximately airway C-shaped circumference, and the mainstem cartilage, the 320° supports around extending bronchi. trachea posterior of the trachea The membranous. wall is lobar support discontinuous. the the bronchi, Beyond for cartilaginous the airways becomes

three lung volume. lobes 55% has andcomprises right lung lower) of approximately (upper, total The middle, the lobes (upper, The lower). has two leftlung analogous lobe, the is inferior to division lingula, upper lobe. middle theleft The the of right

lung for pediatric capacity has The tremendous growth. million adult nearly A million 25 infant an approximately alveoli; has 300 full-term alveoli. growth is of during The years of 2 8 and of occurs complete the by life new alveoli first years age. primarily lung increase this time, by dimensions, alveolar volume in with rarely increases After new alveoli formed.

atmosphere function of (O2)and (CO2) the between and dioxide exchange to the major oxygen carbon the blood. lungs is The metabolism, the control rib interface, circulation, cage, the and neuromuscular all influence pulmonary exchange. mechanics of The of tissue of ventilation of muscles nature and gas alveolar-capillary respiratory the anatomy airways,

enters intrathoracic atmospheric pressure lungs pressure. than when less is the Air lowering the and by of inspiration, diaphragm. generated pressure contraction During intrathoracic negative is accessory used during quiet The or exercise states of are scalene, inspiration to in recruited during cage. not but and sternocleidomastoid muscles disease (external intercostal, the enlarge raise rib muscles)are and breathing but intercostal muscles are Exhalation and internal recruited. passive, with exhalation, abdominal normally is the active

are at During mid-range of inthe rest, volumes (Fig. usually inflation normal lung breathing 133-1). Tidal air amount the breath. each relaxed is volume with of inspired (TV) gas the of at The of retained volume end exhalation the lung relaxed is a in

capacities. volumes and 133-1 Figure Lung residual its but or capacity spirometry, be measurement body nitrogen residual by requires dilution, of volume and can by of functional helium calculation measured subdivisions Vital plethysmography, capacity washout. Saunders, Andreoli editors: 1997, WB 4, JC, al, Bennett 127.) Cecil Medicine, Essentials (From CJ, of TE, Carpenter et Philadelphia, p ed

↑ Asthma Ventilation-perfusion Normal, ↓ Yes ↓, or

oxygen. of PaCO2, inspired FIO2, of partial partial oxygen; pressure PaO2, Fraction carbon arterial arterial pressure of dioxide;

capacity residual functional the (FRC). of gas exhalation. during volume This O2 maintains exchange volume Total and volume (TLC) end lungs maximal at capacity the lung exhalation. of of of maximal (RV) lungs in inhalation gas the is the the a in volume left of residual the end gas is the at fromthe lungs the Vital amount maximal can the and that capacity difference is is of be TLC RV. and air between (VC) expelled

gas, by viscosity length conducting influenced diameter the Airway of the the airflow. is the of of the airways, and and resistance nature power is airways quiet smaller airflow the inversely breathing, in be radius of may to and proportional laminar the fourth the During of airway. the (streamlined), resistance rates, especially increases flow, higher flow in turbulent resistance. At larger the airways, Relatively in airway diameter in airway changes resistance. in large small can changes result and bronchiectasis), airway all bronchospasm, wall compression airway stenosis, may and loss inflammation, secretions, bodies, resistance. mucosal airway airway airway symptomatic produce foreign Excessive increases of in edema with integrity (as resistance. most very laryngomalacia bronchiolitis increased increased of are common causes lower causes airway are fibrosis among and cystic of upper the resistance; whereas and asthma, croup pediatrics, common In (CF) airway

in lung for compliance of ease measure given can change inflated. volume a with pressure) the is in the which Lung (change be a measured compliance in fibrosis, lung edema) decreases volumes. may decrease pulmonary to that deficiency, lung lead pulmonary (surfactant Processes TLC low flow decreased RV, normal and normal compliance, VC, by to FRC lung rates. Restrictive relatively are and lung and low characterized diseases pulmonary inflammation, an effusion, and narrowing/stiffness alveolar (pleural (lobar edema), filling disease excavatum), from weakness, lung can abdominal distention. Restrictive process pectus pleural severe result disease or neuromuscular mass), thoracic pneumonia, (scoliosis,

is the environment. exchange defined the dioxide ventilation external carbon alveoli Alveolar between as of and

the is constant, volume the relatively airways Normally, fills efficacy may (anatomic tidal of increasing ventilation. dead about increase breath of conducting dead 30% the space).Because the tidal each anatomic space (non–gas-exchanging) tidal increases, the and ventilation volume volume ratio then Conversely, if alveolar decreases, space/tidal dead decreases.

the alveolar ventilation, gases exchange membrane. across flow, alveolar-capillary blood and Gas the diffusion on of capillary depends pulmonary Exchange primarily (V) matching of (Q) the of by the is alveolar O2 pulmonary regional ventilation, influenced by blood of with matching). (V/Q flow whereas ventilation is exchange determined CO2 pulmonary areas matching V/Q (local by in that in the are is of vessels constriction vasoconstriction maintained, hypoxic hypoventilated). pulmonary part, are causes five of (Table hypoxemia There 133-1). V/Q the atelectasis) of most hypoxemia. in resulting mismatching (such causes pneumonia Disorders as common are and

StudentConsult.com Available @

are to particles lungs agents. The infectious exposed and constantly the primary for particles. large filter is nose The epithelium pharynx. particles paranasal The sinuses nasal the filtered turbinates the and ciliated of move toward μm less Particles and trachea diameter reach the and 10 on mucosa. may than in the bronchi deposit than the may μm 1 less alveoli. reach Particles from to propel layer the mouth. toward continuously a bronchioles airways lining Ciliated the mucus the thin the cells of larynx particles or and pathogens IgA have macrophages cells serum engulf that been polymorphonuclear by and opsonized Alveolar antibodies. secreted antibodies transudated locally

bronchioles. can that important by be irritation voluntary generated reflex nose, protecting clear forcefulexpiration trachea, secretions.Cough or may airways in ofthe bronchi, is larynx, lungs, a the or debris Cough, the of sinus, pharynx, and close near total (3) exhale. cough inhale and muscles the and open ability (1) (2) to to Effective capacity, forcibly requires the lung contract abdominal to glottis, predisposes Loss to cough, poor theability neuromuscular weakness, clearance andpneumonia. with secretion to as atelectasis of results in and

Available StudentConsult.com @

infants), illness. breathing, The (especially breathing/exercise symptoms to duration, history of onset, (cough, of and frequency noisy swallowing respiratory complete respiratory respiratory others tolerance, work and sputum nasal includes congestion, production), in with function exposure school It (hospitalizations, information visits, of emergency the important symptoms. concerning pattern obtain to chronic, severity or is days) intermittent) (acute, and missed department a or with be For history choking infants, of feeds. should questions feeding obtained, coughing including Family should asthma immune and about CF. and include history atopy, questions deficiencies, environmental exposure to smoke, pets, pollutants. historyqueries and The relevant. history may be also Travel

StudentConsult.com @ Available

the of for be child’s the may should the modesty so half from thorax that maintaining Clothing body inspected, should adolescents respected. be although removed upper be chest quiet, of the is breathing symmetry (AP) and rate, wall observe work child the the of and noting shape respiratory It while the is the optimal to pattern, and diameter. anteroposterior

increase Any respiratory to is factor impairs that mechanics the likely respiratory rate. However, fever, anxiety. causes nonrespiratory of and pain, tachypnea include 133-2). age and with vary Respiratory activity rates (Table

breathing). observe It the respiratory and important degree pattern to effort of of is (work Hyperpnea fever, may (increased or and observed cardiac anxiety. of with respiration) metabolic pulmonary extreme be depth disease, acidosis, extrapulmonary (metabolic distress signs an of etiology fever, Hyperpnea without suggests acidosis, respiratory pain). can or of substernal breathing Increased or (intercostal, as described be inspiratory supraclavicular, work retractions)

system. CNS, Central nervous

expiratory abdominal actively muscles (use exhale). to of nasal flaring. In effort inspiratory manifested also is increased by children, be it distress, may of suggests also (forced respiratory but against pain. closed a manifestation partially glottis) a expiration Grunting

of work croup, (laryngomalacia, subglottic pulmonary compliance increased stenosis) obstruction extrathoracic and/or include breathing decreased inspiration pulmonary Causes during of (pneumonia, airway edema). obstruction airway usually of intrathoracic breathing Increased 133-2). expiratory Table work (see indicates

a Stridor heard more airways, obstructedextrathoracic by heard of exhalation. caused a lower the commonly by partial inspiration.Wheezing is partially during airway, harsh produced commonly obstruction on sound is more low-pitched high-pitched monophonic Wheezes canbe or and and peripheralairways). from small large, musical (from (usually centralairways) intrathoracic in in irregular the producewheezing but more calledrhonchi. may Secretions result airways sounds commonly (crackles airways produce small secretions crumpling or of characteristic sounds may in rales). or Fluid cellophane accentuate a many take sounds. forcefullywill child exhale lung breath and Having the abnormal deep a breathsounds atelectasis, to mass, due Decreased or be effusion. thoracic may pleural lobar consolidation (pneumonia), intrathoracic respiratory of of helps and chest tracheal cardiac deviation,and motion, auscultation, percussion rate, and with (Table wall to breathing, disease work identify Observation combined 133-3).

CF lung less Digital (such seen in diseases clubbing as pulmonary common is other, and interstitial disease). in chronic presence generally concern seen is for heighten should its not It diagnoses. other so in asthma, may Clubbing also or or, rarely, present in (cardiac, chronic gastrointestinal, a be as nonpulmonary familial diseases hematologic) trait.

None or Egophony Deviation opposite to None reduced Pleural effusion area Dull over side Reduced Muffled

Reduced to Normal Normal Inspiratory None process No Interstitial Normal

TE, ed CJ, from 115. et Adapted Essentials WB p of Andreoli Bennett editors: Philadelphia, 1997, Carpenter 4, Saunders, Medicine, Cecil al, JC, Point of impulse. maximum PMI, egophony, sign like pleural consolidation e with also moderate-sized *In effusions). is but of (may a be a sounds associated

and site pectoriloquy, words/voice affected lesions). clearer with over sounds the consolidation (associated †In cavitary

airway in results the mucosa. of Cough receptors stimulation from irritant or with Acute generally the cough exposure subsides or respiratory (smoke) associated infection the as is is eliminated. exposure infections irritant and resolves help under which in circumstances cough The the of the cause. and determining cough the occurs the characteristics a body onset episode choking aspiration. suggests foreign Sudden after of secretions bronchial allergic night the or accumulation sinusitis, excessive the may during be Morning cough due to infection. from rhinitis, and hallmark a disease. gastroesophageal coughing Nighttime reflux be of can caused also by asthma is flat lying postnasal due reflux. or drip, to exacerbated Cough allergic rhinitis, be may sinusitis, by exercise of exercise-induced is Recurrent asthma/bronchospasm. coughing with suggestive cough body pertussis Paroxysmal aspiration. foreign suggests or infants. infections chlamydial occurs in cough staccato in A repetitive, tracheomalacia, cough psychogenic seal-like A suggests harsh, brassy, cough. croup, or (habit) most during The disappears teenagers, common which is in last, sleep. can develop also which during disappears a children sleep. Younger habit cough, throat-clearing

weeks. daily cough is a longer Chronic as defined 3 cough than lasting postnasal syndromes. asthma, postinfectious and sinusitis), tussive drip cough rhinitis, causes are Common chronic (allergic of dysfunction swallowing fistula, It (tracheoesophageal abnormalities and reflux also (infants), chronic disease, by gastroesophageal tracheomalacia), can caused infection. be anatomic in aspiration, or may also be or to by and smoke) stove caused body Persistent it cough origin. exposure foreign may (tobacco psychogenic be irritants wood

the During viral multiple especially or if frequent infections, first have older of preschool. they siblings day care years life, or experience attend children several respiratory further infection not associated resolves a that and viral promptly require clearly does Cough is with diagnostic workup. warrants persisting further However, 3 than longer cough evaluation. weeks

respiratory in disease are radiographs useful Chest children. assessing in lung (cardiomegaly, pericardial or great about thorax In the to vessels (rib rib addition the arch/vascular bony heart abnormalities), effusion), vertebral provide rings, abnormalities, aortic information notching). the determining and they (right (PA) and, Chest following both inspiration. posteroanterior radiographs a full and be projections should if lateral in possible, the obtained lung a a is on AP single and lateral flattened is hyperinflation PA indicator diaphragms better of diameter on increased of hyperinflation. Estimation an projection view based unreliable; the markings vessels as be increased blood misinterpreted with inspiration or can of poor Crowding infiltrates. folds, produce unclear rotation, and may images. motion skin External distorted or affected on does obstruction because due an not that views lung lobe bronchial in aspirated results Expiratory body foreign and regional or deflate may partial to detect exhalation. fluoroscopy the hyperinflation, be also evaluate diaphragm to movement. can used Fluoroscopy

reflux. disorders of lesser fistulas, be barium vascular esophageal esophagram motility, diagnosing gastroesophageal in rings (esophageal (dysphagia) compression), a valuable to A may swallowing tracheoesophageal and and, extent, esophagus a evaluating must tracheoesophageal with situated (see the tip contrast via the a be for under instilled Chapter pressure fistula, When in material 128). catheter distal

computed evaluating for delineating scan well the and as of A chest pleural (CT) the as parenchymal imaging masses, pleural test from is tomography of choice lesions lesions. mediastinal bronchiectasis, can provide information excellent with pulmonary CT about the detect contrast embolism. intravenous great vasculature and vessels and scans pulmonary the interstitial CT (bronchiectasis). disease) malformations, High-resolution pulmonary used assess scans to parenchyma (congenital lung are airways lung and The speed current of

scanners sedating scan them. makes possible children CT most without it to However, required may decrease to and be toddlers motion in artifact. sedation infants visualizing useful (MRI), is pulmonary in evaluation parenchymal and of Magnetic cardiac great vessel resonance imaging lesions. anatomy, useful for less

can assessing masses effusion/empyema. used be choice intra-thoracic of Ultrasonography for delineate and to procedure imaging parapneumonic some is the motion diaphragmatic for children. small is It useful assessing in

Gas of Respiratory Exchange Measures

of both information performed blood A effectiveness the arterial gas analysis properly ventilation. about provides oxygenation and samples are commonly so and more to more arterial difficult However, venous blood obtain, are capillary samples used. that is Pco2 arterial from blood. similar from The sample a to capillary than Pco2. approximately is samples venous The mm in arterial higher 6 Hg Pco2 to of determines ratio The serum pH. concentration the Pco2 the bicarbonate used be oxygenation. venous samples Capillary should to not assess or

respiratory of 37). (see are Chapter metabolic and causes There both acidosis maintain several minutes, be presence the complete pH) may not days. (altering compensation renal (altering serum within In bicarbonate a Pco2 occur can for acidosis, level) but or to of normal an respiratory alkalosis compensation the (whether Recall insult will compensation metabolic the respiratory alkalosis). on pH and acidosis primary side or the of remain both are incomplete, that so the

saturation of or the of absorption O2 by measuring of hemoglobin Pulse light. more oximetry wavelengths the measures two blood easy and is to reliable. It use, noninvasive, Po2 shape of of mm the oxyhemoglobin until the 60 dissociation Hg. not reaches O2 saturation decrease Because approximately the does much curve, is O2 the or passes oximetry through photodetector (carboxyhemoglobin, abnormal if light is hemoglobin methemoglobin), poor, (nail reflect perfusion no present not may saturation accurately true when polish). to when Pulse

The accomplished most by analysis. is of gas Pco2 measurement reliably blood that of there CO2), which alveolar However, (end-tidal monitors is record are Pco2. representative exhaled noninvasive Pco2 measure are intubated at Pco2 Pco2 measurements nares. End-tidal patients, can some used the but in commonly and most mechanically devices ventilated monitor are at electrodes skin used Transcutaneous to Pco2 and be accurate. the less can surface, but Po2 suited best Noninvasive providing values. absolute measurement than for CO2 for detecting are of techniques trends rather

and lung using of volumes spirometry assessing important pulmonary disease. rates in Measurement airflow are until can to forcibly be more air then no The and TLC patient exhales expelled. inhales (FEV1), forced second expiratory flow forced first the maneuver, rates forced and capacity volume are the expired measured. During (FVC), vital (FEF) forced in expiratory height. age, patient race, gender, predicted based and on mostly on to values rely These compared but are years above of can children 6 perform spirometry. age Most equipment. pulmonary possible, sedation is sophisticated and using Infant testing function

plethysmography. as body be FRC, and require Airway other resistance, techniques, measured with cannot spirometry RV and such the helium trapping. the may of inhaled can but dilution determining TLC RV by air underestimate the of in Helium lung, air within also magnitude measure and dilution

flow flow FRC) proportional suggests can airway categorize obstruction then Abnormal a greaterextent restrictive rates and preservation lung FVC, function with decreased obstructive FEV1 the however, rates a decrease testing on than flow defect. FVCand a restrictive increased of FEV1, is (low or and in likely; defect relative results TLC, (low airway pulmonary a or and FVC, the RV disease flow to rates to beused are FRC).When and rates midexpiratoryflow but (FEF25–75%) sensitive rate a more The disease the of more is variable. FEV1, is also small measure mean airways than detect asthma in with bronchodilator. improvementin reversible testing can Pulmonary characteristic of a of obstruction significant airway (>25%) function FEV1 (>12%-15%) a or FEF25–75% followinginhalation also patient is Spirometry management. forlongitudinal useful obtained older useful a home rate expiratory flow monitoring of with can The be (PEFR) be deviceand simple asthma. childrenwith peak may handheld for with be caution. highly patienteffort, and values must However, interpreted is it dependent on airway and technicians. be in should to assess tests a are histamine, experienced pulmonary methacholine, function challenge special and air cold, performed Inhalation require used equipment but expertise with only dry sophisticated laboratory using hyperreactivity, or

Endoscopic Evaluation of the Airways

of nasopharyngoscope fiberoptic nasal assess performed (nasopharyngoscopy) flexible of glottis. with size, the is adenoid airways the the to Endoscopic upper of patency passages, a evaluation and abnormalities useful assessing does and it and It evaluating is vocal motion/function, in especially stridor cord require sedation. not with rigid and the be anesthesia. bronchoscope either space intrathoracic under evaluation a of can done subglottic Endoscopic flexible airways or obtaining secretions) lavage), and immunocompromised is malacia, patients. (stenosis, in abnormalities samples for Bronchoscopy in in identifying especially useful culture excessive (bronchoalveolar airway airway endobronchial lesions, from interventions, flexible performing for method a the is foreign diagnostic and choice and useful bodies most obtaining bronchoscopy the of airways airway removing Rigid is as tool bronchoscopy other lower and for cultures. in children. Transbronchial biopsies performed rarely are absolute few to contraindications are bronchoscopy. There tolerate the thrombocytopenia too contraindications the conditions to patient is clinical (<50,000/cm3), diatheses, Relative and bleeding unstable when include procedure.

Sputum Examination of

useful tract be may to Sputum are in but specimens obtain in they evaluating young respiratory infections, children. difficult lower an specimen secretions. of addition, airway may representative a sample lower expectorated In provide not containing either airway Specimens secretions are or large not squamous yield from are the and numbers upper lower may cells of airways misleading with heavily contaminated results. epithelial in infections polymorphonucleated bacterial patients predominant with often tract leukocytes Sputum lower and culture. contains on respiratory organism one in selected If be be microbiologic used cannot may sputum bronchoalveolar then for specimens lavage obtained, diagnosis situations. specially are as often produce sputum, cultures patients lower cannot for In CF throat surrogates cultures. who with used airway processed

fail may biopsy invasive diagnoses disease, with in When patients to lung pulmonary a required. methods be less provide lung most atypical Concern of mass/malformation disease, immunocompromised for (especially biopsy. an indications childhood the for infection in a common interstitial evaluation are and host), is the biopsy is if performed needed an limited lesion amenable interventional fungal histology an CT-guided is radiologist nodules). needle option approach percutaneous to (e.g., by and or a desired. procedure preferred a if histologic is thoracoscopic is thorough Either evaluation thoracotomy palpate but lung, Thoracotomy aids biopsy, it is for choosing best the thoracoscopy. to more and surgeon inspect than invasive the site the which in allows infants cases, In lung well. most and biopsy tolerate children

be levels. child normal with O2 supplemental in treated to saturation should respiratory Any maintain O2 distress to most device, as unhindered long-term used system. O2 is by the it O2, and cannula patients enables administration eat delivery For widely of nasal a the speak affected by the and fraction provide to nasal Though actual and the respiratory to delivered supplemental can variable quite way (FIO2) be the inspired child’s cannula the of pattern. O2, oxygen easiest size patient is while high nasal provider flow more and to the deliver neonates now is positive noninvasive as alternative an Humidified higher (HFNC) controlling in allows cannula used rates the comfortably to widely pressure. flow FIO2 to with can mask a 30% to O2 nearly Supplemental delivered O2. of mask, can that a face-mask reservoir may ranging systems 100% O2, which by a be 40% variety also nonrebreather from face provide simple provide

relieve should high of enough O2 be administered to The hypoxemia. concentration the O2 on patient situation. clinical acceptable saturation The depends and Generally, to should a above supplemental be saturation administered goal level 90%. O2 achieve saturation greater oxygen is than 95%. Normal saturation, requires 100% potentially is extended especially to this time. periods levels unnecessary of It if of O2 achieve toxic inspired for

concentrations than less usually for use. 40% long-term safe are O2 Inspired the possible with O2 lowest continuously, requiring pulse or gas should with Patients concentration. either oximetry, O2 monitored to blood measurements allow or Po2 to be supplemental arterial titration intermittently of

inhaler therapeutic via Delivering forms inhalation respiratory dose agents of metered or (DPI), the to tract lower accomplished aerosol agents dry of inhaler be nebulizer. by can the (MDI), powder in to of particles generate airway lower devices designed these that are deposit relatively the airways. the bypass and upper All action can filtering small the of breathing and the drug used, patient influence technique, Many of child, age device including pattern. deposition, factors should face (children or with and mask of to loss air. a Nebulizers to be teens) minimize drug (infants) used mouthpiece ambient are and all for used ages chambers should be Plastic (spacers) available holding with always MDIs. for years difficult require of which 6 Dry age. under optimal is for delivery, children drug deep inhalers rapid a single powder inhalation if this nebulizers correct, is carefully the it is families. delivering technique frequently and only so in and important review are medications equally MDIs to with effective

clearance airway maintain processes pulmonary disease When may clearance secretions, of techniques patency. airway help impair moves can which they be central chest toward from is secretions which airways, expectorated. One percussion, the method be and handheld that with can vests. Chest devices Flutter, performed back-pressure effectively and physiotherapy vibration and (TheraPEP, expiratory also generate pneumatic Acapella) especially physiotherapy CF. is those most with beneficial Chest chronic in airway secretions, with children device, from Children mechanical of too an who weak effective use cough chest a cough benefit the are to generate used conjunction physiotherapy. with assist in beneficial established. patients its not has and asthma is pneumonia, Chest atelectasis patients with not effectiveness generally with in physiotherapy for clearly or been

airway or with the necessary artificial ventilation provide airway. patient be the to obstructed it needed, an is mechanical If upper is may are many the which nose via trachea mouth or the alters beneficial. respiratory of done endotracheal This physiology best is into tube ways, not in an the all tract placing by the of (intubation).Intubation the It phonation. of and humidification, air prevents filtration and inspired warming, with interferes also stimulates production. Intubation secretion respiratory lifesaving. with acute/impending intubation However, in failure, an endotracheal is tube

can the damage Endotracheal maintained. the improper and tubes airways are the are larynx not and of carefully size tubes if segment child’s which of it damage, The and surrounded narrowest may makes is airway the cartilage, to a lead cricoid is to stenosis. by completely and ring vulnerable subglottic H2O), the tube mucosa (roughly the by ischemia exceeds necrosis. to pressure mucosal leading filling the pressure cm develops, airway created capillary against If 35 a risk maintained should tube Therefore, leak around mucosal to minimize be endotracheal the small of damage. the air

fatal. be plugs airways Artificial mucous kept of can secretions must with clear be asobstruction the of secretions. suctioning tube the and adequate inspired humidification by of occlusion air of probability reduce Providing appropriate to to addition mask In be (LMA) laryngeal tubes, used airway can endotracheal provide mechanical the ventilation. end This with a the a instrumented. creating larynx, trachea the mask consists that seal placed over device distal soft the of at without being tube a is invasive,the limited less secure, LMA is generally is Although less proceduralanesthesia. so to it

an artificial trachea into the the is airway the Tracheostomy surgical larynx. below of placement and accidental If trauma, extubation, elective used care. anticipated, prolonged patient to laryngeal comfort, danger obviate increase may intubation facilitate nursing is prevent be of tracheostomy the tracheostomy available long guidelines or patients when indicated. a intubated damage how sustaining as can are be without No is airway clear to

those or with upper Children long-term obstruction benefit may airway tracheostomies. chronic mechanical from ventilation requiring severe ability tracheostomy phonate to times. the tube carefully monitored all the must be and communicate, at child the Because hampers tubes tubes, of endotracheal clear kept be As with tracheostomy must secretions. of can accidental the Occlusion the tube be dislodgment or fatal. of tube and tubes with caregivers for be Many well provided adequately equipped. trained tracheostomy the home children are can cared at

exchange to gas may unable mechanical require adequate maintain are ventilation. who Patients inflation the Most gas lungs of involve with mechanical using ventilation pressure. modes positive of and exhalation is passive. is phase active The (air inspiratory pushed is in)

or artificialairway, it often full noninvasively can Positive-pressure be via masks. requires nasal an provided ventilation tight-fitting face though disease patients who support in Noninvasive a used day, can apneaand with part assist failure also is causes. from continuously it for ofthe obstructive but varietyof in only sleep ventilation respiratory neuromuscular be patients ventilation acute require to useful particularly

truly breathing. of method mechanical No ventilation natural simulates All have complications. methods their drawbacks and entire may thoraxand heart to pressure impede the return the is Positive during inspiration. to transmitted venous parenchyma damaged and O2. pressures concentrations may The inspired byinflation and high lung of airways be general, limited for to should lung provide of pressures the those and sufficient inflation to necessary atelectasis. be In adequate prevention expansion ventilation and ventilators widely volume-cycled however, often ventilation. pediatrics; in are Pressure-cycled may oscillatory high-frequency who are lung ventilation themost with be disease used failing neonatology used and are used ventilation) inpatients modalities ventilation conventionalmechanical in and severe high-frequency (conventional jet

134 Breathing 461 of u Control Chapter

medulla to chemoreceptors located levels Ventilation by primarily (Fig. is respond the central and intracellular Pco2 in controlled that pH 134-1). is receptors the to aortic respond extent, and by located Po2. which lesser carotid in To modulated a predominantly bodies, peripheral ventilation quite The sensitive. central receptors are in significant changes ventilation. minute Small changes in in Paco2 result normally acute is Pco2 the the bicarbonate pH normal elevated, When to and is of in the increases chronically increased. ventilatory because drive intracellular returns levels level, compensatory not decreases The Pao2 Hg. stimulate mm to do the receptors approximately peripheral until ventilation not 60 receptors to These important elevation chronic may a CO2. with ventilatory Paco2 response blunted become in have patients who

center by modulated central the mechanisms. output is The of also respiratory reflex infants inspiratory inflation temporarily in lung vagal effort fibers. (Hering-Breuer afferent reflex)through Full inhibits frequency airways efforts the respiratory the (see influence and intercostal muscles Fig. may and depth from reflexes Other of 134-1).

event is and condition frightening characterized change as defined by (ALTE) life-threatening any in An unexpected acute

PCO2, sensory + chemoreceptors receptors (mechanoreceptors,

and stretch, + PO2 irritant

PaCO2 PaO2,

control system. Figure of the representation Schematic 134-1 respiratory and receptors, sensory information the neurons The cerebral brainstem cortex. chemoreceptors, respiratory peripheral receive in the from the This and the output integrated, resulting neural to information is diaphragms transmitted and is lungs. stimulation The the of sign denotes receptor. CJ, 1997, WB JC, ed Saunders, Andreoli 4, TE, et editors: of Bennett al, (From Essentials Carpenter p Medicine, Philadelphia, 171.) Cecil pale), limpness, sudden color or change (usually gagging. blue apnea, choking, or is of to incidence 0.05% events such 1%. The in more of be Specific cases. 50% the than causes can identified associated they of and are causes Gastroesophageal common most are choking, gagging. ALTE, laryngospasm or and reflux emesis, the with derangements accidental causes Central seizures, events from smaller account nervous system cardiovascular bleeding nonaccidental and breath-holding spells, trauma) percentages. metabolic for 15% cases, of (e.g., and (CNS) intracranial approximately account for or (respiratory viruses infections and in respiratory serious others), infants. and [RSV] pertussis, meningitis) virus Acute apnea bacterial syncytial can cause with also (sepsis, infection

careful correct to most cases, lead In a history can diagnosis. a of the feeding the birth, of or the stiffness, social respiratory illnesses, should prior trauma, movements premature (seizure), presence Questions limpness event, or time of and apnea, situation intercurrent any include family. consciousness level at jerking history of the absence of effort, history, and status. on respiratory nutritional neurologic of examination infant, and the the physical should cardiac status, pattern, focus bruising and condition The injury, general count, radiograph, chest electrolytes, include analysis. hemoglobin, white nitrogen, creatinine, blood blood evaluation laboratory cell hematocrit, and a blood gas urea serum glucose, may The serum occur. respiratory with patients in of viruses infection should pertussis Testing and evidence for respiratory be is reflux pH may barium If swallow probe study suspected, useful. a gastroesophageal or and can and time hours to gagging, get the provide on respiratory information and hospital difficulties cardiac situation; parental to history home monitoring patterns in assess feeding the alleviate 24 12 emesis); Cardiorespiratory and provide for anxiety. more (choking, head Useful (for the tomography seizures). computed magnetic resonance a imaging CNS determine scan, to tests causes and (CT) brain, (EEG) of an include electroencephalogram

when There should be recommendations are for home monitoring prescribed. no standard to (SIDS). to which likely useful in progress is children Polysomnography not ALTEs with predicting infant syndrome death sudden are prevention treat to is of events to future identify The underlying key cause it. the and infant event to the surrounding anxiety recommended. cardiopulmonary and (CPR) parents alleviate are attempting Teaching resuscitation

age unexpected younger of than defined in an year death after autopsy, infant of investigation, an which of is the review as remains 1 cause scene history. the and unexplained clinical SIDS death drugs. and premature Native impoverished mothers SIDS whose American African of infants of smoke in American risk cigarettes, abused mothers is infants, The higher low have infants and young in infants, birth and weight who of highest and threeto have winter. is of died is siblings fivefold in during The increased SIDS infants the SIDS risk who of SIDS or and rare months common 2 of months before age. 6 age and 4 after weeks 4 of is is between most SIDS incidence of 1980s. since the The decreased has dramatically

proposed mechanisms of have variety SIDS. unproven A been to explain prone with on during soft position bedding. sleep, associated is especially SIDS sleeping widely two decades. supine explains, SIDS advocated position The the decreased of the part, in incidence past during or include predisposition to control. cellular for maturational Current neural theories delay and a to related abnormalities SIDS cardiorespiratory brainstem (especially A of CNS due down the from respiration, prolongation rebreathing may face of portion and control Q-T abnormal to interval, softbedding). sleeping deaths in CO2 SIDS be of

for diagnosis the differential 134-1 SIDS. Table See of

the bedding. program There and been backto-sleep with in has avoiding decline soft SIDS a significant should their unless there Thus, the position supine to be contraindications. are parents infants instructed all in medical place All soft

infection*,† Fulminant Infant botulism*

due Seizure Brain non-accidental hemorrhage accidental tumor* Intracranial or trauma*,‡ to disorder†

Carnitine dehydrogenase acyl-coenzyme deficiency*,‡ Medium-chain A Hypoglycemia† deficiency‡

or at volvulus/shock* *Obvious autopsy. Midgut suspected Gastroesophageal reflux*,‡

common. †Relatively

test required. ‡Diagnostic

134 beds Breathing on be the should with infants who bedding parents and of counseled should Control u Chapter share risks. avoided, be 463 their Decreasing both recommended. cigarette during maternal and pregnancy, is after smoking,

@ Available StudentConsult.com

to upper cessation obstruction (obstructive airway (central Apnea apnea). or due airflow as respiratory of is effort lack of the defined apnea) either apnea in normal sigh is seconds breath. less healthy during 10 infants common lasting children especially after in sleep, can than Central present a and be than seconds pauses considered 20 lasting longer Central abnormal. to are 15 in sleep, obstructive during apnea, is is more and infants, common children. Central common apnea especially more in older

though of apneic can have episodes central origin, infants recurrent which central/obstructive. that of of are often prematurity, consists mixed apnea be Premature they can Apnea weeks 44 postconceptional should resolve by of prematurity age. children investigation warrant apnea 134-2). infants Older thorough with and (Table

is or a and Central may occurrence outside rare infancy primary apnea be secondary. of mitochondrial/metabolic increased common, central and/or drive CNS Arnold-Chiari and pressure, malformation, medications include of hypoventilation, tumors, intracranial respiratory more disorders. causes (narcotics), impairing are central myelomeningocele which Secondary sclerosis. Genetic and abnormal central tuberous Joubert, respiratory Prader-Willi and and syndromes syndromes with developmental Rett, control delays associated include

hypoxemia. central (CCHS) which during control is of syndrome hypercarbia, central hypoventilation profound disorder there is genetic respiratory apnea, sleep rare Congenital a to and leading in loss a for in development. PHOX2B Most the system is gene, CCHS nervous which defect autonomic patients necessary with have of first difficulties life, although also later within present it with the several in Most CCHS can childhood. weeks have respiratory infants (neuroblastoma). CCHS risk an crest disease Hirschsprung increased associated neural of is tumors and with

2 during Obstructive which 8 to is to with apnea by prevalence airway peak caused upper of sleep. or syndrome partial 3% obstruction 2% complete sleep (OSA), affects years, at young children can pauses, hypoxia in It episodes and restless sleep result presents gasping, of as and that respiratory hypercarbia. daytime morning, a performance, poor in somnolence, poor and Children awakening quality. the changes, as poor somatic of result difficulty school may growth have sleep behavioral hypertension cor pulmonary severe in morning and lead to headaches to or pulmonale. hypoxia and, can Nighttime cases, hypercarbia trisomy other glossoptosis, risk cause but young sequence, include common children, diseases. of the most OSA Adenotonsillar in obesity, neuromuscular for craniofacial (Pierre hypertrophy and 21), malformations Robin is OSA factors have OSA children snore. Not OSA, snore all children and who not who have all children young findings restless classic problems, do gasping Many somnolence behavioral respirations; sleep, much of inattention/hyperactivity are OSA daytime and the common. more with not have and with diagnosis confirmed be the question, polysomnogram. Thus, a is in it should when

is test and definitive apnea. evaluation only for of sleep Polysomnogram obstructive the central (PSG) electrocardiogram, leg pressure, It wall and and for continuous involves recording sleep electro-oculogram audible staging, pulse and oronasal chest snore, oximetry, and abdominal of EEG excursion, and chin airflow electromyogram, capnography. of significant to index(AHI) measured score airflow times or cessation the stage. an child sleep number The the or a magnitude sleep that PSG affect apnea-hypopnea ventilation a hour of is from has of in of negatively reduction or decision the norm daytime the often than accepted less is AHI hinges the pediatric of generally severity although treat An to patients, 1 on for impairment. Measured (REM) captures rapid an worse study ideal so movement AHI supine, child in stages positions. is the all and typically and when is sleep eye sleep

from a of or determining will the whether tonsillectomy. OSA Treatment without an starts with with adenoidectomy, benefit child or intervention If not is surgical indicated fails

bradycardia 134-2 EXAMPLE(S) CPAP, of obstruction Central Apnea, SIGNS HFNC, airway (<36 Apnea upper prematurity Table Apnea Caffeine, DISEASE of Categories TREATMENT intubation Premature MECHANISM control, wk)

Arnold-Chiari CCHS, central apnea/ ventilation Central Apnea Mechanical control Abnormal malformation hypoventilation

cannula. BiPAP, CPAP, CCHS, Bi-level continuous HFNC, airway flow nasal positive hypoventilation congenital high central syndrome; pressure; positive airway pressure;

problem, the be or the then pressure via bi-level can used of airway use sleep. positive airway nasal airway (BiPAP) pressure interfaces alleviate (CPAP) during distend positive upper to the continuous to tight-fitting not mask, may which be This young a requires tolerated children. nasal in well but oxygen not sleep milder OSA fragmentation. hypoxemia can blunt does in cases obstruction and Supplemental of alter hypotonia, those cases, In may tracheostomy abnormalities extreme with especially be craniofacial indicated. associated or

defined (UAO), obstruction which orupper as nasal inlet, of larynx from (subglottic located the trachea life-threatening airway the Upper airway common thoracic any cold due part obstruction ranges the above of to obstruction space). to the is of blockage be for serve serious throughtheir a In becausethe than neonates, nuisance a children, obstruction a airway, it an usually is nasal but mouth of can may who noses. breathe predominantly as more danger problem be airway causes obstruction 135-1, 135-2, differential can intosupraglottic, (Tables also varies subdivided The subglottic and diagnosis patient age glottic, of and with and 135-3).

StudentConsult.com @ Available

increasing leading the inspiration airway, generated to the UAOis is and structures. pressure inspiratory of respiratory resistance caused most harsh noise to airway noise.The UAO a stridor, because upper airflow negative during with more pronounced the by vibration the associated commonly collapses sound feeding,excitement, becauseof inspiratory higher because during and often agitation, Stridor and flow decreases sleep, flow of rates, during lower increases rates. Occasionally exhalation. stridor also may be on present gastroesophageal the cause and in is infants problems most by (floppy larynx) Laryngomalacia reflux. may stridor and ofinspiratory be aggravated swallowing common involvement. Hoarseness cord suggests vocal breathing increased Children UAO work of manifested mayhave retractions. with bysuprasternal inspiratory

hemangioma) pathology) other web, Vocal intracranial Congenital stenosis pressure unilateral or Treacher system Pompe with from syndrome, atresia trisomy 21, cry; malformation DiGeorge Robin Macroglossia Arnold-Chiari or without subglottic encephalocele syndrome, syndrome) bilateral, paralysis/paresis or hypothyroidism, atresia Collins Nasal (weak Micrognathia cleft, Pharyngeal nervous (Beckwith-Wiedemann collapse (Pierre disease, Choanal syndrome, cord central increased Laryngeal

Laryngomalacia acquired, papillomatosis cyst croup Vascular web etiology) Subglottic Laryngeal after hemangioma Airway or stenosis intubation) Rhinitis Laryngeal etiology) infectious common (congenital common or rings/slings Viral non-infectious e.g., (most (most

(airway fever) tonsils 4 and Spasmodic/recurrent tracheitis Foreign Laryngeal abscess mo to high children 6 croup common yr croup age) Bacterial or adenoids Retropharyngeal body of Hypertrophied etiology (toxic, papillomatosis in (most esophageal) Viral

(burns, (allergic fracture) angioedema) gas, Epiglottitis bodies angina injury Mononucleosis wheezing, (adolescents) Trauma abscess history, laryngeal history, Angioedema hydrocarbons) (familial Peritonsillar Inhalation Ludwig uncommon) (tracheal toxic or Anaphylaxis Foreign hypotension) (infection, cutaneous

not swelling. a nasopharynx of neck about child information may adenoidal lateral may Although radiographic views of hypertrophyand with evaluation be airway provide and stridor the helpful, head steeply. be anteroposterior lateral the fall of of subglottic the the walls spaceshould On with theneck extension, (AP) taken and views in airwayshould symmetrical the away stenosis tapering subglotticedema. subglottic suggests suggests Asymmetry or lesion, mass whereas a However, may these subtle. findings be children. delineate Computedtomography of the help of site scans airway the (CT) the but upper obstruction require may sedationin can younger be nasopharyngoscopy/laryngoscopy, done and patency, vocal presence assessing Flexible which cord lesions, extremelyuseful sedation, and laryngomalacia. can in without adenoidtissue, airway airway the of other is Bronchoscopy and the sedation. assessing procedurerequires airways, be large useful subglottic can this but space intrathoracic in

to Anxious Agitated; toxic anxious toxic Anxious; Normal Appearance Normal

b conjugated Prevention None None None None influenzae H. vaccine type

Sudden Prodrome/onset Biphasic sudden Insidious worsening Chronic with sudden or Sudden

Normal BODY ABSCESS PERITONSILLAR Drooling, normal FOREIGN HISTORICAL FEATURE PAPILLOMATOSIS LARYNGEAL CLINICAL/ ABSCESS Variable, Normal Appearance Drooling ANGIOEDEMA RETROPHARYNGEAL trismus usually

None >38.5°C temperature Fever >38.5°C None usually None Body temperature usually Body

from Arnold Modified JE: in obstruction Airway children. Practical Therapy, and in Kliegman Super Strategies Pediatric DM, 126. RM, 1996, Diagnosis Philadelphia, In Nieder Saunders, p WB editors: ML, WBC, virus; infection frozen Fresh blood syncytial human FFP, plasma; HPV, cell. URI, coryza, respiratory upper sneezing); (with white tract papillomavirus; respiratory RSV,

foreign Table angioedema, Airway and Subglottic retropharyngeal Epiglottitis, Croup, abscess Supraglottic peritonsillar SUBGLOTTIC body, SUPRAGLOTTIC FEATURE tracheitis OBSTRUCTION OBSTRUCTION syndromes Causes 135-3 Differentiating Common of Obstruction from clinical

tracheitis unless present Yes No, Toxic is

angioedema No is present No, edema Facial unless

28:859–880, North JC, Clin epiglottitis, et upper croup from Davis Adapted Am airway Acute Gartner Pediatr obstruction: 1981. H, and AG, al: Galvis

The cause is in children common tonsils. hypertrophy the most of of adenoids chronic UAO and and inhaled tonsillar may infection, Adenoidal aggravated and hyperplasia recurrent irritants. by allergy, be

The are patients, (see breathing, sleep mouth snoring, obstructive in of adenoidal 134). hypertrophy and, and signs tonsillar apnea Chapter some otitis obstructed at enter to adenoids, choanae persistent the The be can the and or predisposing media. by recurrent nasopharynx eustachian enlarged tubes

a nasopharyngoscopy. radiograph Adenoidal hypertrophy flexible is by the lateral nasopharynx by or of assessed

to thought treatment removal. If effective adenoids the or most and UAO, tonsils are to is large be contributing then the significantly lymphoid discrete especially is possible, a of adenoids are consist children. not the organ regrowth preschool rather tissue, but Because in are necessary. severe, large tonsils adenoids may in removing tonsils the the to be then obstruction is the and the If addition

is period. presenting stenosis/atresia neonatal a Choanal inthe problem congenital be may relatively or is It bilateral rare. and unilateral Neonates soobstruction generally can when nasal of especially passages feeding. cause nose are breathers, significant respiratorydistress, obligate infants mouths. the Crying because breathe obstruction crying though bypasses their pass easily through of the nostrils shouldraise atresia. suspicion the Inability to catheter a small choanal confirmed inspecting is directly by The scan CT with aflexible by and nasopharyngoscope. area diagnosis the An treatment definitive but may oral surgery. the term, inthe short is airway be useful

@ Available StudentConsult.com

SEE CHAPTER 107.

StudentConsult.com @ Available

SEE CHAPTER 107.

107. CHAPTER SEE

@ Available StudentConsult.com

inspiration. is exaggerated structures, cartilages, during glottic arytenoid especially Laryngomalacia the to and collapse due of the epiglottis be muscular or to due to and immature of surrounding decreased cartilaginous larynx structures tone may It structures. the Table birth shortly at Inspiratory stridor of laryngomalacia the (see suspicion 135-1). after raise should or beginning This the in is cause infants. of stridor common most hypoventilation, not it to respiratory with hypoxemia, does occasionally but significant in difficulty is enough hypercarbia, distress, and feeding. with result usually cause severe It

or no expiratory inspiratory is The sign of laryngomalacia primary stridorwith little component. flexed. when is active the loudest neck or The the decreases feeding prone, the typically relaxed stridor or infant when is or infant placed is and when is airway that laryngomalacia, increases (swallowing condition dysfunction), upper dysphagia including will reflux. respiratory exacerbate and viral infections, Any gastroesophageal inflammation 6 and months of 5 normally and 3 peaks age. between 12 resolves Laryngomalacia by of age months to children those muscles until neurologic of children with in airway However, cerebral conditions, in especially (such with otherwise occasionally affecting underlying persist of age longer upper palsy). months can it 24 up even diseases normal control and as

with presumed infants many laryngomalacia, established by examination. diagnosis be physical tentatively In can history the and laryngomalacia, the for course further then necessary. is If follows typical the no workup patient in and more the to patency important nasopharyngoscopy (collapse) severe However, patient flexible the dynamic or establish should which and of the diagnosis, larynx undergo surrounding firmly movement atypical cases, the to structures. assess is vocal cord can identify abnormalities the also airway cords. lesions This above vocal procedure and

In is laryngomalacia. no required cases, for therapy most evidence of be for respiratory should The of infection closely compromise. respiratory infant during observed times (aryepiglottoplasty) surgical from in failure procedure Infants airway. may hypoventilation, a bypass growth resulting extreme cases, laryngomalacia the upper or, to tracheostomy in a benefit severe hypoxia, or with

Available @ StudentConsult.com

the of the cords. vocal immediately the is stenosis the trachea below Subglottic narrowing portion of often more acquired. be It but congenital is may in subglottic inflammation scarring and infants, repeated the especially some premature space. intubation of or lead prolonged required Endotracheal can intubation, to

expiration). (on both frequently biphasic and stridor Subglottic is inspiration that present can stenosis as is stridor the However, prominent usually on inspiration. more louder. stridor becomes increasing With respiratory effort, the force sound. a with enough small not generate breathe infants Very to to may able be also associated be cough with a barky stenosis that noted Subglottic similar to croup. may with clinical stenosis. subglottic of can infections edema, subglottic the Respiratory manifestations cause exacerbating

rigid endoscopic Definitive by requires diagnosis evaluation, bronchoscopy. flexible either or

with sufficiently can growth alone. and improve managed airway stenosis Mild may be conservatively subglottic More intervention. require surgical severe cases on may the effective. be the Depending nature treatment laser of lesion, endoscopic surgical and procedures. split options Other include cricoid tracheoplasty airway is may tube enough allow A until be the to tracheostomy patent the space subglottic to bypass airflow. required adequate

airway mass uncommon. Upper are lesions relatively presents months in which the childhood of before 6 hemangioma, most common age. usually tumor laryngeal is The Chapter (See 194.) the Subglottic of radiographs endoscopy. definitive subglottic AP of the but requires on space narrowing larynx, diagnosis asymmetrical produce lesions then or If spontaneously therapy. a lesion the needed the with until may tracheostomy improves tube severe, is be obstruction involutes

are webs a occur cysts trauma (intubation). as the failed whereas of in airway glottic consequence utero, Laryngeal result the typically of airway laryngeal recanalization of and Both stridor identified biphasic can by best are produce bronchoscopy. should ingesting objects stridor. be of in body small Foreign acute considered or child develops of who any infant capable onset

tumors caused condition a benign and at maternal is by papillomatosis acquired human rare birth from Juvenile laryngeal (HPV-6 warts. papillomavirus genital of HPV-11) manifestations stridor usually and biphasic in Clinical voice/cry. hoarse start infancy and include parenchyma. most and are The but lung even into to trachea, large the located spread lesions the commonly can in they larynx, the bronchi, distally include laser rarely limited which are and Treatment therapy interferon. and curative, options, required be a tumor. be suggest if avoided Tracheostomy as adequate may with airways an reports but should seeding the distal airway, to possible ensure related of

Available StudentConsult.com @

of is laryngeal important dysfunction. cause paralysis cord an Vocal lesion. recurrent nerve a the Paralysis is than or caused be bilateral often laryngeal and by may damage more by central unilateral to damage to nerve. aortic and arch than laryngeal recurrent is the around susceptible right passes nerve left more laryngeal The the procedures) traction (neck by thoracic surgical caused trauma nerve mediastinal injury be may during and or infants of lesions. Peripheral delivery hemorrhage. causes Arnold-Chiari (meningomyelocele), Central and include intracranial hydrocephalus, malformation

including in as voice presents paralysis biphasic cord a (in stridor Vocal and hoarseness, cry and aphonia. and weak infants), cry, alterations paralysis at by sounds as risk audibly with for and manifested are Children and vocal coarse aspiration, often with airway auscultation. cord drinking coughing/choking

laryngeal often within time, nerve have usually over traumatic spontaneous to to the 3 recurrent improvement injury with months. 6 Patients of be paralyzed not year 1 the injury, If is the it damaged. vocal within cord to has permanently likely recovered then cord protection. phonation a the paralyzed cases, improve some Gelfoam and to In cord vocal reposition can of injection airway with cord Patients vocal and severe placement. airway require tube tracheostomy obstruction in aspiration resulting paralysis may

136 Diseases Airway, Pulmonary 469 Vascular Parenchymal, Chapter Lower and u

VASCULAR AND DISEASES AIRWAY, PARENCHYMAL, PULMONARY LOWER

are 136-1).Lower (Table airway airway in result lower airway obstruction. causes diseases many diseases often There of muscle, obstruction of asthma, in children The lower bronchial which excessive secretions. and in results is diffuse most inflammation, disease airway constriction airway smooth common bronchial from especially under children years 3 episodes common, of Virus-induced in age. are wheezing is in the asthma, weeks evaluation asthma of likely be may life to first despite months therapy warranted. Wheezing further that that diagnostic aggressive persists not begins due or and or airway one aspiration lymph (foreign the extrinsic of Wheezing that chest or narrowing area to focal body is localized or masses by nodes). suggests compression

@ Available StudentConsult.com

to airway obstruction, wheezing In than the obstruction below thoracic on more causes on upper inspiration. contrast expiration inlet sound of that generally by produced is stridor. quality and has a continuous wheeze more walls a vibration musical than is airway does A to to airways during is intrathoracic airway pressure exhalation, collapse the expiration. Intrathoracic relative which increased atmospheric on accentuates pressure and tends narrowing This prolonged work manifests wheeze, and expiratory as phase, breathing. of expiratory expiratory increased (e.g., the permanently In and bronchi patients become fibrosis), dilated airway cystic infection (bronchiectasis). chronic damaged with have inspiratory productive episodes with may crackles. Patients sputum, bronchiectasis and of of cough, have often purulent

arriving of corticosteroids, diagnosis. When a of inhaled (bronchodilators, long-term corticosteroids) is use asthma at short suspected, courses oral useful therapy are empiric in of trials children obstruction tests can pulmonary older years, and bronchodilators. assess In (spirometry) 6 function than response airflow to needed is fever, body not consistent but respiratory history significant of with those with each episode distress, Radiographic with evaluation wheezing, foreign

bronchiolitis) irritant edema particulates pressure or Bronchial (e.g., Infection Inhalation of pulmonary gases Increased venous

or drugs Cholinergic hypersecretion irritant Infection gases Bronchial particulates Inhalation of

body Foreign of Aspiration Aspiration gastric contents

airway Dynamic reactions, collapse (seen or aspergillosis bronchopulmonary fibrosis) with asthma only children either allergic Hypersensitivity cystic in

Vascular dilatation by Anomalous Lymph (tuberculosis, pulmonary Pulmonary lymphoma) vessel mass or or artery Bronchial pulmonary artery valve) blood (absent cysts innominate Airway ring/sling nodes compression

or clear findings aspiration, ciliary auscultatory or focal obtained. chest Bronchitis, hypersecretion and lateral Cystic failure radiographs posteroanterior Bronchial should to Primary (PA) have dyskinesia secretions fibrosis bronchiectasis by Generalized of diaphragms the airways. of increased small suggests indicated and an hyperinflation, diameter, flattening the anteroposterior diffuse (AP) chest obstruction for to in asthma association seen with due pneumonia. often Hyperinflation atelectasis patchy is in densities and mistaken or Localized localized suggests views, an anatomic body anomaly). expiratory obstruction (foreign hyperinflation, bronchial on especially airway with wheezing. inflammation aspiration persistent to can Dysphagia leading present and videofluoroscopic study. swallowing is best This a with assessed reflux may with to especially if it children, asthma aggravate is Gastroesophageal in young associated lead may wheezing and aspiration. very

@ StudentConsult.com Available

CHAPTER 78. SEE

to the trachea is lack a tracheal Tracheomalacia structural floppy of of due wall. integrity extend the The during pressure. maintaining approximately320°, normally of arc intrathoracic of through an cartilaginousrings trachea rigidity tracheal changesin may With membranous absent, may damaged. around cartilaginous the posterior the be completely or rings far usual), trachea tracheomalacia, (leaving widerthan not the be presentbut as may extend circumference be syndromes) of can These excessivecollapse congenital the result or (long-termmechanical bony most during (tracheoesophageal or abnormalities fistula in expiration.Tracheomalacia ventilation). pronounced may dysplasia acquired trachea, extrinsic compression masses by differentiated Tracheomalacia must or vascular tracheal structures. from be Localized extrinsic may tracheomalacia compression. trachea has been afterthe of persist relieved leading may to exacerbate Viralinfections coarseexpiratory cough. barky wheezing tracheomalacia, and bronchiolitis, croup. cough often The ascribed to mistakenly often noisesof tracheomalacia as barky misdiagnosed expiratory is asthmaor are the and

cough. only collapse may With exhalation tracheal apparent during tracheomalacia, with the forced be or by respiratory aggravated is It commonly infections. phase. The recurrent wheeze a expiratory collapse expiratory and prolonged may cause coarse airway may to the segment behind Secretions be predisposing malacia, of retained infection. resulting Infants may tracheomalacia episodes resemble spells. tracheas cyanotic with completely their in collapse that breath-holding severe during agitation, effort. is inspiratory as normal, is The voice the due walls. is the a vibration tracheal In to hallmark cough children, the of brassy, older sign barky persistent This often as and loud and be croup. misdiagnosed is can cough

usually with mild require intervention. Infants moderate tracheomalacia no to as airway in wall Tracheomalacia more increases improves the diameter the with firm. tracheal and lumen becomes growth geared supportive any care. is and treatment toward The older providing of for symptomatic cause cough precipitating treating children Antibiotics be concurrent to necessary infection. may treat with administer tracheomalacia (CPAP), infants, serves airway continuous stent especially may which to open severe Children, tubes tracheostomy the positive require airway. to pressure to tubes Custom-length been tracheostomy stent used the CPAP when airway fails. have open obstruction. children cannot problematic because source stents placed a stenosis of stents thus and serve grow the and airway are Surgically in as fixed

CHAPTER SEE 128.

cause by the Compression can compromise. structures respiratory masses vascular significant of or trachea vessels artery) may stridor, and Tracheal wheezing, aberrant by compression great innominate cause dyspnea. (aorta, cough, that cause normal than compression an from artery distally most common of compression is tracheal aortic arch. anterior from arises The innominate more anomalous the symptoms, is This results mild in respiratory surgical necessary. and rarely correction usually esophagus aortic compress persistent posteriorly arteriosum ligamentum a arch rings, arch a the double and anteriorly, Complete right common). with the which aortic include (most vascular and trachea the on which may lesions right-sided radio-graph. aortic chest have Both visible arches, be cause may of esophageal symptoms, rings result to addition a compression. as In complete dysphagia respiratory vascular be vascular can the which barium a compression. made by swallow, esophageal of often anomalies identifies The diagnosis diagnostic pulsatile is the a airway, and a of the great chest of identify procedure the vessels. angiogram choice (CT) of tomography will but compression computed Bronchoscopy vascular require rings almost repair. Complete always surgical (teratoma, include Other and, cystic tumors), mediastinal extrinsic cell rarely, thymoma, nodes causes mediastinal compression tracheal enlarged lymph lymphoma, germ of hygromas. masses (tuberculosis),

common. bodies foreign the bronchi and trachea relatively is into Aspiration of 4 who foreign of age. years are of bodies The aspirate children majority under in aspiration Most body group. secondary occur this to deaths foreign age left bodies at the lodge bronchus, than the off acute angle to airways. mainstem in takes right bronchus right-sided mainstem less Because foreign a tend foreign Some especially can bodies, nuts,

airway. the Chapter space, the u and Vascular Airway, in occluding proximally Parenchymal, also larynx 471 Pulmonary Lower subglottic 136 more or Diseases lodge totally radiopaque, are radiographically. not detect which to them bodies Many makes foreign difficult small are toys. nuts) young foreign The food by and children common (especially bodies most aspirated the lodge in more often esophagus than Coins the in airways. life-threatening. rubber children have balloons, be can Older to aspirate been known which

Available StudentConsult.com @

foreign foreign choking, radiographic physical have bodies body witnessed histories evidence who or clear aspiration. of or Many of aspiration, aspirate children history because have unrecognized. of a small percentage negative However, aspiration the went a patients findings sputum. body breath include may sounds, acute of localized with stridor, Physical foreign observed wheezing, absence cough, bloody and, rarely, unilateral aspiration

periods small unilateral quickly or recurrent of for andmay bodies lung persistent expelled, time of remain medical are Most butsome foreign production, cough,sputum in attention because pneumonia. the may come to long and and infants atelectasis, in recurrent persistent esophageal unresponsive should explanation.Foreign should chronic lodge trachea, in with cough young another is or therapy, included or symptoms.Therefore, persistent bronchodilator the thus diagnosis also the respiratory present. diagnosis inthe persistentpneumonia, ofpatients dysphagia Foreign bodies if body or children of differential may without esophagus wheezing compress to particularly bodies stridor wheezing, be foreign withpersistent aspiration producing or differential the be

also especially studies expiratory identify views. and the can objects of air focal trapping, Radiographic presence on will reveal radiopaque lateral expiratory when radiographs body ordered. Thus, be decubitus chest or aspiration should suspected, foreign is may fluoroscopy In addition, views. especially be in perform expiratory children helpful, cannot who is of bronchoscopy. aspiration, body history) rigid patient foreign there should (or the If undergo strong evidence Flexible be body when not is bronchoscopy is straightforward, bronchoscopy. the be via but rigid aspirated foreign removal performed body used an foreign useful can to and best presentation may locate

best caregivers. foreign body preventing aspiration educate to and to is parents approach The aspirated. be should be other children erupted, nuts, may small broken teeth or pieces uncooked not given that and have easily and infants molar carrots, into Before foods accessible stage age is at Sound development of to parental be to objects and determine small required judgment what should children.

Available @ StudentConsult.com

CHAPTER 109. SEE

SEE 61. CHAPTER

relatively children. Endobronchial mass lesions are uncommon in from most usually common results is tissue, lesion which inflammation. granulation The local endobronchial can granulomas. Tuberculosis cause Primary tumors rare of the lung in extremely children. are nonsecreting the The most tumor. carcinoid airway is common malignancy partially with that Endobronchial an emphysema obstruct present with hemoptysis. lesions airway occasionally and obstructive wheezing or then the If lesion airway, atelectasis completely may result. occludes the in and the aid of Radiographs diagnosis. CT the making chest scans used confirm often Bronchoscopy diagnosis. is the to

a to lobar referred as congenital of (formerly onelobe of overdistention overinflation consists Congenital of lobar emphysema) lung. tissue, years. compression asymptomatic distress but for also due respiratory normal lung This overdistention be neonatal in and can to undiagnosed severe may period remain the ofsurrounding it cause for Radiographically,it a pneumothorax. may mistaken be patient is may Lobectomy if berequired may but or indicated. resection then is distress surgical severe progressive, asymptomatic, ifthe respiratory notbe

a insults, congenital hernia 61) alveoli, or as Pulmonary unilateral in the result diaphragmatic be or of a decrease pulmonary of congenital (see artery. congenital absence such relative a of hypoplasia, amount Chapter may number of has occurs to been birth up to growth documented years. after 3 8 up predominantly years, Alveolar but

alveolar or is condition of destruction a to disruption due Emphysema septa. spaces pulmonary mechanically emphysema). infants) the ventilated In or which into the refers may or tissue hyperinflation term pediatrics, (interstitial (subcutaneous seen often interstitial to the in of premature emphysema, to emphysema air leakage subcutaneous be is emphysema in adults, common is rare children. Although in it a generalized causes, is variety or caused localized obstruction common. from by hyperinflation, can be However, airway of which commonly disease α1-antitrypsin the is observed it life. the deficiency, appears rarely Emphysema before second of but decade in

ciliary movement the syndrome)is immotile dyskinesia cilia in result of cilia disordered (PCD, in absent Primary an disorder or ultrastructural the cilia. abnormalities which inherited in 1 in affects 19,000persons. This approximately disorder forciliary in abnormalities ciliarystructure, to energy dynein There triphosphatase which but are common the necessary (ATPase), due defects features motility. viaadenosine provide are reported many ultrastructural that most is in arms, the

bronchiectasis. sinusitis, recurrent otitis chronic The media, classic presentation is and for syndrome, and of situs bronchiectasis, cases. triad approximately inversus, accounts the Kartagener pansinusitis, of 50% a sperm. Males of as are result immotile infertile the and results. normally, airways, in cilia beat the to secretions endobronchial infection fail accumulate Because infection, if Chronic early by bronchiectasis adulthood. leads untreated, to otitis in ciliary associated should or suspected be dyskinesia media. Primary recurrent/persistent frequent early-onset with with chronic bronchiectasis sinusitis and/or patients bronchitis

confirmed airwayepithelium. PCD from obtained respiratorycilia, nasal of or scrapings/biopsy electron by is of microscopy and difficult Results as may ultrastructuralabnormalities may inflammation be in chronic cilia. infection to to lead nasal interpret tool of as screening PCD. nitric The measurement nasal has for used been a oxide the (<200 per consistentwith than likely. values billionmake per 400 billion) parts nasalnitric oxide less diagnosis are whereas parts Low values PCD, greater the However, substantiated. assays oxide as a not diagnostic for has nasalnitric test beenfully PCD validity of

clearance is Treatment geared secretions. infections improving of treating toward respiratory and useful are chestCT resolution monitor to confirm scans bronchiectasis. and High therapy. cultures identify and antibiotic guide involved help organisms Surveillance chronic Sinus questionable. their benefit but is are sinusitis, manage procedures to often done surgical progressive. otitis prompt media.Chest children but of tobe for and management treatment of Most the tubes require placement physiotherapy equalization tends (PE) pressure of disease helpful, bacterialinfections of slowly the recurrent are course antibiotics, exacerbations macrolides, thrice-weekly may reduce number the such Preventive per year. of as

StudentConsult.com Available @

SEE 110. CHAPTER

into seepage fluid and the Pulmonary edema spaces. is alveolar the interstitial of pressures forces the airspaces, interstitial hydrostatic and fluid fluid tend forces the into move and to push airspaces. pressures whereas osmotic tend mechanical osmotic plasma away Capillary tissue from to these the of spaces normal Under circumstances, dry. interstitial so and the favors sum absorption, remain alveolar forces is removed alveoli by pulmonary lymphatics. Fluid normally the entering lymphatic flux edema transcapillary fluid drainage. exceeds forms when Pulmonary to left increased function moves venous pulmonary ventricular hydrostatic fluid into and hypertension leads Reduced the and interstitial pressure, capillary space and alveoli. alveoli, bronchioles, and increased interstitial (interstitial the space terminal of edema), arterioles expiration. initially bronchioles and the Fluid premature lung causing stiffness closure enters around on and reducing If fluid resulting then are the units intrapulmonary enters that in alveoli, ventilated). but (alveolar not process further continues, compliance the shunting perfused finding. Decreased ventilation is late a (hypercarbia)

biventricular ventricular left failure or from most commonly Pulmonary heart to due is dysfunction. edema pulmonaryedema not resistance do capillary proximal usually is the associated bed. pulmonale as vascular cor cause dysfunction) tothe hypertension and (rightventricular Pulmonary increased seen such lead sepsis edema. acute indisease can capillary pulmonary respiratory Increased to distresssyndrome, states as and permeability, foreign in also occur edema). seen severeobstruction excessive tracheal body adenoids after edemamay Pulmonary with or as tonsils swings pressure, and pulmonary from (postobstructive intrathoracic hypertrophied aspiration (IV) with iscapillary especially (hypoalbuminemia); central edema). (neurogenic to largevolumes altitude decreased with present high injury ascent of injury; be edema); altitude (high mayalso in conditions serum edema intravenous after nervous pulmonary pressure if and of oncotic fluids, Pulmonary pulmonary there after system administration

StudentConsult.com Available @

u and 136 Diseases Airway, 473 Lower Chapter Parenchymal, Pulmonary Vascular

pulmonary and with frothy, The tachypnea, edema sputum). cough (often of are manifestations clinical pink-tinged dyspnea, and edema As inspiratory worsens, the crackles work diffuse there of on hypoxemia; auscultation. is heard increased breathing be can

may a lung be obscured classically in diffuse but findings reveal hazy underlying radiographs pattern, infiltrates, perihilar disease. may Chest these by at Interstitial bases. lung (Kerley the be especially seen, lines)may edema B

and of pulmonary prognosis edema cause response therapy. on depend Treatment and to the the posture in an O2. be given Patients should upright and positioned supplemental IV rapidly helpful inotropic and therapy edema. pulmonary agents cardiogenic may acting Diuretic be in airway with (CPAP) high positive or ventilation (PEEP) positive Continuous required. pressure pressures pressure intubation be end-expiratory may positive using

SEE 39. CHAPTER

basedon in is classified Pulmonary mechanism. groups five hypertension (PH) to veins 1 as flow pulmonary due those hypertension(PAH) pulmonary is and (previouslycalled drugs pulmonary blood various (including to exposure pulmonary cardiac with thenewborn, arterial amphetamines),and muscular shunting), due hypertension such excessive pulmonary primary hypertension). Group of diseases hypertension congenital pulmonary arteries within left-to-right heart to idiopathic disease (e.g., persistent small arterial cocaine, this IPAH receptor-2 the with and isalso group been (BMPR2) Hereditary morphogenetic bone gene. in has linked the dysfunction is 2 such valvular as of left disease. caused Group by heart and hypoxia, to lung or 3 in Group disease issecondary obstruction upperairway hypoxemia. chronic apnea resulting sleep obstructive including is In secondary Group chronic pulmonarythromboembolism. to PH 4, includes Group including PH of some diseases. 5 autoimmune diseases unclear but multifactorial andmetabolic diseases, changesmay media of intima the With irreversible PAH, and the arterioles. occur pulmonary prolonged in

right arterial which right hypertension of Pulmonary the strains dilation the leads ventricle. hypertrophy and theheart, of side to may to heart insufficiency. retention, tricuspid condition in pulmonale, which hepatic and congestion, a fluid result This right-sided in failure leads cor toward be cor In pulmonale, the may ventricle,hindering left severe ventricular displaced function. septum left theventricular causesof chronic and obstructive hypoxia). pulmonale The are sleep (with untreated common children andsevere diseases, especially lung most severe apnea dysplasia in scleroderma, bronchopulmonary chronic cor

is significantleft-to-right or suspected be hemodynamically wheneverthere should shunting. arterial cardiac prolonged hypoxemia Pulmonary hypertension the addition to associated In be pulmonary pulmonary the physicalfindings other diseases, with second component and of anaccentuated heard. cardiac heart soundmay to ventricular but and the made estimate presence is septal cardiac the insufficiency, used whichcan artery flattening, ventricular may by pressures. catheterization, inter-ventricular diagnosis ofright confirm be pulmonary hypertrophy, dysfunction, tricuspid Definitive echocardiography

the 2 should condition. 5, For hypertension through pulmonary groups on with underlying focus treatment those in of the and with all PH O2 conditions hypoxemia essential. supplemental therapy relief PAH, of In is salt treatment with failure require and may fluid of diuretics and Heart restrictions intake. some used and short can nitric be (sildenafil) Vasodilator is term. inhaled oxide patients, helpful therapy in and forms. intravenous be infusions in is and helpful prostacyclin chronically available and both acutely subcutaneous, Continuous may of inhaled, may beneficial. be antagonists Endothelium with the only may treatment many and PAH of progressive have transplantation courses, form the be patients lung heart-lung or option. Unfortunately, idiopathic

but condition life-threatening in Pulmonary hemorrhage potentially is rare a children. bleeding capillary bronchial to It or airways (hemangiomas, due vessel can fromdiffuse bleeding bleeds) (alveolar fromthe be hemorrhage). Alveolarhemorrhage and due capillary is disruption/inflammation disorders after transplantation. autoimmune caused bonemarrow usually to diffuse by bronchial pulmonary arteriovenous Airway bleeding some be cystic especially which malformations(as can artery in lung with patients infections, hemorrhagic to hereditary airway withchronic and collaterals, fibrosis. develop telangiectasia), due hemangiomas, macrophages or alveolar and a pulmonary iron-staining the byrecurrent bleeding, use rare lavage special in characterized with hemosiderin-laden lung, identifiedmicroscopically deficiency techniquesin is the can be bronchoalveolar of hemosiderosis lung biopsy Idiopathic which disorder iron specimens. anemia, interchangeablywith the mouth a thatresults pharynx,nasopharynx, lung, is finding leading Althoughthe is accumulationin hemosiderin to used it pathologic bleeding pulmonary sometimes hemosiderosis or the anywhere in term lung. hemorrhage, from airway, is hemorrhage preferable a bleeding Pulmonary intrathoracic source. for an from term

StudentConsult.com @ Available

present pulmonary with hemoptysis. Most with hemorrhage children including nasopharynx or more important hemorrhage. It extrapulmonary from hematemesis common true than rule to the of pulmonary out are bleeding, is bleeding these and sources mouth, as wheeze, shortness hemorrhage symptoms hemoptysis, to of cyanosis, include pulmonary cough, and fatigue, and of addition breath, presenting fever. the signs pallor, In frequently radiographs. respiratory infiltrates recurrent associated Episodic with chest pulmonary on manifests pulmonary symptoms hemorrhage as radiographs, hemoptysis result profound hemorrhage infiltrates hemoptysis. radiographic alveolar changes, with hypoxemia, minimal respiratory in on significant whereas bleeding may causes often few airway and diffuse symptoms, Symptomatic the from patients chest, a differentiating experience bubbling sources of be sensation localized diffuse which helpful bleeding. in pulmonary local in may Some may cyanosis, and locally diffusely sounds, auscultation. findings include Physical examination crackles or on decreased breath

hemorrhage bleeding. airway diagnosis alveolar differential The of includes and pulmonary alveolitis (capillary) capillary life-threatening include: and bleeding present acute associated disease; a and with alveolar to diffuse conditions hemorrhage. pressures disease; elevated pulmonary secondary disorders; previously alveolar clotting (capillaritis) The idiopathic alveolar pulmonary hemosiderosis; (Table venous will 136-2).Rarely, cardiac causes of venoocclusive autoimmune well infant diffuse with injury; the is Often to resolves, infant cause acute episode found, once and, returns no normal. the episode. Most a bleeding these never of infants second have cardiovascular, have can (see or pulmonary, Table causes immunologic Hemoptysis 136-2).

perform is to It thorough to airway out a rule upper epistaxis. important examination requires Sometimes nasopharyngoscopy. this granulomatosis lupus be purpura, disease, and Henoch-Schönlein systemic If angiogram radiograph, excluded, especially rheumatologic/autoimmune echocardiogram, should bleeding diseases, CT polyangiitis, Good-pasture a extrapulmonary considered. with then chest, bronchoscopy, havebeen erythematosus, chest and ofthe of sources evaluationfor

episodes with O2, administration bleeding acute often transfusions, bleeding. to of the the acute tamponade The mechanical blood management hemorrhages, includes supplemental with ventilation of pulmonary and, of alveolar PEEP cause of to Attempts the be bleeding. should made the identify is directed Treatment providing disorders the underlying supportive and care. toward bleeding, shown vessel arteriography to with been arterial bronchial embolization has successful. be In

is embolism rare in Pulmonary children. it catheters, central indwelling venous is associated it often occurs, with When

syndrome fibrosis Tumor mycobacterial, states. Pneumonia (bacterial, oral body metastasis) or Tracheobronchitis Bronchogenic parasitic) Lung carcinoid, Cystic abscess contraceptives, Bronchiectasis or Foreign Contusion—trauma fungal, cyst (adenoma, Sequestration Respiratory hemangioma, distress hypercoagulable retention and thromboses obesity, vein deep embolism. (DVTs) pulmonary In may abortion, and trauma, lead to malignancy adolescents,

infected even (septic may small emboli) distensible, Because be cause they and multiple, asymptomatic the are emboli, infection. pulmonary bed vascular pulmonary if is unless dyspnea, emboli chest pleuritic may hemoptysis. acute and Large cough, cause pain, as (ECG). Hypoxia electrocardiogram nonspecific is ST-segment are the on changes and T-wave common, P2 present. and sound increased, sound be be may S4 may an The heart

be cardiomegaly normal, Although the atelectasis seen. may is x-ray chest usually or measurement be in used D-dimers light but of of The can the be must test, a of as a embolism. interpreted screening it pulmonary probability no low, be further for then embolism is may D-dimer is necessary. normal the probability the If workup and choice embolism test if chest. normal moderate of the the D-dimer if diagnostic it the high, is or is a CT of is or the probability but angiogram elevated, is However, of then in to Ventilation-perfusion may defects, but without perform in they scans difficult young are children. ventilation revealing perfusion matching defects in or extremity useful ultrasonography DVTs. be for patients assessing can lower Doppler compression rarely though pulmonary gold angiography, with still CT of standard improvement For in the pulmonary embolism, the is now are diagnosis angiography, necessary. angiograms definitive cause of Leiden. should common an the obvious hypercoagulable which states, is be V pulmonary without embolism with most for factor Children evaluated

heparin. the usually should pulmonary suspected, with be Once patient low-molecular-weight is embolism a anticoagulated, it to patients supplemental treat the predisposing is should receive All factors. O2, important and surgical indicated. of are Thrombolytic therapy resection emboli and rarely an placed recurrent vena inferior prevent emboli. needs caval to be Occasionally filter to

whites. the is genetic (CF) recessive disorder disease Cystic fibrosis is common in an that autosomal most life-limiting of States, heritage. the 1 15,000 is in 3200 United 1 incidence in 31,000 the persons in whites, In CF Asian Americans, approximately African of 1 and chromosome of on the chloride transmembrane polypeptide, a gene of for channel a cells. (CFTR), encodes on long fibrosis located cystic arm 7, epithelial the The apical for surface regulator CF, the located pancreas. membranes and liver, the of of salt and proper important cell water the movement airways, appropriate and CFTR various maintaining across especially the in for composition secretions, is base common three pairs absence at the a of position deletion most in The of phenylalanine (ΔF508). the 508 is resulting mutation mutations More gene than identified. the 1500 have of been CFTR

in of are affected and by of cells abnormal manifestations characteristics CFTR, The resulting epithelial clinical secretory absorptive the CF. ion sweat altered and in gland The chloride the sweat results sodium conductance excessively in chloride high levels. is the chloride standard test, disorder. sweat diagnostic still test the for which of is basis this the This of 99% in > mEq/L) chloride It positive sweat CF. is with (elevated 60 patients to secretions bacteria. the more prone make airway with colonization Abnormal airway the airway also and promote function may in of CFTR bacterial the adhesion epithelium. airway reduce defenses to Defects leads eventually infections This damage chronic airway (bronchiectasis). and all to to bronchial

StudentConsult.com @ Available

Polyuria Chest Failure Pain Thrive Diarrhea Masses Alkalemia Hoarseness Constipation Hyponatremia Neck to Eosinophilia Hepatomegaly Hemoptysis

present malabsorption (cholestatic that protein and liver hypoalbuminemia, CF disease respiratory chronic with fat chronic steatorrhea), jaundice), can or thrive, progressive 137-1). to (failure a infection (Table is disease are currently diagnosed been screening, in of Columbia the and infants since states 2010. newborn 50 available which has all based District on Many commonly with present poorly pulmonary and asthma controlled respiratory manifestations Older such infections. chronic children as impermeability to of The of an epithelium and sodium. chloride with respiratory marked CF excessive exhibits patients reabsorption impaired obstruction relative results dehydration transport. to which leads airway This of airway mucociliary secretions, a and in This, aeruginosa. and endobronchial turn, with Pseudomonas leads aureus in bacteria, to especially Staphylococcus colonization persistent that Chronic bronchial in infection results productive cough or children. often especially older recurrent sputum, is in of bronchiectasis death. Chronic obstruction insufficiency and premature infection and, eventually, and pulmonary airway leads airway to to The currently the median mid-30s. is age (years) in of survival significant in disease. even lung clubbing Digital those with patients in common is CF, without sinusitis Chronic are and polyposis common. nasal

Burkholderia to associated and are with deterioration. cepacia difficult strains Pulmonary with treat of be may clinical accelerated virulent infections a (ABPA) Aspergillus is in bronchopulmonary aspergillosis Allergic the to hypersensitivity CF airways. reaction causes aggravates lung inflammation/obstruction It disease. and airway CF treatment (itraconazole). anti-fungal is agents (prednisone) systemic ABPA and for The corticosteroids is from bronchial often of hemoptysis by usually but major is in lung. infected artery caused collateral vessels due the to airway bleeding damaged/chronically portions Minor infection, hemoptysis lung in can disease. occur Pneumothoraces advanced patients with

bronchiolitis, chronic the Pneumothorax Nasal failure Cor polyps reactivity Airway Mucoid hypoxemia) aspergillosis Sinusitis Hemoptysis pneumonia Allergic of with bronchopulmonary bronchitis, bronchi pulmonale (associated impaction Atelectasis Bronchiectasis, Respiratory

Hepatic states Meconium Distal intestinal cirrhosis Appendicitis Meconium (vitamins Intestinal deficiency, Cholelithiasis A, (non-neonatal failure Growth reflux Gastroesophageal Fibrosing (infants) vitamin Volvulus obstruction soluble Malignancy varices, hypertension: (strictures) (rare) D) (infants) steatosis Neonatal peritonitis esophageal ileus (infants) Insulin jaundice obstructive Rectal colonopathy Intussusception atresia (malabsorption) prolapse (infants) hypersplenism) syndrome Hepatic E, hyperglycemia, deficiency Fat Pancreatitis symptomatic diabetes (portal K, obstruction)

hypokalemia, exhaustion clubbing puberty Edema-hypoproteinemia Delayed to malabsorption) (hyponatremia, (due alkalosis) protein Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy–arthritis Dehydration–heat Digital Electrolyte Infertility disturbances metabolic and hypochloremia,

of patients Ninety with CF percent pancreatic insufficiency. are born with exocrine the mucus inspissation subsequent destruction result and intestine. the inability into pancreatic in of The toexcrete ducts of pancreatic enzymes the fat. especially extent), (to proteins, This of sugars a leads malabsorption lesser to and fat-soluble malabsorption (largefoul-smelling stools), steatorrhea and as and failure (A, deficiencies clinically manifests D,E, of to K), thrive. Fat vitamins with peripheral of in with malabsorption (meconium meconium present are inspissated born intestinal and early obstruction infancy can patients CF as 10% caused by Protein ileus). hypoproteinemia edema.Approximately obstruction mucus inspissated syndrome). in obstruction fromthick intestinal older patients, intestinal lumen intestinal (distal the result may In can lead or adult islet cause deficiency. to damage adolescent In insulin patients,progressive enough pancreatic to celldestruction (CF-related true requires insulintherapy intolerance, develop. presentsas glucose that diabetes) may This but initially diabetes conserve ducts ininfants. and and to thesweat hypochloremic may alkalosis, failure lead of The hyponatremia to chloride sodium especially metabolic in tract in and reproductive dysfunction Inspissation of both toreproductive leads mucus males females. the and the azoospermia absence of deferens males,congenital vas universal. In arenearly reduced females, a and illness tubes women abnormal secondary is oftenpresent chronic secretions body as of in diminished fallopian also amenorrhea In the with by weight.Fertility result can CF is but cervix, conceive. and

newborn should meconium screen with evaluated CF. a infants ileus positive and/or be for with All in any failure symptoms, The thrive, metabolic jaundice, infant abnormalities presenting hypochloremia, or CF be considered chronic (hyponatremia, with alkalosis). diagnosis electrolyte should to seriously cholestatic of respiratory digital clubbing. gastrointestinal especially respiratory symptoms, diagnosis the be chronic children there CF is if with differential or of in should with evaluated especially CF. be those nasal should Any for child than 12 younger years, polyps, with evaluated. also patients should CF be siblings All of

CF CF. 1500 others (and mutations, identified), identified detect DNA analysis will all than not Readily mutations to are many available of more yet but cases because tests detect there commercial DNA be immunoreactive All of but and are the CF, trypsinogen U.S. identifying states newborn (IRT) on tests, false-negative elevated for CF, there or screening DNA have majority either false-positive based infants with results. levels both is diagnostic test sweat of Therefore, the still choice test. the listed Indications 137-2. test performing sweat Table are in for a pulmonary CF (chronic following The of met salt to or be loss nutritional disease, establish more one clinical the abnormalities, CF:The diagnosis or 1. presence and characteristic criteria of syndromes, typical gastrointestinal should of features

mEq/L, if <40mEq/L, performed elevated value sweat if collection) mEq/L, laboratory accredited at with sweat is 40 chloride (positive an CF negative >60 Two 60 tests certified 2. the if and adequate to borderline Foundation

known to identified CF cause 3. analysis Two mutations DNA or by

sibling has positive chloride testing sweat because or CF, a the

persistent the prolonged asthma Hemoptysis or respiratory (if by not in tracheostomy explained other Pseudomonas Recurrent tract intubation) control Recurrent e.g., to factors, atelectasis aeruginosa or wheezing/difficult

atresia) jaundice intestinal vitamin D, childhood any Pancreatitis Fat-soluble peripheral Hepatic plug, ileus in malabsorption manifestations esophageal or (A, cirrhosis K) Meconium E, varices obstruction as hypertension) hypoalbuminemia, infancy prolapse (meconium Cholestatic in Hypoproteinemia, such edema Neonatal Steatorrhea, Rectal (including deficiency states portal

MISCELLANEOUS direct-reacting Prolonged, neonatal jaundice

Hyponatremic of Failure taste alkalosis sweat) only in required history after Aspermia criteria affected cystic infants symptoms disease-causing of on (typically diagnosis, early formed skin polyps Digital to Recurrent sinusitis for the vas crystals manifested are known as mutations in clinical hypochloremic evaporation Absent presence not kissing by clubbing sibling (e.g., deferens Nasal parent may life. salt child—from of be thrive or fibrosis noted Family cousin) in of DNA Salty

there the test results technical 137-3). sensitive (Table for sweat Although is subject both to false-negative are false-positiveand specific CF, problems, and is it and measurements infants Cutoff diagnostic less for months 6 may lower. be than nasal (not potential of measurement elastase the differences and of include epithelium available) widely tests bioelectrical across Other fecal measurement levels. supportive exocrine pancreatic indicate levels fecal insufficiency. elastase Low laboratories identifies 95% by by CF, mutations identified testing. approximately but CF that not patients with done standard there commercial of are are genotyping CFTR all considered Not disease-causing have uncertain are mutations in and consequences. prognostic CFTR-related tests borderline newborn syndrome are of with Some screening considered (CRMS). sweat have consequence metabolic infants identified uncertain to by mutations and and features or clinical present be may CF considered that atypical non-classical tests sweat variant Older borderline with mild children CF.

ΔF508 centers. mutations most of diagnosis Identification with medical of at the and common children is (heterozygotes) and offered carriers prenatal other techniques can more than carriers. of testing 90% Present identify sampling. genotype villus Prenatal amniocentesis known CF of detection may by accomplished or a be chorionic

primarily is gastrointestinal of multifactorial, complications. is directed it and The toward CF but the treatment pulmonary fibrosis. effective no single cystic Presently, for there cure is the at Therapies CFTR underlying are defect correcting under targeted investigation. have patients mechanism of a a their gating targeted an landmark potentiators medication approved to subset defective has as improve small-molecule function Recently, protein. been CF of for who of known CFTR CFTR abnormal small bronchial effects from of toward the and facilitating Management directed the airways of is chronic infection. secretions pulmonary minimizing complications clearance of Airway hypertonic clearance nebulizer, aerosolized mucus. and of both secretion decrease viscosity saline, the help airways, (chest mucus delivered physiotherapy) remove 7% and techniques from by DNAse the controlling in therapy chronic Antibiotic important infection. is (oral, antibiotics cultures to the Monitoring and disease. bacterial with slow flora pulmonary aerosolized, lung therapy via appropriate and progression of IV) help airway providing aggressive of treat 2to intravenous exacerbations. pulmonary antibiotics require often high-dose and to physiotherapy chest Patients 3-week aggressive courses Antibiotics organisms based culture. identified sputum on are selected by then are therapy. throat to for provide If direct to pathogens unable culture used a be patients sputum, CF can Pseudomonas aeruginosa organisms infecting are Staphylococcus Common and aureus.

enzyme is insufficiency Exocrine proteases. with pancreatic which enteric-coated pancreatic and capsules, lipase treated contain CF the of follow Patients high-calorie nutritional encouraged with diets, to addition are supplements. with often high. stool and with losses optimal fat may Even pancreatic be of protein replacement, enzyme Fat significant the diet, from not withheld when should be even exists. steatorrhea is that used. although doses fat be a be absorption, titrated enzyme to optimize limit should Rather, there doses pancreatic should to the dosages they exceeding 2500 Lipase have because fibrosing are with U/kg/meal been associated contraindicated colonopathy. form. K) water-miscible a preferably (A, D, recommended, in E, and are Fat-soluble vitamins

meconium managed Newborns some (Gastrografin) can with ileus with but contrast be may enemas. require surgical intervention, syndrome oral laxatives obstruction intestinal often due the in with with (polyethylene in neonatal CF refractory or, glycol) distal to beyond to solutions. be which may Intestinal obstruction intestinal of (DIOS), courses more need treated is patients lavage balanced period cases, Pancreatic help prevent fiber adequate enzyme recurrent dosage episodes. hydration, adjustment, and may dietary insulin, is nutrition rare. CF-related are diabetes treated primarily with dehydration, prevent Patients to improve as and with ketoacidosis cirrhosis common transaminase 1% only to elevation with of in resulting have in patients CF, Although hypertension. is patients 3% progressive portal salt Cholestasis acid. the treated ursodeoxycholic bile is with are portal cirrhosis liver when to transplantation. procedures esophageal or of managed, with necessary, varices due hypertension liver shunting vein Portal and the and polyps sinus with procedures. disease require symptomatic nasal surgical may sinus Patients

is The centers. CF by CF is personnel complex of coordinated accredited management and best at severe management patients optimistic, their aggressive a with and multidisciplinary diseases, patients comprehensive, requires of and team to an As chronic treatment. working with families maintain to other CF approach

>60°), chest with Thoracic limitation movement. scoliosis, wall chest (curve be severe is of and it associated when can wall deformity lung may lung can lead above turn, further levels. pulmonary decreased respiratory rarely prevent mismatching, (restrictive disease), volumes function function, hypoventilation, to oflung but loss correction of Chapter improves This, and it failure in (see presurgical 202).Surgical even scoliosis ventilation/perfusion

in chest usually concavity deformity wall excavatum), significant (pectus with compromise. associated children, a not Sternal is common pulmonary and/or severe, decreased However, defects, cardiac restrictive disease, obstructive if lung may in function. result it occasionally, of because chest. the medical appearance over Often comes concerns the to of attention it complain pectus Adolescents exercise excavatum with of intolerance. may capacity may spirometry consistent is Routine lung vital but normal often disease. show decreased with restrictive to justified surgical main tolerance. some (cosmetic in and improve is The function repair generally exercise for although reason reasons), correction to appearance is improve cases surgical cardiac

chest an of sternum out. the Pectus which bows is shape wall abnormality in carinatum is pulmonary function. It abnormal with not associated to Underlying deformity. may disease pulmonary contribute the be surgery approach. performed via after cardiac It midsternal can observed purposes. indicated, is condition cosmetic done occasionally correction is for but this rarely of Surgical

space, pleural result in air from trauma accumulation or or the from external lungs the of Pneumothorax, the air which airways. may leakage of from is underlying commonly Spontaneous young more adults, thin primary (no tall, and teenagers and smokers. occurs males cause) in in pneumothorax barotrauma include and pneumothorax asthma, fibrosis, the Factors (underlying cystic to predisposing trauma mechanical pneumonia. severe from to identified) secondary ventilation, cause necrotizing chest,

@ Available StudentConsult.com

dyspnea. common shoulder of are symptoms and and pain most chest signs and The pneumothorax functional respiratory and the cyanosis pneumothorax and (tension severe compresses pneumothorax), may lung distress be present. large is If may communicates result air emphysema the leak mediastinum. when the with Subcutaneous of include decreased pneumothorax the the affected (deviation the Physical a associated percussion findings and pneumothorax). side, shift trachea of the from and maximal on [PMI] note, side impact breath point of mediastinal with away sounds of evidence tympanitic or findings. there may no the pneumothorax be small, clinical is If few under space is the condition patient’s especially in deteriorate expands, clinical pressure pneumothorax the the the can if pleural rapidly (tension air However, if pneumothorax). death a pleural is air. the is not result condition space that decompressed of pleural evacuation if by the can life-threatening This in

a by upright of can confirmed radiographs. presence pneumothorax chest The usually be (cystic the chest in in from pneumothoraces identifying in the pneumothoraces. the parenchyma present recurrent lung are spontaneous within air Computed of size air of may space tomography scans subpleural be that useful the pleural disease) lung differentiating blebs quantifying (CT) and for and infants, a making of of pneumothorax. transillumination in diagnosis of use wall be some chest In rapid the may

nature the pneumothorax the of intervention The on the and of disease. the underlying depends size of type (<20% with intervention notrequire pneumothoraces they Small as spontaneously. resolve often pleural of air) thorax occupied may concentrations reabsorption washing pneumothoraces Inhaling tube. of air any from out preferably pleural supplemental of drainage the and tension pneumothorax O2 may high air, of the via chest enhance requireimmediate by blood.Larger nitrogen a required for tube resolution. In may chest needle simple situation, of often anemergency placement is suffice,although a aspiration with pleural In necessary. be persistent pleural surfaces recurrent to patients obliterate may or the pneumothoraces,sclerosing space(pleurodesis) the chest be (doxycycline) or can agents or instilling talc abradement. This sclerosis either by surgical mechanically, by done chemically, throughthe tube, of when pleural blebs, indicated. pleural the open Surgical surgery spaceand video-assisted (VATS), thoracoscopic enable resection thoracotomy visualization of approaches, and

from mediastinum. dissection the the air results Pneumomediastinum pulmonary from into the parenchyma of that aggressive does self-limited not intervention. process usually mild, a is It require common asthma in forceful coughing children are most and severe exacerbations. The acute causes Common symptoms and chest pain dyspnea. are although appreciated sometimes emphysema noise findings, on over auscultation, often a are There no can physical be subcutaneous the crunching may detected about the and be neck. sternum directed chest treatment the The by is diagnosis toward is disease. lung confirmed and radiograph, underlying

out local of back when drawing forces into space. pushing fluid space vascular that pleural the forces the the Fluid hydrostatic are that are accumulates the exceed space in thevascular fluid oncotic exudates the legion. integrity or impaired failure of of effusions (decreased whereas few be oncotic forces)or heart Pleural or hydrostatic primaryones causes abnormal hypoproteinemiastates, are processes relatively due transudates of transudates, exudates congestive but drainage).There toinflammatory causes are and (intactmembrane membrane can the the being lymphatic fluidaccumulation. in inflammatory result process Almost pleural can anypulmonary of lupus exudatesare causes bacterial andmalignancy. diseases the erythematosus), most infection vascular common pneumonia), Among (systemic collagen (tuberculosis, (elevated Chylous lymphatic lymphangiectasia). pleural thoracic seen are duct (lymphangiomyomatosis, drainage and effusions abnormalitiesof with triglyceridelevels) injury (parapneumonic pneumonia ofpleural can to an effusion). Bacterial lead accumulation fluid it fluid empyema parapneumonic or terms often called this and purulent When an infected, empyema, areused the although interchangeably. then is is effusion effusion children. in Parapneumonic the most common effusion/empyemais Staphylococcus streptococci, Streptococcus aureus. due are pneumoniae, or caused pneumonia effusions Most to group A parapneumonic by

@ StudentConsult.com Available

are pain. be compress if dyspnea, they then tissue, cause but Small effusions lung tachypnea, large occasionally asymptomatic, enough to can may they chest pleural and due Effusions to splinting. poor associated chest fever, are and pain, infection appetite, malaise, with pleuritic usually breath percussion, decreased tactile Physical to include and findings sounds, dullness fremitus. decreased tachypnea, status, young the the cause hemithorax affected mediastinal away Large shift particularly than a occupy children. from in half more respiratory compromising side, may effusions and

be often The can of by radiograph. presence pleural fluid chest confirmed layering addition view decubitus lateral projections, In of be for anteroposterior and assess fluid. to done should to a ultrasonography size. is quantifying useful Chest for presence the confirming the and effusion its of differentiate the lesions of help can fluid from masses. pleural CT pleural scans and chest parenchymal effusion). scans the and compartmentalize effusions strands ultrasonography CT whether can (fibrous that loculations contain Both determine parapneumonic

exudate. analysis an useful The transudate fluid differentiating from a is in of pleural and fluid cell characterize Routine on glucose as pleural dehydrogenase, protein, pH, the tests count, effusions. such lactose and deaminase gram culture, levels diagnosing stain, cytology, Triglyceride hematocrit, be useful levels, can adenosine fast bacilli acid in and

protein 0.5 LDH ratio limits greater greater fluid the ratio 0.6 LDH of than than LDH/serum Pleural Pleural two-thirds fluid OR upper Pleural OR fluid greater protein/serum than

35-50 g/dL bacilli protein 30-50 U/L Positive level adenosine than 4 greater glucose fluid deaminase fluid greater mg/dL than Pleural Pleural fast fluid culture Pleural acid stain,

0.5 fluid than greater hematocrit hematocrit/serum Pleural

Lactate LDH, dehydrogenase.

malignant, and fluid the cultures tuberculous is yield (Table pleural effusions 138-1).However, of chylous, low. with low white protein activity a effusions blood g/dL), (<1.015) a polymorphonuclear content lactate few (<2.5 gravity cell and have pleural and (<200 low (WBC) low count dehydrogenase Transudative specific IU/L), cells. IU/L) g/dL) characterized high gravity by contrast, and are (>3 lactate specific In protein and (>250 high levels. dehydrogenase exudates (<40 lymphocytes low (<7.2); pH may also a low high They glucose a level and leukocytes. WBC count with many or polymorphonuclear mg/dL); have

the is of consequences the underlying effusion directed of and Therapy the relief at fluid at the condition collection. causing mechanical are especially required. no pleural is if transudates, drainage effusions, small For they causing effusions that be compromise Large should respiratory are drained. effusions exudates Transudates with other chest tube. and can parapneumonic most be than a drained is sufficient be not alone may and loculated. the chest effusions/empyema, With a often parapneumonic tube fluid thick because or pleural thoracoscopic drainage best either the achieved fibrinolytic is with chest In surgery of video-assisted administration cases, via (VATS). tubes agents such of reduce antibiotics small many VATS with stay, length be moderate-sized Both parapneumonic with and patients morbidity chest can tubes managed hospital via can alone. to but conservatively fibrinolytic and effusions therapy intravenous

New Physiology, ed Pulmonary 7, McGraw-Hill York, Levitzky MG: 2007,

et Stanton of Philadelphia, Textbook St. 2011, 19, Kliegman Geme JW, Saunders RM, Pediatrics, Nelson BF, ed al:

2008, Pediatric LN, Medicine, Landau Taussig 2, Respiratory et Philadel LI, al: ed phia, Mosby

of Disorders Wilmott and Bush Boat Chernick’s TF, et al: A, RW, the Kendig

Tract Philadelphia, 8, ed in 2012, Saunders Respiratory Children,

Cardiovascular System The

Daniel S. 19 Schneider

drug, and alcohol or excessive other maternal contribute or to medication, systemic use smoking of may cardiac A findings. history (possibly or in early infection in reveal maternal The later prenatal myocardial in pregnancy teratogenic) a dysfunction pregnancy or infants). (causing myocarditis history may weight than Infants significantly head more affected being exhibit height heart circumference. with poor growth, with failure and

Heart with present or may fatigue failure fussiness. diaphoresis feeds or with Tachypnea without dyspnea may present. be significant heart of shortness fatigability, on Older children may failure breath sometimes easy orthopnea. and exertion, have with intolerance. or sign keeping Not other with of a exercise children during exercise is play up recurrent or misdiagnosed Heart may failure be as wheezing, pneumonia, bronchitis, asthma.

time A wellchildren in lives. have an innocent at many their is important, murmur a heart of history some murmur but symptoms and palpitations, cyanosis, cardiac Other include near-syncope. chest syncope, pain, for cardiac 139-2). (Tables cause congenitalmalformation review and 139-1 assesses diseases that or ofsystems possible A systemic abnormalities syndromes may drug history Current medication well as use past use, of important. as and is hypercholesterolemia. disease, and Family be congenital disease, suddenunexplained for thrombophilia, heart rheumatic atherosclerotic hypertension, heart reviewed fever, hereditary diseases, early should deaths, history

when in positions and position starts A complete evaluation standing the and cardiovascular in includes supine possible. examination sitting provide palpation auscultation a examination. complete by is Inspection to supplemented and

signs. The starts with examination vital heart age normal rate activity. varies and with The near infants months slightly 3 beats/minute, to adolescence to and 80 higher beats/minute. are in through gradually then 6 age Newborn declining rates heart approximately 120 of resting approximately of is 30 range below The beats/minute for or given average. any above the age normal failure, or may be heart Tachycardia of dysrhythmia. dehydration, anemia, a shock, manifestation but be tone be manifestation a with finding Bradycardia vagal high patients block. atrioventricular in a can may normal of (athletes), quiet. is best The of rate infant infants is respiratory while assessed the a Respiratory is or left-to-right when increased congestion. pulmonary shunt be venous may there rate

pressure varies age. blood Normal with also should arm a circumference. 90% 80% and is sized that bladder that properly cuff width at 100% to of is have length the a least A is blood measured. in right Initially, arm pressure the evaluate the for in aorta. left are of measurements and elevated, indicated coarctation the If legs to arm possible determined pressure by pulse subtracting pressure from the pressure. The the is diastolic systolic whichever systolic below is pressure, normally Hg or is mm It less. half 50 the wide A pulse pressure

Short failure, syndrome myocardial insufficiency, insufficiency, disease syndrome and dystrophy Hunter-Hurler infarction, aneurysm, failure, Cardiomyopathy, mitral disease myocarditis Valvular Aortic heart heart heart failure interval, Duchenne Coronary Pompe arrhythmias hypertension Kawasaki artery PR thrombosis, Marfan cardiomegaly,

endocarditis, Pericarditis, Systemic erythematosus congenital Libman-Sacks AV lupus block

Tachycardia, disease failure arrhythmias, failure heart (hyperthyroidism) Lyme heart Graves Arrhythmias, disease myocarditis,

rhabdomyoma Tuberous Pulmonic of sclerosis Cardiac Neurofibromatosis stenosis, aorta coarctation

AV, atrioventricular.

cushion defect, VSD, ASD, (Down 21 syndrome) Endocardial Trisomy PDA

18 Trisomy VSD, PS PDA, ASD,

ASD, VSD, Trisomy PDA, 13 dextrocardia

stenosis XO syndrome) aortic (Turner Coarctation of aorta,

genital association syndrome aortic retardation, 22q11 choanae, Aortic TOF, CHARGE atresia arch heart, arch (DiGeorge) conotruncal ear (coloboma, conotruncal and anomalies) anomalies, anomalies* anomalies* and

anal, VACTERL radial, VSD association† anomalies) tracheoesophageal, cardiac, renal, limb (vertebral,

mitral valve Marfan syndrome valve dissecting aortic Dilated aorta, and prolapse regurgitation,

stenosis, pulmonary William stenosis aortic peripheral syndrome Supravalvular

cardiomyopathy, mother VSD, Infant diabetic Hypertrophic conotruncal anomalies of

AV valve Asplenia return, single heart syndrome Complex pulmonary dextrocardia, lesions, cyanotic ventricle, venous single anomalous

atresia, ventricle single continuation vena pulmonary inferior of syndrome cava, Azygos dextrocardia, Polysplenia

VSD, alcohol ASD syndrome Fetal

syndrome TOF hydantoin TGA, VSD, Fetal

defect; patent arteriosus; septal ASD, Atrial atrioventricular; ductus PDA, AV,

stenosis; great TGA, PS, arteries; tetralogy of transposition pulmonic of TOF,

VSD, Fallot; ventricular septal defect. atresia, transposition arteries. truncus great of arteriosus, *Conotruncal—tetralogy Fallot, pulmonary of

the as †VACTERL limb is not in are known included. also association anomalies association, VATER which

or arteriosus ductus depletion sepsis). aortic may connections volume vasodilation or with relative be [PDA], with seen aortopulmonary (patent (anemia, insufficiency, malformations), fever truncus intravascular arteriovenous arteriosus, with aortic is pressure pulse narrow failure. tamponade, and heart A stenosis, pericardial seen

Inspection appearance, and general nutritional status, includes circulation, respiratory effort. Many failure syndromes to Table features thrive must pallor. abnormalities and with 139-2).Skin defects cardiac color chromosomal associated assessed (see dysmorphic have cyanosis for be or and with normal desaturation; feet) (hands, of (tongue, lips) is and cyanosis oxygen. arterial is saturation associated extraction associated peripheral cyanosis increased with isolated peripheral arterial Central in or cyanosis toddlers when Perioral cold. a become infants and pale finding, especially infants is common toenails. arterial clubbing the and of Chronic results in fingernails desaturation prominent suggesting or chest reveal cardiac a Inspection precordium may asymmetry enlargement. left the chronic of

inspection, precordial the pulses four in is extremities, of the After performed. palpation abdomen activity, and all regularity, and symmetry, and lower timing rate, assessed between for extremities. Pulses upper are intensity, pulse effectively coarctation out good A pedal with normal blood pressure arm rules the aorta. right of and a The point of should apical presence maximum assessed hyperactivity, of for impulse, impulse, precordium thrill. be liver Abdominal assesses and palpation size. spleen venous size The volume with assessment liver of intra-vascular and congestion. an provides systemic enlarged is enlarged with infective be may endocarditis. spleen The

but of should supplement and most examination, by what the inspection important the cardiovascular is palpation. already part been Auscultation has found assessment cycle. Systematic room of listening each of a portion the cardiac quiet in allows In and characterized. addition heart sounds, need murmurs clicks, regularity, and rate the heart timed to be and to

left border apex mitral and is lower or is (LLSB) and sternal best heard with valves, is of closure associated (Fig. S1 the usually the at tricuspid single, 139-1). ejection can a click split, if commonly, should or, S4 S1 an much heard, possibility is considered. the an of be be it normally Although split less the aortic with closure S2 is pulmonary of associated and valves. split single with inspiration and It should be with normally exhalation. (Table and component anatomic of associated pulmonary the intensity significant of 139-3). Abnormalities with and are splitting physiologic abnormalities early rapid related and filling. ventricular diastole is S3 to is in heard loud be a LLSB heard abnormal at in and apex may ventricles. normal but conditions dilated is with It best heard is S3 a and sound, or the the with and compliance. is before just decreased S4 ventricular in diastole at best is heard LLSB/apex, occurs late S1, associated abnormal. always It rare is and is

great a valvular implies click dilated abnormality A artery. or or may a in not be murmur. may be or midsystolic ejection associated may and It timing with prolapse. A midsystolic mitral with associated click valve is Ejection systole. early clicks in occur clicks in and Pulmonary left heard are sternal the best border upper with intensity respiration. vary ejection at border respiration. are or vary border, not apex, louder clicks sternal and midsternal left do upper the right often Aortic at with

StudentConsult.com Available @

the timing, pitch of or determine should Murmur frequency duration, radiation, evaluation location, intensity, and murmur. can (see be a Fig. a significance to The determines diagnosis murmur’s and develop used differential timing 139-1).

valve septal Systolic opens ejection S1 Pansystolic stenosis, pressure Mitral valve regurgitation, regurgitation, opens Patent pulmonic Aortic Mitral AV 60 40 Late 0 arteriosus closes valve mitral Mid-diastolic regurgitation (mmHg)AV Aortic v ductus stenosis, Aortic 20 Regurgitant Aortic closes Ventricular 80 contraction stenosis c a systolic 100 120Pressure diastolic atrial pressure valve tricuspid pulmonic stenosis stenosis, defect, Aortic A2 Continuous Holosystolic septal Early Isovolumic pressure defect tricuspid Atrial Ventricular valve prolapse

139-1 Timing Figure murmurs. of heart AV, Atrioventricular.

(aortic arteries semilunar great (d-TGA, atresia, Severe Malposed l-TGA) arteriosus) pulmonary aortic truncus atresia, stenosis valve One

Early closure (right block) valve (pulmonary across valve regurgitation) (severe Increased flow (ASD, PAPVR) across mitral aortic Prolonged Electrical stenosis) delay bundle branch flow

Decreased in Increased Fallot stenosis, hypertension tetralogy severe pulmonary pulmonary in of

partial ASD, of l-TGA, pulmonary arteries; return. anomalous defect; venous the Atrial dextro-transposition the levo-transposition great great of d-TGA, septal PAPVR, arteries;

continuous. should or as Murmurs classified systolic, diastolic, be murmurs ejection or are systolic murmurs further divided into (also regurgitant) Most systolic can pansystolic or holosystolic and be called murmurs. murmurs Ejection time are onset of the short murmur S1 between with contraction). and a crescendo-decrescendo the (isovolumic may ventricle the pulmonary atrial with require from occur of and blood ejection the stenosis, stenosis, ejection aortic murmurs Systolic

soft, I in patient with Grade quiet room cooperative Very heard

with thrill Loud Grade IV palpable

angle Loud with at with thrill, audible stethoscope 45° V Grade

coarctation (ASDs), cm audible stethoscope of septal 1 defects and Grade off with thrill, chest aorta. with VI the Loud S1. onset murmurs Holosystolic with have their mitral has ventricular tricuspid (VSDs) defects plateau a may The quality or with regurgitation. and heard septal and murmur be heard murmur after may click regurgitant A in midsystolic prolapse. be mitral late a valve

flow. Murmurs heard often path are along of blood the at holosystolic apex. are are and of Ejection the heart, LLSB usually murmurs heard at base louder best the the murmurs whereas the ejection back to and radiate axilla. murmurs Pulmonary radiate neck. Aortic ejection to the murmurs a 139-4). VI grade or loudness intensity of through I murmur (Table The heart assessed as is provides pitch gradient. pressure the a or The regarding information of frequency murmur flow of the a area the (valve, murmur. gradient defect), higher vessel, The higher the pressure and faster frequency the narrowed the or across obstruction murmurs to and pressure less restriction flow. imply or mild Low-frequency gradients low

in vibratory LLSB quality Grades apex upright Intensity and or I-III/VI Vibratory, position decreases musical murmur between LLSB

or position in (right Changes with Louder I-III/VI left) of jugular Continuous Infraclavicular compression yr hum Grades head turning patient Venous upright region murmur with vein > 3–6

I-III/VI Carotid not upright radiate Neck, Does Usually Grade over ejection Grade Systolic softer murmur age carotid back LUSB position I-III/VI artery to Any in bruit murmur ejection

6 stenosis Peripheral to ejection Systolic back, Axilla LUSB/ mo and murmur RUSB pulmonary Newborn

I-III/VI Grade high-frequency Harsh, short,

right Left lower border. scapular scapular border; RUSB, upper upper border; left LUSB, LLSB, scapular

abnormal. considered systolic Diastolic and much are common than less should murmurs, murmurs be regurgitation through murmurs is diastolic the there pulmonary or valve. occur when Early aortic or mitral murmurs (ASD, increased VSD) valves. stenosis anatomic tricuspid caused are by across flow or Mid-diastolic the

one venous with when cycle common hum. abnormal through the murmurs and are are is exception, cardiac the there entire flow heard Continuous A abnormal continuous the murmur. common most PDA is aorta when present. murmurs also heard coarctation Continuous be of with are vessels the can collateral

from and in normal early children, years age, of 6 adolescence. or to 3 first of least often infants months 80% physiologic in life, at most murmurs 6 of Normal occurring are during heard and common, innocent the also been functional, vibratory, flow and benign, have murmurs. They called murmurs sound, and Characteristic include quality significant of of (Table alteration the murmur lack positional innocent the in the 139-5). findings intensity of of radiation, significant the changes with are the important, cardiovascular examination Most history otherwise normal. and The or symptoms, about make failure features, cautious more dysmorphic of one should murmur. presence diagnosing to a including normal thrive hum) holosystolic, the thrill and of the systolic, venous a not and normal. are continuous (except murmurs Diastolic, for late presence

congenital complex not be defects. Mild apparent in the may onlyearly heart that clinically desaturation is finding test left lower body.This is in mayallow ductal to a right diagnosis infantsto newborn which Comparingpulse of between in lesion oximetry screening PDA desaturatedblood a right across dependent disease. arm flows to now perfuse a routine congenital extremity rule the out the and lower a heart becoming

(ECG) wall 12-lead electrocardiogram depolarization, the cardiac information chambers. thickness the rhythm, the The rate, provides of size repolarizationof and and cells about and the QRS, assessed rate, (PR, and (Fig. wave, for rhythm, (P intervals It be QTc) QRS, T axis should wave), ventricular) (left adjusted child’s and the right age. left atrial, 139-2), atrial, for right ventricular, voltages

P wave represents depolarization. The atrial enlargement in increase of an wave, P atrial the for A lead criterion of best the II. is amplitude reflected right enlargement in atrial chest the of left of the portion exhibited second diagnosis best wave, prolongation by leads. made is P of The the

the increases complex, of interval, the with from The PR age. of QRS the beginning beginning measured wave the to P the atrioventricular disease) is velocity when or Conduction is (glycogen bypassed increased conduction storage syndrome). (Wolff-Parkinson-White the shortened time is when node slow atrioventricular through prolonged node. conduction the usually PR A interval indicates in or PR also to bundle intervals. Purkinje His, contribute of system prolonged Diseases myocardium, the may atrial

depolarization. QRS The represents ventricular complex of volume mass the a causes greater complex. A or greater magnitude ventricular the that to ventricle’s ventricle to complex. contribution chest of the The accentuates surface right the proximity the with age. in occur ECG Changes normal ECG. each must group to diagnosis from data be age the for known Normative a make

wave. T QRS measured the to The complex the end the interval from of QT of is the beginning QT/ (corrected The less R for (QTc 0.45 rate) to precedingR be interval corrected second should than QT interval). = or be severe interval prolonged The children with in hypocalcemia may hypokalemia. at for It group severe prolonged death a risk and arrhythmias QT of also children ventricular (prolonged syndrome). sudden is in QT may as and interval. Drugs such prolong erythromycin the quinidine

artery extracardiac the a aorta systematic and and position of size of (Fig. of the heart, chest and to assessment the includes approach the size pulmonary A reading structures, and radiograph shape 139-3). Assessment the heart location defect. of a cardiac cardiac the of may and suggest and size silhouette ratio a the On inspiratory film, cardiothoracic should be good

intervals. (ECG) and of electrocardiogram Nomenclature Figure 139-2 waves

the be a chest identified routine heart outlines SVCAoPARARVLVLAABFigure can A, x-ray. Parts of whose 139-3 on Routine of cardiac silhouette. x-ray the posteroanterior normal B, pulmonary PA, cava. left RV, ventricle; atrium; SVC, atrium; Ao, superior right right left LA, vena RA, LV, Aorta; ventricle; artery; (From F, editors: al, TE, Essentials 1990, 2, Saunders.) ed Plum Carpenter Medicine, et Philadelphia, WB Andreoli of Cecil CCJ, in age less 1 older 50% than 55% and infants in than adolescents. of less children under year and be an heart dysfunction shunt) myocardial due volume to (left-right may or to load (dilated cardiomyopathy). due An enlarged increased The of heart heart shape congenital suggest defects. the may specific with heart pulmonary supracardiac seen and are great venous The the tetralogy “snowman” most total of common Fallot, arteries, of dextroposed with the seen with seen boot-shaped return. the anomalous examples transposition egg-on-a-string the of can in blood flow. The chest pulmonary x-ray aid assessment the increased blood associated left-to-right (shunt on pulmonary vascularity) flow have Defects x-ray. with shunting decreased shunts blood have flow. Right-to-left pulmonary

become a in anatomic and most most evaluation has congenital important cardiac noninvasive (Fig. management tool the full heartdefects the in diagnosis Echocardiography of disease,providing 139-4). use can be wave,and bloodflow on obtained color flow of direction Doppler. the continuous Physiologic with data of the pulsed, relationships. views assessment from spatial Imaging multiple providesan of and of valve of Three-dimensional especially (3D)and regard function. providemore (4D) the imaging with the manipulation detail, structure and now to allows heart to four-dimensional reconstruction images therapy. by the 18 delivery fetal weeks Prenatal can hospital, of tertiary for care allows and echocardiography thetimeliness heart infant congenital of gestation of diagnose or improving disease a at needfor based without repaired catheterization. now aresurgically congenital cardiac echocardiogram heart the on defects Many

139-4 echocardiogram an Four-chamber Figure of defect. atrial septal are arrows. identified defect by margins two the The right atrium; Left ventricle; LA, right left atrium; RA, ventricle. RV, LV,

better imaging (TEE) imaging echocardiography provides inadequate. Transesophageal transthoracic is when to function used intraoperatively is assess surgery. cardiac after It results and intracardiac and to radiofrequency dysrhythmias. used of catheterization TEE and guide are interventional echocardiography ablation

Cardiac catheterization precise hemodynamicinformation a information or managementplan. is who before patients or operating needadditional in establishing anatomic performed vessel Pressures, and entered blood each chamber content oxygen (Fig. saturations, oxygen in and aremeasured 139-5). flow information to used calculate resistance. systemic blood is This andpulmonary and secundum collateral define PDAs, supplement contrast dilation anddevice of VSDs. valves perform Angiography closure balloon increasing doneto embolization, sites stenotic percentage of ASDs, anatomy vessels closure and to and of intervention, cardiac by noninvasive stenting information.An injecting material are and selected patent ovales, foramen into is of ballooning muscular of performed by stenoticlesions, an including vessels, catheterizations and coil risk allows of of is radiofrequency activity, electro-physiologic assess mapping in rhythms,and abnormal dysrhythmia. ablationof anticipation the often precise the of done heart site can Catheterization for of studies electrical a with the

The Figure 139-5 normal heart. AO, artery; atrium; right RV, PA, left RA, left ventricle; LA, Aorta; atrium; right pulmonary ventricle. LV, saturations. Circled values are oxygen

StudentConsult.com @ Available

is does history, tone consciousness not Syncope of loss transient the consciousness. of states and altered suggest by other muscle that, or prodromal of or the all loss near-syncope many has of Presyncope symptoms without consciousness. common is Syncope relatively (Table 140-1). vary. frequency syncope The of caused stress, impairment amount of by and functional episodes, but Most cardiac 140-1). are represent may (Table death syncopal that a lead events can serious condition relatively to benign, breath metabolic cause atypical differential The diagnosis and hyperventilation, syncope for includes (hypoglycemia), migraine, holding. seizure, typical

position. usually upright changing to or position in events syncopal the related occur are Typical be a places. the may associated blood or of hot fasting, Syncope sight environment, anxiety, crowded blood, drawing or pain, with pale. often patient appears The prevents or diaphoresis, visual changes of nausea, palpitations, the often patient out), dizziness, and prodrome, possibly lightheadedness, consisting (blacking A warns

140-1 PRESSURE changes convulsion Dizziness: POSTSYNCOPE visual HISTORY ↓/↓<1 At Syncope ± hot; Neurocardiogenic DURATION SYMPTOMS RATE/ BLOOD and RECURRENCE Residual Common min Pallor, nausea, rest pallor, sweaty, Etiology (vasodepressor) DIAGNOSIS HEART recurs DESCRIPTION Table SIGNS/ Brief

Postvoiding 1 Micturition nausea min ↓/↓ < Pallor, Brief;

min <5 (+) Usually Sudden ↓/↓ onset, or Carotid visual collar, turned Fatigue changes Tight pallor head sinus Vague,

SOB pain ↑/↓ or ± chest Baseline Any paroxysmal duration Tumor (+) Pallor mass Recumbent,

Exercise disease SOB Fatigue, ↑/↓ Pallor Coronary duration chest ± (+) artery Any chest

and Lewis dizziness. DA: From Syncope Therapy, 1996, WB Saunders. Philadelphia, and Kliegman Practical RM, Pediatric Strategies editor: In Diagnosis in SOB, without; consistent but not ventricular Left (+), outflow or LVOT, shortness predictable. or of ±, with breath; tract; yes

injury. lasts less than 1 for minute. Unconsciousness normal A quickly. consciousness to return relatively occurs or these episodes of origin. vasovagal syncopal Most in neurocardiogenic are is examination The normal. physical

and family. the reassurance to no Syncopal episodes may than require patient more be evaluation episodes If a on indicated. impact have further activities, significant may daily the to PR with be electrocardiogram QTc should Chapter and (see obtained the attention intervals An 139). (ECG) and and is intake cases to of adequate fluid sometimes be indicated. medical reassurance syncope, management Although treat may salt increasing most

StudentConsult.com @ Available

concern. a patient pain the in often amount pediatric and generates significant Chest patient of parental heart is pain pain. chest raises a concerns in about common children, cardiac in chest disease experiencing child knowledge Although rarely atherosclerotic about origin is in pain in Most musculoskeletal chest childhood origin. diagnosable amount A significant

hyperventilation Anxiety,

artery Ischemia AS or Infection/inflammation HOCM, cocaine) severe pericarditis, disease) abnormalities, PS, Kawasaki Dysrhythmia (coronary (myocarditis,

Slipping Abnormalities syndrome rib spine cage/thoracic of rib Tietze Tumor

Pleural Pulmonary embolism Pleurisy pneumomediastinum effusion Pneumothorax,

stenosis; stenosis. AS, pulmonary Aortic obstructive PS, hypertrophic HOCM, cardiomyopathy;

idiopathic, however. remains an necessary is complete (Table to diagnosis of 141-1). make assessment Knowledge accurate the differential

it Assessment worse during to pain a with time associated activity includes the at what and the chest the any the pain; quality, determine of is symptoms. onset; and radiation, thorough location, present; that pain makes better duration history the and patient of a anxiety the of history often much family and symptom revealing. assessment important is causing and how are A general heart, and careful on lungs, physical examination chest the wall, A should focus abdomen. syncope, etiology. chest of acute A pain a or palpitations fever or exertion, onset cardiac suggests associated with history with associated inflammatory, origin. in pain generally ischemic, causes chest or of are arrhythmic Cardiac

are based on indicated Tests the history. rarely and on and examination. (ECG), exercise be stress echo-cardiogram, chest testing electrocardiogram monitoring, based may x-ray, A 24-hour history obtained Holter Referral frequently, the of in findings, history, level physical and, history, the members anxiety based a to patient the pediatric the examination or is cardiologist family regarding on pain. family

@ Available StudentConsult.com

but abnormalities may and structural intrinsic pediatrics heart 142-1). in abnormalities, by Cardiac conduction uncommon metabolic infection or inflammation, rhythms dysrhythmias (Table are be abnormal and lesions, caused dysrhythmias normal do further not evaluation. treatment are or even that pediatric Many variants require

axis each (upright and P I QRS in has node normal sinus and the Sinus a rhythm complex. in wave preceding AVF) originates leads normal Because and sinus are bradycardia on based age, vary tachycardia sinus defined rates age. with a Sinus children associated a breathing. rate and represents normal heart is finding common arrhythmia the in with variation in on electrocardiogram heart a expiration, recurring the producing (ECG) with The increases pattern and tracing. decreases with inspiration rate or not arrhythmia is further and evaluation does Sinus require normal treatment.

and Sympathomimetic antidepressants, agents Intoxication agents (caffeine, and others) ephedrine, [quinidine]) agents Antiarrhythmic (proarrhythmic theophylline, tricyclic (cocaine,

disturbances Mitochondrial myopathies Pheochromocytoma Cardiomyopathy Porphyria Thyrotoxicosis ↓Mg2+) (↓↑K+, Electrolyte ↓↑Ca2+, Uremia

morphology change variable the atrial the complex. A a and waves interval in pacemaker P is wandering QRS of PR with normal no This evaluation benign is or a requiring further treatment. finding,

and relatively in atrial infants. common Premature contractions prenatally are with an present. abnormal consistent axis A is P ectopic its with usually origin, wave, premature conducted it), The may atrial conducted (a widened, present), normally aberrantly (no QRS activity QRS following be altered blocked complex). or (normal premature QRS during of the are time few if usually around weeks and, atrial present benign of contractions usually first delivery, Premature disappear life. the

congenital usually atrial and Atrial in complex dysrhythmias are fibrillation surgical present and uncommon after heart disease. pediatrics flutter repairof seen drug may They or in myocarditis association also be with inpatients toxicity. with

is pediatric symptomatic in common most Supraventricular patients. dysrhythmia tachycardia the (SVT) complex. rate has The a rapid, regular a narrow with rhythm QRS with children 300 rates 280 slower SVT adolescents. to for beats/minute is and older infants in often has The abrupt tachycardia onset and termination. an a other In child are pounding structurally most than heartbeat. with a asymptomatic heart, a relatively normal episodes there may (>12 disease failure. of is the prolonged alteration symptoms If hours), development is heart the structural there in cardiac and be heart output of or episode most cause have of structurally patients hearts as children normal the normal or and syndrome preexcitation SVT the Although have Wolff-Parkinson-White some ECGs, dysrhythmia. baseline with

contractions older ventricular and infancy (Table common atrial 142-2). less common in contractions are Premature premature but children than (PVCs) more in adolescents wide QRS The preceded beat not bizarre. by complex and is and the premature wave P a is structurally in If and and uniform heart increased PVCs are normal, the the singleton, is heart disappear focus, rate. with and no require treatment. are benign usually PVCs The treatment Any possibly a or investigation syncope with medications. of of from further and death) presentation deviation the history requires (history sudden antiarrhythmic family

relatively pediatric more tachycardia, defined Ventricular PVCs, rare is also in three or patients. as consecutive is there causes serious cardiac usually sign of ventricular are tachycardia, multiple it of a dysfunction Although or disease. in cardiac Rapid-rate cardiovascular ventricular tachycardia results decreased and instability. output is symptomatic in Treatment patients synchronized cardioversion. in Medical a asymptomatic may patient. or lidocaine appropriate conscious amiodarone be with management study. Complete electrophysiologic necessary, is the evaluation including of etiologic picture

prolonged a heart the is of PRinterval. Firstdegree block presence when requires otherwisenormal no present asymptomatic or It is and, treatment. children, in evaluation by block some, waves followed but the heart all, of are when Seconddegree QRS a not complex. P is (also the characterized type progressive complex dropped. a known by is PR QRS interval a I Mobitz until asWenckebach) prolongationof is not in treatment progress usually require further or normal otherwise evaluation does during forms It and oftenseen is children. ofheart block, to other sleep, does not presentwhen PR is QRS dropped. but II is not does interval Mobitz type intermittently change, a the This blockand may require may complete pacemaker form heart to placement. progress Thirddegree or is ventricular relationship whether thereis acquired, activity. between heart present and atrial congenital when block, no atrial the Theventricular rate much than slower rate. is maternal or lupus Congenital disease. Sjögrensyndrome) disease as associated block heart is heart systemic congenital or with erythematosus vascular (such complete collagen cardiac occurs form acquired may drugs. but toinfection, surgery secondary be or The after inflammation, mostoften

face, Supraventricular atrial if related present QRS aberrant waves narrow >220 unless complexes catheter rate be electrical abnormal water ill; adenosine; ablation beats/min); 180–320 complex; sotalol; acutely of present (range, for age; Valsalva cardioversion Increase usually ice are Rate QRS (bag digoxin; to tone conduction beats/min may maneuver); normal, and tachycardia is to vagal P

flutter 300 varying cardioversion rate usually Atrial flutter sawtooth with Atrial block; Digoxin, beats/min, sotalol, of degrees waves

contour, varied waves; pulse or Nonsynchronized fibrillation conducted amplitude QRS Ventricular undulations distinct and irregular with complex No no T cardioversion

block Prolonged digoxin Observe, obtain on age therapy level for interval if First-degree PR heart

PR QRS not (Wenckebach) Progressive followed or until second-degree P underlying abnormalities Mobitz electrolyte I type other of Observe, wave lengthening by interval heart complex correct conducted is block

QRS complex without second-degree II interval Mobitz of Consider heart wave Sudden with block loss lengthening P nonconduction pacemaker of PR progressive type

Rate remove <240 cause Treat tachycardia (fever), beats/min sympathomimetic Sinus drugs

AV, ECG, Atrioventricular; electrocardiogram.

interval complex QRS procainamide, of and QT Ia Prolongation disopyramide Quinidine,

on abnormal Ib mexiletine, tocainide conduction Lidocaine, phenytoin, Significant effect

QRS and Ic of propafenone, moricizine? PR interval Prolongation Flecainide, complex

rate; of slowing Propranolol, PR atenolol, interval prolongation acebutolol β blockade; of sinus

PR, prolongation channel complex; of amiodarone, calcium of QT potential; and sodium QRS action sotalol blockade intervals, Prolongation Bretylium,

and prolongation channel PR Calcium in of channel other AV interval pacemaker and Verapamil node activity agents sinus blockade; blocking reduction and conduction; calcium

Atrioventricular. AV,

require no atrial intervention. dysrhythmias Most in symptoms.Acute cold the part to vagal and forms with SVT Treatment node most usually thereentry SVT. atrioventricular maneuvers, the treatment of usually face.Intravenous of of the on of in infants a of dysrhythmia because circuit patients SVT depends such bag) (ice as application consists (IV) converts presentation adenosine using synchronized time indicated the presentation, 1 patients 2 compromise cardioversion of withcardiovascular In at J/kg. to is options. is palpitations, consideringtherapeutic heartrate document rhythm important with during and it before symptoms their to Inpatients required well to length, The determine require the what need associatedsymptoms dysrhythmia patients the as episodes, convert for treatment.Some the and is rhythm, as and frequency, during the regarding education only follow-up. a management digoxin usually the firstchoice. pharmacologic or with either β-blocker Ongoing is However, in patientswith contraindicated is syndrome. digoxin Wolff-Parkinson-White antiarrhythmic Additional are needed. rarely medications take medications,radiofrequency not aresymptomatic wanting or performed. ablation patients daily be may In those to who

to require used that agents are depends A of variety rate block symptoms. third-degree presence ventricular and of treat the 142-3).Management dysrhythmias intervention antiarrhythmic heart on ventricular (Table of a Treatment, placement requires often needed, pacemaker. if of

StudentConsult.com Available @

births. occurs Congenital disease heart 8 per 1000 in from to ranges asymptomatic The fatal. lesions spectrum of Table multifactorial, chromosomal heart teratogens, of single disease defects, disease 139-2). are maternal (see most cases are or some associated with congenital metabolic gene disorders, Although lesions

groups be can (Table defects heart three 143-1). divided pathophysiologic Congenital into

1.

2.

3.

includes pulmonary shunts an flow left-to-right stenosis, obstructive septal in lesions have coarctation disease the aorta), defect arteriosus pulmonary increase heart Obstructive, atrial blood ventricular of ductus [ASD]) Acyanotic resulting [PDA], and lesions flow. usually stenotic in (aortic septal normal blood defect pulmonary congenital stenosis, [VSD], (patent which

can four is components. ventricular The into that septum be a divided structure complex muscular The is the component septum. largest endocardial The tissue. cushion or inlet posterior septum comprises comprises subarterial tissue. The conotruncal septum supracristal or small. is The aortic below membranous and is the valve septum relatively components when occur VSDs (Fig. normally any to fails these of develop 143-1). 25% heart of congenital for most defect, congenital disease. heart VSD, all accounts the common of all the VSDs Perimembranous common most VSDs are (67%).

location size VSD the of prognostically defect in the crossing Although a depends on and VSD repair, of important is flow the resistance. and the approach to pulmonary amount the of vascular the time. VSDs the Large this is because pulmonary at birth vascular elevated resistance are symptomatic normally not at decreases the to shunt develop. may symptoms the As vascular increases, 6 resistance 8 and life, over first amount of the weeks pulmonary of

but often are little shunt asymptomatic loud a VSDs have Small with murmur. result Moderate to pulmonary in VSDs large

aorta Tricuspid atresia Atrial the HLH septal of Coarctation defect

left venous total anomalous TAPVR, pulmonary Hypoplastic return. syndrome; heart HLH,

septal Ventricular 143-1 defect. Figure RV, right atrium; PA, RA, AO, left LA, atrium; left ventricle; Aorta; ventricle. LV, artery; right pulmonary

heart overcirculation and failure. sternal a pansystolic physical a left The the VSD with heard is best finding usually lower typical at border. murmur, be thrill. a may There a increase apex. Large shunts the flow middiastolic across causing valve mitral murmur the at S2 artery splitting pulmonary depend the of on P2 intensity pressure. and The of

VSD. (ECG) size the depend chest the x-ray of and findings Electrocardiogram on studies. have Small normal VSDs usually hypertrophy. and findings left left heart, Larger side the of ventricular cause the in ECG resulting overload and to enlargement atrial of VSDs volume artery increased the pulmonary in left cardiomegaly, pulmonary of flow. A chest and x-ray reveal the enlargement blood ventricle, increase may an silhouette, either enlargement vascular or hypertension ventricular may resistance to flow due Pulmonary increased and right increased pulmonary lead to hypertrophy.

spontaneously. third all VSDs Approximately one of close and, VSDs not required. do not surgical close spontaneously close, closure may be Small if usually they diuretics to reduction. large afterload digoxin) and for Initial moderate (± includes treatment VSDs pulmonary the hypertension closure poor defect. of therapy requires growth or despite Continued are Most be surgically, devices VSDs placed closed at but muscular closed defects, especially some VSDs, catheterization. can cardiac with

143-2 Atrial defect. Figure septal pulmonary right AO, RV, ventricle; atrium; RA, LV, artery; atrium; left Aorta; PA, right ventricle. LA, left

the of grows endocardial toward heart, atria. the During development the to embryologic the a divide cushions septum leads Failure ASDs or tissue (Fig. to excessive reabsorption septal of of growth 143-2). of represent ASDs congenital all heart approximately 10% defects. ovale, the the the of with is A ASD. most foramen secundum the defect, in common region hole A may atrioventricular located cushions, part complete a with may ventricular endocardial present of septum. near the an primum be or canal intact be defect ASD, which is may sinus venous pulmonary venosus associated least return. ASD The common defect, with be the anomalous

thesize defect The pathophysiology and amount the the depend on the both shunting ventricles. compliance of relative and of of and infants significant large with Even shunts, ASDs are rarely andchildren symptomatic. A impulse often right left lower sternal at the border bepalpated. can ventricular prominent (LLSB) murmur the the and a S2 region soft overload with the II) often systolic A to the or fixed ventricle in outflow audible. prolonged of circuit) tract are split (due right of ejection I (grade ejectioninto ventricular right pulmonary ofthe as a mid-diastolic at tricuspid result A the volume passing across in shuntmay LLSB increased valve. larger murmur the result a

chest the blood right flow through the ECG arteries, atrium, and ventricle, increased findings right reflect pulmonary x-ray

143-3 ductus Patent arteriosus. Figure ventricle; PA, Aorta; RV, left LV, AO, artery; RA, right right LA, pulmonary ventricle. left atrium; atrium;

lungs. and enlargement. ECG axis ventricular may deviation right and right The show pulmonary prominent cardiomegaly, a enlargement, radiograph atrial and right chest artery. show A may

management Medical is indicated. rarely age, recommended. significant is around 3 still closure at years If usually present is of shunt a laboratory. Many ASDs an secundum can device in closed closure ASD be catheterization the with venosus sinus surgical Primum closure. and require defects

the the pulmonary during to life. blood flow from arteriosus The artery allows ductus to aorta fetal Failure results this of the PDA (Fig. of normal closure a in vessel 143-3). a vascular birth, and falling pulmonary pulmonary shunting increased blood flow With resistance after occur. left-to-right blood of Excluding approximately PDAs infants, represent 5% to disease. of heart premature congenital 10%

amount flow. Symptoms of on blood pulmonary the depend length, of pulmonary and the the of magnitude PDA the The the on (diameter, depends resistance. size tortuosity) and shunt vascular failure moderate can large produce pulmonary are symptoms Small of decreases. as shunts the PDAs resistance the vascular heart asymptomatic; to

findings shunt. examination physical The the the size depend of on into diastole. widened of during is pulmonary A often present of runoff the result circulation blood pressure as the pulse a area, of and side heard murmur the often radiating continuous, the left be heard over can arteries well A back. infraclavicular at pulmonary along the left the machinelike shunts in may a result mid-diastolic the hyperdynamic apex a at precordium. Larger flow and the increased across with mitral valve murmur on artery S2 of Splitting the of intensity P2 pressure. and pulmonary depend palpable. A may thrill be

Atrioventricular 143-4 defects. canal Figure right RA, artery; right atrium; AO, LV, PA, pulmonary ventricle; Aorta; atrium; left left LA, RV, ventricle.

PDAs. small are and normal x-ray chest findings ECG with full and to may vascularity. in large silhouette shunts pulmonary a pulmonary result Moderate increased artery left to of from findings hypertrophy. vary normal ECG ventricular evidence hypertrophy. is also If hypertension present, ventricular there pulmonary right is

few closure in PDA after a of weeks full-term uncommon age is Spontaneous infants. of a Moderate PDAs diuretics, but may closure. require be large managed initially eventually and with small, controversial. PDAs is of hemodynamically insignificant Elective closure closure catheterization either PDAs coil PDA embolization can the closed device. laboratory in by be Most a or

or to partial Endocardial also defects, (Fig. cushion may complete canal referred be defects, atrioventricular as endocardial septum in of fuse valves results as atrioventricular the to cushion with well. abnormal the 143-4).Failure results inlet and VSD, the in tricuspid septal anterior or leaflet a the leaflet defect of complete The ASD, of clefts and posterior mitral valves. in a the primum shunting atrioventricular to both left-to-right valve In may addition levels, insufficiency. at there be

life. over the usually resistance of to the symptoms pulmonary first weeks heart vascular decreases develop 6 8 of failure The as insufficiency. atrioventricular Symptoms with may earlier be significant and valve severe more Pulmonary from often circulation increased resulting pulmonary early. hypertension develops levels. at and ventricular of amount of murmurs on depending The the presence varies shunting atrial both large there If VSD be will single. S2 a is component, Growth poor. usually is Down are Complete children seen most syndrome. with in endocardial commonly defects cushion

usually echocardiography. is diagnosis The made with vascularity. A reveals of increased radiograph cardiomegaly chambers presence the enlargement of chest and with all and enlargement. may deviation ECG atrial combined hypertrophy combined reveals ventricular axis show An and left

reduction heart after-load digoxin) of treatment Initial and diuretics for management (± includes failure. Surgical of the ultimately defect is repair required.

all Pulmonary and supravalvular accounts in subvalvular, or be congenital nature. of 10% valvular, disease approximately for stenosis can heart leaflets early insufficient Pulmonary the failure gestation, resorption the in pulmonary of three valve, stenosis from of peripheral of arteries. tissue, results insufficient canalization development, of the the or of infundibular the

degree on of depend present. the Symptoms obstruction stenosis is pulmonary asymptomatic. Mild severe exertional and fatigability. results in easy dyspnea Moderate stenosis to and Newborns symptomatic more level. with may atrial the of severe stenosis be cyanotic at because even shunting right-to-left

the stenosis a murmur second left Pulmonary intercostal the causes at radiates systolic ejection to back. which space A be may present. thrill with S2 may split be widely pulmonary quiet a component. With severe impulse at left lower border the hypertrophy. more sternal from ventricular pulmonary an right results stenosis, may in respiration. a stenosis Valvular varies click with that result causes murmur increase of higher and an the in a stenosis duration frequency sound. Worsening the the of ejection back. pulmonary the of The systolic are including heard of to peripheral circulation, pulmonary obstruction site the radiation in stenosis distal the to murmurs

findings mild ECG normal are in x-ray stenosis. chest and right results in right hypertrophy. severe deviation ventricular to stenosis axis and Moderate dilation be The x-ray, heart is on the chest pulmonary although usually artery main seen. of normal may size well of gradient. of degree as stenosis, of Echocardiography site valve as the hypertrophy, estimate pressure morphology, the assessment of provides an and

is mild. it not progress, if especially Valvular stenosis does pulmonary usually for successful usually levels significant Balloon reducing to acceptable is gradient stenosis. symptomatic or more in valvuloplasty the present. subvalvular valvuloplasty stenosis is Surgical balloon repair or required (muscular) unsuccessful if is when is

heart subvalvular, represents approximately supravalvular all congenital stenosis disease. 5% of Valvular, or aortic of tissue resorption around failure Lesions valve. of development of failure of the result the or from three leaflets

to cause symptoms. Mild moderate no obstructions pain, exertional easy stenosis and in syncope. chest severe fatigability, More results failure. symptoms of stenosis present Infants with heart critical aortic with may

along neck. the the into intercostal radiating A ejection is at systolic murmur the space right heard and sternum second of increases increases. frequency in in the degree murmur stenosis becomes length higher as and The With stenosis, click systolic ejection notch. and border the may right the be thrill is at often in heard, valvular suprasternal or upper sternal present a a component may S2 of intensity. decreased in The be aortic

x-ray chest are and normal findings mild with stenosis. degrees ECG of ventricular detected stenosis with is moderate develops chest to and hypertrophy Left ECG the on x-ray. and severe ascending aortic may the Dilation an of aorta knob seen chest aortopathy due be radiographs. or intrinsic on to shows ventricular it morphology, stenosis, of of presence and the valve allows pressure estimate and gradient. hypertrophy, the of site Echocardiography an the left

age. The degree progresses of and with stenosis aortic growth frequently develops often progresses. Aortic insufficiency or with Serial echocardiography follow-up indicated. is is first usually stenosis. Balloon the significant for interventional valvuloplasty procedure as valvular balloon a significant not valvuloplasty has risk successful as and of higher insufficiency. pulmonary is It or valvuloplasty Surgical insufficiency management significant when is develops. balloon necessary valve unsuccessful is

heart of aorta congenital defects. 10% all occurs approximately the of Coarctation in in position. It always is almost juxtaductal the narrowing correctly, fails the aortic ductus the develop near During in development arch, to area of insertion aortic the the of arteriosus a lumen. of resulting

on the obstruction defects. severity and presentation Timing associated depends of cardiac of abnormal aortic have the and aorta valves, presenting of hypoplastic aortic withcoarctation Infants arches, frequently VSDs. a descending flow. patent bedependent arteriosus They may to on provide aortic ductus the ampullaof develop Symptoms aortic closes. the ductus when Less obstruction no severe symptoms. causes

develop shock, weeks and age. may 2 respiratory distress, including of feeding, before Symptoms, poor with compared are pulses Classically weaker and delayed theright pulse. thefemoral radial extremities extremities. than the blood in The that pressure upper lower in the lower is until appropriate not cardiac resuscitation these If however, is asapparent function poor, is be differences may accomplished. there murmur, Inthis present. be may no an is S3 situation, often but

usually children of aorta asymptomatic. are the presenting Older with coarctation discomfort a epistaxis. leg There headache, with exercise, or of history may be a be pulses, hypertension (upperextremity), murmur or Decreasedor present. absent lower extremity may heard The the may area be have back.If the collaterals left in heard continuous chest. throughout interscapular developed, the significant murmurs istypically of best murmur ejection approximately is time, the present of aortic 50% ejection aorticstenosis. click An and murmur abnormal causing of systolic valve asystolic

in infantile pulmonary hypertrophy chest ECG ventricular and of and show coarctation edema. cardiomegaly The and x-ray with right marked evidence enlargement site the associated Echocardiography coarctation shows of lesions. and a chest usually left and ECG older children, enlarged ventricular show the x-ray and In heart. hypertrophy mildly Rib older with in age) also notching seen (>8 be children years of collaterals. large may of function. and site coarctation, morphology shows the presence of aortic ventricular Echocardiography left and and degree hypertrophy, valve

(chemically other diuretics, agents, intravenous care. opens E1 infusion cardiac infant and with presenting of Management of arteriosus), includes ductus inotropic prostaglandin the supportive decompensation an repair done, performed. commonly but been angioplastyhas coarctation critically Balloon infants, most in of ill surgical is especially the a primary accepted older stenting with more surgical become common therapy, coarctation patients as management. repair and Ballooning of has of remains but form

@ Available StudentConsult.com

lungs heart right without the from returns to shunt). to crosses some the (righttoleft when the occurs going disease and heart left the of systemic congenital the Cyanotic venous side through of the return body g/100 of systemic mL of present when Cyanosis, blood. visible sign 5 the occurs this is shunt, approximately hemoglobin in reduced percentage a patient with of Thus, hemoglobin. appears reduced polycythemic cyanotic lower a with cyanosis. a percentage for patient A of hemoglobin of anemia reduced recognition the requires higher

are congenital heart return defects arteriosus common FallotTransposition Total cyanotic venous most Ts: of The atresiaTruncus great five of the pulmonary the Tetralogy anomalous arteriesTricuspid

pulmonary present of defects can pulmonary complete the amount is Other of cyanosis systemic on heart allow venous mixing blood return that congenital that present. flow and depending with 144-1). period (Table the heart neonatal lesions cyanotic in present Many

congenital of defect, the representing (Fig. all cyanotic defects common of is Tetralogy Fallot congenital 10% most about heart heart 144-1). structural pulmonary defect There and right aorta, defects: (VSD), ventricular overriding stenosis, hypertrophy. ventricular are four septal (3to gestation Fallot aorta due artery septation weeks). occurs of pulmonary in truncus abnormal early the that of to 4 into and the arteriosus Tetralogy is subvalvular VSD is stenosis is and the infundibular. most commonly large The or pulmonary combination frequently, be It levels a may supravalvular, or, valvular, of also of obstruction.

initially acyanotic. Infants may be stenosis the abnormal pulmonary usual initial murmur finding. is A right-to-left of at (and of the VSD The the pulmonary as stenosis cyanosis) degree the amount of increases increases. degree shunting severity of and softer. With shorter murmur the increasing pulmonary becomes stenosis, S2 typical and sternal right and a ventricular left a of cyanosis addition murmur, single degrees are findings. impulse at the to In border varying

When (Tet) progressive. occur, are spells usually they hypoxic inconsolably. During and cry becomes a agitated child spell, restless the typically and may An toddler ambulatory may

defect. septal ASD, AVM, patent defect; arteriosus; atrioventricular; ventricular ductus PDA, Atrial arteriovenous VSD, malformation; AV, septal

Tetralogy of Fallot. 144-1 Figure ventricle. Aorta; artery; AO, pulmonary PA, left right right atrium; RA, atrium; left LV, ventricle; LA, RV,

squat. Hyperpnea of the murmur. occurs with loss increasing cyanosis gradually and and or death occur. In prolonged spells, hemiparesis, unconsciousness severe convulsions, may intracardiac of part, from risk right-to-left in with thromboembolism abscesses their tetralogy Independent increased Fallot hypoxic cerebral patients resulting, of spells, cerebral for are at and shunt. unrepaired

deviation has and (ECG) ventricular electrocardiogram axis right The hypertrophy. usually right and The the small hypertrophy. right heart ventricular secondary pulmonaryartery classic chest x-ray to apex main finding by is bootshaped a created upturned anterior patients pulmonary anatomic artery commonly outflow arising anterior 5% right most of Echocardiography the tetralogy of right surface artery left of the descendingcoronary and quantification anatomic the coronary from tract, stenosis.Coronary shows level crossing and features, arepresent a the Fallot. of the ventricular in with including anomalies,

The of pulmonary cyanosis. and tetralogy Fallot progression of is natural history stenosis of child administration of hypoxic of return). and oxygen the in position Treatment placing spells knee-chest venous the increase (to consists morphine and infundibulum for is sulfate sedation). pulmonary Traditionally, relax given (to the increased If resistance the an α-adrenergic administration be through can the agonist of vascular systemic (phenylephrine). acutely necessary, surgical indication cyanotic repair. occurrence an a of is The spell with to proceed

or surgical be infancy. closure in removal can of patching and pulmonary performed stenosis with VSD the repair Complete a forms is complete pulmonary and shunt complex between done surgery more time. of Occasionally, the later for of and is artery performed subclavian at artery Fallot palliative repair tetralogy there repair is a bacterial is Subacute months until after 6 residual endocarditis unless prophylaxis complete indicated VSD. is is as continued then a long as Prophylaxis residual there VSD.

vessels. the Figure great 144-2 Transposition of right pulmonary left RV, right AO, LV, ventricle. atrium; left RA, LA, Aorta; artery; ventricle; atrium; PA,

it in newborn heart Although the about mostcommon arteries represents of present cyanotic only congenital great the of defects, is lesion period(Fig. the transposition to 5% dextroposed 144-2). great ventriculoarterial the arteriosus. discordance of arteries secondary Transposition is to of the abnormalities septationof truncus In lungs. being dextroposed the and lungs in pumped is anterior right theaorta to transposition, the the the results left ventricle, pulmonary artery, heart sideof from which the enters blood back returning from the the the arises leftside and right to desaturated to whilewell-oxygenated pumped the rightof heart returning ventricle.This back to and of the from the out body, blood arises quickly. circulations, the death occurs of two Withoutmixing [ASD]), [PDA]) or at Mixing arteriosus [VSD], atrial vessel ventricular can level. occur foramen great (patent defect septal ovale/atrial the (patentductus

it history on present, A always depends is mixing. of although of amount the cyanosis S2 present. Quiet single a and are tachypnea typically is be murmur. If no may ventricular intact, there the septum

VSD cyanosis. transposition large and less with improved intracardiac a Children and have mixing may heart of They failure. present with signs left with and hyperdynamic, impulses. right palpable is The ventricular heart murmur is heard. A loud VSD S2 is single.

and ventricular ECG axis typically deviation include hypertrophy. right findings right superior mediastinum. by is egg created The and pulmonary an x-ray classically chest increased a cardiac string vascularity, shadow the narrow the reveals on sites the associated Echocardiography of mixing, and great amount of any shows the transposition the and lesions. arteries,

defect. 144-3 Figure Tricuspid atresia with ventricular septal RA, LV, Aorta; AO, PA, LA, atrium. pulmonary right left artery; atrium; ventricle; left

ductal maintain E1 prostaglandin management patency. to medical Initial includes persists significant two If improves mixing the circulations. between atrial hypoxia prostaglandin septostomy a on balloon therapy, is an switch. Complete often arterial surgical most repair maintain is arterial usually when The 2 still first the can weeks systemic of ventricle life, within the switch left performed pressure.

approximately for accounts atresia congenital heart of defects 2% (Fig. all Tricuspid 144-3). tricuspid hypoplastic ventricle. absence of the right valve The a results in must septum cross into atrium. return the systemic All venous left atrial the flow and necessary PDA A survival. or blood is for pulmonary VSD

atresia severely have cyanotic Infants are with S2. and a tricuspid usually single a a may If present, murmur. be is VSD there valve be mitral the A murmur diastolic audible. across may no significant murmur. there is Frequently

hypertrophy 0° and left ECG a ventricular superior QRS The axis shows (between and –90°). x-ray blood enlarged cardiac a reveals normal chest or mildly with silhouette flow. pulmonary decreased The Echocardiography lesions, source flow. anatomy, blood the shows associated pulmonary and of

a presence blood the the VSD of flow amount on antegrade to Management depends initially and lungs. of the it no there is or maintains E1 pulmonary is small, VSD, If prostaglandin

arteriosus. 144-4 Truncus Figure ventricle. Aorta; atrium; ventricle; left pulmonary LA, left right atrium; RA, PA, AO, artery; LV, RV, right

surgery. blood flow until shunt by with a Glenn) initial shunt Fontan followed (bidirectional Surgery staged an bidirectional cavopulmonary procedure: subclavian is artery-to-pulmonary two-stage (BlalockTaussig procedure)typically procedure. and the venous pulmonary surgeries return directly systemic to direct These arteries.

1% disease Truncus heart of in occurs (Fig. congenital all cases than less of arteriosus 144-4). failure the to the of the 4 weeks results from 3 during gestation. of first septation It truncus of the heart truncal the arises arterial immediately valve. VSD A large a trunk single with from below either arterial that from or The the pulmonary lungs. the trunk single single arterial trunk to arteries arise the from divides as a individually vessel

flow. degrees of on Varying the pulmonary of cyanosis amount depend blood infantmay not of at pulmonary heart If failure as signs diagnosed decreases. birth, develop the vascularresistance tachypnea The signs then include andcough. result are Peripheral the into arteries. diastolic a pulmonary usually pulses as bounding ofthe runoff the to S2 is single A valve. due single a left sternal is a the be there and systolic click, systolic murmur often may at ejection There border.

ECG cardiomegaly. hypertrophy combined ventricular findings and include displaced x-ray and pulmonary arteries. show increased A reveals blood may chest usually pulmonary anatomy, valve the defines the origin Echocardiography pulmonaryarteries. including truncal of and function, theVSD,

144-5 Figure pulmonary return. Total anomalous venous RV, pulmonary cava. artery; LA, vena ventricle; atrium; atrium; right ventricle; left left SVC, cava; superior inferior AO, IVC, PA, pulmonary vena PV, RA, Aorta; vein; right LV,

includes and management needed anticongestive medications. is usually Medical Surgical placement arteries. closure ventricle of VSD the and repair between a and includes pulmonary right conduit

Total for pulmonary venous disease heart of accounts return anomalous (Fig. 1% congenital about 144-5). one development during of results gestation of of week four in Disruption the venous of third abnormalities. the normal pulmonary drainage pulmonary the of right heart. and veins the to abnormally the atrium the All via return to fail connect of side left may mixed or supracardiac, drainage. have They infracardiac, cardiac, communication atrial-level systemic output survival. required and An is for cardiac

have obstruction without important obstruction and the presenceor presentation pulmonary The cyanosis beasymptomatic. of drainage.Infants the is minimal may of determinant venous absence to most the S2 widely ejection a There split impulse (owing upper increased is ventricular at hyperactive to a and ventricular volume) left murmur right with a systolic sternalborder. right the increased the lowerleft murmur mid-diastolic across flow from There usually sternal a border tricuspidvalve. the at is poor. is relatively Growth hepatomegaly. marked failure and tachypnea heart present dyspnea, and signs including cyanosis, obstruction Infants with with ofright-sided little, if in changes any, ventricular be or The murmur no right in in S2. results volume,so increase may there obstruction

ECG For overload. infants the volume without obstruction, right ventricular with is consistent with Cardiomegaly

of 144-6 Figure Hypoplastic left heart. side the right right left PA, LV, arteriosus; RV, Aorta; ventricle; RA, ventricle. artery; LA, left patent ductus PDA, atrium; pulmonary AO, atrium;

pulmonary seen blood x-ray. flow on chest increased is hypertrophy and obstructed on right right Infants deviation ventricular axis veins ECG. with have the or pneumonia. appear is that varying chest edema with On heart similar x-ray, pulmonary hyaline normal membrane or can disease enlarged degrees mildly to of degree heart, right the volume-overloaded drainage shows side of common the atrial and shunting, of site right-to-left level vein and obstruction. Echocardiography of pulmonary

At there opened common or and surgery, ligation the vein draining common pulmonary the into been of any had vein. that is channel is atrium, the vein left

heart defects left for heart Hypoplastic of 1% accounts syndrome all congenital (Fig. cardiac most the first month common from in 144-6) life. cause the defects of of death is but aortic or valve when or development left is arch. of heart failure syndrome Hypoplastic aortic mitral of there the the occurs is support central finding, small of ventricle regardless normal that left a A etiology. is to systemic unable circulation hypoplasia present. arch are aortic aorta the of and degrees Associated of ascending occurs level. atrial shunting at the Left-to-right

arteriosus flow. newborn dependent blood right-to-left ductus for shunting the The on systemic is at blood As signs infant excessive with flow becomes the flow. the blood ductus of obstruction ill symptoms and constricts, and systemic arteriosus pulmonary critically from failure of heart Pulses are absent. diffusely weak or and S2 is single loud. no usually heart is There murmur. but may minimal, output low Cyanosis grayish gives color cardiac mottled cool, skin. to a the be

drainage Right-to-left Antibiotics, CNS abscess shunting

gingivitis, Gingival bleeding Polycythemia, Dental disease hygiene

Allopurinol diuretic Polycythemia, agents Gout

None arthropathy Arthritis, clubbing Hypoxic

placental cardiac Bed poor output perfusion, rest ability Pregnancy Poor to increase

DiGeorge asplenia, Antibiotics syndrome disease Associated Infectious

Ribavirin, RSV pulmonary pneumonia Fatal with RSV hypertension globulin immune

to early failure; consumption, Treat decreased Failure intake heart oxygen increased Growth correct thrive, nutrient defect

activity, cardiac Counseling Psychosocial multiple chronic peer pressure; hospitalizations, disease, Limited adjustment surgical techniques

Central respiratory syncytial system; CNS, RSV, virus. nervous

forces. decreased ventricular with left hypertrophy ventricular ECG include findings right x-ray chest The car reveals

curve the Figure of inotropic vasodilators. function effect illustrating Ventricular arterial or 145-1 agents the function or curves. curve heart patient vasodilator the with onto diuretics, normal ventricular movement effect arterial digitalis between and depressed failure of in to contrast a intermediate In is another therapy the administration to pulmonary shift risk from of the edema. because the function; to also function may agents, of ventricular B of diuretics eliminate When administration the C end-diastolic from patient’s same the venodilators A along cardiac further curve further left these ventricular one of decrease function B of pressure improved and the to by or the may left moves the even this directly arteriolar function from excessive administration C. to properties D from function though the left the and venodilation has Hg) for (e.g., this diuretics, or too ventricular be may heart. vasodilating mm pressure nitroprusside) normal decrease normal would shift A a of to A of would much, A output the cardiac agent (10 end-diastolic If because agent that dilating shifts venous output, avoid 18 of end-diastolic the in pulmonary mm maximize are pressures Left to to to ventricular Hg edema. failing optimal 15 heart cardiac usually but Philadelphia, editors: essentials CCJ, Saunders, 2001.) of Loscalzo Cecil TE, Andreoli J, medicine, Carpenter ed (From 5, Griggs RC, edema. pulmonary the hypoplastic of and Echocardiographyshows the of atrial heart, degree left-to-right theaortic flow. flow valves, and small aorta, ascending left stenosis of the ductal the adequacy of side the right-to-left and mitral

Medical E1 includes prostaglandin arteriosus, management the open needed. and and of blood as ventilatory support ductus acidosis, correction to pressure done in the period. is first newborn Surgical procedure) stagedwith repair (Norwood the surgery for Fontan the systemic procedures), leaving to circulation. a pulmonary Glenn ventricle supply right create source systemic (bidirectional circulation Subsequent procedures and the of many have There modifications to the three been repair. all stages past the for improved has survival two significantly Prognosis over decades.

Table complications are Extracardiac summarized 144-2. in

the contractile preload. basal muscle onits length, which the fiber The equivalent status to depends generated cardiac is by and force As pressure, myocardial the filling length, left preload ventricular tension) volume) or point wall Starling up and (fiber increases volume (thenormal curve). to performance(stroke increases, a curve ventricular the (Fig. The function is relationship 145-1). the fiber retain is work.Heart of the contractilestate rate relative rate. curve,but volume of position the the theheart equals stroke lower cardiac output the work of length muscle another Alterations relationship times in muscle because determinant the of to important cardiac performance(Table cardiac also factors Additional 145-1). affect

is commensurate a blood (oxygen Heart rate to when metabolic failure the at delivery). with heart pump unable needs occurs a placed It abnormal contractility in the results low to or myocardial to loading conditions being cardiac on that be due may myocardium. in output change such septal afterload (volume loading or (VSD), overload, patent (PDA), The (pressure abnormal such coarctation stenosis, pulmonary preload the aorta) insufficiency. in may be defect of conditions ductus as overload, ventricular or valvular arteriosus or with as stenosis, aortic children. failure cause common most of the overload heart Volume is in

(Table creating in 145-2). the presentation is The differential age helpful diagnosis of myocardium In afterload weeks life, on the placed the of being most first is common. excessive the failure due that presenting age to resistance of months usually shunts as apparent around left-to-right decreases. 2 increasing Heart is vascular become pulmonary can any myocarditis such cardiomyopathy, present Acquired and at as disease, heart age.

tone) Atrial contraction muscle intrapericardial of Venous action tone Intrathoracic pressure position skeletal Pumping volume Body blood Total (sympathetic and

characteristics (elasticity vessels arterial wall outflow (preload, Peripheral presence or volume Physical vascular ventricular of tree the tension) of obstruction) of resistance Left

rate Sympathetic inotropic Loss Increased agents* or postextrasystolic myocardium† impulses* Digitalis, nerve Intrinsic calcium, heart of Anoxia, Pharmacologic other Circulating catecholamines* depression† augmentation* depression† acidosis†

Autonomic nervous Temperature, metabolic rate system

Philadelphia, Essentials RC, Griggs 5, CCJ, Saunders. Loscalzo Andreoli From Cecil J: TE, Medicine, 2001, ed Carpenter of

*Increases contractility.

contractility. †Decreases

transfusion, cardiac fetal-maternal failure anemia) Supraventricular block (arteriovenous High-output teratoma) insufficiency malformation, heart (hemolysis, Severe tachycardia Ventricular hypoplastic tachycardia Complete anemia valve Atrioventricular

arteries Galen, of Anemia mixing obstructive aorta, Asphyxial Left-sided cardiac (single truncus malformation of Supraventricular hepatic) great left (vein cardiomyopathy stenosis) aortic Transposition Arteriovenous heart, (coarctation tachycardia lesions of hypoplastic heart block Viral Complete Large arteriosus) myocarditis critical ventricle, defects

shunts coronary Hemangioma Left-to-right Metabolic of Acute tachycardia Postoperative (hemolytic (arteriovenous artery congenital malformation) hypertension heart Supraventricular Anomalous uremic cardiac syndrome) left Kawasaki repair (VSD) disease disease cardiomyopathy

fever Endocarditis heart (radiation, (cystic airway Sickle Viral pulmonale hypertension Acute pulmonale) Thyrotoxicosis Cardiomyopathy Rheumatic doxorubicin) anemia fibrosis) Hemochromatosis/hemosiderosis Unrepaired congenital Arrhythmias Chronic disease or palliated obstruction (cor Cor upper (glomerulonephritis) therapy Cancer cell myocarditis

PDA, arteriosus; VSD, BPD, ventricular defect. patent Bronchopulmonary ductus dysplasia; septal

StudentConsult.com Available @

infants Heart and to feeding. failure with thrive, feeding, failure tachypnea, as presents in poor diaphoresis may shortness Older fatigability, breath, of children and present easy edema. with findings systemic both present. venous The congestion, are on examination congestion, pulmonary whether depend venous or physical Tachycardia, be cause. gallop present thready pulses may and rhythm, either with a left-sided If

Oxygen presence Improves edema oxygenation in of pulmonary

decreases Decreases restrictions congestion; vascular preload fluid Sodium,

cause with reduces by preload; way loop control also may venodilation Salt hypertension; Henle; reduced of ascending of afterload Furosemide of excretion

of Combination sodium and tubule distal Greater excretion diuretics loop

Ca2+, membrane Na+, and myocardial contractility, Digitalis consumption Inhibits oxygen increases improves K+-ATPase cardiac intracellular increases

rates, Dopamine may low diuresis myocardial artery, pressure; dilates systemic at direct effect plus increase infusion blood β-receptor, facilitating on Releases norepinephrine renal

Dobutamine β1-Receptor often agent; combined with dopamine

may effects; vasodilation noncardiac milrinone with Amrinone/ Nonsympathomimetic, inotropic cause glycosides

Captopril/enalapril angiotensin-converting enzyme; reduces of angiotensin production Inhibition II

are counterpulsation pulmonary Improves is edema failure flow, tachypnea, wheezing, seen. and orthopnea, afterload Mechanical predominant, coronary distended are signs failure. right-sided of veins neck and Hepatomegaly, edema,

heart chest rules x-ray cardiomegaly absence the usually out The diagnosis a failure. on of of measures the defects assesses function, An echocardiogram congenital when present. and diagnoses sizes, chamber heart heart myocardial

function myocardial afterload. Initial treatment at improving optimizing and preload directed and is (Table inotropic support, are afterload employed and, Diuretics, reduction 145-3). often, afterload added. Long-term consists diuretics reduction usually therapy of and is although this be remainssomewhat therapy controversial withβblockers also patients. in may Long-term beneficial, pediatric added usually the remodeling. regimen cardiac to because its medical effecton of Spironolactoneis

cause rheumatic remains important Although cardiac acute an preventable United of the in States, disease. fever uncommon to 6 of age. children common It most years in is 15 group to sequela of A beta-hemolytic pharynx. immunologic streptococcal It a is infections is delayed the an that due reaction of and status lower additional rheumatic factors. of history are A family fever socioeconomic

StudentConsult.com Available @

antecedent of Acute criteria is the revised criteria confirm acute a fever. one infection, streptococcal using Jones evidence clinical major of fever the minor diagnosis and rheumatic either findings two with an of diagnosed along (Table two and 146-1).The major laboratory of rheumatic or criteria, presence the by 6 to fever often of presentation weeks. rheumatic precedes 2 infection The most O infection. as reliable the evidence titer, tests, such Streptococcal prior antistreptolysin are laboratory antibody the of

Rheumatic Table Jones Acute of Fever*,† Major Diagnosis Criteria for 146-1

tender, swelling, small but unusual Polyarthritis as Migratory; erythema large joints, such motion, joints or Common; limited rarely vertebrae involves

Common; myocardium pancarditis, pericardium, valves, Carditis

or mitral Carey-Coombs heat; proximal explained extremities, to nonpruritic murmur application evanescent, central murmur; fever; of marginatum with of heart Tachycardia clearing; local greater failure evolving by mid-diastolic aortic than new insufficiency; border by serpiginous elicited

and *Minor fever, elevated or repeated leukocytosis, knees, spine; with ankles associated episodes nontender Uncommon; extensor include rate/C-reactive nodules (temperatures and fever of erythrocyte rheumatic interval. Subcutaneous arthralgias, of prolonged firm, knuckles, PR [38.2°–38.9°C]), elbows, scalp carditis; 101°–102°F criteria sedimentation and previous protein, surface located and over severe

strongly antistreptolysin O recent elevated minor, antibodies) the suggest or and †One fever, rheumatic (e.g., of acute evidence of group antistreptococcal with major two or throat other streptococcal A diagnosis disease major, fever. positive criteria culture, two scarlet or

major common most Arthritis the manifestation. is large and joints migratory. involves It usually is the a Arthralgia used manifestation. manifestation minor if cannot as as be a used arthritis major is Carditis about occurs patients. 50% of in Tachycardia, pericarditis, of are signs heart carditis. a new murmur and failure regurgitation), (mitral cardiomegaly, evidence aortic or of occurs serpiginous, trunk, nonpruritic, warmth. marginatum, the brought rash, is a evanescent and uncommon, Erythema on out is by and with nodules predominantly Subcutaneous recurrent seen are or disease. chronic nodules nonpruritic, the mobile and firm, painless, on the They are extensor the of spine. found the joints, large and small scalp, surfaces neurologic St. (Sydenham consists psychiatric dance) of signs. or and chorea Chorea Vitus long the and is infection. presents also uncommon often after It

and bed salicylates, of the with eradicate streptococcus, Management beta-hemolytic anti-inflammatory consists fever penicillin rheumatic benzathine acute to rest. therapy of supportive be chorea necessary. may for or failure Additional therapy heart prophylaxis, benzathine 1.2 Longterm penicillin penicillin G, preferably intramuscular days, U is million with every 28 required. Oral effective. not regimens for are as prophylaxis generally prognosis of acute damage. permanent depends fever cardiac of on the degree rheumatic The followed. is it Cardiac regimen involvement episode especially completely, if prophylactic the the first and may resolve is involvement severity recurrence rheumatic of with of worsens The cardiac each fever.

with is other heart heart disease an associated 147-1). (Table intrinsic disease forms cardiomyopathy not of A and of the muscle is cardiomyopathy anatomic and based are There 1. on functional types three features: of

2.

3.

cardiomyopathies the most Dilated common. are Coxsackie disease but postinfectious, systemic drugs. virus) or be to They secondary infection (echovirus or to to cardiotoxic often B may idiopathic, be or familial, due are or sporadically. with but familial autosomal may are dominant cardiomyopathies inheritance, occur usually Hypertrophic be associated with 147-2). idiopathic (Table they rare; disease or may Restrictive cardiomyopathies systemic are

Available @ StudentConsult.com

enlargement in result of or leftventricle of the Dilated only both ventricles. cardiomyopathies Myocardial variably contractility is decreased. output of cardiac inadequate dilated signs with and with Children present and failure. heart cardiomyopathy symptoms and present on examination. are tachycardia Tachypnea pulse are of pulses Peripheral a weak often narrow pressure. because audible may Rales auscultation. be on muffled, heart often be an is present. S3 sounds may and The collapse and circulatory dilated children may in cardiomyopathies. in with result shock infectious Concurrent illness

diagnose. to difficult Hypertrophic is initially cardiomyopathy but frequently Infants, of heart not children, failure. older withsigns present older the presentation initial be children. may in death Sudden palpitations and be of near-syncope, affected children may chest more referred family after is Dyspnea, murmur an pain,syncope heard member. present.A fatigue, than identification in 50% of or in cardiomyopathies rare relatively are pediatrics. Restrictive Presentingsymptoms hepatomegaly, exacerbated by examination. dyspnea include S4 usually heart on respiratory syncope, an illness, a sound and

restrictive recessive, deficiency cardiomyopathy Mitochondrial syndromes cardiomyopathy (progressive Myotonic Carnitine storage) myopathy Familial Familial fibroelastosis syndromes ophthalmoplegia) X-linked) (glycogen external dystrophy cardiomyopathy dystrophies dilated (Becker, dystrophy muscular Familial (dominant, Pompe muscular Duchenne limb-girdle) syndrome Kearns-Sayre Other hypertrophic Endocardial disease

infection, measles, varicella, (e.g., infection, Viral HIV infection, Epstein-Barr virus infection) parainfluenza coxsackievirus mumps, influenza,

(e.g., fever) Coxiella Rickettsial infection, Mountain psittacosis, Rocky spotted

disease, Lyme Mycoplasma leptospirosis, diphtheria, disease) (e.g., Bacterial meningococcal infection,

Chagas toxoplasmosis) Parasitic disease, (e.g.,

Hypothyroidism X-linked Pheochromocytoma respiratory Hyperthyroidism 3-methylglutaconic Type oxidative Mitochondrial defects and II, aciduria myopathies chain

immunodeficiency virus. HIV, Human

dominant) Etiology Metabolic Infectious (autosomal (amyloidosis, (idiopathic, Inherited sarcoidosis) Noninfiltrative familial) Toxic Infiltrative Sporadic

(hemochromatosis, Idiopathic disease Fabry Storage

StudentConsult.com Available @

radiographs is three chest cardiomyopathies. usually for all Cardiomegaly seen types of on (ECG) hypertrophy. in The left dilated have cardiomyopathy may and nonspecific ST-T electrocardiogram changes ventricular wave evidence children with cardiomyopathy. of of right ventricular 25% present in ECG is hypertrophy abnormal, with is The ECG but nonspecific. are hypertrophic universally changes cardiomyopathy a cardiomyopathy interval. associated with prolonged is hypertrophic QT Primary the ECG. atrial cardiomyopathies restrictive with may Children enlargement show on cardiomyopathy. vary Echocardiography features type of by

shortening dilation, in depressed ventricular and result globally a Dilated left and cardiomyopathies decreased contractility. fraction, atrial in septal hypertrophy ventricular outflow and hyper-trophic Asymmetrical left cardiomyopathies. obstruction seen are tract atrial cardiomyopathies. is dilation restrictive seen in Massive tests Endomyocardial or for is while hemodynamically obtained identify and mitochondrial specimens, diseases. allow histologic biopsy type patient infiltrative stable, the

provided for Supportive including three of inotropic and therapy, all cardiomyopathy. types diuretics, afterload medications, reduction, is can be at treatment is identified, etiology. etiology a specific If the directed with monitoring crucial. and is close therapy follow-up Symptomatic cardiac associated considered. of transplantation all rate the Because forms mortality with high of be cardiomyopathy, must

pericardium. inflammation the the of is surfaces parietal Pericarditis and visceral of agents. often viral causative origin, in viruses is most as many identified with It bacterial more and causes A but pericarditis. a rare serious symptomatic much is etiology are and bacterial causes. Streptococcus aureus likely most the pneumoniae Staphylococcus and diseases, vascular is with with (Table arthritis, rheumatoid as such seen Pericarditis associated uremia is collagen 148-1). follows heart syndrome surgery. is pericarditis common a form that relatively Postpericardiotomy of

Pneumococcus, meningococcus*

Cytomegalovirus Coxsackievirus (group Epstein-Barr Echovirus Influenza A, Mumps B)

From Chest Sigman G: pain. Nieder Kliegman DM. ML, Super In RM, Practical editors: Pediatric Therapy, Saunders. in Philadelphia, WB and 1996, Strategies Diagnosis

immune complex. or *Infectious

†Common cause myopericarditis common (viral host). pericarditis or of pericarditis most normal previously a probably in acute is the

assumes down if with pain Malaise (worsened sitting position or lying Dyspnea inspiration) Chest Patient

heart and by by percussion examination Tachycardia position) body Distant (accentuated Friction rub heart sounds Enlarged x-ray Fever inspiration,

above, plus: As

(>10 inspiration) perfusion Hepatomegaly with pulse, neck poor Hg Pulsus pulse Weak Narrow Distended pressure paradoxus peripheral veins mm

StudentConsult.com @ Available

of the 148-2) in on The pericarditis the (Table of symptoms depend amount fluid and accumulates. fast pericardial how it space well usually A effusion small is tolerated. large tolerated it well may accumulates effusion be if A slowly. symptoms. the patient The sooner faster compromised and is fluid the hemodynamically develops the accumulates,

Echocardiography the effusions. diagnostictest is specific detection pericardial of useful for most and x-ray chest cardiomegaly. mayreveal A creates a rounded, A globular effusion silhouette. large cardiac (ECG) may showtachycardia, alternans QRS (variable segments, QRS amplitude). ST orelectrical electrocardiogram The reduced voltage elevated The causative titers, diagnostic through antistreptolysin organism may or titers, viral fluid. testing O of be identified pericardial (ASO) the

for indicated the hemodynamically of treatment etiology and determine of to the effusions Pericardiocentesis significant pericarditis. is directed treatment specific the Additional at etiology. is no is viral antiinflammatory for other than treatment There specific medications. pericarditis

Textbook RE, al: RM, HB, Jenson Kliegman et Behrman of Saunders Pediatrics, ed 2011, Nelson 19, Philadelphia,

T: WW, and Echocardiography Pediatric MS, Cohen Lai Geva Mertens LL, in

Fetus Oxford, Disease: Congenital UK, Heart Blackwell 2009, to from Adult,

West UK, 2, Sussex, DW, 2012, Hoffman ed Van Medicine, GF, vascular Pediatric Wren Benson Wiley-Blackwell JH, Hare Moller Cardio JI, C:

RE: Heart 2011, in Congenital Springer Failure Disease, Shaddy London, Heart

2012, Sussex, C: Guide Arrhythmias, to UK, Concise West Pediatric Wren

A. Julie C. Rowena Scott Paul J. Panepinto, and 20 Punzalan,

severity, diagnosis symptoms, factors A the systemic presence history crucial detailed the blood complaints, progression, of exacerbating is and onset, associated a of of to disorder. to In diagnosis. a pedigree of identifying point a the disorders, inheritance detailed many can blood pattern

StudentConsult.com Available @

Anemia Bleeding Pancytopenia to Failure Jaundice Petechiae/Purpura Thrive

examination disordersfirst hemodynamic of blood The focuses with patients on stability. physical Acute ofanemia status. presenting perfusion with be of cognitive life-threatening, and impairment episodes may jaundice. and two The mostcommon pallor findings of anemia include point both.Growth acuteor hemorrhage, whether indicatesabnormalities or chronic coagulation of presence parameters including of bleeding, process. factors, purpura, of sites deeper generalized anemia or The an petechiae, platelets, is to and pattern anemia, a pancytopenia and of types thrombocytopenia, often associated anomalies delay. are Severe with congenital of growth systemic (especially illness hematologic lymphadenopathy) hepatosplenomegaly point for and illness to a Organsystem abnormalities(Table 149-1). the involvement generalized as or cause

hematologic Diagnosis (Table and according sex normal disorders knowledge blood ageand, to varies of values to detailed 149-2). puberty, pediatric after a of according requires the Directed examination, bythe diagnosis. specific diagnostic and laboratorystudies, confirm physical testing screening can history,

begins 3 erythropoiesis Hematopoiesis in the by weeks sac. of yolk with gestation gestation, primary the of By migrates the liver. hematopoiesis months’ 2 to site to marrow. from the months’ the gestation, shifts 6 to liver 5 the process bone By extremely may limited significant marrow hematopoiesis hematopoiesis. due An premature have infant to bone extramedullary During virtually of hematopoietic quite high. is marrow elements and are infancy, actively hematopoietic the stromal cavities to proportion all with the fat. the central marrow of the pelvis), is grows, (vertebrae, body hematopoiesis and replaced and moves bones gradually to As sternum, ribs, child the marrow had shift may Hemolysis repopulation ceased cavities where marrow or to previously hematopoiesis of hematopoiesis. or damage lead delay may the of hematopoiesis. with Hepatosplenomegaly chronic hemolysis in patients extramedullary may signify of When cells. provides marrow cytopenia patient to underproduction a about a examination is that circulating being bone processes lead valuable evaluated, with information addition, liver, spleen, in concert marrow or lymph the In nodes. by storage neoplastic infiltration often elements with in infiltration cells and bone occurs

1. consist the cells of following: hematopoietic The

and myeloid elements 2. that compartment are pluripotential progenitor all resemble capable lymphocytes stem small forming of cells of Small

lineage megakaryocytic of cells and Large 3. myeloid, committed, proliferating of compartment erythroid,

cells(Fig. postmitotic Large of compartment maturing 149-1)

the intravascular The pool marrow about neutrophils bone neutrophils. is seven times the organ for contains storage major of mature and It to contains lineage. 2.5 cells myeloid cells erythroid 5 of as of as many lineage times stored the plasma in lymphocytes, are histiocytes, and marrow. of megakaryocytes, also Smaller cells, numbers stromal cells

blood erythropoietin, pluripotential stem cells stimulatesprimitive to [RBC] Erythropoiesis that the cell production) glycoprotein along differentiate a by (red iscontrolled

sources to 149-1 hematopoiesis. promote actions Major Figure and cytokine and Cells (G-CSF) bone of after macrophage factor marrow fibroblasts, colony-stimulating granulocyte such endothelial produce reticular granulocyte-macrophage the microenvironment, stimulation. colony-stimulating cells, as (GM-CSF), macrophages, (M-CSF), and colony-stimulating factor factor factors. all development a late optimal and For acting early lineages, requires of combination TPO, cell; stem necrosis EPO, IL, TNF, BFU, factor; erythropoietin; interleukin; unit; MSC, tumor thrombopoietin. cell; Burst-forming myeloid colony-forming PSC, pluripotent unit; CFU, stem The CA, of physiology and Sieff anatomy (From Nathan SC: DG, hematopoiesis. Clark ed Philadelphia, Saunders, editors: Nathan 1998, Hematology DG, of WB SH, p 5, In Orkin Childhood, and Infancy 168.)

149-1 seizures, fatigue, SYMPTOMS infant headache heart failure, of SIGNS fibrosis heart CONDITION COMMON Polycythemia Iron disease, cystic jaundice Pallor, Anemia jaundice, diabetic Hematologic mother, hemolytic cyanosis, Disorders Table of anemia Presentation Cyanotic stroke, deficiency, EXAMPLES Irritability, AND

Neutropenia oral pharyngitis, or ulceration, drug-induced agranulocytosis, Congenital lymphadenopathy, cellulitis, leukemia gingivitis bacteremia, Fever,

ITP, Petechiae, hemorrhage, ecchymosis, epistaxis Thrombocytopenia leukemia gastrointestinal

disease, von DIC Coagulopathy mucosal hemophilia, Willebrand bleeding Bruising, hemarthrosis,

Leiden, embolism, antithrombin Pulmonary C, 20210 S, protein vein anticoagulant; prothrombin deficiency; Lupus III factor protein thrombosis deep or V Thrombosis

DIC, idiopathic intravascular coagulation; purpura. ITP, thrombocytopenic Disseminated

10.5–14 18,000 13–20 40–80 mo–6 1 6 2 40 1 5000–21,000 31 12,000 12.0 61 blood 55 4500–13,500 13.7–20.1 38 45 1 33–42 wk mo 34–40 10,000 13.0 9000–30,000 11–16 16.8 45–65 7–12 6 8000 12.0 30 Cord 50 36 9.5–14.5 6000–15,000 16.5 5 31–41 42–66 6000–18,000 1 yr 2 37 12,000 55 3 7

1.6 14.0 3 Female 7 35 7500 12–16 35–70 42 5000–10,000 37–47 0 55

Male 47 16.0 42–52 14–18

editor: Behrman of 1992, Textbook From Pediatrics, 14, RE, Philadelphia, WB ed Saunders. Nelson WBCs, blood White cells.

is to tissue erythroid apparatus of and line juxtaglomerular made by response kidney in the the local hypoxia. level hemoglobin fetal a liver the in high in production tolow is result Po2 of response of erythropoietin the Thenormally in fetus utero. theerythroid to unit. production colony-forming Erythropoietin leads of eight erythroblast, moredaughter the recognizableerythroid The cells. forms or is which earliest cell gradually eventually The is extruded. nucleus and becomes RBC pyknotic is as capacity. The that protein residual mitochondrial releasedfrom cell reticulocyte synthetic maintains marrow the a and then primarily and globin specialized are precursors heme. inthe of glycolytic enzymes, RBC production chains, Thesehighly engaged receptors and globinchains within with the the transferrin combines is immature into Iron RBC. up via synthesized ring, heme which taken incorporated possible; from themessenger its and continues or about of normal longer mitochondria RBC function to 120 protein no gone days. span for When are however,the is RBC,heme life synthesis the RNA

by during fetal F, phase. Embryonic hemoglobin (hemoglobin are then hemoglobins sacerythropoiesis, replaced α2γ2) hepatic the produced yolk during (a2β2). by in thirdtrimester, During resulting beta hemoglobin gradually production chain gamma A diminishes,replaced the chains, fetal chain of factors diabetic mother) birth infant premature delayonset beta production, (e.g., Some of a doesnot. but in erythropoietin thus, oxygen with erythropoiesis saturation, rapid increases birth, ceases. production Just stops and, after survival have RBCs (60days). shorter time a Fetal

decline in with a 8 cessation gradual few During levels, nadir hemoglobin and of a postnatal the RBC to weeks rapid of at first growth, 10 survival, of cause erythropoiesis months life, life. shortened nadir physiologic accentuated so-called infants. in is premature This delivery. in Erythropoietin produced and to in oxygen hemoglobin is the decline response decreased the with count. increase Erythropoiesis resumes subsequently reticulocyte in an of of hemoglobin A. accompanied gradually level by increases, amounts increasing The hemoglobin synthesis healthy of age trace infants, synthesis in By only months occurs. 6 chain gamma

controlled factors by predominantly precursors colony-stimulating is neutrophil two Production (seeFig. different of 149-1). The lymphocytes. by and by immature produced factor arecontrolled most neutrophil precursors granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating (GM-CSF), monocytes primitive GM-CSF the line myeloid increases of into of the precursorcells entry differentiation. precursors. mature factor more colony-stimulating production granulocyte Granulocyte augments (G-CSF) the of GM-CSF can and in 10to neutrophils, functional of stimulate the shorten activity. and 14-day mature working concert, cell augment production neutrophil, production timefrom to usual stem G-CSF, in of The granules. rapid possessing with maturation, the infection under neutrophils neutrophil control of myelocytes a the neutrophil by GM-CSF.During primary thatoccurs mitotic promyelocytes, marrow, is caused stored from bone increase of pool and precursorsexists—myeloblasts, release count bands, postmitotic or ofmetamyelocytes, consists the leukocytes and type. polymorphonuclear granules specific containing pool cell The secondary thatdefine mature Only bacterial with to arefully chemotaxis,and regard functional mature neutrophils killing. phagocytosis, and bands bonemarrow, become 3. under tissues, 7 cells is migrate not the they related glycoprotein the a enter circulate to from and of hormone, that interleukin hours, production the recirculate.Eosinophil do where 6 end-stage control for Neutrophils defense host also periods. in for ofliving are prolonged Eosinophils, role tissues which playa parasites, against in capable

are multinucleated and division. normal derivedfrom cell Megakaryocytes of because content) cell are stem (16 cytoplasmic polyploid but to the giant, DNA 32 timesthe nuclear cells primitive not invagination and of themegakaryocytic periphery. form off by the bud cell Platelets from membrane primary plateletproduction. of the Thrombopoietin is regulator after of that endothelium specific for surfaces and the specific granules also readily via andsubendothelial damaged adhere release proteins, Platelets process have receptors factor (vWF), stimulation trigger Willebrand and fibrinogen.Platelets to theircontents plateletaggregation. von adhesive the nonucleus. have 10 7 Platelets for days and to circulate

young marrow bone Lymphocytes of are children. in abundant the particularly spleen present. but are lymphocytes arising the lymph are also in T nodes, primarily lymphocytes These and B

thepatient’s (see normal The of determined 149-2). by anemia level age-specific Table and comparison hemoglobin of with values diagnosis is sex-specific males normal in tomaintain boys causes a production about to ofandrogens puberty than value hemoglobin 2 g/dLhigher 1.5 of girls. The onset the at hemoglobin easiest The that anemia hematocrit quantitative (SDs) gender. limits) and deviations is any (95% definition standard confidence is below age value themean or 2 of for for hemoglobin oxygen). anemia present cyanotic abnormally disease with be or (e.g., certain pulmonary hemoglobinlevel normal in may pathologicstates, cardiac However, or affinity high a This anemia. definition physiologic a is of is otherorgan process dysfunction. accentuate manifestationof primary a may some often and Anemia other

are on based (Fig. the classified cells size and hemoglobincontent of Anemias the 150-1). production of anemia microcytic by an caused inadequate hemoglobin. is Hypochromic, type and thalassemia. of deficiency iron are most common this The causes of anemia are normocytic illness with that anemias impairs a Most associated systemic

disease minor Sideroblastic ° Copper Hypochromic, anemia (?) Aluminum, deficiency Microcytic major, lead

Hemoglobin S-C, Normochromic, thalassemia SS, Normocytic • S-°

HUS, TTP DIC,

blood Use of 150-1 count, count, Figure blood the reticulocyte smear the in of anemia. and diagnosis complete thrombotic HUS, syndrome; purpura. G6PD, production rule R/O, dehydrogenase; coagulation; TTP, intra-vascular RPI, index; Disseminated DIC, glucose-6-phosphate reticulocyte out; thrombocytopenic uremic hemolytic

marrow acid deficiencies lead and macrocytic folic (RBCs).Vitamin of to anemia. synthesis red B12 adequate blood cells or mediated Hemolytic intrinsic RBC extrinsic by destruction. to diseases are that cell disorders the either increase membrane are spherocytosis hereditary hereditary and The disorders elliptocytosis. common most RBC RBC the to of In lead both of disorders, abnormal shapeand these abnormalities within cytoskeleton function. proteins Numerous RBC glucose-6-phosphate enzyme deficiency pyruvate common: deficiency. deficiencies (G6PD) to kinase hemolysis, two dehydrogenase but and only are maylead phagocytosed Immune-mediated when be the with antibodiesor hemolysismay are reticuloendothelialsystem. coated extravascular complement by RBCs and antibodybinding to when fixation RBCs. The leads of complement hemolysis lysis intravascular be may

@ Available StudentConsult.com

irritability, onset manifested sleeping excessive syncope. state, of elevated poorly headache, exercise feeding, in poor infants) compensated fatigue, result and anemia or rate, a a flow tolerance, can in (especially poor murmur, an heart Acute as contrast, well anemia In is often chronic exceptionally

with 6 hemoglobin preterm (4–8 deficiency term infants reticulocytosis cell blood or or rare suggests of Iron loss; suggests fetal Sickle birth reticulocytopenia, Neonatal anemia blood bone loss with hemolysis of in as weight mo before absence infants of before in age) the Age or doubling mo appear anemia failure in β-thalassemia and disappears marrow

descent; member Asian α-thalassemia of cell Ethnicity (thalassemia spherocytosis Race those in persons G6PD Family African dominant: Greeks, origin) genetic deficiency Autosomal of G6PD descent; Mediterranean, cholecystectomy of splenectomy recessive: (for descent) an Mediterranean of Autosomal and sickle with in bilirubin or anemia and in anemia, considerations early and in stones) Asian blacks, people Middle SC and in Eastern (β-thalassemia of Family age history Fanconi at African, history X-linked: African SS persons origin; deficiency or

Strict Pica: folate Cow’s vitamin vegetarian: deficiency milk deficiency diet: vitamin malabsorption: deficiency deficiency iron diet: Goat’s iron E B12 Nutrition Cholestasis, plumbism, milk deficiency

increasing suppression (e.g., nitrofurantoin, chemotherapy) antimalarials) G6PD: marrow (e.g., Immune-mediated oxidants Bone penicillin) (e.g., folate hemolysis Phenytoin, requirements Drugs

E loss inflammation or with Malabsorption iron of B12 loss and or of intolerance–induced Intestinal Inflammatory anemia disease) protein bowel disease Diarrhea Milk without blood B12 blood vitamin (chronic or resection: vitamin deficiency

deficiency vitamin B12 infection: tapeworm: hemolysis marrow Chronic infection: vitamin infection: bone hemophagocytic Malaria: B12 Mycoplasma Parvovirus Hepatitis: infection Giardia lamblia (blind deficiency iron malabsorption aplastic virus, Endocarditis loop): cytomegalovirus Infection Intestinal hemolysis Epstein-Barr syndromes anemia marrow bacterial HIV overgrowth Fish suppression suppression, bone infection: infection

G6PD, dehydrogenase. Glucose-6-phosphate

of because tolerated cardiovascular children reserve. their in examination. anemia Usually, with children will minimal a on chronic murmur tachycardia have and flow especially The diagnostic of therapeutic the packed should or cardiovascular intervention, dictated the be of hemoglobin. urgency more transfusion, level and of functional absolute use than impairment by RBC the extent of

causes 150-2). of (Tables a age anemia suspected 150-1 can be for often careful history from the and The adjusted patient’s for blood any demands Anemia loss. search age a at

thetime pallor, at or diagnosis the excessive siblings,drug the by of jaundice, of to previously history ingestion important innewborns. birth A mother, provides blood affected loss clues dietary history is A careful crucial. splenomegaly. patients with are pallor, jaundice, key and in anemias hemolytic findings The (bilirubinate), result production, Because hemolysis,are complication. of common gallstones a increased a bilirubin of chronic suggestacute illnesses complaints or probable as anemia. Systemic causes chronic of bloodloss, ingestion, presence symptoms, points from often especially adiagnosis. to unusual Inlater bleeding, the drug diets, constitutional childhood of or menstrual adolescence, and in often frequently membrane the undiagnosed. hemolytic and (enzyme are associated Congenital and go deficiencies disorders problems) disorders life present with months these jaundice, often first6 of although neonatal essential induced. be detecting careful for problemsthat may drug drug history is A complicates iron deficiency loss gastrointestinal further cow’s blood in when protein milk dietary intake. analready iron inadequate and Pure intolerancecauses except israre infancy,

150-2). physical Table causes the point to The potential (see examination may acute pressure blood may abnormal altered be manifesting the patient hemolysis, blood ominously, and and, of acute most of tachycardia, loss physiologic stability consciousness. as an changes, The with state The presence of jaundice hemolysis. suggests a purpura coagulopathy. and Petechiae indicate suggest infiltrative and adenopathy disorders. Hepatosplenomegaly anemia poor chronic gain of suggests disease. or an Growth failure weight stool the the blood. the is An for element of investigation presence physical the essential examination occult of of

anemia. severity the hematocrit of hemoglobin the test A indicates or anemia has indices, the platelet should with reticulocyte a include Once count been blood workup differential, count, and count. substantiated, complete the smear Examination morphology RBCs the blood of of assesses (Fig. peripheral and 150-2), platelets. (WBCs), cells blood white determine process cell All of affects marrow limited to result that or the process lines the should scrutinized other whether a erythroid be elements. a is line to anemia (see cells the of obtained on count, or be organized the whether can workup the and are RBC from basis and or adequate normocytic, is whether microcytic, Using reticulocyte Fig. data production inadequate macrocytic indices the 150-1).

anemia implying loss. production either reticulocyte suggestingincreased elevated to would and be orblood marrow absolute bone hemolysis an appropriate number, An response ineffective number Anemia degree or production suggests a ofanemia. decreased the for reticulocyte normal with present.The bone of onset had of signifies being marrow time thatthe of to are severity indicators elevation are reticulocyte the and so intrinsic the destroyed count. marrow the marrow an not respond, has is (antibodymediated), hemolysis level the or Reticulocytopenia best thatreticulocytes disease acute that in hemoglobin the adequate an decreasein Biochemical bilirubin dehydrogenase inlevels evidence lactate haptoglobin. of a includes of and and increase hemolysis

Frontal major, Head chronic hematoma subdural deficiency, Microcephaly Fanconi iron bossing anemia Thalassemia severe

stature General Fanconi anemia, infection, Small malnutrition HIV

immunodeficiency HIV, erythematosus. SLE, virus; Human systemic lupus

Figure cell. 150-2 Morphologic abnormalities of the blood red A, Normal. (iron Hypochromic deficiency). B, microcytes C, uremic syndrome. Schistocytes (hemolytic (glucose-6-phosphate D, deficiency). dehydrogenase cells Blister Sickle SS disease). (hemoglobin cells E, hemolytic Spherocytes F, (autoimmune anemia). Trost and B. (Courtesy

P. J. Scott.)

Anemia Microcytic Hypochromic,

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Etiology. when toddlers teenage and fed cow’s milk are who girls at 1 iron risk Infants cow’s younger high are for receiving of than volumes fed menstruating iron year milk, of not deficiency. large age, supplemental cow’s common bottle-fed large milk deficiency of food iron are amounts eat of volumes content. who and iron toddlers Dietary anemia minimal most in high receiving is in Chapters and 31.) 28 (See children anemia even may chronic blood chronic also without with found in loss. Iron diseases, deficiency be inflammatory

Epidemiology. than prevalence of toddlers, in cause and iron most about world, girls, in common the deficiency, adolescent is of to 1% boys. The 9% in 11% the less anemia in teenage 9% of deficiency anemia occurs iron third 150-3). are Iron one about who (Table deficient children in risk be may 31). Chapter poor underprivileged United minority the dietary of increased in because for States deficiency intake at Some (see iron populations is to this absorbed. bottle-fed iron although there have infants are less iron infants milk, iron Breastfed than efficiently likely deficiency is because, breast more in less

Clinical Manifestations. to concentration)have to (CNS) oxidase) from system alterations (apathy, of addition anemia, enzymes been linked deficiency, iron-containing abnormalities of manifestations presumably (monoamine In cytochromes. resulting and nervous iron central poor irritability, cardiovascular muscle Poor and been associated and WBC deficiency. T-cell endurance, iron function dysfunction, impaired have with gastrointestinal with infancy be may performance. cognitive in poor Iron later school deficits and deficiency associated

Treatment. trial an a a the response child, iron is iron as as best and In is of diagnostic documented. the therapeutic child for deficiency long is re-examined healthy study otherwise in months). function 48 subjective and (48 reticulocytosis (in includes 30 (4 and iron increase rapid levels to to hemoglobin improvement, 72 iron 3 24 days); of to (within repletion hours); to stores neurologic in to 1 especially hours) response oral The Fe2+ erythroid hyperplasia hyperplasia to The hypo/micro* nc/nc hypo/nc 10–12 <12 mg/day usual of ↓ absent, 4 8–10 <12 absent, erythroid erythroid absent, Fe2+ 6 ↓ ↓ hyperplasia <12 <8 Fe2+ therapeutic dose

TE, WB From Cecil Medicine, ed al: Saunders. JC, 1997, et Carpenter Bennett Philadelphia, 4, CC, Essentials Andreoli of microcytic; normocytic. hypochromic, normochromic, hypo/nc, normocytic; hypo/micro, Hypochromic, nc/nc, (e.g., corpuscular = below yr <2 for = volume = yr 0.5–2 by the fL) 75; 74; at at age mean at at 2–6 70; must = be *Microcytosis, 6–12 adjusted yr mean, yr SD (in 12–18 a and 3–6 SD 77; determined = 78). at mo –2

microcytosis. definition of *See Table 150-3 for

of minor by newborn be diagnosed presence Bart can on the screening. †α-Thalassemia hemoglobin

cases 25% microcytic. are normochromic; ‡Usually of the (different quantitates blood width §Red red anisocytosis cell of blood cells. sizes) distribution degree of

hematocrit). (a iron increase g/dL/day induces 0.4 increase to 0.25 elemental hemoglobin of of in 1%/day an in treatment, institution If compliance, or increase loss, of re-evaluation to Fig. careful hemoglobin other poor fails development causes the of of infection, 150-4; iron blood ongoing microcytic required level (Table anemia weeks 2 after within is for see 150-1).

Prevention. than Bottle-fed older until age iron-containing of receive 6 infants should of infants and an receive formula age, 12 an iron months months supplement. breastfed should introduction by and at prevent foods of milk help deficiency months to amount anemia. a at transition of a can age, cow’s iron-enriched iron foods followed The solid 6 increased 1 solid year, of limited diet are foods. girls should a Teenage iron-containing with have menstruating enriched who iron vitamin may used. be with also A

Epidemiology. Etiology and anemia. and a causes α-Thalassemia are minor with of either or common without mild microcytosis, hypochromic, β-thalassemia microcytic ethnic in Americans). Asian, groups (Mediterranean, certain Southeast African prevalent are They descent three are fetalis of of Fig. or or (Table (α4) disease H in at risk (γ4) and hydrops resulting only with Bart 150-5 α four hemoglobin having genes deleted, Individuals hemoglobin Asian 150-3).

Laboratory Testing. mild count minor with syndromes a hypochromic, anemia 150-5). Table microcytic The thalassemia a low characterized are (see by reticulocyte absolute RBC elevated. count The is usually corpuscular diagnosis 12.5 less divided the the a suggestive count is result, the (Mentzer volume if of than thalassemia trait. is index), RBC (MCV) As by mean The only microcytosis trait. α-thalassemia smear with blood reveals is normal α-thalassemia electrophoresis usually is (see Outside period, Bart hemoglobin minor detectable, Fig. when neonatal the in hemoglobin 150-3). RBCs. microcytic with of Blood show β-thalassemia patients minor smears Target of be also present. alpha may by tetramers, stippled precipitation cells basophilic chain and RBCs, caused A2 hemoglobin levels in elevation is on β-thalassemia. of an F based diagnosis The and variants. Molecular more or is severe testing identification indicated of for unusual

Treatment. for thalassemia treatment children No minor. is with required the are Spring especially or Bart hydrops (γ4), children chronic hemoglobin to likely with hemoglobin, therapy. with variant Constant require transfusion only However, H (α4) fetalis disease

may hypochromic, with Lead microcytic a poisoning associated be anemia. concomitant deficiency. Most patients iron have of older of lead living The pica. raise with a lead suspicion especially with dust in 1980) (built home should before in paint poisoning, or an history child chipped Basophilic is blood stippling smear the common. on Lead intoxication

Syndromes dependency, (Cooley’s Severe PHENOTYPE Table hepatosplenomegaly, transfusion GENOTYPIC ABNORMALITY overload Thalassemia hemolysis, Homozygous erythropoiesis, ineffective 150-5 DISORDER major Thalassemia β-THALASSEMIA iron β0-thalassemia anemia) CLINICAL

complication Moderate β+-thalassemia intermedia is Compound heterozygous severe not hemolysis, main iron Thalassemia anemia, life-threatening splenomegaly, overload but moderately β0and transfusion-dependent;

Microcytosis, Thalassemia β+-thalassemia minor Heterozygous anemia mild β0and

anemia, Hydrops failure; from death heart -/-Severe intrauterine utero congestive or in anasarca birth at fetalis

Andreoli Cecil Griggs Essentials et Saunders. Medicine, From Philadelphia, T, R, al: of 2007, 7, ed C, Carpenter

transfusion. require Spring *The may variant chronic Constant

150-3 gene deletions α-thalassemia the classic the Figure to of origins in gene syndromes due cluster. Genetic α-globin is has of chain small it Spring the phenotypic hydrops variant (1%–2% always Hb a to α-thalassemia (Hb gene, normal) αCS that Constant non-deletion fetalis. CS) severe α-globin an never been a linked has is the impact such associated of allele so with it however, synthesized α-globin functioning allele; in amounts al, (From R, 5, Hoffman Basic Hematology: Livingstone.) ed editors: Philadelphia, Practice, et SS, 2008, EJ, Shattil Churchill Benz and Principles hemolytic trait, carrier) ˜+-Thal silent trait rarely (”Mild” causes anemia. potential the Detection of removal chelation and to routine crucial are development exposure, children. iron affected therapy, deficiency screening, by correction of from

and Treatment. Etiology Anemia disease. of chronic is a component common inflammatory role Hepcidin, key in plays protein the a liver, in iron a homeostasis. made hepcidin, and the production the iron Inflammation process of in macrophages release absorption by the of increase interrupting an causes

intestines from iron constant with spring ˜-Thalassemia of Hb the anemia. Normal to leading often, microcytic. less anemia The normocytic be of may or, inflammation loss blood associated challenge, when inflammatory with pose anemia. children may This clinical microcytic with a a bowel (inflammatory exhibit disorders disease) In two marrow the entities these sample only iron (see differentiate the 150-4). staining bone for circumstances, with of clearly can Table aspiration a Low iron deficiency. levels ferritin indicate concurrent systemically specific a be indicated ill. iron who to children of not diagnosis is in therapy without appear A trial

commonly to a normochromic, infiltration leads by Bone anemia. malignant normocytic marrow cells The mechanism

transplant are late-onset short Cell age Diamond-Blackfan present, syndrome recessive fetal Newborn–1 hemoglobin, thumb; mo; anemia) trait, analysis and DISORDER hematopoietic cell transfusion, neck, yr lip, CHARACTERISTICS Aplastic AGE of CONGENITAL aplasia, cleft webbed 90% Aplasias leukemia, TREATMENT Prednisone, AT stature, fetal Blood cell Table Differentiation triphalangeal macrocytic, <1 patients hypoplastic elevated Pure red mutation blood autosomal Red antigen ONSET stem (congenital Anemias of 150-6 i of

new-onset sickle Any typically Any anemia, cell; Transfusion hemolytic Parvovirus reticulocytopenia age chronic

yr Transfusion, age Epstein-Barr bone age; syndrome, transplantation Any X-linked marrow pancytopenia <5 (EBV) immunodeficiency usually virus of

etoposide. CSF, herpesvirus intravenous CMV, VP-16, 6; cerebrospinal fluid; MCV, Cytomegalovirus; immune volume; mean human corpuscular IVIG, HHV-6, globulin;

RBC which multifactorial. with other cells is cell by and neoplastic marrow interfere synthesis low. often count is reticulocyte The Immature the peripheral because tumor may presence myeloid of the into blood elements the offending of released cells. be metastasize lymphoblasts; blood solid are to reveal marrow, cells these the may of in seen blood. when examination peripheral the the An peripheral seldom tumors blood. may cells peripheral the seen in Teardrop be examination the is necessary bone face marrow frequently normocytic of normochromic, in A anemia.

in severe first of anemia. anemia months disorder, macrocytosis or lifelong few pure life aplasia a and RBC or (Diamond-Blackfan syndrome), mild the presents usually a Congenital with birth at normocytic precursors of to 150-6). (Table cell bone due blood marrow is a red deficiency It than stature. More of a patients short have third receive treatment, must to to respond therapy 66%) corticosteroid but indefinitely. (50% Many patients and who treatment overload. multiple transfusion complications transfusion the are especially long-term are respond iron dependent not do to of Patients at of therapy, risk corticosteroid malignancies or general have higher These hematologic rate than leukemia other population. of patients a the developing

normocytic In after age anemias, usually transient appears an causedby of in hypoplastic congenital erythroblastopenia a childhood, synthesis, to contrast of normal the anemia RBC suppression otherwise infant. monthsof 6 be aplasia leading is Viral the to the mechanism thoughtto understood. trigger, RBC poorly are although infections gradual, The onset anemia severe. but is maybecome spontaneous. usually is Recovery bechallenging. also are in marrow, in precursors or bone diminished Diamond-Blackfan syndrome, which Differentiationfrom erythroid may the absent symptomatic ifthe packed recovery. before necessary may becomes be Transfusion of anemia RBCs

crises anemia. hemolytic chronic complicate Aplastic may any cardiovascular an periods to reticulocytopenia, decompensation. precipitate the leading of severe anemia, of These exacerbation acute may parvovirus erythropoiesis. erythroid down Human infects B19 precursors shuts and cause fifth of (the disease) with Transient individuals is normal in survival. RBC without erythroid consequence aplasia transfusion the spontaneous, severe. if from but Recovery hemolytic is patients anemia need in disease is infection may parvovirus

SEE FIGURE 150-1.

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Etiology. formed in leukocytes, decrease elements of quantitative is and Pancytopenia the blood—erythrocytes, a platelets. of of life relatively and span infection platelets RBCs. or of symptoms because compared of than exhibit often span short the Patients with life the anemia bleeding more WBCs (implying failure of (hypersplenism), disease), bone of intrinsic include Causes marrow destruction. peripheral sequestration production pancytopenia increased and

Differential Diagnosis. bone low suggest of bone abnormal Features not RBCs(implying mandate of count, of in forms marrow replacement, forms and forms, an failure), examination marrow volume just marrow that corpuscular reticulocyte elements include than the band failure a an reticulocytecount. presenceof myeloid elevatedmean or lessmature a platelets, small of leukocytes low and teardrop face failure but all lines, three involving cell starting two later cell isusually one a resulting gradual or bone from Pancytopenia process, with marrow lines. and myeloid destruction and lactic bilirubin suggestingincreased the Features on or serum platelets, dehydrogenase. elements increased jaundice,immature reticulocytosis, smear,large include blood erythroid

Available StudentConsult.com @

Epidemiology. and Etiology with bone pancytopenia evolves and In by as fat. replaced marrow the child anemia, is elements the marrow disappear of aplastic a hematopoietic the countries, developed In most often is aplastic anemia idiopathic. may felbamate as and such be by drugs benzene. as such induced or toxins chloramphenicol The disorder by (see Aplastic may infectious and hepatitis anemia infections, follow Table mononucleosis 150-6). also particularly in postinfectious of and an mechanism hematopoiesis be to aplastic anemia. postulated is Immunosuppression idiopathic important with patients

Studies. Laboratory bone determine the biopsy of marrow crucial A depletion is hematopoietic or to elements. extent the cellularity of

Treatment. although when Survival severe anemia rate may blood alone, 20% in of product vigorous aplastic the antibiotic with years survival support and care supportive provided. is duration about be is absolute lymphocytes. with mixed count neutrophil and HLA 500/mm3, absolute (HSCT) hematopoietic an 50,000/μL, less transplantation by of count compatible on platelet identical specimen is anemia—defined less than treatment marrow bone aplastic of For with stem biopsy from and than choice reticulocyte normal—the less sibling 25% less 20,000/mm3, than count than a children cell severe cellularity products, than survival occurs the rate sensitized recipient greater blood 80%. is When before to HSCT is major or for donor without HLA-matched matched therapy an HSCT or The unrelated potent treatment partially two is HSCT. anemia immunosuppressive with of options: evolving, aplastic cyclosporine, immunosuppressive have therapy in been trials with encouraging. growth combination factors antithymocyte globulin, corticosteroids with hematopoietic using and of Results and often therapy therapy when is toxic, relapses often occur stopped. is Such

StudentConsult.com @ Available

and Etiology Epidemiology. usually anemia constitutional years. decade presents may that life is Fanconi over half of the evolve in aplastic first form of a of anemia latter and the of in recessive inherited in defects identified is autosomal involved proteins Fanconi A which manner. group in an been anemia, genetic in repairhave DNA to demonstration breakage increased after DNA. of diagnosis damage on exposure The based that chromosomal is agents contribute all repair damage risk which DNA in abnormal of malignancies. to in mechanism the is The anemia, for increased Fanconi cells may in 10% Terminal acute of leukemia cases. develops Other include tumors head and the gastrointestinal malignancies tumors. gynecologic and solid of neck, tumors,

Clinical Manifestations. (see Table with Fanconi anemia have characteristic Patients clinical findings 150-6). numerous

Treatment. the cure stem Hematopoietic marrow aplasia. pancytopenia cell caused by transplantation bone can anemia of respond and patients induces and tumors. cause for to with a masculinization anemia with seem Fanconi may therapy, children 20% and which about liver time to Many androgenic injury liver aplastic synthesis transfusion RBC may and therapy increases Androgenic requirements. diminish effect impressive. The less granulocytes, is count, on the and platelet especially

Marrow Replacement. in is of childhood. which Marrow tumors storage a neuroblastoma), and result may diseases, occur myelofibrosis, replacement infants, rare in osteopetrosis as leukemia, (especially solid normal by malignant cells incompletely elements The of complex are understood. and which mechanisms impair hematopoietic marrow synthesis marrow failure. precise diagnosis are etiology Bone synthetic marrow aspirate for biopsy of needed and the of

Destruction Pancytopenia from of Cells. Resulting disorders, acid destruction (myeloproliferative elements destruction cells. of resulting or Pancytopenia of the vitamin of of intramedullary cells peripheral hematopoietic caused may by mature folic deficiencies by be and destruction from B12) the blood of and site The although parts of participate. the usual reticuloendothelial other may is spleen, destruction cells system the liver peripheral of anatomic Hypersplenism storage from (portal or malaria); hypertrophy causes lymphomas, result (including disease, or diseases the of infections hypertension (Gaucher splenic maybe histiocytosis). thalassemia); or pancytopenia significance. when is the clinical is of indicated only Splenectomy

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Etiology. alpha needed alpha F and are erythropoiesis hemoglobin chain of (α2γ2), Because utero. in for fetal production are chains present hemoglobinopathies alpha number 16 Four genes (see chromosomes on two are Fig. present the and 150-3 Table 150-5). can by and measuring techniques. rates molecular be deletions by disorder but produce biologic using synthesis state), α or carrier the gene no Single (silent detected of β or anemia mild of α-thalassemia with minor no two produces microcytosis. Deletion and genes individuals (trans), chromosomes and different deletions the African the disorder origin, occur In benign. is on gene of genes. even or chromosomes on infants deletions In the 16 may three (cis),and same the four number Asian chromosome two occur lacking may inherit population, all administered. genes leads death, transfusions fetalis, to intrauterine unless four Deletion intrauterine anemia, hydrops severe are of and three hemoglobin) produces fetus tetramers hemolytic (hemoglobin (Bart in of γ4 anemia the tetramers with and moderate genes β4 Deletion

(see older children and 150-5). H) Table adults in

States hemoglobinopathies these in are because possibly prevalent alpha not symptomatic the United utero. Beta chain disorders, abnormalities are than more chain in include major beta The hemoglobins hemoglobin alter and that C, β-thalassemias. E, and those D, production, beta S, the that function, alter chain hemoglobinopathies those including are not chains both beta are chromosome Because two both severe, unless chains β-globin most express of RBC and of clinically beta 11 abnormal. they copies each has disorders genes, beta indicates whereas indicates describing in β-thalassemia genes, gene normal when absent a By synthesis permits not chains. gene reduced absent chain convention, synthesis, of a resulting β0 but β+ thalassemic β that thalassemic 4 of months Disorders cord by screening. of the age, detected blood they manifest clinically been between themselves beta and 12 have chain usually unless or prenatally

(Cooley β-Thalassemia Epidemiology. Major Anemia) and Etiology mutations synthesis. β-Thalassemia by beta is that major impair caused chain beta in of the alpha the cells, resulting in marrow chains bone of or alpha spleen. precipitate RBC unbalanced synthesis and chains, destruction the within Because in either most Mediterranean commonly seen individuals in β-Thalassemia major or Asian is descent. of of illness the varies clinical of the on the defect. The severity molecular basis

Clinical Manifestations. chronic Signs of symptoms and normal ineffective A, major or erythropoiesis. of of absent hemoglobin result the production decreased βthalassemia hemolytic disease, combination from and failure is high-output severe The heart and and growth anemia failure. leads to osteopenia, and expansion erythropoiesis of bone rate the the hepatosplenomegaly, erythropoiesis marrow and energy fractures, resultant in Ineffective all pathologic absorption. increased leading extramedullary expenditure increase causes of bones, cavities iron with of to of an

Treatment. erythropoiesis, hypertransfusion and the the major ineffective is limiting Treatment absorption. corrects on own a for anemia stimulus suppresses program that the based increased iron patient’s β-thalassemia of decreases suppression increases and heal, to permits absorption. iron bones expenditures, This dietary the limits metabolic growth, but volume, of reduce transfusion to Splenectomy may infection. the serious risk adds the it should there diabetes of is failure, are present (nonimmune skin, cirrhosis, bronzing multiple with before evidence start clinical the of deferoxamine overload deferasirox overload signs and mellitus, heart abnormalities). Chelation laboratory of endocrine and (hemochromatosis) or therapy iron when iron and is of treatment in before major stem rate overload, a high the β-thalassemia transplantation success iron childhood, induced cell organ choice. had has in dysfunction by Hematopoietic

StudentConsult.com @ Available

Etiology Epidemiology. and hemoglobin S-β The cell are 150-7). S-C variants sickle disease, SS disease, common hemoglobin (Table and thalassemia, syndromes rare hemoglobin and the hemoglobin specific type, clinical complications phenotype must differ because The in identified be frequency, severity. smear: As anemia result microcytic acid amino a substitution of hypochromic, single a

20–30 – is Sickle-0 F Often 1–2 F distributed of uniformly hereditary Hb asymptomatic; S-HPFH 70–80 Hb persistence

Andreoli al: Saunders. Griggs 2007, Carpenter Medicine, et Essentials From T, 7, C, ed Cecil Philadelphia, of R,

forms state. (valine deoxygenated glutamic acid crystallizes the β6 at sickle a and hemoglobin the in position), for gel hemoglobin is normally soluble. When the sickle reoxygenated, The capable of entering cell sickle is microcirculation. reversible the so-called occur, may saturation the sickling the is oxygen microvasculature. As and declines, extracted occluding undergoes inducing dysfunction. tissue The infarction, and surrounding pain is fever, This dehydration. phenomenon and acidosis, hypothermia, by sickling hypoxia, exacerbated

and Treatment. Clinical Manifestations child A age. is months infection sickle vulnerable anemia cell with 4 life-threatening of to by most caused microorganisms spleen, the to by from dysfunction resulting the inability an that filter patients. RBCs the within in of By is time, splenic in bloodstream sickling 2 by 4 age. of eventually, is Splenic to by years dysfunction splenic infarction, usually followed, loss splenic the The by function other organisms, infection especially of encapsulated overwhelming pathogens (Table fever. pneumoniae is normal susceptible and Streptococcus makes infection 150-8).The patient to hallmark of patient be syndrome with a Chapter evaluated cell 96). A >38.5°C) sickle febrile immediately (see must (temperature oral infections type precautions virus, and to influenzae against hepatitis pneumococcus, and include prophylactic Current b, at diagnosis vaccinations daily penicillin prevent begun influenza Haemophilus virus. B

that is disease usually severe, routinely anemia is transfusion moderately of SS hemolytic anemia a hemoglobin not dependent. The chronic, the patient’s The on part depends severity in phenotype. of infancy, and cardiac in pallor, include sexual jaundice, anemia growth maturation. chronic delayed variable a and Manifestations murmur, flow splenomegaly the count. level, the the be basis Decisions about should and hemoglobin the patient’s clinical made transfusion reticulocyte on condition, of

is sudden, caused Sickle life-threatening crisis). dysfunction events RBCs, by or resultant (so-called by and of acute cell the disease with organ complicated severe intra-vascular the occasionally sickling pain superimposed compensated decline acute, the clinical on the may hemoglobin In level be an in situations, potentially chronic anemia. two different life-threatening the the drop within sequestration of Splenic in spleen. hyperacute is pooling patient’s crisis a and volume) level the (blood RBCs sickling secondary to hemoglobin life-threatening, splenic is elevated. is enlarged, count The markedly moderately spleen reticulocyte to the and RBC the sickle the anemia crisis, worsening and rapid of aplastic a RBCs. an life reticulocytopenia parvovirus marrow and In because RBC bone short in of infects very transient of aplasia with induces B19 span precursors aplastic transfusion and anemia the crises symptomatic. Simple sequestration for is therapy is when indicated

occur body may and/or events painful organ significant in by manifested Vasoocclusive (see any the 150-8). pain of and dysfunction are Table the new of syndrome infiltrate crisis a with lungs acute is evidence chest chest vasoocclusive on radiograph. The a within associated often is and with infection It infarction. and within a hypoxia, develops distress. may few pain chest progressive rates, of The patient heart increasing respiratory complain but first cough, and respiratory hours of examination areas Physical chest on reveals and decreased sounds dullness breath percussion. of prevention recognition hypoxemia. Treatment and early arterial involves medications, (rarely bronchodilators, for RBC judicious transfusion) antibiotics, Oxygen, fluids, transfusion therapy syndrome. chest of analgesic are indicated use acute in and exchange help may patients in incidence acute the the with pain in reduce crisis spirometry abdomen. or Incentive chest chest presenting of

hands event.The to the pain of of Pain infancy(dactylitis) in bones most or the arms may the abdomen. feet type crisis or legsbut long occur of smaller the usually is vasoocclusive localizes bones common in the in or last usually 2 days. Painful to7 crises may administration fluids, and femur (usually the Vasoocclusive patient crises of narcotics lead femoral chronic nonsteroidal the avascular is includes if of and to hypoxic. the necrosis oxygen anti-inflammatorydrugs), hip analgesia disease.Treatment within and of pain crises head necessary. and use drug analgesics dependency overrated, impossible for risk ishighly the Although appropriate of to pain quantitate, is isoften

usually 20 boys old. and occurs years Priapism in 6 between a sudden, painful a onset The child of experiences

usually mo Chronic, g/dL require hemoglobin age; folate hemolysis; chronic onset Anemia therapy for 3–4 of may 6-10

crisis and may transfusion reversible; reticulocytopenia; Parvovirus acute infection, Aplastic need

crisis splenomegaly (may Sequestration treat Massive involve transfusion with shock; liver),

with be G6PD deficiency Hemolytic associated May crisis

vasoocclusive bone, infarcts bone painful crisis intestines of marrow, Painful Microvascular lung, muscle,

emboli, syndrome infiltrate, infarction, fat absent asthma, breath dyspnea, atelectasis, chest hypoxemia, severe sounds Acute Infection,

disease cor hypertension pulmonary Pulmonary pulmonale, disease, fibrosis, lung lung restrictive Chronic

Priapism shunt corpora treated with or impotence; cavernosa-tospongiosa oxygen, transfusion, eventual Causes

papillary defect; Renal concentrating nephropathy necrosis, Hematuria, renal

humeral or femoral Skeletal Osteonecrosis head of (avascular)

in Mycoplasma Salmonella deafness aureus meningitis; severe arthritis; Functional from properdin osteomyelitis; and bacteremia, asplenia, defects Infections pneumonia and Staphylococcus system; pneumococcal meningitis,

failure, supplements respond May puberty nutritional Growth to delayed

chronic syndrome illness, chronic addiction (rare), dependence Psychological Narcotic pain problems unusual;

dehydrogenase. Glucose-6-phosphate G6PD,

necrosis in *Clinical sudden trait cell extension, intraocular and are unusual exertion, include but with (hematuria), on manifestations sickling papillary sickle hyphema airplanes. renal death unpressurized

relax. not tumescent that penis will less administration (often of transfusion achieve fluids, to a Therapeutic appropriate hemoglobin S and steps when exchange for transfusion). include partial 30% priapism than oxygen, by the analgesia, urine. that management requires loss of infarction the in to medullary concentrate ability recognition Fluid renal results

disease. 8% 10% occurs patients with in approximately to stroke Overt of SS of These an consciousness, focal the may events sudden paralysis. as present altered state of onset or seizures, is neurologic normal but common examination, 20% which a of as patients approximately stroke, infarction imaging cerebral studies evidence Silent disease. with more in on and defined of SS occurs is behavior school with significant been or performance has change in stroke. A silent associated disease 3 Children using SS screened Doppler be transcranial risk with of (TCD). for age should years Hg over of increased stroke

Laboratory Diagnosis. by hemoglobinopathies liquid identifying high-performance is hemoglobin the made type or chromatography. precise and focusing, The electrophoresis, isoelectric diagnosis using of amount hemoglobin of at-risk birth member (preferably) early an population or during a infancy. Every at performed phenotype of have should precise hemoglobin disease. cell for Most screening states sickle newborn perform

Treatment. Direct is of sickle therapy anemia cell evolving. mainstay of The care measures. supportive is has to The transfusions successful. RBC patients who stroke chronic treat of have use a had very been also for prevent successfully time have periods priapism. events, vasoocclusive to acute used syndrome including and RBC chest Chronic recurrent painful transfusions been short of as children decreases which severity the Hydroxyurea, year age. increases vasoocclusive syndrome hemoglobin and acute of frequency and events as1 of in number chest F, early stem cell many a sibling has with children Hematopoietic transplantation, sickle haploidentical disease. cured match, cell using using donors studied. without alternative HSCT children, being match, for a sibling suitable is

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Etiology. inability hexose dehydrogenase deficiency the the is in abnormality regenerate the monophosphate nicotinamide glycolysis of (G6PD) depletion dinucleotide Glucose-6-phosphate (NADPH) shunt to of reduced that phosphate glutathione. and results reduced an adenine pathway in oxidized, significant patient bodies), with precipitates is sulfhemoglobin specially preparations. stained forming is When oxidant visible a to stress, hemoglobin which of on are exposed G6PD (Heinz the chromosome. deficiency X gene on for G6PD The is

The hemolysis severity of depends variant. enzyme on the of the G6PD with variants, In cannot RBC aging many because replaced anucleated. the is be the become cell unstable enzymes and to are cells susceptible Older hemolysis. most oxidant-induced In the variants, enzyme abnormal. kinetically is other

Epidemiology. The found endemic. G6PD have deficiency malaria areas common been is of most where in variants protects parasitism erythrocyte. against deficiency ofthe G6PD by variant B is termed normalactivity mobility. common and most electrophoretic is defined with type The its The 20% A–. and frequencies A, type type are 70% approximate AfricanAmericans type in gene B, 10% variant, the is the A– variant, Only termed African unstable. are Ten percent males black affected. of Oriental group Sardinians, and the disease. A life-threatening termed Arabs and variant of Sicilians, in found and with associated variants chronic Greeks, Mediterranean Sephardic Jews, hemolysis is is andpotentially hemolytic deficiency G6PD Because thegene chromosome, hemolysis for most clinical X in carried males. common on the is is the higher may who have 1% A– with Heterozygousfemales mayhomozygous normal as inactivated a African become (0.5% of offemales variant percentage randomly the symptomatic, females of to descent). gene

Clinical Manifestations. has deficiency presentations. common G6PD two an by of A– episode an serious acute or triggered hemoglobin havenormal but with of (bacterial) values variant develop oxidant hemolysis ingestion infection the when well, Individuals drug. morphologyduring acute out striking, hemolysis of “bites” have episodes RBC The of (cookie them is cells). to taken appearing These Heinz a by absent hemoglobin that macrophages; are produced blistered. by areareas result,the bodies appear phagocytosis RBCs as splenic of of jaundice, resulting Clinically is darkurine hemolysis are evident and common bilirubin hemoglobinuriawhen haptoglobinlevels episodes. hemolytic decreased intravascular, from during pigments, days. the of exceeds on, ability compensate, the the marrowto thehemolysis so Early low for be reticulocyte usually 4 count 3to bone may

Studies. Laboratory decreased is deficiency NADPH The diagnosis on formation. based G6PD of G6PD. severe destroyed hemolytic an during and may be reticulocytes deficient enriched the most have however, G6PD normal, are with episode acute, been cells because levels aids when at test diagnosis. present time mothers G6PD with the patient testing of later in deficiency, the or condition, suspected a steady-state in the boys precise is a to identify electrophoresis variant the Repeating performing

Treatment Prevention. and treatment G6PD supportive. deficiency of The is compromise present. is are whensignificant Transfusions cardiovascular indicated urine protects the damage hemoglobin. precipitated alkalization and Maintaining from free hydration kidneysagainst known nitrofurantoin, balls primaquine,dimercaprol, of (naphthalene). oxidants, long-acting and avoidance prevented Hemolysis by is sulfonamides, moth particularly Fava patientswith triggered beans(favism) the Mediterranean particularly hemolysis, have variant. in potential G6PD-deficient hemolysis also youngchildren. a infection precipitant is in Serious of

deficiency deficiency enzyme of Pyruvate and individuals disorders kinase common deficiency true represents caused deficiency kinase.Some pyruvate a spectrum is haveabnormal by clinical functional kinetics. of much G6PD and the less a have state, others than metabolic is impairing (ATP)depletion, deficiency kinase ofpyruvate The adenosine RBC survival. triphosphate consequence are is heterozygotes for two not an enzymes. abnormal products usually most autosomal (and Pyruvate deficiency consanguinity) affected aredouble kinase are disorder, of childrenwho and to profound Hemolysisis aggravated reticulocytosis condition. not stress due this oxidant in the by potentiallylife-threatening. are Aplastic crises inpyruvate kinase the RBC for deficiency. removal site is The spleen amelioration ofthe have transfusion anemia aftersplenectomy. reduction Most and requirements of a patients

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Etiology. hereditary hereditary of The spherocytosis are biochemical elliptocytosis similar. and basis underlies band the Both RBC protein the lattice a provides protein defect that to lipid 4.2, and ankyrin, conditions stability appear 3) bilayer membrane in of (spectrin, shape. have the vertical of cytoskeletal of membrane uncoupling lipid of hereditary In as off the spherocytosis, and from cytoskeleton. bud abnormal pieces the because microvesicles interaction the proteins bilayer of When biconcave a disk shape from a loses RBC changes spherocyte. membrane, cell to the is deformable through the narrow The passing RBC less spleen. when passages in that individuals a of African primarily elliptocytosis disorder Hereditary descent. occurs dimer in of is spectrin interactions is causing common. two spontaneous hereditary transmission The of spherocytosis usually but dominant, are variants autosomal mutations the result the pyropoikilocytosis when (unusual of the 45°C) structural of at to spectrin. exposed erythrocytes instability they a is abnormality Hereditary heat are of

Clinical Manifestations. anemia that growth to an well-compensated, spherocytosis Hereditary in hemolytic early in chronic mild may anemia necessitating greatly infancy be splenomegaly, from varies severe ranging discovered requirements incidentally hemolytic and asymptomatic, clinical with splenectomy. severity, transfusion failure, a common hereditary most morphologic clinically without survival. a The variant of shortened insignificant elliptocytosis is RBC abnormality ovalocytes, less a with common hemolysis. is elliptocytes with moderate, associated compensated, spherocytes, The usually variant and occurs hemolysis hereditary pyropoikilocytosis. significant in Far more and blood fragmented The includes peripheral pyropoikilocytosis in striking hereditary spherocytes, elliptocytes, smear often microcytosis. RBCs, RBCs. in with blood bizarre have Such period fragmented the small, patients newborn may smears

Diagnosis. Laboratory clinical spleenpreferentially of with spherocytes. a removes suspected the even blood the because should diagnosis in hereditaryspherocytosis patients on found smear The be fewspherocytes of spherocytes the osmotic andincreases fragility the incubated test presence the of confirms An likelihood diagnosis. whichspherocytes in The fragility any result hemolytic test disease in are example, antibody-mediatedhemolysis. osmotic is abnormal in present—for

Treatment. if 5 splenic bedeferred but function to sepsis minimize to corrects in reports, maximize age the hemolytic ofoverwhelming survival RBC but response theantibody considered to until any growth possible, vaccine.In failure, referable seems to persist.Splenectomy and should maintain risk polyvalent the Splenectomy pneumococcal anemia child abnormalities symptoms partial morphologic anemia should patients be splenectomy anemia the for several postsplenectomy years, in hostdefense. normalizes with improvethe the with the and hereditaryspherocytosis, and or to

150-4 antiglobulin (DAT). or Figure test direct Coombs the blood red is presence (Ig) recognizes antibody so-called used (RBCs) complement surface In detect or of by the cells of serum human C that agglutination. the the DAT, on Coombs or to immunoglobulin (C) can multiple antigen-binding two antibody A, simultaneously RBCs of its IgM sites. bind An because repulsive of great bridge IgM the size potential) to it RBCs between forces the cause The allows agglutination. and (zeta surface B, IgG too bridge small agglutination. to An and the cause zeta is antibody potential bridged the is addition zeta of the RBCs C, On Coombs potential agglutinate. and serum, successfully, anemia. RE, WF: from Rosse Ware hemolytic (Modified Autoimmune Childhood, ed editors: 6, DG, SH, Nathan Hematology Infancy Look Ginsburg and In AT, D, Orkin of

Philadelphia, 530.) p Saunders, 2003,

Red Extrinsic Hemolytic the to Blood Caused Manifestations by Clinical Disorders Anemia Etiology Cell and

StudentConsult.com Available @

not erythrocytes (see against 62). antigens do the hemolysis Chapter mother’s by express maternal immunization that Isoimmune fetal active caused is and the to groups. Duffy, Kell, A, D B, the antigens; blood antigens; Rh and other Rh Examples and antibodies other are Anti-A occurring of hemolysis blood from A by type B mothers lack antibodies naturally placental O). maternal or antigen caused and anti-B the (usually transfer who is of antiglobulin the results the Positive test on (Fig. (Coombs) RBCs infant’s direct infant’s immature (erythroblastosis) precursors 150-4), the serum, diagnosis. the this erythroid and presence the antiglobulin spherocytes on blood confirm the of indirect and mother’s smear on test clinical severity. varies disease in Isoimmune hemolytic and exhibit severe or may the There infant clinical manifestations, fetalis. be jaundice, no may anemia, hydrops

acute, is an infection self-limited process (Mycoplasma,Epstein-Barr, after hemolytic or an anemia other develops Autoimmune that usually viral infections). may also immunodeficiency). the disease symptom disorders, of presenting a hemolyticanemia autoimmune lymphoproliferative erythematosus, or be lupus Autoimmune (systemic chronic a Drugs aCoombs-positive or hapten immune that attach by by on membrane. RBC forming forming anemia membrane (penicillin) to complexes(quinidine) induce may hemolytic the theRBC thenactivate hemolysis. Antibodies complement-induced intravascular immune drugs. duringtreatment a few type Thethird α-methyldopa with other and of occurs hemolysis drug-induced the type,prolonged inducingneoantigen RBC In alters this membrane, formation. exposure drug result are positive theneoantigen; induces farmore a that commonly actually produces this to it produced antiglobulin hemolysis. than test bind Antibodies an innocent erythrocyte conditions, each ofthese the is In bystander.

during membrane circulation. is to A disease by mechanical form of acquired RBC caused damage the hemolytic second are by the and in circulation strands. pass broken through stress thrombotic RBCs these strands they fibrin microangiopathy, by In the trapped as physically shear can intravascular malignant hyperacute coagulation thrombotic rejection purpura, toxemia, hypertension, microangiopathy. uremic thrombotic graft and syndrome, renal produce (DIC), Hemolytic thrombocytopenic disseminated are if survival are that indicating they large, usually decreased have a normal. even The young, but numbers the are platelets of factors other in in clotting DIC of than microangiopathy. the more Consumption thrombotic forms prominent is forms, microspherocytes, shows RBC smear and teardrop The fragments polychromasia. (schistocytes), heart (Kasabach-Merritt rates nonendothelialized result (as flow or high to of valves) Other injury mechanical a in examples damage as artificial by in exposure syndrome). of include to shear hemangiomas and RBCs giant surfaces

survival. membrane especially the shorten RBC and in the plasma may cholesterol, Alterations lead to to lipids, RBC damage membrane. lipids the with the in are Lipids RBC equilibrium in plasma in cholesterol High and levels surface of membrane the cell. the volume without total the increase cholesterol membrane the affecting may diseases. that condition abetalipoproteinemia in seen produces cells spur liver be and This deformability where spleen, the RBC Hemolysis destruction. poor erythrocyte in results in occurs venoms and heavy snake and bind toxins may hemolysis. RBC groups (e.g., metals) membrane damage Circulating the that induce sulfhydryl cells) failure. renal RBCs in are spiculated (burr seen Irregularly abnormal lipids deficiency of as Vitamin of anemia sensitivity cause result can acquired to also an E a membrane stress. hemolytic oxidant not transfusional vitamin in iron with insufficient exposure. or have occur nutrition, deficiency malabsorption infants oxidant to cystic with overload, who are supplemented lead and E can (including severe syndromes infants being may Vitamin in with which infants fibrosis), premature in E who severe

Laboratory Diagnosis. reveals and hemolytic blood RBCs. smear peripheral in occasionally usually spherocytes anemia autoimmune nucleated The as with because some reticulocyte that varies patients count RBC cross-react reticulocyte result of low counts precursors. The autoantibodies relatively have a

Treatment Prognosis. and virtually for all challenging difficult, treatment hemolysis the because of react crossmatching is as with RBCs. autoimmune is autoantibodies the Transfusion depends to of may be antibody on management anemia transfusion, addition lifesaving, hemolytic In type. autoimmune which immunoglobulin. administration intravenous of times, corticosteroids and, at Management may involve the of Corticosteroids clearance RBCs sensitized the in spleen. reduce hemolysis, drug-induced usually process. of resolution In the drug hemolytic to withdrawal leads of the hemolytic with autoimmune spontaneously. recover of More than children 80% anemia

in the involving as of and anticoagulant process vascular coagulation platelets, injury, it interaction wall, dynamic carefullymodulated is the pro-coagulant Hemostasis proteins. of occurs areas vascular of and bind in which conformational platelets Willebrand (vWF), an subendothelial inducesa their Ib to an via collagen vascular protein factor glycoprotein endothelium, After injury receptor. change tothe von adhesive undergo includingadenosine (ADP). and intracellular numerous adhesion, After activation contents, diphosphate release platelets leading induce the matrix and plateletssubsequently platelets.Simultaneously, cascade, theformation activated of These aggregation proteins in additional factor, tissue enzyme other activate (Fig. of collagen, coagulation tissue thrombin to the 151-1). factor positive and the a of Thrombincauses of of 5 activation aggregation fibrinogen of further tofibrin, factors the platelets, and conversion 8, 11. feedbackactivation 7 3 A plug usually ceases, platelet minutes. within to and forms, bleeding which thrombus. fibrin, stable cross-links clot of forminga leads 13, of permanent bythe activation a to factor generation of The formation thrombin within mediate clot contractile elements Finally, theplatelet retraction. into intact on lysis convertingprotein thrombomodulin the protein the by size Thrombin clot contributes to contributes plasmin. of thrombus C. to eventual to the protein Thrombin activated by endothelial also plasminogento cells, activating eventual the limitation C binding of processes with close pro-and subendothelium—into anticoagulant the mediate coagulation that are and All surfaces interwoven biologic endothelialcells, occur bringing the proteins. hemostatic by closely on of critical and players—platelets, proximity

as pathways, Many independently reality and these are extrinsic not having pathways react that intrinsic and is but think do interactive closely the coagulation of (Fig. 151-2). VIII VII to (8). Roman rather misreading factor numerals prevent using are as of For factors than denoted all ease (7) Arabic use, coagulation factor form factor 7a. amounts autocatalyzes small factor vivo, of 7 In to When factor a released of generation. is tissue burst and factor injured, causes tissue 7a is calcium Tissue factor with 7a, 9 and and in factor factor, factor combination activates 10. by factor 7a factor 11, generating of of generation in eventual The formation. 9 11a results activation which thrombin, on factor back accelerating and thrombin factor feeds factor severe deficiency factor deficiency bleeding leads of 9 is disorders, deficiency factor of This explains whereas and process asymptomatic. to 12 or 11 why 8 usually is of factor mild,

of theactivation serve A regulate of series coagulation. inhibitory tightly to factors inactivates III 10a, thrombin Antithrombin factors and and 9a, 11a. and complexes. system cofactors S activated and 5 protein whichare localized and in protein “prothrombinase” The factors the 8, inactivates “tenase” C protein, and The 7a by factor inhibitor, the tissue activation pathway an factor coagulation cascade 10a. of limits factor anticoagulant plasmin, fibrin of into plasminogen products. by split on activator thatdegrades tissue active producing the initiated Fibrinolysis enzyme is plasminogen, the action eventually may of dissolves predispose proteins flow anticoagulant Fibrinolysis normal resume.Deficiencies clot the allows and to tothrombosis.

factor levels 8, 5, In platelets during trimester. and normal the second factor fibrinogen, the approach fetus, increase gradually proteins clotting throughout Levels of gestation. factors and anticoagulant other for risk medical needed care arterial that clottingcomplications by and the bleeding especiallyindwelling The at issimultaneously are increased exacerbated monitoring, of or infant or interventions premature of many catheters. venous levels children although proteins of age, C protein by1 of attainnormal levels and normalize of anticoagulant and procoagulant inadolescence. lag Most year

and for crucial history of family A thrombotic detailed disorders. bleeding diagnosis is are children almost X-linked, Hemophilia all affected and is boys. is von fashion. usually an dominant autosomal in inherited Willebrand disease to early-onset heart history hereditary of the a stroke, predisposition suggests a the or in legs family or blood investigation In thrombotic thrombosis. personal disorders, lungs, attack of clots or causes in vascular, of bleeding origin (Fig. hematologic to causes due be may nonhematologic or The 151-3). treatment provides infection, be (central pregnancy, present estrogens) event a Thrombotic trauma, stimulus. congenital procoagulant (Table a with after catheter, clot nidus malignancy, formation acquired initial and frequently or 151-1) disorders an or for can

interactions multiple Figure mechanism. the of 151-1 hemostatic Diagram the of Solid reactions reactions that coagulation, lines and favor clotting. inhibit that indicate dashed indicate lines GAGs, von fibrinolytic glycosaminoglycans; Epi, factor. PGI2, Willebrand Epinephrine; inhibitor; thromboxane oxide; vWF, activator inhibitor; TXA2, PAI, TAFI, prostaglandin thrombin-activated A2; (prostacyclin); nitric I2 plasminogen NO, Montgomery Hemorrhagic from RR: JP, diseases. (Modified thrombotic Scott and Pediatrics, RM, RE, editors: Textbook Kliegman ed Nelson 2062.) Behrman 18, In Jenson HB, of Saunders, BF, Philadelphia, 2007, Stanton p

StudentConsult.com Available @

with bleeding may have or clotting. hemostatic ofeither Patients complaints disorders Age congenital acquired. indicateswhether or is problem the onset at of bleeding disorder. required the suggest deep) trauma(spontaneous of The type sites or of to injury degree (mucocutaneous or induce the and severity bleeding and significant) of bleeding (aspirin plateletfunction. known by and to exacerbatepreexisting medications Certain disorders are interfering with acid) valproic

The muscles internalbleeding or hemorrhage and mucous physical deepersites into membrane presence and examination characterize joints the the or of skin bleeding should sites. of lesion petechia to mm less refers a in size. 2 non-blanching term than The adjoining ecchymoses Purpura larger lesions palpable is isolated group (bruises) of and hematomas are than are petechiae, ecchymoses. raised, a petechiae,

underlying vasculitic examination of disease. hepatic lymphadenopathy,hepatosplenomegaly, should search chronic rash, also an physical or manifestations for The disease, orrenal ororgans Deep no may cause extremities purplish venous or swollen findings. warm, tender, (distended), thrombi discolored cause extremities. painful,pale, clots acute, poorly and perfused Arterial present Arterial internal thrombi signs organs symptoms with ofthe and ofinfarction.

other bleeding for time time, thromboplastin function. prothrombin screening include of laboratory a count, platelet Screening fibrinogen, bleeding and time, test partial or patients studies platelet the (PFA) bleeding a as screening abnormalities analyzer platelet Many laboratories the adopted have test function time and for replace function to platelet

blood 151-2 pathways Simplified coagulation. Figure of the measured the (APTT). black intrinsic partial by area thromboplastin activated The the time pathway inside line solid is extrinsic the area line pathway, The prothrombin by the time inside measured (PT). the green is both lines pathway. The common area is the encompassed by protein III; TFPI, F, inhibitor. AT-III, pathway tissue HMWK, PL, Antithrombin kininogen; factor P-C/S, high-molecular-weight phospholipid; C/S; factor; Hemorrhagic thrombotic diseases. Scott from and (Modified Montgomery JP, RR: In Nelson 18, RE, RM, BF, Jenson of editors: 2007, p Philadelphia, Saunders, HB, Stanton Behrman 2061.) Pediatrics, Textbook ed Kliegman

Prothrombin anticoagulants, oral Extrinsic time disease ingestion neonate; DIC, newborn, common vitamin neonate in K–dependent Defect sec malabsorption, <12 hemorrhagic and factors; sec of beyond rat term liver 12–18 of disease, in pathway poison

in term neonate; beyond sec products, uremia hypofibrinogenemia, 10–15 split heparin, Fibrinogen to conversion sec 12–17 time neonate DIC, Thrombin fibrin Fibrin

Hemostasis, platelet time von Platelet neonate and 3–7 dysfunction, Bleeding capillary beyond thrombocytopenia, function min

aspirin disease, Willebrand

150,000–450,000/mL Thrombocytopenia Platelet (see differential Platelet diagnosis Fig. number count Willebrand von 151-4) disease. disorders. The for has common PFA specificity variable sensitivity bleeding and bleeding screen all laboratory test can for single disorders. No on bleeding the with The screening findings specific for (Table 151-2). disorder tests vary

Scott and JP: Bleeding From thrombosis. Strategies Therapy, editor: and Pediatric in 1996, Saunders. Diagnosis WB Practical In RM, Kliegman Philadelphia,

Disorders Platelets of

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Platelet counts 150,000/mm3 than thrombocytopenia. constitute less Mucocutaneous the platelet disorders, of bleeding thrombocytopenia. including hallmark is correlates of count. risk platelet with bleeding the imperfectly The as or the withstand Children major surgery able trauma. 80,000/mm3 with challenges, hemostatic but platelet counts to all than most greater extreme such are bleeding. at 20,000/mm3 platelet less for are spontaneous Children risk with counts than platelets (especially the are fibrin as disease. (young, large in drugs antibodies, and aspirin), and renal function usually formed ones) platelet such better modified factors of or products, hepatic generalizations of old of presence by as function, the such inhibitors These platelets presence degradation toxins age of than the the size is the The platelets mean routinely as volume measured (MPV). of platelet (Fig. The thrombocytopenia etiology of mechanisms: may into 1. three be 151-4) organized

2.

3.

as disorders rare aplastic in part Primary of other (platelet childhood, megakaryopoiesis than of production)are an syndrome. of syndromeis the with by with in characterized thrombocytopenia upper Thrombocytopenia orthopedic severe radii especially association absent abnormalities,

intravascular analyzer-100; blood coagulation; Disseminated PFA, platelet DIC, RBC, function red cell.

extremity. over at thrombocytopenia The or birth anomalies. no findings thrombocytopenia presents improves usually shortly congenital severe thereafter thrombocytopenia,but other time.Amegakaryocytic of with hematopoietic cell ofmegakaryocytes to usually all aplasia marrow and lines. The is progresses of devoid

production as thrombocytopenia of Acquired result decreased an finding. isolated is rarely a context or pancytopenia of often seen from aplastic It is failure more resulting bone infiltrative by inthe marrow caused processes. Certain affect may selectively megakaryocytes chemotherapeutic agents

2 ITP to SLE, Drug-induced HIV

Differential Figure childhood syndromes. diagnosis of thrombocytopenic 151-4 appearances. are clinical The syndromes their initially separated by italics. the leading are presented in Clues to diagnosis lower and disorders findings are in leading shown these the of mechanisms figure. to common the part The Disorders shaded commonly the that boxes. neonates are listed affect in neonatal SLE, purpura; ITP, WBC, thrombocytopenic catheter; immune thrombocytopenic umbilical NATP, purpura; UAC, TAR, thrombotic HSM, purpura; idiopathic white of thrombocytopenia radius TTP, artery absence lupus with systemic thrombocytopenic blood erythematosus; (syndrome); Hepatosplenomegaly; cell. alloimmune thrombosis. (From Bleeding JP: Scott and Greenbaum Saunders, Kliegman Practical 2004, Pediatric 920.) and Strategies Philadelphia, Diagnosis Lye editors: Therapy, in LA, In p PS, RM, marrow more other elements. than thrombocytopenia, severe this heart with is rarely congenital clinical but Cyanotic significant with with disease is or bleeding. associated polycythemia often associated may virus[HIV], cytomegalovirus, thrombocytopenia. (anticonvulsants, Congenital and induce andacquired herpes immunodeficiency agents, cytotoxic viral drugs infections [toxoplasmosis,other simplex]) and heparin, quinidine) rubella, some (TORCH Epstein-Barr agents, (human and antibiotics, measles) virus, marrow congenital Postnatal cause may transient function. infections of reactions suppression thrombocytopenia,whereas bone produce prolonged usually infections anddrug

Etiology. a destruction peripheral thrombocytopeniaresulting by from cells. common of of antibody-coatedplatelets who In rapid appears immune-mediated cause well, mechanisms reticuloendothelial are child most the mother alloimmune present occurs the result fetal Neonatal as (NATP) platelets. of sensitization purpura to antigens on a thrombocytopenic of placenta and Chapter Antibodies 59). cross the platelet the attack (see fetal alloantigens platelet permitting diagnosis condition prenatal the an fetus. at-risk in sequenced, been Many identified have of and ITP) neonatal or have resultant (see of a idiopathic Mothers 59). antiplatelet purpura passive with Chapter may thrombocytopenia with thrombocytopenic ITP transfer with (maternal of antibodies, history be platelet affected. the sometimes the of is infant probability indicator The useful count maternal will a that

Clinical Manifestations. hemorrhage the delivery in utero for immediate with and at infant risk process. The NATP is intracranial during intracranial seems induce to greatest In through risk the head birth present canal, during which the of passage hemorrhage. during may ITP, be the molding umbilical Fetal to scalp or sampling sampling measure count. may fetal percutaneous performed platelet the be blood

Treatment. counts with increases and fetal immunoglobulin alleviate and platelet of may ITP. delivery in NATP (IVIG) Administration infants intravenous thrombocytopenia before to (CNS) system Chapter by section prevent recommended cesarean nervous bleeding is Delivery central 59). (see or treated with counts or may corticosteroids until thrombocytopenia be both thrombocytopenia remits. <20,000/mm3) severe with Neonates (platelet IVIG infants may If with NATP receive necessary, maternal washed platelets.

Etiology. usually purpura follows that an ITP) common acute childhood thrombocytopenic is Autoimmune of (childhood infection. viral disorder a that to an is IgM) platelet antibody ITP caused binds by or Childhood membrane. the (IgG splenic condition results The antibody-coated of in receptor–mediated Fc destruction platelets. Rarely, erythematosus ITP symptom as disease, such (SLE). systemic an autoimmune may be of the presenting lupus

Clinical Manifestations. viral to weeks epistaxis. with 1 ITP of 4 Young abrupt children exhibit illness, typically onset and petechiae, after purpura, severe. The is thrombocytopenia usually (WBC) the unusual, adenopathy cell or normal. and cell hepatosplenomegaly blood red are Significant (RBC) counts and blood is white

Diagnosis. not presentation and based require clinical marrow the platelet on count and The of often bone examination. usually a is diagnosis ITP does (leukemia) however, marrow indicated (aplastic anemia). disorder infiltrative noted, an rule findings out atypical If is aplastic an or process are examination to marrow megakaryocytes and reveals erythroid elements. increased myeloid normal the and of In examination an bone ITP,

Treatment and Prognosis. seldom platelet than for counts indicated greater 30,000/mm3. Therapy is of count ITP not is long-term acutely. intended platelet but the outcome does increase affect to Therapy the bleeding clinical options 2 to with mg/kg/24 count thrombocytopenia or moderate days. include g/kg/24 therapeutic 2 hours weeks 2 for 1 severe and for 4 1 severe prednisone, IVIG, For to (platelet <10,000/mm3), hours decreasing antibody. of rather sensitized approaches of of clearance of than the to rate production platelets, All these decrease seem optimal controversial. (if for therapy The choice is any) life-threatening only Splenectomy indicated acute ITP for is in bleeding. spontaneous ITP a Approximately of within 80% after months diagnosis. children 6 of have resolution with especially in fewer 1% than ITP. intracranial of bleeding, bleeding, Serious occurs patients intracranial treatment There that is prevents evidence early bleeding. no

is 6 that for 12 classified to as months persists ITP ITP. chronic the splenectomy. delaying in for need with pulse high-dose anti-D, treatments IV Repeated IVIG, are steroids or effective chronic Secondary and ruled should HIV ITP, causes out. infection, of SLE be especially induces of to chronic in 80% 70% ITP a Splenectomy cases. remission childhood risk the severe of encapsulated risks splenectomy sepsis against of must bacteria, be hypertension) weighed from (surgery, The bleeding. pulmonary

@ StudentConsult.com Available

and X-linked in a an lymphocytes (see molecular syndrome Wiskott-Aldrich and 74). eczema, cytoskeletal characterized thrombocytopenia a platelets caused defect Chapter by hypogammaglobinemia, by to proteincommon is disorder a on seen peripheral Smallplatelets blood are smear. by Nevertheless,thrombocytopenia often is improved splenectomy. cures Hematopoietic the immunodeficiencyand stem transplantation cell thrombocytopenia. the of Familial variant syndrome amutation X-linked be as gene. Wiskott-Aldrich in thrombocytopeniacan seen a or GATA1 22q12. chromosomes deletions in due is mutationsin Autosomal or macrothrombocytopenia to 22q11

Thrombotic to of anemia intravascular causes some cases, destruction, thrombocytopenia, RBC depletion in secondary factors. clotting and, microangiopathy thrombotic are quite microangiopathy ill. usually Children with with wide-ranging vasculature clearance disorder in In the of within and plasmin result strands fibrin activation with hemostatic disseminated (DIC), child a the and activation of intravascular a platelets. and coagulation deposition thrombin of induces uremic exposure syndrome fibrin platelet as to endothelial 164). occurs and Hemolytic injury, and (see a result of toxin activation Chapter that deposition, a clearance or a the deficiency primary von precipitated a of factor, thrombocytopenic metalloproteinase process, Willebrand that purpura, with acquired to deposition by of cleaves congenital seems destruction. RBC platelet modest fibrin thrombotic a and In consumption, be

Platelet of Disorders Function

Etiology. adhesive for of on platelet platelet Primary disorders involvereceptors may function membranes proteins. receptor) of (vWF causesBernard-Soulier complex Ib glycoprotein Deficiency syndrome. thrombasthenia. A receptor) Glanzmann glycoprotein IIb-IIIa of causes (the deficiency fibrinogen acid, by drugs, broad aspirin, release,detectable caused and spectrum platelet abnormalities disorders (uremia, of cause far nonsteroidal valproic of toxins common.Secondary drugs by anti-inflammatory aggregometry, may platelet platelet dysfunction. are Mild more and andinfections) aggregation a

Clinical Manifestations. with secondary. and long prolonged bleeding platelet be or a time or bleeding PFA mucocutaneous of and Disorders primary present may time function closure and or mild Glanzmann in but function severe for platelet thrombasthenia. disorders, disorders syndrome is such The insensitive Bernard-Soulier moderate an screen platelet usually bleeding as function prolonged is time

Disorders Factors Clotting of

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Etiology. proteins Hereditary lead most procoagulant bleeding. deficiencies of to 9are for 8 on otherclotting and factor genes coded chromosome, chromosomes. virtually the autosomal all on are the The X factor factors whereas common the 8 inherited and 9 are disorders. deficiencies bleeding factor severe most Factor disease bleeding disorder. common von Willebrand most is the congenital are the kininogen, a Hageman time a low 12]) bleeding. [factor high-molecular-weight predisposition procoagulant associated levels with partialthromboplastin to prolonged so-called cause and not factor activated the of but factors(prekallikrein, proteins, contact Of

Etiology. in in males. 1 A 5000 deficiency) occurs Hemophilia (factor 8 Hemophilia 9 deficiency) in in occurs 1 B (factor approximately 25,000. disorders Clinically or which 151-3).The formed vascular plug a thrombin, are of functional clot crucial two to their of by factor platelet (Table delays solidifying that other therapy is and lack areas normal, factor has generation injury. indistinguishable 8 the the 9 than forming in the of fibrin degree The clotting the factor determined disorder of deficiency. is severity of the by

9 deficiency A, HEMOPHILIA B Hemophilia Factor of Table factor Comparison and dominant 8 Inheritance vWF, 8 B, Autosomal A FEATURE VON Disease Willebrand Factor WILLEBRAND X-linked 151-3 Factor von X-linked HEMOPHILIA Hemophilia DISEASE

skin, site(s) menstrual surgical surgical joint, surgical, Bleeding joint, Mucous membranes, Muscle, Muscle,

at Normal agglutination Normal, or Normal low, Ristocetin-induced increased platelet

von Platelet function vWF, Willebrand factor. analyzer-100; PFA, von disease. mild hemophilia Willebrand or (DDAVP) moderate *Desmopressin for A type to 1

Manifestations. Clinical have less with factor with factor minor bleeding 8 may or spontaneous trauma. 9 1% (severehemophilia) than or bleeding Patients require factor 5% Patients to (moderate 9 with episodes. bleeding to 8 moderatetrauma or usually induce factor 1% hemophilia) significant bleeding trauma or 8 factor In not mild spontaneous to 9), (>5%factor hemophilia is occur. inducebleeding; does necessary stage. severe in hemophiliamay the child whereas hemophiliamanifests undiagnosed infancy many years, when Mild go for the reaches toddler (hemarthroses). joints themuscles or Insevere hemophilia, in usually spontaneous bleeding occurs,

Studies. Laboratory on partial diagnosis thromboplastin The of hemophilia based is time(aPTT). prolonged activated a 8 surface-active the a are aPTT, coagulation, which factors and agent system In of crucial 9 activates intrinsic components. the of plasma. to normal is with factor is factor plasma but deficiency, or prolonged when should In the quite patient’s the aPTT mixed 9 8 normal correct 1:1 151-2) appropriate are determine factor is factor an the When make therapy. Table a (see needed abnormal assays diagnosis aPTT precise specific to replacement obtained, to Prenatal molecular diagnosis techniques. possible using diagnosis are and carrier

Treatment. of Early, appropriate therapy the hallmark replacement excellent hemophilia care. is patient home age attained the treatment. the best appropriate has are parents treated Acute the the and bleeding learned in home when have episodes bleeding extraction with surgery, appropriate be trauma, and anticipated, be or dental prevented therapy. Bleeding with often can replacement can excessive associated diminished in has therapy infancy starting chronic the with in arthropathy hemophilia. children Prophylactic of greatly likelihood factor For of normal 100% or to are necessary. bleeding, levels life-threatening 80% of 8 factor 9 a appropriate. 8 factor or level 9 factor (hemarthroses), 40% mild episodes level to moderate a for to 40% For is bleeding 30% for whereas of 2%, calculated plasma the recombinant level the the factor factor U/kg dose U/kg increases 1.5 body plasma The 9 weight that be level 1 using of can 8 1%: knowledge increases

(%)× level for 0.5 factor Dose weight 8=desired (kg)×

level (kg) × for (%) factor ×1.5 Dose weight 9=desired recombinant

minimal with vasopressin a vasopressor analog is acetate synthetic Desmopressin effect. levels. triples Desmopressin effect or with moderate (not mild factor hemophilia or initial 8 factor no patient but of A, has on severe) quadruples the 9 level a with of bleeding. that inhibitor Aminocaproic the mild of for individuals may oral and desmopressin be an useful fibrinolysis moderate can hemophilia attained, be is acid hemostatic When A. for treatment adequate levels choice is

9 HIV. and at B, plasma or and risk hepatitis from derived 8 factor treated older D concentrates Patients donors pools were of high with for C, large 8 safe factor Recombinant illnesses. factor transmitted from and concentrates virally are 9 older Acquiredimmunodeficiency is syndrome most common hemophilia (who in plasma-derived causeof received death the factors). (AIDS) patients have Many C. patients also older chronic hepatitis

against or congenitally are antibodies transfusedfactor directed factor in 9 patients. deficient Inhibitors IgG 8 hemophiliacs 15% hemophiliacs. in of factor common factor but in Inhibitorsarise severe 8 9 less are to titerand an treatment. show anamnestic low be or They high response may bleeding is an patients The treatmentof difficult. with inhibitor continuous For factor titerinhibitors, include infusions. low options 8 treat such pastto increased is as administer the the in factor a in prothrombin titer concentrates, complications, Forhigh 7a.Activated infarction. that resulting myocardial usually the inhibitor fatal bypasses inhibitors, necessary product risks to it ofthrombosis, inhibitor, complex recombinant used paradoxically patients, preferably For immunosuppression of of beneficial. tolerance repeated may treatment immune by long-term or induction of infusion inhibitor patients, without be with the deficientfactor

disease beginning with the early replacement hemophilia. prevent in of joint prophylaxis Early chronic associated and continuous factor should childhood institution

Etiology. from of and from caused a disorder acting a collagen platelets as Von serves a and population) and an clearance protectingcirculating factor (1% disease functions: rapid two adhesive is Willebrand between common 8 binding that vWF, by protein circulation. bridge deficiency sub-endothelial ofthe as Willebrand dominanttrait autosomal recessive an Von and rarely usually inherited as trait. an disease is autosomal deficient or 2 eitherquantitatively = vWF type (type type orqualitatively 3) = = dysproteinemia). (partial may absolute abnormal be 1 deficiency classic a von of have Approximately80% mild to disease (i.e., Willebrand 1)disease moderate with of (type patients vWF). clinically important, requiring othersubtypes different each therapy. are Several

Clinical Manifestations. patients and bleeding, gingival menorrhagia cutaneous Willebrand with Mucocutaneous epistaxis, in occur bruising, disease. bleeding, von also have disease, deficiency similar hemophilia to may severe A (hemarthrosis). the may In factor be and profound, manifestations 8 patient (see 151-3). B Findings Willebrand Table hemophilia findings A from von differ in disease in classic and

Testing. Laboratory of ofthe involves immunologically protein, amount usually measured vWF thevWF as (vWF:Ag). antigen measurement testing to cofactor vWF is antibiotic in vWF ristocetin (vWFR:Co), to measuredfunctionally ristocetin induce the platelets. whichuses (vWF:Act) the assay to bind activity

Treatment. of Willebrand von depends The treatment the on bleeding. severity disease of patients of most with treatment and for type disease bleeding disease. in patients with the Desmopressin some choice 2 is type 1 episodes (Humate P) satisfactorily vWF be cannot be achieved may virally a concentrate levels When with but attenuated, needed desmopressin, treatment with appropriate. vWF-containing of are high be dosage can hemophilia. for in factor as calculated The 8 virally used because Cryoprecipitate be it not not attenuated. should is vaccine be Hepatitis products. exposed is to B should patient given before the plasma-derived aspirin all avoided. should bleeding in As be disorders,

31. discussion vitamin K and see deficiency, of 27 For Chapters

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Etiology. with mechanism Disseminated coagulation intravascular the is which a coagulation disorder in is associated of usually (DIC) shock. activation widespread hemorrhage and a is balance between Normal hemostasis thrombosis. In DIC,

Escherichia Other coli) (purpura gram-negative bacteria (Haemophilus, Meningococcemia Salmonella, fulminans)

Rickettsiae fever) Mountain fevers) Fungus hemorrhagic Malaria (cytomegalovirus, (Rocky herpes, Virus spotted

fractures Multiple shock with nervous Hypothermia Profound emboli or injury) Central Massive hyperthermia Crush asphyxia burns trauma or (massive head injury fat system

cytomegalovirus herpes) fetalis infections or Abruptio syndrome Severe Necrotizing viral streptococcal toxemia (e.g., enterocolitis Erythroblastosis distress B Maternal infection disease Congenital respiratory Group placentae

disease Severe transfusion Infusion graft acute hemorrhagic Acute Hyperpyrexia/encephalopathy, complex Heparin-induced concentrates syndrome prothrombin shock thrombosis vascular disease rejection Kawasaki “activated” of hemolytic reaction collagen Severe

Bleeding Scott From JP: thrombosis. and Philadelphia, Practical 1996, RM, editor: Kliegman Diagnosis and in In WB Strategies Therapy, Saunders. Pediatric

the (bleeding). severe the is thrombin plasmin has this patient altered and coagulation so balance (thrombosis) activation by of illness, fibrinolysis mediated by mediated by 8—are and fibrinogen, factors—especially 2, anticoagulant 5, antithrombin, factors as and especially C, platelets, the are plasminogen. Coagulation protein proteins, and consumed, thromboplastic or, factors of mechanism tissue procoagulant venoms) (Table factors, directly (snake injury, activate 151-4). coagulation rarely, exogenous Endothelial release the

Disseminated That Coagulopathies Confused Can Intravascular Differential with Be of Diagnosis Coagulation

Normal deficiency liver disease ↑↑ Normal Normal K Malabsorption, Vitamin

thrombosis. and From JP: Bleeding Scott editor: In and Strategies Pediatric Kliegman Therapy, Practical 1996, in Philadelphia, Diagnosis RM, WB Saunders. DIC, intravascular Disseminated coagulation.

Clinical Manifestations. then a fibrinogen Protein in Ca findings of and fibrinogen of Thrombomodulin confirmed is and laboratory suspected degraded associated DIC (Table thromboplastin time, 151-5). decline is Thrombin partial usually The when platelets with clotted D-dimer, by plasmin diagnosis clinically and is of elevated levels by and elevated prothrombin formed time, of DIC more slowly may there some evolve degree In compensation. and be a may patients, S

of site, occurrence or severely the or from or of or sudden pulmonary evidence petechiae, venipuncture ill bleeding gastrointestinal a patient, a In hemorrhage, ecchymosis incision periph-V

gangrene III of eral or suggests AT thrombosis the DIC. diagnosis T: Fibrin

Treatment. treatment is challenging. of DIC The by guidelines by following: support proteins include blood-clotting disorder factors, transfusion. poor acidosis, depleted inducing platelets, the perfusion; correcting patient the the DIC anticoagulant General first; and the and hypoxia, and treat replace

Heparin thrombotic arterial life-threatening be venous used disease significant to coexist. may treat bleeding of sites unless or

Etiology. protein anticoagulant predisposition by to thrombosis deficiency an A (protein hereditary (Fig. or may antithrombin, a or (see C plasminogen) 151-1) Table be caused of S, 5 151-5), proteolysis resulting level it or protein a by an of a by resistant (factor by making to to protein increased procoagulant (homocysteinemia). damage inhibitor respective Leiden), cells 20210), procoagulant (prothrombin by its a abnormality in endothelial an mutation of with vulnerable Neonates syndromes be deficiency may particularly to thrombosis. with arteries with homozygous present and veins C fulminans both. Neonates purpura or the deficiency protein or of thrombosis major adulthood. or an predisposition with inherited Many adolescence symptoms to thrombosis individuals exhibit early in autosomal whereas C adulthood is presenting recessive. dominant as deficiency autosomal usually the form inherited homozygous is an Protein in trait, usually antithrombin autosomal inherited deficiencies dominant are Protein S and as III traits. hereditary a is appearing in thrombosis, 3% Leiden the Factor of of 5 to common cause predisposition 5% whites. to most also lupus anticoagulant) predispose to Acquired antiphospholipid thrombosis. and (anticardiolipin antibodies

Manifestations. Clinical and adolescents with most disease. present likely patients thromboembolic the are to pediatric Neonates sepsis, pregnancy, to contraceptive all agents, infection, immobilization, disease, bowel thrombosis. syndrome, inflammatory Indwelling trauma, abortion coagulopathy, catheters, and oral vasculitis, nephrotic surgery, predispose

plug 151-5 site the hemostatic vascular of Figure at Formation the injury. of III), formation the III of site protein mechanisms— to to the limit to activated antithrombin major anticoagulant generalized clot Three (AT physiologic and fibrinolytic damage C, system—are thrombosis. prevent and Thrombin. T, (From Intern The 102:814–828, Ann state, hypercoagulable Schafer A: 1985.) Med

and to sounds, pain, of vary diminished loud cyanosis, manifestations pulmonary tachypnea, emboli no a S2, chest from breath The hypoxemia. findings

Diagnostic Imaging and Studies. ultrasound thrombosis Venous by compression be can detected Doppler flow studies. noninvasively for diagnosis The is venogram. gold the standard computed of tomography of ventilation-perfusion abnormal An detection or on scan thrombus (CT) emboli. probability) an diagnostic helical (high is pulmonary intravascular for are There screening appropriate thrombotic disorders. no studies or of assays. acquired congenital specific Diagnosis battery to of a requires a thrombosis predisposition

Treatment. standard and the of warfarin. Therapy thrombotic term on depends then with disorders anticoagulation condition and low-molecular-weight involves usually longer heparin underlying or agents plasminogen necessitate fibrinolytic activator). vessel may thrombosis (recombinant or life-threatening treatment Major tissue thrombosis with with deficiency In plasma, present C may protein antithrombin and newborns, concentrates. concentrates, inherited replacement necessitate syndromes or emergencies as III

life-saving orlife-maintaining Transfusion (Table of platelets, 152-1). granulocytes can cells (RBCs), blood and be red plasma,cryoprecipitate, and provide blood functional is Whole procoagulant to and both is useful anticoagulant most indicated oxygen-carryingcapacity and factors. rarely increase to to oxygen-carrying Otherwise, are packed anemia used RBCs capacity. treat treat RBC (iron by appropriate shouldnot folic nutritional to used be corrected nutrient be asymptomatic the deficienciesthat transfusions can deficient acid). or administering

therapy before proper component agents the administration. testing of unit, compatibility requires infectious Blood blood group and for component screening anticoagulation are Table in reactions Typical listed 152-2. transfusion overload, cardiopulmonary especially in also may Transfusion in presence the deficiency. circulatory result of products may (WBCs) febrile prevent to Filtering of blood remove blood white cells reactions. complications bleeding transfusions 50,000/μL of Long-term 30,000-50,000/μL

13 Fibrinogen, 1 factor ↑ factor vWF, Cryoprecipitate unit/5-10 8, Fibrinogen factor deficiency 50–100 Hypofibrinogenemia, mg/dL 13 by kg

Recombinant ↑ units/kg 0.7 bleeding F9: concentrates F8: as Hemophilic F9: 40–120 Units labeled unit/kg ↑ factor prophylaxis or F8: units/kg 20–50 2%/unit/kg

vWF, blood Willebrand cells; red Hemoglobin; factor. Hgb, RBCs, von

shock, hemolytic early back 1. flushing, transfusion Acute pain, Acute fever, reaction to 1:250,000 be Stop of days (may 2. (incidence hemoglobinuria 1:1,000,000) of fresh bank patient’s blood sample return delayed and 5–10 intravascular to with blood hemolysis, hemoglobinemia, transfusion; flow, blood less pressure, if urine alkalinize high 3. is support intravenously*; anamnestic Hydrate response severe present) maintain urine Check correct abnormalities (hyperkalemia) electrolyte for and

(incidence of reaction 1:100) Allergic transfusion

often has against future from antibodies of distress, recipient within management antigens, ± transfusion; Urticaria, For or donor edema, during because from hypotension 4 hydrocortisone transfusions of pruritus, acute for maculopapular donor occasionally consider: Diphenhydramine atopic 1. preformed infusion antibodies hours passive rash, respiratory

with hydrocortisone diphenhydramine 2. Pretreatment ±

reduce donor 3. plasma Volume reduction to

cellular remove products all Washing to donor reactions) severe plasma (for

CC, WB ed Adapted 4, TE, JC, of Bennett Essentials Carpenter F, Plum from Medicine, 1997, Philadelphia, al: Cecil Andreoli et Saunders. RBCs, cell. WBC, white HLA, Human antigen; blood red blood cells; leukocyte the fluid. *Normal compatible intravenous saline is

(<1:1,800,000 disease. graft-versus-host infectious B and (<1:250,000 immunodeficiency Chagas human as diseases and include such units), units) malaria, virus C (1:1,600,000units), hepatitis brucellosis, disease and babesiosis, syphilis, Patients who RBCs more are platelets. and and transfused alloimmunization chronically are overload iron to prone to

3, Lancet NS, 427–438, 2007, Klein 2, Transfusion Key 370(9585):415–426, C, medicine 439–448 1, al: et Negrier HG,

19, RM, Pediatrics, al: BF, p Geme 2011, Kliegman St. Stanton Nelson Saunders, Textbook et ed JW, 1648–1722 of Philadelphia,

A, therapy and 2): neonates P, et practice 3737S–e801S, American ed: 2012. and of al: prevention thrombosis, in Antithrombotic children: therapy of Physicians clinical 9th NA, Monagle antithrombotic Chest College guidelines, 141(Suppl Chan Goldenberg Chest evidence-based

M, Society Neunert American W, The C, al: et Crowther of Hematology: Lim

2011 guideline Blood immune for 2011 Society 117(16): Hematology practice 4190–4207, evidence-based American of thrombocytopenia,

2012, 2012 anemia: Hematol updates Program Hematology Am Soc therapeutic P: and Aplastic Scheinberg immunosuppression Educ transplantation, in 292–300,

PA, for Marrow disorders, nonmalignant 1): transplantation cell Mehta Biol Transplant 18(Suppl MC: Tolar J, Blood Walters Hematopoietic

2012 S166–S171,

Wofford and 21 Thomas M. McLean Marcia W.

children occur of among age. the 19 rare; in United of Childhood cancer cancer only than is younger about new States years 1% cases most by and tumors of and lymphoma) nervous tissue brain/central sarcomas bone the followed common cancers, (Fig. (CNS) soft Hematopoietic tumors (leukemia, system childhood are 153-1). incidence wide cancers. variability age-specific childhood is There of in the 2 osteosarcoma years to adolescence; as peaks the life; Embryonal during peaks Hodgkin such adolescence disease years); peaks 2 of retinoblastoma, tumors, peak early first neuroblastoma acute and lymphoblastic late childhood (Fig. leukemia 5 during during during and (ages 153-2). American is United and of among that other African higher overall incidence in white is cancer groups children than The that of twice States. ethnic children the among

childhood Many of and signs nonspecific. symptoms cancer are a fatigue, not loss, underlying malignancy. each limp children of weight cancer, may do of an these have Although symptoms most fever, manifestation be with or cancer Uncommonly will with symptoms no have all. a at child or complete palpated count unexpectedly mass An a routine be blood be abdominal may (CBC) abnormal. on may examination, (Table screened susceptibility children genetic and a to have be Some 153-1). appropriately cancer should

severity,and It explore complaint. location, important is quality, precipitating to the events of chief duration, a without or antibiotics)may resolve that does prominentlymph not (with biopsy. A warrant node CBC limp scan. weeksshould and does bone prompt radiograph improve or that a a within a not A imaging or a computed or of tomography magnetic headaches vomiting morning (CT) Persistent the prompt resonance (MRI)scan head. should raisethe sweats, Fever, lymphoma. weight night concern or loss should for history, history, birth history. history,developmental medical important is surgical obtainthe In growth and social family addition and history, history, it to

in Growth to all important parameters patients. vital and obtain signs are respiratory oximetry obtained present. be if Pulse should symptoms are particularly be cachexia, general the pain, appearance overall respiratory The patient of and pallor, distress. noted, should appearance, Palpable masses measured. be should and quantified, Lymphadenopathy if present. organomegaly be should skin petechiae. thorough and may reveal the rashes, examination bruises, A of and tumors vomiting CNS examinations. are have patients examinations neurologic if vast headache Careful majority abnormal crucial because of neurologic ophthalmologic with the or present, is

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Anemia Impairment Leukocoria and Vomiting Pancytopenia Fever Petechiae/Purpura of Origin Lymphadenopathy Visual Headaches Hepatomegaly Splenomegaly Unknown

ormass, fever, changes, common vomiting, cancer abnormal sweats 153-2). of night fatigue, bruising, pallor, malaise, visual loss, most weight petechiae, are bleeding, and lump (Table childhood anorexia, pain, manifestations The headache, Lymphadenopathy with T-cell lymphoblasticleukemia commonin non-Hodgkin leukemia, lymphoma. or organomegaly (ALL) particularly and are acute cough, measurable nerve may palsies, dyspnea, symptoms and and include palpable or signs Patients mass.Other papilledema. limp, usually have cranial tumors a withsolid infectious that relatively are masses nontender, In or are mobile, firm, in to whereas are and inflammatory and tender masses palpation. nature generalmalignant softer, fixed,

IX Retinoblastoma Germ Hepatic tissue Soft VI Renal V VIII Other malig. Bone X IV cell VII Neuroblastoma neo. epithelial XI XII Other

153-2 age. the 5 10 Non-Hodgkin tumor (PNET) sarcoma in 18 lymphoid Birth Sarcomas cancer children of neuroectodermal Figure Testicular Osteosarcoma Acute Glioma cancer Incidence sarcoma Soft-tissue most cancer (yr) Ewing Retinoblastoma common Age types disease leukemia Hodgkin by of Ovarian lymphoma Primitive cumulative The a incidence as is line. dashed shown of MD). Archie Bleyer, (Courtesy

Distinguishing from difficult. diseasecan process a another malignant be Ultimately to pathologic diagnosis cancer. confirmation biopsy) tumor a solid a (from bonemarrow diagnosis confirm is tissue required or with of 20 6.3 11.9 Rate 0.5 0 12.4 9.2 43.1 50 16.9 3.1 per 60 7.8 2.2 47.1 Infection 30 10 25.1 40 1,000,000

III syndromes (includes SEER 153-1 Rates by Cancer: ICCC brain). 2005–2009 myelodysplastic and Childhood Group benign Group Figure Incidence years both sexes, Under races. all age, of 20 and Georgia, Utah, Georgia, SF/SJM/LA, excluding (San Kentucky, excluding Los SEER Jersey, areas Alaska California ATL/RG). Seattle, Angeles, Native Francisco, Jose-Monterey, New Rural Iowa, Louisiana, Hawaii, New Registry, San Source: Atlanta, Detroit, 18 Mexico, Connecticut, are age groups Rates to Std U.S. (19 the 2000 P25-1130). Census Population age-adjusted

Childhood Cancer based is on ICD-O-3. International of Classification al: B, C, Lacour Stiller E, (Steliarova-Foucher et

Childhood Classification 3. International of Cancer, ed Cancer 2005.) 103(7):1457−1467, *Rate includes benign for tumors. III brain (Brain/CNS) Group

malignancy. a commonly masquerades as potential can lymphoma causingfever, leukemia blood andabnormal cytomegalovirus, and In loss, mimic organomegaly, weight or infections virus, counts. Epstein-Barr by lymphadenopathy, mycobacterial particular may Trauma produce thatcan tumors. swelling mimic solid purpuraand thrombocytopenia produce thrombocytic respectively. and deficiency iron anemia, Idiopathic can anemia neutropenia) deficiencies or also Immune irregularities (autoimmune hemolytic or can producecytopenias. and pain musculoskeletal other collagenvascular Juvenile arthritis idiopathic cause leukemia. can anemia,mimicking and disease cell and Benign vascular bone germ tumors, children, tumors/hamartomas,hemangiomas nephromas, including or commonin mature are relatively cysts. other tumors mesoblastic

screening differential review the test is peripheral of malignancies. CBC pediatric many A blood and for best smear with the any or (with Leukopenia anemia, may and neutropenia), without in neuroblastoma, invades leukemia that the marrow or sarcoma). rhabdomyosarcoma, or be Ewing present bone cancer thrombocytopenia (e.g., usually blood on may the present with smear. Leukemia peripheral leukocytosis, also blasts produce isolated thrombocytopenia) but (neutropenia, cytopenia the finding. widens only An be laboratory diagnosis could differential or anemia, abnormal the still a note, Of

Known leukemia Childhood for Cancers 153-1 TYPE Risk RISK increases CANCER x-ray radiation Table COMMENTS Ionizing Factors lymphoid Prenatal risk. Selected Acute FACTOR diagnostic exposure treatment increases Therapeutic for risk. also cancer irradiation

increased an conditions Genetic 20-fold Down estimated risk. 10to syndrome with associated is others, ataxia-telangiectasia, with Bloom are Neurofibromatosis 1, elevated associated and an syndrome, risk. among

epipodophyllotoxins Acute Chemotherapeutic leukemias increase agents and agents myeloid risk. Alkylating

neurofibromatosis Genetic and strongly factors are Down associated. syndrome 1 associated increased 7 with also Familial and are monosomy several genetic risk. other syndromes Patients for other radiation treated cancers. therapy with

head radiation cancers Therapeutic ionizing the Brain to

associated with 1 Genetic gliomas system extent, other nervous a strongly optic factors and, lesser to with Neurofibromatosis central tumors. is are associated and several Tuberous syndromes other genetic with sclerosis risk. increased

are at siblings twins history Family risk. increased Hodgkin and Monozygotic disease

virus with associated risk. is increased Infections Epstein-Barr

and and lymphoma Acquired risk. increase disorders immunosuppressive Immunodeficiency congenital therapy immunodeficiency Non-Hodgkin

associated is with Epstein-Barr virus increased risk. Infections

high radiation increase therapy Cancer exposure Ionizing risk. and Osteosarcoma radium radiation

with and hereditary retinoblastoma. syndrome Genetic is apparent risk Li-Fraumeni Increased factors

Incidence States. higher nine Ewing children in is times white in the children than United sarcoma black about in Race

ALK Neuroblastoma Genetic and with are variants 6p22 Chromosome mutations the genes factors and risk. PHOX in associated increased

on Genetic 14 Retinoblastoma the in gene chromosome Rb factors Mutations

Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Wilms increased anomalies Congenital and tumor risk. Aniridia, conditions are associated other congenital genetic and with

carcinoma cell trait is medullary Renal Sickle unknown. Etiology

associated risk. genetic conditions Congenital and and Rhabdomyosarcoma neurofibromatosis increased syndrome anomalies are Li-Fraumeni with 1

Infections infection Hepatitis Hepatocellular increases carcinoma risk. B virus

risk tumors. Malignant factor germ Cryptorchidism germ for testicular cell a Cryptorchidism tumors is cell

from Philadelphia, Nelson of BF, Pediatrics, 19, editors: ed Geme Stanton Modified Textbook JW III, Kliegman St. Saunders. 2011, RM,

leukemia a may with have CBC. normal patient also (leukemia in lymphoma) in and or are Lactate neuroblastoma. occasionally dehydrogenase and fast-growing tumors sarcomas uric or often acid elevated electrolytes is assess In screening process. to in the renal and function cases, many it hepatic and appropriate Elevated as pressure, should an mass. urine prompt the a should palpation confirmed repeat measurements, abdominal by if of analysis, blood

lymphadenopathy, lateral) chest A weight the a x-ray is (posteroanterior patient fever, (CXR) loss. suspiciouscervical bestscreening and with radiographic for study and effusions CXR. often be and pleural can detected on Mediastinalmasses

an to CT or symptoms or a or CT.Persistent ultrasound warrant head signs abnormal findings vomiting, headache, lead neurologic Abdominal or MRI. should bonetumors, usuallyreveal suspected are if lesion(s), will radiographs and For present. plain indicated the a bony suspected; normalwhen may CT obtained. or a Radiographs shouldbe is lesion MRI pelvic be mass 153-3 to are thesedecisions suspected best studies a usually left metastases. but tosearch of often Other shows a imaging primary diagnostic oncology for delineate pediatric diagnosis for of the indicated, use the of tumor and cancer, the imaging metastases assessing confirmation to following and are general team.Table Positron proved cancers, forsome emission useful response assessing staging especially lymphomas. has tomography(PET) pediatric for and are useful for neuroblastoma. (mIBG) Metaiodobenzylguanidine scans

Pallor, Leukemia, Common Bone Table neuroblastoma marrow of anemia SIGN/SYMPTOM infiltration Manifestations Childhood Malignancies Hematologic SIGNIFICANCE EXAMPLE 153-2

thrombocytopenia neuroblastoma marrow Leukemia, Petechiae, infiltration Bone

Fever, neutropenia marrow Bone Systemic neuroblastoma Leukemia, infiltration

to arthralgia neuroblastoma tumor, Osteosarcoma, bone limp, metastasis Primary Ewing pain, leukemia, sarcoma, bone Bone

night loss, malignancy Fever sweats origin, Hodgkin Lymphoreticular weight unknown disease, lymphoma non-Hodgkin of

Lymphoreticular tumor lymphoma, lymphadenopathy Burkitt lymphoma, Hodgkin thyroid solid Leukemia, non-Hodgkin metastatic disease, malignancy, carcinoma Painless

Neuroblastoma, Langerhans Cutaneous histiocytosis, leukemia, cell melanoma disease lesion metastatic or Primary

hepatoblastoma, germ Abdominal/pelvic tumor organ tumor, lymphoma, cell Abdominal mass Wilms Neuroblastoma,

tumor Wilms Neuroblastoma, nervous tumor Hypertension Sympathetic system pheochromocytoma,

Soft Ewing neuroblastoma, tumor osteosarcoma, cell carcinoma, Local metastatic thyroid tumor rhabdomyosarcoma, sarcoma, or mass germ tissue

Adenoma, galactorrhea, cell craniopharyngioma, prolactinoma, growth histiocytosis of Diabetes hypothalamus Langerhans pituitary or gland involvement poor insipidus, Neuroendocrine

disturbances, tumor; pressure visual papilledema, palsies nerve cranial ataxia, metastasis headache, brain Emesis, intrathecal Increased Primary

Neuroblastoma Horner ptosis, syndrome: heterochromia Miosis, compression cervical of

Opsomyoclonus, (?) Neurotransmitters ataxia Neuroblastoma

Autoimmunity (?)

lymphoma Rhabdomyosarcoma, tumor Thoracic proptosis Exophthalmos, Orbital

large cell mediastinal mediastinal Cough, T-cell Hodgkin Anterior Germ mass B-cell tracheal-bronchial primary compression stridor, pneumonia, lymphoma, disease, tumor, lymphoma

compression; ganglioneuroblastoma, Neuroblastoma, Vertebral mediastinal mass or ganglioneuroma Posterior nerve dysphagia root

scan HVA VMA, mIBG

for Yes Yes, Yes parameningeal Rhabdomyosarcoma only Yes Yes tumors

Germ Consider MRI β-hCG Yes AFP, cell Yes brain tumors

if ± MRI Yes Yes, Yes (brain)

chest retinoblastoma; AFP, marrow computed CSF, system; chorionic β-hCG, emission CXR, beta-human x-ray; imaging; PET, aspirate/biopsy; resonance vanillylmandelic tomography; CNS, bone Rb, MRI, acid. CT, gonadotropin; magnetic positron acid; fluid; HVA, cerebrospinal VMA, mIBG, homovanillic tomography; Alpha-fetoprotein; central metaiodobenzylguanidine; BMA/bx, nervous *Individual may require cases additional studies.

is to toxicity. pediatric minimal goal The all cure of oncology overall patientswith with Treatment involve therapy,and for cancer surgery, and chemotherapy. isoften multimodal children radiation may stem local has or both localtreatment exception are (an cell bone irradiation generally as Surgery and and part is radiation whereas total modalities chemotherapy of systemic a effects. marrow body transplant),

most are for prevention strategies pediatric Primary unknown. malignancies reduce Bvaccine vaccine rates lower and carcinoma hepatitis the are Two theuse and cervical, risk of exceptions use of papillomavirus vaginal human to of cancers. to hepatocellular vulvar, the of the exposure. use, orsun dietary alcohol tobacco associated Childhood with arenot factors, malignancies or be patient), leukemia at-risk may rare. therapy Beckwith-Wiedemann these child a of screening prevention syndromeor with Treatment the by twin increases andradiation certain accomplished with are child a but of (e.g., the opportunities rate agents chemotherapy malignancies.Secondary second

treatments oncologic Adverse tumors effects emergencies 154-1). of and in adolescents in may children and result (Table

masses can Mediastinal lymphoma life-threatening cause from obstruction. airway of function leukemia) uric lymphoma, adversely may with crystals. (e.g., renal acid burden from Tumors deposition tubular large affect tumor a chemotherapy or this before effect. can administered to Allopurinol be minimize rasburicase

metabolic lymphoma. syndrome,often A lysis in and of treatment emergency tumor is common leukemia seen the uric circulation amounts into potassium, of cells. phosphate, Large lysed acid are released from and and spinal emergencies. neurologic with other are Overwhelming infection compromise compression cord oncologic

intestinal is or be for suspected solidtumors (pain, followed [MRI]) presenting palpable be this (usually should (if mass-relatedsymptoms [CT] a imaging tomography mass is as lymphoma, imaging for respiratory biopsy may obtained magnetic computed (whenpossible) not a resection needed. resonance biopsy distress, complete with obstruction) Appropriate resection feasible).An a and or or which exception by to lymphomas surgicalresection. all are chemosensitive not However, pediatric do and almost require

of appropriate studies the so for the performed. are amount determine the all and required of that testing to distribution tissue tissue necessary crucial is It a just oncologic principle to has in resected. but margin general been tumor, entire of tissue also, cases, normal not A most ensure is tumor the resect to surgery the surrounding

leukemia Hyperuricemia syndrome Allopurinol, lysis hydration, Tumor Uric Lymphoma, acid gout nephropathy;

Tumor cardiac insulin bicarbonate, and Hyperkalemia sodium Lymphoma, syndrome arrest lysis Arrhythmias, Kayexalate; leukemia glucose,

blood Pallor, heart suppression cell weakness, loss infiltration; Any marrow chemotherapy failure Packed or Bone Anemia with blood red

or marrow Any chemotherapy hemorrhage suppression with Bone transfusion Thrombocytopenia infiltration Platelet Petechiae,

tumor hemorrhage others Fresh intravascular Promyelocytic coagulation Disseminated Shock, frozen Sepsis, leukemia, infection factors platelets, hypotension, plasma; treat

therapy, mass compression Respiratory Radiation trachea compressing distress Mediastinal Tracheal Lymphoma

Central tomography; CNS, MRI, resonance magnetic computed colony-stimulating granulocyte CT, nervous imaging. factor; system; G-CSF,

tumors. CHEMOTHERAPY therapy. diagnosis, micrometastatic For for localized of chemo-referred tumors disease tumors, adjuvant therapy patients with the as primary removal to is pediatric chemo-Because tumor time administered most after high solid have the at risk solid a of therapy administered is used cases Chemotherapy almost all (Table 154-2). in while neuroblastoma is referred (particu-adjuvant Exceptions tumor neoinclude chemotherapy. Wilms still low-stage primary as tumor present and the is to attack has benefits, on including number and chemotherapy larly Neoadjuvant (CNS) an low-grade potential in early of central infants) system nervous a

acid effects hepatitis; biliary Folic high-dose increases peptic hydration Purine days), renal allopurinol Myelosuppression; Hepatic Methotrexate unchanged; irritability, psychosis, and hunger, ALL toxicity 7–10 osteoporosis, Hepatic levels reductase excreted mucositis; Renal, monitor administration; prevent ulceration, myopathy, with analog osteosarcoma ALL, Renal mucositis, dermatitis, (nadir medulloblastoma, 50%–90% dihydrofolate hepatitis, Myelosuppression inhibits CNS retention antagonist; infection, fluid with and 6-Mercaptopurine leucovorin, lymphoma,

Treatment Chapter Cancer of Principles 154 541 u

Hodgkin Direct Chemotherapy—cont’d ACTION disease, ACUTE hypertension, 154-2 Renal INDICATION diabetes, syndrome, lymphocyte Prednisone ALL; Cushing cytotoxicity Table Antimetabolites DRUG* TOXICITY lymphoma EXCRETION METABOLISM Hepatic Cancer Hormones cataracts,

for Inhibits Carboplatin synthesis Myelosuppression — as Renal Same DNA cisplatin

secondary lymphoma, Topoisomerase-— (VP-16) germ cell inhibitor Myelosuppression, allergic sarcoma ALL, leukemia, Renal tumor, Etoposide reaction

lymphoblastic leukemia; acute leukemia; central acute AML, system. nervous Antidiuretic hormone; ALL, CNS, ADH, myeloid *Many administration, nausea alopecia and produce cause drugs repeated during many vomiting and with doses.

shrinkage plan disease, control, the surgery. for additional local micrometastatic presumed to primary to tumor facilitate time and of definitive

drug target to of of in decreased the so a overcome the can ways: influx into of tissue to the apoptosis. death cell be agent cell; that agent Resistance chemotherapeutic inhibited particular increased to target of malignant it cellular inhibition; processes chemotherapeutic number cannot or blockade the a a amplification leading efflux in programmed by develop normal and mutation from drug; or sensitive or follows Because in to subpopulations tumors, mutation particular is cells that process it ongoing of an any within chemotherapy be less tumor may certain malignant tumor more drug. a agents, this fact, combinations as the to treat sequential childhood forms to are of chemotherapy of Given drugs single opposed cancer. various used,

instillation into blood-brain cerebrospinal the of fluid directly The be barrier (by of may puncture) the penetration the drugs agent the chemotherapeutic necessary. lumbar into chemotherapeutic CNS; prevents blood-brain Radiation also barrier. therapy circumvents the

from delivering the therapy dividing order radiationto malignant more prevent ionizing cells by DNAreplication. process interfering is with them in Radiation directly commonly, or, kill of them to canalso radiation protons, therapy such and Conventional neutrons used. be as photons, uses particles butatomic electrons, all therapy are radiosensitive. radiosensitive, tumors tumors all that necessary in Not and radiation is are not

standard response Certain been or biologic have with treated cancers in monoclonal addition modifiers, cytokines, to antibodies treatments. cells. the specifically therapies normal host sparing tumor Targeted target cells, of leukemia. and a mesylate targets that lymphoblastic t(9;22) myeloid of leukemia protein kinase inhibitor the the translocation acute chronic Imatinib effects is a some cell is in lymphomas. surface CD20 the monoclonal Rituximab antigen directed against antibody expressed is monoclonal neuroblastoma. antibody anti-GD2 for an used Ch14.18

also nutritional antimicrobial products, care therapies. appropriate intensive the an oncology, including in role Supportive support, care, plays pediatric use integrative of important agents, and blood

their use. are adverse agents chemotherapy numerous cellular Because are associated with effects toxins, chemotherapy suppression, adverse commonly of immunosuppression, drugs. are Bone used alopecia effects vomiting, marrow and general nausea, Each chemotherapy has drug specific toxicities. also cisplatin cause cyclophosphamide vincristine can Doxorubicin renal peripheral cardiac damage can cystitis; cause cause ototoxicity; hemorrhagic damage; can can neuropathy. cause ifosfamide and and and therapy produces and many such development as secondary of growth organ the retardation, Radiation cancers. dysfunction, effects adverse later mucositis, in patients pediatric therapy-related may 154-3). cancer effects develop Significant late (Table

Leukoencephalopathy Radiation; venoocclusive chemotherapy panhypopituitarism) radiation Hepatotoxicity disease ± Pulmonary busulfan (growth radiation agents; ± High-dose, methotrexate methotrexate hormone Doxorubicin, Hepatic radiation Cranial cancers Second inhibitors Methotrexate, Radiation Cardiomyopathy Splenectomy Cranial Alkylating 6-mercaptopurine; bleomycin, Pituitary (fibrosis) dysfunction (busulfan, Genetic cyclophosphamide) daunorubicin; Sepsis etoposide, radiation; II intensive radiation predisposition; transplant Cranial deficiency, radiation Cognition/intelligence topoisomerase alkylating marrow bone Scoliosis ± agents, radiation

chemotherapy peers; Psychosocial conditioned death anxiety, responses of to Stress,

etiology is unknown childhood leukemia The multifactorial. of is probably and roles. factors and Genetics environmental play important are many leukemia There in cells. translocations nonrandom recurrent chromosomal with lead the capabilities. translocation A formation may whose a to lead a may to expression novel of transforming gene, new protein lymphoblastic ABL. 9 (ALL), BCR some and gene translocation a In 22 and of incorporating results two and in genes, chronic of cases between a leukemia chromosomes leukemia parts (CML) fusion acute myelogenous role formed leukemias. development the of The an by protein this the gene in important novel plays of addition, predispose acute to constitutional certain genotypes the child In can development a leukemia. have anemia, an Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, neurofibromatosis 1 acute Fanconi increased Down all Bloom syndrome, ataxia-telangiectasia, with leukemia. risk of Patients syndrome, and fourfold of with childhood to risk above twofold population). are developing of the (approximately at Siblings children leukemia leukemia increased for twin increases for risk This twins). siblings monozygotic 25% (up to cells clone chromosomal screening metabolic possible be In suggesting for blood neonatal used and patients etiology. the patient’s the in certain can with gene cord antigen utero unique receptor rearrangement in diseases, the a or specific for characterizing translocation blood leukemic spots leukemia, demonstrated leukemia. are reports familial of There factors agents, radiation particularly exposure of and the leukemia include chemotherapy topoisomerase the Environmental inhibitors. risk certain ionizing that increase to II may

leukemia in the Each to year occur 3500 2500 States. new cases childhood of United million affects 1 age The 40 of children disease 15 the about under per years. 75% approximately of for accounts ALL cases. leukemia (AML)accounts of cases. Acute 20%, CML 15% for myelogenous accounts and to than less for 5% rare juvenile myelomonocytic and leukemias, chronic in are including Other chronic lymphocytic leukemia, leukemia, myelomonocytic childhood. leukemia, chronic

Organization AML. to are 155-1), and according still system French-American-British although clinicians classified many (Table and World AML the for Health ALL the system use pathologists cell B-lineage classified ALL as is to according lineage T-lineage. or either is peaks in boys than The years to 5 incidence higher in and age at of girls. ALL 2 of incidence. associated older as is in predominance ALL, well particular, peak male with age an as T-cell of of States, when especially increase, a into high in ALL slight period relatively of more and in adolescence white AML in there American is adulthood, drops children.The years stabilizes neonatal than the continues the In 55 common beyond which until age. incidence is then United is African equally females are Males by and AML. affected rates have white and children. slightly Hispanic than higher children American African incidence

StudentConsult.com @ Available

of spleen, brain, Signs tissue cells or liver, resulting leukemias gingiva, thrombocytopenia) in and to are infiltration the tissues, acute testes). nodes, marrow into of symptoms skin, leukemic bone neutropenia, normal failure either bone, specific (lymph (anemia, infiltration related bone joint pallor, are symptoms lethargy, malaise, or Common presenting pain. fever, petechiae and or anorexia, ecchymoses, Physical lymphadenopathy hepatosplenomegaly. and reveals frequently examination for enlargement central painless a sites nervous or (CNS) common extramedullary testes be and or testes system one symptoms seen. neurologic are of The both may ALL; mediastinal often ALL cell masses, white Patients disease blood have with high bulky anterior counts, T-cell (WBC)

morphology Burkitt B (i.e., leukemia) ALL, cell—L3

with translocations with AMLs promyelocytic q11–12) t(15;17)(q22; Acute and PML/RAR-alpha) AML1(CBF-alpha)/ETO leukemia—AML M3*) (i.e., AML q22), t(8;21)(q22; cytogenetic recurrent variants, with

abnormal (p13q22) bone t(16;16)(p13; marrow 11q23/MLL with CBFb/MYH11 AML with AML or abnormalities eosinophils—inv(16) q11),

with myelodysplastic AML Without prior dysplasia syndrome With syndrome myelodysplastic multilineage prior

Alkylating lymphoid) Epipodophyllotoxin-related syndromes, AML may (some myelodysplastic types be agent-related and Other therapy-related

basophilic monocytic AML Acute AML Acute (M2) (M7) otherwise Acute AML maturation minimally (M5) maturation leukemia (M6) panmyelosis without with erythroid leukemia AML myelomonocytic Acute leukemia not Acute leukemia myelofibrosis leukemia differentiated megakaryocytic (M4) categorized (M1) (M0) with Acute

from Modified Classification. World Health Organization leukemia. Mixed MLL, lineage of AML, those for and the French-AmericanBritish and is the clinicians Organization M7 Health many still system are by which World used predated system M0 to pathologists. *The designations classification

hepatosplenomegaly, with cervical lymphadenopathy, CNS and involvement. found with sites. may softtissue tumors be patients various AML, In extramedullary in

or smear, immature bone leukemia confirmed The by both. blood peripheral is marrow of of aspirate, the blast findings cells on either diagnosis acute are and counts; anemia thrombocytopenia blood Most abnormal common. patients have of WBC count may patients normal, 50,000/mm3. have The WBC or be high; low, 15% than 20% a to count greater by surface patterns. the cytochemical flow Definitive cell markers of cytometry evaluation diagnosis requires staining (immunophenotype) evaluation of and leukemia. undertaken analysis all Cytogenetic of cases be in should acute have chromosomal lymphoid leukemias both and myeloid specific Certain types of abnormalities. (approximately cases) common translocation associated of a is most prognosis. all favorable ALL, with and t(12;21) is 20% the In t(9;22) prognosis. than in a of with translocation is occurs associated less 5% and The cases poor the is prognosis. poor and in MLL infants often with translocations chromosome involving The (and translocation a patients on gene t(4;11) AML occurs associated generally with other secondary 11) and reaction leukemia may apparent now abnormalities situ hybridization cases used of techniques be karyotypes. many on most chain polymerase routine in or are because not in chromosomal Fluorescent DNA gaining the in relevance and standard are techniques microarray become will future. likely CNS time involvement. A diagnosis should always the lumbar of to be possibility performed the of at puncture evaluate be ALL. chest in seen anterior is mediastinal all to exclude A mass, in obtained patients should T-cell commonly which an x-ray calcium, in patients. and hepatic phosphorus, Electrolytes, be monitored all uric acid, should renal function and

includes and diagnosis of nonmalignant acute leukemia The differential malignant diseases. mimicker common the virus acute leukemia, the of particularly Epstein-Barr Infection probably most is infection. to produce leukemia. mycobacteria) can infections pertussis, signs and (cytomegalovirus, common also Other symptoms to diagnostic or immune lead or acquired purpura, congenital include histiocytosis, anemia, rheumatoid aplastic considerations anemia. juvenile Noninfectious neutropenia arthritis, and thrombocytopenic that conditions Ewing can malignant mimic diagnoses including sarcoma. rhabdomyosarcoma, leukemia, Several neuroblastoma, also and Newborns as produces 21 known may WBC counts myeloproliferative disorder, thrombocytopenia. and with transient elevated which peripheral a have condition anemia, with blasts, trisomy acute life. only, risk few months but significantly leukemia and or (30%) care have true usually with next resolves supportive developing children AML)within a of these of (ALL years the It increased

generally four-agent chemotherapy ALL on assignment. induction group Patients receive with initial risk based their threeor high-risk 4 (daunorubicin receive patients receive anthracycline doxorubicin). standard-risk and for also L-asparaginase patients Lowand vincristine, prednisone, weeks; or an or instillation some of hydro-cortisone combination and to development. leukemia prevent induction, given of intrathecal cytarabine, is methotrexate, treat existing During CNS its nearly patients remission, remission successful is Following the induction ALL, with which in all of with therapy. is achieved CNS-directed consolidated along higher of risk factors on receiving with The chemotherapy. intensive depends patients therapy more intensity risk for and promise. radiation with provided, patients is ALL, at CNS all pediatric therapy T-cell great diagnosis cranial of therapy radiation patients leukemia usually the those with disease For omission detected holds although 2 duration a continuation to therapy patients 3 of for of All therapy years. total receive corticosteroid (orally oral of plus or (5 courses of methotrexate and short daily days) oral therapy weekly vincristine to 6-mercaptopurine, consists generally and intramuscularly). 7 Continuation intermittent therapy,

quite (vincristine, different because asparaginase) treatment are of ALL effective. from prednisone, and of is that not The AML drugs nonmyelosuppressive Several intensive myelosuppressive childhood exception chemotherapy therapy in acute AML; of evidence that to is necessary (with cure there continuation are promyelocytic low-dose is AML of helpful extremely leukemia). little the cycles

for Induction 6-thioguanine). (or consists cytarabine, etoposide of therapy daunomycin, usually and AML in favorable in recommend patient sibling transplantation t(8;21). syndrome a with the relatively cell Down cytogenetics remission, as If except most an first HLA-matched a those stem has t(15;17), donor, experts and patients and such inv(16), with cell being therapy studied for natural childhood and transplantation as AML. are haploidentical sorafenib newly diagnosed an adjuvant killer Bortezomib,

short-term Major with complications result leukemia chemotherapy. marrow from by treatment associated of suppressioncaused the bone Patients necessitates may plateletsor bleeding that transfusion anemia have of andsignificant blood. greatly with to 500 especially neutrophils/mm3, fewer and significant 100 and patient infection. Neutropenia fungal predispose bacterial the fewer than neutrophils/mm3, than (carinii) risk immunosuppression the pneumonia. jiroveci increases ofPneumocystis Cell-mediated is recommended. pentamidine withoral aerosolized Prophylaxis trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or with agents Prophylaxis andantifungal under investigation. is antibiotics previous treated sequelaeof than in Long-term the erasbut in treatment are earlier. in 1980sand long-term less therapy survivors common prevalent are These and stature, malignant dysfunction, Table sequelae cardiac infertility,second 154-3). problems(see obesity, include psychosocial impairment, neoplasms, short neurocognitive

initial into based with and count, classified four therapy. high) standard, genetic and to high, groups Patients very response on WBC prognostic risk are ALL age, induction (low, characteristics, systems Classification and 155-2). complex (Table evolving are are count and with than findings initial low-risk 9 old In 50,000/mm3 years 1 an patients as WBC cytogenetic such general less favorable to t(12;21). or and or High-risk unfavorable younger 1 disease such testicular or are cytogenetics than t(4;11). as patients age greater than 50,000/mm3, of count 10 at have older, CNS have WBC initial of age an have years year diagnosis, Very a have fail translocation, 4 of or therapy. weeks high-risk achieve to hypodiploid DNA remission index, patients after a t(9;22) other ALL. considered patients are standard-risk All to have minimal influence early response factors residual to Immunophenotype, and disease, therapy are risk other that stratification. Slow DNA CNS highly with >10 immunophenotype, t(4;11), often Rapid 1–9.99 Response >1.16 t(9;22) undifferentiated generally a or Present <50,000/mm3 Initial Absent t(12;21) ALL <1 at <1.16 have to count therapy diagnosis a have WBC years >50,000/mm3 years Cytogenetics Infants disease index

CNS, cell. Central nervous blood system; white WBC,

have (e.g., leukemia and mixed gene poor prognosis. the lineage t(4;11)), translocation a involving

childhood approximates current for therapy rate 80%. ALL overall The cure with ALL may the in Relapse but testes, marrow the commonly most of bone in or occur occurs also extramedullary CNS, sites. other receiving therapy. if treatment, occurs If patient prognosis while still than occurs worse is relapse after the the relapse is discontinuation of donor, have Stem blood donor, patients recommended transplant from matched for cord relapse who while receiving a initial chemotherapy. currently sibling a unrelated cell or matched is The approximately AML is rate current 50%. cure childhood for overall alone. first who for with in patients sibling matched patients remission treated receive It transplant for a cell than slightly stem is higher chemotherapy relapsed prognosis The AML for poor. is

malignancies tumors. third childhood, in leukemias Lymphomas, common and the tissues, most (CNS) malignancy are of nervous system behind central or lymphoid lymphoma: and lymphoma non-Hodgkin There of two major (NHL). Hodgkin types disease are evidence cases The conditions. the causal but are suggests virus that role many etiologies unknown, Epstein-Barr in in (EBV) a both plays

little of all NHL cases show and highly malignant, Almost childhood diffuse, differentiation. are in lymphoma), has (Burkitt NHL noncleaved lymphoblastic, small cell. histologic subtypes: large and three cell B-cell B be For origin) of cell, 156-1). cell T and regarded large cell, or as simplicity, may (Table T-cell may (which be these either

unregulated to normal leading site a translocation oncogene expression. increased new, to its site, from may Chromosomal an move occurs Burkitt lymphoma, translocation In

comes or or indeterminate the cell such gene 14, an on locus Large and bone chromosome nodes, 2, (c-myc B-cell, next chromosome that soft immunoglobulin to the c-myc T-cell, skin, oncogene to gene. immunoglobulin oncogene) t(2;5)(p23;q35) 22, between 8 tissue, Lymph reside on gene, c-myc leading The immunoglobulin lymphoma. malignant a B-cell to the turns gene

after the bimodal adult years distribution than age. incidence peaks rarely of adolescent/young in again 50; seen children it and years Hodgkin 5 age in The disease of is a has younger with affected is boys ratio gender in adolescents, In the approximately are equal. commonly than girls; children, more age. increases with NHL The incidence of It in common and than is in males Americans more in than in African females. whites immunodeficiency described acquired cell in has after states congenital been transplantation. with NHL or and or stem association organ seen in two in is EBV. form commonly to commonly has commonly which lymphoma sporadic America strong endemic an a seen Africa, form association forms: into Burkitt divided a and North

Available StudentConsult.com @

lymph clinical often is confined areas, usually two firm one disease node most painless, common lymphadenopathy and cervical of or to presentation nodes. Hodgkin the The supraclavicular is initial of Mediastinal lymphadenopathy breath shortness producing presentation. or frequent cough another drenching for diagnosis. of B 6 sweats, and consecutive one unintentional value: within three or months has prognostic of fever (>38° days), C The night weight presence loss 3 of of symptoms 10% more

an commonly with form American) the frequently lymphoma presents endemic of presentation more of abdominal Burkitt has (North sporadic (typically The jaw. the with whereas form tumors pain), (African) nodes The and T-cell primary cervical mediastinum are anterior for lymphomas. usual sites the These superior lymphomas pleural or effusion, obstruction, may or cause airway both. cava vena

biopsy or pleural The lymphoma tissue diagnosis orexamination is established peritoneal fluid. of by of prominent and in lymphoma,which with are insidious present can in loss, patients cell symptoms,such anaplastic weight be fever be as may and large onset. particularly Systemic blasts, 25% acute If is as the or acute bone B-cell leukemia marrow greater lymphoblastic or T-cellALL). [ALL] leukemia (either disease classified the contains makes therapy distinction because or systemic therapy. therapeuticdifference require inaddition aggressive, prognostic This CNS-directed both little to

measurement blood to have suspected rate, lymphoma should uric phosphorus, have of electrolytes, count, dehydrogenase, acid. and sedimentation calcium, and serum erythrocyte a complete Patients lactate (Fig. for mediastinal mass x-ray assesses a A chest 156-1). from requires diagnosis The a sampling. pathologic confirmation or ultimately tissue fluid positron a gallium also For purposes, and aspirate, bone scan, scan indicated. marrow are bone emission or tomography staging cells. is Reed-Sternberg pathologic Hodgkin The disease identification hallmark of the of sclerosis, 30% similar to in to depletion. disease 10% those subtypes lymphocyte have have Hodgkin in are cellularity, have Histopathologic 15% 50% adults; childhood have and lymphocyte nodular mixed to 5% predominant, 60% less than to responsive subtypes are All treatment. disease system. Ann Arbor to of is the according Staging Hodgkin nodes, identify (lymph often abdominal tomography longer involvement. no computed scans used liver, spleen) children Staging is because in laparotomy

leukemia, and diagnosis germ lymphomas thymomas. nasopharyngeal children in includes rhabdomyosarcoma, for carcinoma, The differential tumors, cell cat mimic of that can capitis, infectious which duct lymphadenitis, and infection, and branchial (Bartonella produce even all infection), toxoplasmosis, cleft tinea lymphoma. can lymphadenopathy significant diagnoses mononucleosis scratch cysts, henselae), Nonmalignant or mycobacterial thyroglossal bacterial viral include disease (EBV may as from pain acute Patients with misdiagnosed be lymphoma having appendicitis. abdominal Burkitt

chemotherapy for radiation low-dose, generally accepted treatment a therapy. combination is childhood and disease involved-field Hodgkin of The doxorubicin, usually Chemotherapy cyclophosphamide, and prednisone, combination some etoposide. vincristine, of procarbazine, vinblastine, of consists bleomycin, to of are courses chemotherapy In given. general combination four six therapy. may chemotherapy cured patients be without alone, with low-risk Selected radiation

a Figure x-ray mediastinal Chest compressing (arrowheads). superior rightward 15-year-old mass and the a anterior boy of deviating demonstrating it large arrows) trachea (large 156-1 non-Hodgkin Biopsy revealed lymphoma.

metastases common are Distant, childhood NHL. in noncontiguous children Systemic at disease localized chemotherapy be to diagnosis. with even should with is administered NHL, clinically mandatory those all and

lymphoblastic regimens treated multidrug in and ALL. generally T-cell to lymphoma are cell used similar large anaplastic lymphoma aggressive with regimens the doxorubicin, drugs The and etoposide. methotrexate, of main cytarabine, NHL cyclophosphamide, high-dose used treatment moderateto the in B-cell are mature ifosfamide, the and highly used therapy and because is radiation is chemotherapy. to localized rarely Surgery rarely sensitive are disease

of vomiting, related other pediatric are from malignancies and commonly immunosuppression, short-term The sequelae and similar alopecia. the complications nausea, lymphoma treatment myelosuppression, from include to adverse dysfunction, include or and neoplasms fibrosis. and Late effects myelodysplasia, second growth, thyroid (acute pulmonary malignancies, leukemia and malignant cancer), breast hypothyroidism, tissue cardiac impaired myeloid bone soft

are low, to Hodgkin stage disease Children bulk. classified or intermediate, with and risk according as andnodal adolescents high is prognosis excellent. generally The 90% and 90% an survival rate, 5-year overall to low-risk There 100% is for approaching 70% high-riskpatients. patients approximately for For also related NHL prognosis stage. is to B-cell, NHL overall3-year 90%. to cell survival rates The T-cell, are70% for and large

cell germ and embryonic tumors ependymoma, in tumor). system are (medulloblastoma, tumors CNS Most primary in or nervous adolescents include that and central originate low-grade neoplasms (CNS) children the astrocytomas contrast are CNS In in high-grade carcinomas. that metastatic secondary or other are from tumors astrocytomas adults tumors patients therapy. radiation CNS may treated in also tumors previously with arise are tumors multifactorial etiology. CNS likely in Organization and complete with evolving, Health classification complex being and most CNS tumors World of is accurate classification system. the the The

children during CNS tumors are overall are solid common tumors childhood. incidence leukemia to in and most the second in new States; rate million is cases children About year 1 15 the 33 years each under age. the approximately cases United occur of in per 1700 peaks incidence years second a then before peak 70. 10 after The decreases age until and age no are other for affected tumor females; gender more ependymoma, differences males medulloblastoma than and For types, exist. rates whites than children. equal years of first the affected whites otherwise life, 2 3 multiracial multiracial and are more essentially incidence to for children; In are

syndromes, risk Turcot syndrome, including an and for sclerosis, neurofibromatosis have 2), Hippel-Lindau Children tuberous syndrome, syndrome, developing increased (types a 1 with von and Li-Fraumeni tumor. CNS inherited certain disorder factor. risk children in Most tumors arise no with underlying CNS or known

StudentConsult.com Available @

Leukocoria and Fontanels Visual Head and Shape, Impairment Abnormal Headaches Size, Vomiting

on pressure cranial Brain obstruction mass tissue normal nerves) a flow or by caused in (usually impingement symptoms by of cause effect. fluid or direct tumors (CSF) can an cerebrospinal either by increase by intracranial CSF of quickly obstruct that flow become the symptomatic. Tumors (particularly pressure morning vomiting Symptoms of awakening). are intracranial and headache, lethargy, the in increased on performance, may poor and loss be developmental all anorexia, of slow-growing milestones of school Irritability, CNS signs tumors. cranial may open with young In children circumference in occur. increase an sutures, head may to lead acuity tumors of visual pathway loss defects. visual Optic field or cranial common pressure. to Inability intracranial nerve as eye the result a of increased the sixth abduct is sign palsy of suggest nerve than of Cranial deficits sixth involvement palsy other the nerve brainstem. to focal supratentorial may also 20% in be with changes or occur sensory seen. patients Seizures weakness of 50% tumors; Pituitary with neuroendocrine excessive tumors, prolactinoma, with growth precocious secretory hormone involvement effects growth produces puberty). (galactorrhea Cerebellar ataxia tumors diminished are with coordination. associated and history and are including physical visual fields careful examination. for include A which funduscopic assessment, evaluation, examination should a fundamental neurologic and a

is (MRI) magnetic If the suspected, is lesion examination choice (Fig. intracranial currently imaging of resonance an 157-1). by disease tumors. of primitive metastatic testing cytocentrifuge presence tumors, essential cell the to determine in CSF and neuroectodermal is Examination of region tumors, germ histologic pineal evaluate should imaging intracranial lumbar obtained of been not for has puncture pressure. performed evidence increased be before A to tumor If a is

Figure fourth heterogeneously enhancing a scan showing of 9-year-old boy ventricular mass imaging (arrow). resonance Magnetic 157-1 a and resected, revealed pathology medulloblastoma. was It

entire assess suspected have neuraxial dissemination. spine should to for potential surgery be MRI to obtained before the (medulloblastoma), metastatic of resection. hours of 24 extent to obtained be the surgery postoperative 48 should within to brain study of A MRI the assess of distinguish resonance can necrosis. tumor During help radiation from spectroscopy recurrent follow-up, magnetic

hemorrhage, includes a of cerebri, arteriovenous metastatic tumor. benign disease abscess, The lesion cysticercosis, granulomatous CNS intracranial rarely, brain malformation, mass (tuberculosis, sarcoid), diagnosis differential vasculitis, pseudotumor malignant and, aneurysm, tumor, tumor,

The the and size, for on individualized with tumor and associatedsymptoms. depends CNS location, tumors therapy children is type, edema. dexamethasone High-dose immediately administered reduce tumor-associated is often to possible, maximal possible. and objectives debulkingif excision Surgical are is not excision, if complete complete a sensitive young combined children, cell In often chemotherapy; tumors are is or in chemotherapy; altogether.Primitive radiationtherapy therapy tumors germ children, avoided be sensitive gliomas chemotherapy. and may radiation to less to neuroectodermal are with (including delayed medulloblastoma) infants role, growth Chemotherapy have particularly high-dose radiation devastatingeffects important of playsan neurocognitive effects CNS whomthe and in on may especially in development.

adverse of fatigue, cushingoid immunosuppression, and anorexia, include features. Short-term nausea, therapy vomiting, effects endocrinologic Long-term myelodysplasia). infertility, malignant (including bone second adverse decreased cataracts, and neurocognitive ototoxicity, insufficiency, include renal deficits, growth, neoplasms effects sequelae, and The the significant, radiation methods neurocognitive search the delivery dose and primary continued and deficits infants for be therapy are radiation can for the therapy boosts. the most in reason lowest young the conformal particularly children, for efficacious tumor an diffuse changes of patients decrease abnormalities. and a mutism occurs apathy, by resection 25% is (e.g., dysfunction, fossa Cerebellar of speech cerebellar in in or behavioral acute irritability, characterized (often both), mutism), syndrome other posterior neurologic and after and to to days cerebellar within may ataxia usually It is self-resolving of begin hours months; surgery within persist. and often weeks dysmetria therapy fatigue sleepiness, syndrome, occur Somnolence excessive may of months is by completion self-limited. after is the in characterized radiation and and which to after fossa as and Posterior weeks syndrome meningitis surgery in area. days this aseptic headache manifests

regimens, Improvements techniques radiation therapy neurosurgical neurodiagnosis, in techniques, and chemotherapy

(%) Tumors 5-YEAR Location, of SURVIVAL LOCATION in (%) Table Incidence, and Children 157-1 Prognosis CNS INCIDENCE

15 5 improved 0–5; High 50–60 outcome. (posterior (cerebral low 0–5 50–75 multiforme 65–75 Astrocytoma 50–75 6 Midline 30 Supratentorial 90 Craniopharyngioma Glioma Infratentorial hemispheres) 95 fossa) (cerebellum) 20 glioma papilloma grade: (germinoma) have grade: 90 70–90 40–55 Optic 2.5 Astrocytoma Medulloblastoma 1 (brainstem) 50–80 Glioblastoma Ependymoma 10 Choroid 3 1.5 15 plexus 20 nerve Pineal Ependymoma overall 55–60 astrocytomas rate cure is resulting with 60%, rate of (Table to large associated curability increasing the overall in the and CNS for medulloblastoma with survival all tumors high The childhood 5-year 157-1). patients measure cerebellar approximately 50% from and Intrinsic multiforme gliomas poor prognoses. brainstem have glioblastoma extremely

that from and crest is Neuroblastoma derived adrenal neural the form nervous medulla sympathetic cells the system. cause The unknown. is is it young that perinatal events. prenatal from children, neuroblastoma results and in thus occur likely cases Most Neuroblastoma hereditary. be cases) to 2% of (1% rarely may genes with PHOX2B cases. associated are most familial ALK Mutations and the in been In sporadic several have identified. cases, mutations genetic

the common in tumor childhood extracranial of and most Neuroblastoma common solid the infancy. is malignancy most median age months. 20 at diagnosis The is approximately the There year. are each cases United new neuroblastoma in of States 650 7000 births. is The to incidence be in live estimated 1 neuroblastoma. a in cases, tumor is history occurs to of of The 1% family 2% but, sporadically, usually there

@ StudentConsult.com Available

remarkable death. for regression metastasis clinical to Neuroblastoma of resulting and spontaneous is in ranging rapidprogression its spectrum from broad prognosis localized the or fever, pain.The nontender. at presentation hard, palpated Childrenwith often as diagnosis,whereas and is is and complaints, are and appear in asymptomatic pain ill often children common such is metastases loss, mass.The abdominal havesystemic most mass weight often with smooth,and flank disease the arise of in in tumors In arise abdomen, adrenal 45% the gland, the and sympathetic ganglia. retroperitoneal 25% the of of origin chest sites the are paravertebralganglia and Other neck. foramina and compression. Paraspinal tumors the neural may spinal cord invadethrough cause seen is sometimes neck syndrome with orapical masses. Horner paraneoplastic feet), associated sweating, dancing (dancing opsomyoclonus secretory including Several profuse neuroblastoma. with are diarrhea, and eyes and syndromes,

Neuroblastoma including multiple bone, lymph and organs, the liver, may metastasize to marrow, nodes. bone orbital sign ecchymoses of is Periorbital involvement. bone a infants is a old) skin, tumor of defined limited year category primary (<1 to with 4S, liver, marrow. unique small neuroblastoma, and A metastasis in or stage bone with is It outcome. a associated favorable

help neuroblastoma. patients films A count with identify blood may plain and complete films observed of in Homovanillic is neuroblastoma abdominal 90% abdomen.About tumors of produce urine. Calcification on can the be detected catecholamines within (Vanillylmandelic neuroblastomas that acid; plain the acid) often Definitive microscopic, microscopic, of electron tissuefor diagnosis immunohistologic requires light and neuroblastoma examination. urinary bone and thechest, and pelvis; a scan scan metaiodobenzylguanidine computed aspiration biopsies;and the scan; tomography A catecholamines (CT) of abdomen, bilateral marrow evaluation. and/or complete bone

an must neuroblastoma which presents mass. differentiated tumor, also Wilms abdominal be from The presentation as abdominal of flank Ultrasound differentiates tumors. usually the examination or CT child sometimes from for abuse. are orbital metastases mistaken ecchymoses Periorbital in bone or often involvement is anemia, have children neutropenia, the marrow Because thrombocytopenia, leukemia with considered differential. may

surgical 158-1). of is biologic staging based Treatment neuroblastoma on and (Table features localized the is of initial treatment excision neuroblastoma. Complete surgical for choice with no favorable resection who biology gross therapy. total further a undergo Children require of diagnosis. given disease, is patients combination advanced usually In after with confirmation chemotherapy the etoposide. commonly agents and cyclophosphamide, cisplatin, vincristine, used are The doxorubicin, most courses resection chemotherapy. tumor the of of undertaken after is numerous primary Delayed therapy often and the is to metastatic bed tumor primary areas Radiation administered of disease. rescue stem the improved chemotherapy patients with cell neuroblastoma. High-dose has outcome for autologous with high-risk anti-GD2 radiation cis-retinoic maximal acid has also tumor antibody of surgery, with chemotherapy, monoclonal with therapy addition therapy. the Survival and improved and after of (isotretinoin) reduction burden

compression Spinal is irreversible from cause cord neurologic an emergency. deficit oncologic may an and neuroblastoma with may syndrome developmental mental opsomyoclonus suffer from the retardation. Children delay or chemotherapy such in neuroblastoma growth complications treat high-risk and used aggressive nephrotoxicity, therapies to The currently radiation second may ototoxicity, as malignancies. and problems, result

is The at primary and prognosis presence by histopathology. DNA ploidy, metastasis, stage, age or affected of diagnosis, absence survival site, MYCN cytogenetics, for status, three risk. average, high low, with divided can children groups: and be Currently into neuroblastoma lack of hyperdiploidy, include biologic of Unfavorable copies/cell) 11q, or the cell mutations oncogene, chromosome factors 1p, of MYCN lack differentiation, and amplification 6p22. of (>10 localized favorable to tend and be younger with often have Patients biology disease. 1 of prognosis Patients than a better patients. have age generally older year under relapse than Older disease. will have 4 unfavorable most disease commonly residual drug-resistant biology, and more 50% stage to due patients with 8% of for cases in represents is 15% children. Although cancer it neuroblastoma of cancer, responsible childhood of only deaths

by Children’s 2A/2B 1 STAGE AGE Low OTHER Low Risk RISK PLOIDY resection Table Group GROUP Neuroblastoma HISTOLOGY 158-1 Stage Stratification >50% MYCN Schema, Proposed Not Oncology amplified

Hogarty JM, Lancet MD, From Maris 369:2106–2120, R, et Neuroblastoma, Bagatell 2007. al: index. DNA DI,

kidney. to is normal arise primitive, blastema, thought a metanephric Wilms the tumor precursor of from tumor-bearing and foci Wilms normal be are rests in that cells embryonal infant (25% may of in Nephrogenic kidneys. found are commonly to (<1%) kidneys found rarely 40%) be to or Wilms are may perilobar, considered both, tumors. They precursors and be widely to intralobar, of anomalies of unknown, at disease. risk or genetic Wilms congenital cause tumor are is conditions the the Although developing certain children increased with

tumor identified. genes Multiple or WT have Wilms been 11p15, band gene The other and WT1 minority at involved. chromosomal also and is are genes 1p a 11p13 at of in 16q, tumors, important the The is tumor tumor demonstrate heterozygosity heterogeneous. Wilms normal the involved or etiology (LOH) of several to the patients predisposition progression of of genetic identification some genes that in in Wilms tissues loss and of

tumor States. 500 tumor the with of childhood, cases new per Wilms the year malignant approximately is common renal most in United predilection gender years diagnosis at 3.5 is and age, is no to mean of The age apparent. 3 A at age hereditary with associated younger presentation onset. bilateral be and tumor form may Wilms of associated anomalies hemihypertrophy, including Wilms congenital with and genitourinary abnormalities. Many aniridia, sporadic are tumor, the as chromosome Patients Wilms genitourinary (Wilms the malformation, resulting a manifestation at with germline WAGR aniridia, tumor tumor, from syndrome of mental syndrome have retardation) 11p. a deletion itself, are and should tumor Patients periodic other risk at screened and overgrowth be imaging. for renal developing Beckwith-Wiedemann syndromes with with increased syndrome some Wilms

Available @ StudentConsult.com

by with parents. they brought an tumor because have that mass medical children their are is abdominal to attention Wilms Most discovered hematuria. time fever, mass at have may do pain, hypertension, noted, many and complaints not the Although associated children symptoms the first abdominal is include that

surrounding distinguish the or computed usually abdominal or in tomography mass ultrasound (CT) can an adrenal other An intrarenal structures. mass scan gland a from the the Evaluation extend from crucial of because inferior may kidney cava tumor vena cava. vena is the into the function and pulmonary chest should a liver blood and be studies, count, metastases) obtained. A renal radio-graph urinalysis, identify (to complete obtained. chest, cases, a the In scan of and most is CT abdomen, pelvis examination the The diagnosis is tumor. confirmed of histologic by classified Although favorable the histology, cases and is predictive of tumor a anaplasia most presence unfavorable. considered are of as Wilms of is prognosis worse

tumor renal retroperitoneal renal of hamartoma; disease and diagnosis nephroma such and Wilms mesoblastic neuroblastoma, hydronephrosis the as differential and such cell The includes other malignant kidney; tumors, benign lymphoma, rhabdomyosarcoma. as carcinoma, and polycystic of tumors,

Wilms The tumor controversial. nephrectomy unilateral, remains of for resectable timing adjuvant neoadjuvant American approach surgery is immediate chemotherapy and give approach chemotherapy to a a North imaging indicated). followed nephrectomy European The adjuvant biopsy, by followed the as whereas sometimes and chemotherapy, by is diagnosis make therapy, (plus for radiation by then comparable The of approach. regardless is survival overall the Children’s with protocols The tumor or histologic for Oncology and include actinomycin, without findings with vincristine generally Group favorable doxorubicin. Wilms is of depending patients for therapy and therapy, stage, status. presence to LOH a minority response of on reserved metastases, Radiation

of Wilms present kidney initial patients. about 5% recurrent to in opposite 4% children of the whereas 5% in disease Bilateral affects is on presentation, tumor tumor be possible. normal bilateral individualized Wilms as as patients kidney for much Treatment to retain with should

second scoliosis, bladder hepatic malignancies. late several and prehypertension, cardiomyopathy, infertility, are Wilms of and including insufficiency, tumor pulmonary for risk hypertension dysfunction, effects, Survivors renal and at dysfunction, left sometimes insufficiency are Patients Wilms or with failure. renal bilateral tumor with complicated pregnancies Female have may deliveries. and survivors

with patients general prognosis In for the Wilms good. isvery tumor and factors include Prognostic features. stage histologic than Anaplastic tumor. significantlyworse have Wilms variants a classic outcome of tumor Wilms 16q without tumors at either site. or at risk In an compared LOH confers of increased to death 1p LOH relapseand addition chromosomes

relapse-free related survival stage. tumors patients directly to of favorable with The histologic of picture is 4-year whereas 70% patients tumor to patients have pulmonary Wilms with for at 80%. rates with Curerates metastases event-free aregreater than survival of 85%, diagnosis approximately localized

Sarcomas are tissue divided and cancers. into bone sarcomas soft from tissue, arise tissue. as primarily tissue tissue, muscle sarcomas such fibrous the tissues body, adipose of connective the Soft and soft sarcoma skeletal in mesenchymal lineage. from are is tissue committed the common muscle children, cells derived Rhabdomyosarcoma, to most that include extraosseous soft tissue sarcoma, Less and sarcoma. fibrosarcoma, common synovial Ewing sarcomas sarcoma. children The common bone cancers in most malignant are osteosarcoma Ewing and bone-forming cells. primitive mesenchymal stem Osteosarcomas derive from are to be origin. Ewing sarcomas cell thought neural of crest

made for risks. is cause observations unknown have a diagnosed although sarcoma, most regarding few children with The been mutations) of syndrome (associated mutation) with softtissue neurofibromatosis (associated sarcomas. an with with NF1 Individuals germline risk increased p53 and Li-Fraumeni a have risk individuals is for a increased with hereditary for retinoblastoma. There osteosarcoma 500-fold specifically agents, or with or osteosarcoma childhood alkylating the treatment risk a malignancy. as cancer Prior therapy for both, for increases radiation chemotherapy, second

age children soft In States, to of sarcomas and years 20 with are are under 350 each rhabdomyosarcoma. 850 tissue diagnosed approximately adolescents United year; the 900 years children to in The adolescents. in of peaks 2 incidence and 6 rhabdomyosarcoma old with genitourinary and the early neck; associated peak region, extremities, The head, and tumors later in peak is is with trunk, genitourinary the tract. associated tumors male the in Boys affected more girls. than times 1.5 often are

with age under Of osteosarcoma tumors 700 children and have each the adolescents year, one of 650 to years thirds sarcoma. diagnosed approximately Ewing have third and 20 bone U.S. two during velocity. occurs period adolescents; most incidence maximum peak the affects commonly Osteosarcoma of growth the The years age. peaks but may any occur and Ewing ages 10 at 20 of incidence between sarcoma sarcoma affects it children Asian rarely in or whites; primarily African Ewing occurs American children.

Available @ StudentConsult.com

on and The presence origin, of of clinical mass metastatic the of effect, site depending disease. rhabdomyosarcoma presentation varies, subsequent motion and an limitation be of may with seen extraocular orbital Periorbital swelling, proptosis, tumor. discharge, dysphagia, with mass, otitis neck other tumors mass, nerve in chronic neck be may head media, Nasal cranial noted and and sites. ear involvement retention be frequency genitourinary tract. paratesticular or or swelling, and urinary noted hematuria, masses, tumors may in with the Urethral vaginal may to that masses not painful. extremity as lesions Trunk or tend may growing rapidly or be present may marrow or be is If present. pain bone failure evidence metastatic marrow, there to disease and limb bone of

(distal involved. metaphysis epiphysis of Osteosarcoma bone or proximal that are any with may is growth often anatomic velocity humerus), femur, maximum but be located sites associated the tibia, at proximal presents and pain It be mass. a with palpable with may associated obtained, the to are lytic of region a swelling to which be often related associated radio-graphs surrounding Because frequently often in with and the lesion. pain lesion, reveal usually soft tissue initially are thought calcification trauma, the affected the apparently to to 80% diagnosis, with While disease have micrometastatic believed have as patients are majority 75% well. of at disease localized patients osteosarcoma of the

can bone in almost the are any the and Ewing Although body, femur the most sarcoma occur pelvis in sites. common may loss. addition and and symptoms, fever swelling, such local include to In weight pain clinical systemic manifestations as

biopsy sarcomas. definitive for Tissue of needed a is diagnosis site biopsy radiation and future of is implications has surgical important Selection resection the and for therapy. Ewing Under as and appear microscopy, light cell blue small, tumors. sarcoma round, rhabdomyosarcoma by the substance. are presence Osteosarcomas distinguishable osteoid of

muscle-specific the actin and of helps confirm diagnosis proteins, as for myosin, Immunohistochemical rhabdomyosarcoma. such staining Two major histologic embryonal alveolar. rhabdomyosarcoma: for exist and variants primary Embryonal head, most children common histologic is in genitourinary variant tumors. neck, and with younger and is variant histologic extremity in in older most patients commonly trunk and occurs Alveolar tumors. seen translocations: Alveolar often specific characterized or t(2;13) is by rhabdomyosarcoma t(1;13). of computed (CT) tomography pelvis; and bone include abdomen, a a for rhabdomyosarcoma aspiration marrow and patients with should the scan; and chest, evaluation bone scan Metastatic biopsy. lumbar required patients in a puncture A is parameningeal with site. primary

diagnosis needle osteosarcoma Definitive of placed establishedby carefully biopsy. often is diagnosisof osteosarcoma. analysis immunohistochemical confirms osteoidand of The the presence imaging(MRI) before The tumor starting extent primary the chemotherapy. carefully magnetic delineated resonance with shouldbe of otherbones. tends and rarely to tometastasize most the commonly, Osteosarcoma lung, to Metastatic CT includes a chest evaluation and scan. a scan bone

studies material. The Ewing diagnosis sarcoma biopsy of diagnostic with of established molecular is and analysis cytogenetic immunohistochemical and the is sarcoma Ewing translocation, a characterized t(11;22), is chromosomal in tumors. seen 95% of by which specific mass. and MRI lesion extent performed associated to the any of tissue be should primary lesion the delineate soft of scan, marrow chest evaluation involves and CT aspiration Metastatic and biopsy. bone scan, a bone

and pain with osteogenic having thought Patients initially with children swelling be may often sarcoma to are sarcoma related Ewing osteomyelitis; as have trauma. to misdiagnosed diagnosis depends tumor. of the location for The the on differential rhabdomyosarcoma as mass a present painless benign often tumors. thought be initially the be to and and may trunk of extremities Tumors chronic cellulitis, misdiagnosed orbital may as infection may rhabdomyosarcoma and be of Periorbital confused and neck be head or sinuses. with rhabdomyosarcoma ears other The includes rhabdomyosarcoma other malignancies, abdominal tumor intra-abdominal diagnosis such for neuroblastoma. as Wilms or differential

picture. the both site currently is of that and rhabdomyosarcoma system a based staging histologic primary incorporates on Treatment result. of system involves local staging group a The disease based extent assessment tumor surgical on and the also are most rhabdomyosarcoma the cyclophosphamide, studies, the common agents intergroup used chemotherapy In actinomycin. and vincristine, ifosfamide, topotecan, and Doxorubicin, etoposide, rhabdomyosarcoma. irinotecan against also active are or disease have of after to Radiation had the primary surgery is tumor. have only initial who a who administered biopsy residual patients

treatment surgery chemotherapy by osteosarcoma adjuvant neoadjuvant current The followed involves of chemotherapy. and and etoposide. doxorubicin, against osteosarcoma ifosfamide, Agents effective are high-dose methotrexate, cisplatin, measures, given, chemotherapy local Ewing for treatment preoperative osteosarcoma; for that control by similar then is and chemotherapy. is further to sarcoma followed The Ewing is sensitive. osteosarcoma, to contrast In sarcoma radiation doxorubicin. includes vincristine, ifosfamide, etoposide, cyclophosphamide, Chemotherapy and

the complications effects chemotherapy, risk have to with children to of the the control tumor. potential late In addition local related of from sarcomas limitation or local sequelae is limb disease the loss If may with function. controlled the of include surgery, long-term of depend therapy. the at and radiation effects on radiation the given, dose accomplished extent of child If development control of is the local site the with radiation time the radiated, the of the therapy, late of may tissues consequences with so and development, occur Irradiating young significant interfere adverse children. in growth

important of metastatic children with prognostic For presence factor. at disease most sarcoma, absence presentation is all or the metastasis who Ewing rhabdomyosarcoma, sarcoma, poor osteosarcoma at The or remains distant from diagnosis. patients outlook have for prognosis Patients in and rhabdomyosarcomas excellent actinomycin. followed treated vincristine sites with favorable have surgery an localized with by when important preoperative necrosis degree and is In Ewing factor after patients another with tumor osteosarcoma of prognostic chemotherapy. sarcoma, the greater whose 80%. survival In rate than show necrosis degree preoperative general, an following event-free (>90%) chemotherapy high patients have a of tumor specimens have a prognosis. large Patients chemotherapy worse viable still presurgical tumor of amounts have much after who rate is 60% and approximately to cure sarcoma for osteosarcoma The with localized Ewing patients 70%. Patients of at approximately who 30% lung rate to metastasis have 35%. cure diagnosis a have to with bones Patients metastases other prognosis. poor a have

Mayo and Folpe PS, of musculoskeletal Proc 2012 et tumors Clin Arndt CA, Rose AL, 87:475–487, Common al: adolescence, childhood

Am toma, and Sandler 2012 cygeal Blanco teratoma, Davenport Surg North KP, Pediatric malignancies: Clin tumor, Wilms hepatoblastoma, neuroblas 92:745–767, rhabdomyosarcoma AD: sacrococ FC,

al. Gupta L, Pelayo-Katsanis Kopp et P, LM, adult 2012 Late of survivors cancer: physician, the Am : J Med primary care effects guide 125:636–641, pediatric a for in

MacDonald tumors, nervous Pediatr Central G: RJ, Packer Vezina system T,

North 55:121–145, Clin Am 2008

where Pui how and Evans CH, Mulligan Pediatric we going al: lymphoblastic there? acute we leuke mia: get et do are WE, CG, 120:1165–1174, Blood

Patel John 22 Mahan P. D. and Hiren

metabolites, filtration produce metabolic glomerular important and The preserve fluid tubular (renin, endocrine through mechanisms: and products (gluconeogenesis), erythropoietin). generate homeostasis balance, waste kidneys secretion, and through energy hormones electrolyte multiple D excrete vitamin maintain can (Table homeostasis, and a disturbing 161-1). growth of in clinical manifestations by Renal disorders, result and affect development variety renal may derive conditions systemic or Renal intrinsic disorders from children 161-2). diseases (Table represent in

maturation, production lung development. amniotic Fetal and contributes fluid urine volume, to somatic associated Congenital reduced amniotic or be (oligohydramnios) disorders renal with may volume (polyhydramnios). increased fluid amniotic fluid face and and result insufficient and Chapters Pulmonary from the 60). syndrome) (Potter extremities fetal 58 maldevelopment (see hypoplasia of may

vein can by thrombosis) detected tubular acute disease be renal for Risk hypoxia-ischemia, perinatal renal careful necrosis, a history. factors (e.g., family history A hereditary may identify renal detailed conditions. abnormal growth intake renal may and/or indicate feeding, dysfunction. fluid and/or underlying Poor output of in urinary Table disorders Other are and/or common manifestations 161-1. tract renal listed

and diseases children initially detected be visits. may Renal during in routine asymptomatic growth, occult 33). (HTN), or edema disease suggest (see may Abnormal hypertension Chapter renal dehydration, syndrome, disorders suggest features with syndromes (fetal Abnormal associated may syndrome). facial alcohol Down renal of cataracts) tags, renal defects. be deformities congenital can external Preauricular with (keratoconus, abnormalities associated iridocyclitis, ophthalmologic or aniridia, ear, the Abdominal examination masses. reveal may renal distention urinary obstruction. may tract or urine-concentrating a suggest defect Bladder

function filtration (proximal [DT]) tubule tubular glomerular Normal renal urine Henle, and intact of and loop on tubule depends results function formation (Fig. in [PT], distal that 161-1). out of the net fluid glomerular of Bowman’s The favors pressure capillaries space. into movement regulated Intraglomerular tone. particularly, by is and, afferent pressure arteriolar efferent flow is proximity glomerulus in of afferent/efferent and glomerular generated DT each released of to Renin located by the apparatus, in that and juxtaglomerular at perfusion. arterioles response base in and the nephron the cells to

PT conducts Fig. reabsorption (see isosmotic The filtered 161-1)to and of thirds reabsorb volume, sodium, two the chloride. acids, almost amino Glucose, completely phosphate potassium, are reabsorbed. and in the is 75% reabsorbed filtered bicarbonate PT. of Approximately filtered When spilled PT bicarbonate into the is threshold, exceeds urine. bicarbonate the as penicillins, such organic also drugs. other secretes acids, and The PT compounds response and calcium/phosphorus PT hormone produced vitamin concentrations. in cells parathyroid (calcitriol)—is The to by most intracellular potent analog—1,25(OH)2-cholecalciferol D

The (see the chloride Henle reabsorption of the site of in glomerulus loop of Fig. is 25% of filtered sodium 161-1).Active urinary chloride medullary hypertonic multiplier for required and countercurrent the interstitial the composes concentration. drives transport gradient

collecting tubule is and DT (CD). The convoluted of (DCT) the composed distal ducts contributes DCT dilution absorption. urine water is The impermeable and by chloride sodium active to leads site the The antidiuretic urine response, is of (vasopressin) concentration. hormone CD primary which to by sodium-hydrogen aldosterone. CD exchange Sodium-potassium and is regulated the in CD. final the the is of occurs the acidification in hydrogen which secretion, responsible urine, for also Active ion

ammonium (NH4+) production intraluminal and generation of hydrogen Renal excretion. urine ion facilitate ammonia anion easily measured calculation not the gap. Urinary of by be inferred can NH4+ urinary but is between consists anions of and measured gap The NH4+. cations largely the excretion with renal Problems production ammonia decrease acid or

tumor polycystic Age Table Renal Flank disease, Disease Common FINDING obstruction of (hydronephrosis), Manifestations 161-1 urinary NEONATE mass by Multicystic tract SIGNIFICANCE dysplasia,

necrosis, tract renal Hematuria urinary malformation, thrombosis trauma, Acute vein tubular/cortical

vascular and tubular acute necrosis, CHILD/ADOLESCENT Renal agenesis, oliguria obstruction, thrombosis Anuria

beets, Cola (hemolysis); Hemoglobinuria red-colored (infection, drugs); myoglobinuria urine (rhabdomyolysis); pigmenturia hematuria Henoch-Schönlein hypercalciuria, glomerulonephritis, purpura, urate, (porphyria, stones)

hematuria Gross hematuria, glomerulonephritis, benign nephrolithiasis, Infection, trauma, tumor

acute/chronic cardiac/liver failure, Nephrotic renal Edema syndrome, glomerulonephritis, disease

the coarctation aorta, dysplasia, artery failure, renal glomerulonephritis, Acute cysts, Hypertension obstruction, acute/chronic of renal stenosis

failure, and abuse obstruction, nephrogenic hypokalemia, diuretic dysplasia, mellitus, Diabetes Polyuria insipidus, central sickle psychogenic polyuric renal hypercalcemia, polydipsia, diabetes disease/trait,

Oliguria tubular acute Dehydration, interstitial hemolytic necrosis, glomerulonephritis, uremic acute syndrome nephritis,

body Dysfunctional tract Neurogenic bladder, vaginitis, voiding/urgency urinary hypercalciuria, foreign infection,

Cystinosis, kidney disease oxalosis Polycystic

fructose tract tumor hereditary Galactosemia, intolerance Renal/urinary

Extrarenal (leukemia, urinary gap. lymphoma) malignancy anion children. in normal 1 of weight is mEq/kg urinary gap body reasonable A approximately

children less preterm in concentrating a less mOsm/L). urinary (∼400 maximum (600 mOsm/L) capacity that in to is thanthat is newborn 800 (∼1200 mOsm/L), older in than newborn afull-term adults The which and lower,the can is glomerular filtration a 90 to because is to (GFR) mOsm/L),but, load the (75 urine rate adults capacity similar less excrete to in dilute water Neonates infants. 2 of age. to levels adult GFRreaches years 1 by Tubular sodium, infants reduced potassium, reabsorption in and phosphateand of adults. relative of hydrogen bicarbonate, to all are excretion 2 andat reabsorb mature years independently so for develops takes a to reabsorption abilityto efficiently, the mature. different ages, bicarbonate neonate it but functions rapidly sodium These interstitial bone helps bloodcell marrow lowoxygen cells Erythropoietin to in renal regulate production. medulla by is secreted the response in and red delivery

StudentConsult.com @ Available

to (due 161-2). secondary can disorders or as illnesses) primary (see Table be systemic Renal classified as HTN, or signs, diseases on examinations with or present with may mass, proteinuria). (abdominal flank obvious screening subtle Renal oredema, signs such hematuria detected kidney but children.Chronic with dysuria tract Fever, UTI associated urinary hematuria). often may (UTIs),whereas in growthand suggest may with poor frequency symptoms screening be infants disease feeding examinations first and vomiting is presenting older be and detected on (HTN, and infections irritability, inneonates urethral valves, posterior other abnormal disorders, bladder lesions. mayindicate stream urine An orobstructive

reabsorbed, is that accurately the but metabolized, tubules. most freely GFR secreted infusion substance filtered by the or is is a or by The of glomerulus measured in by not is concentration, is is to (mg/dL) serum The [U] as V used a concentration is GFR measure flow clearance, substance urine calculated (mL/min). rate follows: urine where of [P] and

individuals. surface is 1.73 different comparison allow of between to m2 GFR body area corrected convention, a By to sized 40 to uncorrected newborn, approximately to 4 mL/min/1.73 mL/min 5 m2. a of full-term GFR an In corrects 120 mL/min/1.73 increases m2). (100 during rapidly the first achieves values GFR adult to years when it of 2 life body proportionately, remains GFR increase and size stable. and that, GFR After

is age, GFR. to approximate mass, and with used creatinine reflects increases muscle Plasma PT, resulting also with Creatinine a with in secreted measurement function. less is decreased accurate kidneys by GFR immature or renal of Blood

osmolalities in vasa Major within different each and of 161-1 tubule levels transport interstitium, segment, Figure including kidney. nephron recta, representative functions the at Antidiuretic glucose; Glu, acid. hormone; OA, ADH, organic editors: of TE, Carpenter et F, al, Saunders.) Medicine, WB Cecil Andreoli (From CCJ, 1986, Plum Essentials Philadelphia, hydration, is urea nitrogen breakdown. function by is altered nutrition, by renal affected but greatly tissue catabolism, and can and to GFR correlation be creatinine between The used estimate GFR. formula The 0.413×Ht Schwartz following: is revised the

centimeters. in measured is Height Serum in is per milligram creatinine measured deciliter. most relatively habitus is body reasonably are function stable. mass formula and muscle renal when andwhen is This normal useful 75 bemost to 15 mL/min in formula accurate per range 1.73 This the of may m2. number. as reported than such rather Values 75 be aspecific should greater as than decreased. is ([UCr]V/[PCr]) GFR Creatinine overestimates renal when function but clearance estimatesGFR

screen is for a Urinalysis renal abnormalities. useful glucose, for color blood, dipstick macroscopic of In urinalysis leukocytes. presence and urine uses and the protein, a to addition turbidity, ketones, pH and urine or a may urine urine concentrated false-positive extremely false-negative Dilute delay with results in a for reading is or may result result occur test. if the there in protein; alkaline few (or of test the are myoglobin); there results sensitive exquisitely presence Dipsticks to are hemoglobin false-negative false-positive many but results. detected reaction, oxidase-peroxidase and leukocyte is esterase a via glucose reaction. are Glucose detected leukocytes a via time to nitrite if nitrite the test long with and urine. The contact reduce the have may bacteria detect bacteriuria nitrate urine voiding, frequent low False-negative obstruction, occur and with unable generate infection nitrite. results bacterial to tract urinary with count, bacteria prolonged Gross nitrite hematuria in result or contact may false-positive (uncircumcised a test. boys) to confirm pyuria used detect Microscopic hematuria is crystals. and casts urinalysis and and

spot Proteinuria protein/ defined spot urine >2.0 well unit-less (UPr/Cr) determination single urine excretion: approximates can nephrotic in further urine (normal m2/day children). very specimen.This correlates with urine a a 24-hour in <0.20; protein/creatinine 24-hour of by value be UPr/Cr range protein

determines and reliably differentiates of medulla. degree kidney dilation, cortex assesses and size, Ultrasound visualized. The bladder be also can and be venous blood assess and kidneys’ index. used to Pulsed the calculate arterial resistive studies can flow Doppler

involves filling and the the urethra. reflux of cystourethrogram vesicoureteral A repeated detect to evaluate voiding bladder to structure have and imaging resonance Computed pyelogram intravenous tomography and function. to mostly the kidney replaced evaluate magnetic define scars, renal and can function/excretion. size, studies Radionuclide renal

protein (<4 of of in are <0.2). Small or healthy mg/m2/hour children urine the found amounts UPr/Cr Nephrotic 40 defined as proteinuria than Pr/Cr >2.0. in greater protein is U children mg/m2/hour or levels mildly is elevated but nephrotic. to Proteinuria not moderately these between

asymptomatic all in recumbent persistent, in orthostatic position) but fixed (present positions). (present upright Proteinuria may and or not transient the or position the symptomatic, in or be be of filtration, Proteinuria barrier the of to may normal (increased impaired or tubular filtration) reabsorption, glomerular (disruptions protein proteins). or glomerular secretion

proteinuria characterized by (mainly (NS) Nephrotic (>250 albuminuria) (>2 hypercholesterolemia heavy edema. persistent g/dL); and albumin <3.0 is syndrome g/m2/24 (serum mg/dL); h);hypoproteinemia geography race, of and the affect NS. Age, incidence HLA-B12) HLA and increased (HLA-DR7, NS. types associated are with HLA-B8, an of Certain incidence the cellular proteins. that glomerular alterations basement and in due Increased barrier normal filtration is of restrict to serum membrane glomerular permeability The to especially massive resultant albumin. leads serum proteins, decreased proteinuria leading is diminished, and to pressure from fluid compartments contraction. plasma vascular Plasma interstitial oncotic shifts volume to glomerulosclerosis vasculitides and Henoch-Schönlein Wegener Primary Renal focal purpura, other syndrome

Membranoproliferative hepatitis infections Chronic B, C, malaria, glomerulonephritis (hepatitis human

heart filtration rate the failure, constrictive glomerular Congestive flow are blood diminished. not and usually sodium Edema reabsorption and blood effective volume tubular of circulating activation from in the reduction chloride secondary renin-angiotensin-aldosterone in system. results increase to triglycerides) lipoprotein stimulates elevated to lipids lipoprotein synthesis Hypoproteinemia and lipoproteins. leading and metabolism, (cholesterol, serum diminishes hepatic

be NS or may secondary primary 162-1). (Table biopsy, is A prior apparent primary nephrotic have syndrome. considered to with NS, renal idiopathic child to NS Minimal primary (MCNS) common change the children. most in is syndrome form of histologic nephrotic NS 7 less than More of children MCNS. have age of 80% years than with 7 a having have years chance old with 50% to MCNS. 16 of NS Children are more Males affected (2:1). than frequently females

accounts glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) segmental to 20% NS. Focal 10% of for children approximately primary with impressive like may MCNS with proteinuria. present less or It may from develop represent FSGS entity. MCNS separate or a increases glomerular factor in circulating some patients permeability found with A is that FSGS. failure. progress More FSGS than 35% with renal to children of

signs with is glomerular characterized disease. renal glomerulonephritis hypocomplementemia of by Membranoproliferative (MPGN) of 15% persistent, MPGN is represents renal NS, high over time. with a has likelihood of primary progression 5% typically children to and to failure

children than primary represents with nephropathy NS. 5% Membranous less of or adolescents on malaria, toxoplasmosis, It systemic specific and medications infections, children such in commonly syphilis, seen penicillamine). as with and B, is most hepatitis (gold,

NS life. of Congenital 2 during presents the months first types. two are There common component glomerular a common in Scandinavian persons descent in recessive mutation the to is of the in nephrin most filtration type Finnish autosomal due The is slit. protein disorder and an type abnormalities, group including mesangial infections. drugs second associated heterogeneous diffuse sclerosis The of with conditions a and or is is Prenatal by elevated levels onset supported alpha-fetoprotein. of maternal

NS in from Secondary Table causes result children in and many may listed are different 162-1.

StudentConsult.com Available @

most the common or of is presentation The sudden for with dependent NS. ascites onset edema children pitting pain and Anorexia, abdominal are often malaise, present. acute in significant to elevated necrosis pressure albumin occur tubular Blood 25% be may decline up and serum in children depletion. with of and on may significant presentation; hypotension sudden volume effusion) or distress and (pulmonary (intestinal be pleural edema) may present. edema respiratory Diarrhea hematuria, hypertension (HTN), and the Typical hypocomplementemia. is by insufficiency, MCNS absence gross characterized renal of

proteinuria that higher should of to random 3 1+ Proteinuria on be 2 further specimens suggests quantified. or persistent urine morning specimen A UPr/Cr on excludes proteinuria. >0.2 first orthostatic a >2.0 range UPr/Cr indicates nephrotic proteinuria.

demonstration includes to complement. testing In a routine of proteinuria, a addition and typically serum hypoalbuminemia, hypercholesterolemia, C3 a C3implies before and low a serum biopsy therapy. MCNS, A steroid renal isindicated other than lesion of trial response in not 25% cases steroids. MCNS up present of of be predict Microscopic to hematuria may butdoes to serum blood level, urea Additional basedon and features. are protein, and including electrolytes, creatinine,total laboratorytests, history performed examination physical albumin nitrogen, ultrasound useful. often is Renal is isnot suspected. performed when Biopsy MCNS

seen seizures, proteinuria and after vigorous dehydration, therapy. agonist can exercise, Transient be adrenergic fever, origin, few usually within resolves mild in always glomerular Proteinuria a and is days. (UPr/Cr<1), disease. indicate It does renal not

Postural defined while recumbent is proteinuria significant by but condition upright. protein excretion (orthostatic) proteinuria benign normal a when thin nature, with disease. adolescents not and in renal and is individuals, It associated in common more progressive tall, glomerular Many proteinuria continue orthostatic this process with children adulthood. into

low-molecular-weight is the necrosis, proteinuria polycystic and disease, kidney pyelonephritis, structural and tubular proteins acute agents. in is Tubular or urine characterized toxins disorders, of such preponderance chemotherapeutic with as suspected antibiotics tubular by renal wasting of proteinuria tubular tubular of with Fanconi glycosuria combination electrolyte termed The and evidence is syndrome.

urine, levels a HTN, blood renal of and cell red combination Glomerular and insufficiency). characterized small-molecular-weight of proteinuria is often variable of (hematuria, evidence the proteinuria, in casts, disease by proteins glomerular largeand syndrome, complex congenital capillary crescentic (MCNS, (poststreptococcal and deposition glomerulonephritis); of proteinuria lupus and nephritis); include uremic altered glomerular permeability glomerulonephritis capillary (hemolytic disruption glomerular capillary NS). glomerular Causes immune glomerular

renal age 80% than a steroid-responsive (chiefly primary of forms biopsy child MCNS), steroid a NS Because children years less 13 greater has have typical if of of therapy than features may NS. with initiated without be day multiple or 60 Typical for therapy MCNS h, mg/m2/24 split doses. once into a 2 is provided prednisone, mg/day), mg/kg/day maximum (60 children 90% do steroids 4 weeks. of within so respond Over to who Responders 12 for steroids receive should weeks. decreases the chance resistance is A the renal MCNS because nonresponders biopsy for is steroid underlying disease. that indicated necessitate Frequent therapy. immunosuppressive additional steroid or may resistance relapses

No for therapy been FSGS identified. has clearly effective respond 35% others to steroid therapy; may therapy. to immunosuppressive respond Approximately do steroid immunosuppressive but NS therapy with and may or improve with chronic reliably steroid remit membranous MPGN therapy. standard not glomerulonephritis of with Aggressive approach nephrectomy, to syndrome. only NS, is transplantation, medical early familial therapy this effective and the congenital dialysis,

is NS intake. by edema restricting treated salt of the edema require may use diuretics. Severe loop do 1 diuresis. albumin 25% not edema, (0.5 of When hours) parenteral 1.0 therapies intravenously administration in cautious g/kg severe over an with these intravenous results usually alleviate to 2 loop to diuretic thus, be administered albumin rapidly, and, restriction salt diuretics and is excreted continued. The must effusions require may Significant drainage. pleural treated blockers. Acute channel HTN with is or calcium β-blockers to responds Persistent angiotensin-converting HTN usually inhibitors. enzyme

An of is bacteremia increased immunoglobulins or (particularly and Escherichia complement. Streptococcus urinary incidence peritonitis coli, pneumoniae, due and infections, Klebsiella), to serious loss of particularly Side of patients. are effects relapsing most and common frequently steroid-dependent steroids in result diuretic or use. from diarrhea Hypovolemia may thromboembolism risk a of (TE). antithrombin, and state of coagulation a hypercoagulable The to factors, plasminogen may loss lead with of low-dose dipyridamole Lovenox, history a Warfarin, minimize in for or aspirin, may with clots or risk patients of high TE. the risk NS TE disease. promotes increased atherosclerotic Hyperlipidemia vascular

eventually Most children remission. into go NS with for heavy MCNS days. 80% proteinuria that 3 or more defined children NS Nearly relapse, with of as consecutive persists experience is proteinuria to a not considered infection (up Transient may relapse. MCNS with intercurrent in occur and 3 children with days) Steroid is effective therapy true relapse. typically for of little Steroid-responsive renal have chronic risk patients failure. may with but respond develop FSGS to initially steroids resistance. Patients later kidney Many 165). children Chapter with (see to end-stage progress failure FSGS of renal 30% undergo in Recurrence FSGS of occurs transplantation. children who

gross requires disease prompt serious A evaluation. with and a child hematuria have may more on per red freshly defined (RBCs) field centrifuged hematuria, as than and blood is often benign. 3 5 cells high-power to Microscopic voided urine, up asymptomatic hematuria in to healthy children. Isolated microscopic of is 4% found In most a cases finding. this is transient tubulointerstitial 163-1). may glomerular (Table Hematuria originate processes, disease, and disorders lower tract from urinary

the (GN). Immune-mediated mechanism inflammation is of glomerulonephritis Poststreptococcal of types but most form of occur. can common and acute IgA GN glomerulonephritis GN, many the is other is (PSGN) chronic nephropathy common GN, the most lower hematuria identifiable urinary common and kidney stones, infection tract The hypercalciuria. of urinary causes (UTI), include tract most

StudentConsult.com @ Available

dyes) myoglobinuria (hemoglobinuria Nonpathologic anemia, foods, crystals ingested in (urate from from Pathologic medications, hemolytic infants, rhabdomyolysis)

systemic IgA MPGN, Structural injury disease) Toxin-mediated membrane disorder diseases) syndrome, (Alport nephropathy, (HUS) Immunologic basement (GN—e.g., thin PSGN, injury

nephritis, tumor, Vascular trait/disease, syndrome) rupture, (sickle Inflammation (interstitial renal (cyst tract obstruction, urinary Structural Nutcracker cell Wilms trauma) pyelonephritis)

kidney cystitis, stone) urethritis) Hypercalciuria (cystitis, Inflammation Injury (trauma, hemorrhagic

hemolytic PSGN, poststreptococcal GN, glomerulonephritis; syndrome; uremic Glomerulonephritis; MPGN, HUS, glomerulonephritis. membranoproliferative

glomerular other (proteinuria, present or insufficiency). GN cardinal microscopic) commonly features renal (gross of along with acute hypertension, edema, hematuria Children with oliguria, injury with of boys. in age is common PSGN years 12 most to and frequently occurs children in 2 more Manifestations PSGN after are of days) to weeks to after streptococcal typical previously (average of develop 21 6 impetigo. 5 pharyngitis listed and infections and days 10 GN 4 acute as PSGN the can presents with postinfectious occur same manner and viral infections Acute other pathogens. following in and GN bacterial PSGN the child treated with of whether antibiotics was at can time develop regardless of the infection. must to as and Special severe attention seizures, to such blood encephalopathy. enough failure, to complications the be may pressure lead paid be hypertension heart because

opposed recurrent PSGN. concurrent IgA an as of of take gross presentation variable nephropathy respiratory GN, the microscopic as with hematuria, asymptomatic form acute days is upper and several hematuria later, or to The with infection more may lupus nephritis, GN with Children other Henoch-Schönlein hematuria disease. the nephritis, to secondary of and as systemic typical with systemic features such respective disorders vasculitis-associated will purpura present

and rapidly with more A GN but acute the of form insufficiency special is progresses typical progressive (RPGN) severely. that GN, of renal quickly features glomerulonephritis presents proliferation shows Renal biopsy crescents. glomerular with cell epithelial any may secondary of idiopathic RPGN or the types of to GN. known be the that RPGN renal prompt progression disease end-stage treatment. of crucial occurs to to without (ESRD) recognition Early prevent is

caused asymptomatic X-chromosome present and abnormal gross leading microscopic hematuria. in glomerular type typically is with or IV Alport either syndrome by an to membrane collagen may mutations basement (GBM) Males typically

Directed Urinalysis H&P to based Cause on confirm studies cause on and RBCs Physical evaluation e.g. apparent suspected History to Positive on confirmed Serum Renal RBCs H&P Urine Cause creatinine chemistries selected hematuria C3 protein Minimal culture microscopy hematuria count confirmed not microscopic Symptomatic blood RBCs for Negative and or complement in kidney Urine RBCs hematuria blood gross stone, cases Serum Rhabdomyolysis for ratio creatinine trauma, Hemolytic anemia ratio Isolated ultrasound blood UTI, Renal GN Urinalysis microscopic apparent Complete Urine calcium C4 albumin Urine to biopsy

dyes foods, crystals in infants Urate Medications,

relatives chemistries persistent: Renal rule ratio for if creatinine to sickle hematuria ultrasound Urine Test calcium to electrophoresis to out Tests consider Hgb hematuria first Serum degree cell

Figure algorithm for of red urine/hematuria. Suggested 163-1 evaluation history urinary UTI, infection. GN, H&P, red blood hemoglobin; Hgb, RBCs, and tract Glomerulonephritis; cells; physical;

during and adolescence hearing and sensorineural loss failure progressive renal adulthood. develop young usually more benign microscopic but hematuria. have typically least course Females at a have thinning (benign to the caused basement mutations familial Thin disease membrane is GBM. of leading hematuria) benign more a by noted is is The often autosomal in therefore hematuria first-degree and relatives. mutation dominant, often opposed typically progressive As membrane excellent to is prognosis. an has thin basement and disease syndrome, Alport usually not

The nonglomerular variable is presentation and etiology. of to related hematuria underlying of the more causes disorders and only to associated proteinuria, tubular usually may be glycosuria, and microscopic is polyuria. Hematuria with due typically with not hypertension These only renal more and develop severe disease. children insufficiency do have exercise. and be may tumor, hematuria Wilms Painless seen cell sickle trait/disease, with gross strenuous due cystic and with not bleeding pain Hematuria when Nutcracker or to associated may syndrome. may be lower severe trauma Gross more following urinary or hematuria injury. may tract signify renal is as symptoms urinary and UTI frequency. with such dysuria typical associated with abdominal be asymptomatic hematuria with or pain. may or associated Urolithiasis flank associated both microscopic or cause and dysuria tract be as such may urinary Hypercalciuria gross asymptomatic. with and may and urinary symptoms be frequency hematuria can

including patients hematuria along with with microscopic pressure) history and careful urinalysis, (including a physical blood identifyRBCs. examination have All to a should Glomerular lowerurinary presence brownish appearance more suggestive a microscopy.A by the urine dysmorphic is and dysmorphic ofRBC on a is RBCs urine that (teaor bright of more suggested casts urine or appearance withoutRBC is color of RBCs cola-colored) and/or hematuria in tract casts source. red the of may thesefindings. there be However overlap

A hematuria algorithm suggested is 163-1. evaluation Figure the given in of for microscopic Gross with hematuria findings associated laboratory evaluation. should hematuria additional have concerning and The low C3 and presence narrows of complement membranoproliferative nephritis. diagnosis lupus GN, PSGN, differential the to with isolated with hematuria microscopic Children may observed repeat urinalyses. be asymptomatic If hematuria evaluation additional persistent, appropriate. is be may the

is needed.Although streptococcal as dietary and involves and treating antihypertensive antibiotic supportive still PSGN prevent for streptococcal infection active with is agents warranted sodiumrestriction, PSGN, not the treatment Therapy diuretics, does infection. on otherforms corticosteroids therapy of cases, involving depend cause beused. for anti-inflammatory some the severity.In GN agents and immunosuppressive children and/or Therapies with may other underlying angiotensin-converting setting should inhibitors may enzyme with hyperperfusion of caution injury. glomerular acutekidney and reduce proteinuria used be but the in Treatment with

has outcome. usually a PSGN benign the 10 and proteinuria, quickly days). 5 gross to hematuria, In cases, (in decline typical edema years; no longterm months 95% recover hematuria even of with over children for persist may sequelae. Microscopic or completely

of have GN with and forms ESRD. IgA other a Children of to progression greater risk chronic nephropathy and is recovery in underlying renal variable chronic and RPGN the The and in GN related disorder for prognosis disease severity. to function, associated on decreased outcomes. heavy kidney hypertension, presence is with biopsy glomerular of poor persistent, severe proteinuria, The and lesions

microscopichematuria disease excellent renal membrane idiopathic or with basement thin isolated have typically Children prognosis. suspected asymptomatic an required renal and bloodpressure, progressive rule to forms disease. follow-up,including exclude urinalysis of proteinuria) Long-term yearly is out (to

an triad Hemolytic children. thrombocytopenia, characterized injury microangiopathic the and is injury is (HUS) cause syndrome anemia, by in acute hemolytic renal kidney and important of uremic of children years children. age less typically of can in 5 HUS occur in occurs older but than type illness The common associated most a is diarrheal (D+HUS). HUS of with prodromal outbreaks. coli water of many responsible verotoxin vegetables, Escherichia fruit, with commonly meat, is for (most E. (VT)-producing O157:H7) coli Contamination or such bacteria coli E. other well may by produced VT as as other Shigella. as be strains 15% enterocolitis variable HUS results severity hemorrhagic of to 5% and affected of in in children. VT causes

may prodrome a age. without of any (atypical diarrhea presenting occur HUS) at HUS severe more usually than clinical is D+HUS. that course of The malignancy, pregnancy. (Streptococcus complement HUS acquired immunodeficiency Atypical secondary regulation, genetic be lupus systemic erythematosus, and infection can in human medications, and to defects pneumonia, virus),

Available StudentConsult.com @

in with bloody Classic often 7 enterocolitis, followed stools, 10 and days weakness, by begins to D+HUS lethargy, with

helmet cells and cells, AST Anemia reticulocyte indirect schistocytes, of Increased Presence Decreased on Increased Increased count haptoglobin burr Thrombocytopenia smear blood LDH bilirubin peripheral Elevated

of on creatinine Presence casts urinalysis hematuria, Elevated pyuria, proteinuria,

shiga-toxin Leukocytosis E. stool Positive coli O157:H7 Elevated stool culture for amylase/lipase test for Positive

AST, LDH, dehydrogenase. Aspartate lactate aminotransferase;

oliguria/anuria. and reveals pallor, irritability, examination petechiae. Physical volume children present; have overload. often Dehydration is however some may due overload be renal injury. and/or Hypertension to volume 25% seizures, of involvement, in up Central system occurs nervous cases. (CNS) including to colonic involvement potential Other includes cardiac pancreatitis, perforation. dysfunction, organ and

of purpura microangiopathic evidence diarrheal without thrombocytopenic a similar mayhave syndrome, (TTP). Children identified a prodrome asthrombotic butmay TTP typically CNS disease. significant renal also Childrenwith predominant have symptoms have Recurrent common. are episodes some cases. CNS also Because difficult HUS be to involvement seen can HUS, in from in TTP distinguish is identified factor-cleaving childrenaffected a von have Deficiencies TTP. been in ADAMTS13, of Willebrand protease, with

164-1. Common are laboratory listed Table HUS in findings in smear hemolysis. blood Peripheral of reveals evidence microangiopathic negative. Coombs is test time diagnosed. of E. may and diarrhea by is HUS The toxin-producing resolved coli have the presence

of supportive hypertension, managing volume renal complications indicated. repletion, dialysis and Therapy and of HUS control includes is insufficiency, including for when transfusions provided are Red needed. cell as blood they transfusions are indicated should the by procedure. in be because only add hemorrhage active and to avoided or thrombotic Platelet may of anticipation a microangiopathy developing of agents the Antibiotics may and risk HUS. antidiarrheal increase lessen the of the during diarrheal may Early phase hydration insufficiency. renal severity of function, renal survive have children with acute D+HUS normal (>95%) long-term may phase although and the Most evidence some morbidity. recover

refers an glomerular to rate function. renal in (GFR) termed Acute kidney decrease failure, acute formerly and (AKI), filtration injury tubular abrupt excretion to lead fluid (e.g., products homeostasis. may of disturbance and This a waste urea) decreased and in electrolyte of are crucial. management Early and recognition AKI

children) difficult neonates to be (<1 may which recognize. infants, in mL/kg/h or and more mL/kg/h <0.5 oliguric AKI nonoliguric, in is or significant. uremia AKI is output in become electrolyte disturbances urine normal and polyuric, nonoliguric Although may postrenal (renal major hypoperfusion), (urinary of obstruction) categories (Table renal and or divided The into may 165-1). causes prerenal injury), glomerular, tract (tubular, vascular intrinsic be AKI many cause AKI is cases multifactorial. of the In

may is azotemia most but be commonly dehydration glomerular of other mechanisms to to Prerenal secondary due hypoperfusion. injury the intrinsic common of in encompasses children. Tubular causes AKI most injury (interstitial occur necrosis), (sepsis),nephrotoxic nephritis). inflammation fromhypoxia-ischemia (medications, agents Tubular myoglobin) tubular contrast, may (acute infection and to AKI obstruction. due urinary Postrenal tract functional may structural be either or

StudentConsult.com Available @

(Table classification allow child AKI studies proper usually History, of basic physical 1652). the with and examination, Prerenal and azotemia oliguria. characterized by factors precipitating is associated may severity injury. output low, normal, but with precipitating of high, tubular depending Intrinsic on be urine is the injury the or factors hematuria, disorders oliguria. edema, Glomerular with may and present and hypertension, vascular low be and may masses a normal distended AKI may on or be associated or with with postrenal flank bladder The output urine examination. severity on illness, signs and dehydration overload. Depending of or with AKI underlying can the cause be associated of volume

retention renal AKI.In (UA) urinalysis be in of gravity specific A hypoperfusion. thesetting should a reflecting the in all with high water renal with azotemia, appropriate prerenal children obtained of is UA unremarkable However are neonates able not

obstruction Ureterocele spinal bladder Neurogenic valves) urethral Ureteral compressing outlet (stricture, injury) Extrinsic cord bladder tumor (myelomeningocele, Urethral posterior obstruction

Infection necrosis as uremic myoglobin) Interstitial to malignant syndrome) Acute hemolytic injury arterial concentrate vasculitis, (primary well. thrombosis, glomerulonephritis, (sepsis) (renal (medications, emboli, Nephrotoxins urine vein tubular Vascular nephritis Glomerular hypertension) contrast, or UA specific mild proteinuria gravity hematuria andpostrenal of with may 1.015 a AKI, injury and/or less. With tubular intrinsic show the the to hematuria vascular glomerularand injury, severe. proteinuriais and amount moderate of usually With urine prerenal sodium may oliguric Table In the acute determining and fractional necrosis excretionof azotemia osmolality (see differentiationbetween beaided tubular by states, 165-2). and Table often 165-2). Renal (see in the ultrasound category determining helpful is AKI select indicated is cases Renal in only. biopsy

metabolic acidosis, electrolyte with Common hypocalcemia, and seen AKI includehyperkalemia, abnormalities hyperphosphatemia. results the frequently,depending be initial monitored These and labs may to on course. clinical need as should count is obtained blood be complete anemia A frequentlyobserved. may Other be as studies clinically obtained indicated.

cases can In the some be treated. disorder underlying in urinary volume stopping offending Examples dehydration, an medication, include repletion and obstruction. tract nephrotoxic relieving nephrotoxic medications). efforts In avoiding and perfusion (e.g., limit cases all additional to should made ensuring renal adequate injury renal be appropriate. Medication as renal should function adjusted for dosages be decreased

on volume output. therapy urine and Fluid the status depends of administration intravenous saline. expanded should volume intravascular be by is If hypovolemia present, hypervolemia 2 restriction may and If be attempted. to of mg/kg present, fluid furosemide is 1 fluid should the meet then relatively the total total adjusted be input If patient to the euvolemic, is

high Low, Low Low output or Urine normal normal, or

casts RBCs, Variable WBCs, protein, Urinalysis Normal

>50 >40 >40 may <20–30 <15 be (mEq/L) Urine Na+ Variable,

be >2.5 <2.5 Variable, >2 >2 <1 may FENa* (%)

∼300 (mOsm/L) be Urine ∼300 Variable, osmolality >350 may >500

differentiation Renal corticomedullary echogenicity, Normal Hydronephrosis Increased decreased ultrasound

cells. blood FENa, RBCs, cells; white red blood WBCs, sodium; of excretion Fractional creatinine)] sodium/plasma (%) 100. (urine creatinine/plasma ÷ *FENa sodium) × [(urine =

output. output, higher depending be the may normal, than or lower on which urine serial of weight. intake Assessment with of measurements output augmented and be body should

treatment management A large of itscomplications. of AKI part involves disorders Electrolyte treated as are appropriate. and be increase medications intake Potassium potassiumshould restricted. that are IV of risk while measures initiated to (diuretics, supplementation beta-agonists, reserved oral exchange calcium Intravenous sodium-potassium insulin/dextrose) dialysis).Preferred lower calcitriol, potassium resins, of supplementation intocells will involves treatment and hypocalcemia and (bicarbonate, hastenremoval is arrhythmia shift severecases. for and may treated Hypertension diuretics, vasodilators. and calcium channel be with blockers, in enzyme(ACE) usually are AKI. inhibitors of Angiotensin-converting the setting avoided

listed in Major 165-3. are dialysis indications Table acute for initiating renalreplacement before may therapy therapy. Medical be attempted level which for uremia. nitrogen There urea orcreatinine blood is set is no dialysis started at children in continuous Renal options include therapy. peritoneal dialysis,hemodialysis, renal replacement replacement and an on Themode is individual used basis. chosen

from depends and severity, AKI on specific the etiology, course. patient’s of Recovery availability of the other treatments, aspects usually recovers the AKI oliguric outcome more with AKI variable. Nonoliguric well, is whereas good chronic a renal future complications, for the with history seemingly place of AKI recovery, disease may risk including Even (CKD). increased kidney child at

the are tract present of the of most and Congenital anomalies that common between of kidney birth causes age. 10 and urinary years (CAKUT) CKD incident glomerulonephritis focal 10 After acquired diseases, are of more CKD. age as segmental (GN), glomerulosclerosis such and common causes renal underlying of severity cause of and related the disease is to CKD. to The (ESRD) risk end-stage progression function deteriorate are and the kidneys not to able adapt renal During to increased damaged puberty, may grow demands. if appropriate monitoring staged (Table CKD evaluation to is facilitate 165-4). and (see children The can estimated 161). the formula be Chapter using Schwartz in GFR CKD do 3 of least until complications manifest at CKD. Most stage not more In the numerous complications stage severe. become CKD, 4 and stage with (ESRD) dialysis transplantation. either CKD are 5 or typically renal Children with treated

with related diagnosis of CKD. may to presentation clinical a underlying the The both of CKD complications be child and polydipsia, CAKUT child and with A infections. tract have recurrent may polyuria, urinary with hypertension. glomerular disease proteinuria, hematuria, edema, may A have child and children listed Common are CKD 165-5. complications in of in Table these complications are etiology. in of Most multifactorial poor renal and to hormone. osteodystrophy hormonal nutrition, failure example, include resistance (ROD), growth with For metabolic acidosis, factors growth associated abnormalities, a results and primarily erythropoietin produce deficiency. to iron adequate from failure Anemia the due hyperparathyroidism ROD renal as excretion). hypocalcemia, D (from hyperphosphatemia in and result usually secondary is decreased to a diminished production of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin kidney, eventually severe, rickets ROD bone and may prolonged lead to If and/or deformities. and Hypertension

60–89 of Table STAGE 1.73 2 Severe reduction damage of of of the Disease mild renal damage (or 30–59 (ml/min/ Minimal GFR Kidney with 3 Moderate >90 4 165-4 m2)* DESCRIPTION Classification Stages kidney End-stage reduction 5 GFR <15 disease reduction Chronic Kidney GFR dialysis) GFR 15–29 of

Kidney Foundation Kidney Quality From National Disease Outcomes Initiative. GFR, filtration Glomerular rate. of age and for 2 children years ranges apply *GFR older.

1. GH recombinant osteodystrophy, 2. acidosis, growth Poor treat renal caloric treat Increased intake, Erythropoietin, supplementation iron Anemia 3.

secondary Renal phosphate phosphorous supplementation, supplementation, hyperparathyroidism dietary osteodystrophy/ 4. D binders 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin calcium restriction,

Cardiovascular 4a. 4b. Antihypertensive Hypertension medications control Volume hypertrophy 5. Left ventricular

furosemide, Electrolyte abnormalities K diet, 5a. Low sodium polystyrene Hyperkalemia sulfonate 5b. Hyponatremia supplementation 5c. Sodium Alkali acidosis replacement Metabolic

growth Chronic kidney hormone; GH, K, disease; potassium. CKD,

ventricular left hypertrophy are commonly cardiovascular seen complications. and feedback Delayed gonadotropin altered results patterns. secretion from puberty impaired and may also Learning performance school in be CKD.

of requires children team with The of advanced pediatric a management practitioners. multidisciplinary CKD requires and dietary if nutrition feedings. be this should provided supplements tube even Adequate a infants be may In low-solute formula indicated. a restriction child fluid not oliguric, is Unless necessary. is salt wasting. supplemental sodium due to urine Many children CAKUT require with become or and to sodium GN children may with retain if tend Conversely edematous given excess salt. hypertensive Common in CKD for complications are other given treatment Table considerations 165-5.

can function slow preserve CKD. progression taken kidney to the of be Measures down or receptor angiotensin and Hypertension treated or be can blockers. inhibitors proteinuria with ACE function should be when medications and nephrotoxic reduced kidney should adjustment as Potentially feasible, made for avoided appropriate. medication be in CKD. not is restricted pediatric intake Protein typically

donors living optimal available. ESRD renal renal are for transplantation.Both transplantation, be The deceased is living can used of when preferred treatment but and donors not renal a child effective renal possible. awaiting dialysis is for or Maintenance is transplantation for whom transplantation given Indications chronic Table are for dialysis in 165-3. at home the dialysis is by family. Peritoneal done Hemodialysis a at a done times week dialysis is three facility. typically

mild needto but Children monitored well of kidney 1 loss function. with CKD and do (stages progressive may be 2) for 3 toESRD CKD stages vary. timing point, progressing of high and although likelihood can a Childrenwith some at the have 4 increased do Children take generally and side have malignancies. complications, for variety well a nephrotoxicity, withkidney immunosuppressive but with associated to risk certain medications transplants effects,including infections, cardiovascular of but time severalyears. over can for last Unfortunatelymost kidneys transplanted fail and especially dialysis. on highest with spent Children on maintenance mortality, have time longer dialysis the morbidity goal kidney is to receive a primary transplant. Thus, their

blood for is least height pressure hypertension percentile gender, (BP) children, the as In than 95th defined different at and on occasions. age, (HTN) greater three of size, (e.g., pain, the The measurement context important. cuff BP anxiety) is staging HTN Table given is The of 166-1. in organ is Hypertensive with BP damage failure). in target associated heart defined emergency severe elevation (encephalopathy, as

(Table or 166-2) HTN Pediatric has (essential) primary secondary. many either causes are that Essential of cause in the common is most HTN HTN adolescents. children more are Obese HTN. likelyto essential develop younger more severely elevated age should and suspectedwith Secondary BP. HTN be the Renal children. of secondary is common disease cause most HTN in

hypertension use Hg) Prehypertension is % 5 120/80 (99th StudentConsult.com + + hypertension the 1 limit. to 95th *90th >120/80, as Available >99th <90th Hg 95th 90th mm *If @ mm Stage lower 2 to Stage 5

Glomerulonephritis Congenital uropathy) tubular (Wilms disease) tumor, necrosis) acute Acquired kidney (renal scarring, anomalies dysplasia, (renal polycystic Structural disorders obstructive injury

tumors Hypercortisolism (pheochromocytoma, Hyperthyroidism syndrome) (Cushing neuroblastoma) Catecholamine-secreting Hyperaldosteronism

Dysautonomia pressure pain) intracranial anxiety, Increased activity (stress, Increased sympathetic

Vasculitis artery (from Coarctation Renal thrombosis of vein aorta stenosis catheter) artery umbilical the Renal artery Renal embolism

Obstructive sleep illicit Medications, apnea drugs

Most HTN no symptoms. have children with severe vision, failure, include and with and flame seizures), retinal symptoms retinopathy spots wool on exam). (headache, vomiting, cotton associated and stroke, (blurred Signs heart HTN hemorrhage, encephalopathy dietary history or weight catheter); salt stroke, and heart of or important. Neonatal history family of use umbilical HTN, are (low history birth caffeine, drugs) or (excessive artery disease; obesity, (coarctation cafe-au-lait leg with and renal stenosis); Wilms spots mass (pheochromocytoma); (neurofibromatosis femoral flushing artery truncal hump suggest specific and buffalo and abdominal pulse (hydronephrosis, pressure syndrome). diaphoresis that weak aorta); Additional of bruit; tumor); acne, flank (Cushing associated findings and striae, include may causes diminished tachycardia may present. disease underlying kidney be of Signs

of physical In with examination, history the addition the includes HTN children to following: evaluation 1. confirmed and

blood nitrogen, electrolytes, urea etiologic ultrasound) assessment creatinine, Baseline 2. renal (urinalysis, and

plasma on clinical based studies vascular Focused (e.g., metanephrines, suspicion thyroid imaging) 3. studies,

4.

cardiovascular of glucose, risk factors uric Assessment fasting acid) other (lipids,

without disease. or Therapeutic for be (diet, damage should lifestyle initiated target 1 systemic organ asymptomatic changes exercise) stage HTN which stage started changes. Medication lifestyle or be fails respond stage HTN, and 2 to to for 1 symptomatic should HTN enzyme first-line blockers Calcium or options in inhibitors frequently channel most the chosen are angiotensin-converting children. are agents. diuretics Angiotensin also first-line blockers, or β-blockers, antihypertensive recommended receptor as be More agent may than needed. one labetalol, parenteral requires may nicardipine, or sodium treatment with antihypertensive prompt require nitroprusside. and emergency esmolol, hospitalization Hypertensive

BP the control. underlying Prognosis on and etiology depends in present associated HTN, usually adolescents, morbidity is when presentation. with Essential at not central in increase stage even for risk renal cardiovascular, system, however, untreated, HTN 1 morbidity adults. Left asymptomatic nervous may and

or to of reflux ureter the is the from the up flow up (VUR) retrograde kidney. bladder to the Vesicoureteral urine even Most of (UV) incompetence childhood. that VUR from congenital a matures junction, early structure through results the ureterovesical significant structural children, UV In of abnormalities never resolve. exist minority that a with a familial; child 40% VUR VUR of 30% to of VUR. also siblings have may be anomalies. secondary bladder to VUR may distal be or urinary tract obstruction also other

ureter to likelihood incomplete bladder and 114). infection to the pressure voiding emptying renal of during the increased hydrodynamic exposes Chapter kidney and due increases (see of the VUR scarring. to progression of Reflux development refers renal and nephropathy urinary infection This a (UTI) or obstruction. if associated VUR is particular is tract risk with a recurrent in with Although a incidence scarring, single children in may result is UTIs. renal the higher UTI is dysplasia with congenital Renal associated VUR. of of newborns identified now before UTI are Because and strategies. with opportunities creating use ultrasonography, occurred, prevention has VUR a intervention maternal-fetal of number increasing early for associated the Duplication without system. of ureters, an upper with ureterocele, collecting or may obstruct the duplicated a pole ureter Often the lower the draining unit VUR. has of renal accompanied by 50% of Neurogenic in children. VUR bladder affected up to is VUR of (cystitis) from the the or intravesicular obstructed may increased be outlet to bladder obstruction. inflammation bladder acquired bladder also by when is due pressure

radiologic UTI Chapter during identified most evaluation a VUR (see following is often 114). likely younger present. is patient the the The with VUR UTI, more with differentiate No with children clinical signs reliably and VUR. UTI without

UTI imaging performing of wait can no the An test. treatment weeks before be with performed days or study to after need initiation urinary the (RUS) is in best study Renal to the children. evaluate tract ultrasound radionuclide and/or to performed A (NCG) cystourethrogram abnormalities (VCUG) voiding cystogram or urethral/bladder is VUR. detect for if of obstructive clinical of atypical a guidelines 2 Pediatrics an hydronephrosis, or VCUG age Academy in other months American RUS with either other grade between VUR findings a and first recommend high complex or reveals Recent or scarring, circumstances. 24 uropathy infants of and UTI suggestive a of be is if there performed a recurrence febrile UTI. also should VCUG mild children more provides may VUR and the NCG radiation. additional the anatomic less involves Although with VCUG detail, detect been describe reflux (Fig. has international to used system grading An in incidence (65%). patients (15%) renal grade with and V scarring reflux low-grade 167-1).The is VUR low with of increases or IV I or resolve scanning to Grade without renal 50% grade less scars. or VUR surgical renal identifies II Nuclear intervention, resolves likely IV but is V. in best than VUR

VUR. antibiotic ornitrofurantoin) indicated long-term moderate Controversy remains whether (trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole mild to is therapy prophylactic about in this It inchildren may high-grade be population recurrent and/or useful in VUR symptomatic with isoptional particularly and

classification 167-1 International of Figure reflux. vesicoureteral

grade II: and Grade ureter, mild dilation the dilation; fornices; minimal calyces with a pelvis moderate calyces III: pelvis, blunting of the grade nondilated the of renal to without and grade into ureter; into I:

V: ureteral the impressions; dilation ureteral of loss calyces; moderate and tortuosity and pelvis of gross ureter, pelvis, calyces; of IV: the papillary and dilation grade tortuosity. and A, (From 2007, al: L, Kavoussi Novick A, et Philadelphia, Saunders.) Urology, Campbell-Walsh ed 9, Wein

UTI. Pivotal under are way. studies hypertension reflux kidney nephropathy chronic of disease(CKD). are Complications and CKD as is interstitial and proteinuria mild development well the focal of segmental as by scarring. heralded andinvolves typically glomerulosclerosis appears of invasive complex very tobe for copolymer development surgical Indications of tomoderate (Deflux correction have and are a successful procedure), been acid VUR. which mild repair dextranomer/hyaluronic of by controversial mademore minimally the VUR

the Anomalies of (UT) up to urinary ofinfants. occur 4% tract in occurs in 4000 1 births. agenesis Bilateral renal in is and of agenesis Renal clubfoot, hypoplasia). syndrome component Potter (flatfacies, pulmonary a renal agenesis UT syndrome.Unilateral common Any in little therefore, African and amniotic births can in Americans. mothers infants 3000 in is results lead fluid that 1 disorder intrauterine in to fetal diabetic little Potter and occurs of and, more urine minimallyreduced or accompanied normal is renal It by function. renal and renal vesicoureteral ear, and thegenital dysplasia, Turner fistula, anal skeletal also component VACTERL or syndrome, of agenesis syndrome, abnormalities, atresia, tract, condition system, can be other be defects). tracheoesophageal This Poland (VUR) found (vertebral association and anomalies agenesis a cardiac with reflux system.Unilateral the can cardiovascular of abnormalities, andlimb

hypoplasia/dysplasia that or both. are kidneys to Renal small, malformed, congenitally refers Over kidney number. children to progress time because chronic affected of (CKD) disease many nephron reduced and unable optimize water, fully and to to often kidneys growth. children are and The salt sodium these supplementation reabsorb require water

development in is to dysplasia 1 renal Multicystic births. 4000 (MCD) abnormalnephron in occurs due that Thereis in renal bilateral the functioning no or minimal affected tissue disease is kidney; lethal. the association contralateral an kidney. There withVUR is in years the (HTN) hypertension over MCD associated often with few urinary first (UTI). spontaneouslyinvolutes is rarely of life and tractinfection recurrent or

(PKDs) genetic Polycystic other of diseases are a the affecting kidneys kidney tissues. diseases and group dominant) other recessive PKD associated (autosomal with be autosomal primary or may or syndromes. in occurs due in PKD in fibrocystin. recessive 10,000 to defects Autosomal to and is genetic children 40,000 1 defects 1 common occurs 1 disease. kidney dominant in making Autosomal it polycystin to most individuals, in or the due in 2, 1000 PKD, inherited there clinically, conditions overlap is differ Although morphologically. two some the Both in or appear in may children. older infancy cysts tuberous disorders, also von sclerosis, in Bardet-Biedl Renal other are such observed and inherited syndrome. Hippel–Lindau as syndrome,

at any can obstruction tract system genitourinary Urinary 168-1). the occur anatomiclevel of (Table obstruction results in in severe dysplasia. renal gestation, Early system, results after the later life or parenchymal ureter alterations. with collecting in of in dilation subsequentrenal and Ureteralobstruction birth fetal often infections, An which may susceptible is UT obstructed injury. worsen renal to most cause are valves urethral bladder of Posterior common the

trauma/ tumor stenosis,* Congenital Congenital, Infundibula/pelvis infection, calculi, calculi, hemorrhage, Ureteropelvic hemorrhage junction trauma/

ureterocele, Ureter ureter, inflammatory Obstructive ectopic disease calculi,* megaureter,* bowel

granulomatous tumor retroperitoneal Retroperitoneal chronic fibrosis, (lymphoma), disease

tumor dysfunction,* diverticula, Neurogenic ectopic ureter (rhabdomyosarcoma), Bladder

ectopic strictures, diverticula, ureter, common. Posterior atresia, valves,* Urethra body, *Relatively priapism foreign phimosis,*

50,000 poor from boys.Parents children.The a valves outlet urethral the note in affected in attach the 1 may verumontanum urine sail-shaped wall. arise in stream obstruction that and present membranes are in males, to may muscle dilated, present, and hypertrophied develops. be VUR becomes prostaticurethra The detrusor variesin severity. dilation Renal be in resulting with obstruction hypoplasia. lethal Some present.Severe oligohydramnios, renal associated of dysplasia degree is pulmonary may often period. ascites produces ascites, is the common Intrauterinerupture which of in the renal urinary newborn most the cause of pelvis

@ Available StudentConsult.com

agenesis in lung and Bilateral results renal insufficient syndrome. Potter development pneumothoraces hypoplasia is severe, distress occur, fatal. severe and Respiratory is can pulmonary Unilateral be undergoes growth kidney and provides because the agenesis asymptomatic nonaffected compensatory normal renal renal may function.

recessive PKD Autosomal by enlargement. bilateral characterized is renal marked over fibrosis tubular progress atrophy Interstitial time. and usually in occurs failure childhood. early Kidney to is lead HTN. present Hepatic fibrosis may and portal dysgenesis occur. Bile and duct ectasia biliary and/or hepatomegaly, display Many masses, flank pneumothorax, infants proteinuria, hematuria. affected

or adulthood typically in middle Autosomal may infancy in dominant but PKD presents present childhood. older but of show to with large picture clinical PKD, may Infants to similar have cysts over similar autosomal developing a adults, isolated pattern a children time. recessive that along the occur unit. anywhere nephron defect The may pancreatic, ovarian develop. present, often cysts also cysts splenic, and Hepatic are can and and on pressure, may of Cerebral hemorrhage. size, aneurysms blood develop, risk the hemorrhage family of intracranial and depends history

ultrasound early may flank but mass during or obstruction usually UT prenatal be discovered is silent with or in UTI childhood. abdominal mass renal the junction (most most of obstruction). newborn, type a ureteropelvic is commonly common In

testsfor UT of Renal diagnosis a standard radionuclide (RUS) are diuretic obstruction. the ultrasound administered) and with renography(usually renal cysts, identificationof UT and agenesis, allows dilation. RUS dysplasia, hypoplasia, suggested result Obstruction may or neurogenicbladder. UT a hypoplasia, but ureteral from mayalso VUR, be dilated apart also A is (VCUG) of evaluation. the cystourethrogram voiding Many prenatal ultrasound. boys urethralvalves identified posterior are with by diagnosis Postnatally are damage renal the established RUSand of by extent VCUG. and

often sodium require renal to children due bilateral with dysplasia additional Infants and wasting. water and recurrent of unless the indicated kidney severe rarely MCD UTI With removal occurs. HTN surgical is or

maintenance of of can renal function. prolong Treatment HTN therapy Chapter and of can improve growth 165) (see General CKD development.

obstruction often or drainage surgical UT requires correction. consists ablation or not if Treatment of primary is (usually urethral valve possible. via diversion either of ablation posterior valve vesicostomy) happens, is when are surgical this obstructed; ureters frequently intervention Ectopic required.

emptying. bladder are prone neurogenic impairment with urine renal to poor from and Children UTI Clean a complications. to is catheterization or help these used minimize urinary diversion intermittent

are tract Urinary or nephrolithiasis urolithiasis. called calculi an recurrent a and serve neurogenic metabolic urinarytract bladder (UTIs), or seen obstructive predisposition. nidus), can intestinal result be infections as or stones bladder underlying bladder augmentation.Renal surgery(sutures from Primary with abnormalities can stones bladder symptomatic ureterovesical idiopathic stones children societies,most junction).Metabolic or hypercalciuria(IHC), cystinuria, urinary junction hyperoxaluria, become and tract the In with hypercalcemic or hypercalciuria, if disorders, renal the in (>90%) the acid industrialized distal uric primaryhyperparathyroidism. (UT)and ureteropelvic causes (commonlyat in lodged passage include familial tubularacidosis, arise Some concomitant predisposition. abnormalitiesand a stones with UT metabolic have children

urine the radiating pain a intermittent the severe of is to renal of lower Acute cause groin. flow colic, abdomen in often flank sharp or the obstruction Vomiting, are characteristic. to inability and pain relieve changes with distress, position not younger symptoms fussiness the may may be vomiting and symptoms. children, apparent; be In only classic gross rapidly passage typically with stone Hematuria gravel may microscopic clears and material. or of or be

kidney may identify UT in ultrasound stones. the can miss kidney but easily stones Renal but can particularly CT, the by helical (CT), identify throughout tomography stones material. can or intravenous be stones a UT, oral contrast obscured Computed be for sent obtained analysis. and can when stone facilitated diagnosis is material Etiologic metabolic are characterize available electrolyte analysis. is determinations, or important a when valuable child, urine studies stone 24-hour even for to are and typical for mineral Spot for obtained and predisposition underlying any the on diet a

calculi of hydration urinary and consists of Acute treatment analgesia. predisposinganatomic twice any of require as treatment correction all rates.Infection-related maintenance metabolic abnormality. stones fluid types oftenremoval of the vigorous Chronic for and of of treatment stonesinvolves usually infection well as stone intake, with is normal Specific low treatments; IHC, oxalate intake sodium prescribed. low and conditions metabolic require intake calcium for specific thiazides with are IHC,potassium or to children required citrate stonerecurrence. minimize some For surgery may berequired Lithotripsy with stones. by infected, pediatric a obstructing or urologist for large, children or

micturition bladder age todelay are in due children in pathways. of preschool maturation and frequent difficulties Voiding and coordination Normal andautonomic innervating nerves and bladder/urinary and structural system. UT the units, continence pathways, rely maturation, central spinal system nervoussystem, the nervous integrity,neurologic autonomic somatic sphincter, on cord the micturition including between is before usually continence Daytime continence. achieved nighttime are night, of 4 and Mostchildren by day age. years dry, to 5 of is during sleep. urine Nocturnalenuresis involuntary the loss never primary (usually of had enuresis span continence. >3months) nighttime a prolonged have Childrenwith primary resolution 15% year. to with Up enuresis per of have 5-year-oldchildren 10% spontaneous if two in parent, if years at Boys than affected of girls with families 70% are 6 one parents). age (40% affected affected more increasedincidence an after uncover generally of enuresis of Secondary to involvesloss control extended the evaluation drynessand requires period nighttime cause.

Manifestations Decision-Making Clinical @ Available StudentConsult.com Algorithm

fre- voiding quency, (DV) may dysuria, or manifest abdominal UTI. recurrent hesitancy, urgency, pain, as lower Dysfunctional incontinence, vary over encephalitis), Symptoms neurologic and/or obvious problems behavioral be injury, cord time associatedwith constipation, and (spinal problems. may changes symptomsmay UTI orschool or on in vary, family depending DV recent life/stressors. with psychologically children DV normal. of anatomically, The majority are neurologically, and

years of may Evaluation any age, until in age. normal isolatedurinary notusually otherwise 5 child is evaluated DV be but incontinence an performed for at exclude urineculture urinalysis infection be disease. occult and and renal should done A to incontinence structural daytime to undergorenal/bladder exclude should with abnormalities. Children ultrasound typically is of for evaluation reserved Urodynamic bladder known a or childrenwith neurogenic suspicion neurologicetiology.

antibiotics prophylactic UTI, useful. For with recurrent be may children sensory are medications voiding bladder hyperactivity Timed treat defects. used and and to anticholinergic More catheterization. include and complicated treatment biofeedback, regimens intermittent α-blockers, for greater provides in used affected alarm children. and than 70% be the effective safe resolution of medical also enuresis, therapy bed simple anticholinergics, with primary For of the may with selected children children; problem wetting or imipramine, DDAVP

Hypospadias in approximately 500 newborn occurs 1 in infants. the this condition over its groove normal urethral completely the and to folds fail leaving located urethral fuse urethral ventrally meatus proximally In to the position. the also foreskin hood. a lacking, portion and the The is of appearance dorsal ventral gives testes is ambiguous undescended of genitalia. Severe form with hypospadias a or include Etiologies females adrenal congenital hyperplasia of insensitivity. masculinization androgen with are uncommon hypospadias. anomalies UT association in with fixed alone, of curvature a (a cases associated severe but chordee with be ventral penile occur in may the Hypospadias shaft). can bifid base is perineum, of to urethra opens sometimes and the dorsal is the scrotum and extends chordee extreme, when Rarely the the onto penis. the the

foreskin 90% males, In adolescence. be retractable by of the should uncircumcised tight need the this age, treatment. prepuce Before may not and be normally to inability prepuce After is age, the the this retract termed phimosis. the of or may The inflammation. congenital condition result be Paraphimosis cannot prepuce the the behind sulcus, been occurs the resume normal or when its and causes of swelling position, coronal has retracted glans pain.

located shaft; posteriorly middle distal the may The the the in (near of coronal, third scrotum). third the of the anteriorly (on meatal be opening or or glans, hypospadias shaft); on of with in boys hypospadias. Testes 10% undescended are Inguinal are common. hernias Males the may repair. be with is should proximal not foreskin circumcised, if later be hypospadias for particularly glans, to the because necessary meatus the months patient is old. hypospadias pediatric 18 before repair Most the urologists

Phimosis rarely symptomatic. is puberty. during occurs of prepuce usually the reassured that Parents be loosening should steroids. if is needed, topical Treatment, is the be If may narrowing severe, stretching gentle useful. the Circumcision reserved severe most is for cases. with leads edema stasis venous Paraphimosis and severe to pain. reduction may be is possible foreskin lubrication. When of discovered early, with paraphimosis the In needed. cases, circumcision is some emergent

year are of boys age. about found Undescended testes 1 of in 1% (cryptorchidism) after common (3.4%) older more newborns in than children. is in full-term It shorter 2500-g in 100% gestation cryptorchidism and (20% in In neonates, 2000to infants common with <900-g infants). is more bilateral Cryptorchidism 30% of cases. in is testes indicate not age, the of after descent find 1 one tend not does to undescended testicular to both failure scrotum occur or but year Spontaneous in does testicles. absent resemble testes, in presentation. ectopic testes, Retractile and testes may cryptorchidism

StudentConsult.com Available @

important a for drug apparent child (steroids) family evaluation are cryptorchidism. history and history of in A use maternal of the in Whether was asked. testis be noted should ever scrotum the the The normal descent, processus patent a true presence the undescended in testis along vaginalis. of embryologic the of is usually path found subject is torsion. often undescended it to an testis also hernia; associated with is An inguinal is high adulthood. of infertility in There a incidence untreated, bilateral is infertility When and uniform. testis, undescended the increased There is 30. usually 20 the risk normal ages between presenting (five with malignancy an rate) of times and surgical is greater correction after puberty. or or those with in untreated males The risk during

canal inguinal that retract from the cremasteric reflex. testes an Retractile exaggerated normal testes into are but diagnosis of later if newborn at not examination. palpable is testes are likely period The testes inthe retractile in his in describe seeing “disappear” hegets whenhe and one seeing testes or Frequentlyparents bath cold. is scrotum the son’s their when both

@ StudentConsult.com Available

the treatment save an prompt affected the diagnosis testis. requiring emergency to is and of testis Torsion age. of accounts Torsion scrotum and years acute for major cases the of boys than pain cause less 6 scrotal swelling of and in the of acute 40% is arise the scrotum. to thought the is from testis to abnormal of fixation It and tender, absent. and the is the examination On cremasteric testicle swollen reflex is ultrasound blood is absence The of or nuclear torsion. scan with flow on Doppler consistent

diagnosis torsion includes The testicular and appendix. pain trauma, of differential epididymal testicular incarcerated the hernia, of an tenderness minimal of the Torsion over the lesion with associated and testis swelling. is point appendix older of and testicular acute must also diagnosis most in common torsion of swelling adolescents, differential include adolescents. In cause epididymitis, the the scrotal pain aided or antecedent Diagnosis history sexual by UTI. of activity an is Testicular is testicular when acute must pain severe principal considered be the as present. torsion diagnosis

normal usually testis undescended is at The birth. histologically and are of life. Atrophy after first year the dysplasia found Some in have dysplasia boys contralateral testis. descended the congenital of at correction Surgical results fertility. chance an in adult greater age early from retractile testosterone testes human chorionic of causes Administration result release of functioning testes. and may gonadotropin in descent

year second Orchidopexy in is usually life. the of done of associated brought extra-abdominal Most hernia. scrotum into with the the testes can correction be may determine ultrasound palpable, imaging magnetic not testis the location. its is If or resonance inguinal to the The the chance the internal closer is successful ring, the better testis of orchidopexy.

of detorsion the fixation of torsion testicular Surgical is called testis. and correction than testicular a 6 hours performed If chance greater of torsion, there of 90% salvage. within is to prevent possible is the scrotum torsion. to testis The usually fixed contralateral necrotic torsion If appendix removed. the is is tissue the found, of

MD, Ohio. of the Urology, Rama acknowledge Children’s We Nationwide Hospital, gratefully Jayanthi, invaluable Columbus, contributions Pediatric

Pediatr TM: Brady 2012 Hypertension, 33:541–552, Rev

et 2009 childhood DS, Pediatrics al: Management 124:747–757, Gipson Massengil SF, nephrotic syndrome, of onset Yao L,

Pediatr Hematuria, Massengill Rev SF: 2008 29:342–348,

31:179–188, McKay CP: stone Rev Renal 2010 Pediatr disease,

estimate MF, Soc equation Am CKD, Nephrol al: 20:629–637, 2009 GFR et Munoz children A, to GJ, Schneider J Schwartz in with New

UTI man 2 infection: guideline tract clinical children Urinary practice infants febrile the to in agement of and diagnosis for and 24 initial months. the

Committee Steering Infection, on Urinary Tract Subcommittee Quality on

and Management, 128:595–610, Improvement 2011 Pediatrics

in RN: Acute Whyte 29:299–307, Rev Fine Pediatr renal children, failure DA,

kidney disease children, 29:335–341, Fine RN: Pediatr DA, Chronic in Rev 2008 Whyte

Palma Heneghan Paola Sisto A. and 23 MaryKathleen

system messengers. body endocrine means by vital hormonal regulates of The functions (gland)of hormone. of the as defined with origin from messengers, Hormones a distance action are organ the circulating at can endocrine Hormones nerve regulated neural can serve agents by be cells; messengers. as a immune of the system hormone. endocrine excess cause There to between and the produce or relationship is autoantibodies organ an deficiency may system; also an a response tissue peripheral endocrine the related the deficiency. to to excess are or Manifestations a hormone an of of disorder

these origin acting also on the to agents cell are neighboring than Hormone action or (Fig. the of (acting cell adjacent of rather hormone the the itself); paracrine factors ways cells in may origin of be of hormones on (acting called autocrine hormone) 170-1). is feedback hormone a that the Hormones of so linked in its or regulated concentration. generally a circulating its loop production effect to are 1. Endocrine four ways: manifest disorders of from generally one

Cushing excess present; excess secondary if adrenal hormone: hormone glucocorticoid is syndrome, there (ACTH) excess secretion In autonomous is adrenocorticotropic By is an the suppressed. hormone glucocorticoid trophic gland, the to the by of

2.

the glucocorticoid of elevated deficiency deficient cortisol is level at inadequate; is if is hormone: deficiency, By In (ACTH). trophic the gland, adrenal the hormone the

3.

hormone: (PTH by face (Gsa) is end the pseudohypoparathyroidism, to stimulatory an defects PTH encoding protein organ alpha deficient of function resistance). manifested in abnormal subunit the elevated of PTH response of the gene the By In levels G (GNAS1) in

4.

and even With than By tumor. pituitary hormone fields enlargement size produced a the function: rather no gland is though a of abnormal as result symptoms signs and that nonfunctioning have other by large neurologic result visual effects adenoma, may

act the membrane second intracellular to messengers attached that effects. through the the the cell receptor, receptors; complextriggers biologic various is specific hormone when Peptide hormones cause aviditymay receptor be Peptide number and hormones. hormone regulated by to the further with the gene hormones exert attachment and where to complex itbinds by DNA, activation. intranuclear and effects hormone-receptor to their receptors, leads nucleus, Steroid translocates

related hormone must controlling of be The factors. serum interpretation levels totheir normal hyperparathyroidism. a may patient hypercalcemic but with partial given eucalcemic example, patient For hypoparathyroidism of in orexcessive a a parathyroidhormone inadequatein value patient hypocalcemic with a be in

gland. the hypothalamus endocrine many The directly either controls through pituitary or systems hypothalamus. nervoussystem central (CNS) centers Higher the control specific control travel anterior (Fig. portal factors hormones the gland,regulating the the inhibiting through the to of factor Hypothalamicreleasing pituitary or system for pituitary capillaries suppress hypothalamicand effects which feed hormones. back their to target hormones their enter controlling other circulation glands, that 170-2).The produce peripheral hormones on pituitary andexert pituitary the (T4)all Insulin-like hypothalamic-pituitary (GH), steroids, factor-1 the growth and thyroxine sex on (IGF-1),growth feed hormone system. back cortisol, a by isthe Prolactin that suppressed only pituitary hypothalamicfactor, dopamine. hormone is The axons in that either vasopressin is posteriorpituitary vasopressin-secreting exert gland and hypothalamus the also via terminate of effect location secretion their the

of and 170-1 factors. action of Figure of hormones mechanisms Schematic growth representation be target transported growth cells may mechanism), and action) cells through (paracrine action to bloodstream modality themselves produced formed traditional glands the endocrine by distant of hormones the by (endocrine in action). neighboring (autocrine or peptide locally are of sites factors Although p editors: Williams Saunders, Foster JD, DW, of WB 8, 1007.) ed Textbook Wilson Philadelphia, (From Endocrinology, 1992,

GnRH steroids Prolactin growth GH TSH TRH GHRH Sex Dopamine Cortisol Lactation CRH factors FSH, T4, Insulin-like binding Growth LH proteins) (somatostatin) (and HYPOTHALAMUSPITUITARYSRIF ACTH T3

Hormonal 170-2 Figure hypothalamus of and pituitary the gland. influences stimulatory line represents inhibitory line represents Solid influence. influence; dotted FSH, Adrenocorticotropic somatostatin triiodothyronine; thyrotropin-releasing hormone; hormone or hormone; GRF; factor, luteinizing SRIF, or hormone hormone corticotropin-releasing LH, TRH, or hormone GH-releasing TRF; SS; luteinizing follicle-stimulating or hormone LRF T3, gonadotropin-releasing TSH, factor, Inhibin hormone; GnRH, hormone; growth LHRH; GHRH, releasing CRF; hormone; somatotropin CRH, or GH, thyroid-stimulating or ACTH, release-inhibiting

thyroxine. T4,

age, Table bone Provocative for IGF-1, CAUSE free IGFBP3 Evaluation tests, or GH 170-1 Diagnostic TESTS* deficiency, both Growth T4, MANIFESTATION deficiency, hypothyroidism, TRH/TSH Hypopituitarism GH or both failure,

Provocative both ACTH GH deficiency, IGF1, ACTH or secretion, insufficiency, test Hypoglycemia tests, of IGFBP3 GH

deficiency ADH electrolytes, serum water osmolality, Polyuria, deprivation (specific polydipsia analysis and test urine serum gravity), Urine

hormone; insulin-like protein magnetic factor-binding hormone; hormone; T4, luteinizing IGF-1, growth nervous resonance follicle-stimulating hormone; imaging; thyroxine. GH, E2, system; growth hormone; TSH, LH, IGFBP3, thyrotropin-releasing hormone; gonadotropin-releasing FSH, TRH, factor; growth estradiol; hormone; central insulin-like CNS, thyroid-stimulating GnRH, Antidiuretic 3; ADH, MRI,

determine the MRI should etiology have the patient condition. evaluation to as with of of CNS hypopituitarism part *Each

or in in effects the pituitary from HYPOTHALAMIC-PITUITARY they can gland. AXIS exert posterior water this terminate of the hypothalamus, THE mediobasal DISORDERS OF the balance, absence on which area even from

determined of pituitary function assessment be may The

in some @ the measurement the assessments hormone Decision-Making state; other require StudentConsult.com stimulation. the pituitary of measuring Available specific by basal after Algorithms be of 170-1). assessment of the function measuring obtained serum (Table Indirect gland concentrations target pituitary by can hormones Several Table of func- in tests 170-2. pituitary are tion listed

TESTS (useful a (a except (not Pituitary accurate in stimulus) hypoglycemia Anterior (affected excess) in random determination OR TARGET RANDOM Function PROVOCATIVE Testing by 170-2 Table MEASUREMENTS or resistance as HORMONE (a as in pituitary GH GH Hormone HORMONE test) useful newborns, dangerous OTHER and IGF-1, GH but gigantism) Insulin-induced malnutrition as Arginine well clinically) MEASUREMENT L-Dopa weak IGFBP3

FT4 to subjects) in TRH LH, prepubertal TSH* GnRH Testosterone/estradiol interpret (difficult FSH*

Adrenocorticotropic hormone; IGF-BP3, hormone; CRH, hormone; hormone; ACTH, GnRH, growth thyroid-stimulating hormone-releasing follicle-stimulating 3; IGF-1, free LH, corticotropin-releasing factor-1; growth factor-binding thyrotropin-releasing insulin-like hormone; gonadotropin-releasing insulin-like GRH, TSH, L-dopa, FSH, growth thyroxine; growth hormone; TRH, hormone; GH, FT4, luteinizing hormone. hormone; L-dihydroxyphenylalanine; protein

allow of supersensitive low assays found abnormally in determination values hypopituitarism. *New

deficiency hormone most in Hypothalamic secretion. but to in an may lead a increase secretions prolactin decrease pituitary leads to in lesions pituitary the of Destructive common hormones. childhood secretion pituitary hypothalamus various thanincreased glandor are of more of the pituitary A the bone tumor craniopharyngioma, Rathke causing descendinto hypothalamic erosion may of the pouch, of a anddestruction sella tissue. and turcica, (Langerhans the CNS; after also trauma of infiltration pituitary therapy and a as infections;from and result gland. from hypopituitarism sarcoidosis); may pituitary the cell radiation Acquired against or histiocytosis [histiocytosisX], lymphoma, to consequence autoimmunity

caused releasing Congenital by absenceof the hypothalamic can be factors. hypopituitarism Without of from (6% its to associated hypothalamicstimulation, not does pituitary cebocephaly, range hypotelorism), (cyclopia, palate are gland cleft associated of defects cases deficiency). cleft GH with holoprosencephaly with release hypopituitarism orbital hormones.Congenital the palate a in result both)may dysplasia significant of hypopituitarism. (inability impairment in varying nystagmus variations hypoplasia, nerve on addition pendular(“roving”) to degrees to or with pellucidum, absent visual Septo-optic target) septum of focus (optic of stalk pituitary pituitary hypopituitarismmay ectopic gland. pituitary The the magnetic of bright resonance gland findings small imaging appearance an and/or transection, congenital posterior a (MRI) spot, include

is an processes point andglycosuria disease end a and characterized few 171-1). by (Table (DM) is mellitus Diabetes of hyperglycemia deficiency. occurring is permanent caused the cells in common The (DM1), of childhood insulin-producing most by leadingto is type type1 DM (islets) the pancreas which destruction beta autoimmune insulin of the 2 and usuallyin resistance context obesity. insulin insulin (DM2) relative of exogenous resultsfrom deficiency, DM Type United in The of andDM2 increasing. is DM1 States incidence the (see in beta insulin common orinherited by genetic types of abnormalities the pancreatic result sensing of Less defects receptor ambient glucose ofdiabetes concentration from Table 171-1). cells

based mg/dL, (OGTT) of A need venous made concentration ≥126 glucose a may serum (2) a an and serum on mg/dL glucose to hyperglycemia, testing: of by with that concentration abnormal ≥6.5%. confirmed DM tolerance glucose is 2-hour ≥200 abnormalities Fasting plasma symptoms (1) a HgbA1c glucose repeat mg/dL, random (3) be (4) ≥200 four glucose test diagnosis postprandial with oral

2-hour is is plasma glucose mg/dL have patient to 100 to impaired 125 or 140 glucose 199 an fasting glucose considered is to if OGTT glucoseif fasting A tolerance concentration mg/dL. impaired following serum of hyperglycemia children, Sporadic an the in can intercurrent occur setting illness. usually in is related When clearly episode hyperglycemic the to

cell islet genetic Classic positive; 1 type component Glycosuria, ketonuria, hyperglycemia,

(L-asparaginase, drugs tacrolimus) hemochromatosis, fibrosis, Secondary Cystic

onset type later only, insulin Associated obesity, to increased of Adult genetic for resistance; diabetes normal risk postpartum; which component diabetes with reverts (classic) pregnancy

with incipient Associated years; 25 point include youth before other stress, maternal diabetes associated age Maturity-onset hepatocyte mutations Mitochondrial and deafness onset of autoimmunity mtDNA Single-gene illness not diabetes small 1β,1α, an glucokinase; (<5%). physiologic 4α; with mutations is neurologic diabetes of 1 obesity factors other defects, nuclear factor the insulin dominant, probability promoter or or Autosomal transmission— of

beta (islets) the from of autoimmune pancreas. destruction results cells of DM1 the insulin-producing presumably diabetes In unknown an process. of susceptibility to the genes, triggers environmental autoimmune the addition insult presence a variety A of host produced has regarding factors. of conflicting environmental studies data mumps, factors. include cytomegalovirus, and cow’s (Coxsackie These milk vitamin at virus, deficiency, early D feeding perinatal infectious age, an rubella), viral agents cell–mediated primarily to disease. DM1 a be T is thought

cell be to antigens cell may islet onset dysfunction years beta before the to of months (Fig. seen Antibodies 171-1). antibodies tyrosine cell others. to These phosphatase islet autoantibodies, antibodies, decarboxylase, to and insulin include IA-2, glutamic acid antibodies diabetes of serum. number risk the increases detected the for in with antibodies The one In 15%; to with antibodies, or 10% 55% 90%. individuals to in with more individuals is is only antibody risk the only, detectable risk the three to euglycemia been result cell mass remaining manifestations the and destroyed, beta insufficient Fig. clinical of beta mass cell diabetes is the 80% of When have maintain 90% to (see 171-1).

annual DM1 of increasing with is geographic differences. significant The incidence steadily but in approximately In annual the is 20 the United States, incidence 100,000. a in 1 in in annual children less to Scandinavian 40 incidence 100,000 among high ranges 100,000 The of than populations China. in from prevalence Indians. African American highest and Hispanic, DM1 whites in United by of States The non-Hispanic in the is Americans, followed

and determinants the complex inheritance multigenic. is the although DM1, Genetic a of in susceptibility to role play mode risk offspring have the identical a or diabetes 8% risk. a 30% patients development of of of 2% diabetes; has twin to for Siblings with an 50% to human approximately familial accounting region of the chromosome provides on DM1. inheritance of The 6 40% determinant susceptibility, strongest antigen of leukocyte (HLA) for alleles HLA and (HLA DM1, developing DR4) HLA class other Specific effect. II the risk specific DR3 a protective increase whereas HLA of DR alleles exert and DQ HLA possess 90% than children More alleles, HLA alleles, or of DR4 DR3 with DM1 both. also variable to is tandem region insulin number linked chromosome repeat susceptibility. 11 DM1 gene The on for of than loci with There 100 is DM1. evidence HLA, other association, beyond more play account for fully DM1; a role. also Genetic susceptibility factors not environmental do factors to

Available StudentConsult.com @

to Failure Polyuria Thrive

when Hyperglycemia and production. renal and capacity results peripheral suppress to secretory becomesinadequate hepatic glucose glucose enhance uptake insulin to postprandial and hyperglycemia deficiencyusually first fastinghyperglycemia. causes Insulin then more is insulin sign Ketogenesis deficiency. of a complete fatty exacerbates acetoacetate, gluconeogenesis acetone. glycogenolysis and and the acidoxidation suppression ketone β-hydroxybutyrate, Lack further generates bodies: hyperglycemia while of of for substrates in are provide metabolized acid and and oxidation. fat adipose stores in fatty tissue muscle to gluconeogenesis Protein stores

160to (from reabsorption renal 190 glucose the when for the concentrationexceeds serum occurs threshold mg/dL). Glycosuria glucose to leading (includingobligate an diuresis osmotic loss potassium, sodium, of causes electrolytes), other Glycosuria and dehydration. occurs losses. excess the attempts patient for Polydipsia the tocompensate as fluid calories through glycosuria results the state loss of ketonuria. and and fromthe catabolic persistent Weight loss presentation loss. and polyphagia, The includespolyuria, DM1 classic of polydipsia, weight

will diabetic features the new-onset clinical (DKA) DM1 detected, not of occur. If ketoacidosis are known 100 diabetes (% autoimmune omitted Schematic Progressive Insulin may Release genetically occur of insulin of cell max) Figure mass Diabetes of DM1 with injections Period the are if representation Beta In Overt 50 (y) Time Birth 0 171-1 Release Impairment patients 0 DKA in “Honeymoon” in individuals. evolution also predisposed

or hormones cortisol, and the concentrations greater growth unmet an counter-regulatory catecholamines). requirements are hormone the (glucagon, of intercurrent during [GH], elevated insulin presence in illness and when stress of or 15 if can arterial mEq/L, the level 7.3, present is in (1) ketones below considered and bicarbonate pH serum the below (3) urine. elevated (2) be serum DKA to are be is

the insulin of secretion, persistent adequate absence bodies fatty of oxidation ketone acids partialhepatic occurs. In to gap. these to bodies with acidosis anion three Twoof acids are metabolic lead elevated an organic and ketone to when dehydration Lactic acidosis results maycontribute severe indecreased tissue perfusion. acid the osmoticdiuresis by that fluidintake. for an compensated increased is Hyperglycemia causes initially maintain hyperglycemia patients diuresis are unable most to large As occurs. intake, and anddehydration worsen, the the fluid the a water increased result losses insensible as Vomiting, worsen caused by increasing of dehydration. acidosis, and tachypneacan from the transmembrane Electrolyte loss urine in resulting and abnormalities electrolytes occurthrough of acidosis. alterations a hydrogen ketoacidosis, intracellular of is As a result as potassium exchanged hydrogen ions. ionsaccumulate for is decrease with the Serum kidney. potassium increase initially acidosis concentrationsof by then potassium asserum cleared or ketoacidosis, theduration potassium may depleted. concentrations be intracellular increased, of potassium concentrations on decreased, serum at but normal, are Depending diagnosis sign potassium an potassium concentration is of ominous decreasedserum depletion. totalbody A excretion the a Phosphate ions. as can of occur phosphate for excess increased required elimination depletion also of result renal hydrogen renallosses and also osmotic of resulting ketoacidosis, caused by gastrointestinal vomiting from diuresis losses (Fig. Sodiumdepletion from is from sodium common 171-2).

Available StudentConsult.com @

polyuria, nausea, initially with present and polydipsia, Patients vomiting. DKA with mimic pain occurs abdomen. acute Abdominal frequently and can an may distended paralytic secondary abdomen a ileus. tender or from to vomiting be The and or patients DKA despite state gastrointestinal with patients from The gastroenteritis other polyuria, of disorders. with diuresis a indicates dehydration, osmotic clinical differentiates presence of (Küssmaul) for Respiratory respirations. with results compensation acidosis tachypnea in deep The of odor the can on patient’s detected be acetone breath. fruity frequently mental ranging status from altered An occur, to coma. disorientation can

less reveal bicarbonate Laboratory and pH concentration below is from is hyperglycemia concentrations glucose 200 studies mg/dL serum than mg/dL).Arterial >1000 7.30, mEq/L. to (serum ranging 15 the on free depending water balance or elevated, and ofsodium losses. sodium low, the be normal, Serum concentrationsmay sodium concentration of measured The hyperglycemia. artificially because is serum low, however, decrease serum also sodium. the to contributes Hyperlipidemia inmeasured secondary urea level The be blood nitrogen(BUN) elevated can azotemia prerenal with todehydration. of without elevatedand white the blood The is presence be ofinfection. can count usually cell implying left-shifted should have a and episode forinfectious sources is that prompt Fever triggered search the unusual ofDKA. may

Available @ StudentConsult.com

patients monitoring of of fluid hyperglycemia with replacement for administration, electrolyte acidosis and Therapy DKA for imbalances, and via careful correction of deficits, correction treatment. insulin of involves complications The to approach shifts and strike balance rapid DKA adequate and management of optimal balance. fluid osmolality between in losses must fluid avoidance of of a correction serious and is edema The complication cerebral and cerebral of its most treatment DKA herniation.

DKA is A approximately be 10% patient severe with to dehydrated. assumed If be measurement extent the recent can weight a calculated. precise available, is of dehydration mL/kg at to be initial restore (normal intravascular intravenous of Ringer solution (IV) lactated a 10 volume saline, An given perfusion. glucose-free fluid isotonic and should solution) renal to 20 bolus the be the hours. bolus fluid should 48 to requirements, should to after deficit slowly remaining over maintenance and replaced be fluid 36 added The total initial not of perfusion unless Ongoing resulting be replaced diuresis present. or are losses large output need do to osmotic usually poor signs is from urine than Osmotic when minimal 300 is diuresis concentration decreases less glucose to the serum mg/dL. usually sodium can 0.9% be followed fluid rapid replacement osmolality, the as chloride. 0.45% sodium chloride 6 to To serum by for used 4 in hours, the avoid shifts initial

Hyperglycemia. should infusion soluble (0.1 U/kg/hour). Fast-acting a continuous insulin as administered IV be glucose rate Serum should concentrations at no a decrease

Pathophysiology 171-2 of diabetic Figure ketoacidosis.

mg/dL/hour. than 100 faster to the less added 300 serum glucose to 250 glucose should When be concentrations decrease to than fluids. mg/dL, IV of mg/dL and before If decreased acidosis, be glucose less before the should concentrations should but be to glucose 200 should by never of decrease correction acidosis. resolution the discontinued infusion IV fluids than of the half, increased, insulin not be more concentration it serum than

Acidosis. glucose and of protein and fatty in free target Insulin decreases catabolism enhances production the tissues. therapy usage acids processes acidosis. correct These should Bicarbonate therapy be avoided. oxyhemoglobin by include administration increased dissociation the (CNS) of caused acidosis abrupt risk curve, the shifts effects edema. paradoxical of increases tissue dioxide adverse potential the in caused development carbon Potential of bicarbonate osmotic in nervous cerebral barrier, hypoxia by of diffusion system blood-brain changes, across and increased central

concentrations ketone appear may acidosis is to rise. corrected, urine As what converted the in with assays, is which is treatment urine acetoacetate. ketone most detects, not to β-Hydroxybutyrate, assay detected are ketone of minute-to-minute concentrations therapy. urine the required a of index adequacy Hence not

Electrolyte imbalances. of potassium the body depletion at potassium serum concentration Regardless presentation, is total likely. is potassium improves acidosis, ions. for concentrations and intracellular can Serum potassium then hydrogen as rapidly insulin and exchanged therapy decrease glucose should shown, When IV be potassium is output to added the adequate fluids. urine of a at to Potassium 20 be concentration 50% replacement chloride should 50% potassium given and mEq/L. phosphate 40 as potassium which deficits This may phosphate hypocalcemia. precipitate replacement avoids of but phosphate excess administration, combination for provides serum level potassium decreases. is greater level potassium until IV If added fluids mEq/L, not potassium be should the the than to 6

Monitoring. include bicarbonate, sodium, concentrations; pH; phosphate a venous and should BUN, or calcium, chloride, glucose, magnesium measurements creatinine, and arterial serum laboratory potassium, Initial urinalysis. should repeated glucose therapy; measurement to hour should repeated concentrations every be be 3 every during electrolyte hours. 2 Serum therapy. 4 Calcium, to concentrations every during 6 measured phosphate, magnesium should be hours and mental at and should status frequent be assessed intervals. Neurologic should evaluation Any status deterioration possible edema. headache or mental prompt complaints for of of rapid cerebral or decreased headache, pupil, apnea), a change sudden a dilated sensorium, seizure. ophthalmoplegia, vital severe include vomiting, Indicative symptoms hypertension, in signs (bradycardia,

1% of Clinically 5% DKA. occurs of to apparent in cerebral edema cases serious rate complication 80%. mortality a most DKA, the Cerebral 20% to with edema of of is osmolar shift swelling. and the edema The involves accumulation fluid in of likely cell cerebral intracellular resulting pathogenesis compartment in this is and brain that defined. factors but swelling herniation cerebral to patients Subclinical are common exacerbate clearly symptomatic DKA, edema not in the with cerebral leading possible process period typically 6 hours often to clinical of therapy after apparent following occurs edema improvement. for begun, Cerebral 12 is a DKA risk initial Pco2, increase Factors include decreases initial correlate concentration, edema concentration treatment, bicarbonate. during sodium treatment lower of to as glucose failure increased concentration with and the for that serum BUN cerebral with higher

papilledema, advanced include bradycardia, inequality, of hypertension, edema apnea. cerebral pupillary or and obtundation, Signs dilation IV bolt. involves intubation, the endotracheal and of subdural a Treatment rapid use require and mannitol, may of ventilation the use failure acute complications edema, DKA abnormalities, dehydration, caused ischemia. bowel and intracranial or arrhythmias pancreatitis, severe with renal by by are thrombosis electrolyte necrosis caused pulmonary infarction, acute tubular of Other edema 24 after in related therapy is elevations to commonly and aldosterone. antidiuretic to hours be hormone residual 48 Peripheral initiated occurs may and

to Outpatient Management Transition

of initiated. When acidosis insulin and subcutaneous be discontinued, patient the oral corrected injections has insulin (SC) a be the IV been regimen infusion and feedings, the can can tolerates IV be before should infusion. 30 dose discontinuation insulin 45 given SC the insulin of first The to minutes be the following should of to days. 2 Further the dose adjustment insulin made 3 over if patient adequate. DM1 be were diagnosed prior with they may A restarted the doses on already approximately adolescents, for 0.5 hours the to insulin total for patients number combinations. 0.7 to U/kg/24 available starting For prepubertal DM1, doses 0.7 with using hours are patient of U/kg/24 and approximately any daily new-onset a 1 typical insulin most by aspart, at (glargine or bedtime. (bolus) (basal) insulin injections common or to The giving meal insulin) detemir) each making transition best (lispro, to begin with of fast-acting and for long-acting SC is the glulisine insulin and choice requires and per in This count daily to administer but of multiple carbohydrates day provides the food. patient to most injections flexibility regimen many injections the (neutral a split and two [NPH] Hagedorn daily An alternative insulin) is regimen fixed injections. with dosing fasting-acting mixed protamine

continuous provide very fast-acting although onset worn insulin SC of not the are at DM1. available, usually pumps a infusion used Externally of that will when amounts provide pumps hour basal insulin provide and every continuously bolus instructed. small in insulin Insulin fast-acting achieve by motivated Insulin all control. used groups age are highly who pumps tight to be may absence depot insulin DKA. of risk or (glargine the SC of The increase can detemir)

2 before provide bedtime, be information at am glucose concentrations periodically 3 each regimen. assessed to at should Serum meal, for the to and adjustment of learning and should their care the possible. principles diabetes families soon begin as of Patients as a to of knowledge is insulin test hypoglycemia using meter of ability management. injections before and necessary glucose glucose the is concentrations Demonstration administer discharge, as control glucose crucial planning is in DM1. Meal to of delivered families diagnosis. care must be services from to Nutrition the part the

patients beta completely the cell of some not DM1, new has with In been destroyed. mass onset seem with insulin function recover The functionalbeta remaining cells treatment. to a this of glucose with When control, concentrations. glucose often blood requirements exogenous normal nearly occurs, decrease.This is insulin period stable disease, the last period, of weeks for known thefirst often months, in as to of 2 usually 6 3 This years. the andcan therapy, starts phase honeymoon continues

children requires nutritional, approach a and comprehensive to of Management issues. in medical, attention psychosocial with DM1 patient with each individual the account. the needs taken be should family and Therapeutic into strategies of flexible diabetes and a including dietitian, social a of a diabetes worker a Optimal or physician, care team psychologist. nurse involves a educator, professionals,

established Diabetes the with Trial nephropathy, The as insulin of blood and intensive normal the glucose concentrations neuropathy). close to as possible, Complications the slow (retinopathy, goal can progression maintaining of and that onset Control of diabetes therapy, delay complications of increase goal risk insulin hypoglycemia. can the using Attaining therapy this intensive significant young be the more glycopenia. because children immature may susceptible may to hypoglycemia be adverse The in effects of CNS slower Although the in increase complications and years is to controversy diabetes, increases whether prepubertal with risk adulthood. diabetic the risk duration for adolescence than as of there in of the is

goals age therapy The differ, depending of thepatient. of on the is goal appropriate years and 180 of glucose 80 For an mg/dL. 5 maintenance children old, concentrationsbetween than blood younger target a reasonable 80 mg/dL For 150 children, is school-age to range. For 70 adolescents, is 130 thegoal to mg/dL. other the abilities takeinto should the hypoglycemia and of also Goals a of individual pasthistory severe as patientand characteristics, of family. therapy such account

effect of differ of action to Many time types 171-2). duration (Table in peak insulin and can be depending and combinations, These used insulins goals in the needs on the patient. individual various of given fast-acting is combination most insulin of at given in commonly with injections meals regimen long-acting insulin basal The of with multiple that bedtime. used regimen assistance flexibility children. per will This many requires administration young day provides injections and require of for but insulin, fast-acting dose of long-acting determined, given high according as is 30% to 50% to insulin divided levels meals. given the and of After for need and as total daily the are insulin, for is corrections glucose remainder the 1800 the insulin. determine hyperglycemia, many with of the by insulin 1800 To how using dose will one of daily sensitivity decrease to insulin deciliter dividing unit glucose correct one rule; can per milligrams for the total of determine of used to 450 one for carbohydrate the of the total The unit by daily calculate divided ratio determines requires of insulin. insulin:carbohydrate insulin of content grams dose that number the food; carbohydrate is

and are used by and adolescents also short-acting continuous achieve who children to infusion are available control. are a that motivated being of tight Pumps insulin provide highly SC

synthetic are result in insulin 171-2). amino action in absorption aspart, and fast and human alterations analogs acid of glulisine Table which insulin onset Lispro, (see action, long-acting Because used with duration these of insulin. short of combination in the are at pH solubility acidic detemir with solubility at Glargine physiologic pH. are insulin and and decreased increased analogs than as a greater 24 insulin. have basal of duration a They act and hours

in the diagnosed honeymoon 0.4 Newly patients U/kg/24 0.6 to period may hours. require diabetes Prepubertal U/kg/24 years 0.5 than 1 require to hours. with to 2 typically patients 1 longer to relative 2 when are requirements doses insulin 1 typical. and concentrations 50%, middle GH hours adolescence elevated to produce increase by 40% U/kg/24 of insulin resistance, During

concentrations and within serum plan the is meal hypoglycemia the crucial Balancing of the maintaining target for daily dosages or with range insulin glucose avoiding hyperglycemia. meals regimen vary the type The to content insulin of used. and of schedule according contribute 12% to the 65% 50% is total carbohydrates recommended to and calories, of fat <30%. It that protein 20%, the of should Saturated <10% and total intake, be should 300 caloric cholesterol fat less contribute than intake mg/24 hours. content fiber High recommended. is

Patients using injections to more flexible carbohydrate or timing schedule insulin multiple content. of regard and meal the the with can meals the daily maintain pump a meal. according patients before or of immediately of insulin after the the meal the dose carbohydrate injection content an to calculated give with each These total Further serum can during the measured activity glucose based the on adjustments the and made in dose concentration plans for be day. of correspond. so and peaks need schedule consistent a fast-acting absorption carbohydrate meal twice-aday combination a using insulin to intermediate-acting and action Children maintain that relatively insulins three using this and three patient meals type A meal a for regimen involves typical schedule daily. snacks of content be of constant. the and total meals The snacks carbohydrate kept should

bedtime. Blood routinely meal be at monitored and should before glucose each at is hypoglycemia no testing the during glucose 3 2 concentrations ensure to hyperglycemia. consistent that variability the night additional excessive in or should Hypoglycemia prompt morning or am or there urine higher concentrations should During 300 mg/dL, glucose be blood of also than or ketones periods tested. are illness when can monitors, glucose concentration useful which Continuous in glucose blood minute-to-minute be information, following provide

DURATION PEAK 171-2 hours ONSET 5−15 Insulin aspart, 30−90 INSULIN minutes Short 3−5 Profiles Very Representative glulisine Lispro, of minutes ACTION Acting Table

ed Associations. Alexandria, 2009, JI, Data from Intensive Diabetes Diabetes Management, Wolfsdorf American 4, editor: VA,

calculations should of not in doses. concentrations but mealtime used be trends blood glucose insulin of

Measurements over the average means the of control. concentration glycemic glycohemoglobin preceding or and A1c provide a for assessing glucose hemoglobin 3 months reflect blood long-term (HgbA1c) measured patients. the should be results used should counseling for be of HgbA1c times a and four year, less children with to 8%, 6 than than years target HgbA1c less of HgbA1c of American ages having HgbA1c 8.5%, 6 has years on 13 ages Association target HgbA1c years based to set less and targets target age to 13 18 The than an of 7.5% Diabetes 7.5%. in patients are of hemoglobinopathies. inaccurate with HgbA1c Measurements albumin be in these Glycosylated cases. used fructosamine or can

should 3 than receive with for 5 DM1 ophthalmologic for annual years an more examination to retinopathy. Patients of be of which annually to renal indicates suggests risk should assessment microalbuminuria, Urine and high a collected nephropathy. dysfunction early progression for enzyme the with may of microalbuminuria. progression halt inhibitors angiotensin-converting Treatment with and blood of recommended. cholesterol measurements In DM1, are annual pressure children periodic assessment of hypertension hypercholesterolemia with limit future disease. detection Early coronary can of help intervention risk appropriate and

result can particularly common is in lymphocytic and Chronic autoimmune thyroiditis hypothyroidism. can be should performed Because annually. function symptoms thyroid tests subtle, be deficiency, celiac include DM1 disease. disease, and frequency Other with children occur that ulcer increased peptic with in disease, disorders Addison IgA

Special Hypoglycemia Problems:

commonly DM1. Hypoglycemia with occurs patients in average expected or on week. patients adequate once control, twice it is to a better occur or For in requiring assistance seizures person, Severe of patients coma per in 10% to in or of or these hypoglycemia, year. occur 25% resulting from episodes another

glucose serum from insulin the concentration. a with in patients results in to relative excess of relation Hypoglycemia DM1 timing, be caused alterations from dose, the resulting can intake; sensitivity insulin activity. by of absorption or changes in carbohydrate or This alterations excess insulin; of in contribute counterregulatory hypoglycemia. to responses Defective also within release years few abnormalities disease, the the in of to glucose serum develop responses Abnormal a glucagon after occur epinephrine duration. and longer falling first concentrations

approximately patients hypoglycemia occurs of 25% with diabetes. in Lack of awareness of episodes after ofhypoglycemia Recent role the play hypoglycemia, are reduced. an pathophysiology in may of episode a subsequent ofhypoglycemia autonomic to episodes responses unawareness; of in hypoglycemicepisodes. of thesepatients to be after 3 can avoidance strict weeks of exhibited of 2 Areturn symptoms hypoglycemia

visual seizures) catecholamine symptoms irritability, resultingfrom of or include Symptoms symptoms resulting tachycardia, and (tremors, fromthe confusion, neuroglycopenia response (headache, diaphoresis, hypoglycemia anxiety). changes, or with absorbed rapidly gel administration glucose fruit oral juices). can ortablets episodes or be of (glucose treated Mild loss seizures treated severe consciousness episodes that at result be of in injections. should or More glucagon with home be IV glucose hospital should given in settings.

nephropathy, disease. Long-term retinopathy, neuropathy, DM1 macrovascular and include complications of with apparent to in by less 5 Evidence is duration. occurs clinically hyperglycemia to 10 patients caused of rare diabetes than of rarely 10 years’ disease damage years’ duration; 15 before organ in leading cause is States. Diabetic the United retinopathy blindness the of eventually end-stage disease. 40% renal accounts of and to Nephropathy occurs adult for in approximately new of 30% all cases 30% motor, deficits. to autonomic occurs DM1 patients 30% and leads sensory, Neuropathy with in 40% or postpubertal of to infarction individuals results of and increased myocardial among diabetes. an disease in Macrovascular risk with stroke

of a insulin a in for using can of diabetes, complications, of testing of microalbuminuria, control an blood reduction glucose 60% the neuropathy. and development multiple injections diabetic 39% in Intensive a including and 76% risk clinical reduction insulin reduction progression retinopathy, daily or reduce frequent pump, or For of adult patients, outweigh intensive for and the increased hypoglycemia. risk therapy pubertal benefits the likely tight whom hypoglycemia and a for regimen patients, risks may For the are be benefits of glucose greater intensive less be may appropriate. younger the in lower, control

common of as the secretion form resistance pancreas by most result followed failure occur and Table processes; pathophysiologic can 171-1). insulin insulin adequate from hyperinsulinemia, various (see however the the of maintain results compensatory to peripheral DM2

parallel Americans, children children and in increasing is obesity with DM2 ethnic with is of of adults, in Americans, prevalence Native African high highest and of Hispanic The in Americans. groups a prevalence in DM2 including childhood syndrome, a family DM2 risk are factors. of history metabolic and the ethnicity, Obesity, the DM2, to to are the time diagnosis. DM2 difficulty differentiating in of have compounding at assumed clinically among from pancreas Auto-antibodies some the present DM1

and the postprandial glucose those same are diagnosis as DM2 for for of DM1. levels Fasting metabolic DM2 may of a syndrome. and of polyuria the be on polydipsia the of in background The suspected basis diagnosis from on be challenging. children grounds DM1 only clinical Differentiating can in DM2 of syndrome, possibility at DM2 have family who are or beta the antibodies of a metabolic of of have in history of of characteristics the considered diabetes. obese, absence cell be diagnosis to strong time DM2, The patients other have antigens should a neck and dermatologic nigricans, areas nape the syndrome. of and flexural sign presents is hyperinsulinism metabolic pigmentation in hyperkeratotic of manifestation in as and a Acanthosis noted insulin the the in resistance, as in of absolute with far commonly under stress it physiologic be as cannot can occurs patients more Although in and an factor. DM1, also used differentiating conditions occur DM2 ketoacidosis with autoreactivity. responses evaluation cell confirmed can to insulin in absence of DM2 stimulation of be orC-peptide carbohydrateand the islet the by oral

secretory result DM2 a is combination a the insulin of of resistance, relative defect. and beta deficiency, cell insulin adjustments) fasting elevated and mildly including lifestyle may be increased (dietary random patients >126 for >200 mg/dL Asymptomatic exercise. modifications, managed (slightly glucose or glucose) nutrition with slightly initially values therapy for mg/dL with Exercise decrease has shown to been resistance. insulin with uncomplicated DM2, most In new-onset, agents usually first therapy. children of are oral line the is the Only insulin approved secretagogue, by an metformin,

Drug for U.S. children. in Food Administration and use metformin is A function. rare occurring patients compromised lactic in with side of mainly effect acidosis, renal upset. gastrointestinal common is effect The most side glycemic but achieve adequate insulin oral first discontinued may continuation If occurs, necessary of to control weeks within be medications. treatment ketonuria is with or ketoacidosis glycemic therapy lifestyle Insulin modifications be may adequate control achieved and with required metformin. if not is

the have early DM2 at is have a course, possible subjects risk in who preclinical syndrome. may long metabolic Because diagnosis modifications, lifestyle exercise, the in have morbidity of Significant role improved increased preventing DM2. or such habits as decreasing a and eating development, syndrome metabolic advanced to of other the polycystic components hyperlipidemia, pubertal critical and is monitor as manage hypertension, it females. syndrome, such and in ovary Finally

diabetes. comprises inherited relatively of mild dominantly group a MODY of forms occur primary to insulin does an glycemic instead not resistance response these insufficient secretory patients; in abnormality is stimulation. the Insulin on the use type sulfonylureas. the and depends of Treatment can include

largevariety a infancy 172-1). result can (Table of in defects and metabolic hormonal childhood from and Hypoglycemia ininfants gestational or period,often of a mothers result premature energy meet the of frequently as newborns. neonatal inadequate most to occurs age transient metabolic disproportionately stores neonatal diabetic early as for hyperinsulinemia of a needs result Hypoglycemia or large the small in of newbornis Chapter and the 6). less frequent first of days concern life Hypoglycemiaduring an few in warrants normal otherwise (see hypoglycemia result the less of is disorders(although common to always ruled far be frequently days 3 ismore of After or life, 2 must theinitial sepsis out). endocrine and metabolic

should with symptoms of a and of of of serum hypoglycemia, glucose after be diagnosis The symptoms compatible concentration, administration on glucose. the made low hypoglycemia resolution basis the

necessitate and abnormal glucose to are concentrations be Serum mg/dL considered 45 treatment. than less be particularly should concurrent Serum if occur there concentrations (Table symptoms occasionally 55 can normal greater individuals, but fasting, considered mg/dL of hypoglycemia 172-2). especially prolonged glucose with in than are suspect,

StudentConsult.com Available @

nervous depression of central lack adrenergic Table and the to correct glucose system of from low catecholamine substrate secretion owing result signs energy response The counterregulatory direct hypoglycemia via of the 172-2). to to hypoglycemia (see and symptoms designed children, not infants do Compared usually symptoms. adrenergic with show older relatively of feeding The and hypoglycemia nonspecific difficulties, levels signs apnea pallor, symptoms of are consciousness, and of in and seizures. and include hypothermia, depressed infants jitteriness, bradycardia, episodes hypotonia, confusion, coma. visual older headaches, pallor, and include weakness, symptoms tremors, and signs sweating, tachycardia, changes, seizures, irritability, In children,

retardation mental prolonged including severe, seizures. treat morbidity, hypoglycemia serious in and and can nonhypoglycemic recognize result long-term to Failure for at with greatest outcomes. risk prolonged infants or severe and hypoglycemia patients adverse Younger are more

Normal number interaction 172-1). of of glucose requires hormonal concentrations signals appropriate metabolic regulation serum (Figure of pathways and a secretion leads concentrations [GH], a increased of and cortisol, hormone hormones secretion of normal Fig. glucose counterregulatory epinephrine) to glucagon, In a individual, the in suppression insulin a and serum (growth decrease (see 172-1). provide This acids gluconeogenesis free of ketogenesis. hepatic fuel (particularly from signal hormonal amino release (FFAs) promotes muscle triglyceride and stores fatty from for to alanine) tissue the to release adipose the acids of as FFAs and muscle. fuels ketones alternate for serve and breakdown also stimulates signal the gluconeogenesis. hepatic This glycogen hormonal promotes of any Failure the lead components can of this signal of hormonal of hypoglycemia. to

@ Available StudentConsult.com

concentrations secretion the neonatal glucose insulin is low beyond of A in lack infants in but serum uncommon response suppression to can period. occur of resulting in to in hyperplasia. frequently glucose exposed fetal This infants high maternally most of islet of arises situation in diabetic utero, concentrations mothers were cell who derived days. hours state to usually transient, The hyperinsulinemic is lasting

from affecting result of Hyperinsulinism insulin beyond a persists distinct glucose-regulated genetic few release. that agecan disorders days were These previously to referred

of a fetalis Infant hyperinsulinemic Infant mother with erythroblastosis hypoglycemia Persistent diabetic

synthase deficiency Glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency Glycogen phosphorylase deficiency Liver Amylo-1,6-glucosidase deficiency

carboxykinase Fructose-1,6-diphosphatase Phosphoenolpyruvate deficiency deficiency carboxylase deficiency Pyruvate

or Long-, or deficiency (primary short-chain deficiency acid deficiency secondary) medium-, dehydrogenase Carnitine fatty palmitoyltransferase acyl-CoA Carnitine

failure dysfunction Hepatitis Sepsis, Global hepatic Heart syndrome shock Reye

hormone; ACTH, growth Adrenocorticotropic insulin-like factor-2. acyl coenzyme A; acyl-CoA, IGF-2,

as hypoglycemia of nesidioblastosis, newborn. persistent the or hyperinsulinemic ofthe in cells infants, excessstimulation absence hyperplasia develops of In the these islet by pancreatic maternal diabetes. the triphosphate−sensitive alter these secretion. function Some sulfonylurea of patients of of that regulatesinsulin cell islet potassium havegenetic defects channel other receptoror adenosine the abnormalities the genetic that earlobe macrosomia, Hyperinsulinism and occur creases. condition characterized a by Beckwith-Wiedemann can in also macroglossia,omphalocele, neonatal syndrome, visceromegaly, gigantism: somatic

Chapter hyperinsulinism neonates age Regardless cause, for arecharacteristically (see 60). of with gestational large the a to severe is 1 and frequently feeding. within of hours Hypoglycemia occurs 3 requirement are mg/kg/min. three the requirements glucose normal increased, oftentwo of 8 to 6to basal times Glucose of is of concentrations the detection The confirmedby greater hyperinsulinism than serum insulin diagnosis

Headache agents. Personality Mental (tachycardia) blunted Vomiting the Staring Trembling changes features may Weakness be and of Paresthesia Anxiety Pallor *These Palpitation is if confusion concentrate Somnolence Convulsions Nausea Inability the to β-blocking receiving patient features Dysarthria perceptions Hunger

μU/mL an of during hypoglycemia. 5 episode in The animportant the urine hyperinsulinismfrom secretion. diagnostic feature, hypoglycemia of absence ketones defects counterregulatory distinguishing and time is hormone at ofserum

secretion. initially high intravenous insulin at glucose diazoxide and Treatment of infusion the of to (IV) rates involves suppress be tried. somatostatin is therapy can analogs If diazoxide long-acting unsuccessful, hypoglycemia. pancreatectomy to subtotal hyperinsulinemic Often hypoglycemia for the prevent newborn medical of persistent and of is neurologic sequelae therapy required is long-term unsuccessful, (90%)

hyperinsulinemia voracious condition adenoma. and results linear appetite, an cell growth by rare characterized islet a usually and obesity, In children from is accelerated a adenoma imaging visualization Computed imaging, pancreas be is resonance magnetic difficult. should but tomography, or attempted, of the of radioisotope usually an is the of removal adenoma curative. Surgical

is child medication Munchausen by a administered as condition a is syndrome which hypoglycemic insulin proxy. by a a to to rare or child of cases or form caregiver a as In abuse, referred parent suspected diagnosis are detected insulin (>100 high if concentrations be This extremely should μU/mL). confirms insulin the are concentrations which source. that low undetectable, is an or from exogenous C-peptide

produce counterregulatory orboth. hormonesthat of in hypoglycemia involve cortisol, GH, the secretion usually Abnormalities epinephrine in and arerare. secretion glucagon Deficiencies deficiency cortisol hypopituitarism. GH as a occur of result and or, commonly, results 173). pituitary of from aplasia deficiencyof hypoplasiaor hypothalamic Hypopituitarism congenital factors (see the from Chapter more releasing diagnosis nerves, impairment presence of absence callosum), of in and in the tothis pendular defects(e.g., lip midline with development visual neurologic include (roving) nystagmus palate or corpus infants in the abnormalities or frompossible the (indicating of cleft hypoglycemia association facial optic Clues the

Heart, kidney, muscle, brain

Brain, cells blood

Regulation 172-1 of serum Figure glucose.

inhibitions. represents growth EPI, TG, Epinephrine; hormone; acid; free FFA, triglyceride. fatty GH,

in (indicating abnormalities which dysplasia), ofmicrophallus occur cryptorchidism septo-optic can the gonadotropin boys and secretion). in in and presence and hepatomegaly simulating hepatitis. occur, Jaundice neonatal alsocan these the are usually infants presence normal deficiency, size Despite at ofGH birth. of

secretion primary adrenal cortisol variety can occur in a also causes. resulting of insufficiency, Deficient from congenital of result adrenal results it a Chapters 178). as deficiency 177 frequently (see often hyperplasia, and In infants most 21-hydroxylase from most children, seen and primary (see frequently in 178). Addison disease disorders adrenal In Chapter other insufficiency older is

requires the other or cortisol cortisol and an GH episode as GH after low Confirmation concentrations of hypoglycemia testing. of during detection or cause hypoglycemia serum stimulatory of the of deficiency contrast to positive In FFAs urine serum and and hyperinsulinism, at are time are elevated. the ketones of hypoglycemia the in deficient supplementation Treatment involves hormones of doses. physiologic

and glycogen, energy stores respond to tissue, Sufficient adipose form of appropriately hypoglycemia. necessary muscle are the in to are in premature Deficiencies hypoglycemia these small or a who of age common cause Chapter neonates for are stores gestational 60). in (see children. metabolic Beyond are in meet to except malnourished usually stores period, the sufficient early the energy neonatal requirements

seen in usually years and children common hypoglycemia of 18months 5 is of age. A new-onset between hypoglycemia, cause idiopathicketotic intercurrent often fasting, hypoglycemia settingof the an have period decreased a prolonged Patients with of illness of after symptoms feeding. in often history ofbeing Children small and disorder are have small withthis for and thin a may gestational age. to although from the fuel havinglower is muscle the condition to gluconeogenesis may mobilization of reserves. be Defective fuel derive cause, from mostly alanine thought there specific disorder, is are testsfor exclusion. of diagnostic this no diagnosis hypoglycemia a ketotic Because

of a involves of Treatment feedings avoidance and high-carbohydrate fasting diet. frequent high-protein, cannot Patients period require illness. IV a maintain of glucose may hospitalization for if oral infusion intake they adequate during to usually years 7 by spontaneously 8 of The disorder resolves age.

ketones) state glucose (FFAs acid Maintenance of glucose normal requires oxidation. of glycogenolysisand fatty in concentrations production serum gluconeogenesis via lipolysis via energysources and thefasting and production the and alternative

differ storage occur of subtypes in severity (see Chapter Glycogen 52). that variety a in diseases subtypes form glucose-6-phosphatase hepatomegaly, acidosis. is which by hypoglycemia, the characterized severe lactic hypoglycemia, retardation, Among in result massive that the severe deficiency, most is growth and in contrast, enzymes deficiencies or hepatomegaly In phosphorylase hypoglycemia. the with cause without glycogen isolated may

hepatomegaly of disease by a glycogen without finding diagnosis is The splenomegaly. of suggested storage liver of requires the diagnosis biopsy of biochemical leukocytes specific Confirmation specimens. or studies tube. during night involves feedings continuous and Treatment day via feedings high-carbohydrate at the nasogastric frequent some uncooked Feedings to overnight cornstarch concentrations are of in maintain patients. sufficient glucose serum

gluconeogenesis deficiency. uncommon fructose-1,6-diphosphatase deficiency and in carboxykinase are and Defects phosphoenolpyruvate include lactic Affected fasting and hypoglycemia, hepatomegaly, hyperuricemia. acidosis, patients exhibit Ketosis and occurs, alanine are and high. concentrations FFA Treatment involves high-carbohydrate, (see 52). Chapter frequent low-protein feedings

carnitine hereditary acid oxidation medium-chain, acyl-coenzyme dehydrogenase 55). acid and (see ketogenesis acyl-CoA long-chain, deficiency the include Chapter and A (CoA) of fatty deficiencies; disorders short-chain dehydrogenase deficiencies; Fatty medium-chain live in is in 1 common; deficiency Of occurs 9000 to disorders, acyl-CoA births. the most dehydrogenase these it 15,000 of or episode infancy well Patients have are years age in first often and at of the older. 2 hypoglycemia hypoglycemia with intercurrent Episodes or fasting prolonged occur usually illness. of during of episodes

hyperuricemia, mild elevations Mild hyperammonemia, hepatomegaly hepatic mild present in may be transaminases. and with along are or undetected. low concentrations Ketone confirmed acids The urine. is the diagnosis of concentrations in elevated of dicarboxylic by finding the Treatment involves fasting. of avoidance

Many disorders hereditary to 172-1). of (see lead disorders intolerance, metabolism including organic fructose Table metabolic acid galactosemia, can hypoglycemia, and to secondary Hypoglycemia global dysfunction of buildup hepatic is in these hepatotoxic intermediates. of the a usually disorders reflection affected. with bodies low ketogenesis present Many also of ketone disorders these concentrations of is because suggests hereditary of galactosemia intolerance. or substances diagnosis The finding in of the a fructose urine non–glucose-reducing after of of suggests fructose symptoms intolerance. fructose ingestion sucrose Occurrence hereditary or substances. requires the dietary offending restriction specific of Treatment

(see adverse 172-1). Table as effect an occur of Hypoglycemia can numerousmedications in to disorder oxidationdefects. acid toxicity similar fatty a the Valproate cause seen that can of ingestion younger the because depletion children, in Ethanol can results metabolism necessary cause forgluconeogenesis. also in the cofactors hypoglycemia,especially ofethanol

and a list in complex, Although patient establishing causes particular is the is important. long hypoglycemia the of of etiology Frequently hypoglycemic difficult diagnosis it make episode. sample time at until to and of one critical is urine of blood the accurate the a can obtain an be a measurement and for FFAs, before the glucose with should GH, acetoacetate. treatment unexplained β-hydroxybutyrate child and obtained and serum In sample cortisol, insulin, of hypoglycemia, a considered. of Measurement levels serum should lactate also be reducing A should urine be for ketones substances. measuring obtained and specimen in defect hyperinsulinism Hypoglycemia acid suggests ketonuria fatty a without oxidation. or metabolic most which testing The information and, if results are are regarding not, of whether of this responsible endocrine establish disorders types causes provide initial can initial likely. further be blood if for should and samples analysis, additional frozen of possible, necessary. Whenever urine

of mL/kg care patient with hypoglycemia of (2 water). in rapid Acute dextrose IV of a administration glucose 10% of consists glucose times the of rate 12 1.5 to normal in infants, should infusion to provide hepatic initial glucose approximately mg/kg/min an After mg/kg/min 8 the (8 production 6 children). bolus, IV in in certain disorders. allows prevents suppression for the with This metabolic further state infusion decompensation patients of catabolic and be suspected, If insufficiency of adrenal should administered. is doses stress glucocorticoids

Normal and nutritional, of many is pathway growth environmental, the (see final factors,including endocrine, common Chapter 5). geneticinfluences considered overall for good of and linear can well-being patternis of be growth the A abioassay whole normal child. health the evidence on 173-1. are growth listed inTable and ofcertain hormones ultimate The height effects itself stature as stature, psychological, factors influence and well-being. Just various social, economic influences potentially consequences medical stature psychosocial the causes of abnormal a concern family often attention. to about seek Parental

somatotrope stimulated factor (GRF) individual with (GH) a [SRIF]), receptors release interact Growth in the noncompetitive inhibited secretion their manner. by (somatostatin, pulsatile, factor hypothalamic which by factor is GH-releasing GH on inhibitory and somatotropin hormone release-inhibiting stimulated is the GH also ghrelin, in stomach. by produced GHBP receptors. reflects abundance (GHBP); circulates to bound GH the protein GH-binding a abundance GH of has many on also in (IGF-1) and tissues. GH direct effects production factor-1 tissue growth of secretion causes insulin-like and IGF-1 production production that liver the along with GH of and the the to acid-labile protein subunit IGF-binding (IGF-BP3); complex this stimulates IGF-1 delivers tissue. forms in

postnatal paracrine as associated acts IGF-1 agent growth. and autocrine and a primarily most closely with is to messengers produce second attaches growth physiology stimulated When the IGF-1 membrane-bound are change receptor, cell effects. and to the of its such disease, malnutrition, production states liver obesity. and disease or hypothyroidism, as is renal influenced chronic IGF-1 by

by early assays IGF-1 in IGF-1; measurable in influenced less IGF-BP3 and than and childhood. is and adequacy, clinical age IGF-BP3 is useful particularly in measuring infancy is nutrition is evaluating and GH

Measurement of Growth

the soles of another the hold infant’s correct still requires the feet head to an length The measurement with adult lower extend to the to perpendicular one and adult legs. infant’s the are be distance the infantometer, movable scale that the used caliper-likedevice, A exact or calipers determined. or plates between an as infant two can an plates on such so leads feet examining disorder the miss Marking head a of in false true or to and on may disorders of about sheet of infant create concerns paper the on child. table normal an growth position the of lying of growth a a and inaccuracies diagnosis for and plotted of (standing), www.cdc.gov/growthcharts/ growth charts length timely http:// ( for or Disease measurements the and down), weight should on be of the disorders growth Control (lying Centers Accurate Prevention height

a height in measured standing the years After the should be age, child position. of 2 of a the in be should surface. barefoot hard against position Children standing measured for measurement device or of stadiometer stature. equivalent Harpenden the optimal A is in than measurement growing 1.25 of the leading rather inappropriate a of cm the referral be many in when decrease lying is child who roughly occur not in children position appear to position, to subspecialist. the the A to may measured standing height

the when short-limbed or Marfan arm conditions diagnoses Klinefelter is other syndrome, the or are dysmorphic of span of dwarfism, considered. essential Measurement the both surface. is the while patient as of distance when against span tips holds the between outstretched standing a the solid arms fingers measured horizontally Arm of segment. from floor measurement segment ratio The is the [known pubis symphysis lower as the segment upper-to-lower the total the subtraction of the from to to lower the height) segment] the upper (determined by ratio the age. with This changes ratio normal term A

LE, from Normal growth. and Van Adapted Underwood Wyk JJ: aberrant ed 1992, Textbook of Wilson Endocrinology, Foster DW, JD, editors: In WB Philadelphia, 8,

Saunders. in patients with most treatment. *Effect

a 1-year-old infant has has upper-to-lower 10-year-old ratio and ratio of 1:1. of an a 1.4:1, of ratio a a 1.7:1, has puberty, untreated the until after suspected a child. not an long-lasting to age and normal leads lead upper-tolower onset commonly of decreased ratio high whereas ratio hypothyroidism greatly of to discerned hypogonadism, adult, Conditions for in or upper-to-lower in the

Hormone of Endocrine Secretion Growth Evaluation

StudentConsult.com @ Available

Fig. secreted and GH gland the pituitary GRF under of a is SRIF the by (see acid protein 191–amino control 170-2). α-adrenergic stress inhibited enhanced β-adrenergic early stimulation sleep, secretion exercise, hyperglycemia. and and of and by is starvation, stimulation, GH hypoglycemia, stages by of sufficiency basis or early of random in determination of the is throughout a of a secretory of or GH middle the are for Because brief low on peaks the night impossible. concentrations GH single concentration the GH daytime deficiency except day, ascertainment morning, the determined of stimulation Adequacy may measure a GH to be by peak secretion test GH secretion. stimulation; GH lack peak response vigorous a consistent deficiency. normal peak is secretory with a such the after of A is false-positive high 10% rate any However normal not of stimulatory (on tests). reach there normal after or the more is about children a may day, peak GH even two GH better secretion, measurements for considered as Indirect deficiency. concentrations IGF-BP3, of of screens such serum are IGF-1 GH and

same the mediate fetal are factors growth The for not the factors that responsible growth. as postnatal achieves fetuses although birth normal from although resistance Thyroid essential fetus thyroid subjects. GH-deficient similarly IGF-1 postnatal deficiency has a hormone normal resulting control a a GH than length; are shorter birth length, hormone–deficient is for a fetus normal growth, dwarfism), (Laron in secretion thyroid to is hormone the necessary of allow Adequate GH. Hypothyroid thyroid with secretion to GH may GH normalizes. patients be repletion, deficient; appear hormone falsely pubertal are steroids the in Gonadal growth spurt. important are 173-1. hormones other Table in effects growth The on noted of

Causes of Stature Nonendocrine Short

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Short consideration. age, the defined and heightsinto of otherchildren subnormal to relative taking family height as same gender stature is conditions(Table It numerous be 173-2). caused by can The growth demarcation of limit. lower and charts Disease Control the 3rd the the of the percentile Centers as curve for use Prevention growth slow denotes rate of a stature. regardless Growth failure growth if processis decreased stature becomes growth rate Ultimately stature, aslow a leads the short. is disease growth sooner detected to short rate but noted beforethe curve for 5th below age percentile velocity with crosses (Fig. appears that associated height percentiles a of as downwardand a chart, on a growth growthfailure velocity Plotted the height is 173-1). is the child (see genetic well helps whetherthe target, growing 6). mid-parental, determine for or corrected A family Chapter height (4 under 10 standard in.). the family cm States, United Todetermine for the by2 height corrected midparental height bracketed of isapproximately a deviations which, consideration, range the (SDs), for normal is or mid-parental height 5th age, the 3.5 height a target The a height mean, below for presence requires corrected percentilefor height evaluation. below SDsbelow height the the a diagnostic velocity of a

important the a Nutrition factor affecting 28). (see is on worldwide growth Chapter most basis or in a as result or caused Failure as deprivation(nutritional thrive interaction) of or a malabsorption, infant form organic of develop psychosocial result illness losses maternal nutrient deficiency the aberrant of a hypermetabolism (anorexia, through to may

adrenal Diabetes hyperplasia under adult) Diabetes vitamin D-resistant Hypophosphatemic (untreated) control short congenital (tall poor child, Virilizing insipidus rickets Exogenous mellitus

P-450c11 deficiencies P-450c21,

Dysmorphic Cornelia dysgenesis) (syndrome 21 Prader-Willi (pseudo-Turner of or Turner syndrome syndromes syndrome (e.g., abnormalities Autosomal Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl trisomy Noonan Russell-Silver syndrome) syndrome gonadal Autosomal syndrome 13, 18,

Malabsorption Inflammatory bowel (e.g., celiac Disorders disease) Gastrointestinal disorders disease swallowing of

by caused neoplasms deficiency chemotherapy Hereditary Zinc Cerebral Iron Malnutrition for deficiency palsy intolerance marasmus fructose Anorexia Kwashiorkor,

Modified Styne Growth disorder. DM: from editor: CT, 1986, of Norwalk, Clinical Lange. Appleton Fitzgerald Endocrinology, PA, & Handbook In immunodeficiency growth syndrome; central growth IGF, CNS, Acquired GH, hormone; AIDS, system; nervous factor. insulin-like intake severely if *Only is diminished. caloric

21). other (see hyperthyroidism or causes) Chapter by also psychosocial affect normalizes, growth and can difficulties environment, physiology occurs. GH growth, logical in Psycho-psychosocial as placed deficiency result deprivation func-The by of in healthier or of as or constitutional condition normal the is different, and growth, considered GH in as delay when growth dwarfism, poor develops growth a puberty known physiologic a tional child a or psychological a tempo, which both caused abuse; of temporary variation cadence, or common reduced in

of linear growth. Figure 173-1 Patterns with for and Constitutional pubertal growth spurt, stature). of percentiles achievement with bone curves Normal and of are growth growth delay adolescence normal shown growth adult delayed age, (5th, 95th) growth for stature along and normal eventual 50th, typical rate (short A, stature adult). as (short childhood in B, and short stature Familial an Chapter untreated 5). primary C, hypothyroidism) Acquired pathologic failure (see growth (e.g., acquired

development (see Fig. 173-1). delayed a Usually achieved puberty normal had final or but a family height. member growth the lower mostly limits of but within normal. bone is remains rate age The the growth delayed, Constitutional in delay sexual delay leads a usually development. to secondary familial of parents. reach short short parents, yet stature to than who of stature or normal 173-3) these expected child the and lower for is a average refers (Table a to Genetic height malnourished of grew the predictive. are the children, up zone the a suffered were war, heights famine, as less If in parents of parents or there ethnicity, the significant in ethnic groups between are most Although height difference with of differences result the in is nutrition. stature associated

underlying an features chromosomaldisorder can in syndromes. suggesting many occur Phenotypic and syndromes upper-to-lower arm can segmentratios. spans These to attending besuspected by obese children 173-2). (see than otherwise syndromes skeletal andphysical normal Table obesity and have combine maturation advanced development average usuallytaller whereas decreasedheight, and often are Genetic portion syndrome postnatal the hypotonia, fetal abnormalities (acromicria), (small 15q11-q13. the infantile insatiableappetite, hypogonadism, developmental of and and The 15th feet acquired at an chromosome small includes hands with almond-shapedeyes, delay, ribonucleicparticle) of Prader-Willi snRNP nuclear obesity and paternal have to25% which both the uniparental of in 20% mother. deletion from Mostcases but disomy, the about sequence, chromosomes 15derive have Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl and characterized with inheritance is syndrome autosomal dominant developmental pigmentosa, hypogonadism, pattern. an retinitis by delay paraplegia; obesity syndrome is associated associatedwith syndrome Laurence-Moon polydactyly. and with Bardet-Biedl spastic is resultant digits (Albright fourthand short parathyroid hypocalcemia,and short hormone phosphorus. hereditary and to with to developmental Pseudohypoparathyroidismleads phenotype),resistance levels and of osteodystrophy fifth delay elevated stature serum syndrome arch extremities,high-arched the with stature, presents nipples, dysplasias mosaic of a by or palate, wide-carrying karyotypeand aortic normal and abnormalities. 45XO of failure, function, kidney with upper characterized karyotype by is chest, angle clinically a Turner wide-spaced short gonadal shield to autoimmune often girlsare susceptible Affected disorders.

@ Available StudentConsult.com

@ Available StudentConsult.com

children. congenital 1 10,000 4000 in about or in GH idiopathic deficiency 1 occurs Classic to in Idiopathic and etiology, congenital is both specific unidentified GH common of cause deficiency. of GH deficiency, acquired most the GH gland, aplasia defects by anatomic of other pituitary deficiency deficiency degrees defects, pituitary variable functions. of the caused is such often of pituitary Less or as with midline other GRF, of GH defects forms differentiation gene the GH are for of pituitary receptor. that GH, of deficiency affect the Hereditary or heterogeneous result secretion. intermediate of secretion may decreased children GH; Classic short reduced of deficiencyrefers have forms GH numerous to GH absent to very the Tables the (see deficiency area late-onset growth tumor compression 173-3). of of Acquired suggests the a or and hypothalamus failure 173-2 GH possibility of pituitary causing causing

near-normal noticeably birth, to Infants achieve but normal length growth age deficiency after 3 with congenital or weight rate GH 2 and most term, a after years. slows at the birth tend and and age shorter ratio, for become progressively short. an to These elevated chubby weight-to-height have children appearing suggest in life diagnosis year the elude patients several age. most years diagnosis, the of may but first of Careful measurements until high-pitched deficiency patient voice from (a the an chubby, immature a with cherub classic appearance resulting a GH A with appearance), of has immature

Normal or deletion Normal or mosaic 45,X of partial X chromosome Normal Normal Karyotype Normal Normal

patient Usually bone Low normal high normal for Possibly Normal Usually Stimulated low, malnourished Low or GH if Normal age

ACTH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone; hormone; thyrotropin-releasing GnRH, hormone; hormone; Adrenocorticotropic thyroxine. CRH, TRH, T4, hormone; GH, growth corticotropin-releasing with deficiency. TRH or CRH, *Possibly GnRH,

CBC nutritional, disease, malignancy chronic Anemia:

bone Leukopenia: marrow syndromes failure

malignancy, infection Thrombocytopenia:

malignancy diseases, CRP Inflammation of ESR, infection, inflammatory

Metabolic (electrolytes, liver of enzymes, status acute adrenal hydration acid-base renal, or chronic BUN) dysfunction; Signs hepatic, and panel

folate, Assess celiac Carotene, celiac prothrombin and disease time; detect panel malabsorption; antibody

with Urinalysis of and hydration, pH acidosis water renal dysfunction, tubular Signs renal homeostasis; salt

glioma, imaging hypothalamic-pituitary defects Cranial Assesses (craniopharyngioma, congenital or midline (MRI) germinoma) tumors

evaluate with and height age age Bone height Compare potential

status nutrition hormone growth or IGF-BP3 IGF-1, Reflects

disease in Elevated Prolactin or pituitary in hypothalamic suppressed dysfunction destruction,

nitrogen; protein; urea factor-binding growth 3; IGF-BP3, blood erythrocyte imaging. resonance insulin-like complete ESR, magnetic sedimentation CBC, MRI, CRP, IGF-1, C-reactive count; BUN, rate; growth protein Blood insulin-like factor-1;

larynx. normal and mentation, defects) (midline affects speech. head (CNS) nervous severe the or system includes the hypoglycemia central defect has a occurs growth age-appropriate intellectual patient that of Unless dysraphism GH 5 (a cm]) isolated or with without hypoglycemia. with Male penile length deficiency to cm microphallus have of 3 and a gonadotropin [normal may fasting stretched is <2 deficiency neonates (ACTH, gluconeogenesis. have in adrenocorticotropic because hormone cortisol more stimulates to also Patients profound stimulates GH cortisol) addition who lack the may hypoglycemia

GH A failure resistance postreceptor cause function is defect. by caused a number growth by receptors GH rare of of very GH or or abnormal insensitivity, or have nasal and delayed sclerae, sparse blood bone involving hypercholesterolemia, low delayed Laron bridge, Patients hypoplastic hair, adiposity, forehead, recessive mutations dentition, blue maturation progressive the of and syndrome, with osteoporosis, a the autosomal receptor, glucose. GH prominent low. and concentrations have serum are They elevated serum GH IGF-1 although IGF-BP3 concentrations, liver may serum Malnutrition, is acquired severe disease elevated medications IGF-1 (corticosteroids), cause is or GH decreased. GH because resistance and

a and other function, anemia, a malabsorption. a and tests history to to complete to panel rule rule liver folate outceliac family should reflect rule levels celiac evaluate nutrition metabolic screening include or and out kidney If (CBC) bloodcount a not and does disease, medical out carotene provide likelydiagnosis, panelto A theevaluation of aids in urinalysis function. renal and assess for renal serum can Urinary tubular acidosis. bicarbonate pH In karyotype girl explanation another without syndrome. for out stature, short Turner a a mayrule A age bone skeletal establish will maturation.

commonly and normal If (Table or tests stimulatory out Table stature short testing laboratory are is two disease 170-2). familial performed (see 173-4), chronic routine GH ruled are >3.5 mean), when whose for who growing poorly is age, projection, based SDs bone considerably percentile is offered height. the corrected short testing should below age), GH (<5th family usually patient growth height on a height be and percentile for to target the rate below (<5th or

after not GH-deficient an stimulation. Classic in serum levels GH show do increase patients secretagogue to but spontaneously in GH Some cannot release or the GH testing during response release night. patients day not a establishing serum but GH IGF-1 suggested and consistently helpful deficiency. Measuring of IGF-BP3 is diagnosis in variable. specific, GH fairly very are and Tests not for insensitive, secretion of grow GH an when definition administered than treatment. of deficiency GH that operational might patients a equivocal cases, In dose faster before be significantly normal

treated deficiency GH. recombinant GH biosynthetic DNA–derived is with to is titrated rate. the growth Dosage of Treatment capital incidence in risk of the an rapidly femoral of growing epiphysis, especially pseudotumor GH carries and adolescents, cerebri. with slipped increased

responsiveness controversial, secretagogues noted diagnostic imperfect; GH extremely explanation, slowly of the patient patients is to GH alternative to Administration sometimes if tests as growing earlier, without are is used. with normal GH is but, therapy failure; in is increasing is in effective GH final the and in Turner syndrome. muscle treatment and and used renal also chronic GH stature weakness Prader-Willi syndrome of for short height growth of rate of indications for age SDs catch-up with the Other short who by height idiopathic gestational 2.25 growth less children the small 2 include born exhibited not of below long-term and stature age mean. or treatment have years stature of support important. is Psychological short children severe with Although stature there are measures. may of short be supportive marital decreased life, vocational is in and status, children not controversy, with satisfaction given who achievement

changes and in discussed Chapter of pubertal are of staging The 67. events the sequence onset The and marked pubarche of gonadarche. by puberty is odor. Pubarche skin, with the oiliness other pubic hair hair; body acne, adrenal or features and axillary include and marked adrenarche of is and hair, results from maturation of appearance increasing steroids of of axis. the by as characterized a gonadal the secretion hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal maturation sex of result is Gonadarche These from and sex gender, progesterone ovaries. and consisting steroids testes of estradiol from the the differ testosterone by and deeper increased facial physical males increased pubic hair, increased size, are testicular hair, volume. penile muscularity, axillary In signs voice, hair, In size the physical cycles. of and females breast development, of development uterus, the regular with menarche are signs female menstrual increased body the habitus, spurt component The of third puberty. the is growth

follicle-stimulating the the Hypothalamic and hormone luteinizing arcuate system (GnRH), pituitary hormone nucleus, the the secreted pituitary of into the (LH) release cause production (FSH) median circulation. and eminence the gonadotropes the produced hormone by hypothalamus in into reaches the to gonadotropin-releasing on portal from and is cells receptors of membrane again fetus until the active onset the activity in suppressed but puberty. years axis increases the The and childhood in at hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal newborn of is is

causes supportof corpus luteum. in formation puberty, and stimulates later ovarian of production and, estrogen FSH In the females the tubules. and stimulates of the productionof in development the support LH puberty, later from the testosterone FSHstimulates Leydig the In seminiferous cells; males The and produce also sex the gonadotropins. the protein inhibin.Both inhibin steroids of secretion gonads suppress interplay of gonadotropins. serum of the GnRH products the the modulates concentrations of The gonadsand episodic the duringdevelopment menstrual that GnRH is in vary period. and pulses during released in released gonadotropins pulsatile are a that pulsesensure These manner. puberty, increases, sex in the amplitude night then With and ofgonadotropins the onset turn, steroids the pulses day. throughout the firstat the of of and, androstenedione. heraldedby is gonadarche Adrenarche earlier several than circulating generallyoccurs increasing (DHEA)or years dehydroepiandrosterone and DHEA years of Serum before theappearance its effects. increases

3 2 thelarche (due finally pubarche sequence years to by closely girls (due gonadarche) in is The developmental adrenarche) to to and menarche, normal later. followed testes first 4 enlargement greater testis by the pubic boys by than volume 2.5 of greater the and than mL). is scrotal thinning of normal of hair (long appearance followed diameter cm, the event In the is seminiferous testes the result during Most of the of enlargement tubule of puberty maturation.

@ Available StudentConsult.com

of there years Puberty in and years delayed 13 no when the by girls and boys living United 14 in 174-1 sign pubertal in age States (Tables is 174-2). is development

delay equal below a bone pubertal as delay the and of development onset standard mean, a constitutional is teenager). significant 2-year which Patients have age 1.5to deviations to delay delayed (2 with heights, parental based height Chapter the patient genetic should close age bone of potential, on reinterpreted when 173). for The the the remain to (see the Usuallyheight the to, is growth fairly percentiles gain although below, on normal curve. parallel or growth pubertal The nadir, or is before prepubertal spurt, their prolonged deceleration protracted. is reassuring. or A in sibling parent family history delayed puberty a of 11 Spontaneous these in years in the boys and bone years puberty the patients 12 usually girls. by begins time reaches age in constitutional diagnosis of in before is puberty must be puberty of a delay delayed Other made. causes eliminated are Observation and appropriate. reassurance height generally genetic potential is attained. Adult normal the for age few is if be In least cases, testosterone a treated low-dose for with months may 12 years. to some the 11 at boys bone endogenous to than because required is longer for 4 ensues. months not 8 hormone Treatment production usually not be should of causes hormone for hypogonadism. other production initiate who evaluated endogenous do Boys are treatment benefits. but been Estrogen with clear added the no used girls constitutional has delay, studies in there showing evaluated Young primary be delayed women for amenorrhea. with puberty need to may

cause 174-1 to or delay and (see Tables may puberty, 174-2). constitutional from delayed a of hypogonadotropic As absent hypogonadism be difficult distinguish hypogonadism to some precludes usually degree. entry into gonadarche; occurs Hypogonadotropic adrenarche spontaneous puberty, hypogonadotropic and patients with in normal hypogonadism proportions childhood and Throughout growth. have early normal, grow these bones because their longer span proportions mayensue of height. greater than an and producing normal limit below their for arm ratio 0.9 an patients upper-to-lower adulthood, eunuchoid reach the of long than When lower is (GH) microphallus. and have concurrent growth exceptionally If may the has stature infancy hormone patient diagnosed deficiency, with a a condition short, in however, been

Tumors Congenital Other germinoma, causes therapy (craniopharyngioma, prolactinoma) malformations Radiation glioma,

deficiencies ballet systemic gonadal gonadotropin Hypothyroidism (Turner forms Familial and sporadic hypogonadism (exercise syndrome XX dysgenesis syndrome gonadal Familial disorders Miscellaneous and and Anorchia Anorexia Noonan variants Functional mellitus Syndrome Klinefelter and failure amenorrhea of XY of XY variants Other tubular puberty primary gonadal amenorrhea) its Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl its variants sporadic forms of XX seminiferous Hypergonadotropic testicular Prader-Willi dysgenesis cryptorchidism Idiopathic Cushing syndrome disease and of variants forms and and of Impaired its in and dysgenesis Chronic and and malnutrition female its and multiple syndrome syndrome) primary nervosa Other Diabetes dancers dysgenesis Galactosemia deficiency menarche (syndrome failure pituitary dysgenesis) genetic hormone disease Hyperprolactinemia gonadal ovarian delayed Psychogenic and athletes

Grumbach Puberty. from MM, DM: Styne Modified Textbook Foster Endocrinology, DW, WB Wilson editors: Philadelphia, ed In of Saunders. Williams 9, 1998, JD,

Central nervous CNS, system.

such disease including syndromes, include Prader-Willi, Kallmann hypogonadism defects, infiltrative many (hemochromatosis), cause and can congenital that syndromes. midline Laurence-Moon-Bardet-Biedl, as tumors, Disorders hypopituitarism, and pituitary isolated inability release an result no a of universally the GnRH). is gonadotropin If to patient has gonadotropins abnormality, but absent other (almost there deficiency to time when growth accelerated the growth the normally they growth characteristic spurt. grow the of spurt, until Patients normal experience of fail the pubertal

olfaction. combines Kallmann isolated syndrome of with gonadotropin disorders deficiency sense both. patients have some othershave heterogeneity; decreased genetic smell, of and is a have reproduction, some abnormal There or at chromosome) gene. KAL2 but number have Most casesare a 22.3 KAL1 of may inthe patients Xp mutations sporadic (X gene to area, neurons medial migrating in the remain primitive GnRH basal rather location nasal hypothalamus. the at The causes mutation to ineffectuallylocated the thecorrect than on often are olfactory and (MRI). imaging resonance magnetic absent sulci Olfactorybulbs the Other fourth bone, of hand, with kidney. the absent one ofthe include otherhand, disorders hand metacarpal copying and shortened symptoms movements an

System Central the Nervous of Abnormalities

StudentConsult.com Available @

pituitary system including adenoma, prolactinoma, of tumors, deficiency. or nervous gonadotropin Central glioma, are important causes (CNS) craniopharyngioma, peak any may posterior the ofanterior type and deficiency. havea in or hormone years Craniopharyngiomas incidence teenage cause sella when the Craniopharyngiomasusually they turcica calcify, expand. eroding on impinge hemianopsia atrophy. to leading bitemporal Theymay the and optic optic chiasm, astrocytomas affect tumors include and pubertaldevelopment Other gliomas. may that

of of pituitary is hormones. Idiopathic the absence hypopituitarism congenital various combinations more occur this autosomal disorder common. X-linked family are hypopituitarism patterns, in idiopathic in types Although recessive or constellations, of sporadic congenital may gonadotropin occurs as well. deficiency adrenocorticotropic hormone if GH male manifest with Congenital deficiency especially seizures, hypoglycemia a with in or hypopituitarism may and with and microphallus with deficiency GH associated a

Syndromes Hypogonadism Hypogonadotropic of

@ StudentConsult.com StudentConsult.com @ Available Available

in usually Normal chronologic normal for later for growth adolescence pubertal and Prepubertal, age, delay Normal age, for later Prepubertal, appropriate chronologic Prepubertal, Short later pubertal Low

Grumbach From Styne MM, Puberty. DM: Textbook Philadelphia, Wilson Williams JD, editors: Endocrinology, 9, of Saunders. Foster In DW, 1997, ed WB gonadotropin-releasing GnRH, hormone; sulfate; luteinizing Dehydroepiandrosterone hormone. DHEAS, LH,

weight. less than weight gonadotropin Hypogonadism when dieting, chronic lossto ideal malnutrition, disease voluntary of Decreased or in results Hypergonadotropic function 80% occurs nervosa is charac- Anorexia

Available weight disorders striking by terized @ and (seeChapter StudentConsult.com 70). psychiatric loss girls, orminimal, of absent or depending level Primary loss weight on and the is is in pubertal the frequently found atonset. secondary affected development and age amenorrhea weight not to the the ideal level reverse immediately condition. Regaining may menstrual activity, athletic physical deficiency decreased weight function activity can interrupted, in when and Increased frequency to is evenwithout amenorrhea; physical gonadotropin menstrual lead loss, mayreturn. inflammatory delay lead mellitus, illness amenorrhea pubertal systemic to fibrosis, bowel hematologicdiseases) Chronic diabetes dysfunction. to or disease, cystic or can fromhypothalamic (e.g., or the puberty inhibits periods. delays Hypothyroidism of and menstrual onset lead precociouspuberty. primary to hypothyroidism Converselysevere may

by elevated from resulting is Hypergonadotropic low sex gonadotropins hypogonadism gonadal characterized steroid primary and levels failure. not condition following permanent lack and into gonadarche is throughout is entry of This the always almost suspected childhood. diagnosed time of do than around shortly increase puberty. greater the before not to Gonadotropins until normal or normal

Ovarian failure elevated diagnosed by gonadotropins. is syndrome, Turner is ovarian and common syndrome the gonadal of stature. cause of dysgenesis, failure a short are 45,XO, The of the mosaicism abnormalities chromosome karyotype classically possible. X but or is other of in 2000 syndrome The births. incidence 1 3000 to in Turner is 1 Turner evident history. a features with of syndrome physical by examination not on The or need girl be girl a who The any is considered must be short diagnosis history. without contributory in patients develop malignancy of other Patients galactosemia failure. with ovarian radiation or chemotherapy well types therapy may treated dysgenesis as as and for undergoing gonadal

of dysgenesis) isthe testicular common tubular syndrome Klinefelter (seminiferous most failure. cause more karyotype X variants with chromosomes are possible. but is47,XXY, The 1 1 in males. 500 in 1000 to is Theincidence approximately in until however function be LH at close spared; seminiferous causing whereas normal be tubular is may usually are unequivocally Leydig infertility.Commonly levels characteristically cell more normal, function elevated. mid-puberty,because FSHlevels lost, to least levels may be may Testosterone to elevated, of secondary age inadequate onsetof because normal, The function. sexual changes of is usually puberty Leydig maynot cell progress but

StudentConsult.com Available @

be addition considered mentioned, girls to lack other with when ofmenses. conditionsneed In to evaluating diagnoses other occurs The syndrome in the 4000 to uterus of ofcongenital absence Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser births. in 5000female 1 normal presents sexualdevelopment also secondary with without hymen by orvaginal Anatomic septum obstruction imperforate menstruation. including syndrome, upper ovaries, vagina, and androgen subjects müllerian or uterus, lacking; feminization, all are hair, tubes, fallopian karyotype primary 46,XY, complete The testes. amenorrhea.In the intra-abdominal normal third includes syndromeof axillary pubic structures, and insensitivity have this of is and the absence of

hypogonadotropic whether to of patient after is levels sexual gonadotropin limits the hypergonadotropic present obtained Table When determine hypogonadism serum has pubertal no (see be age a secondary normal the should development, upper development or 174-2). in is and gonadotropin conditions. are growth constitutional differentiation between hypogonadism Based difficult; levels gonadotropin only, the the hypogonadotropic both on in low delay measurements observation or necessary months is is before the for Sometimes years diagnosis confirmed. pelvic females structures in helpful would Ultrasound the of in delayed be of workup puberty. the

apparent, is a indicated. sexsteroids replacement If is permanent with condition (starting estradiol,low-dose mg in given 25, at a at a progestational gonadal low is 10 (5 mg), to daily normal which to months menstrual by6 transdermal and (5 ethinyl later) acetate started agent, period. to time 20 increasing are daily, added 25 thenormal increases 0.625 mg mg mimic asmedroxyprogesterone to 12 until hormones dosefor days induce or 0.9 estrogens estradiol is μg) with conjugated breakthroughbleeding or occurs, doses to cycling days; on such a in Females to 0.3 bleeding (oral be agents combined after occurs. and may used contraceptives) breakthrough Alternatively estrogen progesterone 4 with (50 to progressive increased levels. with enanthateor In hypergonadotropic 100 is males and intramuscularly 100 hypogonadotropic monthly for to hypogonadism, mg are to appropriate doses mg) a gradually given 200 once regimen cypionate patients increaseto testosterone starting is or adult every weeks.This usedfor of agents hepatotoxicity. Oral not are fear by sex-appropriate who passed the 6-monthcourse upper have, 3to limits low-dose, of normal Patients steroids may given gonadal puberty onset spontaneous a puberty with definition, constitutionaldelay to apparent be occurs. seewhether of puberty in of once This of repeated boneage. advancement course undue of therapymight without be bone at form of is are risk All intake adequate density; any calcium fordecreased with delayed essential. puberty patients with and programmable have, unlikely fertility. hypothalamic-releasing an are schedule.Subjects definition, on able may by hypogonadism fertility achievespontaneous hypogonadotropic pump with gonadotropin be problem a by hypogonadism a primary appropriate to toachieve gonadal administered hormone administration the by hypergonadotropic therapyor therapy of Patients pulsatile

induction GH human secondary include replacement promoting syndrome, therapy exogenous therapy. characteristics of and estrogen/progesterone low-dose subjects Turner the growth and supplementation goals the with of with menses of In with sexual cyclic pregnancies successful vitro Turner fertilization donor Patients had in have support. and endocrine ovum with with after syndrome a

@ Available StudentConsult.com

in Puberty Male in Precocious Puberty Precocious the the Female

secondary past puberty) 9 boys compared to girls, in historical the studies 20 174-4).During years in or years, to classically Europe the reported occurring data. years as before development 8 (Tables States 174-3 (precocious breast as and development is girls Sexual earlier precocity age United defined sexual from the 15 of in and to to onset 1990s an age at in American the 1940s. in earlier Studies puberty the 1930s and girls suggest clearly 1980s compared the However age slightly occurred menarche at or earlier. same at time time span seemed breast have Thus to development to increased. the menarche from the or typical exogenous influence The that reflect sequence events. may factors findings lifestyle could pubertal of

resulting precocious activation from the hypothalamic-pituitarygonadal in of axis (GnRH-dependent). emanates premature Central puberty, gonadarche, precocious Peripheral

congenital disorders after Other treatment True CNS of adrenal precocious virilizing late puberty hyperplasia

pituitary locations chorioepithelioma, (hepatoblastoma) adenoma (e.g., (hCG-dependent Chorionic of the tumors Tumors CNS CNS in precocity) LH-secreting teratoma) germinoma, tumors gonadotropin-secreting sexual outside

androgen testis 11-hydroxylase deficiency) adrenal (21-hydroxylase Increased deficiency, adrenal or hyperplasia by secretion Congenital

adrenal (Congenital neoplasms estrogen extraglandular ovarian Females 3β-Hydroxysteroid Adrenal hyperplasia, deficiency, deficiency, steroids neoplasms Virilizing (feminization) of P-450c11 arrhenoblastomas) adrenal to Males neoplasm Virilizing P-450c21 Increased dehydrogenase (virilization) deficiency) (e.g., conversion circulating

From DM: Styne Puberty. Grumbach MM, DW, WB 9, JD, Williams of Foster ed 1998, Philadelphia, Endocrinology, In editors: Textbook Wilson Saunders. hCG, hormone. nervous human hormone; system; chorionic gonadotropin; Central LH, GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing CNS, luteinizing

adrenarche, hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal involve axis does puberty, not (GnRH-independent). the or gonadarche

steroid precocious consistent secretion, is every pubertal development too increased of pulsatile with age, stature, and tall advanced somatic response to central LH and In of endocrine GnRH. early; and but aspect bone this includes increased normal age physical sex gonadotropin puberty, and puberty clinical central precocious may The wane. course of wax on basis. precocious in is individuals who begin early Benign diagnosis constitutional or familial the puberty puberty a presumptive occurs which is more determined, much in no idiopathic be girls If diagnosis than boys. cause can puberty, often precocious the in well, adrenarche, Obese girls. appropriate-weight than have girls menarche sometimes earlier as and a of CNS such and higher with precocious precipitating hamartomas, incidence as with disorders, the Compared boys puberty girls, have tumors precocious puberty.

puberty including that cysts, hydrocephalus, Almost meningitis, suprasellar central retardation, condition epilepsy, encephalitis, irradiation, puberty and any considered affects mental precocious precipitate be precocious trauma, central before head the can is and CNS, must diagnosed. is or nonmalignant Hamartomas of appearance are rarely tuber the cinereum required. characteristic tomography tumors biopsy MRI; a with (CT) computed on of neurons precocious and puberty. The mass cause secrete GnRH GnRH neoplasms, attention. neurosurgical not are Although they true hamartomas may require is medical puberty GnRH is therapy surgery The indicated. precocious responsive and rarely with agonists, resulting to

masses are precocious not Other benign. that puberty cause produce or pineal sexual structure the which precocity receptor prepubertal cause boys of (hCG), Germinomas tumors that LH LH with noncalcifying of between human are because similarity hCG). hypothalamic the in and may frequently gonadotropin chorionic cross-reacts (hCG or the Optic astrocytomas, CNS (with pubertal disrupting childhood. of may negative and precocious the ependymomas gliomas areas the restraint normally without cause development of inhibit hypothalamic or by puberty that throughout neurofibromatosis), contributes to radiotherapy, which may a risk for tumors require These hypopituitarism. significant

Available @ StudentConsult.com

in Puberty Precocious Female the

bone macules girls au with and polyostotic dysplasia, cutaneous lait spots). of boys gonadarche, most fibrous The and frequent is common more cause McCune-Albright precocious (café a GnRH-independent disorder precocious in hyperpigmented puberty, includes syndrome, than cyst results secretion. formation, precocious ovarian The episodic to from and leading sometimes estrogen hyperfunction gonadarche disorder a results This post-conception from somatic

scan Normal pubertal MRI values of values age brain to 3 yr Pubertal Pubertal puberty precocious of Pubertal True of

Grumbach Styne DM: Puberty. MM, from Modified Philadelphia, Textbook JD, In Wilson DW, 9, Saunders. editors: ed Williams Endocrinology, 1997, of WB Foster CNS, luteinizing hCG, CT, hormone; LH, Central tomography; human sulfate; MRI, gonadotropin-releasing system; resonance hormone; GnRH, chorionic DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone imaging. gonadotropin; computed magnetic nervous *In supersensitive assays.

the cyclase, bone, organs to trophic (specifically mutation in signaling activation stimulation), of ovary, Gsa, reason. G adenylate hyper-function leads of may in which cAMP constitutive in absence unregulated intracellular same the other system cells protein the endocrine skin; also and hormone autonomously of and in the affected for or may acromegaly hyperadrenalism, Hyperthyroidism, occur. as child or a secrete feminize production may of of a usually production child carcinomas as of result such of DHEA; adrenal adrenal the a a may virilize estrogen. androgens, as result androgen Adrenal the adenomas

familial a on GnRH-independent with have may Leydig of cell the sexual gonadarche precocious precocity called entity basis premature rare maturation. Boys the produces of This secretion cell or hCG. LH requiring X-limited continuous germ condition, of by dominant LH leads activation without that constitutive caused production receptor with maturation defect, and testosterone to an

hCG-secreting stimulate LH tumors secretion. increase receptors and The testosterone various the pineal be These (dysgerminomas) found liver places, gland may tumors or the including in (hepatoblastoma).

once recurrent. may or occur cysts Ovarian may be values High mimic may ovarian serum estrogen tumors. virilization Congenital hyperplasia 178). a Chapter girls is cause (see in of (CAH) adrenal

Evaluation of Sexual Precocity

effects,or step precocity to sexual whether 67) in determinewhich The are present of (seeChapter first characteristics estrogen are apparent puberty both normal is (see and 174-4). androgen evaluating effects, Table manifests girls estrogeneffect development, the eventually, In increase,and, uterine menarche. as breast and and the skin as manifest effect hair,and androgen adult facial boys body pubic oiliness odor, axillary and girls acne. Both whether is note boys the inlength cm more (4 which it than volume), In importantto mL 2.5 enlarged implies testes gonadarche. also are progressing, enlarged adrenal the glands exogenous is testes the virilization are not androgens or source sources. the be but may of If the

levels baseline includes Laboratory DHEAS and [dehydroepiandrosterone steroid (testosterone, of gonadotropinconcentrations. or sulfate], determination evaluation androstenedione) sex estradiol, secretion secretionis pulsatile by The rates nature childhoodand and throughout adolescents low characterized secretory in adults. of inherent gonadotropin precocious values puberty is elevated central If pubertalrange, normal are the likely. baselinegonadotropin into immediate no versus bedrawn however, GnRH-independentprecocious may conclusion low, puberty. If are baseline to as gonadotropins GnRH-dependent responsiveness often distinction GnRH gonadotropin assessment requires stimulation. the of to This FSH Aprepubertal whereas a more predominant. LH is is response response predominant, pubertal GnRH primary precocious useful hypothyroidism hormonedetermination cause can also Thyroid puberty. incomplete severe is because appropriate hepatic, the testicular), tumor suggestion of a isindicated. adrenal, of (CNS, there or or MRI a CNS If anomaly ovarian, is location a of of precocious mandates The CNS puberty be an diagnosis that performed. the central MRI

analogs histrelin superactive (leuprolide puberty. the are Long-acting, choice treatment central of precocious GnRH depot) of for depot, gonadal the GnRH to causing secretion They in prepubertal 174-5), revert by gonadotropes suppress gonadotropin state. the secretion receptors to pituitary (Table downregulating GnRH-independent antiandrogen require to treatment Leydig an but an inhibitor of premature with an cell with letrozole). testolactone inhibitor cell spironolactone), maturation germ (e.g., testosterone do and Boys synthesis analogs GnRH aromatase not respond ketoconazole), (e.g., (e.g., or or hormone-secreting removal, surgical require precocious if possible. Patients with tumor a puberty from independent therapy precocious syndrome McCune-Albright to and The is of with puberty the unresponsive GnRH GnRH

FSH (inhibition Inhibition cysts of acetate release) regression of steroidogenesis; of Autonomous ovarian Medroxyprogesterone ovarian cyst

syndrome FSH Inhibition McCune-Albright steroidogenesis; acetate* of release) regression (inhibition ovarian Medroxyprogesterone of cyst of

Testolactone* Boys Inhibition P-450 blocks estrogen of aromatase; synthesis

Modified of Grumbach precocity, Acta Paediatr MM, management the SL: Recent 1988. Kaplan advances from sexual Jpn 30(Suppl):155, diagnosis and in hormone; FSH, Follicle-stimulating GnRH, hormone. gonadotropin-releasing GnRH be agonist can added. a puberty develops, precocious *If true

analog. Therapy testolactone or provided such antiestrogen, is with as antiandrogens tamoxifen. and

@ Available StudentConsult.com

in Female Precocious Puberty the

girls, is ages or unilateral at of 3 bilateral breast to years. 6 thelarche the Benign usually in appearance isolated premature months tissue secretions, There evidence puberty the other acceleration). of velocity, bleeding, are age of excessive (vaginal bone and or height of increased signs no effect thickening no vaginal estrogen compounds of Ingestion application must or be dermal excluded. estrogen-containing to study necessary, a investigations are indicated Laboratory exclude pelvic ovarian not be usually ultrasound may but rarely disease. the progression this that 6 months be apparent thelarche intervals to puberty. at with of 12 of condition is into re-evaluated should precocious premature to ensure Girls beginning not necessary. than no progression reassurance The treatment prognosis excellent; other is occurs, no if is

StudentConsult.com Available @

(see to and is 75% some of normal in In 67). it tissue Chapter may males occur termed degree 45% boys gynecomastia, breast pubertal to the produced, estrogen and of in at are overwhelm modest androgen effect only normally aromatization; amounts stage. to converted by Androgens this can androgens early puberty, estrogen effects are the is that aromatization. the so pubertal from development, there androgen production the Later great estrogen effect is produced by little in puberty Klinefelter also of possibility the can progresses. as syndrome suggest Gynecomastia sources estrogen possible estrogen or from administration of either (oral function of or ovary from endogenous ointments) peripheral source suggests from or gynecomastia unusual sources of or gland aromatization). is or Prepubertal contamination exogenous an dermal adrenal increased (from food abnormal from

StudentConsult.com @ Available

Precocious Puberty the the Amenorrhea Male Puberty in Female in Precocious

pubarche, before boys hair age adrenarche. girls of usually from in before in isolated termed The years 6 pubic appearance to is resulting 9 age 7years premature or It common. relatively is indicated. change), If for the of hair (clitoral signs rapid pubic causeof is oradvanced or growth, detailed associated a investigation or anyother other virilization bone a (acne, orvoice pathologic is with virilization enlargement age) feature penile are indicated the 17-hydroxyprogesterone, Measurements CAH. and serum of DHEAS toinvestigate testosterone, possibility of hyperplastic or virilizing Ultrasound adrenal ovarian tumor. studies gland mayreveal a a adrenalor resulting donot patients and DHEA simply virilization activationof hair adrenal pubic (pubarche) progressive premature have gland. isolated from Most with the secretion have prematureadrenarche from age, may slightly advancedand are assessed by height increased, be normal. The maturation, bone as but slightly skeletal the concentrations testosterone DHEA and III. prepubertal levels usually are with (sexuality stages but Tanner maturityrating) are high II for consistent age

Thyrotropin-releasing release pituitarythyroid-stimulating hypothalamus, hormone hormone tripeptide a (TRH), of stimulates synthesized (TSH). in the the Pituitary release glycoprotein of gland. that and the thyroidhormones stimulates thyroid is the by synthesis a TSH stages. developsin three Thyroid function glanddescends in first oral lower anterior the itsdefinitive the the trimester, At the to position primitive of the of floor cavity end neck. from the functional becomes hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis in The secondtrimester. the of hormones trimester. maturesin metabolism third the thyroid Peripheral

not TSH cross do triiodothyronine significant the Thyroxine placenta amounts. (T4), and in (T3), secretion metabolism. and in primarily serum fetal Concentrations reflect fetal and given (methimazole hyperthyroidism antibodies, treat thyroid (including and iodides and Maternal medications the thyroid affect mothers function. iodides), to to fetal propylthiouracil) radioactive cross placenta restriction and born growth an normal maturational have tests. prematurely to appear standard have infant by hypothyroidism of process the An may intrauterine or with interruption

tyrosine T3. two it diiodotyrosine, coupling gland or concentrates with or thyroid produce and T4 subsequent of molecules tyrosines, iodine to either The binds monoiodotyrosine to from by itself. thyroid to gland T3 thirds) fraction the T3, two (approximately derived major some The T4 of peripheral produced deiodination but is of is circulating requires one conversion to of the the The of from ring T4 T3 outer removal iodine

Figure of 175-1 the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis. Interrelationships stimulates (T4) the the the pituitary and secretion from thyroid thyroxine of (T3) from triiodothyronine gland Thyroid-stimulating (TSH) hormone gland. pituitary TSH act control level by to gland of mechanism. These at a the secretion feedback negative addition, In by pituitary a is T4 to T3 the potent gland deiodinase. within metabolized the by from inhibited somatostatin. thyrotropin-releasing of stimulated hypothalamus is the Secretion by hormone (TRH) and TSH Thyroid secretion signal hypothalamus of stimulate (somatostatin the acts hormone to acts pituitary TSH). the somatostatin secretion a negative to as at of receptor. hormone; leptin Corticotropinreleasing CRH, OB-R, K, Endocrinology, of Philadelphia, (From Polonsky S, 10, 2003, R, Kronenberg H, 101.) editors: Saunders, p Textbook Larsen Williams ed Melmed results has just the birth decreases ring Serum but in soon removing inner iodine little after tyrosine; from reverse of T3, biologic TSH effect. which an increases life. normal for later Preferential lower conver-to considered values T3 a forms as and distress utero the illness, thyroid in T4 and of to respiratory rather severe of birth because metabolism. in increases occurs in TSH including of all T3 reverse than result maturation of peak after syn-of sion T4 secretion is and to It starvation. important anorexia, cachexia, fevers, refer drome, to to to relative after hyperthyout data tests age-adjusted making through-properly, normative and from immediately whether T3 of T4 Conversion increases birth to interpret diagnoses thyroid function life. specific T3 to noncovalently or are therapy. a hypothyroidism bound T4 and roidism or when serum adjusting test and, a T4 thyroxine-binding choice because the eliminates extent, of the carrier of protein, albumin. is effects globulin, to lesser it variation Free (<0.02%) small of Only protein be substantial. binding, T4 and fractions T3 in which can biologically summarizes free to (as 175-1 various T3) it results test not bound; free is converted Table T4 and laboratory T3 are active. free are in effects of types Free metabolic thyroid exerts T3 abnormalities. and on usual (Fig. negative TSH In feedback release plasma circumstances, 175-1). TSH, thyroxine; normal thyrotropin-releasing range decreased; above TRH, ↑, TBG, hormone. Normal; T4, TSH ↓, thyroxine-binding hormone; the globulin; concentrations of increased; N, thyroid-stimulating indicate be may *TSH elevated. slightly

primary the range and often normal of the hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism. most below concentrations indicate presence thyroid pediatric 99m-pertechnetate of evaluation scans occasionally are disease. the indicated Thyroid 123-I-iodine in or with be useful ectopic thyroid They tissue. can or thyroid agenesis in identifying

Available StudentConsult.com @

Delay Male Female Pubertal Precocious Puberty Short in Puberty the in the Stature Precocious

the the and gland decreased of gland the of diagnosed of (tertiary). is Hypothyroidism thyroid (secondary), or abnormalities be serum result diseases abnormalities by (primary may hypothyroidism), a T4 pituitary the hypothalamus free of acquired is (Table goiter be associated Hypothyroidism may 175-2). congenital or a and with

occurs (agenesis, live Congenital is 4000 often, caused to or, births 1 (e.g.,enzyme defects). hypothyroidism ectopia) and aplasia, less dysgenesis approximately in2000 dyshormonogenesis by in palpable Thyroid is not tissue usually inthese sporadic nongoitrous conditions. of 1 livebirths. metabolism, congenital in in Dyshormonogenesis, 30,000 goitrous about intrathyroid or hypothyroidism occurs disorders reflects hormonebiosynthesis metabolism reflects iodide the pathway inthe of of or thyroid A an inborn goiter passage error transplacental of the or drugs given to incorporation mother. antithyroid is free level and TSH elevated. The low, T4 is concentration the programs occur in measure Routine more the in state UnitedStates. values cord often,heel-stick to or, blood every neonatal screening TSH positive infant result An ascreening serum obtained on from confirmatory immediate sample having test. any a shouldbe the T4 A TSH high confirm and free finding. low

Maternal in Thyroid ectopic +/− TSH (endemic) synthesis* or Goiter iodides goitrogen iodides including methimazole, goiter deficiency iodide deficiency No deficiency location Newborn Exposure propylthiouracil, or dysgenesis effect TRH hormone ingestion, Severe Inborn to gland defect

lymphocytic thyroiditis defect lymphoma) chronic drugs in Hashimoto Goiter or infiltrative (sarcoid, thyroiditis: Goitrogenic effect Inborn synthesis hormone

thyroid-stimulating TSH, Thyrotropin-releasing TRH, hormone; hormone.

thyroglobulin coupling thyroglobulin defective defective or dehalogenase, iodide iodotyrosine defective iodination, to transport, iodotyrosine. *Impaired its or

T4 is to occurs 1 low. tertiary hypothyroidism free normal in or births; the in live 100,000 Isolated secondary magnetic anatomy resonance is pituitary-hypothalamic hypothyroidism investigation When tertiary indicated. or assessment hormones detected, via other imaging are pituitary of of and secondary hypothyroid and condition, serum Although and free occurs 10,000 about globulin low concentration, TSH, total not serum associated deficiency in is in normal live with normal births 1 thyroxine-binding a T4. T4 congenital a abnormality. binding with condition a is euthyroid thyroid is not merely hormone it protein and because does This treatment require is X-linked dominant. commonly It

or immediate but become usually after period of Clinical congenital birth. in hypothyroidism the evident more manifestations subtle are newborn weeks months infant’s it there is the ensure development. a to By then too to is cognitive not detriment that late month therapy initiate and replacement 1 younger age. thyroid crucial diagnosis early to Newborn is by screening make an of than stages after dry distress, various skin, skin, and Findings hoarse cry. umbilical hypothermia, distention, abdominal birth fontanels, acrocyanosis, mottled include and respiratory lethargy jaundice, large tongue, feeding, hernia, prolonged edema, large constipation, at poor brain crucial thyroid-dependent such and bone 2 (most 3 Thyroid after maturation 175-3). as (Table birth) occurs and brain of tissues, years are hormones differentiation to for maturation

development levothyroxine) within usually intellectual birth. for therapy or is 2 screening of after birth, offer prognosis to less treatment weeks 1 the is When within normal (with excellent; month initiated programs 1 markedly the of likelihood signs present, months, therapy If normal intellectual the severe is after function are of is when 6 instituted decreased. hypothyroidism Growth late cases. replacement even diagnosed in improves after thyroid levothyroxine of for used to but about dose μg/kg 10 is later age; in newborn, with a is μg/kg changes of levothyroxine 3 15 childhood. used The In rapidly the the hypothyroidism, upper the to free of is of neonatal normal. goal T4 into range serum the half bring excessive because TSH seen in of such of may all suppression and levothyroxine. doses Suppression is not not necessary lead to cases

etiology of is The hypothyroidism in 175-2. Table acquired presented The subtle. clinical be may manifestations any associated child especially loss decline growth has (see 175-3). Hypothyroidism not a if who Table suspected in velocity, weight be with in should States is hypothyroidism of in autoimmune the acquired cause in thyroiditis). United common most thyroiditis older (Hashimoto children lymphocytic The cretinism). goiter the areas of (endemic is iodine In endemic many deficiency world, etiology of the increase may The decrease. be gland by failure of levels of before an heralded the T4 TSH thyroid of hypothyroidism, hypothyroidism is In acquired cause untreated congenital to contrast permanent developmental not a delay.

thyroiditis. Hashimoto acquired and common autoimmune and or disease cause as lymphocytic a known is older children thyroiditis thyroiditis, Also thyroid of goiter adolescents. in Hashimoto present is to of A of in 25% thyroid family history disease 35% patients. the follicle gland autoimmune The fibrosis germinal lymphocytic and against process an and center lymphoid and atrophy. etiology formation targeted is infiltration preceding thyroid with

with or, a hypothyroid, nontender goiter rarely, include surface. manifestations (hashitoxicosis) diffuse a Clinical firm, euthyroid, pebble-like hyperthyroid 175-3 which See signs Table diverse. can for symptoms, and be 6 adolescence age of Onset a incidence female with after peak typically years a occurs with in predominance. Associated (DM1), 1 autoimmune insufficiency, adrenal include diabetes and hypoparathyroidism. mellitus diseases type and, polyglandular type candidiasis I mucocutaneous hypothyroidism. Autoimmune often, of syndrome disease, hypoparathyroidism, consists Addison Autoimmune of II consists autoimmune syndrome type Addison polyglandular and frequently DM1, disease,

facies: Dull depressed bridge, lips, tongue, nasal large thick

Cold bradycardia/heart intolerance ECG Pallor complex changes: block Sinus low-voltage QRS extremities Cold

hypothermia) coma Myalgia of reflexes Cerebellar (nerve hernia relaxation Paresthesias syndrome) lethargy carpal Umbilical Delayed tunnel delay potbelly Myxedema constipation, muscles weakness narcosis, and Developmental entrapment: (carbon Pseudohypertrophy Hypotonia: mental Muscle Physical dioxide ataxia of

bone dysgenesis, age segment increased Delayed upper-to-lower ratio Epiphyseal

ascites) Macrocytosis Hyperprolactinemia cases Serous Elevated pericardial, in puberty Hoarse Menstrual Arthralgia CK effusions Myxedema (pleural, Weight (anemia) gain voice (cry) severe Precocious irregularity Hypercholesterolemia

kinase; Creatine ECG, CK, electrocardiographic.

hypothyroidism. Turner thyroiditis. development autoimmune and 21 of predisposed to Trisomy the are syndrome

peroxidase confirmed may The by (previously and antithyroid serum antithyroglobulin antimicrosomal) be diagnosis antibodies. the Neither from disease. although indicated in differentiate with reduced Graves is may uptake Hashimoto nor scan thyroid thyroid scan biopsy hashitoxicosis thyroiditis,

in for Treatment thyroid hormone Hashimoto and T4 hypothyroidism TSH sufficient indicated with to free thyroiditis. is normalize to TSH 12 free hypothyroidism. hypothyroidism to testing development require manifestation Patients of without months the (serum of and T4)every 6 later function thyroid detect a for usually TSH Goiter normal indication not is treatment. with an

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Graves have stimulating the stimulating autoantibodies children thyroid. the of hyperthyroidism thyroid caused (TSIs)] functioning autonomous immunoglobulins by with Most the [thyroid disease, and metabolism hormones excessive thyroid synthesis, features. clinical The resulting of the release, peripheral produce on their diseases; thyrotoxicosis in a thyroiditis immunologic overlap there findings. is of autoimmune are continuum and Hashimoto present thyrotoxicosis, Hashimoto usually the lower peroxidase values are Antithyroid antibodies be in may antithyroglobulin thyroiditis. and than although in toward the with evolution indicate of may titers of permanent high Exceptionally thyrotoxic the phase thyroiditis antibodies subsequent Hashimoto hypothyroidism. TSH or suppressed. Graves whereas both T4 or serum elevated, free T3 In levels disease, is are and hyperthyroidism causes subacute Rare hypersecretion, nodule hormone thyroiditis, adenoma), thyroid ingestion. or syndrome, of McCune-Albright (often an thyroid TSH include iodine

Clinical manifestations. with and in hyperthyroidism more a girls in adolescence. about in boys, five Graves times peak common than 175-4) as presents (Table is incidence disease changes, are and common problems. performance initial instability, school mood Personality poor with elevated disorder to tests may loss psychological be thyroid and confused insidious free and Tremor, inability until a concentrate, reveal the serum function level. weight T4 anxiety, elevated whereas free be serum may toxicosis). T4 serum is In near-normal selectively cases, rare T3 (T3 firm homogeneous usually present. A goiter is fullness. of patients complain neck Many gland to extended slightly and the patient. lateral neck the enlargement best with Thyroid the with examiner only visualized is thyroid the hands around gland of neck the performed examiner’s Palpation back. from with the is best the and can size, consistency, examiner and the feel so swallows nodularity motion gland. of examine that the patient The the should patient of enlargement to asymmetry examiner swallow discernible lobes. or The the any watch thyroid note the reveal may the Auscultation over needs gland bruit. carotid a that a differentiated bruit be from to

Treatment. treatment available: surgical. iodine, Three are and choices pharmacologic, radioactive

Drugs. mg/kg/day to Medical once 0.6 or hormone thyroid synthesis block methimazole (0.4 therapy to consists of

Shiny, skin smooth

Proptosis, exophthalmos, Miscellaneous failure—dyspnea lag, Cardiac stare, ophthalmopathy lid

concentrate Inability to

coma, Acute *Unusual heart subacute thyroid storm except thyroiditis with phase. shock) (hyperpyrexia, failure, high-output hyperthyroid tachycardia, in

or mg/kg/day (5 dividedevery 8 propylthiouracil daily) hours). to twice 7 of as failure.A however, control propranolol effect. is severe and symptoms startedif cardiac therapy or the takes manifestations tapered liver equally severe are a as to no concerns atenolol, propylthiouracil blocker, first-line liver is is medications to methimazole acute are injury and beta Both longer secondary effective, such is for rate 1 because year. 2 Antithyroidmedication theremission is usually continued per 25% to approximately years with courseof patientscomplying 2-year the repeated. the treatment treatment can be In regimen, should suppressthyroid normalize Medication serum to without T4. to need function add to free thyroidhormone replacement normal, the methimazole Complications pain, granulocytopenia, of rash, jaundice. and muscle are observed only is The is institution blood which count. the onset, in of theearly rapid requires monitoring idiosyncraticcomplication of months antithyroid after granulocytopenia an and medication complete asuppressed antithyroidtherapy white be cell blood observed, If must is discontinued. count in potentially a lethal This users affects 10,000 year. 3 rarecomplication is usually of medication. 50% other of two startedbecause from less After there similarreaction a medications than chance the resolution,the can other antithyroid the a be may used few thyroid administration, a ineffectivein which but becomes therapy. for never weeks, but sometimes Iodine surgery function suppress long-term is a preparation as for

Radioiodine. Radioiodine hypothyroidism. exerting cause dosing, effects, is to (131I) in and is repeated require permanent slower may therapeutic likely the hyperthyroidism. Hypothyroidism desired outcome is safer easier than it because treat to is continued and no reveal studies about Although in concern children. longterm sequelae remains consequences, possible and entering of mainstream method This treatment is the for adolescents. children Radioiodine renders and given the a hypothyroid contraindicated. to is fetus pregnant teenager

Surgery. Surgical partial or consists treatment of completethyroidectomy. keloid thyroidremoval that hyperthyroidism.In possibility the may with recurrent (transient in and and nervepalsy, includethe persistent postoperative laryngeal excessive formation, inadequate of thyroidectomy be use occur. resulting orpermanent) Risks be will anesthesia addition, hypoparathyroidism or hypothyroidism the causing that itwill associated hormone is releaseof preformed a caused by the of rarecomplication. large Thyroid serious storm amounts but immediate become 10 years. Even optimal hypothyroid patients postoperativeresults, may with within

blood is medical pressure, of (see and consisting 175-4) tachycardia, Thyroid disorientation, rare Table emergency storm elevated hyperthermia. a includes a cooling and a the administering symptoms. the hyperfunction and beta hypertension, to tachycardia, blocker reducing hyperthermia control blanket autonomic with Treatment an is medication after block Iodine thyroid release may hormone given antithyroid be started. to for and for failure relative insufficiency, digoxin. includes heart and therapy be may diuretics indicated Hydrocortisone adrenal

at TSIs masked medication maternal off from effects days This several passage which short-lived mother transplacental observed. receiving be disorder the until the results of maternal effects was TSIs for such and transplacental are wear (assuming of the antithyroid may medication), time of cardiomyopathy), polycythemia, with failure thrive are the signs bone hallmarks. tachycardia simulating (often cardiac age craniosynostosis, poor advancement, of failure to feeding, clinical and Irritability, the is to mother known if in be This pregnancy. may condition thyrotoxic be anticipated at affected, Cure of curtails still be the not pregnancy immune or radioiodine disturbance treatment) transiently. TSIs; least (surgery but hyperthyroidism before production underlying may or thus producing limits T4 infant the

a methimazole and, symptoms. help blocker includes beta to Treatment as decrease needed, for affected neonate a severely age. 3 the of passage resulting immunoglobulin several by usually of from half-life thyrotoxicosis of TSIs 2 to months Because of is the transplacental occurs neonatal weeks, spontaneous resolution treatment indicated without Observation in patients who is affected. are minimally

solitary develop children of are which of 2% thyroid most nodules, About benign. nodule a and, neck needed, (FNA). function includes thyroid Evaluation tests, of fine-needle ultrasound, if aspiration of needed not guidance be palpable. small Ultrasound those may or aspiration for nodules found and clinical monitored FNA benign ultrasound. to Nodules may on be exam be through

of children the rare in in of in cancers 9-year-old Carcinoma to the thyroid group). and 7% the of 19-year-old (1% all age pediatric 5to is age 15to cancers group up thyroid cancers. follicular represent Papillary carcinomas and of 90% childhood or or from accidents radiation irradiation head to a nuclear therapeutic exposure history neck cancer. predisposes child thyroid A of Carcinoma a to spread presents to nodes. adjacent hard, nodule nonfunctional usually solitary painless firm lymph as may and (recurrent growth, lung and laryngeal metastasis be present. involvement), Rapid nerve hoarseness may likelihood If feels the ultrasound, cold radioiodine hard, is on of and is carcinoma scanning, high. nodule a on is solid the performed, FNA also usually biopsy is be may but Excisional diagnostic. biopsy

node for disease. total with radioablation 131I and dissection, selective or residual regional Treatment includes thyroidectomy, recurrent disease the good The early. is diagnosed usually prognosis is if

may carcinoma of a Medullary asymptomatic mass. thyroid be the for except calcitonin presenceof histologicexamination. the after either in (difficult and Diagnosis stimulation pentagastrin to based obtain) or elevated the is basal levels, on state with occurs or 2b neoplasia a pattern. multipleendocrine (MEN), This most often possibly 2a tumor familial in proto-oncogene some development thyroid. of of carcinoma of is of mutations RET the the families, medullary In the ofthe predictive presence of help location iswarranted. the when determine can mutation The of removal thyroid the of is of family indicated is after other screening the proband Genetic recognized. a members for with members indicated thesame Prophylacticthyroidectomy allele. is family the

parathyroid andthree Calcium calcitonin. and hormones: hormone vitamin regulated mainly D,and diet phosphate are by (PTH), to in level. response inserum is PTH ionized calcium decrease a secreted increase all to decrease enhance the mobilize kidney and calcium PTH cyclase phosphate. to acts its membrane reabsorption to concentration serum attaches into calcium from while by serum of receptor and fractional calcium via adenylate the then phosphateexcretion; bone inducing the serum elevated the effect of presence phosphatefor PTH calcium age. heraldedby in is low Lack of serum indirectly to values. calcium vitamin 1α-hydroxylase stimulating to deposition into calcium by of secretion 25-hydroxyvitamin calcium acts innormal the effect elevateserum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin PTH and D.Calcitonin stimulates elevated D usedtemporarily calcitonin states bone; serum the extremely increases may but is increasing activity productionof concentration be D subtle, suppress the renal from by

D the gastrointestinal absorption and calcium levels from bone increasing tract, calcium serum mineralization. enhances 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin via exposure skin ingestion. from oral or the Vitamin is to (usually the derived sun) from rays ultraviolet of D active (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin and in 1α-hydroxylated D) form liver 25-hydroxyvitamin D to the It is metabolically the in modified first the kidney. then to (see 25-hydroxyvitamin 31). Chapter D a of reflection serum is The sufficiency vitamin 1,25-hydroxyvitamin than measurement of the better concentration D D of

@ StudentConsult.com Available

spasm fromincreased irritability result and musclecramps, activity. neuromuscular weakness, hypocalcemia laryngospasm, paresthesia, clinical of The manifestations (tetany), and seizure-like include carpopedal sign 5 3 inflated by Tetany the exhibited to blood nerve pressure in ear) mm when flow pressure). sign is the orby (facial the arterialblood cuff tapping Hg bylightly blood the 15 (carpal Chvostek a front to Trousseau over to occluded above facial for just spasms hand spasms with minutes can produced of systolic the bedetected measured, usually active serum although biologically concentration form, ionizedcalcium, is a calcium the serum is of preferable. Total determination the major reservoir protein-bound Albuminis of calcium. pH or albumin plasma when Disordersthat mustbe concentrations calcium evaluated. serum concentration arebeing alter considered circulating The fraction pH; lowering calcium calcium hypocalcemiaby serumcalcium. to of without precipitate can alkalosis inverselyrelated changing ionized plasma total is ionized low the even to lead a caused the hyperpnea Alkalosis result because exertion.Hypoproteinemia may serum calcium ionized though physical anxiety Ca2+ hypocalcemia remains from normal. of may or hyperventilation false from suggestion to total is by related level best to serum It or hypocalcemia calcium measure if is ionized hypercalcemia issuspected.

but Primary hypoparathyroidism does hypocalcemia rickets. causes cause not etiology of The includes 1. primary the hypoparathyroidism following:

of the and syndromes) (see DiGeorge 143 144) developmental from syndrome resulting arches Congenital other complex and branchial third abnormalities (e.g., or Chapters 2. malformation fourth

tissue surgery as complication or parathyroidectomy, deliberately removed in which procedures, Surgical a as thyroidectomy or 3. is for another either such of parathyroid goal

which Autoimmunity, destroy may parathyroid the gland

may Pseudohypoparathyroidism hypocalcemia occur 1. andhyperphosphatemia) forms of follows: four (all one in with as

protein great adenylate PTH the to Gsa of secreted cyclase; is but stimulate quantities not biologically the its abnormality PTH 2. does Ia: linking active an Type receptor receptor in

production Type abnormalities Gsa cyclase adenylate 3. phenotype, Ib: normal of the with normal in

normal a 4. distal eliminates of the effects phenotype, adenylate cyclase, defect PTH abnormal Type production Ic: of but

postreceptor Type Ib production with normal phenotype, adenylatecyclase, type defect, a close normal to of II:

at an is later. may present autosomal condition dominant Pseudohypoparathyroidism that or birth habitus, Albright developmental ganglia, delay. hereditary the basal include round metacarpals,calcification and subcutaneous calcification,and associated with clinical short stockybody manifestations facies, osteodystrophywhose stature, is fourth of Pseudohypoparathyroidism fifth short so to calcium, normal with appearance that serum with may and may hereditary Albrighthereditary inherited have hypocalcemia Albright separately patient phosphate, the a normal or PTH. a PTH, osteodystrophy have phenotype response be osteodystrophymay

hypocalcemia. Transient neonatal supply the first placenta. calcium calcium to 3 birth, via withdrawal maternal the days response after concentrations of decline serum the in During normally in response PTH hypocalcemia. result a in neonate may transient Sluggish a the the neonatal found hypoparathyroidism hypercalcemia; in PTH PTH transient hyperparathyroidism fetal is suppresses by latter infants and with period. mothers Hypocalcemia in attenuated caused causing of release, release

25-Hydroxyvitamin Nl, sl, high; normal; slight; low. ↓, 25(OH)D, D; ↑,

gland action. for Normal normal function and concentrations required serum parathyroid magnesium are Hypomagnesemia to a secondary may than hypoparathyroidism, therapies replacement. other which responds cause magnesium poorly

time albumin. and ionized presentation PTH (preferably low), at phosphate, calcium features be alkaline discerned clinical calcium, usually with the when combining a is etiology can of by of the serum of The determinations phosphatase, magnesium, hypocalcemia is hypomagnesemia) to elevated If concentration (transient, calcium, or caused PTH present. appropriately the the not by is hypoparathyroidism relation low serum in primary, by can or stores determination estimated 25-hydroxyvitamin of 176-1). be (Table by measuring function clearance creatinine is Vitamin creatinine serum Renal a measurement assessed D D. serum

consists gluconate by for which from Treatment electrocardiogram of be solution) mL/kg calcium is 10 seizures (1 minutes while resulting can given severe 10% a to bradycardia, intravenous or over cardiac 2 fatal. tetany slowly of of status monitored hypocalcemia 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, of D as and vitamin administering calcium. preferably hypoparathyroidism involves Long-term treatment calcium to lower half to episodes avoid might of is keep adjusted of serum in that and pancreatitis. the produce the to Therapy avoid hypercalcemia range normal the nephrocalcinosis

StudentConsult.com Available @

growing is defined osteomalacia as defective the same Rickets bone children; or is condition mineralization decreased in in adults. is bone) osteoid (the proportion portion excessive. of organic The of of and long bones As a the soft the bone result, becomes widen. the metaphyses poor costochondral knees, the painful), be thickening of growth, the of rosary) cage rib In the legs (rachitic can of bearing the bowing occur. weight prominence at junctions infants, on (which and linear and older wrists this findings diagnostic. At x-ray are stage,

intestine calcium adequately not vitamin is 31). D deficiency, Chapter the In nutritional (see absorbed from D or causes resulting rickets.Fat because other (biliary Poorvitamin of infants atresia, hepatobiliary may malabsorption from in D vitamin may (cystic the deficiency hepatitis) breastfed sunlight intake to of contribute also is vitaminD or vitamin. avoidance disease fat-soluble produce development a exclusively fibrosis) neonatal the rickets. in D failure, cause can or liver autosomal metabolism vitamin 25-hydroxylation) rickets) kidney in deficiency D–dependent Defects vitamin also by (renal of1α-hydroxylation, recessive (defect

is and the hypophosphatemic adequately defect reabsorb In phosphate major rickets, kidney mineral that is decreases familial so to high. filtered metabolism the of serum urinary failure phosphate phosphate in this usually years in severe within the more life is X-linked typically of few is made first diagnosis males. The and disease of

suggests and vitamin etiology by determined nutritional D an <8 (25-hydroxyvitamin status assessment deficiency) ng/mL Table D 176-1). be usually vitamin The D the mineral rickets of can of (see vitamin metabolites Further D testing be of may of or measurement balance other required. mineral

treatment of can conditions, be chemical widely. potencies rachitic but D forms vary used the vitamin their of for different Several (see being depend dosages condition on treated Required Chapter the 31). also D be calcium. Rickets supplemental treated may and 1,25-hydroxyvitamin with vitamin In is which accompany to rickets, suppress secondary hypophosphatemic (not therapy, must given hyperparathyroidism. phosphate supplementation calcium) D of of normal rickets. resolution skeletal signs produces therapy growth restores radiographic the and Adequate multiple dose, treated doses. larger rickets Nutritional D one doses, given as replacement large is vitamin weekly smaller or with in legs with untreated be may Surgery in to disease. required long-standing patients straighten

sex phenotypic and identity sequence chromosomal of gender The to the of gonadal successive sex, sex, individual. leads appearance (gender the follow external of role) the identity) morphology this individual of (phenotypic of last. determine internal by form self-perception the genitalia sex the of and sex); of sex); secondary the Genes characteristics and the usually individual (gonadal organs the that directs perception others (gender gonads one In (see patients, features sequence, development conform, (DSD) disorder may Chapter not follow this to leading features some sexual or children, blend but, most in and the more of 23). these

The 13 between formed genitalia are weeks internal and external 6and gestation. of female external normal genitalia phenotype and Fetal the development bipotential male are have support capacity (Fig. of a and to gonad or 177-1). for of SRY presence the chromosome, the the sex-determining called fetal a In Y regionon testis gonad (Fig. gene differentiatesinto primitive a 177-2). 45.0 cells surface a of converted is testis and the 49.0 of fusion direct also which of of 5α-reductase labioscrotal has folds mm fusion Leydig and of scrotum; todihydrotestosterone locally rugation, the a 16.8 secretetestosterone, wolffian enlargement, causes mm mm ducts) development into the of enlargement the but enzyme.DHT by the effects ventral urethra; (DHT) penis (stimulating the to penile enclose The the

Differentiation 177-1 male Figure and of

common Scrotum anlage. external female a proceeding Labia genitalia from minora as embryonic acts 13 at weeks to to of gestation anlage. the bipotential Testosterone virilize 9 female action, the the develops. testosterone In of absence phenotype Grumbach Disorders of Conte FA: differentiation. MM, sexual (From DW, editors: JD, Wilson In adapted 873; p from of Foster 1990, Philadelphia, ed WB Endocrinology, 8, Textbook Saunders,

Instit Anus Contrib Embryol 1921.) Spaulding 13:69−88, MH, development and production cells ultimate disappearance the the and and müllerian-inhibitorysubstance ducts Sertoli of such external regression the as fallopian their tubes müllerian of cause male genitalia.Testicular derivatives, phallus with uterus. and secretion of by the develop In of the wolffian and ducts vas the deferens, prostate. seminiferoustubules, testosterone, into presence

specific unless development. alter female The develops male phenotype influences gonad. absence In an primitive SRY, from the ovary the spontaneously develops bipotential, of degenerate. out of develop müllerian-inhibitorysubstance, a of the third of of fallopian and testicular the secretion wolffian fetal ducts tubes, uterus, absence posterior müllerian vagina Inthe ducts, the normal and absence androgens, female. the the total genitalia In appear external of

not terms useful. and pseudohermaphroditism The hermaphroditism, intersex, are under to and DSDs subgroups according main karyotypes). are sex for three XY, karyotype (XX, categorized mosaic chromosome

determination 177-2 male Figure scheme sex diagrammatic of A and differentiation. products female other and genes that male male control are many is differentiation. but sex controlling their and there SRY master differentiation, sexual the gene gene for the factor. testis-determining DHT, SRY, the Dihydrotestosterone; editors: p Textbook Philadelphia, JD, of Saunders, WB Williams 918.) Foster ed DW, (From Endocrinology, Wilson 8, 1992, of Disorders 46,XX Sexual Development

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Alkalemia Hypertension Puberty Female Puberty the the Male Precocious in Genitalia in Amenorrhea Precocious Ambiguous

enlargement which clitoris, androgens for weeks during later caused from the of the external of to gestation) of (except genotypic (Table presence of 177-1). by critical development can androgen females of isolated the exposure) Masculinization genitalia is (8 always of 13 the period occur excessive a can The with clitoral appearance mild of degree the and penile from of virilization fused to male urethra a with raphe. enlargement range scrotum phallus the synthesis glucocorticoids androgen of of is virilizing Congenital of but production. female commonly not adrenal hyperplasia does most most impairs an common affect the ambiguous is enzyme result it genitalia; cause that deficiency 178). to adrenocorticotropic which and hypersecretion, (ACTH) stimulates leads adrenal hyperplasia production of (see the adrenal androgens The excessive Chapter impaired secretion of hormone cortisol cortex

Sexual 46,XY of Development Disorders

StudentConsult.com @ Available

external the male genitalia 177-2). (Table of of relative occurs or a testosterone of production Underdevelopment because action deficiency cryptorchidism of be often unilateral, associated penis present. phallus; or various hypospadias chordee bilateral, is The ventral of and perineal) small, but with may more binding or the degrees (penile palpation sought The canal labioscrotal carefully inguinal folds by ultrasound. the in testes or be or should labioscrotal an in inguinal ovary herniated Rarely ovotestis. canal represents gonad a or fold palpable a or the and have tissue external ambiguous genitalia. patients testicular and latter The ovarian usually Production that some SRY is a least cells implies the at testicular that by carry tissue and gene. gonad present of testosterone

androgen by for reduced of deficiencies can production gonads. of the needed enzymes biosynthesis or by Testosterone dysplasia be the specific present. production In are also a if and reduced, fallopian the latter, uterus tubes is rudimentary müllerian-inhibiting substance

the form resistance of receptor. androgen in insensitivity androgen hormone to complete the example most resistance syndrome androgen action of defects The by or dramatic is or vagina structures. formed inguinal majora), patients the 46,XY have normally testes Affected a short a in müllerian canal (usually no internal labia female external and with karyotype, genitalia located and testosterone the normal time At puberty, male or concentrations to above range. of normal increase peripheral and testosterone at to is normal of Because tissues opposed a without cannot puberty development of hair portion normally or growth converted menstruation. age by the be in ensues the the axillary or estrogen occurrence facial, androgen, the estradiol of breast of pubic, the

perineoscrotal 5α-Reductase with predominantly birth at with genitalia, presents ambiguous female deficiency hypospadias. phenotype or including in testosterone 5α DHT. to reduction its defect is metabolite The of secondary male puberty spontaneous occurs. development At sexual diagnosed with identity significant if patients gender puberty. issues role these and Gender at are psychological

Isolated in DAX1, 17,20-desmolase deficiency normal Adrenal possible deficiency P-450c17 mutations with function

SOX9, GATA4, WT1

Complete of müllerian Female external insensitivity absence genitalia, androgen structures

virilization recessive, insensitivity Autosomal at external previous puberty 5α-Reductase genitalia androgen with Partial deficiency As ambiguous

Steroid StAR, protein. acute regulatory

Development Disorders Ovotesticular of Chromosome Sexual and Sex

StudentConsult.com @ Available

classified DSD. Klinefelter and syndrome and syndrome sex are their as variants Turner chromosome mosaic may hernias. gonadal dysgenesis ambiguity, inguinal and Mixed (45,X; genitalia, present 46,XY) with genital asymmetric external often may virilization There none side other. one and the on be on seen Similar DSD, another be with ovotesticular DSD. findings of classification may

StudentConsult.com Available @

newborn as informed must genitalia delay with context attended little the psychosocial a required. to in as possible to with and Ambiguous sensitivity be as a the often to choice weeks that laboratory take naming required evaluations diagnosis. precedes such might of or complete, assignment The and delaying sex days infant, an and gender providers and childhood, appropriate the come must in the gender care Beyond any families to uncertainty and choice. closure to and in parents, offset health infancy confusion help patient

fusion On lies anterior the physical and note the labioscrotal is folds. it essential portion is the urethral of of to examination, there opening where whether leads genitalia. androgen to [CAH]) in Endogenous gestation weeks ambiguous 13 and excessive of hyperplasia female (as fetus adrenal 9 congenital of in between production a without is later ventral clitoris the no fusion, the the normal, exposure had urethra, If patient of fusion there the but and enlarged vaginal ventral is is opening to androgens. a must action 9 have of to but and to small, gestation. microphallus, normally formed during weeks had with and patient of 13 formed if A a even a exposure penis, androgen fully small scrotum, normal termed

salt-losing life-threatening The CAH). rapid shock loss disorders of of (salt and is the form any a goal identification caused major by been of on potential classic assignment sex has approach and mustbe histology, androgen to than reconstruction feasibility the rather the the fertility based gonadal genital on Although prenatal effects karyotypeor of considered. nonetheless are assignment virilized role cases, femaleinfant sex internal be raise organs gender be and reported the as can Yet fertility may virilizing CAH retainedbecause a female, in female. severely remain inappropriate from to who it is most amale; andadult fully functional and female difficult. becausesurgical raised doesnot a (partial is increase of genitalia 46,XY withambiguous androgen size with small traditionally phallus been that androgen therapy an resistance) phallus a construction in has extremely as A male spontaneouslyto identity. these of male a Some gender frequently revert patients parentsinvolving biology an extensive involves be prognosis.Treatment ambiguous endocrinologist, infant urologistor psychologist, discussion of Present experienced open managed and geneticist, genitalia the the management of should pediatric team,including primary a by carephysician. gynecologist, the the individualized and with and likely

genetic The first (androgen whether (androgen a virilization male of or female determine deficiency) is of underdevelopment toward represents thedisorder Fig. step a to excess) (see diagnosis genetic 177-2). occurred;this ovotestes is usually has mayfeel phenotype thatincomplete Inguinal areevident palpation male indicate and consistent, ovaries on and are similar. and testes a gonads pattern that of development not fetal by ultrasound) implies that müllerian-inhibitingsubstance internal testes. genitalia(detected of secreted present Similarly by was and absence female chromosomes and, determination chromosome have of of factors sexual (it the testicular in is 46,XX may be the one the purposes rearing; for to chromosome,leading may on development many only other to may SRY Karyotype a conversely, reversal, gene an decidingthe gene Y X of identity chromosome, DSD). sex a lack SRY Y been maleXX an found than translocated

21-hydroxylase females have these virilized 90% CAH; most Statistically have deficiency. of females 17-hydroxyprogesterone hundreds is which diagnosis of the measuring 178), times the Chapter normal and concentration is typically androstenedione range. plasma by (see above of The established Other steroid enzyme by to block. circulating proximal adrenal enzymatic may precursor quantifying defects the also the diagnosed levels of defective be

diagnosis accurate males. Establishing underdeveloped an more is difficult in steroid secretion of elevates levels substantially testes, defects in allowing coexist hyperplasia types certain androgen ACTH of excessive precursors, adrenal a adrenal of When diagnosis. the production specific with hCG and defect is the of state If required. measurement in and the may by to biosynthesis, basal precursors testosterone its testosterone stimulation the after restricted be normal normal persistent testosterone an levels morphogenesis have androgen of Patients of genitalia. interruption had resistance have with the of either or associated sex which be müllerian Abnormalities of persistence of with be gonads, chromosomes may may the dysgenetic with associated structures.

biosynthetic raised replacing (cortisolin be support in child defects consists make with testosterone gender the deficient of thewhole appropriatefor look a more and restoration individual the or androgen hyperplasia rearing, psychological male), who surgical Treatment adrenal hormones to of of will as family. discordant gender organs of Gonads and removed. internal are forthe often rearing material should or Y-genetic because develop dysgerminomas theorgan. Dysgenetic be gonadoblastomas may always removed in gonadswith surgery so by usually is genital rearing. structure yearsof age reflects that Reconstructive gender performed 2 of decision. can reconstructive in in performed so be adolescent not that the Thisrecommendation child surgery orearly involved that for advocate is or the be young childhood infancy controversial;some surgery with the later theperson gender outset. is a from may for birth; shared however isrecommended knowledge decision withparents from rearing change that gender A on DSD the of

consists medulla which which The neuroectodermal of responsible and outer synthesis of adrenal steroids, cortex, an tissue, inner derived an from catecholamines. is gland the for synthesizes product an fasciculata sodium mineralocorticoid consists inner aldosterone, adrenal balance), of (end which cortisol), zones: The middle the an cortex and three (end sex glomerulosa outer potassium and is reticularis (synthesizes steroids). is a regulates product 178-1. these The shown Figure is steps in scheme of synthetic general

hormone Hypothalamic release processingfrom by of selective (CRH)stimulates pro-opiomelanocortin. hormone the corticotropin-releasing adrenocorticotropic (ACTH, pituitary corticotropin), derived ACTH of governs adrenal release and synthesisand androgens. the cortisol CRH or of gland from ACTH; also or deficiency adrenal causing and an results serum ACTH concentrations cortisoldeficiency cortisol. occur insufficiency from theadrenal defect may deficiency, any cortisol in low (secondary) in oversecretion Primary (tertiary) low ACTH Endogenous CRH (or ACTH back feed exogenous) secretion. and to inhibit glucocorticoids it when excess, increase effect system aldosteronesecretion. renin-angiotensin The little aldosterone potassium regulate production except secretion; aldosterone ACTH in has and may on

the Steroids that protein form (not fetus, but bound to does [transcortin]) cross circulate mother not. in cortisol-binding to the placentafrom may ACTH free deficiencies placenta an child.Because to axis cortisol in role CRH-ACTH-adrenal a as important metabolic acting secretion. and utero, The mother is in plays between lead steroid the fetal excessiveACTH in synthesis biosynthesis utero, operationalin mediator deficiency, enzyme a such the virilizing If 21-hydroxylase the ispresent, virilizing adrenal androgens, secretes as defect excess adrenalgland fetal fetus. and lower Normalvariation ACTH in serum to cortisol early at of are night. values that high and morning levels leads the take years to to Thisnormal months fullydevelop. may variation diurnal

178-1 and the defects hyperplasia. biosynthetic steroid congenital biosynthetic Diagram that the in result Figure of pathways in one steroidogenic patients reported adrenal lipoid is but the for in The regulatory cleavage) enzyme, with case) CYP11A1 in (cholesterol (except side-chain defect protein. hyperplasia not acute StAR, the membrane from where of is in located. outer protein This involved transport the to inner the mitochondrial enzyme membrane, CYP11A1 the is cholesterol the 11β-deoxycortisol of (11β-hydroxylase) CYP11B1 and deoxycorticosterone 11β-hydroxylation primarily. catalyzes D5-17,20-lyase bond, the and the of 17α-hydroxylation preferential CYP17 for it latter splitting catalyzes but has 17,20 activity. (17α-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase) the aldosterone. conversion to corticosterone of CYP19 catalyzes (aromatase) 3, I 17β-HSD II, type types 3β-HSD CYP21 and II; 17β-hydroxysteroid (P450c21), I 3. dehydrogenase dehydrogenase/Δ4,5-isomerase 21-hydroxylase; 3β-HSD 3β-hydroxysteroid and (P450ccc) mutation the lipoid deletion probably of In in a is but heterogeneous utero, adrenal CYP11A human, caused lethal of a homozygous congenital mutation null hyperplasia. ed Philadelphia, K, p Polonsky 2003, Kronenberg Textbook 10, editors: (From Saunders, H, Endocrinology, Williams et S, of Melmed al, 917.)

lemia, after clinical deficiency Algorithms birth days 7 min but and to features eralocorticoid not adrenal 5 by INSUFFICIENCY congenital hyponatremia developing dominant are The of hyperkaDecision-Making usually ADRENAL

immediately StudentConsult.com @ after Available birth. as shock acidosis deficiency. glucocorticoid does and from dehydration, follow, Vomiting, soon hypotensive undiag- Death the occur nosed if remains may disorder and untreated. ambiguity is clue adrenal be clinical out. of congenital CAH females of virilizing (CAH) inadequate or hyperplasia must that manifestations an salt-losing ruled the obvious simple In genitalia adrenal function the The external all result of (Table or should mineralocorticoids, be cannot or forms Because ambiguous of both from evaluacoids, clinically, action genitalia glucocorti-presentations involve 178-1). distinguished secretion these inadequate deficiency. for In case mineralocorticoid the tion CAH, defects overproduction can or cause 21-hydroxylase not the most gland, genitalia. the enzyme deficiency, of does and the com-of abnormal that of androgens underproduction gonad potent affect males adrenal form In mon occur, (see hyperpigmentation of of There may be blockade site the depending enzyme on Fig. the but is skin, sign. this a 178-scrotal subtle all diagnosis In the infants, 1). Progressive occur females; external may may males. insufficiency in adrenal occur confused be or genitalia virilization incomplete virilization prenatal may the of with overlooked in of pyloric stenosis. In pyloric the contrast contents of of genitalia a enzyme external stomach in in hypochloremia, adrenal manifestation stenosis, to of results fetal disordered function. Ambiguity CAH, salt-losing vomiting is common Precise low, and present. is serum or is potassium diagnosis normal alkalosis lifesaving for therapy, outlook, be genetic of essential preventing counseling. may unnecessary prescription distinction and is appropriate term in long-This the or with patients inappropriate investigations therapy. In enzyme the and of block is of deficiency steroid whereas present defects, a disorder birth; pathways, hyperplasia enzyme proxi-Not of nonclassic. forms (classic) from remain-spectrum (late-onset) precursor present ing an severe mal normal to or enzyme at the all mild the through alternate in ranges to elevation metabolized adrenal is may steroids present subsequent is in manifest the Milder block. forms to childhood, or even (not as adulthood young adolescence,

adrenal Inability spells adrenocorticotropic of collapse (in Hypoglycemia Cortisol insufficiency hormone) excess to withstand with weakness, Vasomotor deficiency Apneic Muscle fatigue Hyperpigmentation stress primary

Hyperkalemia glucocorticoid Diarrhea androgen Urinary weakness Vomiting deficiency craving Hypotension Volume Hyponatremia mineralocorticoid excess). Acidosis sodium as thrive wasting Muscle Aldosterone or Failure to Dehydration deficiencies, Shock but depletion Salt

hypoplasia In of adrenal or the patients is congenital hemorrhage, secretion with adrenal adrenal low. steroids all leads to CAH contrast (see In diagnostic in pattern blood and steroid urine a Fig. 178-1). and common 21-hydroxylase as the paradigm is of Deficiency a (95%) form serves disorders. these for most

@ StudentConsult.com Available

the in Male Female in Puberty Ambiguous Puberty Hypertension the Genitalia Precocious Hirsutism Precocious

21-hydroxylase in 1 of white 15,000 classic about deficiency populations. incidence is various among The 1 certain populations. incidence 50 in CAH in of may Nonclassic occur an with gene 6; on prenatal the of diagnosis may permitting a proband, for 21-hydroxylase be chromosome pregnancy. The determined a the genotype short lies subsequent arm in in

to conversion form, deficiency) a to progesterone (P-450c21 in in activity Deficient salt-losing (17-OHP) impairs proximal deoxycorticosterone, the production of and 17-hydroxyprogesterone to of 11-deoxycortisol 21-hydroxylase aldosterone. the pathway the of mineralocorticoid the which the causes of the shunting production hypersecretion of overproduction immediately to these androgens. decreased stimulates synthesis of of of steroids proximal and block to cortisol The ACTH, unaffected by fetus; affected the development androgens. ovaries, the external of clinical of manifestation of remains the virilization primary the is The tubes the female fallopian uterus, and the genitalia to virilization phallus with 177). (see mild of from clitoromegaly severe fusion simulating folds, ranging The a Chapter labioscrotal of complete varies, clitoromegaly degree apparent at penile be although enlargement A with male infant thereafter. defect this appears birth, normal may until aldosterone, causes deficiency treatment of and patients, wasting about is dehydration found shock the and in The diagnosis salt with given. established in appropriate is 75%

and fludrocortisone deficiency case 21-hydroxylase The form. in salt-losing requires hydro-cortisone treatment of the of the Therapy at throughout must childhood intervals. regular be adjusted will early appearance growth height gain, undertreatment jeopardizing whereas puberty, (cushingoid will skeletal cause advance, weight adult Overtreatment cause potential. and and ultimately gain height excessive stunting features),

noted is typically after birth. Late-onset years CAH without hirsutism, manifestations menstrual or but ambiguous in acne, irregular cycles milder have genitalia, they may amenorrhea. girls Affected subjects and have with girls be confused CAH syndrome. may polycystic ovarian in Late-onset

21-hydroxylase for enzyme Biochemical serum 17-OHP, defective substrate show of elevated activity. diagnostic levels studies the the are hundredfold CAH, thousandfold. newborns elevated with values a In the to a necessary abnormally an test to CAH, show high response an ACTH In late-onset is 17-OHP. of stimulation the derived elevated 17-OHP. because is levels whereas level renin (in salt losers) high, are testosterone is cortisol low, aldosterone Serum and are it levels from

advancement. The are bone of treatment achieve and to normal goals growth linear age providing consists of mg/m2/24 15 at dose approximately doses or of three equivalent. divided hydrocortisone its a to Long-term glucocorticoids hours oral in therapy 10 of losers for fludrocortisone and at to mg/24 Mineralocorticoid salt 0.2 often sodium therapy supplementation in hours, chloride of with 0.1 dose a childhood. consists of infancy early Surgical ambiguous external of be considered. genitalia correction may The concentrations of including by therapy deficiency. adrenal 21-hydroxylase determining precursors, of and 17-OHP serum for monitored adequacy is androstenedione glucocorticoid replacement and addition, as appropriate growth is age In of bone assessment therapy. required linear reflection age, of determination, by the a skeletal illnesses such avoid higher states of given during surgery. To and as febrile are adrenal glucocorticoids stressful insufficiency, threefold doses emergencies in involving Intramuscular is illnesses with hydrocortisone emesis. used or severe levels. with monitored therapy activity sodium, plasma and serum potassium, Mineralocorticoid renin is suppress Prenatal with fetal ACTH-induced to dexamethasone treatment

D Moderate No D D D D Hemorrhage D D No to D severe

deficiency severe D I Absent D I I No D D I to P-450c21 Yes

17-KS, protein. I, adrenocorticotropic D, 17-Ketosteroid; 17-hydroxycorticosteroid; increase; † to regulatory HSD, ACTH, hydroxysteroid 17-OHCS, decrease; steroid Nl, hormone; acute normal; StAR, dehydrogenase; Unresponsiveness manifested days age. 5 after of *Usually

low †High to and normal K+. normal Na+ low

affected genitalia at the fetuses, the begun if 7 external eliminate or female androgen this can controversial. production of gestation; in of ambiguity approximately weeks reduce remains

21-hydroxylase are enzyme in deficiency. rare contrast to Other defects of CAH, deoxycorticosterone cause as and next occurs most hypokalemia, the with of Fig. In deficiency, salt 11-hydroxylase virilization a (see the retention common buildup of result a potent mineralocorticoid. 178-1), excessive Hypertension mineralocorticoid develops result a of as production. features Table 178-2 adrenal clinical the biochemical of infancy. in insufficiency summarizes and

@ Available StudentConsult.com

destruction acquired disease of autoimmune Addison associated usually childhood, of rare cortex. a adrenal disorder the with is form mineralocorticoid. a It adrenal of with and insufficiency glucocorticoid absence of is primary

severe Clinical shock of craving, and hypotension, illness. during hyperpigmentation, manifestations are anorexia, hypoglycemia, episodes salt weakness, fasting postural the indicate and values confirming diagnosis; deficiency. plasma renin activity ACTH-stimulated mineralocorticoid hyponatremia, subnormal, hyperkalemia, Baseline cortisol and are elevated APS polyglandular context II). (APS disease of autoimmune syndromes may and Addison within I occur the or irradiation such causes acquired, whether adrenal in as Other affect and treatment conditions iatrogenic, in for that such of hypothalamus-pituitary malignancy. craniopharyngioma, insufficiency include the of leukodystrophy as rare adrenal

treatment is the 15 maintenance with or hours three during stress indicated, to supplementation hydrocortisone. of times at 10 the Replacement of dosage hydrocortisone with intramuscular mg/m2/24 use rate. titrated The is allow growth to dose normal a and is determinations. renin Mineralocorticoid fludrocortisone plasma and replacement potassium activity serum sodium with by monitored

@ StudentConsult.com Available

in children central of Classic of clinical growth, syndrome obesity, elevated. or striae, weakness, pad, progressive marked and hypertension, often when hirsutism, acne, nuchal manifestations Cushing is longitudinal fat a hyper-pigmentation failure generalized include ACTH requiring of conditions of context in The cause glucocorticoids. frequent numerous most exogenous pharmacologic administration the is long-term doses (Cushing carcinoma, bilateral include an nodular resulting ACTH-secreting in ACTH-secreting adrenal Endogenous pituitary rare causes adrenal an extremely or disease), adrenal microadenoma adenoma, hyperplasia, hyperplasia tumor. late syndrome 24-hour Cushing dexamethasone from suppression evening and include distinguish salivary suppression Diagnostic urinary sampling. cortisol excretion, Cushing dexamethasone test, disease), test (helps tests cortisol high-dose low-dose

syndrome Treatment ectopic adrenal, include Cushing the autonomous tumors. is or to and of directed excision etiology may pituitary, ACTH-secreting of symptoms. control Rarely is adrenalectomy to the needed acute insufficiency. therapy adrenal avoid glucocorticoid is immediately to surgical and during necessary treatment Parenteral after

Backeljauw Am Clin growth growth 41(2):265–282, PF, Metab disorders The SD: of Endocrinol childhood, factors and Chernausek insulin-like North

Geme al: RM, Philadelphia, 19, Elsevier 2011, III of J, et Stanton Pediatrics, ed Textbook B, Kliegman St Nelson

New 21 MI: Am congenital 2011 Clin adrenal hyperplasia, hydroxylase Steroid 58(5):1281–1300, Pediatr K, Nimkarn deficiency S, North Lin-Su

puberty, MR, delayed 2012 J L: 2 Engl Palmert N Clinical Med Dunkel practice: 366(5):443–453,

the F, disorders of Pediatr Muzsnai hypo/hyper, Péter thyroid: A: Congenital

Clin 58(5):1099–1115, North 2011 Am

20(10):506–516, Endocrinol Nesi-França Romero Radovick basis ism, S: 2009 The molecular S, of CJ, Trends hypopituitar Metab

DA, Atkinson Type MA: diabetes. 1 Schatz Haller MJ, Preface, Endocrinol

Metab Am 39(3), Clin 2010 North 481−667

2012 adrenarche, Dis Williams Hughes 97(3):250–254, Premature Arch IA: Ward Child CE, RM,

Jocelyn A. Shellhaas Huang 24 Schiller Renée and

neurologic judicious and and A including use studies, evaluation, pathology. examination, diagnosis the system of allows of localization nervous physical ancillary history, the reflex thenewborn examination primitive the transient with adolescents similar. is andinterpretation and many process age; whereas unique with patterns, of and varies of is adults neurologic examination The cognitive, Careful motorand of gross and evaluation skills, appropriateness age motor social, is key. language, their fine

medical the follows the model pace and two neurologic localization the of traditional history with of problem. additions: process Gathering the the in The a static, to provides the underlying progressive, may fashion. process or evolution evolve as symptom symptoms episodic clues (epidural Progressive neuropathies). tumor); hours minutes subacutely suddenly years acutely or days or over (hereditary (seizures, slowly symptoms (brain hemorrhage); over or stroke); weeks over may evolve character (cerebral Static over not in do life abnormalities are neurologic and palsy). in observed change time early prenatal/perinatal brain often brain are lesions caused congenital by injury. abnormalities Static or suggest or syndromes, others. epilepsy attacks stereotyped of episodes Intermittent among migraine recurrent, periods Episodic by are (demyelinating, followed or of complete symptoms, partial characterized vascular recovery diseases). disorders autoimmune, by

appearance, behavior at the of of child’s Observation begins encounter. start the the and movement, abnormal of environment. posture, may of display gait, unusual or example, awareness the lack For the an child

the brown disorders (NF embryonic and areassociated (flat, brain 1) as (ectoderm), hair, are origin have nails skin same café neurofibromatosis brain Because type with in (neurocutaneousdisorders) such au teeth, lait characteristic. the of abnormalities light and skin, congenital which macules) macules

prominent fibromas, older on children and follicular look regions, nail lesions fibrovascular spots(hypopigmented nose plaques sebaceum, with macules), (flesh-coloredsoft the openings) with are ash-leaf sclerosis. malar like patches Shagreen commonlyseen that Adenoma and tuberous and adults in acne

standard curves circumference largest circumference its and growth measured occipitofrontal The is against head 5). plotted in (Chapter above an 2 and occipitofrontal deviations mean, (SDs) the or represent circumference below respectively. Microcephaly standard macrocephaly injury, disorder). decelerating degenerative (hydrocephalus) plotted (brain or pattern neurologic an time pattern Measurements show accelerating over may is pulsatile upright. a infant fontanelle slightly is depressed anterior and calm placed when The or infant. intracranial may a be in bulging (ICP) or indicate also fontanelle increased A febrile seen tense but pressure crying may or results shape sutures Premature in one of the unusual an closure head. of more (craniosynostosis) in the many lips, Abnormal location, or shape, genetic syndromes. ears eyes, and nares, of condition found philtrum, are face,

cataracts. telangiectasias, should and examination essential conjunctival a for search and A coloboma, ocular include careful epicanthal is folds, cherry-red such as the ophthalmoscopy Direct papilledema a disks optic for or abnormalities and macula spot. assesses the retina indirect requiring pupil of complete typically of use the ophthalmoscopy, involves consultation. examination dilating and A ophthalmologic

feet reveal 50, (Chapters creases 201). and abnormal of or Examination the may hands digits subcutaneous be subtle lipomas) hair (cutaneous dimples, or should sinus tufts, defects. midline for neck obvious examined spine The (myelomeningocele) tracts, and scoliosis abnormalities may Nervous kyphosis 202). (Chapter or in result system

assesses Because the of examination caudal the the primarily ganglia, and immaturity brainstem, the developmental neonatal of basal of neurologic function more infants, structures. developmental examination means outcomes. developing system used the The in nervous that be of cautiously results predicting plasticity should

of A active interspersed infant periods healthy wakefulness sustained should and quiet, with quiet newborn sleep. have

infant’s fingers Birth Grasp Placing flexing of in results 6 mo infant’s in palm finger

in stimulus the Rooting mouth results 4–6 stimulus about Tactile Birth mouth pursuing the mo infant’s

4 Trunk edge along the of stroke vertebrae Stroking side Birth of of concavity with the the on curvature spine mo produces (Gallant) the incurvation the skin

mo the is When infant a dorsum on brought surface, the contact of into Placing foot 4–6 edge surface with Birth foot of places

head posture in the tonic extension of in results neck “fencing” supine, arm turning infant ipsilateral mo and with Birth of a flexion the 3 extremities of Asymmetrical leg opposite With

by Parachute down is Infant chest. face the suspended moved When infant arms table, protect mo if self to a is Never 8–10 extend toward the as

Stroking aspect of results from toes mo lateral dorsiflexion sole great up heel 12–18 in remaining the Birth Babinski of fanning toe and of the

of severely signs brain are nonspecific function. or lethargy, Irritability, abnormal more depressed consciousness

brainstem basal the 179-1). the functional of primitive of provides Examination the of and reflexes ganglia integrity (Table assessment are at responses present Many motor of stereotyped these birth. months and the maturation 4 normal of 6 are age, symmetrical influences. indicating cerebral at to disappear inhibitory of descending They The rootingreflexes by acquired frontal and with life reappear frontal lobe lesions. lobes but of may in are inhibited maturation later grasp peripheral the reflexes lesions. of or primitive brain nerve or focal persistence Asymmetry may indicate

supine. assumes position placed when that the infant calm a naturally is Posture weeks an extended gestation of An infant 28 at posture. shows extremities. 32 a By there of flexion the increase weeks, in and tone slight is lower toward trend the upper weeks, flexed; are 34 extremities extremities At the lower extended. are infant upper lower and The extremities. flexes term premature is absent essentially back position very readiness its Recoil, original in and at or is stretching which with release, to infants term. brisk arm but the springs leg an passive after in infant’s tone. (not to the turned essential tonic is Because side) neutral a of and assessment reflex, neck of it asymmetric during to maintain head posture position the the

and premature infants Spontaneous slow those of infants term are movements rapid. are more of writhing;

to is neurologic symptoms purpose or the examination neuraxis The region the from localize the identify which of within the arise. mental status cerebral The assesses cortex. examination the the integrity the nerve of The cranial examination brainstem. evaluates The examination and motor evaluates function. lower upper motor neuron their reflections. central peripheral examination sensory The sensory receptorsand assesses the and reflexes Deep lower connections. tendon upper motor assess assessment. evaluates dynamic a better Gait motor state functional for the system in assessment

visual assessed spontaneousactivities, by and Alertness to and objects. ability infants feeding follow observing fix behavior, is in tactile, noted. visual, Response to stimuliis and auditory noted. painful to consciousness response If the stimuli is altered, is play of skills. developmentally toddlers of appropriate allowsa nonthreatening assessment Observation at for be humor, judgment, writing, tested memory. older skills, reasoning, numerical and abstract language knowledge, In to function, reading, childrencan fundof addition

way simplest abilities intellectual The to language through assess is skills. gestures) receptive and (speech or speech and expressive (understanding is use of function gestures). Language aphasias. Abnormalities referred resulting of language cerebral to are disorders from hemisphere as Broca Anterior, aphasia non-fluent by or characterized is language. sparse, expressive, inability fluent characterized to by speech or receptive, aphasia language, but an Wernicke is nonsensical. is Posterior, understand that with aphasia to expressive impaired and receptive Global language. refers

cranial of depends brainstem but on and stage The the cooperate. maturation integrity nerve ability to the evaluation assesses brain of a function. A cranial and and nerve may coordination, movement, child’s colorful toy capture observation attention permit young

assessed cooperative than2 older in of verbal, be years children age. can Smell instead substances the nasal stimulate (perfumes, trigeminal of vanilla) irritate shouldbe used (ammonia), and mucosa the Aromatic volatile nerve. substances which

awake dark a strips. newborns quiet in opticokinetic follow room, large, human state Full-term in faces,lights a or estimated in6-month-old in be 20/20 infants. Visual been and has 20/200 newborns to acuity in is picturesinstead toddlers.Peripheral letters can visual visual field surreptitiously acuity displaying the used of assess tested Standard to from charts by visual be behind. vision bringing objectsinto lesions, reduced including theretina, nerves, and pupillary A chiasm. light suggests visual pathway optic anterior reactionto the test. swinging lesionsare by Unilateral identified nerve flashlight optic constrict pupils when thenormal With eye. is both nerveabnormality, an optic directed light into called pupil. is dilate afferent bothpupils this Marcus is light When inappropriately; pupillary eye, an abnormal to Gunn the swung over or defect Horner’s the produces syndrome facial anhidrosis). to sympatheticinnervation unilateral (ptosis,miosis, and of Interruption pupil the but optic loss more to of occipital pupils) a dilate In instance, pathway, lateralgeniculate, affected fields. including radiations, have cortex, and unable is light visual (unequal the normalpupillary this posterior pronounced appropriately.Lesions pupil expressed are of in reactions the dark room,because the is by anisocoria visual

III, Nerves VI IV, and Cranial

movement cranial to capture examined use toy nerves are the easily and with most attention. the colorful eye child’s a of three control These maneuver). young the oculocephalic and to vestibular infant’s follow, eye infants (doll’s reflexes too head For rotating assesses fix the If causes and comatose patient’s to brainstem intact, eyes head or the a vice rotating left, versa. the the is move to newborn to right older the mask awake, In movements patients, eye voluntary reflex.

vision). nerves Abnormalities these (double may cranial cause diplopia of abducted), With ptosis third and eye the a dilated, pupil. and deviates (oculomotor mydriatic associated out unilateral cranial nerve involved down nerve) palsy, with (infraducted, nerve) weakness Injury vertical nerve movement consequent downward IV cranial with eye causes diplopia. to (trochlear of the inability nerve the move in (abducens VI results eye to outward. palsy nerve) Cranial of nerve the cranial VI space, has is a sub-arachnoid nonspecific, one intracranial frequent, eyes within route ICP. abduction of increased of or Because failure but sign a both long

as can an observed be sucks and muscles of The mastication swallows. infant VII at reflex corneal division age. cranial The ophthalmic nerves and can V test any of cotton with light touch gauze pain pinprick. and determined sensation Facial be and can seeking in infant if which neck movement, the assessed an reflex sensation as produce (turns cheek, be the can will and gently rooting head functionally with to by mouthing brushing nurse). Facial

and face rest, blinking. muscles by the observing assessed are crying, during Facial can blink At cooperative furrow their blow cheeks, ages, foreheads. their older, children asked and out forcibly, smile, be to receives in must face, unilateral of (Bell neuron all face affects the palsy).Because mouth, muscles the upper eye, facial the brain indicates cortical a a lesion of of peripheral the of motor the abscess) and lower and Weakness contralateral forehead, innervation, nerve upper of third (tumor, mouth, face if the considered. bilateral ipsilateral be the stroke, the lesion including weakness only

Lesions cranial cause nerve deafness, of tinnitus, and vertigo. VIII or loud Normally, in alert blink other neonates to abrupt, a sound. bell response localize to turn eyes and their a Four-month-old head sound. infants in in can one whispering verbal a covering Hearing the ear ear. while be child a opposite by word tested about is audiologic If are there formal concerns any indicated. hearing, assessment

of symptoms of the vertigo, diaphoresis, vomiting, component nerve cranial nausea, produce of vestibular VIII and Lesions nystagmus. in a phase phase movement direction. in the an involuntary direction eye with opposite beating Nystagmus is and slow a one rapid the horizontal, be defined vertical, direction phase or is the fast By of may nystagmus by and the rotatory. convention,

immature neonate. reflex The brisk gag all very at except ages is the reflex or lesion An muscles. the junction, cranial or pharyngeal gag absent suggests a nerves lower IX brainstem, motor X, neuromuscular neuron of sucking; Weak, are cranial speech; inability of dysfunction. secretions; and drooling nerve nasal weak handle symptoms food and to X gagging of additional or regurgitation nasal breathy,

Observing trapezius functions the sternocleidomastoid and the muscles. the of infant’s and posture spontaneous assesses activity cranial the drooping nerve suggest involving shoulder Head lesions of tilt XI. and muscles directly tested childhood, these can individually. and strength be later in In

(spinal of is Atrophy can horn the when cells age anterior at reliably usually are [SMA]), observed fasciculation atrophy indicating assessed lesion and asleep. be tongue, most any muscular infant the the of a and tongue lesions. in toward side unilateral weak The deviates the

against is by observation infants, movements power In movements of gravity. spontaneous assessed and leg shoulders. movements and be the best buttocks when the seen one supine with should supporting the supporting infant one is symmetrical, hand held and Arm should easily The limbs lift up. against 2 5 Able Unable as but against 4 Power gravity resistance against move Weak move gravity not provide Normal to graded resistance to follows: 3 to but is able

to an from stooping object, observing pick up such floor. abilities, Strength standing functional by toddlers is as the up in and assessed walking, his above to child ground. down An from easily high go reach wheelbarrow her the be run, should up stairs, walk, head, and older able or and arise hop, weakness. to is Gower lying arms sign sign his (child the on of legs proximal a and body) climb from his significant using by up arises floor eyes front Subtle extends asymmetry in the out the and be can closed. palms arms with child upward detected when and to weaker pronate The slowly on side cups hand the begins drift). (pronator individual testing. can undergo children Cooperative muscle strength nerve. cell from the Muscle disease horn indicate denervation of anterior peripheral or fasciculations

the represents of passivestretch. dynamic to Tone resistance muscles decreasedtone Lower cerebellar motor and (hypotonia). lesions produce increased lesions produce motor (spasticity). Upper tone an resistanceis increase (rigidity). a disease, extrapyramidal throughout In in present of joint passive movement

of muscle represents Muscle tissue. the bulk volume atrophic. many conditions motor is or bulk (neuropathies, lower diminished SMA), neuron muscle In have muscle is calves. myotonia such bulk of as congenita; seen their pseudohypertrophy with rare in boys Duchenne dystrophy muscular conditions, Excessive

of the dysfunction a movement, to is due pathways. which coordination of lack Ataxia cerebellar typically the is of coordination analysis functional toddlers. infants and and Observation assess in help truncal the walk child Watching assesses stability. or sit toys of with the and objects permits distance), assessment judging dysfunction. signs dysmetria of Exchanging in intention cerebellar (errors tremor child or alternating or to movements. tapping can test children rapid repetitive foot finger do Cooperative and rapid alternating tests movements. and Cerebellar slowing corticospinal tract of irregularity during produce dysfunction

creep, best child crawl, systems walk 197). a motor the assessment coordination (Chapter Watching the for and or cruise, is global and observed. asymmetries balance or tone, may Subtle power, be in deficits and is gait toddler unsteady. The normally wide-based base narrows with age. the gait of The 6 on and toe). a tandem able toes, to is child walk walk on heels, years, walk By to (heel unsteady executing difficulty in a Cerebellar accompanied dysfunction turns. in by gait broad-based, results Corticospinal produces and a toe gait walking. scissoring dysfunction tract stiff, body. the swing the decreased, is across and Arm affected arm is flexed a stiff, dystonic gait Extrapyramidal with dysfunction produces shuffling slow, postures. motor to gait occurs neuromuscular weakness lower A with waddling neuron due disorders. or hip steppage (common A results from ankle gait palsy). weakness peroneal dorsiflexors of

and can Clonus motor tendon at a areas increased (self-limited Exaggerated in 5-point reported disease. any to quadriceps are decreased be Normal and neuron sustained)These reflexes age lower on spread or contiguous 4 are neuron with elicited 3 diseases response) scale: reflex, reflexes upper motor 2 in Deep Babinski of foot or extensor upward asign the of an corticospinal the is plantar toeand stimulation dysfunction. tract reflex, flaring toes on and the of is movement great of response, lateral except is when this neonates age because at the “normal”response reflex unreliablein varies. This asymmetrical age, the (toes be flexor of plantarresponse 18 to flexing consistently By 12 months should down).

The of and touch observing to limited to newborns sensory sterile examination the behavioral light gentle response is pinprick. or infants produce a the of facial grimace. Stimulation should limb limb. A produce spinal may alone movement of the withdrawal reflex a position In tested temperature, and of cooperative vibration, child, joint be individually. pain, the can touch, senses number the The sensation or the objects must discrimination). simultaneously and a written sharp hand of the to in an (graphesthesia) to be on (stereognosis) applied identify between cortical (two-point in hand distinguish closely object skin placed intact two areas or

is and essential nervous infection central (Table (CNS) cerebrospinal Analysis when suspected is fluid system (CSF) provides diagnoses to of 179-2). clues other important hemorrhage a traumatic subarachnoid from Differentiating puncture caused may be true lumbar hemorrhagic by CSF (LP) difficult. a is the clears most sequence of traumatic LP, of In tubes cases significantly fluid as collected. the cerebral limit (papilledema, must clinical If exercised ICP there an caution of herniation. before increased be performing focal of is LP evidence neurologic to deficits), of risk depression consciousness, before is be tomography A increased be performed and should confirmed to if scan ICP LP (CT) the normal computed suspected. LP be If an is present, increased performed. must ICP it treated before is

parameningeal Brain contents Parasitic Leak dermoid or of abscess infection

CSF Leukodystrophy Spinal thrombosis multiple (Froin block Inflammatory Increased disease Guillain-Barré syndrome Hypertension meningitis Venous Infection Carcinomatous syndrome) (ADEM, protein sclerosis)

trauma HSV) malformation puncture lumbar CNS CSF Traumatic streptococci, (group Subarachnoid hemorrhage Subdural hemorrhage Hemorrhagic Coagulopathy Intraparenchymal meningoencephalitis Vascular B hemorrhage Bloody

ADEM, encephalomyelitis; nervous CNS, disseminated system; central Acute

herpes virus. HSV, simplex *In normal be children, lymphocytes. cells present should

cortex. cerebral generated (EEG) electrical records the activity The by electroencephalogram throughout EEG rhythms childhood. mature behavioral are There key modulation, absence of or epileptiform patterns. state present: three and background features presence patterns, two or and amplitude between localized area should there age, (focal synchrony but without background general be of varies with background any The hemispheres slowing). higher the slower of the frequencies symmetry abnormality foci stroke). Hz) underlying suggest an slow to tumor, (brain Fixed wave delta (1 structural 3 rhythms abscess, when frequency). diffuse is brain suspected must slow activity activity metabolic Bilateral disturbances wave of (increased be (delta ICP, there encephalopathy) indicate in (generalized), region polyspikes, underlying spike-and-wave Spikes, seizure a distributed abnormalities, tendency. an localized either (focal) or and bihemispherically

cells, velocities junctions, abnormalities neuromuscular (NCVs) including the neuromuscular nerve nerves, apparatus, horn of conduction Electromyography muscles. assess and and peripheral anterior for Normal at electrically rest. silent is muscle of muscle groups fibers denervation, Spontaneous horn of or peripheral indicates cells motor (fibrillations)or (fasciculation) dysfunction revealing of discharge nerves. fibers anterior stimulation and are myasthenia as repetitive to disorders, muscle nerve botulism. junction seen responses with gravis Abnormal such neuromuscular in muscle action the compound potentials duration are primary decreased amplitude and of muscle. of The diseases assess transmission peripheral along NCVs the nerves. action potential are neuropathies syndrome). demyelinating NCVs slowed in (Guillain-Barré neuropathies. of in diminished axonal is signal the amplitude The

(MRI). magnetic imaging brain resonance using accomplished spinal cord is Imaging CT or and the accessible and for quick CT is purposes. emergency of detection abnormalities, ischemic detail tumors, subtle provides permits vascular and changes. MRI lesions, cerebral low-grade sequences, different and, fossa posterior anomalies, with fine rapidly child CT because a can choice a lesions. is head the with or large it of hemorrhage or injury headache, study cranial intracranial sudden reveal other For other views or For the might seizures, because be cord. a of cortical of new-onset child an also MRI MRI choice, apparent study spinal the excellent partial dysplasia complex with provides not of focal is area lesions on subtle CT. and noninvasive ventricles procedure a with is to open of bedside fontanelles. and used young ultrasonography children Cranial infants the visualize brain

symptom is Headache common a children and among adolescents. a tension-type secondary can condition. primary be another Headaches headaches) to or problem (migraines, as the minor Secondary but tumors), serious often illnesses necessary. associated such systematic be a most approach infections respiratory so brain sinusitis, is first are may (meningitis, or viral symptom conditions headaches with upper of

@ Available StudentConsult.com

must pattern the clarified. headache The of temporal be own differential 180-1). its diagnosis has (Table pattern Each recurrent-episodic, chronic-progressive, (acute, chronic-nonprogressive)

Tension-type of the most and are common children pattern adolescents. primary headaches headaches in recurrent are so They patients’ not are generally lack and to disruptive mild typically associated lifestyle or symptoms, activities. squeezing and last global days. for in can is or character, The hours or pressing but pain or There photophobia. no vomiting, nausea, phonophobia, is associated underlying Headaches environmental as or be symptomatic can to related psychiatric stresses depression. such anxiety or of illnesses,

of another begin childhood. are Migraine headaches common type in and headaches recurrent frequently and frontal, 72 of are hours. pounding moderate unilateral, Headaches throbbing are last or pain severe, stereotyped bitemporal, to or to 1 that attacks aggravated activity by an nausea, quiet photophobia, symptoms phonophobia, include Associated a and intense room pallor, to desire dark for rest. vomiting, seek Toddlers be source and the vomiting. exhibit their discomfort to sleepiness, verbalize of pallor, of unable episodes may and irritability, with can be auras be associated (visual, atypical. or sensory, may dysphagic) that Migraines typical 30 headache the minutes. to Aura or 15 can and typically persists coincide with for precede that or of spots, fields. of flicker one flashes, auras visual Visual both light consist in lines or auras or unilateral may also of brief consist perioral episodes Atypical of

episodes. a of pain of Single episode Acute: without history such hemorrhage upper “first in which commonly due to and headache, febrile subarachnoid related respiratory worst” infection aneurysmal children. to tract raises concerns The adults, in illness for is of causes more headache (hemorrhage, considered. meningitis, acute be Regardless, must ominous tumor)

Pattern attacks recurrent: intervals. by of of Acute pain separated symptom-free this headache such pattern. or usually Primary cause tension-type syndromes, headache, as migraine sometimes epilepsy), epilepsy abuse, headaches occipital recurrent or (benign can also syndromes to certain be attributed trauma. Infrequently recurrent substance

a Chronic severity patterns— implies the increasing ominous Most and progressive: gradually frequency of of temporal headache. ICP. increasing correlate The is pathologic brain of this abscess, tumor, hydrocephalus, brain Causes include cerebri, pseudotumor pattern subdural chronic collections. and meningitis,

of frequent headache. daily: constant chronic nonprogressive or or Chronic Pattern headaches >4-month >4 history is headaches/month, >15 Chronic of lasting defined with as headache generally hours. daily and common. causes organic underlying Affected normal are psychological neurologic possible have about examinations; anxiety factors patients

unilateral or persist then completely. that resolve vertigo numbness, for weakness, hours, studies. confusion), metabolic (e.g., headache, of accompanied by diagnostic including neuroimaging, monocular atypical appropriate and Complex, warrant ophthalmoplegia, investigation, blindness, combination a electroencephalogram, or a hemiparesis, symptoms careful

causes of Common secondary viral and illness, include sinusitis. headaches trauma, intercurrent head may headaches. complicate and overuse secondary Medication primary headaches secondary include increase vascularmalformation) causes intrinsic pressure mass or by of (ICP) Serious in pressure headache (tumor, (pseudotumorcerebri). caused a increasedintracranial Valsalva be coughing, sleep; arising; or headacheand on from are should the or nerve associated suspected if deficits Increased maneuver, child may ICP neurological ascranial vomiting (Figure or on VI focal palsy the or by lying down areexacerbated be bending on remit awaken seen worse over.Papilledema firstawakening; such examination. when 180-1)

children, the and examination further thorough history an diagnosis obviate For for accurate testing. most provide physical a need and not Neuroimaging necessary. usually is or has there is increased child when the symptoms the neurologic however, are signs of warranted, abnormal, unusual the headache, neurologic Imaging is or features examination during ICP. or may of Focal warrant neurological deficits, imaging. a pattern chronic progressive alteration consciousness, headache posterior choice, imaging, gadolinium sensitivity other, subtle the detecting resonance and fossa without more highest magnetic and In abnormalities. the with of providing contrast, these cases, brain lesions for study is When severe the for (CT) onset, tomography has headache quickly sudden, a computed intracranial emergent evaluate can bleeding. with measurement lumbar for or pressure is glucose, and the opening performed, xanthochromia. blood If and cells, negative, white evaluation red of puncture protein, a CT be should

cup, of hemorrhages the the disc. disc loss Papilledema dilation around optic obliteration with of and of Figure vessels, margin, 180-1 Text-book Pediatrics, Jenson Saunders, of Philadelphia, 18, Kliegman Behrman, HB, 2007, ed (From editors: p Nelson RM, RE, 2107.)

an headache. to disability severity, produced address regimen individually tailored migraines frequency, requires the Treating by and the Intermittent abortive, infrequent, migraine. or analgesics the of treatment of mainstay for intense episodes are symptomatic, in administration room. rest, early and a quiet, an requires dark Symptomatic therapy analgesic, sleep of often or drug as a Acetaminophen ibuprofen naproxen is nonsteroidal such or effective. sodium anti-inflammatory adjunctive also are and antiemetics Hydration useful therapies. agents If first-line insufficient, considered. are be these triptan medications may available in nasal disintegrating, receptor symptoms that tablet injectable, may are spray, migraine agonists serotonin oral promptly. form, and Triptans, alleviate signs Triptans contraindicated basilar the associated migraine are risk deficits (syncope) stroke. with neurological with with patients migraines their of or of because focal consistent for

daily their lives. disrupt and children Many migraines severe frequent that suffer with than require to and per more one frequency Children attack headache disabling week with may agents severity. daily both preventive reduce include acid),antihistamines verapamil). blockers antidepressants and calcium anticonvulsants (propranolol), (amitriptyline, (flunarizine, tricyclic valproic medications beta-blockers nortriptyline), (topiramate, channel (cyproheptadine), Preventative

foods, modifications routines, identify be daily into place and stress, dehydration). aggravating must medications, and sleep, many any (caffeine, lifestyle meals, as regulate initiating precipitating put eliminating or influences, certain exercise daily missed to as possible Before Other psychological management, include adjunctive options stress support, and counseling, biofeedback. treatment

occurrence from synchronous abnormal brain. resulting the symptoms A or of is a excessive activity signs neuronal transient seizure or in

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Paroxysmal infancy of torticollis vertigo Migraine Paroxysmal (benign) and variants

long Vasovagal (arrhythmias, QT Apnea Breath-holding spells syndrome) syncope Syncope syncope Cardiac

Metabolic disorders errors metabolism Hypoglycemia of Inborn

Sleep terrors disorders Night cataplexy Narcolepsy,

events The disorders includes nonepileptic and paroxysmal diagnosis seizures (Table differential of 181-1). are significant clinically phenomena, Nonseizure often some and benign paroxysmal events although or normal are consequential. tool diagnosis. patient from the the medical the for A reliable witnesses is and establishing history most thorough primary correct

to brain infection acute electrolyte (Table seizures symptomatic secondary Acute an or affecting excitability, are problem 181-2). such imbalance as as seizures. recurrent, unprovoked defined Epilepsy is or simultaneously are from from one partial), arise generalized seizures, hemispheres, cortex, (Table Epileptic focal both arising which 181-3). the seizures classified (or of region as generally Approximately 4% least of experience 10% one to children seizure. at The incidence of childhood epilepsy 2%. to 1% is

may regions. from focus (or Simple anatomic may a not brain seizures surrounding or spread to specific arise focal and partial) motor autonomic myoclonic), preserved. clonic, sensory, is psychic, include or abnormalities, but consciousness Clinical (tonic, symptoms seizure the the symptoms. and clinical location The of spread determine direction of focus

also consciousness. similar sensorimotor can have have seizures partial Complex alteration associated of signsbut responsiveness, unresponsive, Althoughthe alteration child may or patients slowing not occur.Along with be (dyscognitive status have staring subtle may may of features) altered mental completely

Trauma of cortical Hemorrhage* Malformation Hypoxic-ischemic development infection encephalopathy* Intrauterine

METABOLIC Hypoglycemia* CONDITIONS unresponsiveness) (staring, GENERALIZED SEIZURES Absence *Common.

(consciousness signs be clonic, Autonomic tonic, (can myoclonic) olfactory, not sensory Simple auditory, Special (visual, Motor impaired) partial vertiginous, gustatory, somatosensory)

partial/focal consciousness (consciousness consciousness impaired vu, fear) impaired) at onset dyscognitive Psychic of Development Complex (déjà Impaired

seizures secondarily Focal Jacksonian seizures generalized with convulsions

(flexion followed phase) or of (tonic contraction) for Tonic-clonic by contractions) Clonic Atonic (loss Tonic and extension of <2 Myoclonic (rhythmic (sustained clonic extremities shock-like contraction) trunk tone) phase (rapid, Spasms

identified Underlying is cause

associated a Idiopathic remote stroke Example: with Focal epilepsy

have a genetic to Presumed etiology

spikes, childhood absence with myoclonic epilepsy juvenile epilepsy Example: centrotemporal epilepsy, childhood Benign Cryptogenic

etiology uncertain Epilepsy of

complex no during seizures. partial automatisms Infantile Example: spasms identifiable and cause with of of smacking, fingers, Automatisms of movements are feet). the mouth (lip shuffling or semipurposeful automatic extremities (rubbing chewing) of seizures déjà difficult as or such seizure, autonomic feeling vu that during lobe temporal can only manifest symptoms, a psychic with be a recognize. to Focal produce secondarily When are the said generalized have focal they whole brain to seizures a to involve seizure, and spread generalized. classically to is face leg as described to Such progression march). arm spread (Jacksonian from seizures clinical seizures It tonic from purely often generalized secondarily and focal distinguish grounds. to is primary clonic generalized on difficult treatment This or because is and are evaluation generalized for focal distinction quite however, different. epilepsy important, syndromes

other seizures tonic-clonic biphasic Tonic, types. or association in clonic, alone may with and occur seizure by abruptly begins jerks. myoclonic occasionally is the a preceded Typically seizure of series but the seizure, eyes. lost, and are posture During deviation of of consciousness stiffening by tonic upward control followed and tonic-clonic a Pooling secretions, of

often Photic but none Variable, Hyperventilation maneuver Provoking stimulation

phase immediately sleepiness (return Postictal None to Confusion, baseline)

of per more day seizures Number Infrequent Many (rarely

or focal 3-Hz features EEG sharp secondary spike-Ictal: Interictal: Focal slowing discharges (with without or waves normal generalized wave Interictal: Ictal:

deficits focal or examination Normal Normal, Neurological

and epilepsy dysplasia, Normal, encephalomalacia) of neoplasm, or diagnosis proper temporal neuroimaging. absence made sclerosis, a abnormalities focal appropriate with cortical the Neuroimaging without context, an EEG, be should focal Normal* (mesial *In clinical

for as be these seizures children medications. carbamazepine and relatively their with †Oxcarbazepine by can epilepsy, contraindicated absence exacerbated are typical

pupillary common. dilation, are and hypertension diaphoresis, phase. follow Clonic jerks the tonic phase, In the post-ictal the child might be hypotonic. Irritability the as are common child headache awakens. and

feature primary or (generalized) Seizures clinical is absence staring in can complex the seizures. partial beeither which with of automatisms, seconds) a brief smacking. fingersand Theclinical loss by or than simple (less seizures hallmark lip eye the such environmental fluttering absence fumbling accompanied is awareness 15 of as age. seizures Absence of 4and usually begin 6 between years examination brain and normal. imagingare Neurologic 3-Hz of (EEG)patterns The characteristic activity. electroencephalographic spike-and-wave generalized consist or stimulation. can provoked clinical seizure be light hyperventilation A strobe by absence and from can for but 181-4). (Table is seizures Differentiating appropriateevaluation essential treatment complexpartial be difficult,

Seizures and Atypical Absence, Myoclonic, Atonic

consciousness and body Atypical automatisms, with eye of absence opening, as manifestations, phenomena, such eye seizures episodes as impaired deviation, and motor autonomic stiffening. manifest EEG discharges are (2 associated types. seizure They slower other with and Hz) jerk a Myoclonus body; is myoclonus of all is the in part nature. all of sudden epileptic or not benign, disease. sleep be serious indicate may Nonepileptic myoclonus myoclonus, as or in usually with epilepsy types. seizure Myoclonic is associated multiple disorder and with ceroid (neuronal myoclonic progressive lipofuscinosis). producing neurologic deterioration myoclonic underlying static epilepsy be or may epilepsy) (juvenile The associated accompany jerks the absence seizures. commonly body that and refers Myoclonic absence seizures atypical absence to brief they seizures loss disabling sudden falls tone, in to 2 injuries. because a quite Although are resulting are of of seconds), atonic typically 1 and postural (lasting

caused of triggered nervous the epilepsy in infections seizures. setting by unrecognized or encephalitis, by Seizures (meningitis, of may system fever the be brainabscess), fever, febrile 6 The of children ofseizures months years children. latter common 6 and represents cause about most of all 4% among the occurring age, between in definition, in fever. By a presence occurs seizure of the febrile generalized neurologicallyand in Simple once child. in only less febrile a 15 last at onset, normal a 24-hour and developmentally occur are minutes, than period seizures or seizure. 24hours, than If preexisting if there is or seizure febrile recurs complex child as are features,the the within challenges,the atypical longer neurologic to minutes focal or referred seizure 15 a lasts has

simple The excellent. febrile of convulsionsis children prognosis with are normal. Intellectual achievements Febrile of 30% seizures in to recur 50% children. (approximately risk is 2%). for greater substantially that The of the than generalpopulation not subsequentepilepsy riskfor seizures. Factors epilepsy include abnormal of the increase febrile family development the of development, andcomplex that history neurologicexamination or epilepsy, children seizures febrile Because benign, is the most briefand outcome treatment. require are no is with reasonable option a seizureto a can administered be of prolonged febrile a forchildren diazepam prolonged and seizures. during Rectal a abort history event for of is potential side daily medication not the anticonvulsant effects, Becauseof administration recommended. does febrile antipyretics preventfebrile Administration of during illnesses not seizures.

or (previously pseudoseizures) malingering. be the of disorders termed manifestation PNES conversion may with may, concurrent exhibit consciously children nonepileptic Additionally, subconsciously, or epilepsy spells. genuine epileptic is clinical often seizures) during patient’s true eyes in often differ and tremulousness difficult, or activity. are from closed (typically PNES Although that open rather movement the epileptic differentiation be tonic-clonic eyes thrashing are seizures the the can than commonly seen in thrusting does and and injury fecal preserved, usually occur. urinary Verbalization is and are not more continence PNES, pelvic more the sides epileptic often of (as the tongue to in is tongue of seizures). the tongue bitten, the If injured opposed is the tip suggestion. often by be terminated initiated PNES can or during not EEG does performed epileptiform patterns. An PNES show critical, medications, mental of and the anticonvulsant The diagnosis not because health treatment. crux is appropriate is care,

events, entities EEG which syndromes distinctive in (see andprognosis clinical history, age,pattern The represent Table of clinical natural features, epilepsy 181-3). are

and common as begins spikes, and also epilepsy known usually epilepsy benign most Benign ages with Rolandic epilepsy, between 5 centrotemporal the among years. childhood is 10 syndromes more sleep typically in seizures occur during only on awakening The or of half patients. than motor mouth, (abnormal involving the seizures and usually guttural drooling, and sound). arm focal rhythmic face around or the movement have children face Affected sensation impaired. Speech and may be swallowing Seizures sometimes generalize. secondarily is EEG sharp independent otherwise but normal. bilateral interictal waves demonstrates centrotemporal The confidence a be diagnosis With not neuroimaging classic is EEG, the can examination, neurological and with normal a and history made and required. respond anticonvulsant Seizures usually to promptly therapy. resolves is Intellectual normal, outcome epilepsy the and after puberty. Comorbid (ADHD) disorder are learning difficulties deficit/hyperactivity common. and attention

another syndrome. absence common Childhood is epilepsy adolescence. Absence the early late school usually childhood by typically in or years begin seizures and resolve (see develop epilepsy If myoclonic does discussion). remit, later on to 44% go not juvenile absence will Ethosuximide is first-choice the therapy. A also of has seizures. generalized subset patients tonic-clonic is the can seizures. and these it children, as absence valproic both For prevent acid choice convulsive first disabilities learning are ADHD common. and Comorbid with ADHD these is children’s contraindication treating medication. There stimulant no to

adults. Juvenile the epilepsy most adolescents common is Janz) and generalized epilepsy young myoclonic among (of myoclonic seizures. objects), and absence generalized often typically seizures, drop early causing (exacerbated jerks to adolescence patient morning, the tonic-clonic in with in is Onset the usually with must promptly medication have acid, shown but been medications (classically life. resolve efficacious), valproic to be several but be anticonvulsant Seizures therapy for maintained

of of and Infantile spasms contractions neck, muscles, arm 2 are followed the seconds. muscle than brief by less lasting a phase sustained contraction trunk, is child Spasms the from frequentlywhen occur going to most sleep. or awakening spasmsin by variable brief of relaxation clusters repeated a period with jerkis Each followed of duration. and is of occur Many the day.West pattern developmentalregression, spasms, syndrome each clusters a abnormal triad EEG infantile (hypsarrhythmia). dramatically high-voltageslow and of polyspikes. chaotic consists Hypsarrhythmia waves, spikes, 8 peak onset 3to months. at The age is may are of mistaken prominent, crying colic syndrome flexion or reflux. When and gastroesophageal for the thighs be the theprognosis. of the spasms dictates The etiology underlying (phenylketonuria).Infants of are (stroke, is malformations identified, spasms development high perinatal (trisomy determined injury than cortical for difficulties. sclerosis, syndromes 21),acquired More symptomatic risk neurodevelopmental been an etiology classified metabolic infantile as hypoxic-ischemicencephalopathy), have 200 (lissencephaly), for including at etiologies are whom different long-term disorders very and genetic brain and having tuberous notdetermined small is The of a etiology for children. subset high remain long-term patients at spasms outcomes. somewhat for a adverse withcryptogenic have but These better risk prognosis corticosteroids, vigabatrin. adrenocorticotropichormone, treatment First-line oral include options high-dose spasms and for infantile vigabatrin with sclerosis, Forinfants is underlying considered of treatment choice. the tuberous treatmentdeterminations a basis. other on patients, are case-by-case made For

of age variable a syndrome epilepsy Lennox-Gastaut with syndrome is severe onset. years. children before present Most age 5 and focal, characterize the or varieties, disorder. including absence, atypical tonic-clonic types, Frequent, generalized atonic, multiple tonic, clonic, seizure underlying have or children injury Many malformations. brain The usually most treatment, poorly significant and have disability. respond seizures to intellectual patients

autosomal channels. to neuronal disorder dominant genetic linked are potassium Benign an convulsions neonatal abnormal colloquial Otherwise leading present newborns the of first with to seizures week fifth-day toward term of life, the well fits. end the focal is the outcome excellent, favorable. generally is to Response treatment typically long-term and

Acquired in loss of characterized children. epileptic syndrome)is previously young language the by acquired (Landau-Kleffner aphasia abrupt an agnosia). cortical disability auditory is language (auditory The deficit acquired dominant in is region (language perisylvian The in the often of area peak EEG the areas). abnormality sleep, being highly epileptiform considered treatable potentially This diagnosis as for is a should regression, autistic clear be it with patients young entity.

consciousness than epilepticus Status of as ongoing neurologic without for seizures repetitive defined is greater activity return or and emergency a is minutes. 30 seizure risk neurologic underlying to the Status new 14% epilepticus most approximately pathology. deficits, of secondary carries an the status epilepticus (4% mortality the 5%) is rate to Similarly, of related to etiology. underlying hemorrhage, any drug withdrawal electrolyte ischemic type, Etiologies trauma, disorders, imbalance, anticonvulsant metabolic hypoglycemia, intracranial children stroke, drug (especially epilepsy), missed hypoxia. acute epilepsy new-onset preexisting include with infection, and among head doses of intoxication,

treatment 38). to first The an adequateairway, is breathing, ensure of priority and (Chapter circulation ventilation may and required. be inadequate, if signsshould oxygen Vital obtained needed.If positive-pressure be administered are respirations beobtained. (IV) access Intravenous should history below). In should undertaken be (see seizures, no laboratory evaluation of with patients for (Table Severalpharmacologic exist management 181-5). options epilepticus of status usually Initial benzodiazepine. is witha management diazepam, effective are midazolamall agents. Lorazepam, and of a but distributes to rapidly short the brain duration action. has Diazepam liquid IV preparations access If per be not may available, administered rectum. is two not after seizure agent benzodiazepine, does be second-line the must resolve dosesof If administered. a monitoring for phenobarbital of is to the 181-5). a fosphenytoin orvalproic is evaluate or butcardiac effective, phenytoin (see dose loading seizures IV persist, arrhythmia.If Table is Either required acid appropriate or and agents to airway midazolam for (with as pentobarbital,can seizures). be strong evaluate of monitoring third-line pressure blood subclinical appropriate employed such protection, continuous video-EEG ongoing consideration support, as Alternatively,continuous infusions, If status are approach ineffective, preparations appropriate this therapy general for undertaken.When is initiated anesthesia anticonvulsant. the with is epilepticus stops, maintenance

examination, neurological with laboratoryevaluation no otherwise unprovoked anda healthy child normal For an required. seizure physical and an is sourceof febrile the who simple with seizures evaluate little no recovered necessary have Children fever. require to other studies laboratory the or completely than evaluation be life-threatening as the meet meningitis, seizures and thesecriteria If presentation suspected, such acute headtrauma, should clinical not does causes potentially and toxins symptomatic pursued. sepsis, are magnesium, toxicology seizures glucose, for potassium, a nitrogen, A as onset complete bicarbonate, calcium, phosphorus, urine of creatinine, measurement blood and or includes well bloodcount of chloride, sodium, and urea as new complete laboratoryevaluation

(airway, breathing, circulation) ABCs

panel—sodium, calcium, magnesium Basic metabolic

Toxicology appropriate studies as

Complete counts, and platelets, differential blood

(maximum 1 rate Midazolam dose) 0.2–0.5 Diazepam 2–4mg mg/kg mg/min) 0.1–0.2 per screening. = mg/kg mg/kg 0.05–0.1 Benzodiazepine administration of Lorazepam (max or historyor a signs lumbar stiffness, (neck meningitis with sign), symptoms Kernig and undergo infection,should of sign, suggestive Brudzinski clinical examination of intracranial Children puncture. physical and levels. protein, glucose counts, cell be culture, (CSF)should Cerebrospinal for analyzed fluid infants, clinical than In months particularlyyoung symptoms 18 besubtle. meningitis may the of old, children less stoolculture trial simplex chain herpes (cytomegalovirus lactate, inborn ofmetabolism; and a for glycine clinical of reaction; may pyridoxine. require urine as blood enterovirus); polymerase and testing and CSF Neonates also and wellas errors ammonia;

having most neurodiagnostic generalized and onset. seizures as seizures from distinguishing is classifying test The EEG for the or for disorders useful paroxysmal nonepileptic focal context or the patterns. children EEG have be The in normal epileptiform some of must because the EEG focal history, interpreted clinical EEGs. may have with interictal normal Children seizures may of monitoring a video in capture more diagnosis an patient typical attempt necessary. and to event sophisticated the recordings prolonged with be the When EEGs unclear, is simultaneous

shows tomography performed in superior pathology,but often acute than the Magnetic (CT) intracranial can clearly hemorrhage to rapidly in is department setting, brain showing be more CT computed imaging emergency and MRI. (MRI) most resonance myoclonic unnecessary primary and with epilepsy. juvenile inpatients the astypical generalized such is MRI absence epilepsies, when features. arteriovenous malformations, do 25% suggest may of (tumors, the examination identified and Lesions atrophy) EEG cysts, strokes, not focal be focal patients,even clinical in gliosis, mesial hamartoma, surgical pharmacoresistant in lesions, temporalsclerosis, epilepsy. assist can cortical such treatmentof some of consideration dysplasia, and asfocal of Identification

decision to long-term based recurrencebalanced a risk likelihood on the of is of the seizure therapy. The seizure daily against medications firstunprovoked institute for drug neurodiagnostic risk of the recurrence Determination historyand clinical on is based the (Table testing 181-6). it usually daily suggested If that 75% prescribed. is or be greater, recurrencerisk is medication the spasms,atypical infantile seizures, Absence seizures absence are fortherapy. of and need the seizures, universallyrecurrent atonic the time at indicating diagnosis,

EXAM AND First EEG BOTH EXAM after NORMAL, Table ABNORMAL ABNORMAL Risk Recurrence Seizure* OR EEG NORMAL a 181-6 SEIZURE EPILEPTIFORM EXAM TYPE EEG Unprovoked

circumstances: 1. Special

For line ethosuximide treatment. is absence the first epilepsy,

2.

or Adrenocorticotropic hormone, oral treat vigabatrin to infantile are used spasms. corticosteroids,

Treatment 181-1 Figure for epilepsy.

an of goal state. to functional maintain is treatment The optimal toxicity itself. seizure weighed of againstthe Medication be risk should of drug is themechanism the on (Fig. selection seizure Initial based 181-1). contains limitstoxicity, A compliance. single improves and cost, agent minimal children 60% obtain initial controland seizure side effects Approximately drug. with satisfactory the of seizurecontrol achieved, not second additionof is If compliance, is considered. drug a despite good monitoring be When measuring blood adjustingdosing anticonvulsant available, helpful levels can compliance. in and “low” does a patient of state; level a seizure is be clinical Levels should who light dose. higher free the in patient’s necessarilyneed drug interpreted a with not the should morning Anticonvulsant bedrawn before drug trough, levels doses. usually at altered. disease is When drug present, binding tobe or likely is hepatic renal free and levels can this instance, bound be anticonvulsant helpful. In

according of seizure type duration syndrome. anticonvulsant to varies The epilepsy and treatment seizures. years after be off For medications weaned 2 children, anticonvulsant most can without exceptions. some are There life. myoclonic epilepsy, and seizures, myoclonic absence children progressive atypical epilepsy, with Lennox-Gastaut syndrome Forexample, treatment require for usually juvenile Children therapy orpersistently that seizures were comorbidities, for is neurological are recurrence control, highest other EEGs epileptiform when at who discontinued. initially difficult risk to have

people of of and thereare with injury supervision. important bathing havethe risk is with as rates normal swimming high, children, cognitively under healthy for considerations drowning Although epilepsy normal mustonly so children occur safety epilepsy.The adult direct same iceskating. for or appropriate shoulduse helmets such as bicycling sports Children epilepsy. for to diving, not are with hang in scuba contact sports, participation but gliding, safe There no climbing people and free is contraindication with epilepsy. driving states country Each regarding laws have specific andindividual people for of freedombefore period Most permit. a a driving seizure issuing require

Weakness and movemuscles. voluntarily ability decreased to actively is a the body. This generalized be to localized may or aspectof one a is resistance of muscle low to movement. state Hypotonia insome present Hypotonia cases but normal be strength. associated motor weakness, with can with is The extensive 182-1). is diagnosis differential (Table weakness for

hypotonia motor motor and be disorders due may or lower neurons. Weakness upper neurons of to voluntary the in control form spinal motor cerebral originatein the cord motor motor axons the ending cortex; their neurons activity. Upper and corticospinaltract motor and muscle motor cells, neuromuscular muscles lower The the junctions, roots, peripheral neurons represent horn and units. their motornerves, anterior requires coordination including cerebral throughout communication normal complex system, tone, spinal thalamus, this basal cortex,cerebellum, and ganglia, and cord. Maintenance integrated of the brainstem, strength,

Available @ StudentConsult.com

disease produced Weakness (Table motor upper by neuron units lower differs caused 182-2). fromweakness motor by of Dysfunction neuron upper voluntary the causes of motor loss

congenital) neonatal, Myasthenia Neuromuscular transient junction Botulism (juvenile, gravis

total of dystrophies leads with Myotonic (Duchenne, neuron, producing activity, Muscle myopathies Dermatomyositis Muscular myopathies final common hypotonia. Becker, Metabolic Polymyositis dystrophies movement the limb-girdle) muscle to absence pathway Congenital the measuring a requiring arise muscle down raise walk on walk above or is by squeeze a individual the muscle ball). stairs, ability the head, hands young of by strength tested from heels, tasks up groups toes to in the perform child, groups best Function ground, or particular the observing (e.g., or,

syndromes, and of infections, an motor diseases upper deep neuron tendon tract, reflexes, metabolic weakness (Babinski may trauma, with increased demyelinating extensor injure the spasticity, corticospinal pattern and infarction, diseases, Tumors, degenerative responses plantar producing sign). coupled

on the the lesion. The distribution depends of of location weakness produce A region parietal tumor hemiparesis. may a in the left right progressive a produce may quadriparesis. slowly glioma A brainstem a would such synthesis, as A disorder produce a progressive of myelin diffuse leukodystrophy, symmetrical quadriparesis.

StudentConsult.com Available @

cord mimics produce neuron lower lesions, flaccid, spinal as may such disease. infarction areflexic motor compression, a Acute paralysis or that most acute syndrome. have exhibits syndrome or child paraparesis acute flaccid an eitheran to or is subacute cord who likely A Guillain-Barré pain a of and disease sensory and spinal bowel or tenderness. motorlevel, function, disturbance Thehallmarks local bladder cord a are of level, spinal cord maybe myelitis, of demyelination, cord the or trauma. syndrome acute tumor, infarction, The result transverse demyelinating Transverse acute spinal steroids. istreated the high-dose an myelitis, postinfectious of cord, disorder with vital management (neuroblastoma, necessitate and spinalcord sarcoma) neurosurgical lymphoma, immediate tumors the compressing Trauma function. topreserve

lower disease any neuron motor of Neuromuscular component affects the unit. The 182-3). point specific toward weakness of diseases can (Table distribution muscle

intrauterine time a of horn cells Progressive (SMA), manifestation atrophy in begin life of is genetic may any muscular degeneration spinal or the anterior key diseasethat thereafter. that simple not movement. total and basal complex of because loss motor stereotyped or of About brainstem ganglia, have patterns of the but nuclei tracts produce control, movement thalamus, Thecorticospinal testedby permits rapid of and alternating is distal best activity fine movements extremities. the tract motor stiff slowed, produces Milddysfunction motions. forearm flexion extension close leg with postures andadduction adduction. elbow and (spasticity) involuntary at wrist chest, stiff, of the the and abnormal produces severe consisting More to dysfunction

local lesion. reflex the Damage reflexes residual movements cord leaves spinal below to of the coordinated spinal level the stereotyped by simple, motor the of lower Destruction

(meningitis, mitochondrial Ischemia (accidental, tumor lactic encephalitis, (arterial Infection Trauma inborn error of abscess) encephalomyopathy, nonaccidental) and venous) metabolism; Hemorrhage stroke-like Degenerative Brain or episodes) Metabolic disease (leukodystrophy; disease acidosis,

Myotonic myopathy dystrophy of Fisher Botulism variant Guillain-Barré myotubular Congenital Miller

and have more Fisher (SMA syndrome), slowly of (SMA severe form variant a chronic,juvenile have a Guillain-Barré form Polio type1/Werdnig-Hoffmann Botulism disease), 3). a 2/Kugelberg-Welander progressive and 25% have type 50% infantile form patients Miller infantile more of 25% type (SMA late with frequentautosomal frequency SMA the is recessive carrier of most 1 50. a diseases, in of one

Available @ StudentConsult.com

life in more starts, the the process the The earlier progression. severe in SMA facial and with present hypotonia, involvement. generalized infancy type Infants early 1 with weakness, severe language cognitive, sensation. normal social, and Infants have skills and aspect are is the lateral the inspecting the (quivering best of child when mouth the asleep. Fasciculations identified tongue) of by absent. Deep tendon are reflexes becomes predominantly shallow, breathing rapid, With and abdominal. progression, pulmonary compromise and death. leads respiratory weak infection, an extremely In to child, atelectasis, die infants within Most SMA 1 with years. first the type 2 with may survive to Children SMA adulthood. 2 type of with appear life slower 3 SMA type can normal with weakness normal, Children and expectancy. progression a

testing. diagnosis made is The genetic by may phosphokinase (CK) normal elevated. mildly or be Creatine fibrillations, other signs shows electromyelogram denervation. (EMG) of and fasciculations, The atrophy. show Muscle grouped specimens biopsy

specific progression delays are studied. treatment of agents No a although promising being number of SMA, and minimizing avoiding infections. preventing is contractures, toward therapy directed scoliosis, maximizing nutrition, Symptomatic with and hygiene, are aggressively infections antibiotics. early and managed pulmonary oxygen, Respiratory illness. for use nonuse stage the patient of in ventilation must feedings or The tube each individualized each of artificial and be

demyelinating neuropathy sensory and tick are nerve polyneuropathy hereditary inflammatory There Guillain-Barré but are: most chronic paralysis. motor diseases many presentations syndrome, (HMSN), (CIDP), childhood, peripheral classic in the and effects alcoholism, toxins, to the in failure, rare are common diabetes are mellitus, children. in but adults Peripheral produced by neoplasm renal neuropathies of exposure chronic vasculitis,

10 demyelinating syndrome pneumonia about Guillain-Barré Mycoplasma infection Campylobacter gastrointestinal can jejuni). days is occur after postinfectious inflammatory or a or that a peripheral respiratory polyradiculoneuropathy) (classically neuropathy (acute autoimmune most all of in people flaccid of cause common It ages the in children. acute occurs paralysis is and

areflexia, characteristic symmetrical and are ascending symptoms The flaccidity, weakness. weeks. over Progression indolently occur more rapidly, can or in hours, in paresthesia and the legs. or start in Typically weak numbness symptoms a hands feet, then the with feeling heavy, trunk, bulbar larynx). ascends arms, pharynx, muscles involve and (tongue, the Weakness to relatively are when is reflexes strength absent preserved. even tendon Deep dramatic are of sensory with compared weakness. Objective loss usually signs the minor respiratory rapidly. insufficiency progress and Bulbar may and Dysfunction incontinence, pressure blood or or to lead other of changes, arrhythmias, retention autonomic stool retention. urinary tachycardia nerves can to acute difficult from polyneuropathy be spinal This syndrome. can distinguish cord an level, toward of and point Guillain-Barré lack spinal bowel Preservation reflexes, bladder arm of loss tenderness a function, and of sensory absence syndrome. of variant Fisher and ophthalmoplegia, partial manifests cranial of Guillain-Barré A called syndrome nerve ataxia, with the areflexia. Miller variant

pleocytosis. but without early significant Guillain-Barré The classically shows in levels sometimes syndrome the illness cerebrospinal protein is in normal elevated fluid may resonance Magnetic reveal roots. (MRI) imaging spinal nerve with gadolinium the enhancement of velocity and required not (EMG, diagnostic studies nerve but evidence prognostic provide can Electrophysiology conduction [NCV]) corroborative are indicators. always

hospital. be admitted the disease should to Children of early in the stages an intensive for progressive severe, Those cared in should with unit. rapidly be or weakness moderate, care Pulmonary and functions cardiac monitored are continuously. should impending secretions. inability to failure or Endotracheal be respiratory in patients intubation with clear performed an are patients (IVIG). initially Most immunoglobulin with intravenous treated IVIG progressive and drugs Plasma or exchange rapidly are is treatment disease. when in unsuccessful alternatives immunosuppressive speech are and Physical, mainstays therapies occupational, treatment. of

usually function of normal albeit The resolves spontaneously, within to patients 12 months. 80% recover slowly; 1 illness residual moderate patients percent mild left weakness. to of are with Twenty acute suffer relapse will children or Some chronic symptoms.

patients and of immune-mediated peripheral is canaffect ages. an neuropathy all CIDP in with (usually affecting and both relapsing-remitting episodic, proximal distal the pattern) present an extremities. Patients weakness or as may Patients changes sensation pain. alsoexperience such numbness, tingling, clinical, diagnosis. confirm The although or is nerve EMG diagnosis the biopsymay glucocorticoids, The are mainstays forCIDP and of plasmapheresis. IVIG, treatment with partial experience whereas or severedisability. complete remission, varies, Prognosis others remission patients undergoing some

of a peripheral is progressive called Charcot-Marie-Tooth group HMSN diseases. [CMT]) Disease nerve (also autonomic dominate picture, functions sensation the components and Motor with later. generally affected clinical The 1A. most is common type CMT HMSN have Other symptoms. forms may milder with symptoms Some subtypes severe starting in infancy. present

The earliest and affected. the and most are peroneal severely nerves tibial complaints preschool years, tripping. weakness the of in and the frequent Most with early adolescent often, begin to ankles of dorsiflexors, and feet), complaints sensation bilateral the deformity (high-arched feet occasional foot cavus normal of pes despite Examination of paresthesia. weakness shows become on may palpable markedly can enlarged exam. and Peripheral be nerves is years Progression slow, over HMSN of extending and decades. hands mild lower feet. entire of in and loss patients the sensory Eventually, develop atrophy weakness the legs and to and hands and moderate abnormalities. and never of ankle reflexes, have a deformity, patients mild loss more electrophysiologic Some than foot a to have tasks their in confined may family with be wheelchair everyday hands. difficulties Others the performing same and

severelydecreased on hypertrophic potential nervebiopsy) HMSN amplitudes (CMT2, with (CMT1, either axonal NCV and degeneration demyelinating decreased with can axonal and normal NCV sural but action or be changes onbiopsy). for HMSN. many available subtypes testing genetic Specific of is not treatment in feet that the is improvefunction. for HMSN braces available,but can maintain Specific dorsiflexion

StudentConsult.com @ Available

neuron acute syndrome. of Tick weakness, paralysis lower produces Guillain-Barré pattern clinically motor to similar an tick a attached similar toxin, female transmission. An blocking to botulism, neuromuscular releases including ocular, with present generalized papillary, paralysis. severe patients and a weakness, flaccid Affected bulbar tick, for any be particularly A areas, acute affixed search made an in in child hairy must with methodical weakness. a function. tick of in results Removal the return prompt motor of

@ Available StudentConsult.com

Myasthenia gravis is autoimmune an condition. auto-antibodies receptors rapid striated number though other fatigability effective the of muscle, receptors, types which at antibodies exist. acetylcholine decreasing (AChR) in commonly, Most results of the the junction, of block neuromuscular The childhood are myasthenia. in late three and varieties childhood, transient myasthenia and congenital myasthenia, juvenile gravis infancy neonatal

presenting ptosis, the are Variable ophthalmoplegia, and symptoms. diplopia, weakness facial Dysphagia, weakness occur. extremity poor and may headcontrol, repetitive neuromuscular muscles fatigueof theday or Rapid disorders, other activity. with distinguishes with worsening progressive from over myasthenia ophthalmoplegia advances never In the and some beyond ptosis children, myasthenia). disease (ocular acetylcholinesterase, a of illness and severity, includes an all andpotentially pyridostigmine, various Others life-threatening musculature, forms have swallowing.Treatment respiration including of involves depending that that ofimmunosuppression. inhibitor and, on progressive

myasthenic 20% the to presenting develops transient gravis, neonates 10% with first myasthenia after in mothers days to A to birth. born syndrome hours in of mothers have with to myasthenia infants anti-AChR maternal born all Almost antibodies. extremity ptosis, variable feeding, weak poor and ophthalmoplegia, movements, weakness. respiratory include Signs difficulty, facial hypotonia, inhibitors few and Neonates for weakness to until a with care require cholinesterase remits. days the supportive myasthenia gravis transient weeks

autoimmune of neuromuscular A of disorders are have that been mediated. junction the rare variety not reported in components gene (CMS) The the congenital are the junction. mutations due neuromuscular of to myasthenic syndromes and ophthalmoparesis, facial although hypotonia, childhood. throughout diplegia, typically infancy weakness, with in present can They extremity present they Respiratory function may be feeding and compromised. disability. CMS with lifelong have usually Children will or to pyridostigmine that Some other neuromuscular respond function. improve junction children drugs

clinical through is antibody the combination symptoms most commonly of testing. and Autoimmune diagnosed myasthenia junction. individuals of the antibodies although to of have the have The other AChR, components majority neuromuscular antibodies some to electrodecrement of feature 3-Hz Neurophysiology repetitive nerve conduction during exhibit may with studies. the classic stimulation can chloride) in particularly improvement in and (edrophonium used additionally result of a cholinesterase verification. inhibitor strength, transient be thus can diagnostic ptosis, Administration for of

@ Available StudentConsult.com

cholinergic blocks produces presynaptic a neurotoxin botulism infection which Clostridium by botulinum, results that intestinal Infant transmission. from to flora bowel disease. age the predispose Young of absence infants competitive this and foods) canned spores. food dust, or poorly ingest soil, (honey may Infants or with contaminated ranges severe. neuromuscular from blockade progressive mild The to and constipation present with often feeding. Infants poor cranial eye by diminished reflex, movements, Hypotonia gag dysfunction ptosis. manifested along pupillary contraction, with weakness and and nerve decreased develop, decreased pressure rate blood fluctuate. and Heart may Affected may infants failure. develop respiratory made The spores by toxin stool presence is C. and diagnosis samples. the botulinum of in suspected. as Therapy diagnosis administered is should IVIG the be botulism with as soon

and and treatment the supportive care, respiratory prognosis is prompt With good.

group dystrophies characterized gradual muscle and diseases replacement muscle tissue. of by progressive the genetic by are a fibrotic myofiber Muscular of degeneration the dystrophy the is childhood. genetic most common Duchenne dystrophy muscular disorders and of common most muscular of one

X-linked boys is in (Xp21) an a resulting gene from mutation and dystrophin. muscular of Duchenne disorder affecting 3500 1 approximately dystrophy gene the the with symptoms; preserve resulting an its disorder allelic muscular partially at least Becker dystrophy more mutations mild product. function associated of is

Available @ StudentConsult.com

infancy. only Infant are symptomatic rarely boys in early 2 run of to 3 develop gait age, an to years and inability properly. an awkward At boys about in motor milestones of during antecedent or an poor have attaining Some infancy. history mild slowness head control proximal weakness to firm shows gait. moderate mild with a hyperlordotic, waddling leg calf Examination hypertrophy and child lying by position (Gower and legs climb the his up arms The floor his using from on a sign). arises to typically body years, and 12 most wheelchair 6 is by boys years. dependent Arm by age evident are weakness age in cardiomyopathy, some boys, dysfunction. scoliosis, and behavioral and, cognitive decline, Other manifestations include respiratory Many boys adulthood. with into Duchenne live or result a early their 30s, dysfunction. of die cardiac in usually as Most 20s or decline progressive respiratory

Serum always CK elevated. markedly levels are Diagnosis by for dystrophin is established gene testing mutation. the genetic possible. Prenatal is diagnosis cases third new mutations. Approximately represent one of increased Occasionally, intrafascicular muscle and made degeneration biopsy regeneration accompanied tissue. the muscle until connective not shows by a is fiber diagnosis

to Steroid of delay therapy slow disease now and motor the disability. is pace instituted the and bracing, dysfunction Supportive physical wheelchairs, of or care treatment cardiac pulmonary proper infections. includes therapy, multidisciplinary is approach A recommended. than in improvements management, Through pre-steroid now significantly the patients living era. in longer are

common present is the in common adulthood. dystrophy most (DM) to second form dystrophy most the muscular and Myotonic dystrophy of genetic triplet protein dominant a the autosomal An by progressive expansion CTG, kinase in caused DM is gene. disease, repeat, myotonic where more is and characterized with of presents severe genetic each the anticipation, repeats, with generation roughly by disease symptoms. Presentation is CTG number correlated the and earlier

adulthood, DM present it most at age. typically in can Although presents any childhood-onset myotonia. and well extremity progressive slowly of facial “classic” include as DM as features Clinical weakness distal Myotonia muscle disorder of contraction. after relaxation a is grasp an Patients grasp, peeling their and have their slowly. onto away object releasing difficulty fingers temples, muscles weakness; of lower facial facial characteristic, The ptosis; and the around and appearance neck; of jaw, is with lip. drooping hollowing is and dysarthric. nasal mildly voice The and of alimentary smooth are striated muscle tissue only affected, the uterus, Not the cardiac is muscle but tract, involved. and impairment. endocrinopathies, deficiencies, have variable immunologic arrhythmias, intellectual cataracts, Patients

repeat of of severe dystrophy length. congenital myotonic of because expansion rapid in CTG DM appear of can form mothers with A infants the reflexes, and with feeding, absence of immobile ptosis, are sucking respiratory hypotonic, poor Moro and Infants difficulties. and which uterine weakness labor sequelae, smooth diagnosis and muscle atony make difficult. during its to ischemic encephalopathy Often, hypoxic more the of associated and lead clinical presence history contractures, of intrauterine poor congenital disease. or indicates The movements neuromuscular of a fetal clubfoot, have requiring of prolonged mortality an infant Those ventilation 25%. of significant Individuals terms independently. often eventually children congenital with DM skills, and in gains ambulate nearly motor all make have approximately DM mental retardation. of 50% However, patients the children a of potentially in experience second with In congenital the arrhythmias. progressive including disease cardiac fatal years, phase teen DM addition,

is Diagnosis established testing. genetic by

Forms Childhood Disease Muscle of Other

(CMDs) in conditions of determined early genetically refer Congenital childhood. group present a that or infancy muscular dystrophies to the congenital subtypes most congenital include muscular muscular dystroglycanopathies. merosin-deficient dystrophy, and Ullrich The dystrophy, common weakness, include clinical development, and characteristic delayed features congenital extremity hypotonia, The motor contractures. elevated muscle on Diagnosis serum dystrophic detected the is biopsy. established CK of combination changes and through although or some wheelchair are of support. children nonprogressive, and course with respiratory is slow many individuals, most dependent disease In require the CMD type progressive and and diminishes status respiratory age. with worsen; severely often scoliosis are Contractures

recessive, dominant, as humeroperoneal known X-linked (EDMD), as autosomal or can be dystrophy, disorder. also Emery-Dreifuss dystrophy muscular muscular an inherited recessive autosomal has childhood, although onset adult typically noted. Symptoms in been begin arrhythmias. progressive Patients defects may muscle and and or contractures, cardiac humeroperoneal early wasting, conduction disease weakness with experience slowly electrocardiograms changes imaging, characteristic abnormal CK but with on EDMD mild of elevations muscle nonspecific (ECG), levels, is muscle associated serum biopsies. abnormal and of no There therapies EDMD, although ECGs of placement abnormal the defibrillators in disease-specific reduces sudden death. are incidence for modifying early patients with

usually recessive are have been muscular autosomal of forms in dystrophy an described, pattern. which Several limb-girdle inherited (LGMD) can subtype the presentation on of Depending childhood. be throughout LGMD, Duchenne-like A subset presentation. will children of a have and hip primarily affects of girdles. shoulder LGMD muscles the atrophic. Distal later muscles may become weak and will with ambulate. LGMD children lose Many ability to the failure. Some may progressive and respiratory cardiac have also

an autosomal dominant Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy is myopathy. the muscles. facial and shouldergirdle appears Weakness in first can in weakness characteristicobservation Shoulder results which scapular often the winging, be of asymmetric. close sleep, Patients ofupper musculature. during in to and facial a pucker eyes decrease arm ptosis, thinness elevating have or lips the mild fully difficulty in arms, neckweakness, the expression,inability Progression and have dysfunction. is upper have significantdisability related extremity and weakness to presentation although can slow, a childrenoften more severe

congenital myopathies that, Congenital disorders hypotonia relatively typically and of common most with (prevalence approximately (CM) are muscle a 1:20,000) like in muscular nondystrophic infancy weakness. group present dystrophies, include “myopathic subluxation/dislocation, muscles, facies”). body and facial and symptoms thin small/atrophic congenital contractures, habitus, characteristic (the signs appearance hip Additional respiratory have nonprogressive or often disabilities lifelong wheelchair severe only dependence, progressive, are children failure. and scoliosis, including often although severe Symptoms slowly in of finding (e.g., the dystrophies distinguish other involvement may Clinical facial myopathies). CMDs congenital and musculature based biopsy results. laboratory ultimately Diagnosis established studies, and genetic findings, is test on nemaline the being most common myopathy, core subtypes features centronuclear myopathy. Histopathologic on characteristic are by biopsy, distinguished myopathy, and muscle More genetic established CMs. 15 than for have been different causes are unresolved. genetically However, 50% of cases nearly therapies models several no CM preclinical Although efficacy therapies for promising subtype, have in shown currently any specific disease. of exist

Glycogen 55. deficiency storage musclecarnitine type in Chapters are 52 and disease II disease) discussed and (Pompe may but ofthese and with the is broad (Chapter disorders 57). phenotype progressive present Several weakness, ophthalmoplegia, hypotonia, myopathies mitochondrial Endocrine and are including with associated myopathies, hyperthyroidism, hyperparathyroidism, weakness. hypothyroidism, proximalmuscle Cushing syndrome, due forms weakness. produces hypokalemia or familial Periodic paralysis of hyperkalemia to episodic

evaluation the guided 179). and examination physical should diagnostic be clinical The by history (Chapter

and hypotension, body is a convulsions. life-threatening arrhythmias, rigidity, syndrome rapid acidosis, increase of respiratory manifested by muscle Malignant hyperthermia and a metabolic temperature, genetic agents in with a anesthetic Acute exposure predisposition. episodes patients by precipitated are to without children dominant and Duchenne as core with dystrophy, also muscle disorder. malignant an disease although hyperpyrexia occur muscular are central myopathy, autosomal Patients can in genetic susceptible, myopathies other noted. during often anesthesia history unexplained A is of family death levels in can and and failure. tubular result CK Serum myoglobinuria rise necrosis renal acute with of genetic contracture Diagnosis on reveals that idiopathic or vitro caffeine. tonic to testing is exposure test possible excessive contraction an muscle and hyperthermia malignant in halothane consists bicarbonate, dantrolene, of and sodium Treatment cooling. IV

lower such expression of and upper in because incomplete blurred of between infants the of neuron is distinction limits The motor system myelinization nervous the clinical disorders many signs, spasticity. developing cardinal as child critical the tendon whether is presence or of and two are points absence clinical weak the The reflexes. deep or Hypotonia a deep with tendon absent and disorder. coupled suggest neuromuscular weakness reflexes depressed brisk motor upper an with reflexes hypotonia. stronger source neuron child suggests the A for are neonatal weakness outlined of Causes earlier. presented algorithm is in hypotonia 182-1. with diagnostic infants A weakness or for Figure

StudentConsult.com Available @

who appear moved. are well in when move to theircribs supine infants Some when or floppy handled lifted, When their

Dysmorphic?

Brain CK, SMA MRI cDM1,

MRI S CK, PWS

Diagnosis? No

Diagnosis?

with infant of Figure an hypotonia. Evaluation 182-1 myotonic conduction SMA, EMG, spinal muscular creatine MRI, CMS, resonance cDM1, NCV, velocity; microarray magnetic Congenital syndrome; PWS, dystrophy; analysis; electromyelogram; CK, chromosomal imaging; atrophy. kinase; nerve Prader-Willi James MD.) Dowling, (Courtesy form the legs, posture). their prone through at supportweight (Landau in an do inverted heads on suspension not flop, shoulders, and they slip U neonates,they placed normal. is When prone but tone decreased, and flexed.Passive instead flat of legs their as lie are arms reflexes may keeping cerebral (Table Hypotonia a be associated 182-4). maybe significant disease phenomenon is outgrown benign that with or may hypotonia most is common of The cause encephalopathy. hypoxic-ischemic

and boys, hands thrive; leading Prader-Willi testicles, small small severe feet; in with to severe and failure cryptorchidism. and, penis, (PWS) a feeding hypotonia; to presents problems small syndrome neonatal develop Severe childhood. early in obesity and hyperphagia of of interstitial deletion 60% affected to have individuals an 70% 15q11q13. paternalchromosome Approximately of hypotonia. common genetic causes neonatal and the are most 21 trisomy PWS

a Infants passive elasticity. the of laxity Ehlers-Danlos as familial have and may laxity, syndrome, disorder, hypotonia, or ligaments, exhibit such tissue syndrome, increased who Marfan skin connective marked ligamentous and They achieve cognition motor milestones and normal strength mental and normally. have peculiar postures They feet unusual or gaits. have may their of

hypotonia to exhibit 6 with months typically skills. old Infants condition with delayed the 12 congenital at gross motor benign unable good but have skills. They creep, social, crawl, or manipulative sit, and verbal, to are mouths. briskly their the bring and appears to and arms infants toes and legs Strength can kick their normal, slip-through often head and tone. ventral display The in floppiness suspension, of lag, children passive birth. infant seems from The floppy diagnosis connective includes diseases. upper and disorders and motor differential tissue The neuron laboratory unrevealing. Extensive often investigation is and catch of to children peers these up Most

anoxia brain Metabolic Structural Infectious or illness* hypoglycemia) (e.g., Severe mother through Intoxication (hydrocephalus)

laxity disorder Congenital ligaments tissue Marfan syndrome Connective of syndrome Ehlers-Danlos *Common.

3 age. years by of normal appear Often, other family have members exhibited pattern. similar developmental a

and that 10 100,000 of The patients. incidence neonates, among is higher to elderly of is children stroke per pediatric approaching 2.5 in childhood wide 182-5). of (Table conditions stroke can spectrum produce A Pediatric thrombosis) cerebral be ischemic sinovenous hemorrhage. due stroke, to or may (arterial strokes ischemia the brain arteries Arterial of results focal from (AIS)is that infarction in occlusion stroke brain. the ischemic such abnormal infarcts cardioembolic autoimmune associated common congenital due or or most are cell as resulting meningitis) vasculitis coagulation disorders. and with cerebral to causes in sickle anemia, The arteries infectious, disease, (either heart vasculitis occlusion ischemia sinovenous of pressure cerebral Coagulation brain, of as can result thrombosis which the rises. the venous cerebral increase the the structures (CSVT), in in disorders also venous risk

dehydration. or by CSVT be can infections caused also (HS) intraparenchymal secondary epidural strokes may bleeding be with Hemorrhagic AIS) subarachnoid, bleeds. or or intra-ventricular, or associated (primary, after subdural, common of HS vasculitis. vascular and causes The most are head malformations, trauma,

in is deficits focal neurologic child onset of otherwise. proven a strokeuntil The acute can which a nonspecific, may subtle to and Symptoms diagnosis. lead be delay in neurologic AIS acute, with typicallypresents focal deficits. be speech, may ismost or deficits Hemiparesis common, sensory, present. balance visual, but focal in childhood common AIS. presentation arequite AIS in of seizures Unlike adults, presents the symptomatic most withencephalopathy. or seizures focal first day acute often AIS in with (typically of life) Similarly,neonatal

Symptoms gradually be more nonspecific than more variable and may AIS. progress of and CSVT be VI cranial from acute of papilledema, child signs have seizures, or may progressive or including diplopia may (most In deficits often the palsy), headache, pressure, CSVT, elevated intracranial present, nerve lethargy, focal confusion.

headache. to with acutely, tends a sudden “thunderclap” HS present focal fatal. consciousness, HS with may seizures also be deficits, rapidly can present of or rigidity, and loss nuchal

one hemiplegia body, ignoring decreased side. handedness, with early use of or as infants becomes of develop, apparent Congenital the side one area cerebral reveals an encephalomalacia in of Neuroimaging contralateral the hemisphere. the details child’s history postnatal and delivery, labor, The unremarkable. are often of intrauterine, predispose The encephalomalacia may of child area the epilepsy. to

more stroke, AIS, which pediatric most CSVT. conditions are than that common HS, of or are mimic There many disease musculoskeletal inflammatory but system, weakness, diagnosis intracranial specific, are or weakness, transient require (migraine, psychogenic central Some others and/or prompt reversible leukoencephalopathy treatment (e.g., mimics nervous posterior of tumor, postictal syndrome). the of infection, benign abnormalities), these

initial On is presentation, acute neuroimaging necessary. tomography mature be (CT) to nonhemorrhagic CT. computed acute AIS; and is on not can sensitive reveal noncontrast head larger, stroke may scan seen routine HS A acute, highly diffusion-weighted Therefore, for required with MRI most presentations. imaging is confirm to arterial magnetic aneurysms. in used Angiography identify is angiography occlusion resonance malformations, by and underlying and arteriopathy, (MRA) vascular CT can angiography AIS or and imaging CSVT the MRI clinical CT. Diagnosis requires with purposeful or suspicion venous system a by of cerebral venography high of a clinical the be assessment of not laboratory based If Table stroke, the on cause investigation should does complete 182-5). undertaken suspected etiologies (see reveal promptly obviate risk need factor, one not a have evaluation. does the children for identifying predisposing one AIS complete with than factor more so Many

on strokes. Treatment future of must secondary limiting prevention injuryand neuronal focus essential. maintaining pressure, by Neuroprotection blood control glucose, andseizures is of temperature, medications an thrombolysis not for Emergency of or active this area children,but is with research. catheterization established yet clinical is heparin, subcutaneous usedfor low-molecular-weight heparin,oral instances. are secondary Anticoagulants(IV warfarin) stroke platelet antiaggregants prevention in and some (aspirin) thosewith CSVT, anticoagulation oftherapy. the progressive is mainstay For are Long-term survivors. programs for required rehabilitation most

smooth inability and usually to Ataxia pathways. accurate, movements, the the make to cerebellar dysfunction a due of is coordinated cerebellar vermis the efferent position disturbances the or midline medulloblastoma, If intoxication). afferent the cerebellar ethanol senses)or ataxia.Truncal either (e.g., to cortex) (cerebellum reflects disturbed, cerebral through ataxia cerebellarataxia, connections (joint of thalamus are acute has patient postinfectious hemisphere astrocytoma). Appendicular ataxia of (e.g., cerebellar the ipsilateral reflects cystic cerebellar disturbances cerebellar childhood are causes postinfectious The most drug acuteataxia intoxications. ataxiaand in acute common of ataxia. Discrete (e.g., hemorrhagesmay ependymoma, cerebellar lesions astrocytoma), tumors multiple sclerosis, within strokes, the medulloblastoma, cause posteriorfossa, and states, neuroblastoma, and metabolism. benign causes migraine,paraneoplastic postictal inborn of head with syndrome Other associated errors trauma, paroxysmalvertigo, include opsoclonus-myoclonus seizures, disorders produce nonprogressiveataxia. Congenital also may chronic, There ataxia syndromes(Table 183-1). number of are a inherited

Available StudentConsult.com @

abuse *Common. Drugs Inhalants of

(overor due undershooting broad-based, or of tremor a ataxia unsteady target The usual distance and abnormal (truncal the are intention of to gait dysmetria ataxia) perception). symptoms An intention target. approaches worsens arm/hand as tremor the the proprioceptive cerebellum similar these lesions inputs cerebellar the causing (Guillain-Barré but symptoms stem of may of pathways, peripheral nerve loss Classically, disorders syndrome) present from with symptoms. the to with ataxia, assessed, be intensify addition, mimic or weakness along strength so must In may coordination.

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Drug common cause of among is ataxia intoxication children. acute the most Overdosage sedative-hypnotic ethanol lethargy, with without lethargyusually acute any results or anticonvulsantdrugs. but produce ataxia and agentcan ataxia from with intoxication may access medications patient about to have the important ask or ofabuse It any is drugs to. supportive. Treatment is

weeks varicella, or viral illnesses, other infectious occur Postinfectious gastrointestinal infections. acute to may ataxia mild respiratory mononucleosis, cerebellar or following 3 1 infection direct response infection represent viral matter. likely, directed and white precipitated an cerebellar The the may at more of by either uncertain the cerebellum pathogenesis and or, viral autoimmune the a is staggering, truncal begin abruptly, frequent falling. ataxia, causing Symptoms and may Dysmetria the and dysarthria, nystagmus, arms, irritability, present. of vomiting, be lethargy days, sitting, to or then stabilize and several severe Symptoms, 2 peak prevent resolve enough which standing weeks. usually be within may over content. fluid sometimes (CSF) protein a pleocytosis examination lymphocytic mild elevation of shows or Cerebrospinal mild may resonance magnetic cerebellar imaging enhancement. reveal Brain injury to specific No phase. except ataxic the during is therapy available prevent

second in tumors Brain neoplasm children. the common most are posterior the 50% within from fossa. About arise the that ataxia in or with that posterior Tumors produce brainstem progressive headache in or gradual acute fossa onset. arise be may pressure. associated a or over weeks, worsening and with There months, intracranial of progressive typically symptoms signs is elevated days, ataxia CSF or invasion fourth and or of the of The obstruction with resultant Sylvius may from pathways dysmetria primary ventricle) from (aqueduct hydrocephalus. result cerebellar this region astrocytoma, ependymoma, common brainstem tumors most glioma. medulloblastoma, The and cerebellar include in

myoclonus, the neuroblastoma in anywhere adrenal ataxia, of along of or a cells in medulla chain the sympathetic thorax the is with abdomen the paraspinal dysmetria, associated Rarely, severe located irritability, Purkinje development and degeneration and or opsoclonus. misdirected immunologic toward neuronal other tumor and cells reaction Purkinje the An to be directed elements. may attack of movements the irregular, limb or lightning-like movements a The are myoclonic head. directions. a suddenly in Opsoclonus is movement random rapid, of multidirectional, the dart eyes, which conjugate for a occult should of search in opsoclonus-myoclonus The neuroblastoma. presence prompt an a child vigorous

ataxia and Several errors rare present with of inborn metabolism of episodes intermittent can somnolence. maple deficiency. include mitochondrial disorders, syrup disease, vitamin Hartnup and abetalipoproteinemia, These urine E disorder,

severe signs nausea manifestation acute associated usually Difficulty a one of is a sense clarified diagnosis and with nystagmus. is and gait (vertigo), pallor, and spinning by the walking severe dizziness of labrynthitis, staggering sweating, associated symptoms but the of vomiting, of

is of ataxias. common the Ataxia-telangiectasia, an disorder, most autosomal degenerative recessive genetic the of ambulation loss progressing patients present age 2 by Affected ataxia to with around years, adolescence. ears, sclerae, mid-childhood, the over and is In extremities. nose, telangiectasia evident in of risk function result tumors and Abnormalities increased greatly early death. lymphoreticular immune in

ataxia autosomalrecessive Friedreich disorder. progressive, a relentlessly is toes, elementary (high-arched develop yearswith kyphoscoliosis). proprioceptionand dysmetria, and ataxia, dysarthria, vibration, in late hypertrophic tendon reflexes, nystagmus,and Children the deep diminished cardiomyopathy and hammer many absent skeletalabnormalities present feet,

@ StudentConsult.com Available

voluntary muscles. excessive, a associated of dyskinesias movements of chaotic, Movement or exaggerated, abnormal disorders explosive with or are entities group diverse ganglia. abnormalities system extrapyramidal generally of basal orthe are of They the result the children movement) typicallyhyperkinetic patterns. disorders in (increased Movement are often abnormalmovements are in activated fatigue The and stress sleep. and disappear by (segmental may myoclonus) migratory not diffuse be and (chorea)but sleep. myoclonus, may typically to specific palatal They in groups isolated muscle disappear are and

is one to hyperkinetic, another. body to rapid, a part unsustained, from purposeless movement seems irregular, flow that Chorea tongue often difficulty the incorporate involuntary more appear the (milkmaid keeping into maintaining Affected demonstrate grip).Patients purposeful them attempt making patients grip protruded to fidgety. or movements movements, 183-2). (Table movement genetic, or in infectious, autoimmune/parainfectious, toxic metabolic origin structural, Choreiform abnormalities may be movements occur may The

hyperthyroidism) neurosyphilis, induced Infectious Autoimmune/parainfectious (Huntington lupus ataxia-telangiectasia) Genetic encephalitis) virus, (acute disease, (human Structural erythematosus) (stroke, fever, failure, immunodeficiency (hepatic/renal Metabolic/toxic Drug scarlet systemic fever,* rheumatic neoplasm)

encephalitis). or as extensive disease) a Wilson Drugs/toxins* disturbances) of disease, Huntington alone Psychogenic encephalopathy, (hyperthyroidism, erythematosus, electrolyte bronchodilators, more chorea, chorea, systemic hepatic tricyclic Sydenham Metabolic Essential amphetamines, (Huntington (caffeine, disorder Hereditary, neurologic Stroke antidepressants) tremor* lupus degenerative or (e.g., tremor part Physiologic*

coarse, distal is muscles. Athetosis is writhing a movement hyperkinetic, pronounced that slow, in more (choreoathetosis) and present conjunction combination in is Athetosis neurologic with signs. other usually chorea is with in frequently seen all disorders may chorea. in be mentioned for virtually seen It the forms of spasticity and Many cerebral mixed have choreoathetosis. with palsy children

abnormal motion Dystonia causing movements characterized is and twisting abnormally contraction, repetitive muscle by postures. or sustained spasm) (torsion Cerebral ganglia thalamic with dystonia basal among children, usually common cause associated of or lesions. is the most palsy been implicated genetic in Many primary have mutations dystonias. and (eye tongue protrusions, face crises the Antipsychotics dystonic typically produce oculogyric torticollis, reactions, and with and antiemetics rotation). acute neck can retrocollis, involving drug associated Tardive antipsychotic involvement usually use chewing). chronic dyskinesia presents face with with (tongue thrusting, and is characteristic

caused by antagonistic of is rhythmic, a Tremor movement contractions simultaneous muscles. oscillatory hyperkinetic, amplitude frequency The and are regular. a Inchildren, to tremor. is tremor,or tremor essential due usually physiologic inchildhood. common Essential most tremor adults, half the onset report in movement and disorder is bronchodilators, include tricyclic of (caffeine, amphetamines, or causes Other thyrotoxicosis,hypoglycemia, tremor antidepressants). drugs

sudden contraction Myoclonus resulting a group, in a of muscle hyperkinetic, is jerk. flexion a brief or be may nonepileptic. epileptic Myoclonus is agonist whereas a muscle, tremor of contraction muscles. is of that and is a from contraction simple simultaneous myoclonus distinguished in tremor agonist Nonepileptic antagonist it an various Myoclonus a metabolic is manifestation of seen encephalopathies. and of infectious, as epilepsies toxic, and neonates. may commonly sleep and be Benign observed during is pronounced in myoclonus particularly

Tics involuntary, eyes, and and purposeless, face, the rapid, shoulder, arm. involve typically stereotyped movements are include simple jerking. twitching, tics motor nose extremity of Examples blinking, and orchestrated gesturing, or jumping. shaking, tics movements, more Complex including head motor are tics simple (grunting, words, Phonic throat clearing) (uttering phrases). complex be may or transient Approximately of have 25% tics. children of into disorders a not be Most and may anxiety. in transient source tic intrusive are children child’s parental but the life, stimulant by unmasked Occasionally, be agents. tics may tic of tics usually that (>12 7 disorder a age are chronic motor with before years. vocal Persistent Tourette months) tics association in syndrome, characteristic begins a history unknown, than is of elicited cases. but tics in tics of 50% underlying family is pathophysiology The more disorder Tourette as disorder half of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, children Comorbid with obsessive-compulsive and in present such features, may (Chapters 13, be 19). Tic clinical are have studies diagnoses, neurodiagnostic and limited disorders value. their unperturbed are children with and by require Many syndrome no or therapy. tics Tourette tic disorders benefit receptor Others including habit and agonists haloperidol, support, therapy reversal psychological with may α-adrenergic neuroleptics (pimozide, or (clonidine) training, from pharmacologic risperidone). often and intervention regardless resolve of entirely or wax by improve disorders most wane and tic substantially Chronic adolescence. late

time). of represents awareness and (place Consciousness and environment self represents and consciousness. maintains Arousal system initiates that the pons the hypothalamus cortex; system activating and through mid-brain the the mediated mediated the the mid by is Consciousness is cerebral from thalamus. to arousal by extending reticular

have an difficulty patients Lethargic arousedstate. maintaining responsive who are have are to but arousal decreased stimuli. obtunded Patients stimuli. a pain Stupor responsivenessto not of is to other state but (bilaterally), the unconsciousness dysfunction unresponsive and cerebral is of Coma of a the by or bothsimultaneously. brainstem, hemispheres state is caused

Disorders Acute Consciousness of

StudentConsult.com @ Available

consciousness in confusion degree coma. and changes Acute from mild vary lethargy in deep to hypoxia-ischemia state, epilepticus) subclinical childhood, In most status (cardiac 184-1). (Table causes common the arrest, coma of trauma, (postictal toxins, infections, are and seizure head near-drowning),

in are a The circulation morbidity with consciousness first. breathing patient cause hypoxia; of common depressed long-term airway, most therefore, addressed and is pulse be assessed. signs, including must oximetry, Vital also status. hypoglycemia checked level because cause should mental glucose is a treatable be rapidly immediately of altered A odors, organ needle searches such consciousness, altered or as Physical failure. of for or of trauma, as clues signs to system examination unusual cause the dehydration tracts,

the to localization, of etiology depth, depressed Breathing patterns important may provide neurologic clues and the consciousness. In respiration, a of Cheyne-Stokes period

Vasculitis (intussusception) Gastrointestinal syndrome (adrenal encephalopathy disorders) disorders Endocrine Renal Reye Hypertensive lupus insufficiency, failure (systemic erythematosus) disorders thyroid (uremia) Hepatic

Inborn Diabetes its Hyponatremia correction or Hypernatremia mellitus—ketoacidosis Hypercapnia its correction Hyperosmolality metabolism errors or correction or or of its Hypoglycemia hypoglycemia Hyperammonemia

gases, Sodium, BUN, substances AST, ammonia and potassium, Routine ALT, urine Glucose creatinine, bicarbonate, testing blood chloride, toxic for Blood analyses laboratory

red Neuroimaging pressure, counts, analysis PCR including culture viral glucose, (± white opening testing) cell protein, CSF and blood and

MRV CT MRA, Head MRI, Brain

acids, cause laboratory urine unknown) level, pyruvate, acids, (if profile serum lactate, amino remains testing Secondary organic Lead acylcarnitine

aminotransferase; imaging/angiography/venography; ALT, resonance computed BUN, aminotransferase; tomography; reaction; magnetic electroencephalogram; polymerase MRI/MRA/MRV, prothrombin nitrogen; PT, aspartate CSF, cerebrospinal PCR, blood chain EEG, Alanine urea CT, fluid; time; AST,

partial time. PTT, thromboplastin

cerebral, a the of is to with the of period comatose focuses the crescendo-decrescendo the which hypothalamic location shorter hyperventilation nates due integrity modulation loss is or a on patient detailed brainstem of thalamic, and of examination apnea a respiration. neurologic pattern of alter-The with the system, of arousal. mediating activating reticular function. in also with This metabolic Pupillary patients seen assess pattern midbrain disor-responses can the be movements are or disease. heart Eye ders, respiratory primary failure, or sustained the central hyperventilation, rapid doll’s with phalic 179) breathing. mid-brain response) caloric maneuver stimulation elicited (Chapter consists A yields neurogenic of observed which eye cold or deep (oculocelesion Gasping respira-(oculovestibular response). cold responses brainstem water irregular elicited are tions indicate irregularly not is the oculocephalic the exterlower of the dysfunction If flushed or are (medulla). and into unclear, ear ominous is and nal Gasping usually canal. is a In apnea. this by person, maneuver elicits followed terminal conscious opposite extreme the side vom- vertigo and with to nystagmus

Coma Scale Glasgow (see iting. can The to 42-2) used Table be toward to irrigated eye In assess unresponsive comatose patients and motor irrigation stimulation brain into if patient best verbal ear the eye elicits canal a functioning not is water a is patient, and opening cold responses a the the ear the their score deviation brainstem regarding with tonic and dead. of to points. 15 3 the oculomotor in With orbit loss eyes center stimulation, brainstem the complete remain of function, any indicating failure. the regardless of of

for stimulation posture alteration Body consciousness. can at responsible of the and noxious the level indicate after anatomic rest comfortable mental by altered may status manifested be posture. Mildly sleeping a of spontaneous yawns, observed. and readjustments sighs are position, Frequent exhibit half-open lie coma. in position who flat, deeper extended, a Patients unvarying with a eyes side. posture dysfunction motor suggests An of asymmetrical one leg. affected external the be may mild subtle, as asymmetry This of such rotation

indicates stimulation neurologic to in Posturing response noxious moreserious conditions. legs posturing feet, extension of fisting supinationof of rigid and hands. Decorticate flexion and consists and the the the of arms, function. bilateral or herniation, subcortical indicates preservedbrainstem abnormalities cortical or It with internal ortoxic-metabolic rotation and a arms) is associated herniation Decerebrate of posturing indicates legs and abnormalities. with classically (rigid extensionand midbrainabnormality may exhibitedunilaterally be bilaterally. or These postures symmetric asymmetric, may posturing whereas toxic-metabolic likely is likely when cause bemore etiologies. posturing underlying with A is structural

in the to important evolution of is The an change consciousness etiology. clue infectious, diagnostic sufficient and among metabolic/toxic, clues usually detailed examination categories three and coma: differentiate A to history provide producing physical major the structural. identified. clinical the is situations, In cause coma of most readily

status. of mental common are derangements causes Metabolic altered bicarbonate, status. produce calcium, blood sodium, of depressed may chemistries urea nitrogen, blood ammonia) (glucose, Disturbances mental of light in level tactile tremors, reflexes. spontaneous deep of coma with and of by the acute coma hallucinations, pupillary suggested and fluctuations preservation are consciousness, visual asterixis, causes myoclonus, Metabolic rigidity, by but caused disorders state, barbiturates. decerebrate in and limp or a Acute observed sometimes and short-acting encephalopathy, usually produce decorticate metabolic coma hypoglycemia, toxic hypertonia, hypotonic, and posturing are hepatic of a progressing subacute liver) deep encephalopathy. hours difficulty course system A drug failure organ over sleep intoxication (stupor) arousing to metabolic or producing (kidney, from suggests somnolence a a consciousness Care conditions background must to failure, leukemia, that medical be taken decline mellitus, produce kidney in diabetes disease). liver may (e.g., investigate alteration be the causes search of ingestion a and must offending to history common (Chapter consciousness, thorough for and 45). taken of Intoxication acute are agent of for difficulties, social depression injury self-inflicted emotional or history abuse, or and A toxic concern drug ingestion. raises

system simplex althoughviral virus) mental Central herpes in nervous meningoencephalitis with canpresent usually such abrupt causes subacute encephalitis, of or status, infection, alteration alterations as meningitis (particularly mental status. and suggests presenceof fever, infection. petechiae, chills, sweats The of or meningeal photophobia Prodromal of and head irritation. pain aresymptoms the eyes movement on syndromeas altered suchas throat, cause point consciousness. diarrhea, viral a encephalitis cough, sore abdominal orrash, of the pain, the conjunctivitis, postinfectious Premonitory or symptoms, toward

hemorrhage, or children. in Structural such processes, infarction, consciousness can sudden cause depressed as hydrocephalus, acute and suggests headache increased pressure morning of vomiting intracranial An evolution (ICP). declining or over immunodeficiency subdural intracranial tuberculous alertness school gradual of weeks A an preceding chronic mass, expanding virus). infection human suggests performance or meningitis, (e.g., hematoma, fading to by either blood Deprivation or oxygen the (hypoxemia) deficient deficient the impairs consciousness. in delivery brain, oxygen caused of of blood to (ischemia), brain the

or consciousness or and paralysis III strong medical VI elevatedICP, neurosurgical of cranial in a nerves of is a patientwith evidence depressed Papilledema emergency. (Table under notch, falx, into through magnum theforamen or 184-2). tentorial occur Herniations the the initiated.Uncal mesial third Recognition are with major syndromes signsassociated the displacement producing treatment tentorial the can be herniation herniation of a the and unilateral neuroimaging lobe temporal implies if of the edge, emergent over lifesaving,

compresses Downward Supratentorial Unilateral of or (below and arrest bilateral beipsilateral, of cerebralpeduncle, or lesions, triad posturing Headache swelling, peduncle). compartment the acute or brain pupil”) into supratentorial edema, midbrain, the Dilated palsy mass diffuse palsy compression Hemiparesis pupil hydrocephalus contralateral can of (uncal) infratentorial Respiratory cerebral III nerve if Cushing nerve Transtentorial because compressing peduncles, hemiparesis brain the tentorium), Decerebrate ipsilateral tissue focal uncus (“blown Cranial the (which cranial circulation third consciousness ipsilateral and posterior displacement contralateral Altered nerve, central) and resulting midbrain, pressure Transtentorial downward medulla). (first gradual with the the pons diencephalonthrough the then herniation to of brain-stem occurs (or compression from tentorium, progressing in motor, a by of signs consciousness accompanied oculomotor, Aprogressive and respiratory transtentorial incipient characteristic pupillary, progression loss herniation. indicates of

examination(see the by and Table Evaluation 184-1). guided history physical is in accurately thepreferred (CT) remains lesions, large edema, because itcan technique tomography emergency situations rapidly imaging identifies midline. and performed Computed space-occupying shifts be ofthe acute hemorrhages, and blood done and head is contrast The scan identify to calcifications. without initial CT administered but and major required lesions. identification lesions, neoplastic Contrast notusually of to can be inflammatory for identify is ICPwithout derangements encephalopathy, of severe injury) metabolic elevations encephalopathy, abnormalities. may syndrome,hyponatremia, lead (hepatic give andhypoxic-ischemic obvious ketoacidosis, diabetic Several CT rise Reye to producing especially in is herniation, if with can exam. result be Lumbar before in ifelevated neurological focal any imaging transtentorial deficits ICP there LP puncture (LP) a should elevated suspected, performed patient ICP on are so If avoided manipulation should or trauma immersion imaging until be fracture aresuspected, subluxation. vertebral injuries or neck cervicalspine excludes

cerebrospinal the fluid may cause alteration of Examination of establishthe the of consciousness. (CSF) injury inflicted to Appropriate islikely with added be neuroimaging to performed LP. that should be no ensure blood The of or simplexvirus), infection cells hemorrhage, to CSF may be hemorrhage, traumatic hemorrhagic (herpes or presence suggest due procedure. it parenchymal a subarachnoid primary inthe red may meningitis associated infectious in meningoencephalitis be or parainfectious or with denote usually White vasculitis CSF but may the syndrome. bloodcells also patientswith Elevated and CSF and or CSFglucose inflammation. are of levels infection meningeal seen protein tumors, markers in inflammation is abnormal also

etiology the status The altered determines mental treatment. of or 45). dialysis, Ingestions specific charcoal necessitate gastric administration, lavage, forced antidotes diuresis, may (Chapter 95). treated agents Infections are antiviral or antibiotics appropriate (Chapter with must (osmotic agents, increased and neurosurgical steroids, be urgent due ICP, changes neuroimaging interventions are acute hyperventilation) If emergent mental medical status performed, consultation to obtained. instituted, surgical medical Structural lesions or necessitate treatment excision. of increased ICP brain may

mental outcome The including altered variables, etiology. of status many relates to prognosis. whereas poor typically hypoxia a carries carries Intoxication prognosis, good a factors and Other of better children outcomes the the duration include coma of age have adults. patient; prognostic the than a is possible of survivors traumatic children; with coma vegetative left persistent days’ from in many Complete neuropsychiatric of disability. however, severe coma several state recovery prolonged in are duration or

Depression Transient, Recurrent of Consciousness

due is (hypoglycemia). recovery with seizure, or to Episodic or migraine, syncope, depression alteration of full abnormality metabolic consciousness usually in state. postictal can impaired be seizures or Consciousness during the impair for with convulsive patients trauma, neurological or epilepticus). (generalized factor complicating consciousness (subclinical) acute status Nonconvulsive common following focal) disorders directly (head meningitis, can is and a status epilepticus postictal Some unrecognized state seizure. patients have may an after prolonged a

or confusional nerve ataxia, by last artery vertigo, cranial migraines or palsies. hours Basilar cortical be accompanied and can blindness, agitation, follow may signs. the or precede neurologic Headache

consciousness. loss one causes of Syncope abrupt, the of of common is episodic most arrhythmia, can of cause cardiac obstructive recurrent consciousness. cardiomyopathy syncope, of Neurocardiogenic an or episodes loss myoclonic (unprovoked irregular, consciousness distinguished epilepsy movements lose (anoxic children Two they with seizures). which thirds have seizures), be of as from much syncope syncope (Chapter require with complete cardiac Children examination a unexplained 140).

lethargy, derangements, hypoglycemia, seizures, coma. of or give confusion, particularly to episodes rise Metabolic disorders (Chapter Several hyperammonemia other of recurrent cause bouts metabolic 53). nausea, and coma. hyperventilation, Symptoms include ataxia, confusion, lethargy, vomiting,

immediate signs of may or any have completely neurologic consciousness deficits injury, of children depression and head neurologic be immediate without alert may Following injury. sports, injuries, recreation-related serious crashes, motor trauma violence. from vehicle Most and results result may fractures, intracranial trauma nerve Head posttraumatic concussion, in skull cervical or cranial spine hemorrhage, injuries. or hemorrhages associated Head young infants the raise should trauma. injury, head of with retinal in abusive other and suspicion injuries, children or

the in forces short-lived result of resolves the impairment on which the Concussion typically traumatic in onset that is neurologic spontaneously. process brain rapid or more (lability, cognitive feeling reaction irritability), like poor one (headache), sleep attention), may have (slowed or fog, a domain: symptoms they in Patients in emotional signs times, somatic are

protocol progress play step hours. with 24 a follows to each taking stepwise Return level. current the level the asymptomatic should continue next at athlete if The to

1.

physical complete mental rest. No and activity,

2.

Light stationary walking as such or training. exercise resistance aerobic cycling; no

3.

exercise in hockey, in (skating running soccer). Sport-specific

4.

more resistance drills; Noncontact, training training. progressive

5.

after medical Full-contact clearance. practice

6.

Game play.

Modified Consensus sport: in International concussion McCrory K, 3rd et Conference from the W, on on statement P, al: Johnston Meeuwisse

held in Sport, in 2008. November Zurich, Concussion J 2009;43:i76-i84. Med Br Sports

amnesia). (loss consciousness, of signs physical or disturbance (drowsiness), and rather abnormalities standard injury, usually on disturbance Acute functional no a reflect than symptoms imaging. seen are structural of may in days, cases, symptoms slower percentage are prolonged. although majority resolve of the concussions children, the The recovery within small and in a 10 be

permanent (second frame risk syndrome). or Repeated within significant a of injury especially time a carry brain short concussions, impact weeks) (days after resume resolve symptoms to must (Table the be activities not physical until 184-3). permitted well Children

brain subarachnoid 184-4). subdural, epidural, and as trauma in intracranial as contusions (Table can well hemorrhages, Head result parenchymal, vomiting include consciousness lethargy, headache, decreased Symptoms seizures. and developing to classic progressive primary The epidural where, injury, a for normal following returns symptoms. of hemorrhages presentation brain of a hours has interval, a then involves lucid neurologic decreased several consciousness, level before child rapidly vigorous Subdural or shaking trauma baby (shaken from from hemorrhages syndrome). may forces result rotational direct symptoms neonates or signs fontanelles, with and infants nonspecific. may In absent open be and in unexpectedly hemorrhage a subdural, rapid, life-threatening children Occasionally, in edema. cerebral or ICP intracranial to develops or due epidural, increase

compound depressed edge (bone linear, the skin diastatic inferiorly), (an fractures breaking displaced Skull suture), be or (spreading surface). the may fragments an necessitate and capable no diastatic fractures but hematoma. underlying Linear indicate trauma of producing treatment, 1 associated but fragments cm, than significance recommended. as fractures of is have the depression surgical to of bone dural same and tears fractures, the more generally if Small, elevation depressed 0.5 are linear repair necessitate debridement surgical and or fractures injuries tetanus Compound penetrating emergent

minutes Lucid followed hours over to compressing brain extracerebral neurologic Lens-shaped deficits Onset progressive hemorrhage interval by

Seizures, over macrocephaly weeks on CT Anemia, Onset mass vomiting subdural Crescentic, Chronic to low-density months

neurologic Brain punctate prompt multifocal Focal Surgical evacuation otherwise areas with findings: hemorrhages poor Prognosis treatment, swelling herniation with good CT deficits or with low-density transtentorial observation

can Prognosis shunt as good subdural be necessary or Subdural taps

pressure elevated Medical * intracranial of treatment guarded Prognosis

tomography. CT, Computed elevation diuresis, hyperventilation, of of *Mannitol, steroids. head bed,

prophylaxis. high of seizures early is The fractures. compound risk in associated and brain contusion

the over pain; and from or (rhinorrhea) fractures CSF behind around Skull or the mastoid process the subcutaneous orbit swelling ear bleeding tympanic or present membrane leak with sign) (hemotympanum); (raccoon eyes); localized (Battle (otorrhea). the nose blood may weeks pulsatile that fracture accumulated Rarely, consists tissue and a linear after tissue soft edges tissue are radiographically, mass is by to soft, scalp leptomeningeal meningeal skull and the possibly fractures, separated a palpable; of a cyst. fibrotic a few months brain mass and, abnormal and The recommended excision of involves of dural leptomeningeal cysts repair. surgical treatment tissue

creating air adjacent and skull cells, fracture communications mastoid between when the paranasal a dura, space tears occurs ear. CSF sinuses, nose, subarachnoid the or leak ear until to fluid the proved trauma after from is leaks otherwise. nose Clear presumed or be that head CSF The between subarachnoid, dural tear open sinuses communication ventricular indicates nose space the paranasal of air the a and brain. or subdural, presence and also or within head patient’s elevated. dura when cases, the most the kept is spontaneously heals In development extradural or with are leaks risk of CSF for at the Patients meningitis abscesses. repaired. meningitis or or the dura if the surgically develops, is recurs If persists leak nerves, Cranial laceration a to or cranial may result permanent. nerve a may palsies, skull fracture transitory be of the or secondary and from contusion Longitudinal conductive and which begin usually facial produces after the hours hearing bone petrous injury palsy, spontaneously. and resolve of fracture loss the a Transverse for with loss spontaneous prognosis and hearing petrous facial a immediate fractures recovery. produce poor palsy sensorineural and Disruption cause of hearing necessitate ossicular can loss the chain surgery. may prolonged producing common. disturbances, posttraumatic vertigo, extremely Vestibular are injury plate. nerves a is the thin cribriform olfaction within of after result Permanent rupture a the loss head olfactory the of of produces head of and III, IV, and Disruption tilt. cranial ophthalmoplegia, nerves VI diplopia, can sixth palsy head medial incomplete both deviation (or abduction) one produce seemingly injuries or minor with nerve Even eye(s). of

Complications Trauma Other of Head

head, the are spine suspected back. present Cervical on be unconscious bruises especially any neck, child, must in or injuries if stabbing back conscious arms, the sensory children, suggest responses of motor In arms findings or to of or or burning quadriplegia, pain, legs or radiating pains asymmetrical spinal or cord injury. paraplegia, neck the flaccid shock, loss vertebra) with spinal cord injury of and fractured may (displaced in spine complete or transection paralysis. sensation, Cervical of result vertebral cord (without may in a A manner. abnormality) similar present contused a stabilization requires clinical abnormality spine cardiopulmonary patient radiologic or and spine consultation. Any and with neurosurgical immediate the of

seizures, Posttraumatic lateposttraumatic of and patterns: seizures, into posttraumatic early seizures are seizures. divided one three impact to seizures and occur a presumed the to Impact are direct injury reflect stimulation within the secondsof cortex. mechanical later prognosis epilepsy andlikelihood negligible. is is The excellent, of of or of cerebral the the head edema. a week injury area the arelikely localized posttraumaticseizures of occurring first within result Early contusion The is quitefavorable. for these prognosis seizures long-term a epilepsy.These that indicate seizures or will Late area posttraumatic more of be require an most weekafter antiepileptic long-term likely drugtherapy. than source corticalgliosis the and patients long-term scarring arise trauma for a often

trauma to for few after disturbances may neurologic minutes develop before last hours and head minutes clearing. a Transient neurologic The may orany and ataxia, other but symptoms are confusional most common appear. deficit states, hemiparesis, corticalblindness be to must in susceptiblechildren, but migraine a exercised These exclude pathology. intracranial symptomsmay care represent trauma-triggered

after Drowsiness, head trauma. common are vomiting headache, and results normal. trend if one by of preserved, not, They are is examination the improvement, of and concern the are is themselves, of consciousness neurologic clinical after Children should easily head but be somnolence susceptible arousable. to especially trauma are 2 1 days, cerebral symptoms more If or to indicated neuroimaging hematoma to look persist for may than or edema. worsen for subdural be

have in unconscious be following should amnesia or evaluated emergency department. who been injury Children have head an a depressed symptoms. injury, with signs, include consciousness, or decreasing High-risk focal skull or penetrating fractures, level depressed worsening of neurologic those persistent skull patients hemorrhage may require deteriorate these in and Because skilled patients care intracranial trauma care, progressively center. patients neurosurgical with warrant immediate a

the for The Glasgow deterioration of 42). course monitoring is after Scale for tool a signs patients of trauma (Chapter Coma valuable circulation. and ensuring airway, an includes Management appropriate breathing, resonance spine with magnetic imaging skull or radiographs Neuroimaging and emergently. obtained are (MRI), CT and cervical not intracranial employed for exists. suspicion concussions of necessary uncomplicated but be Neuroimaging is lesion should structural whenever

of observation hospitalization have who sustained the varies for deficits the concussion. injury may even a children include with severity without and neurologic The period evaluated, play) Table be 184-3). any provider (see to a by patient disposition of care a Any must should and be determined features concussion health demonstrating medically (return be left injury few the for should monitored deterioration alone. The child initial and over not hours after several call child after neurologic discharged change the hours in parents be orientation, instructed alertness, and for is should functioning. any well physician appears If or home, to their somnolence, and vomiting headache, or is neuroimaging. for An concern in increase cause

the surgical may of Patients collection. intervention emergent for decompression require blood with and drainage hemorrhage intracranial (see a osmotic and and Increased later management, of medical drain, require ventricular placement therapy, ICP and aggressive including intubation sedation monitoring, may discussion). ventilation,

favorable with subsequent have late without long-term rare. concussion a prognosis, and deficits are sequelae Children neurologic good for weeks. even with recoveries make contusions signs usually neurologic persist when moderate Children alterations, decrease attention generalized in poor deficits. behavioral skills, include cognitive slowing memory, may skills, or sequelae motor of Longterm function, good makes a child, especially Language a frequently young in recovery. with therapy, education appropriate programs be and necessary. physical management, behavioral Rehabilitation may 4 without hours, Scale plantar reflexes. persistent a Glasgow include on absent light of pupillary reflexes, 24 less signs prognostic score and Poor in than admission Coma extensor improvement

may cerebral improve may Children contusion who vegetative. cerebral swelling or remain acute with gradually survive distress trauma emboli). respiratory patients acute pneumonia, these (aspiration also of Extracranial the to syndrome, sepsis, contributes morbidity Maximal weeks take or months. may recovery significant. with trauma head sequelae late although a compatible risk outcome, is lasting for the after of Coma weeks be may good head state vegetative to for Patients injury months a improve. unlikely after who remain in are

are and When brain to rigid volume, to blood to (80% CSF cranial 15%), 10%). including the fixed (10% sutures the the enclosing a becomes fused, a container skull 85%), (5% a within increases. pressure relationship a the closed increase and massive as intracranial The in volume between in ICP exponential container results volume the The CSF subarachnoid intracranial ICP from accommodates expelling initially increased compartment and blood space. brain spinal the into by reached, When begins continuing brain the of the limits of in ICP. to to this are elevation accommodation itself shift the response Brain the (see or skull dural herniations may shifts barriers extensions across Table 184-2). cause

The hypertension intracranial include increased of cerebral ICP and or lesion, 184-6). (Tables to mass hydrocephalus, causes trauma due edema 184-5, infection idiopathic

may abscess, by pathways, ICP vasogenic but large produce of size, CSF tumor, outflow, only venous of (brain cerebral by Mass blockage of virtue edema. increased of production hemorrhage) lesions not blockage or and Brain usually increased signs present ICP. abscesses focal mass as neurologic lesions, producing Symptoms absent. infection, anorexia, or of stiff and neck, fever, including be subtle may malaise, edema the matter. usually into severe and is Brain extends abscess white around an surrounding infected or disease cardiac pulmonary Children embolize material to chronic to with them brain brains, abscesses. may their predisposing most located Brain fourth children the ventricle. result through due flow to the fossa posterior in often in and in are ICP obstruction tumors CSF cerebral of can and elevated aqueduct

months. extending intracranial weeks congenital of is Hydrocephalus over or syndrome characterized an increased or to evolving ICP typically abnormalities slowly due from a mass by by CSF lateral, continuously produced ventricles. is fourth within choroid the third, and plexus the third ventricles ventricle. to from intraventricular foramen the through aqueduct then to flows the passes fourth the ventricle, the the through cerebral lateral CSF of Monro of Luschka. ventricle of the Magendie CSF exits and fourth foramen the from foramina occurs spinal brain inferiorly to cisterns superiorly subarachnoid to the Sub-arachnoid the space. the flow of and of large the the sinuses. villi Absorption is arachnoid predominantly CSF dural accomplished by into Table is due along (see to CSF of Hydrocephalus course anywhere flow 1846). obstruction the its Obstructive the level ventricle within the is subarachnoid usually by the block hydrocephalus the before CSF caused fourth aqueduct. of flows or space, at a to the subarachnoid within of of the Impairment CSF space flow or impairment

mass Hydrocephalus with Inflammatory Infarction edema Hemorrhage Cyst Intracranial Abscess venous Arterial ischemic stroke Tumor sinus thrombosis

syndrome Hyponatremia intoxication dysequilibrium Fulminant with Dialysis hepatic ketoacidosis Lead Reye Diabetic encephalopathy syndrome insufficiency hypercarbia Pulmonary

hypertension of long-term (pseudotumor Endocrinologic Idiopathic disturbance Obesity Withdrawal steroid cerebri) intracranial Drugs administration

malformation pituitary of Dandy-Walker foramina region (craniopharyngioma, base from Postinfectious Intraventricular cell (ependymoma) of Magendie Aqueduct sclerosis rickets) stenosis Midbrain (cerebral malformation Sylvius obstruction ventricle (achondroplasia, Intraventricular the giant aqueduct) obstruction tumor Arnold-Chiari Tuberous Platybasia Basilar fourth or tumor pineal Obstruction (Monro) flow Aqueductal Parasellar of or mass subependymal and Luschka CSF Posthemorrhagic postinflammatory the cranial tumor) with pathways Impaired lesions foramina Bone germinoma, impression astrocytoma of

Overproduction papilloma of plexus CSF Choroid

villi reabsorption of CSF communicating arachnoid subarachnoid Hypoplasia arachnoid (extraventricular cerebral or posthemorrhagic obstruction of fibrosis Postinfectious thrombosis of Defective the or destruction Extensive sinovenous hydrocephalus) or villi

Cerebrospinal fluid. CSF,

known absorption actually is flow where the is by communicating of extraventricular misnomer hydrocephalus). CSF there obstruction hydrocephalus, (external for by without 4% overproduction Hydrocephalus is in 2% of to obstruction true seen CSF account plexus tumors. childhood of choroid intracranial which papillomas, caused

cerebral edema, produce increase flow, Bacterial blockage cerebral or ICP meningitis CSF (Chapter of increased in infarctions cerebral by 100). multifocal may pathways, blood toxic compartments. children the brain evenly distributed undergo and throughout and bacterial diffuse the spinal CSF safely can Most swelling because meningitis LP brain with is a herniation few hours patients however, within with meningitis, develop transtentorial LP. few A of contraindications a bacterial are reactive pupils, signs, neurologic and poorly a patient tense fontanelle to suspected LP meningitis. in Focal with

exhibit is daily cause a increased (pseudotumor Idiopathic obscurations, cerebri) intracranial brain palsy, imaging.Patients with of associated visual abducens withdiplopia, transient hypertension headache debilitating ICP normal and a papilledema. medications(tetracycline, ingestion associated with of Addison oral may A, develop.The contraceptive syndrome untreated, (thyroid has field agents) permanent been loss vitamin visual disease, If disease). endocrinedisturbances and affects otherwise with who being idiopathic for are overweight, gain Most a weight commonly,this except is being rapid well children and factor. condition predisposing corticosteroids, diuretic, effective. Treatment other acetazolamideor or generally topiramate, including is triggering and medications of loss alsomainstays cessation of treatment. Weight are more management fenestration) visual (opticnerve frompersistent produces required function. Infrequently, and hypertension papilledema visualimpairment, is idiopathic to preserve aggressive intracranial chronic

Available @ StudentConsult.com

increased irritability, signs strabismus, diplopia, include sixthnerve headache,vomiting, of and papilledema. palsy, consciousness, symptoms altered and lethargy, The ICP of worse wakening; maneuver; ICP Headaches the or cough, in increased defecation, those withnocturnal or are associated suggestive Valsalva progressivelyworsening. micturition, with morning; palsy. open an Infants usually have who papilledema abducens or donot fontanelle develop fontanelle,suture in the downward circumference. rapid a ICP (sunsetting), Specific eyes veins, bulging persistent distended infants diastasis, growth consist signsof ofhead and deviation of scalp a of increased in theinfratentorial include ICP increased compartment stiffneck head and fossa) signs (posterior Specific of tilt. hemiparesis from lesions. the nerve lesions, deficits is siteof neurologic that supratentorial or increased reflect cranial lesion ICP ataxiaand Focal palsies infratentorial from and producing the the mayinclude herniation syndromes, ICP discussed as result may increased earlier. Critically in triad addition, bradycardia, respirations In and the Cushing sign late of ICP. is elevated a irregular of critically pressure, blood elevated

The and distention of clinical ICP. manifestations hydrocephalus increased are caused byventricular in lateral the because the the corticospinalpathways, ataxia fibers the are lower mostmarked the that corticopontocerebellar stretches resulting and ventricles. Dilation initially spasticity ventricles leg are and extremities of closestto in nerves, hypothalamic are dysfunction may ventricle, of chiasm, tracts and endocrine compressed. also in third regions to structures Distention result visual and results proximity compressthe ventricle dysfunction.The and optic third the whenthese theanterior are in gazecenter, of deviation aqueduct eyes. periaqueductal causing surrounding the compresses downward vertical the Dilation the cerebral of when time is occur. not evolve for of Manifestationsof obstruction slowly absorption cannot CSF intothe is or rapidly obstruction compensation veins, complete(subarachnoid and hemorrhage) transependymal increased may there complete ICP and and abrupt is when

increased CT brain determined with brain imaging head ICP The by is MRI. either cause or of of or provides visualization and an hemorrhage rapid, clear acute CT dilated is ventricles. readilyavailable, hydrocephalus,and Mass easily lesions, trauma are recognized. better encephalitis,metabolic by may delineated abnormalities, MRI. toxins produced meningitis, swelling injury, hypoxic-ischemic Diffuse be by brain or CT also visualizing cortical the is contusions. to posterior and superior MRI fossa for ICP whendirect absence and intracranial ICP between contraindicated change or promote intracranial hydrocephalus, intracranial lesion in with because patients the for is idiopathic the other of LPreveals diagnosed (essential or compartments a imagingabnormalities. mass the withdrawalof herniation.Idiopathic an elevated during of LP and the of is hypertension hypertension).However, shifts CSF clear LP ICP is in measurement diagnostic for documentation and setting infection manometer can brainstem of elevated intracranial pressures CSF testfor with

Elevated ICP of Treatment

with vital signs. in carried should monitoring to continuous care out attention vigilant ICP intensive acute The be an of increased treatment and setting assessed. to patient’s carefully The interventions be must specific response bed and placed the The of midline 30°. at is the head elevated head a produces decreased to mm endotracheal Immediate volume. but cerebral cerebral in leading ICP lower hyperventilation not (to reduction 35 than blood transient, vasoconstriction, Hg) Paco2 intubation rapid, and by plasma. brain the from 3% fluid or osmotic to used shift the of an be Mannitol may to acutely produce saline to be and A used continuously. CSF catheter remove may monitor the to ventricular ICP cerebral blood metabolism cerebral severely suppressing by flow. and reduces Pentobarbital-induced coma pressure decrease Acetazolamide furosemide may CSF transiently and production. therapies, have transient must effects interventions and can systemic cerebral osmotic impacts and negative barbiturates they ICP, be on and hyperventilation, only on such perfusion used have acute as Because judiciously.

hydrocephalus of the surgical, The treatment depending etiology. medical be or on may CSF may the or of transiently subarachnoid be impaired. meningitis, hemorrhage or After flow absorption beneficial. that this circumstance, use medication acetazolamide, such be of CSF production, decreases may In the as a placing management Surgical lesion, or removing of consists obstructive the shunt, both. extending the a lateral (ventriculoperitoneal usually shunt). consists peritoneal cavity shunt ventricle A polyethylene from of tubing to or acute symptoms of sudden signs hazards with occlusion hydrocephalus. the of infection and carry Shunts

pressure pressure. cerebral adequate maintain perfusion Vasopressor to and be may drugs arterial necessary salt monitored hormone and syndrome antidiuretic the inappropriate of electrolytes be of or Serum cerebral because of osmolarity risk wasting. should positive on have impact a Maintaining outcomes. may normoglycemia agitation, include fever, Other controlling seizures. and measures supportive

process either increased until for treatments treated underlying to is All prevent measuresintended or disease ICP temporary spontaneously. the resolves are herniation Timely reverse interventioncan cerebral herniation. have begun. recovery after neurologic Complete rare, transtentorial foramen magnumherniation of ispossible, signs but or signs longer however,with possible. absent dilated, no is recovery When unreactive these quadriplegia, complete, eye movements,and pupils, bilaterally flaccid are

Children but 7). a sequence milestones developmental (Chapter acquire typically predictable variable in previouslyacquired Rarely, development or children skills. of frank of loss stagnation with present defects group specificgenetic age. from disorders unknown biochemical of causes.Neurodegenerative can and that and neurodegenerative any These present heterogenous encompassa at result disorders diseases varied large also in seizures, neurologic as bedemonstrated concert with motor abilities—sometimes may intellectualor vision, loss and retardation. deterioration phenotypes but feedingdifficulties, vary, of and Clinical speech, mental hearing, may slowover death to early Progression childhood. in be lead many years, may or

affect (neuronal or brain. Degenerative matter disorders), the diseases specific, degenerative of gray white matter, may focal gray white regions and matter (leukodystrophies),both motor are and mark spasticity neuron intellectual upper seizures matter Early progressive of grey signs matter white impairment hallmarks disorders, and disorders. the whereas subcellular within lysosomes, from illnesses neurodegenerative Many organelles, including and (Table enzymatic disorders 185-1). result peroxisomes mitochondria, Therefore, any

jaundice, enzyme hepatosplenomegaly, regression, Cognitive Test: seizures (ASM) acid activity sphingomyelinase

extraocular cytopenia, trismus, swallowing Hepatosplenomegaly, spasticity, hyperextension, palsies, difficulty

enzyme activity glucosylceramidase Test:

coarse retardation, cherry seizures, red Infantile difficulties, features, spot global facial feeding form—early hepatosplenomegaly,

regression; spasticity, Juvenile language blindness seizures, form—incoordination, weakness, later,

ganglioside activity; GLB1 gene Test: testing GM1 enzyme

startle weakness, Tay-Sachs—progressive marked reaction, cherry blindness, spots and spasticity, convulsions, red

Test: Sandhoff activity to enzymatic similar β-hexosaminidase (HEX A) A Tay-Sachs disease—phenotype

activity deficient) B Test: (both A enzyme and hexosaminidase

activity hyperpyrexia, Irritability, blindness seizures, galactocerebrosidase enzyme (GALC) hypertonia, vomiting, Test:

deterioration, intellectual and infantile adult atrophy, of form—stiffening Juvenile ataxia optic reflexes absent spasticity, gait, and Late forms

(ARSA) A 2. activity 1. arylsulfatase Test: enzyme urinary ARSA sulfatide ARSA abnormal controls, testing ARSA <10% excretion genetic activity of pseudodeficiency exclude of If is and/or with

deterioration Visual seizures, loss, motor progressive dementia,

age depends (TPP-1) palmitoyl-protein onset, on enzyme algorithm and on activity 1 thioesterase symptom for replies 1 and (PPT1) testing Test: stepwise Diagnostic tripeptidyl-peptidase of

ataxia, swallowing hypoadrenalism, spasticity, difficulties. and seizures, Academic behavioral disturbances, difficulties,

acids Test: chain incontinence, very urinary adrenal insufficiency fatty paraparesis, Spastic long

clouding Short abnormalities, stature, and kyphoscoliosis, coarse corneal cardiovascular hepatosplenomegaly, facies,

2. glycosaminoglycan enzymes excretion urinary lysosomal Test: 1.

Mitochondrial and stroke-like acidosis, encephalopathy, episodes lactic myopathy,

of nerve and and Myoclonus, sensation red ataxia, fibers, dementia, optic ragged loss hearing epilepsy, atrophy, loss, deep

ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa Neuropathy, and

and complex the tailored lactate to scenario; must reasonable clinical screening pyruvate individual blood serum and disorders and is Tests: mitochondrial for testing be is for

and of difficulties, irregularity, weakness extraocular feeding respiratory movements, ataxia Hypotonia,

clinical depends on Test: phenotype

and apraxia, of spasticity, communication withdrawal, skills, purposeful social seizures, Loss gait movements kyphoscoliosis and hand

testing MECP2 gene Test:

copper of signs basal and error metabolism in cerebellar Inborn ganglia dysfunction resulting of

unknown fibroblasts leukocytes 57). (Chapters patient a levels, battery lysosomal, copper of 56, cause of a serum measurement degenerative with condition neurologic peroxisomal, enzymes and excretion for skin harvested mitochondrial or of Test: urinary ceruloplasmin have standard should is imaging magnetic Neuroimaging, (MRI), usually warranted. resonance brain with also typically usually on matter basis can of leukodystrophy extensive the The changes MRI. diagnosis on of white be cerebral confidently made the Histologic less normal diagnosis in matter secure. biochemical gray encephalopathy, making may be studies much and toxic) (infectious, to Acquired inflammatory, lesions vascular, difficult completely. exclude are biopsy not to is Brain be likely helpful.

comprising substrates of of characterized membranes. by catabolism from storage the sphingolipidoses The are defective intracellular lipid sphingolipids resulting cellular They inherited autosomal an pattern. recessive in are the amount residual of In enzyme. diseases, corresponding forms most there activity in typically the these cases, several relevant of to are

no usually severe, The progression; disease second most rapid are with year the have in activity. presenting enzyme individuals virtually life generally the forms affected first infantile of or normal and childhood even chronic somewhat manifest because residual less fulminant disease adulthood Juvenile in of a activity. later course or enzyme and have are some forms

Niemann-Pick a exhibit the retinal delay, sphingomyelinase hepatosplenomegaly, combination in is and who Classic by be interstitial disease lung suspected should infants of of cherry-red deficiency disease, developmental spots. and caused small The retina white a surrounding by large and cells. macula as not covered ganglion distended cells are area a fovea of red is appear the that and of ganglion the year regression, also jaundice are life. noted myoclonic Cognitive within hypotonia, first seizures, of and clinically Genetic available. mutations is SMPD1 for testing

adults, an is is the featuring indolent illness rapidly disease by Gaucher form infantile enzyme form glucocerebrosidase. of common neurologic fatal caused a most of there Although the of severe involvement deficiency and accumulates spleen, bone liver, in the marrow. Glucoceramide signs bulbar mouth), of signs neurologic opisthotonos movement abnormalities, trunk), the The swallowing. trismus (difficulty eye (arching difficulty including and opening characteristic are

StudentConsult.com Available @

in A by disease ganglioside gangliosidosis) accumulation and GM2 in matter is and gray caused cerebellum. of Tay-Sachs results deficiency of (GM2 hexosaminidase cerebral the until typically except for and intellectual hyperacusis, a spots. they marked 6 retinal response of listlessness, startle develop when are age, months retardation, normal Infants irritability, cherry-red develop. months, opisthotonos spasticity, and Within convulsions, blindness,

causedby demyelination is arylsulfatase system. nervous system leukodystrophy results ofthe a (CNS) Metachromatic deficiency that peripheral of lipidosis and in central nervous (MLD) years the present between late-infantile form of Children 2 with 1and age. occur. a development, period deterioration, atrophy,intellectual of of progressive stiffening reflexes optic and gait, spasticity, and ataxia absent After normal slowing fluid Diagnostictesting sign increased conductionvelocity demyelination). reveals (a of motor peripheral sign demyelination) and cerebral ofCNS spinal protein of (a nerve difficulties, gradual and Older of seizures. by academic with the difficulties school-agechildren clumsiness, onset declining speech,and abilities, succeeded behavior may form MLD present slurred of juvenile sometimes gait with is is before option, progression treatment asibling MLD symptom onset. is marrow diagnosed with if rule.Bone transplant a Relentless particularly the

(globoid Krabbe disease deficiency leukodystrophy) by galactocerebrosidase. a is cell of caused of form first to appear (85% months the infantile cases) life. of 90% to with Individuals normal the be during months begin 6 include seizures, age and extreme Symptoms and blindness. of hypertonia, hyperpyrexia, irritability, by vomiting, results lower peripheral signs. upper in motor the neuron nervous and and of CNS Demyelination system

a death. ceroid abilities, early lysosomal by group progressive and seizures, neurodegenerative The are vision neuronal characterized cognitive lipofuscinoses disorders motordeterioration, storage declining of inherited, loss, and late-infantile, juvenile infantile, types types. have including been different Ten characterized,

neurodegenerative with are a that adrenocortical X-linked often disorders group are adrenoleukodystrophies (ALD) The insufficiency. of associated ALD very by neuronal acid in is is tissue chain abnormal and caused chain adrenal very 178) by accumulation long (Chapter acids long fatty diagnosed fatty and of testing. caused is a by ABCD1 most leukodystrophy classic The common mutation adrenoleukodystrophy, the in gene. X-linked behavioral and 5 seizures, academic 15 disturbances, swallowing ataxia, between abnormalities, spasticity, to present difficulties, difficulties. and and ages Boys years gait progressing with abnormal anterior with at of demonstrates symmetric signal the in pattern classic matter a the enhancement MRI contrast parietal-occipital regions, Brain white margin. 40% of 20% ALD. X-linked hypotension and adrenocortical to with with Symptomatic develops fatigue, insufficiency vomiting, patients in adrenocortical even any with in absence primary male considered of abnormalities. neurological insufficiency, clear-cut be ALD should the in decade in nerves, a Adrenomyeloneuropathy, presents the disorder peripheral third spinal and life. of cord of chronic of symptoms of age). also Female may beginning have later the in to mutation (>35 years carriers similar life ABCD1 adrenomyeloneuropathy,

in of within hydrolases are accumulation mucopolysaccharides resulting caused defective lysosomal Chapter Mucopolysaccharidoses lysosomes 56). (see the by coarse stature, cardiovascular corneal short kyphoscoliosis, clouding. hepatosplenomegaly, include facies, manifestations abnormalities, clinical The and II syndrome),III (Hunter I mucopolysaccharidosis Neurologic in (Hurler syndrome), is seen involvement syndrome), syndrome). (Sly types VII and (Sanfilippo first life, these neurologic illnesses, and during of characteristic Hurler develop Children the skeletal of severe the the normal features. then 6 most months appear with syndrome, spasticity, Intellectual deafness, atrophy disability, progressive. are and optic cerebrospinal obstruction flow Hydrocephalus by fluid occurs frequently (CSF) of thickened leptomeninges. to because

represent (Chapter disorders in disturbance fundamentally (adenosine phosphorylation Mitochondrial synthesis) heterogeneous diseases share a oxidative clinically that 57). triphosphate group of a illness Abrupt such or of concurrent as periods stress physiologic are symptoms fasting. febrile often with manifest defects, analysis difficult to are and within overlap demanding. because diagnoses identify between protein Specific and pleotropic are genetic features defects mitochondrial different function individual because technically often of clinical is acidosis, peripheral nerve and stroke-like neuropathy, manifest and hearing (mitochondrial (myoclonus, which Wolff-Parkinson-White and with dementia, syndrome; and MELAS lactic occasionally NARP and encephalopathy, fibers) atrophy, MERRF sensorineural as ataxia, can cardiomyopathy optic also include pigmentosa). of red myopathy, combinations episodes); ragged Specific epilepsy, (neuropathy, retinitis syndromes loss,

affects is a neurodevelopmental girls. Rett classically syndrome disorder that loss and loss followed apraxia, of verbal development normal regression, hand to of resemble of or by communication 6 hand that hands. movements, life, repetitive appears first of washing, the movements clapping wringing, during months 18 gait Typically, purposeful skills, stereotypic the Girls acquired microcephaly. develop also and/or muscle peripheral often growth prolonged disturbances, abnormal interval hyperpnea, apnea retardation, vasomotor and Episodic QTc occur. tone, spasticity, seizures, and kyphoscoliosis but and regression The plateaus develop. stabilizes, gene transcription factor. 2 protein on etiology an coding The methyl-CpG-binding a X mutation is for chromosome neonatal can delivery, Boys with to severe not survive MECP2 present insufficiency. with encephalopathy, abnormal do seizures, but usually mutations microcephaly, respiratory tone, and

Focal with Manifestations Degenerative Diseases

to the have to region. or predilections systems symptoms affected Some neuraxis, neurodegenerative referable target the disorders producing specific regions within

cerebellar treatable of ganglia condition dysfunction. basal is thatexhibits signs and a Wilson degenerative disease anautosomal It is error inborn of metabolism. copper recessive levels are low. Serumceruloplasmin peripheral producing the deposition degeneration the neuronal producing and (Kayser-Fleischer)ring; in cirrhosis; producing copper Abnormal astrocytosis. liver, in andprotoplasmic green-brown CNS, isfound in characteristic the cornea, a tremor, smile, ganglia. teenage dysarthria, early with in Neurologic the begin lability.MRI symptoms dysphasia,drooling, emotional basal dystonia, and shows abnormalities characteristically fixed of the years such copper-chelating is Treatment oral agent, as penicillamine. witha

@ StudentConsult.com Available

disease, defined, putamen. or involving brainstem, periaqueductal primarily neuropathologically caudate, the a degenerative necrotizing inherited encephalomyelopathy, of CNS region Leigh disease the Subacute is and difficulties, of begin age years hypotonia, ataxia. weakness irregularity, extraocular movements, 2 feeding of Symptoms before of and and consist respiratory usually Blood CSF are levels pyruvate elevated. lactate and and of mitochondrial function clinical produce Several syndrome. this alterations

or ictal poorly of may with epileptic encephalopathy. either and controlled Children postictal continuously because epilepsy may a appearstuporous be an state in their memory,motivation, abilities attention school affect sedating or lossof drugs developmental failure. the are or Antiepileptic or lack that to contribute and mood, may Use highdoses may of multiple compound thisproblem. or anticonvulsants

use anticholinergics) tranquilizers, bring and (sedatives, lethargy, overuse progressive confusion, ataxia. Chronic drug can about or may with with and learning difficulties such cause or Intoxications as to heavy acutely fulminant chronic may pallor, present progressing anorexia, irritability, metals, listlessness, encephalopathy. lead, can ataxia. niacin, vitamin thiamine, B12, E produce neuropathy, vitamin Vitamin deficiency and peripheral encephalopathy, and of

cognition and developmental retards acquired and progress. hypothyroidism impairs Congenital is irreversible damage immediately birth (Chapter it not hypothyroidism produces 175). congenital if Unrecognized treated after

Structural growing dementia. slowly such mimic tumors, hydrocephalus may as diseases, brain and as rubella indolent syphilis, and Certain such (German cause panencephalitis), some rubeola (measles, brain neurologic and causing subacute months fungal infections, years. over infections, measles), deterioration sclerosing skills. causes of and acquired immunodeficiency normal of infection regression development Congenital human failure virus

to rise (Chapter attain apathy can disorders, developmental in give to infancy, such Psychiatric as andfailure severe 21). psychosocial milestones and deprivation depression of a after go period normal phase milestones. througha atabout with early disorder or Children may to autism stagnation of 12 of age spectrum 18 disintegration months developmental can withdrawal, performance, ordementia. in poor children of encephalopathy of raise which Depression social toblunting school and older the lead affect, question

The skin, brain from are nails, derived teeth, embryologically and ectoderm. hair, these of indicate development. Abnormalities brain may structures surface abnormal Not disorders not however, origin. neurocutaneous ectodermal all are all have lesions, characteristic of the of cutaneous and so-called are and neurocutaneous common and ataxia-telangiectasia sclerosis, more tuberous most the disease, 1 of the disorders. Hippel–Lindau Neurofibromatosis syndrome, 2), von 40 Sturge-Weber (types than

an in 3000. known von is as an also autosomal-dominant of with 1 disease, type incidence Recklinghausen Neurofibromatosis (NF1), 1 disorder approximately neurofibromin. the codes gene, suppressor a for gene, of by caused which tumor is mutations NF1 It of the Ras negative transduction regulator a key Neurofibromin pathway. pathway, a major is signal downstream results signaling. in mitogenic Mutations increased is but in in Somatic mosaicism, of cells neurofibromatosis. copy is segmental and abnormality a present not some in post-zygotic others, which the NF1 one mutation an indicates called gene

Available StudentConsult.com @

hamartomas cutaneous neurofibromatosis The (Lisch neurofibromas, lait features nodules). are iris cardinal of inguinal axillary freckling, or and au spots, café who NF1 present of patients than au lait more in spotsare (Fig. have 90% Café 186-1). in They size number the increase over first appear of in years typically life and time. few and spots more child in diagnosis. or 5 six prepubescent presence The than a suggests café-au-lait larger mm the of have NF1. are Lisch frequency age also present of who nodules in more increase than and with adults 90% in

au 186-1 Cafe macules. FIGURE lait Nelson Saunders, (From 2007, RE, Pediatrics, Jenson 2680.) editors: Textbook Phila-delphia, p 19, HB, of Kliegman Behrman RE, ed

of composed and various vascular Neurofibromas cells, elements. Schwann of combinations mast cells, are fibroblasts, neurofibromas soft lesions within skin. Dermal the nearly lie and universal with epidermis are discrete, of move passively dermis small, and consist and that the They significant can rarely any but cosmetic cause symptoms, concerns. cause Neurofibromas within nerves. situated or along blood also may vessels be peripheral viscera and the lie major Plexiform occasionally along lesions nodular, neurofibromas are nerve trunks. peripheral large, subcutaneous that They symptoms including cause spinal and cord. bone, adjacent invasion viscera, often of pain, weakness, or occur. degeneration may Sarcomatous but Surgical attempted, results may often are treatment be unsatisfactory.

seizures, complications cerebral disability, and Common abnormalities. are learning vasculature scoliosis, malignant of tumors gliomas, occur brain astrocytomas nerve in Other spinal and that nerve NF1 peripheral are and optic cord, tumors. tracts, capsule, T2-weighted magnetic are hyperintense the the optic for and disease. internal (MRI) brainstem thalamus, distinctive cerebellum, in lesions common and resonance images that (hamartomas) reveal disappear are They and in adulthood. benign

may life NF1 average to 10 15 expectancy years. be by patients reduced The with of most the cause common of is Malignancy death. important are components for counseling chronic disorder. this of care Genetic and psychological disorder, it to autosomal is for cases. account mutations of 50% spontaneous dominant 30% an Although

(NF2) of type 1 2 disorder an autosomal-dominant incidence 25,000. is an with Neurofibromatosis in the Half have family no cases history. in tumor eye, results gene, The suppressor lesions. NF2 gene and a disease is and neurologic, skin of and intracranial spinal spinal and schwannomas, schwannomas tumors, cranial patients multiple and gliomas. to meningiomas, bilateral acoustic other predisposes NF2 nerves, including lesions, cataracts skin lesions subcutaneous and common, include plaque-like and Posterior schwannomas. nodules, or capsular cutaneous are cortical are cafe and not of au Lisch nodules, axillary freckling lait NF2. features spots,

Tuberous dominant in hamartomas an the organs, disorder, autosomal and brain, many by characterized especially skin, eyes, (TSC), is heart. sclerosis complex kidneys, births. The 1 10,000 incidence is in to mutations. Two are represent thirds new of thought sporadic cases and have who do but sclerosis. not children have Germline tuberous disease apparently with uncommon, mosaicism parents can is how the multiple explains affecting presumed tuberous or Mutations either of TSC2, genes, tumor sclerosis. the TSC1 suppressor cause and encode genes distinct expressed constitutive numerous benign of tumors and leading (hamartomas). in result of the the rapamycin), and target (mammalian kinase tuberin, The protein widely brain proteins, of mTOR in TSC2 formation which TSC1 hamartin are to activation the

disease varying TSC without within family. an with heterogeneous same seizures, often seizures intelligence extremely from variable clinical severe refractory with wide spectrum mental is retardation normal a to expression the and infantile is causes one of sclerosis the of spasms. Tuberous common most often retardation, autism, children epilepsy, intractable and mental develop hyperactivity. These white brain have subependymal may patches) hamartomas, retinal and lesions (retinal hydrocephalus). lesions depigmented tubers, (cortical Patients nodules, cerebral the of of cortex with the symptoms other that, areas responsible mental microscopic dysplasia Tubers development, are abnormal and for in in retardation epilepsy. combination areas are of cell hamartomas mutate cerebrospinal phase giant a causing and of Subependymal that resultant may and nodules into hydrocephalus. fluid obstruction outflow subependymal become are growth astrocytomas

(ash under Extracerebral a ultraviolet include to visualize infancy. leaf easiest lamp manifestations typical apparent and hypomelanotic findings which skin macules Wood spots) are of in are sebaceum) acne. confused over that (adenoma Facial appear nose sometimes as with and red angiofibromas cheeks small nodules are the the childhood are with a that predilection of in regions or and adolescence. gluteal develop for plaques lumbar rough Shagreen elevated, skin early patches late largest and during rhabdomyomas life symptomatic. are and Cardiac are rarely infancy prenatal arrhythmias they obstruction. may cause cardiac outflow or Occasionally, malignant with most cause TSC. angiomyolipomas the are and undergo transformation may adults common Renal of in death (pulmonary lymphangioleiomyomatosis). adults with pulmonary Interstitial TSC disease also affects

Sturge-Weber by ophthalmic (forehead the of vessels syndrome the (angiomas) nerve is sporadic involving ipsilateral upper cerebral and the in blood facial with inherited) leptomeninges stain association glaucoma. an (not eyelid) division and abnormal cortex often, characterized of trigeminal the and, overlying port-wine of due to more much have extensive as stain, even superficial bilateral an also venules is may known a port-wine flammeus, nevus distribution. and The ectasia and all with Sturge-Weber children facial Not a have syndrome. port-wine stain

MRI due abnormalities white hypoxia chronic and be angioma with contrast leptomeningeal to thought matter and demonstrates to atrophy. engorgement presumably, Angiomas produce in which and, are stasis result within thought to venous hypoxia. involved the areas, present stroke-like disabilities. mental episodes, Patients hemiparesis, learning headaches, seizures, retardation, with and occurring ischemic of and most the because Seizures are 75% associated injury of the brain. patients, to common abnormality, neurologic develop in syndrome with Sturge-Weber children intellectually Many seizures with controlled and anticonvulsants. normal, are are well standard of focal in impairment. children ischemia progressive resulting hemianopia, develops brain Sturge-Weber intractable cognitive in hemiparesis, and the syndrome, However, underlying some seizures, with for has Hemispherectomy control. difficult to unilateral whose been individuals with are proposed seizures disease and motor procedure but treatment, sequelae compared the seems considerable. of anticonvulsant improved, the drug risks Intellectual outcome are with ongoing and surgical surgery most nevus therapeutic option promising the the flammeus. facial of cosmetic Pulse is laser dye management for Expert glaucoma is of management required. ophthalmologic evaluations often patients Endocrinology growth hypothyroidism. necessary, have are hormone also these deficiency and/or as

and migration, Central growth and of matter), neural system spinal cord malformations brain skull formation, and disorders gray size, (neuronal nervous shape. specification tube growth and structure include

The ectoderm, the gestation. system the plate the neural nervous develops 18 days embryonic which of of at is of precursor system, which brain rise neural form to tube, The cord, gives forms the and meninges, neural nervous the adrenal medulla. which plate and neural the spinal melanocytes, peripheral cells, crest and gestation. day begins on 22 of tube neural to form The The and region caudal the forms forms the cord. spinal end brain, the rostral the spinal the forms neural The of cord. central ventricles the the canal and of tube lumen the brain of injuries of brain of Most variety are during vulnerable produced occurring period gestation. a by a malformations during rubella, irradiation, herpes); chromosomal, include maternal and factors certain pregnancy. (toxoplasmosis, illness to and genetic, Precipitating abnormalities; drugs, cytomegalovirus, exposure infections and metabolic

results sacral spina anomalies end the neural in at the spinal bifida. 4 tube or cord vertebrae Defective the gestation week of of of lumbar closure called and caudal of S1 spinal malformations, to the back. clinically These on range bone skin in by the vertebral uncovered infant’s or the insignificant major leaving defects L5 anomalies severity or of from cord arches loss myelomeningocele. myelomeningocele, and paralysis dependent incontinence The latter severe location on bowel deficit results sensation called defect, in of extent bladder, a in of the of and the neurologic the degree and of and the legs flaccid with resulting face swallowing. affected displacement tonsils usually in cerebellar an (downward medulla), addition, malformation type have and In of hydrocephalus associated II children the and Chiari weakness of and and the cystic but back, the functionally a the exposed anatomically spinal and intact. canal In meningocele, is on are cord meninges spinal underlying back skin but spina the the apparently In intact, underlying of spinal occulta, or canal the bifida of are present. is defects bone a the cord occulta a thick associated Meningoceles of terminale. dermoid lipoma, spina bifida to or and be cyst, tethering with may filum hair over the tuft present A area. of affected may or be dimple an risk extending dermoid increases from meninges; tract epithelial to meningitis. also may the the associated the have Patients surface sinus, this of skin an recurrent or urinary nephropathy, in and function with bladder spina have occulta difficulties or controlling recurrent can bowel that Patients tract insufficiency. renal in the result result reflux weakness that feet or may in meningocele may bifida numbness and infections, ulcerations, spicule or two cord a band spinal the fibrous diastematomyelia, divides into bone longitudinal sections. In vertebrae the may An and lipoma tethers associated it the infiltrates to present. that cord be incontinence. and Symptoms numbness urinary of and weakness the include feet

Myelomeningocele confirmed by acetylcholinesterase fluid. amniotic of the ultrasound in and concentrations fetus elevated an alpha-fetoprotein the and high alpha-fetoprotein mother’s in suggested blood is in and the by be resonance magnetic abnormalities. dramatic to imaging with screening birth, spinal may less confirm ultrasound After underlying used

the hydrocephalus open myelomeningocele postnatal ventriculoperitoneal require of and shunt. a spinal operative of treatment surgery) or undergo by often closure of must (fetal with defects placement Neonates children lower of therapy, with Toddlers intermittent extremities, bladder the dysfunction catheterization. physical and lower bracing spinal and cord require common and more In problems the epilepsy most learning survivors the are normal absence brain intelligence, have anomalies, in general than associated of population. but

prevented Spina by can to administration bifida many folate in be mother. pregnant the cases are defect daily. women gestation, so oral advised childbearing in folic to all acid take the age Because occurs early of

anencephaly the or Defective closure rostral neural produces tube of encephaloceles. with or anencephaly or midbrain, cortex rudimentary cranium. have no but a brainstem Neonates is This fatal delivery. rapidly after a and meninges with defect alone usually of exposure have encephalocele and skull Patients or meninges brain. tube 3% is in for or subsequent either to The defects cranial neural spinal risk pregnancies recurrence 4%. family, followed lumbosacral a affected myelomeningocele. be anencephalic a by may child birth of birth an a Within with the The neural polygenic. defects inheritance tube is of

in fashion cellular other the complete may isolated be an of or and in of callosum association migration. corpus may with anomalies or Agenesis partial occur vermis, cerebellar the agenesis fossa. malformation enlarged partial triad: the and fourth is the of posterior complete diagnosed of on Dandy-Walker dilation ventricle, classic cystic or the basis of callosum, the corpus migration of hydrocephalus, neuronal be There abnormalities. may associated and absence may Intelligence on cerebral depending normal associated impaired, or dysgenesis. of degree the be

(prosencephalon) the Holoprosencephaly of divide hemispheres. varying of represents into two to distinct failure forebrain degrees cerebral associated is cleft defects lip, (hypotelorism, palate). often with cleft midline facial Holoprosencephaly or associated or This may anomaly with chromosomal a be disorder. isolated genetic lobar) with have (alobar)holoprosencephaly infants poor, neurological outcomes. prognosis or but those for severe (semilobar, with severe The uniformly may less is milder forms varying with characteristically trisomy 13 of degrees 18 have holoprosencephaly. and trisomy Children

intrauterine, but is normally, probably condition is a brain which destroyed develops then in vascular, the insult. Hydranencephaly an by presumably of skull. cerebrum is with intact the an result absence The virtual cortex typically thalamus, occipital The some brainstem, and present. are may of milestones. appearance time do but the normal developmental at Children achieve birth, have not a external

see of the circumference the thickness), (increased may a brain). and 97th of skull be 184), above percentile macrocrania or megalencephaly (enlargement result ventricles; the Chapter (enlargement the Macrocephaly head of hydrocephalus represents marrow Diseases or hypertrophy of of the bone metabolism cause bone macrocrania. or an may of the substances brain accumulation a of disorder abnormal development result 1871). significant metabolic of be (Table Megalencephaly significance. of familial no macrocephaly trait Most is however, clinical often, a If circumference developmentally plotting but help has a can neurodiagnostic provide unnecessary child avoid is to chart growth on head normal and the reassurance testing. parents’ the macrocephaly,

circumference Microcephaly represents the percentile. 3rd below head a 187-2). with of which hereditary (Table and are microcephaly, syndromes metabolic some associated Myriad are disorders In small a of reflection is most a circumference brain. a head instances, small (infectious, Brain vascular) result growth growth rapid brain early likely this period toxic, metabolic, to sustained during period, in and insult is is during impair during the any infancy and perinatal or microcephaly. called result more of a premature sutures, Rarely, head one is small the skull of or craniosynostosis. closure diagnosis made skull. readily is the shape of abnormal This by the and be for a development. rule, raise circumference head prognosis concern alone used about but should microcephaly a As never macrocephaly cognitive ability, a establish to intellectual

severe thickness) Osteopetrosis Macrocrania Achondroplasia Fragile anemia Chronic, (increased Hypochondroplasia skull syndrome X

(enlargement the Masses Chapter 184) see Hydrocephalus ventricles; of

causing disorder the Megalencephaly of of abnormal proliferation brain (enlargement Embryologic brain)

Gangliosidoses Alexander Accumulation of metabolic Canavan substances disease Mucopolysaccharidoses abnormal disease

collections extracerebral of Benign macrocephaly infancy Familial

Neuronal of Migration Disorders

malformations germinal of 5 normal gestation. Many to the result at 1 the from failure of matrix neurons zone surface from of the months periventricular cortical to migration the Multiple may exist in malformations patient. same these on and and malformation. extent type of the varies with Neurologic depends the development anomalies

cortical Schizencephaly that cerebral hemispheres to extend by within is clefts the surface from cavity. the the ventricular characterized and Unilateral whereas causes hemiparesis, spastic schizencephaly disability. associated quadriparesis intellectual congenital clefts cause can isolated bilateral at Affected high are individuals for focal risk epilepsy.

(agyria). brain a cortical A without severe migration, lissencephaly results defect smooth in sulcation in develop. not does The cortex normal six-layered and have children difficult-to-control profound retardation. seizures Affected developmental or mutations). novo autosomal anomaly dominant This is commonly mutations of (Lis-1 part a gene genetic most by be which x-linked disorder, de (DCX mutations) may caused few gyri in In pachygyria, too and the are number

of the Schizencephaly callosum Lissencephaly corpus Micropolygyria broad. Pachygyria Agenesis many gyri too small. and polymicrogyria, In the are too intractable syndrome enlargement pachygyria producing early entire infancy. in and that affect of clinical begin polymicrogyria severe, Sometimes hemisphere and seizures hemisphere, that a of an medically completed abnormal central matter neurons that islands matter process. never migratory have the within Gray of the white heterotopiasare

his on authors 182 help in hypotonia. and thank Chapter Dowling James for weakness preparing generous The Dr.

Clinical a Signs 6, GM: Saunders 2009, Neurology: Approach, Fenichel Symptoms Pediatric ed and Philadelphia,

headache: review, clinical J: Headache 52:333–339, 2012 H, a Gladstein Pediatric Jacobs

Philadelphia, HB, Nelson Saunders Jenson al: et ed RM, of 19, Pediatrics, Textbook 2011, Kliegman Behrman RE,

myoclonus JW, Zinner II: disorders SH: Mink chorea, tremor, Movement dystonia, 2010 and 31:287–295, Pediatr Rev

The floppy infant: DE, MC: Pediatr Peredo of hypotonia, Hannibal evaluation

30:e66–e76, 2009 Rev

Pediatr Schutzman 2012 JE, Pediatric head injury, Rev SA: Schunk 33:398–411,

SH, Zinner disorders stereotypies, and I: Pediatr tics JW: Movement Mink

31:223–233, Rev 2010

Yvonne 25 Chiu E.

skin Approximately one in at at has leastone any age of three recognizable disorder Americans any time. vulgaris, vitiligo, infections acne The dermatitis, impetigo. psoriasis, diseases tumors, settings most and (warts), (eczema), as atopicdermatitis in seborrheic encountered simplex and herpes community aredermatophytosis, verrucae commoncutaneous such most dermatitis, clinics, verrucae the impetigo, seborrheic acne atopic attending vulgaris, dermatology Inchildren are vulgaris,and diagnoses. dermatitis capitis, common tinea pediatric

(fever, duration, malaise, associated the and (pain, importantclues. patient, of symptoms onset, loss) systemicsigns progression, symptoms The or associatedcutaneous pruritus), weight age are original the accurate an accuracy. lesionimproves of description diagnostic Obtaining dramatically. Over-the-counter the appearance of remediesmay a rash alter Patients consider topical astreatment. not antibiotic a medication or oftendo anti-itch is with to deeply probe important it in history. the relatedquestions Thus environmental information important history. history Other family exposure, history,previous and treatment, affected includesa of allergies, contacts, travel

requires the a examination a tactile and visual of assessment. careful skin A of entire Examination skin the be must systematically. the body over performed assessed. origin, all disorders be nails, ectodermal may also hair, cutaneous in teeth, involved and of and be membranes, should Mucous

StudentConsult.com Available @

of and communication providers. lesions differential also between A with descriptive helps care generating skin with a nomenclature health diagnosis is cornerstone Determination change diagnosis. dermatologic lesion and of of the the primary secondary is A primary 188-1 (Table and de as novo defined is lesion lesion disease the most characteristic that Fig. arises and the of process basic 188-1). time rarely lesions external the time seen as or lesions on Primary such are of most are at patient altered a presentation, by factors as

<1 Flat, lesion diameter in cm Patch nonpalpable

but to in cm macule, diameter Similar >1

diameter <1 Elevated, lesion cm Papule in solid

nodule >1 but broad to and has cm in Plaque contrast flat a Similar diameter; to surface papule, in a

surface contrast plaque a but to cm papule, rounded Similar in to a diameter; >1 has Nodule in

Tumor neoplastic growth but inflammatory to than a Similar an process implies rather nodule,

Bulla >1 in diameter to Similar cm vesicle, but

an is lesion, erythema and epidermal phase which Pustule often have may papular surrounded Pus-filled initial by

blood the pressure blanch from papule or extravasated into not with does Macule Purpura resulting skin;

purpura, millimeters than a Similar Petechia less diameter to few in but

Ecchymosis plaque from patch or blood hemorrhagic resulting extravasated Larger,

and within resolving Wheal lesions 24 by in edematous vary Pink, size configuration; characterized with and greatly hours transient (hive) individual nature plaques papules that

Telangiectasia small vessels red superficial of Collection blood

small Milia Superficial, cysts epidermal white, keratin

Plug orifice hair open sebum (whitehead) be follicle, of or of and keratin closed acne lesion characteristic Comedo which vulgaris can within the a of (blackhead);

epidermal lining solid nodule or or of an with Cyst material fluid composed Papule

188-1 Figure of lesions. primary skin Morphology A, lesions. Flat Palpable B, lesions. Fluid-filled C, lesions. lesions. primary Special D, Textbook Philadelphia, Examination, 1989, and of History Swartz Diagnosis: MH: Physical (From Saunders.) WB physical medication scratching). infection, or (e.g., manipulation applied, secondary primary underlying the a often proves the A specific and worthwhile diagnosis to for search category of diagnosis. that for differential lesion the is focuses lesion primary occasion, types different present. two of On lesions be may residue, the are cases, of lesion. the the most lesions result, secondary or effects of In primary a or infection may and seen (Table primary by be They absence in the scratching lesion 188-2). of be created may secondary

color, configuration, location, lesion distribution the texture, and be recorded. should The of primary of psoriasis. eruption as may skin symmetrical grouped localized cutaneous infection, A suggest a whereas suggest may or involvement disorder, widespread, extensor a such surfaces lesions lesions. grouped are Herpesvirus usually Annular syphilis, lesions infections. fungal may Lyme disease, and suggest usually lesions on characterize. mucous as membranes are in the and thick-skinned short-lived, difficult such be particularly to areas, soles, may palms Lesions and

varicella-zoster and time examination light because fluorescence yellowish of cytologic history potassiumhydroxide virus are at (Tzancktest) scrapings fungi diagnosis visibility examination include for physical tests andWood and (KOH) dermatophytes,skin the examination the herpesvirus examination thorough of examination skin.Adjunctive scabies, gold usuallysufficient and for for of the infection, for A the for

of Crust cellular collection Dried serum and debris

depression with of the loss Erosion superficial epidermis Shallow

into Ulcer loss scarring entire epidermis depression with Deeper the heals of with dermis;

appears translucent) and Atrophy epidermis shiny (surface is depressed) (skin of Thinning dermis or

dermal from damage; tissue of results and collection lightens that discolored Scar pink, with initially time but firm, Thickened, connective

of Circumscribed diffuse Sclerosis or skin hardening

the result Lichenification from Accentuated lines/markings skin thickening that epidermis of

that Excoriation erosion caused linear Superficial is by scratching

Fissure within of skin painful the tinea usually is break that Linear surface versicolor. diagnosis. skin performed the biopsy may to helpwith A be are biopsy, procedures. both shave either or simple, accomplishedby specimen can and The punch in-office be biopsy imaging are necessary. or laboratory studies Occasionally,

vulgaris areas greatest affects chronic concentration chest, a such and Acne disorderthat the of is face, as sebaceous glands, (or acne) with the back. inflammatory The acne of multifactorial. is pathogenesis all Gender, age, major genetic factors. environment contributing factors,and are possibly by Stressmay to levels.There foods is linking acne. or affecting no hormone acne, fried candy, trigger chocolate, evidence

of pilosebaceous by caused inflammation chronic is with (hair follicle the an gland). associated unit sebaceous Acne acne is the and event leading which production glands, primary enlargement. of overgrowth increased hair micro-comedo, sebaceous pilosebaceous of in the follicle with results the and of keratin, flora, to the all The sebum development skin obstruction from lesions from occlusion normal stimulus are potent the of Androgens gland. sebaceous a and skin. Propionibacterium of The from a proliferation component acnes, commensal organism formation of subsequent results pustule the inflammatory sebum involves hyperkeratosis, proliferation. of production, bacterial increased acne The thus three pathogenesis components: and these focuses factors. treatment Effective minimizing on

of is in in skin adolescents, occurring common disorder the Acne 85% teenagers. most similar incidence severely are both often The sexes, affected. boys although is more in may may 8 as years as into early Acne continue begin age and of adulthood.

face, such with affects primarily as upper increased sebaceous areas glanddensity, chest, Acne back. the and (whitehead) Superficialplugging in comedones. closed results noninflammatorysmall unit pilosebaceous 2-mm) (blackhead) (1to open of and the than inflammatory become is a open An less comedo comedo. to closed likely inflammatory inflammatory into and an development papules adjacent and comedo dermis of and of a Rupture acnes proliferation induce P. pustules. of response cystic cysts or and skin-colored deeper red Larger, nodulesrepresent and plugging acne. scarring. deep rupture and cyst,increases especially inflammation, of the persistent with a of Increased risk

usually chronic because lesions. diagnosis is acne of and The the not difficult characteristic of not Laboratory acne. are usually to studies and diagnose necessary studies imaging hirsutism, or (irregular underlying hyperandrogenism polycystic of to ovarian voice, deepening necessary there Screening be menses, tumor are (irregular hirsutism, tests may syndrome signs resistance) insulin androgen-secreting due an if clitoromegaly). menses,

are and topical mainstays acne topical keratolytic The treatment of antibiotics. agents of solutions foams, are lotions, Creams, gels, and available. irritating to but they have well be greasier is to drying, tendency Gels these the as skin are and may commonly and acne generally be tend be solutions and used tolerated. not because agents effective. tolerated not may be better and are lotions Creams but as

agents produce subsequently, tazarotene) azelaic desquamation and, superficial The relieve acid, obstruction. (salicylic keratolytic tretinoin, adapalene, acid, follicular mainstay first-line therapy. a are They of are (tretinoin, on The topical adapalene, vitamin based retinoids tazarotene) molecule. A the can be anti-inflammatory and they production antibacterial as activity; and monotherapy. and when most keratin thus decrease some They have sebum the effective used

proliferation. topical Topical inhibit and (erythromycin, P. dapsone, peroxide, sulfur-sulfacetamide) are antibiotics anti-inflammatory and clindamycin) (benzoyl acnes antimicrobials decreased topical to resistance. the of P. resistant such this become as antibiotic; as increasingly peroxide Erythromycin has combined an to development efficacy acnes has benzoyl prevent antimicrobial antibiotics with be should agent therapy antimicrobial either more alone of topical Combination acne. inflammatory for and keratolytic a a topical than effective is agent

with be cystic a deeper for regimen. doxycycline, should Oral minocycline) always (tetracycline, are combination in typically used antibiotics used but topical lesions are effective most their of because antibiotics activity. significant the anti-inflammatory Tetracyclines because bacterial with of erythromycin, As topical used rarely resistance. erythromycin oral is

be severe oral acne, nodulocystic instituted. or recalcitrant isotretinoinmay For 5α-dihydrotestosterone decreases capacity. and sebum formation oral production,and receptor–binding follicular androgen of A,normalizes reduces an vitamin analog keratinization, Isotretinoin, (0.5 the cumulative a of of that remission. mg/kg) dose course durable a alter can reach mg/kg/day 120 is theonly permanently A to induce to1 course isotretinoin acne and of medication the adverse physicians be with by Because high only this medication. used incidenceof it of effects, should familiar monitoring. Isotretinoin and requires counseling, monthly selection, carefulpatient laboratory therapy pretreatment is used or immediately not during must teratogenic and pregnancy. be It before

adolescent’s and devastating significant has Acne self-esteem. image effects and frequently an on body There correlation impact. may little be and psychosocial between severity may morbidity. result Scarring in permanent

15 may 20 to have years. 5 disease although to Classically, years, 3 for individuals acne lasts some natural alter course isotretinoin the with Only may of acne. early treatment lesions with heal erythema hyperpigmentation. Acne postinflammatory temporary and often of atrophic, chronicity, and involvement, scars may hypertrophic depth the or pitted, Depending on develop. severity, scarring the scarring acne Cystic of comedonal cyst rupture even pustular induces inflammation, has of be deep caused though may because acne. the greatest incidence a milder or by highest

exacerbate Greasy be becausethey hair should and cosmetic preexisting preparations avoided acne. is means no effective is acne, that little associated diet there forpreventing There with are and evidence acne. water and astringents or lipids. with surface soap removes Repetitive cleansing only useof abrasives or skin the paradoxically and may ofmicrocomedones usemakes Their acne. oily less appear does not worsen prevent but formation

with chronic a Atopic cure. no disease dermatitis is known inflammatory It morbidity health-related of with is psychosocial decreased and quality life. significant associated by accompanied of atopic many rhinitis. individuals, atopy allergic affected manifestation asthma the and dermatitis skin For is

exaggerated and manifests innate immuneresponses and immune allergens microbes. with responses, a dermatitis skin to barrier,reduced defective Atopic environmental of genetic predisposition dermatitis. in and factors the play Both a development role atopic have associated dysfunction with and barrier with been linked Genes atopicdermatitis. inflammation skin include lesions cells, in predominance early Inflammatory found T implicated and chroniclesions. a with pathway in the mediators acute TH1 helper TH2 predominantly involved prominent as IgE, and play mediators. as well cells, Langerhans role, other a inflammatory eosinophils many sweat, exacerbate of Environmental and contact rubbing. humidity as or extremesof scratching irritants, can thecondition, lack temperature, infections, and allergens, can are from somewhatvariable to individual individual. Triggers

most common 20% of estimated to is in up dermatitis skin prevalence an the children. of Atopic disease children,with manifest adults Only1% of 2% to disease. addition genetic an factors, In contributes. to influence environmental higher dermatitisoccurs areas socioeconomic classes. Atopic and urban frequently in in more where industrial pollution Prevalence in infectionssuch are where less is infections and helminthic areas as endemic. is eosinophil-mediated lower

history family generally of Patients have a atopy. referred atopic to the development allergy to dermatitis atopic with predisposed of march. allergic as rhinitis, are Children the and rhinitis and more up even in develops allergic half with atopic to Asthma dermatitis, of children frequently. with allergies commonly are associated atopic Food dermatitis.

disease and characteristic by relapsing findings. Atopic is skin chronic, a pruritus, xerosis, dermatitis skin characterized remits in childhood continue adulthood. age cases Thecondition with improves adulthood,although into generally some and will

plaques atopic or and dermatitis are borders scale ill-defined erythematous or Characteristic with overlying lesions papules of hyperkeratosis. excoriated Lesions can yellow or have that or an is hemorrhagic. be secondarily overlying crust stages. may be present Weeping acute in lesions. found older Lichenification in is in lesions. chronic acute both is fissures Formation of and common manipulation is not hyperpigmentation or atopic lesions (e.g., hypoand infection can dermatitis after scarring features secondary seen usually unless be resolve, severe become but Temporary physical [scratching]).

of the with age vary patient. the locations Characteristic the face generalized. Infantile atopic surfaces and extremities often and typically of is extensor affects the dermatitis hands, predominate lesions Childhood flexural and and (Fig. ankles, in feet popliteal fossae), (antecubital surfaces wrists, phase of upper occurs and on as areas the involvement back. the toes, the arms in face, after and neck, puberty the dorsa manifests adult 190-1).The predominant flexural including and fingers and the as well hands,

or commonly less is Streptococcus present. bacterial infection, frequently Secondary pyogenes, aureus with Staphylococcus commonly with most disseminated at develop can fungal simplexvirus riskfor with (eczema herpeticum), skin and smallpoxvirus with is susceptible (eczema and more infections infections contagiosum.Atopic skin viruses varicella-zoster as such well. are viruses infections Patients increased molluscum as vaccinatum), to cutaneous herpes virus,

dermatitis 190-1 Atopic Figure (arm).

concomitant lesions crusted or pustules, Signs fever, ofdisease of an of fissures, infection presence patient, acute in orexudative resistance (Fig. well-controlled and include tostandard worsening otherwise therapy, 190-2). Eczema vaccinatum treated. not herpeticumand if eczema life can threatening be

signs based clinical Diagnosis is of atopic on symptoms. and dermatitis exclusively findings generally are skin and biopsy characteristic can but not with overlap conditions. other diagnostic Skin blood be elevated and IgE specific. eosinophilia not Peripheral are found can but levels measurement IgE food although testing Skin sensitization false-positive findings prick environmental levels detect occur. to antibody or of allergens, and can specific

distribution characteristic is of diagnosis pruritic in dermatitis typical. The differential a of condition setting a but history the relapsing extensive, lesions atopy the in and skin is atopic of

lesions borders. seborrheic The dermatitis and have circumscribed of well-defined and scale yellowish. or hyperkeratosis The is thicker,greasy, perinasal dermatitisis eyebrows, coexist. and back.Occasionally of dermatitis, conditions involvingthe seborrheic atopic upper chest, scalp, that different the The distribution two region, from of typically

scalp. localize the elbows, knees, and to back, lower tends Psoriasis on coloration. overlying an of are exposed psoriasis that salmon surfaces silver color with is lesions at The hyperkeratosis on thicker the much with base generally plaques. demarcated, thick very oval are round, They well or

the a distribution of linear, limited corresponding to Allergic angulatedshapes dermatitis has to lesions body contact square, allergen.The the bizarre, source. generally to contact with the area make corresponding one or results Nickel dermatitis metals. to common nickel sensitization is from and in contact or neck under It rub contact the occurs pant around such or lobule periumbilicalarea skin); metal buttons onthe (where and (where ear (necklaces); skin); neck locations, earrings circumferentially against wristbands. in the characteristic from rings as contact well. atopic with Patients can dermatitis as dermatitis have concomitant

190-2 with Staphylococcus Atopic dermatitis superinfection. Figure

triggers of emollients and components: inflammation, use liberal affected skin to of bland three use of anti-inflammatory areas atopic to skin therapy barrier, topical dermatitis main Ideal of of for avoidance frequent includes when needed. medication restorethe on and pruritus of Control an considered should infection be individual basis. are indicated. these may agents be therapy topicaltherapy light and or immunosuppressive If systemic ultraviolet measures inadequate, therapywith

are generally is water there warm short advocate but with bathing. hot controversial who frequent less this some is bath recommended, not although and daily A trap the ointment moisture. to afterward body entire should cream immediately moisturizing A be applied or to topical is most after of bathing. effective immediately Application also medications Science and Eczema can website http://www.nationaleczema.org patients ( for the National of Association for be and at families Additional Education the found information

inflammation atopic detergents, molds. of with pools, dust environmental dander, care saliva pollens, or triggers harsh chlorinated include fabric low personal foods smoke, Common highly that other tobacco sweat, scratching, and softeners, products, are dermatitis fragranced wool acidic, and humidity, or in rubbing materials, animal contact mites, soaps or should Exposure possible. these be to limited triggers whenever an skin exacerbate as disease, unrelated also atopic are dermatitis. Infections upper to such infection, can respiratory that seen allergy commonly typically exacerbation or presents atopic with but dermatitis the of anaphylaxis rather atopic in patients with than dermatitis. Food urticaria is

for atopic are the of anti-inflammatory corticosteroids dermatitis. Topical therapy mainstay oftopical classified are available and strength are VII. from corticosteroids I according to Hundreds to is potency. potencyand highest the is VII the class lowest I Class for relative a can Potency varies to vary concentration accordingto molecule the and, strength vehicle and ingredient), steroid giveningredient, (active base. according areas or areasof with occlusion occlusion (excoriations), or of Enhanced heat hydration. (flexures and openskin such in groin), bandages), (diapers as and axillae penetration in natural occurs withexternal of application this penetration with for recalcitrant advantageof takes corticosteroid and topical for Use wetwraps enhanced lesions. hydration of principle heat are typically avoided I Class II areas of steroids in children young or in orenhanced and skin penetration. thinner

in vehicles. are different Corticosteroids available are their and preferred of efficacy, In general, ointments occlusive nature, tolerability. increased because ingredient for warmer cosmetically may steroid be be older may for a or effective climates. slightly less acceptable Creams more patients but given in less that may more Lotions are have preservatives cause generally irritation and can potent. especially hair-bearing for and useful Sprays, foams, can be areas. solutions, gels should to generally be be of skin on particularly areas solutions, irritating and when gels Creams, and applied can lotions, sprays, skin. avoided open atopic

corticosteroids avoiding care, inflammation should of adequate such emollients. with be Topical and triggers skin used in of conjunction frequent application as is recommended. of application corticosteroids Twice-daily and to for the medications avoid for adverse goal anti-inflammatory The is effects. potential limit need thereby side striae, to of acne, such and site application, Local of are potency, atrophy, and application. as duration effects corticosteroid related hypopigmentation skin topical or of areas corticosteroid of risk enhanced large suppression application with side result Systemic areas potent syndrome Cushing adrenal at a of to penetration. or occluded can effects surface

pimecrolimus inhibitingcalcineurin dermatitis.These calcineurin treatment part tacrolimus interleukin referred production. atopic to such the proliferation regimen (also for and subsequent agents T-cell as Topical of by as topicalimmune and may modulators) topical be 2 selectively inhibitors inhibit particularlyuseful atrophy; There these face lesions. isno skin are for thus agents or for potential genital as currently tomoderate dermatitis. intermittent second-line atopic mild approvedfor therapy They for are treatments studies, are for Long-term combined underway. treatment, modalities withother

useful flares. adjunctive therapy, during (e.g., hydroxyzine)are antihistamines diphenhydramine, Sedating especially night. pruritus on due may improve the but during These can sleeplessness only scratching to effect mild have the effective, be doses dose when needed. daytime A added is on additional an basis and before can bedtime individual most little in of dermatitis. the pruritus benefit controlling antihistamines are Nonsedating atopic of

be and be taperedand in therapy with is used failed topical cases systemic is when careregimen. corticosteroid may skin considered of should an severe corticosteroids administration adequately being instituted.Systemic courses of indicated adequate or conjunction atopic disease appropriate rarely Short-term for natural flare be of the disease dermatitis anticipated withdrawal following toavoid corticosteroids Rebound common atopic of severity. should of is and misinterpretation be avoided prevent repeated adverse and effects. courses should frequent Longterm to

UVA1) moderate be option in (UVB, UVB, children. or to band therapy older for an UVA, Ultraviolet can narrow cases severe light to tapered therapy improvement Typically, and or is is acute until times three weekly seen, light is once resolved. administered discontinued has the two then flare long-term the risk visits, skin and with UV use children while development cooperate office More including ability standing frequent in therapy hindered with requirements potential exposure. of cancer wearing light goggles, damage, box a excessive of skin protective light in by for to is light for frequent for cases. Systemic be mg/kg/day) in dermatitis (up cyclosporine 5 can atopic therapy to severe effective to of of for the to be is controlled. tapered 1 up severe should year control is used gain dermatitis It disease periods atopic and once

@ StudentConsult.com Available

in skin well impaired to decrease immune infections viral, skin due as an skin proteins is and responses. maladaptive and immune bacterial, tendency secondary toward barrier increased the An innate fungal as in

common S. in aureus is Secondary with atopic secondary impetigo dermatitis. the infection most skin found common. is also infection Group Astreptococcus response manifests pustules, erythema, adequate disease, Infection orlack of flare scabbing, anti-inflammatory to therapy. of with crusting, be mupirocin. with can treated lesions topical Localized most lesions with as commonly a therapy, oral first-generation cephalosporin, require cephalexin. antibiotic such Widespreadand generalized be S. antibiotic tailored patient factors. should is and aureus based onlocal resistance Methicillin-resistant increasinglycommon, and therapy rates infection diagnosis and made clinically, can super-infection Diagnosis of bacterialculture antimicrobialsusceptibilities. may provide be a the but superficial confirm of corticosteroids. topical care the use a should continued concomitant routine Treatment including atopicskin include added antibiotics nevertheless and unusual.Rarely, frequent times two baths may septicemia S. with is or to be bleach or progression weekly; common, ½ infections Although a to cellulitis skin may dilute half-full cupof to secondary to is household infection with three bathtub. colonization bleach intravenous full ¼ aureus is benefitfrom required.Children

herpeticum infectious is (Kaposi’s atopic Eczema eruption) varicelliform complications potentially in oneof the serious dermatitis. vesiculopustular simplex (HSV) After a on dermatitisand occurs disseminated eruption herpes of atopic lesions within plaques both pruritic, multiple, virus infection, in an normal-appearing skin. pattern, of crusted hemorrhagic form These (Fig. ruptureand erosions umbilicated papules and punched-out characteristically 190-3). anorexia, seen. be and canalso fever Irritability, nervous havebeen reported. central Systemic and system disease areas skin the occurs. of Bacterial eroded of often superinfection can Giemsa Diagnosis a or not skin Wright’s (Tzanck lesion though from stain be rapidly with sensitive. stained are the test), made highly these scrapingof varicella-zoster virus of or These presence multinucleatedgiant allow the infection. herpes indicative of stains of virus cells microscopic visualization simplex polymerasechain rapid be simplex reaction viral detection of DNA, for sent or fluorescent direct Vesicle can (PCR) herpes culture. also antibody virus testing, fluid clinical with because occur important of is infections. bacterial Laboratory similar confirmation can manifestations infection

190-3 (hand). Figure herpeticum Eczema

significant. psychosocial dermatitis be can impact of The atopic fatigue, of is in on from disfigurement, pruritus in often sleep and limitations There sports. resulting participation and irritability lack in strain, Significant is caring as dermatitis. involved with time, as a child financial for well atopic and Thus, address anticipatory guidance. these issues provide potential management adequate should

less much remits puberty. and dermatitis during frequently after childhood is common Atopic generally The infancy is and early in most childhood. widespread condition and severe commonly adults in or as of manifests Relapse can occur dermatitis. hand face and disease skin have preparations. adults to are many Frequently, over-the-counter that dry skin generalized and aware is sensitive their atopic also allergic develop can dermatitis asthma rhinitis. with Patients and with disease. skin is more commonly severe more associated Asthma

dermatitis with of and frequent Individual can can be avoiding application. of flares prevented triggers atopic emollient be inflammation by lessened Some delays least in months breastfeeding childhood. prevents dermatitis that or atopic the suggests occurrence 4 early evidence for of at not are the evidence infants atopic is prevented with exclusively be may hydrolyzed for 6 and formulas. modest atopic a of of use dermatitis or For with extensively delayed there parent who months, sibling breastfed the or casein-based onset disease 4 by to that dietary soy-based the intervention to 6 beyond 4 that age, other formulas, prevents introduction is the atopic disease. foods or There of complementary development months evidence of insufficient of delaying or is peanuts women There convincing that or risk child’s evidence lower during their no while pregnancy avoid of who breastfeeding allergies. other foods

a substance, dermatitis. dermatitis allergic contact contact of in top skin, two is the direct irritant Inflammation the with layers contact divided and into caused subtypes: by dermatitis contact or an after the surface skin to exposed is irritating chemical Irritant is observed substance. immune also is delayed-type contact dermatitis typeIV called cell-mediated a reaction, or hypersensitivity. Allergic antigen-presenting haptens,involved of theepidermis or antigens, The cells readily in Langerhans the and by the skin. contact allergic bound are penetrate dermatitis cells, to an lymphocytes, immune cascade presented and hapten follows. is The T occur girls in affectedthan and more dermatitismay age, boys. any Contact frequently are

plaques is dermatitis red scaly, (Fig. by ill-defined, patches pink or and contact characterized Irritant 191-1). localized the eruption surfaces that are The exposed to irritant. to skin is surfaces exposure hands repeated washing of the dermatitis contact dorsal frequently to often or on hand observed irritating is Irritant from the patients, in chemicals.

irritant most is commonly dermatitis form a contact Diaper problem dermatitis. of and in infants common is a and while from urine and occluded areas. is caused protected the typically affecting groin folds dermatitis the The the and perianal irritation feces, region buttocks sparing by other by complicate or infection well. may albicans Secondary pathogens diaper dermatitis bacterial Candida as

be may dermatitis contact as as nickel dermatitis). (such chronic dermatitis) acute (such Rhus Allergic or often linear pink, patches, pruritic in bizarre configurations. sharplymarginated lesionsare Acute or bright Within areclear bullae the vesicles (Fig. patches and 191-2). may exposureif been not to symptomsof 7 delayed Signs for previously. 14 days sensitized after be the and has the patient disease reexposure, are moresevere. On begin hours symptoms within usually and persist weeks. eruption may The for pink, atopic often Chronic dermatitis. mimicking pruritic lesionsare plaques, scaly, Even result persistentdermatitis. can exposure intermittent a in

andhistory established recognized of or by The a presentation diagnosis to IgE are helpful irritant contact is cause levels the not indetermining dermatitis. testing allergen.Skin-prick allergic exposure of serum clinical and difficult used may be the to causing Patchtesting determine allergen thereaction in cases.

Figure dermatitis. Irritant diaper 191-1

Allergic 191-2 dermatitis contact Figure tincture of benzoin. to

the appearance distribution diagnostic of detailed history the and useful and The tools. dermatitis are a most exposure (poison especially the legs suggests of oak), the ivy lesions distal exposure lower poison Rhus present. Involvement of configurations plants arms or of to and linear when species are watch), Dermatitis pant periumbilical metal nickel. suggests or allergy of a to (belt buttons) ears buckle or region (bracelet the (earrings), or wrist to allergy, of the dorsal a indicates the dyes, surfaces on or leather. rubber, shoe feet usually Distribution (neomycin) dermatitis. and antibiotics contact perfumes, of are frequent (soaps, causes cosmetics) allergic Topical fragrances

caused quite are rashes common. Candida by Diaper primarily the exposed intertriginous surfaces, contact prominent, Irritant dermatitis Candida affects whereas areas. affects primarily frequently The may present irritant complicate dermatitis. are as two secondary simultaneously, infection Candida

cell seborrheic rash present dermatitis, the in diaperarea. with and erythematous histiocytosis Langerhans can Psoriasis, an should respondto severe does to anychild rash with considered conventional for dermatologist therapy. be rash a Referral diaper that with not or

effective in dermatitis. of contact treatment irritant and corticosteroids are allergic Topical be corticosteroids, short allergic of corticosteroids, reactions and even severe necessary contact for High-potency courses oral may of dermatitis. be itching. may Oral antihistamines control required to

azole candidal nystatin dermatitis diaper of consists topical Treatment antifungals. topical or of used the to concomitantly. anti-fungal the topical present treat therapy in of frequently component when corticosteroids to diaper irritant Low-potency dermatitis addition are topical

any complicate of addition albicans, to of by contactdermatitis. C. form superinfection superinfection In diaper bacterial dermatitis may common of especially scratching. is blistering is because the intact skin This barrier nolonger or if

allergic identify to trigger contact the of Every dermatitis. or made be should effort irritant allergic leads reexposure to severe increasingly dermatitis, often contact With reactions.

Seborrheic different disease inflammatory different presentations ages. at common, clinical has is chronic dermatitis that a as umbilicus. fossae, areas the in infants and dermatitis dermatitis of axillae, the and intertriginous groin, presents or popliteal in cradle cap antecubital Seborrheic classically dandruff. in seen as is It adolescents it an of dermatitis is species theorized to inflammatory is seborrheic The there areas. pathogenesis response abnormal unclear, that in but commensal sebum-rich Malassezia is auditory folds, folds. external Areas to dermatitis include prone auricular posterior nasolabial canals, scalp, seborrheic the eyelids, eyebrows, and

dermatitis persists in month infants of during first Seborrheic and the during year first life. the begins scalp cradle yellow-white the called waxy, and crusting because of (Fig. greasy is the cap scaling also and of thick, It 192-1). is the on usually scalp, It the of prominent vertex but it be diffuse. may folds, plaques auricular extend erythematous, and posterior sometimes face entire scaly, Greasy, and involving may the nonpruritic patches body. to the and patches erythematous areas shiny, demarcated, yellow, with sharply have greasy, can or Diaper scale. waxy-appearing intertriginous Hypopigmentation faded. persist may after has inflammation the which it differentiate eruption infantile is usually The which helps pruritic. dermatitis, atopic asymptomatic, from is

seborrheic adolescence Classic the to scalp. during is dermatitis typically localized dandruff, with scaling of mild commonly dry the is minor form a as known scalp itching. The fine, white, findings yellow brawny dermatitis seborrheic thick, underlying erythema. diffuse, vary oily, of to from areas scaling of crusts Additional focal with as well. external auditory areas may be canals, The intertriginous and eyelids, eyebrows, involved Pruritus or be minimal may severe.

cap). (cradle Seborrheic Figure 192-1 dermatitis

Laboratory imaging and todiagnose are seborrheic studies not studies necessary dermatitis. scalp dermatitis to cultures and the be potassiumhydroxide 98). differentiate studies Fungal seborrheic necessary tinea of Chapter help may from (see capitis

may Seborrheic in difficult to dermatitis, be atopic from in differentiate some fact, an and dermatitis represent overlap. may an infant cases are difficult In scalp findings; have of differentiate similar other to very clinical disorders,especially the there provideadditional no two be very of psoriasis may clues. may cutaneous teenager, seborrheic to the dermatitis a findings it the scalpand if generalized seborrheicdermatitis Langerhans cell Intractable, histiocytosis. suggests severe, chronic to andfailure disease diarrhea immunodeficiency dermatitis, accompanied Leiner acquired syndrome thrive, (AIDS). by suggests Intractableseborrheic or

usually Seborrheic require treatment. andgenerally of not the scalp asymptomatic does dermatitis is be removed scalecan frequent of easily by amounts shampooing. Minor for out into For begently cradle oil minutesbefore and a on (such oil gently and may shampooing. infantswith the as oil) massaged cap, scale left olive the brushing mineral scalp few or or can salicylic selenium Dailyshampooing scalp pyrithione, acid treat shampoos zinc sulfide, with ketoconazole, scale. daily. two lesions rapidly steroids times Seborrheicdermatitis with low-potency responds to treatmentwith inflamed

usually is The response to treatment rapid. but uncommon. Secondary bacterial occur can infection is etiologies. Intractable evaluation other other disease for and warrant complications further

Cradle year self-limited of during resolves is and first life. the cap hair dermatitis does Seborrheic loss. not permanent cause

an teenagers, of often is of For use antiseborrheic control dandruff. continued required shampoo for

may signs dermatitis, help shampooing, progression. seborrheic with prevent of Frequent especially early

is age, self-limited eruption with adolescence. rosea Pityriasis benign, any incidence a peak occur may during at that in torso, orproximal 5-cm, oval breast, the pink, eruption.The found on eczematous is often and thigh is or misdiagnosed theso-called patch, the manifestation with patch herald 2to is first central A as solitary, typically lower of origin. herald fungal clearing, the patch extremities. proximal torso a 2 generalized the eruptionoccurs One later, and weeks on to parallel or pattern). branlikescale (Christmas to to tensionlines skin with are fine, oval macules tan oblong, 0.5to2-cm, tree a Multiple red arranged characteristically eruption papularor involving axillae Rarely, the a or have papulovesicular appearance. and distribution aninverse groin may the prodromal appearance the pruritusis present with in patch, the of present maybe cases. Mild symptoms 25% herald and of lasts weeks, eruption 4 to withgradual 14 The resolution. months clear. hypopigmentation hyperpigmentation to take or Residual can additional managed low-potency phototherapy, antihistamines, with Treatment be corticosteroids. pruritus is oral topical unnecessary, though and can

is condition by erythematous, characterized common well-demarcated, papules scaling andplaques. papulosquamous a Psoriasis occurs infancy, ages, at all Psoriasis 30% during withonset childhood. of including cases of relapsing is a and chronic spontaneous by although The remissions occur. course, characterized can disease Streptococcus medications trauma, pyogenes), diseaseexacerbations. may (especially cause and Infections stress, subtypes of exist. Various psoriasis localized is generalized. plaque-type (psoriasis mostcommon vulgaris), be variety or psoriasis The which can silvery points well-demarcated, is scale, thescales revealed pinpoint sign). its red removal ofround, bleeding to in 7 The consist which plaques with cm lesions distinctive appearance withmicaceous thick, on (Auspitz 1 of measuring region, occipital region, the cleft. distinctivedistribution extensor of of the scalp, posterior The andknees, intergluteal a psoriasis aspect involving periumbilical elbows lesions have and lumbosacral involving of Children the aspect eyelids. faciallesions have often the superomedial brownsubungual is includes common pitting, involvement (reddish staining macular onycholysis, discoloration). Nailplate and subungual and hyperkeratosis, oil patches body forms surface diffusely may body distributed (moist torso), and folds), affecting areas), Guttate (covering occur. smallplaques pustular (numerous large on the erythrodermic inverse red

The is therapy of topical foundation corticosteroids. induce pustularpsoriasis psoriasis and with can avoided. of corticosteroids oral should Treatment be least telangiectases, fluorinated use is preparations thegoal potent when corticosteroid atrophy,striae, Because of necessary. especially the potent long-term, risk are and the to of corticosteroid administered adjuvants salicylic corticosteroids. areuseful topical D Topical tar to analogs, and acid, preparations vitamin children. be inolder useful B as (UVB) withultraviolet therapy Phototherapy light can secondary cyclosporine,tumor plaque necessitate andpustular withimmune necrosis psoriasis erythrodermic, systemic antagonists). medication factor-α or may suppressive treatments guttate, (methotrexate, Extensive triggers removed. and be or such identified asinfection should Disease medications

describes a anomalies skin. is Birthmark term that congenital of the diagnosis prognosis. congenital be a in and their vary skin appearance used as lesions It greatly definitive should because not birthmarks diagnosis 193-1. listed The in differential of various Table is

90% dermal 70% white approximately which infants American African-American, Hispanic, pigmented most melanosis, Asian, in and lesion of occurs The encountered in Native 5% infants. frequently is to and of the the is congenital their dermis in epidermis. migration during crest a lesion caused into by from of melanocytes This entrapment neural the flank, face extremities, the the at (Mongolian Although lumbosacral as lesions these in or, of such buttocks, occur most also spot), rarely, (Fig. the area they are found sites other 193-1). Single present. to demarcated, patches cm poorly gray-blue or up in multiple, be size may 10 lesions persist. aberrant during are unusual first disappear few years likely Most in lesions of the sites more life; to gradually

newborn (Fig. whichmay but be patches, during lait in tend Café macules a macules childhood are present or au develop to pigmented 193-2). from chocolate They color brown. range in light brownto a very lait 25% café Up newborns and and of 40% of foundin normal 1.8% significance. children, are to to five macules no au have or in puberty), in inguinal six or before especially 1.5 more café cm diameter freckling, laitmacules carefully after be diameter should puberty greater when (0.5 au Children axillary than evaluated cm with or accompaniedby

risk Variable Low of Brown melanoma Congenital melanocytic (<20 nevus cm)/plaque

Giant congenital of melanocytic (>20 and common Trunk melanoma Brown most nevus cm)/plaque Risk

Variable, May Epidermal Brown-“flesh-colored”/plaque neck time and with enlarge nevus trunk

common Sturge-Weber associated Red/patch Variable, flammeus) face Port-wine syndrome May be with most (nevus stain

Salmon (nevus nape resolves simplex) Red/patch of Glabella, patch eyelids, or with Improves neck time

and hemangiomas, or Hemangioma plaque liver hemangiomas, with Red/papule May associated be syndrome PHACE airway Variable

Scalp Blue-purple/nodule Resolves time Cephalohematoma with

malformation Intermittent mixed and or Blue-purple/plaque Venous, Variable pain lymphatic, swelling

neurofibromatosis Plexiform type neurofibromatosis neurofibroma type for of with Hypertrichosis/tumor most stigmata 1. 1 common Trunk Associated additional include tuberous and macules Noonan disorders neurofibromatosis, Legius syndrome, au multiple Russell-Silver of McCune-Albright syndrome. syndrome, associated lentigines/LEOPARDsyndrome, also syndrome, the sclerosis, café forms lait other Other with

193-1 (back). Figure hypermelanosis Dermal

spots au Cafe 193-2 Figure (leg). lait

congenital to of newborns 2% Approximately have 1% nevi. melanocytic an are opposed patches plaques, or often configuration. lancet with giant pigmented lesions nevi) (as or to oval Smaller brown au to but with macules changes, elevation textural develop and darker pigmentation, variegated differentiate (Fig. and lesions café may these help Lesions time speckles, resemble lait initially, 193-3). is frequently melanocytic congenital (Fig. coarse with dark, hair nevi associated Thick, 193-4). size in site most but solitary. often lesions These are and vary pose malignant of melanocytic adulthood. risk slightly developing nevi for usually very development during a melanoma, Congenital increased the and considered observation. the to or although for may some improve elect the transformation, Surgical removal likelihood physicians reduce appearance to malignant of the cosmetic patient patients of be is biopsy suspected. change malignant Excisional when indicated is

that the Giant of approximately body. be would length and neck in cm in neonate, 20 are the congenital translates nevi cm and nevi as on 9 defined to in melanocytic this rest the a 6 on adulthood; cm head to and addition. smaller black color nevi) brown with macules plaques, patch variegated, sometimes lesions papules (satellite These appear in or as light nodular, The may be affected or smooth, skin leathery. often dark is present. Prominent, hypertrichosis associated melanocytes in system, melanocytic central the with nervous be presence giant may the nevi. of congenital Neuromelanosis, hydrocephalus death during early be have asymptomatic childhood. seizures; patients symptomatic often and may in patients, Affected results or congenital patients lesion approximately melanocytes. or 10% 2% develops either Malignant the in melanocytic melanoma the neural of giant in with nevi, to cutaneous and likely small during contrast childhood. nevi, melanoma to congenital medium to more In develop melanocytic is of incidence deformity, degeneration Because considered of the should and resectable extensive surgical excision malignant for be lesions. capability use techniques the surgical improved expansion large of for has lesions. tissue greatly of removal The

Figure 193-3 Congenital nevus melanocytic (buttock).

nevus. 193-4 Figure congenital Hairy

common lesions. nevi melanocytic skin are Acquired children and at any in may prepubertal however, developmost the rapidly nevi Melanocytic age; lesions teenagers. occur papules. brown oval, are maculesand round to nevi Melanocytic well-delineated, arms. common on are upper most torso,and face, Lesions the and are history, fair major Family considered risk exposure sun skin, factors. in growth,bleeding, pigmentation, suggest a change indoor and biopsy rapid should configuration malignant is isan borders in there use and childhood; rare in performed.Malignant however, especially tanning. incidence signsof Irregular be degeneration alarming melanoma in inthose adolescence, increase who or lesions and sun of of Education the is of children protection, and exposure, sun appropriate risks worrisome parents important. regarding recognition

can and divided Vascular be malformations. two anomalies major into categories:tumors hypercellularity, are Vascular growth. tumors characterized by and proliferation, developmental vessels. derived malformations, defects from or lymphatic venous, the arterial, Vascular are capillary, however, malformations time. staticover In vascular relatively remain tohemangiomas, contrast implications. they have and entities between importantbecause is these different Differentiating clinical prognoses

Available StudentConsult.com @

of of infancy, 5% tissue in common Hemangiomas 1-year-old 10% the soft to most are infants. approximately tumors occurring In hemangiomas with macule threadlike pale newborns, a originate telangiectasia. white as may or it nodule When assumes component, the tumor most form proliferates, lobulated (superficial a as its bright red, Fig. recognizable plaque 194-1). deeper (deeper that are skin a masses in Hemangiomas component). discoloration soft, lie bluish the with warm slightly have both a component. hemangiomas Frequently, deep a superficial and to solitary; range and involve several in few from lesions. centimeters millimeters a diameter 20% usually are They multiple an incidence (3:1) females predominantly in and increased in premature infants. occur have Hemangiomas 55% present life. the birth; are develop the weeks Approximately of in at rest first deep Superficial 14 8 12 but size months. by to for maximal to their grow reach hemangiomas months, may 6 hemangiomas slow, to They then resolution, which 3 10 years. takes undergo spontaneous

194-1 Hemangioma (chest). Figure

extent. nature there depending may on compromise disfigurement most permanent and the benign the be or location of hemangiomas, Despite risk functional cutaneous of the of painful infection, Ulceration, and and the most frequent scarring. increases hemorrhage, be can complication, risk the buttocks. lesions), with complications tip, lip, nasal beard, and groin, Areas periocular associated region, the face include frequently (large

should hemangiomas risk be carefully. considerable Periorbital tovision and pose monitored obstruction axis resulting of from on globe, causing pressure astigmatism. Amblyopia the in the visual hemangioma or the canresult should patient have an concern, If urgentevaluation ophthalmologist. the there any by is blindness. to indicated Treatment may prevent be stridor; progression rapid. as Subglottic manifest respiratoryfailure may be hemangiomas and hoarseness to in beard facialhemangiomas than a extensive be and should airway infants referredfor with (beard laryngoscopy. of the hemangioma 50% jaw Symptomatic chin more infant distribution);any hemangiomasdevelop with on hemangiomatosis) hemangiomas and facial hemangiomas. with be (diffuse associated large visceral may cutaneous Multiple and defects, Extensive (PHACE hemangiomas,arterial cerebrovasculature, anomalies,including fossa eye posterior cervicofacialhemangiomas anomalies be aorta the syndrome). cardiac of and may malformations, associated coarctation with multiple of abnormalities hemangiomas without anorectal with anomalies. and suggest or Lumbosacral urogenital occultspinal dysraphism an hemangiomas the of the Magnetic is spine with indicated in midline lumbosacral resonance in imaging area. all cutaneous patients

therapy. do involute and not necessitate treatment is propranolol Most however, complicationsarise hemangiomas spontaneously; is oral intervention medical if warranted, and of themainstay

seen pyogenic A commonly children. is vascular granuloma benign in an tumor acquired, lesions into to papules 10 2 red, vascular, growing that mm. arise of bright pink-red the rapidly Initially, trauma, appear pedunculated period minor a papule as over a weeks often often after measuring granulation lesions tissue The have often very of the and appearance are friable. head, most neck, occur commonly but extremities on may are the the and body, affected. They anywhere upper may often medical requiring lesions attention. emergent bleed these When profusely, traumatized, Surgical though option, be is pulsed lesions. for excision small can very dye useful most treatment the definitive laser

the malformation) capillary flammeus, the (nevus superficial of skin. Port-wine capillaries aremalformations of stains present permanent birth be considered should are Theselesions developmental at defects. and surface, to common. body localized stain apparent most birth; by port-wine are is any may any in They the do growth lesions size the butfacial child.A increase of be caused enlarge not after in infancy and sharplydemarcated patches pink-red, are They macules (Fig. 194-2). and With a thickened they a port-wine maydevelop purple slightly surface. or color to time, pebbly or darken the complications within in theselesions dyelaser, in bleed.The series sessions and after which and result become successful form or associated modality can use can improvement is treatment the pulsed a symptomatic 80% with blebsmay in dilation. treatment 90% lesions future to of Vascular vascular most avoid in effective if undertaken infancy. ismore Treatment facial Overgrowth frommalalignment frequently patients underlying of that bone maxillofacial seen develops. and need with occur is intervention often lesions.Affected can

indicate occur Most not and do isolated stains systemic malformations. as port-wine defects defects ocular or they specific suggest neurocutaneous syndromes. may Rarely, distribution of usually a cutaneous trigeminal may the Sturge-Weber of nerve. with the port-wine in syndrome first facial stain, occur the angiomatosis) (encephalotrigeminal branch atrophy. Other retardation, buphthalmos, glaucoma, choroid, defects, mental and optic ipsilateral leptomeningeal angiomatosis, the hemiparesis and the of intracortical seizures, manifestations frequent calcification, such facial as lesions, contralateral angioma hemianoptic ocular include to features procedures have of and some neurosurgical Anticonvulsant therapy in value been patients. these patients even with Sturge-Weber of pressures. in the need occur Glaucoma on lifelong stains of association eyelid, can the monitoring syndrome, port-wine and absence located ocular in venous Klippel-Trénaunay-Webersyndrome malformations, by bone—of the capillary hyperplasia varicosities, characterized often is involved of and area. of and the triad the soft venous tissues—and lower most affected. limb The is commonly the an dysraphism port-wine A stain a rarely spine spinal intraspinal malformation. or of be may overlying marker vascular

stain Port-wine 194-2 (face). Figure

nevus that (nevus bite, simplex, 70% of avariant kiss) is patch salmon in A present stork normal is angel’s newborns. flammeus of thenape dilation patches the are the red, glabella. They macular on the usually dermal irregular, capillaries neck, found are eyelids, and and of of resultingfrom of age, life. neck lesions Most by persistfor may the of the 1 faciallesions year on but fade of persistenceof approximately Surveys lesions the adult of the populations population. nuchal in 25% confirm the

ERYTHEMA SYNDROME, EPIDERMAL TOXIC AND MULTIFORME, STEVENS-JOHNSON NECROLYSIS

organisms a usually to syndrome hypersensitivity hypersensitivity Erythema or reactions a characterized acute and (TEN) drugs. (EM), necrosis.These mucosal syndromes (SJS),and Stevens-Johnson cutaneous by infectious precipitating toxic multiforme are represent epidermal cause, necrolysis reaction of use a same thought represent of were disease historically to process, diseasenames the confusion. and led to inconsistent Thesedisorders further spectrum these SJS/TEN distinct was and A the literature is from consensus favors of in EM disease. that published spectrum definition current 1993, differential listed Table vesiculobullous The of is eruptions 195-1. diagnosis in

StudentConsult.com Available @

macules hypersensitivity self-limiting, center. of with acute EM dusky round, a syndrome bullous papules or the and by abrupt gray onset a well-demarcated common, deep is red, characterized may but millimeters are to few lesions diameter. in most The size few a centimeters, a range cm 1 from approximately the intermediate red is white, three The a concentric is rings; purple. center consists or dusky and the is target of outermost classic the red, lesion plaques edematous progress can These to or bullae. If circumscribed is blistering it occurs,

malaise, headache, fever, involvement epidermal mucosal throat, anticonvulsants) sore with related Frequently Extensive necrosis Prodrome cough, (e.g., drugs sulfonamides, diarrhea of vomiting, sign to Nikolsky

erythema age septic Desquamation as underlying with infection and arthritis, erosions associated moist Nikolsky tender than years in 5 common sign Occasionally of in such osteomyelitis, areas More younger especially pneumonia Generalized, children observed, intertriginous

Herpes be Grouped fever, hands trauma, Reactivated base at cheeks, May recurrent simplex stress sunlight, same vesicles on site— by erythematous eyes, lips,

(“dewdrops fever Varicella petal”) simultaneously rose of Crops Highly vesicles May on contagious of stages on base with see multiple lesions Associated erythematous

erythematous children pruritus adjacent unilateral several or Grouped one commonly most dermatomes to base vesicles Thoracic Usually dermatomes in involved Burning, on limited

in Oval Prodrome oral and in in sore fever, late on erythematous in in erosions Highly acral usually throat anorexia, Peak fall base incidence summer few distribution, number blisters mucosa Shallow, of infectious oral

surfaces infection Urticaria rare Erythema lesions bullous involvement Target in virus sites sign are Associated Red-brown herpes macules Lesions of mucosal in with simplex May childhood papules; pigmentosa have and acral and appear spontaneously multiforme on lesions Darier infancy resolve

1to crystallina areas, occurring superficial axillae Clean, 2-mm Intertriginous in crops and especially neck vesicles Miliaria Rupture spontaneously

epidermolytic hyperkeratosis epidermolysis incontinentia Hereditary: pigmenti, bullosa,

disease, dermatitis Autoimmune: herpetiformis linear IgA bullous pemphigoid,

RG: and Modified Rashes Rabinowotz lesions. Nopper from AJ, skin Strategies Therapy, Philadelphia, Saunders. WB Pediatric RM, Practical editor: Diagnosis 1996, and Kliegman In in

than the and surface area. body involves 10% less of such elbows, areas hands, the commonly and as Cutaneous lesions feet, involve and are symmetrical acral knees. mucosa genital in seen ocular, some and of cases. can Involvement be oral, the

infection, virus simplex precipitated cases herpes develops. the by no in longer though Most time EM EM the may children be are apparent infection by also EM. may pneumoniaeand infectious organisms other Mycoplasma trigger sufficient. treatment usually is Symptomatic Oral antihistamines and help pruritus, suppress burning. stinging, be use mucosal but controversial disease. The severe may is considered corticosteroids for systemic of with EM, though the EM may candidates for children simplex do prophylactic herpes not virus alter medications of antivirals. targeting be course recurrent the Antiviral most than The excellent, with no prognosis 2 is more weeks. lesions lasting scarring. without Healing occurs

disorders the overlap represent disease SJS, and TEN, SJS/TEN thought to same continuum. life-threatening are severe, to and fever, a prodrome symptoms of Theyare onset by preceded usually malaise, of 1 cutaneouslesions. upperrespiratory days the 14 before over macules tend suddenly to face predominant coalesce the distribution patches, and a intolarge appear with Red andtrunk. may EM, causing diagnostic be the Atypical targets lack confusion initially targets atypical with thecharacteristic three zones. although present, Skin rapidly evolve necrosis. lesions areas of into bullaeand overlap has 10% detachment to TEN surface whereas than the area involvement. as is body greater 10% than body epidermal surface has defined area, SJS 30% SJS/TEN of and 30% ofless and lower erosions hemorrhagic and theoral and redwith upper mucosal mucosa involved.The generally may be crusts, surface the may be and involved. lips are remainder swollen of bright also Any the injection; however, bilateral disease Early process,there conjunctival this conjunctival erosions. usuallyprogresses to in is erosions be ofthe may There mucosa. vaginal, penile, perianal or the cases. severe tracheal be may surfaces in most Urogenital, involved esophageal,and

of infections children. most Drugs pneumoniae and Mycoplasma causes are in the common SJS/TEN are drugs, The and implicated common drugs antibiotics. nonsteroidal sulfonamides, anti-inflammatory anticonvulsants, most infections, are viral bacterial infections, factors deep fungal and infections. precipitating Other syphilis,

occur SJS/TEN at age. can any of The are tests. SJS/TEN diagnosis there clinical; no is diagnostic may occur. shock Kawasaki syndrome, (scarlet Confusion toxic skin syndrome) with scalded fever, and disease, staphylococcal bacterial EM, diseases toxin-mediated and with membranes. mucous hyperemia disease Patients and of have the Kawasaki conjunctival injection occur; blistering, are does not erosions, observed. mucosal not severe and of surfaces Necrosis crusting the staphylococcal mucosal changes are and of frank minor, erosions skin syndrome present. scalded The not are intertriginous blistering The is superficial favors more and the of regions. skin

cases a high illness TEN. as35% is SJS/TEN a with as severe rate of for serious mortality agent discontinuation of theoffending is key. Prompt immunoglobulin therapy exist, clinical of initiation controlled No regardingmedical been early has intravenous proposed. though trials and component necessary. care anotheressential is Supportive multidisciplinary of therapy, is often careteam a of for major of cause wound the is so crucial, warranted. cutaneous Sepsis antibiotics meticulous mortality, care infections with as morbidityand surveillance stringent is use and or healing early the Parenteral should process. beinstituted accelerate feeding nasogastric to critical. and are monitoring Careful of fluidmanagement electrolytes ophthalmologist cause an of important. of a long-term is involvement morbidity, Ocular major are soearly complications

are in environment. common the Arthropods a infest Although many can humans, only or few humans. sting bite common, skin. Arachnids depositing into eggs humans most and the (mites) within and skin parasitizing burrowing by animals the the are

Available StudentConsult.com @

by Scabies caused scabiei. Sarcoptes is the mite deposits her epidermis 14 eggs, and burrows into The 10 which the female mite mature in to days. contagious humans infested 4 3 or is weeks, the do to transmission. because symptoms facilitating signs The not for disease manifest typical highly person An 10 only harbors with immunocompetent scabies typically 20 to mites.

status depending of the presentation varies of patient. on patient, and infestation, of duration the clinical The immune the age hallmark, frequently of worse is and would suggest. Severe the itching eruption that itching paroxysmal is the with than complaints and excoriated of composed Most papules red, eruption nodules. an children eczematous exhibit is find. burrow often or papule difficult to linear classic The spaces and the axillae, in umbilicus, of is papules toes found the most the instep (Fig. Distribution fingers the foot, web groin, the of finding; penis, and are diagnostic 196-1). pinpoint erythema, infested Infants papules. and diffuse scaling, have with scabies vesicles, and are much be in diffusely common may nodules and more Pustules, infants distributed. more The usually are are older areas infants. face but children, and spared and scalp involved in adults these in usually Nodular lesions resolution may of following active infestation. lesions or hypersensitivity infection prolonged represent at a 2 persons crusted neurologically of form of may the or Norwegian time. mites million one scabies, Immunocompromised as impaired develop with live or disease severe infestation known

Figure (hand). 196-1 Scabies

can immersion. eggs, examined of larvae, in burrows of feces by scrapings visualization diagnosis under or papules be the mite, oil The of scabies or confirmed microscopic useful nodular. is become Skin have necessary lesions be biopsy if may but rarely

to 5% permethrin achieved the by a cream is of (overnight) 12-hour entire application Curative treatment applied body. larvae. treatment eggs, kill 1 should later is repeated to any hatched subsequently effective against permethrin not the be week the Because if and asymptomatic. contacts All members should simultaneously, treated close household be even using clothes hot heat; is before Bed for towels, days effective be and worn machine-washed should previous treatment most the 2 in linens, and the water machine-dried scabicide. high heat 7 Items for may be sealed days. not are dry-cleaned or in placed plastic that bag a washable

is may but infection Secondary uncommon. occur bacterial for infections. contrast vector a to the In not pediculoses, is scabies 14 successful indicate hypersensitivity days may a persist failure. not 7 because for which does of after reaction, Pruritus to prolonged treatment therapy reinfestation treatment. or lesions should Inadequate after develop be new suspected if treatment

body Pediculus infest capitis, (also species and the known humanus humanus lice louse. of louse; the Pthirus crab corporis), Pediculus pubis, pubic louse head as Pediculus the humanus humans: Three louse; or humanus Lice mm are wingless cannot to 4 that in 2 length insects jump. or fly direct another occurs Transmission individual. with contact usually by infested contact caps, belongings, hairbrushes, combs, personal or less spread Indirect as such or frequent. is much fomites through with

on skin. scabies host hair and the the infestation from differs by piercing intermittently in Pediculosis the clothing on resides that the louse or feeds The causes urticarial itching. bite and papules small live depositing lice 6 of days, on the mm for scalp. 400 to nits and Head the skin live 100 as 30 to shafts, within close hair usually eggs may

school-agechildren. most are frequently early in Head lice seen hair are lice more unrelated to children hair. dirty long hygiene infestations common Head not orwith among with andare are persons 3% to 6 head United of the and to 12 1% estimated is developedcountries States infested personsin that each It in year. lice million with to more rare more In may infestation the play thanboys among in UnitedStates, which Americansand do. with common tendency is girls, head be is totheir one another African closely lice attributed

by lice sexual Pubic contact. transmitted are Their be in abuse. a presence sign of may children child lice hygiene, as clothing changes. poor infrequent evidence and washing Body of such are firm

symptom. present, the is if primary Itching, the neck, a of or the ears Pediculosis in causes or the on usually behind crawling scalp. capitis sensation the nape pruritus Pediculosis pubis the causes in pruritus groin. usually and in Eyelash children may involvement crusting blepharitis. cause may lichenification bacterial or scratching, result corporis because repeated of infection. pruritus secondary Pediculosis in that, causes without be may or regional Excoriations and present. crusting, with lymphadenopathy, associated

has and little with the Infestation morbidity. may head louse asymptomatic be can visualizing live by a confirmed diagnosis louse. be The at effective lice fine-toothed hair. trap simply is to the A more looking comb than propel combing static may is combing the that but the comb. from Wet away more produces time-consuming, dry lice

of louse casing Nits outer the ova. represent the louse within the end nits intact Viable (cap) the and an a egg. have developing on nonattached operculum shaft Brown on nits the infestation. located suggest proximal active hair nits 4 indicate shaft infestation. on located previous scalp from farther the cm the or White hair to infestation. weeks months the active children for stuck resolved, nits hair remain an can lice nits have has in many nonviable infestation after not do Because with

head The lice many is resistance treatment controversial of options. to established of because Over-the-counter and (1%) therapy. first the to permethrin 0.33%)are of choices pyrethrin-based products (0.17% second a 10 to one to eggsmay in 20% 30% survive days. treatment treatment, should of Because 7 beapplied be alternative as on Drug (0.5%) may resistance cases. is lotion forresistant andmalathion used rise, an the

for reinfestation. be reduce lice live in and the family found if head Everyone the to should of lice risk treated checked are water in linens, clothes hot Bed using heat. treatment before and 2 should the high be for previous machine-dried and worn days towels, machine-washed or a plastic sealed be dry-cleaned weeks. bag are that may placed washable 2 Items in not for combs rubbing Brushes for alcohol detergent be 1 in soaked and dish should or hour. mattresses, and seats car furniture, should be Rugs, vacuumed thoroughly.

not after treatment is to prevent spread. of necessary removal nits Manual the school regardless head first to or return the presence Children for remaining immediately combing, after first completion effective nits. of treated of should of lice treatment wet or policies of no nit evidence is transmission lice. that head nit-free no reduce There metal for the to achieved wetting best nit by removal school, required fine-toothed hair is return combing with comb. and a If

become infected bacteria, with secondarily and usually skin Streptococcus. Excoriations can Staphylococcus fever, louse caused louse-borne States. Borrelia in trench and quintana.These functions as the fever, vector infections caused United Rickettsia relapsing a recurrentis; infectious by louse-borne are rare diseases, potentially including epidemic caused prowazekii; The body serious for Bartonella by typhus, by pubic associated lice body to transmission In infections. not head contrast other lice of lice, are with and

Neonatal LE, NB, Eichenfield Saunders ed of IJ: Frieden Esterly 2008, Philadelphia, Dermatology, 2, Textbook

Clin 57:1069–1083, BA: Holland Infantile Am North hemangioma, KE, Pediatr Drolet 2010

of dermatitis AC, Krakowski 122:812–814, pediatric MA: Dohil Management population, Pediatrics the LF, Eichenfield in 2008 atopic

Clinical 4, Hurwitz AJ: Paller ed Mancini Dermatology, AS, Pediatric

Saunders 2011, Philadelphia,

Pediatric RC: Hansen 2011, ed 4, Schachner LA, Philadelphia, Dermatology,

pediatric 30:S16–S21, LF, Eichenfield ment: to Baldwin Semin an treat et 2011 Cutan al: update, Med Surg acne Yan HE, Approach AC,

Tassone and Kevin D. Channing 26 Walter J.

for the development as orthopedic pediatric patient, (Table and well To the growth must terms of one musculoskeletal as care common understand 197-1). system the Practitioners

Bone insertion growth not a center tibial that a muscular tubercle) is considered has (example: but growth plate

in the Pes “open” bones Malformation femoral head of Displacement Arthroscopy the a of at Flat respect due (example: limb, that Surgical Osteotomy the an angulation Inward procedure Surgical foot of Femoral a incision joint of or the forefoot, or neck to Increased (toward Surgical flexion rotation cavus Dislocation arthroscope a hindfoot, Pes Equinus Arthrotomy foot Deformation planus foot of force joint; syndactyly) a a Plantar medial plane head Arthroplasty and to occurs fetal entire trunk, High of life joint arch in Rotation, bone Surgical using midline) of development anteversion Defect an with Changes frontal exploration division mechanical during into reconstruction joint

of or or is disorders valgum (example: Valgus/ from bowlegs) acquired in internal a contact which (away Subluxation the a tibia external of 197-2). midline) bone or Rotation knock-knee) the midline midline common Outward (Table is orthopedic rotation of bone toward joint Varus/varum joint Incomplete fashion in the apex away apex the Tibial in Rotation, an external loss congenital Angulation recognize two between from and joint should the for surfaces torsion Angulation mechanisms (example: which of

contain of higher of long skeletally adult the proportion an cartilage ends the in a (Figs. child much in The than immature bones 197-2). 197-1 and trauma metaphysis). to unique in cartilage allows content a infection (particularly high and the The for vulnerability

The the growth physis of thelong for responsible bones. is longitudinal of allows thetarsals. ends toenlarge for bones, and as cartilage the bone Articular accounts growth the such smaller of acidosis, disorders and may hypothyroid) aberrations. provide growth infection, deficiency metabolic distinct inborn the processes periosteum (renal and (rickets), of can produce The tubular nutritional of other affecteach metabolism (mucopolysaccharidoses), growth.Trauma, circumferential errors

structure. long Schematic 197-1 bone of Figure

achievement musculoskeletal marked Section (see is milestones, important motor 2). normal development for by Neurologic developmental maturation, of secondary disorder extremity abnormality (e.g., A muscular neurologic a contractures dystrophy). musculoskeletal in may cause Duchenne motor normal included system. in be development of Thus, a the normal must musculoskeletal definition

StudentConsult.com Available @

Toe-Walking and Out-Toeing, Knock-Knees and Bowlegs In-Toeing,

and extremity or skeletal system, the lower in torsional fetus alignment the especially utero angular of can (temporary of (Fig. the position permanent) affect the The of 197-3). hips newborn’s rotated. are externally The and Pes varum planus are common. genu with usually are flexed born Infants a posture. usually months. neutral position This within the decreases 6 to first 4 to the adducted and the with often the is birth; inverted compared under is hindfoot. The at flat ankle will when tucked foot forefoot and be straighten border to must be foot utero to secondary positioning. even considered out, The with lateral in dorsiflexion, of the

positioning. and utero also neck The head in distorted be by may less The to be upper extremities are likely spine affected. and in resolved. age effects have the 3 of to 4 usually By of the years, positioning utero

symmetrical phase. Normal have timing has phase legshould gait each swing each with stance phase; and a The

various bones ages. ends Figure The 197-2 long of at heavily areas stippled represent cartilage composition, are darkened ossification. Lightly whereas areas zones of the MO: Tachjidan New York, p Hip, (From 1982, Livingstone, 105.) Churchill of Congenital Dislocation swing with toe-off.During on is cycle the foot phases ground.The the strike) the begins and (40%), the (usually gait limb. thesame stance represents and of with is phase phase the the ends heel the 60% off footcontact stance between gait interval

18 age. independently walk of months Toddlers by generally will reciprocal the rotated steps, short, swing. is have not rapid gait inconsistent, does characterized is externally Their usually by arm and over achieved gait by coordination with normal usually time school. a enters elementary time, Gait the improves child a

StudentConsult.com Available @

In-Toeing, Out-Toeing, and Limp Toe-Walking

The Child Limping

age by is 197-3). or presence child categorized absence The often limp differential painful limping of a diagnosis a for and (Table stance during swing phase. fromdropping phase, the pelvis stabilizes in muscle the toward leg gluteus medius The preventing thepelvis the a to limb. is the weight stride affected decrease limbare phase the and of stance antalgic limp; the painful affected of discomfort shortened bearingon the An gait swaying a The of phase, the excessive but stance gait trunk. has Trendelenburg normal function refers gluteusmuscles. Waddling of a gait in the bilateral decrease to

Toe a in common walkers. is early walking complaint toe physician age any whostill walks. of A evaluate 3 should older than child years most leg-length discrepancyshould Although is cord a palsy, this tendoncontracture disorder be cord), (cerebral (heel Achilles tightness), neuromuscular considered. likely tethered or habit, a

Children Limping Differential of Diagnosis in

Early of 1 to age years walker: 3

years to Child: of 3 age 10

length Cerebral Lower hip inequality disorder of palsy the extremity dysplasia Neuromuscular Developmental

Septic osteomyelitis, Transient synovitis disorders Trauma Rheumatologic myositis arthritis, monarticular

of extremity Lower Neuromuscular length disease Legg-Calve-Perthes hip Developmental inequality dysplasia disorder the

11 maturity years Muscular Cerebral age (Duchenne) to palsy of dystrophy Adolescent:

epiphysis: Slipped Septic femoral myositis Trauma osteomyelitis, acute; capital Malignancy disorder Rheumatologic unstable arthritis,

chronic; capital epiphysis: hip: dysplasia Developmental Slipped disorder femoral Neuromuscular the of dysplasia length stable inequality extremity acetabular Lower

anatomic, 10% management. account to patterns and account injuries.The Fractures physiologic for differencesin fracture of unique for 15% children biomechanical, childhood and all describe terminology fractures(Table Fracture 198-1). helps

a more pediatric skeleton larger periosteum, adult. of The an active a rapidly has in callus proportion than and producing higher a of more stronger, thicker, capable and cartilage displaced decrease of and fractures thick the reduction. stabilize after fractures periosteum may The rate withstand cartilage, or patient skeletally of force proportion the immature higher fracture can than bone. Because before more of the deformation adult children rate of approaches of that mature slows into adults. As adolescence, healing and the

truly break. compression torus cortex the or bone; after occur does the not of Buckle bony fractures fractures that will with typically the metaphysis occur These are weeks heal fractures in 4 in stable immobilization. and approximately arm outstretched a fall buckle common distal onto is in a example causing A fracture the radius. an

are when fractures Complete sides of occur bony cortex both fractured. classified most or oblique, This line. of fracture direction depending common spiral, the comminuted, fracture on the and as the be is transverse, may

beyond occur is bone the fractures angulated deformation. of plastic limits when a Greenstick the deformity bend on The fails bone the a sustains on tension side side. and compression force to is complete (Fig. insufficient fracture cause The a 198-1).

completely separate The fragments Incomplete bone

Linear are joined bone still The fragments partially

angular a in fragments rotational have to are to diagonal to that bone’s has malalignment The bone results fragments the The several Referring Shortening fracture long Referring Referring a Open the a A to the of that have right fragments fracture Comminution skin A line long pierced a axis fracture overlap Angulation is line bone’s fracture at The the Referring malalignment The Rotation Oblique to fractured is angle a the in each axis that driven Spiral bones which fracture into Compaction twisting long is ends that to fracture other parallel fragments Transverse line bone’s to the bone axis

limit on demonstrate radiographs, no beyond of plastic its bone fracture fractures deformation. evident but bent line is Bowing the will fracture, heal is a true not but with reaction. This periosteal

@ StudentConsult.com Available

involving growth 20% all patient. Fractures in constitute skeletally the the fractures about immature plate of These in males are male-female (2:1 common fractures more ratio). in boys and peak 13 years is 11 incidence The in to girls. 14 years 12 to fibula most distal The common distal tibia, distal are radius, and locations. the

insert frequently onto Ligaments epiphyses. may metaphysis; as mechanisms physis, an sprains not is fracture the to that injury biomechanically extremity traumatic adult. cause the with the which to as transmitted be may in Thus, it strong forces may of growth is torsional forces. to The and most plate angular susceptible

allows growth and Physeal information plate of described classification, fractures outcomes. which regarding poor premature prognostic functional using the for are closure Salter-Harris will higher complications. the the number, The have patient the likely more type are There main five groups (Fig. unusual disturbance through fracture the transverse is physis; I: 198-2):Type growth

II: the fracture of fracture of (75%) through metaphysis; portion type Type a and most common Salter-Harris physis

in of intra-articular because into epiphysis or disruption through that and joint of the the a the complication zone hypertrophic the III: may physis result and of portion component of growing because fracture of physis Type

greenstick The fracture fracture. 198-1 an Figure incomplete is

White fractures, from and Pediatr 3:94–105, Clin R: Emerg evaluation classification pediatric Sty N, (Modified of Med 2002.) Radiological

metaphysis, Type a V: through functional a epiphysis physis, with physis of high to complicationType IV: a the and fracture crush with risk poor the injury

and by I closed fractures be managed alignment. often perfect require do can II reduction not and Types outcome anatomic with type which A of is major associated a alignment is distal femur, the the obtained. proper exception poor II is unless fracture and III Types IV fractures treatment. successful for require alignment anatomic the of premature result V and fractures Type rare in physis. closure often are

pediatric managed can of The methods. with closed be fractures majority improve reduction fractures alignment. closed need Some to pediatric fixation. internal require 4% fractures of Approximately intra-articular in likely fractures:Displaced with require the they multiple if epiphyseal Patients a injuriesOpen one to child more fracturesUnstable with have open fracturesFractures fractures fracturesDisplaced internal following fixation are physes of

maintain improve The anatomic alignment. goal is to internal of and fixation done healing in pins, This cortical screws with wires, with immobilization Steinmann cast external usually is satisfactory. is until subsequent a Kirschner and hardware frequently to healing, into damage. After is physeal the callus incorporation and prevent the removed prevent

necessary pelvic External instability. without for may be casting fractures causing fixation hemodynamic damage associated with benefit Fractures tissue may burns, from neurovascular soft external loss, fixation. and

ofperiosteal remodeling formation. combination resorption because occurs of and a new bone Fracture Many do not fractures for healing. perfect anatomic alignment need proper pediatric have patients fracture for potential Younger remodeling. greater growth remodeling. the meta-physis,near the plate, that undergo may occur Fractures more in very fractures, or not angulated motion fracture well. the displaced fractures, Fractures plane theplane diaphysealfractures, not of in in rotated of and remodel well.Intra-articular also deformity motion remodel as to tend angulated

Overgrowth the in occurs flow increased fracture associated blood with result long of bones healing. as Femoral than of 1 to will younger in fractures years overgrow children cm. frequently 3 10 age end-to-end is for femur long-bone be the indicated. reason fractures This alignment not may and age, a end-to-end so recommended. is overgrowth of problem, is 10 years After alignment of less

injuries result and can premature closure. to physis in Fractures the a If be deformity. consequence an angular the may partial is it closure, complete occur. may closure, is a it If limb shortening the commonly most are femur and tibia. The the affected distal distal locations proximal and

vessels damage and blood may Fractures and adjacent dislocations nerves. distal common most is and and the physeal (dislocation location knee fracture). (supracondylar The the humerus fracture) to careful necessary document the examination and fracture It function). sensory, to (pulse, neurovascular a and perform is distal motor

is orthopedic and emergency the extremity. that Compartment soft tissue results fascial from an within syndrome compartments swelling tight of hemorrhage an decompressed. surgically and result unless neurovascular compromise in is ischemia This it can muscle sites arm (supracondylar most the (tibial fracture) are lower common fracture). and The leg

eventually the sensation in will in have dermatomes have Affected the by compartment. pain supplied the located decreased severe and patients nerves and with passive compartments and present. stretching Swollen pain are tight when actually too This is cast occur may can cast applied and underneath tightly. a happen a educate realize patients compartment is the fractures of an ensure important emergency. with syndrome It that it and all on they signs is to

Figure injury 198-2 classified Harris. plate of Salter The by and types growth as involving plate, to V. See RB, WR: for Surg J Joint 1963.) the Salter (From I epiphyseal Am 45:587–622, of descriptions Harris text Bone Injuries types

fibula is This an distal fracture tibia a oblique of fracture. without the no There is trauma. significant often usually limping old, and bearing. with as 1 to 3 and are old Patients pain with weight but as can be 6 present years swelling be may There minimal and pain. the radiographs in always 7 x-ray 10 persist, a not do symptoms helpful. to be show repeat if may Initial fracture; days

@ Available StudentConsult.com

abuse the child years younger those considered 3 must differential (see with of especially fractures, diagnosis in always a than 22). be Child Chapter in stages the fractures fracture suspicion Common in that fractures for of healing, history, different too should severe multiple in corner fractures of increase metaphyseal nonambulatory or fractures the index patterns (shaking), include radiographic infants. spiral seen were considered nonabuse fractures situations. for long they can bones historically pathognomic of Although in be abuse,

the admission When child should include may to a for child is concern there evaluation, abuse, full hospital. which the have the and or hemorrhages well-documented focus tissue thorough A examination should cranium, on and funduscopic examination physical retinal a for injuries, detachment. soft be helpful survey or fractures. A may identifying a other skeletal in bone scan

joint socket important for and that is a head) is hip stability. ball (acetabulum) skeletal The (femoral and normal acetabulum and development. for femoral head growth are interdependent The contain head, epiphysis, capital which intra-articular. The and femoral the are neck femoral neck, the supply to because and the blood are unique The surface the entering extraosseous peripherally. region femoral lie this vessels the blood on is of epiphysis intra-articular to blood pressure. other to may causes vulnerable and trauma, Thus, increase is head that the the supply infection, femoral necrosis. avascular can supply to blood the lead to Damage

may dislocatable. atbirth (DDH), or dislocated hip of In dysplasia be developmental the the hips andacetabulum by11 joint is head from same The the femoral hip weeks’ gestation, the cells; formed. mesenchymal develop DDH: typesof and are typical. two teratologic There usually Teratologic dislocationsoccur disorders (spina are in with arthrogryposis). and early utero bifida, associated neuromuscular and birth. neurologically can the dislocations or in Typical infant occur normal occurbefore after per of unknown, The as true as but DDH is be infants. may it incidence 1.5 high cases 1000

dislocation spontaneous infants head. in the if laxity lead significant that, of have hip, enough ligamentous to may and the Newborn reduction femoral tightening. to muscle can spontaneous Persistence limitmotion, the joint changes, contractures pattern capsule pathologic such of acetabulum, asflattening lead of and this that as positioning. often left possibly because hip, hip right times The of the inutero is affectedthree as

laxity, are associated relaxin). factors pelvic hormones with and ligamentous Physiologic (estrogen that perhaps maternal risk generalized a ligament from for relaxation include DDH DDH. in of 20% positive is risk all infants history with patients (9:1); Female are at higher family

Other oligohydramnios, (60%), include risk positioning. presentation, firstbornchild and breech factors postnatal infant pelvis. is the situated presentations, in pelvis fetal thematernal breech In thefemoral of joint and the causing hip flexion stretching hip further head. limit increase alreadylax overall motion, exposing the This fetal and can of posterior aspect capsule the between head causes acetabulum The relationship abnormal development. acetabular femoral altered and extended in hip Postnatal hips and swaddlewith the the joint. a can the tight hips of displace positioning adducted

muscular torticollis, with Congenital are and DDH. adductus, associated clubfoot metatarsus of An examination three of any receive conditions careful with hips. a should infant these the

newborn screening physical is examination requires for a least further physical evaluation the toddlers. part 18 through examination of at first of life forDDH; Every months the examination so the over the change time, as may DDHevolves patientages. and hips inspection and the folds starts flexed. for with examination gluteal knees The asymmetricalthigh with femur relativeshortening the and asymmetrical A Galeazzi with positive DDH. skin of sign is a indicates folds lap onthe assessed in of pelvis the motion the supine with the parent’s child and Range shouldbe examining not (Fig. table, stabilized 199-1). should reach or Hipabduction easily 30°. hip and 75°, reach exceed adductionshould with associated decreased abduction. especially contractures DDH, Limitations may indicate

months birth 1 month at normal, age age 1 to of to Normal of Often 9

199-1 test. Hip abduction Figure 90°, flex fully supine, hips. Place the the hips the abduct and infant disease broad, patient should any hip suspected to be abduction. the Although lacks than normal range who 45° is 30° more of abduction in Lea 1981, Disorders Febiger, 69.) p (From in SMK: & Philadelphia, Hip Infants and Chung Children,

(Fig. Barlow an The hip unstable to attempts test dislocate 199-2). The grasp and flexed the and stabilize abducted should pelvis hand. the the other infant’s thigh hand in one examiner with be hip should 90°. to The flexed to force Next, posterior the hip. begin to the anterior while a adduct applying hip, test. hip a is and A this in readily is be (clunk that can positive method dislocated feeling) felt perform or posterior removed, the is may test. Ortolani force spontaneously may need examiner the the It once to reduce

reduce test dislocated Ortolani hip The a may (Fig. hold and Barlow the examiner method same for as the the pelvis the 199-3).The test. should leg stabilize in be The flexion. should of 90° infant’s hip in to Abduct hip applying thigh. while anterior the the pressure posterior (clunk). positive may of felt is be the which A palpable test the reduction dislocation, tests. of After may preventing positive Ortolani 2 contractures, hip age, muscular the develop months

hip force performed a be only gentle These one should time. with at done and tests difficult to test The repeated can multiple need to be be times, interpret. may they as or gluteal the not tendons. click, which tension A from hip surface occur of may joint pathologic, is snapping breaking the

dislocations a symmetry exam. dilemma because fixed on the diagnostic Bilateral of present greater anterior superior line over by placing The imaginary third finger between spine, situation; the done useful is index and then the test the is the in over trochanter iliac an drawing Klisic this it the finger two. umbilicus the should child. point in to line a normal The (between in is lower the dislocated pubis). However, to line and project hip, causes trochanter the greater umbilicus elevated, a the which This be difficult the symmetry otherwise DDH, identifying to can is diagnose helpful of which on examination. bilateral test found because

unrecognized DDH with children with limping. present may Older increased lumbar A bilateral patient waddling with DDH. may lordosis gait have an and unrecognized a

(dislocation) Barlow test. Figure 199-2 test. of Ortolani Reverse performed the to the examination, acetabulum discover is is If the test at instability. Barlow time the hip any femoral head of in as with The thigh downward infant’s adducted gentle and shown A, is pressure. grasped femoral acetabulum. as palpable the out B, head is the of Dislocation slips with test. Ortolani the Diagnosis is confirmed

test. (reduction) Figure 199-3 Ortolani the With relaxed a firm the surface, flexed to content and hips and infant are knees 90°. on time. The are a hips one examined at thigh the the grasps over to lifts bring the from The thigh femoral position middle greater head the with to and infant’s the examiner the its acetabulum. posterior trochanter finger dislocated opposite head Simultaneously in the the femoral reducing thigh the gently is abducted, acetabulum. clunk. palpable, In by audible reduction nearly examiner senses the a a finding, positive

initial evaluation Ultrasound used infants of is for DDH. with a breech history girls both sexes. positive is in family necessary Ultrasonography or with presentation for avoid confusion be misleading age,plain to ossify should 4 radiographs the can begins age to of head are physiologic be laxity.Because until of weeks patients femoral at This obtainedafter months 6 6 to with older.

individualized of child’s at The treatment depends on age is the and diagnosis. DDH treatment development and hip. the results goal The of in stable a growth reduction that normal is of suspected, orthopedic the is should sent be DDH If pediatric child specialist. a to

The up an harness ofage. months 6 effective Pavlik is treatment to tono adduction provides just It neutral. than flexion limits hip to more and over 90° This headtoward positioning acetabulum. femoral the the redirects be Pavlik 1 in beginning device. harness, more to the of time hip within The infant must reduced willneed although 2weeks the the treatment is for The in and80% of true or Pavlik successful hips, of dislocations. approximately dysplastic treating 95% successful harness subluxated hips damage. more should remain Pavlik iatrogenic than2 in Persistently weeks of dislocated harness acetabular a not for for fear an abduction warrant Patients orthosis. treatment failingthe harness Pavlik with

over those spica using who nonoperative hip cast. failed Children reduction undergo 6 closed treatment have months should or a This reduction under is or with computed postoperative imaging general arthrogram, tomography evaluated confirmed by done resonance (MRI). magnetic intraoperative (CT) then is anesthesia; an fails, is reduction indicated. closed If reduction open a Patients may pelvic osteotomy. and age 18 months of require femoral over

complication femoral important and DDH of necrosis iatrogenic head. the most avascular The of is severe excessive cast. the Pavlik This flexion or harness positioning from during of occur or abduction spica can hip highest risk. 6 are months Infants at age of under ulcers prolonged Pressure with can casting. occur and or occur. Redislocation can femoral dysplasia of residual acetabular head subluxation the

Available StudentConsult.com @

synovitis, as a children. is synovitis, in limping common known Transient also toxic cause of because must and osteomyelitis hip be diagnosis 117 of a and arthritis the of excluded Chapters 118). It (see exclusion, septic is

but synovitis causes uncertain, of transient illness The and hypersensitivity. are possible is viral etiology upper in the 14 infection diagnosed have to viral preceding Approximately an with children of respiratory 70% 7 days. tract synovitis transient revealed nonspecific have hypertrophy. Biopsies synovial negative infection. bacterial for or necessary, bacterial joint when Hip signs are aspirations, of culture

3 range is onset of to a years, years. 8 age at The with mean 6 children. in as It is male twice common

describe onset will of an family the anterior thigh, knee. or acute in The pain patient or groin/hip, and cause at pathology thigh when can the Irritation nerve pain in of the obturator the hip. referred the is knee hip a bacterial diseases walk elevated afebrile, count, with sedimentation the are often have white erythrocyte normal and and to Patients with (Table minimally compared rate blood with painful transient protein, limp, C-reactive cell 199-1). of synovitis 197-3 differential child. diagnosis the Table of limping lists a

the of hip and usually Anteroposterior frog-leg radiographs are normal. may effusion. Ultrasonography a reveal joint with aspiration presence is septic arthritis to cell mandatory a It effusion rule and the out in joint count. of

the until treatment weight minimal and mainstay pain is resolves. The bearing rest bed of to sufficient usually decrease Nonsteroidal medication is anti-inflammatory pain. activity 1 recovery strenuous 2 to Limiting following helpful. weeks exercise is for and ensure deterioration. that will Follow-up there is help no Lack more evaluation disorders. for serious further necessitates improvement of

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Afebrile >38.5° cell and Leukocytosis >20 count ESR WBC Normal count joint mm/hour fluid CRP ESR Normal C Elevated Fever—temperature

rotation, in external normally held walk held and flexion Hip abduction, Refusal limp Painful to Hip

rate; CRP, blood white protein; sedimentation cell. C-reactive WBC, erythrocyte ESR,

Septic osteomyelitis *Examples: of arthritis, hip.

femoral disease of Legg-Calve-Perthes (LCPD) is avascular the idiopathic of necrosis head. the capital (osteonecrosis) epiphysis by to blood an is capital epiphysis. etiology unclear, caused supply interruption the of femoral likely The it but is the hypercoagulability state (factor may Leiden). There associated V be an

LCPD in age of age, years 12 with 7 years. commonly mean of patients to a 3 presents four is in to five boys. more times It common

weeks is child limp. an Patients may not for with minimaldiscomfort; the classic because of present several painless a presentation atraumatic, There be hip/groin, pain. anterior or mild intermittent thigh, or knee may abduction with muscular atrophy spasm, thigh thigh andanterior internal present. be some discomfort, muscle rotationand Decreased may age. Patients havedelayed bone

management. and Anteroposterior for both diagnosis hips frog-leg are usually adequate and of radiographs extent necessary of document its progression. follow to is It the the disease and bone to LCPD. are scan and diagnose MRI helpful early

by LCPD usually a orthopedist. that should be followed self-limited disorder a is pediatric of focuses restoration of treatment hip control on motion. and pain Initial range prevention goal of complications, and head such The of osteoarthritis. femoral treatment is as secondary deformity

is inside acetabulum, LCPD; femoral for like Containment which a epiphysis contained acts it in treating the reossifies. the is important mold capital head the femoral as uses femur surgical the osteotomies orthoses, containment abduction proximal of casts and with Nonsurgical pelvis. containment whereas is accomplished and

head completed. has healing is deformity prognosis femoral after magnitude of the the The determined short-term by follow-up, the improved compliance with diagnosis, and by good treatment It plan. early is to head and likely more with osteoarthritis are residual children deformity (OA). a Older children develop femoral of of The in it patients incidence 5 developed is after negligible onset before LCPD is who with to of years in children age years 10 OA age. close 100%; risk age a of of 40%. of 9 between than and Patients less 6 years OA have

@ StudentConsult.com Available

epiphysis emergency. hip disorder adolescent that an common femoral is (SCFE) a capital orthopedic is Slipped males. is in higher is per and slightly it 10.8 incidence The 100,000, African-American higher Hispanic and populations risk. are at may another 40% to SCFE involvement. at and progress presentation, 20% Approximately patients 20% to bilateral will bilateral have of involvement with age with girls. years, a mean years years in 16 12 11 boys is to 10 average The of and in growth trisomy disorders 21, factors endocrine obesity, pituitary and tumor, for SCFE include (hypothyroid, deficiency). Additional risk hormone

classified stable unstable. is SCFE as or to Unstable with even ambulate crutches. refuse patients gait. an patients antalgic Stable have SCFE (symptoms acute over as than 3 be weeks) weeks). 3 (symptoms chronic can characterized also less or Acute-on-chronic of seen accompanied 3 are when than pain weight. weeks symptoms acute SCFE by difficulty/inability to of an exacerbation bear more is and

and is slip. The variable, type of presentation on based severity range pain, report or motion. hip to decreased knee limp often of inability hip will and Patients or ambulate, There may traumatic event. be or a not may and the of pain pain knee mandates can the referred along examination cause obturator pathology knee anterior hip, Any to an the hip nerve. thigh as patient the in The holds rotation. extremity affected external usually progressively the flexed, As will externally is rotate. hip it a of abduction. There rotation, loss and internal but limitation usually be is a flexion also of there may external If antalgic the weight, with affected it leg in the patient an rotation. is can bear gait typically examine involvement. to hips is important both to determine bilateral It

with SCFE suspicionshould or radiographs. undergo high with not lateral frog-leg Anteroposterior radiographs indicated.Patients are frog-leg of and a index known iatrogenic Instead, reduces risk of crosstable a radiograph lateral progression. the of is widening (preslip The condition). withoutslippage SCFE physis the earliest sign of Klein’s line (Fig. assessing helpfulin SCFE. for the radiograph anteroposterior is 199-4) (0% (>50%). type II as displacement), The 50%), I be or (34% can radiographically slippage III type to to 33% type classified displacement. with of increases of likelihood degree complications The

a should immediately non–weight bearing SCFE pediatric to be and referred orthopedist. with made Patients accomplished further The with cannulated situ goal a and enhance to in internal is which usually with is minimize complications, prevent single closure, slippage, screw. fixation physeal and dislocation the to surgical hip More realign may require epiphysis. reduction cases severe is nonaffected fixation surrounding There prophylactic of controversy side. the the of particularly 16 of years age. to outside for Assessment disorders important, range endocrine is in 10 children the

femoral (SCFE). Slipped epiphysis capital 199-4 Figure and Anteroposterior a radiograph the epiphysis decreased arrows) reveals the of (small A, widened on physis left. height triangle of right) right). (c) of (normal In acetabular lateral line Capener arrow) double an the metaphysis there the superimposed is density addition, medial the on on posterior loss (normal (large on rim neck femoral abnormal and inferomedial view of SCFE. the B, position Frog, confirms the lateral St the Requisites, ed Mosby, Pediatric Blickman 2, Radiology, 1998, p (From 244.) Louis, H:

avascular serious chondrolysis two most necrosis. are The complications of SCFE and Chondrolysis of is articular the cartilage. destruction It of is penetration intra-articular with with slips and associated operative severe more hardware. and (OA) lead severe to This disability. can osteoarthritis Avascular supply disruption to there capital of the blood necrosis a is femoral the when occurs epiphysis. during manipulation time forced but at happens slip. injury, usually an occur of the of unstable may This OA. 50% may SCFEs necrosis Avascular in to up occur of may and to lead unstable

Torsional are legs angular in bowlegs (in-toeing medical that and child. (physiologic knees) parents common their for variations seek reasons attention out-toeing) knock the and and and normal of are these with Most resolve physiologic concerns growth. family and to nonphysiologic reassure identify Understanding the physicians that history disorders necessitate allows the to intervention. further natural referred pathologic to Physiologic are deformities. disturbances disturbances are called as variations;

femur internally decreasing about rotated at to is The (anteversion) maturity. birth, 30° 10° at about birth at internal tibia up 30° mean begins at can rotation maturity. decrease a of 15° and to with The to of

variations a limp should pain. or cause Torsional not for a neuromuscular or (hemiplegia) Unilateral torsion the index neurologic disorder. suspicion raises of

@ StudentConsult.com Available

and Out-Toeing, In-Toeing, Toe-Walking

or years Internal in-toeing anteversion 2 femoral in or the is common cause (Table children 200-1). of most torsion femoral older is its age, of It and worst years then 6 at and 4 resolves. between in often It girls. occurs twice as cases laxity. generalized ligamentous are Many associated with abnormal sitting as W-sitting. habits is common and is of etiology likely anteversion with femoral such individuals congenital The in

Clinical Manifestations. parents family when history may of family history a give may be and the there a concerns similar The were of W-sitting, younger. child kneecaps of may rotation The to internal femur. have kissing due the increased with flip and the legs egg-beatergait child laterally. the appear rotated, walking, where appear While to may entire the running have internally will leg an have and rotation 90° will 70°) 10°. increased limited 80° external internal (normal hip to to to 60° about flexed The to rotation indicated. not Radiographic usually evaluation is

StudentConsult.com @ Available

and Toe-Walking In-Toeing, Out-Toeing,

measurement. 200-1 angle Thigh-foot FIGURE angle is useful torsion. of The assessment tibial thigh-foot for to with 90°. patient prone, lies knees flexed The foot is long axis to of of the the the axis thigh The to determine compared angle. long the thigh-foot associated and with torsion, angles external torsion. angles are internal are with tibial associated Negative positive tibial

years This old. in-toeing is a the cause most younger in 2 child than of common result the When associated with it adductus. it is may metatarsus of in be positioning, utero

Clinical Manifestations. will history in-toeing. present of child witha The thigh-foot the (Fig. of bemeasured torsion angle degree may tibial using The 200-1). the with to the the prone axis long of flexed 90°.The with of Thepatient lies is axis a compared thigh. knee long table on foot the rotated represents foot a tibial inwardly internal negativeangle torsion. and An follow-up to If done document improvement. visit should is warranted,measurements be each at

In-toeing of Treatment

follow-up The anteversion document of and pathologic to and management reassurance patients identify for is internal to and femoral have tibial who patients with mainstay reasons in-toeing torsion. improvement for until to the correction, It it age for families 8 so inform years can important to of is of 7 timeline. take appropriate do splint) Braces conditions. these improve not Browne (Denis patients 1% Fewer in-toeing with functional all will intervention surgical of than need because disability of or cosmetic appearance.

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Toe-Walking and In-Toeing, Out-Toeing,

and FIGURE 200-2 deformities. Bowleg knock-knee Bowleg deformity. A, angulation varum) referred tilted the varus because midline are from body. of to are away (genu as the knees the Bowlegs of valgus deformity or knees. the B, Knock-knee the toward The tilted knee is midline. Medical Chicago, p 1982, Publishers, Pediatric Year 84.) Clinical (From Orthopedics P: Scoles Practice, in Book

the associated common a is tibial (see out-toeingand Chapter201). be torsion most External foot cause may calcaneovalgus with of in utero positioning. is often This to related with the worsen. It external but because rotates age, can may improveover time, torsion tibia externally tibial It factor especially an etiologic be combined when with may anteversion. forpatellofemoral syndrome, femoral and patients with surgical from but reassurance, is cosmetic observation maybenefit intervention. usually and concerns dysfunction Treatment

Available @ StudentConsult.com

are of normal or present varum) with bowlegs who majority patients The knock-knees (genu valgum) (Fig. (genu varum. 200-2).Infants maximum are with born genu of The 18 straightens age. months out around extremity lower years. around maximal valgum to genu 4 typicallyprogress Children The adulthood. in valgum slight legs a to areusually genu straight

inquire and It is assessoverall height. about important history to family have dysplasia. belownormal skeletal 2 angular child deviations A who may deformities standard is with should Dietary obtained, deformities. as Chapter angular cause be (see history may 31) rickets touching) with (distance two medial knees distance the intermalleolar genu For valgum,following betweenthe malleoli isused. tibial the of between medialmalleoli medial femoral genu (the touching) the intercondylar the used distance varum. distance for Measurement with the condyles is or track measurements improvement progression. These important is radiographs, have forward. the When it the patella, to feet,facing not obtaining with ofbowlegs. false forward the appearance child facing external In the tibial feet the torsion,having gives

StudentConsult.com Available @

3to knock-knees between 4-year-oldsand 5 Physiologic years of usually common are 8 resolve age. in most and knock-knees or have underlying (e.g., may causing genu renal dysplasia). osteodystrophy, their valgum skeletal Patients withasymmetrical disease severe deformity on based is patient. and ofthe family reassurance Treatment deformities, dysfunction, gait intervention be and pain, may Surgical severe cosmesis. indicatedfor

@ StudentConsult.com Available

Physiologic in months 18 than symmetrical common older children with bowlegs most are genu varum. years This as 2 generallyimprove the age. approaches will of child varum genu The disease important and for Blount vara). is differentiating varum genu consideration most betweenphysiologic (tibia

StudentConsult.com @ Available

genu vara associated is varum. the pathologic most Tibia common with disorder aspect tibial proximal epiphysis, resulting of is medial varus of in deformity. progressive growth It the by a abnormal characterized the years)Adolescent age of classified onset:Infantile (>11 according to Blount is to (4 to years) years)Juvenile (1 disease 3 10

is less Late-onset than common disease. infantile disease Blount The growth from knee. compressive across to unknown, it is increased medial be forces secondary suppression the cause felt to but is

more in obese common Americans, vara and is patients. females, African Infantile tibia walkers. patients Many early were

disease bilateral with involvement. Blount infantile patients have of Nearly 80% is painless. It usually tibial have torsion significant discrepancy. patients The lower and will often extremity leg-length internal metaphyseal There medial may a palpable also tibial beak. be

African markedly in common Americans, more Blount is Late-onset disease obese and patients. males, bilateral have Only involvement. 50% initial is usually painful bowlegs. The presentation internal usually or Blount torsion, discrepancy. associated significant disease with Late-onset palpable leg-length beaking, tibial significant is not metaphyseal

tibia necessary for anteroposterior radiographs vara. legs of the Weight-bearing are and diagnosis lateral both of wedging, radiologic medial infantile are Blount major proximal of the features disease. of Fragmentation, and beak tibia deformities the disease, noticeable. readily Blount not the as may In be medial late-onset deformity be on difference physiologic can age. varum Blount tell difficult in very radiographs infantile the and years genu disease to than between It patients younger 2 of

is begin the immediately. treatment of diagnosis confirmed, disease Blount Once should in mild a children to compressive Orthotics unload 3 be can with younger deformity. medial forces age used than years the of with Compliance this regimen be difficult. can more Nonoperative contraindicated. of disease severe Blount management is than Any surgical 4 intervention. older years should patient undergo severe treatment deformity with Patients intervention. patients to surgical who also orthotic require moderate and fail the performed. usual Proximal fibular osteotomy procedure diaphyseal is tibial with osteotomy valgus

Available @ StudentConsult.com

and Out-Toeing, In-Toeing, Toe-Walking

or to and due be discrepancy differences bones. (LLD) common Leg-length tibia, is may both in femur, the Table extensive, in common diagnosis differential listed 200-2. The is causes but are of the femur and proximal tibia lower the majority The (38%) comes extremity distal from (27%). the growth

landmarks Clinical are malleolus) measurements superior medial spine inaccurate. bony using to (anterior iliac radiograph is The single of a young teloradiograph legs be can done that in children. very both exposures three The of knees, orthoradiograph of slightly ankles. overlapping consists and the hips, the of the and three extremities. knees, next to a standard The ankles with of hips, scanogram consists radiographs ruler A

Developmental dysplasia Developmental hip (LCPD) disease of (DDH) the Legg-Calve-Perthes

Disuse developmental Neuromuscular to Hemiplegia secondary delay

Infectious to osteomyelitis secondary injury Physeal

Fibrous neoplastic injury irradiation dysplasia secondary to Physeal Overgrowth infiltration or Tumors

Trauma LLD, scanogram Physeal premature measure but injury the has accurate most fracture also Malunion Overgrowth healing (shortening with highest (CT) computed radiation extremity) exposure. of of closure the tomography of is scanning such an extremely Technology scan. CT as EOS/slot is alternative to reduced-radiation accurate, followed measured discrepancy Moseley and Green-Anderson graphs. using is The

LLD complex. is Treating the estimated discrepancy measurements, skeletal adult height, patient and physician of aspects must the family. and account the psychological maturity, into take The greater LLD usually 2 requires cm than treatment. lifts and Shoe shoes they the but and used, will can stable. problems the make often less for heavier cause be may psychosocial child of of options combination lengthening of a include two or procedures. the Surgical longer the extremity, the shortening shorter extremity, discrepancies than are the cm affected treated cm treated of lengthening. by Discrepancies side, than closure) whereas are greater by 5 physeal (surgical less epiphysiodesis 5 use modulation allowed which without on treatment. permit accurate of more impact growth for has growth and early removable implants, plates, Current permanent

Available StudentConsult.com @

fit geometric The joint articulating bones. than is rather knee of the tissues by soft constrained usual The medial stability. collateral as ligaments well knee lateral cruciate the ligaments as maintain and and posterior anterior and and can cross cartilage articular Weight meniscus. the force transmission

lateralis of femoris vastus rectus Pull intermedialis vastus

patellar tendon Pull medialis vastus of of Pull Femur PATELLA

mechanism. 200-3 extensor the of knee Diagram FIGURE major the sulcus. the pull by the exerted intercondylar laterally force of to quadriceps muscle tends patella The out the to medialis The vastus medially muscle centralized. keep pulls patella problems JB: 33:1439, Knee from Pediatr (Modified Clin children, Am in 1986.) North Smith

site knee common joint a of (Fig. patellofemoral the mechanism and adolescent is The the the injury extensor in of 200-3).

sign Knee or common a is injury. effusion swelling of the a rapidly accumulates fracture,ligamentous cruciate or may usually injury, Whenthe is ligament[ACL]), the an anterior meniscus tear. fluid of (often and ahemarthrosis after in joint) (blood indicate disruption it idiopathic disease, Unexplained laxity). arthritis, as mayoccur Lyme result lupus with syndrome hypermobilejoint (septic, occur (ligamentous and postinfectious,juvenile effusion also a may arthritis viral, knee overactivity erythematosus).It of systemic unexplained evaluation expedite aspiration laboratory An of effusion and can help adiagnosis.

meniscus Each meniscus be is in will disk normally shaped. rarely shape; thelateral semilunar anteriorly isattached and posteriorlywith knee A glides meniscus periphery the at motion. and normal discoid is mobile and easily. The tear meniscus more may less inadequate flexion, audible can attachment, knee is displace posterolateral discoid an causing there the When anteriorlywith click. meniscus childhood or in late pain adolescenceafter will injury early an swelling. Most commonly,patients present and knee with arthroscopic reshaping increased (MRI) resonance show is of imaging space meniscus. and of The asquared-off confirm of appearance the can the lateral can anteroposterior femoral radiographs diagnosis.Treatment usually condyle; and excision tears magnetic joint the

is cyst cyst) themiddle childhood seen years. (Baker commonly popliteal A in aspect fluid. of posteromedial bursa gastrocnemius semimembranous by ofthe the the distension and alongthe knee synovial is cause The cysts meniscus associated Baker Inadults, are with tears. usually benign. childhood, In the are cysts and painless take radiographs several years.Knee it normal. resolve, may are but spontaneously Theyoften by confirmed The can be diagnosis ultrasound. cysts reassurance, that progressive cause indicated is excision is disability. cysts only or becausesurgical Treatment for

StudentConsult.com Available @

Osteochondritis commonly most dissecans involves (OCD) theknee. and suffers occurs of vascular the adjacentbone. area a when insult an from adjacent It bone the separates to articularcartilage of lateral aspect the most medialfemoral condyle. affects It commonly the and pain be or of lateral, seen on swelling.The complain tunnelview can Patients anteroposterior, knee lesions radiographs. may in MRI determining the injury. the can helpful be extentof articular from heal cartilage,the revascularize with young rest often will In activities. and with patients lesion intact take The healing requiresradiographic and document follow-up may healing. to months process several cartilage for risk With and increases. thebony separation fragment of articular increasingage, the damage patients more Older to likely intervention. are needsurgical improve Any articularcartilage fracture of patient intervention. a with not will surgical without the a be should OCD Patientswith specialist. referred to

@ StudentConsult.com Available

the Osgood-Schlatter disease at a the patellar insertion common of is tubercle. on tendon tibial cause knee pain of the developing partial is transmitted the cause muscle The from can avulsion tibial center. microfracture which fracture through ossification stress a in tubercle, quadriceps contracting the a or occurs is after usually growth in a It common and spurt more boys. for is age onset 11 to 13 girls boys. and The years 14 years typically for at

during tubercle. swelling with present the activity and and Patients tenderness as tibial over pain well have local after will as necessary may rule or Radiographs to fracture. be avulsion tumor, infection, out

treatment. are and for Rest paramount activity modification icing helpful. and may medications be control Pain programs are extremity Lower flexibility important. and strengthening exercise patients Some require immobilization. may frequently 1 The to usually 2 is but years. benign, symptoms course last the tubercle. can fracture bony enlargement of tibial Complications and tubercle of include avulsion the tibial

StudentConsult.com Available @

The patellofemoral a restraining for of patella,muscular that joint the alignment ligaments knee, forces the is dependson complex and joint around between normalfunction. balance a that a patella groove femurcalled matching the through the V-shapedbottom the trochlea. surface a has interior of moves in The the quadriceps the tendon is lateraldirection. of the in patellarligaments pullingthrough the the muscular majority a move flexed, and patella knee the forces When motion, toward pulling muscle the patella counteracts lateral medialis the vastus midline. The the result in function usually Problemswith joint anterior this kneepain. of

a knee complaint pain common is inadolescents. anterior Idiopathic prevalent is adolescent particularly It in femaleathletes. joint was chondromalaciaof patella term surfacesof Previously, patella, the incorrect referred but the the are normal. as this to as this is pain It known (PFPS). patellofemoral syndrome as is now pain one extended going stairs, for an sitting up The will knee worsens and after with in position anddown present soreness activity, that withanterior patient time. swelling.The patient may kneecap. There complain underthe sensation of associated grinding no is usually a joint the patellofemoral Palpating extended pain. knee and the with elicits compressing oftenhave lower poor flexibility weak extremities. in hip Patients or the musculature Radiographs rule as other but to osteochondritisdissecans. be indicated diagnoses such are out rarely helpful may

is biomechanical causing problems that correcting pain. Treatment focused the on are the usually girdle and is strengthening using program lower medialis hip done an exercise This with extremity vastus emphasizing flexibility. also Anti-inflammatory be activity ice, modifications medication, may and helpful. sports should orthopedic an specialist. cases to or be referred Persistent medicine

when and a recurrent patellar with dislocation subluxation must PFPS. One evaluating exclude patient weight disability significant initial Acute traumatic dislocation. usually and seen an will in dislocation bearing cause Patients recurrent genu with ligamentous associated valgum, often femoral have and laxity, dislocations anteversion. program improve nonoperative period aggressive is of therapy by may treatment strengthen the joint. immobilization, and brief followed function a the involve The designed and patellofemoral to of physical initial quadriceps an dislocation repair subluxation is treatment recurrent plan, this of is Continued or surgical failure and usually necessary.

deformity and the posturing In infants, non–weight-bearing between difference important. and is newborns Posturing the which is foot; infant habitual passive motion in of holds position is the the range normal. an but passive posturing, Deformity similar to restricted. appearance motion produces is are foot painless. disorders Most pediatric children common older Foot more pain is (Table in 201-1).

Available @ StudentConsult.com

and Toe-Walking Out-Toeing, In-Toeing,

A leg, involves clubfoot entire thefoot. just the not deformity cases. half and one newborns It in 1000 affects bilateral 1 of in is tarsals talus The affected is affected. most are the foot hypoplastic;the in mainly limb whichleads a the shortening of limb to tarsal hypoplasia, abnormal muscles the foot. generalized because affectingand hypo-plastic of the The interactions, are of atrophy usually is There calfmusculature. the

is Family history important. be can positional. teratologic, or Club congenital, foot infant clubfoot be an is congenital of developmental cases) Although abnormality, for the isolated hip. of all usually assessed dysplasia should every (75% arthrogryposis, or such neuromuscular Teratologic associated as with a clubfoot is disorder, myelomeningocele, syndromes. other was utero. is clubfoot the normal position deformed Positional in a that in held foot

confused seldom diagnosis The (Fig. other disorders is with 201-1). careful of a abnormalities. prompt for clubfoot The presence search other should adduction, have will forefoot varying The hindfoot infant equinus and varus, rigidity. and degrees of joint. talonavicular the of are secondary to the abnormalities All foot atrophy Calf older are in noticeable shortening more children. and

infants, imaging for rarely advanced assessment ossification. incomplete necessary have radiographs In because their tarsals are and navicular age for about and ossifies for years 4 at 3 boys. years girls The of can children age, to to and positioning. As navicular the follow angles tibial calcaneal be talocalcaneal and used radiographs assess lateral

sarcoma, to 12 disease) Plantar (navicular, years years Hypermobile sprain) idiopathic (Freiberg flatfoot (fracture, Foreign body sprain) Puncture (Kohler arthritis shoes Cellulitis warts navicular disease Stress coalition fasciitis of 6 fitting tendinopathy (Ewing Sever Leukemia (fracture, Accessory idiopathic os Poorly shoes fitting necrosis tourniquet wound wound to Trauma arthritis 12 Avascular fitting to Hair 0 Juvenile fracture or Puncture infarction) Plantar tarsal trigonum) Oncologic 6 Ingrown body Trauma Accessory Poorly leukemia) Osteomyelitis toenail Tarsal shoes ossicles Poorly Foreign Achilles 18 metatarsal Fracture navicular years Juvenile Metatarsalgia

demonstrating clubfoot FIGURE 201-1 picture Clinical deformity. Jenson p HB, Philadelphia, ed of Kliegman RM, 18, Pediatrics, et Saunders, al: Behrman, RE, Textbook 2778.) Nelson’s (From 2007,

treatment preserve to is mobility. of goal the and The deformity correct method Nonoperative the casting. serial of treatment Ponseti involves Ponseti the correct percutaneous equinus on to the also tenotomy deformity. Achilles help tendon The relies of a method

a opposite 201-2 side. nor-mal of with FIGURE on metatarsus picture Clinical foot adductus al: of Textbook 2777.) Nelson’s p 2007, et HB, Philadelphia, Behrman, Kliegman (From Saunders, RM, Jenson 18, Pediatrics, RE, ed

an tibialis transfer early will anterior patients tendon of require 20% childhood. About in surgical Rarely, more be procedures may need done. to aggressive of severe disability. include clubfoot untreated Complications include recurrence Complications of clubfoot treated stiffness. and

Available @ StudentConsult.com

Out-Toeing, Toe-Walking In-Toeing, and

most is the infants. in Metatarsus adductus disorder common foot lateral It foot of a (Fig. is the convexity characterized by utero 201-2) by in and caused is positioning. is half of bilateral in It cases. common first-born children of the in and is equally uterus. it girls, because in boys Occurring more smaller primigravid with have dysplasia of metatarsus percent adductus of the Two developmental infants hip.

but supinated, hindfoot normal. the adducted sometimes and midfoot forefoot are and The is medial the of while lateral convex, is concave. The is border border the foot and are dorsiflexion normal. plantar flexion Ankle beyond abduction). position pushed deformity the neutral a With can and midfoot stabilized, hindfoot the (into be present children Older in-toeing gait. may an with

resolves 90% adductus True spontaneously that without reassurance all so time metatarsus is the treatment, is of needed. over orthopedist. within improve needs evaluation adductus Metatarsus a not that pediatric 2 years does by may benefit or bracing, Persistent surgery. and potentially serial cases from casting The disability. with a not deformity associated is

It adductus, important skewfoot. is to varus, differentiate metatarsus among and metatarsus rigid varus adductus, but deformity looks will serial an that like casting. uncommon is Metatarsus metatarsus need it giving serpentine thatis is adduction, uncommon abduction,and or forefoot the appearance. Z hindfoot Skewfoot midfoot flexion, by characterized foot a an deformity plantar This of the risk adulthood. reduce in help surgery be managed disability serial to to very castingand needs with carefully

foot secondary common innewborns is in foot to utero that The calcaneovalgus another disorder positioning. is valgus. abduction a hyperdorsiflexed It with characterized forefoot is by andheel foot unilateral. usually is It vertical be but quitesevere may dorsiflexion, is a deformity not like appearance rigid The talus. congenital it for benecessary questionable weight-bearing may diagnoses. Simulated radiographs appear The hindfoot normal calcaneovalgus minimal have valgus. footwill or

beyond treatment reassurance. disorder requires no This for can exercises their stretching infant’s foot. Parents passive taught be realign Most by affected years. infants 2 whichresolves calcaneovalgus but leg can length be of may foot bowing a the tibia, associated A with exist. discrepancy spontaneously,

in of 15% or pronated are adults. feet Hypermobile seen with Thechild activitylimitations. asymptomatic flatfeet no has is and usually the arch. fat flatfoot longitudinal medial toddler result ligamentous laxity of the and Newborn is and in by and yearsof 6 usually developmental iscalled This flatfoot age. improves positive flatfoot and family is of result a older there typically is often the ligamentous history. laxity, children, In generalized thought flatfoot normal be variant. as Hypermobile a can of

arch. a non–weight-bearing the have a medial with In flatfoot child flexible position, longitudinal will the older pronates of degrees varying hindfoot with collapse) valgus. weight (arch the foot When bearing, all and normal. dorsiflexion) motion plantar (essentially except ankle motion Subtalar is which neuromuscular be indicate contractures. to subtalar of and coalition, disorders heel may related can tarsal rigid loss flatfoot, (cerebral cord palsy), Any a motion of Radiographs flatfeet not hyper-mobile indicated. are usually

developmental pes planus that, years until after ofage; is cannot diagnosed pes Hypermobile planus. it 6 be before variant a normal thatthis is very is important. Reassurance heel symptomatic education supports, may proper, activity require with stretching. cord on supportivefootwear, Patients who and orthotics/arch are

rigid with coalition at with of will tarsal flatfoot eversion a Patients the present usually joint). (loss and subtalar inversion is bones. two congenital fusion tarsal or more produced or by a segmentation of failure of Coalition attachment The osseous. be cartilaginous, or fibrous, may unilateral coalition bilateral will Tarsal or in can early become adolescence. be symptomatic and often The most and are talocalcaneal. coalition calcaneonavicular of forms tarsal common

Available @ StudentConsult.com

muscle present may with which laterally of because will peroneal hindfoot usually spasm. radiate patient The pain, young with frequent by sprains. can exacerbated Symptoms are athletes present and sports, ankle familial a There component. is and both present in is Pes bearing non–weightbearing usually weight planus positions. at of and pain. may usually loss passive subtalar produce motion, joint There attempts motion is a

obtained, lateral, not be disorder. oblique they identify the clearly may Anteroposterior, should but radiographs and always calcaneonavicular the coalition. often The oblique view identifies is diagnosis (CT) gold of for the coalition. Computed tomography standard tarsal scan a to a CT second coalition out radiographs plain Even on should rule coalition. patients obvious with calcaneonavicular have

not are asymptomatic treatment. majority) need do (the that Coalitions pain immobilization a few for cast with treatment of weeks patients orthotics. for consists Nonoperative foot and symptoms will surgery. The return, often necessitating prevent and very reossification soft of interposition Surgical the coalition can excision tissue effective. be to

medial characterized Cavus the height of increased varus. longitudinal foot (high arch) hindfoot is frequently and by arch physiologic classified as or be neuromuscular. can It physiologic cavus are Most with asymptomatic. foot patients with thorough all on foot a cavus examination is neurologic A patients important. (tethered disease, and a cord) there familial a high strong have neuromuscular arches neuropathy. disease, of high risk Charcot-Marie-Tooth is association and neurologic with a with Patients painful first. The disorder be should treated underlying helpful. orthotics not Nonoperative is treatment usually using will reconstruction. Progressive, foot surgical likely need cavus symptomatic

Available StudentConsult.com @

to are (tarsal uncommon due and Freiberg necrosis. disease second navicular) avascular (headof the Kohler metatarsal) and disease present sitewith pain the bearing. affected at and with activity will Patients weight and neoplasm Infection, be excluded. fracture, should activity restriction. consists Treatment of immobilization and and majority the re-formationof The patients of willimprove revascularization upon subsequent bone.

Available StudentConsult.com @

active is people. among of heel pain common Sever disease young cause a 11 9 is of years. 12 age presentation of girls to years age for about for The boys mean and about bilateral. 60% of Approximately are cases musculature Achilles disease the the apophysis, at through by causing calcaneal caused calf the microfracture. of the forces Sever is tendon and ages As child pain begins to the close, apophysis the the disappears.

that is decreases pain activity developsheel with athlete young who The a common presentation rest. with be Swelling limping Sever associated with is disease. rare,but may to and the have The pain childwill heel oftentight palpation of cords. posterior calcaneus rarely should persistent be but infection tumor. exclude Radiographs to or pain indicated, with are done they

can modification, be anti-inflammatory icing, helpful. and medications Activity to A strength symptoms. and ankle heel designed program cord overall improve may flexibility decrease can using heel elevation heel helpful. be Heel or cups wedges

the fifth lesser the common toes commonly most Curly of affected. are deformity toes.The are most toes fourth and lateral toe. flexion are the of Curlytoes interphalangeal joint the by with characterized rotation proximal at bycontractures is caused the digitorum tendons. It flexor and longus brevis of Some to 3 by spontaneously 4years toes resolve age. will curly of tenotomy. surgical treated Persistent may by be deformity

Polydactyly toes) newborn found on examination. the is initial (extra usually physical by simple is toe and stalk fifth tissue adjacent toe attached ligation the soft effective. of or When a skin, amputation extra to only is or the surgical or toe deformity the great involves intervention bone, middle the When or is cartilage delayed has toes, when indicated. the digit or extra (fusion is toes) than more common polydactyly. Syndactyly of benign is It a problem. usually cosmetic may and (Table polydactyly with be malformation Both 201-2). syndactyly syndromes associated

and Syndactyly Associated Polydactyly with Disorders

202-1. simplified Table common presented the in scoliosis and of classification spinal abnormalities, kyphosis, is A

Available StudentConsult.com @

pain of is present free. patients for an which spine, asymmetrical will Most evaluation usually an patient any A because with deformity physical spinal underlying can examination the a disease. necessary deformity, indicate for is complete back is examined (Fig. The from behind 202-1). assessed. the levelness pelvis of is the First, in scoliosis. pelvic compensatory produces which results discrepancy Leg-length often obliquity, symmetry curvature the spinal patient with examined the for the and pelvis spine is upright. is When level, dimple, (hemangioma, skin Cutaneous or tuft) lesions hair be noted. should The be of areas should palpated tenderness. for spine

to (Adams the the directed between forward patient is hands forward feet bend bend The test). asked then with spine. for inspect asymmetry should the The examiner in for The in of the hump is this presence scoliosis. hallmark the position is of because depressed The hump usually the rotation. area spinal opposite another, thoracic malalignment spine in elevation on muscle the is a elevation vertebra paravertebral in spine. in rib rotational resulting lumbar and one Scoliosis the of side the roundback. reveal of the With inspection degree flexed still the position, can from forward patient the in forward A sharp region in kyphotic the angulation deformity. thoracolumbar a indicates spots nevi It important dysraphism). hairy the to (spinal patches, examine lait café skin au (neurofibromatosis), for is and Abnormal indicate may extremities

Failure Wedge formation Hemivertebrae of vertebrae

bar segmentation Bilateral of Unilateral Failure bar

Research from Scoliosis Society, the Committee the Adapted Terminology of 1975.

associated be murmurs skeletal whereas syndrome. Marfan heart can dysplasia, with to and secondary producing neurologic to to idiopathic to scoliosis assess disease, is underlying neurologic sequelae. whether It determine a or full whether essential examination the is scoliosis do is the an any neuromuscular

side curve evaluation rib side hump turns of unwinding and patient from Estimating as to of

of edge hump Measuring rib with straight

of for leg length Measuring

Figure 202-1 A B = scoliosis. Medial a leg spine with actual Clinical obliquity = pelvic malleolus B A apparent length determination length AB of of A evaluation iliac patient

lateral the should radiographs standing entire film a of Initial and spine. include posteroanterior be visible crests The maturity. iliac should help determine skeletal to angle or from determine is superiorly inferiorly the to tilted end degree Cobb of (Fig. curvature curve The and measured of the vertebra most the 202-2). obtain EOS as such modalities than provide imaging to much the or accurate scanning slot lower Newer radiation radiographs. with ability measurements

termed normal anteroposterior in spinal the scoliosis. occur that Alterations alignment are in plane Most deformities scoliotic

of scoliotic Figure method curve measurement. Cobb 202-2

the and severely upper and most toward the at vertebrae curve of the They limits the curve: tilt of are the the Determine concavity curve. end of lower one lines, bottom from from the the the top Draw body. one upper and body two perpendicular lower of of the the angle formed. Measure is the accepted This Scoliosis measurement according method of Society. Research curve to the 0° 40°, than greater of to 20° mild; 40°, moderate; are 20° to severe. and Curves

are idiopathic. congenital, may a discrepancy. Scoliosis compensatory also neuromuscular, or be leg-length from

Idiopathic common scoliosis. is most scoliosis form of the children. occurs in It normal healthy, neurologically have family a 20% patients of Approximately positive history. more than and in likely the condition treatment is to incidence girls in The require females. is progress slightly and higher boys, have is genetic some component evidence There progressive scoliosis that a as may well.

years). adolescent 10 years), be Idiopathic to (4 (birth in (>11 juvenile three categories:infantile classified 3 years), scoliosis and to can scoliosis (80%) common deformity. isthe Idiopathic spinal of cause most adolescent most the The curve is pattern. common rightthoracic are adolescents. scoliosis becausemany be they is until Juvenile seek do but underrepresented uncommon, treatment may patients not of 11 not patient there idiopathic. any years that scoliosis agreater than is likelihood In younger is age, an of a intraspinal The approximately scoliosis abnormality prevalence 40%. in with child congenital is

a scoliosis time. Idiopathic 70% the painless of is disorder patient requires with a pain careful evaluation. A incidence patient with (syrinx has of intraspinal or pathology Any left-sided presenting a tumor). a curve high the spine cases. imaging indicated these is resonance of withmagnetic (MRI) in Evaluation

and on is of curve, or is nonprogressive. the based size progressive Treatment whether the spinal of the of idiopathic the scoliosis skeletalmaturity curvature the patient, progression. treatment to observation for and assess for Initial scoliosis repeatradiographs is likely indicated is deformities. for treatment No nonprogressive risk location, curvemagnitude. progression factors The include gender, and curve forcurve to Girls thanboys. are likely times more five progress more likely progress patients are than olderpatients. Younger to

25° Typically, observed. are under curves bracing. skeletally and with patient curves treated immature 20° in are between 50° a Progressive evaluate correction. A in to important the radiograph is orthotic intervention. usually greater than surgical Curves 50° require

may formation deformities early to lead are the the birth vertebral during of Abnormalities trimester structural the evident spine at of that or first childhood. be can classified follows (Fig. as Congenital scoliosis (wedge vertebra 202-3):Partial (unsegmented complete or failure of vertebral complete or bars)Mixed segmentation formation failure of or hemivertebra)Partial

as tracheoesophageal Klippel-Feil anus, such of as than anomalies, syndrome. agenesis) renal patients 60% cardiac other or abnormalities limb such abnormalities, VACTERL anomalies, imperforate (vertebral fistula, radial associated have association More defects, Renal congenital with silent, anomalies of renal in suggesting occur common; need uropathy children evaluation have ultrasonography. most children 20% a of being the the 6% scoliosis, agenesis with obstructive with for heart occurs in disease of 12% about patients. Congenital occurs diastematomyelia) cord, 20% of lipoma, scoliosis. in (tethered Spinal diplomyelia, and children with congenital intradural syringomyelia, dysraphism approximately calf neurologic on cutaneous (e.g., These back changes, the feet legs atrophy). with cavus of are abnormalities and the foot, and frequently disorders associated lesions of MRI evaluation spinal indicated in dysraphism. is

depends progression scoliosis malformed the potential deformity of risk is vertebrae. the and in The spinal growth on of variable congenital a progresses, bar growth unilateral block has but A vertebra little typically potential. unsegmented continues 50% 75% until some is About scoliosis of type that skeletal and will treatment. some progression patients show growth of require congenital about complete, will with during be can 10 expected and growth 2 (before years). Progression periods years rapid of after

curves. Treatment early diagnosis of scoliosis progressive on of and congenital identification hinges in treatment helpful congenital scoliosis. not Orthotic is surgery has spinal once Early should be been documented. progression performed This major prevent can deformities. help insufficiency surgery cause should thoracic curves that with large undergo Patients immediately.

many and dystrophy, problem associated common as Duchenne spinal disorders, with potentially spinal neuromuscular muscular a Progressive such is cerebral palsy, deformity serious

Types 202-3 and Figure result scoliosis. in congenital that anomalies of closed vertebral spinal extravertebral Partial vertebra). failure of unilateral (wedge formation A, of failure B, unilateral formation (hemivertebra). Complete Unilateral (congenital C, bar). failure segmentation of (block of D, Bilateral vertebra). failure segmentation

muscular bifida. atrophy, spina and with patient without routine part exterbe sit Spinal a can when they neuro-nal of independent must a the examination support. alignment in for wheelchair balance, Progressive impair sitting disease. can muscular curves Once quality scoliosis of progression affects life. begins, which usually is is inefcontinuous. usually Orthotic treatment the The of on the neuromuscular deformity scoliosis. in depends magnitude fective of pelvis. Surgical with underlying severity the and dis-be intervention to weakness, the may fusion whether frequent pattern necessary of progressive, growth. remaining musculoskeletal is the amount process ease and deformity patients Nonambulatory incidence of spinal ambulatory higher patients. a have than involve Adolescents a for scoliosis. Compensatory have spine, to sweeping, Scoliosis screening obliquity, tend long (Chapter produce be 200) the patients, positive discrepancy the curves and leg-length examination cervical pelvic In with may a nonambulatory Before lung restrictive produce and also disease. the then or cannot direction the in a the the stand, the curves If as pelvic seated obliquity, of of anteroposterior radiograph supine obliquity. same spine child correction the obliquity, any However, identification should view, rather spine, entire is the posteroanterior indicated. curvature pelvic standing than with and a of correction should the leg-length dis- be at directed resolve, treatment and

loss is and The of goal progression to prevent of treatment crepancy. strucfunction. important it to a Thus, is distinguish between Nonambulatory deformity. are more and spinal patients and tural comfortable compensatory

@ Available StudentConsult.com

to the refers plane. increased thoracolumbar spine deformity roundback sagittal to angulation a or the or thoracic of Kyphosis in kyphosis), or postural, congenital. can be structural (Scheuermann Kyphosis

kyphosis posture. poor Postural is to secondary in prone the and is standing voluntarily It corrected positions. may increased patient lordosis. have lumbar The also kyphosis if corrects. are the unnecessary fully usually Radiographs radiographs no reveal vertebral not, abnormalities. If will is needed, improving posture. at Treatment, child’s aimed the if

the disease is of cause second deformity. Scheuermann spinal common pediatric most and equally females. in males occurs It etiology unknown, there hereditary is The may be but factors. examination differentiated roundback postural from radiographs. on physical kyphosis by Scheuermann and is

or standing correct cannot disease with lying A Scheuermann thekyphosis with prone. patient viewed the When in thoracic Scheuermann in have angulation abrupt flexed (Fig. fromthe with disease forward will side patients tolower mid an region the position, 202-4), contour. with show patients posturalroundback smooth, symmetrical a and In lumbar bothconditions, increased. is lordosis atypical with thoracolumbar half However, disease backpain, patients Scheuermann kyphosis. have of will with especially of involved at in of Irregularities The more nodes spaceLoss of vertebrae endplatesSchmorl findings producing following:Narrowing or kyphosis disk the vertebral of the height consecutive 5° Scheuermann of the anterior include of classic wedging vertebrae radiologic least three

of Scheuermann scoliosis. similar idiopathic is Treatment kyphosis to and the pain. of presence maturity, of absence or degree skeletal the on deformity, is dependent It begins with bracing. Nonoperative treatment have deformity, is completed fusion intractable for or who pain. growth, have severe patients Surgical done a have

failure of kyphosis both. body a anterior posterior segmentation is all elements) part of of spine, (with or preservation the of failure or vertebral formation the Congenital the of of or progress. deformities at and found to tend are rapidly Severe birth cease of not skeletal growth. Progression end until will the in may result deformity A progressive deficit. spine neurologic Treatment often congenital kyphosis surgical. of is

child Figure 202-4 the the sharp Note of with break in a kyphosis. contour RE: Philadelphia, ed Nelson (From 1992, Textbook Saunders.) 14, Behrman Pediatrics, WB of

head of identified is newborns tilt. in a because first Torticollis usually muscle shortened secondary Torticollis sternocleidomastoid to (muscular torticollis). usually is a in or positioning This may trauma. result utero from birth system spine nervous upper be central to may torticollis abnormalities Acquired lesion). cervical related pathology or (mass it during or It respiratory infection, or to head a children older can secondary also diagnoses. herald infection (potentially neck and may occur psychiatric local in lymphadenitis)

Available StudentConsult.com @

ipsilateral side. muscular Infants clavicle the tilted the torticollis with toward ear have the on will upward toward the side. face The contralateral look may the which fibrosis after a swelling contracture. a the is or sternocleidomastoid in be precursor often There body of palpable the shortly of birth, asymmetry developmental with hip. associated facial skull the muscular dysplasia and Congenital of torticollis and (plagiocephaly) is

obtained. should examination, lateral neurologic After anteroposterior and be thorough radiographs a The rule isto a etiology. nonmuscular out goal head neck of necessary MRI symptoms, forpersistent the or pain, and neck computed scan A neurologic is tomography persistentdeformity. (CT) and

of and the torticollis deformity. muscular neck cosmetic at of correcting increasing the range the motion Treatment of aimed is be the for Stretching very of beneficial exercises can neck infants. with improve physical stretching do in patients therapy. management adequate if Surgical not indicated is exercises recurrence. risk the Postoperative needed physical decrease is of to therapy Treatment target disorder. the patients with in disorders underlying should

population Back concern. with always approached be should the pediatric in pain psychological, the be In preadolescents. back especially or of result back children in is pain whom contrast frequently to in adults, in pain organic may causes, mechanical longer requires week than investigation. lasting a pain detailed Back a an 85% than approximately occult posttraumatic scoliosis), 18% a In (spondylolysis, specific 33% developmental have are for with fracture), greater and the have back or of months tumor. 33% lesion: children are pediatric pain 2 infection (kyphosis, population, the diagnosis remaining the In undetermined. is 15%,

StudentConsult.com Available @

and duration The of must history include onset symptoms. the pain and character, of The are radiation location, important. sensory Neurologic or be reviewed. must dysfunction) weakness, bowel changes, bladder and symptoms (muscle Medical processes. should a obtained, be pain, history neoplastic rheumatologic with history and disorders, back and focus on family recent fever, The recent chills, weight and systems should loss, questions overall health, illnesses. review on of detailed include musculoskeletal include a evaluation. neurologic should and Physical complete examination spasm Spinal tenderness, and noted. alignment, areas range muscle of motion, of be should back a loss), strongly include painful or young increasing 4 night childhood Red waking, left with activity, curvature. (e.g., deficits, pain (under bladder neurologic weight persistent restricts that pain dysfunction, tumor), and spinal findings systemic or age is associated fever, for pain, bowel flags thoracic

area bilateral of Anteroposterior with views be affected the of entire oblique films lateral standing should the obtained. spine and or necessary bone imaging be diagnosis. CT for Secondary with scan, MRI may scan, very is MRI for useful suspected pathology. intraspinal arthritis and as testing and may studies, such complete for Laboratory be specialized (CRP), indicated. ankylosing juvenile protein spondylitis, a count, blood erythrocyte idiopathic C-reactive (ESR), rate sedimentation

extensive of differential back 202-2). diagnosis pediatric is The (Table pain Treatment the specific diagnosis. depends on been trial been recommended. initial has has pathology physicaltherapy ruled no reevaluation and definitediagnosis an for of with is close serious established, If follow-up out

6 common the before Spinal Diskitis Pyelonephritis abscess Vertebral years) tuberculous) age or (pyogenic (most of osteomyelitis epidural Pancreatitis

instability pelvic (spondylolysis, sickle Hip pulposus disk) Overuse syndrome) (intervertebral Vertebral Herniated fractures and instability) spine spondylolisthesis) nucleus (facet (atlantoaxial injuries (steroid, compression Upper anemia) joint dysfunction) Vertebral (sacroiliac cervical fracture stress cell abnormalities

(neuroblastoma) marrow (astrocytoma) vertebral (eosinophilic Metastatic Bone tumors sarcoma) osteoid Primary malignancy spinal Benign osteoma) (osteogenic granuloma, tumor (leukemia, Primary lymphoma) tumors tumor

pars in the defect Spondylolysis a interarticularis. is vertebra the vertebra. the inferior slippageof on to Spondylolisthesis bilateral superior defects anterior refers with not at the will are by but of present age. have lesions years 6 birth, of The 5% about children lesion adolescent especially most sports in back common extension. It athletes, that is those in involverepetitive involved seenin and divers. this was injury Classically, gymnasts an incidence However, is year-round sports, with the increasing. intensityand increased soccer (extension examples Footballinterior players(extension while shooting), (extension while lineman and players rebounding) athletes basketball of are blocking), while higherrisk. at followed L4. The spondylolysis by common of L5, is most location

3: according to less Grade 99% of 25% than is Grade degree complete Grade 50% to slippage:Grade 75% to 2: 50% Spondylolisthesis or 4: the 1: classified to 75% spondyloptosis 5: Grade displacement 25%

spondylolisthesis on S1. L5 is The location most common of

Available StudentConsult.com @

often persisting over of back Patients low of insidious 2 complain onset an pain weeks. will with worsen The with and extension of and back the improves pain with tends activity to rest. of to radiation buttocks. There may the pain be some lumbar to occur muscular lordosis of loss may A spasm. due the spine present lesion. lumbar palpation with with is Pain of over and extension have step may off lumbosacral with spondylolisthesis the Patients area. palpable a at root nerve can spondylolisthesis neurologic should done, because be have especially detailed examination involvement. A

lateral, obtained. should oblique of spine Anteroposterior, the radiographs and be Scotty oblique findings The spondylolysis. may show associated views with classic dog the allow measurement lateral will spondylolisthesis. of view The not regularly Unfortunately, do radiographs reveal plain spondylol