seventh following edition team: are pleased section of the the that We as continued Drs. members authors have and Kalman (muscle), system), Dr. Lang Drs. Dr. James (cardiovascular Pappano Eric Watras Achilles system), Rubinson (nervous Michelle Cloutier (respiratory Drs. system), Thrall and Roger Bruce Dr. and systems). system), (endocrine Barrett White (gastrointestinal Helen and Kim reproductive Raybould and (cardiovascular reproduction and John We systems). and (endocrine Dr. Withrow Wier following Gil authors: Dr. system), also welcome Harrison the

emphasize have isolated to this compilation the editions we to textbook, of in previous minimize facts. broad concepts and As attempted of the current written as chapter been has Each make the lucid, as to accurate, and text possible. feedback this and each clinical into provide the in phenomena included clinical has insights physiologic section, information cellular indicated context new molecular features We as and on both information that molecular and serves at these have levels. to topics in information further edition the reader the for to on covered that chapter. this of New can a consult list is each sources valuable We addition book. find the hope you that a this to

gastrointestinal, human into reproductive). of tissues and and respiratory, and that of epithelia, body cardiovascular, tissue) nervous, cells consists systems (e.g., organized organ nervous (e.g., renal, muscle, endocrine, The billions are daily live and to to must For properly and met. function conditions tissues activities, general several and thus be these systems organ out carry allow humans First within must cells the survive. the body foremost, and requires environment. and an defense milieu, intracellular external hostile maintenance supplies, adequate energy Survival against appropriate cellular of a survival by is its specialized perform designated skeletal then the muscle function cell ensured, cells). (e.g., Once can contraction cell or and be must function and of Ultimately, the cells, tissues, regulated. organs coordinated the of are presented these physiology throughout book. functions of are of All and essence the discipline this these concepts. introduction a to general follows brief is What

energy. constant a need supply Cells of the triphosphate hydrolysis is of This from derived adenosine (ATP). energy 1 ATP in most in supply less replenished, the If than cells be minute. not cellular depleted would ATP synthesized. be must continuously Thus, fuels. of a in cellular This requires steady supply turn However, are few only acids, in minutes. fuels for and ketoacids) present cellular the levels glucose, a fatty the that at cellular (e.g., metabolism can support blood precursors of fuels fats). (i.e., are carbohydrates, levels the proteins, ingestion and of cellular The blood these maintained through mobilized these when is be of precursors the addition, then not stored possible. In fuels ingestion can and and and triglycerides are the tissue), protein. of in these fuels (stored storage (stored skeletal liver adipose muscle), The in glycogen forms of maintenance a the organ in tissues, adequate is involving following the cellular fuels and levels process of The systems: complex organs, blood

(e.g., when Liver: during glycogen and into → fasting ingested, amino glycogen) converts and forms → food fuels fuel cellular storage acids is glucose). forms → glucose (e.g., precursors Converts storage to glucose

glucose) amino stores and during protein protein) converts (e.g., Like glycogen muscle: fuel (glycogen intermediates to fuel protein liver, (e.g., or acids) Skeletal and → the fuels fasting. and

tract: precursors. fuel Gastrointestinal and absorbs Digests

Stores tissue: the → and during fuel feeding (e.g., triglycerides) during Adipose fasting. acids fuels fatty releases

the cells Cardiovascular to and the to Delivers storage fuels system: from and sites. their

the cellular the by (e.g., and release system: Maintains regulating storage and controlling their from insulin Endocrine of blood their fuels glucagons). storage and levels

nutrient levels and oxygen Nervous endocrine response, drinking content blood Monitors pulmonary, modulates feeding in in and cardiovascular, system: and and, the induces and behaviors. the systems maintain constant cells to the intracellular environment the In relatively survive. of body a metabolism, must to energy addition cellular uptake of from and membrane the a cell This of produce export cellular intracellular volume. the the wastes, of potential, fuels the a resting constant ATP, the environment, to of appropriate maintenance ionic includes maintenance an needed of the establishment transport carried by functions these proteins. are membrane of out All specific

must relatively that composition also the the of cells The bathes maintained extracellular constant. (ECF) be fluid temperature addition, In volume of be and must ECF the the regulated. lungs, responsible Epithelial volume a the cells the ECF, for role regulation. in in skin of and the plays the tract, while kidneys and are maintaining temperature composition gastrointestinal major daily food a the absorbed cells are the On across epithelial and are essential H2O tract. basis, gastrointestinal of ingested, components and and must This intake body, solutes be the of matched by maintaining from water excretion balance. steady-state daily thus balance , pH, for ECF solutes). The of organic of (e.g., kidneys maintenance and steady-state Na+ the Ca++ − K+ critically the , many in HCO3 water involved , , are components and lungs production “burn” supply of product of for ensure major ATP adequate (i.e., the excrete O2 CO2). fuels the waste an process The to of the this cellular pH can kidneys pH. the maintain Because ECF lungs the the with affect CO2 work to of the ECF,

adapt imposed to body between ambient availability temperature of to and many food and be environments often humans inhabit the water. in able challenges and the by changes rapidly must different environments, Because move the adaptation cells regulation. tissues requires of of in Such coordination organs as function well and as different their endocrine and function. systems tissue, organ The nervous and coordinate regulate and cell, (days regulation moves or a low-salt longer for from periods can to individual cellular occur weeks), case to to as of for in fuels a levels changes case is as an is environment The diet. when a hot over the cool from the the to time or of rapidly function a blood, high-salt of much minutes), (seconds acclimatization

body complex represents human multiple of function levels. processes at the The what book This about explains currently these processes. known is of the on also principles at often abnormal processes discussion and appropriate, is human physiologic the illustrate extremes. Although the emphasis is disease function these of normal function and as body, the

for what have for believe likely the phenomena presented responsible section most be mechanisms each under they The to the consideration. authors adopted to We and brevity, simplicity. achieve compromise clarity, this have

Bruce M. 29TheGastricPhaseoftheIntegratedResponsetoaMeal,529 PhD 31TheColonicPhaseoftheIntegratedResponsetoaMeal,559 Bruce MD, A. Stanton, 32TransportandMetabolicFunctionsoftheLiver,568 30TheSmallIntestinalPhaseoftheIntegratedResponsetoaMeal,541 PhD Koeppen,

580 System, Renal Section 7: The 37RoleoftheKidneysintheRegulationofAcid-BaseBalance,670

Endocrine 685 Reproductive 8: Section Systems, The and

Physiology A. BRUCE BRUCE 1Cellular STANTON SECTION M. KOEPPEN AND

of be chapter, answer this Upon should completion student the following able to the 1. questions:

cell, a are organelles and function? in eukaryotic is What their found typical what

2.

What the plasma composition the is of membrane?

3.

What and important proteins, major transport plasma they transport the are of membrane molecules across do the and biologically membrane? ions classes how

4.

membrane determine used the is or is molecule the What to it passive? how of and is plasma ion the gradient, across a active electrochemical or transport whether

5.

membrane What and for across movement cell capillary are the the water of forces driving wall?

solutions of and human understand define student is body the to addition, physiologically In should be and properties fluids: of following cells. able of he composed important the billions perform common different can cells share Although elements. they certain functions, the of membrane. focuses these the and the on of This cell chapter transport an molecules into overview important of and plasma its water across provides elements common function and of out

Cells Eukaryotic Overview of

Eukaryotic distinguished prokaryotic a the nucleus. of by cells presence from membrane-delimited cells are all exception cells nucleus. body the lens cells With contain and the within eye, blood the within of a mature human red cells the of human the compartments: the into therefore cell divided is two The and effectively nucleus cytoplasm. containing molecules, a an and ions, organic of number numerous solution aqueous is cytoplasm cytoskeletal organelles. The elements, function. the Many of carry are cellular out specific compartments organelles membrane-enclosed that An idealized eukaryotic cell depicted in is

Fig. the compartments . , and 1.1 of of and function in the components summarized some are cell primary consult biology and the a cell this one textbooks to more material on many presentation in-depth currently that are are Readers available. who encouraged molecular of desire of

Membrane The Plasma

extracellular plasma The the by body that cells intracellular the environment. surrounded within from are membrane the separates a contents of the is specific following: of the the of membrane involved functions, the this including plasma presence and, in of particular, important cellular properties membrane proteins, Because membrane in a number

into of the of transport Selective out molecules cell. and carried proteins. out transport by membrane function A

Cell recognition of surface cell the use antigens. through

and receptors through neurotransmitter hormone pathways. signal transduction Cell communication through and

permanent of matrix, interaction organization, a and with use and cell of Tissue junctions, molecules. extracellular temporary the adhesion such with cell variety the as

activity. Membrane-dependent enzymatic

shape the linkage Determination of cytoskeleton the of plasma to cell membrane. by of function structure chapter, the the membrane In considered. are of and eukaryotic cells this plasma the membrane. the focuses across More the specifically, molecules chapter transport plasma and water of on are the transport of here. Only principles membrane presented chapters Additional are in relate the to that various and book. specific presented details cells sections of this

of of consists bilayer ( plasma lipid with proteins a associated The membrane cells eukaryotic 5-nm-thick

Fig. 1.2 ). integrated Some to lipid are into of more are attached others the membrane-associated proteins bilayer; loosely the the

Fig. CHAPTER 1 Function Membrane • of Principles 3 Cell and and the a is top 1.1 portion the drawing The of eukaryotic intracellular cell various cell. omitted organelles. to of nucleus illustrate Schematic See for text details.

Cellular Some of Components Primary Eukaryotic and 1.1 Compartments Functions

transportNucleusGenome of and the and lipids, large lipids within ribosomesTranslation particles cellLysosomeIntracellular of sorting, (e.g., synthesisMitochondriaATP the Ca2+ DNA cholesterol, associated autosomes into by of CytosolMetabolism, of (22 of to endoplasmic small uptake chromosomes), out membrane reticulumTranslation of from reticulumSynthesis and oxidative phosphorylation, RNA cell plasma organelles water and bacteria, for protein mRNA of debris)Golgi proteins of degradationEndosomeCellular storageFree secretion sex other and or and shape synthesis synthesis delivery intracellular membrane, mRNA for movement, proteins removal endoplasmic cytosolic Ca2+ into apparatusModification, internalization of ribosomes)CytoskeletonCell 2 storageSmooth into proteinsRough the molecules packaging cell, receptors uptake (free

adenosine RNA. mRNA, ATP, triphosphate; messenger

charged surfaces a or by the membrane outer that hydrophilic inner contain often (or molecules proteins. integral to binding membrane, polar) the of hydrophobic chains (nonpolar) acyl and head ( fatty two

Fig.

). 1.3 major fatty the of phospholipid for molecule The Membrane the is hydrophobic the of lipids amphipathic The membrane are formation and phosphoglycerides. acyl the core of bilayer, and Lipids polar chains the phospholipids the bilayer: critical form the nature plasma of The on groups exposed surface. are are the head amphipathic Phospholipids

• Fig. the GM. See of are membrane. rafts. cell Not text details. plasma (Modified Cooper 1.2 from diagram Schematic for lipid shown 12.3.) 2000, Molecular Sinauer; The Washington, Approach. ed. 2nd DC: Cell—A Fig.

Phospholipid Glycolipid (e.g., (e.g., phosphatidylcholine) galactosylceramide) Cholesterol

Fig. galactose) Sugar • (e.g., in One depicting one of opposing and the acyl of phospholipid plasma in regions leaflet is the of the molecule molecules. classes tight Models fatty they prevents shown. The 1.3 which exist The as of of not molecules “kink” hydrophilic membrane increases acyl The arranged leaflet this and produces fatty membrane lipids of a major packing hydrophobic chain, fluidity. presence lipids, chains bilayer. in bond the the of unsaturated. double the are membrane the is (Modified Netter’s of from Icon Atlas Learning Teterboro, Physiology. NJ: BM: Hansen 2002.) Human JT, Koeppen Systems;

chains, acyl glycerol are membrane phospholipids (i.e., the may one length bonds). carbons or in have or fatty saturated which double unsaturated attached more be and to a majority “backbone” of The contain linked to phosphate an a glycerol alcohol and is group. via even varies serine, the alcohols and ethanolamine, different cell are types composition and glycerol. common the The between choline, membrane phospholipid among The inositol, of Another bilayer important phospholipid, leaflets. sphingomyelin, as in are of has “backbone” membrane, phosphatidylcholine its and sphingosine the plasma sphingomyelin the erythrocyte instead For example, alcohol glycerol. amino

phospholipids. common predominantly found the of these the leaflet membrane, in lists outer phosphatidylinositol found are chains to leaflet. in phosphatidylethanolamine, The fatty inner 14 acyl whereas phosphatidylserine, 20 are usually the and

the facilitates an signaling phosphatidylinositol , location leaflet and membrane transduction, of role the plays its inner role. in important this signal in

(see bilayer critical of cholesterol component sterol a also is the The molecule

Fig. ). 1.3 found is at both the (37°C). in membrane serves and temperature leaflets normal stabilize body to It much be As of the lipids membrane in cholesterol. the 50% as can found minor component glycolipids. lipid of plasma membrane the A is that consist carbohydrates polar two linked to indicates, as of chains consist lipids, head acyl These (see of fatty their groups name

Fig.

). 1.3 , plays the on anchoring the to glycosylphosphatylinositol important the section (GPI), leaflet discussed glycolipid, an proteins one outer membrane. in of As role in on amphipathic, the which they located. polar in and surface leaflet glycolipids, are Both they like of the cholesterol and outer with the phospholipids, groups their oriented are are portion within located interior is hydrophobic of the Their the thus bilayer.

a lipid structure. not The bilayer is static and lipids membrane. plane the The within proteins diffuse of can associated the temperature composition. fluidity the is lipid The by of membrane determined and by its increases, As the membrane temperature increases. the of fluidity the and fluidity. chains unsaturated glycolipids membrane fatty phospholipids in presence increases of acyl also The fatty a double acyl If the presence (see bond introduces “kink” chain of molecule is unsaturated, a in a the

Fig. 1.3).

membrane increased. associating molecule fluidity This is from and, the a result, kink with prevents surrounding as closely lipids, constrained can membrane of movement is the the proteins or lipid in limited. be Although “fluid,” bilayer of limits cytoskeleton, example, which movement. intracellular the be For their components can membrane proteins anchored to another. one from isolated domains can also be Membrane found epithelial An in be example this important tissues. can of into of basolateral epithelial complexes (e.g., apical plasma and tight separate Junctional the two domains: junctions) membrane cells (see ). targeted The allows one to epithelial carry localization domains cells or other of proteins of membrane into these

Cell substances and the of side from CHAPTER the Function side. vectorial opposite Membrane of to one 1 epithelium transport out of Principles The gastrointestinal kidneys). crucial organ vectorial and to carry the systems out several tract of for (e.g., functioning the ability is transport called into addition, (e.g., aggregate In that the regions sphingomyelin are rafts. some membrane cholesterol) and of what lipids lipid contain specific plane as diffuse lipid membrane unit. association of with the have the in rafts These which discrete a often proteins, an appear rafts a serve Lipid number of functions. to to important segregate One function of is molecules. rafts signaling these

the As as of much plasma composed of 50% is proteins. membrane proteins or are lipid-anchored, These membrane as peripheral. classified integral,

fatty membrane the membrane bilayer, residues in with Integral lipid acyl chains lipids. the hydrophobic proteins the associated are imbedded are acid where of amino hydrophobic Many integral transmembrane bilayer; membrane proteins proteins. are span proteins termed the such regions. and hydrophobic both have hydrophilic proteins Transmembrane of in hydrophobic form the helix, The an often region, α spans membrane. the environment the acid residues then membrane. aqueous on exposed to either the side are Hydrophilic of amino multiple membrane through the proteins pass times. Transmembrane may

protein–coupled Thereisasuperfamilyofmembraneproteinsthatserveasreceptorsformanyhormones,neurotransmitters,andnumerousdrugs.ThesereceptorsarecoupledtoheterotrimericGproteinsandaretermedG ).Theseproteinsspanthemembranewithsevenα-helicaldomains.Thebindingsiteofeachligandiseitherontheextracellularportionoftheprotein(largeligands)orinthemembrane-spanningportion(smallligands),whereasthecytoplasmicportionbindstotheGprotein.Thissuperfamilyofmembraneproteinsmakesupthethirdlargestfamilyofgenesinhumans.NearlyhalfofallnonantibioticprescriptiondrugsaretargetedtowardGprotein–coupledreceptors. (see receptors

membrane lipid the to also A via anchors. be protein attached can bilayer. attached is a lipid which of covalently to protein then molecule, The in one embedded leaflet the is of outer membrane. the proteins anchors to the leaflet Glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) their myristate Proteins via or prenyl or inner geranylgeranyl). can leaflet farnesyl (e.g., carboxyl-terminus be acids by amino-terminus to the via attached palmitate) (e.g., by or anchors their fatty

of proteins. with lipids, head groups more bind lipid-anchored they associated but proteins Peripheral may the be integral polar or membrane the to commonly

many of chains them). the outer as many have (i.e., on of cells, the the surface outer some called attached lipids, exposed In glycosylated leaflet are to proteins sugars, of membrane, oligosaccharides, the short as well of form glycocalyx. Collectively, the and these glycoproteins called glycolipids what is involved neutrophils vascular surface interactions cell-cell of cell cells). endothelial on formation recognition in (e.g., cell glycoproteins Depending cell glycolipids (e.g., the of to these and may and attachment antigens) be

group of on of membrane chapter plasma transporters. cellular focuses or proteins: proteins, previously, membrane many Although noted as membrane this remainder transport the important plasma one functions, proteins the perform has human 10% (≈2000) transporters. for genes estimated It been code of that approximately targets They drugs. numerous for also are

of and the normal The requires of solutes water function movement and the of cells cell. continuous out into are in dissolved. ions, of are primarily intracellular solutes H2O, and glucose, which extracellular (e.g., fluids The amino composed acids) effective of these important is solutes. The the an movement plasma all its core, virtually of hydrophobic barrier to with biologically membrane, of restricts the across water the movement It also membrane. membrane solutes is of for The membrane. responsible transporters water membrane in presence movement the and the across specific these of the

transporters have Membrane ways. classified different been several in solute four general the carriers, this In triphosphate adenosine groups: ion chapter, water and transporters (ATP)–dependent are channels, channels, transporters. into divided

ions molecules lists at of membrane and the transport they their transport, modes rates estimates across membrane. of groups which of or transporters, the these

movement and the (AQPs), of for or the out aquaporins main cell. Water water routes are channels, into brain, gastrointestinal throughout (e.g., They tract, glands, the distributed and lungs, liver). salivary body widely are kidneys, the different multiple AQP isoforms. and cells Cells even isoforms, express some express AQP4 cells their and and For ducts membrane in their collecting membrane. kidneys AQP3 apical example, in the AQP2 in the of basolateral express membrane antidiuretic (also kidneys by the arginine AQP2 of which ability apical crucial to is Moreover, is vasopressin), concentrate hormone abundance for urine of the the the regulated (see in called the

NH3 allow such membrane. CO2, AQP across of all the the cross other provide a to movement also passive isoforms membrane, and pathway some mannitol, urea, pyrimidines, isoforms purines, the molecules Although as glycerol, for H2O identified via aquaglyceroporins the group of is crossing AQPs the first one (see some was collectively this Because glycerol as molecules ). AQPs, also of membrane called the leave of Regulation that number can H2O membrane. the the occurs the of cell AQPs in via or primarily by AQPs of amount altering enter

EachAQPmoleculeconsistsofsixmembrane-spanningdomainsandacentralwater-transportingpore.FourAQPmonomersassembletoformahomotetramerintheplasmamembrane,witheachmonomerfunctioningasawaterchannel.

(e.g., found and are of function and the cells). especially neurons all excitable are for Ion muscle important cells, in channels cells of are Ion classified by channels mechanism and (i.e., channel conductance selectivity, opening their closing). and gating through the is defined as ions that Selectivity nature the of pass channel. the channels be highly ion they one through. specific allow in that At selective, ion only extreme, can a of the or cations nonselective, through. they At may a extreme, or all other anions group allowing be refers that the picosiemens in the is channel number through to Channel typically conductance pass (pS). and of expressed ions conductance have of of pS, considerable: is a a to only than conductance The 100 whereas 2 Some conductance range have channels others more of pS. 1 For the some direction is varies, ion in the conductance depending moving. the which channels, on an moving into if channel channel example, the the are cell when than they when out inward are a cell, of ions larger rectifier. is said moving has the to conductance be the For a or gating open ( Moreover, an process ion state channels fluctuate closed between called a state,

Fig. 1.4 ). include control acetylcholine that an the in antagonists Factors extracellular can gating controls cation-selective or agonists extracellular a (e.g., mitochondria,andwaterchannels(i.e.,aquaporins)thatfunctionas is that the channel voltage, agonist apore. of membrane gating

skeletal of plate cells; ATP,adenosinetriphosphate.motor see muscle end

6), , Chapter cyclic ATP, Ca++ messengers (e.g., intracellular guanosine

1 Principles •Fig. of and CHAPTER Membrane Function Cell 10−12amps);thatis,12.5millionions/secondcrossthemembrane. 1.4 Recordingofcurrentflowthroughasingleionchannel.Thechannelspontaneouslyfluctuatesbetweenanopenstateandaclosedstate.Theamplitudeofthecurrentisapproximately2pA(2×

mechanical and membrane. plasma of monophosphate), stretch the of or change membrane a the Ion gating in in be channels number channels channels. can by the of by the regulated

transporters HUGO more large into Gene 50 been by Committee) almost categorized transporters (denoted Nomenclature the have to represent 400 Solute than date. membrane group carriers specific of identified SLCs families; a carriers of can These mode divided their according groups be into transport. to three single (or the group, uniporters molecule facilitated transports One across membrane. a transporters), this glucose or group. is important of SLC2A1) that [GLUT-1], transporter (glucose an into The the cell 1 transporter brings member the second membrane. of couples two more The (or across group, molecules/ions movement or cotransporters), symporters the As are same direction. in transported molecules/ions the the name implies, the The urine ), Na+,K+,2Cl− or SLC12A1), the found this (NKCC2, (NKCC) and for of concentrating a kidney is diluting in symporter is which group. crucial the (see member membrane; directions. however, exchange in third more also the The across transported of movement in couples two molecules/ions or transporters), case, (or group, molecules/ions antiporters are opposite the this the of solute a The member antiporter Na+-H+ carriers. group of is this antiporter in (NHE-1, regulating isoform or in SLC9A1) important found pH. is an plays all role this of intracellular cells One and

as drive ATP-dependent membrane. the molecules/ to movement their name The ions of in the energy implies, use across ATP the transporters, two cassette transporters are transporters: of the (ABC) ATP-dependent ion the There ATPase and groups transporters. ATP-binding ATPases. P-type The V-type ATPase are ion into subdivided transporters and ATPases

ATPases the cycle. are during The transport phosphorylated P-type an Na+,K+-ATPase important example is a ATPase. P-type of cell. the transports hydrolysis of With the and into it each ions the out ATP Na+ three two K+ of ions cell molecule, ion electrical cell cellular a all is and (see as volume as cells maintaining in role in present Na+,K+-ATPase establishing gradients, well plays and critical

lysosomes); endosomes, they of several H+-ATPases. are vacuolar V-type a in (e.g., referred as result, the found H+-ATPases as also organelles are to intracellular membranes are ATP ATPases, aAnother is type ATPases, of F-type they for The responsible the in synthesis. mitochondria, found and considered They this in chapter. are not

andK+ subunittothemembraneandalsoappearstomodulatetheaffinityoftheNa+,K+-ATPaseforNa+ andK+ subunit.However,theγ orjusttheNa+pump)isfoundinallcellsandisresponsibleforestablishingthegradientsofNa+ subunitcontainsbindingsitesforNa+,K+ subunit.Theβ (sonamedfortheFXYDaminoacidsequencefoundintheprotein). andK+ .Theα ).Na+,K+-ATPaseiscomposedofthreesubunits(α,β,andγ),andtheproteinexistsinthemembranewithastoichiometriccompositionof1α,1β,1γ.Theα subunitappearstoplayaregulatoryrole.Theγ transportintheabsenceoftheγ subunitscancarryoutNa+ proteins subunitisthefunctionalsubunitoftheenzyme(i.e.,ithydrolyzesATP,bindsNa+ Na+,K+-ATPase(alsocalledtheNa+,K+-pump subunitisresponsiblefortargetingtheα acrosstheplasmamembrane.Thesegradientsinturnprovideenergyforseveralessentialcellfunctions(see andATP.Itisalsothesubunitthatbindscardiacglycosides(e.g.,ouabain),whichspecificallyinhibittheenzyme.Ithasatransmembranedomainandthreeintracellulardomains:phosphorylation(P-domain),nucleotidebinding(N-domain),andactuator(A-domain).Althoughtheα andK+ ,andtranslocatesthemacrossthemembrane),itcannotfunctionwithouttheβ andβ subunitisamemberofafamilyofproteinscalledFXYD

an in role urinary membrane important plasma in the (see plays H+-ATPase acidification

represent transporters. transporters large ABC of group a membrane ATP cells, prokaryotic domains domains). both and that ABC have they amino eukaryotic and in are bind acid (i.e., They found of have more than transporters 40 humans been and specific transporters subgroups in ABC to identified Seven date. a bile cholesterol, Cl−, molecules/ions, group anions. iron, including diverse and transport drugs, acids, They organic of

and transporters, transport specific membrane leave through and Because enter regulated. important molecules cells biologically membrane is transporters expressed types. Although Na+,K+-ATPase), some other limited the are cell expression transporters to is specific cells all membrane many (e.g., in ubiquitously of which to system the expression located sodium-glucose–linked the epithelial proximal SGLT-1 This tubules). organ and and of intestines renal of the SGLT-2 in specificity in tailors the the of (e.g., transporters is cells cell the it function of be membrane across the amount being In molecule can addition, regulated. transported the a the kinetics of through regulation transporters take stays in ion of altering altering or state), or versus place in open rate (e.g., transporters the number membrane time individual the Such closed can channel the an both. the or

and of endocytosis through the released water and Solute the cell process cell be into exocytosis. brought the from through process a can of is the pinches off plasma piece process the Endocytosis of and membrane a whereby

fibrosis formoredetails).Inpatientswithcysticfibrosis,theinabilitytosecreteCl− channelandalsoregulatesothermembranetransporters(e.g.,theepithelialNa+ normallyfunctionsasaCl− transmembrane fibrosis ,andH2Oresultsinanincreaseintheviscosityoftheairwaysurfacemucus;thustheciliacannottransporttheentrappedbacteriaandotherpathogensoutofthelung.Thisinturnleadstorecurrentandchroniclunginfections.Theinflammatoryprocessthataccompaniestheseinfectionsultimatelydestroysthelungtissue,causingrespiratoryfailureanddeath.In2015,the ,Na+ conductance transport regulator isanautosomalrecessivediseasecharacterizedbychroniclunginfections,pancreaticinsufficiency,andinfertilityinboysandmen.Deathusuallyoccursbecauseofrespiratoryfailure.Itismostprevalentinwhitepeopleandisthemostcommonlethalgeneticdiseaseinthispopulation,occurringin1per3000livebirths.Itisaresultofmutationsinageneonchromosome7thatcodesforanABCtransporter.Todate,morethan1000mutationsinthegenehavebeenidentified.Themostcommonmutationisadeletionofaphenylalanineatposition508(F508del).Becauseofthisdeletion,degradationoftheproteinbytheendoplasmicreticuluminenhanced,and,asaresult,thetransporterdoesnotreachtheplasmamembrane.Thistransporter,calledcystic Cystic channel[ENaC]).Thusinindividualswithcysticfibrosis,epithelialtransportisdefective,whichisresponsibleforthepathophysiologicprocess.Forexample,inpatientsnotaffectedbycysticfibrosis,theepithelialcellsthatlinetheairwayofthelungarecoveredwithalayerofmucusthatentrapsinhaledparticulatesandbacteria.Ciliaontheepithelialcellsthentransporttheentrappedmaterialoutofthelung,aprocesstermedmucociliary (see (CFTR),

U.S.FoodandDrugAdministrationapprovedlumacaftor/ivacaftor(Orkambi),adrugthatincreasestheamountofF508delCFTRintheplasmamembraneoflungepithelialcells.

fuse exocytosis interior, membrane. the the the cell plasma with inside internalized whereby process cell is into and is the vesicles of cellular the for contents among the the and vesicles In these integrity maintained, membrane is the transfer the compartments. of plasma of allow both processes, cell is by cells across endocytosis exocytosis epithelial tract), (e.g., the lining the membrane cells one membrane. of across followed the opposite In gastrointestinal some the of the epithelium, vesicles across transport a inside termed substances This process the transcytosis. allows the

three Endocytosis in occurs mechanisms. which small and cell. water the The nonspecific is first uptake into consists pinocytosis, of molecules the of these occurs for portion is the that exchange a of line across the capillaries cells fluid feature prominent of that vessels. and responsible is Pinocytosis endothelial a endocytosis, second debris). (e.g., for form cell of cellular allows of The bacteria, the large phagocytosis, particles internalization characteristic cells neutrophils is process in the (e.g., This important and macrophages). of an immune system receptor-mediated always, but process. is a not Often, phagocytosis For example,

Membrane Principles 9 of and 1 Cell CHAPTER Function

being of constantly and attachment by being are a are cells plasma Proteins membrane protein. of within of result, are with membrane which proteins by “tagged” One the portion synthesized the cytoplasmic newly replaced. As the proteins the mechanism removed replaced ubiquitin membrane replacement for to proteins. is constantly One membrane that class Cells 76–amino is the DUBs. these or by Once a 4 the that in also the are ubiquitinated, added covalently the on important protein by developmentally protein lysosomes ligases. groups that rate to versus of degraded a amount family. time protein attached a Ubiquitin protein downregulated Thus undergoes is ubiquitin group enzymes membrane (usually by the stays it (DUBs). a enzymes the acid to (Nedd4)/Nedd4-like is ubiquitin of plasma membrane proteosome. depends the are is rate endocytosis and protein contain ligases is the the of either removed lysine) called protein by by they deubiquitinating ligases kidneys (see is reabsorption of the the One of the by of epithelial Na+ hormone apical ENaC membrane For stimulated ubiquitination This is ). aldosterone the ducts to by of of inhibit aldosterone actions adrenal cells. prevents example, Nedd4-2. collecting in the Thus result, membrane, the longer period thereby retained a Na+ and channels for a in reabsorbed. the and of the are cell enters more as time is

have immunoglobulins. macrophages their of on receptors portion that bind Fc surface the coated When a process are called bacteria with invade opsonization. body often the antibody, they attach the fragment portion membrane macrophages of the via the inside to immunoglobulin, and phagocytosis, of (Fc) then the destroyed cell. are bacteria undergo crystallizable These of endocytosis, molecules cell. is the third the uptake mechanism receptor-mediated of endocytosis specific into The which allows form of receptors In bind molecules endocytosis, surface the of cell. to the on this the of dynamin clathrin, a and including number GTPase accessory adaptin, Endocytosis proteins, involves (

Fig. 1.5

either regulated. can be constitutive or Exocytosis that example, cells secretion secreting secreting fibroblasts or collagen. in in for immunoglobulin plasma Constitutive are occurs, in glandular cells exocrine cells). endocrine cells, Regulated secretion pancreatic acinar and occurs (e.g., neurons, secretion or cytoplasm is In the hormone, in product after digestive reticulum (e.g., appropriate received. cells, for signal endoplasmic apparatus, Golgi synthesis granules an is and these neurotransmitter, in rough secretory and the until processing enzyme), the in secretory stored signals These be hormonal or may neural. with stimulus, the the cell Once the membrane and secretory releases into contents vesicle the fluid. receives appropriate extracellular plasma the fuses its Fusion by accessory the of a with the vesicle number mediated is of proteins. membrane the [NSF] sensitive fusion group N-ethylmaleimide protein protein (soluble One SNARE receptors) proteins. attachment is important These the membrane help proteins target secretory

coated Formation pit vesicle of Dynamin Formation of Receptor coated

fuse Fig. to ready lysosome) uncoating (e.g., vesicle Vesicle • Uncoated A the molecules the from Wilkins; a clathrin. organelles cell, Ross is dissociate Williams molecules Dynamin, endocytosis. the formed then inside assists clathrin-coated clathrin & endocytic and fuse bind ligand. adaptin in with triphosphatase of (GTPase), the W: membrane. (Adapted and are Histology. recycled. on uncoated adaptin guanosine the linking lysosomes). the other in 5th from the the vesicle to surface with pit to cell MH, 1.5 cell (e.g., 2006.) Receptors of the Baltimore: ed. Pawlina ready separation is Once The Receptor-mediated vesicle receptor Lippincott

with Cholesterol levels LDL. receptors However, it of endocytosis available recycle development through important the and receptors to degraded is cell collect and it made the bind unable transported receptor lipoproteins. diet, is layer cholesterol-containing “bad with is “coated cholesterol cells are the arteries. an therefore to elevated cellular membranes). LDL, LDL Individuals and have carry this clathrin-coated the of LDL the cell, Inside and blood LDL of the the with called component Defects is prevent they ingested the the surface. the a it associated cell. smooth LDL in in component uptake defect is the to synthesize then the pits” most endosomes plasma is and from blood. of in the the the because then lysosomes, of bind Normally, they cell, obtain cells in undergo receptors in cells, as plaques the blood blood into in release cholesterol in cholesterol Once lipoproteins association cholesterol LDL vesicles. inside often of muscle cholesterol,” where LDL, Low-density (LDLs) to is (e.g., back must to After key membrane. it atherosclerosis, occlusion This the arteries. attacks increased of of result coronary with for is as associated heart risk an a process,

to the plasma vesicle membrane. is of ([Ca++]). the usually triggered of increase Ca++ process concentration an intracellular The in by secretion exist: secretion this kidney general the two in the as rule by hormone intracellular cells of occurs ), (1) by Renin a decrease However, the with parathyroid exceptions to secretion (see (2) gland parathyroid Ca++ does notable (see of the juxtaglomerular

Transport Principles Solute Basic of Water and

membrane, the important noted, its the out of barrier is cell. hydrophobic to molecules virtually an into with biologically the all core, effective plasma of or movement already As provide proteins transport of pathway allows and into out membrane transport the that to cells. Thus occur sufficient transport also of to pathway driving an appropriate the not presence for occur; However, force a is is required. and section, In this presented. diffusion, and active of basic are passive principles osmosis the transport, These other in the sections topics book. discussed are as of in depth, greater the appropriate,

area low of to concentration an move molecules Diffusion concentration. high which is the of process by one spontaneously from expenditure gradient molecules diffusion establishment of of concentration requires the gradients later, Thus to (as exists, dissipates region for of concentration discussed energy). the of of molecules from concentration gradient a the region concentration wherever the the low high thermal process driven a motion the Diffusion molecules. by is the random of a first from of quantifies molecule point the to diffusion rate diffuses at which law A Fick’s B: point

across A along which ΔX D = the J diffusion which diffusion Equation distance diffusion occurring = point B coefficient concentration per area of diffusion ΔC the is = or = flux where difference A occurring and the 1.1 the between = unit the is time rate

which size, and the energy molecule, diffusion is coefficient of The of diffusion the its the thermal place. viscosity the medium account into takes taking through For equation: approximated D spherical Stokes-Einstein by the molecules, is

η= of of k = the radius medium T Boltzmann’s molecule Kelvin Equation temperature = r 1.2 constant in the degrees = viscosity where

According to eqs. will and rate large small of 1.1 molecules 1.2 , the for diffusion faster than molecules. for be when and In presence a diffusion rates concentration large gradients, diffusion high low-viscosity the medium. in are temperatures, at of addition, occurs in elevated variables linearly of related other gradient. to the constant, rate all is diffusion With concentration held the

can lipid bilayer. barrier, be diffusion of the applied as to such molecules Fick’s across also a a equation applied bilayer When (D) the the to of the to across molecule diffusion bilayer, bilayer. diffusion especially ability through a incorporates the and of the the coefficient of the molecule properties diffuse a partition To the is term quantify with the interaction coefficient of molecule bilayer, (β) used. the the that the (e.g., bilayer lipid lipid 1. the the and For “dissolves” in water) β= bathing bilayer, equally a in fluid molecule the and it less 1. in easily molecule in more bilayer, lipid dissolves If bilayer, the if lipid the β> 1; easily β< dissolves coefficient lipid thus diffusion and the the partition the greater. simple of coefficient—therefore molecule molecule across is, more diffusion the the soluble For the lipid larger a bilayer, is, bilayer—is rate the the of thickness and the represents ΔC membrane, is difference situation, the area, membrane. In this of the across the concentration ΔX is the A membrane

(or plasma membrane) follows: quantitating across the is useful Another the for diffusion molecules membrane as equation any of

1.3 Equation

i = concentration coefficient the of concentration J membrane of Co diffusion the the P where cell rate cell across flux the − = =−PC( molecule the = molecule J = inside Ci outside the permeability the of or is the Co),

eq. is This Fick’s equation equation from ( derived ). 1.1 incorporates coefficient the and P (β). ΔX, A, D, partition velocity per moles/cm3. P expressed centimeters is in the units units C and of second), (e.g., of centimeter Thus moles the square (mol/cm2/ are units of second sec). per flux per P be can for any experimentally bilayer. molecule Values and for obtained

important of molecules. many the represents biologically an to portion phospholipid barrier membrane noted, plasma the effective As Consequently, membrane. the the these phase membrane the of for is lipid efficient diffusion not molecules process across through movement of an plasma take cell gradient 8 a µm only approximately It the plasma phospholipids, of across membrane of has imposed in a for been minutes. dissipation would membrane estimated 20 a composed with that diameter, urea amino years take for to glucose acids take and gradients approximately hours whereas dissipate. ion dissipate, would gradients 14 to would Similar

cross the molecules through noted membrane membranes the lipid than diffusing vast via specific As majority previously, of cell the important biologically of membrane. transporters, by portion rather eq. Nevertheless, the membranes. been molecules many quantitate diffusion and can biological of used across 1.3 to be has value reflects the transporter is cases, of in uses properties transporters) the the cross to done, the pathway this multiple molecule the permeability some (P) membrane. When the (e.g., coefficient that of or, membrane

the the fluid. of cells lungs for in (see of through limitations the movement the of the transport the molecules Despite the understanding movement describe cell ), understand molecules important of and cytoplasm exchange diffusion the and gas is of using also membranes, to across in it between cell, extracellular molecules of For rest. of perfused recruitment muscle one the physiological to that of not are skeletal at the opening or responses exercise example, capillaries is previously muscle the capillaries the fuels contracting and of between quickly This fatty so can diffusion glucose) distance be reduces density and delivered the opening cellular oxygen more fiber. thereby closed that to increases muscle (e.g., and fiber capillary the and acids capillary be to 40 a fiber from estimated is of capillary the distance resting µm. muscle, average muscle a In 20 distance µm However, this decreases less. with to exercise, or

quantitate on cause gradient is the to membrane. (also driving molecule called to a the difference) to move potential electrochemical across a force used acting The electrochemical it electrochemical follows: calculated is (Δµx) molecule gradient The for any as

,[X]o = T = the [X]o = = Faraday of membrane X concentration Vi = the Vo) = degrees cell potential = logarithm the − the Ln temperature = xm concentration X outside the (Vm zFV [X]i natural inside R + the gas F the Equation in cell 1.4 = of valence RTln constant the Vm Kelvin ˜µx molecules constant charged where zx = of

the the transporting the membrane. molecule is of to The carry out measure available work across energy useful electrochemical of free gradient the a has It bBy are potential energy membrane cell. regard the represents the with X convention, voltages to component and in (chemical concentration membrane two the the for determined exterior gradient across reported of the One components: a In is (Vm) the resting negative. membrane cell, potential typical Vm peak in Positive potential. excitable action cells the values can some be an at of observed

Cell CHAPTER difference). Function 1 Principles Membrane of and across a (electrical (i.e., 0 potential exits difference) when membrane potential associated the membrane molecules represents (e.g., energy moving with mV). second The ions) charged the Vm component ≠ cell (Fig. for be inside the across a outside need to of and glucose the concentrations Thus the considered movement glucose of membrane, only of 1.6A ). the (see of example, from membrane, the across inside However, K+ concentrations and for membrane both determined would K+ from the cell be of voltage the the and movement outside

Fig. 1.6B

Eq. situation for which the the 0): a Δµ is membrane at = can derive molecule used in equation 1.4 Nernst across to the be (i.e., equilibrium

Equation 1.5a

Equation 1.5b

Vm equilibrium equation to is as condition the calculated Nernst across referred the molecule Vm potential at value the (Ex, equilibrium there the Nernst no of and represents the net transport which membrane). The is the with of gradient a millivolts. It equilibrium Nernst the apparent energy that energy in concentration in be that the quantitates should and potential expresses example, in For for cell the depicted

Fig. for proportional move in Nernst of 1.6B from (causing to (derived gradient to energy equilibrium 90.8 K+ the is , K+ K+ cell). potential [EK+]) out the the mV the magnitude (Vm =−60 the mV), which to in cell. opposite voltage causes to, greater the and This energy is the enter than, of K+ membrane electrochemical of the net out cell. such membrane the a As of is the will be gradient across that K+ the result, movement driving K+ mV way 30.8 out K+ the EK+) (Vm Another force for the state − is cell). this is net to (driving that of in more described detail is in This

C, function: 37° replacing function by The with the the can be follows natural base equation, logarithm at 10 logarithm as written Nernst

Equation [X]i 61 1.6a 5. mV

o mV = log •Fig. [X]E zx 1.6b Equation 615. x [X]i Becauseglucoseisuncharged,theelectrochemicalgradientisdeterminedsolelybytheconcentrationgradientforglucoseacrossthecellmembrane.Asshown,theglucoseconcentrationgradientwouldbeexpectedtodriveglucoseintothecell.B, eq.1.5a (EK+ BecauseK+ ),calculatedwith Electrochemicalgradientsandcellulartransportofmolecules.A, Vm ischarged,theelectrochemicalgradientisdeterminedbyboththeconcentrationgradientandthemembranevoltage(Vm).TheNernstequilibriumpotentialforK+ ,is−90.8mV(EK+= intothecell.Thustheelectrochemicalgradient,ornetdrivingforce,is2.97kJ/mol(equivalentto30.8mV),whichdrivesK+ 1.6 atequilibrium).Theenergyintheconcentrationgradient,whichdrivesK+ outofthecell. outofthecell,isthusproportionalto+90.8mV.Themembranevoltageof−60mVdrivesK+

use. are the most of the These equation forms Nernst in common across electrical is Na+ equations, to (e.g., apparent (at a these to of membrane potential is , 100-fold a 37° equivalent 123 the K+ difference of In C), an concentration equivalent Cl−), and a electrical it ion 10-fold mV. potential that , gradient univalent mV for is an difference energy in gradient 61.5 a difference, a 10-fold equivalent is z eqs. ion Ca++), concentration 30.7-mV in for electrical potential (e.g., gradient divalent Similarly, a to because to and 2. 1.6b 1.6a equal is

membrane passive occurs of predicted by movement electrochemical direction is movement transport. a net the a that molecule gradient, When the the across termed in for the given examples in Thus

Fig. considered of movement the passive out , would be into 1.6 and the K+ cell transport. of the movement the glucose cell of In electrochemical that is opposite across requires the or process the passive the termed a gradient.” “downhill the that Transport as of molecule movement by is gradient, electrochemical with is contrast, (e.g., predicted of transport, a that net movement input either the sometimes to if referred to is energy “transport active ATP). that transport” membrane Active electrochemical transport transport” “uphill gradient.” to “transport as referred or the is against either sometimes

H2O as (e.g., transport the molecules movement various glucose later transport through water the process and of the channels via plasma of uniporters a of movement classes channels (see proteins, passive via of is GLUT-1). through discussion), transport ions In membrane is the ion of transporters energy Na+,K+-ATPase, ATP can of The use the drive molecules in or transporters). transport active ABC (e.g., to ATPase-dependent H+-ATPase, active the of it to coupled to transport. as primary directly the ATP, referred is hydrolysis Because is transport their Ca++ antiporter) this or electrochemical in Na+ respective or molecules molecules molecules Solute gradient or the against often molecule (three the (e.g., through (one the the one example). molecule example) this two energy gradient more use of carriers electrochemical couple in other of transport that of 3Na+,Ca++ movement in more secondary their molecule said be this active gradient or against by the occurs, transported to electrochemical When ( are transported mechanisms transport molecules

Fig. 1.7

occurs water of osmosis. process membranes of by The the movement across cell passive, movement with the pressure being the The cell osmotic membrane. the of this movement force difference for across driving water is

Fig. solution. illustrates pressure and osmosis the the a the of of 1.8 osmotic concept of measurement

number Osmotic the in solute determined molecules pressure solution. the dissolved is of by dependent not or on nature chemical factors the as their is their (e.g., size of the such mass, valence). It molecules, (π), pressure law follows: atmospheres Hoff’s by calculated in as is (atm), van’t Osmotic measured

˜= 1.7 nCRT, Equation

of and Membrane Cell Function CHAPTER 1 Principles

(ionized) channel ATP of Ca++ K+: mEq/L Glucose uniporter Ca++: transport 0.001 active Ca++ Na+: 2 active Glucose 2.5 mEq/L Na+ and Glucose: Na+ transport K+ antiporter 145 mEq/L Na+, Na+ mEq/L Primary K+ mEq/L (ionized) Ca++: 3Na+ K+: transport -ATPase 12 IntracellularconcentrationsExtracellularconcentrations3Na+ 2K+ 120 K+ Secondary 3Na+-Ca++ channel 5 Passive Na+: mmol/L •Fig. mmol/L mEq/L of K+ 4 Glucose: Examplesofseveralmembranetransporters,illustratingprimaryactive,passive,andsecondaryactivetransport.Seetextfordetails.ATP,adenosinetriphosphate. 1.7

ion,andtheenergyintheelectrochemicalgradientforNa+ 615. [Na+ (intothecell)drivesthesecondaryactiveuptakeofglucose.Accordingtothefollowingequation,forcalculatingtheelectrochemicalgradient,andifthemembranepotential(Vm)is−60mVandthereisa10-fold[Na+]gradientacrossthemembrane,anapproximate100-foldglucosegradientcouldbegeneratedbySGLT-2:[Glucose]i mV V ]o Glucoseistransportedbytheepithelialcellsthatlinethegastrointestinaltract(smallintestine),andbycellsthatformtheproximaltubulesofthekidneys.Inthegastrointestinaltract,theglucoseisabsorbedfromingestedfood.Inthekidney,theproximaltubulereabsorbstheglucosethatwasfilteredacrosstheglomerularcapillariesandtherebypreventsitfrombeinglostintheurine.Theuptakeofglucoseintotheepithelialcellfromthelumenofthesmallintestineandfromthelumenoftheproximaltubuleisasecondaryactiveprocessinvolvingthesodium-glucose–linkedtransportersSGLT-1andSGLT-2.SGLT-2transportsoneglucosemoleculewithoneNa+

Thus,iftheintracellularglucoseconcentrationwas2mmol/L,thecellcouldlowertheextracellularglucoseconcentrationtoapproximately0.02mmol/L.However,byincreasingthenumberofNa+ 615. mV ionstransportedwithglucosefromonetotwo,SGLT-1cangenerateanearly10,000-foldglucosegradient:

Again,iftheintracellularglucoseconcentrationis2mmol/L,SGLT-1couldremovevirtuallyallglucosefromeitherthelumenofthesmallintestineorthelumenoftheproximaltubule(i.e.,theluminalglucoseconcentration≅ 0.0002mmol/L).

of 10−2 at number as an particles calculated per 37°C of = exert 2.54 pressure molecules can with atm, eq. where n molecule dissociable osmotic × R following 1.7 concentration = 0.001 1 T = = = temperature = degrees and gas total mol/L values: in n C solute constant Kelvin the C

mmol/L of solution 310 T that a containing = 0.082 as does not water, or 1 For these °K dissociate atm such a in = K molecule R L/mol •Fig. glucose urea, 1.8 Schematicrepresentationofosmoticwatermovementandthegenerationofanosmoticpressure.CompartmentAandcompartmentBareseparatedbyasemipermeablemembrane(i.e.,themembraneishighlypermeablebywaterbutimpermeablebysolute).CompartmentAcontainsasolute,whereascompartmentBcontainsonlydistilledwater.Overtime,watermovesbyosmosisfromcompartmentBtocompartmentA.(Note:Thiswatermovementisdrivenbytheconcentrationgradientforwater.BecauseofthepresenceofsoluteparticlesincompartmentA,theconcentrationofwaterincompartmentAislessthanthatincompartmentB.Consequently,watermovesacrossthesemipermeablemembranefromcompartmentBtocompartmentAdownitsconcentrationgradient.)ThiscausestheleveloffluidtoberaisedincompartmentAandloweredincompartmentB.Atequilibrium,thehydrostaticpressureexertedbythecolumnofwater(h)stopsthenetmovementofwaterfromcompartmentBtoA.Thusatequilibrium,thehydrostaticpressureisequalandoppositetotheosmoticpressureexertedbythesoluteparticlesincompartmentA. Physiology. (RedrawnfromKoeppenBM,StantonBA.Renal 4thed.St.Louis:Mosby;2006.)

Hg at Hg. 19.3 this atm expressed be Because π sea 760 also solution level, for mm mm equals as can 1 pressure section). terms in the is following osmotic of expressed Alternatively, (see osmolarity exerts molecule, of an a therefore pressure mmol/L proportional solution containing of to osmotic molecule mOsm/L. Regardless the the 1 1

dissociate in that molecules For n eq. solution, of a will a have 1. other 1.7 than value of NaCl molecule of into a approximately Cl− example, For a each of mOsm/L has 150-mmol/L = and because ion Na+ 2). osmolarity dissociates an NaCl (i.e., a solution 300 n

an of be molecule ions integer. component into a not will is n not dissociation its If complete, calculated for any be solution follows: osmolarity Accordingly, as can

Equation 1.8

= of × of mOsm/L Osmolarity number number particles dissociable × mmol/L = particles concentration

are osmolality terms interchanged. osmolarity The frequently and incorrectly and confused 1 Osmolarity of dissolved osmolality L pressure whereas the generated refers to dissolved of molecules number by solvent. in 1 of solvent, the kg the molecules solute is osmotic in not osmolality cNaCl dissociate water. and between completely osmolarity does solution, For dilute is a in difference the is rather The than 2. 1.88 n value for However, value of is for used. often most simplicity, 2 the

insignificant. the of varies temperature at with larger of solvent volume osmolarity Measurements higher (i.e., dependent temperatures). the the because is are volume temperature osmolality, is contrast, on is the temperature which In mass solvent, independent. of based the throughout is systems this term book. used and is the reason, osmolality For for preferred this biologic nature of osmolalities the in kilogram biological fluids H2O). (mOsm/kg of water and biological bodily dilute per as solutions, and solvent solutions are bodily expressed solutions and because milliosmoles water, the Because is of

volume solution related on the of cell. of The tonicity a of to effect solution a the is the cell be a that are volume of change said the to isotonic. Solutions do not solution a causes cell A shrink. to a cell hypertonic to causes whereas solution hypotonic a swell, molecules related the also the of accounts the to Although cell membrane. ability for to osmolality, solution tonicity cross in

solution of and 300-mmol/L solutions: a 300-mmol/L urea. two Consider sucrose a solution of same isosmotic are osmolality). be to Both solutions and therefore H2O mOsm/kg of osmolality said an the have they have (i.e., 300 an of two in also When this illustration 300 fluid of volume, urea in and for the placed cells—which solution maintain red eventually their osmolality burst. placed the H2O—are purpose intracellular those normal swell sucrose have mOsm/kg solutions, blood those the in whereas Thus solution hypotonic. sucrose solution is urea and the is isotonic the effect solutions differential on The of these

CHAPTER Cell blood to red Function and urea. Principles of Membrane the is red volume related permeability plasma sucrose and of cell to blood cell the membrane 1 The for uniporters contains urea. blood red cell membrane is cell the concentration). by the extracellular urea permeable Thus crosses concentration urea by urea), driven easily the (i.e., membrane gradient > (i.e., cell concentration intracellular urea In blood cannot sucrose the sucrose). (i.e., and enter cell not contain impermeable membrane by cell red cell does the the is contrast, transporters, sucrose

a across molecule a membrane, pressure membrane. not an cross exert the osmotic To must cell this an pressure blood H2O). blood to by membrane red generated the mOsm/kg red the the is 300 exerts equal the osmotic (in pressure sucrose, contents it opposite osmotic cell Because within by case, impermeable and an cross that the red red In to generated cell blood solutes of the intracellular able exert and it urea the to cell. cannot pressure membrane, blood readily osmotic balance contrast, is by osmole. effective sucrose ineffective is urea is an osmole, an termed Consequently, whereas

membrane rewrite take osmotic eq. account the it necessary molecule’s is on To to pressure, of a permeate the ability effect to into as follows: 1.7

cross of molecule relative and σ is ability ˜e the (or cell and pressure.” to osmotic the the membrane, coefficient) is coefficient = osmotic Equation measure the where Πe 1.9 a is reflection the “effective ˙(nCRT), of

effective freely For blood the an and that no is cells). the is molecule such preceding example, cell ineffective membrane, σ= for urea pressure (e.g., as can red exerted urea cross osmotic osmole in a 0, cell solute cannot preceding a that cross (in for membrane the σ= 1 sucrose). the In contrast, example, osmole. Such to substance an is effective said be a and completely 1) are cross of fraction is in membranes able expected nor from solution. unable the an to completely what osmotic <σ< is molecules that cell Many 0 a pressure only neither molecules’ concentration generate (i.e.,

(especially in Oncotic the osmotic pressure proteins) molecules generated large solution. is pressure by As in illustrated

Fig. generated Hoff’s , not a of by 1.9 of solution protein van’t pressure conform osmotic to the the law. magnitude does understood, relationship to the anomalous of it concentration between be is related cause The osmotic and pressure this protein but appears protein to completely not the and size shape molecule. of is to larger more the correlation precise molecules. van’t than proteins small, For example, with Hoff’s globular with law protein

plasma approximately mm 28 pressure to of Hg. 26 oncotic exerted normal The a human by has value in proteins relation involved in H2O), it to appears fluid Although important to pressure in Hg 1.4 force movement this capillaries is ≅ •Fig. small mm mOsm/kg (see osmotic across pressure an be (28 plasma ActualOsmotic 0 Hoff’s 10 Normal Predicted by 6 (g/dL) 20 (g/dl) 14 2 1.9 law 40 Relationshipbetweentheconcentrationofplasmapro-teinsinsolutionandtheosmoticpressure(oncoticpressure)theygenerate.Proteinconcentrationisexpressedingramsperdeciliter.Normalplasmaproteinconcentrationisindicated.Notehowtheactualpressuregeneratedexceedsthatpredictedbyvan’tHoff’slaw.80 60 van’t Protein pressure

be gravity. total specific in concentration all The molecules solution can of a measured as also water. as gravity equal divided of is defined distilled the an Specific volume of solution weight by of weight of the volume a is of distilled water gravity Thus 1. specific the contain different fluids molecules, gravities greater Because their a biological are number 1. than of specific range For 1.008 plasma 1.010. human has of the gravity example, a specific normal to in

500g/mole)forx-raystudies,valuesofurinespecificgravitycanbehigh(1.040to1.050),eventhoughtheurineosmolalityissimilartothatofplasma(e.g.,300mOsm/kgH2O). Thespecificgravityofurineissometimesmeasuredinclinicalsettingsandusedtoassesstheurineconcentratingabilityofthekidneys.Thespecificgravityofurinevariesinproportiontoitsosmolality.However,becausespecificgravitydependsbothonthenumberofmoleculesandontheirweight,therelationshipbetweenspecificgravityandosmolalityisnotalwayspredictable.Forexample,inpatientswhohavereceivedaninjectionofradiocontrastdye(molecularweight>

which plasma cholesterol, of of is composed are a wide and proteins. lipid phospholipids range into embedded bilayer The a membrane these the in of or class membrane transport the involved (membrane transport and proteins transporters) cell. of proteins is regulated selective into One molecules out and of ATP-dependent and channels transporters water These ion channels, carriers, transporters. (aquaporins), include solute

and gradients only). and, across the is and differences solute gradients molecules concentration electrical driven ion through concentration by movement channels The molecules carriers (charged plasma potential membrane chemical of chemical The used electrochemical is quantitate gradient driving force. to this the in across and chemical to establish the ATP-dependent transport molecules energy use membrane ATP the often transporters

al. Alberts B, et Cell Essential Biology. ed. 4th 2014. Science; York: New Garland

Mechanisms L. Ruess cell epithelia. and transport GA, across Altenberg of membranes water M, Alpern O, In: Moe R, Kaplan eds. The and and Pathophysiology. Seldin Giebisch’s Kidney—Physiology ed. 5th York: Academic New Press; 2013.

al. MA, et Hediger disease membrane introduction. (SLC in health The ABCs of transporters series): and Aspects Mol Med. 2013; 34:95-107.

drive through molecules and transport of carriers. other gradients channels and the electrical then by the that solute by movement the aquaporins Water across driven membrane. through osmotic is pressure an difference

is membrane the classified Transport • as across or passive active. transport from Passive the movement molecule. is expected gradient the as of for molecules electrochemical that against Active transport gradient. transport the represents electrochemical transport further secondary transport. divided and active active Active into primary is directly coupled (e.g., to hydrolysis Primary ATP-dependent is active of transporters). ATP transport the passive drives of of for the Na+-H+ molecules movement or other active which carriers, active transport Na+-glucose more Secondary occurs molecules solute antiporter). transport with coupled one symporter, (e.g.,

Biology. W. Correlated Cell Text with and Histology: A and Atlas Molecular Pawlina 7th ed. Alphen Wolters Netherlands: aan Kluwer; The Rijn, den 2016.

A, Rojeck al. et view A aquaglyceroporins. current of mammalian Rev Physiol. Annu 2008;70:301-327.

L, Ruess GA. Mechanisms cell of Altenberg membranes. transport across ion Alpern M, Kaplan Moe R, O, In: eds. Seldin The and Giebisch’s and Pathophysiology. Kidney—Physiology 5th ed. New Academic York: Press; 2013.

be following student of Upon the this should completion chapter, to questions: 1. the answer able

What and, water what is balance example, with the an balance? elements are to as achieve steady-state balance, needed steady-state

2.

various body the how compartments, do under are they change fluid the conditions? of and What volumes

3.

with How to do differ fluid the their regard body composition? compartments

4.

resting determines membrane of potential cells? the What

5.

and regulate cells hypotonic, volume How do their solutions? hypertonic isotonic, in

6.

carry vectorial they is what regulated? of cells, transport, structural out general do are transport and the which features What are by how mechanisms the epithelial

of the regard a a and water, requires substances—be ions, intracellular molecules, other to small composition—with host cellular maintained pH, function that range. ormal narrow within substances is This transport and in into . described the proteins, many accomplished out by via and the of of membrane as cell transport water from products and each day, are water food waste excreted body. are and addition, In the ingested, changes composition. compartments the volume these fluid their without healthy significant In processes of occur individual, body in a or the either their fluid animals humans) warm-blooded (and of body of is the termed and and compartments constant in composition maintenance The volume temperature homeostasis. achieve to book. are multiple designed the in human the which of of has various The this body explained details homeostasis, systems chapters chapter, principles this the the outlined. underlie are maintenance that In homeostasis basic of are and body various composition compartments volume the fluid defined. of In the addition,

of Concept Balance Steady-State

substances body an day similarly, the The is from means lost the day. which are human added are and, body body to “open substances that each system,” each and added access disease and from amounts cultural body environment, the to the norms. even or food widely, The on can processes, to water, depending vary lost through homeostasis In occurs steady-state an the open such process balance. of system,

a To river is consider illustrate on to concept dam steady-state of the lake. create a which a built balance, synthetic streams day, it. that rivers Each from the various lake water and the enters feed snow. addition, added is springs, by rain, and underground In water by of evaporation. the through process of the is time, and same dam the the spillways At lost water level lost, For amount constant rate be of (i.e., of the the at steady-state regardless added, to of route. is the again of lake matched by remain source, balance), the must exactly which water regardless water only maintain to through a evaporation Because the by be way level of is easily water controlled, is cannot regulate the of the the lost the the and lake is spillways. addition amount controlled to constant loss not that

the balance are human applies important. steady-state the key body, it as concepts understand to To following

1.

room be adjusting baseline in from the of example, temperature thermostat). a lake There a by in level that the must point” the or be the the (e.g., deviations can setting monitored so this preceding “set

2.

that to from set desired input the that can maintain electrical point the air must deviations furnace output, the or to signals” or or The point signals the to both, in proper the changes the adjust to sensor or either maintain temperature). lead (e.g., in analogy, signals spillway or generate either to “effector set electrical sensors monitor conditioner dam room sent

3.

operate, or an conditioner generated the set the the appropriate must furnace effector air organs” spillway the on). must and respond way to signals must in turn gates “Effector (i.e., point by monitor

4.

to of how The signals, set rapidly sensor of (i.e., effector the for respond detect signals. the several the of point system sensor factors, a the from of organs is effector depends to the nature point how of effector from deviation is the generation the a tolerated) time the how sensitivity and the (i.e., deviation), much needed including deviation much on for necessary the set the

1.

2.

1.

2.

3.

4.

•Fig. 2.1 Steady-State Water Whole-Body Balance. Seetextfordetails.ADH,antidiuretichormone(alsocalledargininevasopressin);CNS,centralnervoussystem;GI,gastrointestinal.

balance to do occur. that steady-state deviations recognize is It from important than balance exists. state greater When is positive a output, of input balance When exists. output, input less is a state negative than of positive imbalance be transient life. of with or tolerated, states prolonged negative incompatible periods of can balance are Although generally

Fig. water water are for of of maintenance maintenance illustrates 2.1 concepts to (details presented several steady-state steady-state balance ). the the important in related balance depicted As in

Fig. multiple regulated. there of which vary cannot are can water, outputs , 2.1 of nevertheless inputs and many but be amount and For humidity the (e.g., loss lungs low the lungs). of air and through the humidity of lost of depends the on rate water respiration rapid the from increase example, water the breathing the to lost ambient Similarly, as of varies water activity. sweat temperature amount physical according and many loss Finally, 200 normal a diarrhea. increase acute tract the 100 liters can water to via of from mL/day with gastrointestinal level to urine alterations in to and regulated of these increased can kidneys outputs, inputs are response be output and the ingestion that only thirst two (see Of the in by water

Chapter 35).

body determines Water balance the osmolality the fluids. of for the monitor point hypothalamus set within body H2O). the mOsm/kg osmolality fluid from Cells (normal brain deviations range: 280-295 of the effector are sensed, generated. two are When signals deviations and of thirst. the neural sensation One is individual’s to relates amount vasopressin), hormone, called hormonal by arginine other regulates is excreted also of The kidneys. water (antidiuretic the which the both With osmolality keep thereby maintain water to adjusted responses at body input, two to point. water are the fluid balance these appropriate or output, and set signals,

Body of Fluid Composition and Volumes Compartments

with environment Unicellular composition inhabit organisms maintain volume through sea (e.g., and they water). their exchanges the must composition constitute and their the more task their of as is much well, cells billions maintain difficult. volume human that The body but articulated challenge, its Claude by was as French solution, as well first (1813-1878). the Bernard physiologist This the and surrounds that although through the with (i.e., extracellular with the through fluid). exchanges their within environment, fluid can environment they recognized volume maintain that body composition them He do the so exchanges cannot cells milieu as the referred Bernard extracellular the environment (“the within”). intérieur fluid to recognized This extracellular their “constant membrane composition result and with function interieur the a systems all cells (see or as to in constant internal He to volume also of the of environment.” that maintain the milieu are transport exchanges through a maintain allows organ a and body designed fluid turn

by the the of and epithelial gastrointestinal lungs interface cells are the with body’s tract, kidneys, Transport the

and Body environment Homeostasis: water. intake of and Fluid as Volume the numerous 2 substances, external Compartments both excretion control of and well as Composition CHAPTER and nutrients tissues and the the well cells to fluid keeps waste removes mixed. from system The extracellular delivers and cardiovascular products and integration functions. important of these systems provide regulation nervous the Finally, endocrine and

the and and composition maintain organ volume of provide presents this To cells an normal intracellular volume. all overview of for fluid describes chapter systems, study composition and their compartments of body how the background the membrane the maintain for how on function fundamental which potential, Included cells of understanding is neurons (e.g., a cells a and generate presentation muscle is excitable cells). and reviewed. process also central of and because the epithelial transport cells Finally, the water composition the solute so body epithelial to cells by fluids, of the regulating and volume principles are are of

Fluid Volumes Compartments Body Definition of and

individuals Water among of a is of variability weight; amount of function 60% tissue. body’s adipose approximately makes up the the weight. lower tissue of is body that the content of Because the reduce increased the other fraction total adipose amounts tissue, of water of tissue in adipose than water with percentage attributed also weight body varies of water to The age. 75%. approximately In is it newborns, by adult value the age decreases of the to year. 1 This of 60%

Fig. are major by membrane. cell is the body which between water compartments, total 2.2, two divided distributed

approximately contains The thirds intracellular compartment and (ICF) water. of the fluid total the two larger is compartment, body remaining is The the extracellular compartment. (ECF) contained in third fluid body the percentages weight, volumes and ICF, body follows: as are as water, ECF of Expressed of total

water 0 body 6. = Total ICF (body 0 × = weight) 4. × (body 2. 0 weight) ECF = × weight) (body

is and The interstitial fluid ECF into compartment subdivided further plasma. tissue, fluid. includes and as ECF dense The as well contained the within also cerebrospinal connective bone fluid the surrounds fluid in of three the body The cells the and up interstitial various makes volume. ECF of fourths the tissues the is remaining Plasma within compartment the ECF. vascular fourth represents and contained of the fluid space. may accumulate to third in a In additional is some conditions, what as pathological referred mass of an L and assumed of collections are aIn fluid 1 all these ECF) of part 1 and ECF; subsequent of a it Third-space has (e.g., fluid ICF that the calculations, is kg. fluids. the of ECF allows Although, has ICF more 1 1 mass kg, L this volume simplification of from of of weight conversion measurements and slightly body a body to than

x membrane L body weight L fluid 0.4 weight 28 42 weight body Total (ICF) 14 body Cell 0.2 water body Extracellular L 0.6 fluid (TBW) x (ECF) x Intracellular

of L Interstitial fluid 10.5 3/4 ECF

ECF 3.5 L Plasma •Fig. of 1/4 the Various Compartments. Volumes the Relationship 2.2 Fluid of Body Between Theactualvaluesshownareforanindividualweighing70kg. Principles Physiology.4thed.St.Louis:Mosby;2006.) (ModifiedfromLevyMN,KoeppenBM,StantonBA.Berne Levy’s & of (ascites) with peritoneal the in disease. example liver accumulation fluid of of cavity is individuals the

Compartments Body Between Water of Fluid Movement

Fig. compartments the water moves moves between the (plasma) the interstitial of compartments capillary across vascular plasma ICF membranes and 2.2 and cells, across , and walls. it ECF between for cell this in and walls. movement across pathways The to comparison the forces driving membranes, are capillary different water

the and plasma (see between water occurs across expressed ICF of ECF Movement the aquaporins compartments, membranes, through cell in membrane

Chapter 1).

this for movement water pressure is difference. osmotic an driving The force determined molecules/ions The in is the both present of the ICF these and by fluids. osmotic pressure ECF be weight into (1) (e.g., macromolecules divided low and glucose) can (e.g., these (2) ions Na+) For (e.g., proteins). simplicity, molecular molecules of and pressures H2O. of 280 to of ICF 295 both and ECF range osmotic mOsm/kg the are the The in pressure by low-molecular-weight 2 mOsm/kg to all the osmotic account nearly only molecules this of ECF, and pressure because contributed proteins 1 For the is for the ions H2O. the molecules glucose), macromolecules ions also well low-molecular-weight to The the molecules/ions cell (e.g., and less but contributing (e.g., are (e.g., Na+), within include pressure understood, they osmotic proteins). constant fact that osmolality inside the is constant ECF volume to that means of the is cells equal The pressure when cell that osmotic ECF. the remains would exist, described in either section the pressure difference Volume or Regulation.” If osmotic cells “Nonisotonic Cell shrink, did swell as the an

between the occurs the vascular wall. and interstitial of Movement the (plasma) compartment water across compartment capillary fluid the the that depending wall, capillary. water capillary the amount The across moves of of water movement and mechanism the varies on capillary separated large cells sinusoids the of are liver, capillary). example, by For gaps often endothelial (discontinuous the in As elements) can (and the easily water the cellular plasma of result, components wall. and across pass all a some nm to cells capillaries that up endothelial 100 to kidneys). are lined by that Other are in 80 (e.g., diameter contain fenestrations in the pass cellular plasma all cannot (only the the fenestrations) across components through to move elements of fenestrations the of capillary wall. These allow blood a cells. water capillaries and brain) tight through pores the molecules adjacent ions, or small surface cell in movement relatively the and clefts on water to endothelial small Some form through occurs between and endothelial (e.g., barrier These 4 allow to molecules and nm smaller and clefts pass. water pores than small cells. endothelial pinocytosis a capillary amount addition, water by the traverses wall via In of

hydrostatic pressure (i.e., oncotic movement driving wall pressure pressure forces and The by capillary the proteins). for are generated across fluid osmotic (water) called forces. Collectively, are Starling the these and (as fluid gravity is in the feeding in of hydrostatic effect brief, capillary. column the vessels a the the Capillary result in blood to a move of of out pressure fluid force causes capillary heart within is that discussed of a of on in movement detail the capillary) the the pumping interstitial in surrounding pressure of tissue Hydrostatic hydrostatic the the pressure. opposes effect the capillary to in draw the capillary from oncotic the capillary. pressure The plasma tends into interstitium the fluid of the The oncotic this. interstitial pressure fluid the opposes of the follows: wall determined Thus across fluid amount of moving of capillary the the is as

2.1 Equation

pressure. = Kf + = filtration oncotic constant in πi fluid interstitial area of surface (measure

these magnitude the capillary may Depending out of on the into forces, or the of capillary. fluid move

are various differ; described the essentially these osmolalities body compartments identical. of the The of however, fluid compartments compositions fluid later, the within as

are addition, redistribute In osmolality the osmotic across them compartments, into compartments which one brings water causes any change compartment quickly of “osmotic in equilibrium. all equilibrium.” in to the back Thus fluid water, the other fluid). do, rapid of is the interstitial intracellular redistribution compartments the plasma serum, easy osmolality of fluid osmolality measuring Because to of or of and which this body reveals (i.e.,

of a is the As ECF. described later, Na+ major constituent its with primarily this osmolality of the compartment. (and the its −) concentration molecules determinant major ions, Cl− Because of is in attendant HCO3 and of anions, Na+ comparison other high and simply it sodium ECF an the the by possible osmolality [Na+]. of to is approximate obtain Accordingly, estimate doubling concentration follows: of a the is if sample its as example, serum estimated can individual, be For obtained from and [Na+] 145 blood the is osmolality an mEq/L,

Equation 2.2

movement contrast proteins to cell cell “ depends is presence membranes of the specific and In of on more water, transport cell variable the section across from (see to ions membrane the

”). Composition Fluid Body Compart of can in compartments, between solutes. freely while fluid of the the compartments, little to of there fluid body is be physiology movement Consequently, understand shifts moves net water trying it between that assumed most a this reasonable For is situations, assumption.

to physiologic ECF. To of NaCl what of amounts shifts, are the fluid containing various characteristics when added happens solutions consider the illustrate

Sodium Isotonic to Fluid Extracellular Chloride Example 1: Addition of the

isotonic do ≈ 290 osmolality 0.9% exceptions NaCl intravenous solution of NaCl: infusion (e.g., of mOsm/kg an H2O) bSome exist. Addition slightly elsewhere fluid is its higher the the than ECF, that ECF cerebrospinal is The in the body. but osmolality of part of Also, the than ECF. can within that than that osmolalities less are of or greater have the kidney regions either comparison L). the small volumes (≈150 However, total the these (≥12 mL) of are volume in ECF with clotted blood. derived from is cSerum differs serum from plasma factors. by Thus absence the clotting of the concentrations concentrations plasma to With osmolality the in molecules virtually and ions, serum other of and and regard and osmolality identical. are dFluids administered usually intravenously. are fluid by equilibration walls for of many and minutes) electrolyte this interstitial solutions between infused capillary of high route, (i.e., the rapid When are because plasma electrolytes. is and water permeability to essentially these fluids added are ECF. the Thus entire mmol/L solution NaCl NaCl/100 (0.9 0.9% eA g of NaCl. mL) contains 154 dissociate this the (i.e., ECF. normal completely 290 Osm/mol), very 1.88 mOsm/kg similar in is that is does of osmolality H2O, NaCl solution which Because not of to solution

2 Volume Compartments CHAPTER of Composition Fluid Homeostasis: Body and

28. Insomeclinicalsituations,itispossibletoobtainamoreaccurateestimateoftheserumosmolality,andthustheosmolalitiesoftheECFandICF,byalsoconsideringtheosmolescontributedbyglucoseandurea,asthesearethenextmostabundantsolutesintheECF(theothercomponentsoftheECFcontributeonlyafewadditionalmilliosmoles).Accordingly,serumosmolalitycanbeestimatedasfollows: 18

allowsconversionfromtheunitsofmilligramsperdecilitertomillimolesperliterandthustomilliosmolesperkilogramofH2O).Thisestimationofserumosmolalityisespeciallyusefulintreatingpatientswhohaveanelevatedserumglucoseconcentrationsecondarytodiabetesmellitus,andinpatientswithchronicrenalfailure,whoseserumureaconcentrationiselevatedbecauseofreducedrenalexcretion. Theglucoseandureaconcentrationsareexpressedinunitsofmilligramsperdeciliter(dividingby18forglucoseand2.8for

,theabilityofasubstancetocausewatertomoveacrosstheplasmamembraneofacelldependsonwhetherthesubstanceitselfcrossesthemembrane.Recall

isan“effectiveosmole”forwatermovementacrosstheplasmamembraneofvirtuallyallcells. thereflectioncoefficientforthesubstance.Formanycells,glucoseandureacrossthecellmembrane.Althoughtheycontributetoserumosmolality,asmeasuredbyalaboratoryosmometerwhereallmoleculesare“effectiveosmoles,”theyareineffectiveosmolesforwatermovementacrossmany,butnotall,cellmembranes.Incontrast,Na+ Eq.1.9 theeffectiveosmoticpressureandσ= whereΠe=

Eq.2.2 givesthebestestimateoftheeffectiveosmolalityoftheserum.

*Theureaconcentrationinplasmaismeasuredasthenitrogenintheureamolecule,orbloodureanitrogen(BUN).

the this of administered. volume compartment ECF by increases the volume the fluid of to between volume for the osmolality fluid does therefore force there driving this ECF, compartments, fluid the as same Because movement has remains these is and of ICF the and ICF, no the the unchanged. activity is cell the Na+ cells membrane of ECF present Although the the restricted membranes, cross of all Na+,K+-ATPase, in is plasma can which it “ section to the the by effectively (see

Composition Ionic of Cells”).

net infused of NaCl movement is Therefore, solution the cells. into there no isotonic

Hypotonic Fluid of the 2: Example to Chloride Extracellular Addition Sodium

decreases 145 results which (e.g., the movement mOsm/kg Addition to solution of intravenous of the H2O) compartment, osmolality in fluid of 0.45% NaCl the of osmolality infusion water ≅ NaCl; ECF a into this hypotonic

Neurosurgicalproceduresandcerebrovascularaccidents(strokes)oftenresultintheaccumulationofinterstitialfluidinthebrain(i.e.,edema)andswellingoftheneurons.Becausethebrainisenclosedwithintheskull,edemacanraiseintracranialpressureandtherebydisruptneuronalfunction,whichleadstocomaanddeath.Theblood-brainbarrier,whichseparatesthecerebrospinalfluidandbraininterstitialfluidfromblood,canbepermeatedfreelybywaterbutnotbymostothersubstances.Asaresult,excessfluidinbraintissuecanberemovedbyimposinganosmoticgradientacrosstheblood-brainbarrier.Mannitolcanbeusedforthispurpose.Mannitolisasugar(molecularweight,182g/mol)thatdoesnotreadilycrosstheblood-brainbarrierandmembranesofcells(neuronsandothercellsinthebody).Therefore,mannitolisaneffectiveosmole,andintravenousinfusionresultsinthemovementofinterstitialfluidoutofthebrainbyosmosis.

ICF. the but the than again equal is each of ECF volume and equilibration, before are infusion, lower increased. of the the osmolalities the After osmotic and compartment ICF in than the The increase in volume ICF volume. is greater ECF increase

Chloride 3: Example the to Addition Sodium Fluid Hypertonic of Extracellular

compartment, in osmolality infusion to a ECF of increases out mOsm/kg ≅ the the which of of (e.g., water NaCl: solution intravenous of cells. hypertonic of the movement osmolality 1000 results this H2O) 3% Addition NaCl equilibration, of before ICF ECF higher equal and but the osmotic infusion. again than After the the osmolalities are ICF that of of decreased. whereas ECF The increased, volume the the is is

Compartments of Fluid Body Composition

of ICF considerably. and differ compositions ECF The the the significantly The more than ICF proteins has macromolecules ECF. and concentrations are of differences many the in There ions. also by composition the cell proteins. membrane number transport of the maintained of ICF specific action The is a of triphosphatase and of and electrical the used Na+,K+adenosine solute molecules ATP among transport be and (e.g., ions the these which the into can converts carriers turn which (Na+,K+-ATPase), energy antiporters). in of means transporters Principal gradients, to in ion other channels and is ion symporters by drive

similar are compositions capillary because by barrier small interstitial and plasma those only the molecules of can compartments the compartments ECF of that a The are the permeate. fluid ions endothelium, and separated interstitial the latter is significantly between that fluid and difference contains more protein. The major plasma the differential this of can concentration protein Although the affect

Fluidandelectrolytedisordersareobservedcommonlyinclinicalpractice(e.g.,inpatientswithvomitingordiarrhea,orboth).Inmostinstances,thesedisordersareself-limited,andcorrectionofthedisorderoccurswithoutneedforintervention.However,moresevereorprolongeddisordersmaynecessitatefluidreplacementtherapy.Suchtherapymaybeadministeredorally,withspecialelectrolytesolutions,orintravenously,withfluid.

Intravenoussolutionsareavailableinmanyformulations.Thetypeoffluidadministeredtoaparticularpatientisdictatedbythepatient’sneed.Forexample,ifanincreaseinthepatient’svascularvolumeisnecessary,asolutioncontainingsubstancesthatdonotreadilycrossthecapillarywallisinfused(e.g.,5%proteinordextransolutions).Theoncoticpressuregeneratedbythealbuminmoleculescausesfluidtoberetainedinthevascularcompartment,whichexpandsitsvolume.ExpansionoftheECFisaccomplishedmostoftenwithisotonicsalinesolutions(e.g.,0.9%NaClorlactatedRingersolution).Asalreadynoted,administrationofanisotonicNaClsolutiondoesnotresultinthedevelopmentofanosmoticpressuregradientacrosstheplasmamembraneofcells.Therefore,theentirevolumeoftheinfusedsolutionremainsintheECF.

Patientswhosebodyfluidsarehyperosmoticneedhypotonicsolutions.ThesesolutionsmaybehypotonicNaCl(e.g.,0.45%NaCl)or5%dextroseinwater(D5W).AdministrationoftheD5WsolutionisequivalenttotheinfusionofdistilledwaterbecausethedextroseismetabolizedtoCO2andwater.AdministrationofthesefluidsincreasesthevolumesofboththeICFandECF.Inaddition,patientswhosebodyfluidsarehypotonicneedhypertonicsolutions.ThesearetypicallyNaCl-containingsolutions(e.g.,3%or5%NaCl).ThesesolutionsexpandthevolumeoftheECFbutdecreasethevolumeoftheICF.Otherconstituents,suchaselectrolytes(e.g.,K+)ordrugs,canbeaddedtointravenoussolutionstotailorthetherapytothepatient’sfluid,electrolyte,andmetabolicneeds.

plasma of two details), ” “ identical. is and for the compositions cations considered this by distribution the section interstitial be be can and the of and anions compartments effect (see between ionic Gibbs-Donnan small, fluid the these to effect

Homeostasis of Cellular Maintenance

ionic requires that composition Normal the of controlled. ICF tightly the function be cellular activity example, dependent; be enzymes therefore, intracellular For of is pH regulated. some pH must the a In the addition, range. other intracellular is composition held within electrolytes of similarly narrow muscle the for see intracellular the for a is intracellular (e.g., the potential, membrane (e.g., for details). signaling and normal function property establishment of cells neurons for [Ca++]; of and This especially cell necessary excitable important cells) lead or volume or shrinking damage to cells can must maintained cell Finally, swelling cells be the of of death. because of intracellular The regulation

3.5-5.0mEq/L120-150mEq/L K+

2.1-2.8(total)mmol/L 1.1-1.4(ionized)≈10−7M(ionized) Ca++

*Ca++ Pi1.0-1.4(total)mmol/L andPi(H2PO4−/HPO4−2)areboundtoproteinsandotherorganicmolecules.Inaddition,largeamountsofCa++ 0.5-0.7(ionized)0.5-0.7(ionized) canbesequesteredwithincells.LargeamountsofPiarepresentincellsaspartoforganicmolecules,suchasadenosinetriphosphate(ATP).

transporters the cells. membrane of and specific composition activity the accomplished through is volume in cell of plasma the of by environment and the maintain which mechanisms This and section their volume. their cells potential which by a review they is intracellular control membrane their ionic

of Ionic Cells Composition

The composition tissue. ionic intracellular of from to cells tissue varies composition the of that different is neurons from muscle cells, of For differ of both blood example, cells. intracellular that which from of are these Nevertheless, and patterns, presented are in there . similar [Na+] characterized the [K+]. is In and with by ECF, comparison ICF a the low high a of K+ molecule the cell Na+ result each ions the of This the activity for of which out cell 3 into is and the ions the hydrolyzed. transports ATP 2 Na+,K+-ATPase, K+ molecules. Na+,K+-ATPase and but not establishing only activity is important the for of cellular Na+ As ions other the for indirectly, gradients chapter, gradients later determining, in involved and in the many is also the discussed this cellular the membrane leak of that K+ K+ voltage major the cellular importance “ of by because (see determinant of K+selective gradient the activity the is the of section Of generated cell is through out the channels a of the Na+,K+-ATPase

Membrane Potential”).

into K+), the the ATP converts a and (i.e., Na+ in ion voltage Na+,K+-ATPase membrane (i.e., gradients gradient Thus voltage). energy and

transport ion ( or out The are other drive Na+,K+-ATPase–generated into and ions of molecules used cell and gradients the the electrical of to

Fig. 2.3 ). ions or For example, carriers of a to molecules. , solute in couple other the that described of as Na+ number of transport Na+-glucose use bring Na+ in electrochemical gradient, Na+–amino The to directed Na+ the acid the energy and symporters

2 of •Fig. Volume and CHAPTER Compartments Fluid Composition Homeostasis: Body Gradients Established. the Membrane and (Vm) Are Depicting Model How Cell 2.3 Potential Cellular exitsthecellviaK+-selectivechannelsandgeneratestheVm(cell’sinterioriselectricallynegative). (1)TheNa+,K+-ATPasedecreasestheintracellular[Na+]andincreasestheintracellular[K+].SomeK+ electrochemicalgradientdrivesthetransportofotherionsandmoleculesthroughtheuseofvarioussolutecarriers. (2)TheenergyintheNa+ outofthecellviaCl−-selectivechannels. (3)TheVmdrivesCl− (4)TheCa++-ATPaseandthe3Na+-Ca++ antiportersmaintainthelowintracellular[Ca++].

amino cellular of uptake to glucose the into the acids. secondary and drive active cell, directed gradient contributes Na+ the inwardly from the pH. Similarly, drives extrusion the active intracellular thus the and of secondary H+ of maintenance to cell antiporter, of maintenance cell low the Ca++-ATPase, 3Na+-Ca++ The intracellular [Ca++]. along the Ca++ extrudes and a with to plasma membrane the thus contributes from

In lowering concentration the thus Cl−-selective of below that addition, the out of voltage channels, the ECF. membrane Cl− cell intracellular drives through the

As potential determinants membrane (Vm) K+-selective the the channels are of important plasma described membrane in of the Na+,K+-ATPase the and previously, cell. within the For to with ECF. the Vm all the of is relation the negative body, the in cell resting oriented electrically interior cells However, can Vm the magnitude vary of widely. the

transfers magnitude of Vm. that the transporter that across potential has understand membrane influence it the to to the To recognize Vm, the charge important what any determines the is Ca++-ATPase said (see the be a contraction and during not but smooth membrane of the also transporters [Ca++] plasma muscle regulated molecule 3Na+-Ca++ cells, which the is activity Ca++-ATPase the state the relaxed only of a located maintenance in the the intracellular [Ca++], fIn reticulum are intracellular low to in endoplasmic antiporter involves Such by

12 14 Chapters to electrogenic. the various As of to from electrogenic might is cell. highly Vm the expected, transporters variable cell to contribution be across the thus two channel three charge Na+ net transfers For K+ transports membrane. positive the Na+,K+-ATPase and example, and one ions is Vm cells to the most most. the millivolts contribution a Na+,K+-ATPase direct the few However, of only at of the as symporter electrogenic antiporter other of 3Na+-Ca++ the such is minimal. transporters, Similarly, the the contribution Na+-glucose and ion are Vm determinants major The of the channels. the of determine magnitude activity channels the these and type number, gating) (e.g., of Vm. (e.g., The selectivity), in (see such those excitable muscle cells, changes as action the of activity and , neurons rapid cardiac As described and other potential channel in ion skeletal underlies in

across As the generate they current. channel, through a a membrane move ions described measured, channel. of As this current level in , the even single can a be at of cations the movement the is current. By as cell, cell, the of defined the generated current by of out or negative anions into movement the convention, out the cell, Conversely, of defined movement anions of or movement current. of into the cell, the positive the as is cations of Also cell a of the the of the by negative cell cell. −80 the a for Vm the of expressed convention, is the in to mV, Vm electrically relation outside relation outside of in interior to magnitude is cell; the the thus with

by ion a The carried force conductance on the channel the depends and on ions through of driving current the moving that channel. for calculated membrane (Eq. is described the driving for (Ei), in by determined equation the the concentration As in as energy force the the the across gradient ion Nernst by , the Vm: and ) 1.5a

Equation 2.3

Ei. Driving Vm − = force

through follows: the law, the Ohm’s is as ion current Thus by as determined channel defined (Ii)

is channel. 2.4 gi conductance of where the Equation the in to channel the the the of of a ion time the is in conductance the (Gi) the by particular by a ion is channels state. number of cell, and each membrane determined membrane open For amount

Fig. there net or is cell. out the into which 2.4 is voltage , the the ion of no flow at Vm has , , Cl− K+ that Thus and for cell ion for channels Na+ , a selective

2.5 Equation

+ [(Vm 2.6 )× − Equation 0. − G ]= E −

•Fig. 2.4 Cell Current-Voltage Hypothetical K+-, Cl−-Selective a Channels. Containing and of Relationship Na+-, Membranecurrentsareplottedoverarangeofmembranevoltages(i.e.,current-voltagerelationships).EachioncurrentiscalculatedwiththeuseofOhm’slaw,theNernstequilibriumpotentialfortheion(ECl,EK,andENa),andthemembraneconductancefortheion.Thecurrent-voltagerelationshipforthewholecellisalsoshown.Totalcellcurrent(Icell)wascalculatedwiththechordconductanceequation(see

,therestingmembranevoltage(Vm)of−64.4mVisneartothatoftheNernstequilibriumpotentialforK+ Eq.2.7).Because80%of cellconductanceisduetoK+ .

˜G where = G −. Equation ++ G G 2.7 ++

of Inspection

Eq. highest near chord Vm of equation, called is 2.7 to the which the , often reveals the has the that equilibrium potential the conductance. which to the conductance membrane Nernst ion will be In

Fig. (EK+). attributable as 80% Nernst the conductance membrane to K+; of 2.4 a is result, is for to K+ Vm , near the potential equilibrium approximates membrane For K+ to at has EK+. thus high rest, Vm conductance the most the and a cells , of is magnitude EK+ ECF. in by turn Vm influenced is [K+] , greatly the Moreover, the the in the influenced of greatly which changes by [K+] −90.8 For 4 the is mEq/L extracellular if value 120 [K+] is of has mEq/L, mV. and a intracellular EK+ the example, If to EK+ [K+] be 7 is extracellular increased the mV. would −79.9 mEq/L, is the in Vm EK+ negative). (i.e., change This less depolarizes Vm and the if to 2 (i.e., mEq/L, decreased more extracellular [K+] EK+ is Vm −109.4 Vm negative). is Conversely, mV, the hyperpolarizes becomes

•Fig. , Potential Na+ Membrane and Nerve ( and Showing in Action and 2.5 G GK+ K+ the Respectively) the Changes Conductances

Potential (Vm). (EK+ conductancethenincreasesaboveitsvaluebeforetheactionpotential.ThishyperpolarizesthecellasVmapproachesEK+.AstheK+ conductanceofthemembrane,andtheVmapproachestheNernstequilibriumpotentialforNa+ conductanceistransient,andtheK+ ).TheincreaseinNa+ conductancereturnstoitsbaselinevalue,Vmreturnstoitsrestingvalueof−70mV. ).Withtheinitiationoftheactionpotential,thereisalargeincreaseintheNa+ Atrest,themembranehasahighK+ (ENa+ conductance,andVmisneartheNernstequilibriumpotentialforK+ Principles Levy’s (ModifiedfromLevyMN,KoeppenBM,StantonBA.Berne & Physiology. of 4thed.St.Louis:Mosby;2006.)

Changesintheextracellular[K+]canhaveimportanteffectsonexcitablecells,especiallythoseoftheheart.Adecreaseinextracellular[K+](hypokalemia) hyperpolarizestheVmofcardiacmyocytesand,insodoing,makesinitiatinganactionpotentialmoredifficult,becausealargerdepolarizingcurrentisneededtoreachthreshold(see ).Ifsevere,hypokalemiacanleadtocardiacarrhythmias,andeventuallytheheartcanstopcontracting(asystole). Anincreaseintheextracellular[K+](hyperkalemia) canbeequallydeleterioustocardiacfunction.Withhyperkalemia,theVmisdepolarized,anditiseasiertoinitiateanactionpotential.However,oncetheactionpotentialfiresthechannelsbecomeinactivated,andareunabletoinitiateanotheractionpotential,untiltheyarereactivatedbynormalrepolarizationoftheVm.BecausetheVmisdepolarizedinhyperkalemia,thechannelsstayinaninactivatedstate.ThusdepolarizationoftheVmwithhyperkalemiacanleadtocardiacarrhythmiasandlossofcardiacmusclecontraction.

Eq. membrane potential. also 2.7 for limits the the defines In in example depicted the

Fig. the . EK+ 2.4, be would negative than it (−90.8 to mV), the were if apparent is the Vm only be conductive that more membrane as case K+ cannot could membrane Na+ to positive the more were ENa+ a the met . mV); Conversely, be Vm would conductive if condition only (66.6 be not such than dependence ions the generated ( cells Vm potentials of of which the action the specific in conductance are by The to membrane the excitable is basis on

Fig. 2.5). previously, As excitable noted the in all cells,

Body at Composition is and K+ , and EK+. Compartments is Homeostasis: CHAPTER conductive Volume membrane to of Vm 2 Fluid near predominantly rest thus potential and open an predominantly Na+ to When is membrane initiated, now . the action is conductive Na+-channels now approaches ENa+. Vm result, As a discussed generation The in more action is detail of in potentials

TheestablishmentoftheVmrequirestheseparationofchargeacrosstheplasmamembrane.However,thenumberofionsthatmustmoveacrossthemembraneisatinyfractionofthetotalnumberofionsinthecell.Forexample,considerasphericalcellwithadiameterof20µmandaVmof−80mV.Furthermore,assumethatthisVmof−80mVistheresultofthediffusionofK+ outofthecellandthattheintracellular[K+]is120mmol/L.TheamountofK+ thatwouldhavetodiffuseoutofthecelltoestablishtheVmof−80mVisthencalculatedasfollows.

whereQ= × chargeandisexpressedinunitsofcoulombs.Ifthesurfaceareaofthecellis4πr2or1.26× 1× 10−5cm2,thecapacitanceofthecelliscalculatedasfollows: . F/cm 10 Firstthechargeseparationacrossthemembraneneedstobecalculated.Thisisdonewiththeknowledgethattheplasmamembranebehaveselectricallylikeacapacitor,thecapacitance(C)ofwhichisapproximately1µF/cm2,and 10 . × cm = F. 10 126 126 ×

Thusthechargeseparationacrossthemembraneiscalculatedasfollows: 10−12 coulombs. 1 01×

contains96,480coulombs,theamountofK+ . Because1moleofK+ thathadtodiffuseacrossthemembranetoestablishtheVmof−80mViscalculatedasfollows: 1 = 05. coul ofK mole 10 × , ombs/mol

× 19 . Withacellvolumeof4.19× 4 4πr3/3)andanintracellular[K+]of120mmol/L,thetotalintracellularK+ 10−12L(volume= × 10 contentis . mol/L 03 = 5 012 . moles 10 ×

outofthecellrepresentsonlya0.002%changeintheintracellularK+ 10−17molesofK+ content: Therefore,thediffusionof1.05× . mol −13 0 ° 002. . × 10 % es 03 5 mol

outofthecell. Thustheintracellular[K+]ofthecellisnotappreciablyalteredbythediffusionofK+

Volume Cell Regulation of

damage noted, death. already cell and changes volume can lead cell to As in to developed mechanisms volume. Cells regulate their have cells aquaporins are the of plasma because their permeable presence water Most membranes. in highly of by in As discussed

across pressure to move by or osmotic membrane which result osmoles cell, gradients changes 1, either Chapter cause generated out cell water cell effective the the that of volume. in in are into in placed and when when Thus hypertonic shrink cells the ”). placed solutions (see hypotonic section in swell solutions the requiring activity cell maintenance Na+,K+-ATPase. volume even of However, cell the process of solution, is of when a in expenditure isotonic an and specifically active ATP an placed the is the

cells inhibited digoxin observation when ATP glycosides Na+,K+-ATPase Na+,K+-ATPase that reduced synthesis) or when (e.g., isotonic of be in importance the cardiac by the (i.e., ouabain, appreciated volume can the red [Lanoxin]). chilled The blood cell swell by regulation is necessity the isotonic of to is ions of volume the the maintain ( plasma the result an Gibbs-Donnan across so-called intracellular in on solution energy effect The for membrane: of expenditure cell distribution the proteins effect

Fig. 2.6

by when all solutions permeated molecules can the not occurs in but two of The effect separating a Gibbs-Donnan be solution. some membrane noted the plasma of fluid. ionic the interstitial and effect for the small in As this previously, accounts compositions differences the ability whose the molecules membrane, across the plasma the endothelium represents the In to is and restricted. this case, are proteins permeate capillary the capillary and the the membrane, is are and impermeant intracellular the the membrane plasma For molecules. molecules organic proteins cells,

Fig. , molecules/ions the protein) compartment 2.6 permeant presence of one same molecules accumulation in the the of in results in over time (e.g., impermeant compartment. compartment the thereby which pressure, the turn in This active compartment. of osmotic the particles number anions, water increases containing that osmotically enters impermeant the increases in and would in osmotically the cells, the cell in effect For the swelling. active Gibbs-Donnan result increase and number cell, particles of two extruded, ions are extruding brought the the However, actively into are cell). Gibbs-Donnan cations (three activity counteracts ions the Na+ of effect the Na+,K+-ATPase whereas by K+ allows is addition, Cl− electrically Vm the that in gradient Na+,K+-ATPase drives by established cell’s turn of for K+ the anions and In which (in the the of development interior negative), the out other cell. the Thus the particles is of the Na+,K+-ATPase, of through intracellular active osmotically the activity number

normal. to intracellular and cell osmotic volume restoring thereby pressure the B restoring Conversely normal. volume cell transports raising a with the osmotic pressure volume the to cell regulatory thereby response shrinking into increase osmolytes intracellular cell, and myo-inositol), glutamate, as methylamines β-alanine). ions betaine), include polyols molecules organic and such and These amino and (glycerophosphorylcholine some (taurine, acids osmolytes and (sorbitol and levels processes. the the If alters of time, to for exposed organic an is the of cell through osmolytes the cell metabolic extended the nonisotonic period ECF intracellular

•Fig. The Effect. 2.6 Gibbs-Donnan diffusesfromcompartmentBtocompartmentAdownitsconcentrationgradient.ThiscausescompartmentAtobecomeelectricallynegativewithregardtocompartmentB.ThemembranevoltagethendrivesthediffusionofNa+ ,Cl− fromcompartmentBtocompartmentA.TheaccumulationofadditionalNa+ ,andH2Obutnotpermeablebyprotein(P−).TheosmolalityofsolutionAisidenticaltothatofsolutionB.Bottom, Cl− incompartmentAincreasesitsosmolalityandcauseswatertoflowfromcompartmentBtocompartmentA(Note:theincreasevolumeofcompartmentAresultsinalower[P−]).IfthecontainercontainingthetwosolutionsweresealedatthetopsothatwatercouldnotmovefromcompartmentBtocompartmentA,thepressureincompartmentAwouldincreaseasthenumberofosmoticallyactiveparticlesincreasesinthatcompartment. TwosolutionsareseparatedbyamembranethatispermeablebyNa+ Top, andCl−

solutions. would and effect, volume be Gibbs-Donnan caused cell maintained reduced from isotonic the is what by in

(see ). the Most throughout cells are bathed isotonic body tightly which with of ECF, composition is regulated the hypertonic. the the balance, isotonic of either disorders medulla of certain with can ECF within become However, are hypotonic regions or not the the and body water kidney), (e.g., or shrink. When this swell occurs, cells either that in degree swelling can result changes. Cell the shrinkage cell cell or damage have to volume cells but which many mechanisms limit death, the or of These serious within skull space are neurological lead damage. the important mechanisms for swelling neurons, particularly which the to can in confined

seconds nonisotonic minutes ( cell are to cell In is ECF, restore responses volume general, activated to when to volume-regulatory exposed within a

Fig. 2.7 ). of particles decrease reducing response With a volume osmotically active swelling, the cell, transports out regulatory (osmolytes) cell

TheECFofindividualswithdisordersinwaterbalancemaybeeitherhypotonic(positivewaterbalance)orhypertonic(negativewaterbalance).WithadecreaseinECFosmolality,neuronsandglialcellsswellaswaterentersthecell.Tominimizethisswelling,theneuronsandglialcellsreduceintracellularosmolytes.IftheECFosmolalityiscorrected(i.e.,increased)tooquickly,theneuronsandglialcellsthenshrinkbecauseofthereducednumberofintracellularosmolytes.ThisresponsetoarapidcorrectionofECFosmolalitycanleadtocelldamage.Damagetotheglialcellsthatsynthesizemyelinwithinthebraincanresultindemyelinization.Thisdemyelinizationresponse,termedosmotic demyelinization canaffectanyofthewhitematterofthebrain,butespeciallyregionsofthepons.Theseeffectsareoftenirreversible.Therefore,correctionofdisordersofwaterbalanceisusuallyaccomplishedslowlytoavoidthisseriousneurologicalcomplication. syndrome,

organic and response of rapid NaCl increase uptake osmolytes. volume regulatory the The of results in number a NaCl volume symporter the bring channels, increase together To the into which cell and Na+-H+ a of number an is cell. (NHE-1), activation the of there cation-selective 1Na+,1K+,2Cl− antiporter (NKCC1), KCl the increased. for ultimately that content Na+ in extrudes the , The is so Na+,K+-ATPase then exchange K+ cell the of organic activated are increase volume. cell to also transporters osmolyte Several acid 3Na+,1Cl−-taurine 3Na+,2Cl−-betaine symporter, symporter, and a Na+– symporter. a amino a a These symporter, 2Na+–myo-inositol include the and cells. in active use these energy Cl− of secondary drive osmolytes These transporters the the organic uptake gradients to into Na+

and from volume the results KCl osmolytes decrease cell. in The organic response loss the regulatory of as wide the K+-Cl− (the of channels activation through loss of symporters. KCl cell), channels of well K+selective, anion-selective range on Cl−-selective, the involved as activation specific through depending of The occurs vary and a of anion channels). the (e.g., volume-sensitive Some the cell to leave organic appear osmolyte-anion channels organic osmolytes via

are transporters the Several involved of during activation mechanisms various volume in these regulatory

Fluid and Homeostasis: Compartments Composition Volume of Body 2Cl Na+, •Fig. Na+ + Cl– CHAPTER 2 2.7 Hypotonic in Hypertonic and Regulation Volume Media. Cells of Whencellsareexposedtoahypertonicmedium,theyshrinkandthenundergoavolume-regulatoryincrease(RVI).DuringtheRVI,NaClandorganicosmolytesenterthecell.TheincreaseintheactivityofNa+,K+-ATPase(notdepicted)enhancestheexchangeNa+ Whencellsareexposedtoahypotonicmedium,theyswellandthenundergoavolume-regulatorydecrease(RVD).TheRVDinvolveslossofKClandorganicosmolytesfromthecell.ThedecreaseincellularKClandorganicosmolytescausesintracellularosmoticpressuretodecrease,waterleavesthecell,andthecellreturnstonearlyitsoriginalvolume.Bottom, Top, forK+ (andCl−)contentofthecellisincreased.TheincreaseincellularKCl,alongwithariseinintracellularorganicosmolytes,increasesintracellularosmoticpressure,whichbringswaterbackintothecell,andthecellvolumereturnstonearlyitsoriginalvolume.π,theoncoticpressureinsidethecell. sothattheK+

responses. by membrane to or cation cytoskeleton, appear influenced, stretch-activated channels the plasma either in gating monitored the stretch cell ionic changes Changes strength in crowding cytoplasm, of whose the channels). by is volume and indirectly, macromolecular directly by (e.g., of and by the of may A kinase intracellular number A, calmodulin, second protein involved also mechanisms [Ca++], but C), have and defined responses messenger precise in been protein not kinase (e.g., these systems completely. be

Transport Epithelial of Principles

arranged Epithelial body. world of ECF) sheets internal between the environment provide in cells the the and and external are interface (i.e., the environment as their serve Depending water on tract, microorganisms to cells establishing maintenance of tract, (lungs, and the gastrointestinal functions, of such body prevention a barrier and (lungs, loss of from internal kidneys). the and (skin), skin), constant location, gastrointestinal important a epithelial many ability latter the cells one from This (i.e., to opposite the result out side). of epithelial of a is carry transport sheet of vectorial side epithelial the to cell regulated function transport reviewed. section, of epithelial In principles are transport this the are functions appropriate book. the specific this throughout of in cells transport epithelial discussed chapters The

Fig. a representation cell. epithelial of schematic 2.8 shows an epithelial the free as The is surface membrane. referred of layer the apical to gastrointestinal contact the of tract) It and the and airways the environment of extracellular the within and of ducts external secretions is larger the pancreas contents the sweat or the of lungs (e.g., nephrons filtrate fluids in glomerular in with air or the the (e.g., alveoli with glands). of kidneys the the lamina, to and by the on in is underlying a connective The rests side tissue. attached epithelium secreted this epithelial turn basal basal which cells, the of is

connective the cells are junctions of (see a one specialized to Epithelial by another and number tissue to connected underlying

Fig. 2.8 ). to and adhesion or of junction mechanical The (adhering cytoskeleton underlying and tissue linking the adhering (hemidesmosome). connective hemidesmosomes by junction, provide desmosomes, adjacent desmosome) together cells the important roles. gap and play junction junction tight The physiological

connections provide junctions between Gap cells. low-resistance

is the gap unit The connexon. the functional of junction of to epithelial are limited is composed integral cells. not six gGap connexon junctions The gap junctions of and myocytes have (e.g., also muscle cardiac smooth number A other cells). cells

•Fig. 2.8 Epithelial Various Adhering Illustrating Schematic an the of Junctions. Cell, Thetightjunctionseparatestheapicalmembranefrombasolateralmembrane(seetextfordetails).

protein called subunits membrane connexins. connexon cell connexon a channel. forming is A the the in one adjacent in with aligned cell, movement when and allows small cells. between open, it be of may ions the it molecules The is channel gated, and one electrical Because the effectively adjacent their cell. cell electrically low to couple of they resistance,

two tight junction serves main functions. The two cell restricts lipids It doing, and divides the and, so basolateral) of domains the into movement in these domains. between membrane membrane proteins two (apical and membrane one so-called cells to membrane This to opposite carry the segregating other to by one of surface epithelial or function vectorial of transporters transport out domains. fence the cell surface the from allows of They a also serve and ions, across the movement for the molecules as water, pathway epithelium. small This the is through cells pathway, cells. the as to pathway to pathway between referred opposed the the paracellular as transcellular

apical have of structural epithelial may The specific cells surface features. is One microvilli such (Fig. feature

2.9A ). the 3 Microvilli µm length), apical (typically nonmotile membrane area. projections to small in increase 1 plasma are serve surface of to that quantities cells epithelial cells the molecules tubule). located large of intestine must the are and and ions, water, that lining on (e.g., proximal transport They renal cells commonly small of and is the composed filaments actin accessory a of of of The number core microvilli proteins. of connected network web cytoskeleton to terminal the (a fibers core via This is cell the actin at of actin the

adhesion claudins, occludens)arecomposedofseveralintegralmembraneproteins,includingoccludins, Epithelialcelltightjunctions(alsocalledzonula [JAM]).Occludinsandclaudinsaretransmembraneproteinsthatspanthemembraneofonecellandlinktotheextracellularportionofthesamemoleculeintheadjacentcell.Cytoplasmiclinkerproteins(e.g.,tightjunctionprotein[ZO-1,ZO-2,andZO-3])thenlinkthemembranespanningproteinstothecytoskeletonofthecell. molecule andseveralmembersoftheimmunoglobulinsuperfamily(e.g.,thejunctional

Ofthesejunctionalproteins,claudinsappeartobeimportantindeterminingthepermeabilitycharacteristicsofthetightjunction,especiallywithregardtocationsandanions.Todate,27mammalianclaudingeneshavebeenidentified,and26arefoundinthehumangenome(thegeneforclaudin13isnotfoundinhumans).Certainclaudinsserveasbarrierproteinsthatrestrictthemovementofionsthroughthetightjunction,whereasothersforma“pore”thatfacilitatesthemovementofionsthroughthejunction.Thusthepermeabilitycharacteristicsofthetightjunctionofanepitheliumaredeterminedbythecomplementofclaudinsexpressedbythecell.Forexample,theproximaltubuleofthekidneyistermeda“leaky”epithelium,inwhichwaterandsolutes(e.g.,Na+)movethroughthejunction.Claudin4andclaudin10areexpressedinthetightjunctionofproximaltubulecells.Incontrast,thecollectingductofthekidneyisconsidereda“tight”epithelium,withrestrictedmovementofionsthroughthetightjunction.Collectingductcellsexpressclaudins3,4,7,8,10,and18.

reabsorptionbydistalsegmentsoftherenalnephron(see Thefunctionofclaudinscanberegulatedatseverallevels,includinggeneexpression,posttranslationalmodification,interactionswithcytoplasmicscaffoldingproteins,andinteractionswithotherclaudinsinthesamemembrane(cis-interaction),aswellaswithclaudinsofadjacentcells(trans-interaction).ThemineralocorticoidhormonealdosteronestimulatesNa+ fromtheinterstitiumintothetubulelumen,therebyallowingmoreefficientNa+ transportersinthecell,aldosteronealsoupregulatesexpressionofclaudin8inthetightjunction.Theincreasedexpressionofclaudin8reducestheabilityofNa+ reabsorptionbytheepithelium. topermeatethetightjunction,whichthenreducesthebackwardsleakofNa+ ).Inadditiontothehormone’seffectonNa+

andMg++ hypomagnesemia, (FHHNC).Claudin16isfoundinthetightjunctionofthethickascendingportionofHenle’sloopinthekidneysandservesasaroutefortheparacellularreabsorptionofCa++ nephrocalcinosis Mutationsinthegenethatcodesforclaudin16resultintheautosomalrecessiveconditionknowasfamilial and hypercalcuria, fromthetubularfluid.IndividualswithFHHNClackfunctionalcopiesofclaudin16,andreabsorptionofthesedivalentionsisthusreduced,whichleadstohypomagnesemia,hypercalcuria,andnephrocalcinosis.

29 CHAPTER 2 Homeostasis: of and • Fluid Compartments Volume Fig. Composition Body with can length Apical cells Pawlina, 2.9 small 3 intestine). the Microvilli reproductive and (Redrawn 1 apical of epididymis proteins. Drawn from A, (e.g., membrane a area composed to structure the stereocilia primarily those Both the the (Not be serve tract). Illustration core have increase Cells to in of those nonmotile. µm are Both up length male microvilli of of W. µm B, Specializations of of to to (e.g., actin, of Epithelial epithelial in Membrane of Scale). associated number surface the of Stereocilia a 120 the Kluwer Correlated Text 2016.) Histology: Cell 7th Molecular A ed. with Biology. Philadelphia: Health, and Wolters Atlas, and structural the provides microvilli. and base the microvilli) of the support for Another surface feature is (see stereocilia

Fig. ). 2.9B the of the increase apical are 120 surface projections nonmotile area like long microvilli, membrane. to membrane that, Stereocilia µm), (up inner “hair testis the cells” the and ear. of found are of epididymis in They the the in and Their also core filaments proteins. actin accessory contains

feature is apical ( third A membrane cilia

Fig. 2.10 ). (called secondary non-motile either Cilia motile be may primary or (called cilia) cilia). (nine a of contain arranged microtubule center). “9+2” of pattern in microtubules the motile The in pairs the and circumference one of microtubules characteristic pair a around the cilia cilium, core cilium. motor is the drives the Dynein movement of the molecular that the the cilia Motile respiratory tract. features are cells line of that characteristic epithelial mucociliary synchronized to manner and and a particulates (see inhaled mucus the out a transport termed transport serve lung, in of pulsate process They

Chapter 26).

of nephron fluid organs are the of as kidneys asymmetry as and flow involved embryological mechanoreceptors left-right in well as during sensing (see cilia in the determining of ). development, the Nonmotile serve rate membrane found Only single cilium in nonmotile of the is apical a cells. lack and microtubule Nonmotile motor have arrangement) core a cilia a protein. (“9+0”

junction effectively the surface. divides As noted into epithelial plasma an previously, a of surface basolateral the tight membrane two apical cell domains: an and or membrane folded epithelial The invaginated. basolateral of cells many is so This have transport rates. cells that for epithelial high is especially to membrane. to the Na+,K+-ATPase) number needed of membrane These accommodate surface in the transporters the membrane invaginations (e.g., increase area large serve

vectorial the transport, opposite cells are can (i.e., side of tight one and apical two plasma be of an to capable epithelial junction whereby sheet the the domains from divides membrane transported molecule side ( Because into the epithelial basolateral), or ion

Fig. ). 2.11 domains. of to specific transport The that one the targeted and requires accomplishment or transport membrane other vectorial proteins be the remain in membrane of the shown in In example

Fig. present is the the channel Na+ •Fig. 2.11 , only in apical Ciliaareapicalmembranespecializationsofsomeepithelialcells.Ciliaare5to10µminlengthandcontainarraysofmicrotubules,asdepictedinthesecross-sectiondiagrams.Left, Theprimaryciliumhasnineperipheralmicrotubulearrays.Itisnonmotileandservesasamechanoreceptor(e.g.,cellsoftherenalcollectingduct).Cellsthathaveaprimaryciliumhaveonlyasinglecilium.Right, Thesecondaryciliumhasacentralpairofmicrotubulesinadditiontothenineperipheralmicrotubulearrays.Alsointhesecondarycilium,themotorproteindyneinisassociatedwiththemicrotubulearraysandthereforeismotile.Asinglecellcanhavethousandsofsecondaryciliaonitsapicalsurface(e.g.,epithelialcellsoftherespiratorytract). 2.10 (RedrawnfromRodat-DespoixL,DelmasP.Ciliaryfunctionsinthe nephron.Pflugers Archiv.2009;458:179.) are Na+,K+-ATPase K+ confined the the basolateral whereas to membrane. channels membrane, the and interior a the cell gradient cell (intracellular respect with the membrane exterior). operation cell’s which of channel with Na+ channel the through electrochemical the [Na+] membrane the electrically for apical of K+ extracellular to the the is The Vm oriented up across leakage across of [Na+], < the enter to negative Na+ and basolateral large sets cell’s and the out Na+,K+-ATPase Na+,K+-ATPase, the is transport of from the the vectorial pumped and side of out epithelium The apical by Na+ side epithelium the cell to the the basolateral of then occurs. reabsorption: the For renal absorption epithelium nutrients NaCl the is termed lumen of Transport termed lumen the uptake the the from basolateral transport either termed or apical tract from gastrointestinal an the water example, of absorption, side from side of whereas nephrons and the to reabsorption. of the is is of side Transport is the from secretion. to epithelium side basolateral termed the the apical of

Na+,K+-ATPase role K+-selective in noted the Na+ in an establishing generating play Vm. ion and cellular the As for and and previously, gradients important channels K+ epithelium, In membrane the the the the pigment cells channel plexus retinal in of all Na+,K+-ATPase and basolateral is located choroid epithelial cell. except may in channels cells membrane are and Numerous K+selective located epithelial either domain. in be transport 1Na+,1K+,2Cl− Through driven be voltage of symporter). of ions Na+-H+ other − can 1Na+-3HCO3 and these the establishment chemical solutes antiporter, the gradients, symporter, symporter, and Na+-glucose (e.g., located. transport transporters of transepithelial domain which the depends on simply membrane direction The secretion) are (reabsorption or of the the expenditure requires energy. on dependence Na+,K+-ATPase, of transport epithelial the Because xenobiotics which ATP-dependent as (MRP2), ABC 2 H+,K+-ATPase, transport host of as cystic such (drugs), which conductance resistance-associated transporters, P-glycoprotein transport. transmembrane Other H+-ATPase, transports and Cl−—are (CFTR), epithelial (PGP) multidrug protein and in and fibrosis involved a the transporters—such regulator

and brain plexus is choroid fluid. the of the cerebrospinal in hThe the located secretes ventricles in The cells. channel of is apical Na+,K+-ATPase membrane these the located

Fluid •Fig. and CHAPTER of Volume Compartments Composition Body Homeostasis: 2 incontrast,areasymmetricalandtargetvariousmembranetransportproteinstoeithertheapicalorthebasolateralmembrane.Whenthetransportersareconfinedtoamembranedomain,vectorialtransportcanoccur.Inthecelldepicted,Na+ Insymmetricalcells(A; e.g.,redbloodcells),membranetransportproteinsaredistributedovertheentiresurfaceofthecell.Epithelialcells(B), istransportedfromtheapicalsurfacetothebasolateralsurface.ATP,adenosinetriphosphate. 2.11

and across both by across Solutes by transported epithelium and the (transcellular tight (paracellular junction water the between transport) or moving traversing the can an cells basolateral transport). be membranes apical both which membrane. the apical is the transport a across basolateral transported transcellular solute Solute via process, and molecule is route two-step in the the transport or cell, the of passive or may active an process. a into cell, Uptake either be out the of active. steps other passive, is is and one the Typically, example the shown For in

Fig. across passive channel electrochemical membrane gradient is 2.11B Na+-selective for the uptake by cell Na+ and of driven through apical . the the the Na+ the into , exit channel. across the The Na+,K+-ATPase via membrane cell primary the from of is the transport active Na+ basolateral by the for compartment active). said to gradient Because the transepithelial in transport can transepithelial reduced can generated of is a be process be compartment, the overall Na+ the that [Na+] below (i.e., basolateral of this apical be process Na+ transported that solute via epithelium Any pathway. transcellular is transported across an actively the be must

pathway paracellular water. is solute an epithelium, route transepithelial transport for and on Depending important the the of are by the determined, the the specific paracellular part, of that pathway are claudins permeability expressed cell. the characteristics As large noted, by in can solutes, or a permeability for junction or it have have tight the can permeability. low both, Thus high water, For rates of in are epithelia which transport, high transepithelial there •Fig. Across Epithelial Cell. The an Electrical 2.12 Profile Themagnitudeofthemembranevoltages,andthetransepithelialvoltagearedeterminedbythevariousmembranetransportproteinsintheapicalandbasolateralmembranes.Thetransepithelialvoltageisequaltothesumoftheapicalandbasolateralmembranevoltages(seetextfordetails).

tight leaky). (i.e., are junctions have the typically a permeability high (e.g., include and the jejunum). nephron the duodenum the epithelia renal of early proximal segments such small and of intestine of tubule the Examples the are transepithelial junctions for permeability solutes, the large If tight). establish water, low tight have must or epithelium both, typically gradients (i.e., of include nephron, bladder, the collecting duct of colon. the the epithelium this of of portion and terminal type urinary renal the Examples the selective be cation for solutes tight addition, the (e.g., anion versus junction certain may In selective).

that in transport paracellular is passive occurs solute nature. through pathway All the two (Fig. are the this and, concentration gradient solute transepithelial transport driving transepithelial charged, the forces the voltage the is if solute for The for 2.12 ). in The oriented apical relation surface electrically with as in be the voltage surface negative the shown transepithelial basolateral may to

Fig. oriented electrically or be in the it surface. basolateral relation to with may surface positive the , apical 2.12 well tight junction. polarity specific is of in membrane voltage and membranes, as the transepithelial the the of apical as and permeability characteristics basolateral determined The transporters the the by by magnitude

and important in transcellular voltage It turn set transport recognize drive paracellular the to transepithelial which gradients, processes can is up transport. chemical that illustrated is This in

Fig. and that epithelium an for for secretes reabsorbs NaCl. NaCl epithelium that an 2.13 basolateral transepithelial epithelia, is negative oriented in with voltage the surface electrically the In surface. both relation apical to the NaCl-reabsorbing For voltage reabsorption transcellular active, of the is epithelium, . Na+ by transepithelial generated the the drives reabsorption the pathway. through paracellular Cl− in This turn voltage for generated Cl− active epithelium, . is secretion the transcellular In the voltage the contrast, NaCl-secreting transepithelial of by transepithelial driven the by is passively via paracellular voltage. secreted Na+ negative pathway, the then

osmotic movement epithelia driven by across passive and transepithelial is pressure gradients. Water transcellular in occur the both by aquaporins basolateral involving Water and apical movement route a can membranes.

the water In addition, paracellular move may pathway. through also depicted In in epithelium the NaCl-reabsorbing

Fig. compartment, from compartment that osmotic basolateral apical whereas addition that , 2.13A in compartment. pressure osmotic of pressure NaCl in the the NaCl to compartment the reabsorption lowers of the the raises the the apical of a from a the to As (i.e., result, reabsorption). the established osmotic compartment gradient basolateral that movement is drives water transepithelial pressure epithelia (see The with NaCl-secreting occurs opposite

Fig. a in osmotic transepithelial transepithelial secretion establishes which drives 2.13B pressure gradient that NaCl of ), secretion. water the

solute. the can of renal pathway additional the the (e.g., the drive proximal the epithelium nephron), water In movement tubule via some of epithelia of movement paracellular across water will fact dissolved the This solutes in reflects junction process solvent that and the drag the with traverse the tight water. is termed

transepithelial and gradients cells. pressure by transepithelial case transport solutes the of epithelial concentration is transcellular the with the of voltage establishment the osmotic requires establishment of gradients, As

basolateral in are membrane. and expressed often aquaporin apical the iDifferent isoforms isoforms of addition, may in be one expressed membrane multiple the In more or domains.

CHAPTER and of Composition Fluid Body Compartments Homeostasis: 2 Volume

•Fig. NaCl reabsorption in Epithelial of The 2.13 the Paracellular Role Pathway

Transport. throughthetightjunction.NaClsecretionresults. Cl− throughthetightjunction.NaClreabsorptionresults.B, transportthroughthecellgeneratesatransepithelial voltagethatthendrivesthepassivemovementofCl− Na+ A, transportthroughthecellgeneratesatransepithelialvoltagethatthendrivesthepassivetransportofNa+

Regulation Transport Epithelial of

needs meet the of regulated the individual. must to homeostatic be Epithelial transport neural hormonal mechanisms, or both. on or Depending epithelium, regulation the involves this intestine transport by and nervous gastrointestinal tract cells the the epithelial of For regulates line and example, that system enteric the the colon. water solute by nervous epithelial of nephron. system Similarly, the cells sympathetic the renal regulates transport the transport epithelial ), steroid NaCl that sweat by a by a produced hormone the Aldosterone, the colon, stimulates cells and is example ducts. of an of (see renal adrenal cortex the hormone nephron, locally regulated regulation. can cell be locally a and termed Epithelial also transport paracrine produced process substances, acting by stimulation the an secretion of The in stomach is HCl by histamine example this of process. stomach cells the which the the secrete HCl. epithelial located cells of release HCl-secreting to stomach cells) them the on acts stimulates histamine, are Cells that (parietal and of near

When by in Retrieval by the transporters transporters or a insertion may of acted respond signal, endocytosis, • including: from of an a the from different vesicular ways, membrane, several the regulatory called cell membrane epithelial into process intracellular upon by pool,

Change transporters activity of channel membrane in (e.g., gating)

of Synthesis the insertion transporters, specific their membrane into and

2Cl– (seconds to days). takes to The can minutes), Na+ tional addi-K+ quite transporters first two occur the (minutes rapidly synthesis mechanisms of but time

water The of steady-state balance body a important and number for solutes. maintains from body equals output input occurs This when into the body. the each For and there a set point. water, solute is normal point output), activated are effector that this and balance. from (i.e., mechanisms monitored set restore are Deviations input when ≠ achieved water intake adjustment either of is and excretion This or solutes. of balance by are to again equal and maintain input balance. Thereafter, output

are the channels establishing and (Vm), The important and composition, maintaining the in and K+-selective Na+,K+-ATPase critically volume. cell membrane intracellular potential converts in the Na+,K+-ATPase energy

Mechanisms epithelia. transport L. of Altenberg and Ruess across membranes GA, cell water Alpern O, M, In: eds. R, Kaplan Moe Seldin Kidney—Physiology and The and Pathophysiology. Giebisch’s ed. 5th York: Academic New 2013. Press;

D, Günzel Yu ASL. the junction permeability. Claudins of modulation and tight Physiol Rev. 2013;93:525-569.

EK, al. et Hoffman of volume regulation Physiology cell in vertebrates. Rev. Physiol 2009;89:193-277.

control. F. volume Lang Cell Alpern M, R, O, eds. Kaplan Moe In: and Seldin The Giebisch’s Pathophysiology. Kidney—Physiology and 5th ed. York: New 2013. Academic Press;

gradients potential. membrane ion into ATP and of the potential energy molecules, and to by especially ions antiporters). (i.e., gradients ion symporters this transport other and the then drive other used are process of electrical and solute carriers created by The

environment internal constitute the external the and the body. the interface between • of Epithelial world cells Vectorial maintain of balance a water number solutes for solutes. of helps across important steady-state and transport epithelia and water individual. highly because homeostatic water by Because food environment meet is and intake to is dietary and the of regulated needs the the epithelia external variable, transport of constantly changes,

Molecular and Pawlina with and Biology. Histology: W. Correlated Text Atlas, Cell A ed. 7th 2016. Wolters Philadelphia: Health; Kluwer

A, Pedersen Kapus SF, EK. Hoffmann mechanisms regulation. volume Osmosensory and systemic in cellular Am J Nephrol. Soc 2011;22:1587-1597.

LG. Palmer Sackin H, transepithelial Electrophysiological transport. analysis of Kaplan eds. O, Alpern Moe R, M, In: and Giebisch’s The and Seldin Kidney—Physiology Pathophysiology. ed. 5th Academic New 2013. York: Press;

Regulation and Signal Transduction, Messengers, Second Expression Receptors, Membrane 3 of Gene

this answer be 1. the completion student questions: Upon chapter, following to should the able of

each other? do with cells communicate How

2.

and receptors? what class associated classes What of are four with are pathways signal the receptors, transduction each of

3.

kinases steroid receptor hormones, cyclic do gene expression? How adenosine monophosphate, tyrosine regulate thyroid and and

of composed of each is cells, human with billions distinct he body a function. chemical coordinated products hormones, function neurotransmitters, growth odorants, and of and metabolism cellular serve is However, provide communication. of cells factors, external tightly signals, integrated the as cell-to-cell by that messengers including chemical and and external function. also are signals cellular physical stimuli coordinate Mechanical thermal that and light and plasma with nucleus. receptors located interact membrane, in messengers Chemical physical cytoplasm, the and initiates receptors a mediate the response stimulus. events Interaction each messengers that of to with of cascade signaling these specific, that signaling the and pathways coordinated. to messengers ensure is tightly regulated, These cellular response external amplified, chapter of process that external cellular overview discussion This information the and coordinated a response. highly a signaling via of external pathways into cells provides an messengers communicate how system, and discussed respiratory in details muscular system, are system, signaling gastrointestinal system on subsequent endocrine system, cardiovascular detail. pathways greater system, chapters, system, in the nervous renal In

drugs by significance short act illustrated of signaling popular pathways. by is regulating following that the of signaling pathways The in list medicine pathways and chapters. on in presented these are other later this Details

first pharmaceutical inhibits and of (COX2) (1899), the (i.e., clots). blood Aspirin, and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX1) reduces the antithrombotic is cyclooxygenase-1 therefore formation

and medical treat conditions. variety receptor β-Adrenergic to used a antagonists are of agonists contractility in heart low with rate blood and patients cardiac pressure. β1-Agonists increase and β2-Agonists dilate disease. obstructive bronchi are to chronic used treat lung asthma and used In congestive and to treat arrhythmias, cardiac contrast, angina, are (see hypertension, heart antagonists β-adrenergic failure

Chapter 18).

(see Fluoxetine presynaptic (Prozac) neurotransmitter which inhibits in that activation cell, serotonin is reuptake of antidepressant the receptors of into medication enhanced an the serotonin results

are treat activation growth antibodies the of in caused used cancer Several receptors by cancer monoclonal cells. to factor a of stimulate family HER2/neu, metastatic trastuzumab member and overexpress women cancer factor who the For monoclonal treat to which breast of used epidermal cell is differentiation. growth growth (Herceptin) in receptors, antibody (EGF) example, a of cancers and treat Cetuximab head antibodies and bevacizumab the monoclonal (Erbitux) are (Avastin) used colorectal to cancer and neck. metastatic that are antibodies in EGF-induced thereby inhibit and receptor cells. inhibit and cancer to cell These the bind EGF growth

tadalafil to dysfunction cyclic guanosine type erectile 5, treat nitric vardenafil are arterial sildenafil monophosphate as and Drugs effects phosphodiesterase prolong the inhibit and that hypertension vasodilatory such pulmonary and (Levitra), (see of oxide (Cialis), (cGMP)–specific (Viagra), used

Chapter 17).

is other in how each An presented cells of overview communicate with

Fig. 3.1 . hormones membrane, communicate releasing neurotransmitters) receptor by plasma extracellular molecules that to located bind cytoplasm, and proteins signaling (e.g., in the nucleus. or Cells or into activation, messengers is This transduced the by one interacting or signal inactivation, more with intracellular receptors. of variety kinases, proteins). intracellular signaling interact a triphosphate including proteins, and phosphatases, of (GTP)–binding Receptors (G guanosine with proteins and modulate interact the of These proteins with target thereby and cellular signaling regulate activity function. proteins that metabolic proteins, proteins cell limited enzymes, other regulate growth division. cycle transport and to, and include, Target gene not proteins, proteins are ion and channels regulatory but cytoskeletal cell proteins, of steps; multiple multiple (3) response and functions; the mechanisms, these amplification provide of minimize (1) regulation activation regulatory signal-receptor control multiple, characterized the pathways which cellular response; binding of and by signaling pathways tight are magnifies Signaling hierarchical (2) pathways. event, the over which follows. brief description cells communicate how of A presentation material this available. the more and Readers consult currently who cellular encouraged of to a molecular textbooks of are one in-depth desire many biology

Ca++), amines chemicals, (e.g., proteins estrogen); and (e.g., acids, nucleotides, steroid (3) animals in insulin); space norepinephrine); dioxide. peptides (1) small (e.g., as gases, and such ions aldosterone, and extracellular (2) hormones higher amino including oxide nitric molecules, the and into of release Cells including hundreds (4) and epinephrine carbon (e.g., Fig. is of signaling • molecules Secretion Cells Overview An 3.1 of How Communicate. receptor, cytosol, which the molecule signaling be or nucleus. in may membrane, binds A or (i.e., neurotransmitter) hormone plasma to a more proteins one a intracellular function. with or cellular proteins, of receptor ligand Binding which signaling to regulate to target activity the change interact activates and of differentiation growth, Signaling cellular and metabolism. regulate influence and molecules cell division, activity addition, and intracellular the ionic composition ion transport In of the by they regulating modulate proteins. channels cytoskeleton-associated adhesion. control molecules and events, cell and including shape, cell-to-matrix Signaling migration also cell-to-cell division, and Cell. from the Molecular Biology al: B, et of Alberts (Redrawn 6th ed. 2015.) Science; New York: Garland

and Membrane specific. Second Transduction, 3 of Receptors, Signal Gene Expression cell-type CHAPTER Regulation Messengers, 37 cells. stimulates cells beta into example, in insulin, glucose which For pancreas uptake release the on the of of that bind signaling affinity with a molecule receptors to expression a the specificity. depends signaling and high specific respond molecule ability The to cell located nucleus membrane, the cytosol, Receptors in are ( the the plasma and

Fig. 3.2

Fig. 3.3).

one membrane-bound of (see cancer plasma which to responses, cell during in Contact-dependent is membrane cell, signaling, binds signaling immune receptor development, directly in a another important a molecule of and in

Fig. 3.3A ). released paracrine act called are that and are (see Molecules locally

Fig. 3.3B

Fig. hormones. ) 3.3C signals they degraded (within are by one cells taken of or type are Paracrine and rapidly target by another up act type; usually Fig. cell • on released the molecules, cognate bind to membrane, ones cross directly that and 3.2 membrane plasma in the are especially receptors (A). cannot plasma their hydrophilic Signaling plasma readily steroid membrane, and to nuclear signaling the where proteins acids, diffuse the nucleus bind Other D—bind vitamin in and including in carrier molecules— cognate triiodothyronines, retinoic across or hormones, to they receptors (B). cytosol blood (B). diffuse can membrane act to signaling nitric proteins other cross protein without including on carrier the and molecules, intracellular Still targets oxide, regulate of when transcription. Both ligand receptors, classes bound, gene messenger mRNA, RNA. B, of the from Molecular Cell. et (Redrawn al: Alberts Biology 6th ed. Science; New 2015.) York: Garland enzymes. minutes) by example, enterochromaffin-like the cells by For parietal neighboring stomach in stimulates acid the details). cells histamine, which for secrete production (see of molecule type Autocrine affects involves the of cells the that cell other of (e.g., same or signaling cells). release a cancer same the synaptic signaling (see In

Fig. signals 3.3D or that distant body. electrical neurons and are ), axons release neurons synapses transmit affect other function the cell along of neurotransmitters neuron from their the that at cells the is that the close terminal and the neurotransmitter to between ensures The cell cell. specific delivered nerve target physical a relationship signaling on synaptic are in Details discussed

Chapter 6.

Endocrine (see signals hormones and widely into are that secreted in blood dispersed body are the the are

Fig. 3.3E ). signaling on in endocrine are discussed Details

synaptic adjacent addition to autocrine, junctions via gap In cells between and occurs paracrine, that communication (see cell-to-cell also ). signaling, endocrine, form D are an intracellular generally adjacent diffuse 1200 signaling one size, junctions allow cell to specialized cytoplasm molecules, to that the in from cell. of less than junctions Gap regulated [Ca++], by and and The [H+], the permeability gap membrane cyclic potential. by cytosolic monophosphate of adenosine (cAMP) junctions is cells allow of also muscle cardiac vitally and coordinated junctions to be is smooth which (see for Gap activity coupled, electrically important the cells

response extracellular depends on to an mechanism of the signal speed delivery. The a of is for flow fast because synaptic target blood is signals the and relatively to slow signaling (seconds cell, whereas are required extremely (milliseconds). time minutes) Endocrine to diffusion may the in to the in milliseconds proteins response changes If involves activity of the response the cell, in occur seconds. response may of and a if involves response days. changes hours take the in However, proteins, novo the expression and the occur, to maximal de synthesis response take may gene develop For (see of stimulatory days on example, requires to transport aldosterone by sodium fully kidneys effect the the

signaling molecules receptor. ligand response high that of that reach also molecule a molecule or receptor degree (i.e., interact to on expression on specificity), with recognize depends The on molecule particular a a cognate cell, cytoplasmic signaling particular ability and of with particular signaling to receptors the a the the the the of on have molecules signaling type. dependent cell effects different frequently the are that Thus many stimulates decreases but of the contraction of For force example, neurotransmitter muscle. contraction muscle skeletal acetylcholine heart the in different and express acetylcholine receptors. because This muscle cells heart skeletal is

nicotine can the neurotransmitter. receptor action skeletal because aThe of muscle mimic in nicotinic is termed acetylcholine this is muscarine, acetylcholine receptor the this alkaloid from muscle effect contrast, derived is cardiac by mushroom mimicked an termed muscarinic in because In the

muscaria. Amanita

Fig. • by (C), communication endocrine (D), five is (A), autocrine mechanisms: paracrine mediated Cell-to-cell (B), signaling basic (E). 3.3 contact-dependent and synaptic the described detail are mechanisms text. in in These the B, Biology Cell. from Molecular of al: et Alberts (Redrawn 6th ed. Science; York: New 2015.) Garland

Membrane CHAPTER of Second and Signal Regulation 3 Receptors, Messengers, Expression Transduction, Gene

Nuclear ligand: Extracellular receptors

Glutamate: GABA ATP NMDA (muscle) ACh

ligand: Intracellular

Cytokines, lipids (ACh) Odorants oxytocin) Peptides Neurotransmitters (PTH,

TGF-β Steroid Interleukin-6, Insulin, EGF erythropoietin ANP hormones:

Miscellaneous hormones:

, Ca++ , Na+ Na+ K+ Ca++ , , , Na+ Cl− Membrane currents: , K+ Ca++ K+

Subunit ion , α activates Subunits Na+ βγ K+ enzymes: channels Ca++ activate K+

its metabolites. diacylglycerol, generate arachidonic and generate phospholipases Cyclases cAMP, and that generate phospholipases cGMP, and that that acid InsP3

receptor kinase Monomeric kinase–associated guanylyl serine/threonine or in cyclase to and Bind Tyrosine regulatory kinase DNA Receptor sequences G increase proteins tyrosine Receptor Receptor

gene DNA increase in decrease or to and sequences regulatory Bind transcription

InsP3, cyclic gamma-aminobutyric atrial adenosine monophosphate; ATP, ACh, adenosine cyclic parathyroid factor. factor; EGF, guanosine monophosphate; inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate; GABA, PTH, TGF, N-methyl-D-aspartate; hormone; natriuretic triphosphate; cGMP, cAMP, transforming ANP, growth acetylcholine; NMDA, acid; peptide; epidermal growth

event All molecules that as act signaling into intracellular converting cellular signal function. affect that to receptors binding transducers, a signals ligand-receptor bind thereby specific G the receptors and structure Receptors protein–coupled be channels, (GPCRs), (4) ligand-gated classes and enzyme-linked can into their of divided four of action: nuclear (1) (2) basic (3) receptors basis on mechanism receptors, ion (

Table 3.1

Figs. 3.5). 3.4

Fig. 3.4A). and membrane or plasma ionic close to ion and receptors the permeability channels, the either of changing thereby altering open potential. bind the Neurotransmitters membrane see details, examples and more For

GPCRs such as the of ion activity other and channels enzymes proteins, regulate (see

Fig. ). 3.4B In example the in

Fig. and the are subunits. the , β, which heterotrimeric mediated between G interaction is protein γ α, 3.4B proteins, target receptor and composed of the by if G signaling proteins inhibits that ligand-bound membrane an enzyme downstream target activates regulate or target ion receptors if proteins the or target is ion channel. of permeability pathways protein by changes is an the Stimulation protein

enzymes enzymes function (see associated are and with as either or Enzyme-linked regulate receptors

Fig. ). 3.4C activates on subset are in inhibits ligand amino protein causes enzyme-linked or acids, phosphorylate kinases specific the associated or Most to turn activity. a binding and protein of proteins kinases, specific kinases are protein with which receptors

to retinoids, and ligand, (see translocate hormones, D, diffuse cytoplasmic have receptors including are nuclear plasma days), to the to small steroid bound membrane, Nuclear the to biological their long receptors once that, across and hormones, hydrophobic half-life receptors to or nucleus that thyroid vitamin molecules, bind (hours a

Fig.

). 3.5 Some those that as receptors, bind cortisol nuclear such

Signal Fig. • molecule a Signal dimer as molecule Four of Plasma 3.4 Classes Receptors. the Membrane of Three See for text details. Molecular al: from Biology B, (Redrawn the Alberts et Cell. of ed. 6th Science; New York: 2015.) Garland located hormone nucleus. and located hormone, nucleus receptors, are to the in cytosol the and binding including whereas receptor, after in other the thyroid aldosterone, are enter the hormone complex. to receptors both in inhibitory of bound and In of binding proteins, cases, results dissociation inhibitory inactive the are transcription. that receptor coactivator proteins Hormone causes gene to binding bind the activate genes. of hormone-receptor specific activated, transcription Once the complex the regulates in genes two produce an days) steps: delayed activates which a early specific (hours to minutes), that usually stimulate Activation response genes genes to primary response secondary (≈30 other (see of occurs

Fig. 3.5).

a based more regulate with specific cell activated for cellular expression that expression genes that elicits cognate well of of regulatory transcription response the the proteins the on of (see receptor, to of as on receptor a is specific details). Each hormone type–specific interact set as gene membrane the regulate existence and that addition expression, receptors hormones. steroid gene of of also rapid, to that suggests receptors In effects the evidence steroid mediate juxtamembrane nongenomic steroid

signals has they that into a subserve classic the Some but signals a do second of messenger membrane in extracellular recognize biological the effect. receptor-like and transduce an that function receptors, proteins definition they not fit intracellular example, which a intramembrane cytosolic enters activation gene peptide expression that fragment by nucleus proteins regulated and the some For regulates undergo on proteolysis ligand, membrane a (RIP), ( elaborates

Fig. ). 3.6 a membrane produces that In receptor the to members γ-secretase. family, fragment carboxy-terminal is of ligand and this pathway, facilitated of for shedding, by metalloproteinase-disintegrin binding plasma ectodomain a signaling the substrate to leads the of induces release γ-Secretase causing of RIP, intracellular an thereby domain

Gene Messengers, Receptors, Transduction, 3 Signal CHAPTER and 41 Membrane • Expression Fig. Second Regulation of 3.5 and Stimulate Steroid the Transcription of Late-Response Genes Hormones Genes. Early-Response for details. text See Biology of from Molecular Cell. (Redrawn al: Alberts et B, ed. 6th York: New

Garland 2015.) Science;

the • Translocation nucleus Fig. to 3.6 Intramembrane Regulated Proteolysis. text for details. See Molecular from the B, Biology (Redrawn al: of Alberts Cell. et 6th ed. Garland Science; 2015.) New York: protein (see enters regulates that the nucleus the and transcription

Fig. ). 3.6 transmembrane sterol protein regulatory of in The expressed reticulum. the the of endoplasmic example best the protein a element–binding is (SREBP), RIP characterized membrane nucleus, proteolytically genes cholesterol biosynthesis. are into When fragment RIP, undergoes levels where it cholesterol SREBP translocated low, the cleaved is that the and transcriptionally activates cellular promote

signaling When via to hormones bind relayed pathways. membrane proteins effector are to intracellular signals plasma receptors, nuclear to receptors, through signals or When expression. regulation gene cytosolic bind they of primarily hormones relay desensitize and hormone. can even response, the also amplify Signaling signals the or presence pathways can in continued and terminating downregulate reducing but integrate of signals,

by affects disease, people a approximately characterized 44 formation amyloid of million worldwide. neurodegenerative plaques, progressive disease brain the Alzheimer’s pathogenesis of β-protein forms regulated (APP) disease. proteolysis to amyloid contribute of intramembrane disease, the the precursor Alzheimer’s amyloid In which (Aβ), plaques β-protein causes accumulation Alzheimer’s of amyloid that spans APP transmembrane (i.e., the its type only is a once). I protein membrane by proteolysis β-secretase individuals After γ-secretase that life and Aβ40 its and Alzheimer’s in sequential ectodomain throughout produces Aβ42 the with normally peptides disease. are shedding, produced but accumulate and production Aβ42, proteins Missense into aggregation is more hydrophobic more the prone than γ-secretase in Aβ40 protein. regulate is enhance amyloid to that presenilins, of activity, abundant mutations which fibrils protease the

cAMP, such binds cGMP, receptor)—include messengers molecules signal small and the diacylglycerol. the ligand Ca++, the molecules—so-called as Intracellular is to messenger that first signaling of (the second within include (Fig. often of form networks the Signaling that pathways dozens complicated cell molecules small ). 3.7 the (e.g., by protein to passing in allosteric proteins the pathways signaling directly an relay a Some target, message by phosphorylating signal intracellular and by or causing the change). another binding from Such switch versa, When to inactive active signaling signaling act signal until process. as they switches: another vice proteins an the an reverses molecule is molecular reversible received, intracellular a form or signaling many to This pathways. principle of reversibility is central hormone cases, thyroid the signal. by of to For in the inhibition: example, many bound is protein an receptor is absence inhibitory reversing In achieved activation

of specificity Signaling speed, physically, multiple interact that composed efficiency, signaling. the and complexes, proteins of enhance amounts transduce or either of signaling signaling enzymes amplify producing usually of additional chemical into or form simultaneously signal signal by by large molecules the Many proteins. the number different channels, large downstream and proteins, ion activating a a transduces generating by the G example, and For the that activation cyclase, enzyme large adenylyl proteins) of cAMP. signal amounts signal a (receptor of makes amplifies cAMP, signals. Other of that integrate those types multiple proteins include signaling the signal for the one to carry cell region the translocating by from Other of proteins another: cytosol nucleus. example, from to the

signals. can rapidly adjust changing to Cells manner hormone, of molecule can graded a in respond the and signaling increasing effect short-lived. Cells of be quickly can long-or a either to and concentrations also desensitization, exposure a sensitivity signal to prolonged whereby response cell’s by over Cells hormone a decreases can adjust time. their to the a receptors signaling that reduction proteins can number involve plasma the Desensitization inactivation that of the the a or reversible effect the downstream receptors. membrane, of receptors, mediate in process in expressed is of in changes that response a the the ligand. response only heterologous response the whereas molecule one is and desensitization desensitization Homologous in (e.g., to the to opioid caused tolerance), signaling involves another desensitizes when ligand reduction dependence

Table general a four summarizes with signal receptors of provides associated each pathways examples the classes few the receptors. of of class transduction 3.1 and

class electrical into elicits response. signal which a This receptors of an chemical signal, transduces a arachidonic reticulum sarcoplasmic of the to the into triphosphate or Ca++ facilitates skeletal cytosol, membrane located the adenosine caffeine, in activated metabolites acid ryanodine , of release muscle example, of contraction Ca++ details). receptor, is for muscle, by the (see (ATP), which For synaptic prior glutamate led the partial activity synaptic which plasticity. have influx in N-methyl-D-aspartate important of In activation depolarization, glutamergic to receptor high synapses by membrane Ca++ for of levels stimulates

[GDP] classes and diphosphate There monomeric to heterotrimeric and to α, are for hydrolyze (i.e., their two of an which β, and are composed named proteins γ subunits. of GTP-binding proteins G GTP low-molecular-weight, ability GTPases, inorganic proteins phosphate): G guanosine GDP binding GTP inactivates, of (Fig. proteins GTP activates, whereas GTP-binding hydrolysis to ). 3.8A GTPase and controlled nucleotide replaced (GEFs) GTPases including guanine proteins, GDP induce GDP, GTPase-activating release causes GTP are to to is factors of thus the proteins, All GTPase inactivate which rapidly GTP, hydrolysis activating GTPase, thereby the that and the by regulatory (see which the by exchange

Fig. 3.8B

can 40-kDa membrane Monomeric of G proteins of and the composed single protein be lipids 20to a are bound addition posttranslationally. because of in and cell have Arf), enzyme-linked and proliferation, differentiation, proteins Rho, Monomeric classified many been survival. (Ras, role central a and G play pathways, gene into and five Ran, regulate families expression Rab, receptor actin regulate cytoskeletal GTPases progression, cell and expression. gene organization, cycle Rho pathways. The of between endocytic and trafficking Rab in intravesicular organelles transport secretory regulate proteins the and GTPases and Ran GTPases RNA regulate transport of nucleocytoplasmic

Second Transduction, of Messengers, • Gene Fig. Signal Regulation Expression Membrane and 3 Receptors, 43 CHAPTER 3.7 Illustration Amplified Signals of Intracellular How Integrated. Are and the cell. molecules dozens and within Signaling form of networks that include complicated often pathways proteins small the protein. signal relay the passing to by signaling proteins message Some another of signaling proteins. downstream signaling by by proteins activating amounts amplify the large a number or of signal Many additional either producing large molecules region from carry the of Other to another. cell signal one proteins the more for See text details. the Molecular Cell. from al: Biology of (Redrawn Alberts B, et 6th ed. Garland York: 2015. Science; New ).

Fig. • GTP-Binding 3.8 Proteins. of inactivates GDP binding GTP-binding GTP activates whereas (A). to hydrolysis GTP proteins thereby GDP, which which (GEF) to to controlled of GTPase replaced the cause activating and GDP, All GTPase-activating (B). (GAP), the that thus exchange GTP GTPase by hydrolysis GTPase, regulatory GTPase which induce guanine proteins inactivating the is the rapidly GTP, nucleotide by release factors, are proteins, including WN. (Redrawn Kantrowitx ER, Lipscomb from coli aspartate a transition. allosteric the molecular Escherichia transcarbamoylase: for basis concerted Trends Biochem

Sci. 1990;15:53-59.) proteins. GTPases control Ras signaling division, death. proliferation pathways many are cell that involved in and GTPases, Rab regulate GTPases, Arf vesicular like transport.

thereby response the Heterotrimeric cellular signaling and 1000 odorants. an to different proteins to than receptors of and mediate set incredibly more including diverse G couple hormones, peptides, neurotransmitters, molecules, can G of membrane lipids posttranslationally. monomeric be addition bound the they Like proteins, because of α, three subunits: β, are γ. Heterotrimeric composed complexes and of subunits, γ subunits, number effectors. can and of which hundreds and with exist and There a of interact different receptors combinations into 5 β α assemble subunits, thereby 16 11 diverse the and on and The assembly with of receptors effectors association the depend subunits type. cell

activation heterotrimeric illustrated protein An G overview is of in

Fig. . 3.9 a absence these GDP which and proteins of in subunit. ligand, complex the G binds to heterotrimeric In α inactive the form are subunit. the the G promotes the molecule inactive change protein a GPCR of GDP in of the an to a α and GTP signal of that release to Binding binding conformational subsequent induces from the of the of α such heterotrimeric from GTP results as complex subunit to βγ (see release and of effectors can dimer, stimulates dissociation of cyclase α subunit the the subunit with downstream interact and the which adenylyl regulate in each α Binding phospholipases and

Fig. ). 3.9 and subunit α GDP the hydrolyzes to (Pi). Activation subunit of and phosphate is downstream dimer α the GTP by effectors the bound when βγ inorganic terminated α subunit the and The terminates with GDP activation βγ to associates bound of effectors. the dimer

a or plasma from attenuate involves signaling removal to terminate and desensitization way the GPCR membrane. endocytic Another receptors through of the increases which to called GPCRs, intracellular the domain GPCR. bind kinases to a to of of hormone Binding to GPCR of recruits proteins phosphorylate the β-arrestins GPCR ability and inactivate endocytic promote β-Arrestins the receptor

Fig. Messengers, Receptors, Second CHAPTER and 45 3 Membrane • Regulation Gene Signal Transduction, Expression of of Activation Effector G a Protein–Coupled Activation. and Receptor 3.9 (GPCR) the absence proteins in to In because an of GDP the heterotrimeric ligand, inactive subunit. G are state α binds protein signal of GDP GTP of subsequent promotes induces G protein–coupled of an that to binding receptor (GPCR) G release α to the subunit. and a inactive the a change in the Binding molecule the conformational of downstream from release can each Binding the interact in the of effectors. and α of the dissociation complex GTP of βγ α to with stimulates subunit heterotrimeric the subunit α which subunit dimer, the regulate results and from of (Redrawn Alberts Biology the B, al: Molecular from Cell. et 6th ed. York: New

2015.) Garland Science; from the membrane. plasma GPCR the of removal mechanism is during GPCRs inactivation elevated cells an hormone levels. kinase/β-arrestin with endocytosis (desensitize) exposure response prolonged GPCR of downregulate to whereby important a major and adrenergic desensitization the recovery blockers, reverse is chronic that failure, of benefits associated One congestive of responsiveness. of the they for β heart given

to protein couple phospholipases adenylyl phosphodiesterases, variety a (A2, and G subunits α and effector proteins, cyclase, including D). Activated of C, cyclase, A very of cAMP conversion heterotrimeric facilitates of ( G adenylyl ATP effector the proteins to common which downstream is

Fig. 3.10 ). subunit as interacts which G a result, activated, kinase a with protein and, increase composed a in molecule a GPCR causes signal (PKA). activation to αs of cAMP the protein When cyclase class, levels of that binds α is an an adenylyl A of residues phosphorylating regulates specific effector By protein threonine activity. and on proteins, downstream PKA effector serine protein cyclase a that a reductions in of PKA is the consequently, causes of In adenylyl class, and, in a which with α levels composed αi cAMP inhibited, receptor to binds subunit ligand G contrast, interacts a when activity.

proteins, are Some effector also by regulated directly ion-gated as channels, cAMP. such AMP phosphorylated cAMP is CREB to •Fig. degraded activated, A.Binding cytosolic molecule protein cAMP, a (PKA). and adenylyl increases Stimulation of mediates stimulation Protein A of activates Adenylyl which to turn cAMP, in a Kinase 3.10 GPCR which of kinase GPCR Cyclase, signal cyclase, Gs to phosphorylates target a PKA effects. number Activated many of proteins elicit response where nucleus it protein). PKA enters CREB [cyclic adenosine (cyclic also the mono-phosphate AMP] phosphorylates element–binding which CREB transcription. recruits coactivator CBP, Phosphorylated stimulates gene from Alberts (Redrawn etal: B, Biology the Molecular of Cell. 6th ed. New 2015.) Science; York: Garland by phosphodiesterases, inhibited factor transcription which other are caf-and the and and methylxanthines. phosphorylate cAMP activate by feine cAMP interfering constitutive protein with signal, a (see prolong “off” by element–binding (CREB) Thus caffeine cellular can response a

Fig. ). 3.10 mediated and increases transcripresponse cAMP PKA. Phospho-CREB by the protein can of set kinetics. in of distinct target Because produce (e.g., responses with much extremely a they genes, be turn rapid which slower tion proteins, can many these effects existing has response). Hence, cAMP adrenaline and enter PKA. effects can cellular In many by mediated signaling, including cytoplasmic PKA of to direct of cells addition catalytic subunit the nucleus effects, indirect the

Gene of Membrane Second Transduction, and Signal 3 Messengers, Receptors, Expression Regulation CHAPTER

of the by αs G-protein activity Cholera which the Vibrio cholera, ribosylation GTPase ADP inhibits αs. toxin, of secreted the subunit, catalyzes increase remains αs in in activation cAMP/PKA levels. of GTP-bound Thus in cyclase its turn an activated, which and causes state, adenylyl loss leads fibrosis intestines, (CFTR)–mediated secretion, levels regulator extensive secretory cholera. fluids, the chloride elevated of of which In PKA increase and cystic of transmembrane characteristic conductance diarrhea to ribosylates pertussis secretes toxin, the causes cough, αi pertussis, the ADP Bordetella whooping that subunit. bacterium which cyclase case, the inhibition of αi, cAMP/PKA. also to levels the inactivates In this and of ribosylation leading reducing adenylyl thus increased

G also proteins Heterotrimeric regulate phototransduction. of subunit which the rod In cells in activates cGMP eye, via absorption transducin, activates αt by the phosphodiesterase. protein the light rhodopsin G phosphodiesterase lowers the and of channel. of closes cGMP-activated Activation cation cGMP concentration this a thereby cation in activity channel ensuing membrane change alters the voltage. The of of rods by to and amplification to phosphodiesterase–cGMP details). in The the of for a the single of G signaling sensitivity the rhodopsin light) exquisite pathway light—rods due can (see protein–cGMP of more detect (a channel rods light—is abundance photon photon signal

pathways. Heterotrimeric a also variety G enzymes that of family of modulate signaling regulate phospholipases, a proteins (InsP3) and phospholipase inositol that C, receptors subunit diacylglycerol. that activate converts the that 4,5-biphosphate are Ligands to stimulate to 1,4,5-triphosphate αq coupled an phosphatidylinositol enzyme the channel diacylglycerol a second InsP3 proteins. that reticulum, activates the kinase a messenger into diffuses is release to ligand-activated where endoplasmic effector cytosol, protein phosphorylates to Ca++ it whereas which Ca++ activates C, as earlier, as protein other to proteins, Ca++ effector pathways, both C As noted well elicit responses. and kinase signaling influence

and be activate also from also diacylglycerol releases GPCRs stimulate binding an Ligand be arachidonic to acid that cells phospholipids acid, from which can cells inflammation. phospholipase can from A2, neighboring an or pathway, enzyme thereby Arachidonic released via membrane can released indirect regulate in is membrane where retained to the cells, of be ion the It enzymes affect metabolized it or intracellular the also second plasma and that messengers channels. into within form incorporated can activity is cytosol facilitate acid and metabolism cytosolic arachidonic prostacyclins. one In thromboxanes, pathway, cyclooxygenases the prostaglandins, of to of aggregation inflammation. Prostaglandins cause induce airways, the and mediate of constriction platelets, constrict whereas aggregation inhibits of platelet induce vessels, platelet prostacyclin and Thromboxanes blood and dilation blood causes aggregation vessels. also enzyme allergic leukotrienes, in arachidonic acid which inflammatory disease. In and rheumatoid a of asthma, and acid including conversion bowel responses, the those initiates pathway the second causing participate 5-lipoxygenase arachidonic arthritis, to metabolism, inflammatory of is acid epoxygenase, by acid initiated cis-epoxyeicosatrienoic metabolism enzyme that pathway (cis-EET). an of arachidonic of hydroxyeicosatetraenoic generation facilitates the acid (HETE) and third The responses. from the their proliferation, regulate cell metabolites and release stimulate endoplasmic HETE inflammatory cis-EET and Ca++ and reticulum, increase of

Ca++ also cellular an elicits proteins, Ca++-binding is notably intracellular that messenger most calmodulin effects (CaM). via conformation allows that cAMP an the and regulate degrades When to CaM, and phosphodiesterase, activate enzyme proteins, AMP, bind signaling including inactive its is to PKA. cAMP CaM change to it which to other to altered, in structural and Ca++ binds unable is proteins, many serine kinase, (see light-chain binding phosphorylates facilitates including specific and threonine muscle which residues also myosin to contraction CaM-dependent in kinases, smooth By CaM

Protein Counteract Phosphodiesterases and Nucleotide Cyclic Activation Phosphatases of the Kinases

enhancing cGMP: cAMP terminate of protein effectors are these two and by There to of signal nucleotides initiated degradation ways cyclic phosphodiesterases and a dephosphorylation by phosphatases. by the ligand cAMP are by AMP activated of Phosphodiesterases cGMP activation and GMP, to and respectively, and facilitate of breakdown GPCRs. Phosphatases that were proteins such phosphorylated dephosphorylate kinases effector as by PKA. the thus proteins. phosphatase-mediated signaling state the between The regulation phosphorylation rapid activity dephosphorylation allows and phosphorylated exquisite of balance kinase-mediated and and of

several or activity. activity enzymatic have associated of that proteins intimately have receptors are with that are There classes enzymatic cyclase transforming next, oxide nitric receptors of peptide (PDGF), responses the receptors); mediate Four these and platelet-derived including kinase (tyrosine are (guanylyl kinase and natriuretic growth threonine/serine receptors); (tyrosine atrial factor-β classes to kinase–associated insulin EGF, interleukins cellular that receptors); receptors). factor and discussed (ANP) (TGF-β; growth

There isoforms are of COX2. two and cyclooxygenase: COX1 in endothelial blood (thrombin). COX1 production clots the inhibit activated which cells, of When facilitates prostacyclins, COX1 cells production thromboxane platelets, of which the vascular facilitates muscle and smooth A2, is prothrombotic. In thromboxane in types. health balance on and distinct the A2, part depends by cardiovascular Thus between cell generated prostacyclins doses nonsteroidal little of endothelial production. by aspirin, on platelets prostacyclin effect reduce Low a with thromboxane (NSAID), production drug antiinflammatory A2 antithrombotic reduces aspirin is (i.e., blood Thus clots). low-dose inflammatory stimuli. by COX2 activated is Thus indomethacin) of inhibition due COX2. the naproxen, suppress NSAIDs to is ability to the aspirin, inflammatory ibuprofen, of response acetaminophen, (e.g., stomach. COX2 of facilitate protect and the COX1 the production that Both prostanoids must elicit lines inhibited evidence the and gastrointestinal COX1 to Several to both be COX2 tract. suggest damage that of NSAIDs gastric nonselective negative by incidence most Consequently, mucosa the the COX1 effects of of to bleeding) (e.g., and likely inhibitors. these inhibition on increased COX are COX2 of gastrointestinal due

and inhibitors (e.g., selectively to celecoxib, effective the are in very inflammatory inhibiting are Selective COX2 used reduce extensively rofecoxib) COX2 response. by their use gastrointestinal to lack are COX2 has the Because thought NSAIDs effects elicited increased negative dramatically. inhibitors the tract, on inhibitors, warning and product as announced NSAIDs a the the that adverse for for Administration for as nonselective COX2selective (FDA) well increased potential selective 2005, Food NSAIDs, Drug the strokes label that required cardiovascular the U.S. and risk and attacks that in COX2 risk packaging heart events However, carry increase and on nonselective stroke. highlighted and required cause increased bleeding. potential bleeding, In inhibitors for the although not for to warning also add that industry label do 2005 the evidence FDA COX2selective on COX2-selective a gastrointestinal in about risk the the much addition, to gastrointestinal suggests drugs pharmaceutical caution strengthened increase In 2015, NSAIDs and that risk attacks of strokes. heart warnings the both COX2-selective and COX2-nonselective FDA the

bSee U.S. and Administration. Food Drug Can FDA Anti-inflammatory Non-aspirin Heart or Strokes. Communication: FDA Nonsteroidal Cause Safety Warning (NSAIDs) That Strengthens Drug Drugs Attacks http://www.fda.gov/ <

Drugs/DrugSafety/ucm451800.htm >; 25.07.16. 2015 Accessed

receptor binds which activation membrane cyclase receptor and guanylyl cGMP. causes ANP of dimerization a guanylyl to conformational induces the domain the extracellular and change cyclase, the plasma to metabolizes of receptor in GTP that specific which kinase, activates protein on proteins threonine residues. cGMP serine and phosphorylates cGMP-dependent collecting the reabsorption duct by the water inhibits ANP (see and of sodium In kidney,

oxide soluble converts smooth cGMP, which guanylyl GTP muscle. cyclase receptor Nitric relaxes that activates a to concentrations Because blood of increases nitroglycerin

G proteins, pathways proliferation, that and cell in division, death. are monomeric many Ras control involved signaling GTPases, signaling oncogenic mutations inactivate the causing) pathway are of in or tumor (cancer Many proteins Ras suppressors. Ras to colon, the pancreas, activity, Mutations overexpression as proteins step genes lungs. of the as in well cancer in proliferation, lead a organs, many in transcriptional including as inhibit a cell of and GTPase activation, that major result Ras of continuous development also mutations of which (see hydrolysis, addition, overexpression proteins, GTPase-activating GDP, and GTP which and In facilitate in exchange GTP GEFs, accelerate oncogenic may be for of

Fig. smooth blood heart long nitric by chest which pectoris treat in (i.e., and to inadequate cGMP increases pain oxide, arteries, has it relaxes muscle flow muscle; see 3.8B caused been angina thereby coronary used to

The is has TGF-β subunits. two threonine/serine that kinase receptor a and I growth, to and in effector type cell other cellular serine threonine the which and cell residues, turn, type apoptosis. phosphorylates residues induces to the on and serine II it phosphorylate downstream TGF-β proteins elicits subunit of threonine differentiation, including subunit Binding on specific thereby responses,

There two receptors. kinase tyrosine classes of are receptors factor are examples growth of (NGF) class. typical Nerve one NGF the and cytoplasmic each two facilitates binding of activate monomer thus enables to the other phosphorylate monomer. receptors domain Ligand tyrosine dimerization and kinase their to and other which is factor-receptor programs recruit in membrane, the downstream 2 gene regulate turn as cell transcription can and survival plasma that protein kinases domains phosphorylated, such GEFs for growth monomer Ras to cytoplasmic the important bound Once proliferation. the activates

receptor of two is (which of example tetrameric the an β type composed and subunits) is and of Activation the of insulin two other insulin tyrosine α kinase receptor. by the α that between facilitates of and insulin produces the α subunits β pairs. Binding to interaction change conformational two a the causes and tissue. of the including the of receptor cellular proteins blood its the β glucose muscle from then skeletal cytoplasmic subunits, insulin of its stimulating autophosphorylation phosphorylates to fat in residues and into initiate absorption the effects, of tyrosine activated Binding domains catalytic receptor to

kinase–associated but do tyrosine The have receptors kinase no that intrinsic activity proteins with have associate

and Transduction, tyrosine Regulation Expression CHAPTER of Receptors, kinase including activity, the Second Messengers, Src of Janus family. tyrosine Signal Membrane and kinases 3 Gene family bind that the interleukin-6, red which several bacterial cytokine and for class infections, blood necessary Receptors of production a in resistance cytokines, is stimulates proinflammatory this erythropoietin, to cells. including (αβγ) (αβ), bind. assemble heterodimers homodimers receptor Tyrosine ligands (αα), into when heterotrimers subunits kinase–associated or as which the phosphorylates the well the Subunit kinases, kinases, and tyrosine tyrosine kinase receptor. thereby induces enhances residues binding activity assembly on on as of Most polypeptide to bind receptors. growth tyrosine-kinase-associated factors

Signal Gene Pathways by Regulation of Expression Transduction

thyroid in hormones, receptor and kinases and gene expression Steroid transcription cAMP, tyrosine regulate participate signal and that are thereby pathways. transduction factors This expression tyrosine regulation section discusses gene kinases. receptor the thyroid and by and steroid of hormones, cAMP,

ligand-receptor 30 on receptors hormones basis mechanism genes more of bind structure been genes that steroid and (1) When two acid, of nuclear and of family and to subfamilies (see into thyroid The action: has to (iodothyronines), receptors (2) D. divided vitamin ligands hormone of retinoic factors the receptors the that these and bind transcription activates receptors, expression the regulate DNA complex and includes than bind

Figs. and 3.5, 3.7 3.2B,

The of varies. location nuclear receptors shock (i.e., proteins; chaperones heat with the see cytoplasm, receptors interact mineralocorticoid where and located in are they Glucocorticoid

Fig. 3.2B ). the motif a the of to revealing that receptor of facilitates chaperones a translocation receptors from conformational localization hormone-bound hormone nucleus. receptor, dissociate these complex change in to causes that to results the thereby nuclear Binding hormone Estrogen and bound the acid receptors in receptors are and to located nucleus primarily DNA. progesterone in located nucleus, thyroid retinoic and are the

response bind sequences DNA activated called of by hormone elements. to receptors When regions the specific regulatory in genes hormone responsive nuclear binding, in causes initiates binding transcription. change to DNA conformational a that Ligand-receptor DNA gene repressors. expression regulate also receptors as by Nuclear acting transcriptional glucocorticoids inflammation. that the of (AP-1) κB, the suppress genes factor transcription which cause stimulate example, nuclear expression and For protein-1 activator reduce this inflammation. By glucocorticoids mechanism

cAMP previously, noted an important messenger. is second As threonine including specific that in importance including residues to the transcription on cAMP many PKA, stimulates glucagon, somatostatin, (see and for serine activating In and of those its which polypeptide vasoactive phosphorylates proteins, intestinal addition hormones, genes, code

Fig. 3.10 ). Many cAMP in (CRE) activated cAMP by have genes their a element response DNA. it not cytoplasm CREB stimulate translocate where PKA, CREB-binding to also cAMP the in and but nucleus, acts (CBP). affinity can protein its Increases phosphorylates only increases in the which for thereby complex CREB-CBP activates transcription. The PKA is a CREB when dephosphorylates The response phosphorylates phosphatase that terminated (see

Fig. 3.10).

tyrosine PDGF, and activate including growth enzyme-linked factors, activity. and that bind Many NGF, EGF, have to kinase insulin, receptors of activity cell steps which the then GTP-binding phosphorylates growth. nucleus in kinases small the series of tyrosine and to a and Ras, mitogenactivated kinase, protein translocates a Activation transcription proteins stimulates enhance stimulate that that cascade the protein of intermediary initiates of events the which of genes

interferon. activated a including and as hormone, growth hormones, earlier, by variety noted receptors, Tyrosine are of kinase–associated cytokines, kinase not family associated with kinase they have proteins, do tyrosine do Although receptors these activity. activity, which have Janus are tyrosine activated, (STATs). which factors of family signal hormone Once activate tyrosine and Janus phosphorylates activators receptors associated transcription transducers kinase– latent protein, called transcription regulate dimerize then transcription. the STATs on phosphorylated tyrosine enter and and residues, nucleus When

1. by odorants, external and of The is factors, hormones, cellular coordinated and as neurotransmitters, metabolism that growth provide serve products including of communication. function chemical and integrated tightly cell-to-cell cells signals, messengers chemical receptors and with and cytoplasm, the physical signals plasma membrane, located in Chemical nucleus. interact Interaction that of with mediate events stimulus. response signals initiates each receptors of cascade a the these to

ensure specific, that regulated, cellular signals and pathways response to the amplified, is external coordinated. These tightly

2. proteins: proteins GTP-binding heterotrimeric are composed There G and subunits. proteins two classes of monomeric of β, and α, γ G transport, organization, vesicular expression. progression, proteins intracellular cytoskeleton gene cell actin Monomeric and regulate cycle G pathways), (which and and signaling signaling Heterotrimeric phosphodiesterases regulate cGMP also proteins cAMP ion cyclase G regulate channels, the adenylyl cAMP-PKA and pathway,

WL. Kraus Cheung E, analyses of Genomic gene hormone signaling and regulation. Physiol. Annu Rev 2010;72:191-218.

P, Rastinejad nuclear overview superfamily: Structural physiology V, therapeutics. insights receptor of the Huang into F. Chandra and Annu Physiol. Rev 2010;72:247-272.

Levin ER. steroid are receptors Extranuclear for steroid actions. essential hormone Rev Annu Med. 2015;66:271-280.

Riccardi development, adult physiology, Kemp disease. D, calcium and extracellular conception, P. The beyond calcium-sensing homeostasis: receptor Rev Physiol. Annu 2012;74:271-297.

assemblies new paradigm signal transduction. in a of Higher-order Wu H. Cell. 2013;153:287-292.

of regulate prostacyclins, prostaglandins, which the thromboxanes. phospholipases, and production

3.

interleukins. including PDGF, enzyme-linked variety nitric to ANP, signals, of are wide oxide, of insulin, a mediate TGF-β, the There cellular response and four receptors that subtypes

4.

two receptors: (1) located in nucleus. nucleus There types ligand are (2) nuclear one the permanently ligand when resides and is the in another type the to and of that type absence in the cytoplasm that bound translocates to of Both of receptors classes regulate gene transcription.

Signal Cantley transduction. L. EL, eds. In: Boron Boulpaep WF, Medical Physiology. ed. 3rd 3]. Elsevier; [Chapter Philadelphia: 2016

Caplan MJ. organization the Functional cell. of eds. In: WF, EL, Boron Boulpaep Physiology. Medical 3rd ed. 2016 Elsevier; Philadelphia: 2]. [Chapter

Heald signaling. Cell R. In: al., Alberts Johnson Lewis eds. J, et B, A, of Molecular Biology the Cell. ed. 6th New York: Science; 2015 [Chapter 15]. Garland

of Igarashi gene expression. P. Regulation eds. EL, In: Boron Boulpaep WF, Physiology. Medical ed. 3rd Elsevier; Philadelphia: 4]. [Chapter 2016

Nervous SECTION ERIC KALMAN 2The System LANG J. AND RUBINSON

The to System: 4 and Introduction Systems Cells Nervous Chapter

Potentials 5 Chapter Action of Generation and Conduction

The System Somatosensory

Special The Senses

Motor Organization of Function

of Integrative 10 Chapter Functions the Nervous System

11 System Its Central Autonomic The Nervous Chapter Control and

should of the be answer completion 1. questions: to student able chapter this following Upon the

of and types the What cell peripheral major nervous central the are systems?

2.

functional and of components their the what roles? are a major are What neuron,

3.

functional glial the major cell roles of the types? are What

4.

divisions the main the What of central are nervous system?

5.

system? and how circulate How it where cerebrospinal exit and the fluid does formed, the and ventricular is

6.

How transport response the axon to of axon transection? is the to related

and a both an environment world body) the (the outside with to where the internal its external and of adaptively that network communications control body). components cavities nervous rapidly and is organism environment the includes environment, the allows environment he (the interact system and takes in (receptors), chosen sources function integrates obtained decides To to in organism (muscles execute sensors issues course then out on system evolution, and with embedded information behavioral that been as the using nervous specialized system effector information drives variety and with sensory nervous carry glands) the memories its the information goals to of a of have organs its the and response. the previously and stored a of intrinsic commands from action, through this

many responses of all behavioral almost coordination require body parts. the Moreover, movement in sensory a themselves may extremity For up maintain muscles proprioceptive) has and balance, which vestibular, to by require integrated. monitored the example, different whose arm systems even three simple the and posture coactivation may be lower possibly information muscles and (vision, axial of of reaching to to be internal can and and heart thus require rates, Furthermore, in changes blood and processes. movements compensatory internal vessel breathing diameters, the other environment can alter must these work the are for generally to by subsystems controlled nervous together variables specialized and system, survive. All monitored various and which the movements all perform of of organism to more should be chapters major is describe normal behavior. to it these subsystems generate The will their remembered succeeding however, individually; in activity that reality integrated

peripheral system and to is useful it parts. into nervous divide To central the begin, consists spinal brain The the of and system nervous central (CNS) cord. and ganglia and peripheral parts (PNS) an system between of that consists of nerves innervate neurons) groups environment the provide the interface nervous The of body the all CNS. and (small fibers the to occurs from to cord where nerve spinal and emerge the near and cranial ventral the they CNS near on dorsal they where the PNS brain. and transition from rootlets on arise between the The

the Components of System Cellular Nervous

up of The connective and system is tissue, vessels. blood nervous made cells, and = glue”). major (nerve cells) The (neuroglia are cell glia types “nerve neurons be integration as muscle electrochemical cells generation of to electrical In [e.g., defined its on signals its a with other based neurons other cells]) general an properties neurons. (to of be sent function or neuron’s form most own from effector can signals points is are communication the The function process where occurs of specific neuronal transmission synapses, synaptic to as ). critical neuron-to-neuron (see and known nervous characterized known isolate from and nervous now both activity just neurons glia, cells traditionally physically, have sustain been help through roles system. the each as is flow Neuroglia, the shaping of neurons the they that have metabolically however, and the it other, supportive important individual milieu in internal or system; of also maintain that

typical main body (also compartments: a referred cell The as of or consists a perikaryon to three neuron cellular

The Cells Nervous 4 System: and to CHAPTER •Fig. Systems Introduction Schematicdiagramofanidealizedneuronanditsmajorcomponentsandconnections.A,Afferentinputfromaxonsofothercellsterminatesinsynapsesonthedendritesandcellbody.Theinitialsegmentoftheaxonattachesattheaxonhillock.Thisaxonismyelinated,asindicatedbythebluestructuresthatencapsulatesegmentsoftheaxon.Theaxonterminatesontwopostsynapticneuronsbyformingsynapticterminals.B,NodesofRanvierarethegapsbetweenthemyelinsegmentswheretheaxonmembraneisexposedtotheextracellularspace.C,Higher-magnificationviewofsynapse. 4.1 (RedrawnfromBlumenfeldH.Neuroanatomy Through Clinical Cases. 2nded.Sunderland,MA:SinauerAssociates;2010.) extend number called dendrites, soma an variable axon of soma), that from ( and a the processes

Fig. 4.1 ). dendrites tremendous cases of A ( may absent template axon basic variants including this of or an be morphological exist, number where

Fig. ). 4.2 These not class. neuronal but properties functional occur the to randomly do rather distinct relate of each variations similar the with in of region. and CNS CNS neurons characterize Indeed, each morphologies performed often processing reflect neuronal the distinct regions specific

metabolic the body cell and neuron. the is main The center of genetic functions the it the apparatus nerve membrane substances also synthetic the constituents, and cell possesses biosynthetic enzymes, well-developed a specialized chemical and Correspondingly manufacturing and nucleolus cells. contains of of for needed other nucleus for a of neuronal apparatus are apparatus. reticulum, rough bodies, stacks endoplasmic includes Golgi Nissl biosynthetic which prominent and The including numerous microtubules. cytoskeletal and contains and neurofilaments also soma The elements, mitochondria

region signals electrical other input synaptic in neurons). from receives The a neuron chemical also (i.e., cell which and the body is from the the to to dendritic qualitatively it of less often axon, the that soma the much synaptic usually override inputs, and those quantitatively of differs closeness than dendrites the is virtue dendrites, by inputs the soma to soma input to can to (see Although the

extensions and Dendrites neurons. main soma and recipients signals the from direct are branching are the tapering other of of surface a of and plus may thought as available neuron, account to 90% they of the specialize can and synaptic than contact (soma more surface for of the expand a area be area way They dendrites). for indeed, branch, extend in and from divided primary that (daughter dendrites Dendrites into proximal dendrites (those branches can more extending higher-order from a •Fig. the be directly soma) A,Purkinjecell.B,Pyramidalcell.C,Golgicell.D,Granulecell.E,Inferiorolivecells.F,Bipolarcells. 4.2 and Neurosci (A,CourtesyofBorisBarbour.B,CourtesyofT.F.Fletcher,from neurHistAtls/pages/neuron3.html .C,FigurewasprovidedbyCourtHullandWadeRegehr,DepartmentofNeurobiology,HarvardMedicalSchool.D,FromDelvendahlIetal.Front Cerebellar http://vanat.cvm.umn.edu/ the Cerebellum 2015;9:93,Fig.1A.E,FromMathyA,ClarkBA.In:MantoMetal[eds].Handbook Cell Disorders. of Dordrecht,Netherlands:SpringerScience+BusinessMediaDordrecht;2013.F,FromLiW,DeVriesSH.Nat Neurosci 2006;9:669-675,Fig.2.) closeness soma). which proximal to refers to the Golgi also however, dendrites can the neurofilaments; and cytoplasmic parts organelles are Nissl apparatus. primary microtubules the of in bodies main contain and dendrites The

dendrites its is tree. set A of termed dendritic neuron’s the between organization tremendously trees types differ and the terms of different spatial in Dendritic neurons size, number, of dendrites. of highly of ramified consist a unbranched can or dendrites few tree dendritic dendrites. of A many just 20 longer length. only mm to in dendrites 10 Individual be than 1 or µm can main from variation small major Another spines, or not mushroomor which has whether the dendrite lollipop-shaped protrusions a dendrite. are morphological is sites contact not synaptic but excitatory for Spines specialized inputs. always) from are (usually, (see the of in of dendritic the determinants synaptic channels membrane, as of as and shape important the the dendritic distribution well and will neuron the population affect size tree, The how are input all

6). Chapter

neurons The as the or, motor an output the to cell muscle in of of conveys is to a well. extension axon of cells the case the neuron, cell other that diameter. general, is In axon, it and uniform of usually each has one neuron only The axons type. with the length diameter of and vary neuronal a the or dendrites, extend others of the more axons long. much length be beyond not do meter Some may whereas branches en branches spray may (represented orthogonal their passant, end Axons of arborization often terminal branches they a called terminals but a in have by the and four synaptic in terminal

Fig. 4.1A ). determine contact. it which the size, organization and The terminal cells of arborization shape, other will initial (or arises axon region sometimes and dendrite) specialized the a from known is as segment from hillock. called of the part proximal in first soma a the axon the The from a dendrites axon ribosomes, Golgi differs and The the rough free in proximal and lacks that reticulum, soma apparatus. endoplasmic it are are down site (spikes) that the axon potentials usually the initial ). propagated (see where action initiated segment is The may it in make terminate and/or may a synapses axon its synapse An along length. Synapses detail described in be in will

CHAPTER System: and Cells Nervous Introduction 4 to Systems The •Fig. 4.3 Axonaltransport.Schematicofneuronandenlargementofaxonaltransportmechanism.Axonaltransportdependsonmovementofmaterialalongtransportfilamentssuchasmicrotubules.Transportedcomponentsattachtotransportfilamentsbymeansofcross-bridges.Differentobjectsaretransportedanterogradely(fromcellbodytoaxonterminal)andothersretrogradely(towardthecellbody).Thedirectionoftransport—retrogradeandanterograde—isdeterminedbyspecificproteinssuch asdyneinandkinesin,respectively.

their because Neurons respond are and to control electricity. ability special of to part parts. and control in a distinct mechanisms of of each Moreover, neuron response those other the from are the the channel the composition of This of and of ion specialization particular consequence neuron. intraneuronal part morphology each is a to integration have For of chemicals released allows branching for ligand channels other ion pattern allow that neurons, dendrites their multiple respond example, signals. and gated by neurons input to characteristic rapidly that to distances it potentials) (action the has contrast In allows voltage-gated channels without convey axon alteration. electrical of over and a high length long long signals concentration typically

and soma axonal the support of there. substances the are engine synthesized synaptic to Because function neuron, metabolic needed is the the to replenish the and distributed inactivated axon terminals. These must especially to along substances materials be secreted or presynaptic simple movement long Most substances too to are soma diffusion. by synaptic of efficient to axons the endings from the allow axonal special Thus mechanisms to ( task accomplish this transport evolved have

Fig. 4.3).

an that a neuronal has to. the fact to cut degenerating metabolic been is and when of degenerate consequence cut from distal tracing out dependency axonal cell pathways; axons the A would determine where scientists disconnected that projected they body, this used pathway then by axons the

transport Several of axonal exist. types axonal rapidly organelles Membrane-bound mitochondria transport. and by transported relatively fast are slow axonal that by in are proteins) dissolved moved Substances are transport. (e.g., cytoplasm In fast transport mm/day, as slow at proceeds axonal axonal mm/day. as about mammals, whereas 1 occurs transport rapidly 400 neuron can vesicles, in fast a Synaptic to in junction the 2.5 from motor in person’s axonal spinal the travel transport, which a foot soma days. neuromuscular a by travel about cord of soluble movement same the some the nearly In take over proteins 3 distance of can comparison years.

requires transport metabolic involves ions. and Axonal energy calcium a organelles (see guidewires membrane-bound Microtubules provide along move of system which

Fig.

4.3 ). microtubules Organelles between through to similar and fibers. a thin that skeletal attach of the muscle thick linkage to filaments along the triggers the Ca++ movement microtubules. of organelles for dynein kinesin Special proteins are transport. required motor called microtubule-associated and axonal

occurs transport both directions. in Axonal the Transport anterograde toward axonal axonal from transport. is soma the terminals called synaptic kinesin, vesicles allows involves of This synthesis responsible the process it in for synaptic and enzymes and replenishment of terminals. neurotransmitters which is opposite direction, transport. called dynein, in driven the by retrograde axonal is Transport lysosomal returns vesicle the membrane recycled soma for degradation. process This synaptic to

bacteriamaygrowinadirtywound,andifthepersonhadnotbeenvaccinatedagainsttetanustoxin,thetoxincanbetransportedretrogradelyintheaxonsofmotorneurons.Thetoxincanescapeintotheextracellularspaceofthespinalcordventralhornandblockthesynapticreceptorsforinhibitoryaminoacids.Thisprocesscanresultintetanicconvulsions. Certainvirusesandtoxinscanbeconveyedbyaxonaltransportalongperipheralnerves.Forexample,herpeszoster,thevirusofchickenpox,invadesdorsalrootganglioncells.Thevirusmaybeharboredbytheseneuronsformanyyears.However,eventuallythevirusmaybecomeactivebecauseofachangeinimmunestatus.Thevirusmaythenbetransportedalongthesensoryaxonstotheskin,causingshingles,averypainfuldisease.Anotherexampleistheaxonaltransportoftetanustoxin.Clostridium tetani

are major the elements nonneuronal system cellular the ( The of nervous glia

Fig. 4.4 ). neurons. CNS of about glia human are in there cells by an magnitude: 1013 neurons 1012 the Glial order outnumber and ependymal in cells CNS cells Glial the oligodendrocytes, and (see microglia, astrocytes, include

Fig. the and cells. are 4.4 ); glial Schwann satellite cells PNS in cells the of of and that myelination supportive the functions were as of cells, their microenvironment axons. thought Traditionally, and with cells include glial consistent regulation conception, to to that important through related Glial recognized to and signals be important modulate the act neuronal are also cells circuits, and synaptogenesis in and they roles of flow transmission nonsynaptic of have synaptic and now determinants maintenance.

in nervous conditions CNS, to star microenvironment the of both normal regulate the and to their (named response help damage for system. shape) the under Astrocytes cell from branches Astrocytes main a arise. which body several have hundreds thousands of give Through to to repeated these branchlets. processes branching rise main neurons general extracellular surround processes them Astrocyte adjacent synapses space. and isolating from endings, the synaptic contact and also •Fig. have Astrocytes foot SchematicrepresentationofcellularelementsintheCNS.Twoastrocytesareshownendingonasomaanddendritesofaneuron.Astrocytesalsocontactthepialsurfaceorcapillariesorboth.Anoligodendrocyteprovidesthemyelinsheathsforaxons.Alsoshownaremicrogliaandependymalcells. 4.4 N,neuron. Neuroanatomy Man. (RedrawnfromWilliamsPL,WarwickR.Functional of Edinburgh:ChurchillLivingstone;1975.) capillaries surface the CNS, processes (see connective the that the pia and tissue the of at mater contact

Fig. 4.4 ). the These substances help the may into mediate processes CNS. of foot entry Astrocytes they K+ actively ions metabolize, or take substances, and neurotransmitter recycle. up biodegrade, which can ions serve with extracellular buffer of and to environment astrocytes neurons Thus both the neurotransmitters. to respect provide filaments CNS glial contains of that astrocytes support for tissue. The cytoplasm mechanical become of astrocytes. a to reactive After variety undergo astrocytes changes the injury of around the allows surrounding example and tissue glial reactive segregates scar impact thereby a damaged One processes the act that to on which area is of damage, site to focal minimizing act inflammatory selectively of a damage, the tissue. form normal an class astrocytes at synaptic can transmission, which is of properties the discussed also in Astrocytes affect

are critical of Schwann for axons. function the cells Oligodendrocytes and membrane a surrounded myelin by of multilayered glial spiral which sheath, is cell ( Many are axons a wrapping

Fig. ). 4.5A–B by the PNS formed oligodendrocytes, cells whereas Schwann is the myelin. in CNS, myelin In the form by speed restricting part the increases the in potential action conduction, Myelin of

and Systems Cells 4 to Nervous •Fig. Introduction The System: CHAPTER 4.5 Axonal/glialassociations.A,MyelinatedaxonsintheCNS.Asingleoligodendrocyte(G)emitsseveralprocesses,eachofwhichwindsinaspiralfashionaroundanaxontoformamyelinsegment.Theaxonisshownincutaway.Themyelinfromasingleoligodendrocyteendsbeforethenextwrappingfromanotheroligodendrocyte.ThebareaxonbetweenthemyelinatedsegmentsisthenodeofRanvier(N).B,ElectronmicrographofmyelinatedaxoninthePNSshownincrosssection.Theaxon(Ax)isseenatthecenterwithinasheathconsistingofmultiplewrappingsoftheSchwanncell’scytoplasmicmembrane.TheSchwanncellsoma(SC)isattheupperright.mes,mesaxon,internalandexternal.C,Electronmicro-graphofunmyelinatedaxonsinPNS.Nineaxons(asterisks) cutincrosssectionareseenembeddedinaSchwanncellwhosenucleusisatthecenter(N).Atlowerrightaportionofamyelinatedaxonisvisible. Nervous Fine of Structure (B,FromPetersAetal.The the System. NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress;1991,Fig.6.5.C,FromPanneseE.Neurocytology. 2nded.Basel,Switzerland:SpringerInternational;2015.)

overawideareaviacurrentflowinmanyastrocytes. Astrocytesarecoupledtoeachotherbygapjunctionssuchthattheyformasyncytiumthroughwhichsmallmoleculesandionscanredistributealongtheirconcentrationgradientsorbycurrentflow.Whennormalneuralactivitygivesrisetoalocalincreaseinextracellular[K+],thiscouplednetworkcanenablespatialredistributionofK+

fromneurons.Theadditionalreleaseonlyexacerbatestheproblemandcanleadtoneuronaldeath.Undersuchconditions,localastrogliawillprobablytakeuptheexcessK+ symportratherthanbyspatialbuffering,becausetheelevationinextracellular[K+]tendstobewidespreadratherthanlocal. byK+-Cl− Underconditionsofhypoxia,suchasmightbeassociatedwithischemiasecondarytoblockageofanartery(i.e.,astroke),[K+]intheextracellularspaceofabrainregioncanincreasebyafactorofasmuchas20.Thiswilldepolarizeneuronsandsynapticterminalsandresultinreleaseoftransmitterssuchasglutamate,whichwillcausefurtherreleaseofK+

to small cells, current of axon glial flow nodes portions between the of (see unmyelinated of ). ionic the adjacent Ranvier axons are both speed there in several act between the differences and Schwann to important the of conduction, either oligodendrocytes relationship Although increase cells. or single PNS. multiple major CNS, axon that single the cell myelinate in typically a helps helps myelinate whereas only One a difference each axons the is in oligodendrocyte Schwann not. A unmyelinated unmyelinated second is whereas in in the axons difference CNS, are PNS, are that the bare, axons (the surrounded by a bundle) the instead Remak with (see multilayered processes; however, unymyelinated Rather, of is axons Schwann (i.e., surround that parts not but cell form they extends does myelin), Schwann covering called of axons a processes cell, are cell several Schwann its set

Fig. 4.5C

and fashion in regulate cranial ganglion cells dorsal their encapsulate Satellite astrocytes. cells of nerve root similar that a to and microenvironment

the from development. early that Microglia stem in CNS derived erythromyeloid are migrate into cells important the They in responses CNS. immune play an within role help phagocytosis. remove damaged, damage is CNS of the cellular by the When the microglia products They assisted the other circulation. CNS other and by the phagocytes invade by are that glia from brain during including and they function, also healthy their suggests immune of pruning brain development excess addition are active that tissue and may in in and synaptic synapses normal to recent roles development formed responses, in plasticity. evidence are In important role have

of lining (cerebrospinal Ependymal which the the ventricular form cells epithelium brain, spaces CSF. the fluid) contain plexuses the system. is choroid large of the in in secreted part specialized located ependymal ventricular cells by CSF Many the substances lies CSF. ependyma, readily which the the the diffuse extracellular space between of and across brain

Mostneuronsintheadultnervoussystemarepostmitoticcells(althoughsomestemcellsmayalsoremainincertainsitesinthebrain).Manyglialprecursorcellsarepresentintheadultbrain,andtheycanstilldivideanddifferentiate.Thusthecellularelementsthatgiverisetomostintrinsicbraintumorsintheadultbrainaretheglialcells.Forexample,braintumorscanbederivedfromastrocytes(whichvaryinmalignancyfromtheslowlygrowingastrocytomatotherapidlyfatalglioblastomamultiforme),fromoligodendroglia(oligodendroglioma),orfromependymalcells(ependymoma).Meningealcellscanalsogiverisetoslowlygrowingtumors(meningiomas)thatcompressbraintissue,ascanSchwanncells(e.g.,acousticschwannomas,whicharetumorsformedbySchwanncellsoftheeighthcranialnerve).Inthebrainofinfants,neuronsthatarestilldividingcansometimesgiverisetoneuroblastomas(e.g.,oftheroofofthefourthventricle)orretinoblastomas(intheeye).

Peripheral The Nervous System

from The information sensory an the and the environment interface commands for the between PNS for to CNS, flowing motor issued provides the CNS both CNS. and (or neurons, primary neurons, motor afferent) neurons. and somatic motor sensory includes autonomic It

system be into cells. start in nervous specialized or an additional may with pathways which of Sensory a axon may the part include receptor, a the simply PNS signal. sensory a transduces is Each that organized an receptor energy type specific electrical into of it so transduce light, mechanoreceptors type photoreceptors energy transduce and terms classified transduce be (e.g., they they force). of in displacement can the of Thus angle They body the be signal according also proprioceptors external the to input classified signal may interoceptors part of distension as of exteroceptors state the the signal of of and elbow, the (e.g., gut). such a source the events,

primary afferent potential, the innervating response the fibers in process to called an which afferent triggers electrical in receptor action a leads the receptor. primary potentials transduction The sensory CNS primary potentials via contain is stimulus These afferent. to the conveyed action the about the information that

convey and the autonomic neurons to motor signals targets. Somatic effector their CNS respective from throughout muscles The the somatic motor the skeletal neurons body. innervate nuclei) ventral Their project of root a or out and CNS cranial horn lie the the nerve. ventral brainstem (or bodies cell equivalent in via The is in muscles relationship details to of . covered their the for muscle, is organs, responsible and pathway motor glands. The controlling smooth functioning autonomic of It is actually and in its are properties covered a two-neuron pathway,

Chapter 11.

System Central The Nervous

( is from includes spinal brain CNS the just the The cord and cellular built and described elements

Fig. ). 4.6A ways These that in of cellular the the of elements the underlie connected are form a functions to performed variety subsystems complex multitude CNS. by covered of physiology here. these a basic however, be will needed is of ; discussed The in briefly systems physiology systems knowledge understand is to CNS anatomy and

few myelin Regions are (and white neurons) axonal refractive very concentrations the matter of called are the containing of CNS high sheaths because pathways axons axon the to highly of light. neurons called high Regions are gray matter. and containing by dendrites of concentrations contrast Note are gray in axons present that matter. also neurons fibers from be be either passage. or or of on them) terminating These may may (i.e., related local local axons originating to processing an of of damage loss Thus local or effects may area to reflect either disconnection function

Introduction to Mammillary Cells horn lateral body System: ventricle Fimbria The nucleus Nervous Temporal CHAPTER (fornix) of (tail) Systems pallidus and Inferior 4 of Caudate

peduncle •Fig. of Hippocampus hypothalamus OpticB Cerebral tract 4.6 A,SchematicofthemajorcomponentsoftheCNSasshowninalongitudinalmidlineview.B–F,Representativesectionsthroughthebrainandspinalcord,withthemajorlandmarkslabeled.B,Cerebrumandthalamus;C,midbrain;D,pons;E,medulla;F,cervicalspinalcord.Notethatmanypathways(e.g.,corticospinalfibers)crosssides(decussate)astheytravelthroughtheCNS,butthesedescussationsarenotindicatedinthefigure(seeChapters7and9fordetailsonthemotorandsensorypathwaycrossings). for Basic Clinical Neuroscience (A,FromHainesDE[ed].Fundamental and Applications. 3rded.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.) was area of been had regions that by remote passage through fibers damaged. of that linked the

travel In axons CNS, tracts. in often bundles or the describe names tracts The their to termination. applied and origin usually example, convey to from cord spinocerebellar the cerebellum. the information the tracts For spinal function links auditory generally auditory that similar is particular (e.g., synapses used neuron-to-neuron pathway: The to several and across process a but of a tract series pathway is term the suggest information). convey to

configurations in Gray in CNS. matter exists two main the grouping PNS ganglion). of A is (in nucleus a neurons CNS in called such a a the the group is cranial Examples thalamic, nerve include cerebellar, the nuclei. and is of the CNS. the that on A cortex surface found and usually layers are organized neurons into cerebellar which cerebral hemispheres are cortices, the The surface most cover of and cerebral the respectively the cerebellum, the ( and prominent

Fig. 4.7

broad most and into cortices, projection one classify can neurons two cells nuclei categories: interneurons. and In local their cells various of axon that Projection are neurons of tracts another send system. the are and region to nervous origins the thus the local the to signals with conveying axons and another. interneurons neural have in computations of from are terminate structure origin In involved rather cell one local same region that their as than contrast, exclusive; to branches not project are off both and more local neurons regions. have or distant one many categories give that axons These

Fig. • medulla. of Note showing the of division (frontal, human and J. of Lateral the Angevine cerebellum, 4.7 the J, view the and temporal) lobes and and two pons, central). brain the left (lateral Nolte major cerebrum the (From fissures parietal, occipital, hemisphere, cerebral Louis: 2000.) Diagrams. St ed. Brain Photographs The 2nd in Mosby; and Human

Anatomy Regional CNS of the

into regions a subdivided series spinal The of (see can cord be

Fig. lumbar, ), enter a 4.6A and for of segments their sacral, number 5 1 the leave: of composed named thoracic, coccygeal. 5 12 vertebrae each 8 or cervical, roots where nerve may Each spinal although patent. its its portion appearance, not the remain tubular maintains lumen, canal, structure a whose ( horn and contains ventral Within dorsal the the from information processes motor axons and the the roots motor neurons ventral sensory is out whereas via roots, horn the dorsal the primarily project receives gray matter

Fig. 4.8

communication for levels interconnecting of the The spinal and consists surrounding brain. white matter with cord tracts many (see system spinothalamic tract/anterolateral are major ones (motor), column-medial lateral the tract and lemniscus dorsal pathway (sensory), (sensory) corticospinal Three

Fig. 4.6F

medulla, The and midbrain pons, ( consists of brainstem the

Fig. 4.9

Fig. ). 4.6 spinal longitudinal nuclei by and the pathways In to brainstem the additional level. pathways that interconnecting vary contains the cord, many with addition commands) brain consciousness. are of cord to state the those analogous spinal functions, have which (e.g., control others a of of cardiac sensory structures information related some other such conveying as variety These and basic and to and motor of functions, many input output via also sends and nerves receives ( motor cranial brainstem The

Table 4.1

The cerebellum medulla. sits the pons and dorsal to to brainstem, from cord, many inputs projects of spinal receives cerebral and and It same cortex these structures. back in The as is motor having coordination key recognized but cognitive for increasingly other is cerebellum functions. critical roles

Fig. • spinal the represented. the and and and dorsal cell roots, of first body primary root receptor distributed, where spinal branches neuron dorsal skin. gray of sensory its with afferent spinal are a spinal nerve. which to nerve the processes spinal few and roots is matter Diagram (rami), ventral peripheral respectively, shown 4.8 in in central multiple the fuse, cord, its and the A cord and the begins ganglion to The has is to fiber. to spinal cell the root motor α out ventral muscle project shown innervate cord axon neuron the a to matter An body its skeletal in its and gray have

Introduction to CHAPTER Systems System: Cells Nervous The and 4

foramen Infundibular Anterior Massa Lamina of Thalamus Fornix recess intermedia Interventricular terminalis commissure

•Fig. plexus third of Choroid ventricle Midsagittalviewofthebrainshowingthethirdandfourthventricles,thecerebralaqueductofthemidbrain,andthechoroidplexus.TheCSFformedbythechoroidplexusinthelateralventriclesentersthiscirculationviatheinterventricularforamen.Notealsothelocationofthecorpuscallosumandothercommissures. 4.9 Applications. Neuroscience Clinical and Basic for (FromHainesDE[ed]:Fundamental 3rded.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.)

(see the sits which thalamus interconnected highly it by cerebrum with The and of the is is end the upper at enclosed brainstem

Fig. ). 4.6B conveys it reaches the cortex. a few to first With exceptions, information which cerebral the ascending thalamus, including structures awareness, in language. play major conscious volition, These memory, and role many a functions, group to cortex, a and addition and of ganglia, cortex interconnected described be contains function the In that thalamus nuclei, whose in the are cerebrum deep basal will the with the

of CNS of in major parts listed are the different the The functions

Table 4.1

subarachnoid CSF directly of brain, the fills surrounding the spaces a the space system, interconnected brain. series within the ventricular and forces. to subarachnoid of ependyma, of brain extracellular brain’s composition in exchange the intraventricular the via reflects space effect the across CSF and minimize the the free mechanical external CSF The “floats” the space The ventricles and cerebral CSF the mL, sub-arachnoid approximately that in of is about mL. volume within 125 is the 30 than daily. is mL turned 0.35 minute, Because each produced three of about CSF more CSF times over is

which formed is comprise invaginating a and CSF mater, of specialized largely blood capillaries, capillary cells choroid plexuses, ependymal for transport. filtrate pia by the fourth the plexuses located choroid in lateral, The are ventricles (see and third,

Fig. ). 4.9 two The hemispheres. ventricles cerebral the are situated lateral within foramina inter-ventricular ventricle Monro). the of the one third with (of They each through connect sides. lies ventricle midline in the third between diencephalon on the the two The the ventricle. the (of midbrain third cerebral ventricle aqueduct fourth The the with connects traverses and Sylvius) space defined the pons and the by The medulla and a above. fourth cerebellum is ventricle below fully adult not humans the is The canal the of the patent close canal although central spinal caudally continues fourth from continues cord ventricle, and age. in with to

of roof in medial the foramen Luschka) from system fourth Magendie three located of ventricle. two CSF foramina apertures through of lateral ventricular the the foramina and or (a escapes leaving the brain surrounds cord. circulates the through After and the system, ventricular subarachnoid space spinal CSF that are are where cisterns. spaces Regions called these subarachnoid expanded level An roots lumbar sacral which example cord. the the spinal below of the cistern, surrounds spinal the lumbar and of is termination cistern a the The sample for lumbar procedure to clinical CSF. is puncture, target lumbar the valvular flow is CSF granulations arachnoid by A through venous removed in the cranium. the bulk sinuses of large part dural into

CSF with the a useful of the cord. of the extracellular and CSF, CNS composition of in the indicator the of brain is environment communicates spinal within composition the extracellular the the fluid neurons Because CSF The of in in listed constituents are main the cistern lumbar

4.2. Table

same the are also the concentrations comparison in blood constituents For of given. of than but K+ and lower does. protein blood Na+ greater a CSF concentration glucose, of a and has Cl− , concentration cells. Furthermore, blood contains no practically CSF The and concentration increased be to Cl− to isotonic CSF Na+ enables blood. of

is to person H2O recumbent. mm The in the when a about CSF column 120 is pressure 180 rate relatively which independent in the is CSF The is formed of pressure the at

(mEq/L)2.93.5–5Cl− (mEq/L)148136–145K+ 103pH7.3 Na+ (mEq/L)120–130100–106Glucose(mg/dL)50–7570–100Protein(mg/dL)15–456.8×

Neurobiology. FromWillisWD,GrossmanRG.Medical 3rded.StLouis:Mosby;1981.

and as pressure. ventricles as subarachnoid systemic space, well blood However, CSF of function the absorption of is direct pressure. rate CSF a

hydrocephalus. ObstructionofthecirculationofCSFleadstoincreasedCSFpressureandhydrocephalus,anabnormalaccumulationoffluidinthecranium.Inhydrocephalustheventriclesbecomedistended,andiftheincreaseinpressureissustained,brainsubstanceislost.Whentheobstructioniswithintheventricularsystemorintheforaminaofthefourthventricle,theconditioniscalledanoncommunicating hydrocephalus. Iftheobstructionisinthesubarachnoidspaceorthearachnoidvilli,itisknownasacommunicating

Blood-Brain Barrier The

the of protected The neurons bathes local of CNS extreme normally that them. that variations such controlled the fluid from extracellular in are environment most is composition neurons CSF the circulation, by presence control of fluid the the barrier regulation of CNS provided of Part of extracellular are functions this CNS). glia, between (other of the substances a mechanisms blood-brain exchange buffering and of is and molecules brain large and highly ions restricted. Movement and spinal into the severely blood of is from cord charged capillary junctions action endothelial tight to is them. cells at due and CNS between the the partly least of the The barrier the of restriction may movement certain the Astrocytes also limit help substances. of take astrocytes in up can space. example, ions [K+] the and extracellular thus potassium For regulate transport mechanisms. by such penicillin, pharmaceutical from the removed as CNS are agents, Some

Nervous to Tissue Reactions Injury

tissue responses neurons to and elicits nervous Injury by glia. causes injury cell death. Severe general, lost in is a Except instances, replaced neuron in it be cannot specific once because,

Nervous 4 System: Cells The CHAPTER to Introduction Systems and 63

example, brain The brain. penetrate normally that to may the blood-brain can by be Radiologists of cannot by otherwise a tumors from introducing exploit substance brain the enter are For can circulation. allow the circulation excluded this substances pathology that the the barrier into disrupted blood-brain barrier. If its demonstrate by can used tumor the the imaged, tumor. occupied the into leakage can the region distribution be be the substance of to brain

cells. postmitotic neurons are only hippocampal humans, CNS. however, are evidence the for hippocampus significant exceptions two neurogenesis and been has in animals, adult for of levels bulb found in olfactory the neurons; In

the basic Normally, transected, an reaction.” may bodies RNA Nissl to aniline chromatolysis, is of soma neuron which with well or axon show When “axonal the dyes, ( stain the attach of ribosomes

Fig. 4.10A ). to the After injury

Fig. and neuron the axon become rough with the cisterns the products new structural 4.10B), the distended of synthesis. reticulum by endoplasmic proteins, to the of protein attempts making repair aniline weakly dyes. be ribosomes bodies and stained appear are the Nissl disorganized, The basic to by staining pattern (see alters This the chromatolysis, called process,

Fig. 4.10C ). may and rounded, swell and In addition, soma become the an may nucleus assume eccentric the position. the These accompany cytological processes that increased morphological protein changes synthesis. reflect

the new transection axon protein, synthesize distal to (see the Because it dies cannot

Fig. ). 4.10C endings the the a disintegrate. few and days axon associated all synaptic Within eventually by fragment the would axon axon myelin CNS, a removed been be sheath the and myelinated also phagocytosis. the in had If formed undergo had cell they myelin the that PNS sheath Schwann and remain in However, fact viable, the the cells in division. wallerian was This events of called by and originally is described Waller sequence degeneration.

the an a effector the • interrupted, cell If provide input axons neuron the or to are Fig. to or predominant that synaptic sole axon. with C, of regeneration A B, This motor the fiber. sprouting axon muscle undergoing been The A, has and is motor and, in severed, innervating excess is 4.10 with chromatolysis. the a sprouts time neuron D, associated motor in degenerate. neuron skeletal Normal longer the present. chromatolysis When no reinnervated, E, is cell target is

death. even and atrophy been after example by of of skeletal neurons this fibers interrupted. muscle motor known innervation has The best their is innervating axons are space additional influence other postsynaptic the sprout axons up synaptic cell. a of However, the thereby increasing taking their if and may the removed, damaged one of only surviving terminals, the on the or axons few

a axon. can is the an neurons new after regenerate lost PNS, axon through injury, In many The proximal of stump axon develops sprouts (see damaged the

Fig. and the these original 4.10C route they path if ), grow sprouts of nerve the along this available is elongate, (see

Fig. 4.10D ). stump the and the in the distal axons. rows not survive degeneration nerve taken cells only proliferate The by course wallerian also previously form but of Schwann the the along they (see their may cones axons find peripheral structures and Schwann of eventually reinnervate cells, sprouting of target original Growth the these along rows the way

Fig.

). 4.10E cells axons. The remyelinate then the Schwann limited axonal about 1 slow regeneration rate mm/day. of of to The the rate transport by is

sprout. transected CNS, axons In also the in along form proper sprouts the the the path guidance not because However, lacking, which is can do grow. sprouts part oligodendroglia for a a consequence periphery. central whereas axons, myelinates single limitation single of only may fact the the many cell that in a a provides a This single cell myelin for oligodendroglial be axon Schwann signals addition, different regeneration affect may differently. central attempts and at peripheral chemical In that during regeneration trajectories formation glial include of of scar axonal successful development. to Other influences a and guided astrocytes lack CNS by obstacles trophic

1.

processing, The and the nervous information system detection, functions of include excitability, sensory behavior.

2.

includes cord the The brain. spinal and CNS medulla, The cerebellum, includes pons, cerebral cortex. ganglia, and midbrain, hypothalamus, thalamus, brain the basal

3.

of is nervous system. unit neuron The the the functional three have compartments: the cell axon. body, and Neurons dendrites, major and the signals the of integrate The cells. to and output conveys neuron axon receive first two signals, other the

4.

innervate, receptors and motor the primary axons they includes PNS and somatic sensory of neurons the The autonomic afferent neurons, neurons.

5.

potentials and and Information axons transmission by axons and conveyed circuits neurons of between other and or effector the cells. somas neurons by between neural the of dendrites action axons through synaptic is in

6.

neurons cell their of the and and in as morphology distribution a individual their ion of specialized soma, consequence the types axons. channel are membrane Different dendrites, of

7.

proprioceptors. interoceptors, exteroceptors, include and Sensory receptors responses transforming are is into the effects the Stimuli are signals. transduction of detected sensory by by electrical sensory and excite are that stimuli which stimuli, events environmental energy process receptors, their

8.

of classified the the receptors by the or in Sensory type of they can input. of source energy terms be transduce information named origin Central by their pathways for or and usually termination type are of conveyed. the

9.

transport. are slow axons distributed or by substances fast axonal along Chemical the The may axonal be of direction transport retrograde. or anterograde

10.

include PNS Glial the macrophages). (regulate and ventricles), microglia cells cells astrocytes myelin), (form Schwann (CNS ependymal (form oligodendroglia myelin), the cells CNS (line CNS microenvironment), sheaths axons. the Myelin increase velocity of conduction

11.

The choroid plexus forms CSF. concentration of a a cells. and CSF having concentration K+ normally lower and and CSF protein , higher glucose, lacks from differs blood Cl−; in blood of Na+

12.

CSF, the the fluid barrier, composition by The extracellular regulated and blood-brain of is CNS astrocytes.

13.

of axon cell axon body the the reaction an in the degeneration wallerian (chromatolysis) injury. to the Damage neuron a axonal of to and distal causes likely than PNS of regeneration more CNS axons. is Regeneration axons of

L, D. Squire Fundamental Neuroscience. Berg 4th ed. Waltham, MA:

Kiernan An Barr’s System: 2012. Academic Rajakumar JA, Human Press; N. The Nervous Anatomical Viewpoint. 10th ed. Philadelphia: D. Human 2013. Introduction Gould to T, The its Nolte’s Lippincott Wilkins; & Vanderah An Williams Brain: Anatomy. Functional ed. 7th Louis: Mosby; 2015. St.

be chapter, the Upon 1. of the should answer following to able questions: this student completion

a nerve like to and a circuit batteries, resistors, comprising How capacitors? is stimuli passive response membrane’s electric small-amplitude

2.

the of membrane? a constants time and length What determine nerve factors the electric nerve shape How do of these responses membrane? the constants

3.

subthreshold membrane the responses)? and an the a of differ responses from action passive (i.e., does How potential local

4.

conductances the the is potential? underlies that of action What sequence

5.

channels depolarization the of to K+ membrane Na+ are and How responses similar? How differ? gate does the to Na+ the responses of presence channel inactivation the cause

6.

gating action K+ the absolute and How properties relative of channels the the and Na+ potential? relate to refractory do periods of

7.

without the propagated is action How decrement? potential its velocity? What the determine factors are that propagation

8.

increase structural are of What properties underlie velocity? to its myelin the that conduction ability

9.

are distinguished different action potentials, the of system? Given central nature stimuli how all-or-none characteristics the by the of nervous

the potential, n rapid, membrane potential the in return followed change by a membrane all-or-none resting is potential. action to a action the propagated channels voltage-dependent chapter with in and plasma the generated the are by This ion of describes and how length shape membrane axon. potentials an size same along and ion axon myelin The and influences are discussed geometry, explained. channel distribution, of in information is and nerve groups and encoded cells by in potentials The of pattern of frequency in are also individual ways described. cells the which action are world nervous through information because important the transduction Finally, and principles about provides general of sensory introduced. the specific system coding receptors, sensory external detailed and chapters. about information in other is mechanisms provided these More systems sensory

placed µm) the tip inside a is neuron, a of through membrane cell plasma and observed between in outside a the is electrode microelectrode diameter (tip <0.5 When microelectrode potential the of the difference cell. an the inserted resting the with simply, (see the details approximately electrode, the to for regard referred resting of electrode The or, to potential). potential external this internal difference on is potential basis and is mV the negative the resting 70 membrane as potentials convention, potential minus (By membrane as extracellular the expressed intracellular the potential.) are resting mV. have −70 is potential around Neurons a typically that

their ability stimulus. change potential response One to rapidly their in is of rest the signature features membrane of an neurons appropriate to from such chapter of respectively. and potentials synaptic action potentials, this responses which next, are are classes Two the and described in from ionic Current species. with many experiments potentials about mechanisms knowledge the action of comes the is model because the studied electrophysiological diameter to mm) with the makes the an for (up electrodes. most giant squid of axon research 0.5 it One excellent of large intracellular squid

The Passive Response

membrane. and passive action is necessary needed, why an generated is the the potential of how To properties it it nerve understand to understand electrical is cell cell passive circuits, and to fact term properties of passive of including very behave the elements to components similarly some capacitors. The batteries, resistors, refers of membrane the that electric the very This because understood. of these properties well elements are is useful the containing correspond and circuit lipid particular, ion as circuit) capacitor. to (parallel changes voltage responds parallel a resistor, across much to capacitor RC channels ion acts in of containing would: the The and a the piece channels it as resistor membrane bilayer in a a In parallel across to with terminals a the flows circuit causing it connected all current through I voltage a is the begin RC the the circuit, a capacitor, battery for of two When of across ˜ (recall dV/dt). changing of the capacitor, branch the that first time, the that the whereas capacitor through increases. Over decreases, through the current flow resistor however, rate change this voltage the happens, the the slows, of steady-state across voltage (and approaches and resistor) a As value. capacitor in of voltage exponential an on the characteristics change resistor resistance the course has (R) This capacitor. and depend time whose specific (C) capacitance and fall) it its and equation a 63% for the approximately the equals * initial rise can be the final for R takes by exponentially C, defined the by time circuit constant, τ= this it time (or to of Moreover, between τ, difference voltage values. and

electrical to an to regard responds how axon actually stimulation, With

Fig. (upward-going passing membrane baseline –0.11 experiment of axon in of –0.44 20 the 5 10 –0.89 25 15 Change 0 0.89 is potential depolarizing 1.0 by of an –1.0 (mV) 5.1 results –0.22 the 0.44 from in illustrates 0.11 which Voltage 0.22 altered an rectangular pulses

activation 4.6 of conductance Na Linear 0.0 Slope 1.0 Upward deviation –1.0 range •Fig. –0.5 0.5 to ˜ 0.0 MegaOhms due –1.0 1.0 5.1 Current-voltage(I-V)plotderivedfromdatainA.Currentpulseamplitudeisplottedonthex-axis,andvoltageresponse(measuredatdottedline)isplottedonthey-axis.Notethedeviationfromlinearitywithlargedepolarizations,whichisduetoactivationofvoltage-gatedconductances. Voltageresponsesofanaxontorectangularpulsesofhyperpolarizingcurrent(negativenumbers)ordepolarizingcurrent(positivenumbers)asinjectedandrecordedfromanintracellularelectrode.Thechangesintransmembranepotentialaremirrorimagesofthesmallamplitudepulses.Atthethresholdlevel(current= 1.0),thereisa50:50chanceofreturningtorestingpotentialorofgeneratinganactionpotential.Forclarity,onlytherisingphaseoftheactionpotentialisshown.B, (A) R Biol Sci. (RedrawnfromHodgkinAL,RushtonWAH:Theelectricalconstantsofacrustaceannervefibre.Proc Lond Soc B 1946;133:444-479.) (downward-going current hyperpolarizing pulses) across cell pulses) or its membrane. positive of decreases less membrane). because difference The (i.e., cell cell is it the depolarizing injection negative potential the the across makes charge potential membrane negative, makes this of and injection in negative hyperpolarization. the potential the called change is charge Conversely, more the the injected, larger potential change is will that the in current greater be. the The membrane responses hyperpolarizing The (see small-amplitude depolarizing pulses to and current

Fig. 5.1A same the the because ) properties have the fundamental all of of passive membrane. shape the stimuli larger In pulses contrast, membrane. of hyperpolarizing pulses responses current differ the nonpassive small-amplitude and to the activate the the because in those to depolarizing shapes stimulus depolarizing larger elements from

voltage several to the a allow has of pulses, membrane For start to the plateau (essentially the enough through virtually responses of to pulse current elapsed injected is long hyperpolarizing once time from current the current flowing all the resistance. the membrane times τ), and the of voltages steady-state the between current amplitude (see the pulse plotted against If the initial difference is

Fig. is what 5.1B a expected law observed the from * Ohm’s = ), linear for which relationship hyperpolarizing is (V exactly is I pulses,

for flowing R) through a current resistor. line just the of (ΔV/ΔI) referred described. is as input is The and (Rin) to the this slope resistance determined as experimentally, cell exactly of the to cases. but in Rin is related depends (rm) the most cell relationship membrane is complex exact the the of geometry and of cell, on the resistance

vertical voltage the and of with the injected rising just and rectangular starts although edges, ends is as pulses, rises after that slower falling the the the Next, falls. and of shape note current pulses membrane have responses small-amplitude hyperpolarizing only depolarizing current and to (see regard with to responses pulses Moreover, the

Fig. fall membrane in exponential voltage shapes. 5.1A the ), rise and the have thus shows the the cases that constant as stimulus is to is voltage is, membrane capacitance change the pulses these current same or of the in circuit the governed that and parallel and resistance membrane the time course no (τ). RC membrane by (cm), all rise responding in This would; same fall is causes it a in because time

of can between axon relationships region certain a and of RC the just range by be in voltage show within membrane one cell The a passive stimulation, described current circuit. the that modeled the capacitor, other is a that of one only single of in intracellular and significant structures However, extended the the no because electrical regions. in factor account spatially with fact takes a events are affect circuit, this this, that how model and space of axons resistor region resistance of intracellular be their would all and space would axons That is, part voltage changes, had resistance, axonal like one instantaneously. membrane intracellular just regions if across those described, occur the no across isoelectric, would be a there this In case, need no for

Potentials axon. to Generation the action and the mechanism Action potential) (i.e., 5 propagate special of down CHAPTER signals Conduction actively actuality, significant is in and In structures axons the (and to general) rm reason relationship one (this spatially extended regions current flow with between different of neurons is Rin resistance complicated). are is understand characteristics. and membrane along their helps needed because point why of affects at how the other some points the Therefore, to both injected this at one explain important action helps current it axon potential explain are potentials

the electrode across elicit ( distance membrane, recorded of responses current size change potential passed from plasma the the recording depends on current passage are point of the only pulses When that passive the of the of the in

Fig. 5.2).

the change and the potential current the recording closer steeper site larger to the is of electrode in The passage, is. 0.5 0.0 distance mm the magnitude change with exponentially of in mm potential decreases The the from

membrane of potential Change 4.5mV 1.5 (mV) mm •Fig. mm 1.0 2.5 2.0 5.2 Responsesofanaxonofashorecrabtoasubthresholdrectangularcurrentpulsebyanextracellularelectrodeappliedcloselytoitssurfaceandlocatedatdifferentdistancesfromthecurrent-passingelectrode.Astherecordingelectrodeismovedfartherfromthepointofstimulation,theresponseofthemembranepotentialisslowerandsmaller. Biol R B (RedrawnfromHodgkinAL,RushtonWAH:Theelectricalconstantsofacrustaceannervefibre.Proc Sci. Lond Soc 1946;133:444-479.) said of electrotonic passive of reflect current, potential passage the to and conduction. site the or in change is changes membrane spread in before become do they insignificant. conducted very passively the not far potential Such along in shown As

Fig. an millimeters. a of over 5.2 signal a away dies distance conducted few electrotonically , called space is logarithms which 1/e length maximal decreases value (37%) in constant 2.7182). natural its the of to potential of and the equal is distance base change to the over The is (where e or constant the of far for meter to propagate mammalian soma constant axons, the electrical can be long, need the axon. is 1 which A a end mechanism for to which obvious more a information length events mm at makes the generated 3 than to of about typical

cable. of be related to to have the properties according constant The fibers cable electrical can because properties nerve of many of the an length theory electrical axon the a is surrounding a current along loss medium, the signal prevents all perfect so undiminished the the of surrounding In strength. cable, cable the insulation that conductor to with transmitted core membrane an the the electrical equates plasma and unmyelinated to not cytoplasm cable, later) perfect but (discussed an a the conductor, nerve the membrane insulation to fiber is compared is the If as core insulator. plasma (ra). Thus of axonal the signals ratio resistance the membrane cytoplasm of the the on depends resistance to of axial spread the cable, is without When as ratio can rm length, decrement plasma to lost of better ra longer. unit membrane distance axon of less current is can per the and the across the electrotonically high, the be conveyed is that a axonal significant signal function a with holes useful think in garden of a hose it. the A axon to as analogy poked is in loss water is rm the and more The less is when low) are of holes length the hose, there leaks more more to current (analogous nozzle. out delivered its water to the its along theory, resistance length can to cable According and be equal rm/ra constant to related to . axonal is the relationship can the axonal how affect used determine to decay potentials of how constant the This be in length and, electrotonic hence, varies. changes diameter both in the increase of and diameter ra the axon rm. An reduces to cross-sectional whereas inversely axon), is related to it is (because to proportional squared the diameter circumference However, area related the rm varies of to inversely is (because the axon). the of ra it diameter the diameter length rm axonal increases as increases, more and the Thus decreases therefore rapidly than constant ( does ra

Fig. or (Vo) decays of to which 5.3 original ~ 1 response Distance size ˜ = over 37%

lowra 1 Vo/e Vo/e ˜˜˜˜ mm high˜Vo ˜ Vo/e ra 1. is = 3 = is Large-diameter axon Vo/e mm 2.

•Fig. Axon Constant Comparison to Length 5.3 the of Diameter. Notethattheincreaseindiameterisassociatedwithadecreaseinaxialresistanceoftheaxonalcytoplasm(ra)andanincreaseinthelengthconstant(λ).(RedrawnfromBlankenshipJ.Neurophysiology. Philadelphia:Mosby;2002.)

of Conduction Action and CHAPTER Generation Potentials 5

the how of spread will identical and other point thus elements, can membrane electrical in parts. length is to how that the rapidly be the at determine and composed of signals membrane, electrical far characterized to and circuit which the sum, cell passive constants essentially response one time a passive to electrical it domain, stimuli by the of In in

The Response Local

regard the to in shown experiment With

Fig. if current of pulses the a depolarizing 5.1, the passive voltage injected, response RC that no are resembles membrane longer of circuit. larger defined depolarizations is as but of 50%). easily the action the the just an action action threshold to an membrane can to probability be the 1.0; or potential potential voltage at that elicit potential is evoke This fail pulses (tracings threshold below potential potential most either and membrane with for 0.89 which observed an evoking the of from (described voltage channels these sufficiently cases, numbers to opening changed that voltage-sensitive the In shape Na+ has membrane the is the of of significant response passive because cause the potential altered stimulus responses later).

the note from upward curve in the (see Also, for linearity I-V corresponding points deviation the

Fig. ). 5.1B and these Opening allows electrochemical enter its more gradient. of the easily, membrane’s driven voltage-sensitive by changes to Na+ resistance channels the by electrode. pulse entry of current) by the depolarization to (Na+ the enhances charge adding current positive delivered This depolarization resulting The response. is a called local The active ions conductance), properties remains various in in response, electrotonic whereas Na+ its (specifically, local constant. a from to changes results passive the membrane conductance response is decreases amplitude local the in self-regenerating distance. Nevertheless, again, not but, response with to an The needed is membrane potential. change what properties insufficient action is for generate in

Response: The Suprathreshold Potential Action

potential a at action occur. pulse can which different potential sort as is amplitude the is membrane point the Local response, size responses threshold spike), until of current increase reached, the in of increased, (or the will depolarizing threshold near mV. is The −55 typically value exceeds always triggered. potential when an Normally, value, action the this is potential membrane

Fig. typical of action shape the shows potential. an 5.4 reverses in the the potential see positive becomes and that past and the negative but depolarized not does reach, ). explosive for (ENa; overshoots from is potential Na+ the When Nernst a depolarization equilibrium way such membrane approaches, membrane to threshold, membrane toward beyond almost returns as in resting resting rapidly potential (repolarizes) it potential hyperpolarizes it as its The general, (the membrane potential was the then depolarized, and afterhyperpolarization). return a it of phase the can to persist the has onset potential (from but duration •Fig. 1 the resting afterhyperpolarization, 2 the to of action msec, to typically The the potential) main Components Potential to Voltage. Time Action With Regard of the and 5.4 Markersindicatetheabsoluteandrelativerefractoryperiods.Notethatthetimescaleforthefirstfewmillisecondshasbeenexpandedforclarity.RMP,restingmembranepotential.(RedrawnfromBlankenshipJ.Neurophysiology. Philadelphia:Mosby;2002.) a particular of to from msec, neuron. type the few on 100 depending

overshoots the (the 0 is three It relation potential response (1) subthreshold the in in potential membrane exterior). of polarity cell The becomes of to amplitude, which a interior in ways: differs larger passive and actually the much the from responses action important mV positive

The shape without the length its axon). it because travels entire (2) down axon and generally of size is (i.e., the is it as along it action potential maintains regenerated decrement propagated the to means which stimulus is response, produces fails a either that action (3) all-or-none a full-sized produce an normally potential It or one. and of previously all-or-none contrast to the graded responses nature is to responses local described passive and both in (see This nature synaptic the

Action Basis Potentials of Ionic

(EK), the by average equation potentials is conductance as of K+ Recall by potential resting chord the determined the (ENa) for primarily Nernst membrane (see weighted and defined that Na+ the ). ion. are (g factors each = weighting 1/resistance) conductance The to the to mV). (gK) (Vr high in the and relation resting conductance rest Na+ the At closer to so for EK K+ to potential that is membrane (gNa), (Vr) is ≅−70 membrane were potential. in relative cause conductances to the these to the If, this however, change change, would ions corresponding a a depolarize whereas For membrane, gK mV. membrane approximately would decrease an because the the −100 in hyperpolarize is EK would in example, gK increase membrane of the in reversal is would in polarity sufficient an gNa and, lead if +65 Conversely, mV. increase because depolarize membrane to even ENa a approximately magnitude,

An of in is, rapid sequence the in fact, a gNa or or changes both. action of axonic gK, transient result potential rise to brief all there a gNa, levels. in axons by is decline In a followed baseline back gNa axons, gK In discussed a some leak channels, in which against this are voltage-gated; not (because occurs resting fixed of change later). other both In however, cases, gNa and many gK change. and potential on is membrane bring the the not the neuron in changing constant is for gK/gNa K+ the to K+; the (1) gradient bring (2) Na+ but membrane toward potential, contrast but depends resting the action is the toward of Na+ ratio rest, continuously. the as to resting to opposing tendencies membrane gradient the the for at Nernst with potential potential Thus potential potential Nernst the when resting into an (as potential a because to membrane the note taken the the a potential is during quantitatively potential exists, must because also is also that potential action capacitative membrane difference additional is constant no valid this changing, describe conductance One the chord only be capacitative current membrane equation there when corollary, current). then account is that and is

membrane potential action (INa). (the and the toward increase gNa result the of of positive thus of is the current ENa) of rapid deflection Na+ early a potential phase in The a membrane cause for These the the to Na+ potential equilibrium toward potential changes move . not is gK/gNa The of gNa ratio does reach to the peak ENa action the fall not does (i.e., because not zero). rise infinite potential in the

rise (described with in channels Na+ the gNa depolarization of later), the Because of underlying is nature the transient. depolarization a cases, the to gK. leads in many in rise Moreover, two the gK/gNa toward potential is and the back resting a increasing; factors its thus to falling result, toward value. repolarizes membrane stop cause ratio as EK driven and start These return in gK, its the value the to the hyperpolarizes potential change, membrane which not to rise resting gK does (if involves its beyond normal cases repolarization in simply In a gNa potential). the temporarily drop causes in membrane rest This action a afterhyperpolarization remains time gK after elevated period of potential. for the because occurs to returns rest value. returns baseline level, the membrane gK As its to potential its

ion described Na+ and next. explained by the changes K+ are be properties which These of can channels, in conductance

potentials Early through and pass mechanism ion currents indicated studies that Na+ action characteristics, cell separate distinct the with of membrane. the K+ channels, in underlying each supported Subsequent this has research interpretation. and The detail. functional the in characteristics channel many of acid amino are known the channels sequences of now structural and of proteins the

( voltage-gated Na+ structure a of channel The

Fig. of consists ) two and α subunits. β subunits four 5.5 subunit repeated helices ion motifs has transmembrane each α surround a pore. that central six four of The are helices the six by each in walls pore motif. formed partly The Na+ motifs six the that the the each channel. to consisting Most subunit subunits, of separate channels polypeptide α of up similar K+ a membrane-spanning make segments, four composed with are of voltage-gated

An voltage. the channels, they of underlie by characteristic are some the important membrane gated is action those potential, such that as that either membrane then the the to These close channels the or and open membrane to sense act across voltage-gated the according potential pore potential. are voltage and acid the and for that occur action channel gNa dependence potential. and during charged account K+ gates residues, Na+ gates amino can of formed gK the by the complex an groups in changes The of

Changes the The the Characteristics Channels Potential Na+ and Action Explain of the Conductance During K+

enabled underlying of techniques the recording investigators currents and ionic to conductance changes characterize with voltage-clamp along intracellular Use standard

Potentials and Generation of •Fig. Conduction Action CHAPTER 71 5 Na+ of Voltage-Gated A Model 5.5 the Channel. subunitsandthetwoyellowelementsareβ scorpiontoxin(ScTX)andtetrodotoxin(TTX)indicated.B, A, Thelargeredelementsrepresentthefourα subunitareshownwiththeirtransmembranehelices. β1andβ2subunitsflankinganα subunitswiththereceptorsitesforα Physiol. (RedrawnfromCatterallWA:Structureandfunctionofvoltage-gatedsodiumchannelsatatomicresolution.Exp 2014;99:35-51.) the action potential. associated with channels recordings analyses that Na+ of made to nature K+ about remarkable and the statistical Detailed of passed also be currents. the these allowed these inferences of channels. enabled of of The recording, direct patch however, individual behavior the the observation development this suction microelectrode. to technique, of a specially and against is is cell, surface shaped applied In the a the placed microelectrode is brane between and a tip a result, the As seal mem high-resistance the (Fig. of the formed microelectrode in recording 5.6A be whatever which patch the of membrane happen that the inside of allows channels ), is the to seal. activity of are few patch. present membrane one ideal channels Under a a the ion in conditions only or single type of

flip open channels close to recordings and conductance closed many gates ion the that have as their that open they and between show if Patch entrance spontaneously pore. states the the of state In voltage-gated the a time in gate the probabilistic the spends sensitive thus potential. and gate function is case is channels, each membrane of to voltage membrane, a the across of behavior this a patch K+ demonstrates recording (see channel A probabilistic

Fig. 5.6B ). (see in is open voltage that to reflects potential membrane which dependence more probability will of the state, the As depolarized open channel the the more spends the channel clamped its levels, time

Fig. ). 5.6C amplitude with at farther is is from the driving because greater open level (i.e., the the more in this potential the current state Also, depolarization; the the K+ the potential). of membrane Nernst increases depolarized levels for force of is K+

The than a of that more K+ the channel. Na+ behavior is complex of channel 1.0 a 200 SECTION2Berne Like & resistor C (mA/cm2) ˜°°50 potential 0.4 0 density Ground K+ Cell 50 0.8 the 0.6 Physiology X˜X˜X˜X˜X˜Cytosol membrane 72 mV solution °20 (1ms/division)B A 0 Na+ Po °60 Operational amplifier Micropipette °80 channel, Patch channel Feedback (mV) it Ion °40 Pipette 0.2 pipette Time Levy has D °1.0 current Membrane

and Action Conduction 5 Potentials •Fig. CHAPTER Generation of channelasitopensspontaneously.Notethatasthetransmembranevoltageisprogressivelydepolarized(fromtoptobottom),boththeprobabilitythatthechannelwillopenandtheamplitudeofthecurrentareincreased.C, Agraphoftheprobabilitythatthechannelwillopenversusmembranedepolarization.D, (exceptthatitcontainsseveralNa+ Amicropipetteisappliedtothecellmembraneandsufficientsuctionisappliedtoelectricallyisolateasinglechannelatthetip.Anamplifierrecordsthecurrentthatpassesthroughthechannel.B, Agraphoftransmembranevoltage(lowertracing,right-sidedscale)andthecurrentdensityfromapopulationofNa+ currentthatiscurtailedevenwhilethedepolarizationcontinues.Thisisduetotheclosingofthechannels’inactivationgates.Afterabriefreturntorestingpotential,anotherdepolarizationto0mVevokesinwardcurrentflow,butitissmallerandbrieferbecausetherehasnotbeenenoughtimeformostoftheslowinactivationgatestoreopen. A, 5.6 EachlineshowsthecurrentpassedthroughaK+ channels).Initially,atrestingpotential,thereisnocurrentflow.Withdepolarizationto0mV,thereisaninwardNa+ channels(uppertracing,left-sidedscale)isolatedinapatchsimilartothatinA probability being voltage-sensitive gate) with (B, http://www.physiologymodels.info/electrophysiology open of areredrawnfrom (activation andD C, increases depolarization. whose gate only and However, then remain Na+ at channels, open the K+ channels of the maintained depolarization closed. unlike with depolarization, onset second (inactivation have is Na+ depolarized. goes a membrane the as probability whose channels suggests gate) This down gate that open being of current be will channels Na+ these by conducted (see transient any Thus

Fig. ), will gate that probabilities same and because the close. the will 5.6D that inactivation (depolarization) increases the both the activation gate stimulus open once that channel closes, gate be the Note membrane as the when channel this is is it referred is two the and has called is is to and the repolarized. the channel the closed is that “inactivated.” which one states, Na+ which one to second gate reason “closed,” inactivation and so gate is “inactivated” remain The in closes closed, closed, the in the thus gate until activation channel will said contrast, at with open The in probabilities. all can and differing potentials, close activation gate, just membrane

following, knowledge change the action interaction (in With during gNa K+ by the understand we the and generated behavior is gating of how can we Na+ of and channel discussed, that gK these both potential). the the potential the action channels just assume action (gNa; As previously, in a the increase starts rapid with stated potential conductance Na+

Fig. ). 5.7 of channels the to Na+ depolarization. increase response This opening the Na+ in conductance in many reflects depolarize of Na+ open the channels the allow ions, current The of influx is further. membrane and the effect this to the that in nature which increases action which Note a feedback is of channels current to Na+ this open, explosive Na+ turn for which the the more Na+ potential: the current. accounts depolarizes the positive membrane, causes loop, Na+ In of account of the voltage-dependent the depolarizing Na+ sum, action rising phase action channels and the opening potential. the current for of the

of end rising the gNa the result increase phase is the a and an reduction potential the processes: of action The (repolarization) of in subsequent phase in falling and two gK. simply The is will rise consequence probability membrane a depolarization, channel in K+ which gK be that increases of the the open. two from decrease The results •Fig. in gNa the Potential Action That The Action and the and Currents 5.7 Potential Regard Underlie Time. to Conductance With channels. current(INa)beforethepeakoftheactionpotential(eventhoughgNaisstillhigh)isduetoinactivationoftheNa+ NotethattheincreasedconductanceforNa+ (gNa),aswellasitsinwardflow,isassociatedwiththerisingphaseoftheactionpotential,whereastheslowerincreaseinconductanceforK+ (gK),aswellasitsoutwardflow,isassociatedwithrepolarizationofthemembraneandwithafterhyperpolarization.ThereductionintheNa+ (RedrawnfromSquiresLR,etal:Fundamental Neuroscience. 2nded.SanDiego,CA:AcademicPress;2002.) factors. a the channels First, with depolarization. Na+ inactivation as the inactivated gate of are result closing of activation until states the remains membrane occurs. can gate, is when depolarized, which even closed, flip significant repolarization Unlike gate, the inactivation between the closed once channel. inactivation shut gate ratio of both repolarize, a activation the membrane of opening Na+ to Second, this the to channels), the result channels of begins the increases acts as K+ of Na+ gK/gNa and (as repolarization and back Na+ state. voltage-gated brings channels phase K+ membrane of The both and the closure the falling resting its to during channels axons), simply Na+ for action membrane opened is had (as during only If potential return the some to would case the potential. rest the its the present response because opened afterhyperpolarization hyperpolarization. to channels also be potential, channels these voltage-gated an close slowly would during K+ action had If K+ in

filter. Knowledgeofthemolecularstructureofchannelshasincreasedtheunderstandingofthebasisoftheirproperties.Forexample,mostchannelsarehighlyselectiveforaparticularion.First,ifthechannelwallsarelinedwitheitherpositiveornegativecharges,theneithercationsoranionscanbeexcluded;however,mostchannelsarealsodifferentiallypermeablebydifferentionsofthesamecharge.Thisfurtherselectivityappearstobetheresultofrequiringionstobecomedehydratedastheypassthroughthenarrowestpartofachannel,knownastheselectivity Ionsinsolutionarehydrated(aresurroundedbyashellofH2Omolecules),andtheradiusofthishydrationshellisdifferentforeachtypeofion.InNa+ channels,tomakedehydrationenergeticallypossible,theporeofthechannelislinedwithnegativelypolarizedaminoacidsubstituentsofaparticulargeometry,andthesesubstituentssubstituteforthewatermolecules.Suchsubstitution,however,requiresclosematchingofthefilter’ssizetotheion’shydrationshell.Becauseeachionhasadifferent-sizedshell,aparticularchannelwillbestallowpassageofoneparticularionicspecies. andK+

oneofthemostpotentpoisonsknown,specificallyblockstheNa+ channel.TTXbindstotheextracellularsideofthesodiumchannel(see Tetrodotoxin (TTX),

anotherpoison,blocksK+ channelfromthecytoplasmicsideandblocksthechannelbecauseTEA+ Fig.5.5A channels.TEA+ (TEA+), isunabletopassthroughit.Theovariesofcertainspeciesofpufferfish,alsoknownasblowfish,containTTX.RawpufferfishisahighlyprizeddelicacyinJapan.ConnoisseursofpufferfishenjoythetinglingnumbnessofthelipscausedbytheminusculequantitiesofTTXpresentintheflesh.Sushichefswhoaretrainedtoremovetheovariessafelyarelicensedbythegovernmenttopreparepufferfish.Despitetheseprecautions,severalpeopledieeachyearasaresultofeatingimproperlypreparedpufferfish. ).Tetraethylammonium enterstheK+

channelsthatisproducedbythereddishdinoflagellatesthatareresponsibleforso-calledredtides.Shellfisheatthedinoflagellatesandconcentratesaxitoxinintheirtissues.Apersonwhoeatstheseshellfishmayexperiencelife-threateningparalysiswithin30minutesafterthemeal. SaxitoxinisanotherblockerofNa+

the the may nerve When passed this action firing an without very be slowly, is phenomenon normal depolarized accommodation. threshold is potential; a called of K+ involved Na+ accommodation. and in Both are channels In then, a decreases. gNa and time depolarization, first membrane short to response later, increases inactivation of the of and due the Na+ channels. gates opening activation of to This gates the the is closing depolarization critical Normally, a action only threshold the potential can if of Na+ explosive number an depolarization the occur beyond however, potential; recruited. triggers action channels or membrane of are to is inactivated recruit the even noninactivated cell to able action an the be sufficient an stimulus can number the if Na+ Na+ of occurrence a to the to channels Na+ a (i.e., of action available be slowly depolarized, reduced channels without state) pool point channels not of become in closed to at a may Thus potential, channels generate potential. can and which the additional response is that to depolarization. accommodation channels slowly K+ open An causing in factor in increased fire depolarization an The to gK tends likely of to makes potential. membrane, which the action even it oppose less

is cell is it or stronger an it fire completely to action usual. unable requires either potential a than a refractory, When much stimulation of cell because not potential matter is another During completely the strongly no will stimulated. how potential, is action much action it fire it refractory the This refractory absolute (see period

Fig. the be cannot is channels and ) are large when repolarized. the fraction of therefore until Na+ occurs reopened membrane inactivated a 5.4 channels Na+ number this critical potential During cannot to recruited. the of required period, an be produce action

Inaninheriteddisordercalledprimary channelsthatresultinadecreasedrateofvoltageinactivation.Thisresultsinlonger-lastingactionpotentialsinskeletalmusclecellsandincreasedeffluxofK+ hyperkalemic duringeachactionpotential,whichcanraiseextracellular[K+]. patientshaveepisodesofpainfulspontaneousmusclecontractionsfollowedbyperiodsofparalysisoftheaffectedmuscles.Thesesymptomsareaccompaniedbyelevated[K+]inplasmaandextracellularfluid.Somepatientswiththisdisorderhavemutationsofvoltage-gatedNa+ paralysis,

Theelevationinextracellular[K+]causesdepolarizationofskeletalmusclecells.Initially,thedepolarizationbringsmusclecellsclosertothreshold,andsospontaneousactionpotentialsandcontractionsaremorelikelytooccur.Asdepolarizationofthecellsbecomesmoremarked,thecellsbecomerefractorybecauseincreasingnumbersofNa+ channelsbecomeinactivated.Consequently,thecellsbecomeunabletofireactionpotentialsandarenotabletocontractinresponsetoactionpotentialsintheirmotoraxons.

but action able fire latter the period, normal is during potential, than to of action afterhyperpolarization required. part the cell stronger the the second stimulus a a During potential, and is is called relative period. This refractory the period period, relative the before in refractory the Early

resting the there when the membrane of still Conduction stimulated and Potentials is to therefore are potential the to the inactivated, potential of Action the are 5 have in returned state depolarized) (and some enough Generation generation to they potential open. Na+ level, channels closed to support action an open but membrane CHAPTER potential has voltage are if recruit the Na+ the action total is necessary than critical normal a of (i.e., reduction countered potential opening). is to an to by needed number the probability available Na+ of number of trigger stronger channels stimulus channels increasing in However, the of elevated, opposes the to the conductance K+ period, which depolarization membrane. relative refractory is Throughout the throughout continues of increase most of in the and conductance This the K+ period. accounts afterhyperpolarization for duration relative refractory

Action of Conduction Potentials

to transmission Fundamental neuronal system pathways. the information is nervous function of along potentials this, that the in To the from in to down length presynaptic accomplish size axon terminals. neurotransmitter release generate their propagate action without decrement neurons order trigger of affect an axon how action this propagation axon are down discussed potentials and How the propagate characteristics in section. of the this they is in How release transmitter covered trigger

Self-Reinforcing Action Potential as Signal a

because passively rapidly very will conducted one a signals order (i.e., axon its their the the short from not size to transport an constant) axon of end signal with other is Passive length distance on unless origin. of decrease from conduction in the the distance so exist; such retina of is conduction from Neurons the one in to the example, for that electrotonic is neuron short (passive) next small axons eye, sufficient. with the than many cases, in constant. are most axons times their longer However, length 1 thus neurons) of more In constant. up fact, or (e.g., length they motor those hundreds can m of and to length in their times be shape constant. the axon, successive at record would Nonetheless, axon, points researchers if along that the arrives along from as to size were potential they points its typical a traveling and action remain find actively is the the because and regenerates potential fiber to is This propagated. is as action it along be said conducted itself thus

Fig. that a current to the response 5.8 one local acts in flows of depolarize membrane through the the in shows membrane. neighboring part how happens thing axon, these except areas. areas The Na+ side action in when large in threshold action will the one at on case, site and enough by potential that to along the depolarize channels the neighboring generate potentials opened the thus this are be an either past current same current potentials, then past generate inward can current Na+ in that so •Fig. action provide threshold these neighbors depolarize they the their to areas turn The in 5.8 of of Electrotonic Spread Depolarization. Mechanism + – – – + + – + + + + + + + – – – – + + – + + – + – – + Thelocalcurrentsthatflowtodepolarizeadjacentareasofthemembraneandallowconductionofthedepolarization.B + on. + – – + + – – + so + – + – + – – + – – + A, – – – – + – + + – – and – + + – + – – + – Thereversalofmembranepolaritythatoccurswithlocaldepolariza-tion.B, + potential provide for recurring an local sufficient involves of short, of cell of propagation In membrane. action cycles in flow potential depolarization an to action an the region along adjacent generation axon current said to propagated be is “new” with action the action being the generated along axon, length. its potential Thus potentials down retaining axon In the way, this the action the potential length and can size while of down shape. same the entire propagate

dendrite) and body potentials then the terminal where to end. the Normally, to conducted neuron at attached are first generated (i.e., cell proximal axon’s action the initial the segment axon or is spiking it and thus has high dendrites. of soma this that very The voltage-gated or a does reason than has segment density channels, for lower initial is the threshold the Na+ a for inherently unidirectional axons are However, conductors. not For implied as local shown the example, circuits in by

Fig. a simultaneously. action axon its of initiation an is an both in middle by from conducted the depolarization in , site generated potential 5.8 directions

propagate spike directions? at Why segment both a not initial in that the does starts does. it fact, In can to flowing channels. down initial propagating from segment because the has the soma the spike back be voltage-gated the the current the cause soma In addition to generated Na+ also in a to axon, soma from “backpropagating” however, spikes send start of segment down somatic cause a a do occur, initial nor to (and not the does time axon second Additional axon axon the the another and cycle). spike the the spike fire thereby repeating does area because that for unable the refractory a happen any membrane short spiked fire already to not This second makes a time. of has period the spike site. initial for that depolarizes at begun at the both current the started of the spike sides and on traveling membrane has axon, of Thus flowing that spike down the in the segment a site closer inactivated. spike, cell channels which are fired depolarization because Na+ the respond this cannot However, has a body, recently to still side the to its By of (because open) site potential to their the would time are be membrane Na+ msec). has able the only state depolarization returned de-inactivated closed to lasts for at action ≈1 channels and (have ended the that the at its unidirectional singular origin potential channel duration from it propagation for of is Na+ inactivation initial but determine the and of only its also the segment. the helps Thus gate action not the responsible

electrical membrane its in cytoplasm and a properties that fiber, as speed by plasma the as nerve is the fiber The of the conduction of surrounds by the determined geometry. well nonmyelinated of to root conduction proportional the In (Fig. diameter the is cross-sectional square velocity fibers, ). 5.9 This with effect in the to related diameter. and is changes rm ra fiber diameter of current the decreases rm square with of to •Fig. diameter, resistance only result, as diameter; ra and a the increases linearly As a the with increases,

lines representextrapolationsthatshowtheadvantageofmyelinationoversimplyincreasingaxondiameterasamechanismforincreasedconductionvelocity. felineaxonsasfunctionsofaxondiameter.Solid 5.9 representmeasureddata.Dotted lines andmyelinated(red) Conductionvelocitiesofunmyelinated(blue) (FromSchmidt-Nielsen

K.

Animal Physiology: Adaptation and Environment. 5thed.Cambridge,UK:CambridgeUniversityPress;1997.) down axon to the more across flow does decreases than membrane. flow it the current increases the length constant (see This

Fig. at large a to fibers means those neighboring one axon, of regions is faster which which more to brings 5.3 that of along diameters. action entering is greater regions conducted delivered current thus ), the the quickly, and site with the threshold amount potential

the also held area the However, increases charges other. each the are negative outer to and increasing diameter surface positive plasma of inner which membrane over increasing in conduction tends Discharging and increase the this increased slow by velocity diameter. to conduction gained capacitance mitigate

myelinated. In and are such said nerve to many coated be myelin, are fibers fibers with vertebrates, consists peripheral cells the of nerve the around central plasma (in oligodendroglia wrap of or and system) the membranes Myelin nervous [CNS]), fiber nervous (in system insulate the Schwann which (

Fig. B 5.10A ). and membrane. several of plasma cell of The to sheath layers myelin 100 more than glial consists nodes 1-2 one of about µm that Gaps wide, Schwann oligodendrocyte) contribution Ranvier, of known separate from another. of cell the (or as membrane of the the membrane, caliber the capacitance and axon does to decreases all axon, Ranvier. the of but increases fiber the For conduction axon unmyelinated myelinated smallest effective sheath greater the much of generation of myelin limits diameter, potentials a has nodes than of of the an same the resistance the action velocity axons because the greatly of properties myelination short, the In electrical axon. alters

membrane of the rm/ra membrane axon increase wrappings around resistance the the length constant are greater. the many effective Because and much the less of of the membrane less (by with through length and thus decreases membrane opening be a signal means regenerated per the increased often. axon current distance that and needs amplitude channels) resistance axon, conducted less The to along is of Na+ lost

larger it of much to charges In the that much in bare each the across membrane addition, so separation thicker axon, than other. results are less a of across it an membrane myelin-wrapped charges across the bound exists tightly a and moved its analogous the are plates is when reduce capacitance. This capacitor apart of to which membrane at is rate potential reduced changed, the the membrane depolarization effect rapidly. of to the the Because slow occurs axons be the more can capacitance means myelinated that capacitance of myelination, one by to speed Ranvier reasons, at node velocity (see of is For is conduction the all generated at great current next these greatly increased conducted the and

Fig. 5.10

that myelinated generation about highly concentrated of action bring axons, the are potential In an channels Na+

•Fig. Generation Conduction and 5 Potentials CHAPTER Action of Viewoftwonodesandtheinterveninginternodeofmyelin.C, A, Saltatoryconductioninamyelinatedaxonwithaplotoftheactionpotentiallocationalongtheaxon(x-axis)versustime(y-axis).Notetheshorttimetakenfortheactionpotentialtotraversethelargedistancebetweennodes(shallow line sloped 5.10 ontheplot)becauseofthehighresistanceandlowcapacitanceoftheinternodalregion.Incontrast,theactionpotentialslowsasitcrosseseachnode(steep lines sloped Schematicillustrations,incrosssectionandlongitudinalsectionthroughanodeofRanvier,ofaSchwanncellwrappedaroundanaxontoformmyelin.NotethattheaxonisexposedtotheextracellularspaceonlyatthenodeofRanvier.B, segments). RedrawnfromSquiresLRetal:Fundamental Neuroscience. (B, 2nded.SanDiego,CA:AcademicPress;2002.C, RedrawnfromBlankenshipJ:Neurophysiology. Philadelphia:

Mosby;2002.) at and them. of are between the Ranvier not found nodes at the the as is along potential the unmyelinated being an than nodes the mm fiber, of case apart) Thus only in regenerated rather continuously (0.3-2 action is Ranvier fiber. regenerated Resistance that myelin make the layers restricted present that currents stretches transmembrane the ions nodes the to plasma is so flow across many naked (see are sheath are that at the membrane Ranvier short of the high up to largely of of

Fig. 5.10C ). is node. Therefore, successive action potential the each at regenerated node each node, The entirely 20 µsec. bringing from currents node one in entering to are the almost to conducted threshold node local next the about is called of conduction word (from the from next, appears ( one the node leap”) to the Latin potential saltare, process to and Ranvier the Thus “jump” “to saltatory action

Fig. 5.11

of Consequences Myelination Functional

of by consequences can highlighted a and mammalian comparison squid myelination axons. be The of functional nerve in Although comparable squid speeds myelination. or giant are fibers axons, smaller at axons even diameter than conduct much because of human human faster conduction giant m/sec. a The 500-µm of a has about velocity axon squid and unmyelinated 20 diameter and to than range 1-2 all µm larger from In diameters are with diameters fibers about myelinated. 20 axon mammals, 0.2 µm, fiber, than a than less which (see m/sec conduction velocity µm, to diameter less An nerve of has 1 2 mammalian unmyelinated has of 2 a

Fig. because expected axon. its squid comparison to giant as 5.9 diameter smaller of in ), the In 1/50 diameter. myelinated 50 of that the the than conduction twice m/sec, velocity in of giant its despite of contrast, 500-µm a fiber more mammalian 10-µm squid axon, being range has a myelination velocity the CNS. achieved Thus with enormously volume a tremendous without of by far increase high connectivity conduction axons narrower the neuronal expanding in the allows mental their one reflexes evolution neurons is generate to This numbers the everything from and processing. efficient that that nervous factor of systems complex certainly to are fast enabled with able huge of mammalian

which about receive of world, specialized contains variety the a •Fig. of each the CNS To wide receptors, is sensory information in Potential of Myelinated Unmyelinated Comparison Axon Axon. Action an in Conduction a 5.11 and isdepolarizingallofthemembranetothenextnode.Atthesecondinstantintime(B hasbeengeneratedatsubsequentnodesandisalreadydepolarizingthelastnodetotheright. Attheinitialtime(A andD),theactionpotentialintheunmyelinatedaxon(B) andC),anactionpotentialisbeinggeneratedattheleftsideofeachaxon.Notethattheinwardcurrentintheunmyelinatedaxon(A) hasbeengeneratedintheadjacentportion,whereastheactionpotentialinthemyelinatedaxon(D) isdepolarizinganadjacentportion,whereastheinwardcurrentinthemyelinatedaxon(C) Approach. Outline (RedrawnfromCastroA,etal:Neuroscience: An Philadelphia:Mosby;2002.)

scatteredprogressivedemyelinationofaxonsintheCNSresultsinlossofmotorcontrolandsensorydeficits.Theneuropathycommoninseverecasesofdiabetesmellitusiscausedbythedemyelinationofperipheralaxons.Whenmyelinislost,thelengthconstantbecomesmuchshorter.Hence,theactionpotentiallosesamplitudeasitiselectrotonicallyconductedfromonenodeofRanviertothenext.Ifdemyelinationissufficientlysevere,theactionpotentialmayarriveatthenextnodeofRanvierwithinsufficientstrengthtofireanactionpotentialatthatnode,leadingtopropagationfailure. disorders, Insomediseasesknownasdemyelinating sclerosis, themyelinsheathdeteriorates.Inmultiple

of particular (stimulus). detect to energy a type and into stimulus When the stimulus transduction intensity by called activates sensory sensory electrical its which a information duration) is initiates process receptor, a local it (e.g., signals. a about converted signals local are called These

TheactionpotentialsofmyelinatedaxonsmaynothaveahyperpolarizingafterpotentialoranextendedrelativerefractoryperiodbecausetheirK+ channelsaredisplacedfromthenodesintothepartlyexposedflankingparanodes.Thatincreasestherateatwhichthesefast-conductingaxonscanfire.Myelinatedaxonsarealsomoremetabolicallyefficientthanunmyelinatedaxons.Na+,K+-ATPaseextrudestheNa+ thatentersthecellandcausestheK+ thatleavesthecelltoreaccumulateduringactionpotentials.Inmyelinatedaxons,ioniccurrentsarerestrictedtothesmallfractionofthemembranesurfaceatthenodesofRanvier.Forthisreason,farfewerionstraverseaunitlengthoffibermembrane,andmuchlessionpumping—andenergyexpenditure—isnecessarytomaintainthegradients.

or action potential.Theclinicalvalueofsucharecordingisitsability,incertaindiseasestates,torevealthedysfunctionofaparticulargroupofaxonsassociatedwithspecificfunctions,aswellasthenoninvasivenatureofthetechniquebecauseitcanbeperformedwithskinsurfaceelectrodes( receptor generator potentials. );someoftheaxonsaremyelinated,andsomearenot.Consequently,actionpotentialstravelatdifferentvelocitiesintheindividualaxons.Asaresult,arecordingfromsuchanervewithexternalelectrodesdoesnotshowasinglesynchronouspeakbutaseriesofpeaksthatvaryintime(whichreflectstheconductionvelocityofgroupsofaxons)andinmagnitude(whichreflectsthenumberofaxonsineachvelocitygroup).Thisiscalledacompound ofvariousdiameters(Fig.5.12 Investigatorscanrecordanactionpotentialwithamicroelectrodewithoutpenetratingtheaxonbyplacingtwospacedelectrodesonitssurfaceandcomparingtheelectricalchargeateachpoint.Anelectrodelocatedwherethereisanactionpotentialwouldyieldasomewhatnegativesignalincomparisontoanelectrodewherethereisnoactionpotential.Astheactionpotentialisconductedtothesecondelectrode,thepolarityoftherecordingreverses.Thistechniqueisusedclinicallytoassessnervefunction.Peripheralnervesandmanycentralpathwaysconsistofapopulationofaxons transformed axons or over patterns receptor potentials action that into of The one CNS. potentials are be into conducted more then can the produce the connected to receptor. to are potentials to receptor of order In enough one must that this fibers more afferent or the stimulus are change for large happen, the that primary spiking levels sensory intensities the can Weaker produce are subthreshold and neurons thus receptor stimulation but detected. such activity stimuli not central not of of change potentials, do reliably can weakest be is stimulus that defined threshold as stimulus detected. the Thus

that or chemical, sensory forms evoke mechanical, be thermal, energy. of can transduction other events Environmental However, by information used types the a of

and Conduction CHAPTER of receptors. particular Generation set depend Potentials of on organism 5 sensory Action its

animals For fields, example, electrical other stimuli. such sense cannot sense can or humans but magnetic the fish migration. electroreceptors, magnetic particular, to during various many and use fish and themselves have In birds orient earth’s field

stimulus The with of type transduction process the detected. being varies environmental

Fig. properties m/s other three that in transduce shows receptors stimuli how 5.13 of 72 examples such are chapters). each 36 examples these of for 0246 the 108 given details alter stimuli can of membrane specific the sensory (further

Fig. a chemoreceptor, such taste receptor with A that membrane and smell, stimulant illustrates respond molecules might a as when how for chemical plasma of the used reacts the sensory receptor. 5.13A on the of Binding •Fig. 5.12 andacutaneousnerve(B). Thedistributionofaxons,bysizeandconductionvelocity,inamixed(muscle)nerve(A) fibersinthecutaneousnerve. Notetheincreasednumberofsmall-diameterfibersandtheabsenceofAα for Neuroscience (FromHainesDE[ed].Fundamental Clinical Basic Applications. and 3rded.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.) cell. current enables ionic molecule of stimulant an to receptor depolarizes the that sensory which receptor opens an chemical influx the the channel, ion similar to (This described for in ligand-gated is channels is what

Chapter 6.)

Fig. the membrane, current channel skin, to the opens those a of a as this depolarize of mechanoreceptor, ion such the the influx in 5.13B, receptor. in allows force application sensory to of the and an along mechanical response In

Fig. (so-called a pigment when in of light) retinal absorbed photon is a because open and membrane. responds internal channel dark the photoreceptor disc closed an by 5.13C, ion it to is the cell on case, applied. when this the ceases is current current dark; influx In light of the in an occurs current the hyperpolarizes. photoreceptor the When stops, must influences, distant mechanism.) “second ion photon this channel the of process involve intracellular from capture it the an (Because messenger” is that

The vary. of nature the can also receptor axon, the specialized receptor of In situation, a simplest is portion an just a

N/A2-812-48IntrafusalmusclefibersBN/A1-36-18PreganglionicautonomicfibersCN/A0.2-20.5-2Postganglionicautonomicfibers N/A8-1344-78ExtrafusalskeletalmusclefibersAγ Aα

Applications. Neuroscience and Clinical FromHainesDE(ed).Fundamental Basic for 3rded.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.N/A,notapplicable.

•Fig. 5.13 of in Three Models Types Receptors. Mechanisms of Transducer Mechanoreceptor.C, A, Photoreceptor. Chemoreceptor.B,

the cell. potential receptor which a into translation the in stimulus a of transduction into this same take all spike and of train the in place potential case of can on For forms of of stimulus, a as a as mechanoreceptor, the that the axon finger, shown skin part mechanical in membrane distort such example, an pressure a

Fig. 5.14A . flow at along of longitudinal of current current the causes the axon axon. end parts the distortion This and and outward neighboring inward flow the an outward potential) current threshold for might action potential produces a that exceed (see (the depolarization The the receptor

Fig. ). 5.14B stimulus. fiber about and the primary information so, CNS more If are travel to convey the thereby mechanical along afferent evoked potentials one action then this or and

cell. one many In cases, receptor the more other of than composed is this but occurs situation, that in one •Fig. cell, spikes In transduction cells in are are other generated 5.14 arrow) A, ThereceptorpotentialproducedbythecurrentandanactionpotentialthatwouldbesuperimposedonthereceptorpotentialifitweretoexceedthresholdatthefirstnodeofRanvier. Currentflow(thin arrows) ofamechanoreceptoratthetipofanaxon.AnintracellularrecordingelectrodeisplacedatthefirstnodeofRanvier.B, producedbystimulation(thick

synaptically (see to it connected ). fibers afferent primary cells. the For mechanoreceptive hair in get cochlea, example, synaptic input the from transduction Sensory organs in complex in can more arrangement. be this such sense earlier, and as dark the moreover, the receptor interruption is the potential current event. hyperpolarizing, of signal photoreceptors, is mentioned In in these of is Information mechanisms about discussed each

8. Chapter

a the afferent synapse the cell that typically Although has result the (i.e., with a in pathway) or the cell. of receptor neuron end potential types, transduction sensory first in neuron vary mechanisms receptor a sensory primary receptor is stimulus either the the between

is a the theme relationship the field a of major of activation particular location The in sensory physiology. sensory between of and stimulus neurons of sensory region receptive the that, activity a that neuron is field when affects of The neuron. stimulated, the only a indentation skin. of area receptor a small by sensory might activated be example, of For receptive area field the That is of excitatory receptor. the sensory sensory large the of receptors, it in as receptive sensory have with receptor field slightly receive neuron Moreover, several CNS field. a receptive a different as many from might a information a may each because that times CNS The sensory that receptors of field thus receptive neuron it. is of the receptive that sum influence the fields the of of the field stimulus of neuron. determined sensory the location is the The for location to sensory apparatus receptive signaling responsible by information the transduction about the

In are receptive general, fields excitatory. sensory can receptive excitatory includes that it a an sensory inhibit it. a inhibitory an field indeed, that complex or, However, areas neuron and either receptive areas central excite field or have that are of fields such discussed complex Examples receptive in

by of Action Potentials Information Coding

information to Central function the neurons. of transmission CNS between is the action neurotransmitter primarily through signaling which This presynaptic axon accomplished postsynaptic the to potentials, propagate the is down release, terminals cause and cells. nature this explained, carry purpose. whereas of and with such the potentials suitable (see potentials action local synaptic axon, signals or not the signals, ), regardless of regenerative as them distance are therefore As length already for receptor of to decay allows the generally means do. the all-or-none that and nature local do convey of information size that however, potentials potentials is in their The tradeoff, gradations not the shape way of action for the information of be between Instead, neurons. variations transmission in primarily rate action of the as timing potentials used or the “codes” appear to

being as spikes/second, firing fired the rate refers is coded as expressed rate spikes where defined of time, per called firing (Hz). in Rate number usually hertz a to the also unit information coding neuron, of to triggered of be For skin, faster in that action primary will afferent by greater primary potential the firing receptor receptor the skin a the afferent force larger potential and, resulting rate be neuron the the be. of as rate will neuron the the the consequence, mechanical the the innervates the applied stimulus skin; in encoded can potentials to force the of the example, the a rate movements, the rate employ the shows particular behavior. Research sense firing many or aspects of neurons sensory shown has a other to in upcoming a parameters stimuli, of consistent of neuron relationship coding that

codes such several is in amount The information rate by of factors. constrained firing a of is factor neuron’s range One rates. range determined refractory upper a maximal action relative the can neuron is set duration potentials, (see periods by of which this that fire absolute by limit the of and the frequency is The

Fig. and Hz. 5.4 exceeds 1000 rarely ) neurons the negative is, as fire cannot Hz, firing course, 0 of limit at range rates. lower of The have spontaneous many To avoid problem, levels. neurons activity this range inputs. These let decrease Purkinje or quite over its a some increase fire can cells to cell either at spontaneously a in similar 100 activity response (e.g., high and be Hz) constraining of rate, coding. neuron’s variability information neuron’s the is of the A which resolution the factor second firing determines

Generation CHAPTER 5 Conduction of Potentials and Action

the of in timing rather spike rate refers encodes or codes to overall firing temporal Timing, than which coding, specific spikes information. the One of often-studied across of version temporal is neurons. coding synchronization the spikes number been function number occur to to been has of brain related spiking of regions of a neuronal and in shown in Synchronization a instances. has coding, can convey coding not inasmuch averaging, is An that of does advantage as than can more time. it rate which it takes require temporal information quickly rate and inasmuch firing events mutually can Moreover, are synchronous be exclusive, not superimposed. temporal while varied as are coding coding rates overall codes may information multiplexing the pathways. Such capacity increase of transmission neuronal of

neurons Sensory information stimuli. about encode be of more encoded the stimulus process way a transduction, In one can in be sensory or the of by CNS. that interpreted aspects must the is the are information (2) information of processing abstraction sensory The the sensory stimulus, activated, an and responses on receptors (3) the pathway. which encoded sensory to (1) receptors in based that can stimulus modality, sensory be frequency, include location, Some encoded intensity, duration. parameters and that aspects relation particular to are described of chapters. stimuli later are in sensory encoded in systems Other

A sensation. a sensory class is modality of pressure, example, stimuli skin transient vibration. may and For sensations or to mechanical result touch evoke applied sensations in or sustained the mechanical of of stimuli flutter modalities Other and cold, include warmth, cutaneous pain. are examples of taste, smell audition, sensory and modalities. noncutaneous Vision, define modality sensory receptors normal a The associated the energy of with specific the sensory pathway. the of cortex the neurons pathway ). the photoreceptors, of the areas nucleus cerebral visual For geniculate the (see lateral and retina, example, thalamus, visual includes the in means is of pathway visual the The retina. light striking activating normal the electrical sensation. visual pressure on visual However, the produce (e.g., also pathway mechanical neurons of in or the stimulation a stimulation eyeball) whatever sensation. be labeled as results system Thus in regarded visual line, of activated a a means, can by which, visual neurons when the

stimulus. whose by receptive by activation a the stimulus the of location affected fields population signaled of particular sensory of neurons are The is encoded as may the map. neural information in a be CNS The surface locations receive somatotopic in cortex (see the map arrays formed the information a is example, from ). body neurons somatosensory that by For of corresponding on points the visual maps retinotopic by that are system, form the neuronal retina In (see represented on arrays

Intensity of encoded number may a in ways. be intensity neurons (rate coding). action some by discharge frequency uniform have encode of a sensory magnitude, potentials their Because as between stimulus relationship The and stimulus-response can function. a plotted response intensity be 1. the exponential to, approximates can than, be exponent function equal stimulus-response with curve sensory For or an than less an that greater many neurons, characterize functions with fractional exponents many Stimulus-response mechanoreceptors. in (exponent changes 1). linear detect curves which temperature, Thermoreceptors, of have stimulus-response for Nociceptors, the accelerating greater). painful stimulus-response may (i.e., detect is 1 which or positively have or these functions exponent curves stimuli, linear positively functions of pain urgency accelerating help as The increases. explain that nociceptors sensation the stimulus-response experienced the is

stimulus is which according that are receptors way to the intensity encoded of sensory Another activated. number is in one may only of primary similar strong or the activate neurons whereas may an receptors. afferent of class, stimulus a a perception few stimulus the threshold many appropriate type at A for same only recruit afferent neurons as sensory primary class affected more receive more this input sensory be of particular neurons discharge. receptors would that Central powerfully from Greater neurons perceived a in stimulus. activity be central as stronger sensory may

different intensities sets may also of sensory activate Stimuli different receptors. of of limit action a limit a rate range response to its firing The can of also potentials stimulus. neuron’s of different input with higher thresholds overcome intensities. can thresholds whereas others with this intensities, higher can low of input over Those with signal can thresholds signal However, problem: a mechanoreceptors low range extended over they Together range fine an resolution allow of intensities. higher intensities and that stimulus. change addition, also perceived of the still In nociceptors, the recruit quality will might

intervals interspike at to Stimulus can between by exactly intervals correspond intervals frequency the potentials encoded be corresponding action •Fig. whose (e.g., stimuli sometimes to and Displacement of Adapting Skin. Slowly of Rapidly Responses the 5.15 Mechanoreceptors toC arethedischargesofprimaryafferentfibersduringaramp-and-holdstimulusshowninD. A Theresponseofaslowlyadaptingreceptorthatsignalsthemagnitudeanddurationofdisplacement.B, A, Theresponseofadifferentrapidlyadaptingreceptorthatrespondstoacceleration.p,displacement;R,response;t,time. Theresponseofarapidlyadaptingreceptorwhoseoutputsignalsthevelocityofdisplacement.C,

to that vibration). a low-frequency of limits earlier. by firing the neurons limited mechanism discussed However, of rate as is this of strategies other be see ), frequencies higher 20,000 auditory needed. encoded humans When frequencies which detecting to are is the need Hz; system, to (e.g., up capable in of of neurons. across firing patterns spatiotemporal the candidate Other depend on codes populations

of of encoded duration and populations The sensory onset events are neurons. and by offset the different discharge throughout a prolonged in stimulus. the skin repetitive For a slowly receptors produce adapting example, spikes onset stimulus. of receptors same rapidly the However, the adapting (or at produce offset)

Fig. types of of shows deflection receptors skin, three the in depicted of to the bottom figure. graph which is the slow responses the of the 5.15 the at receptors with is features temporal functional that rates. be stimulus of signaled different a different implication by can adaptation The

1.

pores. ion-selective proteins channels that Ion are have integral membrane two conductance states: high channel (closed). has conductance typically and ion An (open) zero as close the to Different of act gates regions ion protein an channel. channel and open closed between open channel flips and the states. spontaneously The

2.

of difference. state transmembrane spends potential For the voltage-dependent open channel that fraction a the is function in the channel, of a the time

3.

delayed and opening of opening by closing the rapid K+ channels. the channels by subsequent and voltage generated action potential The and voltage-dependent inactivation Na+ voltage-dependent of is

4.

relative closure to Na+ refractory and absolute inactivation response and The repolarization. result in of of voltage channels K+ from periods delayed channels membrane the the action These refractory periods firing potentials. rate limit of

5.

potentials action and the of conducted currents. by length circuit cell local Subthreshold along signals a are Subthreshold decrease distance. signals are conducted and only with thus electrotonically,

6.

propagated as action it conducted; moves is the The potential axon. merely it rather is along than regenerated way, potential the it In shape retains and an along axon. same as action the size travels this

7.

axon. increased current axial A allows because flow velocity has of lowers axon large-diameter greater the farther and greater diameter resistance down propagation to axon amounts

8.

capacitance. axon and resistance Myelination because the a increases membrane dramatically myelin of membrane lowers conduction velocity nerve increases allows Myelination to action potential an

Fain GL. of Neurons. and Cellular Physiology Molecular 2nd ed. University 2014. Press; Harvard MA: Cambridge,

Channels Hille of Membranes. Ion B. Excitable 3rd ed. 2001. Sinauer Associates; Sunderland, MA:

AL, Hodgkin Huxley AF. current application and nerve. to A quantitative its and description conduction membrane excitation in of J Physiol. 1952;117:500-544.

of Conduction of Action CHAPTER next. one node 5 to very conducted and Generation from Ranvier Potentials the be rapidly This to to conduction potential conduction. action form makes of called node the from node in jump saltatory a appear

9.

energy. particular of A stimulus responds a receptor form preferentially to which that of domain receptive energy sensory affect part receptor. the field can Its in a is

10.

of potentials stimuli. sensory Receptor result transduction of the are reflect the and, if stimulus parameters potentials of of firing threshold, afferent potential they alter exceed the the patterns action neurons. specific These the

D, SM-S. Wu Johnston Neurophysiology. of Cellular Foundations Cambridge, MA: 1994. Press; MIT

Neher Sakmann B, Recording. E. Single-Channel 2nd ed. Springer; Philadelphia: 1995.

this able chapter questions: completion student Upon of should 1. following the answer to be the

the characteristics are electrical synapses? What of

2.

are elements the postsynaptic What synapse? the a specializations chemical presynaptic found and in of

3.

of entry sequence at action the of of to events arrival the the presynaptic connect terminal calcium? potential the What

4.

calcium presynaptic What neurotransmitter? the events to of connect at the entry terminal of of sequence release

5.

is this end potentials hypothesis? support the of What the miniature hypothesis plate transmission, presence does synaptic how quantal and of

6.

near mV? 0 a EPSP reversal Why is the typical of potential

7.

in probability? terms membrane EPSPs of underlying ionic and effect and IPSPs neuronal on conductances, distinguishes potential, firing What

8.

resting still an than How inhibit when neuron the more or is neuron’s potential? positive IPSP a does equal its reversal to potential

9.

synaptic mechanisms can the change are effects which time? What by over

10.

a the inhibitory excitatory criteria determining for substance are neurotransmitter, and neurotransmitters? are What and the what major a is

11.

the are of neurotransmitter classes What receptors? major

sensory are neurons electrical major the or which within system transferred muscle nervous by and cells (or ynaptic signals receptors). between the between cells process transmission is the synaptic at two occurs Within is of nervous an specialized between manner point-to-point transmission a that interaction in neurons usually junctions conceived called system, synapses. as synapses distinguished: main of Two are and electrical chemical. classes has as neurotransmitters of constitutes action and of expanded. of as of transmission mechanisms what has understanding However, conception definition increased, the their to be grown and has synaptic and refined list chemical had the form realize the that element that We occurs glia. of synapse process now synaptic neurons, involves no as neurons and and that important think transmission between an glia a signaling but only longer of released territory at Moreover, some is which widespread at it than the act synapse neurotransmitter just from in rather over a synapse cases, will a released. system Thus, communicate must classically either generalize one by defined definition in synaptic several the mechanisms of of the cells consider each transmission synaptic but which or transmission with as we other. nervous between then chapter nontraditional system. classic modifications first how in synaptic and communication nervous we cells some neurotransmitters discuss the in transmission conception chemical) they In and this introduce the the describe of have and forced of our of conception chemical (electrical

mammalian junctions, system adult nervous synapses, neurons in of Although the been (CNS) existence for little to be relatively thought has their functioning gap for of a CNS. were the between mammalian importance electrical the or central time, known long functions. synapses quite are common neuronal they it that has apparent and Only that may important recently become underlie these

allows low-resistance molecules small from to directly exchange between allows flow cell one the more generally, of a An synapse to pathway and, cells between another cells. effectively that current electrical is Electrical to from are animals the synapses CNS present of in invertebrates mammals. cells well as between present between neurons. glial as are They neurons olive, olfactory including cerebellum, coupling thalamus, brain hippocampus, bulb, has for most Electrical and cord, inferior spinal demonstrated striatum. retina, the neocortex, of regions, been

gap of the junction also an A electrical (see morphological synapse is ). correlate structures filled electron-dense (the in are 3 closely coupled junctions (Fig. ≈ become which space intercellular material These the plasma cells nm) membranes plaque-like the and to apposed of narrows with 6.1 ). junctions that proteins to the intramembrane arrays electron intercellular channels Freeze-fracture correspond of connecting form regular cells. display micrographs that gap the of particles ions not other but typical channel small permeable only thus molecules (1 it to diameter making nm), large The to also approximately is to in 1 kDa up size. 2

Fig. .28 µm • comprises two six structure. by the in narrowing Schematic Each connexon connexin turn of intercellularspaceto3.5nmatthejunction.Thegapjunctionhasmultiplechannels,witheachchannel subunits. formed view hemichannels. junction gap the 6.1 of showing junction A, connexon Gap B,Electronmicrographofpartofacomplexsynapticarrangementcalledaglomerulusthatisfoundin theinferioroliveandsomeotherCNSregions.Twodendriticspinesarecoupledbyagapjunction(small arrows).Anaxonterminalpackedwithsynapticvesiclesfillstheupperrightpartofthepanel.Large arrowheadspointtotheelectron-densematerialthatmarkstheactivezones.Blackdotsareimmunogold black labelingforGABA,thusidentifyingthisterminalasGABAergic.Redarrowheadspointtosynapticvesicles. (FromDeZeeuwCIetal.J Neurosci1996;16:3420.Copyright1996bytheSocietyforNeuroscience.)

Eachgapjunctionchannelisformedbytwohemichannels(calledconnexons),onecontributedbyeachcell.Eachconnexon,inturn,isahexamerofconnexinproteinsubunits,whichareencodedforbyagenefamilyofatleast21differentmembersinmammals.(Asecondfamilyofproteinsthatformgapjunctions,thepannexins,hasalsobeenidentified. )Gapjunctionsformedbydifferentconnexinshavedistinctbiophysicalproperties(gatingandconductance)andcellulardistributions.Althoughatleast10connexintypesareexpressedintheCNS,connexin36(connexinsarenamedaccordingtotheirmolecularweight;thus,thenumberreferstotheapproximatemolecularweightoftheconnexininkilodaltons)isthemajorneuronalconnexinintheadultCNS.OtherconnexintypesfoundintheCNSformgapjunctionsbetweenglialcellsorareprimarilyexpressedtransientlyduringdevelopment.

generated gap junction to cell other can cell). the either current synapses fast Electrical (essentially and influence the bidirectional (i.e., synaptic delay) in are no flow across low-pass they act In addition as filters. transmitted as potentials. is, than That readily events much are slow more signals such action are electrical fast appears important junctions to be network One synchronization for of role neuronal gap activity. inferior olive. uncorrelated synchronized becomes example, into gap For of junctions is when of the injected normally pharmacological inferior the blockers are but olivary activity neurons may It appears gap that highly the of also specific. patterns coupling electrical be junctions by to of same For type. exclusively interneurons neocortical couple the almost interneurons example, interneurons across may electrically gap pattern coexist the that coupled independent, of multiple, junction–coupling This specific suggests networks neocortex.

electrical simple they comparison Finally, may synapses, fairly although dynamic are regarded as synapses static be relatively entities. in actually to generally and chemical and of For intracellular pH, including properties factors, be synapses example, electrical modulated several can [Ca++]. voltage, the by by and junction, (the Moreover, a gap G protein–coupled connexins that to see form subunits protein are subject they receptors, regulation

Cellular The sites for At phosphorylation. contain ) causing between can by ones. of cells the change conductance, or of coupling existing removal changes gap single-channel junctions, factors in formation new These

and the a Chemical Loewi. experiment synaptic Otto nerve demonstrated between vagus simple heart transmission by first was the by of rate the the collected. down was while solution perfusing nerve a frog slow was the vagus heart stimulated The heart to second into the had was the to vagal slowed, chemical to that used a caused solution. then This demonstrating stimulation solution also beating released be nerve a then heart, perfuse whose other was central we neuromuscular be know systems. acetylcholine, at which found The responsible also nervous peripheral is to in and a neurotransmitter chemical the now at synapses the and junction

situation there synapses, is the at no the cytoplasm synapses direct cells. between at chemical of the electrical Unlike communication two a as the cells the occurs and 20 some membranes Instead via synaptic intermediaries chemical known interaction of cleft separated by between neurotransmitters. are nm, cell refer synapses diagramed Chemical that generally can the and postsynaptic are thus in presynaptic are one and elements unidirectional, to

Fig. 6.2.

exact they vary element and whose presynaptic shape portion the is with with terminal and contain. packed small The vesicles axon the is of size an often neurotransmitter zones, that the known material postsynaptic release corresponds transmitter the has the apposed addition, electron-dense membrane of in (see proteins presynaptic active regions, involved In element to as to

Fig. 6.1B). endoplasmic terminal. and are in the mitochondria reticulum presynaptic rough Moreover, found typically neurotransmitter. case is membrane electron-dense corresponds The which material, this receptors the for the by also characterized to postsynaptic in

neurons. occur synapses Chemical between parts of different cell onto by dendrites been such synapses be Traditionally, on will has second the axosomatic our soma (axodendritic or a description synapses. primarily of focus formed axon based an and or synapses), placed on types and are as synapses, dendrite), to dendrodendritic to (axon additional soma). to there such (dendrite axon), dendrosomatic chemical (dendrite axoaxonic of However, many in with complex synapse and a element; is yet arrangements as synapses, an cells synapses, are which the Furthermore, each chemical of form influences such that efficacy synapse both release in terminal the to and serial onto other. with synaptic both axoaxonic electrical in synapses, axon terminal’s synapses mixed possible, and the transmitter third cells influence can other; which made reciprocal which

Fig. among a shows that glomerulus elements. called and electrical arrangement chemical a synapses complex synaptic participating involves both the 6.1B

neurons neurons motor innervate a giant squid the used potential of comes Much frog muscle the synapse conductances we motor synapse the two action neuromuscular a that the a neuron [see the what fiber) second-order know classic from junction onto axons neuron chemical of (the were to underlying i.e., ]). and muscle synapses onto whose preparations, third-order squid’s about of mantle; the from (the study synapse characterize from the the well, the CNS the within at using mostly what with synapses called least mammalian The to regard these apply transmission at are to as neurotransmitters synapses (see principles governing the synapses “classic” mitters). section discussion also following be two from these out. based will pointed differences preparations; be much results CNS in some synapses Thus, on will however, of the

cell space protein–complex cells. G extrasynaptic Citrulline and receptors in Gaseous Mitochondria and NO 3 Gaseous transmitters transmitters Arginine into diffuse of Peptides and bind to out extracellular other of directly origin diffuse synthase synaptic across origin + from (inactive) coupled of 1 G can •Fig. concentrates neurotransmitters They Other cleft 2 Reuptake small-molecule Large cell vesicles neurotransmittersSmall-molecule receptors enzymes Presynaptic G cells Neuropeptides in and protein– receptors bind by Vesicle distant to coupled Nitrogen and diffuse Ionotropic Postsynaptic act of into of vesicles O2 release CoA point receptors electron-dense terminal protein– NO postsynaptic synaptic cell AChAcetyl Acetyl cholinesterase channels Small-molecule neurotransmitter Activates or oxide NO Ca++ transporter variety inside neurotransmitters transporter Choline Schematicofachemicalsynapticterminalreleasingallthreemainclassesofneurotransmitter.Foreach,themechanismsofrelease,sitesofaction,andmechanismsforterminationofactivityareshown.Realsynapsesreleasetransmitterfromoneormoreclasses. 6.2

at a may follows. transmission synapse summarized Synaptic be chemical as initiated the transmission arrival the potential of presynaptic terminal. Synaptic is action at by which to open. channels The the causes depolarizes action Ca++ potential terminal, vesicles terminal triggers membrane. containing fusion with the subsequent rise neurotransmitter [Ca++] The within in plasma the of the specific on binds cleft, is it, into expelled postsynaptic the the across diffuses membrane. synaptic The to transmitter and then receptors ion the postsynaptic alter changes the receptors of closing) in often, postsynaptic resistance membrane the that which transmitter (or the opening the less in in causes Binding channels then of membrane, excitability to the results of the cell. turn of in potential and The postsynaptic and cell IPSPs) are excitatory ( and termed potential postsynaptic in membrane potentials the changes of inhibitory (EPSPs

Fig. whether cell’s respectively, its action defined probability 6.3 they increase potentials. depending the ), which excitability, decrease, can of as be firing on or (milliseconds) the for clear mechanisms The the transmitter rapidly acts reuptake because synaptic cleft. transmitter from and degradation a only very short time

amplify The this specific summary. of sections succeeding will points and that required and gaseous oxide) aspects such point metabotropic discovery of this this the receptors neuropeptides modifications several basic as conception. neurotransmitters of worth the nitric some (e.g., of types mentioning of nonclassic at neurotransmitters of have is However, it an initiates not channel integral is ion ion G ionotropic an of protein cascades messenger receptor contain affect as (Whereas an that can a the does receptor channels.) contains ultimately itself, coupled instead that part second ion to channel usually metabotropic but a in the Some peptide listed classic differences of are and between transmitters

. 6.1 Table peptide the covered provided receptors the More properties chapter, of section. are on transmitters gaseous in in the details parts this Receptors relevant and of are section and metabotropic the of

Is Entry Transmitter for the Signal Calcium Release

causes to channels the of potential terminal and into release Ca++ action the voltage-gated makes Ca++ possible by presynaptic open, flow to it trigger for Depolarization which membrane the transmitter. the of there if only do to a gradient terminal the electrochemical enter is Ca++ However, favorable will so. of gradients the Recall flow voltage channels. the ion open through the concentration and is direction of it determines that combination that Extracellular the is potential positive, which peak charge. high entry of membrane the into [Ca++], of the of [Ca++] during relative intracellular however, because the terminal; potential, positive gradient is the to opposes entry the action its Ca++ voltage favors and membrane permeable small. although at overall action terminal the relatively the little force potential, highly enters of the the peak is Thus, is to , because driving Ca++ the Ca++ can potential one the using experimentally make potential In equilibrium membrane positive to by Ca++ fact, Nernst . equal voltage the and for clamp, a will is despite no open, the Ca++ as enter response being no terminal postsynaptic result no a this transmitter done, If Ca++ released and observed. channels is and is suppression the is This known voltage potential. as clamp), made negative rushes Ca++ instantaneously Ca++ remains action transmitter the voltage the potential in membrane it because permeability in potential the into potential), takes channels to thereby (which postsynaptic repolarization) high by close large driving of or the end membrane and on If adjusting to the the high a arises the ( is several the release response response new as to the (because force resulting terminal result a again milliseconds (which rapidly membrane either of of and of Ca++

Fig. 6.4 •Fig. 6.3 IPSPsandEPSPsrecordedwithamicroelectrodeinacatspinalmotorneuroninresponsetostimulationofappropriateperipheralafferentfibers.Fortytracesaresuperimposed.NotethattheseIPSPsarehyperpolarizing,butinsomecasesIPSPscanbedepolarizing—seetextforanexplanation. 1959;145:529.) (RedrawnfromCurtisDR,EcclesJC.J Physiol

Transmitter the Release Vesicles and Nature Synaptic Quantal of

to is it questions are and released stored is fundamental How neurotransmitter how transmission. synaptic observations. Answering began with these two questions shaped electron by organelles was synaptic terminals The known vesicles of the first discovery irregularly or round as small microscopy in presynaptic (see

Figs. 6.2 ). 6.1B postsynaptic second neuromuscular at from the recordings junction. came responses The of observation a in potential equivalent plate postsynaptic motor Normally is an (EPP), in neuron. depolarization in causes to end the which an a neuron potential large action an a muscle, EPSP termed presynaptic transmitter Ca++ proportional of is is extracellular current (because reduced, reduced release and amplitude leading smaller [Ca++], a to under EPP the the However, [Ca++]). intracellular [Ca++], is in conditions low to rise EPP condition, among fluctuate the this is seen ( In discrete to values

Fig. ). 6.5 (mEPPs), miniature of observable. the small membrane, spontaneous Moreover, plate are potentials depolarizations end postsynaptic termed to low proposed shown of corresponded was and integral amplitude; mV) the mEPP other of the mEPP of [Ca++], multiples amplitudes The corresponds evoked EPP thus, the EPPs it (≤1 the be that were each under to mEPP of amplitude that smallest

SynthesizedandpackagedinthenerveterminalSynthesizedandpackagedinthecellbody;transportedtothenerveterminalbyfastaxonaltransportSynthesizedinactiveformActivepeptideformedwhenitiscleavedfromamuchlargerpolypeptidethatcontainsseveralneuropeptidesUsuallypresentinsmallclearvesiclesUsuallypresentinlargeelectron-densevesiclesReleasedintoasynapticcleftMaybereleasedsomedistancefromthepostsynapticcellTheremaybenowell-definedsynapticstructureActionofmanyterminatedbecauseofuptakebypresynapticActionterminatedbyproteolysisorbythepeptidediffusingawayterminalsviaNa+-poweredactivetransportTypically,actionhasshortlatencyandshortduration(msec)Actionmayhavelonglatencyandmaypersistformanyseconds •Fig. 6.4 PresynapticCa++ Schematicofasquidgiantsynapsepreparation.Electrodes1and2areusedtovoltage-clampthepresynapticterminalandrecorditsvoltageandcurrent. currentanditsrelationshiptothepostsynapticresponse.A, (NotethattetrodotoxinandtetraethylammoniumwerepresenttoblockNa+ andK+ conductance. conductancetoisolatetheCa++ )Electrode3recordsthemembranepotentialofthepostsynapticaxon.Thepresynapticterminalwasvoltage-clampedtoincreasinglymoredepolarizedlevels(blue traces). currentduringthestep,butalargetailcurrentandoffresponseareobserved. increasesboththeonandtheoffcomponentsoftheCa++ ThevoltagestepistotheNernstpotentialforCa++ ,sothereisnoCa++ Withasmalldepolarization(B), asmallCa++ currentstartsshortlyafterthevoltagestep,continuestogrowforthedurationofthestep(oncurrent),andthendecaysexponentiallyafteritstermination(offortailcurrent).Alargervoltagestep(C) current,andnowdistinctonandoffresponsesareobservedinthepostsynapticresponse.D, 1981;33:323.) J (BasedondataofLlinasRetal.Biophys release EPPs of simultaneous transmitter vesicle to vesicles. the transmitter and a many release that represented the from from single of combined

that implies of vesicles molecules many linking caused action of of This neurotransmitter mEPPs and each receptors. is to the by binding mEPP postsynaptic be than solutions postsynaptic to was by in and because alternative in muscle. a could single that responses to single the a part be by mEPPs transmitter dilute mEPP of applying binding rejected, caused opening acetylcholine directly generated amplitude experimentally The could receptor smaller each molecule molecules, neurotransmitter calculated to single be caused were approximately within of action contained mEPPs In 10,000 molecules the estimates fact, corresponds number a the by of vesicle. to well of which

have confirmed of additional the studies neurotransmitter hypothesis Many vesicle release. shown of microscopic been potentials and and membrane that concentrated in the fusion neurotransmitter example, the biochemical their vesicles, techniques. cytoplasm electron action to For depletion in plasma studies have shown have after terminal with vesicles is

•Fig. 47 1 msec msec A mV mV 20 3.6 B EPPsevokedbynervestimulationunderlow-[Ca++]conditions,whichreducetheprobabilityoftransmitterrelease.Thesmall-amplitudeEPPsevokedundertheseconditionsvaryinamplitudeinastep-likemanner,wherethesizeofthestepisequaltothesmallestEPP,whichinturnequalsthesizeofthemEPPs.(Notethatintheseconditionsthestimulusoftenfailstoevokeanyresponse,asindicatedbyaflatresponse. A, 6.5 SpontaneousmEPPsrecordedataneuromuscularjunctioninafiberoffrogextensordigitorumlongus.B, 1952;117:109.) 1950;166:597;B, datafromFattP,KatzB.J )(A, Physiol DatafromFattP,KatzB.Nature

membrane contain neurotransmitters sites active vesicles at that zones. small nonpeptide with called fuse only the can presynaptic The specific with undergo then To a active at active zone, at and priming become fuse the the process. to dock small an first must competent vesicle membrane presynaptic zone a to synaptic in the release increase transmitter Once primed can and the vesicle an cytoplasmic its response into fuse [Ca++]. in local cleft of proteins On may play docking, roles priming, 25 order the and fusion. in plasma are proteins or membrane. the of presynaptic associated whereas are Some proteins with others cytosolic, the these vesicle membrane these increased incompletely functions release recent of has dramatically are details in understood; molecular years. of most proteins The of however, the of transmitter knowledge

plasma (soluble maleimide-sensitive with exocytotic proteins: in membrane presynaptic v-SNARES receptor) As SM factor other the involves (target) attachment N-ethyl in t-SNARES protein and (sec1/Munc18-like) release the and vesicle membrane. neurotransmitter processes, SNARE (a bring and membrane membrane Zipper-like are the SM the and assistance of the close syntaxin with vesicle plasma together before (both fusion. SNAP-25 v-SNARE) synaptobrevin proteins interactions and t-SNARES) presynaptic between demonstrating proteins process. role which transmission, critical targets disrupt The toxins, SNARE are various in synaptic this botulinum their thus for actual so be not event. do fusion another triggers sensor Nevertheless, the the that protein they Ca++ , must bind Ca++ that the synaptotagmin certainly indicates cytoplasmic domains more Ca++ second protein and, a Evidence binding even is site. two its of Ca++ almost contains that specifically, the sensor the vesicular Interestingly, brain sensor differ synaptotagmins as their Ca++ for member acts family the fusion. synaptotagmin as regions to in which kinetics, vary and the expression neurons a and region. needs genes of specific be vesicle synaptotagmin kinetics the each synaptic to in adapt functional differential release of tailor characteristics mechanism of to the CNS of transmission may Thus, thereby

vesicles. the the sites adjacent membrane channels zone active are located in at to docked Calcium high is created a zone. area open, microdomain [Ca++], small a of When they the at active local a lasts (which docked high a for and of than allows millisecond), allowing the concentration This to synaptotagmin, fusion neurotransmitter. release Ca++ its binding of rapid of the triggering vesicle less of each extremely synapse the Despite a to vesicular apparatuses release of involved, at rapid proximity the because multiple of the molecular process the other. close involved is steps msec. 0.2 vesicle Indeed, to about influx time Ca++ fusion is the from

“Docked” Coated-vesicle and Fusion collapse Competence (?) pool retrieval maturation “Recycling” “Primed” pool “Reserve” (2') (3') ? (2) ? “Cocked” (5) (?) (1) (3) (4) Fire! Armed ? ? Run! (RRP) Kiss... pool releasable” “Readily machine Kiss-and-run fusion fusion Phosphorylations, assembly Ca++ ? ? ? •Fig. Ca++ Vesiclerecyclingpathways.Synapticvesicleshavebeenthoughttofusewiththemembranewhileemptyingtheircontentsandthenberecycledbyformingclathrin-coatedpitsthatareendocytosedtoformcoatedvesicles(1→ 2→ 1). 3→ 3′→ 4→ 5→ 6.6 [2or2′]→ 1).Analternativepathwaythatmayallowmorerapidrecyclingofvesicleshasbeenproposed.Thispathway,called“kissandrun,”involvesonlytransientfusionofthevesicletothepresynapticmembranetoformaporethroughwhichthevesiclecontentsmaybeemptied,followedbydetachmentofthevesiclefromthemembrane(1→ Biol 2001;11:324.) Cell (RedrawnfromValtortaF,MeldolesiJ,FesceR.Trends

membrane with into cleft. to fuse synaptic their During contents the transmission, plasma must release the vesicles synaptic hard a membrane). terminal be with would However, of and the population, protein just content synaptic discussed, surface to also likewise distinct from process; functionality not would the be (because, as grow of otherwise, change that it of membrane’s each would and its vesicle there must but presynaptic the sustain reverse molecular membrane vesicle only bout the content transmission, the area is

to neurotransmitter two are be after mechanisms release which distinct vesicles their content retrieved There appear of (Fig. by ). 6.6 most commonly types. in cell pathway endocytotic found mechanism the is One off are formed in coated the pinch which terminal. presynaptic within membrane, of cytoplasm vesicles to pits then Coated plasma the the form vesicles neurotransmitter) the become These with release. to once undergo further then ready (i.e., their transformations be proteins and acquire synaptic for again correct complement refilled coat membrane lose and of vesicles

obtained (see for recycling second, rapid been a more Evidence mechanism has

Fig. ). 6.6 pore is the It with the formation involves this and there a transient case, membrane. been which the fusion the leads into the fusion the vesicle transmitter through and expelled, to In is vesicle to of the synaptic called the run.” of of membrane no but collapse synaptic “kiss vesicle membrane of has wholesale detaches Instead, the the itself. membrane duration is brief, from the and fusion plasma after of very reseals vesicle the which membrane vesicle Thus, the retains molecular its identity. the making again. ready vesicle then replenished, for Its use thereby simply be contents can

these The is of still debated. mechanisms relative two being importance tend at hundred time CNS neuromuscular of in at of be the rapid during hertz, avoid synaptic transmission a of consequent failure junction, contain activity Hz). vesicle of the ≈ neuron the types the the the comparison which in of and and 1000 may to firing can show periods synapses, few of can vesicles fire of high relatively few kiss-and-run help rates neurons to depletion rates However, course several central problem and small (many mechanism

cleft and vesicle (a the very on are Following the across receptors fusion rapid membrane. released diffuse process) postsynaptic to and the synaptic molecules neurotransmitter bind the binding often ion opening leads This the to channels. less of (or closing) These are closing opening channels termed of binding because the neurotransmitter. ligand-gated and primarily by their are controlled the contrasted of mechanism potential, action the underlying membrane be whose can This by closing channels with are voltage-gated that the potential. determined opening and are most (N-methyl-Daspartate) and NMDA gated. channels, both are the channel, voltage that some notably ligand there However,

is to ion what is when what noting of in refers happens part It binds neurotransmitter that to follows the receptor also which in channel section the itself. worth this receptors here to and synaptic receptors transmission. referred receptors as are These now called ionotropic “fast” is underlie what ion biochemical (see transmission, to receptors, not metabotropic “slow” for molecule, Receptors also mediated that the postsynaptic potentials same is binding of cascades and of details). section neurotransmitter slow and There which the part to in initiates receptor the with receptor synaptic the by onsets what are lead are called channel the apply time of to the many of same potential. both types principles postsynaptic courses, Despite differing basic

EPSPs. the increase IPSPs these binding membrane as changes of stated the As of potentials. to the EPSPs neurotransmitter inhibit and firing postsynaptic cell, referred they are neuron and potential the earlier, when when the action generally excitability neuron changes from the they of and are IPSPs always EPSPs depolarizing are potentials, usually hyperpolarizing.

for the current a channel ion(s). through the driving flow is the is it permeant direction ligand-gated electrochemical determined force of by open, Once of similar with cations of the are out relatively and that most large channels ease. therefore underlie allow EPSPs passage It turns pores that most the acetylcholinegated is that opened at consider the channel neuromuscular As an junction. example, cations are of = present Na+ + approximately is IK). INa the net and (Inet currents major K+ therefore, and Na+ the intracellularly); the the (Na+ the through K+ K+ extracellularly and channel current sum two dependent that the is ion. of current factors: the driving channel conductance a on ion channel particular the the Recall to and ion from a force the the through on This by equation the relationship is expressed

where and x, gx the the potential, conductance 6.1 membrane Equation to channel Vm ion Ex potential is of the for Nernst the is x. is ion equilibrium determinant so forces Na+ gx for case relative In of Ex). and similar is current , the this is K+ main driving − the net (Vm the −90 mV), the is Nernst resting its close a mV), K+ Nernst potential to cell because cell the at enter (about is Vm strong K+ the this to Na+ membrane for potential leave +55 for is there mV). from Na+ ENa) force (about small (typically the a whereas potential force is − to (Vm potential driving only because driving is −70 If there far around in Thus, at a current, to Na+ current open small resting which membrane. large and a through outward is depolarize a net channel, its resulting thereby current the channels acetylcholine will inward potential, when acts inward if the the membrane flow K+ acetylcholine-gated

The current inward current that postsynaptic opening channels such from results excitatory is net called (EPSC). the

Fig. the for contrasts and the of resulting EPSP synaptic 6.7A transmission. course EPSC fast the time to is the open. corresponds channels msec are (≈1 much actually shorter the duration) time EPSC The in and 2 to neurons. to taken by while a in or glia remains The for synaptic being only up of is due EPSC fact the the short short degraded the released before cleft either the that neurotransmitter either enzymatically duration or the rapidly, in postsynaptic concentration once the place unbinding of to the as take Binding so a its receptor close terminate its and and receptor EPSC. rapidly channels neurotransmitter cleft, well falls to EPSC followed by how the Note is which of the the of the corresponds tail. a end EPSP, long peak the (i.e., cell of of EPSP duration the and decay rate properties of properties) amplitude reflect the membrane passive (see the tail RC ). the The its in synaptic of the and the deactivation transmission, processes properties. In more membrane than reflects slow activation the duration biochemical of the EPSP because of summate. overlap EPSPs thereby EPSPs The fast to allows to functionally potentials) EPSCs even action and is (relative duration important it long and (see the next is central integrative Such the properties of summation section, neurons to

if depolarization depolarizes EPSP and an an action potential threshold, membrane, this generated. Normally reaches is the the experimentally the an current the potential is membrane intracellular through what electrode. the and depolarized injecting consider postsynaptic However, cell are if of blocked by channels underlying happens action now decreased force membrane for K+ driving increased. positive, that the more potential and Na+ Because is for is the the changes because (the in the this channel If EPSC) through receptor is smaller of the relative synapse activated point, at force. current will the driving net be will channel net EPSP. and no the K+ through which no and is depolarized at potential if current there currents enough, a and thus Na+ be equal and the are This implies is membrane the that there opposite, point (i.e., will negative). will receptor the a is the membrane hyperpolarize the there and EPSP channels beyond outward depolarized point, this current be If the is membrane net through is EPSP is EPSC) (or there which reversal potential. as the no at known Thus, potential the (see synapses, usually mV on synapse around the (±10 mV), For reversal the potential 0 is excitatory depending

Fig. 6.7B–C

of that only It currents reversal is a that selective key a the is except nature open not a at criterion they reverse, potential as voltage-gated synaptic is are do potential potential). because the opposed for for to through of (and the demonstrating if which ion noting then Nernst channel the worth voltage-gated response channels at chemical-gated the will current because voltage-gated potential, be they no flow closed. a certain membrane beyond channels through Consequently, will thus have opened membrane them, reversal net the through current can ligand-gated one can potential In except flow always a channels potential. any and contrast, at voltage, at be specific

by EPSP 5 Action triggered potentials mV 0.1 msec/div ˜V •Fig. TodeterminetheEPSPreversalpotential,theinitialmembranepotentialisplottedagainstthesizeoftheEPSP(ΔV).ThisEPSPreversedat−7mV. IntracellularlyrecordedEPSPsatdifferentlevelsofdepolarization.EPSPswereevokedinmotorneuronsbystimulationofIaafferents.Thenumbertotheleftofeachtraceindicatesthemembranepotentialinducedbyinjectionofcurrentthroughtheelectrode.Atinitialmembranepotentialsof−42and−60mV,theEPSPtriggeredanactionpotential.Atmoredepolarizedlevels,Na+ TimecourseofafastEPSPcomparedwiththatoftheunderlyingEPSC.Inmanycases,suchasthisone,theEPSCismuchshorterthantheEPSP;however,sometimestheEPSCcanhaveafairlyextensivetail.B, channelsareinactivated,sonospikeoccurs.C, 6.7 PropertiesofEPSPs.A, datafromCoombsJSetal.J Physiol 1959;145:529;B, DatafromCurtisDR,EcclesJC.J 1955;130:374.) Physiol (A,

IPSPs. action by would triggered it definition the Like postsynaptic spiking and cell to the on binding an increase receptors IPSPs are neurotransmitter potential of ability (otherwise an EPSPs, the be prob-of the by EPSP). counterintuitive that as of result It be opening involve may increase still membrane that typically but the channels. a considered membrane inhibitory, depolarizes can in if an membrane the and seem something of permeability ligand-gated K+ . channels indeed spiking, single They then or are is decreases a species, ionic probability differ that in it the IPSP Cl− of permeable to only it either potential Integration to Nernst IPSPs have Synaptic the inhibitory will in reversal equal is Thus, (a further a the explanation given potential section). underlying the ion of current. the carrying the be a outward hyperpolarizing that potential, is of is hyperpolarizing, membrane through either depolarto ions in Typically always resting izing Nernst always for sum, IPSPs the current or IPSP. an relative an can are IPSP potential so somewhat depolarizing, there results channels resting potential, them In from starting open, the EPSPs potential and is flow negative when these membrane key (see the of distinction the between inhibitory hyperpolarization Thus,

Fig. 6.3 ). they how IPSPs excitatory (and is and EPSPs) synapses and

K+) affect or the for inhibitory whereas Nernst of cell in Cl− an may of synapse equals the produce activation no probability, potential brane the cells, or the change firing probability. However, increase (if in the decrease IPSPs probability potential potential potential: an the some action mem-EPSPs small actually may a in depolarization. result Safety Nevertheless, factor. cell. cases, potential and in vary for PSP of these strength in in the thus the the generated cells reversal the in both postsynaptic between size Synapses IPSP the level for determine the past strength, and threshold synapse. synaptic between size the Many cells, factors regard of the vesicle and of for still eliciting with two activity and synaptic history, is probability to fusion its contacts number negative the including strength EPSP ratio as the (the an what to the may the For reach threshold needed of be quantified of amplitude its is amplitude the action by factor to synapses, synapse to potential). known safety excitatory trigger multiple low potential it factors of neuron. and trigger active the Most action an to (<1), safety postsynaptic synapses EPSPs summed takes in synapses the have thus summation which integration, up This in next taken is process the the of section. at is core synaptic safety is exist, the however, junction high one (>1) neuromuscular prominent factors with and Synapses example. at action is an equivalent in triggers of generated potential plate motor end junction, a fiber. When in (EPP; neuromuscular of a neuron an the the release neurotransmitter the muscle EPSP potential neuron) thus under normal is sarcolemma potential circumstances depolarizes well so threshold of action and a the spike, that triggers to The cell. always leading the above it contraction large muscle EPP the sense contract has contacted because made system neuron the a muscle. nervous is muscle and that cell safety neuron, decision firing, to junction is basically the motor single only neuromuscular each makes A the factor motor for by that high if sometimes EPPs of safety In such trigger to thus and are the syndrome, and such certain fall that Lambert-Eaton the fail diseases potentials the weakness. as gravis leading the reduced fibers, 1, EPPs below junction, can factor action to the in neuromuscular muscle myasthenia

effect a its particular of The on overall location. synapse is dependent are a the the first because understand spike. threshold generated action To it initiation that of recall lowest for has initial cell concept this at must fully, we Na+ of the density voltage-gated of therefore typically segment and highest the channels potentials the synaptic of is at for spike. initial point, summed critical this amplitudes segment, is the that the to potentials Thus, the decision it will dendrites) the initial soma onto the segment initial synapses generated depolarization proximal the or a at result EPSPs larger distal by (i.e., synapses in than ( close EPSPs generated segment will synapses to by on dendrites

Fig.

in versus 2 1). potential axon single action 6.8A length from membrane same the and of generated at ). constant locally the EPSC is because at than so resulting the initial if from at one, a EPSP a smaller two generation thereby more distal cell synapse, the (see the synapse the distal will initial the arrive of current This synaptic even segment discussion synapses synapse local initial of more leaky currents are the generate in in is the by proximal of the less size, segment in location important spatial an the dendritic synapse’s determinant the is Thus, its efficacy. of tree generated the to even synapses, to positions in (i.e., EPSPs mentioned, favorable close themselves as •Fig. those by CNS by are However, initial reach segment), too most already small Spatialsummation.Responsesevokedbysynapsesthatareelectricallydistantfromeachother(1and3).D, Temporalsummation.EPSPsinresponsetotwospikesinthesameaxonoccurringinrapidsuccession(axon2).C, Sublinearsummationoftwosynapseslocatedneareachotherbecauseofshunting(2and4). 6.8 SynapticintegrationofEPSPsrecordedattheaxonhillockadjacenttotheinitialsegment.A, ComparisonofEPSPsevokedbyproximalversusdistalsynapses(2versus1).B,

in as in threshold spiking illustrated the postsynaptic cell, the

Fig. where action in both a (proximal) 2 an EPSPs either that small 1 6.8A , produce spike. potential are or to axon (distal) too trigger required from a trigger the reach Thus, synapses multiple EPSPs and to summed are generally threshold spike.

of for is multiple requirement order a The the what to EPSPs EPSPs trigger important. long relatively summate in so spike duration to makes Temporal refers a their less duration latency that can to the summation fact by sum. than are EPSPs that separated in This illustrated is

Fig.

10 rates action less apart times overlap fire well can same over synapse be than at in will Hz); , (axons 6.8B the succession in where rapid this msec activated and is multiple potentials successive situation, therefore 100 and EPSPs sum. higher amplitude peak. Note the of second the

summation can potentials refers synapses fact synaptic that different generated the interact. to by Spatial example, For in

Fig. an separated 6.8 , 1 potential but action at each suppose widely axon times. and 3 fire depolarizes the Each threshold cell (see too small to EPSP that reach produces is but an

Fig. , 6.8C EPSP1, EPSP3). short of within each axons shown can their a other, fire additive, both if in time as be effect enough Instead,

Fig. (EPSP 6.8C 1+3). then the may EPSP cell. The and reach of amplitude spiking combined to threshold lead of and If by 1 axons would have the then pure spatial generated summation. an were we EPSPs simultaneous, example 3 times both thus spatial present. summation two we the example were slightly of In shown, EPSPs and separated, however, temporal the the have fact underlying EPSCs) EPSPs with have that potentials facilitates of time compared the action both or types (when long a synaptic integration. course The

EPSPs action the two was the 3. summation approximately EPSP combined of individual in foregoing and axons evoked potentials In the example, the linear by 1 two are the apart. far case when is synapses This synapses two 4 as close the such are (see and 2 for If together, axons

Fig. less because ), as a what is becomes of summation shunting the linear effect. than 6.8D known when 2 leaky. is which synapse means that channels in it opened That the membrane, cell active, is more are is, more segment. membrane, will synapse Therefore, down current will the EPSC initial be the of when dendrite the its left active, through and is lost dendritic be travel less also to 4 to (shunted) segment it causes smaller result 4 than synapse would at have that the initial generated The in EPSP is a isolation. than the still larger or by alone. 2 an is EPSP combined EPSP caused 4 either Nevertheless, synapse

do fit IPSPs into synaptic Where integration? In them negative many cases EPSPs. one as of can think the Thus, and from to to bring potential make together IPSPs add it negative therefore the more to EPSPs potential and help threshold. up threshold, subtract from spiking membrane beyond membrane whereas further the cell to the whether reaches to sum the the IPSPS a determine EPSPs ongoing and whether up In adds threshold. deciding subtracts spike, varies efficacy with of EPSP, its the with location. an As an IPSP

described In just subtracting membrane addition the algebraically for earlier IPSPs was to EPSPs. shunting an exert action inhibitory mechanism, via potential, as from the size channels thereby resistance) more lower make EPSPs, IPSP (i.e., is, the open, they That of its thus them reduce the less and making effective. membrane the are while leaky of that not do change potential—or mechanism depolarize This it—can those still shunting the IPSPs decrease membrane cell. excitability the slightly how even explains that the its membrane An that each to as view to potential. to synapse device alternative look is this bring potential way at to effect the own equilibrium tries a the below harder is this Because potential the the action to IPSPs of IPSPs, it make in cell case for potential spike. threshold

the presented membrane (i.e., each acts the and postsynaptic is synaptic been potentials resistors cell passive with under has assumption capacitors though as parallel of that it interaction simply it Thus the in far were other). and most, alter somas clear and is EPSPs (i.e., not of However, amplify the gated dendrites and contain if active it neurons can channels) all, that elements that IPSPs. or dendritic EPSP a a channels propagated potentials. if activates larger-than-expected that Ca++ dendritically-located Na+ even distal or For action amplitude voltage-gated have its generate EPSP can the effect example, boost the is K+ dendrites Ca++-activated some that channels in of Another present are example neurons. inexcitable of hyperpolarizations Ca++ voltage-gated channels opened cell make dendritic activated cause through hundreds can and tens milliseconds. are synaptic effectively by that of either These Ca++ influx channels via for channels EPSPs the or to by the long-lasting channels some example, that As underlie there a Ca++ Ca++ are low-threshold spike. a final allow These that normally open membrane and a results large IPSP. them from hyperpolarization de-inactivate are (and resting to inactive the of after at termination a produce them potentials, can the but IPSP channels spike) In the actually “inhibition” cell’s this case increases excitability. process. nonlinear highly a integration is complex, In synaptic sum, principles described the Nevertheless, its core. just at remain basic

Modulation Activity Synaptic of

described in represents synaptic the postsynaptic Integration as aspect neuron, input a of by transmission. of previous section, of the nature synaptic dynamic one their or A that activity. synapses a individual second strength use vary function of the of aspect is as can state synapse’s history. current is, a functional its That to extent, reflects, some

postsynaptic response of will a synapse the in state. cell a is postsynaptic similar (i.e., be that potential) cell in assuming time, the produces each a typically the roughly same postsynaptic Activation a the response changes patterns of activation in result Certain to the in synaptic however, of subsequent synapse. activation, may either or synapse’s short and or (milliseconds) be the long suppression of durations for days) may changes a remain to (minutes strength. use-related potentiation Such learning probably These changes as underlie and cognitive such abilities memory. of are by which in synapse’s Thus, the changes a synaptic activity feature in results transmission. a processes efficacy critical

rapid than by that it a (Fig. axon often potential second postsynaptic the one succession, are the is the is amplitude When found the twice presynaptic larger first stimulated in in evoked stimulus evoked by ). 6.9 increase This

12.5/sec Posttetanic stimulation 8 after C sec sec 25/sec 1 tetanic Facilitation stimulation Time B Facilitation 5/sec tetanic A 10 sec 27 14 10/sec 4 sec msec 1/sec •Fig. potentiation 31.2/sec msec 3 mV A, .C, Posttetanicpotentiationatafrogneuromuscularjunction.ThetoptwotracesindicatecontrolEPPsinresponsetosingleactionpotentialsinthemotoraxon.SubsequenttracesindicateEPPsinresponsetosingleactionpotentialsaftertetanicstimulation(50impulses/secfor20seconds)ofthemotorneuron.Thetimeintervalbetweentheendoftetanicstimulationandthesingleactionpotentialisshownoneachtrace.Themusclewastreatedwithtetrodotoxintopreventgenerationofactionpotentials. Facilitationataneuromuscularjunction.EPPsataneuromuscularjunctionintoadsartoriusmusclewereelicitedbysuccessiveactionpotentialsinthemotoraxon.Neuromusculartransmissionwasdepressedby5mMMg++ EPPsatafrogneuromuscularjunctionelicitedbyrepetitivelystimulatingthemotoraxonatdifferentfrequencies.Notethatfacilitationfailedtooccuratthelowestfrequencyofstimulation(1/sec)andthatthedegreeoffacilitationincreasedwithincreasingfrequencyofstimulationintherangeoffrequencyused.Neuromusculartransmissionwasinhibitedbybathingthepreparationin12to20mMMg++ 6.9 and2.1mMcuraresothatactionpotentialsdidnotoccur.B, (A, redrawnfromMagelbyKL.J 1977;266:435;B, Physiol Physiol Physiol RedrawnfromBelnaveRJ,GagePW.J redrawnfromWeinrichD.J 1973;234:327;C, 1971;212:431.) paired-pulse as known (PPF). is facilitation Note greater size. summation, second distinct which sum two EPSP response; overlap PPF from and PPF in temporal larger is itself a the in with to EPSPs is the the on in time to two increase size the a as seen depend stimuli, interval. of plots PSP (PSPs) the function one between second If of the of two time be potentials postsynaptic the will relative amount intervals two the interval facilitation amplitude of in milliseconds, several reduction hundred facilitation PSPs increase; Maximal no around at continues gradual the interstimulus observed. followed equal a facilitation is as msec, to and 20 with are occurs by in Thus, relatively in rapid synaptic efficacy. is short-lasting PPF change a and

to compared to stimuli a before is responses of Posttetanic case similar of presynaptic at the frequency). (PTP) the stimulation hundreds (tens high this after PPF; are and neuron however, in potentiation tetanically synaptic in stimulus efficacy Such causes a tetanic increase train an (see

Fig. 6.9C ). longer: several lasts of after but PPF, it stimulation. cessation to an tetanic PTP, postsynaptic the of seconds of is enhancement response, the minutes like tens

sensitivity PPF of result have experiments a not Numerous transmitter. the in postsynaptic cell the changes change generally the and the involve are that in do presynaptic and to of PTP terminal shown quanta transmitter increased Rather, repeated an to being leads stimulation released. of the of number that transmitter. stimulus thought potentiate to after release in terminal increase of due of remain is amounts Ca++ to presynaptic This each residual subsequent and help the be yet is enhances residual which this exact not However, Ca++ the by clear. or release mechanisms mechanism not, to simply the however, enters response sites active triggers in zone at same that the Ca++ to action fusion as to binding potential. does appear the residual The Ca++ vesicle by and directly the act

a a Use also can to its synapse of lead in efficacy. short-term depression PPF presynaptic. such for the is and or commonly, transmitter hence, the as was synapse applied a a change normally micropipette; from fatigued depressed to postsynaptic case PTP, responds at the cell Most thought of reflect the is depletion general, to depression number presynaptic the of In releasable vesicles. release under after and that conditions in single seen stimulus and [Ca++]). synapses high (i.e., short-term of often probability which synaptic high most at transmission the a release most is easily of is Thus, depression favor desensitization in of cause A postsynaptic of the the synaptic membrane. can postsynaptically be depression receptors related

Both same potentiation depressive occur the processes can synapse. and at So dominates. observed type on modulation general, in of which will the depend process ionic reflect This parameters, the synapse. local properties and can of turn in stimulus the conditions, synapses for vesicles. releasing In particular, different have baseline probabilities Synapses more show to be with facilitated be high easily. depression, low with can likely store are whereas likely probability release and more thus less deplete to will their vesicle release poststimulus those probability a responses occur. Sometimes can mixed train are a train but synapse during once a For stimulus vesicles response, the may facilitation example, posttetanic can tetanic depressed a recycled. show synapse the the show after

neurotransmitters, does membrane as so the contains receptors postsynaptic presynaptic Just the membrane. for terminal. release receptors modulate by subsequent When transmitter these the can that of they events presynaptic bind cause neurotransmitter, the can be that can it referred presynaptic be nonsynaptically (i.e., terminal that the transmitter to terminal of the as onto synapse), are sources which terminal be are acting neurotransmitter it the receptors by released serial self-modulation, to case receptors: by another bind a (see (a can the or in synapses several autoreceptors), itself section There released presynaptic it transmitter

or receptors Presynaptic metabotropic. ionotropic can be either cascades onset and that latter depend will the action second the slow long on their duration effect specific recall in relatively case, the In activated. and be are will messenger that in presynaptic can proteins release. K+ Ca++ alter voltage-gated and and thereby vesicle presynaptic Such regulate cascades ultimately channels and other the probability of

ionotropic will effects). electrical time scale) of terminal the presynaptic cause directly much and alter vesicle activation lasting in the presynaptic transient rapid (millisecond probability they properties the changes contrast, have release of (although receptors too longer can In of the amount presynaptic the receptor and an open an channels action alter in of terminal will released Binding by of transmitter potential. ionotropic thereby

result in be decrease leads and or binding more occasions transmitter, when refers it Presynaptic release the receptors inhibition of to of (Fig. one of mechanisms a can presynaptic to 6.10 ). a of First, current opening creates decreases membrane shunt. resistance channels and zone release channels, active active shunt the membrane thereby less entry, divert with less lessens transmitter. the depolarization The the current in of the to less acts which of associated results Ca++ potential Ca++ and from and activation the of action zone, •Fig. the opening presynaptic the of A is membrane by mechanism in caused second change potential 6.10 channelsandthereforereleaseofneurotransmitter. Presynapticinhibition.Activeregenerationofactionpotentialsinaxon2endsatthelastnode.Theactionpotentialisthenpassivelyconductedintotheterminal.Axon1makesanaxoaxonicsynapsewithaxon2.Activationofthissynapsereducesconductionoftheactionpotentialinaxon2totheactivezoneofitssynapticterminalbymechanismsdescribedinthetext.Thisreducestheopeningofvoltage-gatedCa++

channels. ionotropic a result, voltage-gated small potential–associated is current will thereby and of release. the action If Na+ inactivation be channels the lessening depolarization and transmitter of there presynaptic in Presynaptic γ-aminobutyric spinal these the A mechanisms. mediate by inhibition (GABAA) cord occur receptors acid and Cl− channels. They control Generally, opening hyperpolarization. a generates Cl− channels of small a generates flows gradient [Cl−] such the cell presynaptic terminal, in and out is Cl− However, depolarization. the that the of enough facilitation). of it not voltage-gated would channels; small it significant opening increase of is otherwise, does that transmitter release cause depolarization (presynaptic Ca++ This transmitter. depolarizations, channels are that there the receptors increasing create thereby of other In control cation release fact, large and receptors cation acetylcholine that In . presynaptic Ca++ is addition, control nicotinic a to permeable channel receptors these increase the entry allowing , release the terminal. of transmitter from additional of Ca++ By

the in of Repetitive stimulation in synapses long-term these produce potentiation a efficacy also brain more called process certain depression. long-term can persistent of transmission at synapses, the or changes days are to persist be the of Such and believed in can for involved changes storage to weeks memories.

The to potentiation to increased synaptic transmitter (greater and long-term that changes contrast sensitivity function. involves in both probably release) postsynaptic the in short-term efficacy occurs changes, only presynaptic changes involve in (greater that presynaptic transmitter) into enhancement the of changes is for region of the in to the postsynaptic postsynaptic calcium long-term cell step Entry early the neurotransmitter. required response result initiating of that an Receptors). occurs acid) through the propionic of glutamate of (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole section AMPA some Entry see calcium and NMDA (classes receptors receptors; Ca++-calmodulin very is Entry Ca++ of densities. to kinase in in concentrations postsynaptic believed present protein II, kinase high a multifunctional activate is that thereby and phosphorylate kinase [Ca++], of can become itself In this active. high the presence is potentiation. II are for proteins long-term of phosphorylate to believed Calciumcalmodulin the that kinase induction essential have an Long-term component. also may potentiation anatomic After of number stimulation dendrites of the postsynaptic of presynaptic increase neurons rapidly. appropriate pathway, the synapses number dendritic and spines may of a on the terminal in Changes potentiation. to the may presynaptic also long-term contribute nerve that terminal. suggested) transmitter been oxide presynaptic nerve signal release has release neuron (nitric the The may a of enhances by postsynaptic

substances Neurotransmitters are the signaling chemical neurons. that between mediate it several considered a recognized be generally a criteria. For substance neurotransmitter, meet to must be to demonstrated able substance to and presynaptic in must cell be the present the the be must the First, synthesize terminal, substance. It on should depolarization of be terminal. the released receptors the for specific be it postsynaptic should membrane. Finally, on there over receptors at act substances situations as relaxed include be transmitters, to single include sites inclusive outside widespread territories at last rather the certainly located but be for needs to and that criterion which that in to act is want a criterion if last synapse, the are synapse. synaptic true This we substances than just Neurotransmission signaling a between has describe cells. and general both been suggested synaptic term as nonsynaptic to

identified criteria. these of all some than potential because neurotransmitters have qualifier) or have More (hence they met been the 100 “potential” as substances These subdivided categories: three be substances and transmitters, gaseous small-molecule peptides, transmitters. major into can biogenic acetylcholine, amino subdivided purines. amines, further be The into neurotransmitters small-molecule and acids, may what the are small-molecule groups of considered The first classic three contain transmitters neurotransmitters. although of more many the known for substances neurotransmitters, important Remaining transmitters in as are a molecules other biologically contexts of time. additions been long that to are them recent list have

nervous In is sympathetic few a and sympathetic peripheral neuromuscular parasympathetic ganglia. ganglia postganglionic and the transmitter system, the at the at parasympathetic fibers junctions, ganglia, all acetylcholine from of and most and also neurons transmitter neuron within cord the forebrain basal ganglia, nuclei in and is collaterals). nucleus of nuclei, prominently several and axon in of motor spinal parts some in It brainstem a basal the CNS, (e.g., basalis) the (septal and hippocampus in been memory basal neocortex from forebrain neurons and have to diffusely implicated the project areas throughout functions. and Cholinergic amygdala, they the the disease, function form cells Alzheimer’s is memory dementia degeneration in in of progressively Indeed, which gradually a occurs lost. and of these

interferewithacetylcholinesteraseandtherebyenhancetheactionofacetylcholinebyprolongingitspresenceatitssynapses.Suchdrugsincludeinsecticidesandchemicalwarfareagents,aswellassometherapeuticdrugs,suchasthoseusedtotreatmyasthenia Anumberofdrugsknownasanticholinesterases gravis. Myastheniagravisisanautoimmunediseaseinwhichantibodiesbindtoacetylcholinereceptorsattheneuromuscularjunction,therebydisruptingtheirfunctionalityandcausingthemtobemorerapidlydegraded.Thisreductioninreceptorsleadstosevereweaknessandultimatelyparalysis.Theweaknessischaracterizedbyrapidtiringofthemusclewithrepeateduse.Rapidtiringoccursbecausethenumberofpresynapticvesiclesavailableforreleasedropsduringthehigh-frequencytrainofmotorneuronactionpotentialsthatgeneratessuchcontractions.Normally,becauseofthehighsafetyfactoroftheneuromuscularjunction,smallerbutstillsuprathresholdEPPswouldstillbegeneratedandmaintainmusclecontractionduringrepeateduse.Inpeoplewithmyastheniagravis,thesafetyfactorissoreducedbythelossofacetylcholinereceptorsthatthedecreaseinreleaseofacetylcholinewithrepeatedactivityleadstoEPPsthatfailtotriggerspikes,andthusmuscularcontractionfails.Standardtreatmentsincludeanticholinesterases,whichallowagreaterconcentrationofacetylcholinetopartiallyovercomethedeficitcausedbythereducednumberoffunctionalpostsynapticreceptors,andimmunosuppressivetherapiesandplasmaexchange,whichreducelevelsofautoantibodiesagainsttheacetylcholinereceptor.Thesetherapiesareallrelativelynonspecificandcanthereforehavemanysideeffects.PotentialfuturetherapiesarebeingdevelopedandincludeinducingtolerancetotheacetylcholinereceptorandselectivedestructionoftheBcellsthatmakeantibodiesagainstthereceptor.

cholinergic which the synthesized is cytoplasm terminals. acetyl coenzyme acetyltransferase, located A in of by choline the is and presynaptic from Acetylcholine choline enzyme concentrated acetylcholine in vesicles. synthesis, After is in the the cleft. enzyme After acetylcholinesterase, highly concentrated action terminated which by acetylcholine the of synaptic is release, is hydrolyzes choline. acetate Acetylcholinesterase into and acetylcholine acetylcholine. symporter for an presynaptic of Na+ by is The up the then choline membrane in resynthesis taken the action is of neurotransmitters a The the as other via proteins. transporter terminated a reuptake classic of series synaptic extracellular of neurotransmitter specialized acetylcholine by enzymatic degradation for inasmuch is unusual

•Fig. Glutamatetransportcycle.A, Schematicoftransportershowingdirectionofionflowassociatedwiththemovementofglutamateacrossthemembrane. Schematicshowsthefateofglutamatereleasedfromapresynapticterminal.Distinctglutamatetransportersexistonthepresynapticandpostsynapticcellmembranesforreuptake.Inaddition,glialcellstakeupglutamateandconvertittoglutamine.Theglutamineisthenreleasedandtakenintothepresynapticterminal,whereitisconvertedbacktoglutamatebeforebeingrepackagedintosynapticvesicles.B, 6.11

neurotransmitters. function of A as amino acids variety glycine, three are most glutamate, and The important GABA.

neurotransmitter excitatory at the the synapses is the majority Glutamate overwhelming of CNS. throughout glutamatergic in glutamate identify key cells; it present neurons specific a inhibitory role to major the and its precursor pathways, neurotransmitter. is was is has it Despite metabolic multiple to ubiquity, difficult a initially in all because as it GABA, the CNS have glutamate major Nevertheless, as neurotransmitter. now results clearly excitatory established experimental to cells, released is transporters for depolarization and specific have identified. neurons, from been it When applied and receptors causes and it

being neurotoxin excitatory neurotransmitter, at potent is main glutamate concentrations. high to the a addition In transmission of the release after prevent not from to to terminal but its normal also allow limitation strict synaptic necessary, Thus, presynaptic death. activity is cell only glutamate’s is specialized task accomplished ( proteins This transporter by membrane

Fig. 6.11

the Level At Cellular box).

neurotransmitters. glycine GABA as act inhibitory and the transmitter major is the throughout inhibitory nervous GABA system. in a produced glutamate transmitter. present is (glutamic is neurons as GABA from enzyme acid specific a only that that by GABA decarboxylase) use as experimentally, antibodies possible Thus, mark identify inhibitory see to is to cells (immunolabeling, them this it enzyme using by GABAergic neurons to

Fig. 6.1B ). are GABAergic. local interneurons Many numbers large contain GABAergic several brain projection In addition, regions of neurons. the striatum of most Purkinje the cells the cerebellar are spiny of notable The cortex. neurons the and especially nuclei). the activity vestibular The inhibitory (cerebellar cortex, to and the cells activity downstream of suppress cortical basically cerebellar targets output of cerebellar was surprising because of thus represent the they its and nature Purkinje entire functions

more restricted as functions territory. much an neurotransmitter in a Glycine inhibitory in Glycinergic spinal of synapses. predominantly cord, synapses they found half where the inhibitory approximately are represent the brainstem, lower likewise cerebellum, in They the present significant are in numbers. and retina synaptic another has Interestingly, glycine function. also be channel the NMDA-type receptors, to must At for also glutamate bound excitatory open. ion glycine as cotransmitter a Thus, acts at it these synapses. which generally glycine sites not that extracellular levels binding in were that the suggest an recent may always channel may of of glycine modulator implies also but important physiological high concentration conditions results thought be the It that NMDA-mediated the this transmission. be NMDA synaptic always fluctuations glycine true, that was saturated, enough under was

nerve and glycine glia presynaptic terminal released into taken up are membrane Na+-Cl−–coupled they by After the are and neighboring the transporters. high-affinity back GABA terminal, from These for is Na+-Cl− for of (SLC6) 6 distinct family part neurotransmitters, what transporters it those the those of the from called is amine includes carrier also are that solute but transporters glutamate. biogenic with symport and of cell into Transport one two Na+ accomplished ion. is by the Cl− the neurotransmitter CNS. GABA highly the transporter (GAT1, Four BGT1) and in been identified; are GAT1 expressed GAT3 ones genes GAT2, that GAT3, the are and however, have be and/or they expressed in neurons Depending glia. region may species, on and in transporters, GlyT2. and glycine two main are GlyT1 There is on CNS. predominantly throughout the present and GlyT1 found astrocytes is located largely and restricted terminals glycinergic is nerve spinal on contrast, cord, In cerebellum. the is GlyT2 to and brainstem,

this roles hormones. be the nervous category neurotransmitters system, in the they Many outside of familiar have as because may often and as known (5-hydroxytryptamine serotonin amines Among neurotransmitters histamine. (noradrenaline), are to act epinephrine norepinephrine [5-HT]), (adrenaline), dopamine, the are the amino share a biosynthetic starts acid with and epinephrine pathway and norepinephrine, that tyrosine. common they Dopamine, catecholamines, by hydroxylase. converted is Tyrosine the enzyme L-dopa tyrosine to dopamine L-Dopa is then to dopa-decarboxylase. converted by the neurons, here. stops dopaminergic In pathway enzyme, to noradrenergic In another dopamine norepinephrine. converts β-hydroxylase, neurons, dopamine adding transferase. to phenylethanolamineN-methyl by is group a via methyl Epinephrine norepinephrine obtained serotonin from the is neurons, acid tryptophan. synthesized amino serotoninergic essential In 5-hydroxylase, is aromatic Tryptophan acid decarboxylase. converted then by which is to converted to tryptophan L-amino by first serotonin 5-hydroxytryptophan histidine by of histidine to histaminergic in is neurons conversion catalyzed the histamine Finally, decarboxylase.

the by of amines generally glia transporter to into synaptically belonging transporters biogenic accomplished reuptake and neurons Removal via is family. released Na+-Cl−–dependent are by The monoamine Omethyltransferase. oxidase two and catecholamines catechol enzymes, degraded then

amino ionoutofthecell(see transporter)thatcarryglutamateacrosstheplasmamembranehavebeenidentified.TheyareallpartoftheNa+-K+–dependentfamilyoftransporters.InwardmovementofeachglutamatemoleculeisdrivenbythecotransportofthreeNa+ standsforexcitatory ionandthecountertransportofoneK+ ionsandoneH+ acid Atleastfivetransporters(EAAT1toEAAT5,inwhichEAAT

conductance,althoughpassageofCl− Fig.6.11B ionsisnotstoichiometricallylinkedtoglutamatetransport.Glutamatetransportersarefoundonbothneuronsandglia.However,thetransportersdifferintheirregionalandcellulardistributionandintheirpharmacologicalandbiophysicalproperties.Forexample,EAAT2isfoundongliaandisgenerallyresponsibleformorethan90%ofglutamateuptakefromtheextracellularspace.TheglutamatetakenupintoglialcellsbyEAAT2iseventuallyreturnedtothepresynapticterminalbytheglutamateglutaminecycle(see ).Inaddition,thetransporterhasCl−

(vesicular ).Insideglialcells,glutamateisconvertedtoglutamine.Glutamineisthentransportedoutoftheglialcellandbackintothepresynapticterminal,whereitissubsequentlyconvertedbacktoglutamate.GlutamateinsidethepresynapticterminalispackagedintosynapticvesiclesbyasecondsetofglutamatetransportersknownasvGLUTs ions,theelectrochemicalgradientforwhichhavingbeenestablishedbyanH+-ATPaseinthevesiclemembrane. glutamate transporters),whicharepresentinthemembraneofglutamatergicvesicles.TransportofglutamateintosynapticvesiclesbyvGLUTisdrivenbythecountertransportofH+ Fig.6.11

CNS, the as of rather cells within areas which found that nerve of nuclei, primarily of are brain. one project a use biogenic diffusely large most throughout the Within amines brainstem few neurotransmitters the which locus of are pons. dorsal the nucleus are each found located near part the rostral primarily and other in in Noradrenergic neurons coeruleus subcoeruleus, neurons locus entire coeruleus of project brain. The the throughout the of cord. limited subcoeruleus nucleus are Targets include the spinal widespread more still pons, the medulla, but and and the because by also (Norepinephrine postganglionic is peripheral important it nervous in system is cells.) used sympathetic Serotoninergic nuclei of midline the the a from as at fibers brainstem, located known the series nuclei. arise raphe of are spinal noradrenergic serotoninergic the throughout fibers, to brain cord. Similar the and fibers of distributed most which Dopaminergic to neocortex nigra fibers the brainstem projects accumbens. the regions: ventral pars and striatum, including from arise which subcortical the two tegmental area, the areas, widely more main the nucleus compacta, to and substantia projects and diffusely project hypothalamus are the within Histaminergic tuberomammillary the neurons nucleus throughout the CNS. located of other with biogenic relatively in the few adrenergic are amine number transmitters. compared Finally, neurons when small rostral medulla. to bodies groups in have cell the They localized cell the projections of group, coeruleus levels down the and to terminate the intermediomedial termed nuclei largest thoracic the lumbar in spinal they C1, and the columns. has autonomic locus cord, The where and cell intermediolateral of to pressure. control Thus, ones, autonomic particularly are arterial functions, such for of as important neurons vasomotor these

amine most nature systems projection their diffuse the the of is in proposed pattern of mirrored The functions. of Activity important setting in different global states. the aminergic is be systems brain in believed to setting level waking), the these and systems For are in attention, example, (sleep, arousal mood. of involved pathways and important centers other functions. they homeostatic the also with that indicates hypothalamus Their autonomic have in involvement connected pathways motor to the the in dopamine The balancing in flow disease and observed of basal through how leads ganglia symptoms its in the activity role of are loss described Parkinson’s

to nervous at peripheral in or has central transmitter act the cotransmitter the synapses and as potential a systems. ATP transmission. is vesicles ATP found is synaptic in synaptic co-released thus and during all ion but it standard its serotonin, receptors, has GABA. other action channels, norepinephrine, ATP neurotransmitters, coupled also which neurotransmitters and including like to is the co-released, glutamate, of modify with dopamine, are can own which it after stimulation. ATP also certain release may of types cells Glial presynaptic to ATPases by adenosine, the by released, and 5-nucleotidase terminal. which ATP up taken can be broken again is down Once

3 acids. about amino consist neurotransmitters 40 between chains and of Peptide of neuropeptides Studies of

Hyperactivityofdopaminergicsynapsesmaybeinvolvedinsomeformsofpsychosis.Chlorpromazine andrelatedantipsychoticdrugsinhibitdopaminereceptorsonpostsynapticmembranesandthusdiminishtheeffectsofdopaminereleasedfrompresynapticnerveterminals.Overdosesofsuchantipsychoticdrugscanproduceatemporaryparkinsonian-likestate.

for many the hypothalamus years. focused on act is However, mechanism neurons neuropeptides fundamental are neurotransmission the now thus of the on it throughout a throughout CNS are by and and that CNS. receptors released clear have date, neuropeptides To than identified. been more 100 can in They into groups, several functional classified shown as be

of 6.1 the , which neuropeptides. some Box lists known neurotransmitters many that release neuropeptides. neurons that now clear also is classic release It become research. the and understanding transmitters coexisting between detailed As peptide an later, area important has interaction of classic a or another co-released at also function neuropeptides neurotransmitter can being with to sole as addition transmitter, synapse. In the primary

they In neurotransmitters: release into classic Ca++ on synaptic like is vesicles, , are target the to are packaged they their on neuropeptides ways some and receptors specific neurons. bind dependent differences, nonsynaptic, also that there intercellular have mediated volume as for neuropeptides, to and the such communication names alternative ones significant by parasynaptic, transmission. led However, are

and 6.1 of differences some between Table classic peptide neurotransmitters. summarizes these

transported synthesized the body at are the presynaptic to then and cell synthesized which neurotransmitters, terminal, the Unlike (see at neuropeptides are classic terminal

Fig. ). 6.2 vesicles are Neuropeptides the are small-molecule throughout the transmitters large than rather electron-lucent small scattered active vesicles zone, docked electron-dense where that presynaptic stored. are terminal in into at packaged (In neurons multiple co-stored in that same neuropeptides, vesicles.) are various the the peptides make and reuptake confined to not region, by synaptic are in mechanisms. receptors Neuropeptide limited is the general, peptide action not

of functional implications. Each has these differences nonpeptide For transmitters response example, of question released stimulation immediately the the of storage differentially to co-released are raises two separate in and whether peptide particular transmitters or patterns. the

earlier. been a storage differential of release and vesicle described of fact, result is In the of and demonstrated has cell from the types same several peptide for classic in differences transmitters neurons probably rapidly the vesicles Some result action potentials be zones, of their to 6.1 (<1 nonpeptide Neuroactive BOX influx Ca++ to single msec) proximity • in a released of . Peptides active of as Because localized can response the low-frequency nonpeptide causes cell of release Thus, of transmitter. just stimulation the neuropeptide leads global the increase is that terminal with a throughout of of well higher-frequency neurotransmitter. neuron, as in there [Ca++] In contrast, the to presynaptic as release more nerve stimulation

they or with synergistically other act may transmitters, neuropeptides antagonistically. are co-released When serotonin. tachykinins and peptide gene–related enhance glutamate of action (CGRP) cord, the For with the synergistically act example, P to and with substance calcitonin spinal in other and at synapses. antagonize tachykinins norepinephrine’s action CGRP Conversely, simply one-to-one classic action a of are spatial interactions, a temporal the versus profiles however, The the peptides of antagonism synapse particular synergism differing not because or transmitters. of at and lack affect rather a have that all specific can brain long rapid reuptake just than at and acting appropriate the diffuse tissue, act at for slower over durations, which release released. mean of and (that particular, the cells the synapse region region it receptors) in neuropeptides that of was In the there the that peptide. a receptors often that for presynaptic have studies fact, a between mismatch that In the terminals neuropeptide is sites spatial shown and of contain particular the whereas particular a a more affect in classic co-released In the local transmitters a of peptides as from neuronal released act synapse manner. probably whole, point-to-point sum, population

from are the drugs opium derived the Opiates juice poppy. of to a form are binding functionally the that and but that direct and receptors neuropeptides. from by opioids important opiate clinically Compounds class are derived opium poppy of not called exert effects whose naloxone. are a called are Operationally, stereospecifically defined morphine derivative antagonized effects opioids as by compounds

dynorphins. are three of in classes major and The mammals endorphins, enkephalins, peptides endogenous opioid simplest they are the are opioids; pentapeptides. Enkephalins Dynorphins of other longer contain the or one that N-terminal the are and at endorphins ends. sequences peptides enkephalin their somewhat

and neurons the neurons in widely of CNS tract. intrinsic peptides Opioid gastrointestinal distributed the of are discretely are widely dynorphins and whereas CNS, distributed. more localized the endorphins The in particular structures of the enkephalins are brain neurons inhibit the Opioids of perception the in pain. in involved (pain-relieving) are most the analgesic known, opiates are analgesics. used among Indeed, powerful potent peptides and as compounds opioid therapeutically exert opiate to their effect receptors. specific by binding They analgesic

11 of acids. P a Substance amino peptide is consisting brain, present in the the gastrointestinal tract. specific in is neurons, sensory plexus neurons wall and in neurons the of It primary in in plexuses The ). with networks (see innervated the is that of or form wall neurons also gastrointestinal richly tract exert gastrointestinal control activities. and The the its secretory tract intrinsic primary of motor plexuses over contain substance the column. in brain including enteric neuropeptides, P, spinal These of found the are neurons many and that pain transmission involved and effect P on smooth in is powerful Substance a muscle. has

primary a in cell made the thus it sensory horn used the spinal P peptide ganglia) and as the spinal the a by primary a column, an dorsal is transmitter root at neurons with transmitter dorsal are example probably at bodies of interneurons Substance (their acting in synapse. is synapses of

decrease the to at of the for thereby at synapse substance P inhibit pathway the in pathway. and these act first Enkephalins the sensation pain release synapses

This newest stretches defined transmission the do. category even the to is definition neurotransmitter of and usual be than neuropeptides synaptic of further into vesicles neither exocytosis. are nor neurotransmitters packaged by Gas released synaptic highly Instead, (the the being synaptic gas cells enzymes). synthesis activates diffuse nerve permeant terminals simply influx terminal Ca++ neighboring after to of triggered and from synthetic by depolarization are their of synthesis, neurotransmitters or or reuptake so do undergo anions enzymatic mechanisms, binding scavenger their appears to they diffusion no specific nor there action ended be proteins. Moreover, to by various are superoxide destruction, of nitric neurotransmitters. Both (CO) (NO) monoxide are carbon examples gaseous and oxide and enteric nervous system ). of is the neurons cells synapses muscle between inhibitory a motor at transmitter NO gastrointestinal smooth (see in the NO functions neurotransmitter as also CNS. a arginine of citrulline. NO the catalyzes as synthase oxidation the production of The product NO to enzyme of a cytosolic by [Ca++]. increase an in stimulated This is enzyme

as as signal and addition muscle; (e.g., transduction vascular a molecule see a in smooth nonneuronal serving in NO to cellular neurons cells functions neurotransmitter, both In

14). Chapter

by produces cGMP is GTP. way cyclase, transduction regulating enzyme from guanylyl as One functions NO the that that a molecule signal group to binds potently the guanylyl a enzyme. stimulates heme and in soluble cyclase NO target cell. of in cGMP Stimulation in leads to the this enzyme elevation an processes. influence then multiple can The cellular cGMP

multitude of system used in the provides specific and interneuronal nervous communications flexible it neurotransmitters system. The a with for further each even enhanced These the receptors variety by of are characteristics neurotransmitter. for their sensitivity particular particular a traditionally in to were primarily Receptors and by differences agonists pharmacological neurotransmitter distinguished antagonists. example, nicotine. they or acetylcholine nicotinic bind whether into receptors classes, muscarinic were muscarine split depending on and For kainic sensitivity AMPA. three acid, glutamate to main according receptors to their split were agonists or NMDA, the groups into Similarly, receptor useful, to it activated subtypes agonists, for be limitations: to the disclose by some and scheme receptors particular fail transmitter. a Though various all this classification several has fails the approaches biological have many neurotransmitters. identify known sequence molecular the so, used for and genes receptor of past been the to years 15 Over or It that the we these receptors. now have genes is catalog for thought complete a of relatively that used subtypes the that are be actual potential is there and is nervous revealed diversity tremendous system. What receptor has or this by could of work a has the knowledge other and gene important sequences an relationship the proteins. proteins to enabled each of to understanding receptor Moreover, other of different of workings studies, understanding of deeper structural of and has the of led functional knowledge, a crystallographic, biochemical, of to other combined results with the proteins. receptor much types This and on based various and grouped gene various be of families sequences, each into and can features. receptors In structural family share particular, functional members

of one Neurotransmitter of receptors, members ( also of known families referred receptors, protein– as large coupled as metabotropic and ion are channels, also ligand-gated proteins: or G two receptors receptors to groups ionotropic

Fig. ). 6.12A–B one receptor. classic neurotransmitters at metabotropic-type all and least Almost have neuropeptides neurotransmitters have also ionotropic least of Many classic the at one receptor. (pore) channel the complexes that for binding protein ion transmitter site receptors an have the through extracellular form an cell both membrane. Ionotropic are and a contribute subunits, of to has The five, several to domains, some is three receptor of of the of typically which usually made wall series channel. each of protein which membrane-spanning the ion up typically ion results the and in state of channel are several in Binding (usually in increases) onset of and the of open alters the thus rapid being milliseconds. the events with neurotransmitter that duration both a decay, postsynaptic probability Ionotropic described underlie fast receptors earlier. IPSPs, as synaptic EPSPs and

Theionotropicreceptorscanbedividedintoseveralsuperfamilies.Membersofthecys-loopsuperfamilyhavepeptidesubunitsthathaveanN-terminalextracellulardomainthatcontainsaloopdelimitedbycysteineresidues.Thisfamilyincludestheionotropicreceptorsforacetylcholine,serotonin,GABA,andglycine.Inadditiontotheirfamily-definingcysteineloop,thesereceptorssharethefollowingcommonfeatures:theyarepentamers,witheachpeptidesubunithavingfourtransmembranedomains;theneurotransmitterbindstotheN-terminaldomain;andthesecondtransmembranedomainsarethoughttoformthewalloftheionpore.

IonotropicglutamateandATPreceptorsformtwootherionotropicreceptorsuperfamilies;thedetailsforeacharegiveninthelatercorrespondingsections.Transientreceptorpotential(TRP)channels,whichareimportantfortransductionofpainandthermalsensations,formyetanotherfamily(see 1. 1. Neurotransmitter Ions binds Neurotransmitter Neurotransmitter binds 2. opens Channel 5. flow across membrane 4. Ions Ion 3. Ions membrane flow 2. Ions across protein G 3. is G or • protein subunits Fig. the D, domain B, 2001.) glutamate the 2 Pore Fitzpatrick are protein–coupled cys-loop for Associates; Purves the of topologies loop receptors. for D. wall action are for of and From channel, structures MA: GABA, receptors. for the of receptors mechanism receptors. 6.12 channels and Cys-loop ion basic forms ionotropic transmembrane C structure and transmembrane ionotropic and plus of and Sunderland, respectively. include of (A) 2nd (ionotropic subunits Neurotransmitter and form Sinauer cys-loop four shown wall The in ligand-gated these receptors of glycine, receptors internal domains loops Note receptors: (B). shown serotonin, G Detailed cys-loop internal a membrane differing GJ, of D, (A glutamate Neuroscience. classes (metabotropic) receptors receptors individual ed. and three Augustine glutamate pore whereas the receptors) acetylcholine. two

not receptors Metabotropic ion are channels. monomers extracellular protein. binding G are Instead, site that have they an intracellular binding protein site particular a transmitter for and an a for cascade Binding membrane. in step leads in the receptor postsynaptic of an signal transduction G of activation protein, first of channel a to the the that the function ion which alters is a slow receptors minutes. phenomena of that receptors, metabotropic from that ionotropic a to In contrast and milliseconds persist may to post-synaptic hundreds mediate have onset postsynaptic potential. initiate, cascades just have beyond potential they the Because changes they the great various a biochemical cause of generating in neuron to

to into nicotine two classified on a or Acetylcholine basis were muscarine) groups. sensitive originally pharmacological major receptors (being groupings structural corresponds and to based biological on This molecular studies. grouping family, metabotropic receptor the of family and cys-loop of muscarinic proteins. are members the are Nicotinic ionotropic receptors part of receptors

mediate within transmission as are synaptic junction also at neuromuscular however, nicotinic nicotinic receptors the CNS. the present described The receptors earlier; relatively nonselective binding cationic a The EPSP. channel, contains of so an receptor acetylcholine produces nicotinic are of the a acetylcholine types of contain family, which δ, called of members subunit multiple some α, members. ε, receptors cys-loop Being constructed from γ, series β, pentamers the the is the 2α, junction 2β. typically composition in β, At ε, constructed channel from the 3α, δ, whereas CNS is neuromuscular α the one the junctional centrally use between subunits α2 of use α1 Furthermore, all receptors whereas receptors and subunit, located α10. the result with and sensitivities kinetics channel noted, receptors subunits and As differing differing in selectivity. the pharmacological

receptors known of five muscarinic acetylcholine to (M1 subtypes are There M5). effects however, thus are distinct metabotropic receptors; can on proteins they cell. are G different the and coupled have to All coupled toxin–insensitive G are pertussis proteins. are proteins, toxin–sensitive pertussis coupled to M2 to and G M4 whereas M3, M1, M5 and messenger details and pathways proteins set (see pathways). of these to of is different G second enzymes coupled for Each

Inhibitory GABA and Glycine Receptors: Amino Acid

either glycine the CNS transmitter. most their or use As inhibitory common the GABA synapses in noted, as synapses up are in cord, the the whereas brain. the in common make majority GABAergic inhibitory Glycine-mediated synapses of inhibitory synapses spinal

and as characteristics members family, cys-loop that the are have GABA receptors glycine Both of of already sharing ionotropic described. a number thus while which bound. these channel, a portion has of addition, receptor the Cl− In opens each receptors is open neurotransmitter and controlled receptor is time specific. channels average for the the the which a are channel of of by these the opening concentration probability the Therefore, stays

are and ratio) (3:2 pentamers Glycine subunits be β may homomers. or and α of receptors heteromers related heteromers to molecular homomers located be extrasynaptically. located and appears composition its with location, cellular the postsynaptically Interestingly, to protein seems intracellular help an β bind called that to to localize the subunit to appears to The site. receptors postsynaptic scaffold gephyrin glycine variants distinct α splice are the coding The each). genes subunits for binding subunit (and site, of contains and α four there distinct receptor sites. modulatory and affinity, having and conductance, Each variant in results a agonist antagonist kinetics, Intriguingly, brain during are different subunit differentially regions. in variants development expressed and

GABAC) receptors ionotropic by GABA for separate and two has of (GABAA genes. sets distinct coded Like a glycine receptors, both channel. Cl− control receptors of from of three subunits, multiple are have generated which GABAA heteromers seven classes members. account α1, of common is γ2 are a the many may however, most The the other for heteromers 80% stoichiometry, which in brain. receptors; in 2:2:1 configuration found β2, the different distinct As confer with properties glycine, receptor. on subunits benzodiazepines GABAA and receptors example, the barbiturates. major drugs: of are two classes of targets For relaxant are used drugs. diazepam) widely Benzodiazepines and (e.g., antianxiety sedatives anticonvulsants. as used Barbiturates are and subunits receptors Cl− receptors’ drugs the sites distinct GABA. response in enhance of to opening and the α on channels bind Both of to classes of GABAA with of benzodiazepines α2 subunit, the The appear binding with anxiolytic and anticonvulsant α1 to sedative be effects whereas receptors subunit. actions the by reflect to mediated receptors the separate benzodiazepines) receptors distinct GABAC receptors they by by are for ρ2, set similar affected ρ3). but genes to coded (e.g., are of and a pharmacological GABAA structurally have profile not and a are (ρ1,

The GABAB a receptor metabotropic receptor. is hence activation of of reduction heterotrimeric and see in located the a (G thus ), of transmitter. K+ Ca++ channels release and hyperpolarization Binding protein which GABA this (when protein; channels a as cell, to leads activates GTP-binding well postsynaptic presynaptically) of to receptor inhibition as of

Acid Receptors: Excitatory Glutamate Amino

and both metabotropic receptors. Glutamate has ionotropic pharmacological subtypes subunit properties composition, ionotropic recognized: distinct kainate, receptor AMPA, and are on and Based several NMDA. subunits receptors. Overall, glutamate genes ionotropic code that 18 for there the known are glutamate for (AMPA, δ) subtypes NMDA, to and the genes pharmacological divided families into essentially receptors. several correspond The that of kainate, are receptor is a tetramer. Each glutamate certain the receptor there a Thus, and genes the between correspondence formed. is types are that and KA2 receptors have example, NR2 GluR1 NMDA require receptors of to subunits. GluR4 GluR5 or plus and AMPA all subunits, some subunits, combination kainate either subunits NR1 KA1 from receptors and to formed NR3 GluR7 are For for receptors, properties the was with mentioned receptor subunit As composition. vary other the are a excitatory receptors glutamate contain cationic-selective and Ionotropic channel. Na+ the only and , channels to all pass. are Ca++ permeable to Thus, a subset K+ but allow

channel of AMPA to ligand-gated thereby glutamate receptors the the as opens to classic channels flow, as receptor, and allows behave on already binding and generating an kainate EPSP. discussed; current NMDA are different. channels glutamate glycine and both require First, to of they open. binding Mg++ a sensitivity display as Second, result they blockade channel. of of voltage the so glutamate channel membrane flows that even at negative) to more is, ion and glycine potentials, the are current a the resting through entrance blocks channel. Mg++ when bound, no That the (or current or and EPSPs), However, by current if Mg++ channel. experimentally injection cell through electrode (either the the depolarized the block relieved is through an by can other is of flow A of a that interesting is feature as further NMDA can generally second messenger. act to which they are permeable channels Ca++, The sensitivity permeability of learning voltage role hypotheses of has channels concerning in (see and functions their and memory-related to led NMDA Ca++ the combination

genes glutamate three and have classified Eight receptors groups. coding identified metabotropic been for into are III found found postsynaptically, and Group receptors II are groups whereas presynaptically. I as trigger generate These second cascades (see probably receptors importantly, least messenger slow but they at EPSPs,

Purines ionotropic two (P2Y) a family. metabotropic have families: and (P2X) receptor an their of they subunit ligand-gated identified channels, that represent seven superfamily are P2X There channels. form types and own and two the site. with these between has domains, extracellularly loop transmembrane two subunit only Each binding containing ATP domains located the receptors are hexamers. homotrimers or heterotrimers The or is that Ca++ , general, . Na+ to , cationic permeable K+ these channel form a receptors and In The subunits distribution on significantly, and some a pathways). present cells distribution widespread in pain-related limited of mostly brain being in quite is subunits with having the (P2X3 others (P2X2) involved varies

in human coded CNS. Metabotropic for purine only 6 but expressed 10 are genes, by the are receptors voltage-gated Ca++ and both and of activate protein–coupled modulate currents. features G are and known receptors NMDA the K+ to They currents typical have astrocytes. P2X receptors although latter dominates on present is P2Y and between neurons, on that localization distinction the interesting are An both

ATP. Finally, to that receptors enzymatic the of in after respond released P2Y is addition to and the which the breakdown P2X to there receptors, respond that ATP, adenosine are adenosine inhibit inhibiting These . Ca++ are synaptic receptors presynaptically influx by of located transmission and to act

Adrenaline, Serotonin, Histamine Noradrenaline, Biogenic Receptors: Dopamine, Amine

metabotropic-type cys-loop the With receptors serotonin ionotropic of family, the that amines various receptors one part of exception are all (5-HT3) receptors. for biogenic are the class of act time to and on by these second synaptic scales relatively Thus, cascades. messenger slow potentials initiating tend generating long neurotransmitters by for important tools many various blockers and are these treating neurological clinical receptors of disorders. Agonists and psychiatric of the basal The of motor will receptors in in (see systems dopamine ganglia different disorders be role covered

and proteins the essentially to peptides mediate all are of G the metabotropic As messenger that for various cascades. amines, biogenic are the type effects with second coupled via case receptors the is of between particular terminals mismatch consistently again mentioning the worth locations the It studies show it. peptide a and for is receptors containing a that by are than these synapses. through at Thus, extracellular often neurotransmitter receptors activated the space rather diffusing receptors their of concentrations and agonist, implies experience sensitive lower indeed, these This they very will to that agonists. are much

to Unlike that CO other the NO not receptors. bind neurotransmitters were do covered, and activity One messenger second they cyclase. activate cell do guanylyl to cascades, enzymes such as in involved affect is way been Na+,K+-ATPase receptors the of to proteins, pump, such modify NO and by shown nitrosylating them. as other has In addition, the NMDA activity

1.

electrical important are nervous synapses mammalian the and communication Both in system. cellular chemical means of

2.

allow bidirectional directly between flow synapses rapid current connect neurons. of Electrical the and two cytosol neurons filters. They low-pass act as

3.

junctions morphological Gap electrical are correlate synapses. of the junctions by channels Gap contain formed called hemichannels connexons. by proteins formed connexins. are Connexons called

4.

of to from involves apposed the on membrane. diffusion of a synaptic Standard transmitter terminal, synaptic transmitter release cleft, the chemical presynaptic binding receptors and of a transmission postsynaptic transmitter across the

5.

triggers Entry of of release neurotransmitter. the the calcium terminal presynaptic into mEPPs the of as by demonstrated first recording is the neurotransmitter quantal, Release frog junction. at neuromuscular of

6.

the vesicles terminal. into in presynaptic packaged is synaptic Transmitter the vesicles quantal The are elements. at central mPSP equivalently, the transmitter at the That one is, or, neuromuscular release one from mEPP synapse. junction causes vesicle a a of

7.

fusion docking, of in priming, synaptic Many are and involved proteins vesicles. the triggering fusion. vesicle for Ca++ is sensor Synaptotagmin

8.

inhibitory respectively, Excitatory increase or probability will synapses neuron the postsynaptic spike. that and the decrease,

9.

ligand-gated at The reversal potential potential which flow reverses. membrane current through net a channel the is of reversal threshold, positive as depolarizing potentials result channels. cation synapses to generate a most the have Excitatory spike the that potentials often of nonselective opening (EPSPs)

10.

than potentials spike reversal threshold synapses potential. that to IPSPs Inhibitory resting not the the more negative negative necessarily generate have but shunt input currents. by the of a Inhibitory the can a of decrease spike and synapses decrease probability hyperpolarization of neuron, in to membrane leading two mechanisms: the synaptic resistance

Tsien RW. AA, Alabi and exocytosis, in endocytosis, neurotransmission. role Perspectives kiss-and-run: on Annu Physiol. Rev 2013;75:393-422.

11.

synaptic its referred as a to a neuron process inputs which as by an potential result is The action integration. of fire to decides nonlinear and and of depends location The tree, properties relative cell. passive can the summation dendritic of the EPSPs to the inputs of the membrane factors, the synaptic and the geometry IPSPs segment, on active (RC) of initial many and including highly be

12.

neuron. transmission of on The action in the presynaptic timing of synaptic potentials frequency and the depends efficacy increased efficacy in Facilitation, of and of examples synaptic stimulations previous of are synapse. potentiation, to a long-term posttetanic transmission response multiple potentiation from efficacy of resulting activation synapse. reduced depression previous is an of example Long-term the

13.

The neurotransmitters. uses hundreds system of nervous Neurotransmitters amino (acetylcholine, classes: can amines, gases subdivided functional a and purines), few small-molecule and acids, peptides, (CO, biogenic NO). into broad transmitters be The of postsynaptic receptors. a its action on neurotransmitter depends Most receptors. metabotropic and ionotropic transmitters have both nongaseous

14.

is locally, enzymatic duration of Small-molecule reuptake their by action limited and transmitters single act degradation. mainly and a across synapse, have thus diffuse cells a release presynaptic local all their within region. can and from potential Peptides the affect site to to their diffuse free are Gaseous from site. transmitters release

15.

neurotransmitter Ionotropic of the gated binding receptor. receptors versus ion an channel the contain closed) (open is whose state by to messengers activate on binding neurotransmitter. Metabotropic receptors second

16.

activity depends release and on terminal. the multiple which they can ones pattern transmitters, Many synapses of release the types of independently or Co-released function synergistically or antagonistically. act may transmitters

GL. Fain Molecular and Physiology Cellular Neurons. of 2nd ed. MA: Cambridge, Harvard University Press; 2014.

Membranes. B. of Hille Excitable Ion Channels 3rd ed. Associates; Sinauer MA: 2001. Sunderland,

questions: chapter should completion the Upon 1. the able this to of answer be following student

periphery primary information, that each are pathways somatosensory from cortex? the somatosensory what major the convey of and What modalities to the the are corresponding

2.

enteroceptive divisions and the with? are body of categories What exteroceptive, system associated and of information the proprioceptive, regions somatosensory

3.

are fine/discriminatory receptors main What sensations? the for touch

4.

types does the cerebellum What of somatosensory receive? information

5.

are temperature What sensations? receptors pain and the touch main for

6.

of is phenomenon pain? What referred the

7.

What proteins different are information? transducing in somatosensory of involved categories

8.

to descending of the pathways? activity regulate flow pathways act ascending How somatosensory in do

system with information world. the and the somatosensory contact state of he about central to (CNS) body provides nervous its the the system stretch, vibrations) transduce and thermal It into signals. (pressure, does variety by sensory so and that energies electrical receptors a using mechanical of trigger potential stimulus. about of that neurons, they action potentials and characteristics information axons signals trains somatosensory of These the the of occur receptor electrical are generator called distal in first-order where the ends or reflect bodies of are The neurons ( dorsal root located these cell in

Fig. 7.1A

Fig.

4.8 ganglia. ) cranial and nerve

off peripheral gives process into central and that short after divides ganglion cell a Each a a process. axon an distance coalesce ganglion processes cells peripheral nerves. peripheral of The the to form mixed contain efferent and nerve both (motor) which (sensory) afferent fibers. sensory have such innervate will fibers cells; ganglion from only will nerves, muscles, however, A purely axons peripheral branch as sensory receptor. the target with an repeatedly, afferent axon the of organ each At terminal ending a process divides itself and cells the cells) by forms a receptor. some most the In encapsulated ending accessory but receptor, in ending nerve functional is free structure (axon forms by accessory the cases entire the nerve plus terminal

cell enters nerve. via ganglion spinal cranial process axonal dorsal or the the via a The central either the root enters of brainstem a cord A to with of rise that numerous pathways. typically second-order the neurons synapse of a central types, including somatosensory gives variety may branches cell process transmitted. these branches information on being of location of type varies terminal The depending central the terminate at the others nuclei. segmental brainstem Some entry, whereas project to near of level or

information for specific project Second-order somatosensory reside. of third-order thalamic the perception where neurons the part the are neurons that pathway of nuclei to (S-I). primary neurons in These project to cortex the turn somatosensory in Within processed information the S-I in numerous areas. cortex, and higher-order cortical somatosensory is cerebellum also coordination for information its function. by transmitted neurons the Somatosensory motor to in second-order is use other

has clinical distinct of implications. both somatosensory system the which other organization from that The experimental and is senses, of quite the systems for single In they eye visual other have receptors a present at are particular, sensory localized their organ, the to (e.g., where the high density system). head). throughout (and body the receptors contrast, In are distributed somatosensory

of Somatosensory the Subdivisions System

on three categories the based of somatosensory its receptors. information receives broad of The distribution system Its nociceptive of responsible are purpose. thermal mechanoceptive, external (pain), exteroceptive division about for receptors world, in for this objects used skin a the and of information variety the cutaneous and with is providing contact Understanding main this this be chapter. the division will of focus position proprioceptive muscles, about body and and tendons. provides joints, component information on and primarily limb receptors The found in and movement relies pathways that originate central ascending The

7 CHAPTER Somatosensory System The 109

Pain, 7 Fig. crude touch temperature, • are the Again, from not 7.1 shown proprioceptive the information for the and central second-, the side the of that cases, in for tactile information transmitted clarity. pathways. but in one midline clarity. head spinothalamic parts the body. from pathways text, the head so in and the second-order nucleus two cutaneous from Major upper at Homologous but in illustrated originate column/medial carrying the takes the First-, the are body pathway. pathways cerebral of is pathways crosses but the body. main to both from neuraxis they the and and somatosensory the and distinct nuclei dorsal are Note neurons conveying each are lower sensory for neuron cortex: from described originate levels the the side the A, to information shown third-order pathways pathways of trigeminal which spinocerebellar brain, cerebellum B, not axon the in Ascending the place opposite are body lemniscal the to trigeminal of for this for the panels A the midsagittal shows A sections cross the nervous of B. spinal system the and of in and brainstem view levels

covered will and and conscious proprioceptive with underlie in chapter. be that unconscious them functions this they these be intimately again that the control movement, pathways also involved discussed receptors will . initiate of in However, because are in the the distention that detect fullness for and mechanoreceptors or enteroceptive body the includes bladder. has receptors of of Finally, the the state division internal of monitoring gut division as also Aspects are enteroceptive functions. autonomic in to are of they related covered

somatosensory classified by information The also of carry. pathways can be type they the of are Two which functional recognized, subsumes each submodalities. several somatosensory broad categories discriminatory vibration), stretch or (low-frequency light flutter Fine touch and sensations tension. pressure, vibration, include touch, pain sensations The group second temperature. functional and of is major that of both warm and and chemical here and include innocuous cold noxious mechanical and pain. Submodalities sensations associated Itch by pain carried fibers to system. also is with pain the related to closely and particular be appears

Thesensoryfunctionsofvariouscutaneoussensoryreceptorshavebeenstudiedinhumansubjectswithatechniqueknownasmicroneurography, inwhichafinemetalmicroelectrodeisinsertedintoanervetrunkinthearmorlegtorecordtheactionpotentialsfromsinglesensoryaxons.Whenarecordingcanbemadefromasinglesensoryaxon,thereceptivefieldofthefiberismapped.Mostofthevarioustypesofsensoryreceptorsthathavebeenstudiedinexperimentalanimalshavealsobeenfoundinhumanswiththistechnique.

Afterthereceptivefieldofasensoryaxonhasbeencharacterized,theelectrodecanbeusedtostimulatethesamesensoryaxon.Intheseexperimentsthesubjectisaskedtolocatetheperceivedreceptivefieldofthesensoryaxon,whichturnsouttobeidenticaltothemappedreceptivefield.

CNS somatosensory the experimentally, different are the sizes. convey great importance submodalities fibers these afferent Of that to Recall the peaks, from a being in nerve uniformly series consists recorded ) than are peripheral compound of 5.1 diameters potential distributed. thus of a (see the grouped a of that axons action nerve that implying rather via unmyelinated myelinated sensations travels and by temperature primarily lightly tactile (C) myelinated whereas carried about the (Aδ) pain class, and Aβ small-diameter, fibers. fibers large-diameter in Information is information selectively isolation. of particular of axons somatosensory possible different the of to in block is stimulate submodalities or a class size, study It thereby allowing

Skin Innervation of the

innervated is richly and sensory not skin afferents. an is with important a organ The of surprisingly variety afferent to discriminatory or sensations. the fine first related types touch We consider related are what afferents are to low-threshold These called mechanoreceptors. separately thermoceptor this considered will a innervation be Nociceptor and later section of chapter. in

tactile used to a region or a press small-diameter localized of on skin. receptors, the rod wire To responsiveness study is of and of slow-adapting this fast-adapting ( be technique, two responses responses fibers: sensory types recording when seen (SA) may With basic (FA) afferent

Fig. 7.2). in They are present quantities. similar FA but short action will then potentials application of firing rod. first despite continued rod will show fibers the cease skin, the on they burst the pushes down when a of of burst rod the stimulus (i.e., also when cessation They the the may is lifted at off). potentials In firing units to their (or stimulus until action contrast, the stimulus continue the increase onset and firing rate) ends. the fire start at will of SA

the of is as fields, on stimuli of a the the change be field evoke afferent skin defined from the subdivided and where axon). classes region of (i.e., the response their afferent can firing basis other receptive FA aspects Both SA which receptive of can have small units with fields 1 borders. well-defined Type receptive uniform glabrous Particularly of on at palms and (i.e., skin that the which the or ( there feet), and is a has the stimuli to receptive the decreases hands of circular skin, soles sensitivity within as the such sharply for relatively border shape field ovoid high hairless

Fig. 7.3).

particularly units, SA1 units, 1 Type best to edges. respond the larger is stimulus. is receptive a the the them response field indented their edge cuts That through a field is, when than entire when elicited receptive of by from stimulus

gradual maximal with of wider sensitivity sensitivity, borders a with reduction distance a have receptive single which point and fields is only from defined there 2 Type poorly in units (see

Fig. 7.3 ). finger. approximately a receptive will fingertip, field covers receptive comparison that the 1 of four unit’s For typically a unit ridges whereas type a a will have or most field all cover in papillary 2 type

classes SA2). and of physiologically main (FA1, Thus, four FA2, afferents been have identified SA1, low-threshold mechanosensitive within with a receptor structure axons endings, specialized or nerve up supporting as terminate free of may cells. associated a these made either follicle, Peripherally hair

afferent the types four and been with specific four skin whose have receptor associated glabrous histologically classes structures identified of locations For physical

7 The CHAPTER Somatosensory •Fig. System Cutaneousmechanoreceptorsandtheresponsepatternsofassociatedafferentfibers.A,Schematicviewsofglabrous(hairless)andhairyskinshowingthearrangementofthevariousmajormechanoreceptors.B,Firingpatternsofthedifferentcutaneouslow-thresholdmechanosensitiveafferentfibersthatinnervatethevariousencapsulatedreceptorsoftheskin. 7.2 1983;6:27.) (TracesinBarebasedondatafromJohanssonRS,VallboÅB.Trends Neurosci •Fig. Receptivefieldcharacteristicsfortype1andtype2sensoryafferents.Plotsinthetoprowshowthethresholdlevelofforceneededtoevokearesponseasafunctionofthedistanceacrossthereceptivefield.Receptivefieldsizeisshownonthehandbeloweachplot. 7.3 1983;6:27.) (DatafromJohanssonRS,VallboÅB.Trends Neurosci characteristics of afferents. firing the help properties explain these sensory FA1 Meissner’s whereas in SA1 terminate terminate disks. afferents corpuscles, Merkel’s afferents in (Meissner) cases just the either superficially, basal in or receptor the located In both below relatively epidermis is the (Merkel) (see epidermis

Fig. 7.2 ). down oriented them, to detect allowing to SA1 small receptive thus afferents and pressing skin stimuli the These are just fields. small surface on and above FA1 have receptors For afferents Ruffini in end glabrous SA2 in Pacinian and terminate endings afferents FA2 skin, corpuscles. therefore are of over tissue sensitive receptors and lie dermis stimuli connective Both these in territory. the applied much to larger deeper and slowly afferents to stimuli. changing both The of act selectively capsules stimuli, out to making Pacinian or these thus receptors sensitive and changing filter steady Meissner

skin, skin. similar that between relationship is of receptors For afferent and glabrous the classes to hairy SA1 same fibers to skin. SA2 connect Ruffini and and for as Merkel the endings, glabrous blood properties FA2 underlie and are they muscles the instead Pacinian afferents; however, vessels. of but surrounding skin hairy tissues located are deep corpuscles found also not in in There an exact the afferents. analogue FA1 not is to hair afferents are hair wrap whose (see around which units, free there endings follicles Rather are

Fig. 7.2 ). such hair to will hairs connect large a 20 with produce shaped receptive or field. ovoid unit Each about irregularly movement units sensitive single hair. extremely to These are a even of There units, large but field unlike to they touch are the that units FA1 of also fields. receptive skin, respond have

properties psychophysical of coding the can be field the various neural afferents. and categories Several and to related receptive of sensitivities questions of of example, receptors peripheral processes? stimuli the central tactile due sensitivity the to For perception threshold is the of or to as regions, the perception possible such indicating In is the dependent afferent that using skin it an single that however, perceived, from show thus is on the in finger fact, spike factors sensitivity; limit for more central a can to other be by receptors attention. FA1 microneurography

measure behavioral spatial or important of somatosensory discrimination. is and two-point function An acuity clinical apply will points doctor of the skin to needle-like two a Clinically a simultaneously patient. they than generally across points the as stimuli distinct as some farther varies distance, body. as The long are apart patient perceive two threshold will the which fingertips. best threshold at distance) The the is discrimination (shortest type which 1 of spatial the underlie given than units. 1 type surprising Type receptive is fields 2 units smaller units acuity, not units distance closely region to have the density similarly a with throughout palm but its fall-off rise skin sized their for from these density fields the threshold glabrous receptive to in of threshold to is fingertip skin, Moreover, this and because distance. forearm, of units the falls off correlates type 1 most related of that density innervation regions to overall this the sensitivity variation also stimuli. cutaneous skin in different Note matches

that stimulus issue afferent rates is quality of another the in relationship addressed The has techniques. to been microneurographic important the firing perceived classes with various fiber a brief the current that spike, is SA When that is stimulated receptive felt pulse fiber. single sensation pressure field steady each of at pulses a such of a with area triggers perceived. increase As frequency pressure concurrent pulse increased is in a is the the codes for Thus force stimulus. in SA firing of tactile the rate fibers the to one is stimulus results sensation the an frequency first, repetitively FA tapping turns fiber when the and as As a of stimulated, increased, of of another vibration. is example, sensation feeling of particular character—for a as fiber in qualitative does stimulus the pain—so to change only activates neither example, long its stimulus case a class. the Interestingly, of by low-threshold used that that those mechanoreceptors. is This pain fibers is distinct uses distinct submodality set a a from evidence

systems an line. called These sensory important illustrate findings labeled principle of conveyed modality) is a distinct to system. CNS of quality (i.e., of specific a fact The have sensation the particular it a the that is targets the from set of the that idea in that nervous set by afferents results will only aspects the change in in quantitative therefore sensation. Alterations of afferents these activity dedicated and arising such and the SA mechanoreceptors, at in CNS levels be populations to nociceptors) relatively thalamus somatosensory separate submodalities seen detail from as more high later, the primary appear information and FA of somatosensory use various the even As (i.e., relatively proprioceptors, will cortex. cell

of Body Innervation the

(or system through cranial the CNS nervous the Axons peripheral roots through nerves). of leave spinal (PNS) or enter the the composed associated The its root segment central processes root spinal cells. ganglion a dorsal entirely dorsal is of given of of preganglionic levels, at and γ axons root certain (see and ventral The axons, ), consists chiefly axons of segmental α autonomic motor neuron motor (see including

Somatosensory 7 System The CHAPTER

pattern of embryo-logical is during development. determined The innervation dorsal region given called a In root specific supplies dermatome. a cutaneous adults a ganglion as become because formed, they during also lower an development, upper are posture. maintain chiefly upright because the and rotation humans distorted of extremities of but Many dermatomes quadrupedal a sequence be the However, of can readily a in person ( on understood if position the body depicted of dermatomes

Fig. 7.4).

collaterals spinal dermatome. a from receives also segment, from the its Although supply innervation afferent corresponding segments cord the the dermatome densest of fibers adjacent spinal little root transection loss Thus dorsal in sensory single dermatome. causes a of the corresponding dorsal Anesthesia of of given roots. any adjacent interruption dermatome several requires

Acommondiseasethatillustratesthedermatomalorganizationofthedorsalrootsisshingles. Shinglesistheresultofreactivationoftheherpeszostervirus,whichtypicallycauseschickenpoxduringtheinitialinfection.Duringtheinitialinfectionthevirusinfectsdorsalroot(andcranialnerve)ganglioncells,whereitcanremainlatentforyearstodecades.Whenthevirusreactivates,thecellsofthatparticulardorsalrootganglionbecomeinfected,andthevirustravelsalongtheperipheralaxonbranchesandgivesrisetoapainfuloritchyrashthatisconfinedtoonesideofthebody(endsatthemidline)inadermatomal,belt-likedistributionortothedistributionofacranialnerve.

roots, distributed. dorsal fibers not are randomly Within the Rather myelinated root, unmyelinated medial position in myelinated the assume fibers whereas and lateral. large the dorsal primary are more the a small afferent fibers column, they afferent caudally into rostrally the large directed enter placed and branches. The dorsal where medially fibers bifurcate segments. These give that collaterals terminate branches several off in neighboring the lemniscus as pathway. of dorsal also ascends to medulla the part The branch rostral column–medial reflex The in gray to provide horn axonal spinal cord neurons matter terminate afferent that sensory information dorsal locally the transmit and in limb of also branches the pathways the (see

Chapter 9).

of Face the Innervation

face by the body that that primarily trigeminal for fibers primary supply of and the of nerve. comparable the of is afferent The provided is fibers arrangement that fibers to supply nerve Peripheral innervate mandibular maxillary, the face. or through divisions pass and of to regions the in trigeminal ganglion) the (also ophthalmic, the of called ganglion dermatome-like processes gasserian neurons semilunar of trigeminal the and information. fibers pain temperature carry information These and tactile both The •Fig. nerve trigeminal A,Dermatomesrepresentedonadrawingofapersonassumingaquadrupedalposition.NotenerveC1generallyhaslittleornosensorycomponent,andtheunlabeledportionoftheheadandthefaceareinnervatedbysensoryfibersofthecranialnerves,primarilythetrigeminalnerve.B,SagittalviewofthespinalcordshowingtheoriginofnervescorrespondingtoeachofthedermatomesshowninA. 7.4

(ormain)sensory, Thetrigeminalnuclearcomplexconsistsoffourmaindivisions,threeofwhicharesensory.Thethreesensorydivisions(fromrostraltocaudal)arethemesencephalic, anddescending chief nuclei. (orspinal)trigeminal Thelattertwoaretypicalsensorynucleiinthatthecellbodiescontainedinthemaresecond-orderneurons.Themesencephalicnucleusactuallycontainsfirst-orderneuronsandthusisanalogoustoadorsalrootganglion.Thefourthdivisionofthetrigeminalcomplexisthemotornucleusofthetrigeminalnerve,whosemotorneuronsprojecttoskeletalmusclesoftheheadviathetrigeminalnerve(see

and the oral innervates mater. nasal dura Fig.4.6D–E and also cranial cavities, teeth, the the

central also cranial trigeminal V). trigeminal the at processes corresponds brainstem ganglion chief of enter the of midpontine sensory the level the nerve (nucleus level, to of nucleus cells The which touch terminate touch), fine as the descending trigeminal information (primarily trigeminal carry others nucleus. descending Some the medulla needed nucleus axons information carrying descends pain for large-caliber whereas axons discriminative (intermediateand the just axons well small-caliber that through this in tract, and which form lateral to the about as temperature) descends, this tract off As nucleus. peel synapse axons the in and

the in however, trigeminal unique the the the bodies this in conveyed are within CNS the case of mesencephalic information portion Proprioceptive the nerve; trigeminal of cell also is first-order located via nucleus. fibers of equivalent cord spinal reticular segmental the and the (to sensory reflexes The these trigeminal central nucleus. to trigeminal terminate the neurons the segmental formation, chief in motor ]), subserve nucleus processes reflexes [see

travels to targets distinct be the somatosensory the and different structures CNS related brainstem. in extent via already the cord different may into clear, a of axons As to spinal submodalities information sets large and pathways the the segregation as Within cord CNS and the this via up travels information continues spinal brainstem. separate the is the from pain, conveyed the conveyed example, is pathway, system. crude information fine column–medial For whereas discriminatory touch and lemniscus dorsal by information body, by temperature, anterolateral touch

another with lemniscal by transmitted the route that yet dorsal is column–medial Proprioceptive pathway. partially overlaps information is example, ability discriminative some lesion dorsal segregation not columns. that a of recovery Note, can the functional after this of for so, be however, touch there absolute, be on because section pain that the anterolateral critical for will is system discussed information. in it The the pathway central the Here, pathways

considered 7 touch CHAPTER and are for detail. Somatosensory System discriminatory in The proprioception

in its in entirety shown pathway This is

Fig. 7.1A.

by myelinated of dorsal formed the are The root dorsal cells neurons). branches (the ascending ganglion of first-order axons columns large up the at to from information nuclei: each and one the the from the axons which and the and which gracilis, upper body to and rostrally nucleus in segmental of medulla travel leg, the enter These cuneatus, nucleus the the body receives level spinal synapse dorsal part information of lower caudal column part arm. of receives there nuclei across the columns and by with the dorsal dorsal a the body, column legs the is then somatotopic most represented trunk and medially, Note of the representation followed limb. across that upper the dorsal somatotopy funiculus the consequence spinal added lateral cord afferents as is border This ascended. of the being the entering newly of a to is through Such somatosensory cortices. sensory least in all at levels system, are maps the present primary somatotopic the at

discriminatory contain in the are for of touch the sensation. located column the neurons The dorsal nuclei pathway second-order medulla and (see primary the cells synapse the description types). These them respond fibers on afferent to similarly earlier of afferent that column main receptor as on and neurons fibers on inhibitory receptive fields class follows: and types of synapse given dorsal have column to afferent neuron, one neurons, the convergence between neurons sensory are sometimes because more responses fibers differences larger local that than often afferent column (1) a several through second-order (3) of of dorsal column dorsal dorsal neurons different fields neurons interneurons. primary afferent primary multiple receptive primary dorsal the The column of (2) are the have mediated because neurons of respond

of medullary column same exit ventrally the fibers referred internal as then nuclei projection neurons midline and to as they The cross medially axons are the at nuclei. the the level arcuate dorsal as sweep nuclear and to the Immediately lemniscus after crossing these form medial fibers the midline, the (see

Fig. thalamus. rostrally which projects to 4.6C–E the ), level this important deficits. Knowledge of includes contralateral will below lemniscal is level, this fine all produce produce on same, lesion, will side column–medial of the the whereas this cord, spinal the damage which ipsilateral, clinically pathway to somatosensory discriminatory lesions loss of because the of level the decussation dorsal or abilities of above regions. fine-touch there clear medial somatotopic limited loss localized arrangement in of to the lesions body is fibers sensations selective lemniscus, a because Moreover, of cause specific

The cortex ( the of (VPL) located ventral project cerebral of the thalamus posterior of pathway are the third-order neurons in the nucleus and areas somatosensory to lateral

Fig. 7.5 •Fig. 7.5 Diagramofconnectionsfromthesomatosensoryreceivingnucleiofthethalamustothesomatosensorycortexoftheparietallobe.Notetheparallelflowofdifferenttypesofsomatosensoryinformationthroughthethalamusandontothecortex.CS,centralsulcus;S1andS2areprimaryandsecondarysomatosensoryareas,respectively.Note:collectively,areas3a,3b,1,and2arereferredtoasS1.

pathway dorsal and sensations. conveys fine-touch column–medial information lemniscus vibratory The about the abilities critical we many for tactile of is discriminatory This information have. by by their lost objects shape is spatial by be this acuity the can damage pathway, and ability damage identify and to For lowered this to texture example, to pathway. direction Clinically, the letters may on to ability or for impaired or traced recognize skin. to a one of for graphesthesia, drawn the skin, tell loss ability numbers or across the line of the test the of and of remains awareness still complete can tactile stimuli some loss function and localization occur. nonnoxious the after even tactile dorsal columns, Importantly, ascending also some pathways. least pathway by at additional column the Thus information conveyed by is carried of the dorsal lesions temperature In touch severe columns. and in to sensation, dorsal cutaneous discriminatory the unaffected pain are contrast sensations by of the deficits However, by diminished to pain damage dorsal substantially the columns. is visceral

Trigeminal the From for Sensation Pathway Fine-Touch Face

oral nerve. nucleus cranial brainstem the meninges nuclei, descending several trigeminal nasal the main nucleus face, the cavities, teeth, the that fibers supply sensory in and Primary and including synapse and of afferent

through lemniscus the the resembles column–medial pathway. dorsal The pathway sensory nucleus main the information ventral tactile trigeminothalamic medial way posterior This of contralateral tract. the (VPM) relays thalamic sensory by nucleus nucleus to neurons project area cortex. VPM facial somatosensory in nucleus to the the Third-order the of

body. information Proprioceptors positions movement of and of about parts provide the the local being reflexes used to In addition for (see

two and 9), information the this has the cortex. targets, Chapter main cerebellum cerebral functions. this The coordination motor information uses cerebellum for its of (e.g., which our to information body sent cerebral the to our is for referred kinesthesia. the hand), basis The conscious of awareness is cortex as parts position

to pathways which shown are The the cerebellum information major brought in by is somatosensory

Fig. . 7.1B and cerebellum. the These carry to cutaneous proprioceptive pathways information both For (nucleus Clarke’s root column and lower cells in dorsalis). dorsal the with trunk limb, ganglion whose starts synapse the axons pathway which form to funiculus of lateral send tract, ipsilateral their cells Clarke’s peduncle. inferior into dorsal cerebellum enters spinocerebellar cerebellar the the column axons the The the via the input limb spinocerebellar somatosensory The also lower ventral cerebellum. to tract from the provides spinocerebellar of cord ventral the at the Note one pathway levels the decussation (one matter). the double white a decussation cerebellar second and in spinal of to body. general each highlights side the rule crossing is related of half cerebellum the functionally ipsilateral the that double the This

main dorsal spinocerebellar the is limb from cortex, give tract that proprioceptive axons To rostral to cerebral provide which the off nucleus gracilis. the the z, nucleus in branch terminates medulla lower the the a of just to in information medial the and from part form arcuate of VPL to internal lemniscus thalamus. fibers z the of nucleus of and cells the nucleus axons ascend The then

limb are from The (see those to the ascending limb lower cerebellum for upper somatosensory pathways simpler than the the

Fig. ). 7.1B cerebellum dorsal the external to with nucleus. spinal cuneate fibers fasciculus route the from The ascend starts levels the cuneate to cervical in the that ganglion root which cuneocerebellar peduncle. axons enters the the via then external the of tract, cuneate form its inferior The cerebellum nucleus

lemniscal from upper that synapse of then the column–medial discriminative information and to pathway, nucleus to route the the for the dorsal is for thalamus. in in the touch: nucleus with cortex cuneate cerebral VPL limb a proprioceptive the The identical

carried is of the input the by nucleus For trigeminal the nerve. of mesencephalic proprioceptive head, cells (muscles the the that actually other the this of of in move of innervate nucleus the mastication bodies muscles jaw) head. in the and receptors are neurons afferents cell the in that stretch that Recall muscles primary trigeminal the motor of nucleus the to or central processes neurons reticular local nearby these formation. to project reflexes The for from in join reticular of neurons thalamus. these VPM terminates trigeminothalamic the tract, the formation Axons the which for pathways are somatosensory cerebellum. and the also There the information trigeminocerebellar conveying from (tactile to proprioceptive) head

the termination The ventroposterior nuclear represents information thalamus somatosensory diencephalon. of in the site the main complex ascending for called of VPM, smaller nucleus major consists nuclei, the It (VPI) the ventral two posterior and inferior VPL a (see and

Fig. 7.5 ). The lemniscus forms the nerve sensory nucleus to the and main nucleus. of input trigeminal forms VPM the VPL the tract input main medial the trigeminothalamic equivalent nucleus, main to the the from conveying receive input tracts, equivalent also information pain temperature trigeminothalamic spinothalamic nuclei and These or the from respectively. The spinothalamic nucleus tract. input receives from VPI the of other in parts nuclear tract posterior and addition, thalamic complex the nuclei. terminates spinothalamic several In the

these firstand the shown in those the the nuclei resemble ascending stimuli many have complex to of neurons responses of in the Single-unit nuclei second-order of that recordings of tracts. ventroposterior neurons from thalamic fibers. primary fields are receptive cells those small afferent of but larger than of The somewhat particular dominated receptor. the type Moreover, may be of responses sensory a by receptor SA) from from cutaneous receptive and example, as input. or proprioceptive either whose of (FA cells receptors, lemniscal nuclei or fields one typically expected VPM type VPL their have from reflect medial For input and main posterior cells the input activation to In to contrast, the VPI of responses nuclei pathway. of spinothalamic the nociceptors, show

receptive inhibitory as have Thalamic neurons as excitatory often well fields. dorsal the nuclei in column spinal The of place or may take horn actually the the cord. inhibition in dorsal are the also inhibitory thalamus. However, situated circuits within example, of reticular nuclei primates interneurons in and project and rodents), the but inhibitory GABAergic nucleus interneurons not the VPM and the (in VPL into GABAergic inhibitory For the VPM in VPL thalamus nuclei. contain thalamus of of a of shell much the the (The that reticular nucleus surrounds is neurons thalamus. thin reticular axon feed-forward send both the and with and/ thalamic whose feedback neurons collaterals complete corticothalamic circuits in Thalamocortical respectively nuclei.) other or inhibitory to then neurons neurons nucleus,

nuclei the excitability system is sensory somatosensory sleep/wake the difference the One neurons depends presence anesthesia. of in or stage of and absence thalamic cycle that VPM between the on and neurons levels on neuron VPL of at the lower and inhibitory drowsiness anesthesia, thalamic During barbiturate neurons sequence of to tend or of an during state undergo excitatory a and alternating potentials. postsynaptic in alternating discharges excite bursts intermittently in the of neurons cerebral cortex. The turn in on inhibition and result an of or the spindling electroencephalogram. excitation patterns α in Such rhythm these NMDA thalamic excitation non-NMDA amino may inhibitory excitatory the states potentials level and by act excitatory postsynaptic and This reflect two during receptors. that at acids neurons alternation of of of the also thalamic by of may the It through pathways neurons recurrent reticular reflect inhibition nucleus.

are across complex. systematically contralateral and side nuclear Thalamic ventroposterior receptive neuron, on the fields to receptive body field the the locations vary neuron the the of such limb medially the VPL the head in and organized nuclei and the lower represented the That nucleus. even most in somatotopically the is limb nucleus, VPL upper more VPM and are represented is, that most is medially the VPM laterally are multiple of that the that from input fact one there out neurons Moreover, nuclear class maps the somatotopic ventroposterior receptor thalamic across receive often complex. suggests laid only to That SA, pain there out appear the separate and ventroposterior be is, nuclear complex. laid maps across for FA, sensations somatotopic proprioceptive and

not randomly are These interspersed. maps largely the sensation VPI across nucleus. already As pain is mapped mentioned, located cells central that “shell” to form appear to cells the a complex, (VPS) drive whereas In of this core. a information directed cutaneous proprioceptive receptors addition, region the in VPL-VPM around is “core” the and information in is then flow diagramed of parallel cortex thalamus into onto This

Fig. 7.5

also of intralaminar nucleus the the complex lateral and including the thalamic thalamus. spinothalamic projects posterior tract other to regions, The the nucleus central of ganglia diffusely of somatotopically organized, The they intralaminar and to (see cortex not well cerebral project ). the the thalamus the nuclei basal to as as are part and be in lateral involved arousal of of attention. cortex projection S-I the the may to The the central nucleus in of this cortex selective

in somatosensory Third-order the project to neurons cortex. the thalamus sensory details The are of shown in projection pattern this

Fig. . 7.5 The receiving somatosensory main

the Somatosensory 7 S-I cortex are System areas and The called the areas. S-II CHAPTER of is the and S-II in (secondary cortex The somatosensory the is cortex) fissure lateral superior postcentral the bank somatosensory of cortex (see located S-I the cortex) gyrus, (or primary on

Fig. 7.5

thalamus, has like previously organization. the the somatosensory S-I As somatotopic cortex, a discussed, a other understood the also The cortex map, somatotopic less cortex. of areas several as S-II contains do in In above cortex the lateral fissure. is the the gyrus, represented postcentral the the of lateral part S-I face and gyrus, dorsolateral of postcentral lower the in represented and The hemisphere. are the of part upper surface the extremity the the hand medial extremity on of rest the the map is of the postcentral the of on human a surface the sensory homunculus. of gyrus A body a and called face is density is of the The to map devoted region body of innervation. its to the a volume distorted neural because proportional tissue cortex Thus their and disproportionately up to humans, thumb, the relative area, take size. of a expanse perioral large the digits in other

an information. somatosensory The of coding is of homunculus place sensory expression location somatosensory the A body S-I face. of encodes of stimulus surface the the on a the locus or in cortex been brain body a neurons part in certain For the the certain because has gyrus activated. knows postcentral example, of are stimulated that the

functional each The and map. subdivision morphological and a cortex several has S-I subdivisions, has somatotopic Nissl-stained of layers as based seen of various they on were neurons by in preparations. subdivisions These described the in the the Brodmann, were and arrangements cortex, originally 2 3b, (see and The Brodmann therefore areas ). known 3a, subdivisions as are 1, in Cutaneous (proprioceptive) 3b dominates input areas 3a dominates and and in input whereas joint areas 1, 2. muscle and processing cortical proprioceptive for (see information zones separate Thus are and specialized tactile

Fig. 7.5

receptive similar a Within and fields. S-I the properties particular have surface cortex, any all along of cortical to response neurons line the area perpendicular the columnar S-I to have thus said organization. cortex is The a comparable primary organization (see has A demonstrated also receiving including cortices ). auditory areas, other been sensory columnar and visual for primary the different S-I columns cortex the modalities. process Nearby sensory may in information cortical for reaches area one a that in mechanoreceptors. mechanoreceptors, whereas that come the from might reaches may column 3b information from information For SA example, the neighboring column cortical FA cutaneous originate

initial of begins the higher-order information, feature such responsible extraction. somatosensory also being for the cortex processing processing Besides S-I as receptive direction across neurons the to (Fig. in in a moves preferentially but the direction field respond not stimulus certain For one in example, opposite that 1 area ). 7.6 grasped presumably an stimulus direction slippage of being object help by neurons contribute to detect applied of an the could to the and Such the hand. recognize perceptual ability

SECTION2Berne Physiology 118 •Fig. Levy & Featureextractionbycorticalneurons.Theresponseswererecordedfromaneuroninthesomatosensorycortexofamonkey.Thedirectionofastimuluswasvaried,asshownbythearrowsinthedrawing.NotethattheresponsesweregreatestwhenthestimulusmovedinthedirectionfromUWtoRFandleastfromRWtoUF.F,fingers;R,radialside;U,ulnarside;W,wrist. 7.6 Neurophysiol 1980;43:1319. (FromCostanzoRM,GardnerEP.J RW U second F 1 F RF UW )R UF R UF RF R W UW W U RW W F U

Lesions Somatosensory of of the Cortex Effects

produced somatosensory the a cortex the lesion S-I to A humans produces sensory in similar lesion of of changes those thalamus. by on only and the confined, for with leg, the may the location part a the sensory lesion the homunculus. involved, cortex the thus example, be or is sensory However, usually depending loss to respect of the to of to face sense. sensory affected and most The touch discriminative modalities are position and and coins as handled) the keys to disturbed. recognize (i.e., such objects particularly they Graphesthesia stereognosis are ability as are thermal loss and pain may of cortical unaffected, sensation follow lesions. relatively sensation may be although Pain state can lesions result cortical thalamic “ central pain pain resembles Conversely, (see a that in

Somatosensory of Thalamus Spinotha of the the Interruption Tract and Effects of Lesions on lamic

fibers the grouped the mediated pathways same together are same are PNS conveyed because the in of of types are they receptors sensations and overlapping sets The related in by pain and often temperature of the and and by CNS. are pain that be stronger these labeled not particular in lines as thought. might sensations naively pathways, due of of consequence activation is to One touch is frequently, stimulated for more example, are not sensation but if borne This and difference pressure tactile stronger out SA the experimentally painful. becomes of afferents, more because

the are carry and C conducting of Aδ members The that classes. slowly relatively painful sensations thermal axons and light manner and carry axons was described temperature to touch and pain to C for a information; respond not all mechanoreceptors. similar Aδ what some in low-threshold However,

(This and endings “free information morphologically entirely properties, case but description as originate are mechanoreceptors Aδ the the in and not low-threshold to distinct receptors covered axons conveying accurate; endings.” which appear temperature entirely is C the not Schwann correspond mostly nerve mostly cells.) for pain Unlike to by response associated the specialization a constitute endings, their variety stimuli (or tissue-damaging C differentially Aδ or of that morphological population sensitive heterogeneous distinct is thermal axons to and of a both). with lack Despite tissue-damaging thermal, mediated called (mechanical, nociceptors. stimuli chemical) or sense are This by is to what ability with as the (see These sensitized later). are receptors distinct such features in low-threshold to ways, become many some ability share mechanoreceptors but C or that until to stimuli be fibers any number unresponsive appear significant Indeed, sensitized. silent a to there are first of

be axons. made the C Aδ system and The functional first pain in that between distinction may is what is thought pain. underlie and Aδ fibers pain, are are responsible first axons called to C whereas C faster than conduct fibers do second for signals a pain) more diffuse, a followed an initial stimulus, one localized damaging pain). highly by sharp, (first pricking, (second Thus after sensation burning feels sensation duller, first activity fibers produces Aδ pain–like Experiments were that first that in in which fibers C demonstrated activated or pain sensations. activity and in sensations selectively Aδ second to similar produces C fibers

sensitivity to in Each with fiber to turn heterogeneous class regard a group forms stimuli. afferents their and sensitivity Thus stimuli. chemical size and to according are both mechanical, thermal, classified to stimulation Fibers high it. threshold may to a have low insensitive to be mechanical or or completely heat, cool, has noxious been noxious responsiveness cold. Thermal sensitivity as classified to and warmth, and that 43°C painful. approximate which, as and respectively, are are Note below stimuli sensed 15°C above limits the thermal of compounds variety a to has sensitivity irritating been oil, capsaicin mustard in tested, including chili and Chemical peppers), (found acids.

been of have may more fibers or stimuli accordingly. types and one named sensitive Afferent to be those fibers stimuli to called high-intensity (also mechanoheat-sensitive sensitive mechanosensitive (damaging) mechanical labeled only example, heat to are C and mechanical polymodal fibers whereas called fibers, are C sensitive fibers). C stimuli For mechanoheat-sensitive C mechanosensitive, types Aδ identified and include Other fiber Aδ and fibers. cold-sensitive, types; accounts for nearly type is C a which afferent is the Thus the however, half fiber, of polymodal afferent the variety C cutaneous fibers. of quite there common most sensitized—see until common an Surprisingly mechanoheatinsensitive is afferent type sensitive the afferent (i.e., to stimuli second the noxious most not later). that is

horn the temperature pain information the dorsal and central C the carrying of body from and cord. terminates spinal Aδ axons portion The of the in V II. fibers lamina lamina part (base of of I (area fibers dorsal the gray in matter, horn), and (dorsalmost whereas and of target C Aδ terminate The horn), central the surrounding X dorsal I canal) two messages ability separated, C are this and the The cord Aδ the is and distinct spinal types to consistent our the that CNS feel patterns carrying are with in kept termination of of to pain. distinct the suggest they fibers

the can they the are descending primary systems interactions have pain afferent control with because patterns also important determine with The spinal possible later). help termination cord other and in fibers (see afferents may theory control gate that the Indeed, phenomenon pain to the of refers

or as painful area, such rubbing CHAPTER sensations. a Somatosensory innocuous System reduce hurt block stimuli, 7 can The stimulation activates Aβ) Such within and inter-neurons (Aα horn. activity and leads the of GABA and other their dorsal the release large-diameter fibers, neurotransmitters to by then presynaptic of by spinothalamic both GABA mechanisms shut the activity postsynaptic cells. tract and down to acts respectively. Ca++ and blocking GABAA and terminal which depolarization of Presynaptically, activates of the receptors, GABAB leads partial presynaptic GABA to channels, both excitation lessen transmitter of decrease by actions tract of afferent terminal inhibition). release Both and presynaptic the thereby will the on (see cell section

and originates the similar limbs. in to processed information thermoreceptive that fashion a head of from the that regions is for and trunk Nociceptive enter thermoreceptors in the the through enter The the glossopharyngeal, trigeminal afferent vagus through of and fibers head primary facial, and nociceptors (some also brainstem nerve the nerves). the both pain. and includes trigeminal note, headache Of distribution tooth as fibers upper nerve. trigeminal descend the descending through far These the then cervical via spinal tract brainstem of the cord the as trigeminal descending of the the tract nerve. join fibers also mechanoreceptive afferent Some trigeminal descending in synapse nerve. the descending of nucleus neurons on the the Axons tract in second-order

Elderlypeoplearesometimessusceptibletoaconditionofchronicpainknownastrigeminal neuralgia. Peoplewiththisconditionexperiencespontaneousepisodesofsevere,oftenlancinatingpaininthedistributionofoneormorebranchesofthetrigeminalnerve.Frequentlythepainistriggeredbyweakmechanicalstimulationinthesameregion.Amajorcontributingfactortothispainfulstateappearstobemechanicaldamagetothetrigeminalganglionbyanarterythatimpingesontheganglion.Surgicaldisplacementofthearterycanoftenresolvethecondition.

spinomesencephalic spinothalamic, tracts. The pathways pain central spinoreticular, and the include pathway thermal the sensations and spinothalamic sensory most the The (see for body somatic important is pain from tract

Fig. ). 7.1A It also sensation. to contributes tactile (primarily laminae in spinal second-order The I originates and located VI). the neurons IV spinothalamic tract from to cord opposite or of their cells axons near The to cross of side cord of origin. the level to the at these third-order brainstem part neurons), ventral to (thalamocortical the thalamus, terminate the then as to in the brain funiculus described They neurons ascend lateral through they and subsequently of where on earlier. the the and the the target pain some end portion complex also VPI of the Spinothalamic in cells temperature ventroposterior (although conveying

posterior of thalamus. VPL), nuclei spinothalamic the the cells the and intralaminar nucleus, tract Multireceptive cortex but the including and areas insula, areas, somatosensory forwarded limbic to then functions several are (see as the cortical gyrus have that also cortical only system which Nociceptive involved in the such are cingulate affective responses, not 120 signals

Fig. 7.5

noxious or from viscera. joints, be in excited cells spinothalamic of input muscle, nociceptors Most tract skin, stimulation many the receive but excitatory also by can viscera. Few input from receive only (hot cold), Effective cutaneous mechanical, include stimuli chemical thermal stimuli. or and noxious thermal, in events. manner noxious, different mechanical appropriate respond cells tract a Thus for signaling spinothalamic or A

spinothalamic nociceptive cutaneous Some classes of convergent sensory tract from excitatory different input several cells receptors. receive For a example, given spino

Fig. 7.7A ). neurons multirecep-120 activated wide–dynamic tive of they stimuli range or Such by called cells intensities. a are cells are with wide range because Wide–dynamic by centers. signal be weak mainly tactile to stimuli ignored range higher to noxious responses appear neurons the events; pain, sensation a by ficiently may of activated stimuli pathological a be in activity sensitized previously However, that conditions, neurons to evoke result were silent. of tactile suf as these certain possibly afferents in explain of allodynia). (mechanical mechanoreceptors This would pain in states pain some activation which causes Other noxious activated by tract cells are stimuli. only spinothalamic often called neurons nociceptive-specific Such (see are cells high-threshold or

Fig. 7.7B

convey input source visceral misidentify from pain. information of also cutaneous Because the brain typically signaling may the cells the receptors, This called phenomenon is pain. referred wall A is felt left the becomes and heart chest ischemic example in pain when muscle arm. is and the typical

excitatory released polypeptide acid Neurotransmitters CGRP, several (VIP). by of tract such intestinal afferents nociceptive as and vasoactive activate spinothalamic cells amino SP, the any include peptides, that and glutamate fast receptors. acid to act by on a its excitatory transmitter as Glutamate amino non-NMDA action appears also NMDA can act stimulation, through glutamate repetitive However, receptors. with appear Peptides as neuromodulators. act to excitatory as a For called of an responsiveness with sensitization. the a in example, increase this through produce cells; action enhanced responses such combined central SP spinothalamic tract glutamate, long-lasting is acid can amino inhibiting of its increase the and to enzymatic seems of action SP prolong release SP CGRP by degradation.

receptive cells have tract inhibitory Spinothalamic often fields. from effective result most mechanical but inhibitory Inhibition stimuli, •Fig. the usually may weak stimuli 7.7 A,Responsesofawide–dynamicrangeormultireceptivespinothalamictractcell.B,Responsesofahigh-thresholdspinothalamictractcell.Graphsshowresponsestogradedintensitiesofmechanicalstimulation.Brushstimulusisacamel’shairbrushrepeatedlystrokedacrossthereceptivefield.Pressureisappliedbyattachmentofanarterialcliptotheskin.Thisisamarginallypainfulstimulustoahuman.Pinchisachievedbyattachmentofastiffarterialcliptotheskinandisdistinctlypainful.Squeezeisappliedbycompressingafoldofskinwithforcepsandisdamagingtotheskin.

ones. noxious are body the very inhibitory face. and be receptive of may and may nociceptive include large The fields most Such the for manipulations, account pain. receptive transcutaneous to stimulation nerve ability physical acupuncture, and may fields suppress various electrical of including GABA spinothalamic cells glycine, and that tract opioid and inhibit peptides. as well the can Neurotransmitters endogenous include as the acids monoamines amino inhibitory

bilateral stimuli have include Spinoreticular effective tract ones. large, receptive neurons sometimes noxious frequently fields, and dorsal target multiple reticular regions pontine neurons the These formation. horn in medullary and arousal wide formation, cortex, reticular The and areas mechanisms (see the to the thereby attentional to thalamus complex and in of projects involved of intralaminar the is cerebral which

10). Chapter

reticular descending control systems rise to descending gives transmission pain. formation contribute The to reticulospinal which also of that the projections,

the stimuli, to noxious receptive or may small the tract fields cells of be and Many large. spinomesencephalic respond The which the important system. is of are periaqueductal component several in midbrain including tract gray, endogenous nuclei, analgesia an the of terminations this may Motivational responses matter. gray from also result activation the of periaqueductal can gray vocalization the and behavior. cause For in aversive periaqueductal matter stimulation example, amygdala. the relayed to is to the the from midbrain but only thalamus Information also not several provides by of trigger pathways noxious emotional responses. stimuli one This which can

from is as from and central pathways, Pain the is body. information such analogous along conveyed the temperature information face ascending head and originating trigeminal medial runs in which with information the VPI) specific the of descending ventral transmit the via association thalamus in Neurons contralateral to trigeminothalamic the lemniscus. temperature (VPM, nucleus and close tract, nuclei pain The intralaminar and complex nucleus fashion the that thalamic nuclei of projects other to the spinothalamic a similar in to also tract. descending for cortex and and regions turn motivational-affective nuclei in project other discrimination the sensory cortical pain for of temperature to to somatosensory cerebral The thalamic responsible responses.

Effects and on Tract Sensation Somatosensory of Lesions Thalamus of the the of Spinothalamic Interruption

When of the spinal components both spinothalamic ventral lost accompanying the motivational-affective sensory-discriminative cord contralateral the side the interrupted, pain body. pathways tract are of and are the on and as pain which to in anterolateral many from those treat especially cancer. cordotomy, was used known motivated result suffering This the development surgical individuals, of procedure successful cordotomy. This years now returns is in initially pain and drug of therapy infrequently months because to after operation because an used often improvements may the central or of disease state. development reflect extension of pain of Return a pain either addition sensation loss of of produces the cold and to In cordotomy body. loss of sensation, contralateral the anterolateral on pain side warmth tactile tract reveal interruption intact by any the spinothalamic that sensory the deficit cord of a the as tactile the loss testing spinal insignificant. Careful provide caused of is dorsal part information of may but pathways minimal sufficient well,

VPL Destruction diminishes of the the or nuclei on face. side or body of VPM sensation contralateral the that sensory are reflect are lost those The that qualities

CHAPTER The and 7 dorsal Somatosensory lemniscus transmitted column–medial trigeminal its by mainly pathway the equivalent. System The pain is component sensory-discriminative lost. of also sensation if medial is motivational-affective present is However, still pain component the intact. thalamus the of this projections to thalamus. the Presumably, of because pain of persists and spinoreticulothalamic part spinothalamic the In the some lesion as of central results in thalamic thalamus known pain a a pain. state somatosensory individuals lower of painful, pain the pain feels even although receptor. with any report that touch the the slightest touch thalamic threshold Patients of than the is intensity pain their of column a is thalamic system that fibers that is sensitivity due It onto sprouting to that synapse low-threshold normally only surviving mediate dorsal pain. thought neurons post-lesion cortex. pain in produced can lesions be thalamic from brainstem Pain or by the indistinguishable also is that

Pain absence of sometimes in nociceptor the stimulation. occurs is damage type transmitting or nerves CNS the of that information. most after nociceptive in to of are pain to This involved parts peripheral likely occur to to caused neural damage is pain. by neuropathic Pain called structures and pain which include central sometimes peripheral may which neuropathic damage states damage structures. occurs CNS peripheral to follow a after pain, Neuropathic to pain, nerve, neuropathic

a limb of nerve Examples peripheral pain are secondary pain. and damage to causalgia phantom to to a after develop traumatic damage nerve. may Causalgia peripheral innervated Even develop by the pain pain is reduced, severe in the damaged may though evoked nerve. area This strong drugs. treat, difficult pain very with even may be to analgesic in Na+ channels. root may dorsal ganglion develops attributed caused cells; such is upregulation The by in part pain spontaneous to that activity of be activity the a nerve neural to sympathetic sympathetic maintained alleviate In because by may seems block pain. some be pain cases activity, the of in into ganglia, dorsal by be sprouting upregulation relate to may the afferent postganglionic adrenoreceptors accompanied involvement axons damaged may neurons. sympathic root Sympathetic it the of primary and follows some in traumatic pain individuals. limb Phantom amputation pain area caused is present. longer by of nociceptors no Such receptors because activation which are in not pain phantom felt, in is these clearly the

spontaneous cause is of which a of at central severe levels may the pathway pain. Lesions the pain, other spinothalamocortical thalamus or reduce nociceptive peripheral the pain the However, by pathway of may the prevent stimulation. or by interruption simultaneously lesion evoked same damage caused of pain trauma-induced neural mechanism The poorly understood. such by is to properties pain in in more and activity distant neurons response on the the depend system. The of appears nociceptive changes

Somatosensory Transduction the System in

system factors. difficult of processes somatosensory the a the because for transduction proven has Unraveling variety of the of and the The the specialized neuron branch ganglia axon of endings root occurs cells). the heart the transduction trigeminal at process of sensory ganglia (dorsal peripheral of that activated generator stimuli that thermal, and/or are (see underlies chemical allow endings current flow These mechanical, by the that and have local the channels potential

Fig. ). 5.13 spikes the (see afferent in fiber triggers potential generator The then

Fig. 5.14 ). fact is the onto retina, somatosensory compare found low difficult proteins body that However, axons in photoreceptors packed the the of purification which densities, (e.g., are surface). density throughout small at are a making the high at with

the Ca++ generator matters, can by and be a excitatory (e.g., and Na+ Complicating modified host (K+ of voltage-gated channels, channels) potential inhibitory both channels). modify (e.g., structure corpuscles), the described process. cases of as terminal Moreover, properties this is and accessory transduction in Pacinian earlier, the many encapsulated axon the the They having release the capsule, stimulus. do passively, or of to a characteristics so mechanical may result cells a in accessory by transmitter of as actively response the the the and recent neurotransmitter. of channels release Merkel An axon cells have Merkel evidence innervating the suggests mechanosensitive cells is both and them the example where Merkel latter cells,

complications, increase transduction a has somatosensory these using our of of approaches, processes rapidly. to knowledge Despite begun number

expressed invertebrates thought underlying currents, such are family, in the to dorsal recently, root to cutaneous elegans, DEG/ENaC the these (acid-sensing Caenorhabditis be because ASIC channel belong as cells. of Until proteins ASIC and ganglion sensation channel) underlie had mechanoactivated homologs because ion proteins the proteins the in been highly which touch some proteins, proteins, are channel the by in cells indicating ganglion mechanoactivated mechanotransduction. that not the root are However, not knockdown dorsal currents ASIC the of underlying they affected cutaneous they role Nevertheless, mutants, and touch so transduction the in altered knockdown still pain may sensitivity such play in is modulatory process. a

that rapidly adapting mechanical pore forms response underlying stimuli. Piezo2 nonselective cutaneous because the opens for mechanical to thought responses, transduction a protein Currently, be channel cation in is to it causing are the consistent rapidly this the channel red) by it (gadolinium, mechanoactivated of these adapting and Moreover, kinetics agents block is currents. activation current, its and rapidly blocked ruthenium adapting that inactivation with of blocks the interfering in rapid cells cells. with Furthermore, ganglion mechanoactivated current transfection small (si)RNA Piezo2 for these of expression in cells. shown (m)RNA ganglion Piezo2 root Lastly, has been messenger dorsal

low-threshold a been (light innocuous Piezo2, indicating plays role and touch) found both to Both ganglion touch cells nociceptive-type have express painful in that sensation. and it a The and Piezo2) visceral organs in (Piezo1 both are well. underlie of sensation proteins variety and Piezo found as may thus and main ]) found the Golgi protein [see mechanotransducer well. as to there proprioceptors and the Piezo2 be has main organs in appears spindles tendon (muscle been

in been of to family found it spiciness) populations The binds ganglion has in receptor molecule root be either and expressed of cells. a one has related that capsaicin identified, their dorsal proteins responsible been chili (the for of or peppers likely transducers TRP potential) of most for the sensations. currently and being proteins protein are (transient thermal These candidates family the receptor the to belong

channels, many gating that enzymes) mechanism. however, of other as important proteins, e.g., case the to note channels temperature in is ion the It acting are is temperature; sensitive to (and directly TRP are The which are specific channels in by at temperatures active arrows indicated TRP

Fig. which (bottom), the in of direction 7.8 •Fig. each 7.8 Temperaturedependenceoffiringratesindifferentthermo-sensitiveafferents.BelowthefiringratecurvesareshowntherangesoverwhichthedifferentTRPchannelsareactivated.Thedirectionofincreasingactivationisindicatedbyanarrowineachcase.Notehowinsomecasestherangeoverwhichanafferentisactive(topgraphs)correspondswelltotheactivationrangeofasingleTRPchannel,thussuggestingthattheafferentwouldneedtoexpressonlyasingletypeofchannel.InothercasestheactiverangeoftheafferentsuggeststhatmultipleTRPchannelswouldbeneededtounderliethecompleteresponsivenessoftheafferent.

cause which activation. temperatures indicates arrow greater For comparison,

Fig. temperature. a fibers rates several plots the of 7.8 as also firing thermosensitive function of individual ranges match channels. the up those Note of afferents heat-sensitive largely response how of with the firing does. channel The range show wider one however, TRP a cold than over any fibers, possible of ganglion them over temperatures. root a classes that discrepancy express multiple of TRP, for which dorsal range explanation respond may would enable is One wider physiological to this cells

andwerefoundtobepartofthephototransductionprocessinDrosophila photoreceptors.Thusthename(TRP) channels.Theyarehomotetramersorheterotetramers.Eachsubunithassixtransmembranedomains.TRPproteinsappeartohaveavarietyoffunctions(e.g.,phototransduction,chemotransduction,andmechanotransduction)andareexpressedinanumberofcelltypes.Thoselistedin MembersoftheTRPproteinfamilywerefirstidentifiedinDrosophila referstothefactthatamutationinthegeneleadstoatransientdepolarizingresponsetoalightstimulusinsteadofthenormalsustainedresponse.Onthebasisofsequencehomology,anumberofgenesencodingTRPproteinshavebeenfoundinmammals(27inhumansalone),whicharecurrentlydividedintosevensubfamilies.TRPchannelsarecationpermeableandhaveastructuresimilartovoltage-gatedK+

Table7.1 appeartoactastemperaturesensorswithdistinctthermalsensitivitiesthatspantherangeofphysiologicallyrelevanttemperatures.

Process of Transduction Modulation the

the innocuous mechanoreceptors low-threshold As activation touch nociceptor with the various for sensations, of

Thefourthletterinthenameidentifiesthesubfamilyandwaschosenbecauseofthefirstmemberofthesubfamilyidentified:V,vanilloid;M,melastatin;A,ankyrin-like.Eachoftheproteinslistedisexpressedinatleastsomedorsalrootganglioncells,buttheyarealsoexpressedinothercelltypes.

System transmits to Somatosensory transduction proteins the afferent, that of the potential generator CNS. information 7 a CHAPTER leads spiking to causes The which In gene–related P to local (CGRP). nociceptors (substance chemical [SP]) and tachykinins various compounds, also activation calcitonin of addition, protein of including release leads skin). (edema redness the and cells surrounding These from substances neurogenic of others damaged cause the and inflammation released

substances may or subsequent these reaction, serve earlier, damaging henceforth to any nociceptors such causing the respond activate local that they mentioned to to silent In can addition stimuli. a insensitive painful innocuous to stimuli). were pain felt that of and (increase an injury) stimuli Sensitization has hyperalgesia suggested been allodynia already in underlie level to (elicitation by the painful of sensations of before nociceptors silent of Thermal hyperalgesia channels. sensitization TRPV1 to due is The hyperalgesia known phenomena. is suggesting increased current allodynia, and these in this cause substances underlie to Piezo2 current changes by mechanical

Somatosensation of Control Centrifugal

experience detection events. of not Sensory passive just is environmental the of exploration Instead, depends often it the on environment. more Tactile hand a are the cues by surface. moving sought over result eyes. scanning the from Visual targets with cues result often a as the sensory information Thus in of is activity received motor system. Furthermore, brain in by is to descending transmission systems. the of pathways centers control sensory regulated the These the its incoming filtering brain sensory to allow by messages. the control systems input ignored. unimportant to information information can be Important and can be attended

proprioceptive and and regions The cerebral somatosensory the are by motor regulated pathways in that cortex. tactile S-I the of pathways descending originate input that is example, dorsal nuclei by help transmitted cortical the column the to projections For control medial lemniscus pathway. sensory the dorsal column–

regulates descending control particular interest that Of information. the nociceptive of transmission is system certain excessive pain circumstances. suppresses under This system presumably on soldiers battlefield, often the pain victims, well accident and at competition is wound little it no example, athletes is occurs time a bone a feel broken. the that or For or in known severe. a At develop later become may time, and pain is special the that sensation, modulates the Although system control is regulatory more the endogenous control a is of a of centrifugal all called so it controls pain important analgesia general distinguished descending part system system as that system. system medically pain forms that

contribute the to pathways these brainstem in the system. and Several centers endogenous analgesia from centers descending in midbrain For the example, •Fig. stimulation 7.9 A, Modelsofdescendingcontrolofascendingpainpathways.A,Schematicshowingtheascendingnociceptivepathwaythatconveyspaininformationtothebrain,representedbythespinothalamictract(STT),andthedescendingpathwaythatmodulates(gates)theflowofinformationintoit.Thedescendingpathwaystartsintheperiaqueductalgray(PAG),whichprojectsviatherostroventromedial(RVM)medullatothedorsalhorn.ActivationofthePAGorRVMblockstransmissionofpaininformationatthespinalcordlevel.B,Thestandardmodelofdescendingcontrolofpainperception.TonicallyactiveGABAergicinterneuronsinthePAGandRVMinhibittheprojectioncells(notethatthePAGhaslocalGABAergicinterneuronsbutalsoreceivesGABAergicterminalsfromotherbrainregions,andbothmaybeinvolvedintonicallyinhibitingthePAGprojectioncells).OpioidsappeartoinhibittheGABAergicinterneurons,thusdisinhibitingtheprojectionneurons,whoseincreasedactivityleadstoblockingtheactivationofSTTcellsbynociceptivedorsalrootganglion(DRG)cells.C,Parallelinhibition-excitationmodel.SomestudiessuggestbothexcitatoryandinhibitorycellsprojectfromthePAGandtheRVM.Inthismodel,gatingoftransmissionofpaininformationwouldbeduetoabalanceoftheexcitatoryandinhibitoryactivityinthedescendingpathways.Notethattheexcitatoryandinhibitorypathwaysareshownonoppositesidesjustforclarity.D,Possiblepresynapticandpostsynapticsitesofactionofenkephalin(Enk).ManyoftheterminalsfromthedescendingpathwaysforpainmodulationreleasebothGABAandenkephalin(EnK),whichappearstohavebothpre-andpostsynapticsitesofaction.ThepresynapticactionmightpreventreleaseofsubstanceP(SubP.)fromnociceptors. 2014;29:159.D,RedrawnfromHenryJL.In:PorterR,O’ConnorM[eds]:CibaFoundationSymposium91.London:Pitman;1982.) (A-C,RedrawnfromLauBK,VaughanCW.Curr Neurobiol Opin nociceptive periaqueductal including medullary neurons raphe spinal gray, cells locus spinothalamic and level, at or cord nuclei ( brainstem and tract inhibits coeruleus, the trigeminothalamic

Fig. ). 7.9A-C cortex, Other reticular the inhibitory and originate formation. in hypothalamus, sensorimotor pathways

into component endogenous system The the uses as endogenous two be components: opioid neurotransmitters subdivided does can other one analgesia peptides not. and of neuropeptides one several Endogenous that types opioids of activate opiate receptors. are of endogenous the Some

opioid receptor and Enk receptor β-endorphin. afferent STT sites include enkephalin, Opiate P dynorphin, binding cell Sub Substance relay P. Circulating opioids reversed prevented by the or generally narcotic Opiate analgesia antagonist naloxone. can be by to determine used naloxone mediated mechanism. opioid analgesia Therefore whether is an is frequently

morphine analgesia other opioid-mediated be by administration or exogenous system drugs. opiate can activated of The endogenous of on of the Thus of sensory the a treatments depends one medical triggering pain control oldest system. activity nociceptive inhibit Opiates pathways. typically neural in (see of postsynaptic for have inhibition, Two and opiate sites action proposed been presynaptic

Fig. 7.9D ). presynaptic prevent afferent of nociceptive transmitters action thought on is release terminals to such of SP. opiates as The excitatory produces postsynaptic inhibitory action an potential. postsynaptic The of opiates activate can an neurotransmitter pathways? inhibitory How descending by both that tonic and inhibitory analgesia descending system the interneurons is is inhibitory hypothesis control the medulla. midbrain One under in analgesia would descending The inhibitory inhibit and thereby inter-neurons action the of disinhibit the pathways. opiates

analgesia other by endogenous than by neurotransmitters thus naloxone. and pathways are opioids unaffected operate Some analgesia One a way engaging nonopioid of

stress. pathway of forms CHAPTER System Somatosensory certain through The is 7 form a thus stress-induced of is The produced analgesia analgesia.

raphe neurons nuclei in the neurotransmitter. Many use as serotonin a an Serotonin plays system. endogenous in nociceptive inhibit can the neurons analgesia presumably role important and and Other in spinal the release neurons catecholamines, brainstem as such cord. norepinephrine epinephrine, catecholaminergic contribute may analgesia These nociceptive inhibit endogenous neurons; system. to catecholamines neurons also the therefore monoamine Furthermore, these neurotransmitters endogenous interact opioids. with the involved substances are many system. Undoubtedly, analgesia other in evidence addition, antagonists endogenous opiate opiate that for the can In analgesia. is of existence prevent there

1.

proprioceptive and are (2) trigeminal for body dura, bodies (1) sensory neurons, oral the Sensory for nerve neurons innervating dorsal cranial mesencephalic the the in and have and neurons face, nerve for innervating except ganglia nucleus. in which cell ganglia: ganglia cavities, nasal root neurons or to peripherally sensory They neurons spinal the connect brainstem. receptor in a cord and to second-order centrally

2.

mechanoreceptors, and contains low-threshold nociceptors. thermoreceptors, Skin and joints, and viscera Muscle, mechanoreceptors nociceptors. have or may mechanoreceptors adapting. rapidly be slowly Low-threshold include cold and Thermoreceptors warm receptors. substances stimuli be and may nociceptors Aδ sensitized damaged of and C thermal, from and chemical mechanical, noxious cells. detect chemical release by Peripheral such release substances, inflammation. may from peptides, of nociceptors to contribute as themselves

3.

the collaterals ventral root; the dorsal funiculus horn, dorsal horn. enter the medial afferent zone, intermediate fibers through part deep and synapse of primary Large dorsal the in the dorsal part collaterals fibers of the cord in horn. the Small the afferent dorsal root; synapse spinal through lateral primary enter

4.

the large column second-order dorsal primary on branches Ascending of nuclei. afferent in neurons fibers synapse of synapse the nucleus. project third-order lemniscus thalamus on and via neurons medial contralateral to neurons second-order the These VPL the trigeminal sensory by relayed The to VPM main nucleus. the equivalent is nucleus pathway contralateral the

5.

spinal column and sensations flutter-vibration, pathways The cord the dorsal signal of touch-pressure, proprioception. including visceral visceral pain. sensation, contribute also to They

6.

includes spinothalamic cross, dorsal The its and and nuclei are thermoreceptive, horn, nociceptive, origin the and the the neurons; in of ventrolateral mostly VPL, of thalamus. synapse cells intralaminar in ascend funiculus, the and axons in posterior the VPI, and tract tactile trigeminal contralateral trigeminal the intralaminar pathway by is The VPM descending the and nucleus nuclei. relayed to and equivalent projects

7.

VPM, the nuclei aspects for of the VPL, pain. and relay spinothalamic account in sensory-discriminative VPI helps The the and pathways contribute the aspects to spinomesencephalic of pain. nociceptive projection tracts the are Parallel to these and spinothalamic motivational-affective the thalamus funiculus spinoreticular medial the in tracts; ventrolateral

8.

to spinothalamic the from and input Referred is explained tract viscera. body from by cells wall convergent pain

9.

The and and somatotopically nuclei are inhibitory organized circuits. VPL VPM contain multiple contain one These somatotopic nuclei each for submodality. maps, somatosensory regions; regions these includes and the The somatotopically are S-II S-I somatosensory cortex organized. also

10.

The receptive and fields similar neurons cortex with S-I of columns contains properties. response are neurons feature in S-I extraction. involved Some

11.

systems. Transmission regulated by control pathways in is somatosensory descending endogenous as norepinephrine, analgesia it The transmitters opioid serotonin. and transmission, regulates uses system nociceptive and endogenous peptides, such

BK, Lau Readings Additional CW. Vaughan disinhibition modulation pain: of analgesia. hypothesis GABA the of Descending Neurobiol. Opin Curr et B, B, Coste Santos JS, al. Xiao Piezo proteins subunits mechanically activated of are pore-2014;29:159-164. forming channels. Nature. et Berg D, al., Squire L, FE, Bloom eds. Fundamental Neuroscience. 4th ed. Press; Waltham, 2013. MA: Academic

2012;483:176-181.

following this the the 1. should of Upon student completion able be answer chapter, to questions:

and a it? absorption What the current, change the how of does dark is photon

2.

the cell? of the field the surround of central pathways are What synaptic on-center receptive and for portions bipolar an bipolar an Of cell? off-center

3.

in receptive simple are cortex? the complex properties What the visual cells of and field

4.

the is encoding? frequency sound theory What of the is theory Why place also required?

5.

organs? stimuli What normally are canals semicircular cells by hair otolith and transduced the in the that are the

6.

the What differing of molecules receptor consequences functional receptor are gustatory the olfactory cells? numbers of and between different

in sensory shows the in special vertebrates with organs of the a cephalization corresponding animals, trend of evolution the brain. heads development called along which develop he of signal signals and movement well light, detect the the systems, as which the of head. the chemical sensory analyze sound, vestibular, visual, systems, position olfactory, environment, special These in as include and and auditory, and gustatory conscious The behavior. for but these familiar when reflexive provide stimuli and the by important are awareness to the sensory as they most humans subconscious systems environment, equally are basis transduced they of

The System Visual

humans the basis most is and, for along the most special human with audition, of one is important senses communication. in Vision eye 400 enters The retina. between electromagnetic detects 750 photoreceptors as and impinges the light, sensory specialized visible waves on and epithelium, in which the long a nm visual system

two cones, (or its aspects The photoreceptors, (or can light: and brightness of color). distinguish wavelength luminance) its rods and high Rods nor contribute well-defined but not low color provide intensities detecting images, have for do visual to do light they sensitivity vision. vision). operate under of Rods conditions lighting best (scotopic reduced sensitive Cones, contrast, best under conditions to operate as vision). as are in and daylight are thus not (photopic rods light acuity for color are and high vision. responsible visual Cones

outgrowth of is The an the thalamus. retina the is retinal and Thus the processing optic carried of within are the ganglion performed retina nerves. to information signals output in brain cells axons the neurons, by retinal the by all a side to of of There crossing optic axons causes the that space partial pass to from one these opposite side input visual is the of chiasm brain. the the in ganglion synapse form axons of optic brain. cells and optic tracts the Posterior of the in nuclei to chiasm, retinal the the information cortex. targets visual of pathway projects The (LGN) geniculate this the main through lateral to nucleus and visual in the thalamus nucleus, the visual the the humans radiations, visual pretectum, the Other pathways size, the control project structures visual eyes, hypothalamus, in superior rhythms, respectively. and orientation of to of participate and that pupil colliculus, circadian

Eye of Structure the

wall is eye three of concentric ( composed the layers of The

Fig. ). 8.1 sclera. layer, coat, outer the the with epithelium, and cornea, its fibrous the transparent The opaque or includes the and middle or coat, The iris the choroid. includes vascular layer, radially iris the constricter and which oriented pupillary and both up muscle dilator fibers, contains respectively. circularly muscles, The smooth make rich the and retina, that layers blood in contains vessels pigment. support the choroid of also The outer it is innermost and diencephalon is The the is part therefore of the embryologically the nervous system the layer eye, derived central (CNS). retina, of from the where nerve the head, the the for or optic of eye retina optic axons functional posterior retina. the part nerve is which except leave of the optic disc, entire The covers aspect is as to (see referred the this are “blind spot” at Because there it no location, receptors anatomical often

Fig. 8.1

eyes under the number are muscular A of control. of functions the eyes appropriate target Externally muscles visual extraocular (see toward ). an attached aim muscles These by nerve innervated •Fig. are the oculomotor 8.1 Illustrationofaviewofahorizontalsectionoftherighteye. Vertebrate Its Adaptive (RedrawnfromWallGL.The and Radiation. Eye BloomfieldHills,MI:CranbrookInstituteofScience;1942. Lens Zonule fibers Optic trochlear )IrisPosterior chamber humor abducens body chamber III), the Aqueous IV), Sclera Anterior and Choroid (CN [CN] retina nerve nerve retina nerve disc Cornea Fovea Temporal (cranial Nasal (CN Ciliary humor VI). Retina Limbus point Optic Vitreous Nodal the nerve (intraocular are the Several also eye within muscles). found muscles in of focus and retina. control lens muscles on the the shape ciliary The images body the thereby The muscles of a eye, control sphincter entering the and in pupillary a way of light diaphragm dilator to amount of the camera. iris in that the the similar system (through dilator by controlled nervous ciliary The sympathetic the see activated the nerve; sphincter whereas and the the system, by are muscles is nervous parasympathetic oculomotor

through collectively the called dioptric a enters the series of media. Light transparent and cornea through are the passes that and structures fluids eye and humor and These lens, fluids consist aqueous vitreous the cornea, structures of humor, (see

Fig. ). 8.1 the the in eye. and in of posterior maintain lens) shape the space behind humor help (located the the the and (located humor The vitreous anterior aqueous chambers)

the (see point optic the Although at human lens reaches the of a optic axis eye geometrical between through and the passes fovea and nodal the the the disc of point retina

Fig. the point, oculomotor a the point, are the called to oriented system target. eyes by ), the visual on 8.1 fixation the fovea. point through and fixation on the is Light of from focused lens the nodal point the passes from surrounding retina the Light the the fovea. on target remainder visual falls the of

a target Normally, by refract the retina and visual the lens, or on cornea which is bend focused light. sharply from the light eye, 43 The (D). the with power is major refractive element of diopters a of refractive the cornea the change 13 for lens Thus lens vary the its However, the unlike focus of optical D. responsible and shape between power 26 the and adjusting can eye. the is cornea, refractive the fibers) to at Suspensory ciliary wall body ligaments the the (see eye of zonule (or attach

Fig. hold lens and ) place. the in 8.1 body the in ligaments ciliary exerted the flattens by the are When tension the suspensory lens. relaxed, muscles the ciliary process the suspensory ligaments When reduced; to shape. spherical somewhat contract, allows assume more lens a the this muscles the the is tension elastic on by ciliary system nerve. activated the the are via parasympathetic oculomotor nervous muscles The

to, focus or accommodate to In the way, either or lens eye this distant allows objects. the on, near focus target a normal visual the muscle), the image from retina. when (one eye target on a is with in relaxed For distant a ciliary light instance, enters the target, retina measurement of visual blurred) directed light accommodation the is in is the a measured focal initially at length meters. at of the is eye power unit that a of nearby (i.e., aA However, image focused the behind diopter reciprocal if is equal the optical is to the until retina length, lens distance is 0.5 of would light 2-D reciprocal of focus of it m. into a a parallel unit and bring Thus rays at a

more Special 8 strongly, focus waves contracts, the Senses more lens occurs; causing refract the The image CHAPTER the causes ciliary convexity bringing become on muscle lens to until into to is, retina. light spherical, that the increased the the the

which the depends also not adjusts the that only Proper retina amount of of light eye on the on pupil. cornea iris, enter lens the and the can but on light imaging through the the also and which amount aperture the image camera, analogous the produced depth pupil the field is of to this in by a the controls of lens. of the spherical regard, In aberration of minimal. the light the lens, spherical constricted, part the pupil is is where of is central When through is the field aberration and the depth directed increased, occurs adapts eye when both. to vision for constriction near or accommodates Pupillary bright light, the or reflexively or light. improved when does fine quality adequate the visual by a image other work, of person Thus the is reads

Layers of Retina the

The in layers are of shown 10 the retina

Fig. . 8.2 is choroid. epithelium the inside 1), The the pigmented (layer outermost portion is just which cells The have pigment

Asanindividualages,theelasticityofthelensgraduallydeclines.Asaresult,accommodationofthelensfornearvisionbecomesprogressivelylesseffective,aconditioncalledpresbyopia. Ayoungpersoncanchangethepowerofthelensbyasmuchas14D.However,bythetimethatapersonreaches40yearsofage,theamountofaccommodationhalves,andafter50years,itcandecreaseto2Dorless.Presbyopiacanbecorrectedbyconvexlenses.

(far-sightedness),theimagesofdistantobjectsarefocusedbehindtheretina;thisproblemcanbecorrectedwithconvexlenses.Inastigmatism, (near-sightedness),theimagesofdistantobjectsarefocusedinfrontoftheretina.Concavelensescorrectthisproblem.Conversely,inhypermetropia Defectsinfocuscanalsobecausedbyadiscrepancybetweenthesizeoftheeyeandtherefractivepowerofthedioptricmedia.Forexample,inmyopia anasymmetryexistsintheradiiofcurvatureofdifferentmeridiansofthecorneaorlens(orsometimesoftheretina).Astigmatismcanoftenbecorrectedwithlensesthatpossesscomplementaryradiiofcurvature.

•Fig. of the Retina. Layers 8.2 segment Axons Pigment 6 Inner processes cell layer lateral Rod geniculate 2) Outer body nerve, tract 1 layer layer Bipolar via limiting surface limiting optic chiasm cells outer and passing 7 nuclear cell 8 layer Amacrine plexiform 10 nuclear of of surround into the the cell layer Photoreceptor photoreceptor glial Ganglion Inner epithelium fiber 4 Inner at Lightimpingingontheretinawouldbecomingfromthetopofthefigure,andwouldpassthroughallthesuperficiallayerstoreachthephotoreceptorrodsandcones.9 cell and segments Choroid tentacle-like plexiform 3 layer cell) the membrane to that Ganglion segment retina and layer membrane cell Müller Nerve (supporting layer rods Outer Pigment 5 Outer extend 2 cones. Cone Outer Inner Horizontal (layer cell between photoreceptors. of transverse light These prevent scatter processes layers contact and the In a addition, continuously between form maintaining the shed; outer pigment reconvert 2 (3) can function of can the the and of photoreceptors; into from that so back pigmented segments visual remove nutrients that metabolized reused waste and be (1) a transported rods, 1 the ends to mechanical the are epithelium phagocytose they (2) is provide it which after in photoreceptors. serve

cells, maintaining geometry as important the an Retinal play cells, Müller of glial known internal in retina. the role are retina. radially, the the cells light Müller oriented path parallel to through junctions connections inner cells retina). of the limiting have 3 these ends Müller with outer tight of The the a outer segments continuous photoreceptors, of the and layer, the the membrane appearance numerous form of (layer

Thejunctionbetweenlayers1and2oftheretinainadultsrepresentsthesurfaceofcontactbetweentheanteriorandposteriorwallsoftheembryonicopticcupduringdevelopmentandisstructurallyweak.Retinaldetachmentisseparationatthissurfaceandcancauselossofvisionbecauseofdisplacementoftheretinafromthefocalplaneoftheeye.Itcanalsoleadtothedeathofphotoreceptorcells,whicharemaintainedbythebloodsupplyofthechoroid(thephotoreceptorlayeritselfisavascular).Deteriorationofthepigmentedepitheliumcanalsoresultinmaculardegeneration,acriticallossofhigh-acuitycentralandcolorvisionthatdoesnotaffectperipheralvision.

nuclei rods that of the the and cell the nuclear limiting contains outer external the (layer layer bodies and Inside membrane cones. is 4) nuclear layer and layer The 5) contains inner (layer photoreceptors in are synapses plexiform (layer interneurons, outer found the horizontal cells, bipolar whose 6). cells the between cell and bodies including retinal bodies the and contains interneurons Müller also other amacrine cells. and the This layer interplexiform cell cells) retinal of (the

nuclear layer and including whose the cells, ganglion ganglion plexiform neurons synapses the the the retinal the bipolar cell of layer, cells, and between inner (layer (layer lie 7) layer amacrine bodies contains in 8). cell inner The is previously axons output their the mentioned, As retina; the brain. cells that it the the to visual transmit of information are ganglion cells the nerve. of where the form surface retina optic while as (layer inner the enter axons the the fovea, fiber disc, optic eye avoiding leave the along 9), and they pass These the optic layer fiber layer ganglion they they the cell unmyelinated, remain optic of become portions in disc. myelinated that axons after reach but the are the The optic The where myelin lack the of

membrane •Fig. Folding of Cones. Rods and 8.3 showthegeneralfeaturesofarodandacone.Theinsets Thedrawingsatthebottom showtheoutersegments.

axons with cross permit helps retina through the minimal to retina inner distortion. light the pass

limiting formed 10) (layer layer membrane The the Müller by of is innermost end-feet inner the retina cells. the of

Structure and Rods Cones of Photoreceptors:

extend photoreceptor that and a (Fig. into cell an onto layer set other inner that body cells 4), layer or 5 retinal a cone of an segment Each layer cell synapse (in composed in terminals rod is 2, outer and of synaptic ). 8.3 not are cones formed by plasma segments stacks as of outer the rods, long infoldings membrane. those The membranes contain as disc of and of they of in of membrane of they having and longer, The the segments that outer are completely when plasma float membrane from formed contain freely stacks the at outer discs the base. disconnected rods segment, pigment greater which visual a rich pigment density, accounts partly but are Both their rods light. of to sensitivity have sets discs for visual in greater molecules, response, whereas be A for can cone required a response. several may hundred rod elicit photon a photons single

of outer the which number cilium organelles, a the photoreceptors connected inner contain to a modified including by segments mitochondria. segments, numerous are of The is before synthesized incorporated into visual inner of the The segment. where the pigment are the membranes outer sites the segments is it displaced until the new into undergo of In inserted apex are discs, distally of shed phagocytosis rods, the where are membranous they pigment the pigmented at by outer which cells eventually is segment, the they then

•Fig. CHAPTER 8 Senses Special The Retinal of a 8.4 Graph and Plot of the of From of as the Density Cones Eccentricity a Rods Function Fovea. Notethatconedensitypeaksatthefovea,roddensitypeaksatabout20degreeseccentricity,andnophotoreceptorsarefoundattheopticdisc,wheretheganglioncellaxonsleavetoformtheopticnerve. (DatafromCornsweetTN.Visual Perception. NewYork:AcademicPress;1970.) epithelium. the rods. rod-like the of of This process shape determines outer segments take inserted to folds rods, does the outer the the pigment seen of that comparable in visual place. In cones, membranous shedding, is and randomly not segment, into

Retina Regional in the Variations

characterized color. a slight is pale by of central macula vision thickening lutea and area The a and the is interneurons, needed high photoreceptors are for vision. high-resolution to the of thickness concentration The and is due which optic around both are nerve and fibers It it. vessels is because routed pale blood

fixation The from the the with resolution macula region the visual of which fovea. highest light noted a retina the is the point previously, is focused very lutea, fovea, in the and, is the as on depression bring eye into of of view function (A the major fovea.) objects movements interest to on is pushed the because surrounding in the unusual aside them of be to region into The appear retinal foveal several are macula. layers and to photoreceptors reach through the retina, light of foveal layers are light the loss can both inner having and the without minimized. pass distortion image Consequently, density. with cones packing for high which unusually has allows The segments, outer long and fovea thin fovea, in density providing of maximal for cone as quality the In fact, is high image the resolution, well high ( as visual

Fig. 8.4

retina, The photosensitivity. where the leave ganglion axons cell lacks therefore optic photoreceptors and lacks disc, visual blind the a of spot the retina it surface (see is Thus so-called in

Figs. ). 8.9 8.4 and A visual the of the field is because the incomplete visual of person be which perceptually. part spot contralateral because eye to process the images seen tend can normally corresponding psychological be blind by unaware the of in completed

Asmentioned,theaxonsofretinalganglioncellscrosstheretinaintheopticfiberlayer(layer9)toentertheopticnerveattheopticdisc.Theseaxonsintheopticfiberlayerpassaroundthemaculaandfovea,asdothebloodvesselsthatsupplytheinnerlayersoftheretina.Theopticdisccanbevisualizedonphysicalexaminationwithanophthalmoscope. ortheopticdiscmayprotrudeintothevitreousspacebecauseofedema(papilledema) thatresultsfromincreasedintracranialpressure. Thenormalopticdischasaslightdepressioninitscenter.Changesintheappearanceoftheopticdiscareimportantclinically.Forexample,thedepressionmaybeexaggeratedbylossofganglioncellaxons(optic atrophy),

must retina, To the light be detected by be absorbed. energy and class ganglion is is also pigment small the are accomplished by photosensitive) of in outer their visual the molecules job primarily segments. (a and cones of rods cells This located to chromophore, bound the a protein. rods retinal, consists molecule and an both pigment 11-cis opsin For cones, of The it outer visual absorbed). named the has visual because of rods purple appearance light segments is when a purple (so has found been pigment in rhodopsin, or best It 500 of at absorbs nm. a wavelength light to species, most of each opsins retinal, pigments). the one expresses variants are resulting three (in in the different from of found visual of pigment, cone binding cone Three cones 419 cone absorb (red). and at nm nm at pigments The (green), at nm 533 best (blue), 564 ( is so of overlap spectrum absorption broad pigments these the However, they visual considerably that

Fig. 8.5).

•Fig. 8.5 of the of Cone Human of the the Three Rod (Rhodopsin) Sensitivity Types Spectral Pigments The in and Retina. Pigment Notethatthecurvesoverlapandthattheso-calledblueandredconesactuallyabsorbmaximallyinthevioletandyellowranges,respectively. (DatafromSquireLR,etal[eds].Fundamental Neuroscience. SanDiego,CA:AcademicPress;2002.)

differences transduction in sensitivity, spectral Despite rods and is the in process cones. similar the and by of absorption bond visual to of the molecule isomerization release the with retinal leads a to 11-cis the retinol. of The retinal pigment to conversion a retinal, opsin, all-trans photon of section). messenger (discussed in in or change trigger a leads These cascade activity cone this second rod the electrical later of a the changes to that

of retinal visual absorb loses The light causes of both the its and (i.e., pigment ability bleaching all-trans opsin its to separation from the loss color). also the retinal esterified cones, retinal. the In the reduced visual a it to to pigmented of multistep regeneration pigment 11-cis retinal layer, isomerized, process: rods cell transported molecule back and to is is where all-trans is retinol, and both light. transported photoreceptor outer pigment segments, again with back It regenerate is which molecule, up and layer, absorb can the to by visual then to opsin the taken recombined that to regenerate visual is cones also evidence pathway pigment. There second use a (see transport and much This is the more the of retinal cells involves rapid molecule Müller from to and pathway

Fig. ) 8.2 rather cells. the pigmented than epithelial section the The importance pathway this “ in is of potential discussed rapid more

photons hyperpolarize. to of triggered absorption photoreceptor process by transduction causes the Ultimately, the (i.e., before state To necessary this photoreceptor it fully, action a understand the of photon). the baseline the and in it dark is to absorbs know its consequences in open photoreceptors cation cyclic neurons mV) monophosphate slightly most channels relation are their In outer (Fig. to because guanosine (≈−40 depolarized are in segments (cGMP)–gated darkness, 8.6A ). allow a of channels and These influx Na+ Ca2+ steady . the the The tonic known resulting and the of release current, neurotransmitter glutamate depolarization the photoreceptor’s current leads synapses. at it as the causes to dark is

rhodopsin in When activates is (see transducin equivalent happens G sequence photoisomerization light (an a protein in cones), called of absorbed a rod

Fig. 8.6B ). monophosphate phosphodiesterase, to the turn, rod lowers with in 5′-GMP, associated discs, cGMP This the which guanosine rhodopsin-containing hydrolyzes protein, cyclic is in concentration and the G cGMP cytoplasm. activates hyperpolarization the to neurotransmitters. and membrane, cell the cGMP reduction rod channels, the The of leads of closing release reduction cation in in of cGMP-gated a rhodopsin of acts photon translate a Thus a to the into messenger” cGMP change as in potential. absorption membrane “second by a

photoreceptor In process reduction (2) photoreceptors neurotransmitters. release rod of for transduction), sum, of hyperpolarization and a that the described undergo energy (cones all a analogous to in to light the in (1) capture of leads potential. Because release distance and very the short is the the an of without of action between of accomplished the neurotransmitter site of synapse, transduction modulation generation the

sensitivity to the ambient ability light. Adaptation its the according of refers adjust to to retina it range conditions, switching use between the operate cone low-light the the rod and over brightand retina reflects of conditions, respectively. for a a to allows ability wide of lighting systems efficiently and This

The Special CHAPTER •Fig. Senses 8 Na+ GMP Rh Active Na+ B 8.6 Disc Light GC influx SequenceofthesecondmessengereventsthatfollowtheabsorptionoflightthroughthereductionofcGMP.BecausecGMPmaintainsopenNa+channelsinthedark,theresultsoflightabsorptionaretheclosingoftheNa+channelsandhyperpolarizationoftherod.cGMP,cyclicguanosinemonophosphate;GC,guanylatecyclase;GTP,guanosinetriphosphate;PDE,phosphodiesterase;Rh,rhodopsin;T,transducin.Passive + PDE A, + Na+ efflux A Na+ Drawingofarodwiththeflowofcurrentinthedark.WiththeassistanceoftheNa+,K+pump,therodiskeptdepolarized.B, Na+ K+ GTP + – Membrane Membrane cGMP T Hyperpolarization current Ca++

orvitaminA.Retinolisderivedfromcarotenoids,suchasβ-carotene,theorangepigmentfoundincarrots.Likeothervitamins,retinolcannotbesynthesizedbyhumans;instead,itisderivedfromfoodsources.IndividualswithaseverevitaminAdeficiencysufferfrom“nightblindness,”aconditioninwhichvisionisdefectiveinlow-lightsituations. whichisthealdehydeofretinol, Rhodopsincontainsachromophorecalledretinal,

Theextraordinarysensitivityofrods,whichcansignalthecaptureofasinglephoton,isenhancedbyanamplificationmechanisminwhichphotoactivationofonlyonerhodopsinmoleculecanactivatehundredsoftransducinmolecules.Inaddition,eachphosphodiesterasemoleculehydrolyzesthousandsofcGMPmoleculespersecond.Similareventsoccurincones,butthemembranehyperpolarizationoccursmuchmorequicklythaninrodsandrequiresthousandsofphotons.

the all-trans described absorption which from a then of splits opsin to photon 11-cis previously, (bleaching). As causes converted retinal, be retinal to The pigment in rods. visual than however, rate; regeneration more cones at in and the visual rods rapidly occurs in a cones similar bleached of much are pigments is, cones’ utilize (see section). pathway due to regeneration a the This part, for to difference ability second least previous at in visual unresponsive in bright prevents conditions. light from of cones This pigment regeneration rapid becoming more light found of regeneration not bleached. means much those slowness molecules contrast, of In levels rhodopsin in all essentially the that evening are of above at hours, the rhodopsin molecules the only cone be in conditions, is is Thus the the functioning, bright-light to and retina said light-adapted. system

When association empty theater, darkened adaptation in reduced evidence of much can see observe to the with the the (decreased light rhodopsin) of person existing a light the entering (or in else). inability amount sensitivity movie seats a while person the return to system, a regeneration as gradual see the process the the ability theater of in The of remains and adaptation. the slow the reflects rhodopsin of known recovery seats dark of function rod

the gradual light low-light conditions. of retina to refers This process the when in increase sensitivity in it slowly Rods minutes to darkness restored, become their adapt may fully levels for the take dark-adapted. 30 retina are to as more than and, indeed, rhodopsin not level light contrast, to rapidly they is low. In darkness, function cones adapt relatively adapted high, threshold and so ambient do but is their the when for vision within room, vision a main 10 and than the seeing. dark minutes cone more in sensitive Thus system rod becomes is

vision). not are vision colors state, distinguished acuity dark-adapted is and called visual is sum, low In scotopic operative, and thus (this the is primarily in rod cone (this acuity projected) restored. the resumes However, vision), are color higher light are and vision when is (e.g., called visual when and function levels photopic movie is rod (mesopic and levels functional light which vision). There range intermediate is an are cones of at both

the outer The visual cone pigments segments different in contain opsins. differences, three different of best light absorb the result a As wavelengths. these of at cones types are blue, referred pigments, to maximum cone efficiency violet, and red as green, pigments have (see wavelengths, yellow to respectively green, they and the Although closer

Fig. 8.5). the to shades gray. opposed in of spectra cone The see only colors, absorption underlie to as humans’ differences ability

pigments presumed vision of because are account to produce the to theory, absorption the mixture cone a efficiency differences of in three color. for suitable other any can visual colors trichromacy color the According cell, the of on pigment, mechanism (see of of However, by absorbed the both the color and of exist brightness for also a the depends light response wavelength the because as subsequent amount neural light as analysis well the a intensity must the visual

Fig. 8.5 ). the each wavelength three that by pigments but efficiency light, cone wavelength. may according its the a to at or differs absorbed absorb of of Two amount particular remain absorb intensity absorption them of of ratio all among constant. increased more the less), If will the (or will decreased), is but the (or light the to be neural wavelengths compare the to cones different by different Consequently, different types visual of distinguish of system mechanism of light absorption the a for must there colors. cones of two different color least required kinds vision. are At for when three it most The in light, presence that ambiguity at three cones all and two visible colors distinguishing of wavelengths light. the decreases will absorb of kinds absorb of least ensures types

activate certain that is colors to process theory pairs on of opponent opposing based seem neural processes. The observations red as Green and are black blue, well are white. yellow opposed, and as as and a appears gray a to the ring, is area by For if color. area surrounded example, acquire gray green reddish a not a Furthermore, yellow a does color exist. bluish red or greenish are red wavelengths by inhibited activated observations by that supported are green These wavelengths. findings neurons by wavelengths wavelengths. neurons blue be may Similarly, inhibited by excited yellow by characteristics at are visual contrast opposing and the increase the both higher in these the serve between Neurons present retina levels and of to see with to pathway seem the ability colors. to

the of shown in of diagram retina A basic circuitry is the

Fig. 8.7 . are noteworthy. of Several this circuitry features by the is Input to provided striking retina the light photoreceptors. of axons output cells ganglion carried is the retinal by the to brain. The interneurons. retina the Information the by is processed within bipolar a is a pathway to The (see the direct retina ganglion photoreceptor from cell and to then most through cell a

Fig. 8.7).

adjacent cells, horizontal interactions well and cells indirect to ganglion that More pathways. as as between pathways provide photoreceptors, intraretinal cells, bipolar lateral involve provide amacrine cells, processing for signal

Observationsoncolorblindnessareconsistentwiththetrichromacytheory.Incolorblindness,ageneticdefect(sex-linkedrecessive),oneormoreconemechanismsarelost.Peoplewithnormalcolorvisionaretrichromatsbecausetheyhavethreeconemechanisms.Individualswholackoneoftheconemechanismsarecalleddichromats.Whenthelong-wavelengthconemechanismisabsent,theresultingconditioniscalledprotanopia;absenceofthemedium-wavelengthsystemcausesdeuteranopia;andabsenceoftheshort-wavelengthsystemcausestritanopia.Monochromatslacktwoormoreconemechanisms.

differences phototransduction important in several cone have retinal their functional Rod and pathways and mechanisms circuitry. their more described As system signal better cones pigment cones. and amplification do, a there and rods many than have visual previously, more than are rods function Thus light in and better function blindness. dim loss of (scotopic night rod in rods vision), results pigment, rods signal they visual contain color differences. In cannot addition, same so the all rods individual the low fields spatial results Furthermore, and large receptive many bipolar onto cells converge and very are resolution. light, under so rods no function photopic bleached, rhodopsin most bright longer is in conditions. Finally, that

in thus a are to higher adaptation. light dark not have after light dim and activated threshold Cones daylight. well However, very they operate in in cone high-resolution pathways. vision provide bipolar converge onto individual cells because cones a few only They cells. bipolar fovea, convergence connections one-to-one make to the cones the in no Moreover, occurs where resolve receptive fields other. have stimuli to from pathways originate close of sources and As very a can each reduced the very small that convergence, cone result Cones with resolution. good sequential respond also to stimuli temporal cones three have Finally,

Special Senses 8 CHAPTER •Fig. The Basic Retinal 8.7 Circuitry. Thearrow attheleftindicatesthedirectionoflightthroughtheretina.Photoreceptors(R)synapseonthedendritesofbipolarcells(B)andhorizontalcells(H)intheouterplexiformlayer.Thehorizontalcellsmakereciprocalsynapticconnectionswithphotoreceptorcellsandareelectricallycoupledtootherhorizontalcells.Bipolarcellsreachsynapseonthedendritesofganglioncells(G)andontheprocessesofamacrinecells(A)intheinnerplexiformlayer.Amacrinecellsconnectwithganglioncellsandotheramacrinecells.

provide visual for and vision. different pigments color therefore blindness; function for normal sufficient vision not results Loss requirements. cone visual is in functional rod of

photoreceptor an The receptive of is field circular. individual receptive in cause Light photoreceptor the neurotransmitter. hyperpolarizes less cell it release to and the field determine and the which retinal retinal interneurons fields their converges. fields of The the photoreceptors receptive receptive onto ganglion of activity cells visual about all important fields receptive in visual retinal processing an The characteristics the in to constitute because conveyed the ganglion contained activity. information ganglion events brain step information is the of cells is cell that of

receives The cell, fields, of bipolar photoreceptor, receptive as from either have can which a shown in input types two of

Fig. 8.8.

that the that that in central inhibits organization described are effect. which the Both the the of surrounds central either converse field light region the center-surround strikes a excites region cell, receptive whereas as a has or the strikes light portion the having called on-center, an field is receptive centrally by excitatory located field with The annulus receptive a surrounded region inhibitory (see off-surround an

Fig. ). 8.8A a Bipolar cells “on” such are as cells. described field with bipolar receptive an cells of arrangement, “off” which off-center, receptive The characterizes field type other on-surround (see bipolar has

Fig. 8.8F

the response a receptive due only that cell. is center the photoreceptors to of directly bipolar field The with synapse cell bipolar to in the respond increased with with glutamate release a Photoreceptor release. and and light decrease hyperpolarization to respond light cells depolarization of glutamate removal and responses the that “off glutamate. center their This in difference implies to ” in cells of and “on” the lies response bipolar SECTION2Berne & field Off-center cell I Diffuse 0.5 1.5 In illumination Peripheral spot illumination Off-center Central off-center Diffuse A illumination illumination field On-center light D 0 Central H Levy Physiology cell 1.0 136 of 0 G Sec illumination responses C E Light 1.0 spot bipolar illumination 0.5 Annular Central responses B Sec F 1.5 J On-center fact, Annular

Fig. and throughE andoff-center(F) Thereceptivefieldsofon-center(A) 8.8 recording)areshowninB recording)andperipheralspots(lower bipolarcellsand,belowthem,thereceptivefieldsofganglioncellsB towhichtheyareconnected.Ganglioncellresponsestocentralspots(upper andG throughJ

G.

and Alsoshownareresponsestocentral(C andG),anddiffusewhole-field(E andH),surround(D

J)illuminationintheirreceptivefields.Theganglioncellsandtheon-centerandoff-centerbipolarcellsprovidinginputtotheseganglioncellshavesimilarreceptivefields,butwhereasganglioncellsincreaseordecreasetheirspikefrequency,bipolarcellsdepolarizeorhyperpolarize,withoutgeneratingactionpotentials. Neuroscience. (RedrawnfromSquireLRetal[eds].Fundamental SanDiego,CA:AcademicPress;2002.) are of of in light channels by glutamate center their open glutamate, receptive cells ionotropic removal and receptor response excited thus the they to that the field. stimuli from have channels that bipolar In their contrast, have response close metabotropic cells in on-center receptors glutamate glutamate. to the field, are metabotropic depolarized receptive in on open photoreceptors results their glutamate of center reduced They light the of release more because by by the channels. are by bipolar of stimulation their light receptive on-center of fields. Thus excited center cells the

bipolar synapse that cells due of surround on antagonistic photoreceptors surround those directly that them. is to response The with also complex cells participate with connect photoreceptors cells. triadic in These many synapses own directly horizontal their with bipolar and that (which bipolar cells) synapse photoreceptors pathway The •Fig. through Relationshipsamongavisualtarget(long arrow, 8.9 andprojectionsoftheganglioncellscarryingvisualinformationabouttheseimages(bottom). top),imagesontheretinasofthetwoeyes(middle), therightvisualfieldisconveyedtotheleftside. Thetargetimageissolargethatitextendsintothemonocularsegmentsoftheeyes,whereonesideofitisseenbyonlytheipsilateraleye.Notehowtheaxonsaresortedinthechiasmsothatallinformationabouttheleftvisualfieldofbotheyesisconveyedtotherightsideofthebrainandallinformationabout

within field movement will be the continued object signaled. not to of P respond light. different cells wavelengths differently but yellow have opposing and to of Because only and fact shown to to in red only and there are combinations are cones, been combination many red green red cells (a have blue P of and possible, properties responses green, green). color blue, or may can for in and observations. ambiguity process overlap sensitivity the cone by reduce the detection greatly These color substrate the a of provide color opponency mechanisms caused

potentials receptive redistribution caused to of fields. with respond be within such their the large object cells, M phasic the an on bursts of hand, would by movement of action as the other light, to are P are than sensitive to luminance cells but sensitive differences M cells in are. wavelength more not

color, about the receptive illumination small form, fine that with consists ganglion convey movement. information output and (2) Thus linear the primarily nonlinear retina information about and (1) phasic, cells details from P that and sustained, fields receptive cell of axons cells convey larger M with of fields and off-center Both exist on-center varieties ( in

Fig. 8.8

The Pathway Visual

tract. Retinal optic optic optic way to chiasm, information the nerve, ganglion cells brain the of by and transmit

Fig.

retinal 8.9 the of of shows the the target projections hemispheres relationships retinal the the ganglion brain. two the target, in two a eyes, and cells to the visual of among images chiasm, nerves, The eyes tract the optic above. from viewed and and are

arrow, (see The fields visual eyes target, an both is the of in visual

Fig. each by ) the of case, it the segments can be is this the one seen end so in (i.e., that of by monocular into other the one 8.9 target other and eye). extends long end only eye and, retina only point. center the of represents The circle the fixation at the target shaded The of is target the lens by system. image reversed the the on retinas The left

The target imaged the is the the right of CHAPTER retina visual 8 on left nasal eye. half and eye of retina the Senses of temporal the Special the Thus and seen temporal retina by visual field nasal left the the retina. right left is the by the left and nasal the on retina is the target retina. temporal visual of seen right imaged Similarly, right and half with an upper vertical system vice The axis, lower and inversion the also visual versa. retina the the in lens on field imaged causes

of cell not optic retinal axons of the in retina cross cells may on chiasm, the location (see The ganglion ganglion the or in depending may the

Fig. ). 8.9 the of terminate the through Axons of the from lateral side the portion optic chiasm, and the ipsilaterally temporal pass brain. and ipsilateral tract retina each nerve, optic optic the in opposite pass to side cross through optic the to and each from contralateral pass of through retina then tract the of brain. the the the nerve, Axons optic in in portion optic end the the nasal side chiasm, contralateral in are arrangement, of As a right and the objects field right in the left in of the the brain, of the the of field result are of vision represented left in vision side side this those brain. represented

vision cell target ganglion parts synapse nucleus lateral axons brain, the Retinal several the for main in can of geniculate the thalamus. but (LGN) is the of the retina There point-to-point the is a from LGN. to projection thus a has The map. LGN retinotopic that location the be particular of layers Cells drawn lines projection along retinal can across that LGN. aligned represent the a are

layers to is P receive layers and two 3 three input) parvocellular The LGN, (layers the 1 6 (layers the 2 of eye M cell cell one and magnocellular input). of distributed to the the projection from each of layers of receive zones. between the layers, of the cells to intralaminar Color-coded groups ganglion major cells project those retinal the Thus are similar cells. very of to ganglion neurons LGN of properties off-center or be on-center cells, have they example, classified P as receptive For neurons fields. can M and or LGN

the reticular nuclei and brainstem input from areas of also The formation. the LGN nucleus, visual of cortex, the receives cerebral several thalamic the reticular neurons the thalamic inhibited of nucleus. LGN activity reticular both LGN in the and is in The by interneurons projection GABA inhibitory neurotransmitter. as use These their cells monoamine the via signals is influenced that neurons corticofugal activity addition, brainstem by In neurotransmitters. and neurons of LGN transmit pathways by visual These systems important be information for selective filter attention. may and control

LGN or by radiations. way visual visual projects cortex the of primary The striate to cortex the project appropriate (and visual gyrus, lies upper the fibers the to which field) information The therefore half of hemiretinas radiation derived carrying the lower visual the lingual contralateral from

Fig.

8.9 hemianopsia andoccursbecausethecrossingfibersoriginatefromganglioncellsinthenasalhalvesofeachretina.Alesionoftheentireoptictract,LGN,visualradiation,orvisualcortexononesidecauseshomonymous ).Forexample,atinylesionintheretinawouldresultinablindspot(scotoma) whichinthiscaseislossofvisioninthecontralateral,uppervisualfield. whichislossofvisionintheentirecontralateralvisualfield.Partiallesionsresultinpartialvisualfielddefects.Forexample,alesioninthelingualgyruscausesanupperhomonymous hemianopsia, inthateye,whereasasimilarlesioninthestriatecortexwouldproducecorrespondingscotomasinbotheyes.Interruptionoftheopticnerveononesideproducesblindnessinthateye.Damagetotheopticnervefibersastheycrossintheopticchiasmresultsinlossofvisioninbothtemporalfieldsofvision;thisconditionisknownasbitemporal quadrantanopsia,

occipital the below lobe, the just of the calcarine on sulcus. medial surface that adjacent cuneus the lower sulcus. Axons which visual the calcarine represent project the just gyrus, in lies to field contralateral the radiation visual above line 17; sulcus that of primary the these gyri constitute visual area border and Brodmann cortex (or the the two portions Together, calcarine

Fig. 8.10

the contains cortex LGN, map. retinotopic striate a the Like parts of retina gyri. the macula most projected the progressively both these occupies are the The gyri, more more largest peripheral of and areas of and posterior anterior part of to representation retinal an the (see of is striate surface there across of the Overall, loci mapping orderly cortex

Fig. 8.10

striate ( chiefly of in cortex 4 ends layer the geniculostriate pathway The

Fig. layers in 3. the intralaminar and projection terminates blobs whereas from ), 2 the LGN in 8.11 so-called adjacent that axons Similarly, terminate the or that layer one within ocular columns. patches dominance 4C represent in alternate eye define other respond eye. one preferentially such column Cortical to from a input neurons in ocular columns, two from two to eyes. respond border dominance input neurons Near about the between equally the

The more 4C, are layer monocular aside cells of of complex in from those cortex, striate fields receptive neurons. the than LGN the in neurons one from both and eyes, Neurons other eye to in often (see be respond although the may binocular input stimulation layers dominates ). of in outside stimulus, orientation a (i.e., particular layer or as neurons a often cortical respond way; and they the In 4C when show oriented such an edge, addition, is selectivity positioned best bar

Fig. ). 8.12 received cells” fields such in that “simple flanked way regions. input centers concentric were responding were to antagonistic cells be “on” in from as arranged though aligned whose their receptive row center-surround appear by These a a they “Complex” •Fig. cortical 8.10 Theleftvisualfieldisrelayed(viatheLGNandvisualradiation)totheprimaryvisualcortexoftherighthemisphere,asapoint-to-pointretinotopicmap.Therepresentationofeachpartofvisualspaceisproportionaltothenumberofafferentaxonswithreceptivefieldsinthatpartofspace.Asaresult,theareaofmacularrepresentation(neartheoccipitalpole)islargerthanthatfortherestofthebinocularandmonocularfields.Notethatthelowerhalfofthefieldisrepresentedinthecuneusgyrusabovethecalcarinesulcusandtheupperhalfofthefieldinthelingualgyrusbelowthesulcus.(RedrawnfromPurvesD,etal[eds].Neuroscience. 3rded.Sunderland,MA:Sinauer;2004.) •Fig. DiagramofvisualinformationflowintothevisualcortexfromtheLGNanditsprojectiontotheextrastriatecortex,tothesuperiorcolliculus(SC),andbacktotheLGN.M,magnocellularpath;P,parvocellularpath. 8.11 (RedrawnfromSquireLR,etal[eds].Fundamental Neuroscience. SanDiego,CA:AcademicPress;2002. having field. that SC similar particular orientation to flanking anywhere Cortex stimulus p and Cortex (2+3) 2+3 excitatory their respond neurons instead cells p 4C˜4C°Blobs intralaminar cell are to of orientation a zones, LGN LGN m they 6 5 )LGN inhibitory but 4B best “simple” in they cell receptive are cell specific, in LGN when display it may may also one is, that stimulus direction the respond opposite they (see the direction selectivity; They moved moved not is but in direction when is in

Fig. 8.12 ). selectivity. of with cell a The “simple” be field “complex” orientation of a cells composite of adjacent thought may receptive as similar zone are such orientation of particular selectivity, form the orientation (Fig. tend the cortex in have they to to neurons same column all a Because an considered 8.13

pathway three of discussed, visual spectral the color on well may that the already neurons as in vision different opposition. of cones, presence show As depend as types retina the in LGN Retinal cells, and spectral properties. neurons, some opponent ganglion P cells display antagonistically the the cortical in striate opponent both The and these the spectral center and which found surround blobs, cortex in are double-opponency, respond in portions neurons show

Senses 8 The CHAPTER •Fig. Special Complex With Inputs and Visual Fields. 8.12 Multiple From Be the Concentric Generated Can Cortex Fields in Simple Receptive withadjacentreceptivefieldsconvergedontoonecorticalneuron(E), andB A thatneuron,asimplecell,wouldrespondbesttoalongbarstimulusataspecificlocationandorientation(C). representon-centerandoff-centerinput,respectively,fromtheretina.Ifthreeon-centercells(A) Forthreeoff-centerinputs(B), theresultingreceptivefieldisshowninD. wouldresultinacomplexcellthatrespondsbesttoabarstimuluswithaverticalorientationthatcanbeplacedanywherewithinitsreceptivefield. Theconvergenceofmultiplesimplecellsontoanothercorticalneuron(F) Neuroscience. (RedrawnfromSquireLR,etal[eds].Fundamental SanDiego,CA:AcademicPress;2002.) colors. to two shown responds to surround red (R+G−) cell, but responds green but portion and center whose Such in whose not to is red green (R−G+), a not

Fig. . 8.13A and The blobs in relationships orientation are and the the cortical shown columns dominance color ocular between

Fig. 8.13B

or area striate 25 addition in identified at areas the V1). least the cortex, studies, cortex to 17, cerebral (Brodmann have animal been in In visual different several pathways include The areas visual of processing. parallel extrastriate and in recognition of form P and The with originates pathway the P color. cells functions the area the the include layers layer of LGN P pathway to several (Brodmann 4Cβ in striate inferotemporal 19), cortex, in and V4 region Structures ( 3 areas 6,

Fig. 8.14 ). of Processing faces. recognition complex such form of includes as visual patterns, from separately information Color processed form. is and motion cells and functions M detection movement. with M eye control originates of in The pathway and MT of layers cortex the and 4Cα M the structures and Cortical striate temporal) include (medial areas pathway 4B in

C I concerned color C duration Orientation •Fig. columns I Stimulus Cortical blobs, with A, Diagramofthecolumnararrangementofthevisualcortex.OculardominancecolumnsareindicatedbyI(foripsilateral)andC(forcontralateral).Orientationcolumnsareindicatedbythesmallercolumnsmarkedwithshortbarsatvaryingangles.ThecorticalblobscontainneuronslikethatinA 8.13 andhavespectralopponent-receptivefields. Thereceptivefieldandresponsesofadouble-opponent(R+G−/R−G+)neuroninablobofthestriatecortexasitrespondstovariouscombinationsofredandgreenbars.Thebest“on”responseistoaredbarflankedbytwogreenbars.B,

•Fig. 3-6 P-cell Visual MST DistributionofPandMcellinfluencesondifferentareasofthevisualcortex.IT,inferotemporalarea;MST,medialsuperiortemporalarea;MT,medialtemporalarea;V1,striatecortex;V2andV4,higherordervisualareas.MT7 pathway Laminae IT Dorsal Laminae cortex pathway V2 LGNM-cell V1 8.14 V4 1,2

of well lobe of parietal superior the (medial the lobe, the aspect area MST Brodmann as (see on temporal lateral 7a as temporal)

Fig. 8.14

images stereopsis, in to two eyes. Both which or dependent in the formed the retinal is depth pathways on and P perception slight contribute M differences useful relatively objects. nearby for Stereopsis is only cases, depth. about these such provide disparities However, visual in cues eye must indicates from segregated parallel the pathways left/right on striate in a Interestingly, the depth the because LGN the and the cortex. but function of visual 4 input in it of and be depends anatomy convergent eyes inputs perception Layer are that two cortical

that and cortical all retina of for through M how are issue events, humans and account of P separation The the the objects, raises coherent regions clear, the the the persons perceive. thalamus of combined from parts all and to images the pathways seems the It face of all a percept, somehow that converged are it. recognizes belongs a that that such components familiar parts onto as single a to whether that person, and neuron face a unlikely represent the of activity from the Rather, percepts across of sets of multiple CNS. complex neurons coordinated probably regions large arise elements is which percept may working is anatomically synchronization but events. a temporal by such by The a one be of unclear, into that accomplished “binding” process distributed disparate neuronal many the hypothesis of neural it

Lesionsoftheextrastriatevisualcortexcanproducevariousdeficits.Bilaterallesionsoftheinferotemporalcortexcanresultincorticalcolorblindness(achromatopsia) orinaninabilitytorecognizefaces,evenofclosemembersofthefamily(prosopagnosia). AlesioninareaMTorMSTcaninterferewithmotiondetectionandeyemovements.

Senses 8 CHAPTER •Fig. The Special anddashed lines. Twopuretonesareshownbythesolid 8.15 Frequencyisdeterminedfromthewavelengthasindicated.Amplitudeisthepeak-to-peakchangeinsoundpressure.Thetwotoneshavethesamefrequencyandamplitudebutdifferinphase.

layered a for the movements ). certain (see is The midbrain structure of colliculus types is that of important superior eye particularly somatosensory as the system, exclusively involved three most movement. layers in from the receive multimodal cortical areas as involved well The processing, from eye layers auditory visual are input deeper the visual and whereas in superficial systems,

in the is preganglionic cause neurons the nucleus in activates light pretectum, parasympathetic Another reflex. retinal bilaterally which constriction pupillary the to projection pupillary Edinger-Westphal that shown also reflex posterior through pupillary a light in pretectal eye. areas the both The (consensual) interconnected causes when contra-lateral the commissure, and constriction (direct) one is and thus are ipsilateral

connections visual nuclei serve other to that The vision. functions also than include pathways projection example, hypothalamus suprachiasmatic to retinal controls a of nucleus (see For circadian rhythmicity the the

The Systems Auditory and Vestibular

cells (CN transmit components hair transducers, of VIII). as and nerve through the peripheral mechanical the of to vestibulocochlear parts CNS information labyrinths, share membranous systems auditory use the bony vestibular and and the The vestibular However, processing and and the sensory of functions distinct. auditory systems the CNS are The sound. function is auditory of transduce the system to us cues to with environmental communicate other This allows to recognize and organisms. auditory language. involved The most are in those functions complex provide of the head information CNS space. the vestibular The to the is to the function and in position of with related movements system eye vestibular of Control is discussed in system the by movement

as water. in such media, produced Sound in air is waves decompression by elastic and compression other or hertz or is per frequency cycles in (Hz). second, Sound measured and sinusoidal pure by frequency and is also, by ( a results only instantaneously, particular Each at its its tone not a but from phase amplitude wave characterized frequency

Fig. ). 8.15 pure mixture a tones. is Most sound, naturally of however, occurring sound pure have of and unwanted is tones. composition any Noise may propagates about 335 m/sec air. in at Sound certain pressure. changes, associated The called are sound with waves pressure (SPL). sound (N/m2), pressure sound meter of unit squared expressed is sound as but more pressure the commonly is Newtons pressure level The per decibel of the is unit The (dB): SPL

is and absolute sound where 8.1 reference PR pressure a human hearing is for dyne/cm2, 1000 P pressure at (0.0002 Hz). Equation threshold the 20 greater 40 A intensity times dB; with one would greater times be be 100 dB. sound 10 would

Hz. pure sensitive 20,000 to frequencies with tones ear 20 The is range about that normal between human and young its threshold pure ( detection of for The frequency with a varies tone

Fig. ). 8.16 lowest approximately pure thresholds The are, for Hz. 3000 tones, hearing for human 1000 at −3 Hz. −5 with threshold dB 0 dB, to comparison these approximately the The is in reference at frequencies to speech 65 reference fall Hz. of has the 3500 intensity this in an dB, main to normal and 300 about frequencies of range scale, its In dB and apparatus, damage. higher permanent the 120 cause pain that can auditory than Sounds peripheral exceed dB those and can damage 100 at frequencies tones, hear presbycusis. people rise, such reducing age, called high a condition their thereby to ability thresholds their As

• Fig. at Threshold 8.16 Intensities Different Frequencies. Sound intensity a indicates curve to needed detect bottom sound. The absolute the threshold dashed hearing.Thetop represents curve the functional damaging. curveindicateslevelsatwhichsoundispainfuland The for

The Ear

ear, the ear, the inner The peripheral subdivided auditory the and (Fig. be is ear which into ear, middle external the apparatus can 8.17

auditory pinna and ear canal). the external (auditory the meatus external includes The cerumen, protective a auditory substance. The contains that waxy canal secrete glands pinna and a sound the sounds direct into The canal localization. helps auditory role plays in the tympanic sound membrane. canal to auditory The the waves pressure transmits this perceptual auditory canal about the resonance of and a to threshold low In for humans, resonant range. in the has contributes sounds frequency 3500Hz, that

by ear is The (see separated tympanic from the ear middle external membrane the

Fig. ). 8.17A middle ear contains The air. present are and serve window membrane the of Three tympanic the inner oval the link to ear. ossicles to

tympani Corti Fig. Scala of and • vestibuli organ Scala Structure. apparatus, and Ear 8.17 to vestibular external ear. of human A, the the Cochlear the in and cochlea middle relation Location ear, right the ear for middle, spaces; the unrolled inner depicted and cochlea clarity. B,Relationshipsbetweentheouter, is

Special • Fig. The 8 145 Senses CHAPTER 8.17, the cont’d of a Drawing cross-section through C, cochlea. of Corti organ The (see

Fig.

8.18A outlined. is ) and B

window, is ear oval window membrane-covered ear and another opening between middle Adjacent the (see inner to the the round

Fig. B 8.17A and

incus, malleus, include ossicles the The stapes. the and the a that into has the oval The footplate window. inserts stapes is ear, oval inner the the the fluid-filled window vestibule. Behind a component of scala a tubular vestibuli. the continuous structure It as with is known window (see by of the stapes oval movement pressure push the the membrane into of the footplate Inward to ossicles the causes chain wave a sound of tympanic

Fig. 8.17B ). movement fluid footplate This vestibuli. stapes the of turn scala in displaces within the the to that within bulge membrane through transmitted fluid the ear. the to the window wave cochlea (described causes into the and ensues The middle tympani round is later), pressure basilar of the the scala it

membrane the tympanic and an as serve chain of impedance-matching ossicles device. The fluid-filled must on than ear but acoustic in air, in of higher is detect traveling cochlea, where air. waves much The the the that neural transduction mechanism depends impedance sound movement shore without a reflected, swimming be ear most are from person special water. under is Therefore, voices a for device impedance reaching sound matching, the would when as simply matching Impedance the system the ratio surface of the on the advantage the ear the formed ossicles. depends area in membrane tympanic of of large lever (1) by in nearly the of of dB by is increase to transfer sufficient hearing Hz. energy range from to matching impedance efficiency 30 3500 300 This the

differences the malleus of ear does ear ear the occur between become the the the membrane. movements protect between not ear through and, be enough. explosion muscles during damp The tube. this can stapes. middle difference be the muscles as against also the the If acoustic in ossicles stapedius tube to of middle through sounds tympanic ear the the However, ear the middle are infection, in and attached these functions. of equalized This cause the can passage. attached may still The muscles an apparatus can Pressure reflex acoustic membrane blocked. painful the the decrease anticipated. quickly acoustic to the because external resulting the to the The apparatus. found eustachian ear ear, and extreme produce tympanic displacement the apparatus rupture that chamber middle tensor external sensitivity and middle can a eustachian action the fluid cases, Two of tympani damaging middle of serves the other contract, damage pharynx connects of middle in they ear: pressure When and can sudden contraction collects a can also cause as of Unequalized changes diving or result discomfort. flying pressure

smaller mechanical of the window that oval (2) to the and

ear membranous bony The inner the includes labyrinths. and complex inside a a of of is series but the bone labyrinth. the lying bony consists whereas the spaces spaces series tissue continuous labyrinth temporal The skull, and of the soft labyrinth bony membranous of in channels these structures. apparatus the are from formed cochlea vestibular and The (see a organ is The spiral-shaped cochlea

Fig. ). 8.17A narrow turns broad from internal the 23 the a base top. although consists lumen base at small spiral is and of wide to its apex, a humans, In at 4 the (see cochlea the faces laterally of apex The

Fig. ). 8.17A into of labyrinth subdivided component is the chambers. cochlea The several bony oval (see is window facing The vestibule space the the

Fig. ). 8.17A with apex the where the of vestibule to the vestibuli, helicotrema. scala cochlea, extends the merges the that with the it the tympani is and spiral-shaped meets at scala chamber Continuous window and scala round (see the ends The spiral-shaped another at down that tympani back winds the space cochlea is

Fig. 8.17B ). Separating membranous the except media labyrinth. the is enclosed at the the scala in two, helicotrema,

duct The cochlear scala media, or (see

Fig. scala spiral between along and vestibuli is 8.17B a cochlea, and extends tympani. the that ), tube the membrane-bound scala Reissner’s the media stria third another and basilar the of is One by wall by (see membrane, membrane, the vascularis scala the formed by

Fig. 8.17C

the within fluid. with The cochlea filled spaces are labyrinth, bony is fluid. fluid The and scala scala resembles tympani, closely vestibuli which cerebrospinal the the perilymph, in including perilymph. The including is in different the membranous very media, endolymph, labyrinth, scala is from the fluid which high to 2 (about mV) the a mm) [Na+] positive stria with generated +80 (about high perilymph. has (about the and [K+] potential vascularis, low by regard Endolymph, mM) 145 and contains gradient endolymph. large cilia that exists into membranes very As hair mV) extend result, potential across cell the 140 a the a the (about of (These more the in are hair cells, later.) which detail discussed for sound, receptors sensory are

organ responsible of for Corti (see The of neural apparatus transduction the sound is

Fig. which cochlear ), located is duct. within the 8.17C three number outer lies inner and hair of basilar membrane, supporting of cells, several components, gelatinous consists and types membrane cells, a on It rows single of of a hair of row tectorial including cells. a the contains and hair inner Corti organ of humans in cells. The 3500 15,000 outer scaffold. rods The provide rigid help of Corti a membrane. surface the as nonmotile apical the cilia on described cells stereocilia, are Located which hair the be that of tectorial contact can

(CN is nerve of The of cochlear innervated Corti by nerve of the division organ the vestibulocochlear fibers VIII). fibers 32,000 in cells afferent in ganglion The spiral sensory originate humans in ganglion. the auditory and These of organ penetrate the terminate hair of the cells at Corti nerve bases fibers the (

Fig. 8.18

Fig. ). 8.17C fibers and cells. end on cells, Approximately of inner 90% the hair end outer on hair remainder the Thus inner 10 approximately afferent to each. diverge whereas other fibers cells hair five hair afferent about outer supply fibers each supply cell, the the about The processes CNS signals neural hair information of provide that inner cells for acoustic hearing. clearly most hair outer cells clear. the The of sensory is function less

which on fibers, outer to hair terminate Corti organ the of of is most afferent by efferent In addition fibers, cells. supplied the brainstem cochlear efferent and olivocochlear the originate called the fibers. superior of These nucleus fibers are often in olivary hair changes outer of length hair suggests characteristic inner sensitivity, the varies; outer may “tuning,” cell length hair or The cells. of this the affect that cells the in outer fibers control cochlear hair efferent The length. cell may cochlea influence a recognizes of Such conceivably the mechanism sensitivity that and sound. brain the the way could the and inhibitory, discrimination. may afferent frequency be efferent on improve cochlear may they that fibers Other help fibers end

transduced Sound the by Corti. of is organ scala the oscillations are the reach these membrane oscillate, to ear cause waves to transmitted the the that and ossicles. tympanic by vestibuli Sound the a difference (see between and tympani creates pressure scala This the vestibuli scala

Fig. organ the the to of Corti (see membrane serves it, that basilar displace with and, ) 8.17B

Fig. ). and B 8.18A the Because tectorial relative forces the cells shear by of of and displacement membranes, bend. set stereocilia the the up hair the of basilar the which cells. opposite displacement tallest which toward hair cells; hyperpolarizes the depolarizes the bends in stereocilia direction, bends downward stereocilia Upward the the hair the deflection cilium,

Acommoncauseofdeafnessisthedestructionofhaircellsbyloudsounds.Haircellscanbedestroyed,forexample,byexposuretoindustrialnoiseorbylisteningtoloudmusic.Typically,haircellsincertainpartsofthecochleaareselectivelydamagedbyexposuretohighlevelsofsoundatparticularfrequencies(aspredictedbytheplacetheory),andthushearingmaybelostoveradiscretefrequencyrange.Presbycusis,orthelossofhigh-frequencyhearingwithage,isprobablyincreasedbythelossofhaircellsasaresultoflong-termnoiseexposureinurbanenvironments.

range of In is response. provide frequencies transduction for of that the fast stimuli, and a sound surprise no hair cell of it wide must view amplitudes tip each direct to cilia based one the that on the channels taller connect ion stereocilium with the links shaft of deflection of by so-called is tip next response of fast the (see opening The of

8 •Fig. CHAPTER Senses The Special 8.18 andwithupwardmovementofthebasilarmembrane(B). DetailoftheorganofCortiatrest(A) Diagramofahaircellwithtiplinkconnectionsbetweenthehaircellciliatoshowhowshearforcesopenmechanoreceptorchannelsand Theupwardmovementcausesthestereociliatobendbecauseofshearforcesproducedbyrelativedisplacementofthehaircellsandthetectorialmembrane.C, depolarizethehaircell.

Fig. 8.18C ). transiently endolymph), subjected high the depolarizes a cell. to high With [K+] are the in tip opens of and the hair (because lever the allows channels, deflection, of the that links entry action and K+ potential for the adaptation rapid important account been mechanisms necessary for equally high-frequency response. proposed have Several to a tip the shaft the “spring” attachment A stereocilium’s to link would allow be to leverage the of mechanical response along the link. links tip by of reset the moved point tip the of statistical and been opening. the to force, has enter it addition, can reduce greater bind In require Ca++ the probability to open change observed and channel, thereby it that opening

cells hair gradient potential and The hair into positive induces includes movement of the of ions both that the resting the potential potential the endolymph. cells of across total 140 is As mV. about of membrane the noted the cells gradient apical previously, hair in that rapid apical produces these membranes cells a potential in flow in Therefore, receptor K+ change conductance a of in the current hair cells. results the same as can the event frequency stimulus. oscillatory the that be acoustic current cochlear flow extracellularly an a This has potential, recorded as microphonic potential of microphonic potentials The represents of a number sum cochlear the of hair cells. the receptor

like depolarized. photoreceptors, cells, glutamate) (probably retinal release an excitatory neurotransmitter Hair when potential produces which the neurotransmitter the nerve (EPSP) fibers in afferent with The cochlear hair synapses. cell an postsynaptic excitatory basilar hair cochlear changes potentials membrane transient when the In of is in of the nerve and, summary, transmembrane the oscillatory sound action cause voltage fibers. the finally, transduced in of generation afferent cells movements of can be recorded large activity of nerve a cochlear the in auditory a fibers number compound potential. afferent action extracellularly The as

and the the basis originally investigators membrane different of of parts frequencies. resonant width have differences tension, basilar On in concluded that different

•Fig. Amplitudes Sound Result Frequencies of Along Sites at in the Different Different Different of Corti. of 8.19 Displacement Organ Envelopesoftravelingwavesproducedbyseveralfrequenciesofsound.Notethatthemaximumdisplacementvarieswithfrequencyandisclosesttothestapeswhenthefrequencyishighest. istheenvelopeformedbythepeaksofthewaveatdifferenttimes.Maximumdeflectionoccursatabout29mmfromtheovalwindow.B, line Travelingwaveproducedinthebasilarmembranebyasoundof200Hz.Thecurvesata,b,c,anddrepresentdisplacementofthebasilarmembraneatdifferenttimes,andthedashed A, Hearing. (RedrawnfromvonBekesyG.Experiments in NewYork:McGraw-Hill;1960.)

base at and about basilar the For wide the 500 wide is at µm µm apex. the 100 membrane example, at the has It also tension higher base. higher the investigators as of frequencies at the instruments. apex, strings the vibrate that musical Thus, the shorter would base would than predicted do a basilar moves the Experiments shown ( membrane waves whole traveling as in that have

Fig. membrane and during is basilar high-frequency during tones nearer maximal cochlea but apex displacement of base maximal nearer the 8.19 the the the low-frequency ), tones. of

In Corti, it Hz serves as along hair of of respond the effect, to sound. different analyzer; a frequencies cells particular distributes the membrane the differentially and basilar organ 50 frequency stimulus of is of basis place theory hearing. the This the in variations frequencies properties. stereocilia their different the to organ at cells places may hair In biophysical because addition, and of of different Corti tuned along located be Corti As tonotopic basilar of the brane and of have these mem a result a map ( organ factors, so-called

Fig. 8.20).

the Neurotransmitter organ cells potentials in the evoke primary nerve. fibers the release cochlear action of in Corti of afferent can hair by with the bipolar cells axons. a cell the VIII) in bodies, the (CN sheath around well are vestibulocochlear Afferent myelin around as nerve as fibers cells, their of the ganglion, are The 400 and processes the synapse bodies of the at spiral base the Hz peripheral in cochlear cell processes central brainstem. nuclei their synapse hair in

frequency. acteristic The frequency ( can a the fiber tuning determined for from curve characteristic be

Fig. 8.21 ). a frequencies. different tuning curve of the sound A by of activation the plot is for threshold nerve fiber of hair the major afferent the is that The basilar that they the fibers of influences along individual the location membrane cells activity innervate. factor along (see membrane those there is for of (mm) its of of a travels wave B the given Distance as cells site from pressure hair important frequency, maximum because the is The displacement length location sound basilar stapes any

Fig. 8.19 ). curves sharp Typically, the tuning are characteristic near

Senses CHAPTER The Special 8

•Fig. Base20,0007,0005,0001,0004,0003,0006004002002,0001,500800Apex Thetonotopicmapofthecochlea. 8.20 (RedrawnfromStuhlmanO.An Biophysics. Introduction to NewYork:JohnWiley&Sons;1943.) but sound at high broaden pressure levels. they frequency, excitatory areas curves (see inhibitory Tuning and have can

Fig. 8.21A ). of may reflect sharpness the regions inhibitory excitatory processes. The

the an The of different features nerve fibers. discharges encoded are stimulus cochlear of in acoustic by of intensity neural Duration and duration both the number by that amount of signaled activity by the discharge. fibers the signaled of is activity; is an afferent (phase phase to fiber the For with locking; discharge stimulus of low-frequency see by frequency sounds, the the in is signaled tendency

Fig. ). 8.22A fiber single with absolute than shorter a refractory is occur can the tone also kHz, but discharge cannot the of If cycle, afferent for the with locking 1 than every fiber. periods phase period sounds much more which, of the in activity with afferent of each information fibers, the CNS (see which the stimulus frequency the frequency to signal phase This of the population and allows a stimulus higher as detect discharges a of from group,

Fig. ). 8.22B is basis This observation theory of the frequency of the hearing.

frequencies near (>5000 being For of high hair activate CNS place interprets as Hz), fibers of the theory the frequency. higher cochlea cells supplying still sounds afferent base dominates: the the that to 20 are frequency sound the necessary the theory) coding frequency to range of the explain (duplex place both Thus 20,000 from the Hz. theories and entire across

Threshold Frequency –60 0 1 0 Frequency 2 –80 A 10 –80 •Fig. –20 –40 –60 intensity (dB) (kHz) B –40 7 intensity –100 (kHz) (dB) 2052 I 0.2 Threshold –20 E 154 100.5 I of Auditory Tuning System. 8.21 the Curves in Neurons Tuningcurvesforcochlearnervefibers. Tuningcurvewithcentralexcitatoryfrequencies(E)andflankinginhibitoryfrequencies(I).B, Tuningcurvescanbeconsideredasreceptivefieldplots.A, Communication. Physiol 1971;212:593.B, [Lond] RedrawnfromKatsuiY.In:RosenblithWA[ed].Sensory RedrawnfromArthurRM,etal.J (A, Cambridge,MA:MITPress;1961.)

atumorofSchwanncellsofthevestibulocochlearnerve(CNVIII).Asthetumorgrows,irritationofcochlearnervefibersmaycausearingingsoundintheaffectedear(tinnitus). Animportant,althoughrelativelyuncommon,conditionthatcaninterruptthefunctionofcochlearnervefibersisanacoustic neuroma, Eventually,conductionincochlearnervefibersisblocked,andtheearbecomesdeaf.Thetumormaybeoperablewhilestillsmall;therefore,earlydiagnosisisimportant.Ifthetumorisallowedtoenlargesubstantially,itcouldinterrupttheentirevestibulocochlearnerveandcausevestibularaswellasauditorydifficulties.Itcouldalsoimpingeonordistortneighboringcranialnerves(e.g.,V,VII,IX,andX),anditcouldproducecerebellarsignsbycompressingthecerebellarpeduncles.

•Fig. A, Athigherfrequencies,eachafferentfibergeneratesanactionpotentialonlyatcertaincycles,limitedbyitsmaximumfiringfrequency.However,theoverallpopulationofafferentfiberscanstillsignalstimulusfrequencybytheiraggregatefiringfrequency. Atlowfrequencies,individualauditoryafferentfiberscanrespondateachcycletothesignalfrequency.B, 8.22

afferent cochlear synapse the fibers nuclei. Cochlear and neurons on of ventral dorsal to neurons contribute pathways. The have these the that auditory in axons nuclei central nuclei the from ascending the in the the the side cross of and tract. contralateral lemniscus, lateral cochlear ascend to axons auditory main Some contralateral lateral with various such contralateral olivary which through the nuclei, and nuclei, superior ipsilateral Others the project lemnisci. or connect as ipsilateral lemniscus inferior lateral in ends an Each colliculus. thalamus, the colliculus to the radiation. to medial nucleus which project of geniculate of the Neurons the rise gives inferior auditory the the the of auditory cortex on lobe. and primary The temporal (Brodmann superior areas 41 42), auditory in radiation ends surface located

from of pathway ascending system level ear and is auditory lemniscus lateral each The the input the the at above. in bilaterally represented of brainstem the at complex, representation the even level. Thus space auditory is or isolated peripheral the more Consequently, lesions may unilateral with cochlear deafness structures. occur nuclei of do localization. overall interfere or although sound with deafness, lesions with not speech they to cause may unilateral Central sensitivity

Functional Central System Auditory of the Organization

curves auditory belong neurons of described system several tuning in responses be structures the can that by to (see The

Fig. 8.21B ). distribution auditory may By in revealed cortex, the ordered to map a plotting frequencies are neurons “best” of frequencies. characteristic of be which tonotopic their neurons a in the within nucleus according or the the nucleus, been maps inferior Tonotopic geniculate found complex, auditory colliculus, nuclei, cochlear olivary have and medial cortex. superior in auditory fact, given contain in several maps. tonotopic structure may, A

fields). they to (i.e., cochlear stimulation above at nuclei respond the have auditory ear receptive of neurons levels binaural either Most fields contribute localization. receptive Binaural sound to originating degree. distinguish as A by can sounds separated as 1 from human sources little (or sides to several arrival of at time phase) the differences of sound auditory origin of the uses and on in intensity The the sound the clues ears the in differences including system head. sounds, two the two judge of

the neurons nucleus have in superior For dendrites. and example, medial olivary lateral medial are the originate cochlear contralateral medial the excitatory, on they The ventral largely synapses dendrites and from nucleus. nucleus. on and inhibitory ipsilateral the cochlear come from lateral are dendrites Those the ventral mostly of in ears strength excitation affect the the particular phase sound the medial a and timing reaching the reaching and olivary two neuron. Differences the of inhibition superior the provide sound the source differences superior two nucleus The the information lateral of in to intensity processes ears olivary sound. that reaches about the activity localization. The of superior information sound provide olivary can about neurons

primary areas. resemble auditory features Several the primary other of sensory cortex those of also sensory tonotopic feature this case, cortical but only maps—in cortex extraction. performs are maps—present the this auditory Not region in the the frequency), cortex isofrequency neurons summation same primary characteristic (in alternating in have form in form Neurons suppression the known auditory they columns column columns, which and and also columns. as the are more than summation input. binaural Neurons in responsive to monaural columns to less to to and, response responsive dominant. in the Neurons ear one binaural stimulation, than to suppression is accordingly, are columns monaural the Some change. of direction neurons selective are for frequency

on localize lesions ability to or abilities speech. auditory the of some understand to different intensity the the and frequency effect and distinguish sound they of cortex reduce to the sounds, have Bilateral nondominant hemisphere little have if (for is ). lesions, especially effect, however, involved Unilateral (see language) the activity auditory of pathway, levels at depends frequency the Evidently, possibly lower on the discrimination colliculus. inferior

andsensorineural loss loss. Twosimpletestsareoftenusedclinicallytodistinguishthemostimportanttypesofdeafness:conduction Conductionhearinglossoccursindisordersoftheexternalear(e.g.,earcanalblockedbycerumen)ormiddleear(e.g.,ruptureoftheeardrum).Sensorineuralhearinglossreflectsdisordersoftheinnerear,thecochlearnerve,orcentralconnections.

masking). isusedtoevaluatethemagnitudeofconductionhearingloss.Inthistest,thebaseofavibratingtuningforkisplacedagainstthemiddleoftheperson’sforehead,andthepersonisaskedtolocalizethesound.Normally,thesoundisnotlocalizedtoaparticularear.However,ifthepersonhasconductivehearingloss(e.g.,duetoapuncturedtympanicmembrane,fluidinthemiddleear,otosclerosis,orlossofcontinuityoftheossicularchain),thesoundislocalizedtothedeafearbecauseitisconductedtothecochleathroughbone.Thesoundisalsoconductedtothecochleaoftheundamagedear,butbone-conductedsounddoesnotactivatetheorganofCortiaswellasdoessoundconductednormallythroughthetympanicmembraneandossiclechain.OnereasonwhythesoundintheWebertestisnotlocalizedtothenormalearmaybethathearinginthenormalearisinhibitedbytheambientsoundlevel(auditory test TheWeber Conversely,inpeoplewithsensorineuralhearingloss(e.g.,duetodamagetotheorganofCorti,thecochlearnerve,orthecochlearnuclei),thesoundislocalizedtothenormalside.

avibratingtuningforkisplacedagainstthebonebehindtheperson’sear,andthepersonisaskedtoindicatewhenthesounddiesout.Thetuningforkisthenheldneartheexternalauditorymeatusofthatear.Inpeoplewithnormalhearing,thesoundisagainheardbecausethesoundismoreeffectivelytransmittedtothecochleainair(i.e.,airconduction> boneconduction).Iftheconductionmechanismisdamaged,thesoundisnotheardwhenthetuningforkisheldneartheexternalauditorymeatus.Boneconductioninthiscaseisbetterthanairconduction.Ifthehearinglossissensorineural,thesoundisheardagainwhenthetuningforkisplacedbytheexternalauditorymeatusbecausewithsensorineuralhearingloss,theinnerearandcochlearnervearelessabletotransmitimpulsesregardlessofwhetherthesoundvibrationsreachthecochleaviaairorbone.Thusbecauseairconductionismoreeffectivethanboneconduction,theboneconductionpatternseenwithsensorineuralhearinglossisthesameasinanormalear. IntheRinne test,

System The Vestibular

detects accelerations and head. of vestibular the system angular linear The stabilize posture the body make Signals and system the image head balance maintain on adjustments to eye allow and trigger from in vestibular retina. the visual the to that movements vestibular the vestibular of emphasizes vestibular description and introduces of system aspects central the it The function, sensory pathways. the following is role vestibular discussed The in control motor of apparatus in the

Apparatus The Vestibular

the Labyrinth Structure of Vestibular

The like membranous the apparatus, the consists of within located a component cochlea, vestibular of labyrinth

8 Senses Special labyrinth. CHAPTER The the bony each two side vestibular semicircular of apparatus The is organs ( three and on composed otolith canals

Fig. 8.23

Fig. 8.17A).

are contain structures surrounded These endolymph perilymph. and by are The named the canals canals. and anterior, semicircular horizontal, posterior are organs as the (together the “Vestibule” otolith in utricle indicated The and saccule

Fig. 8.17A ). canal point it ampulla a Each utricle. semicircular the joins where swelling at an called has the which The through cochlea) apparatus. of vestibular saccule with the the vascularis can the reach connects endolymph cochlea, by (produced the stria

other matched semicircular the side. on with corresponding The semicircular canals one are side on canals three coplanar on the other each side the The side canal one canals (see as of horizontal anterior posterior correspond, the on side head on and the do canal

Fig. ). 8.23B acceleration two nearly sensing the orthogonal in to in in cooperate of the pairs about canals This head allows three arrangement sensory sides, of epithelia, on axes space. the corresponding horizon. lie the canals degrees if relation the they horizontal to head are in down horizontal not 30 plane truly in horizontal; is tilted rather, The the

crista canals of each the a called or contains ampullaris, The ( epithelium sensory ampullary a semicircular ampulla crest of

Fig. ). 8.24 An transverse hair of long consists is canal, by containing a the ridge, epithelium axis crest vestibular cells. that of to the ampullary covered cells hair a by afferent the (CN nerve which These are of primary the nerve, innervated vestibular subdivision is VIII). of fibers vestibulocochlear

of hair surface. hair on apical cell stereocilia its cells, set Like a cochlear vestibular each contains hair cochlear a cells kinocilium. However, large single unlike cells, also vestibular contain hair cupula. The on ampullary gelatinous are embedded cilia hair in cells called the structure a completely. and cupula the crista occlude of ampulla lumen the The the the deflects the of plane axis of produced canal, an cilia acceleration to cells. the the Movement the hair the angular of consequently and perpendicular by head bends about on cupula endolymph, as specific is as such by linear cupula gravity endolymph, thus same and The forces, it acceleratory has unaffected the gravity.

of epithelia the organs sensory macula macula the sacculi the The called are utriculi ( otolith and

Fig. ). 8.25 utricle oriented horizontally; vertically. saccule is nearly is oriented The the macula. each that are embedded in overlies the Their cells hair epithelium macula of the a crests, gelatinous mass. kinocilia project in the stereocilia into and ampullary the As otoliths gelatinous carbonate macula the However, in the composed of contains stones”) (“ear crystals. mass numerous calcium gelatinous mass otolithic Together, otoliths are the its an known and as membrane. to The gravity otolithic the the increase about that endolymph. specific of of the otoliths twice membrane center as move particularly otolithic that membrane subjected the when to head. rotation tends or Hence, linear produced to gravity) whether by is outside of when acceleration, the angular, (such the

Fig. • Note Scale were ampullae plastic. after Lateral 8.23 semicircular is with A, canals with associated that monkey dissected in B,Overheadviewofthebaseoftheskullshowingtheorientationofstructuresoftheinnerear.Coplanar the canal. DE the of of [ed]. millimeters. rhesus SchoolofMedicine.B,Redrawnfrom right canals.(A,CourtesyofDr.JohnSimpson,New Haines YorkUniversity a being view pairsofsemicircularcanalsincludethehorizontalcanals,aswellastheanteriorandcontralateralposterior each filled for and Applications. Clinical ed. Fundamental Basic 3rd Neuroscience ChurchillLivingstone;2006.) Philadelphia: •Fig. eachhaircellextendintothecupula,whichextendsacrosstheentirecross-sectionoftheampulla.Head movement(acceleration)totherightwouldresultinendolymphpressuretotheleftanddeflectionofthe cupulatotheleft. andthekinocilium Ampullary Crest of an Drawing Ampulla.Thestereocilia an of Inside 8.24

Epithelia of Vestibular of the Apparatus Innervation Sensory

ganglion. Scarpa are the vestibular in nerve of the cell bodies afferent primary fibers the of located The as and neurons are well their as cell axons, The bodies, are myelinated. bipolar, nerve gives the separate Peripherally, off vestibular • Fig. orientation, their kinocilium otolith saccule. (Redrawn from striola. the of with Note mirror symmetry the of as variation in Lindeman HH. as Structure one orderly regard the well organs, the to 8.25 1973;20:405.) Adv Otorhinolaryngol

and the auditory facial Senses the accompanies 8 epithelia; as vestibular CHAPTER 153 centrally, to internal the cochlear each skull. they enter meatus it nerves of The of Special the branches

cells, transduction to polarized, similar. hair are the functionally mechanism cochlear and be is presumed Like cells hair vestibular conductance of K+ the membrane increases are toward and, apical for is high (in of case, endolymph, bent the the kinocilium), depolarized of the cilium K+ cell hair this the concentration longest ( because enters, cations When stereocilia the vestibular and the

Fig. 8.26 ). bent when is Conversely, hair hyperpolarized. the the kinocilium, away the cilia are from cell an The glutamate neurotransmitter afferent the (either has on fiber that resting aspartate) synapses cell releases discharge. excitatory a or tonically, it so which hair the fiber cell the discharge more increases. released, rate is afferent of When and is hair neurotransmitter the depolarized, Conversely, rate and of released, less is neurotransmitter the firing hair fiber cell slows. afferent the hyperpolarized, when the is

Angular accelerations of head movement minute the head of endolymph produce the in to relation ( the

Fig. ). 8.27 membranous causes the of to the happens it initial This of endolymph because the inertia the acceleration resist labyrinth. changes bend, the fibers. consequently rates to the of on the the vestibular lag cupula, pushes and discharge cilia causes afferent This are the in All crest the oriented a cilia given ampullary same in direction. the and from oriented away are toward the oriented the cilia horizontal they In the other the ampullae, canal, are in utricle, utricle.

• Fig. (Redrawn or JH. Hair from are afferent are cell Polarization of is stereocilia is is kinocilium, from the Kandel and hair kinocilium, cell the away Cells. toward discharge the and bent the bent stops. depolarized, When the ER, excited. fiber hair the Functional the Vestibular afferent 8.26 stereocilia hyperpolarized, When slows Schwartz the New Principles 1981.) Elsevier; Science. of Neural York:

of motion head Turning

AmpullaAxis of

of Axis hair •Fig. cells 8.27 Fibers Head on Leftward of in Supplying Movement the Cells Afferent of Hair Vestibular the Semicircular Canals. Horizontal Effect Activity the head from looking the is down. above in The perspective figure (acceleration) left to pressure canal. case, output and the endolymph left right the from rotation the decreased is output In to causes the the result right increased and head canal this from arrows atthetopindicatesmovementofthehead;smaller indicaterelativemovementoftheendolymph. arrows Small arrow intheampullaindicatethefunctionalpolarityofthehaircells.Thelarge curved curved

of acceleration affects which by canals. the the fibers of the head way that discharge The exemplified is vestibular from originates the in horizontal afferent activity angular

Fig.

as left. horizontal to above canals and the the rotated is utricle, head shows 8.27 seen as the (accelerated) from the begins, horizontal toward left endolymph canals in side. acceleration inertia increases of the the pressure right As to the the cilia cells bends to the causes horizontal canal toward right of This left cilia away ampulla hair from of the the on the the and utricle. of the canal bend utricle the These afferent increase decrease and the right. actions the on in the firing firing on fibers rate the the fibers afferent of the left rate acceleration), rotation as hair head be constant Once they be is a of the would and rest. moving (i.e., the no velocity firing force cupula, no canals would both cells at on of do at either there therefore in caused when the acceleration. stopped, the the by opposite the that inertia force original of the a cupulas, endolymph is to indicated rotation However, direction creates on but both the on of afferent rate decrease fibers an and increase in This the on in discharge discharge a in results side rate left. the the right significance. effect clinical functional of and This is postrotatory

organs cells the hair crests, the are hair in not Unlike the the same in all otolith •Fig. oriented cells ampullary the in Organs. Otolith Hair Polarization 8.28 Cells the in Functional of Thesaccule.B, A, Theutricle.Thestriolaineachcaseisindicatedbythedotted line. Its and Diseases. System (RedrawnfromSpoendlinHH.In:WolfsonRJ[ed].The Vestibular Philadelphia:UniversityofPennsylvaniaPress;1966.)

(see disease, canresultinrhythmicconjugatedeviationsoftheeyes,followedbyquickreturnsaccades.Thisconditionisknownasnystagmus Irritationofthevestibularlabyrinth,asinMeniere’s

movementsareaccompaniedbyasenseofvertigo andoftennausea. Chapter9).Theseeye Thebraininterpretsadifferenceintheinputfromthetwosidesofthevestibularsystemasheadmotion.Irritation(ordestruction)ofonelabyrinthproducesanasymmetryofinputthatresultsinabnormaleyemovementandassociatedpsychologicaleffects.

direction. they the striola, otolith called organ the Instead, are oriented in ridge, a (see relation along to

Fig. 8.25 ). polarized are in the either toward striola. they the side hair utricle, striola, from whereas are the of on striola cells In the saccule the the away polarized the with in Because organ there striola orientations cells of the the hair organ curved, are plane each otolith all in ( is

Fig. ). 8.28 cilia the hair any orientation extents are to the the vector. varying particular bent orientation of in according relation head, cells to of to the gravitational their In in particular otolith a results the CNS. pattern to organs input from the of This changes, the in the position, membranes new of When relation vector is bent cilia and are in way. of new so cells a hair otolithic the to to gravitational head a the the the orientation tilted of movement, the the in hair input CNS and bending change the the possibly various This otolith reflexes. from of cilia triggering organs well to of cells the pattern creates changes as of the the as sensation fall a tangential a otolith accelerations centripetal in or the have around other a turns (angular when and output forces, such acceleration angular from curve organs. as Similarly, instantaneous linear might linear affects the occur caused a car acceleration also by components),

the fibers brainstem the through to project nerve. vestibular vestibular The afferent are in located of Scarpa previously the afferent the fibers As bodies cell these ganglion. mentioned, terminate fibers afferent These (see nuclei the in primary vestibular

Fig. 4.6

and cerebellum, are rostral in prominently of and the to in E), D the most in which nodulus. caudal located regions the pons medulla specific

medial including projections projections, nuclei to the (see The rise through give various fasciculus longitudinal vestibular

Fig. nuclei. oculomotor E 4.6C ) to to the movements reflex). vestibular powerful nuclei over control eye is surprising that exert (the it vestibule-ocular Therefore, the not to (vestibulocolic provide movements of vestibulospinal neck respectively, the tracts, lateral rise and reflex). equilibrium and contribute to activation trunk medial muscles which, Other head thereby to projections give the for and and and the to well vestibular to the the thalamus. as reticular are contra-lateral cerebellum, There vestibular as formation, complex, the pathways via a thalamus, cortex, mediates the activity. of to projection pathway the vestibular conscious to cerebral sensation The reflexes clinical described and in of vestibular are tests Vestibular function

Chemical Senses The

gustation chemical (taste) and are of detect The olfaction in (smell) the senses in food and present stimuli air. drink that or either help and quality of the food survival of contribute other of the to evolution value are important not humans, stimulants they and some senses but of considerably they chemical selection, In apparently did the these life senses, of have digestion. and In and chemical senses have a territoriality, value, their the animals, feeding. social greater of number including mating, activation behaviors, survival evokes other

salty, and qualities: tastes sour, that taste stimuli of are five umami. commonly bitter, know as sweet, we actually elementary The mixtures

sucrose, in quinine, stimuli and sensations chloride, are respectively, acid, effective are, glutamate. particularly mono-sodium these sodium hydrochloric that Taste eliciting described Umami as meaty been has a proteinaceous, having character.

fatty a is (free bThe fat existence taste, being of currently debated. acids), sixth,

8 Special Senses The CHAPTER

in activation taste located on the chemoreceptors depends taste The of sensation of buds. group bud A receptor (Fig. cells as supporting taste 50 consists as 150 cells of well cells, and basal of to a 8.29A ). pore. at microvilli nerve primary afferent apices toward synapse and bases have a that with their chemoreceptor their extend The taste fibers, cells days. 10 Chemoreceptor about only cells live taste new base cells by located cells of the near differentiate from bud. that continuously chemoreceptor the are They replaced basal

for Chemoreceptor of molecules, stimulus, tongue, to on one sit the chemoreceptor mucus part pore molecules into microvilli the of taste detect the taste cells type of the from originates diffuse from buds. specialized each which taste the glands adjacent overlying of that and stores open channels quinine, a second for (sucrose, for pass cell (see Ca++ sour), potential glutamate intracellular directly depolarize and others a can whereas and (also messenger can activate for and activate open sour) channels cation bitter, and H+ stimuli sweet, Some to either or (Na+ generate receptor it the cation into umami) directly or to that salty salty

Fig. 8.29B ). in case, excitatory primary an the nerve results neurotransmitter transmitted receptor fiber release of action that In are CNS. potentials in each of depolarization to the consequently, afferent the and, the

different a on of is based primary because range entirely intensely each for chemoreceptors stimuli, the of taste, the not selectivity although the cell Coding qualities to however, of most to one. responds of recognition the a effect of Because responding differentially a patterned natural each appears population from the have quality stimulus. on chemoreceptors, most number responses of to that of chemoreceptors, input from depend the taste chemicals components to tastes total the The in stimulus of reflected activity the intensity of is amount evoked.

of Distribution and Innervation Buds Taste

papillae larynx. pharynx, on of Taste taste buds and palate, the found types different are on tongue, located anterior fungiform lateral Types include papillae foliate base of circumvallate and tongue papillae aspects, papillae of of the and the respectively, tongue taste the on the and (see on

Fig. 8.29C).

The hundred buds. circumvallate papillae contain several taste may in The taste have may several humans thousand tongue buds. qualities type widely the of The slightly varies of distributed. different responding different each regions because tongue sensitivity buds for taste taste taste to are of are innervated cranial by taste three The nerves. buds of the the branch two IX) buds taste of (CN nerve The buds tympani anterior posterior tongue, (see VII) taste the on the (CN thirds tongue glossopharyngeal innervates nerve of on third the facial chorda innervates and the

Fig. ). 8.29C vagus nerve (CN The

the upper in taste innervates and few larynx buds X) esophagus. a

geniculate, taste respectively. in the X ganglia, and of cell are bodies VII, and nodose petrosal, cranial fibers The located IX, in nerves central the solitary tract, the in solitary The of nucleus tract and join enter medulla, fibers (see the the afferent processes of synapse the

Fig. 4.6

E). to D rodent second-order animals, including the rostrally ipsilateral the solitary several nucleus the species, taste neurons In some project nucleus. parabrachial to of then The (parvocellular) nucleus medial parabrachial to of small-celled ventroposterior the nucleus thalamus. the of part (VPMpc) projects the the projects VPMpc nucleus. nucleus to solitary monkeys, directly In the of insula. face the The other nucleus two cortex: S1 one is cortex and the cerebral gustatory in in different areas the VPMpc to the area connected of the it that of feature uncrossed is the pathway predominantly somatosensory an An central are which the is pathway crossed). (unlike unusual central pathways, predominantly gustatory

animals) much in sense humans. smell The of some better animals developed (macrosmatic in is than to other the is use of of basis animals to on insects legendary, pheromones as by the The dogs attract is odor ability mates. of track humans’ conjure emotional and life, odors However, contributes up can olfaction effectively to memories. helps also It

Fig. of Release • top the taste A cells; shown 8.29 cell; bud ciliated A, below. taste with innervation is and at its B, pore the basal taste supporting R, S, receptor cells. B, Taste and ligand-gated, cell. receptor depolarization the of showing in direct resulting depolarization second cell messenger,

• Fig. the [eds]. LR, the cont’d from on buds Squire C, al and (Redrawn tongue of innervation. et Distribution taste their 8.29, Neuroscience. Diego, CA: San Fundamental 2002.) Press; Academic people situations. dangerous avoid consuming food spoiled detect and odorless, is to unpleasant leak. natural For example, added so colorless a can detect odorant an easily people that gas

Odor more than primary taste qualities does. has

many 350 As represent as population largest coded genome. G of odor the 1000 types functional, human genome, the protein–coupled receptors they receptors the although approximately and in different only in are are contains of receptors mucosa trigeminal nerve. somatosensory also The the olfactory thermal in receptors such ammonia clinical or noxious salts.” olfaction, as these stimuli, When with avoid tests somatosensory “smelling activating used clinicians the of must performing

a the olfactory The chemoreceptor specialized part cells nasopharynx. are in mucosa, the located olfactory of are chemoreceptors ( Olfactory nerve cells bipolar

Fig. 8.30 ). result cThe the the by from and is pass molecules of conscious The nasal food from in input that are odor, of taste particularly flavor, gustatory mouth, volatile maceration as pharynx. and retronasal the odor up of into from released foods, macerated cavity based both inhaled the and on directly olfactory it perception the the is

these The odorant the on that in detect nonmotile overlying 8 CHAPTER the Senses layer. cells surface contain mucus Special apical chemicals chemoreceptors dissolved 157 cilia of penetrates gives bone. of the the cell of its that the olfactory opposite openings unmyelinated other off an ethmoid nerve side, filaments through the the plate in and From axon skull cribriform joins base cranial below base olfactory the frontal at nerves ( olfactory hemisphere of of the the synapse a the of the in just cerebral brain These bulb, located cavity, the portion lobe

Fig. 8.31

olfactory million have chemoreceptors. about 10 Humans span also replaced. a Like 60 have short life days), (about taste they and chemoreceptors cells, olfactory are continuously olfactory true cells neurons that throughout are such, regenerated are and, However, neurons receptor as continuously only the are life.

odorant mucosa exposed during cavity currents olfactory ventilatory the air feeding. oral from or is by The molecules to odorants. of Sniffing the influx increases bound that by secreted The is binding olfactory in an cavity. to odorants mucus gland temporarily a nasal are in the protein

molecules in natural that odors of a coding excite of that most complex chemoreceptors. consist Olfactory olfactory resembles variety and many are taste coding wide olfactory overall strength Coding chemoreceptors, activity. perceived of for odor is the of particular neural a the on many by of odorant depends afferent represented responses the amount and the

of a the which in olfactory is is the on the the The specialized underside olfactory of and lobe. located bulb, pathway initial frontal portion of the located cortex synapse cerebral cells, It periglomerular clusters (glomeruli; distinct synaptic (granule contains mitral cells), cells; see and interneurons

Fig. ) which afferent interact olfactory in 8.31 with theses fibers. dendrites the glomerulus synapse on olfactory As the olfactory olfactory as olfactory to mucosa, from they bulb reach mitral an fibers of they the branch the afferent approach cells. of olfactory to of the Each afferent single receptor. fibers olfactory target is type glomerulus thousands all from the but of convey the glomerulus fibers, afferent a one input axons This being cells regenerated all therefore and correct new because the glomerulus. more is way navigate must are continuously to remarkable a olfactory receptor their

are inhibitory cells granule The and inter-neurons. periglomerular of reciprocal form synapses cells. the dendrites mitral They dendrodendritic with the Activity cells, glomeruli. original and in adjacent cell turn inhibit a these inhibitory in mitral depolarizes and they contrast, is Because appears by for do unique stimulus to cells being odor a in this retina. the specialized much the of the a combination glomerulus afferent target way fibers horizontal of enhancing qualities, of each way be In provides adaptation mechanism for continuous to a it stimulation. addition,

Fig. • AJD. Y Lorenzo from [ed]. de cells. Zotterman 8.30 In: chemoreceptors (Redrawn supporting and Olfactory Olfaction Elmsford, 1963.) and NY: Pergamon; Taste. Fig. • Olfactory Showing mitral in cells Pansky exiting The Neurons (Modified of Olfactory Terminations EL, the the the shown axons of Bulb. in tract Cells Bulb, the Olfactory B. of Intrinsic Sagittal olfactory Glomeruli are to Drawing Chemoreceptor the House the the and right. an of Through from Olfactory Section a 8.31 A Approach McGraw-Hill; New Functional 1967.) ed. York: Neuroanatomy. to 2nd

CHAPTER Senses Special 8 The

bulb olfactory enter cells axons of leave the tracts. The olfactory and mitral the complex. here, From the olfactory become connections highly bulb the tracts from input the contralateral Within through is olfactory bulb the to nucleus, the olfactory receives the nucleus, called olfactory and commissure. projects a anterior olfactory anterior that base the approaches of lateral the As tract and olfactory into the brain, striae. medial each splits olfactory it stria animals, the the cortex, prepiriform piriform includes which of lateral lobe). in (and, Axons many olfactory the the cortex in olfactory primary synapse the as stria The the well basal projections to as includes to medial olfactory amygdala, forebrain. These or of, the system are portions (see limbic connected directly to, structures

note Of the the in olfactory only not the pathway is reach system the obligatory does cortex. that that an have signals before sensory is thalamus relay synaptic does orbitofrontal transmitted the prefrontal then mediodorsal and thalamus, of olfactory it nucleus the reach is However, to and cortex. the information to roles of much the perception the include providing the functional enhancing of olfaction, subtleties 1. of addition of The conscious in odor, by taste

through Light focused on which eye back the and the lens the eye. the lines retina, and is cornea of the enters has is lens of cornea be The to a refractive allows the near on images the the surface, power most objects powerful focused but that variable retina. illumination amount of and enters the that depth The iris the field regulates of eye.

2.

of the The segments photoreceptor transduce outer cells light. other cells. turn on ganglion bipolar synapse interneurons Photoreceptors in cells, synapse on and which retinal on to through brain optic the the nerve. cells ganglion project The blind retina, optic leaves no contains The nerve is and the optic disc, the photoreceptors therefore spot. where a retina resolution the macula. and of the highest of The fovea portion the with degree spatial the surrounding is

3.

high colors, low under best levels. photoreceptors sensitivity, light discriminate not have do Rod and function among but sensitivity lower photoreceptors higher spatial Cone resolution. have different spectral three of on that relies types the cones sensitivities. Color have vision

4.

have Bipolar ganglion off-center/on-surround on-center/off-surround concentric fields an receptive cells many cells or organization. and with Horizontal this cells mediate center-surround antagonism. stimulation and by modulating membrane neurotransmitters, bipolar, release horizontal respond Photoreceptor, and cells their to of their potential

Olfactionisnotgenerallyexaminedinaroutineneurologicalexamination.However,smellcanbetestedbyhavingthepatientinhaleandidentifyanodorant.Onenostrilshouldbeexaminedatatimewhiletheothernostrilisoccluded.Strongodorants,suchasammonia,shouldbeavoidedbecausetheyalsoactivatetrigeminalnervefibers.Smellsensationcanbelost(anosmia) seizures, groove whichareepilepticseizuresthatoriginateinthemedialtemporallobe. afterabasalskullfractureorafterdamagetooneorbotholfactorybulbsortractsbyatumor(suchasanolfactory meningioma).Concussionscancauseanosmiabecausethesuddenmovementofthebraininsidetheskullcanshearthesmallunmyelinatedolfactorynervefibers.Anauraofadisagreeableodor,oftenthesmellofburningrubber,occursduringuncinate

receptors. narrow with range wide repertoire of receptors of the gustatory olfactory emotions, memory, intimate related subconscious structures, extension, it input its hypothalamic to provides via In and limbic with sexual to by mechanisms behavior. connections addition, and,

by respond potentials. ganglion but action cells generating

5.

cross nasal the cells temporal brain in to chiasm. the project of those in axons the retina retina The in ganglion the ipsilaterally; optic side field the each the to eyes. both on the of inverts visual the side the of retina, brain lens the projected that is for contralateral Because falls image and M as well. movement) separate and In thalamus, each (sensitive and cells to in nucleus (LGN) the to to P terminates layers the color) separate layers, detail cells input from (sensitive the project the lateral geniculate of ganglion ganglion eye

6.

to in layer map. (striate) LGN orderly visual primary retinotopic 4, visual via and radiation terminates The there the is largely where an cortex projects in dominance create from points Within eye to adjacent maps to extend the vertically cortex. alternating ocular that columns the each map, information 4 layer stimuli particular outside way. or neurons oriented respond cortical of to best edge bar a in Striate orientation stimulus a grouped particular “prefer” orientation that columns. are Cells in

7.

extrastriate functions. visual The areas have different are the inferotemporal detection, in function and face discrimination. in chiefly and they by P Some influenced color vision, cells, form cortex and regions cells the control the M of movements. detection middle temporal which parietal motion function in eye of and cortex, influence

8.

and pure phase. terms is characterized its tone frequency, A amplitude, of in pure are tones. sounds Natural combinations of level. a in is reference pressure in measured decibels relation (dB), Sound to

9.

pinna membrane. sound airborne The to and canal auditory convey the tympanic waves transmit small ear. of The of ear oval three the membrane the inner of (ossicles) bones the middle to the window fluid-filled vibrations the tympanic and the about most the because at Hz 3000 of dimensions the sensitive of canal mechanics is the Hearing of ossicles. auditory

10.

vestibuli, cochlea three the ear scala of duct). (cochlear compartments: the has tympani, media scala main scala inner intervening the and The the of sound which is side membrane, lies the the The the on mechanism. duct basilar cochlear on bounded organ Corti, by one transduction

11.

open channels. membrane forces, hair stereocilia in oval cells the into vestibuli organ at introduced the scala basilar which to When pressure oscillates the mechanoreceptor the of waves of response K+ are the Corti shear window, the of to subjected neurotransmitters conductance of release cochlear modulates that on membrane change nerve This results the a in to fibers.

12.

the apex. the of hair activate low-frequency best near cells near High-frequency base cochlea, sounds the activate and sounds cells the medial also in organization central is geniculate cochlear colliculus, auditory primary structures, including inferior the Such and auditory tonotopic present complex, olivary superior nucleus, nuclei, cortex. a

13.

the intensity and many sound speech contributes in central auditory sites pathway recognition. frequency Auditory analysis, processing and to localization, at

14.

is apparatus part The vestibular the ear. of inner semicircular (horizontal, includes saccule) three otolith and posterior) canals anterior, side. two (utricle and and each organs It on of accelerations and head. These linear respectively, transduce, angular the semicircular about any are so mutually resolve the of axis The orthogonal, head can three they canals rotation. acceleration of angular

15.

cupula, a which sensory whose In cilia semicircular the extend canal. are cross-section there cells hair of into canal, blocks endolymph-filled each the the head displaces cilia. Angular the acceleration and cupula, bending the endolymph the an toward depolarized, stereocilia cell bend is which afferent rate the If the fiber. hair in the in the firing causes kinocilium, increase

16.

the organs, otolith In otolithic into project an the cilia membrane. with otolithic the and of cells, patterns to the (because relation movement, otoliths) of the on firing in changes gravity displaces membrane as linear hair in of or depending the orientation. change the position of head, their Acceleration the mass

17.

include vestibular afferent the connections Central to vestibular cerebellum. and nuclei pathways the relayed via afferent vestibular position by to nuclei neck is to acceleration change that is or movements, adjustments and eye of fibers the the the brain mediate pathways detected compensatory head as posture. movements, vestibular and Activation

18.

buds a chemoreceptor Taste arranged contain pore. cells taste around several in buds and papillae Taste the pharynx on kinds larynx. located and on are the tongue of elementary sweet, taste-receptor bitter, umami. of of types sour, cells salty, five the Five detect taste: and qualities taste signaled activity by input. and the with central classes olfactory receptor multiple of patterned correlation flavors are accompanying by Complex of

19.

Afferent the fibers nucleus synapse tract. taste of the in solitary areas is a to insula. part taste-receiving the ventroposterior the located nucleus and medial S1 thalamic the in the via relay The cortex of

20.

Odors detected olfactory which chemoreceptor mucosa. are cells, are olfactory continuously the in regenerated by receptors neurons are with that that of wide odor true protein–coupled cells enable detection the of These array are endowed of G molecules. a hundreds

21.

in olfactory for project glomeruli, stimulus the bulb. olfactory to type, olfactory Individual each axons specific with of dendrites which They the interneurons. have synapse reciprocal inhibitory on cells, synapse mitral adaptation the in organization This glomerulus stimulus contrast underlies enhancement. synaptic and

Squire D. Fundamental Berg L, Neuroscience. ed. 4th 2012. Academic New York: Press;

chapter, of should completion able the the this student to following answer be Upon questions: 1.

neurons and neuron, different? how is γ What a and α are motor motor

2.

What is motor a unit? to motor recruitment “size units? the the How orderly apply of principle” does

3.

for reflexes useful reflex, understanding? and why clinical What is and a are scientific

4.

sensed the spindles, nervous fibers What muscle afferent convey information by to the the about and of this system the state (CNS)? information central is what muscle

5.

responses How the neurons spindle? do the of γ modulate motor muscle

6.

What and functions basic the are pathways reflexes? the spinal of

7.

generator, and is movements what What a used be it of can for? types pattern central

8.

pathways motor What descending lateral pathways control? the medial and distinguishes of the in

9.

of are what for What the implications control rigidity, and its tone? is muscle decerebrate

10.

motor from each What the areas cortical distinguishes other?

11.

cortex? of in the motor parameters motor for coded activity neurons What in are

12.

How of organization origins, connections. to olivocerebellar systems the fiber the and (climbing) cerebellum the their afferent does mossy in differ topography, synaptic and

13.

the relationship cerebellar is elements between cortex? What cellular major geometric of the the

14.

and simple Purkinje complex spikes What are cells? in

15.

indirect ganglia, and the the their basal and in movement? What influence are activity how direct pathways does

16.

in Parkinson’s How indirect between pathways and disease Huntington’s of disease? and the the activity altered direct balance is

17.

gaze? vestibuloocular do How optokinetic stabilize act and the reflexes to do other? complement they each How

18.

are pursuit in saccades movements tracking? smooth roles of and visual the What

19.

normal what is types of sensory stimulation and nystagmus, a What drive can individual? nystagmus in

20.

the is involved somatotopic of in the control. CNS regions organization motor different What

major world. the with ovements humans are which the interact way in eating, Most writing, talking, reaching, activities— involve and including reading—ultimately acts. motor running, the arose. central from Thus probably major it is and reason of control systems task an that system nervous motor is a (CNS), perspective, nervous evolutionary first the to devoted to posture and to movement as of of head, Not contraction maintain a the CNS body generation or signals defined make postures). large of between a can is amount control, a musculature to the be coordinate either the of surprisingly, two motor which (transition the

diseases involved nervous often of control, abnormalities. are in the amounts Because or in damage of the system motor nervous large system result motor important function motor of motor malfunctioning clinical symptoms tool. location Conversely, an region; damaged thus particular the of or help the is assessment determine

basal cortex, brainstem, involved ganglia. CNS described, cord starting cerebellum, and motor with with area is continuing each this In chapter, the control in and cerebral the major spinal Eye discussed and involved their chapter importance their circuits at because the of the of in generation. movements end specialized the are isolation, function however, brain is action CNS most CNS multiple regions and area Each coordinated movements described not do in the of from regions. result separately; local which cerebral ultimately voluntary of generated descending the which cord, motor analogous by commands, arise spinal activity, by muscles for activation and movements, are For circuits spinal from by example, are be (or can and reflexes, circuitry brainstem nuclei in the even spinal head face). in cord modified virtually all mediated the

Spinal Cord Principles of Organization

to is deep matter matter gray the in The white found a the shell. spinal and superficially cylindrical white matter cord which has shape is located the the matter a of gray that length forms continuous The runs cord. the column exit basis which into nerves, form roots naming •Fig. the spinal the cord nerve that bundle and enter for the However, discrete the Neurons the Motor Ventral in Cord. Spinal Horn of of Musculotopic Organization the 9.1 Schematicviewofthecervicothoracicspinalcordandassociatedcross-sections,showingtheloca-tionsofmotorneuronsthatinnervateaflexor(blue dots). dots) A, andanextensor(red B, Spinalcordcross-section,withlocationsofdifferentmusclesrepresentedbyadrawingofthearm.(RedrawnfromPurvesD,etal[eds].Neuroscience. 3rded.Sunderland,MA:Sinauer;2004. sacral, 5 muscles cord lumbar, muscles (8 spinal Distal the cervical, 1 (“segments”) Proximal 12 and )B of thoracic, specific coccygeal). levels 5 gray “H” When shape. cross-section, typically viewed butterfly matter or the has in an column an that are dorsal by into are ( wings” zone divided intermediate “butterfly The ventral separated and horns

Fig. spinal small horn also is some lateral present; 9.1 see (at ). cord ) a levels, a motor thus ventral primarily neurons it where motor reside, and horn is has The function. main the motor descending Correspondingly, pathways target it the of from brain. is recipient is contrast, horn the tract; sensory source major see main dorsal the information the the (e.g., and of In incoming sensory ascending spinothalamic of pathways

7). Chapter

description ventral organization horn. of properties cord begins and of with therefore function motor neurons the the spinal of The their in the motor the cranial and motor Similar that and nerve facial the are the trigeminal musculature in of face (e.g., controlling nuclei). the hold involved organizational head for principles nuclei

is to muscle projects cells. that a neuron A neuron motor to muscle represent termed activity, for motor motor control been Because the CNS neurons common pathway. final route only activity neurons the have There motor neurons autonomic both and somatic neurons. motor are discussed are motor this chapter, somatic neuron autonomic in motor the only to neurons refers motor term in However, . neurons; Somatic the muscles innervate body. skeletal of the motor neurons (striated) the neurons. α Two are their of motor γ classes main and axonal on distinguished basis diameters:

multipolar to large, The in that size neurons in 70 up range motor α neurons are µm (see diameter

Fig. ). 4.10A the cord and roots cranial spinal the several muscles the brainstem through via appropriate and skeletal nerves. axons the to distributed nerves peripheral Their are leave ventral via The projects other motor axons collateral to leaving axon off by the CNS. giving also before α neurons neuron onto the The extrafusal terminates main fibers. by synapsing muscle axon or synapses neuromuscular junctions end are plates. These called contractile of a skeletal fibers large see later whose functions muscle muscle the essentially (a its in are this muscle also fibers detailed also and chapter; force up that make fibers Extrafusal generate intrafusal bulk are contains

key out fibers branches projection to A muscle. neuron innervates functional axon only muscle, of CNS motor aspect but that within each neuron’s that multiple innervate pattern is of the the it one in by one mammals is extrafusal α only each supplied fiber muscle Moreover, neuron. motor a the motor motor Thus defined as and supplies. can neuron of unit α be its that all skeletal muscle an axon fibers of the an of fibers can motor circumstances, the unit as The unit muscle regarded of motor because discharges basic movement the all when be α motor unit normal neuron under contract. fiber axon is, unit. potential the every action in is the than in potential muscle action of That neuromuscular junction so and an factor the ) 1, of the greater (see motor triggers motor neuron safety each

of muscle Of control that how varies (i.e., average size of muscles, an fine the motor by innervated required. is unit muscle fibers between is the of number depending axon) on a the importance the muscles, a muscle eye α finely an supply fibers. such controlled neuron the few only motor muscles, as may For proximal single thousands muscle limb as α of such muscle, However, the may neuron motor femoris, innervate in a quadriceps fibers. a

a that called muscle to a fibers given unit. The unit are motor muscle belong histochemical muscle [type fast-twitch muscle or in slow-twitch type IIA unit the either they are [type all a fibers All the (i.e., IIB] are same or I] of fibers). types, description of see For fiber muscle in-depth . an of this this properties histochemical is that physiological chapter importance correlated scheme. with are Of number a in classification particular, relax name, essentially slowly levels generate fatigue. contract their as which by implied fibers, low-force also In slow-twitch but and never rapidly, fast-twitch and varying the higher In force, contrast, and contract levels at generate fatigue fiber rates. relax of

effort in by The either cases, action or many during be motor activated voluntary units first or just reflex to

the CHAPTER smallest Motor motor 9 are maintain those posture, of Organization Function axons. with to contractile fibers be thus and initial motor the These generate to units the contraction finely smallest slow-twitch contain force, graded. allowing These continuously, tend makes time, and of lack not fatigability of be sense. their the much if to good functional so active units

recruited As the fast-twitch involved, axons and become with more axons motor neurons fibers. for act, are progressively a larger motor these motor synapse units onto they tension. of larger amounts Thus generate progressively amounts and short most of units can of recruited motor tasks weight), for jumping, powerful periods for lifting are typically only large (e.g., people time. tasks heavy force requiring for that such sprinting, perform The a only

recruitment of force units at orderly range the of a control large motor relatively different maintain levels. helps the CNS also precise The forces and generate because axon are principle motor recruitment the called motor neuron order of This size. is in size pattern recruited the units neurons. more depends are the large motor principle are on fact that The than size easily small neurons motor activated that current. an opens excitatory Recall is the postsynaptic and membrane it excitatory active, synapse channels an causes postsynaptic if in neurons potential of have higher a initial than change at a neurons than = of of resistance small and segment it neuron, same that an larger as excitatory (V Ohm’s motor law do. fact current does postsynaptic generates larger a size simply a at motor larger membrane the consequence motor axon smaller the IR) neuron The motor because spikes, to for the will rises are the potentials threshold of in reach to postsynaptic smaller the need synaptic triggering Thus in summate motor excitatory and first. CNS spiking threshold as zero, bombardment depolarization neurons resulting from reach level small cases, differing this exceptions, however, to be the neurons. principle there in size presumably provide can synaptic As must descending assumption is to hold; usually and the motor of motor obeyed, drive the levels generally these appears pathways different-sized

about smaller neurons soma motor motor of than The neurons; a α are have they diameter 35 γ µm. motor α same a The horn supply that project neurons in that are as muscle of located neurons particular that regions the motor to ventral muscle. γ the the neurons extrafusal muscle Motor spindles muscles. instead, that called synapse are in fibers fibers; supply embedded not specialized muscle do receptors muscle γ traverse intrafusal striated they on skeletal muscle called which fibers, later). is of the neurons γ to (discussed The regulate receptors sensitivity function these motor of

Neurons of Horn in the Motor Topographic Ventral Organization

of highly in cord neurons is spinal organized. spatial distribution the motor The is the (This nuclei.) in true also nerve cranial is A a muscle group by given supplied skeletal

Aclinicallyusefulwaytomonitortheactivityofmotorunitsiselectromyography. motorneurons.Electromyographyisusedforvariouspurposes.Forexample,theconductionvelocityofmotoraxonscanbeestimatedasthedifferenceinlatencyofmotorunitpotentialswhenaperipheralnerveisstimulatedattwositesseparatedbyaknowndistance.Anotheruseistoobservefibrillationpotentialsthatoccurwhenmusclefibersaredenervated.Fibrillationpotentialsarespontaneouslyoccurringactionpotentialsinsinglemusclefibers.Thesespontaneouspotentialscontrastwithmotorunitpotentials,whicharelargerandhavealongerdurationbecausetheyrepresenttheactionpotentialsinasetofmusclefibersthatbelongtoamotorunit. Anelectrodeisplacedwithinaskeletalmuscletorecordthesummedactionpotentialsoftheskeletalmusclefibersofamuscleunit.Ifnospontaneousactivityisnoted,thepatientisaskedtocontractthemusclevoluntarilytoincreasetheactivityofmotorunitsinthemuscle.Astheforceofvoluntarycontractionincreases,moremotorunitsarerecruited.Inadditiontotherecruitmentofmoremotorneurons,contractilestrengthincreaseswithincreasesintherateofdischargeoftheactiveα

neurons, located the motor in called α a motor of nucleus, horn. ventral takes motor column rostrocaudally can the a running several Each nucleus such spinal form (see span of cord that levels

Fig. ). 9.1A spinal form column Motor that cells of the cord. of the axial a collectively the neurons extends that musculature supply length these lumbosacral the other of ventral the In entire medial ventral most the located levels, in are essentially cells horn; horn. at part they and cervical form enlargements, the those The to for they the form cervical muscles muscles. motor are where the lateral that lumbosacral axial columns and enlargements, limb the are innervating in neurons those of medially muscles more the located proximal more located limb neurons to of are Motor ( distal whereas most muscles the are that laterally, part innervate

Fig. 9.1B). innervate dorsal to to Also, flexors that those neurons motor extensors. are that motor within column. α are intermixed the motor neurons given and the neuron a to same γ Note found muscle

interneurons in connect are similarly neurons motor also enlargements the The the organized. that with topographically parts are intermediate the mainly interneurons supply the horns. the located dorsal and between of the ventral limb in horn that muscles general, deep dorsal lateral and In region the are the Those axial muscles, of in the ventral part that supply medial however, the located horn. the of of of connections synaptic they part fibers receive from pathways. both and and spinal pathways primary descending All interneurons the these motor afferent control that reflex from thus arcs and brain, are descend from axons

project of supply laterally aspect placed systems whereas distal interneuronal interneurons or ipsilaterally limb that is important the that An interneurons muscles, proximal the medial to project neurons the the bilaterally. motor This allows to lateral independently. interneurons controlled of limbs the the arrangement be bilateral interneurons the control and muscles contrast, the neurons neck. the provide of to axial trunk motor allows arrangement support to postural of bilateral to the In medial

to Although single each final only muscles pathway the CNS neurons motor is activity acts are transformed muscle. into from and shape motor neuronal common thus muscular neuron directly contraction, a how the on isolated however, muscle. are caused the Normal postures), an of individual (or by contraction ever, if movements rarely, activity of reflect of they coordinated the groups large muscles. Rather, of elbow extensor relaxation muscles, such activity triceps. example, such the flexion involves biceps, muscles, as and flexor as an of in in For initial the burst activity flexion the a at then is and second position. of of to the the the This burst biceps succeeded burst of triceps by a in movement activity desired stop then activity elbow during also other Furthermore, flexion are balance overall muscles the posture. to activated maintain and

elbow movement. roles shows, different are example played by muscle during As a each flexion the is The prime cause the and initiates, agonist. movement muscle of, is the called that the are the agonist to the antagonists. whose Muscles action that agonist similarly called synergists, act opposes activity of muscles whereas the are to joint roles. in muscles a act fixators can In as postural and immobilize addition, the muscles movement the being depend two relationship performed. have each Moreover, on may specific other to to the For biceps. triceps an during the elbow flexion, example, acts antagonist forearm) the elbow also the elbow, biceps (which agonist, fixator. the that is to contrast, again occurring of during an role supinate but supination forearm triceps the of the rotation acts about of is In an the without

to groups flexibly requires (and muscles. of different unlinking) the control motor Thus of neurons activity motor that linking connect spinal used are control. the cord the aspect CNS for of circuits The motor by major a this of mechanism descending there Indeed, motor from interneurons brain are axons the although target synapse that onto directly cord, pathways spinal the some descending of the neurons. primarily

circuitry organization. Spinal levels several of cord has segments is, is single or a repeated that several is at circuit largely neighboring The many again that most segmental is the and to levels. a that level: basic confined below flexion spinal such and are reflexes myotatic, the covered inverse reflexes) basic by The (i.e., mediated circuits. myotatic, different of this and the propriospinal which cord cord. run the to is interconnect the up system, of levels a Superimposed segmental neurons down organization series is whose the on axons spinal different behavior activity as •Fig. such of important and is both coordination involving the which at limbs, the the forelimbs spinal This levels, hind system allows for 9.2 Proprioceptors. Muscle Chain fibers fibers B 250 Schematicviewofamuscle,showingthearrangementofaspindleinparallelwithextrafusalmusclefibersandatendonorganinserieswithmusclefibers.B, organ fibersGolgi Bag Ib µm C afferent tendon Tendon Muscle Skeletalmusclescontainsensoryreceptorsembeddedwithinthemuscle(spindles)andwithintheirtendons(Golgitendonorgans).A, neuron Structureandinnervation(motorandsensory)ofamusclespindle.C, Structureandinnervationofatendonorgan.A

innervation is that which The neural of differs fiber fiber, an an a motor significantly from innervated extrafusal by single of intrafusal neuron. and are multiply Intrafusal sensory fibers and innervated motor innervation. receive both afferent variable fiber II typically single sensory (see group a and innervation number fibers a group The afferent includes Ia of

Fig. 9.2B). nerve fibers and intermediate largest sensory 80 conduct 75 to to Ia the Group at belong group 120 fibers to at of and m/sec; II class fibers conduct with size are in m/sec. the 35 diameters as of a primary intrafusal termination, ending, fibers each muscle on referred the spindle. afferent in to spiral-shaped a A group Ia the forms fiber chain on on nuclear primary both fibers. Thus are endings types found bag fibers of nuclear and II fibers. forms secondary type a afferent nuclear on on chain and bag2 ending The fiber not group but fibers, bag1 the on are intrafusal The secondary sensitive muscle level that the tension have to of and channels endings fiber. primary mechanosensitive

two supply muscle γ to spindle a types (see of axons motor motor The of consists

Fig. 9.2B ). axons motor and on bag2 motor static nuclear γ Dynamic fibers, nuclear γ end axons fibers. on end chain and bag1

length shortened they or in fibers. to lie with extrafusal are also therefore muscle with spindles changes Muscle in extrafusal parallel along and stretched the respond fibers the because in length tension properties, the group are and changes afferent under, Ia this a their muscle mechanoreceptors display like spindle and they by Because spring-like of sensed group all that change the is intrafusal II fibers, fibers. fibers, change when the changes muscle as fibers channel has The been that afferent spindle sense sensory transduction Piezo2 stress length. a identified changes in cation that mechanical allows occur to channel principal nonselective

Fig. the shows the is of of spindle muscle when fibers a in changes muscle stretched. afferent 9.3 the activity group to Ia clear is respond II that stretch. and differently It fibers group chiefly amount and are fibers stretch. rate, both whereas of stretch of group to its to muscle respond the to amount II the sensitive Ia Group fibers increases group a new longer when (see proportion the of in firing is to stretch Thus a length, to stretched II muscle amount

Fig.

allowed left), to the and firing decreases (see rate muscle 9.3 proportionately , its is when shorten,

Fig. 9.3 , right). fibers. length), II reflects conditions muscle rate amount fibers of under Ia stretch, thus response, static-type this show firing Group similar group (i.e., and muscle that same to the constant steady-state of their

however, stretch changing, or the of Ia group shortening muscle firing rate also that the reflects undergoing. is length While muscle is Its possibly muscle ceases) (and during during activity undershoots muscle and shortening. overshoots stretch are These responses. called dynamic that fibers such activity oscillatory stretches, group dynamic of sensitive also much of as means is more to and the Ia transient shown the in diagrams This middle sensitivity

Fig. 9.3 . attached hit In used muscle. reflex a is and of particular, when profile the tendon is thereby the cause muscle stretching a hammer to what tap brief occurs the rate the for change changes the elicited muscle in profile) II too large because high this so fibers. stimulus, is of the group tap group of with (slopes brief firing responses occur, The but significant in of dynamic magnitude change are the to is length Ia in tap group arcs is involving when what the to assessed fibers reflex hammer a reflex being on is is Ia tendons. of used afferent functionality Thus

of Motor Neurons the γ Sensitivity the Adjust Spindle

described motor Up γ this muscle have how neuron there no changes we are to only in activity. when point, behave spindles however, efferent extremely stretch. is of spindles it because important, sensitivity innervation muscle of muscle the The spindles determines to example, in For

Fig. is muscle fiber activity the spindle a of shown during 9.4A, afferent

9 Motor Organization Function CHAPTER •Fig. of 9.3 of Primary and to a in Ia) Changes Secondary a Muscle (Group Ending (Group II) Length. Ending Responses Notethedifferenceindynamicandstaticresponsivenessoftheseendings.Thewaveformsatthetoprepresentthechangesinmusclelength.ThemiddleandbottomrowsshowthedischargesofagroupIafiberandagroupIIfiber,respectively,duringthevariouschangesinmusclelength.

•Fig. on Motor of the Neurons a Fiber. Unloading Can Muscle of Effects of Discharge The the Afferent Activity Spindle 9.4 Counteract γ Theactivityofamusclespindleafferentfiberduringsteadystretch.B, andγ motorneuronat0mseccausescontractionoftheextrafusalfibers,whichleadstomuscleshorteningandincreasedmuscletensionbutunloadingofthetensionacrossthemusclespindle,whichinturninducestheafferentfibertostopfiring.Uponrelaxation,themusclereturnstoitsoriginallength,andtensionisrestoredontheintrafusalfibers,causingthereturnofactivityinthegroupIaafferentfiber.C, A, motorneuronscausesshorteningofbothextrafusalandintrafusalfibers.Thusthereisnounloadingofthespindle,andtheafferentfibermaintainsitsspontaneousactivity. Coactivationofα Stimulationofα (RedrawnfromKufflerSW,NichollsJG.From Brain. Neuron to Sunderland,MA:Sinauer;1976.) a stretch. steady extrafusal were fibers the only done (this contract by be discharging experimentally selective to length. If further become may insensitive to muscle stop in decreases and can muscle the of neurons; α motor However, see stimulation the of unloading

Fig. if neurons resultant spindle and 9.4B prevented unloaded stimulated spindle by be would muscle of simultaneously. γ ), the are α be motor shortening the can combined muscle. stimulation Such the on intrafusal the spindle spindle the (see muscle tension the extrafusal fiber happens, afferent this with portion If baseline to causes the the of fibers, along muscle equatorial shorten fibers maintaining muscle the fibers of intrafusal the

Fig. 9.4C •Fig. Dynamic Ending Stretch. of Static Muscle a of and to Neurons 9.5 Responses Primary Effects γMotor the on Stimulationofastaticγmotoraxon.D, ThedischargeofgroupIafibersintheabsenceofγmotorneuronactivity.C, Thetimecourseofthestretch.B, Stimulationofadynamicγmotoraxon. A, (RedrawnfromCroweA,MatthewsPBC.J Physiol. 1964;174:109.)

that the muscle the contract polar intrafusal Note equatorial two protein. has contract; regions located, region, not of little where the contractile are does it the because nuclei only polar sensitivity. the the contract, when its regains and equatorial elongates region Nevertheless, regions neuron a the the on thus thereby the firing ends tension decrease (and its a elongates Conversely, thus is concurrent of afferent neuron central drops) relaxes (if motor prevent level as fiber reaching activity activity the when of γ portion motor which are being intrafusal allows to a fibers muscle relax fibers saturated. from the pulled), at and intrafusal in elongate) well and (α the muscle of range allows spindle retaining muscle operate high while lengths neuron wide to to motor in length. Thus over sensitivity small system changes the γ a

as α fact in from just motor brain maintain described. presumably motor spindle activate simultaneously, typically descending movements, neurons For voluntary the and sensitivity commands γ to This has important functions. two muscle stretch and to the the disturbances length, of the ongoing maintaining section) any By both capable next reflex signaling an the CNS CNS, spindle’s and muscle, turn that this voluntary movement sensitivity (see spindle and cause changes sensing, as in to remains to the muscle of allows the corrections. unexpected initiate the driving movement, movement intended the would were the drive, (see this arc α during the the via by group muscles. if section), the next decreasing become unloaded neurons spindle the to agonist motor to Ia oppose the reflex excitatory Second,

earlier, motor mentioned As static two there of and dynamic (see are neurons: types γ

Fig. 9.2).

the precise very CNS muscle This spindle. the sensitivity the control to over of have allows on end nuclear fibers. bag2 on motor fibers, γ chain synapse bag1 γ Dynamic axons and static nuclear and axons motor γ afferent the II and motor static fibers the the Ia fibers responsiveness static of group a group the a fibers when II when Ia is group of γ the dynamic afferent but group motor afferent responsiveness neuron the activity the enhanced, is discharges, of of response unchanged; afferent fiber is Thus neuron are the increased. activated, static fiber’s of a in response effects the afferent stretch dynamic stimulating to on The fibers are illustrated group and Ia

Fig. 9.5 . during static γ the reflex functioning and spindle of neurons the activity also, and of thereby influence alter spinal movements. cord the motor the muscle preferentially can presumably, Descending nature in or voluntary dynamic pathways

Ia) (or Reflex The Phasic Stretch

for is reflex phasic responsible The stretch in arc reflex the depicted

Fig. 9.6 ; muscle rectus an example. serves femoris as the this rapid signal of then spindles, which group muscle the fibers of Ia muscle the stretch rectus strongly spinal activates cord. A the into femoris the convey In knee. as at on form afferent group neurons virtually branches directly α muscle to such many in the the acts excitatory Ia the this spinal vastus all intermedius known α times also fiber motor motor many each leg the the same innervate the case, cord, with muscle that which neurons synapses synergists, (monosynaptically) extend that (also as homonymous) to supply and cause a neurons the is If contraction powerful enough, muscle. of discharge motor and excitation the the avoid fibers do contact neurons, the possibly Note motor the group Ia γ not a to positive-feedback situation. loop that other α α of selective is most neurons. targeting neurons descending in pathways reflex This and motor both target motor that exceptional and γ

Ia Other the inhibitory fibers branches of interneurons; reciprocal variety cell type, however, in of a (black group end on Ia interneuron one

Fig. with ), important reflex. stretch particularly the regard 9.6 to is •Fig. they are inhibitory are identifiable interneurons because interneurons only the These of Stretch 9.6 Reflex Arc Reflex. the isagroupIainhibitoryinterneuron.DRG,dorsalrootganglion. Thepathwaybacktotherectusfemorisinthisarccontainsasinglesynapsewithinthecentralnervoussystem;hence,itisamonosynapticreflex.Theinterneuron,showninblack,

receive cells that afferent Renshaw both (see Ia from input and group the fibers

Fig. ). 9.12 flex to the the muscle—which knee. innervate motor muscles—in hamstring neurons that They on end this α the act case, the semitendinosus antagonist muscles, including cortex) the ascending of information group pathways fibers the yet cerebellum with the with afferent about neurons various of that Other muscle. of (particularly cerebral branches the other that and provide originate parts synapse state the brain Ia

activated arc neurons and the of The inhibited. organization set opposing stretch guarantees is α motor one is reflex set the of that This as innervation. arrangement reciprocal is known system; involve can the of organization this a descending patterns. possible reciprocal innervation, innervation such override such pathways many only Although type motor motor of control reflexes is not

part its large monosynaptic is of stretch powerful, The because quite reflex in nature. and as from in this the pathway, divergence from such maximal of essentially the is circuit that power diagrams, convergence also this The apparent which not reflex derives exist

Fig. typically to , are 9.6 illustrate pathways. reflex used that each such neuron group fiber every α input homonymous motor muscle. all each That Ia contacts in spindle virtually that neurons, receives is, motor and from α little of group direct monosynaptic also it is Although relatively its control there the makes rapid nature and powerful, reflex Ia for that means opportunity

CHAPTER its Motor of 9 reflex arc. Organization flow activity through Function sensitivity overcomes as γ neuron spindle CNS problem system this The controlling motor by muscle previously. via the described

Tonic Stretch Reflex The

joint. elicited by can reflex of bending The stretch a be tonic passive group Ia II from muscle This circuit spindles. reflex group includes both and fibers afferent excite Group α with connections also neurons, but fibers II motor make disynaptic through they excitatory monosynaptic pathways. and them polysynaptic Normally, contributes tone. reflex rate is II firing of there in group group baseline to fibers ongoing muscle a neurons; motor the and α that the helps of maintain afferent activity therefore, stretch Ia tonic posture. to activity ability also to a Its maintain the contributes posture. flex thereby restoring a contracts opposing begins the and reflex elicited, of the because soldier of flexion muscle For stretched, to and is if knee the is attention stretch fatigue, more, example, the the tonic quadriceps standing quadriceps at a

suggests length. act that a The reflexes discussion stretch control muscle to foregoing negative-feedback system can like changes oppose equilibrium changes to it its following to is point. stretch act possible length in particular arc, from reflex see activity in that a By the muscle neurons II of muscle’s For α is be to contraction increase the muscle stretch. in example, group increased, Ia and motor an group there if the of homonymous and reversal length will by firing excites fibers, which and the leads leads thus excitatory the the of muscle Similarly, the motor passive of unloads drive muscle. a the in the decrease and neurons spindles and to relaxation shortening to rotate able humans how are So their to joints? enough movement point and strength to the is or the because of gain spindle thereby that shift input stretch partly coactivated low motor It the the neurons partly is neuron override γ the motor equilibrium and can of reflex are because reflex. the the during other a

level in in The myotatic reflex muscle. the of force to the acts changes oppose inverse be muscle. Just force a maintain can of of be in myotatic, system a stretch a help thought regulate the to as can the or Ib, to thought group levels inverse reflex reflex feedback muscle as system length, feedback as group Ib part example, leg reflex With upper as the the arc is of the in depicted an

Fig. 9.7.

arc tendon tension which receptor, muscle. The Golgi starts the senses with organ in the the are tendon muscle tendon fibers and the the (see parallel at of located in series organs the muscle in contrast fibers, and the of spindles the with muscle junction lie the thus arrangement to Golgi

Fig. 9.2 ). of µm tendon have a 100 length a of diameter about organs 1 mm. and about Golgi terminals group innervated is Golgi organ fibers. tendon the by A afferent Ib of wrap terminals a the tendon tendinous in of These bundles of collagen muscle). in within (or the fibers muscle inscriptions about

Hyperactivestretchreflexescanleadtotremorsandclonus,whicharetypesofinvoluntaryrhythmicmovements.Althoughthenegative-feedbackactionofthestretchreflexcanhelpstabilizethelimbataparticularposition,ifanexternalperturbationtothelimboccurs,theconductiondelaybetweentheinitiatingstimulus(musclestretch)andtheresponse(musclecontraction)cancausethestretchreflexcircuittobeasourceofinstabilitythatleadstorhythmicmovements.Specifically,clonusiselicitedbyasustainedstretchofamuscleinapersonwhohasspinalcorddamage.Normally,animposedsustainedstretchonamuscleelicitsanincreaseingroupIaandgroupIIfiberactivity,whichafteradelaycausesacontractioninthemusclethatopposesthestretchbutdoesnotcompletelyreturnthemuscletoitsinitiallengthbecausethegainofthestretchreflexismuchless than1. *

Thispartialcompensation,inturn,leadstoadecreaseingroupIaandgroupIIfiberactivity,whichcausesthelimbtolengthenagain,butnotfully.ThislengtheningonceagainincreasesgroupIaandgroupIIfiberactivity,andsoon.Thedelayisessentialinsettingupthisoscillationbecauseitcausesthefeedbacksignaltocontinueevenafterthemusclehascompensatedandthusresultsinanovercompensationthatleadstothenextovercorrection.However,becausethereflexgainisnormallymuchlessthan1,thisoscillationnormallydiesoutquickly(theovercompensationsdecreaseinamplituderapidly),andthemusclecomestorestatanintermediatelength.Incontrast,whendescendingmotorpathwaysaredamaged,theresultingchangesinspinalcordconnectivityandincreasesinneuronalexcitabilityresultinahyperactivereflex(whichisequivalenttoraisingthegainofthestretchreflexcloseto1).Inthiscase,thesuccessiveovercompensationsaremuchlarger,andanovertbuttransientoscillationcanbeobserved(clonus).Ifthegainequals1,theclonusdoesnotdieoutbutratherpersistsforaslongastheinitialstretchstimulusismaintained.

ofasystemisdefinedasitsoutputforagiveninput.Inthiscase,theinputtothesystemistheimposedstretch,andtheoutputismovementcausedbythestretchreflex–evokedcontraction. *Ingeneral,gain

Because be contraction. can the or their Golgi to either organs muscle by tendon of muscle muscle, relationship stretch activated in-series by which by actual tendon to the is cases, the In develops sensed tendon is organ it that the however, in force the both stimulus linked. Golgi the spring the nature of force muscle (i.e., Thus how spring-like it law, the result to to Hooke’s much stretched). is stretch the response of is on proportional by a the is

group and when can a group be the longer length the Golgi compared Ib held and fibers a between (Fig. organs, firing distinguish To responsiveness patterns muscle Ia is tendon spindles of the stretched of then at and muscle

9.8 ). fibers rate the of firing stretch The reversed. its maintains group increase is Ia the until increase the in a the shows initial an the then large increased by group the muscle tension the its and shows is of tension recycling of gradual the firing In rate return contrast, but lengthening on the initial toward because muscle the Ib stretch, resultant caused fiber reflecting lowered cross-bridge as on •Fig. firing, Inverse Arc Reflex. Myotatic the of Reflex 9.7 Theinterneuronsincludebothexcitatory(white) andinhibitory(black) interneurons.Thisisanexampleofadisynapticreflex.

•Fig. a in Is When New Ia Rates Ib 9.8 Stretched Muscle Firing to Group Changes Group Length. and graph, lower line) andhasafiringprofilethatmatchesthetensionlevelinthemusclecausedbythestretch(upper Afteratransientburst,thefiringrateofthegroupIafiberremainsconstantatanewhigherlevelthatisproportionaltotheincreaseinlength(compareblue graph, and upper graphs).Incontrast,thegroupIbfibershowsaninitialrapidincreaseinfiringfollowedbyaslowdecreasebacktowarditsoriginallevel(lower red lines red line). in

sarcomeres. spindles organs whereas force, Golgi muscle signal tendon length. Therefore, signal with muscle even firing correlated activity group therefore unchanged. length and is distinction is evidence Ib during contraction force isometric level group Ia of Further this though that are

Organization CHAPTER of •Fig. Function Motor 9 Flexion 9.9 The Arc Reflex of Reflex. the Black interneuronsareinhibitory,andwhite onesareexcitatory.FRA,flexionreflexafferentfiber.++––FRASemitendinosusNociceptorFlexionExtensionRectusfemoris

branch Ib The group fibers and end spinal they cord enter on as the afferent interneurons. no neurons. are connections α mono-synaptic There to motor case excitatory muscle) onto fibers motor two that α (in the and femoris supply the afferent Ib group neurons rectus that classes interneurons: interneurons activate antagonist Rather, muscle interneurons homonymous (the that the the semitendinosus neurons this motor of muscle). synapse α inhibit to disynaptic arc. is in a synapses CNS, in there this the are reflex series Because two name, Ib muscle, these Ia group of the have action reflex group myotatic should the fiber the group stretch activity inverse Ib explains opposite during Because which of the the of reflex’s stretch connections, other passive reflex.

act the synergistically, the can arcs however, following two example reflex Functionally, as shows. that Recall tendon tendon monitor across the organs levels they that the supply. force Golgi the rectus as If knee maintained standing as the at during muscle) extensors (such attention) on tendon declines. to posture (such begin fatigue, pulling the femoris patellar force this The organs Golgi tendon. activity in force decline tendon in reduces the of reflex Because activity and reverse by thereby enhances caused reduced helps rectus motor group excitability femoris of α the the in Ib normally neurons the the the the the fatigue. (i.e., the to decrease neurons disinhibits) Golgi force muscle, organs α tendon inhibits motor of same the the from which extensors bending spindles, activates knee muscle then the and knee motor Simultaneously, afferent fibers the α stretches the neurons. of excite the from standing help fibers both to Thus the action due of decrease and posture. contraction and afferent to Golgi fatigue together the oppose femoris in of tendon maintain coordinated the work muscle muscle thereby spindle organ rectus

the cord collectively and receptors, the one of spinal including sensory be a III starts afferent The including via of group or activation fibers, flexion signals variety fibers, a to group flexion more reflex whose nociceptors, fibers. afferent called of (FRA) with of reflex can carried variety II motor the ( extensor excitatory and in In flexor (1) α cause α to volleys muscles flexion to neurons that the (2) supply ipsilateral motor the afferent neurons the interneurons supply antagonistic muscles inhibit the that inter-neurons limb reflexes, activate cause inhibitory

Fig. 9.9).

more pattern stimulated joints flex. in of limb to This activity one the or causes of opposite evoke the pattern contralateral the of (see In cord the commissural activity interneurons addition, side in spinal

Fig. 9.9 in ), crossed reflex. extension the of extension which results the limb, opposite balance in (or the humans helps be forelimbs to enabling hind transferred reflex part support extension of the it able additional limb is when lifted. in that in load For crossed limbs and quadrupeds), both is the limbs to for the contralateral flexed to by lower maintaining limb the

Afterdamagetothedescendingmotorpathways,hyperactivestretchreflexesmayresultinspasticity,inwhichthereislargeresistancetopassiverotationofthelimbs.Inthiscondition,itmaybepossibletodemonstratewhatiscalledtheclasp-knife reflex. Whenspasticityispresent,attemptstorotatealimbaboutajointinitiallymeethighresistance.However,iftheappliedforceisincreased,therecomesapointatwhichtheresistancesuddenlydissipatesandthelimbrotateseasily.Thischangeinresistanceiscausedbyreflexinhibition.ThegroupIbreflexarcsuggeststhatrisingactivityinthispathwaycouldunderliethesuddenreleaseofresistance,andindeed,theclasp-knifereflexwasonceattributedtotheactivationofGolgitendonorganswhenthesereceptorswerethoughttohaveahighthresholdtomusclestretch.However,thetendonorganshavesincebeenshowntobeactivatedatverylowlevelsofforceandarenolongerthoughttocausetheclasp-knifereflex.Itisnowthoughtthatthisreflexiscausedbytheactivationofotherhigh-thresholdmusclereceptorsthatsupplythefasciaaroundthemuscle.Signalsfromthesereceptorscausetheactivationofinterneuronsthatleadtoinhibitionofthehomonymousmotorneurons.

a painful Because reflex. in the from body typically to and flexion reflexes withdrawal stimulus, the of affected are a flexion limb brings type away closer In

Fig. joint. neural of only neurons that reflex circuit shown , 9.9 the affect the the flexion is knee for flexion Actually, considerable reflex. primary in afferent of and divergence occurs however, pathways the the interneuronal flexor be In in reflex. a withdrawal may limb hip, the strong involved all of ankle) (e.g., a fact, major and knee, joints depending reflex withdrawal flexor the vary, the of the of stimulus. Details on and nature location

central appear reflexes and are generator subserving be for are circuits an (CPG) multiple thus also example The locomotion to generating used interneurons purposes. how of part pattern for reflex of flexion the of acts, CPG the neurons that activity capable set circuits even rhythmic of is generating motor sensory underlies a in A input. the and of absence and flexor the the emerge. converse FRA the one FRA activation stepping on inhibition extensor cord on in excitation opposite if pattern pattern on example, the leads to interneurons of alternated side, and side a side the of each a active, pattern For being and inter-neurons of would spinal motion interneurons alternately on FRA from result walking That is, activating each the side. could Note the they from could FRA be a brain). need on pathways FRA dependent fibers the themselves (e.g., circuits activity in activated be pattern not descending activity the such rhythmic by that from

these were rhythm, cord (i.e., causes locomotion a that made the showed spontaneous brainstem supported, is actually generate spinal locomotion that involved sequence). show can that and preparations the spinal weight perform in To limbs cord is if activity the transected circuits the generating circuits to locomotion are normal flexors such the the ( the effect limb and preparation, electromyographic extensors to one then demonstrate locomotion In the of rhythm and on a FRA stimulated from fibers were recorded, signals

Fig. 9.10 ). a extensor and activity electromyographic pattern of alternating stimulus, any Before flexor exists. spontaneous (EMG) not responsible locomotion least were for in were circuits generating rhythm the or If circuit, part not a the fibers the critical of (see at the involved FRA

Fig.

flexor EMG burst be record (i.e., and have single on but activity in would inhibition extensor 9.10B long-term expected ), brief of the the effect to the produce stimulus EMG response a ongoing to a pattern. EMG record) no transient in only a transient is (see observed Such response

Fig. ; just stimulus). 9.10A after records EMG the times phase stimulus. the permanent, a However, before in shift from of stimulus rhythm, after the as shown 180degree approximately also comparison a causes of and can contractions locomotor the be activity indicate expected if the lines pattern. EMG phase response shift would which The EMG no dashed had the from the stimulus times a vertical produced flexor at stimulus, vertical after the at end aligned is onset line flexor Before of of burst, each the vertical whereas burst. stimulus, the a with EMG the each line flexor occurs the and CPG this the the itself critical are the interneurons a of FRA Therefore, affected stimulus part locomotor CPG (see

Fig. 9.10C

(and illustrated A that be fiber point CPGs by experiment by important afferent strong locomotion in general) can is this activity. CPG second the influenced The that the terrain fiber’s as in the to afferent influence changes generator pattern locomotion proceeds. adapts ensures occur must and Such may coordination. be rapidly during ensure running, locomotion adjusted proper changes then to

Organization Spinal the Cord Reflexes Use of Through Determining

reflex Convergence circuits general. aspects pathways and and important of are of in divergence neuronal of previous Several phenomena these the in discussion been examples reflexes. have of described the to in the identify these spinal be Reflexes and phenomena characterize cord. can used example, spatial illustrated the which phenomenon demonstrated be in is convergent input For can of facilitation, through

Fig. 9.11

group is nerves the electrical each two fibers Ia reflex this of by In of a elicited stimulation (see monosynaptic example, in

Fig. 9.11A ). (as recording α of discharges action is compound characterized a response motor ventral The appropriate axons by root from the reflex the of potential). a potential compound A. a When small nerve action A is reflex stimulated, as is recorded B is is B stimulated, recorded. nerve reflex when Similarly,

Fig. contained neurons motor 9.11B nucleus. motor within depicts the the

Organization Motor CHAPTER of •Fig. Function 9 Phase of Stimulation Central the Flexion Locomotion Identify Underlying by Reflex Pattern Reset of 9.10 Helps (CPG). Generator Neuronal (FRA) Afferent Fiber Components Rhythm A, EMGrecordsfromkneeflexorandextensormuscles.Notetherhythmicalternatingpatternbeforeapplicationofthestimulus.Thesolid lines beloweachtraceindicatethetimesatwhichflexorcontractionisinitiated.Thedashed vertical vertical lines indicatethetimesatwhichflexorcontractionwouldhavebeeninitiatedifthestimuluscausednolastingeffectontherhythmicpattern.B TwopossiblemodelsfortheCPGunderlyingthelocomotorrhythmdepictedinA. andC, B, supportthemodelshowninC. TheFRAinterneurons(INs)intheCPGarenotshown.C, TheFRAinterneuronsareshown.ThedatashowninA MN,motoneuron. (DatafromHultbornH,etal.Ann Sci. Y N Acad 1998;860:70.)

is activated branch nerve when threshold are discharge each stimulated the neurons α The motor in zones separately. above neurons pair motor each stimulated a Thus is alone. spike of when α nerve distinct pairs In neurons addition, fringe surrounded trigger of additional a is not motor to are that each these motor excited spikes. sufficiently of neuron but eight by subliminal (compare discharge RB are reflex with at RB of the RA much right a time, nerves RA When is stimulated the at same and recordings the larger + recorded two

Fig. 9.11B ). after discharge motor the they (two additional As α seven simultaneously of nerve) each nerves figure neurons are discharge in represents both spiked α this only the facilitation four the the that for singular per nerve zone) the stimulated neurons: the made because subliminal that when lie the stimulation are of and demonstrates, (located nerves. three two to fringe in reflex motor

stimulation of of stimuli effect effect repetitive still second be volley provided the together elicited after one the similar volley occur close of persists could the A enough the some that by first excitatory of the nerves, arrives. that summation. effect called temporal is This fibers excitatory and group Both afferent neurons by the in temporal Ia summation (see properties the summation the motor postsynaptic on depend of potentials spatial evoked α

Fig. 6.8).

between occlusion. stimuli, Convergence interactions can a called lead inhibitory also phenomenon to of nerves a two in one in the If volley

Fig. at (see the reaches reflex when relatively highly the nucleus is are a motor neurons excitable, motor the discharge time 9.11 large

Fig. 9.11C ). nerve similar in volley response. the A other a produce might also reflex large are the the the evoked alone of than nerves of simultaneously, two to two the the However, reflex the independently of overlap excited cells threshold either activation two reaching nerves can if less when reflexes be significantly. sum cause discharge the 12 together lie In neurons motor nerves because α of motor in two afferent in activates case, zones to motor both afferent neurons discharge α the this 7 neurons, nerve only two individual volleys each but the nerves.

cord spinal temporal between phenomena neurons be spatial various of to occlusion and interactions used and the summation demonstrate The can and also circuits. reflex evoked can afferent To monosynaptic a fibers group muscle discharge start, by in nerve. Ia stimulation the a reflex of be the motor is neurons. excitability α reflex of test of This population of a a nerve flexor muscle recorded or proper motor chosen. the of is if extensor The either neurons α stimulated to be discharges be can kinds of •Fig. Other fibers afferent 9.11 Spatial Facilitation. areas) thecombinedvolleyscausedocclusion. A, encloseα Experimentinwhichcombinedstimulationofafferentfibersintwomusclenervesresultedinspatialsummation(RAandRB).Thedischargezones(pink Arrangementforusingelectricallyevokedafferentvolleysandrecordingsfrommotoraxonsinaventralroottostudyreflexes.B, motorneuronsthatareactivatedabovethresholdwheneachnervebranchisstimulatedseparately.InC, the Nervous (RedrawnfromEyzaguirreC,FidoneSJ.Physiology of System. 2nded.Chicago:Mosby–YearBook;1975.) group to group the the stimulation demonstrate with the Ia stimulated response muscle the along changes. Ia whether then to are afferent fibers homonymous from stimulation (which the produces the to mediated response group group inhibition reciprocal afferent by For described fibers previously). inhibitory the Ia in to the example, group homonymous of muscles the stimulation interneuron Ia nerve is of antagonist Ia

the α muscles of small afferent the extensor those muscles stimulation flexor flexion fibers another to potentiated). α group example, innervate that evoke innervate cutaneous motor the are the a motor are are neurons reflex, that nerve if a stimulated to As Ia of neurons of responses (and inhibited

and inhibition. the ventral final root example, inhibition of As reciprocal Ia responses inhibits Ia a group of stimulation a causes group feed back population inhibitory neuron result this that motor root onto presence only the axon contains implies excite motor the ventral same Because ( that axons, collaterals the interneurons neuron of

Fig. ). 9.12 are Renshaw cells. named interneurons These interneurons are no stimulation). reciprocal Because by group the inhibition stimulation group stimulation Ia other inhibited inhibits but (and Ia root of ventral the interneurons, motor Ia group also antagonist classes activated root uniquely ventral neurons, of by been provide detailed used to described circuitry knowledge the cord. like Experiments these of a have the spinal of

•Fig. With Cell Connections Inhibitory 9.12 Neurons Ia Motor Group Renshaw (RC) Interneurons. and areexcitatory. areinhibitory,andblue andgreen cells cells ThecircuitsshownmediategroupIareciprocalinhibitionofantagonistmuscles(inthiscase,anextensor)andinhibitionofthisreciprocalinhibitionbyRenshawcells.NotethatequivalentnumbersofRenshawcellsandgroupIainhibitoryinterneuronsareassociatedwithextensormotorneuronsandgroupIainputfromspindlesinextensormuscles,buttheyarenotshownforsimplicity.Orange

Pathways Descending Motor Classification of

were Descending into pyramidal extrapyramidal motor traditionally pathways. pathways and subdivided pyramidal and disease reflects a extrapyramidal clinical between dichotomy tract disease. terminology This In tract corticospinal interrupted. tract the disease, is pyramidal (pyramidal) to were disease named of this tract function through corticospinal originally the (so pyramidal of passes of loss the medullary the the because The attributed signs tract pyramid). in are disease tract also other of tract cases disease, many (see functions the “ pyramidal and later most altered, However, pathways of signs the of section pyramidal

by but of Lesions by also additional to solely caused loss Motor corticospinal tract apparently are Descending pathways. motor ”) reflect of not Caused damage the Pathways The

problematic. Motor term Organization Function 9 more is CHAPTER of even extrapyramidal in Thus this classification book. this is not used system

of way control based in classifying consequent motor the spinal differences in the in the the sites movement roles of Another of termination their cord posture. and on pathways their and is cord’s portions lateral the ( matter pathways gray spinal in The lateral terminate the of

Fig. 9.13 ). The excite target. directly, their pathways are interneurons can motor main lateral although neurons the movement in as arcs of as that the musculature proximal limbs, fine well those of reflex limbs. They influence of supporting activate ends ends that control distal (see on interneurons end horn medial The group pathways of medial in the the ventral medial

Fig. 9.13 ). with control thereby interneurons and contribute and balance motor connect These bilaterally musculature to that neurons posture. axial the contribute proximal to also muscles. control limb the of They lateral the to used this In book, are pathways. descending the classify motor medial terms and and the trees of bodies ventral large neuron not cell terminology localized is are although motor horn. because rather However, form dendritic motor columns, partly typically most neuron this perfect, span even potentially can lateral system receive pathways. neuron medial Thus or input from any motor so-called

Lateral System The

The of and tracts originate region cerebral cortex. from the corticobulbar corticospinal wide a includes the motor, and region of cortex the motor and lobe. frontal the premotor, primary lobe cingulate the areas somatosensory of parietal supplementary, This including of small of Betz. V and pyramidal cells the of layer of these cells tracts origin cortex, both large of cells the pyramidal giant The include motor to only of the cells tracts. found they in are they to they contributing the the represent are tracts, these minority the primary in cells there and the a motor Betz primary even minority represent of Although cortex, cells of contribute small feature (<5%) cortex, that defining part a a because peduncle, cortex surface the in (see the cerebral capsule, the emerge ventral traverse internal medulla then the midbrain the of leave the basilar form on and tracts the These enter pyramids and the through to pass pons,

Fig. 9.13A). of various cranial corticobulbar the The the in descends nerves. as motor nuclei the tract terminate brainstem in leave it the and axons in most cross continue of caudally, to corticospinal about side. the region the them 90% opposite caudal of fibers the The medulla, and tract. contralateral in the corticospinal lateral lateral They as the then descend funiculus also neurons. terminate lateral on primarily cord but interneurons, at The on motor axons levels, all corticospinal spinal on the axons which in tract, as corticospinal The medial funiculus the ventral to continue the uncrossed belongs same system. remaining side the ventral caudally terminate. Many cord at which they (cross) decussate these spinal fibers at the level of ultimately

•Fig. Descending 9.13 Pathways. Motor Medialsystempathways,medullary(blue) reticulospinalandlateralvestibulospinal(red) andrubrospinal(blue) Majorpathwaysconnectingthecorticalandbrainstemmotorareastothespinalcordareshown.A, forsimplicity.B, Lateralsystempathways,corticospinal(red) pathways.C-B,corticobulbar;C-P,corticopontine;C-S,corticospinal;LCST,lateralcorticospinaltract;VCST,ventralcorticospinaltract. andpontine(green) pathways.NotethattheventralcorticospinalpathwayispartofthemedialsystembutisshowninA

tract in functionally more is and in axons. The million lower very 1 than humans, which in corticospinal a relatively is tract contains quantitatively mammals primates, in lateral minor important particularly it but cerebral represents because still relatively a in peduncles. number proportion the approximately small This the are the 20 outflow million axons there of from cortex other to of permanent often of loss fine abilities Nevertheless, typically ability, tract independent control for the corticospinal of the a though critical lesions with movement, movement the finger this even isolated as such lesions. recovered inasmuch are is pathway lead corticospinal finely movements. muscles primates, probably independent, to make particularly in motor and prevalent for finger neurons motor of synapses the are the finger Indeed, directly basis neurons controlled corticospinal ability controlling are the onto

ventral and comparable which corticospinal lateral that projects are to nuclei, motor The subdivisions the nerve corticobulbar tracts. cranial with the has tract, ends example, part of the part contralaterally the corticobulbar face nucleus. lower For in of of of tract muscles that the the supplies in the the hypoglossal portion nucleus and facial component is of like tract. corticobulbar the lateral tract This corticospinal the organized the of tract remainder The corticobulbar ends bilaterally.

portion in in magnocellular red is originates located midbrain the The nucleus, rubrospinal the tract tegmentum. the of which cord. to in corticospinal just lateral the These spinal tract and and position the up midbrain, decussate a ventral then medulla, through the pons in take descend fibers the distal do neurons controlling affect preferentially as the fibers. corticospinal They motor musculature, cortex; making cerebellum area and the neurons input motor from activity nucleus Red these an systems. motor two of from thus receive the this of integration from

Medial The System

ventral and regarded the tract corticospinal corticobulbar system tract pathways. of can medial as The much be the equivalent and brainstem. end group in on neurons cord on the tracts the spinal of These in interneurons medial muscles The by are pathways. axial controlled these some bilaterally often These muscles swallowing provide wrinkling postural other contract support brow. bilateral the function, or of to or such as

pathways the medial system in brainstem. originate Other tract. the and reticulospinal and tracts, These and tectospinal medullary the the medial lateral pontine vestibulospinal include tracts,

reticular to that formation. medial pontine the pontine are give in the reticulospinal cells rise The tract ends the descends the in funiculus, The tract on ventral and it

CHAPTER Function Organization Motor of group 9 of ipsilateral medial interneurons. extensor proximal muscles is posture. neurons motor to the support Its function to excite to

gigantocellularis the neurons medullary arise of reticulospinal those reticular nucleus. The from medulla, medial the tracts of particularly cell and funiculus, bilaterally mainly with in descend end associated groups medial on the motor ventral neurons. The of they tracts interneurons lateral function The inhibitory. pathway the is mainly of

also vestibular nucleus. vestibulospinal lateral the originates Deiter’s as tract lateral nucleus, The known in of the medial descends through and ends spinal cord on the This motor ipsilaterally groups. with ventral tract associated funiculus neuron interneurons the of for of muscles lateral part that that important proximal vestibulospinal excites motor postural the neurons control. supply extensor The are the tract limb flexor In this because excites group inhibit reciprocal addition, from the also receive that in Ia which Ia motor muscles, pathway neurons group it neurons. flexor inhibits interneurons input turn extensor motor the from the inhibitory of excitatory The whereas from the input organs, of the Purkinje otolith semicircular cells the anterior canals nucleus input cortex. vermis is cerebellar the and the is region both vestibular lateral to important accelerations to function tract head. lateral after in vestibulospinal An the of of angular postural is assist and linear adjustments the

the vestibulospinal nucleus. from medial The originates tract vestibular medial cervical ends on tract the the ventral medial interneurons. it to the cord levels, of of This the midthoracic funiculus and in descends group and spinal canals. the Sensory from is input vestibular semicircular the the to labyrinth chiefly nucleus from medial acceleration pathway thus in head angular to position of mediates adjustments the This head. response in

Tectospinal Tract The

superior originates the of The colliculus. layers the tract deep in tectospinal cross just the periaqueductal gray contralateral The the axons matter. side, below to terminate spinal the in They of on cervical upper ventral the then descend interneurons group the spinal of cord funiculus the in cord. medial to The movement stimuli. in tectospinal auditory, visual, regulates somatic tract and to head response

organized descend specifically spinal to the to the and systems, addition systems the from brainstem In cord. lateral medial less transmitters. as in synaptic serve which include monoamines pathways These several

norepinephrine-containing composed and nuclei neurons. they locus the pons, and are are nucleus the located coeruleus rostral in of subcoeruleus The CNS, and project cord the travels funiculus. the throughout widely nuclei in to These projection the spinal lateral their Their and interneurons terminals motor neurons. on are is the effect The of pathway dominant inhibitory.

nuclei the to several The also raphe give raphe-spinal and medulla of widely project pathways. throughout CNS rise the may to function, motor regard the ventral enhance activity. horn motor projection With

monoaminergic reflex cord to arcs. general, In spinal pathways act circuits, the the the of responsiveness alter including rather discrete excitability than or widespread in changes In behavior. in induce movements they this way, changes specific

by Caused of Motor Lesions Pathways Deficits Descending Motor

A common impairment in capsular is motor cerebral of interruptions cortical in humans strokes. efferent the capsule; fibers the such interruption in internal occur of cause or neuron misnomers. a disorder names tract are often upper motor pyramidal is syndrome, termed resulting although these The disease, abdominal sign weakness, superficial and foot reflexes (spasticity); distal phasic the increased (dorsiflexion finger muscles, is toes (2) this Babinski include of the cremasteric other reflexes. the (4) especially and of usually pathological of Motor characteristic as big in the changes fanning reflexes, stroked); the the of (1) when reduction toe a (3) reflexes, of such of including stretch muscles; tonic sole and the and the disorder of of interrupted, absent. can or the tract lesion with Of only if occur the are reduced a medullary most that pyramid, importance signs is is these corticospinal much as most weakness fingers, of the sign. In muscles, especially distal the prominent are situation, this Babinski the deficits and of a those may occur; decrease. actually not instead, Spasticity does tone muscle loss origin cortical these after brainstem influence such of the presence as of of occur the Evidently, the function tracts, spasticity the other to the of as disordered requires nuclei tracts. would pathways, of reticulospinal descending

effects quite produced pathways different the system from interruption of tract medial those are The of corticospinal lesions. by of in interruption associated loss The deficits an medial tone system initial reduction of reflexes. muscles and postural with righting main are the frequent effects locomotor impairment include Long-term and falling. objects perfectly is However, of normal. manipulation manual

The Decerebrate Preparation

the various for The with investigating preparation decerebrate interact descending has been cord circuitry. spinal how pathways experimentally useful the of Surgical the transection this midbrain, of vessels decerebration by area. by level, achieved intercollicular at occlusion either or is feeding an blood often cerebellum, anterior latter the distinction. of the occurs lesion the a also vermis important In an case, in

the in as some transection, such cortex, intercollicular in are intact. remain those cerebral others, the pathways, originating originating whereas those such interrupted, descending the With as brainstem,

the tract that of remember However, descending cortical the component only corticospinal is fibers. one throughout of Many origin for descending cortical the fibers the project brainstem, medial including locations the pathways. to nuclei other the in intact these activity cortical Loss altered descending of systems control in pathways. results As hypertonia rigidity. exaggeration is of as decerebrate suppression the the animals such affected called reflexes, reflex; others, condition a stretch such some result, spinal and reflex, as and this of show flexion exaggerated called animals been that a has Decerebrate maintain standing. posture also features same a patients state brainstem many that develop with of the may has reflex preparations. Human animal decerebrate damage as is appear. The in of patients poor such prognosis signs if decerebration

pontine and results medullary in the in the formation reticulospinal the activity in increased control activity reticular pathway decreased Loss descending reticulospinal pathway. of on Such and inhibition increased of activity, decrease which the neurons, and explains in increase decreased observed excitation (disinhibition) the rigidity. produces respectively, motor cutting this have dorsal hypertonia Interestingly, major γ neurons. can a reticulospinal effect motor by which tracts be relieved on indicates the that the roots, cord which stiffness and the α order muscle dorsal afferent motor increasing alters increased This neuron causes II to and Ia innervate roots in group because the is fibers, spinal travel thereby activity in into the spindle group by the through motor γ neurons. muscle activity sensitivity

hyperactive used vermis damage cerebellum, tract to to in because the When the is decerebrate lateral of becomes major nucleus. projection of inhibitory cells the occlusion the Purkinje the lateral state, generate which to the provide vestibulospinal anterior vestibular vessel is (either a actually of roots, lost transection implies acting significant via on extent vestibulospinal neurons directly dorsal the This to interneurons). that not motor lateral or tract monosynaptically after the α hypertonia which is

Posture Movement Control of Brainstem and

evident animals. the brainstem of motor control observations increased importance of The that decerebrate from in is reflexes in pathways and occur stretch the extensor that phasic hypertonus originate systems been locomotion. posture brainstem and influencing have identified as Particular the are control of these at discussed circuits are of in circuits section a separate the the eye involved Brainstem in end chapter. critically also movement;

head Several is when neck reflex the are moved is evoked or mechanisms bent. the of righting postural There reflexes, three reflexes, and reflexes. vestibular reflexes: types are tonic neck ), receptors stretch which movement, the these The reflexes responsible for stimulated neck. vestibular (see and head in receptors apparatus sensory include the by is

postural The of one reflexes class vestibular constitute reflex. receptors the Rotation of sensory of ). semicircular canals (see activates the head results addition nuclei vestibular in the input generating postural adjustments. to to movement, In the sensory eye are tracts spinal by the medial lateral Such reticulospinal commands to through adjustments the transmitted cord mediated the tracts. and vestibulospinal and support lateral tract activates posture. extensor The that vestibulospinal muscles on rotated the the left if to head left, the instance, For increased side. postural support is is to the person the This prevents as from increased head rotation left support the continues. falling has tends to A left. person the that the disease ear labyrinthine eliminates fall left function who any to in person to a Conversely, left a (stimulates) that fall to with irritates right. labyrinth tends the the disease causes neck movement (vestibulocollic medial the oppose vestibulospinal reflex). tract of contractions muscles that induced The

otolith on individual organs the changes hair head acceleration the of vestibular of the Tilting the linear cells also apparatus. The cell hair changes produce postural in activity and resulting eye can adjustment. movement the extension neck consequently body reflexes), head when flexion of forelimbs of hind cat, the is tonic and limbs. without the bending quadruped, forward result as example, For the neck a tilts and a the (without such the evoking and body restore orientation. its action the original This to toward tends vestibular and hind if flex neck), bending and extend. the head the Conversely, forelimbs (without quadruped backward the the limbs body the tilts the vestibular also reaction. to organs contribute Otolithic placing as forelimbs If in a the of such of to is dropped, for landing. the animal, utricles cat, preparation stimulation an leads extension

positional are tonic reflex. reflexes The of neck type another the These muscles. in neck by muscle found activated reflexes spindles are of largest body. muscle of any the contain muscles spindles in muscle the These concentration the the muscle without is neck tonic the vestibular from evoke (without neck spindles interference head), of reflexes system. If tilting bent neck the extended, and hind neck flex. the the extend the forelimbs When limbs is when the is effects neck flexed. The occur opposite vestibular system. Note effects that opposite these the are by those evoked extensor to the if limbs on muscles in Furthermore, and side muscles in the limbs the left, the is bent the left right more, relax. the the on flexor the neck contract

9 Function Motor of CHAPTER Organization

class is postural third righting The the of reflex reflexes. restore to body position normal. head and an These of reflexes altered toward tend the the the responsible for righting apparatus, and neck reflexes of vestibular The mechanoreceptors wall. receptors, body the receptors include stretch

Control Brainstem Locomotion of

The serve cord neural as earlier. as pattern for contains that spinal discussed generators circuits central locomotion, circuits CPG behavior, produce stereotyped rhythmic output These walking. such very characterizes as regular that output of the in see a past you to extend can however, are this about real-world leg walking are beyond it). irregularities forward solid stereotyped step, where you require environments, ground hole of if swing the The and often (e.g., floor onto of modification your you hole the

in shown the sensory to modifications spinal of Such as result can input the be cord,

Fig. the phase a caused of fibers nerve 9.10 in in in FRA pattern. , which shift a stimulation peripheral locomotor along be commands of the motor also pathways discussed earlier. can They descending result the (e.g., modifications to can by this be In make avoided. brain can the visual) sensory so potential activity obstacles CPG be anticipatory in used case, that data start the deciding can activation, and walking). shutdown, control when of In consciously CPG people to or (i.e., stop addition, voluntarily to originates known in appears much of of regions cortex; the spinal be locomotion regulation however, cortical the regions. mediated CPGs projections Such as via brainstem cerebral on to voluntary locomotor influence sustained locomotion. defined that, stimulated, a leads can region to area locomotor when be A brain as

levels in they locomotor each with are and other. connected several the such and ranging located different from are to There at medulla regions brain-stem, the subthalamus the are locomotor commands best which The organize the region, known is to midbrain initiate to is locomotion. thought inferior midbrain at level the of colliculus. is It the in the located in cortex region. the trigger the to midbrain Voluntary the of by locomotion can motor corticobulbar originates fibers that activity action projecting locomotor The reticular via the relayed to commands the through are the and formation spinal then reticulospinal tracts. cord

Motor Cortex by the Cerebral Control

automatic this far movement. on types chapter, been in of reflexes and relatively has emphasis Thus neural voluntary more movement. for complex, discuss the now basis goal-directed We initiated to frequently of and is external processes rather stimulus. a varies in repeated than movement Such as when an cognitive response result direct often areas the the cerebral of motor Thus participation of it cortex. requires

•Fig. of Frontal Motor the Cortex. Areas 9.14 A Diagramshowinginterconnectionsofthemotorareas.PMA,premotorarea;SMA,supplementarymotorarea. inB andB, Lateralandmedialviewsofahemisphere,showingthemajorcorticalmotorareas.FEF,frontaleyefield.Theinset showsthewallsofthecingulatesulcus,whichcontainthecingulatemotorareas.NumbersinparenthesesareBrodmannareanumbersforthecingulatemotorareas(CMAs).C,

to movement. consider necessary voluntary First, a is what generate must (or make identify arm, it a locate goal) example, external reaching movement first in target your and For the space. to with you target. particular, arm in internal of of the Next, in to your must hand be limb representation trajectory a and, on determined your relation an the basis Finally, a computed. the set must of desired necessary trajectory forces be to generate between as of coordinate This often is process transformations systems. thought series of a in a space of and a when as retinotopic is the thus the is space, visually image measured world external nonmoving location target perceived perceived an eye, position location example, a the stable, in (i.e., identified the target’s retina, the but of For target is its or changes). on even computed calculation in a ultimately hand-centered frame. and body-or forces be a reference of trajectory a system, involve must Next, finally, muscle-based would

of that successive linear motor steps a out and traditionally it was the carried a These steps. thought form hierarchy areas sequence, target information in of example, sensory pooling posterior (Fig. by parietal be identified the was thought of cortex movement to the the For cerebral

9.14A ). the whose cortex, information stage force to generation the be areas, would premotor (e.g., where would final a would execution plan appropriate then activity primary motor levels). be to motor the be transmitted related and then supplementary and This motor of to forwarded developed to would nuclei. discussed transmit earlier, motor cortex then and spinal commands, The via motor brainstem cord descending pathways the the

support recent hierarchical view that cortical the system, generation the voluntary motor areas should of by Although network suggested different hierarchy distributed results of in a (see various thought is significant there strict of of the be namely, as evidence motor forming a than more conception: movement this a parallel have rather

Fig.

9.14C ). in pathways; to example, descending lobe. motor motor makes significant frontal motor half tract For from contributes the the corticospinal arise primary the the area contribution that cortical cortex only approximately the each own fibers its executing the studies a areas of and motor the later described and to suggest planning each several results of of the a other, all recording role movement. of bidirectionally Moreover, areas each the single-unit are various connected in plays stages that of the of probably debate debate time. organization some in network because versus and various guises, hierarchical discussion been continue for its themes one the will the This ongoing has decades forms for distributed following

movement. experiments in applied the motor originally were cortex contralateral on evoked of the which areas defined in The stimuli cerebral basis to electrical cortex the discrete, other cortical can when evoked intensely. be however, also are more Movement, areas stimulated movement defined from which be can as those stimulus are the motor intensity. Thus evoked lowest areas by On the humans, basis the studies, recordings, electrophysiological areas of of the produced experiments, modern cortex “motor” have been (see of studies lesions, anatomical and these many cerebral recognized stimulation by imaging effects results in

Fig. primary to sulcus cortex cortex, in ), of just the on of primary premotor supplementary motor the motor 9.14 the on rostral lobe. motor cortex gyrus, the in motor cingulate the hemisphere, the located walls including and the cingulate areas aspect the frontal the the medial three precentral area specifically in to section (see There regions are movement the lobes activity cortical also other whose eye related is

Organization Cortical Areas Motor Somatotopic of

from the with which motor The motor are cortex can electrical amount be cortex) as just defined primary movements the cortex (or stimulation. of elicited of least region the with essentially (see congruent area cytoarchitectonic 4 Brodmann is It

Fig. 10.3). gyrus humans that the of the the gyrus. In parts central the form of wall rostral apex caudal sulcus and the precentral on of is the of the located half it having that surface stimulation, initial somatosensory parallels mapping topographic was of the basis a that the studies, which cortex of cortex. the On described as motor done organization with were face, fissure, extremity face inferiorly, with medial limb surface the of lower mostly located on The the superiorly, aspect were the most hemisphere. upper lateral the the and on represented the the and lateral body, torso near figurine often represented graphic form This somatotopic a a in homunculus is motor or ( called organization a as

Fig. ). 9.15B of body is The indicates distortion control. the in to motor devoted how their cortex the various homunculus of approximately the much parts keyboard traditional for cortical of acting fit and homunculus a This as simple motor cortex the being spinal conceptions motor and the well final to a stage the piano commands likened with relay to cord. sending was

Beginning inserted apply microelectrodes 1960s or layers of to investigators mapping using and began studies the in in stimuli. the 1970s, deep, output, the cortex to movements used microstimulation, previously could imagined intracortical higher lower cortex, stimulus (see topography much revealed of more resolution motor which With mapping this to complex and evoke the be technique, intensities a much than thus allowed called was

Function of Motor Organization CHAPTER 9

Fig. ). 9.15C by to noncontiguous of columns Movement evoked the cortex. regions throughout found many each wide about motor joint was be are actually joint to among movement about control other movement a Thus cell interspersed that about many related columns particular joints. columns although such columns have muscles part. a cell the may subdivisions motor or intermingling body a is the cortex In there complex within control that limb to large corresponding that sum, each within the of area head,

mixing in of most is are makes localized from connectivity columns confined throughout cortex a axon most surrounding and originate). cell connect to movement of that which different a 1to muscles requires because the 3-mm column the the action cell (i.e., collaterals primarily sense functional Such columns coordinated they limb region other joint about be about controlling control intermixed that Thus columns movement movement a and with generated movement columns when whole. cell multijoint as joints, multiple are can a present

is of Although topography part the a dynamic it pathway, determined is in anatomically the the map. topographic of cortex map corticospinal also motor by the potentially joints. the multiple could in different Axon activity one so column to cell collaterals link columns, about that movement lead this transmit In modulated acid (GABA). or are can connections interneurons but intercolumnar by secrete gamma-aminobutyric fact, inhibitory these that happen, cortex neighboring blocking region of in region. locally motor This stimulating then was by and one the shown GABA the also evoked region was Before in of that ( were inhibited longer evoked one was the blocked, but inhibition set contractions stimuli no by muscles, block, contractions of once the controlled muscles

Fig. ). 9.16 can their be map controlled motor on time state, a be can radically scale, the depending columns millisecond cell cortex changed. and between Functional on connections representation. part changes also its for the a term disuse) somatotopic size to can are of Longer plastic use example, affect body known occur; (or the of

Brodmann to (see of The hemisphere, primary area motor located medial on and portion mainly the (SMA) medial the of supplementary the motor 6 corresponds is just to cortex, area surface anterior the

Fig. 9.14). subdivided the just and is pre-SMA. called regions: is It more the proper anterior as the into (or portion to SMA), referred SMA part is posterior the two complete it the with areas proper it interconnected to somatotopic tract, contains SMA similar to areas. motor listed: a already contributes is other and map, motor corticospinal it other the the The is cord to In is and the the but other is cortex. areas contrast, strongly with the motor connected spinal pre-SMA rather not connected prefrontal

studies that in show somatotopic SMA. stimulation the complete motor map cortex, in a as the of results The there is can SMA of the Stimulation movement isolated evoke

of •Fig. sulcus wall Rostral central Cortex Modern Musculotopic Motor of Organization. and Traditional 9.15 Views A, Lateralviewofthecerebrum,showingaplaneofsectionthroughtheprecentralgyrus(primarymotorcortex)thatcorrespondstothesectionshowninB. Classicviewofmotorcortexmusculotopy(“muscularhomunculus”).C, B, Modernviewofmotorcortexorganizationinwhicheachbodypartisrepresentedmultipletimesacrossseveraldiscreteregions.

CHAPTER Motor of Organization 9 •Fig. Function Musculotopic a Motor Map. 9.16 Nature of Cortex Dynamic Schematicviewofexcitatoryconnectionsbetweentworegionsofprimarymotorcortexandlocalinhibitoryneuronswithinasingleregion.B, ForelimbEMGrecordsshowingresponsetostimulationoftheVibregionbeforeandduringtheapplicationofbicucullineandafteritwaswashedout.NotethatVibstimulationevokedvibrissaemovementinallconditionsbutevokedforelimbmovementonlywheninhibitoryinterneuronsinFLwereblocked.(DatafromJacobsK,DonoghueJ.Science. InhibitoryGABAergicinterneuronsplayanimportantroleinshapingmotorresponsestostimulationofeachregionofthemotorcortex.A, Schematicviewofaratbrain,indicatingmotorcortex(MC)regionswhereelectricalstimuliwereappliedtoevokemovements(Vibregion)andbicucullinewasappliedtoblockGABAergicsynapses(intheFLregion).FL,forelimb;Vib,vibrissa.C, 1991;251:944.) after of but of moreover, stimulation evoked single evoked movements than and duration; more stimulation to are motor that the the intensity complex often higher about stimulation those cortex. motor longer the must of cortex, be similar by joints, movement duration primary absolute. of not and purposeful so the However, distinction apparently stimulation complex, can motor the longer also cortex evoke sequences, is In or addition, temporary it vocalization postural can but movements, the namely, result: complex can opposite have speech. of SMA of produce also or stimulation the a arrest movement grasping cortex Removal in movement the contralateral result retards supplementary may hand. of opposite the forced movements motor with and of extremities the

area surface primary motor lateral on in lies cortex brain the of Brodmann the 6 and (see contained area is This the to rostral

Fig. 9.14 ). intensities from primary by can be motor the higher distinguished needed It the evoke cortex stimulus to movement. has area The into two and been ventral. dorsal subdivisions: divided functionally distinct premotor and are somatotopically both the organized tract. to the both corticospinal contribute subdivisions motor cortex, Like and leg, dorsal map a (PMd) trunk, division face. relatively arm, contains representing the complete The and mostly map leg with limited representation. ventral contrast, of (PMv) face, the the a small to somatotopic is In the only division arm upper the of head and specialized limb control for appears PMv Thus to be movement. muscles. contains of a second the has distal large of subdivisions between whereas representation that representation the muscles, A the a difference the is the large PMd PMv proximal

the areas the at the within These same approximately SMA. level are as located anterior-posterior cingulate sulcus motor ventral, areas are three rostral; see motor There (dorsal, cingulate and

Fig. ). 9.14B somatotopic to Each map contributes the tract. and contains a corticospinal intensities that movement again, these higher motor evokes Microstimulation needed. evoked areas in to similar stimulus that, by cortex stimulation, are except movements. motor of Single-cell related cingulate activity the areas shown execution have the preparation that is in to during recordings and the movements spontaneous neurons of

Areas Motor Cortical of the Connections

synapses area input and itself: the source an of specifically, cortex however, local is largest areas area motor the the from in sources, receive of of a connections. number cortical the The subcortical; intrinsic areas specificity bidirectionally described the (see connected are high all Moreover, with to earlier topographic motor each other

Fig. ). 9.14C areas each of to the regions project For motor other. the cingulate example, motor primary and cortex arm the to pathways sensory information thalamus. relay Ascending the This or the cortex. somatosensory the way cortex from information directly motor of the by thalamus can reach indirectly somatosensory motor the from the conveyed are Both areas visual cortex. information posterior to parietal information and The involved motor other the them with cerebellum motor in areas brain ganglia. the circuits receive also of that and basal interconnect namely, major regions the control: through cortex information ventral lateral and which structures motor to ventral project then project two distinct the of the nuclei), anterior cortical parts (the These thalamus to areas.

spinal several through the descending is of cortical and the conducted motor brainstem output The areas pathways. cord to and also indirect but projections nucleus pathways These to not various and (to the formation. cranial red to through in direct include nuclei only corticobulbar nuclei) reticular projections corticospinal the the tracts the nerve muscles the is in various by Descending mediated brainstem projections cranial section nerve neck these and reviewed to nuclei. head sites .” Control projections were of the from and cerebellum the to loops thus The with also regions motor basal these ganglia, completing structures. project neuroanatomical projections the in basilar is project turn to the pontine nuclei, the to cerebellum which major the connection cerebellum. via corticopontine The to motor precerebellar the cortical nucleus, areas project, midbrain, inferior the another addition, in area. olivary via pathways to that important the In mostly disynaptic synapse the ganglia. of The regions directly project cortical the basal striatum motor to regulates projections cortex that information by the thalamus receives. major it there which are the to the Finally,

Motor Cells Cortex of Activity

cortex extensively the in investigated control individual trained neurons in been motor has of The role monkeys. of movement primary cortex in discharges from of as the during learned immediately experiments, such In the these (Fig. cue a neuron recorded motor in to flexion, previously sensory are execution a made simple response movement, a wrist

). 9.17 the (i.e., time firing initiation of neurons to change correlated were from of change cue before onset the the reaction movement). the to the Motor found onset time this was the movement, cortex with rates of and their this with rather than in of task, firing the was contractile muscle with the correlated that in the with position of Moreover, the of joint. of the change the generates cortex force neurons the rate force change often movement motor and in the in These hierarchical view consistent is and are involved that stages motor cells the planning with these areas. executing the cortical movements, of of findings suggest final which

cortex of these to in rates experiments, the motor However, appeared to some firing stages. even relate planning cells earlier early motor neurons a the a changed any Moreover, still despite cue, period when the of firing was movement monkey rates even movement. to the after withhold the for cortex absence of certain trained that motor of a other suggests planning Such in along be and may in tasks activity of amply areas involved in the motor cortex. other with “set-related” stages cortex activity been the variety activity has earlier confirmed a movement. may needed the also initiation It subcortical, the suggests perhaps be possibility for signal to other, that systems generate trigger of

subsequent on in capture have a of and a surface studies, to In researchers to trained animals on move the hold tasks (a targets which a to front circle used in end) manipulandum a device (Fig. small with handle them lighted were

). 9.18A were and These to changes arm many (see firing directions response of experiments thus the rates in described cells their tuned the in in in broadly motor cortex region different showed movement as demonstrated that

Fig.

9.18B ). a increases other show somewhat cell for directions even direction, showed direction, would that decreases also in for preferred its That particular in maximal one increase is, smaller a called (see movement movement or

Fig.

9.18C ). of different directions. Moreover, across 360 of preferred possible uniformly all distributed the were directions cells the movement degrees

how but is arm that raised probably results implied made cell tuned of broadly cells. could precise most movements, movements be in with issue a such they also involved particular These the the individual was could. could changes of predict population direction activity It net movement, that the cells activity not suggested or of upcoming in precisely the specify the of the although which test idea, activity the cell To were models vector each is a as (see in of made represented this

Fig. ). 9.18D direction of a The cell of the preferred the determined each vector particular rate the proportional vector movement. of cell and preceding the during is the the by of to time movement the for direction is firing cell, the magnitude cell vectors The individual (see

Fig. summed to 9.18D lines) cells (see be black can from , vectorially resultant or get of then population hundreds vector a

Fig. , movement. predicts that red the 9.18D accurately lines) upcoming

parameters displacement, these various that correlated firing of location, force, the of difficulties assessing between movement in as relationship with the each cells and One velocity, and target cortical normally are parameters, is other. such variations of have used the vary in various Therefore, the described to to (e.g., earlier to using these parameters needed a changing tasks decorrelate displacement, the illustrated force been movement as weights without make

Fig. 9.17A external muscles generate that the required , rotating position so in the starting trajectory are of the to or same space). different wrist The stages. cells each the related planning may these to of of be results of motor that experiments cortex activity showed various the motor Furthermore, as one be activity time correlated then initially onset single movement approaches. the parameter for the a switch of cell and may with of

the many in to similar is and motor in areas the that supplementary cortex. in premotor ways primary Activity motor show upcoming these in related to activity areas Cells

of •Fig. 9 antagonist flexion relaxation Function from Motor results CHAPTER movement Organization of 9.17 A, Thepyramidaltractneuron(PTN)dischargesbeforetheonsetofmovementorEMGactivitywhenflexorsneedtogenerateforce(noloadandflexorloadconditions).Moreover,thefiringrateiscorrelatedwiththelevelofflexorforcethatisneeded.Intheextensorloadcondition,flexorsdonotneedtocontracttogeneratemovement,andthusthereisnoactivityinthisPTN.Thetoptraceshowswristmovement,whichisessentiallyidenticalforallthreeexperimentalconditions.Thusthiscell’sactivityinvolvesencodingforcemagnitudeanddirection,butnotdisplacement. Experimentalarrangementforrecordingfromacorticospinalneuronwhileamonkeyperformstrainedwristmovements.Astimulationelectrodeisusedtoelicitantidromicspikesthatareusedtoidentifythemotorcortexneuronspecificallyasapyramidaltractneuron.Stimuliarenotappliedwhilethemonkeyisperformingmovements.B, basedonworkofEvartsandcolleagues.) (Figure the the and activity is can as with is and distributed parameters, which with cortical of motor consistent activity view be, areas. as force, displacement, network just primary such the movement cortex motor correlated target movement, location, be differences some as the more differences well, appear do, areas to may these qualitative. real quantitative There be however, although than between supplementary of example, areas in that the premotor cells to percentage is primary higher of stages such earlier cells motor activity motor show in For the cortex. related and than that planning the motor distinguished the the area and involvement other in the from greater apparently supplementary external can addition, be of shown in in cues each premotor to In the by (such areas movements motor made premotor as task

Fig.

self-initiated). the movements cues greater (i.e., to in area 9.18 of motor response supplementary internal ) the involvement made in and functionally this the such revealed and Research subdivided; heterogeneous are areas each however, these further beyond is details be scope that of discussion. can also therefore has of

Control the by Motor Cerebellum

in the Role of Control the Motor of Cerebellum Overview

to scientists to coordination. damage in motor cerebellum deficits that led showed 1900s, early In the the inability nature an understand task; or rather, of or it cerebellum of to loss leads not movements does perform That a to to an of to the loss paralysis, the inability is, sensation, lead damage well. role 135 of • precise movement 315° hard has it Fig. define been Yet 45 the 225 or Direction to movement. one The the distal cell of Cosine captures then Experimental a bar a the the on, and A, the holds activity spots and each eight direction of fit of horizontal C, of the motor T one on setup cortex is function M the turns spike function light apparatus absence movement. arm an Raster target a onset indicates the end the motor movement, captures central the of rate shows first a and light of at the during of level raster of the marks spot that directions. captures indicates onto in indicates time becomes whichever to was which monkey each arm. Each cortex in different which the the average of activity mark firing plots a the the trial. raster. upcoming monkey time of at showing targets cell’s surrounding center 9.18 illuminated. whereas the firing the movement of B, during at The in light represents row as with which cell, spontaneous just significantly during most from baseline. for before Note directions, in activity periods the movement the changed that and

•Fig. Vectormodelofpopulationactivityinthemotorcortex.Black D, pointsinessentiallythedirectionoftheupcomingmovement. representindividualcellvectors.Whenallofthemaresummedforaparticulardirectionofmovement,theresultingpopulationvector(red) lines 9.18, cont’d (B ModifiedfromGeorgopoulosAP,etal.J andC, Neurosci. vol.7:Neuronal ModifiedfromGeorgopoulosAP,etal.InMassionJ,etal[eds].Experimental Coding 1982;2:1527.D, Performance. Research Brain Series, Motor of Berlin:Springer-Verlag;1983.) organization anatomic other have CNS scientists knowledge than in more cerebellum its simple movement, although, of of region. generating any the paradoxically, and detailed deceptively physiological of roles to a both is proposed in movements. the and certain The reflex voluntary role of critical cerebellum learning play execution and their that complete However, prevent these significant face about roles acceptance. challenges hypotheses the rest cerebellum of are finally by discussed, followed In of of and then both its effects the with a and behavioral the section, this description the of damaging a discussion connectivity, intrinsic CNS, activity. its

Behavioral of Consequences Damage Cerebellar

one side body. of Damage cerebellum side on the of the to impairs motor the function ipsilateral the motor output most cerebellum-related This neurons. travels reflects crossing double it a of as to occurs The crossing whereas the the typically crossing efferent second in pathway, place pathways. takes cerebellar the descending motor first in cortex, the the at medulla. pathway motor example, cerebellum the the via recrosses projects the For midline contralateral and lower corticospinal thalamus, to the

specific from cerebellar component lesions motor of the on which functional deficits The depend that result

CHAPTER of affected. cerebellum Motor is 9 Organization Function most If gait difficulty lobe balance the vestibular damaged, the motor include and flocculonodular produced those and disorders lesion the of disorders is apparatus; by a nystagmus. such in in resemble often region occur is involved, affects or disorders in is disturbance the the motor affected, motor the intermediate vermis and If the trunk, if hemisphere the limbs. distal depends site muscles the more the the affect The limbs of part lesions than on of lesions do. affected paravermal hemispheric damage;

in cerebellar equilibrium, disease include motor coordination, tone. of Types of muscle and disorders dysfunction a and which from as smoothly a force a desired ataxia and manifested to the condition is prevent moved in being is called in position. Incoordination errors direction often limb dysmetria, of movement and dysdiadochokinesia, in supination to may pronation the which alternating of execute. be as also difficult rapid manifested is arm Ataxia of movement in more attempted, smooth of decomposition movement a as occurs, sequence. accomplished movement the is in complicated a When is than which series discrete rather of steps is as that the in target asked a subject the affected hand target; (or foot) approached. tremor develops appears touch is An intention to when magnitude the tremor increases a seen, a wide-based tends the may to ataxia). may affected be with disturbed, balance and fall and equilibrium individual impaired stance walk the side (gait is When toward speech. defect slow scanning be called a and may is Speech slurred; such diminished may knee rigidity); lesions tone earlier section may with Muscle a the (see decerebrate (hypotonia), except jerk. associated be be diminished tone vermis on of pendular the for anterior by the striking tendon. demonstrated eliciting can be reflex the patellar a muscle This by of phasic stretch quadriceps because damped hypotonia, the in a oscillation person. leg forth of normal highly The to swing in and the continues back to contrast

abnormal of These part, reflect, timing contractions. disorders muscle in muscles. timed and EMG limb in movements both precisely antagonist Normally, agonist involve bursts burst initial antagonist is a an by a and, burst. the followed in finally, agonist There burst agonist second the is ( damage, cerebellar relative of timing With these bursts abnormal

Fig. 9.19

(superior, fossa located the (“little cranium, the is via is cerebellum cerebellar just lobe, posterior to inferior). connected and middle, of brain”) the the The peduncles brainstem and three occipital in below is outer the cortex visible. From the surface, only are nuclei: to emboliform, white the buried and cerebellar matter fastigial, the of the is white the to matter within cortex cerebellum, the dentate laterally, four medially Deep proceeding globose, and nuclei. the nuclei and middle are often as nucleus. interpositus two The the grouped to referred together •Fig. afferent cortex cerebellum and the to most part, enter nuclei the the fibers cerebellar For 9.19 of Alters Movement. Activity Cerebellar the of During Disruption Timing EMG Responses Thecerebellarnucleiwerecooledtoblocktheirfunctioningtemporarilywhilemonkeysperformedmovementsabouttheirelbow.LossofcerebellaractivitydisruptstherelativetimingofagonistandantagonistEMGbursts.Thisleadstoabnormalaccelerationofthelimbandamovementtrajectorythatovershootsthetargetposition(hypermetria). (DatafromFlamentD,HoreJ.J Neurophysiol. 1986;55:1221.) the via fibers inferior from cerebellar efferent leave and via superior the nuclei the peduncle. peduncles, and middle

flocculonodular ( lobes: rostrocaudally subdivided lobe, the the anterior arranged cerebellar and posterior lobe three lobe, is the into The cortex

Fig. 9.20A ). is up The each fissures, fissure and the lobe or major posterolateral by lobules. separated more the cerebellar made one two primary of and are fissure, lobes of of lobule Each a called cortex is folia. transverse the series composed of cerebellar folds

The compartments into longitudinal (see cortex also divided has cerebellar been

Fig. C). 9.20B and cortex into on which and lies lies the Initially, compartments: hemispheres. the of divided midline; vermis, cerebellar adjacent such to the was sides which three lateral the paravermis, the vermis; both the the functional now cerebellar of specific compartments aligned these patterns of also fibers, Although of scheme. the C. not and system, aldolase significance of of and receptive expression been the bundles olivocerebellar organizational These molecules, as the precisely axonal many known, properties the Purkinje cerebellar compartments them, cells topography into (patterns is basis to follow this matter) further subdivided field tend such with particularly fully regions of on is the afferent white in the have myeloarchitectonics

and classes olivocerebellar fibers. two are fibers of major mossy afferent cerebellar There systems: cortex: it distinctive bunch through cerebellar of short named a and as a granule in appearance on sends swells their out occasion the fiber layer, Mossy branchlets. mossy the fibers courses for twisted are These neurons contact granule and in points of are the entities cell these called and fibers between rosettes layer. are synaptic afferent column Mossy pontine cord fibers from including and trigeminal nuclei, sources, vestibular arise dorsal the many spinal in nuclei, pathways), nuclei, cerebellar the nucleus, basilar (the nuclei reticular fibers, vestibular formation, spinocerebellar primary the nuclei. fiber points noting: 1. The however, projection several are the of patterns are specific scope chapter; details mossy this worth of general beyond

are fibers excitatory. Mossy

2.

and proprioceptive cerebellar and from the least across cortex. at somatotopic maps form the body of information exteroceptive two They head and convey body the on the like these those of are the cerebellar of motor body are areas sense However, not maps necessarily the represented in that cortex; mosaics. the regions cortex, contiguous are maps complicated fractured contiguous rather,

3.

are to of fibers and the vermis. the conveying lobe flocculonodular regions vestibular Mossy information restricted vermis as sometimes result, regions the of are referred lobe to vestibulocerebellum. As the the a flocculonodular and not same function and of visual, is these regions other vestibular. However, their a exclusively (e.g., oculomotor), receive neck, variety so information also

4.

mossy pontine the to areas basilar much fibers nuclei, from cerebral largest cortex. serve are of throughout the information sources relay The of which

5.

to cerebellar to the fibers up enter collateral provide heading cortex. all three cerebellar peduncles Mossy and the fibers cerebellum before nuclei via the a information, as and receives motor-related as system, In via the sum, of activity. fiber descending the sensory wide cerebellum cognitive-related mossy well variety rostral medulla, diverse from lateral is originate mossy olivocerebellar olivary of fibers and in located nucleus: inferior origins a pyramids. nucleus, fibers, In to the dorsal just all the which single contrast the to the projection off giving nucleus cerebellar whose inferior olivary enter are brainstem all collaterals primarily cells via and cerebellum then the the axons to the peduncle. the without cross leave neurons Almost the collaterals fibers, cerebellar to axons excitatory nuclei cerebellar are to white the and the Like ascend the through as send cortex. mossy they matter olivocerebellar form they axons with but and stellate, may basket, synapse arrangement cortex, synaptic the cells, cells. with special Purkinje a cerebellar Golgi olivocerebellar In “climbs” climbing dendrites synapses. and Purkinje excitatory fiber, receives proximal makes up input hundreds from its a Each cell only of which single referred portion terminal a olivocerebellar as of climbing the is to fiber.) axon (The to form each fibers. branches 10 olivary 15 axon to Conversely, about climbing

Motor Organization CHAPTER •Fig. of 9 Function of Anatomic 9.20 Cerebellum. Divisions the yellow A, Schematicmidsagittalviewofthefoldingofthecortexintolobe,lobules,andfolia.B, Schematicviewofanunfoldedferretcerebellarcortextoillustrateearliercompartmentationschemesforsubdividingthecerebellarcortexintothree(vermis,paravermis,andhemisphere)andthensevenlongitudinallyrunningzones(A,B,C1,C2,C3,D1,D2).Thelight portionofeachhemisphereindicatesanareaforwhichnodatawereavailable.

VPFL Cr FL Cr Ic Sim mm b Sim DPFL Vlc V C, Rostral C Xb Cr II VIII Ia pf Vlb 1 Vla IXb Xa Left Cr VII IIa 4−5a−4a−4b−3−3−2−1−*3b+4+a+a+a+2+*2b+d+d+c+5+5+4+5a+6+4b+6+3+3+2+2+1+1+7+e2+*f+4+4+e1+b+2−1−b−III CP Caudal IXc 5 1+2+3+3−3b−2b−*2a−5a−4−d−d−6−1−a−c−5−5−e2−e1−f−Par mm Right IXa a Schematicviewofanunfoldedratcerebellum,showingitssubdivisionintomorethanI Ib Vld IV IIb •Fig. Cr cont’d on indicatecerebellarlobules.Names numbers the 9.20, on down left hemisphere indicatenamesofcerebellarlobules.CP,copulapyramis;Cr,crus;DPFL,dorsalparaflocculus;FL,flocculus;Par,paramedian;pf,primaryfissure;Sim,simplex;VPFL,ventralparaflocculus. ofthecerebellumindicatethezebrincompartmentnumber.Roman 20compartments,accordingtostainingformolecularmarkers:inthiscase,zebrinII(aldolaseC).Letters the right center and half numerals (B, ModifiedfromVoogdJ.InLlinásRR(ed).Neurobiology Development. and of Evolution Cerebellar Chicago:AmericanMedicalAssociation;1969.C, CourtesyofDr.IzumiSugihara.)

several olivary a nucleus inferior The region brain reasons. distinctive for is chemical all cells, synaptic interaction cells. virtually As are the little already between there and projection local neurons is its so noted, olivary electrically Instead, by are neurons each junctions. to other gap coupled density highest neuronal of junctions olivary the nucleus In the the CNS. has in fact, inferior gap transmitted that to synchronized allows gets have cerebellum. olivary to This activity neurons the two many olivary CNS, divided into to nuclei. may the transmitting the cerebellar which inhibitory transmitting those throughout few and GABAergic input classes: main from fibers the and from Afferent those nuclei regions input, brainstem a inferior arises excitatory be nucleus (as of and in neurons to modulate intrinsic Although fibers olivary be these olivary modulation of potential rates the the regions), neurons is to these most a properties afferent with hertz the typical few brain firing oscillators. of neurons limit this endows a membrane can range of also patterns olivary cerebellum. coupling of acts Instead and the between activity firing neurons the to the thus just modify to synchronous modulating activity changes effectiveness of the delivered olivary afferent rates, electrical also expression modulate activity potential Afferent oscillatory of may olivary of the neurons. the nucleus olivary be the across synchronous organized to generate inferior appears activity cortex. to patterns Thus cerebellar of controversial. significance these remains functional patterns of The commands various is provide muscle that hypothesis a for gating motor to combinations. One synchronizing they signal

Function •Fig. 9 of CHAPTER Motor Organization the of Cerebellar the Some View Three-Dimensional Cortex, Showing Cerebellar of Neurons. 9.21 Thecutfaceattheleftisalongthelongaxisofthefolium;thecutfaceattherightisatrightanglestothelongaxis.BC,basketcell;BCA,basketcellaxon;CF,climbing(olivocerebellar)fiber;CN,cerebellarnuclearcell;GC,Golgicell;Glm,glomerulus;GrC,granulecell;MF,mossyfiber;PC,Purkinje cell;PF,parallelfiber;SC,stellatecell.

Cortex and the Efferent of Elements Fibers Cellular

cerebellar organization remained of invariant. Despite cortex expansion nearly the throughout anatomical its enormous basic evolution, the has vertebrate The circuitry most any among the region. of stereotyped is regular also and brain candelabrum contains granule Purkinje cells, The eight cortex cerebellar brush cells, different stellate cells, cells, types: cells, and cells, neuronal cells, cells. unipolar Golgi Lugaro basket found cerebellar input. limited mainly which are with to all unipolar cerebellar exception regions are the of the in of These cells cortex, cells, receiving brush areas vestibular eight make ( the vertebrates cortex cell up higher types three layers the cerebellar distributed among These are of that

Fig. 9.21 ). superficial layer; the or and there. are found cells The molecular is outer basket stellate layer and contains layer; the in deepest cellular and layer CNS highest the is The layer Golgi, has granule, cells. brush the this unipolar cell density granule cell layer, molecular one-cell-thick arranged as Purkinje is Purkinje a cell Separating formed the by cell granule layers are somata, which cells. of and sheet the also in layer. Candelabrum cells this are located of border are layer. at the Lugaro slightly the deeper cell upper situated cells granule

inhibitory. collaterals axon, the local fiber Purkinje and is efferent also the is from The sole has cortex and which cell GABAergic local Thus remaining types interneurons. are the cell seven these, candelabrum unipolar Lugaro, the GABAergic are stellate, and also basket, cells inhibitory are granule cells excitatory. the Golgi, Of brush and neurons, whereas

Microcircuitry the of Cortex

synaptic connections cerebellar (long) the transverse (Fig. to the dendrites, most organized neurons cortex of patterns with are and of the (short) The within longitudinal and of axons, regard axes folium 9.21 ). plane, where the respectively. sagittal and planes, to sagittal axes vermis, in the In the coronal these folia lie perpendicular run the the at folia must the the folia with regard angles axes the local are serve plane, oriented hemispheres, sagittal correspondence axes. then the In the various as this and to reference of lost, is where

in The the largest CNS. the tree cell dendritic is Purkinje in transverse along microns the the 30 of cell from to cortex several and layer longitudinal the the molecular extends layer only of 40 µm for axis the the through It but direction. folium hundred for to Purkinje cerebellar surface the axis lies a pancake folium. plane of is in parallel Thus to it the like that the transverse a flat a the folium. with can a axis of of Accordingly, the pancakes, cell of be thought along set the stack dendritic running of Purkinje as trees longitudinal stack

•Fig. Functional Cerebellar the Connectivity Cortex. of 9.22 Becauseofthegeometricorganizationofthecerebellarcorticalcircuits,thefunctionalconnectivityofthecellularelementscanbedeterminedelectrophysiologically.Thefiguredepictsaclassicparadigminwhichstimulationofthecerebellarcortexactivatesabeamofparallelfibers(orange). asaresultoftheperpendicularspatialrelationshipoftheparallelfibersandthestellateandbasketcellaxons. cells) andPurkinjecells(PCs;orange cells)inlinewiththisbeamshowthattheyareexcitedbytheparallelfibers.Incontrast,Purkinjecellsflankingthebeamreceiveonlyinhibition(purple Recordingsfromthestellateandbasketcells(green areas)

dendritic and are much (stellate are interneurons cells) that of dendritic manner less tree, to layer a trees although molecular The they basket cell extensive. the of the oriented similar Purkinje in transversely and folium run The Purkinje the across synapses of axons form basket with and cells stellate cells. synapse Stellate onto cells dendrites. cell basket and Purkinje which cell synapses name. gives basket the base the form soma, around its soma addition, and the make basket on cells of basket-like a the cell Purkinje structure In

complex with expansion five four each as small are ending axons Granule dendrites, arrangement to short unbranched known rosette and neurons with a a terminals a a mossy cell glomerulus. cells in fiber with that claw-like in Golgi from synapses fibers. to cells layer, axons Purkinje of The the granule ascend where form parallel cell layer bifurcate molecular and the through they along cells. and axis trees) with run of of dendrites to the basket parallel surface Golgi, Purkinje, of the (perpendicular basket the and dendritic cerebellar longitudinal synapses and form stellate, The the planes fibers the Purkinje, parallel the to cell folium the stellate, excitatory

trees Purkinje fibers stellate functional of relationship molecular has and between (basket cells) the cells the and orthogonal layer interneurons the The consequences. parallel dendritic and significant arrangement convergence maximal occur. and allows to This divergence with crosses passes Purkinje the than however, 6 cell dendritic particular short cell any the single (and A it which trees dimension tree. chance synapses long, parallel fiber, two through has dendrites); 100 can only through one because also dendritic make interneuron more be to or it up of the to mm cell Conversely, Purkinje from order given of the synapses a parallel fibers. receives 100,000 on that a this Thus excites be interneurons and row can fibers which beam ( line beam with experimentally, of in cells of excited a Purkinje parallel are

Fig. ). 9.22 beam flanked by of axons fibers, of to the interneurons because run is excitation the parallel In perpendicular this inhibition. the addition, electrophysiological cortex, classic such of whether connectivity a functional question. clearly occur the this remains excitation the beams cerebellar of experiment normally Although demonstrates controversial

in layer. The cells granule are the inhibitory cell Golgi interneurons tips that approximately which an arbors planar like meet. where soma the conical two dendritic cones, of axons the cone their geometric to carve tip and exception two to The cortex the in point axonal tip, orthogonal their dendrites the organization and and at territories: is is in organization the out of upper the and cone, dendritic layer, molecular forms the tree often forms extends the into The axon one. the lower which by mossy cells granule and fibers cell axons Purkinje inhibited basket, and (parallel cell by fibers) axon collaterals. Golgi and are excited by stellate, olivocerebellar and inhibit They in cells. granule turn mossy by and in parallel cell. excited fibers) Thus excited the participate in feedforward they loops activity both control Purkinje feedback the that inhibitory by fibers) (when mossy to fiber–parallel pathway fiber (when in

the one transverse from emerge relatively run just cell Purkinje side, usually folium cells of which from axis several for that along hundred Lugaro two somata microns, fusiform the layer. under dendrites, each the unbranched have cell to collaterals provide the input these input. axon granule cell axons add and Purkinje neurons, minor main basket, terminates possibly in Purkinje mainly the The axon cells. stellate, molecular on and layer inhibit Thus signals cells) Purkinje directly and both cell). activity cells to inhibit of positive-feedback the the (they provide Purkinje and (they these the appear signals that interneurons cells Purkinje sample negative-feedback inhibit

brush bunch a as tight resemble dendrite cells branchlets have Unipolar a of only single that brush. a ends that excitatory fibers from Golgi inhibitory input cells. from receive cells and input mossy These the thought which they with cells, Golgi fiber–parallel in excitatory that cells feedforward fiber synapse It and would pathway. is these an granule link make mossy

located are layer. in cells GABAergic Purkinje cells Candelabrum the in axons the terminate dendrites and the a candelabrum. pattern layer, resembles where Their arborization molecular axonal

cerebellar targets are cortex. nuclei cerebellar the The main of the organized such in is way of specific of strip nuclei. the each longitudinal targets a cortex region that projection This a cerebellar topographically gross nuclei, fastigial is to the nucleus. the and projects pattern that hemisphere the vestibular the interpositus, vermis and to to the projects projects dentate lateral the The region paravermal

to The the cerebellum output to provide nuclear brain that exception cells of the from neurons the the the project cerebellar Purkinje turn rest the primary of in (with

nuclei). Motor Function 9 Organization vestibular CHAPTER of the the it because principal In the negative-feedback cells a and is nuclear they to the cerebellar GABAergic sources. are to group GABAergic discussing useful loop the one of back inferior afferent output to cells whether according cerebellum’s nuclei, olivary the project to form of nucleus strip of part climbing the cells inferior specific longitudinal that GABAergic to from project the from of which cortex input their they olivary which importance and receives overlying nucleus Of is receive fibers. loops. the of a nuclei, closed are series cortex, inferior functionally cerebellar Thus nucleus organized as and olivary cerebellar variety of from project targets The thalamus. a cord the the nuclear excitatory to to cells non-GABAergic, spinal cerebellar crossed the nucleus each the leave general, projections gives cerebellum via peduncle. and that to rise ascending descending In superior rise projection gyrus, cerebellar also crossed the leaves to The significant bundle, or second via peduncle. well as the fastigial as gives nucleus called hook that uncinate fibers, uncrossed a inferior

targets cerebellar cerebellum the nucleus, colliculus, connects the each areas as there structures, ascending ventral which the in the the motor and cerebrum. the nucleus to thalamus, Although in projections lateral differences thereby links red specific such superior of and nucleus primary of motor target general, cortex the of midbrain to are the and in linked nucleus.) the are including (The basilar that olivary relay areas and motor likewise cerebral pathways, cerebellum by the pons to ones inferior multiple from the of It that cerebellar frontal the mentioned be nonmotor dentate projections, particularly cerebrum, in particularly also lobe. ascending regions target should the nucleus, also descending pontine nucleus, fibers and The basilar inferior target olivary reticular nuclei. the several nuclei, mainly cerebellospinal nucleus. a the principally pathway fastigial Lastly, arises small from vestibular fastigial significant the In to nuclei. projections has the addition, nucleus

in Purkinje the Cerebellar Cortex Motor Cells of in Coordination Context Activity the of

their cell to Mossy of causes the input to discharge potentials, via as fiber spikes excitation simple ( cortex, action to granule referred Purkinje cells, cerebellar single a

Fig. ). 9.23 input of can relative parallel from between firing from modulated depending a and cell 0 inhibition cortex balance but over be (from rate spike of much The >200 a and Hz), Purkinje fiber spontaneous 20 is typically excitation wider Hz range to 100 on cerebellar simple the interneurons. the cerebellar activity Thus reflects the this cortex. state of regions. 2000s across cerebellar levels twice early of the vary those that in regions cortex: the studies simple spike evidence the systematically of indicates zebrin-negative average performed from rates in Interestingly, the activity Firing spontaneous zebrin-positive functionally but known, uniformity this the it the they circuits, quite discovery cortical The suggests anatomical distinct. be that significance might despite of cerebellar full is not of

•Fig. of Cell a Input, Extracellularly. Purkinje Recorded Excitatory Responses 9.23 to inPurkinjecells.Notethatthespikesfollowingtheinitialonearesmallerandreferredtoasspikelets. A, Climbingfiberactivityleadstohigh-frequency(≈500-Hz)burstsofspikesknownascomplex spikes Granulecells,viatheirascendingaxonsandparallelfibers,excitePurkinjecellsandtriggersimplespikes.B,

a discharge (see called a of spike high-frequency fiber burst potentials, contrast, climbing causes action complex a In

Fig. ), single massive excitation is provided receives. the in of all-or-none that manner cell fiber 9.23 the climbing by because that Purkinje a an a climbing powerful excitation and discharge so one-to-one there fiber spike. This complex relationship is a essentially is between that the at olivary spikes override essentially cortex inferior Thus reflect complex the of and is what the state level happening nucleus. Hz. firing complex spontaneous a only spike is about 1 of The rate average

the motor cells, at generate not the direct they ongoing in spikes is involved not a the change of and rates they firing cerebellar do role control. as climbing fibers in that therefore complex shaping substantially argued no a of frequency, have such cortex the are low output it Because average and commonly consequence, Purkinje cells to it their is function of the fiber input. thought commonly Purkinje Instead, parallel that to is responsiveness alter spike parallel prolonged under efficacy synaptic depression certain long-term in termed (LTD). particular, circumstances, of a In produces depression activity complex fibers, by act hypotheses. in which fibers mechanism the phenomenon is climbing motor-learning This proposed then olivary LTD this inferior parallel the complex typical is the intended spikes generating ongoing between the active simple it, and and error in are a activates involved system fiber the which parallel hypotheses According movement, to lead there when and movement, spikes about hence fiber and result, nucleus actual of to synapses. mismatch synaptic in the weight motor output future. This in adjustment changes the not an additional the is in program complex If properly olivary executed movement, nucleus inferior this a error, further on. occur, activation synaptic motor is so olivocerebellar if change still system unchanged, does efficacy, and spikes that the results the there but of and triggers cause changes in learned memory cerebellum can is to this of stored. when are behavior LTD and remain portions occur in which blocked that view removal Major challenges can the supposedly that the of chemically learning after is motor

particular, helps of is motor in in does preclude olivocerebellar the in is motor role (note control learning not in view as a directly that this An the and, well) system timing alternative commands. motor involved that deficits generate of that from of follows damage in nucleus cerebellar discharges view the across spike olivary cells. synchronous inferior This and of rhythmic, namely, earlier: the properties populations motor it types complex can special for the observed mentioned Purkinje accounts These then result the cerebellar the currents as convergence produce in (IPSPs) present on inhibitory of a cell postsynaptic the complex nuclear Purkinje nuclear cerebellar would spikes to axon neurons projection. synchronized which largely of simple would on than qualitatively could of nuclear spikes, IPSPs asynchronous. these properties different have the more cell nuclear effect a neurons, Because IPSPs are firing but by synchronized membrane cerebellar the caused numerous as the systems nuclear to they precisely gating transmitted timed could changes trigger signal. large other activity in would motor that Specifically, then be a cell series appear of to fact, central of composed voluntary In a process. movements a periodic reflect be oscillatory accelerations that evidence. However, requires helps determining commands olivocerebellar further motor whether the time system

by Basal Ganglia Control Motor the

ganglia the deep nuclei The basal cerebrum. in are of regulate this on function Like the cerebellum, the activity focus role will we basal is that a major and ganglia to section. in motor cerebellum, they, that worth noting the functions. cognitive it is also and contribute affective to like However, through around two there ganglia, the functionally organized in two loops direct control, between which the discussion pathways understand cortex pathways. and activity the themes: distinct indirect following basal and and basal is motor are (2) through function connections basal the flows ganglia (1) ganglia To major form

Related and Ganglia the Basal Organization Nuclei of

the The basal caudate globus ganglia the and nucleus, putamen, ( the include pallidus

Fig. 9.24 ). The of from term striated these derived striatum, appearance the

Motor 9 CHAPTER •Fig. of Organization Function Regions. Ganglia Associated Basal Components 9.24 Brain and of Other Closely Themaincomponentsofthebasalgangliaarethecaudatenucleus,putamen,globuspallidus,andsubstantianigraparsreticulata.Majorportionsofthebasalgangliaconnectwithmotorareasinthefrontalcortex,viatheventralanteriorandventrallateralthalamicnuclei,andwiththesuperiorcolliculus.Inputfromthesubstantianigraparscompactaiscriticalfornormalbasalgangliafunction.GPe,externalsegmentofglobuspallidus;GPi,internalsegmentofglobuspallidus.

refers caudate putamen. and to nuclei, the nucleus only it of the capsule bundles striations formed by caudate separates are the internal produced limb nucleus by fiber as putamen. the and anterior The the an pallidus and an internal segment. parts: The segment typically has external globus two pallidus referred the often of globus lentiform and The putamen combination to is nucleus. as

ganglia are Associated with thalamic several the basal nuclei. several and and the of lateral These (VL) (VA) the ventral intralaminar ventral components complex. nuclei anterior include of (see associated substantia midbrain the Other subthalamic nuclei the of diencephalon nucleus nigra and are the the

Fig. 9.24 ). of content substance”) from derives name nigra The its pigment. melanin (“black its substantia dopamine compacta this in contain Many of neurons nucleus the melanin, of the byproduct pars a of synthesis. other the substantia the is subdivision of The pars reticulata. nigra extension have the as nuclei analogous regarded origin these an internal of an be segment can and identical because the structure connections. pallidus This of globus

Basal Operation Connections Ganglia of and the

cerebral and regions most primary to topographically With the the visual cortex the project striatum. cortices, of auditory the exception of layer The the in V corticostriatal cortex. from arises projection neurons of appears to Glutamate these the neurons. neurotransmitter of excitatory be in the influences indirect by The the and then direct of ( two neurons thalamus pathways: nuclei striatum

Fig.

). 9.25A the neurons of cortex cerebral closed in excite most neurons with thalamic the of loops thereby cortex. turn forming The basis function; loops operation the ( on Several as ganglia of on motor-related loops focus a will model cortical identified been and distinct we here for have however, the basal regions

Fig. 9.25A

basal overall cortex direct to of to The enhance the the activity. areas through motor is the pathway of motor action ganglia pathway, striatum direct •Fig. projects the to In the 9.25 Functional of Basal Ganglia Motor the for Control. Connectivity symbols ChangesinactivityflowthatoccurinParkinson’sdisease,inwhichthesubstantianigraparscompacta(SNpc)degenerates.C, Connectionsbetweenvariousbasalgangliacomponentsandotherassociatedmotorareas.TheexcitatorycorticalinputtothecaudateandputameninfluencesoutputfromtheGPiandthesubstantianigraparsreticulata(SNpr)viaadirectandanindirectpathway.Thetwoinhibitorystepsintheindirectpathwaymeanthatactivitythroughthispathwayhasaneffectonbasalgangliaoutputtothethalamusandsuperiorcolliculusoppositethatofthedirectpathway.Dopamine(DA)isaneuromodulatorthatactsonD1andD2receptorsonstriatalneuronsthatparticipateinthedirectandindirectpathways,respectively.B, (−),respectively,indicatetheexcitatoryorinhibitorynatureofasynapticconnection.glu,glutamate;GPe,externalglobuspallidus;GPi,internalglobuspallidus;VA/VL,ventralanterior/ventrallateralnucleiofthethalamus. ChangesinactivityflowinHuntington’sdisease,inwhichinhibitorycontroloftheGPeislost.Plus A, symbols (+)andminus

of (GPi). globus the the pallidus internal segment transmitter inhibitory, is This main the is projection and GABA. of nuclei to and the thalamus. VL projects The the GPi VA are GABA and inhibitory. function connections also with These and send supplementary excitatory VA premotor, cortex. VL motor The nuclei connections the to prefrontal, and of planning, also affects neurons. the motor corticobulbar This it cortex to input influences corticospinal the discharge and and

input Neurons from striatum cortex. movement during by The pathway activity, the to little activated as have their are background function appears they but the follows: direct in level contrast, In in neurons activity. of background high GPi the a have pallidus of pallidal neurons. inhibitory activated, When slow globus activity the projections is striatum the to its the VL tonic the and the in neurons neurons nuclei normally VA inhibition are of However, thalamus. the pallidal they of and provide inhibitory, themselves of of striatum the nuclei. of the VL disinhibition VA causes Therefore, activation neurons and the their the cerebral VA/VL cortex. of exciting in disinhibited, increase firing neurons rates, the target When their neurons motor areas in and can α the basal movement cord by motor brainstem, activity regulate motor the areas neurons cortex. neurons ganglia and by γ spinal enhancing activating the Because the motor the in of evoke movement

The of overall is the to reduce areas motor pathway in cerebral of neurons cortex. the effect the of indirect activity subthalamic inhibitory the external striatum indirect (GPe), GPi. an the sends the to The and pallidus segment involves pathway nucleus globus from of to turn the inhibitory the in connections to which projection GPi to then back The subthalamic nucleus the projection (see sends excitatory an

Fig. 9.25A

GABA pallidus. from inhibited the segment striatal pallidal neurons the released in are globus in terminals external the In by pathway, this neurons. GPe the subthalamic GABA in thereby the and subthalamic The releases inhibits normally nucleus subthalamic GPe nucleus. inhibition striatal of neurons the of of Therefore, the disinhibition in results the neurons they subthalamic are the neurons normally and releasing The excite by active, glutamate. in GPi disinhibition, GPi. because nucleus the the become When they the active in neurons glutamate subthalamic of release of more more nuclei. VA the This consequently VL projections that affect inhibitory neurons thalamic in and the transmitter excites GPi and activates thalamic neurons neurons decreases, the consequently the they the activity as cortical of The does of that influence. activity

and one of of imbalance increase have in motor actions; pathways pathways The might opposing control. thus activity to an the lead in indirect an direct either these typical motor the imbalances, are ganglion diseases, basal cortex. alter the output of which Such may of

CHAPTER 9 Motor Function Organization of

Substantia Nigra Actions of the the the Neurons Compacta Striatum Pars on of in

neurotransmitter substantia compacta. is the the of by Dopamine nigra used neurons pars has on release inhibitory and of pathway. the action the overall an excitatory an action the pathway, dopamine In nigrostriatal pathway direct on indirect not effect; other causing that cells’ to by is, transmitters. action but is, dopamine type striatal apparently This of spikes altering rather however, triggering its response directly is a by the modulatory expression spiny the and types pathways the of on D2) and The by receptors striatum indirect and of (D1 the projection of direct different dopamine contribute pathways. cells from to direct the result that the indirect actions different D1 to are GPe. the form found the participate pathway indirect pathway on project the on striatal D2 that to cells that GPi, receptors by whereas in projecting receptors cells and the striatal direct found are in the cerebral cases cortex. The overall consequence of is motor activity the facilitation both release of dopamine of in areas

Striatum Striosomes of the Into and Matrix Subdivision

has called the the striosomes been On subdivided associated zones basis neurotransmitters, the into stria-tum and of matrix. the motor matrix The projections to area. end in control related cortical projects The striosomes. system to the limbic the Striosomes synapse substantia of dopaminergic pathway. to nigrostriatal compacta the are influence pars and nigra to in thought the

Role Motor of the Control in Basal Ganglia

areas. motor the The cortical basal ganglia influence on Therefore, pathways. ganglia system basal have influence of lateral the important the motor an with the ganglia. Such of some observed in consistent is basal of movement diseases the disorders an influence must affect tone basal of the diseases ganglia However, proximal of because medial additionally motor the basal also the ganglia can the regulate pathways muscles. posture and

(cogwheel basal ganglia movement various increased in The include rigidity), deficits slowness (dyskinesia), diseases (bradykinesia). muscle seen and the movement tone abnormal initiating in dystonia. Abnormal chorea, includes and ballism, tremor, movement athetosis, when occurs tremor a that The the 3-Hz disease rest. ganglion “pill-rolling” at of basal is is limb tremor by is and flicking the Athetosis parts of of the whereas characterized movement limbs, facial of consists distal rapid, the chorea muscles. movement of writhing extremities slow, associated flailing limbs with (ballistic violent, movement movement). is the Ballism of Finally, dystonic may movements that slow postures. body involuntary cause are distorted movements

is a tremor, Parkinson’s rigidity, common disease by bradykinesia. characterized disorder and nigra. disease by the substantia compacta This the loss of caused pars is of neurons in dopamine. striatum suffers a severe of loss Consequently, the the the as also as Neurons nuclei, lost. other well and of coeruleus locus raphe monoaminergic nuclei, are and the increases The activity diminishes pathway activity direct loss indirect of dopamine the of the pathway of (see the

Fig. 9.25B ). the pallidus. the in of in increase activity an segment The globus the effect net internal neurons is of motor inhibition in VA neurons pronounced the and the activation nuclei less in results This and greater of VL areas. of cortical movement consequence is The slowed (bradykinesia).

the disease. are of of dopaminergic in levodopa neurons some relieve lost, completely motor administration can Parkinson’s the Before deficits barrier. of dopamine, the is blood-brain precursor and cross a Levodopa it can is the dopamine-synthesizing of possibility striatum into transplanting being the Currently, neurons explored. role. focus doubt research for therapeutic to a potential play Future cells the will stem human such no on embryonic

which gene. disturbance Huntington’s involves an from a genetic results ganglia is Another that defect basal disease, dominant autosomal loss degeneration with the cortex, neurons to project leads the and to preferential defect that This of cerebral indirect dementia). pathway the of resultant (and of as GABAergic striatal also the GPe cholinergic part of the diminished of activity Loss leads (see nucleus inhibition presumably GPe the subthalamic neurons to of in

Fig. ). 9.25C reduced. excitation of the neurons the be would Hence, GPi of would This VA in nuclei. VL neurons and the disinhibit enhancement cortex resulting in of motor may movements cerebral explain disease. The in the Huntington’s neurons of the of activity areas the choreiform help overtreatment sense opposite be the a chorea rigidity disease patients with The can Parkinson’s result Parkinson’s in because levodopa may chorea. of in of in disease with

of on a the caused nucleus lesion the is subthalamic side of Hemiballism brain. by one of may contralateral involuntary, lesion. body disorder, In side flailing this the violent movements to of on the occur limbs the the these subthalamic the GPi, neurons. pallidal nucleus subthalamic Because excites neurons nucleus the activity of the would lesion of the a reduce of neurons be neurons of the and inhibited, of activity the thalamus Therefore, cortex VL the in less in would and the be would motor nuclei increased. VA

motor dysfunction these is In diseased all ganglia basal component. the disorders, contralateral to the mediated tract. of by main corticospinal basal the to is understandable because This output the the the ganglia body final is

from motor a Eye it other features number that movement of has distinguish behavior. their In muscles, perform, can eye movement simple. comparison and is relatively limbs, with with the that movement joints multiple and controlled and muscle example, inferior the superior inferior medial For the muscles. lateral eye oblique is agonistantagonist superior only recti, recti, and by the and three each pairs: These three to the axes. allow rotate muscles eye about (which axis a the the along left is of to axis axes that sight). runs horizontal the vertical upright that and right, head are in axis, the axis Assuming directed the is torsional an position, torsional recti other generate horizontal muscles the the vertical lateral The about axis; four movement axes. the control and about medial movement and feature no that is compensated. to be simplifying Another loads there external are for which specialized appears with by circuitry. to its Furthermore, distinct controlled type each into a being few own separable eye types, movement be a for motor system of offers model studying control. number movement Thus advantages eye as a clues the deficits of in diagnosis problems. provide important clinical neurological Moreover, eye movement to movement their first generation. eye different the types then circuitry discuss and the We neural review underlying

of Eye Movement Types

the world external probably evolved of Eye movement the still. hold first image to to world.) of movements regard limb the generate position (In the contrast, external with the to changes limb evolved in the The is scene in rapidly there reason the retina). degrades when visual external (i.e., across relation movement eye that is world acuity visual to the slips movement A is of major the head. of cause such slippage The order head visual is one on maintain in to which of vestibuloocular is stability the reflex scene retina. the main movement (VOR) mechanisms the of by compensated

VOR are the and visual a retina, that maintain of movement eyes movements scene equal produces To opposite on the the stable the the head. of system reflex (see by initiated vestibular in ). is cells) receptors the This (hair stimulation the of are not the and to vestibular organs light visual acceleration, the dark. Recall and in VOR occurs cues, that the sensitive both head thus is is a is but feedback an immediate it movement) in open-loop the that system success what response about or to stimulus output its its (head generates output. failure not an (eye Functionally, behavior regulated it called acceleration), of in by to eye be to is back at retina), the the however, slip of by the pathways over least, adjustments worth VOR head eliminate can noting, and image signal by VOR failure match across error visual the can is to in fed time rotation of circuits results (i.e., light VOR the and the this other what slip in retinal the that the and in any to lead neuronal error. called strength It studying in This is of for brain. plasticity model adaptation VOR a the the major

acceleration VOR. the signals initiate As stated, be change orbit. however, eye in the position must in VOR, of The a output the translate problem vestibular to organs the eyes. the the solved the correct Thus system is be sensed acceleration nervous positional into by signals signals for by the to integration. can double this of as thought be a Mathematically, proportional acceleration, velocity The least to in are in afferent to (at because the head vestibular first head receptor fibers the physiologically). vestibular encountered that integration respond the stimuli cells hair for most are occurs signals the although apparatus in CNS velocity from the circuits The position, integration, described occurs to second later. in

of and different often can three to six in move six ways, translational as degrees three head referred The rotational. freedom: about there for these both axis). for rotation types To are (e.g., movement, vertical different handling subsystems angular about horizontal compensate as a different separate translational and well VORs, of directions as or a movement

with conjunction the retina, scene CNS which The in the is works (OKR) stabilizes it reflex by often a and mechanism on the visual second optokinetic the VOR. is of scene is the the caused of itself the scene, activated head Whereas activated or OKR visual movement VOR only by by head motion. by motion, motion by the whether sensory ganglion for as visual Specifically, detected by motion-sensitive retina stimulus reflex is the of this the cells. retinal slip on scene the keep the An begins the you sitting occurs in eyes a train of example moving: adjacent to when the stable. track image former car are train rotate Your neighboring a on of the and that you moving are to into (this the circuits leads feed vestibular the surprising by This same OKR a circuits often entirely system). because is as sensation used not

to stable with because conjunction the VOR image maintaining the for particularly conditions. head stabilize a poorly and image important works when these slow The movements in are work is in OKR visual can the VOR

becomes the retina. the focused it of move to of to able with have eyes in a importance the whose relation so the particularly In eye high-resolution to objects (i.e., main part visual the be fovea, world onto can be fovea scrutinized scene) advantageous that and animals this eye ability: movement Two smooth this of and saccadic pursuit. classes underlie that onto Very called the a are movements bring saccades. world of discrete rapid visual fovea the particular region onto bring this words saccades a sentence, to of your making are to series be read. successive to For fovea read you example, that and the in fovea, a the be may lack to make also animals environment. rapidly even thus visual used However, saccades scan saccades, eyes

movements. rapid eye are Saccades extremely a can degrees/second, velocity with saccade velocity 800 to during response in humans, In reach generated and than typical VOR movement of comparison in degrees/second less 10 eye

Organization Motor Function CHAPTER 9 of

saccade ≈120 up than to stimuli the maximal degrees/second OKR by still can velocities). they OKR much (velocities humans; of are slower however, produced stimuli be in reflexively. Saccades or be voluntarily made can visual can are they sensory usually other or targets. toward made in targets, Moreover, in they memorized toward be made cues, the to response dark, or auditory also although

that during motion. processing Interestingly, be particularly pathway concerned visual appears saccades, suppressed the in to and with magnocellular visual is visual before just such would prevent of and during may a sudden, of absence rapid movement function that known suppression is the suppression. visual saccade saccadic of in sensations as phenomenon to This world the result fully suppression reduced visual altered The known, and the saccadic are underlying the visual the not related cells responsiveness to mechanisms processing, during but cortex in stimuli to saccades. of of is areas

of has interest brought onto pursuit fovea, a the a the despite to system smooth the fovea its moving on saccade Once object person stable motion. keep it the allows continued primates observation and This moving ability of appears object. continuous be prolonged allows limited a to to Note smooth targets, lost; to be distinction difference for requires fact, OKR. of moving that background small seem target respects, smooth there in the not may because and target pursuit grows, the similar is however, in the between the absolute size an as pursuit might some OKR; suppression effect it finger forth and the while your see tracking suppression text can with this of in by eyes. your moving back of You front this the page on the will of this slip will along be scene part and become they words Your background retina. will focus, in as finger be your illegible but

direction), in earlier. is a a one stable reflexes to eyes in these the there turning VOR or image on (e.g., if will as keep attempt an maintain you When prolonged counterrotate initially stimulus retina, the OKR described the with to and will eyes image further no prolonged begin limit, a However, the stimulus, reach mechanical will the their will retina. slip on be compensation possible, the opposite the in the To eyes visual a occurs again. this direction, to scene begin eyes the essentially avoid movement fast situation, of viewing saccade-like resetting start VOR-induced the anew. counterrotation OKR-or Then slow will nystagmogram and of This alternation ( recorded is can on slow be movement and nystagmus directions fast opposite a in

Fig.

9.26 ). rhythmic of there movements or a which eye fast phase can in be nystagmus oscillatory Thus defined and the slow as a is phase. direction more The the because to fast according the of the phase is phase is nystagmus fast easily observed. named

periphery (e.g., the vestibular nystagmus addition stimuli, damage physiologically from result VOR to or being cranial either OKR nerve induced by can •Fig. in the In circuits, to Showing Nystagmogram That 9.26 Occur Eye Nystagmus. Movements During Theplotshowsaleftnystagmusbecausethefastphaseisdirectedtowardtheleft(downwardonthegraph).

VIII) vestibular informative an be diagnostic and (e.g., centrally symptom. can nuclei), or

is an Conjugate movement and equal amount. movement eyes same the in eye direction both in of both be necessary (double maintained binocular on foveae vision a movement eye vision). is allows and maintain to during coordination diplopia target Such without to close the of objects on two when non-identical a target m), (<30 requires are maintaining However, foveae movements eyes. both approaching or movements also on vergence, of objects are Such for eyes disjunctive, both receding. necessary that fixation or are images. trigger blurry and that are Stimuli diplopia movements vergence movements, pupillary in to noted convergence It constriction tracking near when the occurs. lens addition accommodates object be that and an should vision, approaching for

Motor Muscles the Neurons Extraocular of

supply extraocular muscles: and nerve nuclei nuclei. abducens cranial trochlear, the oculomotor, Three nucleus nuclei collectively These sometimes three be context to nuclei; should the however, as clear. three) all referred are (the specific oculomotor the or ipsilateral those ipsilateral in are those and Motor lateral reside reside medial rectus and rectus the nucleus. muscles recti, for ipsilateral neurons the the oblique, the superior in inferior located oblique muscle for the nucleus; abducens superior nucleus; the inferior oculomotor contralateral in contralateral trochlear and for muscle units motor These eye the motor consistent which control : smallest with movement. 10 (1 some precise neurons is for very needed the nerve-to-muscle ratio), form fine of

that activity correlated with velocity. in neurons position is spontaneous is rate An position extraocular important when muscles innervating is ahead), regarding point the have straight and the primary (looking firing the their and eye eye motor most system. pairs muscle push-pull activity the responsiveness allows a which the manner, to in of act increases antagonist the spontaneous This those its are as inhibited, cause are motor and activated which increased contraction, innervating leads neurons relaxation. one to is, innervating antagonist muscle That

neurons. internuclear nuclei have addition abducens motor the In neurons, to medial medial These motor to contralateral in neurons the oculomotor nucleus. rectus longitudinal the fasciculus, via neurons project, this VOR. medial in movements, of recti for action needed coordinated the described As that later, conjugate as those projection the is that lateral facilitates such occur the and muscles

the Reflex Underlying Circuits Vestibuloocular

to in by eyes rotation causing acts head of the counter opposite direction. VOR the The motion of are rotational head. circuits for the and movement separate translational There for the are the and former are for the semicircular (the canals, The otoliths utricle the sensors saccule). the sensors and latter complex), Vestibular illustrate neurons scheme and to axons this and that straightforward muscles. go nuclei oculomotor oculomotor the the the on vestibular focuses the is fibers angular VOR however, nuclei nuclei, various the these to basic section vestibular motor (but more pathways innervate the are circuits to nuclei, in the turn rise in reflex afferent works; to extraocular The give for still project how same: this vestibular and involved. nuclei What that specific varies are the oculomotor are

the originates the the horizontal generating posterior movement pathway eye angular pathways, VOR for originates in vertical regard canals, movement anterior the to analogous one With and in for canals. the and horizontal

Fig.

9.27A horizontal the VOR. the shows basic for circuit pathways from arise major vestibular the only and Note right shown; canal canal left nuclei. horizontal the mirror nuclei image and circuits that the central vestibular originating in are however, medial fibers bilaterally; project afferent ones synapse involved contralaterally. in inhibitory in Vestibular horizontal and the the projects primarily vestibular project ipsilaterally, which pathway VOR neurons nucleus, abducens the nucleus excitatory to that rectus the of of the from the controlling rectus neurons project muscle medial the medial the oculomotor part is abducens achieved internuclear by abducens Control to muscle. nucleus aligning with rectus the of lateral of pathway this of the the decussation in functional rectus). results Note the medial right (e.g., responses left synergists double

nucleus, the involves projections has pathway VOR which The direct vertical oculomotor the bilateral to vestibular nucleus. superior primarily

in Consider to what the canal happens there shown pathway in when horizontal is as rotation head left, the

Fig.

9.27B.

head cause visual would Leftward image the right. to slip rotation to the angular VOR would triggered left depolarization response the cells compensation canal the by hair the of in by be However, of the acceleration to

Organization Motor 9 CHAPTER of Function •Fig. Vestibuloocular Reflex 9.27 Horizontal Circuits (VOR). Underlying the A, Thevestibularnucleireceiveexcitatoryinputfromtheafferentfibersofthehorizontalcanalandprojecttotheabducens(cranialnerveVI)nucleus.Thisnucleusinnervatesthelateralrectusmuscleandprojectstothecontralateraloculomotor(cranialnerveIII)nucleus,whichcontrolsthemedialrectusmuscle.Excitatoryneuronsareshowninred; inhibitoryones,inblue. lines). Notethatonlythemajorpathwaysoriginatingintheleftvestibularnucleiareshown.Forclarity,onlythebeginningsofmirrorimagepathwaysfromtherightvestibularnucleiareshown(dotted FlowofactivityintheVORcircuitryinducedbyleftwardheadrotation.Increasedaxonalthicknessindicatesincreasedactivity;thinneraxonsindicatedecreasedactivityincomparisonwithlevelsatrest(A). B, Notethatleftwardrotationcausesbothanincreaseinactivityoftheleftvestibularafferentfibersandadecreaseinactivityoftherightones.MLF,mediallongitudinalfasciculus;vestibularnuclei:I,inferior;L,lateral;M,medial;S,superior.

Fig. 8.27 ). the vestibular cause excite in left vestibular medial and the neurons fibers left cells of depolarized nucleus. afferent increased hair thereby activity The neurons. include synapse the to neurons nucleus and excitatory that and abducens internuclear neurons with contralateral both project motor These of neurons right rectus motor leads whereas neurons internuclear eye of the the to rectus causing rotation leads medial the Excitation nucleus right rotate left the of eye muscle of nucleus, lateral contraction and right, left abducens the of neurons excitation well. of motor the to the to in the thus to as the the right to excitation right oculomotor

cells latter that nucleus). project to these muscle (the and activity medial the the left inhibitory to neurons starting nucleus vestibular from to of of leads the abducens Along medial the the lateral internuclear via the motor rectus to neurons to vestibular pathway left the right with nucleus, ipsilateral inhibition neurons right muscle oculomotor motor rectus neurons the the Consequently, relax, to right. rotation the muscles thereby of these facilitating eyes of by eye of the is set one the pulled muscles. in “pushed” increased of by the being tension set tension muscles the of antagonist and Thus release

Note again out been right canal from that the have image left originating the mirror pathways of

Fig. head clarity, but would those through synergistically are the changes activity and exactly opposite, thus would that leftward for the be they function 9.27 with rotation in shown. with them an As activity exercise, in out work the resulting changes through circuits. these disfacilitation leading nuclear the canal, hyper-polarizes the neurons. afferent thereby of activity Remember right that of right a right hair rotation the decrease vestibular vestibular leftward and in head cells to

connect nuclei vestibular excitatory fibers inhibitory the inhibit neurons medial on that projection of end are nucleus. commissural local two that vestibular thus and but consider the of Now, the nucleus interneurons the contralateral vestibular their the on vestibular the fibers target neurons. of reinforces nuclear actions contra-lateral afferent This pathway activated in neurons, aforementioned right the cause the active decrease caused are commissural reinforces vestibular nucleus by afferent example, nuclei which therefore the in cells of activity. left the disfacilitation right medial In the and projection vestibular inhibition destroys powerful to to even commissural of the contralateral In vestibular pathway enough which input afferent fact, after these modulate this nuclei. labyrinthectomy, the unilateral nuclei is the vestibular direct activity

the brainstem on superimposed circuits importance is that is the Of cerebellum. primary nuclear vestibular turn fibers pathway nuclei in via directly of vestibular the back nucleus. vestibular receive fastigial flocculonodular disynaptic of secondary and vermis afferent neurons), lobe or or afferent both, project (axons to involving the Parts and a and the vestibular the fibers nystagmus, debated, spontaneous to VOR movement, inasmuch leads is dysfunction. vestibular generating symptoms circuits to role they but the eye critical much as in abnormal these are damage other exact The of and as cerebellar of such them

Whenalabyrinthisirritatedinoneear,asinMeniere’s orwhenalabyrinthisrenderednonfunctional,asmayhappenasaresultofheadtraumaordiseaseofthelabyrinth,thesignalstransmittedthroughtheVORpathwaysfromthetwosidesbecomeunbalanced.Vestibularnystagmuscanthenresult.Forexample,irritationofthelabyrinthoftheleftearcanincreasethedischargeofafferentfibersthatsupplythelefthorizontalsemicircularduct.Thesignalproducedresemblesthatnormallygeneratedwhentheheadisrotatedtotheleft.Becausethestimulusisongoing,aleftnystagmusresults,withaslowphasetotheright(causedbytheVORpathway)andafastphasetotheleft.Destructionofthelabyrinthintherightearproduceseffectssimilartothoseinducedbyirritationoftheleftlabyrinth.Interestingly,thenystagmusistemporary,whichshowstheabilityofthesecircuitstoadaptovertime. disease,

Underlying the Reflex Optokinetic Circuits

slip), start of stimulus visual and the eliciting are so is OKR arc. The photoreceptors (retinal the the reflex the tegmentum region this lie midbrain. for the rostral Key pretectal brainstem centers reflex and of in optic the the (AON). of They accessory group optic and are a tract as nuclei (NOT) nuclei known collectively of the nucleus motion-sensitive to carrying a source ganglion cells information nuclei. are afferent Direction-selective, retinal these visual major temporal In occipital primary from input addition, in comes lobes. visual areas and and cortical order higher the afferent These humans. important particularly are and in latter primates sources responses scene. the the NOT selective have Cells and for of of movement large direction speed their the and of visual are AON receptive fields, and the interest of to that facilitating of OKR retinal by produce cells thereby to correspond movement caused rotation the of is directions semicircular axes perpendicular NOT/AON to canals, the coordination and VOR closely about stable the preferred motion Of images.

these nuclei are and fully numerous efferent and not connections understood. The complex of vestibular monosynaptic There the abducens and interaction VOR. input the allow oculomotor and polysynaptic to the which nuclei, pathways to nuclei are with projections There nuclei, are various pontine to including precerebellar the nucleus and nuclei. inferior olivary basilar then the nuclei. loop These pathways vestibular flocculus to the and through back oculomotor results. proper several in neurons the counterrotation arrives at whose parallel, ultimately In sum, pathways via operating activity eyes are and activated, the various nuclei motor of

cortex (frontal superior and in the colliculus or response eye Saccades to generated the activity in are cerebral fields

ClinicaltestingoflabyrinthinefunctionisdoneeitherbyrotatingthepatientinaBáránychairtoactivatethelabyrinthsinbothearsorbyintroducingcoldorwarmwaterintotheexternalauditorycanalofoneear(caloric test). WhenapersonisrotatedinaBáránychair,nystagmusdevelopsduringtherotation.Thedirectionofthefastphaseofthenystagmusisinthesamedirectionastherotation.Whentherotationofthechairishalted,nystagmusintheoppositedirectiondevelops(postrotatorynystagmus)becausestoppingarotationhasthesameeffectasacceleratingintheoppositedirection.

Thecalorictestismoreusefulbecauseitcandistinguishbetweenmalfunctionofthelabyrinthsonthetwosides.Theneckisbentbackwardabout60degreessothatthetwohorizontalcanalsareessentiallyvertical.Ifwarmwaterisintroducedintotheleftear,theendolymphintheouterportionoftheloopoftheleftsemicircularcanaltendstoriseasthespecificgravityoftheendolymphdecreasesbecauseofheating.Thissetsupaconvectionflowofendolymph,andasaresult,thekinociliaoftheleftampullarycresthaircellsaredeflectedtowardtheutricle,asiftheheadhadrotatedtotheleft;thedischargeoftheafferentfibersthatsupplythiscanalincreases;andnystagmusoccurswiththefastphasetowardtheleft.Thenystagmusproducesasensationthattheenvironmentisspinningtotheright,andthepersontendstofalltotheright.Theoppositeeffectsareproducedifcoldwaterisplacedintheear.AmnemonicexpressionthatcanhelpinrememberingthedirectionofthenystagmusinthecalorictestisCOWS (“coldopposite,warmsame”).Inotherwords,coldwaterinoneearresultsinafastphaseofnystagmustowardtheoppositeside,andwarmwatercausesafastphasetowardthesameside.

parietal posterior areas). is colliculus computation related direction saccade. superior of the Activity the in and of the to amplitude motor layers of map locations. colliculus superior Indeed, the contain deep a saccade the of topographic the forwarded horizontal sites of for the saccades, and referred control is centers, vertical superior vertical gaze as horizontal to to From information and colliculus, respectively. distinct consists pontine formation, gaze paramedian neurons nucleus the in ( horizontal the vicinity center The of of abducens reticular the in

Fig. 9.28A ). medial formation longitudinal Cajal. the fasciculus in the The rostral vertical the center gaze of the reticular the located interstitial and specifically, interstitial nucleus of of nucleus is midbrain: gaze of of better circuitry here center are understood is the and the those the in operation vertical it detail. discussed gaze Because horizontal than center, cells in center. been have vertical described However, patterns activity analogous the gaze showing

Fig. is an neural the generated, which and 9.28A by overview are of circuitry saccades

Fig. shows found types certain that are neurons horizontal saccades. for activity center 9.28B of the in of responsible the gaze motor has neurons neurons (which internuclear horizontal burst ipsilateral project nucleus excitatory medial to the center Each the neurons excites abducens that to in and rectus motor gaze

nucleus). of neurons in Motor Function oculomotor contralateral CHAPTER 9 Organization the inhibitory contralateral neurons that also has It the burst inhibit abducens. of to capable bursts 1000 extremely burst neurons Hz). are high spikes of (up These has the activity. center showing burst-tonic activity tonic neurons Moreover, and gaze

the excitatory inhibited by are burst both raphe. nucleus neurons dorsal of neurons Normally, and inhibitory the omnipause in located frontal When the from burst cells eye of cells is the made, a colliculus, to superior or fields side. the on the be inhibition or both, activity excitation and omnipause contralateral leads of saccade the to motor ipsilateral the in provide to of and The the medial high-frequency neurons contralateral neurons bursts drive lateral excitatory resulting burst rectus muscles powerful rectus (see a

Fig. relaxation burst inhibitory the the of same neurons time, enable 9.28A ); antagonists. at of movement allow The of extraocular to and muscles, bursts the enables occur. rapid overcomes contraction muscle initial strong these the extraocular which the of appropriate neurons viscosity

target eyes (Fig. tracking moving involves a the Smooth with pursuit ). 9.29 several information in processed the the cortical of frontal including the and a is occipital in areas, fields. about lobe series velocity areas, cortex target eye temporal visual Visual lobe, eye control dedicated fields the that saccades, shown eye within either production more to evidence but there of frontal be the fields smooth related or distinct were In has pursuit. past, saccade thought are regions recent to only the frontal to of each there types may distinct cortical specialized for networks, eye one of two movement. Indeed, be these parts of nucleus to via Cortical fed pontis. multiple areas tegmenti cerebellum from activity the nuclei the is and reticularis cortical pontine project of lobe to the Specific nuclei. the the vestibular flocculus, input, and they paraflocculus—receive this turn vermis, in the areas cerebellum—namely, posterior the in and parts can to nuclei, be the the nuclei, for oculomotor, trochlear activity and abducens, forwarded was the earlier. as described From then VOR vestibular

neural underlying known. are movements not circuits vergence well The nuclei. neurons) various that are There brainstem areas motor the onto neurons located (neurons surrounding feed in premotor the oculomotor areas whose activity during the two to image neurons the cortical movements. of variation the In of is to disparity or are frontal there the vergence visual image on the fields, and retinas the eye some related areas vergence these brainstem cortical premotor How clear. in signals is not feed neurons the into to cerebellar appears of play movements The vergence in type impair a lesions this also movement. because role cerebellum eye fasciculus lesions compromise of medial a do vergence. the not that loss VOR Note the that of result in longitudinal

•Fig. 9.28 Saccade Horizontal Pathways. A, Circuitdiagramofthemajorpathways.EBN,excitatoryburstneuron;FEF,frontaleyefield;IBN,inhibitoryburstneuron;LBN,longleadburstneuron;OPN,omnipauseneuron;PPRF,paramedianpontinereticularformation.B, Firingpatternsofsomeoftheneuronsinvolvedinmakingsaccades.Excitationofburstneuronsoftherighthorizontalgazecentercausesabducensmotorneuronsontherightandmedialrectusmotorneuronsonthelefttobeactivated.Theascendingpathwaytotheoculomotornucleusisthroughthemediallongitudinalfasciculus.Thelefthorizontalgazecenterissimultaneouslyinhibited.

9 of Motor •Fig. CHAPTER Organization Function Pursuit Smooth Pathways. 9.29 object Vermis commands areas Flocculus Motor Brainstem sensory-related into MT NRTP involved FEF LGN Pontine nuclei Oculomotor command motion transforming Fastigial nuclei Thestimulusforsmoothpursuiteyemovementisamovingvisualtarget.Thiscausesactivitytoflowthroughthecircuitrydiagramedinthefigureandleadstomaintenanceofthefoveaonthetarget.FEF,frontaleyefield;LGN,lateralgeniculatenucleus;MSTandMT,higherordervisualassociationareas;MVN,medialvestibularnucleus;NRTP,nucleusreticularistegmentipontis;SEF,supplementaryeyefield;V1,primaryvisualcortex.Retina MST y-group and paraflocculus MVN areas Cortical nucleus to processing eye in involved muscles signal SEF cerebellar V1 in motor 1.

skeletal The fibers neurons. by motor α are muscle innervated extrafusal neuron synapses. which motor unit of fibers muscle single the with consists motor and α a it all A allow size units force. muscle greatly muscles; motor Motor among control finer small unit varies of

2.

α from principle largest. refers neurons of orderly size motor to the smallest their according to The to recruitment size, and units, control weak contractions. fineness similar smaller connect is strong neurons of motor Because weaker motor motor relative to for the

3.

reflex a stereotyped to a is A stimulus. simple, motor response and responsible fibers, the motor neurons A arc reflex. reflex the interneurons, afferent includes for

4.

sensory Muscle found in are spindles receptors muscle. skeletal complex and nuclear bag fibers, lie they extrafusal to contain parallel muscle nuclear muscle chain intrafusal fibers. They and length. in the the changes being can muscle, detect parallel By spindle to in main muscle

5.

endings fibers on afferent on chain fibers. form and endings and chain Ia nuclear and primary II fibers bag2 secondary fibers, group form bag1, Group bag2, nuclear

6.

muscle dynamic responses rate both of that demonstrate endings length in length. Primary signal and and change muscle static muscle and endings static signal demonstrate only responses only Secondary length.

7.

associated are fibers γ intrafusal The by spindles muscle innervated with neurons. motor muscle length; of level γ spindle sensitivity influence muscle directly the Contraction these in in when fibers cause adjusted, or tension however, intrafusal tension of stretch. to does fibers muscle the changes motor the not is significant of neurons

8.

the Golgi tendon with organs thus of series and arranged in located muscles in tendons are the muscle. are They afferent supplied group fibers. are Ib by organs Their in-series whether generated can due the to detect it tendon or relationship force muscle, muscle. means stretch to passive level of that contraction the the active by is

9.

includes motor motor same stretch a fibers (2) muscles disynaptic antagonistic to excitatory and neurons from in to Ia that (1) supply The inhibitory the group phasic reflex pathway α monosynaptic neurons. synergistic (or and myotatic) muscle afferent pathway spindles a

10.

tendon myotatic inverse organs. The reflex is Golgi by evoked neurons antagonist muscle fibers motor muscles. to same in from given volleys group muscle, motor α and a inhibition to α Afferent disynaptic of neurons cause the they excite Ib

11.

The stimuli. an limb is it acts a response flexion protective because reflex to important damaging withdraw from is volleys reflex fibers by The supply particularly that afferent various in receptors, nociceptors. evoked motor volleys neurons pathways, motor excitation Via ipsilaterally. neurons of of polysynaptic flexor these extensor cause inhibition and occurs action and of motor as crossed contralaterally the extension flexor extensor neurons) opposite is pattern Concurrently, the excitation referred to (inhibition of of and reflex.

12.

(1) can group ends (2) limb the motor a Descending to muscles and group neurons lateral interneurons. and medial system, on into interneurons, system, pathways subdivided which on on be which medial of the ends lateral of a

13.

part corticobulbar includes lateral tract system the the corticospinal lateral tract. The and of face supply the tongue. contralateral the the of neurons that the influence motor the limbs, of muscles These the digits, and pathways of of musculature part lower and the the especially

14.

and the includes reticulospinal, tectospinal ventral corticospinal, medial lateral and tracts. The vestibulospinal, medial system posture digits. mainly provide limbs of for and pathways and affect the movement background the motor These

15.

commands locomotor through is relayed by midbrain center. the Locomotion triggered spinal cord organization and provide afferent activity. locomotor However, detailed influenced generators by for pattern by input formed of central the circuits

16.

cortex, of among the basal the areas depend on ganglia. interactions cerebral movements motor cerebellum, and Voluntary the

17.

network, the as parallel various in of areas contributes each to pathways. the cortex are cerebral Motor which arranged motor a descending distributed areas cortex, premotor involved include body motor areas. cortex, primarily movement area, and head and motor the the The primary in the cingulate the supplementary motor movement eye fields help and saccades. are important The frontal initiate voluntary eye for

18.

neurons contractions related of muscles corticospinal before occur. discharge voluntary Individual contractile force are to than The position. discharges to typically rather related joint of encode activity movement. the However, an different individual parameters different execution of at neuron the that may times to relation in a movement of

19.

the be can upcoming to cortex activity The of of motor predict used population neurons direction movements.

20.

the force, and movements. cerebellum The range, of rate, direction influences posture, movement and balance. influences tone and as muscle also eye It as well

21.

the of is circuitry remarkably cerebellum uniform. intrinsic The afferent Differences cerebellum sources result targets. arise of parts largely function efferent of differing a the as and of different in

22.

running longitudinally compartments. distinct, and the into be cortex may cerebellar Anatomical techniques shown physiological have divided functionally many that

23.

through input is cerebellum fibers. the that end pathways the to Most mossy as of cortex. cells, Mossy fibers whose only axons evoke granule potentials, called in single the Purkinje cerebellar output form in can from cells, turn spikes, action which simple the pathway excite

24.

cerebellum projections inferior and only as end of of fibers nucleus the the The are source them. to olivary climbing the one receives climbing massive cell input Purkinje Each from fiber. just several each a fiber of the complex as As climbing action a discharge high-frequency in potentials, burst a spike, known Purkinje cell. result, produces

25.

complex cells allow these complex in activity activity neurons, are convergence to nuclear precisely activity, of cells, is because onto Purkinje cerebellar relatively across Although output. synchronization rare complex and to of may cerebellar the populations synchronized simple of comparison significantly spike spike affect this spike spikes of neurons inferior olivary the gap junctions. complex electrical spikes of is coupling Synchronization of result by

26.

and basal nuclei the several telencephalic globus pallidus). nucleus, deep putamen, ganglia (including The include caudate nigra, The basal subthalamic nucleus, ganglia substantia with thalamus. cortex, and cerebral interact the

27.

transmitted the facilitate pathways. to indirect basal cortex basal either from on the motor the Activity inhibit can that ganglia of and direct neurons ganglia thalamic or through cortex, between areas balance depending cerebral the project the is there disorders occur. an When of pathways, imbalance these hyperkinetic two hypokinetic or

Organization Motor Function CHAPTER 9 28. of movement Some the types of stabilize help view visual of the world. eye moves, visual is world This when dramatically because drops or visual slips, the across critical retina. the acuity stabilize or the optokinetic of movements movement the on both). Vestibuloocular compensating retina for world visual the head and by external help world (or of remains a the pursuit target allow Smooth foveae. tracking on visual so movements that it centered

Ito JC, M, Eccles J. Szentagothai a The Cerebellum as Machine. Neuronal Springer; New 2013. York: (Original published 1967.) work

R, SP. Wise Shadmehr Pointing: Foundation and Reaching Learning. A Motor for The Computational Neurobiology of MA: Cambridge, 2004. Bradford Books;

GM. Shepherd Spinal cord. Organization the Brain. Synaptic of In: 5th ed. 2003: Oxford, 3. University Press; Oxford UK: Chapter

29.

to scene to part visual inspection. act detailed the move of area highest acuity, fovea, the a the Saccades specific of for retinal

30.

vertical control for of areas There and movements. eye the in are horizontal brainstem and circuits specialized movement. initiates (when eye and by reflexive used areas the cortex input voluntary by are that movements made) the eye are sensory both These

Shepherd GM. Cerebellum. the Synaptic of Brain. Organization In: 5th ed. Press; 2003: Oxford Oxford, 7. Chapter UK: University

GM. Shepherd Basal ganglia. Synaptic of the Organization Brain. In: 5th ed. Press; Chapter 9. Oxford 2003: UK: Oxford, University

et al. Cerminara J, Kotsurovskyy Y, NL, Xiao Systematic cell variations Purkinje regional in patterns. spiking PLoS ONE. e105633. 2014;9:

questions: 1. able be student chapter, this to completion Upon should answer of following the the

the this the outputs layering cortical neocortex, and of basic is and pattern What inputs do align pattern? with how layering What is in significance areas? pattern functional the layering the of variation cortical the between

2.

of each of the lobes the major What of functions cerebrum? the are

3.

does activity? How the electroencephalogram reflect (EEG) cortical evoked are potentials? What

4.

language with and correlate hand preference? cerebral dominance does How

5.

aphasia, different what compromised is of the types in and What aphasia? is

6.

and processes How and synaptic cellular do learning support memory? the How in distributed brain? is memory

7.

play What system? damage does plasticity of in and development nervous in the to response neural role

reflex). link earlier discussed stretch the and such the vestibuloocular and of the nervous reflexes in of terms of body central with motor relatively n interaction transduction chapters, the outside the that analysis and as organization sensory and of simple the reflex processes the them, function, world system was the (e.g., events, other has higher capabilities, directly modalities The or tied are that nervous or less specific so-called integrative sensory motor behavior. system functions, to in other of functions, increasingly cerebral cerebral of the the and between cortex, is brain. being parts different the between require interactions and, parts as recognized, particular, These cortex chapter. neural The this some higher discussed in of for these functions is basis first. are described as organization dependent so its and these voluntary sensory cerebral well is motor cortex, (as functions perception on highly Because the basic function)

Cortex Cerebral The

cm3 of of human cerebral cm2. occupies The has cortex and 2500 about volume area a surface 600 a and The known the into surface of folded gyri. is convoluted as cortex ridges highly or (if called shallow) by fissures sulci see grooves (if are deep; Gyri separated

Fig. 4.7 ). the surface increases area volume cortex within of fit be into skull. can the the folding fixed limited that greatly This and be cannot of seen surface because Indeed, cortex folding. the most brain from this the of

and into subdivided divided cortex of cerebral The number a (Fig. left into hemispheres and the right be can lobes

10.1

Fig. frontal, parietal, occipital the temporal, ), lobes. 4.7 including and are The parietal the separated both by central the lobe the sulcus; fissure. lobes from lateral are separated and by frontal temporal separated parieto-occipital fissure by (see the (on occipital of The the medial lobes are surface the parietal and hemisphere)

Fig.

10.1 ). the is insula another lateral (see within lobe, Buried fissure the

Fig. 4.6A). formation, the of hippocampal aspect of make the gyrus is lobe the largest the of temporal folded A hemisphere, from brain. of into surface and the the is be medial its up cannot limbic and on that the group seen lobe structures the part, parahippocampal

the commissures. is cerebral cortex the by of hemispheres in the through Activity cerebral interconnections two coordinated connected The bulk is of the through cortex the (see massive corpus callosum

Figs. and lobes through 4.9 anterior commissure. parts the connect the temporal 10.1), of

of are three and paleocortex. neocortex, archicortex, cortex: cerebral types There The has six cortical neocortex layers (Fig. 10.2 ). and three In archicortex has contrast, only four the layers, to paleocortex the five has layers. cerebral approximately In the cortex of humans, 90% neocortex. is

Neocortex The

in the Neuronal Cell Types Neocortex

A number have (see described types of the different neuronal cell neocortex been in

Fig. ). 10.2 most and of account neurons. neocortical the are 75% for type cells approximately abundant cell Pyramidal types and Stellate cells neurons of nonpyramidal balance. the up other various make cells cell body, a have large a triangular •Fig. Pyramidal long 10.1 Lateral(A) illustrationsofthelefthemisphereofthehumancerebrumwiththemajorfeatureslabeledandthelobesindicatedbycolor.R,G,B,andSindicate,respectively,therostrum,genu,body,andspleniumofthecorpuscallosum. andmedial(B) Neuroscience (FromHainesDE[ed].Fundamental Clinical Applications. Basic for and 3rded.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.)

layer I. Molecular

II. External granular layer

layer III.External pyramidal

IV.

V.

layer Baillarger VI.Polymorphic Outer of band

Inner of band Baillarger

Fig. Neocortex An by 10.2 Area Three Stained Different of Methods. TheNisslstain(center) showsthecellbodiesofallneuronsandrevealshowdifferenttypesaredistributedamongthesixlayers.TheGolgistain(left) showsonlyasampleoftheneuronalpopulationbutrevealsdetailsoftheirdendrites.TheWeigertstainformyelin(right) demonstratesverticallyorientedbundlesofaxonsenteringandleavingthecortexandhorizontallycoursingfibersthatinterconnectneuronswithinalayer. (FromBrodmann

K.

Zellenbaues. Leipzig:JABarth;1909.) cortical directed dendrite apical toward and basal the several surface, dendrites. matter. body white and project those cell’s the pyramidal the dendrite, The opposite subcortical axon the emerges from larger apical cells from into the cortex. The axon descends the may collateral through give branches it off as or is amino pyramidal The aspartate). cells neurotransmitter of excitatory acid an (glutamate granule called cells, local often Stellate cells, interneurons are with connections. and a many pyramidal have They have thus apical look dendrite small small dendrites, although soma an cells. numerous like branched and are section). interneurons; are in abundant cells excitatory in IV (described of layer the next these the cortex Some axons into in many remain Their the layers. ascend region, same the cortical cortical and upper inhibitory inter-neurons neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric cells whose (GABA). Some are acid stellate is

Cytoarchitecture Cortical Layers of

layers of Each (see the neocortex cellular the characteristic a six content has of

Fig. ). 10.2 bodies dendrites. synapsing contains cell Layer layer) and mostly apical few on (molecular axon neuronal has I terminals cells. (external II layer) mostly Layer contains stellate granular (external pyramidal consists layer) III Layer mostly cells. pyramidal small of axons. (internal Layer stellate cells mostly granular contains a layer) dense and matrix IV of cells, subcortical pyramidal dominated most (internal pyramidal V the source layer) regions. to by main large is Layer efferents of cortical layer) VI (multiform types pyramidal, Layer of other fusiform, contains and cells.

layers. of the five by paleocortex in is has four thalamus, regions Most central to cortex relayed (CNS) to the the neurons from other nervous input system the and located the is border neocortex. archicortex between at The paleocortex the

In hippocampal formation the the part archicortex. humans, is of is can into lobe the and brain when dissected. be viewed It the folded only is temporal hippocampal layers. The molecular, layers: three and pyramidal cell, the cortex polymorphic has of the and VI neocortex. resemble I, layers V, They The efferent called hippocampus matter is which covering contains hippocampal alveus, and the afferent fibers. the white coalesce the fornix to axons form (Fig. The efferent 10.4

Lobes Cerebral Cortex the the Functions of of

exact with nevertheless, no correspondence folds hemispheres association helps of that a the function; There organization. lobes cortex and gyri) the cortical cerebral the some function is general and the cerebral individual have (lobes of with between clarify

lobe behavior. is motor main the functions of One frontal of the , cingulate supplementary located •Fig. the discussed motor, motor, and in are premotor, areas As motor 10.3 Brodmann’sareasinthehumancerebralcortex. (RedrawnfromCrosbyEC,etal.Correlative the System. of Nervous Anatomy NewYork:Macmillan;1962. •Fig. )6312578910113825273029262834363523312433321237201919181817B 10.4 Thehippocampusandtheamygdalaarelocatedonthemedialaspectofthetemporallobe.Thefornix,themajoroutputpathwayfromthehippocampus,projectstothemammillarybody,whichinturnconnectstotheanteriornucleusofthethalamusviathemammillothalamictract.Alsoillustratedarethecingulategyrus,thebasalforebrainarea(septalnuclei,bednucleusofthestriaterminalis,nucleusaccumbens),andtheprefrontalcortex.(FromPurvesD.Sleepandwakefulness.In:PurvesD,etal[eds].Neuroscience. 3rded.Sunderland,MA:Sinauer;2004.) is as lobe, the eye frontal the field. frontal in and are planning motor These crucial behavior. areas for executing left as explained is the generation Broca’s gyrus human located for the later). the the area, inferior of in frontal speech, for (almost essential language hemisphere always of hemisphere, dominant emotional role major plays the in more in anterior personality and behavior. cortex prefrontal In addition, a

the disease lesions may prefrontal by frontal surgical cortex lobotomy. a Bilateral either by be produced or of and attention, lesions deficits and problem social planning in difficulty in inappropriate behavior. solving, Such produce lessened also pain sensation is pain component although motivational-affective remains. of behavior and is the reduced Aggressive and effective because drug performed Frontal provide management today modern therapies chronic pain. for and more lobotomies mental are focal illness rarely

The cortex. cortex the contains (see parietal and somatosensory ) lobe association the parietal adjacent and information. The perception, association and the and auditory is parietal processing, integration of in information cortex visual, gets sensory involved somatosensory, cortices from information somatosensory allow to frontal motor aid the lobe activity. Connections in with voluntary later. to can auditory centers, be Wernicke’s transferred visual, described information also area, as language as Somatosensory, such and includes perform inability her name numerical a the or a to the can left and his lobe person’s in in loss ability (or to of those of Gerstmann’s Lesions another) result which fingers parietal syndrome, calculations. lobe spatial involved is context. parietal right in The determining the of left. neglect objects, patient the and events body Localized left his seems result can her lesions the of in side on or persons, syndrome, his her or which in and unaware of (See “ an

in box chapter.) the Clinic later ” this In

The function processing and lobe occipital is the perception visual major of (see ). (Brodmann cortex area is visual 17) tertiary the lines calcarine secondary area The visual flanked primary 19) (Brodmann and (Brodmann and sulcus cortices. by area 18) the areas cuneus contralateral of gyrus lingual these field; the those lower the visual field. Lesions in gyrus the in in in contralateral in upper result visual blindness in result blindness assists to the and the eye fields Connections gaze, to direction eye control affect frontal in the of projections convergent of midbrain

parietal cortex andthefrontal macaques. frontal andtheinferior cortices ).Mirrorneuronshavebeenfoundinboththeinferior of cortex, theformerbecauseitintegratessensoryinformationneededtodefinethecontextofatask(see Twoareasimportantforplanningandexecutingmotortasksaretheparietal Thesecellsrespondduringperformanceofaspecificmotortaskandalsoduringobservationofthesametaskperformedbyanotheranimal.Becausethesemirrorcellsseemtoencodeforandrespondtoveryspecificandparticulartasks,ithasbeenspeculatedthattheymayunderliesuchfunctionsasunderstandingtheintentionsofothersandempathy,aswellastheabilitytolearntasksfromobservation.Inhumans,EEGactivityconsistentwiththebehaviorofsuchmirrorneuronshasbeenlocalizedtotheinferior lobes. parietal frontal andsuperior Autism,whichinvolvesaninabilityto“read”theintentionsandemotionsofothers,hasbeenlinkedtoalackofmirrorneuronsbyEEGevidence.

movements, eyes and accommodation, adjust of pupillary near constriction, occur the for when all which vision.

has and lobe ). including information perception and temporal processing higher visual different vestibular the The of (see sounds order processing and functions, many in surface, faces. is example, inferior For infratemporal its the recognition involved on cortex, the of optic through In addition, the part temporal loop, which forms of the pathway, Meyer’s passes lobe. vision part in of a visual temporal As result, damage lesions upper lobe field. can the lies Similarly, posterior the language, area, of a for region of understanding the Wernicke’s lobe. the of temporal portion in essential

dominates system (see limbic medial lobe The temporal the

Fig. learning “Learning participates (see and emotional and memory behavior in and the and Memory” ), in 10.4 section). it system Papez behavior, The circuit. hypothalamus emotional in helps the on part control an via influence by limbic the projects mammillary the This hypothalamus. the and fornix, circuit the entorhinal to the cortex gyrus there, bodies to and the cingulate in via from from hippocampus, with nuclei, the the thalamic back The gyrus to project mammillothalamic then anterior connects cingulate (see hypothalamus which the tract

Fig. 10.4 ). are and and prefrontal cortex. connected cingulate addition, anterior forebrain, hippocampus In the basal the the the amygdala to cortex,

of temporal which Klüver-Bucy habits; tendency the the dangerous meaning a even (visual stimuli; by agnosia); to loss of produce examine and recognize dietary all decreased attention a lesions characterized visual Bilateral lobe to ability cues to objects in orally; irrelevant is syndrome, hypersexuality; objects, emotionality. from change can ones,

amygdala. of temporal highlighted of syndrome lesions described role was all studies recent this of following have originally large Although or the the the as lobe, most more stimuli these with gyrus, to conditions avoidance painful The fear the and medial association the cingulate responses trigger, emotional recur. connections frontal amygdala stimuli via anterior may and of or cortex when region accumbens, pleasurable of tangles center.” the events common to plaques basal and called the has nucleus The brainstem in addition, which site Alzheimer’s “reward been a accumbens input also a the from In ventral the of tegmental nucleus most the the disease. projects associated is response with of to dopaminergic and signals ganglia area the amygdala

foci). seizure seizures Thefunctionsofthedifferentlobesofthecerebralcortexhavebeendefinedaccordingtoboththeeffectsoflesionsproducedbydiseaseorthoseofsurgicalinterventionstotreatdiseaseinhumansandfromexperimentsonanimals.Inanotherapproach,thephysicalmanifestationsofepileptic havebeencorrelatedwiththebrainlocationsthatgiverisetoseizures(epileptic fit). inwhichatouchsensationisperceived.Similarly,seizuresthatstartinthevisualcortexcauseavisualaura(scintillations,colors),thoseintheauditorycortexcauseanauditoryaura(humming,buzzing,ringing),andthoseinthevestibularcortexcauseasensationofspinning.Complexbehaviorresultsfromseizuresthatoriginateintheassociationareasofthetemporallobe;inaddition,amalodorousauramaybeperceivediftheolfactorycortexisinvolved (uncinate Forexample,epilepticfociinthemotorcortexcausemovementsonthecontralateralside;theexactmovementsrelatetothesomatotopiclocationoftheseizurefocus.Seizuresthatoriginateinthesomatosensorycortexcauseanepileptic aura

The Cortex the Activity Electrical of

placed the a electrical the of skull. cerebral electrodes An activity cortex the by of is (EEG) electroencephalogram made on neuronal recording generation a of and synaptic are the that waves in summed pyramidal cells extracellular of the potential. result normally type potentials EEG currents reflect the thus from field neuron), discrete (to a cell the of generated on placed activity the record single events waves pyramidal too EEG microns to must single an currents detected cells. the within a small many the of the microelectrode be be the of by are a electrode neuron, Because by activity combined reflect as skull currents event activity must so on Moreover, detectable to their summate the group to generate produce they an oriented detectable be a neurons individual EEG, that of a field. for of their with field sheet, potentials. apical aligned arrangement form pyramidal is a of parallel particularly dendrites generating in large dipole for favorable The to neurons, sheet One is toward the the cortical pole white surface toward this subcortical and of matter. other oriented the •Fig. generated currents Thus the Electroencephalographictracingsduringdrowsiness;stages1,2,and4ofslow-wave(non–rapideyemovement[non-REM])sleep;andREMsleep.(ModifiedfromShepherdGM.Neurobiology. 10.5 London:OxfordUniversityPress;1983.) by produce be similar potential cortical summate detected. a that therefore have field can a to can cells and orientation pyramidal to The than potentials. action synaptic have why primarily than do potentials electrical order much in EEG reflect need rather sum, for time potentials synaptic summation signals action durations and potentials: explains longer also overlap must in events

cells or positive sign but or not negative, excited alone pyramidal does whether be of wave indicate The direction its can an inhibited. being EEG are (or by be generated inhibition at by EEG somas. the the instance, negative a of For skull of potential cortex) near dendrites apical may excitation surface or the excitation can by wave EEG Conversely, be apical the positive or somas. by near of dendrites a produced inhibition

of of frequencies. various A tracing EEG waves consists normal electrodes, the on state or age the the recording of the absence of frequencies presence location including disease. wakefulness, and The the of dominant subject, of or several factors, depend the drugs the a relaxed and are the occipital recorded adult parietal frequencies is with When normal Hz, 12 about of to rhythm. over 8 dominant the closed, eyes the awake lobes the alpha EEG 13 to Hz, the to the open dominant frequency increases 30 eyes, synchronized, the If called asked is becomes the rhythm. wave to less is which the and subject beta (3 to and 2 (see theta discussion; 7 Hz) sleep following during delta (0.5 rhythms The Hz) to the observed are

Fig. 10.5 ). of brief but spikes, because shape, as referred does they exist are potentials. this to their imply associated and, sometimes are do with not action that waves EEG Also,

that EEG a An be called potential. elicited evoked change is a cortical can stimulus by from area A cortical recorded the skull the potential located the over activated. cortical being of evoked is best part can of somatosensory evoked be recorded potential recorded is bone, results near whereas occipital junction and best parietal that in visual an potential a most the the over effectively For bones. stimulus frontal the example, evoked a activity reflect in of the Evoked numbers neurons. cortical potentials large subcortical They also reflect in may activity structures.

the small waves. of with EEG potentials are in Evoked the size comparison averaging. their process by called can a appearance be enhanced However, signal during In the is EEGs trial process, electronically repeated, each and this the recorded are stimulation averaged. stimulus. With after fixed time evoked potential the the stimulus, occurs at repetition of the each a evoked potentials the association stimulus the other, random temporal When sum. that the of with records whereas each components averaged, a cancel EEG are have the the

Evokedpotentialsareusedclinicallytoassesstheintegrityofasensorypathway,atleasttotheleveloftheprimarysensoryreceivingarea.Thesepotentialscanberecordedincomatoseindividuals,aswellasininfantstooyoungtoundergoasensoryexamination.Theinitialpartsoftheauditoryevokedpotentialactuallyreflectactivityinthebrainstem;therefore,thisevokedpotentialcanbeusedtoassessthefunctionofbrainstemstructures.

1-day) (about wakefulness functions that show the of are body many Sleep the circadian and among periodicity. in the EEG changes sleep-wake can changes behavioral the state in during with be cycle. Characteristic the correlated dominates an aroused activity awake, Beta individual. in wave be is low-voltage, said desynchronized; EEG activity. high-frequency to The displays it alpha eyes dominated EEG waves (see the is their closed, with relaxed individuals In by

Fig. ). 10.5 to through stages 1 of slow-wave falling a sleep sequentially 45 over passes period person A (called four minutes 4) (see asleep of through 30 stages

Fig. ). 10.5 1, waves frequency with theta interspersed waves. stage are alpha In lower called waves activity are the slow 12 further, slow sleep spindles, and interrupted bursts (large, potentials). of which Hz, slow-wave by stage complexes by waves at In is K large activity to the but 14 2, Stage sleep occasional with and sleep is with spindles. delta waves associated 3 without by is delta characterized Stage spindles. 4 waves

sleep, the intermittently. but slow-wave muscles During of the adjusted body relax, is posture the decrease, blood pressure rate heart and gastrointestinal increases. The motility and these awakened as The with which can stages. they ease decreases progressively individuals pass through be sleep stages awaken, the As reverse in through individuals sleep pass they order.

a called sleep, sleep form (REM) slow-wave sleep. to minutes, 90 different eye every changes of movement rapid About again REM the desynchronized. becomes EEG In sleep, resembles EEG fast seen sleep the REM low-voltage, that aroused The of an in subject activity from (see

Fig.

bottom , 10.5 trace). the sleep. to the individual awake person, term characterizes this paradoxical awaking of type similarity of the difficulty sleep that and of an of the Because the EEG number lost, tone but is notably contractions occur the eye Muscle a completely muscles. most in muscles, of phasic resulting eye type for basis name of movements rapid this The of sleep. the are place. also autonomic Many changes take lost, is and meiosis regulation Temperature occurs. Penile may of type occur during erection sleep. this pressure, blood rate, Heart intermittently. change and respiration night. each of occur sleep episodes REM Several person arousal sleep, it arouse REM internal Although a to common. is difficult is from dreaming during sleep. REM occurs Most

Thesleep-wakecyclehasanendogenousperiodicityofabout25hours,butitnormallybecomesentrainedtotheday-nightcycle.Thesourceofcircadianperiodicityappearstobethesuprachiasmaticnucleusofthehypothalamus.Thisnucleusreceivesprojectionsfromtheretina,anditsneuronsseemtoformabiologicalclockthatadaptstothelight-darkcycle.However,theentrainmentcanbedisruptedwhenthesubjectisisolatedfromtheenvironmentorchangestimezones(jetlag).Destructionofthesuprachiasmaticnucleusdisruptsanumberofbiologicalrhythms,includingthesleep-wakecycle.

with REM to proportion sleep of age. sleep varies slow-wave (non-REM) The have sleep, half Newborns people little sleep about of time sleep. spend their in elderly whereas REM REM to 20% of sleep sleep. young REM of About is adults the 25%

mechanism incompletely sleep The is of understood. low-voltage, activating reticular in activity. Stimulation the system EEG in as brainstem known fast and arousal a large causes region the to in reduced once be by a was of activating activity thought the level Sleep caused reticular system. data, medulla the in However, tract observations of brainstem that of and an nucleus results active the process. sleep suggest can sleep, the the arousal that in including is solitary stimulation induce anesthesia substantial the lower near that manipulations are norepinephrine, a to cycle. sleep-wake which serotonin, affect mechanisms levels acetylcholine, sleep used; Investigators can of the relationship including find have and networks tried neurotransmitters, of particular between in and the the these brain brainstem in transmitters neural is However, a detailed of not neurochemical mechanisms the yet available. sleep explanation of

unclear. still is sleep the of purpose Similarly, have a debilitating. because sleep it value in However, is because sleep high be so life lack can and spent of must much of sleep sleepwalking, bed-wetting, Medically cycle disorders important include and insomnia, the sleep-wake apnea, narcolepsy. of

•Fig. Electroencephalographic in of Forms (EEG) Epilepsy. Several Abnormalities 10.6 EEGtracingsduringthetonic(left) EEGtracinginapersonwithtemporallobeepilepsy.D, phasesofatonic-clonic(grandmal)seizure.B, A, Spikeandwavecomponentsofanabsence(petitmal)seizure.C, EEGtracingofafocalseizure. andclonic(right) of (RedrawnfromEyzaguirreC,FidoneSJ.Physiology the System. Nervous 2nded.St.Louis:Mosby;1975.)

TheEEGbecomesabnormalinavarietyofpathologicalcircumstances.Forexample,duringcoma,theEEGisdominatedbydeltaactivity.Brain isdefinedbyamaintainedflatEEGwave. death

Epilepsy commonlycauses,andcanbediagnosedby,specificEEGabnormalities.Therearemanyformsofepilepsy,andexamplesofEEGpatternsfromsomeofthesetypesofepilepsyareshownin

Figure10.6 .Epilepticseizurescanbeeitherpartialorgeneralized.

).ThisstereotypicalprogressioniscalledaJacksonian march. Oneformofpartialseizuresoriginatesinthemotorcortexandresultsinlocalizedcontractionsofcontralateralmuscles.Thecontractionsmaythenspreadtoothermuscles;suchspreadfollowsthesomatotopicsequenceofthemotorcortex(see epilepsy)originateinthelimbicstructuresofthetemporallobeandresultinillusionsandsemipurposefulmotoractivity.Duringandbetweenfocalseizures,scalprecordingsmayrevealEEGspikes(see Complexpartialseizures(whichmayoccurinpsychomotor

Fig.

andD 10.6C

Generalizedseizuresinvolvewideareasofthebrainandlossofconsciousness.Twomajortypesarepetit and mal

hemisphere than dominant in humans, assigned hemisphere dominance and the hemisphere, is of communicate; the the is left more left-handedness is in to right which left-handed hemisphere the dominance people. the dominance a rightand both hemisphere left in Although a 90% to represents right-handedness cerebral of represents of sensorimotor language sensorimotor dominance mal This grand seizures. wave activity Inpetitmalepilepsy,consciousnessislosttransiently(typicallyforlessthan15seconds),andtheEEGdisplaysspike (see and

phase). Fig.10.6B phase), ).Ingrandmalseizures,consciousnessislostforalongerperiod,andtheaffectedindividualmayfallifstandingwhentheseizurestarts.Theseizurebeginswithageneralizedincreaseinmuscletone(tonic followedbyaseriesofjerkymovements(clonic Thebowelandbladdermaybeevacuated.TheEEGshowswidelydistributedseizureactivity(see

Fig.10.6A

EEGspikesthatoccurbetweenfull-blownseizuresarecalledinterictal spikes. Similareventscanbestudiedexperimentally.Thesespikesarisefromabrupt,long-lastingdepolarizations,calleddepolarization andexcitatoryaminoacidsfromhyperactiveneuronsmayalsocontributetotheincreasedcorticalexcitability. shifts, thattriggerrepetitiveactionpotentialsincorticalneurons.Thesedepolarizationshiftsmayreflectseveralchangesinepilepticfoci.SuchchangesincluderegenerativeCa++-mediateddendriticactionpotentialsincorticalneuronsandareductionininhibitoryinteractionsincorticalcircuits.ElectricalfieldpotentialsandthereleaseofK+

(2) in left effects the the language when of (inability into left or the produce and lesions hemisphere deficits that carotid the speak a of that artery. to transient (1) by been (aphasia) function by anesthetic introduced is has aphasia write) results short-acting demonstrated do and of nondominant hemisphere language the usually it substantially. affect Lesions not of anesthetic injection into

the left in areas are in Several involved language. hemisphere the cortex lobe. the part large in behind Wernicke’s posterior gyrus, superior auditory the is temporal of from area the extending a area into parietal inferior cortex. Broca’s is the posterior the the important area, gyrus, area, to motor close frontal face in the part representation language Another of of has if language; fluent, Wernicke’s remains production person results aphasia, meaningless. speech spoken to the difficulty area which and however, written comprehending in receptive in Damage a causes in and writing, in have understand generating Conversely, in which although language relatively well. aphasia, difficulty they speech Broca’s lesion area individuals expressive can

The and terms receptive aphasia aphasia, sensory are and aphasia motor with expressive respectively. interchanged aphasia often control and have expressive for A muscles person visual with auditory not speech aphasia motor receptive the former are may aphasia of with or normal or misleading: writing. responsible terms, however, have may one impairment, The inability language-encoded on sensory sensation decode or an into encode concepts concepts is of rather, it into to does skill; information depend language. not or to Aphasia deficit motor of a of express to in forms However, to aphasia, muscles as may or paralysis in mixed lesions language. some changes sensory result well be enough large hemisphere used as of of the dominant the unclear in manifest needed that a tongue, the motor representation (vocal of cords, the face situation of cortex lips) the of because a example, the latter could apparatus speaking For manipulate for results motor inability speech be and jaws, would mechanical occur to an with deficit. lesion as portion dysarthria, to individual if serving able cortex the affected write limb upper unaffected. be were An however, would, the motor

Corpus the Callosum﻿ Interhem﻿ispheric and Com﻿m﻿unication

in as control can function the two one The of hemispheres independently, somewhat cerebral hand. must activity of be on information hemispheres two the the to body. between coordinate sides transferred the However, anterior or some the that information through the commissure). Much transmitted hippocampal is commissure corpus although is commissures of callosum, through other the (e.g., transmitted

is illustrated corpus in importance interhemispheric of the callosum The transfer information of for

Figure 10.7A.

An discrimination corpus (see task learns animal and eye the visual chiasm callosum left a with optic closed intact with an and

Fig. 10.7A).

is transmitted to corpus callosum, chiasm made hemispheres by both connections bilateral or optic the information through both. the or through The right closed left animal the tested (see and eye is the the open eye with When

Fig. task can both task. center), performed the have the 10.7A, be hemispheres still learned because is before optic the the (see trained, the animal is the result same If transected is chiasm

Fig. 10.7B). hemispheres the Information two the through is presumably corpus transferred callosum. between be both can optic This chiasm cutting confirmed and by the training (see corpus before the finding callosum

Fig. ). 10.7C must the information each learn hemisphere and Then independently. transferred, not is the task

was transection who to A in similar epilepsy conducted patients prevent callosum of human the the had ( spread surgical corpus of undergone interhemispheric experiment

Fig. ). 10.8 optic remained the one information of but the screen. vision visual by was directed the The patient’s other chiasm point on to central the intact, or hemisphere fixing of that fixation point, the object an so to reached the visual then side flashed information or picture one name only contralateral was picture A the of hemisphere. about patient the to allowed beneath An not seen. screen could opening manipulate objects the that be The the objects projected included in those shown pictures. able object hand. individuals with the to Normal would be correct locate either visual that (contralateral the callosum ipsilateral with a hemisphere locate correct received object to transected projected the patients to information). the only the could the However, with hand image corpus motor information For access the to hand the must to and the have explore areas cortex. the and the object, of correct somatosensory recognize visual motor cut, areas same visual side the the corpus brain. With callosum are the interconnected only and of on the

ask test what seen picture. was the was object to verbally the Another identify in to patient the picture the a information the the correct was would to only response to reached right that patient hemisphere. visual The point verbal (language-dominant) left fixation of make a projected because that only identify reached not left because hemifield information hemisphere. the right picture However, to visual the was verbally presented a the patient could

patients callosum used. be different stimuli observations forms of made are transected can in Similar a with corpus when example, so are such they arm, to do verbal command raise the For a without difficulty. when given patients right left motor movement centers send signals in arm. language produce the the signals right and The to these the of hemisphere areas, the ipsilateral a the left patients to raise cannot these to respond However, arm. command right motor the side callosum unless The language influence areas the the areas is cannot left on intact. the on corpus of patients the can stimuli to the transected by the the to be cannot same applied stimuli a described side body left side patients the but with corpus callosum, right describe applied Somatosensory these body. of cortex centers corpus cut. areas the the Information language if somatosensory that reaches right reach been has the of the cannot callosum

two transected addition compared to hemispheres corpus of a callosum. by language, can exploring the In other the of with functional capabilities be in performance the individuals differences solve Such patients

CHAPTER System﻿ 10 Integrative of Fig. Functions the • Nervous 219 Involves B, down. between and a up Corpus Eye.A, One of depends Discrimination is Learning Role 10.7 between circle. Discrimination oriented the Transfer Information apex Interhemispheric When the in on of distinguishing Visual a triangles cross Callosum with the or vertical and bars. horizontal C, is Discrimination between

•Fig. Corpus With Patient of Transected Tests a a 10.8 Callosum. in Illustration Thepatientfixesonapointonarearprojectionscreen,andpicturesareprojectedtoeithersideofthefixationpoint.Thehandcanpalpateobjectsthatcorrespondtotheprojectedpictures,buttheseobjectscannotbeseen.B, Responsebythelefthandtoapictureofakeyintheleftfieldofview.However,theverbalresponseisthatthepatientseesapictureofaring. A, Program. Neurosciences: Study Third (RedrawnfromSperryRW.In:SchmittFO,WordenFG[eds].The Cambridge,MA:MITPress;1974.) left with the which with tasks. that has spatial puzzles hemisphere, the hemisphere right better right three-dimensional functions the specialized for suggests than than ( right are intonation the with more the expression, and left be to body functions that language, associated Other speech seem hemisphere facial

Fig. ). 10.9 corpus transected lack callosum normal with coordination. interhemispheric a Patients a other tries dressing, shirt When while it. button hand the are one unbutton may they for example, to longer the of Observation no are indicates these quite when patients interconnected. hemispheres two operate they that independently can language, with nonverbally. other only the one However, hemisphere whereas can communicates express itself

neglect,” whichisaconsequenceofalesionintheparietalcortexofthenondominant(usuallyright)hemisphere.Insuchcases,thepatientignoresobjectsandindividualsintheleftvisualfield,drawsobjectsthatareincompleteontheleft,deniestheexistenceofhisorherleftarmandleg,andfailstodresstheleftsideofhisorherbody.Thepatientalsodenieshavinganysuchdifficulties(anosognosia). Oneofthemorestrikingexamplesofinterhemisphericdifferencesisthephenomenonof“cortical Althoughthepatientmayrespondtotouchandpinprickontheleftsideofthebody,heorshecannotidentifyobjectsplacedinthelefthand.Thelesionisadjacenttothefirstsomatosensory(SI)cortex,aswellasthevisualassociationcortex,anditsuggeststhatthisregionplaysaspecialroleintheperceptionofbodyimageandimmediateextrapersonalspace.Similarlesionsonthedominantsideresultonlyinlossofsomehigherordersomesthesias,suchasagraphesthesia (inabilitytoidentifyanobjectonlybytouch). (inabilitytoidentifycharactersdrawnonthepalm)andastereognosis

functions levels the Major memory. learning are and the system of nervous higher of mechanism a changes the experience. is neural of organism’s which a result behavior by as Learning learned. mechanism what for Memory is storage the is

difficult study. is complex memory learning to The mammals in and and neural in circuitry involved cellular invertebrates), of are anatomical/physiological systems the at and and the analysis approaches lesions, in animal pathway simpler consequences Alternative the (especially of of nervous functional studies studies level. example, respond marine and (learning motor aspects not of (learning connection stimulus), For habituation single a in (increased Aplysia, presentation event sensitization strong insignificant a an neuron that which follow it a to to it innocuous neuron, a between insignificant the of noxious to a respond of sensory repetitions mollusk responsiveness stimuli isolate and even stimulus), associative or to conditioning previously has shows has to possible been the after to been

Left Recognition preference) forms, Right-side Motor (left-ear 49 writing) skills visual Left RLR and side Stereognosis, ability 18228 right olfaction x olfaction 372 shapes Memory ability (right-ear field preference) image side fieldRight language of Hearing for Stereognosis, (e.g., memory L Left-side Verbal •Fig. Hearing Right-hand visual Right Musical Mathematical Understanding speech left faces, body 10.9 Schematicillustrationofthefunctionalspecializationsoftheleftandrighthemispheres,asdeterminedinpatientsaftersectionofthecorpuscallosum. (ModifiedfromSiegelA,SapruHN.Essential Neuroscience. 5thed.Philadelphia:LippincottWilliams&Wilkins;2005.) significant paired a with one). the In transmitter in habituation, gradually the case diminishes. successive released of of responses amount alteration the current change neurotransmitter. that of triggers an involves Ca++ The in release action repeated of this is cause presynaptic by Ca++ channels of inactivation potentials. change The habituation be Long-term can produced. also active endings remaining numbers In this decreases. zones terminals synaptic of and the the case, in

provided models potentiation (LTD). learning, and called of phenomena, long-term long-term synaptic (LTP) Additional by are depression has extensively most been (see the LTD in studied cerebellum

other CNS. the occurs in the it also but hippocampus regions of and 9), Chapter in

vitro, in studied hippocampus and studied in also been other but CNS. slices intensively has most been cerebellum, of parts it has in the the the of LTP neocortex, of cells. of intrinsic of the hippocampus repetitive connections pyramidal afferent pathway increases the Repetitive to activation one activation of or an the responses The even last days in vitro increased weeks (and vivo). to responses (the for in hours LTP) the LTP synaptic forms depending differ, system. The of on particular postsynaptic events. the involve and of The to mechanism synaptic seems efficacy enhanced presynaptic both act an include Ca++ receptors, in of are of into post-synaptic acids N-methyl-D-aspartate which (NMDA) amino associated on the LTP The that excitatory neuron. with involved the neurotransmitters responses influx receptors. Second also II, and Ca++/calmodulin-dependent in changes are the messenger C) of cause G, kinase kinase kinases protein G neurotransmitter these pathways responsiveness protein proteins, and kinase and phosphorylation (including protein involved, (or may be released messenger, is neurons retrograde to endings that monoxide), a release way enhanced. transmitter A on such presynaptic carbon nitric from act perhaps postsynaptic oxide in during also LTP. Immediate-early genes activated are expression in may Hence, also be gene involved. changes

between short-term memory to of is storage, regard the a long-term and useful. memory With distinction memory stages ongoing be stored persists memory to neural in memory for because only Recent appear short-term by events activity minutes. short-term to the memory remember page after is in a Short-term for index. instance, up looking used, numbers them in book which difficult memory can form, into a long-lasting can be an Long-term disrupt. disrupted, intermediate be to which is and subdivided form, for loss amnesia, be interference se, of per can accessing Memory information. loss, by or from the can a with it memory the result information caused or mechanism intact memory. can even it probably that memory after changes because structural Long-term disrupt short-term events involves remain

severely appear particularly memory. lobes The hippocampal temporal disrupt bilateral memory the recent be removal because and to for formation can of permanently important new and memories long-term unaffected, memories longer Short-term but long-term be can established. are no before meet new their multiple exposures, fail surgery. be with reintroduced amnesia after remember Thus even to people surgery patients with repeatedly and such must they but events, recall events the to general declarative of of the conscious This personal memory places, and events, loss recall involves history. memory, learn retain involves patients, because which Such tasks they can still motor skills. however, associational some and procedural subsequent of better first mirror task. complex perform (e.g., session patients to If having with are perform task given any despite also days on their earlier training improve that the writing), such denial during they not only experience but a in structures not yet defined. are cerebral involved memory The procedural

Plasticity refers ability its change the of most to commonly connectivity. to the CNS discussion), and memory learning various development. contexts, previous including damage, (see changes in occur and Such can alter neural to behavior. CNS of thereby pathways induce remodeling Damage can and the in is greatest brain, Plasticity but the developing

Cellularstudiesofthehippocampusandtheentorhinalcortex(whichisadjacentandparalleltothehippocampus)havedemonstratedtheexistenceof“placecells”thatfirewhenthesubjectentersaspecificplaceinatestenvironment.Althoughtherearemanyplacecells,theyarenotdistributedinanorderlymannerthatwouldresembleatopographicmap.Placecellsappearinveryyounganimalsassoonastheyareabletoexplore.Morerecentstudiesrevealthepresenceof“gridcells,”whichalsorespondtospecificsitesbutaredistributedinhexagonalarraysthatresemblesanorderlymapoftheenvironmentalspaceintheposteriorentorhinalcortex.Althoughthiscognitivemapisfixedforanycontext,changestotheenvironmentorremovalofthepersontoanewtestenvironmentcausesthegenerationofanewandappropriatemapofgridcells.

Becausetheentorhinalcortexisamajorsourceofinputtothehippocampus,itisinterestingthatstudiesofLondon’staxidrivers—whomustdemonstrateanextremelydetailedknowledgeofthecity’sstreetsandmostefficientroutesbeforebeinglicensed—indicatethattheposteriorhippocampusintrainedandexperienceddriversislargerthanthatinbeginnersorthegeneralpopulation.“Gettinglost,”acommoncomplaintassociatedwithamnesia,maybeduetothelossofspatialmemoryskills.

some as deprivation, to sensory manipulations, of brain, certain brain, the plasticity as degree by experience. even in lesions the evidenced such or of remains responses adult

at referred for may be time neural The a some maximal to for the period. capability critical developmental as plasticity systems critical during formed one but eye during providing is period alter in their a early preventing in some it connections development the input, development. specific possible example, pathways by visual only For to from ( animals, such abnormal In become visually deprived visual the connections

Fig. not deprived abnormality, normal critical 10.10 vision undo does functional and the input from ), the of the nor restoration eye. restore visual does after it period life does similar not abnormal In contrast, result visual in connections. deprivation later in whereby in for pruned may The such connections, reflect seen competition are away. less a experiments changes synaptic connections the plastic functional pruning has the a and a probability of gene schizophrenia. efficacy of the correlation between synaptic Research that of form modulates shown the

injury can after the changes brain Plastic occur in also to adults. to occur function, in axons do sprouts. sprouts restore not of the and appear damaged the not normal do produce Sprouting however, new pathways does CNS; neural necessarily many therapy diseases CNS neural many plasticity after in of concerning vital to for the neural CNS the Additional is improved adult and medical knowledge be if is trauma. conducted •Fig. currently Research to is explore being Plasticity During the of in 10.10 Deprivation Sensory Pathway a Visual Result Development. as Normalpattern.B, Theoculardominancecolumnsaredemonstratedbyautoradiographyafterinjectionofaradioactivetracerintooneeye.Thetraceristransportedtothelateralgeniculatenucleusandthentransneurallytransportedtothestriatecortex.Thecortexislabeledinbandsthatalternatewithunlabeledbandswhoseinputisfromtheuninjectedeye.A, Changedpatterninananimalraisedwithmonocularvisualdeprivation.Theinjectionwasmadeintothenondeprivedeye,andtheoculardominancecolumnsforthiseyewereclearlyexpanded.Otherexperimentsshowedthattheoculardominancecolumnsforthedeprivedeyecontracted. B. Lond R FromHubelDH,WieselTN.Proc (A, Soc Neurol. Comp 1977;198:1.B, FromLeVayS,etal.J 1980;191:1.) potential CNS human stem for restoring embryonic the function. cells of

limb example adults. of in neural an Phantom sensation plasticity is limb A missing the often has been on elsewhere perceives patient body. amputated the stimulated sensations limb when on whose from studies that this served the a territories region the of into of spread had surrounding cortical suggest limb. imaging that Functional amputated result is cortical the connections the

Itwastraditionalpolicytodelaycorrectivesurgeryforachildbornwithacongenitalcataractuntilthechildwasolderandmoreabletocopewiththestressofsurgery.However,ifthecorrectionisdeferreduntilafterthe“criticalperiod,”fullrecoveryoffunctionisunlikely.Similarly,childrenbornwithamblyopia, aconditioncharacterizedbystrabismus(crosseye)becauseofrelativeweaknessofoneoftheextraocularmuscles,tendtousetheunaffectedeyeinpreference.Inbothcases,earlysurgeryisnowcommonpracticesothatthecorticalcircuitrycanbecorrectlysculptedbybalancedinputfromthetwoeyes.

of Such can digits surgical remapping and the third occur of amputation after also second hand. the Before was gyrus of represented postcentral the cortex). areas digits of surgery, each (SI in somatotopically the discrete and organized digits adjacent mapped is now the surgery, an area the that amputated After of enlarged represented digits with ( representation the

Fig. ). 10.11 in digits single or individuals these a have (fusion overlapping digits SI of representation more born the of hand) the cortex. two syndactyly of with mostly or Conversely, corrective independent After to come the representations. digits surgery, distinctive have more is daily their requiring remarkable were cortical Even on that that sensory a repeated differences of discrimination trained monkeys fingertips after task use showed training. larger SI fingertips increased. before cortical territories Not receptive number was only training fields on the but were the of recorded of cortically than fingertips likewise also their the

•Fig. afteramputationofthesecondandthirddigits. andreorganizationofthisrepresentation Representationofthedigitregionoftheleftfirstsomatosensory(SI)cortex(A) (B) 10.11 (FromHainesDE[ed].Fundamental and for Clinical Applications. Basic Neuroscience 3rded.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.) 1. can of on the divided cerebral sulci. The be and gyri lobes the of cortex basis pattern into shown lobe as of Each distinctive functions, effects has the by lesions. individuals. is in most dominant left for language hemisphere The cerebral for is posterior is the of Wernicke’s temporal Broca’s the and lobe) its (in responsible frontal (in responsible expression. lobe) inferior area area for language, understanding the

2. The contains several neocortex of interneurons. kinds and pyramidal cells afferent of in mainly layer layers VI. thalamocortical neocortex; thalamocortical synapse fibers afferent IV the in and Specific terminate I diffuse fibers targets, and the V striatum, from subcortical in including pyramidal cells the brainstem, to output major source spinal Axons are cord, of thalamus. layer

3.

different in The varies regions. cortical structure variations these structure correspond reflect designations Brodmann’s cortical in areas. and functionally to discrete

4.

by sleep-wake with the disease, varies the state cycle, factors. generated pyramidal the reflects EEG of electrical The fields and of and activity other the potentials useful evoked sensory clinical EEG about transmission. stimulus-triggered Cortical are data changes and in are

5.

into slow-wave patterns during divided REM and EEG sleep are forms. EEG stages 4, a each sleep through 1 with characteristic pattern. through Slow-wave progresses sleep. occur in Most dreams REM Sleep produced actively is by a brainstem mechanism,

L, D. Squire Fundamental Berg Neuroscience. 4th ed. New Academic 2012. Press; York:

suprachiasmatic and by is circadian nucleus. its controlled the rhythmicity

6.

callosum. the transferred between two corpus Information the hemispheres through is primarily hemisphere capable in tasks, the facial expression, language, intonation. spatial left is than more The speech right and body for language, computation. The for hemisphere logic, understanding is left generation of mathematical specialized for and the and

7.

on can Learning in invertebrates, studied and higher in be the cellular and animals. level, memory a short-term and Memory long-term includes recent, minutes), storage and mechanism. (lasting processes retrieval memory. is formation and important storing declarative spatial for hippocampal The

8.

the life. plasticity behavioral that and occurs studies throughout brain indicate studies in Lesion circuitry. of in However, life, be periods” “critical plasticity important appears and more synaptic competition is early the there neural for to in establishment

should to student the of able questions: following the this completion answer Upon chapter, 1. be

organizations in are and differences systems? general the parasympathetic the and similarities of sympathetic What the

2.

the arise lost? sympathetic what are and the is of innervation actions the when parasympathetic What sympathetic and symptoms respective the of innervation eye, parasympathetic or

3.

to micturation? parasympathetic sympathetic bladder that and the activity occur during What changes the are of balance the in

4.

a What “servomechanism”? is meant by

5.

feedback feeding body body temperature, loops that regulate are and and water intake? the weight, What specific

6.

What the feedback the these is each loops? in of role of hypothalamus

body to environment a autonomic (homeostasis). the nervous function he in of the assist internal is maintaining main system constant required, signal the compensatory nervous When is outflow issue that to body’s that autonomic central internal regulation its commands lead stimuli the environment and of system actions. (CNS) a in system sudden turn pressure in is blood (see which example, lowered blood activity the systemic of pressure modify the previous baroreceptors, nervous so activates level the that For autonomic increase the toward its

autonomic both nervous motor sensory and system divisions. The has divisions. motor further sympathetic is division the divided parasympathetic and The into of actions autonomic the is to Because the viscera, much the relate called system. it nervous sometimes of control visceral nervous system’s

service to autonomic perception a where of distention CNS reflex, at function, state percept intestines) information viscera, to mediates sensory of provides has homeostatic visceral anyone gastrocolic (e.g., nervous too and a reflexes stomach In much of peristalsis our who the for the known the the the eaten system meal. in triggers the its to and More these distention; nausea, receptors voluntary sensory as in such a can generally, homeostasis. pain, of behaviors assist sense perceptions lead evoke thirst, hunger, of autonomic experiences then activation maintaining of variety compensatory visceral can that a

addition behaviors. voluntary of system responses role in to stimuli system participates the its central In homeostasis, coordinated appropriate in the that autonomic the somatic performing in required nervous also external optimal and functioning are to nervous for the light visual helps in range nervous size thus to light, helping pupil example, regulate over of ambient the operate different system intensity. large For of a autonomic to intensities system response

considered autonomic entity although is part system separate system, In enteric considered of nervous also the (see also sometimes a this nervous chapter, ). it the is addition, chapter. the system because CNS is in the central autonomic nervous nervous are the control, system this components under In of autonomic discussed and levels feeding, (see defense, with associated limbic ) many central of components emotions of the reproduction, survival and (e.g., types include which These that value. thermoregulation, system, aggression) drinking, and behavior the are hypothalamus higher visceral have with

Nervous Organization the of System Autonomic

cranial the ganglia. sensory nerve the The are neurons located autonomic and in dorsal root ganglia in the to that are root Like with axonal other the of the central and ganglia, pseudounipolar viscera a dorsal the of CNS. branch they enters neurons cells a extended branch peripheral one cell and a nervous and preganglionic to which neuron, sympathetic regard use body the cell the of a is one both body autonomic located autonomic parasympathetic postganglionic of consists is whose systems motor whose a in With motor in CNS, output, pathway, ganglia located two-neuron the ( neuron,

Figs. 11.2 11.1 ). of targets The motor this

System and Control Central The CHAPTER Nervous 11 Its 227 Autonomic

parasympathetic Parasympathetic of system nervous Projections

Facial (IX) Glossopharyngeal Fig. (VII) • nerve, nerve Illustration pathways of in Sympathetic pathways the are and Pathways. red shown blue. and parasympathetic Schematic 11.1 Parasympathetic Sympathetic in and lighter in shown shades, darker neurons, postganglionic are in Preganglionic shades. neurons

are pathway and cardiac muscle, smooth glands. muscle, wall the The tract. which the of and located the system plexuses, in includes the enteric neurons nervous and nerve submucosal fibers myenteric gastrointestinal are in

is of organs Control and many systems antagonistic. parasympathetic of often the nervous sympathetic digest” sometimes or referred the the the systems, highlight parasympathetic and to and are respectively. “fight as sympathetic this To and flight” “rest systems contrast, to of dilation, blood increased pupil the to Indeed, muscles, nervous the heart response to threat activation of and secretions, the a blood fight-orflight and the intense leads sympathetic of and decreased system, rate organism to redistribution which gastrointestinal including pressure, variety a reflects sweating. an peristalsis responses,

coordinated regulate under the parts most control function. system However, conditions, of acting work a the and two autonomic synergistically—to reciprocally visceral sometimes manner—sometimes in both by all innervated not systems. visceral Furthermore, are structures body muscles glands in smooth and sympathetic of vessels the parasympathetic exclusively; and only have blood the the fraction the blood most small vessels in of For receive innervation. a the innervation example, skin and in innervates the nervous not body pelvic head the abdominal, system only parasympathetic structures in and the the but thoracic, Indeed, cavities. wall

Nervous The Sympathetic System

are of in spinal located and cord. The sympathetic the the upper thoracic preganglionic lumbar neurons segments thoracolumbar autonomic For of referred division the nervous this reason, the system. system the nervous is sometimes as to sympathetic cord are preganglionic column the thoracic cell intermediolateral spinal (lateral Specifically, concentrated sympathetic segments lumbar upper horn) of the in the in and neurons (see

Fig. 11.2). also segment. in may the neurons found Some C8 be intermediate lateral column, locations, matter, preganglionic addition dorsal and to groups funiculus, central canal. the the sympathetic found in including neurons the to the matter gray cell gray intermediolateral the In of are other •Fig. found in paravertebral neurons Sympathetic the are post-ganglionic generally Sympathetic the Segment. Pathway Details 11.2 a Thoracic of Spinal at lines, lines. Autonomicsensoryfibersarerepresentedbyblue lines; preganglionicaxons,bysolid lines; sympatheticfibers,byred andpostganglionicaxons,bydashed Human Neuroanatomy. (RedrawnfromParentA,CarpenterMB.Carpenter’s 9thed.Philadelphia:Williams&Wilkins;1996:295. fiber Skin Visceral glands horn fiber Visceral ganglion Preganglionic fibers muscle Arrector sensory Blood pili Postganglionic Spinal afferent fibers Sympathetic Prevertebral )White Postganglionic ganglion Digestive Hair Peripheral fiber trunk Gray tube ganglion Paravertebral vessel nerve ganglia. Lateral prevertebral ramus ramus or sets ganglia to of ganglia, one the side The form two vertebral lateral each of paravertebral column. sympathetic by (see ganglia are side axons on running The a individual that trunk each form linked longitudinally

Figs. ). 11.1 11.2 and Inferior the and include Celiac Prevertebral in cavity ganglia the Ganglia Mesenteric and Superior located are abdominal (see

Fig. 11.1 ). located from and ganglia target organs. their prevertebral distance are some paravertebral Thus at

are small, B The preganglionic fibers as myelinated neurons of (see known fibers nerve axons often

Table 5.1 ). C are However, fibers. some unmyelinated a the the spinal level paravertebral at in enter same the root white and the through segmental cord leave ventral communicating They ganglion ramus. the are rami found only levels L2. from to T1 White of ganglia enter synapse The it travel entry; within may ganglion of the pass and sympathetic at trunk, nerve prevertebral or ganglion off travel postganglionic ganglion, may on a to the may through the splanchnic level neurons and to to preganglionic passes; rostrally the give that the a trunk sympathetic exit caudally axon or its collaterals in (see

Figs. 11.2 11.1 ). nerves both fibers the autonomic or afferents motor and visceral parasympathetic). contain they (sympathetic viscera; innervate Splanchnic

lie ramus generally communicating (see paravertebral spinal a enter in through their send Postganglionic gray neurons nerve whose ganglia a to somata axons

Fig. ). 11.2 Each spinal pairs the nerves 31 of a gray ramus. of has piloerector joints. such the glands, vessels, muscles, through distributed blood located the peripheral Postganglionic effectors, axons as and muscle, and sweat in are to nerves skin, (C fibers), exceptions axons generally Postganglionic are unmyelinated although some exist. axons relative and unmyelinated myelinated rami the rami. in these contents white gray and names reflect The of

splanchnic pass autonomic end ganglion. or in plexus prevertebral through the to a distant nerve a travel ganglion more axons a and ganglion Preganglionic often and in an and may they synapse, the a directly pass which medulla, splanchnic end to axons Some postganglionic nerve preganglionic of equivalent cells are cells. adrenal on through and

cervical the extends to cord. The sympathetic of spinal levels from the chain the coccygeal segments. neurons, the preganglionic body to are thoracic a upper enables that This as all system and distribution neurons which limited postganglionic arrangement innervate to that activate lumbar serves segments, spinal are some development. there the However, than there are during ganglia ganglia paravertebral because fewer fuse of segmental segments ganglion represents sympathetic a ganglion fused the the For sympathetic inferior sympathetic ganglia cervical C7 of middle of and and cervical ganglia ganglion at the the the of ganglia combination is example, C4; C1 superior through C5 C6; is cervical and fused the C8. to with of T1. term ganglion the of the ganglion refers fusion stellate cervical inferior The ganglion sympathetic postganglionic ganglion to the the The and cervical and neck, superior and head middle lungs, cervical sympathetic and the heart, bronchi. provides innervation stellate ganglia innervate

In body. autonomic on distributed and the side ipsilateral thus of the to general, neurons control sympathetic ganglia are the function preganglionic same intestines sympathetic and the pelvic are the innervation Important are bilateral. which of viscera, both the exceptions that are preganglionic skeletal segments. several neurons organ sympathetic As with motor a over control muscle, particular to neurons spread the are distributed For distributed T5, whereas neurons T12. to functions those to are neck control the preganglionic region control that gland example, in that at C8 sympathetic adrenal head the sympathetic levels levels at and T4

Parasympathetic Nervous System The

in sacral brainstem (see the neurons (S3-S4) the are nuclei spinal preganglionic in matter gray cord of of cranial found The parasympathetic several nerve and

Fig. 11.1 ). system division. the sometimes of this craniosacral is the part Hence, autonomic called nervous X). parasympathetic contain neurons nucleus and the The nerve nucleus (cranial (cranial nerve motor the are superior the salivatory preganglionic vagus (cranial nucleus inferior and dorsal cranial that nerve nuclei, nerve Edinger-Westphal the nerve nuclei III), (cranial ambiguus VII) and of IX) the ciliary cells located is salivatory is submandibular from otic (input the nucleus), including the input in ganglia are superior pterygopalatine (preganglionic and Edinger-Westphal and the Postganglionic from salivatory nucleus). is (input inferior parasympathetic cranial the from ganglion ganglia, the nucleus), ganglion pupillary eye. in sphincter ciliary and The innervates the muscles the ciliary ganglion well glands pharynx. the ganglion and nasal pterygopalatine gland, supplies lacrimal The oral the as in as submandibular glands oral to the and salivary cavity. ganglion The glands sublingual submandibular in the to projects and salivary The mouth. and the innervates ganglion gland glands the in otic parotid

neurons abdominal, Other in located are visceral or walls the organs the postganglionic in and of parasympathetic pelvic near thoracic, cavities. the include also Neurons enteric of considered postganglionic be cells plexus parasympathetic that neurons. can the input All cells from of nerves. pelvic vagus or these receive heart, pancreas, lungs, splenic vagus liver, gastrointestinal the of The tract the nerves to bronchi, and esophagus colon. from innervate flexure the the that the and in neurons and organs, remainder neurons reproductive the is supplied bladder sacral to pelvic as through The the rectum, travel of as parasympathetic preganglionic ganglia. the urinary well colon nerves postganglionic by pelvic

(see the that project abdomen located dorsal thorax of The to in part the and preganglionic viscera neurons the nucleus of the vagus the are of parasympathetic motor

Fig.

4.6E ) and the ambiguus. nucleus activity nucleus of cardiac motor is modifies largely muscle). secretomotor The the glands), (it whereas dorsal (it activates the nucleus is visceromotor ambiguus much heart, visceral the thoracic bronchi, cavity and cavity in (pharynx, the organs supplies abdominal gastrointestinal and nucleus neck larynx), pancreas). esophagus), motor of and (including liver, lungs, dorsal (trachea, The tract, glucagon motor gastric Electrical dorsal secretion, insulin nucleus the the of stimulation of as acid secretion results in pancreas. and as by well described, Although have to the heart projections uncertain. been their function is esophagus a in that also that palate, and slows (1) heart group ventrolateral innervates soft contains group ambiguus the and neurons: groups The (branchiomotor) larynx, of dorsal striated (see a (2) and muscle the pharynx, activates two nucleus

accompanied nerves the visceral are fibers visceral fibers. autonomic motor in by The afferent information these originates afferent fibers sensory viscera. from that supply receptors the in of Most afferent The level the arcs. only these the sensory consciousness; these reaches receptors however, initiate receptors of reflex rarely limb of of activity and viscerosomatic by afferent elicited are fibers. these viscerovisceral reflexes Both and homeostatic these adjustment they operate to subconscious important at a reflexes external Even generally stimuli. regulation though for are level, visceral very

many fibers these amino not release released transmitter visceral neurons although acid by The as neurotransmitters well fast-acting afferent of an glutamate. are excitatory documented, such II, galanin, calcitonin arginine enkephalin, and peptide, vasoactive angiotensin fibers visceral oxytocin, many afferent combinations polypeptide. somatostatin, vasopressin, also intestinal bombesin, neuropeptides of gene–related substance neuropeptides, including or P, contain cholecystokinin, However,

such afferent conscious the mediate include sensation in can that nerves. that nerves, Visceral fibers splanchnic sympathetic as nociceptors travel distention of or by caused pain obstruction, excessive hollow is Visceral contraction viscera, ischemia. an against the difficult of often the nature is because diffuse to identify visceral pain The and to structures (see referred origin of be somatic its tendency to ). pain of reach in white chain, sympathetic cord Visceral dorsal rami, roots. and the the spinal via nociceptors sympathetic nerves to nociceptive region to fibers central canal. project The terminals surrounding the dorsal afferent and horn the of the cells, projection to brain. They pain include reflex also activate local spinothalamic which signal interneurons, only that the arcs, participate cells tract but in which not

lumbosacral the cord. major of spinal visceral pelvis relay the the nociceptive a pathway gray matter involves A from in axons nucleus These in the neurons the gracilis gracilis. fasciculus that send terminate into lateral spinothalamic that tract). also (their for pathway of the part columns the of second-order axons as neurons dorsal the only pain but main (recall component) in for pain somatic Thus visceral funiculus contain primary not second-order somatic afferents the sensation travel then the presumably posterior ventral to cortex. lateral from transmitted the there the signals thalamus are to of nociceptive nucleus cerebral Visceral and produced beneficial to of column cancer dorsal effects of pain by organs. levels for the of surgically pelvic induced the this at pathway accounts the of lesions lower relieve thoracic Interruption

in parasympathetic fibers Other nerves. visceral afferent travel fibers fibers; reflexes sensation are involved for afferent generally These ). than in see taste rather (except sinus the For are in afferent baroreceptor the that innervate the example, carotid nerve. glossopharyngeal fibers They (see the nucleus through tract enter the solitary tract, brainstem, the pass in and terminate solitary of the

Fig. ). 4.6E with formation. in connect These the interneurons reticular neurons brainstem the in turn, heart autonomic rate pressure interneurons, (see The project control blood neurons and to that preganglionic

The pelvis. organs, tract except solitary in of those nucleus all from visceral the receives information the from that nucleus This areas subdivided visceral into several receive specific is organs. information

System Enteric Nervous The

100 nervous which the about neurons. located The is in enteric the tract, contains of wall million gastrointestinal system, longitudinal lies and of nervous is the in the gut. enteric myenteric muscle gut, which submucosa submucosal lies system the the plexus, between which and layers plexus, the The of subdivided circular the into plexus of fluid the (see the whereas myenteric plexus regulate ), those gastrointestinal The motility primarily control body neurons submucosal homeostasis primarily (see in

excitatory motor found and plexus afferent include types neurons) considered neurons. neurons the inhibitory neurons The and can of (which myenteric parasympathetic not but also only postganglionic be interneurons primary in tract. Afferent gastrointestinal mechanoreceptors the neurons wall supply within the of limb These the of are afferent the reflex beginning within of the mechanoreceptors arcs enteric plexus. muscle to excitatory reflexes, in the and neurons is cells. sent Local output interneurons and smooth inhibitory participate motor through the these and polypeptide. substance dynorphin neurons release intestinal and P; neurons release motor acetylcholine vasoactive Excitatory motor inhibitory enteric it from plexus has that the completely that the of body. of coordinate movements so extensive is the circuitry removed been an can intestine The autonomic normal function CNS. by the regulation requires the by However, and preganglionic innervation neurons

by system nervous the sympathetic modulated enteric nervous Activity the is in system. norepinephrine those those norepinephrine motility, that and secretion. inhibit flow, intestinal norepinephrine intestinal Y and somatostatin control and Sympathetic that contain contain regulate blood that contain neuropeptide post-ganglionic neurons Feedback the back from ganglia. is to project the that sympathetic intestinofugal provided myenteric by plexus neurons

glandular water across secretion. epithelium regulates intestinal transport ion The plexus submucosal the and and communicates to ensure the the also coordination with It the myenteric of enteric components of plexus nervous functions two system. the of The organized. submucosal networks the as neural those well not are contain and plexus the many are neurons circuits myenteric of the plexus, neurons of the but neural well of understood neuropeptides, as and

type post-ganglionic main the neuron. is in autonomic of ganglia The neuron receive project cells effector preganglionic neurons, connections to cells. from autonomic synaptic These they and However, contain interneurons. autonomic also ganglia many regarded information be this the of kind process within as ganglia; example enteric autonomic processing. interneurons the plexus These can elaborate an of cells. hence, some found autonomic intensely a ganglia been of fluorescent these type concentration of interneurons interneuron catecholamines; One contains in (SIF) high called have small, SIF inhibitory. cells to are believed be

parasympathetic, The sympathetic is of acetylcholine. neurotransmitter or autonomic whether classic ganglia, in plant classes named alkaloids of muscarine. receptors, to nicotinic acetylcholine The so ganglia nicotine receptors and responses of are and their two because the muscarinic autonomic Nicotinic be atropine. blocked as acetylcholine and can receptors hexamethonium, by such agents by be or receptors blocked muscarinic can curare differ autonomic Nicotinic cells. from skeletal somewhat receptors on in muscle ganglia those

postsynaptic mediate receptors (EPSPs), both these potentials and muscarinic potentials Nicotinic different excitatory courses. have but time EPSP. followed neurons EPSP, Stimulation a slow a fast by elicits of preganglionic receptors, results activation of ion channels EPSP fast which from The open. nicotinic cause to inhibit EPSP (primarily conductance. the M2 produced see by receptors mediated ) is The slow current by the that a receptor; muscarinic potassium current, M

that autonomic Neurons act as ganglia in neuromodulators. also neuropeptides release preganglionic neurons hormone, release may luteinizing acetylcholine, somatostatin. substance P, neurotensin, sympathetic or hormone–releasing Besides enkephalin,

dopamine such SIF as neurotransmitters as and in the of norepinephrine ganglia. serve cells Catecholamines autonomic

release which inhibits typically neurons nor-epinephrine, effector some but excites postganglionic cells Sympathetic others. receptors. either receptors be β-adrenergic may α-or target on The cells and subdivided α1, into and These receptor receptors genetic pharmacological β1, types are α2, features. of β2, β3 further on the basis by The postganglionic are of types and listed distribution these various organs target actions the of in activated sympathetic for neurons they that receptors mediate when

receptors 11.1 postsynaptically, receptors postsynaptic. may α1 are presynaptic or either be Table located α2 but release located generally usually they called transmitter. Receptors presynaptically of are autoreceptors; inhibit or through The be distinguished receptors block α2 specifically. can receptors the use of these that of effects α1 excite to agents antagonists is yohimbine antagonist. α2-adrenergic α1-adrenergic For selective example, and is antagonist, a prazosin selective a by activation second are α1 inositol receptors The mediated the triphosphate/diacylglycerol of of messenger effects system (see

3). Chapter

(cAMP) rate of contrast, on synthesis G α2 action adenosine of protein. cyclic receptors monophosphate decrease In through the a

by to were the antagonists this of originally basis supplemented them, ability has on been but β the of classified studies. genetic receptors block has that more β extracellular and up thought of The β3, membrane-spanning proteins three proteins that by studied all types ). the is it are regions (see connected receptors make but than seven extensively have intracellular and β1 much with been domains similar, β2 G on the Agonist concentration. work activate cyclase stimulates to receptors protein increase a cAMP adenylyl that that drugs β guanosine by buildup the of This is action diphosphate. terminated

—Sphinctermuscle,irisα Radialmuscle,irisα Contraction(mydriasis)++ Ciliarymuscleβ —Contraction(miosis)+++ Contractionfornearvision+++ Relaxationforfarvision+

Atriaβ1IncreaseincontractilityandconductionDecreaseincontractilityand(usually)velocity++ +++ His-Purkinjesystemβ1IncreaseinautomaticityandLittleeffectconductionvelocity+++ Sinoatrialnodeβ1Increaseinheartrate++ Atrioventricular(AV)nodeβ1IncreaseinautomaticityandDecreaseinconductionvelocity;AVblockconductionvelocity++ Ventriclesβ1Increaseincontractility,conductionSlightdecreaseincontractilityvelocity,automaticity,andrateofidioventricularpacemakers+++ increaseinconductionvelocity++ Decreaseinheartrate;vagalarrest+++

Coronaryα,β2Constriction+;dilation

c,e Skeletalmuscleα,β2Constriction++;dilation

Pulmonaryα,β2Constriction+;dilation

—Salivaryglandsα Constriction+++ + Abdominalviscera,renalα,β2Constriction+++;dilation (Systemic) Dilation++ — α,β2Constriction++;dilation++ Veins

11.1 Nerve Responses Autonomic to Effector Organs Impulses—cont’d of

Responsesb Impulses,a Receptor Adrenergic Effector Type Responsesb Impulses,a Organs Cholinergic

Bronchialglands?Inhibition(? Contraction++ Bronchialmuscleβ2Relaxation+ )Stimulation+++

Relaxation(usually)+ Contraction(usually)+ Increase+++ + Sphinctersα SecretionInhibition(? Motilityandtoneα2,β2Decrease(usually) )Stimulation+++

Contraction(usually)+ Motilityandtoneα2,β2Decrease + Increase+++ Relaxation(usually)+ Sphinctersα SecretionInhibition(? Relaxation+ and Gallbladder )Stimulation+++ Contraction+ Ducts

Increase(usually)Increase(? Motilityandtoneα α,β2Pregnant:contraction(α);Variable Erection+++ Capsule Male )Uterus + α α,β2Contraction+++;relaxation+ Ejaculation+++ Generalizedsecretion+++ Organs, nonpregnant:relaxation(β)Sex — Spleen

Medulla β2Increasedsecretion+ α,β2Glycogenolysis,gluconeogenesis —SecretionofepinephrineandnorepinephrineLiver —Fatcellsα,β1Lipolysis Adrenal

FromGoodmanLS,GilmanA.The of Pharmacological Basis Therapeutics. receptorsonparasympatheticcholinergic(excitatory)ganglioncellsoftheAuerbachplexus.hDependsonthestageofthemenstrualcycle,theamountofcirculatingestrogenandprogesterone,andotherfactors.iPalmsofthehandsandsomeothersites(“adrenergicsweating”).jThereissignificantvariationamongspeciesinthetypeofreceptorthatmediatescertainmetabolicresponses. receptorresponse(vasoconstriction)predominatesinbloodvesselsofotherabdominalviscera.Therenalandmesentericvesselsalsocontainspecificdopaminergicreceptors,activationofwhichcausesdilation,buttheirphysiologicalsignificancehasnotbeenestablished.fThesympatheticcholinergicsystemcausesvasodilationinskeletalmuscle,butthisisnotinvolvedinmostphysiologicalresponses.gIthasbeenproposedthatadrenergicfibersterminateatinhibitoryβ receptorsonsmoothmusclefibersandatinhibitoryα toprovideanapproximateindicationoftheimportanceofadrenergicandcholinergicnerveactivityincontrolofthevariousorgansandfunctionslisted.cDilationpredominatesinsitubecauseofmetabolicautoregulatoryphenomena.dCholinergicvasodilationatthesesitesisofquestionablephysiologicalsignificance.eOvertheusualconcentrationrangeofphysiologicallyreleasedcirculatingepinephrine,aβ 6thed.NewYork:Macmillan;1980.aAlongdash(—)signifiesnoknownfunctionalinnervation.bResponsesaredesignated+ to+++ receptorresponse(vasodilation)predominatesinbloodvesselsofskeletalmuscleandtheliver,andanα

β receptor activity controlled of number is ways. in a It the antagonized of action α1 be can receptors. by agonists. also phosphorylation with can by The desensitized β exposure be to receptors prolonged a Regulation β mechanism. of represents control third receptor numbers receptor by can being decreased For be numbers internalized. β example, increased Alternatively, certain circumstances: example, for numbers β after (upregulated) be receptor can denervation. in is Note of regulated. α the likewise that number receptors

neuropeptides such release neuropeptide postganglionic releasing and neurons to addition somatostatin norepinephrine, sympathetic Y. as In the For tract, and neuropeptide cells that of both and the vessels in both norepinephrine cells release and example, and supply blood the release mucosa gastrointestinal somatostatin Y innervate norepinephrine the that limb. gut sympathetic chemical mediator is Another postganglionic triphosphate neurons adenosine (ATP). in

the to (see similar many cells endocrine postganglionic adrenal in neurons are The sympathetic also ways ). of medulla They from input neurons, preganglionic acetylcholine, by excited sympathetic release catecholamines. receive and are into rather However, than adrenal synapse. circulation they of the sympathetic the in from neurons postganglionic differ that the catecholamines a release into cells medulla the Moreover, catecholamine is norepinephrine. main not epinephrine, released 20% of is medulla 80% by released and epinephrine, adrenal In the is norepinephrine. catecholamine the humans,

neurotransmitter. norepinephrine postganglionic rather Some as acetylcholine their neurons release than sympathetic glands eccrine cholinergic. sweat sympathetic neurons that postganglionic are example, For innervate involved acetylcholine and they muscarinic, blocked by are therefore are atropine. receptors The some vessels cholinergic neurons. by postganglionic are innervated sympathetic blood Similarly, In sweat vasoactive releasing calcitonin that postganglionic including also and release acetylcholine, supply addition neuropeptides, gene–related peptide the polypeptide. glands intestinal neurons the to

The released by neurons parasympathetic postganglionic is acetylcholine. neurotransmitter effects listed of The are neurons these target various organs in on

. 11.1 Table Parasympathetic mediated receptors. actions muscarinic by postganglionic are molecular of of the On have cloning, types receptors muscarinic and selective of (see studies, basis been binding action identified five the antagonists,

Chapter 6).

the secretion the stomach. in enhances gastric acid receptors Activation M1 of of in smooth type M2 most and trachea, abundant uterus, bladder. intestines, the receptor muscle, are the in receptors muscle smooth including the and autonomic In negative in where in present and heart, chronotropic they addition, exert they ganglia (see actions are inotropic

Chapter 18). also a between require of to normal and less variety they muscle the although abundant in are M are smooth of interaction organs, two receptors, receptors types an present the appear M2 than patterns 3 contractile receptors. of and at transmission role are these in receptors, sites. play ganglia like receptors, synaptic M2 in thus present a M4 autonomic blood in the cerebral the parotid receptors esophagus, gland, vessels. of the in well in in as and M5 are as sphincter the pupil, muscle present

Muscarinic have diverse adrenergic receptors, like receptors, actions. Some mediated second systems. by specific are their messenger of effects cyclase receptors and system, triphosphate may they M2 way synthesis. muscarinic act inositol the adenylyl thus of inhibit may For by cardiac and cAMP also example, receptors particularly channels, or open or ion Ca++ also channels. K+ close Muscarinic channels activation likely on of through This G occur action ion proteins. to is muscarinic action factor by relaxing endothelium-derived muscle (EDRF). receptors which third relax smooth A to vascular an cells, of is produce on effect endothelial (see oxide oxide, released is nitric EDRF by gas converted a synthase ). citrulline arginine actually when nitric is to activates in vascular ). oxide by muscle increasing a protein turn kinase guanosine (see cyclase guanylate thereby levels Nitric stimulating monophosphate relaxes and cyclic (cGMP), smooth cGMP-dependent which of of of is to muscarinic agonists number receptors receptors. exposure decreases receptors the and internalization regulated, by The the muscarinic of number

disease Chagas istheresultofinfectionbytheparasiteTrypanosoma cruzi. About18millionpeopleareinfectedworldwide,andapproximately50,000dieeachyearasaresultofcomplicationsfromthedisease.Themostseriousformsinvolveenlargementoftheesophagus,colon,andheart.Lossofparasympatheticcontrolisasignificantcomponentoftheinitialstagesofthedisease;shortlyaftertheinitialinfection,theparasympatheticneuronsinnervatingtheheart,esophagus,andcolonaredestroyed,whichleadstoarrhythmias(andpotentiallysuddendeath)andaperistalsis.Chroniccardiomyopathy(malfunctionoftheheartmuscle)thatcanleadtodeathoccursinapproximately30%ofthoseinfected.Althoughthepathogenesisofthecardiomyopathyisnotfullyunderstood,oneleadingideainvolvesautoimmunity.Antibodiesagainsttheparasiticantigenshavebeenfoundtobindtotheβ-adrenergicandM2acetylcholinereceptorsintheheart.Theseantibodiesnotonlytriggerautoimmuneresponsesthatdestroyheartmusclebutalsoactasagonistsatthesereceptorsandcauseinappropriateresponsesofthecardiovascularsystemtochangingexternaldemands.

Control of Autonomic Central Function

of preganglionic on autonomic preganglionic are synapse controlled neurons discharges autonomic pathways neurons. that by The systems of reflex as descending hypothalamus. pathways, well the at the levels higher autonomic brainstem include originating as nervous influence such that and activity system, cord control spinal The pathways as

Organs Control of Examples of Particular Autonomic

dilator and determine size and pupil. control the under the the of constrictor The which respectively, sympathetic of the iris, fibers, muscles of parasympathetic are during white in Activation thoracic dilates and emotional the innervation excitement ganglia, response and of pupil, trunk also stimulation. via eye, the occurs sympathetic rami to which painful of sympathetic at it neurotransmitter postganglionic The at synapses is α norepinephrine, sympathetic receptors. and the acts

exerts nervous system. that nervous The opposite sympathetic an system the pupillary of on action parasympathetic size pupillary the the the dilation, Whereas parasympathetic constricts system sympathetic system pupil. elicits nerves the The the in the dilated so damage pupil and preganglionic lead cranial can in and nerve nerve parasympathetic is to which innervate nucleus, are a pupillary this travel Edinger-Westphal to III, midbrain, that in constrictor (mydriasis).

syndrome. Sympatheticcontrolofthepupilissometimesaffectedbydisease.Forexample,interruptionofthesympatheticinnervationoftheheadandneckresultsinHorner’s (retractionoftheeyeintotheorbit)alsooccursinsomeanimals(rats,cats,anddogs,amongothers),butinhumansnotrueenophthalmosoccurs;however,thereisanapparentenophthalmos,anillusioncreatedbypartialclosureoftheeyelidfromtheptosis.Horner’ssyndromecanbeproducedbyalesionthat(1)destroysthesympatheticpreganglionicneuronsintheupperthoracicspinalcord,(2)interruptsthecervicalsympatheticchain,or(3)damagesthelowerbrainstemintheregionofthereticularformation,throughwhichpathwaysdescendtothespinalcordtoactivatesympatheticpreganglionicneurons.Inthelastcase,thereisalsoalossofsweatingonthesideofthebodyipsilateraltothelesion. Thissyndromeischaracterizedbythetriadofmiosis(abnormalpupillaryconstriction),ptosis(causedbyparalysisofthesuperiortarsalmuscle),andanhydrosis(lossofsweating)ontheface.Enophthalmos

reflex near pupillary vision. and by size reduced light accommodation for is the during Pupil processed by excite In ganglion light circuits the strikes that retinal that the light retina cells pupillary (see retinal is W-type reflex,

Chapter 8). illumination. to diffuse respond cells These The optic nucleus. the the some tract they olivary synapse of and pretectal the cells project to of pretectal axons nerve the where in area, through W-type that illumination. also respond to nucleus neurons This contains diffuse preganglionic olivary of Edinger-Westphal neurons the nuclei. in nucleus of with causes bilateral neurons pretectal parasympathetic connections by constriction of Activity pupillary means the of reflex muscles only even eyes, shone eye. The results pupillary into when in both sphincter light one contraction the is in

curvature important increasing which of near eyes. pupillary on of involves is for response, focusing objects, the and the The the lens, constriction, convergence accommodation transmitted the ). through (see response cells the retina to triggered geniculostriate the is is visual of information cortex pathway from by striate that This M trigger to a disparity and stimuli of retinal thought specific that image accommodation between are eyes. the The two be blurred image the cortex, or middle temporal signals directly they as information is the in activate visual area neurons the to transmitted known MT. the where processed visual indirectly are cortex, a After in the neurons constriction. Edinger-Westphal pupillary in that to the transmit results in which parasympathetic neurons nuclei, MT signals preganglionic midbrain activate Area cause to contract. are At transmitted time, to signals the it muscle that ciliary the same the up power. allows muscle refractile The its increase to and round contraction ciliary lens a is of response (Convergence neurons nucleus III] nerve somatic by mediated in midbrain.) the the oculomotor [cranial

Robertson pupil. Thepupillarylightreflexissometimesabsentinpatientswithtertiary(advanced)syphilis,whichaffectstheCNS(i.e.,intheformoftabesdorsalis).Althoughthepupilfailstorespondtolight,ithasanormalaccommodationresponse.ThisconditionisknownastheArgyll Theexactmechanismiscontroversial.Oneexplanationrestsonthefactthatsomeoptictractfibersprojecttothepretectalareainthemidbrain.Thesefiberscanbedamagedinsyphiliticmeningitis,possiblybythepresenceofspirochetesinthesubarachnoidspace.NotethatthepretectalareaprojectstotheEdinger-Westphalnucleus,alsointhemidbrain,whosecellsoriginatetheparasympatheticinnervationoftheeye,whichcontrolsthepupillarysphinctermuscle.Althoughinputtotheolivarypretectalnucleusisinterrupted,theoptictractfibersprojectingtothelateralgeniculatenucleusarenotdestroyed,andthusvisionismaintained,asispupillaryconstrictionduringaccommodation.

cord spinal pathways is controlled and the supraspinal center reflex in urinary a ( by by bladder also The

Fig. ). 11.3 cord. spinal The innervation segments sympathetic from sympathetic lumbar originates neurons the upper of in preganglionic the of muscle to of act smooth excite Postganglionic and region urethral (detrusor muscle) the muscle the sympathetic they body trigone bladder, axons the to also internal smooth inhibit and the the sphincter. throughout the act

•Fig. That Bladder. the 11.3 for Descending Control Illustration of Urinary Pathways Efferent Reflexes and Forclarity,onlysomeofthemajorinvolvedpathwaysareshown. (RedrawnfromdeGroatWC,BoothAM.InDyckPJ,etal[eds].Peripheral Neuropathy. 2nded.Philadelphia:WBSaunders;1984.)

is from the filling muscle The detrusor bladder, of during inhibition being voided. such prevents urine and tonically inhibited norepinephrine excitation the action the on is elicited sphincter norepinephrine β detrusor mediated receptors. muscle action whereas urethral internal of of trigone of by and is the receptors, by the of Inhibition on α

also control urethra the external helps of voiding. The sphincter a which somatic it nerves. This innervated pudendal is the and in muscle, by striated sphincter are is motor nerves, axons in ventral Onuf motor the cord. the horn neurons sacral spinal nucleus, located are of the The in

located that S2 or and segments). the are in (the the S3 bladder preganglionic parasympathetic and The S3 spinal neurons cord sacral S4 control cholinergic pelvic distributed and These bladder the through wall. nerves ganglia are plexus project to neurons the pelvic in the and Post-ganglionic the bladder muscle, the detrusor in well as wall as innervate neurons the trigone and parasympathetic sphincter. and internal detrusor parasympathetic The and contracts sphincter. relaxes trigone the muscle activity the or urination. These micturition, in result actions release neurons are of cholinergic are the (they Some and postganglionic purinergic others ATP).

normally reflex micturition Micturition the by controlled (see is

Fig. ). 11.3 in Mechanoreceptors the wall in wall. and muscles contraction excited the stretch both of bladder are by the bladder afferents accumulates the mechanoreceptor discharge. urine and the bladder, to Thus distends as begin bladder urinary 10 in increases begins. (5 the micturition cm to it H2O), is but when filling low The pressure during abruptly or be voluntarily. reflexively triggered Micturition either can center project and that In the the in bladder activate the micturition fibers pons brainstem afferent micturition, (Barrington’s neurons to rostral excite nucleus). reflex that preganglionic prevent inhibit neurons descending The sympathetic projections voiding. also center. triggered of a by occurs ascending level in micturition When activity pathway, sufficient is micturition this the Commands the spinal pathway. reach a through reticulospinal cord sacral Activity projections to in to and is parasympathetic bladder the projection activated. bladder the the inhibited, sympathetic are the the supply wall of muscle the the bladder loop. a thereby Contraction of the mechanoreceptors supraspinal further in activates the wall and vigorous bladder that discharge causes of bladder. complete The the is result emptying of

reflex also for exists A micturition. pathway spinal pathway operational newborn infants. in is This take maturation, triggering in a dominant control pathways role the with on micturition. supraspinal However, injury, period during (urinary lose control spinal spinal of human shock cord incontinence). the After adults bladder the spinal of of recovered function because cord As is micturition reflex. of spinal degree from the enhancement cord shock, recovers spinal some bladder the to However, fails increased has completely. empty and bladder muscle tone lead frequently to These urinary circumstances infections.

Centers in Brain the Autonomic

neurons, is maintained networks a brain which local of over of centers, consist autonomic autonomic Influence of output variety regions. in by pons, discussed, the The example. just was in is which one micturition center diverse with exist. autonomic centers other functions Many Vasomotor in and centers medulla, in centers medulla vasodilator pons. are and the and are the respiratory in hypothalamus. the centers concentration Perhaps the greatest of found is autonomic

Area The Hypothalamus and Preoptic

the hypothalamus part of diencephalon. is The in hypothalamus shown of Some the are of nuclei the

Fig. . 11.4 hypothalamus the region function. structures: of anteriorly are preoptic help telencephalic both the and Located autonomic regulate septum, which from Important and tracts hypothalamus medial the tract. the forebrain the that are through course fornix, fiber mammillothalamic the bundle, fornix as and lateral landmark divide the to used is into hypothalamus a zones. The medial

functions; of hypothalamus function. see discussion many has control of hypothalamic endocrine The a for Its control of emphasized is autonomic here. function much like function, in a autonomic of control functions system •Fig. its that In control is termed, hypothalamus the Third 11.4 of Main the Viewed Illustration Nuclei the Hypothalamus, of From Ventricle. Anterioristotheright. Hypothalamus. (RedrawnfromNautaWJH,HaymakerW.The Springfield,IL:CharlesCThomas;1969.) a point is, maintain parameter particular physiological parameter the servomechanism: of to use which set engineering, through at loops a that a a negative system value. controlled feedback the in is particular or adiposity, following examples body and intake. water and illustrate this temperature, body weight principle The for

of situations differing body a fluctuating in activity production. bodily temperatures core Homeothermic temperature relatively endogenous levels cause animals constant heat that maintain of environmental and on and This skin, CNS, ability the viscera. rests thermoreceptors located information in groups of three from main

by about external the in temperature thermoreceptors Information the is provided skin. in the temperature area Core thermoreceptive central of is the monitored blood. cord), spinal the body by preoptic temperature possibly monitor local (and which neurons these Thermoreceptors in monitor the temperature organs. in viscera the the All this these temperature constant. used provide hypothalamus, later), in preoptic of (pathways temperature keep the to parts with receptors which described to information core of is information area along body servomechanism point preoptic area temperature. as with the hypothalamus the a act at body set normal Thus and together a

signals depending integrated, sources their of Although relative situation. from on importance may the are shift, the these each mechanism skin cutaneous for evoke body and temperature. are initial temperature the the in and external in in so core, compensating most of much changes and temperature changes the probably more the receptors environmental in larger for Changes often rapid used than for internal exercise, so more signals situations thermoreceptors body causes temperature starts as are Central important change or are despite or which that changes core severe from with change, the during thermoreceptors. external temperature prolonged temperature peripheral of to such in hot or body of detected thermoreceptors. or the liquids visceral temperature Last, by of alteration cold is by ingestion food

evoke that the warming deviation of toward temperature and cooling set point which set signals (i.e., body Error to restore the the from responses tend servomechanism, body), the of point. represent a These autonomic, endocrine responses somatic, and by systems. are mediated the

for heat involving of (thermogenesis) heat variety trigger increase cooling, responses production Situations and that a example, loss. minimize Heat lead (in the include is that that reaction from dissipated tissue instead), increases production increased muscle released the to by allows energy of BAT is and thermogenesis, increased brown contractions hormone shivering mechanisms production) skeletal metabolism. to adipose and levels uncoupled (BAT) thermogenesis heat be oxidative synthesis, (asynchronous phosphorylation which by increased as heat ATP thyroid thermogenesis is vasoconstriction and loss reduced by piloerection. Heat cutaneous by not humans; goose is effective in Piloerection latter, result only but fur is with the in in animals the bumps. the to tachycardia distribute muscle) the and metabolites help which addition, (fat may heat help thermogenesis in to occurs, generated throughout used the provide body. be thermogenic In and tissues of on decision initiate being perception putting influences cold Finally, possibly this behaviors: the to the jacket. in voluntary a case,

opposite body in direction. the causes the changes generally Warming metabolic less of leads thyroid production. gland heat activity activity The the diminishes, and which to reduced not increased (because of humans), is by sweating, cutaneous sympathetic and (in salivation some Heat loss activity). but vasodilation decreased animals heat this cutaneous the tachycardia again circulation to time occurs, perfusion optimal dissipation. of for However, allow presumably

as anterior heat conservation hypothalamus hypothalamus as Early the center. a center a posterior preoptic loss the and identified and heat studies region with For in hyperthermia an prevent a a lesion if in and occurs. region individual vasodilation, and sweating warm region lesions preoptic in placed is example, this the cutaneous environment, the stimulation shivering. and cutaneous loss Conversely, vasodilation inhibits causes center heat of electrical in heat person dorsolateral in production a body and area In can the cold the is mammillary conservation interfere the when to and lesions cause hypothermia with contrast, environment. in region the stimulation brain of evokes this shivering. Electrical

circuitry they physiologic underlying and temperature preoptic the area body and responses that the regulation details and of regulation key components now processes medial dorsal known, indicate are of in Many hypothalamic are temperature. nucleus the the area be to target sensory the in of of particular sources various The appears the preoptic information. neurons and caudal the by is cord in horn temperature the that midbrain. of dorsal conveyed the to that Cutaneous spinal parabrachial synapse up excite in afferents onto nucleus project information the primary thermosensitive the solitary afferents well. relayed as parabrachial is visceral by to Information from nucleus the nucleus within preoptic the median part (of of The parabrachial neurons area). a the excite in neurons area, specific preoptic nucleus the turn (see (EP3), sensitive which in the are temperature (PGE2) median also Clinic” responses changes blood neurons to 3 “In fever nucleus Many following local and box). the contain E2 receptor prostaglandin mediates

nucleus thermoregulatory various preoptic integrated. component median from system of control which types the the is a the Thus of key is in information thermoreceptors directly regions nucleus. and to from nucleus the the the area, medulla, projects medial medial hypothalamic of both to is via Output this directed preoptic dorsal which rostral neighboring to located, rostral the these cord, the the that vasomotor BAT project activity The medulla regulates projecting are thermogenesis neurons neurons where tone. spinal spinally sympathetic neurons of the preganglionic lateral modulates cutaneous and and has of horn neurons the shivering response. spinal also which and rostral somatic to mediate ventral horn the motor the projects muscle that medulla contains skeletal contract cord, of thus The the

bymicroorganismsorbycellsmediatingtheinflammatoryresponse.Thepyrogen’seffecttoraisethesetpointismediatedprimarilybytheactionofprostaglandinPGE2’sbindingtoEP3receptorsonneuronsinthepreopticarea.PGE2isreleasedbyperipheraltissuesandbybloodvesselssupplyingthepreopticarea.ThebindingofPGE2toEP3receptorscausesareductionintheactivityofpreopticneurons.ThisreductioninneuronalactivityleadstoincreasedheatproductionthroughshiveringandBATthermogenesisandtoheatconservationbycutaneousvasoconstriction,thecombinedeffectofwhichistoraisebodytemperature.EvidenceofthismechanismoffeverproductionincludesstudiesinwhichinjectionofPGE2intothepreopticareainducedfeverandothersinwhichselectivedeletionoftheEP3receptorfrompreopticneuronsabolishedtheabilityofPGE2injectionstoinducefever. Fever,whichaccompaniessomeinfections,canbethoughtofasanelevationofthesetpointforbodytemperature.Thiselevationcanbecausedbythereleaseofpyrogens

of Body Regulation Weight and Feeding

crucial animal. for is Energy survival the the of homeostasis eat; is need a they periodic have animals of to continuous nutrients but that instead, meals. do most function, The supply most challenge cells constantly not control by to stores. and which energy energy on ensure basis factors, sufficient both operate Thus behavior short-term ingestion feeding weight to body on basis to is order controlled to homeostasis, long-term many a a control achieve in is Both role chapter, of central the homeostasis. because are hedonic involved; and energy focus the in that in latter the however, this on plays homeostatic hypothalamus factors the

of short the In by run, number eating controlled is a mechanisms. stomach as stomach. receptors First, that wall fills the food distention stretch the signal has are medulla. the the vagus the in to conveyed solitary the nucleus These nerve by of signals afferents organize the cortex, via material, brain relay responses is information conscious directly a the relayed nucleus, to or areas, and autonomic to the of in the including thalamus and to hypothalamus, the there stomach. the several for parabrachial fullness ingested either awareness of the From the In are lateral these targets hypothalamus nuclei signals. dorsomedial, the major the arcuate and paraventricular, and of the hypothalamus,

stretch this the the there, from described that to and the in lipids and similar sense a to receptors. circulation afferents for hepatic the and, and solitary portal intestines nucleus manner hypothalamus, send glucose the also the of concentrations to in Sensory information ghrelin. release hormones and (GLP-1), peptide-1 peptide including in glucagonlike the gut number feeding, of response cholecystokinin, to In stomach a and YY, addition, influenced directly receptors for many hormones Hypothalamic be and by of can have these them. cells pathway receptors hypothalamus. provide In thus areas hormones brain the these cells addition, other may an and for to have indirect in it. postrema, projects to just is One is solitary region the dorsal which area and nucleus such the to intake. which and to organs), neurons of by not is barrier respond food postrema its and cholecystokinin protected to circumventricular The area blood-brain (it decreased one GLP-1, the the leads is

by is influenced nervous and the of interaction the long factors weight of and systems. endocrine run the involves many over Control body a of hypothalamus is provides another part servomechanism. of role of nervous on hypothalamus focus is its the the the the of which this In system, how control and example section, autonomic is the controlled adiposity case, In this parameter. further details see the role, endocrine system’s on For

and ventromedial lesions used and evidence in studies that hypothalamus stimulation are electrical provided Early ventrolateral which homeostasis. involved the energy in researchers decreases that same whereas lesion in stimulation electrical region causes behavior. in A obesity, ventromedial (hyperphagia) feeding results of in intake the region the food increase an lesions high activity, decreasing to turn insulin of were conservation autonomic blood levels, tone, to and which alter energy also in increasing storage and sympathetic both lead (see parasympathetic promote shown ). These which ventromedial These that center. a to contains satiety the hypothalamus observations idea the led body even simply not (i.e., body adiposity). the interpretation levels primary an that more rather fat specifically, behavior and, controlled per alternative variable is weight eating but se be However, may defend Thus actions be feeding of just one behavior may used point. several set a modulation body to of weight for by is dynamic maintained is although in initial present, followed which the in hyperphagia. hyperphagia this this of a that an which cause period lesions period without weight weight gain higher is is static Evidence nonetheless obese, Moreover, of that changes a hyperphagia fed ventromedial in the in lesion (normal) the of prevent processes. a amount regulation fixed hypothalamus which food implies other become with are to animals metabolic have the ventromedial lesions hypothalamus levels been expenditure. Last, of energy alter shown to of

to the intake in food of a death lead can In to such lesions. the starve after lesions and contrast those hypothalamus, suppress body animals weight; hypothalamus lateral ventromedial decrease (hypophagia) to indeed, of electrical hypothalamus and evokes behavior stimulation forebrain Conversely, present. of the exploratory lateral if the in eating, is food medial bundle also a abuse. as (food, effects drugs that the of rewarding reward as sex) provides well dopamine-dependent incentive mediates of natural rewards effects of most This stimulation the led contains a to lateral the These hypothalamus observations center. feeding that the view way just these or dopaminergic so the lateral their for axons pass to to of in loss complicated experiments. and the could on interpretation, striatum, hypothalamus the substantia however, This effects account fact neurons of these nigra that by is the produced fibers lateral the stimulation does been that peptides, to probably homeostasis. hypothalamus as the lateral hypothalamic play a feeding role neurons However, affect in found such have synthesize behavior, orexin, energy lateral so and

underlie and In have of in of control energy interactions many homeostasis endocrine weight, been a identified feeding body the and and and nervous systems clarified. between studies, investigators number neuropeptides involved hormones have the newer that of

varying correlated with with insulin (in of are levels levels glucose adiposity blood substances). normal addition acutely In individuals, blood and other to of (primarily correlated hormone released leptin, adiposity. level protein a adipocytes tissue), the with forming Similarly, white the by adipose is those fat tissue, low leptin actions. leptin intake reverse including stimulate loss processes, of levels whereas trigger and levels High inhibit the of food catabolic Similarly, levels energy storage promote processes. high insulin

nucleus, for body express actions insulin hormones arcuate neurons their both has the been on The of the particularly to also to and ). (see receptors ability hypothalamus, whose weight leptin linked regulate been major leptin respond have to that identified. of insulin Two neurons arcuate and classes nucleus insulin, catabolism. express (CART) leptin are and and increased leads by (POMC) Neurons amphetamine-related activity proopiomelanocortin and that to stimulated their transcript cocaine-and but activity is a leptin by those contrast, (NPY) neuropeptide Y of neurons, inhibited the and insulin. of second group express triggers that processes and agouti-related In peptide (AgRP), anabolic in high act to of which levels, leptin both and increased catabolism, activity body to NPYand to which increase levels of of fat point. lead decrease Thus activity the turn to set increased (1) neurons, insulin neurons, return their leading AgRP-expressing leading both and anabolism; to decreased (2) fat body POMCand the levels CART-expressing level increase sequence of to events that their levels to a described result fat just fat in set Lowering body original levels point. would body or to opposite

that neurons not is worked fully of the sets of out. actions mediates efferent arcuate these limb The paraventricular the step an the to projection be pathway. arcuate appears nucleus hypothalamic in However, to important nucleus the oxytocin. Paraventricular contain neurons Many ). uterine in and contractions (see the during gland pituitary and of project to labor are involved posterior lactation them its autonomic release. in stimulate the release, insulin spinal paraventricular and regulation project cord, which weight body which the preautonomic pancreas, and a of involved are with neurons inhibit that neurons distinct act the to they to where brainstem to sympathetic fibers act fibers, to probably vagal that subset synapse control parasympathetic However, down and nuclei

Intake Water of Regulation

on depends servomechanism. also intake a Water by and influenced volume intake is blood ( Fluid osmolality

Fig. 11.5

causes the deprivation, hyperosmotic. which in With turn extracellular the water becomes hyperosmotic, fluid become fluid intracellular to neurons brain also osmoreceptors for in detection extracellular of ). of The fluid the that pressure osmotic serve (see contains as increases organum The the located be in appear to osmoreceptors

circuit, the in including receptors receptors II posterior B •Fig. vessels Drinking neurons pituitary Angiotensin vasopressin-releasing II Blood Osmotic receptors Angiotensin Structuresthoughttoplayaroleintheregulationofwaterintakeinrats.LHA,lateralhypothalamicarea.B, 11.5 A, Neuralcircuitsthatsignalchangesinbloodosmolalityandvolume. RedrawnfromShepherdGM.Neurobiology. (A, NewYork:OxfordUniversityPress;1983.) the terminalis, lamina organ. circumventricular vasculosum a is which of a barrier. lack blood-brain the Circumventricular cerebral surround ventricles organs and thirst. organum in vasculosum involved are and organ the subfornical The

also of which in the volume, receptors sensed of heart causes ). (see decrease atrium deprivation is a the by Water side vasculature, also including in blood the right the low-pressure decreased In triggers blood the kidneys. volume release addition, the by renin of Renin I, which angiotensinogen breaks (see angiotensin ). into II then down angiotensin to hydrolyzed is II subfornical organ. peptide action of circumventricular stimulates the on in This drinking receptors the by another an angiotensin organs, release of II and aldosterone vasoconstriction also antidiuretic Angiotensin (ADH). hormone and causes

water excessive greater intake. problem water usually is a Insufficient than intake supraoptic neurons taken the their ). (see terminals by at eliminated nucleus required, the posterior it gland in inhibition is However, pituitary in of of easily when release than in more is ADH water the from ADH that and release previously, increased fluid. decreased signals osmolality extracellular of of include inhibit As volume mentioned blood intake, lateral hypothalamus, regulate hypothalamus. areas preoptic several the outside help region and the Other particularly do structures water of as the hypothalamus,

Several the of forebrain than autonomic control. also in play the regions other hypothalamus role a of the well terminalis, the and regions central as a the cerebral include These of as the amygdala nucleus cortex. number of of stria bed areas the nucleus tract, the autonomic ascending and from centers viscera higher the parabrachial nucleus nucleus, solitary system that reaches these of through the hypothalamus. the the involves Information an matter, periaqueductal gray of the paraventricular activity the and originate ventromedial control nuclei structures the structures group the such Descending autonomic A5, pathways ventrolateral the rostral and in cell nucleus hypothalamus, as help of medulla, noradrenergic adjacent raphe medulla. that

Neural the on System Immune Influences

of Environmentalstresscancauseimmunosuppression,inwhich and number the killer helper cells cells of the reduced. activity natural T are be result of can the Immunosuppression even classical conditioning. release the such an hypothalamus. mechanism the effect of One for factor from involves corticotropin-releasing adrenal cause ). of causes Corticotropin-releasing the corticosteroids, stimulates immunosuppression hormone release the pituitary of release which factor from the adrenocorticotropic gland; (see (ACTH) ACTH of secretion tissue. actions on mechanisms Other include lymphoid neural direct influence neural also immune may The activity. system

1.

system controls glands. muscle, and cardiac The muscle, autonomic smooth nervous coordinates external to It homeostasis helps responses maintain stimuli. and motor and has components, divisions. of sympathetic component sensory consists parasympathetic motor It the and and The with considered enteric specifically concerned autonomic the often as is tract. of nervous is nervous of but gastrointestinal control system system part the

2.

Autonomic preganglionic motor pathways postganglionic neurons. have and the in neurons CNS, neurons lie ganglia. postganglionic whereas peripheral Preganglionic in reside are the neurons neurons and postganglionic preganglionic ganglia. Sympathetic cord, the in of are prevertebral sympathetic located in paravertebral located region thoracolumbar and spinal cranial or cord. preganglionic Parasympathetic of sacral portion the in neurons are in nerve the nuclei located spinal the located in in neurons near Parasympathetic postganglionic ganglia organs. reside or target

3.

sensory in fibers the viscera. receptors Autonomic innervate afferent that are to some, sensations leads also consciously. function experienced Most to for activate activation reflexes;

4.

gastrointestinal The the myenteric submucosal wall system enteric nervous includes of the and plexuses the tract. in motility, The water submucosal regulates and secretion. myenteric the transport plexus regulates and plexus ion and

5.

the include in neuropeptides. synapses number of nicotinic and and preganglionic Neurotransmitters neurons ganglia a acetylcholine autonomic muscarinic both at receptors) at of (acting in Interneurons

Nakamura Central for circuitries fever. regulation K. body temperature and Physiol. Integr J Regul Comp Physiol Am 2011;301: R1207-R1228.

release catecholamines. the ganglia receptors) on is (acting neurons; Norepinephrine are released released. the by generally also postganglionic adrenergic neuropeptides sympathetic neurotransmitter Sympathetic sweat acetylcholine. glands postganglionic that neurons supply release Parasympathetic on neurons (acting postganglionic acetylcholine release receptors). muscarinic

6.

systems. and reciprocally pupil sympathetic nervous the parasympathetic The controlled by is dilation pupillary pupillary activity (mydriasis); causes activity (meiosis). Sympathetic constriction causes parasympathetic

7.

reflex. the the on urinary depends micturition outflow bladder parasympathetic Emptying during of sphincter the prevents of Sympathetic internal the of urethra constriction voiding. and pons. The normal is receptors, triggered center reflex in it by in the micturition adults micturition a controlled is stretch by

8.

of weight, to regulation of intake. contains that have body and variety temperature, functions, fluid hypothalamus basic bodily body functions a many related The including nuclei

9.

homeostasis parameters as function physiological hypothalamic servomechanism. acting to critical goal of a is by maintain The of hypothalamus and parameters The specific uses receives to a parameters about each maintain of information set at point. these physiological specific this information mechanisms. does via so multiple It the control of via chapter homeostasis it its maintains autonomic This system. how illustrates

TC, Elmquist Saper CB, JK. Chou The eating. to homeostatic feed: hedonic control of and need Neuron. 2002;36:199-211.

Berg Neuroscience. L, D. Squire Fundamental 4th ed. 2012. York: Press; Academic New

JAMES 3Muscle SECTION M. WATRAS

student able 1. Upon the the of questions: answer following be completion this to should chapter,

the structural the organization muscle, muscle effect to the features/proteins skeletal contractile the Describe link fiber extracellular elements movement. and to matrix skeletal the including of that bone within affect a conditions might and myopathy. they the various contribute While that linkages, particular how to identify describing congenital commonly structures

2.

spinal action muscle. in molecular of a the of skeletal in lead α mechanisms column which ventral by an horn contraction can to potential neuron the the motor Describe the

3.

Describe of mechanisms increases. which by force muscle the the contraction skeletal

4.

metabolic of skeletal activity. of various and pattern, their types for Compare characteristics, in thus fiber muscle characteristics, contractile recruitment types suitability terms

5.

pathways signaling the the that the to phenotype phenotype. fast-twitch slow-twitch the muscle versus muscle expression contribute Discuss of

6.

to contribute pathways signaling that Describe or general hypertrophy atrophy.

7.

of underlying development mechanisms Discuss muscular the fatigue.

8.

underlying the mechanisms reflex. monosynaptic Describe

9.

the curves muscle, for both force-velocity curves. and skeletal of curves the including bases molecular Discuss length-tension

of energy. cells mechanical for highly specialized are the energy to conversion chemical Muscle adenosine energy work. Specifically, generate muscle do use the or to force in cells triphosphate (ATP) several (such or types have as blood, can peristalsis), locomotion, pumping Because work evolved. of forms muscle take many muscle, basic skeletal muscle. are cardiac types smooth The three and of muscle, muscle

on acts skeleton. Skeletal the muscle limbs, a muscle lever spans example, a In joint, for thereby action. allowing skeletal numerous speech, plays controlled such and respiration. under Skeletal nervous activities as locomotion, by maintenance role (i.e., posture, is the system) central a muscle and key voluntary in of control myosin that When muscle under skeletal viewed 3 organized arrangement striations microscope, intervals from within (at the the transverse skeletal to of cells. the and of result 2 highly actin muscle molecules exhibits µm) a Thus as classified striated is muscle. skeletal muscle modulated also cardiac of it intrinsic although a pacemaker involuntary muscle composed it the autonomic an The muscle, controlled by is muscle, striated and nervous heart system). is an is by and (i.e., muscle) an in skeletal such lining Smooth is muscle the hollow the muscle organs striations typically evident involuntary as lacks vessels. found and and blood (which cardiac intestine transient molecules, all interaction of In types, myosin force of and process elevation is muscle requires [Ca++]. a that intracellular actin generated three the by

mechanisms skeletal contraction muscle. directed In the of attention underlying molecular at is this chapter, regulating force the of for also Mechanisms addressed. contraction are organization put to into perspective, To skeletal important basic first this is information the muscle. examine it of

Skeletal Organization Muscle of

Fig. spanning muscles skeletal elbow 12.1 the illustrates joint. either on The of attached to muscles are bone the side joint. closest the far (distal) called the (proximal) joint whereas the insertion. spine called the is the origin, point of point is of attachment side of attachment on The the to (connective end These attachment the the at occur of points muscle. through of tissue) tendons elbow motion. a is of enables close to Note broad range point that joint, of insertion the which the muscle flexor on side on of the muscle extensor Also the note an joint. joint a the by spanned opposite and is side one that the in of (see muscle Thus the muscle flexor contraction biceps

Fig. (see decrease contraction in of extensor muscle muscle the in shoulder), the the joint results the angle in forearm the a whereas to (bringing closer triceps ) 12.1 the of elbow

Fig. in (extending 12.1 reverse motion the the arm). results )

The in skeletal basic structure is muscle shown of

Fig.

. 12.2 muscle of Fig. • numerous called Each is composed cells 12.1. the and Skeleton of to distal allows of a respectively. to and Way that Spans of range insertion Joint. joint, and Note motion. the insertion, origin a Attaches of Muscle termed Tendons which are tendon points close attachment is by Typically Skeletal The the proximal the broad flexion the extension of joint, Also which that skeletal of both forearm. both sides note the span and allows muscles

Fig. • details. represents individual is muscle of bundle 12.2. from arrangement bundles such striations A of are is (Redrawn myofibrils. due composed of fibers; each Skeletal contains bundles muscle muscle fasciculus. and DW. fiber muscle and the thick Fawcett The text W, an See Bloom of cell called a for to thin filaments. 10th 1975.) Saunders; A of Textbook ed. Philadelphia: Histology. fibers. muscle endomysium A called the these tissue surrounds each connective of layer fibers. are together fascicles, the called which into grouped perimysium. layer then tissue fibers muscle are by Individual connective another surrounded Within individual the vessels nerves blood that the the supply are and fibers. perimysium muscle joined form are together The to muscle. fascicles the muscle surrounds sheath that the tissue is The called connective epimysium. the the come the muscle layers to form the tendon, to a attaches the of skeleton. together the ends muscle, which connective tissue At the with muscle interdigitate myotendinous fibers movement of of The (discussed of tendon skeleton force the of the muscle the the of tendon section). for effect the the region is where ends to a the junction transmission contraction specialized tendon this of to later the in fibers The damage and prevent mainly contraction. muscle the to to as result layers tension tendon and overstretching collagen of muscle they and are the thus of composed also fibers, tissue connective elastin and a of or contribute passive

in skeletal cm can 25 cells 80 narrow µm but be length). they diameter), muscle (≈10 extremely long to Individual (up in to are cell. bundles axis filaments, the of skeletal called the contains Each of along myofibrils, running fiber muscle gross myofibrils. repeating the a results of pattern The striation pattern cell from in the filaments thick regular gives muscle. and myofibrils, organized the highly with Specifically, rise these the it coupled within alignment appearance that the skeletal thin myofibrils, of to of adjacent is arrangement striated of the myofibrils. in in fibers Striations underlying and observed the muscle can intact be

Fig. 12.3 ). sarcomere two skeletal and demarcated lines contractile lines represents The by is repeating unit called dark muscle. a in Z 2 average of The is µm. length sarcomere a side band a actin. line is that On of thin primarily the band) either Z protein the contains light of filaments composed (I the is A filaments protein primarily within band, contains area myosin. of sarcomere which between the a I The composed thick two bands portion overlap and the of actin sarcomere filaments The thin from line Z center of the filaments. a the the thick toward extend thick represents A The area overlap of band thin end between region of filaments. and the the dark this at band. of the the in area A called is center light the sarcomere H filaments. myosin A the band the actin no of represents portion thin that This contains but thick area filaments the from H the edge thin Z in actin a of the to and thick the band. line of filament portion Thus band the filaments A overlap extend A the includes that center dark alignment called filaments the in proteins and line appear of in sarcomere the of the evident M the critical organization for sarcomere. be to thick and line is

Fig. in sarcoplasmic myofibril each 12.3, muscle a is surrounded reticulum by (SR). fiber network is •Fig. an intracellular SR membrane a that The plays critical 12.3. Organizationoftheproteinswithinasinglesarcomere.Thecross-sectionalarrangementoftheproteinsisalsoillustrated. Eachfibrilissurroundedbysarcoplasmicreticulum(SR).TerminalcisternaeoftheSRarecloselyassociatedwithTtubulesandformatriadatthejunctionoftheIandAbands.TheZlinesdefinetheboundaryofthesarcomere.Thestriationsareformedbyoverlapofthecontractileproteins.Threebandscanbeobserved:theAband,Iband,andHband.AnMlineisvisibleinthemiddleoftheHband.C, Myofibrilsarearrangedinparallelwithinamusclefiber.B, A,

the regulation intracellular [Ca++]. of role in the of the T SR). ends fiber muscle near close Invaginations of tubules, the the the to called into (i.e., A band pass sarcolemma, in network, however, tubules distinct the T an with T whereas tubules, SR systems: is are space. The the are The SR extracellular and membrane intracellular contact the SR. tubules gap in from (≈15 A nm the separates T the width) the nearest and the which it T The tubules section the of the Ca++ contraction is skeletal SR is muscle is portion (see ”). critical “ cisternae, of release, site terminal called the of for The with cisternae the SR are and of length terminal the of the sarcomere. continuous portions longitudinal extend along the Ca++ the and of Ca++ (i.e., high portion protein contains Endoplasmic the density of pump critical Sarcoplasmic for SR SR This Reticulum reaccumulation SERCA: of is Ca++-ATPase), muscle. relaxation the in for hence which a of

the are (see myofibrils sarcomere highly and of thin in organized The thick filaments

Fig. ). 12.3 extend actin mentioned, the As whereas filaments filaments thin the centrally myosin the portion center of line opposing are from and the Z filaments. sarcomere, located a thick of thin overlap toward actin The thin thin surrounded that of thick the is filaments overlap oriented such myosin are by region each sarcomere, filaments. array thick the filament of hexagonal within a a way in and actin in The force myosin Interaction: the (see of contraction thick stimulation section the muscle and of actin of thin interaction after the “Actin-Myosin generate the the Ca++-dependent filaments filaments

filament actin globular two-stranded helical F-actin. actin molecules The of into a aggregation filamentous thin filament or actin or called formed (termed is G-actin) by regulation the the filament of of extends length the may in participate protein along and the cytoskeletal nebulin elongated length thin of The thin filament. and molecules. extend entire Dimers actin actin protein binding the the tropomyosin filament cover sites myosin of the on over seven across dimer molecules, extends dimers with head-to-tail configuration. tropomyosin tropomyosin sequential a actin Each in arranged troponin consisting (troponin troponin T, troponin three A and subunits complex I, of

section each actin influences dimer is tropomyosin of myosin filament present the the “Actin-Myosin of tropomyosin inhibit on to hence the of C) on (see Interaction: and low the at concentrations Ca ability tropomyosin cytosolic the binding filament position molecule and the actin to

Cross-Bridge Formation”).

exposes Ca++ troponin promotes the binding to cytosolic Binding interaction, contraction C myosin actin-myosin ”). thereby hence section the movement the facilitating Interaction: (see filament on actin, on and actin of “Actin-Myosin of that sites tropomyosin CapZ tropomodulin, proteins include protein. and filament the associated thin α-actinin, Additional with Tropomodulin the the located length at of filament, sarcomere, may toward the of is filament. the center the thin in and the setting thin end participate of

• Fig. and fibers, numerous tissue of (B) which Costameres connective (C). tissue helps tendon connections is the the tip Costameres of connective the the cell muscle of the lines tendon, junction: DGC, (at subsarcolemmal the an The the collagen From the associated contraction, contraction end by myofibrils sarcolemma extracellular force and to tendon the (at contraction fibers interdigitation failure (A represents of the B, laterally the and costameres). atrophy. with to Tidball with of and Myotendinous transmitted located the JG. of both sides transmitted longitudinally with myotendinous in fiber fiber fiber of Z sarcolemma. the facilitate of (M) The changes muscle dystrophinassociated transmission the the the junction) to muscle of the of in is 12.4. on represent muscle mechanical end result lateral morphological glycoprotein at and stabilize extracellular between muscle Folds bridges adjacent are complex. force junction. and arrow). fiber the force (A, the from myotendinous the muscle in C, Hughes K. and skeletal Exp Baar in Pathol. of M, transfer Molec muscle. Effects Wallace aging, on From force disease exercise, 1984;40:1-12. D, Metab. 2015;309:E1-E10.) Endocrin Physiol Am J

to and fila-of serve CapZ protein to lateral line. thin the transmission α-actinin anchor ment the sarcomeres across muscles of the and Z this (described later force section). in

of is to force longitua both cytoskeletal filaments Z are thick called The contraction tethered titin. by transmitted myosin protein The the lines (via extends myotendinous elastic to center of appears very connective the (molecular adjacent Titin large, (via Z line junctions) from a fibers the tissue to dinally laterally to sarcomere to protein weight, the to and the muscle kDa) costameres). tendon is the be that and >3000 a the ments alignment muscle fila-specialized the thick the region connects junction represents in important fiber and to the of for organization myotendinous The sarcomere. where forms ( dystrophy Some muscular of tendon

Fig. 12.4A and B).

in of defects the sarcolemma been titinopathies). titin attributed to (i.e., have Folding in junction an interdigitation at myotendinous the results

with of fiber, and the the The highly the the intermediate in protein ment contact area cytoskeleton tendon participates muscle between (including sarcomeres. align-increases the filament muscle the desmin) of which fiber organized of the end the at tissue Desmin lines the extends muscle adjacent hence to per the the unit from of fiber. complexes on force protein and connective sarcomeres end of reduces the integrin the Z area the muscular the folding thus of in junction. sarcolemma decreased both alignment forms the myotendinous participates with and Some dystrophy at associated are involved complexes talin-vinculin-integrin include the protein and myotendinous in force the dystrophin-glycoprotein junction of at Proteins transmission longitudinal the complexes. signaling. have Z been implicated proteins The junction also contains disk myotendinous that in

of proteins subsarcolemmal sarcomeres of to involves lines link contraction force of through series (see Z the Lateral a which matrix costameres, transmission extracellular of the

Fig. 12.4C ). is that muscle. not the important do muscle for fibers particularly the extend entire This length of it force of during is damage stabilize also to and contraction. The lateral to from transmission the protect sarcolemma thought The also molecules. junction contain and the costameres myotendinous signaling

(describedbyG.B.Duchennein1861)isthemostcommonofthemusculardystrophiesandaffects1per3500boys(3to5yearsofage).Severemusclewastingoccurs,andmostaffectedpatientsarewheelchairboundbytheageof12;manydieofrespiratoryfailureinadulthood(30to40yearsofage).Duchenne’smusculardystrophyisanX-linkedrecessivediseasethathasbeenlinkedtoadefectinthedystrophingenethatleadstoadeficiencyofthedystrophinproteininskeletalmuscle,brain,retina,andsmoothmuscle.Dystrophin isalarge(427-kDa)proteinthatispresentinlowabundance(0.025%)inskeletalmuscle.Itislocalizedontheintracellularsurfaceofthesarcolemmainassociationwithseveralintegralmembraneglycoproteins(formingadystrophin-glycoproteincomplex; Themusculardystrophiesconstituteagroupofgeneticallydetermineddegenerativedisorders.Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy

Fig.12.5 ).Thisdystrophin-glycoproteincomplexprovidesastructurallinkbetweenthesubsarcolemmalcytoskeletonofthemusclecellandtheextracellularmatrixandappearstostabilizethesarcolemmaandhencepreventcontraction-inducedinjury(rupture).Thedystrophin-glycoproteincomplexmayalsoserveasascaffoldforcellsignalingcascades.Theenzymenitricoxidesynthaseispresentinthedystrophin-glycoproteincomplex.

muscular muscular 3 dystrophy Althoughdefectsinthedystrophin-glycoproteincomplexareinvolvedinmanyformsofmusculardystrophy,someformsofmusculardystrophythatinvolveothermechanismshavebeenidentified.Specifically,adefectinsarcolemmarepair(attributedtoloss/mutationoftheproteindysferlin)appearstounderlieatleastoneformofmusculardystrophy(limb-girdle 2J muscular dystrophy).Mutationsintheproteasecalpain (resultinginlossofproteaseactivity)havealsobeenimplicatedinsometypesofmusculardystrophy(e.g.,limb-girdlemusculardystrophy2A),apparentlysecondarytoapoptosis. 2B, dystrophy associatedwithmusclewastinginthepelvicregion).Defectsintheproteintitin(titinopathies)havebeenimplicatedinotherformsofmusculardystrophy(e.g.,limb-girdle andtibial

is in the filament of Organization thick shown

Fig. 12.6 . large chains one that chains large kDa) of two with six pair consists heavy and (≈200 (≈20 (≈480 a kDa) is of protein pairs light of Myosin polypeptides different kDa). configuration long head. the to are globular form α-helical in N-terminal form heavy The segment, chains chain a and an each large heavy a together portions wound rod-like of actin. thick of the actin filament that can and the is filament head the from region the molecule portion away The extends thin bind toward to head able ATP, is also located in Myosin is ATPase activity well. to as hydrolyze the and globular the chains associated light of Two with head. globular are pairs of myosin. light light for activity of termed these the crucial chains, of ATPase chains, essential is pairs One Ca++/calmodulin-dependent the chains, myosin chain can which (see kinase, myosin regulatory protein chains, influence of by actin interaction of can the other be phosphorylated with light pair light “ section called The light

Types”). Skeletal Muscle

Thus presence occurs “essential” and chains). of the activity globular light chains light in requires myosin (namely, ATPase the head myosin the of

a of filaments tail-to-tail by the form arrangement molecules, a in of results which Myosin bipolar filament. myosin association thick head-to-tail bare thick then extends the on by M The association a filament’s zone on side maintaining either molecules, thus central organization the the of bipolar filament line. myosin centered of together Such is arrangement the length drawing a bipolar Z of the the (i.e., during contraction. sarcomere) lines shortening critical for scaffold for in participate to of this the a thought organized the thick is formation in titin alignment the The filament of structure are protein mechanisms myosin thick controlling although highly filament organization cytoskeletal sarcomere. not clear, the and the of thick bipolar myomesin of found C proteins protein) in the filament may both). thick the packing (or in filaments participate and or Additional organization (e.g., also the

Activity of Muscle Skeletal Control

is nervous muscle system. controlled by Skeletal central the an α by muscle each is innervated Specifically, skeletal neuron. motor in ( The the of bodies cord ventral spinal the neurons cell are located α horn of motor

Fig. ). 12.7 the muscle nerves. and reach through ventral roots the axons via mixed exit motor The peripheral muscle innervates the a in branch nerves each single The fiber. branch muscle, motor and cholinergic action transmission and in generates that the the muscle process described the synapse that in are neuromuscular an forms potential junction specialized neuromuscular The fiber

unit and motor nerve. the motor the muscle all consists fibers the nerve by A innervated of contract unit when within motor motor unit is contractile all the the muscle cells functional nerve a because synchronously fires. the The motor unit depending units of a muscle. the the on The muscle size of varies, motor function within

Fig. • between neuronal terminus; skeletal Froehner amino and the CC, dystrophy. syntrophin-binding the in in muscular to (e.g., with (e.g., N, injury structural S. site; skeletal signaling: Ca2+, (A, prevents nitric (CTRL). muscle Electron syntrophin. in domains longitudinal muscle dystrophin-glycoprotein in The N, Another domain; loss associated micrographs indicate oxygen coiled-coil reactive the of of muscular the µ; (D) cross-sectional sarcospan; extracellular actin-binding domain; (rupture). H1, nNOSµ, dystroglycan-binding a view H2) of DBD, Syn, dystrophin the view ABD, 12). SSPN, 12.5. of species, cross-sectional matrix, Whitehead which Organization loss Absence dystrophin repeat the regions and Duchenne’s dystrophin 4, Duchenne’s muscle provides patient a and roles disrupts in From link hinge oxide and complex a dystrophy is muscle terminus; view stabilize of and distribution A, dystrophin. patient hence dystrophy contraction-induced a (DMD). oxide a muscular dystrophinglycoprotein the synthase 8, of SBS, normal sarcolemma with domain; skeletal C, cell of from of (B) shows cytoskeleton Numbers appears development spectrin-like nitric carboxy skeletal D, of the dystrophin of complex show muscle. (C) Allen Rev. muscle muscular From Anastasi 2016;96:253-305. proteins in B, et Physiol Costameric during inactivity. G, skeletal human al. Duchenne reproducible individual and 2008;213:284-295. in from sensitive, A method in D, dystrophy. C Beekman immunofluorescence patients Anat. al. analysis of fibers with samples J dystrophin et muscular C, From and objective PLoS One. 2014;9[9]:e107494.)

approximately of contrast, units is small 200 fibers cardiac a in of Activation muscle, with msec. number motor facilitates motor control. fine increased. can within the (see contractions numbers which muscle Force duration way one skeletal short the action very yet a the The allows muscle units of Activation potential by section contrac“Recruitment” in “Modulation tion provides another the can muscle a by and developed of varying in motor rapid mechanism the force be of controlled of the of is of be fiber of tension which tension ”). Increasing by repetitive stimulation the called of is (see tetany section muscle the

The by α junction “ the formed motor neuromuscular

Force Modulation Contraction of ”). the of an (see neuron is for end plate details). called that action potential its in neuron the from at Acetylcholine along junction the muscle rapidly motor neuromuscular spreads α initiates an the released length. fiber and fiber skeletal potential is than T transmitted action 5 in lemma less action down an the tubules, of the muscle of potential sarco-The along msec. the duration the muscle is then When action cisternae SR potential the The the in of released terminal from Ca++ the into duration is

light cleavage Fig. (S-1) • Proteolytic Globular with heads chains 12.6. The Thick center function the for the (A). tail-to-tail heads a light the Organization in tail and molecules polymerization region. contain formed The a are from that molecule individual configuration of A of extending chains composed thick a of myosin globular of region important filament an myosin (B). has by a An cross-bridge region is cross-bridge Filament. globular sarcomere ATPase heads myosin and is of activity. arm the 2. and S-2, 1 meromyosin; subfragments and light LMM, myosin S-1

myoplasm. and release promotes contraction. intracellular to actin-myosin turn rise, [Ca++] interaction causes which in This potential time the relation and [Ca++] is action for the development intracellular The in in of force in to shown increase course

Fig. . 12.8 (≈5 extremely short-lived msec). The potential action is potential action the [Ca++] and The at begins 20 slightly elevation intracellular after msec. peaks approximately in called This a initiates twitch. [Ca++] contraction increase a intracellular in

SR. [Ca++] T an and intracellular in the of cisternae protein between tubule the the interaction previously As mechanism involves adjacent elevation (see the terminal described underlying in The

Fig. invagination extends terminal sarcolemma into an the of SR. muscle a represents association that fiber T forms close the with ), of cisternae tubule 12.3 the the two and two called triad. a tubule a terminal T The association cisternae opposing of with is a gap there Although cisternae, the in bridge tubule this and (≈15 nm gap. is between T terminal proteins width) the called their ( bridging of the these electron appearance on basis On feet are micrographs, proteins

Fig. 12.9 ). membrane elevation potential. response release are feet the channels the to cisternae in of intracellular in that the action terminal responsible for in These the Ca++ the are [Ca++] this it called receptor channel Because (RYR). ryanodine drug ryanodine, commonly is the binds the that exists is large a RYR homotetramer. kDa) (≈500 a as protein Only RYR embedded SR actually the portion is of molecule membrane. the small a in

the between the terminal of appears cisternae myoplasm to spans in T the be and and tubule the Most gap molecule RYR ( the

Fig. 12.10

T RYR (DHPR). the tubule At with receptor dihydropyridine to called the thought a is interact protein membrane, the an is voltage-gated with Ca++ five channel DHPR L-type subunits. binds be to and drugs subunits to class release induce of tubule of in for the action appears of these T ability the the the dihydropyridine of from Ca++ crucial channel-blocking potential One SR. the initiation release of SR. for However, not the into cell the Ca++ the is of influx the Ca++ needed through from DHPR the is does or DHPR contract in muscle able conduct skeletal with Ca++ extracellular fact, to . In mutated a that Ca++ not of absence terminal the as down the tubule, the opens and SR change is means the of the a in the the DHPR myoplasm. in passes T by protein-protein the to cisternae result RYR this Instead, of releases of DHPR, from and interaction, from release action thought potential change into conformational a conformational Ca++ Ca++

evidence provides freeze-fracture the for use and (see including Structural techniques, close of of a association physical analysis, RYR DHPR

Fig. 12.9 ). in SR membrane. T in homotetrameric opposite directly corners DHPR reside four RYR tubule the of to appears the the the channel membrane underlying influx protein coupling of that have Stac3 which to muscle. also not for the of skeletal direct Stac3 SH3-cysteine initiate in excitation-contraction is shown the and the DHPR present sarcolemma to in Ca++ relies in is domain muscle, cardiac from Ca++ coupling SR. during the Studies the through RYR the DHPR critical the on coupling RYR the 3 rich of skeletal muscle instead RYR release

RYR include Other proteins that junctin the reside (see and calsequestrin, near triadin,

Fig. 12.10 ). present the lumen protein the Calsequestrin is Ca++-binding is of low-affinity in that cisternae. a terminal a from be RYR It establishes the thereby SR favorable the concentration into and Ca++ to at gradient Ca++ allows when facilitates that the of efflux “stored” opens. the concentration myoplasm high at capacity anchor they the Triadin junctin and could release. RYR bind membrane Ca++ the increase the Ca++ of buffering and in thereby cisternae both and site are calsequestrin; near and RYR terminal calsequestrin abundant than SR another low-affinity is Ca++-binding the lumen, although calcium-binding calsequestrin. is less protein in Histidine-rich it protein possibility as role serving a it manner, the a Ca++ which important triadin than in buffer. to Ca++-dependent raises has that appears It more bind a simply tetany. evidence There (SOCE) the muscle store-operated during the is in also via Ca entry (e.g., for skeletal of complex) presence Orai/Stim1 be Inhibition suggests high there may Ca tetanic maximal influx electrical compensated did to tension intracellular by Ca rates but of excitation-contraction coupling extrusion of did maintain tension. that at Ca during some maximal tetany, which not affect which influx stimulation, of reduce tetanic is

•Fig. 12.7. Controlled potentials) Signals (i.e., Skeletal With Efferent an Central Through Passing Motor Neuron α Voluntary action System, by Fibers. Nervous Muscle the Muscle Muscle to Is Eachmotorneuronmayinnervatemanymusclefiberswithinamuscle,althougheachmusclefiberisinnervatedbyonlyonemotorneuron(A). Ascanningelectronmicrograph(B) showsinnervationofseveralmusclefibersbyasinglemotorneuron. Textbook FromBloomW,FawcettDW:A Physiology. of (B, 12thed.NewYork:Chapman&Hall;1994.)

AvarietyofmutationalstudieshavebeenconductedtoascertaintheregionoftheDHPRthatiscriticalforopeningoftheRYR.Onepossiblesiteofinteraction(depictedin

)isthemyoplasmicloopbetweentransmembranedomainsIIandIIIintheα1subunitoftheDHPR.Thevoltage-sensingregionoftheDHPRinvolvedinintramembranouschargemovementisthoughttoresideintheS4transmembranesegmentsoftheα1subunit.GeneticmutationsintheRYRorDHPR,orinboth,havebeenassociatedwithpathologicaldisturbancesinmyoplasmic[Ca++].Suchdisturbancesincludemalignanthyperthermiaandcentralcoredisease,asdescribedlater.ThesemutationsaretypicallyobservedinthemyoplasmicportionoftheRYR,althoughmutationshavealsobeenobservedinamyoplasmicloopintheDHPR.ResultsofstudiesindicatethattheproteinStac3isalsoimportantforthecouplingoftheDHPRtotheRYRinskeletalmuscleandthatamutationinStac3thatispresentintherarecongenitaldisorderNativeAmericanmyopathyresultsinimpairedexcitation-contractioncouplinginskeletalmuscle. Fig.12.10

a. b. 0 ADP [Ca++] Pi Ca++ tubule force T Sarcolemma Action •Fig. interaction c. 120 DHPR Calsequestrin 160 Terminal + Ca++ ATP 200 SRRYR SERCA Myoplasmic of potential Actin-myosin potential Twitch cisternae 8040 12.8. ispumpedbackintotheSRbysarcoplasmicendoplasmicreticulumCa++-ATPase(SERCA),relaxationoccurs.DHPR,dihydropyridinereceptor;Pi,inorganicphosphate;RYR,ryanodinereceptor.B, StimulationofaskeletalmusclefiberinitiatesanactionpotentialinthemusclethattravelsdowntheTtubuleandinducesreleaseofCa++ A, fromtheterminalcisternaeofthesarcoplasmicreticulum(SR).Theriseinintracellular[Ca++]causesacontraction.AsCa++ transient,andforceofthetwitchcontraction. Timecoursesoftheactionpotential,myoplasmicCa++

RYR SR •Fig. tubule T of cisternae DHPR Terminal 12.9. EachRYRintheSRisassociatedwithfourdihydropyridinereceptors(DHPRs)intheTtubule. A, betweentheTtubuleandthesarcoplasmicreticulum(SR),whicharethoughttobetheryanodinereceptors(RYRs)intheSR.B, Electronmicrographofatriadillustratingthe“feet”(arrows) J. (FromProtasiF,etal.RYR1andRYR3havedifferentrolesintheassemblyofcalciumreleaseunitsofskeletalmuscle.Biophys 2000;79:2494.)

of Uptake Relaxation to muscle intracellular as by of SR is the occurs a Ca++ skeletal (i.e., resequestered SR. Ca++-ATPase). of Ca++ action the pump the into is due Ca++ unique all This the it in is endoplasmic association pump reticulum. muscle; in to is cells found not with skeletal named stands it is SERCA, reticulum endoplasmic calcium sarcoplasmic ATPase. which for Accordingly, SR is muscle, the throughout protein tubules of the terminal as the it well. and skeletal SERCA longitudinal in and abundant is cisternae distributed most the hydrolyzed. into each molecule two for It of molecules its lumen transports ATP Ca++ of

seen contraction a transient Ca++ twitch during (see Thus the

Fig. into from the ) reuptake the release 12.8 by of primarily SERCA. terminal SR the reflects RYR of the and portion Ca++ longitudinal cisternae via is the SR present of the and uptake Ca++ to Ca++ tubules of sites throughout sites be to in the longitudinal regions of tubules sarcalumenin nonjunctional release Ca++-binding cisternae. thought the terminal Ca++ terminal from is in the in the transfer protein cisternae The of longitudinal involved and low-affinity of of luminal at uptake sarcalumenin increases least part by that suggest Results in buffering by studies SERCA, Ca++

pump. near the Ca++

phospholamban, SERCA shown myoregulin Ca the micropeptides The have uptake sarcolipin, ( of and decreasing to activity by been regulate Ca of sensitivity the endogenous

Fig. ). 12.11 heart. similar phospholamban phosphorylation skeletal has phospholamban of phosphorylation to in the been in reported in the SR, to Ca A–dependent the transport increase muscle kinase effect slow-twitch Protein of both Phospholamban myoregulin slow-twitch muscle. present in sarcolipin muscle, are is fastand and whereas present in slow-twitch

(i.e., SR). Ca++ of Ca++ exchanges the is ions two two the for pumped H+ , out of SERCA *During ions H+ transport

•Fig. 12.10. the Between Membrane in Structure (SR) Dihydropyridine the Molecular Sarcoplasmic Ryanodine Tubule in (RYR) (DHPR) the Reticulum the Membrane. Receptor Receptor and and Relationships T TriadinisanassociatedSRproteinthatmayparticipateintheinteractionofRYRandDHPR.Calsequestrinisalow-affinityCa++-bindingproteinthathelpsaccumulateCa++ intheterminalcisternae.Seetextfordetails.COOH,carboxylicacid. Nerve. (FromRossiAE,DirksenRT.Sarcoplasmicreticulum:thedynamiccalciumgovernorofmuscle.Muscle 2006;33:715.) toward movement associated of tropomyosin the molecule

of filament. Actin-Myosin the cleft Interaction: actin the form As noted, contraction thereby of actin movement skeletal in of generate cross-bridge [Ca++]. sites intracellular the an and tropo myosin muscle binding on requires a This and allows exposes to filament myosin increase section tension “ process Moreover, of (see contraction the

Cross-Bridge filament. by Sarcomere is Cycling: thin regulated the As shown in

Fig. 12.12 ”). binding sites. four has Ca++ C Troponin sites µM, (i.e., affinity at have rest. bind intracellular high these increases for sigmoidal contractile Mg++ [Ca++] but as Ca++ is a manner force 0.1 in tension) above elevated of Two also in Ca++ seem less µM at . control-with sites be to force half-maximal occurring than involved 1 These mechanism subunits. between promotes The and which troponin the Ca++ in enhancing this interaction the T and troponin ling increase by I the as sites concentration affinity Ca++ , facilitates C troponin with from as have rises Ca++ The and after lower the Once two binding from is troponin bound tension Ca++ SR its release SR. C. follows: to binds other bind released actin to Binding the myosin of Fig. • sarcolamban; al. by endogenous PLN, and DM, (Modified sarcolipin. Ca++-ATPase 12.11. from a performance. (SERCA; A myoregulin; three Identification organization muscle sarcoplasmic that encoded in membrane Cell. phospholamban; A), long SR the MLN, et inhibit noncoding endoplasmic micropeptides reticulum SCL, Anderson their predicted micropeptide putative 2015;160:595-606.) SLN, RNA regulates of (B). Fig. 0.01 0 • 1 100 10 0.1 details. from of underlying binding subsequent In 12.12. a from the in skeletal Hartshorne away force Ca++-dependent the ed. contractile molecules. text Lapedes as of Ca++ on (Redrawn See muscle for result C DJ. DN. myosin actin a binding movement increases manner tropomyosin troponin of and sites The of to Technology. McGraw-Hill; Yearbook 1976.) York: Science of New and a further cause shift filaments to tropomyosin. in appears in of actin actin perhaps that 14 binding the of tropomyosin movement results actin sites molecules, tropomyosin is given Although molecules. on exposing an myosin seven adjacent over molecule, hypothesized molecule extends a as to many it myosin binding strong as another of to of tropomyosin one a of adjacent tropomyosin of proximity be close movement influence This the may molecules. consequence ability molecule the

Cross-Bridge Cycling: Sarcomere Shortening

molecule of the sarcomere. bound, the the center in are conformational myosin actin toward filaments the changes ATP-dependent Once myosin and of actin movement in result thereby fiber. sarcomere and of contracts the Such length shortens the the movement muscle shortens force (labeled in involve to to d termed the thought collectively cross-bridge basic and myosin the are produces by steps The a four that is sarcomere which cycle mechanism

Fig. ). 12.13 resting to thought have myosin the In ATP hydrolyzed partially state, (state a). is the promotes of actin released exposed. troponin sites actin in from to such tropomyosin of Ca++ movement way filament When a in myosin-binding on on binds terminal C, that which are cisternae SR, the it turn is the This the then “energized” allows

disease, core disease. GeneticdiseasesthatcausedisturbancesinCa++ hyperthermia, central andBrody’s homeostasisinskeletalmuscleincludemalignant fromtheSR,therebyresultinginskeletalmusclerigidity,tachycardia,hyperventilation,andhyperthermia.Thisconditionislethalifnottreatedimmediately.Therearecurrentlyaseriesoftests(involvingcontractileresponsesofmusclebiopsyspecimens)toassesswhetherapatienthasmalignanthyperthermia.Theincidenceofthisconditionisapproximately1per15,000childrenand1per50,000adultstreatedwithanesthetics.MalignanthyperthermiaistheresultofadefectintheSRCa++ Malignanthyperthermiaisanautosomaldominanttraitthathaslife-threateningconsequencesincertainsurgicalinstances.AnestheticssuchashalothaneoretherandthemusclerelaxantsuccinylcholinecanproduceuncontrolledreleaseofCa++ intothemyoplasm,andhenceprolongsmusclecontraction(rigidity).ThedefectintheRYRisnotrestrictedtoasinglelocus.Insomecases,malignanthyperthermiahasbeenlinkedtoadefectintheDHPRoftheTtubule. releasechannel(RYR),whichbecomesactivatedinthepresenceoftheaforementionedanesthetics,causesthereleaseofCa++

,whichleadstomitochondrialCa++ Centralcorediseaseisarareautosomaldominanttraitthatresultsinmuscleweakness,lossofmitochondriainthecoreofskeletalmusclefibers,andsomedisintegrationofcontractilefilaments.Itisoftencloselyassociatedwithmalignanthyperthermia,andsopatientswithcentralcorediseasearetreatedasthoughtheyaresusceptibletomalignanthyperthermiainsurgicalsituations.ItishypothesizedthatcentralcoresdevoidofmitochondriarepresentareasofelevatedintracellularCa++ secondarytoamutationintheRYR.ThelossofmitochondriaisthoughttooccurwhentheytakeuptheelevatedCa++ overload.

head myosin Brody’sdiseaseischaracterizedbypainlessmusclecrampingandimpairedmusclerelaxationduringexercise.Whileanaffectedpersonrunsupstairs,forexample,musclesmaystiffenandtemporarilycannotbeused.Thisrelaxation underlying (state to actin the b). bind to that conformational next the actin “ratchet of action” undergoes sarcomere filament termed pulls change center Myosin a toward the (state the c). of Binding releases d). ATP the actin, the c. in affinity and from (ADP) release phosphate decreases resulting of diphosphate for actin to adenosine transition of the to myosin (state the Myosin myosin state filament thereby myosin during inorganic to to partially resting the ATP, is of recock and hydrolyzes Myosin energy the head used the in and the ATP then return the part state.

of undergoes muscle. contraction another still [Ca++] is produces and myosin elevated, intracellular If the further cycle cross-bridge of the capable 10 nm. approximately is thin of ratchet The cross-bridge the action moving filament cycle continues the filament. The complex moves on SERCA myosin the SR. back dissociates troponin-tropomyosin As and sites blocks Ca++ the the from falls, the actin and pumps Ca++ troponin C, [Ca++] into until binding supply stops pumpfoundinfast-twitchskeletalmuscle(seethesection ATP with as is death, ”).ThedecreasedactivityofSERCA1hasbeenassociatedwithmutationsinthegenethatencodesSERCA1,althoughanotheraccessoryfactormaycontributetothedecreasedSRCa++ occurs the If exhausted, abnormalityisseeninmusclesofthelegs,arms,andeyelid,andtheresponseisworsenedincoldweather.Brody’sdiseasecanbeeitherautosomalrecessiveorautosomaldominantandmayinvolvemutationsinuptothreegenes;however,itisrare(affecting1per10,000,000births).ItappearstoresultfromdecreasedactivityoftheSERCA1Ca++ the cycle of uptakeinthefast-twitchskeletalmuscleofindividualswithBrody’sdisease.

gene,whichencodesthechloridevoltage-gatedchannel1inskeletalmusclesarcolemmaandTtubules.Chlorideconductanceintheskeletalmuscleisimportantforrepolarizationandstabilizationofthemembranepotential,andsothereducedchlorideconductanceinskeletalmusclesofindividualswithmyotoniacongenitaresultsinhyperexcitabilityofthemusclefiber.Voluntarycontractionmaythereforebefollowedbyaseriesofactionpotentials(afterdepolarizations)inthemusclethatresultinprolongedcontractions(i.e.,cramping).Epinephrine(e.g.,duringstressfulsituations)oftenworsensthecondition,asshowninmyotonic(“fainting”)goats.Musclestiffnesscanberelievedbyrepeatedcontractions(i.e.,thewarm-upphenomenon),althoughthemechanismunderlyingthewarm-upphenomenonisnotknown.MutationsintheCLCN1 Myotoniacongenitaisalsoassociatedwithprolongedmusclecontractions(painlesscramping)aftervoluntarycontractions,asaresultofmutationsintheCLCN1 geneinmyotoniacongenitamaybetransmittedineitheranautosomalrecessivemanner(asinBecker’sdisease,onetypeofmyotoniacongenita)oranautosomaldominantmanner(asinThomsen’sdisease,theothertypeofmyotoniacongenita).Theprevalenceofmyotoniacongenitaisapproximately1per100,000worldwide;theincidenceishigher(≈1:10,000)innorthernScandinavia.

permanent state). in rigor actin-myosin the state c complexes (i.e., of with formation the this is In muscle the and rigid, is mortis. rigor condition termed state, the

myosin bipolar a already the As orientation formation association noted, of thick (see a of molecules tail-totail configuration to involves in the produce filaments

Fig. ). 12.6 filaments the the pull myosin to during actin toward the cycle. allows a sarcomere center the Such cross-bridge bipolar of orientation are filaments in helical toward each extend also filament molecules such thick filament thin a of The surrounding way the six the myosin in the array a that cross-bridges in thick (see oriented

Fig.

12.3 ). of can thick extend the perpendicular electron to micrographs on rest. seen be and These from at skeletal projections/cross-bridges muscle appear filaments myosin center the myosin state, contracted the the slant of myosin toward which cross-bridges with is the of sarcomere, In head. the ratchet consistent action the

described cycling cross-bridge just the filament theory is The mechanism myosin because sliding called the

stops Cycle (because actions in here mechanisms) regulatory of living relaxed of muscle

msec G. S. 90 Tension L.R. Time0 40 1.0 0.5 7.5 0 •Fig. 12.13. Cycle. Cross-Bridge Intherelaxedstate(statea),ATPispartiallyhydrolyzed(M•ADP•Pi).InthepresenceofelevatedmyoplasmicCa++ (stateb),myosin(M)bindstoactin(A).HydrolysisofATPiscompleted(statec)andcausesaconformationalchangeinthemyosinmoleculethatpullstheactinfilamenttowardthecenterofthesarcomere.AnewATPmoleculebindstomyosinandcausesreleaseofthecross-bridge(stated).PartialhydrolysisofthenewlyboundATPrecocksthemyosinhead,whichisnowreadytobindagainandagain.Ifmyoplasmic[Ca++]isstillelevated,thecyclerepeats.Ifmyoplasmic[Ca++]islow,relaxationresults.

an in toward thin results thin of filament. the the cross-bridge actin filament pulling filament is “sliding” the thick which apparent of the sarcomere, past the center molecule in myosin of molecules contribute many There myosin and involved. both however, given are heads is, to how force uncertainty myosin whether a generation the about actin calculated that myosin been myosin thick stoichiometry a per may 1.8 It has heads of be 600 there molecules. with filament, 1 per head that As result 20% bind the myosin actin, is to generation, suggest myosin only force considerations, a of heads can and heads maximal to calculations actin. during it interact that unlikely with 40% all steric of even

chemical mechanical highly by energy ATP) of conversion (i.e., efficient. is muscle The energy to obtained maximal a efficiency) efficiency submaximal tension. In isolated force mechanical 30% maximum preparations, of muscle (≈65% at is humans range efficiencies to In mechanical 57%. exercise, 40% performing steady-state ergometer from

speed muscle to fibers main Skeletal fast-twitch be two contraction: groups classified of •Fig. can into the according 12.14. ThespeedofshorteningiscorrelatedwithmyosinATPaseactivity.N-SOL,normalsoleusmuscle(slowtwitch);N-EDL,normalextensordigitorumlongusmuscle(fasttwitch);S-EDL,self-innervatedextensordigitorumlongusmuscle(EDLmotornervetransectedandresutured);S-SOL,self-innervatedsoleusmuscle(soleusmotornervetransectedandresutured);X-EDL,cross-innervatedextensordigitorumlongusmuscle(EDLinnervatedbysoleusmotornerve);X-SOL,cross-innervatedSOLmuscle(soleusinnervatedbyEDLmotornerve). A, Musclesvaryintermsofthespeedofcontraction.G,gastrocnemiusmuscleoftheleg;LR,lateralrectusmuscleoftheeye;S,soleusmuscleoftheleg.B, Physiology. FromMontcastleV[ed].Medical (A, 12thed.St.Louis:Mosby;1974.B, Physiol. FromBárányM,CloseRI.J 1971;213:455.) slow-twitch and fibers. muscle As shown in

Fig. msec, tension action rectus eye potential, quickly of in short peak in which relaxes the to an 8 then within a contracts of duration 12.14A contraction. and reaching response quickly, very the , results lateral 90 potential, to muscle and it tension slowly. reach response an The action relaxes leg, contrast, in the peak soleus in requires then of msec to this intermediate presence requires peak fast-twitch tension muscle the of in (40 muscle an reach because time msec) both muscle. The and gastrocnemius fibers to slow-twitch of

difference ATPase in and correlated speed fast-twitch myosin activity (see slow-twitch The is with between muscles contraction of

Fig. fiber muscle 12.14B in the myosin the turn (Fig. of in type which ), present reflects 12.15

Table 12.1 ). that hydrolyze contain contain isoforms slow-twitch muscle quickly, ATP that fast-twitch muscle Thus ATP myosin whereas myosin fibers fibers isoforms hydrolyze

•Fig. IIb, antigravity, sustained Type MHC IIx I burst weight Function: expression: IIx IIa, MHC MHC bearing, expression: expression: and Function: Function: 12.15. Comparisonofthreebasicmotorunitphenotypesinskeletalmuscleofextremitiesandtrunk.MHC,myosinheavychain. (RedrawnfromBaldwinK,HaddadF,PandorfC,etal.Alterationsinmusclemassandcontractilephenotypeinresponsetounloadingmodels:roleoftranscriptional/pretranslationalmechanisms.Front Physiol. 2013;4:284.) *Human“fastglycolytic”skeletalmusclefiberstypicallyexpressthetypeIIxmyosinisoenzymeinsteadofthetypeIIbmyosinisoenzyme.Incontrast,rodentsexpressonetypeofslow-twitchmusclefiber(typeI)andthreetypesoffast-twitchmusclefibers(expressingtypeIIa,typeIIx,ortypeIIbmyosinisoenzymes);thetypeIIxmusclefibersexpressmetabolicpropertiesintermediatebetweenthoseoftypeIIaandtypeIIbmusclefibers.ThetypeIIxmyosinisoenzymemaybecoexpressedwithtypeIIamyosinisoenzymein“fastoxidative”musclefibers.Intext,thesimpledesignationtype fiber referstofastglycolyticmusclefibers. II

slowly. previously, with of the acid These amino types myosin in differ same have structure and isoforms two composition. basic two they described of heavy chains pairs although chains, light two

very surgically involves a fiber, difficult interconnecting convert neurons. into which by to accomplished cross-innervation, is be although It it fiber fast-twitch slow-twitch a motor can two muscle shown in As

Fig. 12.14B of X-SOL vice underwent muscle of versa), soleus controlled and by speed and neuron the , in ATPase was activity the when of muscle (and that digitorum the soleus the increased the the cross-innervation, contraction contraction digitorum myosin soleus extensor longus motor muscle (labeled the so muscle extensor

Fig. decrease (labeled ATPase 12.14 whereas exhibited myosin velocity shortening activity ), and longus digitorum in X-EDL). a extensor the an Thus role of in the the myosin motor muscle of important fiber. plays innervation the expressed isoform fiber which determining type in is muscle the activity fast in the isoform muscle expressed in the important showed concentration isoform the (see muscle the fiber myosin pattern Further or (secondary differences an that the myosin motor the determinant of to section was slow study intracellular whether the Ca of neuron)

of muscle expressed myosin on myosin (see the in be skeletal The distinguished can chain isoforms basis composition heavy

Fig. 12.15

). Table 12.1 or express type IIx, could IIb type whereas chains. Slow-twitch muscle type myosin I chain, IIa, heavy type skeletal myosin fibers contain fast-twitch muscle heavy fibers mixture a isoforms. contain fibers muscle may II of Some myosin type fast-twitch

capacity Slow-twitch oxidative by characterized a muscles skeletal high also (see are

Table with myosin the low resistance muscle to slow-twitch combination in ATPase the fibers. fatigue contribute ), activity of which 12.1 fiber muscle heavy type fibers ranges myosin muscle expressing chains). of low IIa oxidative The the fast-twitch high IIb to myosin type relatively chain) capacity heavy from (in expressing (in fibers muscle oxidative muscle of fatigue. high muscle coupled the the IIb to increases capacity ATPase fibers, of myosin with type fibers fast these low susceptibility The activity, the myosin heavy Humans, chain. express IIb however, rarely type in IIb animals are Type as and rabbit such rats. expressed small myosins

( fiber of one are units only composed type muscle of generally Motor

12.2 Table

Fig. a the muscle 12.15), transition. unless are undergoing fibers atrophy type trigger the with a Conditions chronic fiber chronic the IIx). in within and fast to unloading, the myosin include space change motor a gradual myosin flight), the conditions slow such that expression myosin severe muscle transition denervation, of in the in promote microgravity (type muscle (in expression a and as I) expressed of associated may from fiber unit muscle which of IIa and (types are

slow of units function in is motor maintenance important of posture An the (see

Fig. ). 12.15 of low their low to at these coupled ATPase units fatigue. slow and activity the energy capacity, of with oxidative in motor high posture cost maintain ability myosin motor The facilitates thus units, slow resist muscle resist muscle, slow higher of also fatigue. diameter the smaller slow capillary density muscle in and helps The fibers, slow

force, movements, both faster that require in for activities (see muscle, recruited is more contrast, or Fast

Fig.

12.15 ). require example, lot a Weightlifting, for short of for can duration. power demands units meet more recruited. additional to are the In order for motor force, the units, muscle In motor fibers typically slow comparison units fast (see with more motor contain

). Table 12.2 a fibers. diameter muscle slow muscle than larger do fibers Fast have also Thus meet weightlifting. help increased fast of units as of the activities such burst demands recruitment can motor of fatigue. fast however, large of high myosin fast in muscle muscle fibers the (resulting from increase susceptibility fibers The in fast muscle the distance the diffusion ATPase and the increase to fibers), activity diameter

muscles differences the slow and fast include following: Additional 1. between

and muscle, in so that fast neuron typically is recruited motor easily The are muscles slow first. muscle excited slow more than in with previously, helps slow susceptibility in the reduce slow oxidative muscle. As myosin low to coupled the stated muscle, of ATPase the high fatigue capacity activity,

2.

all for endow in of which with released, of of activity, amount the in a channel acetylcholine receptors, neuromuscular fast from density, muscle and muscle The factor the Na of fast initiation that an acetylcholine higher differs safety muscle vesicle acetylcholine junction content, acetylcholine density the the terms nicotinic of of slow action potential. esterase drops fast that the stimulation, seen muscle repetitive than in safety in During muscle). (faster quickly factor however, slow

3.

which intracellular higher transient muscle, ratio, forceful and RYR, levels quick, fast larger, which than a the important slow a development in with of in SERCA, Ca, fast for muscle, faster is developed SR The higher muscle highly is of of Ca promote all more lumenal contraction. in DHPR/RYR in fibers noted, the type–specific also In manner. a and are slow differences muscle to fast fiber addition proteins between just expressed other C tropomyosin, three the protein. proteins subunits, and include Such troponin of the troponin The contraction influences isoforms dependency tropomyosin expression on differential Ca++ . of and fibers at develop than begin do. fast lower to fibers [Ca++] tension Slow This related the two has has fibers fibers in Ca++ to binding in sensitivity site, whereas low-affinity fact to slow is part C sites. in only single the low-affinity difference isoform troponin troponin of fast that C a Ca++-binding the in contraction the dependence C differences however, troponin restricted Changes on in the isoforms. , Ca++ not of to are T and also tropomyosin troponin in isoforms Differences found. are filament. proteins Ca++ thin the and involves multiple dependence Thus complex of the contributions on on is of from contraction regulation fast in can higher chain particularly by activity muscle because reported of fibers the calmodulin-dependent Phosphorylation however, fast Ca++ Ca++/ chain regulatory of of fibers). increase myosin muscle light myosin kinase light myosin chain contraction, light sensitivity of of the kinase, in (partly

•Fig. 12.16. of Electrical of Increasing Results Force Stimulation in of Contraction. in Muscle Skeletal Increase an the the Frequency ThisisattributabletoprolongationoftheintracellularCa++transientandistermedtetany. tetanus sec IncompletetetanyresultsfrominitiationofanotherintracellularCa++transientbeforethemusclehascompletelyrelaxed.Thusthereisasummationoftwitchforces.Seetextfordetails.Action Tetanus Twitch 1 potential Ca++ force Incomplete Myoplasmic Time force

Modulation of the of Force Contraction

muscle of to recruit of contraction simple increasing force means more is muscle A a of the fibers. a by motor unit Because within motor more fibers muscle muscle are units. a muscle activated fibers the more recruiting simultaneously, all recruits fast-twitch or As as be can already fibers slow-twitch. classified muscle noted, fiber innervation. by type its is of The determined all motor same type. the α motor a unit single fibers are within Because a in a motor neuron, are innervated fibers by unit all of α motor an neuron innervated Slow-twitch easily and 500 that be small fibers) by is motor units are excited (see tend to (100 to muscle

12.2 Table ). motor are to motor tend be in fibers) more that units, to and to Fast-twitch 1000 innervated excite. difficult (containing are muscle large contrast, 2000 α by neurons motor to slow-twitch recruited Thus be tend first. units As is motor force needed, more recruited. more units fast-twitch and are are to advantage The such muscle a resistance first the recruited high those that of recruitment fibers fatigue. that have is strategy motor small size of units at control motor levels low fine allows Moreover, the force. slow-twitch of contraction “summed” by muscle. are force is spatial The process area the motor larger a units because of fibers forces additional within muscle recruiting from of termed increasing of summation the being is later. to temporal is summation, discussed in which This contrast

lead are the to in of quite a Action potentials uniform skeletal SR Ca++ pulse reproducible ( of the muscles and release from

Fig. ). 12.16 potential A sufficient contraction. to releases cause single action a Ca++ twitch this is because short the the contraction Ca++ back rapidly pumped very very is SR. duration into However, of second increases of contraction it a If muscle is the (see time is force before stimulated fully relaxed, the

Fig. , 12.16 middle). are increases. forces frequency Thus as amplified stimulus twitch maintained of At a increases (see throughout level stimulation, intracellular stimulation high the [Ca++] period and of is

Fig. amount greatly that observed exceeds twitch. developed a during of , the right), force 12.16 and termed response The is tetany. baseline next just [Ca++] At to returns frequency, before intermediate stimulus. intracellular the stimulus in However, a (see gradual force is rise there

Fig. 12.16 , middle). termed incomplete phenomenon tetany. is This fusion produce a cases, to stimulation In the twitches. of of is frequency both increased said

the during tetany, a in The low due twitch, with may in a presence generation component of the comparison muscle. force series elastic during be that to initiation force of after the shortly the approximates small muscle when maximal tetanic force. Specifically, is a action muscle potential, generates amount the a twitch the that stretched with Ca++ contraction the tension. actin-myosin the Ca++ maximal a allow that This during into produce is transient of that twitch that the released is to size twitch the coupled observation suggests comparable tetany, during during myoplasm interactions to a enough intracellular the with result, twitch the duration the short series fully is during intracellular not the However, Ca++ elastic that muscle. have fiber a in elements of to components transient enough the contractile stretch sufficiently the and time may is submaximal. the As tension result, measured a

sufficient of contractile thereby transient, An tetany, with of series the muscle force the as component Ca++ results the stretch actin-myosin full and the expression with of the intracellular increase provides to maximal in interactions in completely occurs tension). duration (i.e., time the elastic a •Fig. expected the single component Partial be stretching series of elastic during followed twitch), (as might 12.17. at a Frequency Tetany Do Stimulation Slow-Twitch Muscles Than Muscles. Fast-Twitch Lower Exhibit brackets Slow-twitchmotorunitinthegastrocnemiusmuscle.C, Fast-twitchmotorunitinthegastrocnemiusmuscle.B, underthecurves.Notethelargeforcegeneratedbythefast-twitchmotorunit(A). Slow-twitchmuscleunitinthesoleusmuscle.Themotorunitswerestimulatedatthefrequenciesindicatedontheleft.Thecalibrationbarfortension(ingrams)generatedduringconcentrationisindicatedbythevertical A, Physiology. (FromMontcastleV[ed].Medical 12thed.St.Louis:Mosby:1974.) seen restimulation by the tension, however, to relaxation, of before with tetany. similar of incomplete level be an intermediate to yield complete that expected muscle would muscle of not location component elastic in The known. series the is skeletal the One molecule myosin potential source is itself. such that tissue addition, likely the the and sources component, of there connective In other series is elastic are it as titin.

fibers tetany or fast The the ( to whether produce unit depends on consists needed slow frequency of motor stimulus

Fig. ). 12.17 fast be fibers. can frequencies can tetanized than Slow lower fibers at stimulation frequencies at seen least fibers. to contraction slow-twitch longer part, muscle ability of The lower in tetanize in slow reflects, at of duration the also As illustrated in

Fig. larger larger force fibers a fibers slow in 12.17 fast fibers fibers in units maximal do develop than than motor are and , diameter units. slow there fast are slow in fibers fast because motor than more

Reflex Modulation Arcs Force by of

called muscles fibers. Skeletal muscle also to the fibers parallel skeletal run spindles; intrafusal fibers) (muscle sensory contain that the as muscle the assess contraction. speed degree as of well stretch the of spindles of The muscle, increased of spindles the of the frequency tendon) in an the the the stretching lengthens muscle stretch neurons spindle. action afferent In rapid sensory reflex, results and in of potentials tapping the muscle the (e.g., in the the stretched muscle. fibers These turn spinal that the motor cord neurons innervate in in α excite afferent contraction stretch-induced a that muscle brain. input from is centers in that result high the The arc the require not the reflex is of does takes muscle to is muscle shortens, stretch ensures and to also out spindle, the the thereby output As the the efferent at to lengths. its all which slack respond of sent spindle ability a help muscle the a action, its and By terms at maintain spindles provide muscle length thus their in of angle. to feedback given joint

located Golgi tendon provide and regarding feedback muscle. muscles the organs tendons the contraction of are in of and in that The elongated muscle bundles of series muscle of fibers organ individual main fascicle to fibers. is with an the component of collagen tendon contractions is can respond the through organ fibers fibers tendon A (or and may sends Ib muscle fast-twitch afferent type in nerve or attach impulses both) muscle several response contraction. slow-twitch to to given impulses enter can type promote of contracting neurons cord, (and motor afferent of the excitation inhibition synergistic) α motor neurons antagonistic the to muscles. α The promoting muscles while to spinal Ib which The mediated create postsynaptic the inhibitory the an are an actions α cord motor transmitter inhibitory through inhibitory interneurons neuron to and release in that potential. higher centers sent cerebellum). and the also of brain to type impulses are cortex Ib The (including motor the afferent hypothesized to organs progression muscle of smooth motor that contraction additional of tendon from contraction in may the the is by muscle the recruitment units. response limiting feedback It of may drops off is units not organ of force; higher levels it rather, that recruitment linearly which at to is tendon motor the the interest higher of related the levels of facilitate Of response effort. at force,

skeletal The body posture with of the supports expenditure an the erect relatively energy. little system in exhibit contractile muscles activity. at normally some of even rest, level Nonetheless, in to muscles unstimulated denervated) state Isolated flaccid. (i.e., are a and are be said relaxed body firm. relaxed However, comparatively are muscles the in caused some muscle low levels by the the reflex or driven by of activity arcs of firmness, and This is motor units in contractile tone, from spindles. is tone. afferent by fibers of sectioning resting muscle the sensory this abolishes of the Interruption arc reflex the muscle distinct skeletal “tone” in from The in tone smooth muscle (see is

convert mechanical Muscle cells to energy. chemical energy conversion. is source the for energy ATP used this if not is of The supporting and pool few contractions capable in skeletal only small replenished. ATP muscle a ATP as replenished pool, only even the contraction, are decreased. later, during when is muscle so continually that fatigues, described however, stores modestly This

ATP contraction. the to thus ADP used and store contain cells phosphate, convert to during creatine muscle which replenish is Muscle ATP muscle, store for replenishing in phosphate during ATP represents source exercise. intense the supply skeletal high-energy creatine the The especially immediate reaction: creatine phosphokinase enzyme the catalyzes The

creatine small line). phosphokinase much is the present Although a the the located of is in thick myoplasm, M the filament amount (near in in rapid The participate during the in filament contraction. the thick may myosin heads of ATP phosphokinase muscle the near creatine resynthesis cannot store created, five activity). ATP size times of and minute store than The a thus only the maximal muscle contraction about is (less phosphate the however, prolonged support periods of of fatigue is muscle creatine of store, with during does that subsequently, phosphate Skeletal intense the depletion not of by imply fatigue depletion caused associated necessarily the as phosphate the exercise store. creatine although is this described muscle is during phosphokinase–catalyzed Because cell synthesized using phosphate recovery creatine fatigue pool oxidative reversible, phosphorylation. reaction replenishes the from by ATP creatine through the the

glycolysis, cells can contraction the replenish to which phosphorylation Muscle muscle be glucose which to of store. contain during ATP glycogen, and ATP generate oxidative provide both for metabolized glucose by process cells (see Muscle up can blood, stimulated a also is that take insulin from

Chapter 39). are combination 1-phosphate glycolysis which the oxidative glucose the then phosphorylation cytosolic cytosol) ATP and 1-phosphate. a from of mitochondria) (in equivalent 37 of releases phosphory yield (in glycogen, of residues of to by enzyme glucose metabolized The mol per the mole lase to ATP glycolysis. glucose used of phosphorylate per glucose ATP at is yields the glucose start of because 36 mole of mol Blood 1 yields, dependent ATP an adequate supply. oxygen are however, These on (along per of respectively contrast, yields with Under glucose mole and mol lactate). and mol only in ATP of glucose, glucose of 2 anaerobic 1-phosphate metabolism of 2 and conditions, glycogen 3 is prolonged discussed fatigue glycogen muscle with As later, during stores of exercise associated muscle. in depletion the

muscle important prolonged represent for energy acids cells Fatty exercise. during of an source contain can acids fatty cells but Muscle from take up acids also fatty blood. store which can addition, can needed to triglycerides, fatty hydrolyzed acids. when muscle be In cells produce oxidation to acids within β The are the subjected fatty mitochondria. they A however, in they cytosol into (CoA). converted are acylcarnitine acyl the to then enter and fatty For the to coenzyme acids mitochondria, the mitochondria, converted where transported to are the yields subjected acyl ATP. β Within the and acid to citric ultimately CoA, CoA which then oxidation mitochondria, enters is produces the cycle and acetyl

debt the of demands phosphorylation, by energy exercise cannot an is oxidative incurred. oxygen be met If in order the of resting After this remains respiration exercise, level debt. completion oxygen to above “repay” generated lactate by is ATP) metabolize oxygen during creatine to metabolite phase extra and used levels recovery consumption restore glycolysis. (such this to as phosphate and the The motor phosphate because this oxygen oxidative meet and oxygen increase considerable or recovery can “borrowed.” has low explains from cardiac be increased before debt ATP, production requirements. was respiratory at seen and even levels the consume consumption ATP “repaid” work derived exercise why units steady-state metabolism occurs to The Some oxidative creatine of glycolysis, to to than increased oxygen during contributes slow time more also with is when glycolytic debt (Fig. motor strenuous fast are much The units oxygen greater exercise, used with 12.18 ). the by areas is consumed to minus metabolism energy darkand the equal exercise The that approximately oxidative light-colored (i.e., debt oxygen supplied in during

Fig. are equal). 12.18 approximately during used levels. cellular earlier, the indicated metabolite from oxygen As represents additional recovery restoring normal energy requirements exercise for the

a meet exercise. major muscle energy needs duration the is of the of ability determinant of to The result depletion energy stores. is of not the of fatigue However, of byproducts metabolic seem to be onset important the Instead, factors in fatigue. any delivery glucose) in the cells, supplies oxygen cardiovascular the involved fatty brain of at may systems and in and energy and muscle to from that contraction, potentially the as the maintain exercising well (i.e., acids Fatigue the to points as muscle occur respiratory muscle.

factors been fatigue. have implicated Several in muscle is the circulation is of long oxygen adequate During periods the muscle intact. to as tetany, the as supply brief the these generated during force/stress brief However,

expenditure of Rate energy •Fig. 12.18. Oxygen When Expenditure Debt by An Energy Exercising the of Is Metabolism. Energy Muscle Rate Incurred Oxidative Exceeds the the Rate Production of of by Energyexpenditureduringstrenuousexercise.Lower panel, Upper Energyexpenditureduringenduranceexercise.Seetextfordetails. panel,

tetanic can rapidly for periods ( decays long be periods level a maintained that to

Fig. 12.19 ). units. fast and motor the the represents almost rapid failure total This decay of creatine phosphate acid. paralleled force/stress in The and of decline depletion accumulation glycogen and of lactic is stores the by force/ the muscle when is stress reduced, so into not rigor. decline ATP pool Of the in importance that greatly the do occurs fibers not is that go of significant to fibers even energy do demands after motor this hours. are not units In many slow the contrast, and condition, under meet exhibit they fatigue, the able Evidently, factor can associated (e.g., fast factor fibers), in clearly has with not the contraction but been identified. energy inhibit this metabolism some

fatigue. in accounts lactic phosphate During for the inorganic myoplasm (Pi) and accumulation of muscle acid exercise, intense to pH as 26 high lactic myoplasmic (from ≈7 mmol/L, The to accumulation and interactions. ≈6.2) 15 inhibits actin-myosin to of levels acid, as decreases decreasing This sensitivity in the interaction binding maximum actin-myosin Ca++ actin-myosin decrease pH the the Ca++ C of by and interactions. number to by reduces of altering to troponin nearly factor intense to rest the implicated working from as inasmuch increase Pi also can 40 as fatigue concentrations 2 important an phosphate during of approximately development at muscle. mmol/L exercise, been has in mmol/L in least different •Fig. Such [Pi] can by mechanisms: following tension reduce in the an elevation at three 12.19. from 4 and muscle inhibition 2 SR, motor 30 Whole the units Ca++ Minutes 5 Tetanus actin-myosin (kg/cm2 ) in to in 20 the Aseriesofbrieftetanicstimulationsofskeletalmuscleresultinarapiddecreaseinforce(tetanicstress,exemplifiedbythe“Wholemuscle”lineinplot)thatisattributabletofatigueoffast-twitch(typeII)motorunitsinthemuscle.Undertheseconditions,however,slow-twitch(typeI)motorunitsareresistanttofatigue.3 1 alteration of Type II units Ca++ 10 1 binding. motor , (1) 0 (3) 10 Type sensitivity contraction release (2) stress 2 3 decrease of been a increase exercise-induced localized generation and forms of of oxygen compartment, various specialized fatigue. including of factors, muscle from number a of extracellular radicals, also [K+], other [ADP], depletion have in A elevation glycogen implicated in free system central individual. the especially to in by nervous contributes Finally, perceived is how fatigue, the fatigue

myoplasmic or level high-intensity not the is of ATP as the Regardless exercise decrease does whether of consequence muscle a exercise, prolonged fatigued substantially. In of of availability death. injury maintain as described been the cells cell of to minimize protective fatigue ATP the view has of all or reliance a mechanism muscle viability, to on the risk systems have developed to levels and cells of is redundant likely dangerously to Consequently, ensure ATP it muscle viability drop that hence skeletal not risk do levels low the the cell. that

before Most long cease unit persons fatigues. and the motor tire exercise homeostatic work. produced disturbance physical defined fatigue as General by may a be factors. many basis for perceived The discomfort the probably involves even pain) (or factors metabolites. may These accumulation decrease plasma and glucose in include of a levels function is central Motor in not the impaired. system nervous system the which some can exercise at fatigue and motivated point unit the of withstand trained athletes motor occurs. to Highly may discomfort and fatigue of motivational the involves performance enhanced observed Part training factors. after

junctions they differentiate after are and before fibers well formed muscle neuromuscular some innervated, Skeletal are birth. fibers cells. Before innervation, I) (type the muscle slow physiologically resemble Acetylcholine of sarcolemma cells are to throughout uninnervated are neurotransmitter. supersensitive the that these receptors and distributed growing plate end the establishes cell. a first An muscle terminal contact nerve formed with when is no The membranes. plate in end forms and receptors further cell concentrated to association nerves, become with acetylcholine the I) small form innervated (type motor units. neuron by oxidative Cells motor a slow (type all units. motor by motor large develop fast characteristics nerves Fibers II) the innervated of of produces neonatal replace variants. which major synthesis including fast slow myosin changes, and the cellular Innervation embryonic or isoforms, type the by fiber Thus is nerves muscle fiber. that determined the innervate

and size strength in maturation. increase An during muscle occurs skeleton the lengthen. muscle the cells grows, As accomplished ( Lengthening the of at the sarcomeres muscle the additional ends cells formation by of is

Fig. a is process 12.20 reversible. that ), limb sarcomeres terminal are position muscle immobilized the shortened can a a improper of setting when which when eliminated, limb cell when a is segment. with in a causes the length For fracture example, the shortening of decreases occur or of generated that do the not muscle. but of velocity extent muscle force be length and of amount shortening in influence the can by the Changes affect growth strength gradual mainly is and of by muscle during a The hypertrophy. diameter increase in achieved sarcomeres the may amount (hypertrophy, on by more the Doubling diameter double no velocity force in myofibrillar generated of example) adding effect parallel maximal the has shortening. but of for in by exercise the pathway, synthesis of and box in signaling Akt-mTOR simultaneous hypertrophy protein of net protein O ( Resistance increase the pathway an results (FoxO)–atrogene promote forkhead inhibition which activation can

Fig. ). 12.21A biogenesis proliferator-activated and expression intracellular (see slow receptor γ coactivator Ca signaling phenotype mitochondrial ATP activation of in of can in decrease concentration through muscle 1α (PGC-1α) also peroxisome stimulate increase and The a

Fig. 12.21B

new muscles a Skeletal to limited (hyperplasia). have fibers ability form in from differentiation the tissues. are of fibers These result satellite present cells new that leads by However, major cellular scar destruction to tissue. replacement

must be growth loading. used maintain but to only also Muscles development not and experience normal must

•Fig. 12.20. Output a Mechanical Growth Muscle Effects Cell. of on of the Typically,skeletalmusclecellgrowthinvolveseitherlengthening(addingmoresarcomerestotheendsofthemusclefibers)orincreasingmusclefiberdiameter(hypertrophyasaresultoftheadditionofmoremyofilaments/myofibrilsinparallelwithinthemusclefiber).Theformationofnewmusclefibersiscalledmuscle anditisinfrequentinskeletalmuscle. hyperplasia,

mass. a lose immobilized Muscles cast in their mechanically addition, flight space that muscles. In unloads to environment a exposes astronauts microgravity leads of atrophy) (i.e., mass muscle loss rapid weakness. to unloading and Such activation inhibition pathway). protein synthesis degradation the of (with appears FoxO-atrogene both protein involve and stimulation net of to atrophy of Disuse of the process) (which illness). include with with and an categories muscle associated atrophy is skeletal Other atrophy associated sarcopenia (which atrophy cachexia aging is

have body units. the oxidative contract (type Muscles to number typically slow support frequently a of high I) motor that prolonged atrophy more of These during (type than units unloading. the fast motor units II) slow periods rapidly motor with a tetanic force of also in is maximal maximal This decrease in shortening motor but increase slow units atrophy associated an velocity. myosin fast the correlated fibers. with The velocity increase in these of is isoform in expression during such minimize medicine space An important that the changes exercise of flight. prolonged design space phenotypic is aspect programs of

• Fig. PGC-1alpha Basic CREB, in respiratory 2006;103:16260-16265. B, receptor-α; skeletal histone 1; gene phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase; mitochondrial family through muscle response to (A) to 1, protein the estrogen-related a C, FoxO, contributing (A, and protein 2α; class phosphorylated myocyte factors; glucose transporter triphosphate; J, protein transcription. signaling From coactivator Nrf2α, response FoxO; 4; biogenesis muscle B); coactivators. of proliferator-activated AMPK, and Tn forkhead PI3K, M, PGC-1 I, monophosphate–activated AKT, BM. type growth molecular 1α; transcription kinase et MEF2, 5; Lin al. cAMP of element (B) HDAC5, factor insulin-like and peroxisome mTOR, control PGC-1α, from FoxO-P, FoxO3 in atrophy O skeletal adenosine deacetylase exercise. 12.21. pathways serine/threonine-specific kinase, 2, synthesis ATP, involved of rapamycin; γ action protects receptor Handschin Nrf2, CaM troponin From protein 2; protein; 5′ by and suppressing Nrf1, kinase; Sandri PNAS. net enhancer atrophy-specific kinase; Ca++/calmodulin-dependent box nuclear factor in IGF-1, ERRα, mammalian Glut-4, kinase binding Metabolic transcription factors (protein target Spiegelman adenosine I. Cell 2005;1:361-370.) Metab.

Testosterone is because greater it the for major Denervation, Reinnervation, men ). muscle factor has both mass in responsible action a myotrophic As for growth innervation A while to skeletal the been anabolic crucial synthetic enhance molecules, steroids, called of phenotype. designed muscle variety noted, mini-muscle have already is is the muscle cut, their androgenic If action. motor nerve fasmizing used are widely These occurs. drugs ciculation of irregular by contractions caused athletes small, from acetylcholine release important. which sports is is Fasciculation and in by in by characterized strength bodybuilders portion of axon. distal 10-to the the terminals degenerating The are typically doses of greater the 50-fold after therapeutically prescribed denervation, muscle individuals fibrillation than begins. Several be for days might with impaired hormone production. by of Fibrillation androgenic none effects. lack spontaneous, is compounds characterized repetitive Unfortunately, these the Hence, at contractions. over effect have hormone the reverting used, spread disturbances, cholinergic in entire out including time, production. this of serious the membrane, they induce testosterone doses At cell depression receptors to embryonic A arrangement. their preinnervation major whether increase to issue reflect in muscle these fact acetylcholine. fibrillations and drugs supersensitivity do The muscle is atrophy, levels testosterone. of with normal muscles performance circulating a of in with decrease the Affected also athletic the in size individuals they its and used since have been Although muscle cells. months humans, 1950s, facts in Atrophy some with 4 scientific the degeneration of or 3 the after cells remain progressive denervation. and is uncertain, most of connective have replaced in the Most muscle muscle by are development. animals not demonstrated on and any fibers effects fat experimental significant studies after years. to Reports 1 of 2 tissue These can changes studies in remain humans be controversial. if reversed a claim months. few reinnervation Proponents occurs within in achieved world-class provide performance. growth stump peripheral the increases strength normally advantages of in is Reinnervation that by of Critics nerve axons largely motor sheath. nerve increases the old argue along are these that and fast factors. by fibers expectations associated a motivational small II) (type with of effects Reinnervation placebo formerly slow has and The vice as of cell along led with to designation their anabolic redifferentiate (type motor to I) steroids a axon fiber, public causes substances, into debate versa. on that controlled abuse barbiturates. and that opiates, suggests large amphetamines, and This qualitatively have that the nerves the on motor differ nerves effect small fibers. “trophic” and muscle specific a This stimulation. fiber the rate effect “trophic” reflects of via in denervation lessen electrodes atrophy. muscle implanted can stimulation For the example, units units. these causes of More motor to slow low-frequency fast strikingly, chronic converted to units be stimulation frequency excitatory phenotype when reducing of decreased by typical conversion the Some contraction occur in fast-fiber toward input. slow is can a the greatly units spinal mechanoreceptors. by the input severing functionally can inactivates tendon, sectioning or be appropriate root reduced Excitatory dorsal which by peripheral the or

changes determines frequency expression in fiber and of contraction protein gene through phenotype synthesis. The and development frequent undergo many isoform the myosin. of synthesize form and that mitochondria slow Fibers contractile activity contract by innervated less excitable axons large, infrequently. Fibers mitochondria, have inactive the concentrations relatively synthesize enzymes myosin. form of fast typically isoform fibers of glycolytic Such few large and

enhancing factor hasalsobeenimplicatedinthistransitionfromfast-twitchtoslow-twitchmuscle(see Fig.12.22A ).Specifically,itappearsthatstimulationofadultfast-twitchmusclecellsatafrequencyconsistentwithslow-twitchmusclecellscanactivatetheCa++-dependentphosphatasecalcineurin,whichinturncandephosphorylateNFATandresultintranslocationofNFATfromthemyoplasmtothenucleus,followedbythetranscriptionofslow-twitchmusclegenes(andinhibitionoffast-twitchmusclegenes).Inaccordancewiththismechanism,expressionofconstitutivelyactiveNFATinfast-twitchmusclepromotestheexpressionofslow-twitchmyosinwhileinhibitingtheexpressionoffast-twitchmyosin.Thetranscriptionfactormyocyte 2 (MEF2)

Fig.12.22B ).ActivationofMEF2isthoughttoresultfromCa++/calmodulin-dependentphosphorylationofaninhibitorofMEF2:namely,histonedeacetylase(HDAC).

important appears play to expression Intracellular isoform. slow in of myosin the [Ca++] an role level intracellular Ca++ than muscle fibers. Slow-twitch fast-twitch muscle fibers higher a do of resting have myosin precedes of the of myoplasmic addition, chronic accompanied resting in increase fast-twitch [Ca++] muscle electrical by expression slow-twitch In 2.5fold myosin. increased expression is and a stimulation fast-twitch that of decreased a 8 in from myosin the expression to muscle of intracellular isoform expressing myosin Similarly, gene change in Ca++ elevation chronic myosin isoform induces fivefold) muscle the (approximately within cells fast fast-twitch slow days. dehydrogenase activity Ca++-dependent increase in decrease of in oxidative (an indicator glycolytic a accompany capacity) capacity) lactate citrate (an this synthetase of An indicator activity and

Muscle: membrane Surface action potential •Fig. 12.22. Transition Fast-Twitch From Pathways the Muscle to Slow-Twitch Contributing Muscle. Signaling Molecular to Chronicelectricalstimulationofafast-twitchmuscleinapatternconsistentwithaslow-twitchmuscleresultsindevelopmentoftheslow-twitchmusclephenotypebecauseofdephosphorylationofthetranscriptionfactornuclearfactorfromactivatedTcells(NFAT)bytheCa++/calmodulin-dependentproteinphosphatasecalcineurin(CaN);thisinturnresultsinnucleartranslocationofNFATandexpressionofslow-twitchmusclefibergenes(A). Activationofthetranscriptionfactormyocyteenhancerfactor2(MEF2)alsoappearstocontributetothisfibertypetransition(B), inwhichactivationofMEF2involvesCa++/calmodulin-dependentphosphorylationofaninhibitor,histonedeacetylase(HDAC).CaMK,Ca++/calmodulin-dependentproteinkinase;ECC,excitation-contractioncoupling;P,phosphorylationofHDAC. (FromLiuY,etal:.Signalingpathwaysinactivity-dependentfibertypeplasticityinadultskeletalmuscle.J Motil. Muscle Res Cell 2005;26:13-21.) myosin. from fast-twitch to slow-twitch transition These intracellular a [Ca++]. Ca++-dependent of by are reversible reduction changes

Response Exercise to

of endurance, learning, Exercise and categories and regimens physiologists training three strength responses: ( identify training

12.3). Table

most involve endeavors of elements all three. athletic Typically, coordination. as of as factors, aspect involves well neuromuscular training learning The motivational fibers involve aspect se. does of not in training changes muscle per adaptive This the the responses muscle can exercise. to cells skills training, However, motor for unlike persist regular years of without

healthy level is muscular can that some of activity metabolism. continuous supported by persons maintain All oxidative exercise can by adaptive that regimen increased sufficient greatly to level a is responses. be This induce regular result mainly oxidative is the motor the of involved. exercise the increase of response in an The endurance units capacity skeletal fibers to adaptive muscle metabolic of respiratory the demand systems capacity places muscles. of increased increases and respiratory load the and This heart the an on and cardiovascular responsible are associated latter the exercise. for endurance principal benefits effects The health with

units. efforts increased strength be most motor massive Muscle by regular involve can that units. units, motor glycolytic well recruit motor Such as efforts fast as slow oxidative be intravascular blood interrupted supply as these working the above muscles pressures tissue to pressure. During efforts, may rise the of reduced The duration contraction. blood limits flow the of of hypertrophy muscle such synthesis and exercise, more as maximal-strength cells. active the myofibrils weightlifting, Regular hence the induces increased bones. of stress induces The and growth also tendons the

not slow produce to to motor nor a does effort cause units exercise motor from become maximal Endurance units. does slow, fast fast shift muscular superimposed activities, regimen, exercise alter does daily when any not normal probably on fiber practical muscle Thus phenotype.

that as vigorous lengthening muscles and vigorously, are too (e.g., such contracting and and does exercise in downhill than stretching cycling). hiking followed not particular, which stiffness by comparable running, are or, stretched muscle pain lengthened more Activities involve after in its slowly aching and develops dull, reaches The resultant 24 48 hours. to pain within peak pain associated the stiffness, of muscles. affected The with motion, is of and weakness reduced range pain factors prime are to injury that junction. cause most and swelling The the myotendinous near from commonly cells, inflammation the muscle the than I maximal which are is motor type imposed in the because motor the II units Type large in force maximal develop. can units more the cells are that affected 60% loads greater approximately cells, highest than force sarcomeres. the of regeneration slow Recovery depends on injured is and

Skeletal Biophysical Properties of Muscle

and biophysical muscle the for molecular mechanisms earlier contraction of responsible underlie properties The described of muscle. are described these Historically, of of contraction. the were properties biophysical before elucidation molecular well mechanisms important describing They function. of muscle remain ways

When (often measured and in generate or decrease length. contract, as force stress) tension muscles they properties In other usually one of muscle, an of experimental and held the constant, after these biophysical is measured of maneuver. examination the is parameters isometric Accordingly, muscle is is the generated an length and in during which held then contraction contraction the is force measured. constant, one held is contraction measured. (or tone) length which then force one in in constant, of change and muscle the is the isotonic is the An

extent increases resists rapidly that slowly ( the muscle then force as more stretched, stretch a stretch first rest is and of increases at at it a by When

Fig. 12.23 ). elasticity is of the the passive muscle property to tissue. purely due This relationship lengths, obtained. stimulated these If muscle various a the at to is is contract different to LO is as Specifically, indicate to up a increases (designated point force contractile length optimal length). increased muscle force LO, contractile decreases. beyond stretched is muscle As the the filament curve sliding is theory, with length-tension described previously. This consistent length 1 Sarcomere (fraction very of a 0 Length •Fig. optimum) 201 (µm) At 12.23. Muscle. Skeletal in Length-Tension Relationship Plotofactivetensionasafunctionofmusclelength,withthepredictedoverlapofthickandthinfilamentsatselectedpoints. Howactivetensionwascalculatedatvariousmusclelengths(i.e.,bysubtractingpassivetensionfromtotaltensionateachmusclelength).C, Experimentalsetupinwhichmaximalisometrictetanictensionismeasuredatvariousmusclelengths.B, A,

•Fig. 12.24. of Force-Velocity Skeletal Muscle. Relationship Theexperimentalsetupisshownontheright.Theinitialmusclelengthwaskeptconstant,buttheamountofweightthatthemusclehadtoliftduringtetanicstimulationvaried.Whilethesevariousamountsofweightwerelifted,muscle-shorteningvelocitywasmeasured.Seetextfordetails.F,force;V,velocity.

actin there sarcomere overlap myosin filaments, no (3.7 µm), is so longer contraction. length with long and no filaments toward progressively and contractile decreased LO, increases. As length is muscle of increases, overlap amount force the disturbed, of decreases the interaction in below force decreases. thin collide hence the middle the length actin-myosin is 2 As sarcomere contractile µm, the and sarcomere, filaments length, a contraction). at maintained muscles given curves, (i.e., contractile For the and construction was of measured were isometric length-tension then force

relationship the Thus sliding muscle theory filament supports contraction. of length-tension the

develop must The force the the at shortens on amount strongly dependent velocity a which of is muscle that muscle (

Fig. 12.24 ). V0). velocity absence load, In the any as of maximal muscle the the (denoted is shortening of the cross-bridges of the rate activity] to [ATPase is by maximal myosin). to V0 rate the turnover of it cycling corresponds energy proportional (i.e., maximal V0 than muscle. Thus slow-twitch higher for muscle fast-twitch is that for (zero cannot the load, the maximal the decreases velocity). Increasing muscle at lift until, shortening muscle cannot velocity hence the shorten load of load and in increases load velocity). in stretching (negative result muscle the Further units larger and greater a maximal and force the of motor muscle fast-twitch myosin, at velocity between fast-twitch of cross-bridges muscle isometric for zero) active (because unit). the is fibers of number diameter which shortening The motor tension usually and in to is (i.e., it proportional fast-twitch of actin is number typical greater fibers In

Fig. done rate (namely, of the at of rate work was 12.24 shows submaximal the of the that the maximal work tetanic load maximal curve , reflects a done contraction 30% the load force when of was at power-stress each and tension). approximately To x-and the the calculate product were the curve, of a latter function simply y-coordinates was x-coordinate. plotted and then as the multiplied,

1.

in fibers) cm that numerous diameter muscle are to muscle composed to of cells 80 typically length. in Skeletal 25 10 µm (muscle up is and the striations skeletal muscle of appearance of organized and to arrangement thin of skeletal is in highly fibers. thick filaments muscle The due myofibrils in the sarcomere skeletal in The unit muscle. is contractile a at in sarcomere Each two 2 is and bounded µm lines. length Z approximately is rest by length in arranged the series myofibril. Sarcomeres of are the along Thin containing filaments, sarcomere. of center the the Z line the toward actin, extend from filaments, overlap sarcomere the filaments. and in the positioned of containing center Thick thin myosin, the actin are actin, Ca++-dependent myosin center of in myosin sarcomere. of contraction the from toward thin interaction pulls Muscle filaments the results and the which the

2.

control is voluntary). of skeletal (i.e., the central Contraction nervous muscle system under of the ventral in Motor motor cord. spinal the of of the control brain in horns neurons centers α the activity motor fibers. muscle on neurons, These in synapse turn, α skeletal a within innervated innervates by fibers fiber neuron, Whereas each one muscle neuron muscle only the is motor muscle. skeletal motor several innervated A motor single a the fibers refers by motor all unit to muscle neuron.

3.

neuron an muscle The fiber. producing action potential of skeletal by initiates in motor the muscle contraction tubules release which tubules down (DHPRs) receptors As the opening fiber, Ca++ from then the neighboring receptors passes called result potential the ryanodine of muscle in Ca++ of undergo that channels SR in T dihydropyridine to the (RYRs), the myoplasm action the conformational the T SR. changes thin actin sites promotes in myosin-binding binding by of filaments movement followed contraction exposing of by toward filament). increase C, the myoplasmic (a muscle the process on groove thin that Ca++ the The Ca++ involves to in troponin tropomyosin then of pulled contracting action, the appear skeletal fiber. to the toward the ratchet sarcomere undergo and thin a center with muscle the Myosin cross-bridges filaments by the as myoplasmic in of Ca++ muscle SR. Relaxation (SERCA) resequestered Ca++-ATPase is follows the

4.

(i.e., of the action an more which neurons more of increase contraction potentials recruiting or by increased frequency activation be fiber, of muscle of The force motor produces in the fibers) by in the muscle can tetany. tetanic prolonged [Ca++]. intracellular of due force during is The elevation in contractions to increase

5.

skeletal muscle of their contraction the two The (i.e., of of distinguished fast-twitch slow-twitch). basic basis on versus are speed types fibers of isoforms The different activity. speed in difference the contraction ATPase that myosin myosin differ is expression attributed of in to to addition motor metabolic diameter, fiber ATPase activity, activity, pattern. in and sensitivity also the tetany, muscles differ recruitment to myosin in size, In unit difference slow-twitch fast-and

6.

before the motor fibers slow-twitch innervating because greater muscles neurons of Typically, recruited excitability fast-twitch muscles. slow-twitch muscle are of sustained The high activity. slow-twitch muscle capacity supports fibers oxidative of contractile glycolytic have muscle in low capacity. contrast, oxidative typically capacity and to fibers, large Fast-twitch tend be and high levels for fast-twitch of periods when suited are high force short are best The activity required. motor thus of units

7.

fibers muscle versa), stimulation pattern. slow-twitch fibers converted be depending muscle (and the on can Fast-twitch vice to of a muscle myosin, oxidative stimulation fast-twitch capacity. and in slow-twitch with Chronic expression fast-twitch along expression results of electrical the in an of myosin increase decreased to mechanism the elevation resting [Ca++]. appears gene mechanisms but unknown, in intracellular The in or change change to an are underlying be expression secondary this and fast-twitch the slow-twitch to transcription have transition this in from phenotype. calcineurin Ca++-dependent been the factor The phosphatase the implicated NFAT transcription factor and MEF2 phenotype the participate the transition. in Ca++/calmodulin-dependent may kinase also

8.

atrophy denervation. fibers muscle Skeletal after on of nerves differentiated for Muscle phenotype. activity their fibers maintenance the motor of depend the these the Reinnervation can original along axon sheath reverse nerve changes. growth by has a of to disease. trauma result muscle Skeletal cells lost limited or capacity replace as a signaling and rate to disuse the appears the of Inhibition the pathway and decreased FoxO the degradation pathways (respectively) during atrophy. of protein activation of PI3K/Akt observed rate synthesis of contribute increased to protein during is ubiquitin to degradation 3) levels in protein of increases activity of ubiquitination ligases). protease The caspase elevated and increased (through attributed (e.g., atrophy both activation

9.

exhibits considerable Skeletal plasticity. phenotypic muscle and with to of the the match associated more ends at caused myofibrils of the by sarcomeres cell skeletal addition is hypertrophy, growth. more growth cellular Normal training whereas training induces Strength the cellular endurance hypertrophy, increases

SC. Whitehead NP, DG, Froehner Allen Ca2+ disrupts oxide oxygen of skeletal muscle dystrophin species, Absence development reactive muscular in signaling: roles dystrophy. , of of the nitric and Physiol Rev. 2016;96(1):253-305.

Chang CL, et DM, KM, al. Anderson Anderson long a putative A by micropeptide muscle RNA noncoding encoded performance. regulates Cell. 2015;160(4):595-606.

Roy F, Haddad VR. RR, Edgerton Baldwin KM, Pandorf CE, to response mechanisms. models: of Alterations contractile muscle mass role phenotype and unloading in transcriptional/pretranslational in Physiol. Front 2013;4:284.

JD. Burr AR, Molkentin mouse the evidence death dystrophy. solidifies in the myofiber muscular of hypothesis calcium in Genetic Differ. Death Cell 2015;22:1402-1412.

motor capacity oxidative all involved of units. or expression alter isoforms. cannot myosin fiber type of regimens the Training

10.

due of ATP. fatigue to exercise depletion during is Muscle not of accumulation been ADP) Pi, are or metabolic mechanism although fatigue implicated. (lactate, products underlying mechanisms the exercise-induced not known, various The has multiple would before induce developed of of mechanisms hydrolysis myoplasmic view injury rate or the may of importance hence and individual it have of the skeletal been the lower the affect ATP fatigue ATP, viability the the likely which of cell, is depletion muscle preventing death that cell. risks In to of

11.

be is muscle an cannot the energy by an debt exercising of oxidative oxygen When incurred. met metabolism, demands exercise during Increased reflects this debt. breathing the after oxygen period recovery the The on greater anaerobic debt. muscle metabolism greater the the requirements reliance oxygen contraction, the meet of energy to

of in Gordon Regnier M. Regulation muscle. E, AM, striated Homsher contraction Physiol Rev. 2000;80(2):853-924.

Pessia Altamura Imbrici JF, C, DC. P, R, Camerino Desaphy Mantegazza M, challenges. and channels: ClC-1 research future chloride state-of-the-art Neurosci. Cell Front 2015;9:156.

Casey MJ, Joyner DP. a hierarchy exercise: competing needs. of flow during increased Regulation physiological blood (hyperemia) muscles to of Rev. Physiol 2015;95(2):549-601.

Fitts Nelson CR, RH. pCa-force of temperatures. at low single and in elevated pH cell Effects relationship fibers on the muscle near-physiological inorganic phosphate Am Cell Physiol. J Physiol 2014;306(7):C670-C678.

cancer Protein breakdown M. in cachexia. Sandri Dev Cell Semin Biol. 2016;54:11-19.

S, C. in Fiber types muscles. mammalian skeletal Reggiani Schiaffino Rev. Physiol 2011;91(4):1447-1531.

the this chapter, of 1. able the Upon to answer student questions: should completion following be

the how of the it of and demands organ. organization cardiac muscle the Describe meets

2.

cardiac molecular Describe organ. mechanisms excitation-contraction this and involved muscle the in for its coupling suitability in

3.

the of mechanisms force molecular heart. Describe the that to lead contraction in an of the increase

4.

for muscle, and length-tension for relationship cardiac curves. the Discuss including the both force-velocity the curve molecular basis

muscle each for of already be will the objectives on student the cardiac and has listed. compare skeletal able student muscle, to completed learning just the skeletal If

of and heart the cardiac to accomplished function the through highly blood cells. muscle circulatory system, contraction is the this organized of by is he pump electrical to connections electrical cells together are adjacent muscle between cardiac mechanical connected syncytium, and muscle form with the tight Specifically, cardiac an cells. of An contraction the pumping able of is facilitate the potential the initiated which the the quickly muscle a heart sinoatrial action important region pass therefore action the heart. heart specialized throughout synchronized cells, in to to for of (e.g., node) is cardiac synchronized relaxation refilling pathological heart; requires Likewise, abnormal often results heart of relaxation the conditions. in the of

organization electrical the heart, the of and muscle description including within cardiac a This with of connections. begins tight chapter of the cells discussion mechanical The of underlie of mechanisms and muscle contraction, regulation relaxation, that contraction of force addressed. cells are cardiac also the significantly different contraction. muscle both striated organization, skeletal muscle and electrical coupling, mechanisms force muscles, terms the of of in Although coupling, and mechanical they regulate are are and cardiac excitation-contraction to also differences highlighted. These are

Cardiac Cells Organization Muscle Basic of

muscle smaller are than muscle skeletal cells. much Cardiac cells approximately measure 10 in and 100 diameter cardiac muscle length. cells µm µm in Typically, shown As in

Fig. include cardiac combination are cells a mechanical each junctions disks, connections. which and of to other , electrical through intercalated connected 13.1A from The cells connections, include contracting, pulling and desmosomes. the the apart which fascia mechanical when adherens keep junctions the potential Gap provide cells between hand, action the to muscle electrical of on the throughout allow cardiac between other propagation cells, heart. connections single is and form said synchronous, the (generated muscle action can sinoatrial within so in the wave-like to contract within allows cardiac of arrangement syncytium pass heart Thus a electrical manner. node) heart mechanical cells heart to the an the potential that the a that throughout course vessels myocardium. the through Blood

filaments (see cells skeletal is muscle and muscle in organization of that ). thin with The comparable in thick basic cardiac reveals and (see A repeating bands, dark light that respectively microscopy and I Electron bands bands represent

Fig. 13.1B

Fig.

). 12.3 a is as Thus muscle muscle. cardiac striated classified of represents band The the of line attachment I thin the transects the filaments. point and Z The represents the cell. muscle adjacent contractile between of sarcomere, lines the the which Z two region is unit and band. the thin of into actin, and The extend are composed A troponin filaments tropomyosin, some of along composed band filaments. overlap filaments, thick The of with A is thin thick toward of filaments are composed the of from Z lines. and sarcomere the the The center myosin extend

by myosin of the a Z molecules lines. tail-to-tail the formed are Myosin the filaments sarcomere, a in followed toward as thick extends of association by association head-to-tail center the filament the the polarized actin filaments toward for poised is sarcomere. filament myosin of pulling the Thus the and center that and by is filament A filament thick each near cross-section the filaments, six band A attachments three end sarcomere receives view thin cross-bridge surrounded thick shows of thin of filaments. each from the the • both cardiac filaments muscle complex and and characteristic thick thin skeletal array Fig. helps and This of is of Schematic adjacent in of micrograph. Telser and of disks the left A, and, cardiac that A. gap functions Intercalated of disk Photomicrograph connects couples cell well 13.1 end portion lower muscle muscle junctions, either of mechanical as sarcomere a a presence electrical cell. the ×210). identified the of the (A, the muscle From myocytes cardiac at are as organization an a cells electrically The within (magnification, representation of intercalated syncytium. because physically B, so muscle cells the of of B, The the cat Redrawn ultrastructure Mosby; Louis: NS. St. Integrated muscle. Ventricular Elsevier’s papillary Histology. Fawcett McNutt I. from myocardium. D, 2007. Biol. 1969;42:1-45.) Cell J (see during the stabilize contraction muscle filaments

Fig.

array of 12.3B the hexagonal striated the muscle). thick , of filaments in thin and for sarcomere

the sarcomere), center a which organization serve proteins for filaments, organization meromyosin the may the scaffold of appear Several to including as of protein to the and C filaments. thick contribute and thin (in thick the of scaffold as the Similarly, may length filament. and actin serve a thin the for nebulin of filament the extends along filament. whereas filament tropomodulin to the the and actin line is of the The of protein anchored the at actin thin Z resides the the length end by regulates α-actinin, filament skeletal cells. cardiac and proteins are These muscle both in present

elastic a are the tethered The large to thick lines called Z filaments by protein titin. stress). in to is titin by signaling cell sensor there thus acting may protein Z to and postulated response a stretch evidence (perhaps lines in thus Although indicating participate tether the synthesis of the prevent was myosin overstretching modulating that as sarcomere, titin to and signaling in has by titin Such muscle both cells. been observed cardiac skeletal and both and and genetic atrophy and dystrophies both cells result cardiac (termed contribute of skeletal skeletal titin Moreover, defects titinopathies). muscle may muscle to dysfunction in cardiac in is (discussed force also contribute later to “ ability the thought Titin the muscle in increase cardiac section of to stretch upon to

abundance contain more an of and there connective heart. the tissue, tissue in Although is connective muscle cardiac muscle both skeletal it heart. of rupture The also muscle the overstretching muscle), in but in tissue of prevents skeletal heart prevent abundance the (as connective helps passive analysis cardiac dramatic as increase tension resting its is cardiac example, muscle, a length. of stretched in Length-tension beyond muscle shows for increases stretch to level. contrast, muscle, of tolerates degree a tension greater a Skeletal passive comparable much before in tissue possibility that typically cardiac known, surrounding is range the joint, reason although of the The not muscle is stretch turn motion the one is difference between is this by ligaments/connective and the of joint. limited skeletal skeletal which for in limited of muscle by

on rely appears cells of the other during The connective muscle venous prevent increased return. cardiac to overstretching hand, periods on to heart, around the tissue of abundance return fivefold. exercise, may During example, venous for increase intense the 20%). arterial with blood heart volume system less (i.e., of increases heart the only than changes of is into extra of However, this capable the volume pumping the volume ventricular end-diastolic in minor that during regulatory heart pump the the of limits the (as of connective venous blood ”). Although periods tissue return, the abundance the receives heart increased section extra additional in discussed it stretch “ these heart mechanisms in help of the to to of and were the and in cells would heart decrease would be result of pressure, venous expected be pulmonary insufficient increased decreased the overlap overstretched, ability if the edema. perhaps Conversely, filaments), of (because contractile thin which pumping, cardiac muscle thick

by reticulum internal (see Within myofibrils the membranes muscle cardiac are of sarcoplasmic network cells, an surrounded (SR),

Fig. 13.1B ). less to muscle This the similar well except the in skeletal is and is as not heart SR in developed. that the SR dense just of during sarcolemma in the below Terminal the SR an or the regions both) role (or elevation a and key the lie of [Ca++] action potential. tubule intracellular play abut T potential (as in however, significantly mechanism that heart, initiates in by Ca++ The release the differs ”). skeletal “ section muscle the action an in from of discussed which is organelles. volume by mitochondria; of abundance the the 30% heart these of contains heart occupied up The of an to heart provides high with in than great is typical density so capacity, more muscle. of the mitochondria The skeletal oxidative

skeletal comparable invaginations seen (T to contains of those muscle. sarcolemma in cardiac tubules) muscle also The mammalian of Z the the muscle, T bands. whereas ends at are at cardiac positioned however, are the lines, muscle, T positioned tubules in In tubules I skeletal between skeletal tubules fewer the as are the as, than, muscle. and in not well muscle, cardiac In T and developed those connections the SR

Familial occursinapproximately0.2%ofthegeneralpopulationbutisaleadingcauseofsuddendeathinotherwisehealthyadults.Ithasbeenlinkedtogeneticdefectsinavarietyofproteinsincardiacsarcomeres,includingmyosin,troponin,tropomyosin,andmyosin-bindingproteinC,astructuralproteinlocatedinthemiddleoftheAbandofthesarcomere.FCHisanautosomaldominantdisease,andtransgenicstudiesindicatethatexpressionofonlyasmallamountofthemutatedproteincanresultindevelopmentofthecardiomyopathicphenotype.Moreover,mutationofasingleaminoacidinthemyosinmoleculeissufficienttoproducecardiomyopathichypertrophy.ThepathogenesisofFCH,however,isvariable,evenwithinafamilywithasinglegenedefect,intermsofbothonsetandseverity;thisvariabilitysuggeststhepresenceofmodifyingloci. (FCH) hypertrophy cardiomyopathic

of Activity Control Muscle Cardiac

is intrinsic an involuntary muscle Cardiac with muscle an pacemaker. the specialized in and the to represents is The generate (located right that spontaneous of depolarization pacemaker node action potentials. undergo a sinoatrial atrium) able cell sinoatrial importance depolarizations several although spontaneous depolarize that are fastest in occur in Of able node. the to in the cells spontaneously, cells heart is the an heart specialized spontaneously contact). is pathways action potential given fires a depolarizes cell then throughout action Moreover, propagated conduction and this potential, (by cell-to-cell the once and of is to wave Thus in needed a one heartbeat). heart only cell initiate the from (i.e., depolarization contraction a The in depolarization discussed depth underlying mechanisms this spontaneous in are

Fig. is the propagated an in as , specialized is atria. node, atrial sinoatrial via once between cells well gap action it initiated the fibers in conduction junctions, 16.17 through potential as the pass within atria approximately throughout can action msec. 70 The potential it must intercalated gap and the node, via and system) ventricles, of ventricle reach the conduction specialized potential (the the the Purkinje of passes through action potential junctions myocytes. the atrioventricular For His throughout cardiac action in adjacent bundle the pass which after to the pathways disks after pass heart node. action The the through msec potential sinoatrial 220 the can in initiation entire within this lasts contraction cardiac of rapid cell heart 300 muscle nearly muscle a conduction typically msec, Because synchronous cells. contraction promotes of are the in of which increased. are into very skeletal of contraction grouped motor a recruited is from as units scenario is that force different This muscle, that independently cells

typically physiologist Sidney days 2 to the extracellular Ca++ mmol/L has 1 been Blood of Ringer known , fluids of since contain the (ca. and free and it contract. requires extracellular that 1882) the to Ca++ heart that beat Thus isolated when 2 Tyrode’s solution heart the solution), (37°C), approximately contains with typically extracellular physiological of absence . it stops a salt in perfused warm mmol/L Ca++ but continues (e.g., oxygenated, beating an to This contractions electrically of the extracellular observed demonstrates of in of Ca++ Ca++-deficient which media muscle. cardiac hearts contraction cessation for is also importance further that stimulated, are in total contract the in can This is quite absence of from muscle, . situation that skeletal of which Ca++ different extracellular

cardiac lasting 150 ( prolonged, muscle potentials are Action in to msec 300

Fig. potentials action is (≈5 msec). skeletal in inset), muscle substantially longer the than 13.2 which calcium is through action slow a a in muscle the of cardiac long potential Ca++ inward current duration due channel the voltage-gated The sarcolemma. L-type in to The into relatively small SR. is of Ca++ cell from Ca++ for amount the coming cardiac a release the of muscle as trigger serves and it still the In action although an can Fig. in muscle, Ca++ potential • extracellular cardiac absence initiated , be of modified Bers New time BF, L-type (Ca), Grune coupling. the influx VB: and O: the PLN, of See antiporter; Mountcastle triphosphate; in action 3Na+-Ca++ (Modified ed. the tubules. in transient and shows Medical 13 Orias Brooks sarcolemma potential Excitation-contraction ATP, channels EE, Suckling (AP), Ca++ York, RYR, text receptor. heart Louis, adenosine DM. requires Excitability 1974; for Stratton, 2002;415:198-205. calcium from CM, Physiology, Cardiac Hoffman Nature. Inset through NCX, Heart. contraction. 1955.) ryanodine coupling & St sarcolemmal intracellular phospholamban; excitation-contraction Ca T course from Inset Mosby, details. 13.2 of shorter initiate contraction. and is duration in a unable to considerably of for Thus during Ca++ action release and thus the contraction. crucial from SR initiating potential influx Ca++ triggering the of is

α2, (α1, L-type calcium and The composed subunits β, γ, of five channel is δ). also class α1 the (DHPR) of because subunit nitrendipine dihydropyridine the The and called binds is (e.g., channel–blocking drugs nimodipine). receptor it dihydropyridine calcium the very different in skeletal serves the Although two next muscle it present muscle, is (discussed complex channel cardiac paragraph). this types functions both in and in

tubules abut of the cardiac each terminal (see sarcomere, muscle the and In T SR regions sarcolemma

Figs. 13.1B 13.2 ). in a ryanodine These receptors the junctional Ca++ of the SR release in (RYRs; regions SR). are channel enriched able so Ca++ influx of release during from muscle. cardiac in initiate an The a is Ca++-gated the of potential and calcium is RYR action Ca++ to channel, SR although is “trigger” . the not released cytosol the sarcolemma, amount without cytosol that of entering this greater occur Ca++ Ca++ The of of the SR the than Ca++ SR into from does release from entry much the from not involve Ca++ change from instead voltage-induced in SR across muscle, does skeletal Ca++ contrast, a of In entry release from conformational the DHPR. of the the in results but sarcolemma in direct excitation-contraction excitation-contraction tubule RYR interactions release muscle the termed Ca++), in electrochemical is (involving between Thus the coupling coupling cardiac the in and Ca++-induced muscle in skeletal SR). electromechanical termed (involving DHPR coupling T the is of coupling whereas a on skeletal depend DHPR in requirement these extracellular in mechanisms of this skeletal results modified of appears cells release in muscle for difference cells. Ca++ cardiac contraction The expression to Ca++ because the isoform for for muscle DHPR basis

thin filaments, by and promote regulated to As elevation necessary is actin-myosin is intracellular cardiac skeletal in muscle, in contraction [Ca++] interaction. an muscle of actin of binding to tropomyosin. myosin (<50 intracellular blocked is by [Ca++], low At nmol/L) complex during filament cytosolic of conformational a change slips As action binding in troponin the [Ca++] to potential, in however, into myosin the C which results an on groove filament. the increases and sites actin troponin/tropomyosin tropomyosin of actin in the Ca++ binding exposes to will exposed, bind undergo ratchet contract actin, sites and and the cell. [Ca++] elevated, cardiac long hence myosin muscle action, as As a myosin binding cytosolic remains are a myosin at contraction filament because cardiac exposed during [Ca++], of actin regulated. termed are on Note and blocked binding is low [Ca++] muscle thin sites in intracellular that rise is muscle, situation muscle; (see to smooth in skeletal regulated This filament contrast, contraction is in thick in identical the

[Ca++] of that cross-bridges in a rise actin, of of myosin During steps in series muscle cardiac cell. result the a the and myosin-binding on undergo exposure sites contraction intracellular in “cock At actin. the to thus interact and are head” molecules have they (ATP) ready rest, hydrolyzed to partially triphosphate the that energized adenosine are myosin with An in to elevation and thus allows intracellular [Ca++] actin on myosin-binding 1). sites exposes then myosin bind actin (step the 2). in toward a the which pulled The subsequently actin filament (step the is sarcomere myosin undergoes powerstroke of center bound the energy to ATP are myosin inorganic Adenosine (ADP) from phosphate (Pi) the from released diphosphate used this head contract is during muscle. as the step and 70 myosin action during approximately moves head each cycle). The ratchet nm (cross-bridge and of ATP to myosin Binding thus actin from to actin myosin of (step affinity 3). decreases for myosin release allows the ready cycle. reenergize (step partially another for to hydrolyzes the and then the Myosin (“cock”) cross-bridge 4) the head bound ATP cycle is to identical muscle described four-step (see This for skeletal that

Fig. 12.13).

Cardiac interactions. in level differ, hence in the number potential actin-myosin and of after action and attained intracellular skeletal muscle muscle the however, of [Ca++] an muscle, In an actin-myosin [Ca++] rises of potential. skeletal the high and interactions intracellular action number after is without force the the [Ca++] undergoing important muscle be intracellular or of tetany. cells the cardiac modulating In recruiting affords an more of regulated, muscle, rise in can heart contraction means which more the muscle activated and the muscle recruiting contraction, that not heart, option. Recall cells during cells in all are is so a an of thus fatal. pumping be cardiac cells any and Moreover, would tetany action prevent muscle means amplitude varying contraction, transient. different relies force the including of the heart Consequently, intracellular increasing Ca++ the on the of of

of Cardiac Relaxation Muscle

simply Relaxation SR the pump. reaccumulation skeletal muscle the endoplasmic also by the of SR of through Ca++ known (SERCA), Ca++ action reticulum requires the of as calcium-ATPase sarcoplasmic sarcolemmal the muscle each the [Ca++] cytosolic Ca++ a SERCA skeletal than channels decrease Although in during the the key in that more calcium is action muscle process muscle, cell some enters through plays complex because potential. role cardiac cardiac in trigger in Ca++; amount A result. overload exist the this increase, otherwise, would in mechanism and extrude trigger Ca++ the Ca++ to would of must SR therefore continuously sarcolemmal (Fig. particular, 3Na+-Ca++ a cardiac cell Ca++ is antiporter though and Ca++ In pump muscle from the extruded the sarcolemmal some 13.2 ). accomplished and is intracellular The a of millimolar extrusion extracellular submicromolar, is in gradient. large the chemical the whereas is so against [Ca++] of [Ca++] range, amount Ca++ in cell. within considerably the Similarly, is extracellular the [Na+] than higher media antiporter cell. of uphill the across the Na+ power cell movement Ca++ out of the the The gradient to uses Because ions exchange electrogenic the in ion, 3Na+-Ca++ antiporter cell depolarizing for Ca++ and is the one current. a three Na+ creates enter from to hand, cell. pump, on Ca++ the other ATP extrude energy the sarcolemmal the Ca++ in The uses to contribute cardiac thus SERCA [Ca++]. of and by the cytosolic muscle relaxation decreasing extrusion Both mechanisms

[Ca++]. in in intracellular interaction proteins [Ca++], of Ca++-binding small free myoplasm total a much the and larger necessitates in the requires of increase increase a myosin Although actin intracellular the relatively abundance free half-maximal to nmol/L of 50 requires . approximately 100 of 600 force resting intracellular The [Ca++] Ca++ is contraction approximately nmol/L; Ca++-binding myoplasmic because C, troponin proteins of total parvalbumin the 70 by as µmol/L. such increase and concentration However, must myoplasmic of [Ca++] total noted, of this in through the Ca++ release occurs increase already much SR. As from of the the release 70% for SR and a account cats, species, uptake number rabbits, guinea pigs, Ca++ In and intracellular dogs, of by of including Ca++ approximately transient. humans, rise the intracellular to extrusion antiporter during through channels and significantly 30% calcium to [Ca++] the may influx sarcolemma, attributable up of Ca++ the in Ca++ contributes in 3Na+-Ca++ of to be voltage-gated Thus relaxation.

Ca++ The is thus sarcolemmal regulation for lower resting pump than 3Na+-Ca++ a in has the abundance affinity higher (see [Ca++] contribute to more intracellular and Ca++ of but antiporter may the

Fig. 13.2 ). of species. varies Ca++ however, mechanisms, extrusion The the between relative contribution Ca++ accounts transport). by (i.e., Ca++ mouse rely and rat the For of on example, myocytes primarily for the 92% reuptake SR SR

Contraction of of Force Regulation the

electrical to an of beat, cardiac possible single the Because recruiting muscle during all contract more muscle syncytium, the the is in cells. a heart it increase cells force by which contraction represents not would heart. heart defeat pumping be would of the it critical because the Moreover, action lethal of tetany the contraction. heart alternative of strategies the to developed has The therefore force increase action the The L-type long activation in long to turn which a channel, period, which cardiac prevents potential tetany. in due of duration the voltage-gated is results refractory calcium in found of muscle, a however, and the force cytosolic hence of the Ca++ channels during potential, action provides influx heart L-type contraction. an through [Ca++] Modulation of alter to mechanism calcium with

is vitro of A [Ca++]. of muscle extracellular force modulating cells in to the cardiac vary means contraction of simple requires previously, As heart the Ca++ extracellular contraction noted of . to Decreasing from normal mmol/L force reduces for range contraction. mmol/L, [Ca++] 2 of example, of extracellular to 1 the the a 0.5 sequestration have and in with the associated the duration a kinetic Ca++ because reduction the change force characteristics of contraction contraction not extrusion of modified. of This by in is SR not Ca++ been the means it is not approach contraction alter a vivo. extracellular Although of force cardiac in demonstrable is this common contraction the force the to in varying vitro, of of of modulating [Ca++]

section the and increase stimulation In occurs contraction (see in an force transient response hence of the intracellular in the to sympathetic Ca++ of the size vivo,

18). Chapter (released heart) adrenal or norepinephrine terminals medulla Sympathetic involves often periods of the nerve stimulation and bloodstream). in the on fright β-adrenergic epinephrine into the by (released heart occurs excitement from the activation from of receptors during or shown As in

Fig. a size the in agonist results transient 13.3 increase and, a Ca++ β-adrenergic more contraction. isoproterenol intracellular of dramatic consequently, , the forceful in the contraction increase of inotropy. positive is force An termed the in rate Typically, in of also results this a stimulation β-adrenergic increases, contraction. the shorter relaxation which accompanying of in termed muscle The the relaxation lusitropy. positive is increase rate contractions the chronotropy. and of increases stimulation with heart also The β-adrenergic frequency positive is of termed contractions. more stronger, Thus the and produces β-adrenergic of briefer, frequent stimulation heart

cells, to or of the phosphorylation neurotransmitter and nervous β-adrenergic norepinephrine heart, the prepare of The flight.” “fight the human muscle proteins promotes the or a in receptors is or adenylate increased In said hormone thus ( cAMP-dependent cardiac for increases sympathetic levels is individual the when (cAMP), turn becomes monophosphate cyclase, on it cardiac an system sympathetic numerous in stimulated activate and muscle of excited, epinephrine animal medullary adrenal case the cells activates cyclic which adenosine

Fig. 13.4

Both protein protein by SERCA, phospholamban, Ca++) the trigger with phosphorylated calcium L-type cAMPdependent called a (responsible associated and voltage-gated are kinase. channels for phosphorylations these amount of combined of the the in action Ca++ The SR. increases it SERCA, before Specifically, Ca++ increases phospholamban the the sarcolemmal the accumulate phosphorylation allowing the more calcium antiporter by channel activity the thereby pump. Ca++ 3Na+-Ca++ to enter the sarcolemmal and Ca++ of more causes and extruded cell, trigger SR to phosphorylation is of of promotes The the cytosol the interactions that during contraction of hence force into the is action next result greater net (see more SR which and releases actin-myosin potential, Ca++ more

Fig. ). 13.3 also The of increased SR. after by results of of a reaccumulation stimulation sympathetic because contraction rapid activity shortened the the Ca++ SERCA in its allows relaxation. turn increase in This rate the heart of to increase pacemaker a of in direct additional an consequence (see the cells An on is sympathetic stimulation effect rate •Fig. heart through 13.3 Stimulationofβ-adrenergicreceptorsintheheartincreasestheforceofcontraction.Electricalstimulationofmyocardiumresultsinatransientriseinintracellular[Ca++]andproductionofforce(A). Isoproterenol(aβ-adrenergicreceptoragonist)increasestheamplitudeoftheintracellularCa++transientandhencetheamountofforcegenerated(B). Ca +Isoproterenol Force A B Control Force sec Ca 0.5

and with be influence to transport. associated SR appear Additional SERCA proteins some and calcium micropeptides also dwarf open SERCA calcium 34–amino reading ( the This frame affinity includes increases which acid (DWORF), peptide

Fig. ), apparently phospholamban. 13.5 displacing by putative non-coding DWORF in RNA. was identified

anchoring kinase hasbeenshowntobecloselyassociatedwiththeL-typecalciumchannelintheheart,therebypositioningcAMP-dependent protein transientand,insodoing,resultinamoreforceful,briefercardiaccontractionisdiscussedingeneraltermslater(seealso closetothechannelandfacilitatingcAMP-dependentphosphorylationofthischannelduringsympatheticstimulation.HowthesecAMP-dependentphosphorylationsincreasetheamplitudeoftheintracellularCa++ (AKAP) kinase protein Themechanismsunderlyingtheresponseofthehearttoβ-adrenergicstimulationarecomplexandinvolvecAMPdependentphosphorylationofseveralproteins.AnA

extrusionduringdiastoleresultsinanetinwardcurrentsufficienttodepolarizethecelltothethresholdforanactionpotential.TreatmentofCPVTinvolvesantiadrenergictherapy(withβ-adrenergicantagonists)or(forunresponsivepatients)animplanteddefibrillator. antiporter,whereinCa++ Mutationsinthecardiacryanodinereceptor(RYR2)havebeenassociatedwithcardiacarrhythmias.Specifically,catecholaminergicpolymorphicventriculartachycardia(CPVT)isaninheritedautosomaldominantdiseasethatistypicallymanifestedduringchildhoodasanexercise-inducedtachycardiathatcanprogresstoarrhythmiasduringexercise(orstress)andresultinsuddendeath.Approximately40%ofpatientswithCPVTexhibitadefectinRYR2thathasbeenassociatedwithincreasedreleaseofCa++ fromtheSR.ThemutationinRYR2mayinvolvesubstitutionofahighlyconservedaminoacid,whichdiffersfrommalignanthyperthermia,inwhichsplicingerrorsordeletionswithinRYRhavebeenreported.Itishypothesizedthatduringperiodsofexerciseorstress,increasedlevelsofintracellularCa++ (becauseofthecombinedeffectsofβ-adrenergicstimulationandincreasedactivityofthemutatedRYR2)promotethedevelopmentofdelayedafterdepolarizationsandhencearrhythmias.Elevationofintracellular[Ca++]duringdiastoleisthoughttopromotethedevelopmentofdelayedafterdepolarizationsthroughactivationofthe3Na+-Ca++

mechanism an of increases and contraction contractile regulating force in both the force. intrinsic the Stretching heart for of in is vivo vitro and exhibits length. resting skeletal contrast, typically tension muscle maximal at In return times the venous or of increased during or slowed, is to of (e.g., of occurs heart rate vivo the in when the blood both). during exercise heart heart Stretching which increase of force heart •Fig. The Frank-Starling to at to the of heart when contraction occurs stretched, refers the its ability of law this Sympatheticstimulationoftheheartresultsinanincreaseincytosoliccyclicadenosinemonophosphate(cAMP)andhencephosphorylationofseveralproteinsbyproteinkinaseA(PKA).AnAkinaseanchorprotein(AKAP)adjacenttotheL-typecalciumchannelfacilitatesphosphorylationofthischannelandpossiblynearbysarcoplasmicreticulumcalciumchannels.OtherproteinsphosphorylatedbyPKAincludephospholamban(PLN)andtroponinI.Muscarinicagonists(e.g.,acetylcholine[ACh]),ontheotherhand,inhibitthissympatheticcascadebyinhibitingtheproductionofcAMPbyadenylatecyclase(AC).β-AR,β-adrenergicreceptor;ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;Gi,inhibitoryGprotein;M2Rec,muscarinicacetylcholineM2receptor;Reg,regeneratinggenereceptor. 13.4 2002;415:198.) (RedrawnfromBersDM.Cardiacexcitation-contractioncoupling.Nature of times increased venous return (Fig. 13.6A

The importance blood it is whatever receives. it that this helps volume heart mechanism of of the pump are of the contraction a ensures force increased, lot of receives heart stretched, the blood, extra of the this Thus which when volume is and ventricles ejection blood. of Stretching tension, which helps overstretching of also muscle passive cardiac of heart. increases prevent the that (connective This attributed in to skeletal intracellular is both in and passive (titin). is proteins matrix tissue) heart than greater and the extracellular resistance muscle elastic

force range cardiac lengths occurs increase muscle stretch-induced of of of narrow over sarcomere This contraction in (ca. a length-dependent um), a resulting 1.6-2.3 activation contraction. in of steep in relationship in much muscle that This is skeletal than of limb the ascending cardiac seen muscle. steeper length-tension force occur this is note important singe that within can heart beat. stretch-induced to increase a It in

as but stretch-induced The thick ( the of changes well appears contraction contraction sensitivity as overlap in of stretch-induced force in this muscle to in is thin of and the the underlying involve cardiac increase increase of controversial, Ca++ mechanism(s) filaments

Fig. whereas 40% stretch-induced to contraction contraction increase an stretch-induced 13.6B thin to of the the attributed filaments. of in increase the in remaining of force the attributed force in overlap been been has in of of the sensitivity, Ca++ and increase changes has thick of the region this relationship optimal is sarcomere represents to in to increase in overlap, um, likely in represent as contribute in cardiac myofilaments as thought less length of The force region to changes however, the from continued tension (and plateau a are increases 2.0um overlap skeletal to length contraction myofilament a 2.3 of muscle).

stretch-induced not proteins titin, increase elastic well but The contraction as sensitivity troponinC). to appears clear, as intracellular (e.g., of involve contributing the in regulatory to mechanism(s) protein Ca++ are cardiac the

myosin the small, continually muscle, be the pool, generate in must As which so force, is to uses replenished. ATP energy in ATP skeletal metabolism, carbohydrates. of the oxidation Typically, by this and fats pools aerobic ATP is including replenishment of accomplished to ATP, decrease. which times ADP During converts may phosphate ischemia, pool, of the creatine muscle, skeletal As the in

is In 60% muscle, trabecular rat pool creatine ventricular approximately phosphate small.

MyocyteSarcoplasmic reticulum 100 25 KCa[Ca2˜]free 50 7.5 KO 250 * Levy 6.0 7.0 RyRSERCASERCAPLNDWORF & KO pCa A Tg (nM) * WT 0 6.5 8.0 Vmax % ContractionSarcomereCa2˜Ca2˜Ca2˜Sarcomere Tg 50 •Fig. Physiology SECTION3Berne 200 100 WT C 150 75 B 5.5 RelaxationSarcoplasm 0 276 125 Asmall(34–aminoacid)peptideencodedbyalongnoncodingRNAappearstoimprovesarcoplasmicreticulumfunctionandmyocyteperformancebycounteringtheinhibitoryeffectofphospholamban(PLN)(asdepictedintheworkingmodelshowninpanelA).TheabilityofDWORFtoincreasecardiacSRCauptakeisshowninpanelsBandC,whereoverexpressionofDWORFincardiomyocytes(labeledTg)increasedtheCasensitivityofSRCatransport,whereasknockoutofDWORF(labeledKO)hadthereverseeffect.DWORF,dwarfopenreadingframe;KO,knockout;SERCA,sarcoplasmicendoplasmicreticulumcalcium-ATPase;Tg,transgenic;WT,wild-type.(FromNelsonBR,MakarewichCA,AndersonDM,etal.ApeptideencodedbyatranscriptannotatedaslongnoncodingRNAenhancesSERCAactivityinmuscle.Science. 13.5 2016;351:271-275.)

O2 stopped-flow of 30 occlusion cease because (i.e., completely deprived ischemia), cardiac When contractions (within seconds). quickly a muscle of is coronary of vessel decline or these levels phosphate not more to depletion is slowly. ATP because due either creatine of This ability. as near after Even 20% only phosphate contractile stopped-flow of remains, when zero restore energy the creatine reperfusion are as these stores, ischemia, of can minutes well ATP and levels 10 and contractile phosphate so results only in reperfusion activity. 20 stopped-flow the minutes ATP, However, less has ischemia of that ATP levels creatine effect, restoration further prolonging considerably drops limited or in for with

individual can as a size Exercise such hypertrophy the cells. result of of muscle of the cardiac endurance heart running increase as by this increase and so-called oxygen athlete’s with in is an preserved Concomitant enlarged as volume, heart relaxation. cardiac consumption, performance, improved increased assessed stroke “physiological hypertrophy,” of contractile an beneficial the effects. example Thus with athlete’s represents heart

dilated concentric the may exposed hypertrophy, function. to chronic overload, ventricular either of undergo heart which left In hypertrophy if contrast, left or causes ventricular impairment pressure found hypertrophy regarding and mechanistic can be functional, this (see elsewhere between of various differences Details types textbook these morphological, the in

Chapter 18).

to a is Concentric increased by wall thickening left the of ventricular represents the load. and compensatory characterized hypertrophy hypertrophy by ventricular characterized is hypertrophy Dilated volume). volume increased (end-diastolic exhibit limits have Both ventricular shown and response contractile concentric/compensatory β-adrenergic which dilated reserve. hypertrophy stimulation, to left left contractile been decreased to the ventricular hypertrophy •Fig. left normal dilated ventricular hypertrophy, In Stretchingoftheheartincreasestheforceofcontraction(A). 13.6 ThisisattributabletobothanincreaseinthemaximalforceofcontractionandanincreaseinthesensitivityofcontractiontoCa++ (B). ItreflectsanintrinsicregulatoryprocessreferredtoastheFrank-Starling the law heart. of Circ Heart Physiol Physiol. J (B,RedrawnfromDobeshD,KonhilasJ,deTombeP.Cooperativeactivationincardiacmuscle:impactofsarcomerelength.Am 2002;282:H1055-H1062.) also along with Frank-Starling the may impaired. function, contractile response, be

The an not has the cellular although hypertrophy implicated. clear, molecular cardiac elevation are underlying and [Ca++] mechanisms in intracellular been development of

response are cardiac chronic and unclear. overload hypertrophy, or The during performance, decreased pressure β-adrenergic cardiac link between impaired links [Ca++]. attributed intracellular been of dysregulation cardiac to has Decreased performance dysregulation all in (pathological heart calcium Ca++ phosphorylation RYR, proteins, status and phospholamban, channels, activity, level, a the a been L-type with hypertrophy). associated SERCA, including of implicated Alterations in of the have variety and failing

been cardiac to growth (miR-222) be for to has response shown in important exercise. A microRNA reperfusion It after injury. of to maladaptive the also heart inhibit appeared remodeling ischemia/

(NFAT), cells therebyfacilitatingtranslocationofNFATtothenucleusandultimatelypromotingproteinsynthesisandthushypertrophy( thatcandephosphorylatethetranscriptionfactornuclear T factor of activated Amodestelevationinintracellular[Ca++](asaresultofincreasedcontractileactivity,forexample),hasbeenproposedtoactivateaCa++/calmodulin-dependentproteinphosphatase(calcineurin)

enhancer bypromotingthedissociation(nuclearexport)ofaninhibitorofMEF2(namely,histone Fig.13.7 2 [HDAC]). deacetylase factor ).ActivationofCa++/calmodulin-dependentproteinkinasehasalsobeenimplicatedinactivationofthetranscriptionfactormyocyte (MEF2)

(PI3K) receptor 1 andβ-adrenergic Theimpairedβ-adrenergicresponseofcardiacmuscleafterchronicpressureoverloadinvolves,atleastinpart,adecreaseinβ-adrenergicreceptorsbecauseofinternalization.Bothphosphatidylinositol-3-kinase havebeenimplicatedintheinternalizationofβ-adrenergicreceptors. kinase

Highbloodpressure,defectsinheartvalves,andventricularwallsweakenedasaresultofmyocardialinfarctioncanallleadtoheartfailure,aleadingcauseofdeath.Heartfailuremaybeseenwiththickeningofthewallsoftheventricleorwithdilation(i.e.,increasedvolume)oftheventricles.

uptakeactivityintheSRbecausephospholambantypicallyinhibitsSERCA.IncreasedactivityofSERCAwouldfacilitaterelaxationoftheheartasaresultofrapidCa++ isavailableforrelease.IncreasedCa++ uptakebytheSRmayalsodecreaseactivationoftheCa++-dependentphosphatasesthathavebeenimplicatedinthedevelopmentofcardiachypertrophy. Resultsofstudiessuggestthatdilatedcardiomyopathycanbepreventedinananimalmodelbydownregulatingphospholamban.ThemechanismunderlyingthispreventiveeffectofphospholambandownregulationisthoughttoinvolveanincreaseinCa++ uptakebytheSR.Inaddition,theforceofcontractionisincreasedbecausemoreCa++

There with hypertrophy is impairments. cardiac associated some functional may be evidence that not density, signaling, decreased without decreased and levels, in capillary for aortic Intermittent decreased SERCA2 example, β-adrenergic hypertrophy. evidence result constrictions, of involved this response. Activation PI3K to appears of in be

& Levy 278 SECTION3Berne Physiology Ca++ transducers? Activity Other effectors? Other Expression Hypertrophy/Tissue Remodeling Gene Myocyte targets? Other Reprogramming CalcineurinCaMK GATA MCIP GSK3 Cabin CsA •Fig. MEF2 Agonists HDAC P NFAT NFAT 13.7 Calcium-dependentactivationofcalcineurinandcalmodulin-dependentproteinkinasehavebeenimplicatedinthedevelopmentofcardiachypertrophyandinvolveactivationofthefollowingtranscriptionfactors:nuclearfactorofactivatedTcells(NFAT),transcriptionfactorbindingtoDNAsequenceGATA(GATA),andmyocyteenhancerfactor2(MEF2).Cabin,calcineurin-bindingprotein/inhibitor;CaMK,Ca++/calmodulin-dependentproteinkinase;CsA,cyclosporine;GSK3,glycogensynthasekinase3;HDAC,histonedeacetylase;MCIP,modulatorycalcineurin-interactingprotein.(RedrawnfromOlsonEN,WilliamsRS.Calcineurinsignalingandmuscleremodeling.Cell. 2000;101:689-692.) 1.

Cardiac involuntary, an muscle. is striated muscle small connections electrical an relatively are cells. adjacent cardiac tight Cardiac between form muscle electrical µm) with cells and µm syncytium muscle 100 and × mechanical (10 the throughout allow initiated in heart. the synchronous quickly pumping to the Action sinoatrial of node spread are potentials contraction, action the heart feature a and important for

2.

Ca++dependent in of actin muscle filaments, and myosin skeletal cardiac as Contraction the of interaction muscle. involves unlike extracellular requires muscle skeletal an . influx Ca++ However, cardiac of muscle, Ca++ contraction. release SR, the of influx and then during Ca++ promotes potential triggers the Specifically, interaction of an which actin-myosin from action

3.

and the SR pump. the the cardiac reaccumulation from of 3Na+-Ca++ and the involves of muscle by Relaxation via of sarcolemmal Ca++ cell antiporter Ca++ Ca++ extrusion proteins of (forming micropeptide pump The a numerous endogenous is the and inhibitors with activators. associated regulosome), SR including some Ca++

4.

stimulation. of by is and sympathetic (Frank-Starling of contraction The the muscle of Heart) Law force cardiac increased by stretch force tetany. contrast, by or more Skeletal muscle by increases in recruiting muscle, fibers

5.

can genetic response in pressure to chronic mutations. heart exercise, or occur overload, Hypertrophy of the cardiac relaxation. beneficial, The with cardiac normal and from consumption, increased exercise typically resulting oxygen is improved hypertrophy performance, decreased contractile on pressure result other in that hypertrophy is progress initially Chronic cardiac response decreased hand, characterized ability. can the hypertrophy, but may β-adrenergic cardiac to dilated with by associated overload, a hypertrophy in resulting cardiac include mutations Genetic familial hypertrophic

CL, KM, Anderson DM, Chang et Anderson al. performance. A muscle long regulates by a micropeptide noncoding encoded putative RNA Cell. 2015;160:595-606.

Ca2+ Cardiac signaling and Endoh sensitizers. Ca2+ M. Circ J. 2008;72:1915-1925.

P, K, Haghighi Bidwell EG. Kranias interactome Phospholamban and an contractility a vision friend. cardiac old survival: new in of Cardiol. Cell J Mol 2014;77:160-167.

H. in through titin molecular and health disease. Hidalgo Granzier giant the phosphorylation: C, Tuning role Cardiovasc Trends Med. 2013;23:165-171.

which cardiomyopathy, a single and hypertrophic response. may protein promote function a in in contractile intracellular a alter mutation microRNA and hypertrophy of to after a maladaptide to identified the appears injury. inhibit exercise-induced have to that remodeling ischemia/reperfusion Researchers the contribute heart

et Kobirumaki-Shimozawa F, SA, Inoue al. T, Shintani and Frank–Starling thin filament Cardiac mechanism. the regulation Sci. Physiol J 2014;64:221-232.

Marks AR. and therapeutics. and Calcium proteins cycling failure: mechanisms heart J Clin Invest. 2013;123(1):46-52.

Bei Zhang H, Xiao Tao J, X. Li L, Y, for signaling Exercise heart: the pathways. Oncotarget. 2015;6:20773-20784.

Boyman L, GS, WJ. Lederer Williams Mitochondrial of metabolism the heart. in calcium and the regulation J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015;78:35-45.

student chapter the following 1. able this the to of completion should be questions: Upon answer

smooth muscle various meets and the demands how in each of Describe the organ. tissue/ of it organization tissues,

2.

the contraction the mechanisms vasculature smooth relaxation promote muscle and and that organs. of in Discuss various

3.

maintain over relatively a pressures. tissue mechanism can artery perfusion blood flow of Describe the range which an a autoregulatory broad constant by to

4.

basis phasic the from transition Describe to utility of and a contraction. tonic contraction

5.

the for and basis Discuss length-tension for curves each smooth curves. muscle, curves of force-velocity these the molecular and

of the already for possible. muscle, should of cardiac listed the student tissues and each muscle completed comparison If on has objectives all be three skeletal learning

and or a cells are urogenital such hollow muscle airways, component tract. onstriated, alimentary the smooth, vasculature, canal, organs as major of in (as of which serves of (as Contraction peristalsis flow the contents the increasing vasoconstriction). the the to or of dimensions organ in the result muscle resistance smooth may of to either organ, in alter intestine) the propelling with muscle in mechanism although myosin of smooth (as are basic important The striated actin of underlying muscle), involves differences. an there some contraction interaction is muscle and alteration the muscle of on of can bind can striated in contraction before of it contraction thick-filament movement smooth complex actin. filament troponin-tropomyosin regulated is thin-filament requires actin and myosin to with before whereas requires myosin actin, interact the Specifically, an regulated and in the hormonal exhibits blood hence vascular muscle tone contracted extended maintaining either energy signals at or contract ability response low remain pressure. for important to can as and of consumption, periods which to such is Smooth for electrical levels functions multiple regulation sometimes intracellular involving complex, is cascades. of signaling muscle smooth of Thus contraction the appropriate, made is and, smooth those mechanisms in regulation to present muscle. with contraction underlying mechanisms of chapter, striated In effort this identify these when regulatory observed muscle compare diverse in regulation have Alterations function/ are pathological smooth in that conditions also muscle various been discussed. implicated

Overview Smooth Muscle of

Smooth Muscle of Types

into muscle Smooth and has groups: unit single been two subdivided multiunit. muscle smooth the electrically cells. smooth electrical stimulation stimulation are of of single-unit followed coupled one is such cell muscle muscle In adjacent by smooth cells that in results as in wave peristalsis. a This of contraction, smooth a by muscle exhibits pacemaker in cell single-unit hence and initiated a electrical may (i.e., that be smooth cell contraction, depolarization). spontaneous this activity, muscle Moreover, wave of not adjacent of contrast, smooth multiunit of result are In muscle cell smooth muscle stimulation one cells does cells. in coupled, not so necessarily electrically activation of and Examples vas the eye. male the tract genital the muscle deferens the multiunit include of iris smooth of with muscle, spectrum. of ends diverse, however, single-unit and the even more is classifications a multiunit representing Smooth somewhat represent inhibitors smooth degree coupling by oversimplification, neural produced response however; of cell-to-cell activators single-unit modulated locally with some a and or least also promote an muscles coordinated at terms that combination multiunit muscles. of a smooth The many of and elements are

A types is muscle second ( discussing pattern when the activity consideration smooth of

Fig. 14.1 ). level muscles walls muscle and muscle smooth smooth continuously phasic in (GI) In smooth muscle other maintain rhythmic active exhibiting and intermittent intermittently, rhythmically of cells activity a the is the smooth includes and or organs the organs are cells whereas contract muscle termed or urogenital the of tracts. in gastrointestinal Smooth some “tone.” Such to to potentials action contract muscle that the described from muscle earlier phasic cell. in to response corresponds cells propagate smooth smooth because the cell single-unit category is that the termed hand, Smooth tonic is muscle. smooth muscle on other active, continuously

smooth respiratory smooth Vascular some continuously sphincters are muscle, muscle, and active. tonic not is is proportional partial activation potentials, associated smooth potential. muscle to action membrane it continuous although The of with would earlier. the to smooth correspond described muscle thus multiunit muscle smooth Tonic from muscle a Phasic in result chapter, actin as contractions there cross-bridge cycling tonic filaments, can smooth energy interactions smooth and although in later change force myosin of the low is maintain such kinetics at cost. that and tonic during discussed this contraction, of muscle

•Fig. 14.1 Somecontractileactivitypatternsexhibitedbysmoothmuscles.Tonicsmoothmusclesarenormallycontractedandgenerateavariablesteady-stateforce.Examplesaresphincters,bloodvessels,andairways.Phasicsmoothmusclescommonlyexhibitrhythmiccontractions(e.g.,peristalsisintheGItract)butmaycontractintermittentlyduringphysiologicalactivitiesundervoluntarycontrol(e.g.,voidingofurinefromurinarybladder,swallowing).

of Smooth Cells Structure Muscle

Fig. 14.2 ). Blood contraction and structure a muscle circumferentially, reduces which in arranged diameter cells are simple tubular of so exhibit smooth tube. the the airways vessels the resistance length of to has This organ. on the the the blood air little effect contraction flow increases of but or more the muscle Smooth organization tract. is cell complex GI in the circumferential longitudinal provide anus. and muscle from both mechanical the of the for also and Layers orientations luminal smooth mouth food propelling the mixing in contents to action between these complex of depends Coordination on system by a layers linked plexuses. autonomic nerves organs located ability urination reduce in to are These volume the cells contributes during plexuses internal between muscle walls almost the of two zero these layers. to to their of such of the accumulation the allows urinary organ size The as walls the feces. urine in structures to smooth muscle bladder or or rectum in saccular with increase arrangement of varied The

Normally contracted (tone) bladder Stomach, Phasically Esophagus, active defecation. vessels, partially airways Blood or urinary intestines occur in depending a in function of loads. their forms, muscle hollow mechanical cells and on organs Smooth spectrum

organ or separated other elements, cellular digestive as of the endothelium as by the complex which of tract. as be may organs vascular smooth all is In as mucosa contents the hollow simple from the the muscle as organs an increasing of increases. The connective the stress wall share tissue also large bear of volume of that amounts walls organ hollow contain

set The enable following components describe that alter structural organ to or hollow smooth muscle volume. sections the the •Fig. systems such components contractile include force-transmitting These proteins, regulatory and as andlongitudinal(above) 50mm).C,Rectangularsmoothmusclecellswiththinprojectionstoadjacentcellsinasmalltesticularduct(bar, layersofintestinalsmoothmusclesandwichingneuralcomponentsofthemyentericplexus(asterisk) Scanningelectronmicrographsofsmoothmuscle.A,Musculararteriolewithfusiformsmoothmusclecellsinacircularorientation(bar, 14.2 5µm). (bar, 20µm).B,Superimposedimagesofcircular(below) Muscle. (FromMottaPM[ed].Ultrastructure of Smooth Norwell,MA:KluwerAcademic;1990.) cytoskeleton, and myoplasmic systems into that the transduce membrane linkages between and cells [Ca++]. changes signals in extracellular matrix, extracellular

smooth cells. of A variety exists specialized muscle contacts between communication between mechanical cells. contacts and allow linkage Such normally to attached skeletal contrast (and muscle In end tendon, smooth cardiac) cells, to are connected which cells either each other. are a at to muscle not linked arranged also to simultaneously mechanically Because be anatomically smooth must same and but the be series, they in must muscle activated only degree. cells are muscle functional mechanical smooth to is This linkage crucial and function. If such linkage did

another increase Thin Sarcoplasmic in in bodies without stretch decrease exist, Dense radius would 0.1 region substantial pressure. a µm0.1 simply reticulum filaments µm or in Mitochondria C Caveolae c Thick Filaments Thick region mµ 0.5 not contraction one sheaths muscle provided connections specific by between attachments connective junctions of mechanical to cells. The tissue by are and

found Several smooth in are junctions types of muscle. linkage gap ( Functional provided the by junctions of is cells

Fig. ). 14.3A between (see low-resistance form cells junctions Gap ). pathways diffusion of by chemical allow compounds. also They communication low-molecular-weight layer exist. as large numbers the tissues, of such junctions In in intestine, outer longitudinal such smooth the muscle certain of through potentials propagated from Action to cell are such cell readily tissues.

Surface B mµ 0.5 reticulum 0.5 •Fig. Sarcoplasmic couplings mµ mµ0.2 Junctions,membranes,andmyofilaments,insmoothmuscle.A,TransmissionelectronmicrographofGapjunctionbetweenintestinalsmoothmusclecells.B,Longitudinalviewofapulmonaryarterysmoothmusclecell.Thesarcoplasmicreticulumisstainedwithosmiumferricyanideandappearstoformacontinuousnetworkthroughoutthecellconsistingoftubules,fenestratedsheets(long andsurfacecouplingsatthecellmembrane(short 14.3 arrows). arrows), andtherelativelylargenumberofsurroundingthin(actin)filaments(inset). C,Transversesectionofabundleofvenoussmoothmusclecellsillustratingtheregularspacingofthickfilaments(long line) occurattheperipheryofthesecells.D,Scanningelectronmicrographoftheinnersurfaceofthesarcolemmaofanintestinalsmoothmusclecell.Longitudinalrowsofcaveolaeprojectintothemyoplasm(small, spheres), line) aresitesofattachmentforthethinactinfilamentsandequivalenttotheZlinesofstriatedmuscles.Elementsofsarcoplasmicreticulum(short light-colored surroundedbydarkerelementsofthetubularsarcoplasmicreticulum.Theattachmentsofthinfilamentstothesarcolemmabetweentherowsofmembraneelementswereremovedduringpreparationofthespecimen. Densebodies(arrowheads) Smooth (AandD,FromMottaPM[ed].Ultrastructure of Muscle. Norwell,MA:KluwerAcademic;1990.BandC,FromSomlyoAP,SomlyoAV.Smoothmusclestructureandfunction.In:FozzardHAetal. System.2nded.NewYork:RavenPress;1992.) [eds].The Heart and Cardiovascular cells. muscle (≈60 are opposing as that a small thickened by The membranes of junction adherens dense separated material. regions appears containing gap cell nm) granular adherens generated filaments adjacent contractile to force the allow smooth Thin transmitted cell to extend into be the muscle in cells. muscle to junction smooth one

each do Embryonic single cells nucleus. centrally located cell differentiated fuse, smooth muscle and not has a long). large cells Though muscle quite cells, dwarfed are skeletal muscle smooth nevertheless µm by (typically 40–600 in to their taper 10 and diameter are most cells region the of nucleus, µm ends. the 2 toward in These of result other extracellular the irregular. the and often Contracting to are or as sections quite exerted cells a these cell cross very of by matrix, distorted force cells cells on to attachments become the

of Smooth skeletal tubules, muscle muscle invaginations electrical (SR). sarcoplasmic the links cells sarcolemma provide lack T reticulum the the to that sac-like the sarcolemma has tiny (see of caveolae smooth of muscle However, inpocketings called rows longitudinal

Fig. 14.3B–D ). approximately are muscle. the and been 15 and skeletal ratio of surface-to-volume of the closely the gap between cells in has to gap the increase A underlying the between SR Caveolae nm SR. caveolae and often underlying tubules comparable T SR, terminal the observed apposed to the a thus that in of vicinity possibility Ca++-handling muscle. may the regulation in raising intracellular sparks” SR the of variety observed and smooth have [Ca++] “Ca++ caveolae underlying contribute to caveolae, of and been proteins the the Moreover, example, 3Na+-1Ca++ are L-type antiporter, The channel for the associated and with voltage-gated Ca++ caveolae. it the critical caveolin for reflect mentioned that in may a both cholesterol to Ca++ proteins specialized contain hypothesized sarcolemma of that and is signaling also of The caveolae, formation are addition molecules and region caveolae earlier. various the the signaling the

that intracellular membrane network reservoir muscle serves for Ca++ also Smooth intracellular an an has as (see of SR

Fig. 14.3B–D ). hormones, myoplasm when released can or to receptors drugs neurotransmitters, stimulatory into on bind the be SR sarcolemma. the the from Calcium Importantly, similar is smooth inositol ryanodine intracellular muscle SR in (RYR), to channels SR, receptor of that and the channel. skeletal muscle the (InsP3)-gated found which the Ca++ include in Ca++ 1,4,5-trisphosphate through response RYR the of in typically intracellular a an (i.e., influx release rise of Ca++ activated Ca++-induced to by sarcolemma). The in is [Ca++] Ca++ a on the when bind InsP3-gated is which produced Ca++ channel by hormones various receptors or Ca++-mobilizing activated to is InsP3, sarcolemma. hormone The antiporter Intracellular a and sarcolemmal is the Ca++-ATPase. Ca++ cell [Ca++] Ca++-ATPase action extrusion through of via from (SERCA) the an SR 3Na+-1Ca++ of a lowered and muscle approximates of of that from smooth 2% and cell volume amount SR to varies of The in muscle. 6% cells skeletal increase the a InsP3 in SR. within the Chemical between [Ca++] SR) sarcolemma localized and as intracellular the and such the gap link functionally signals caveolae or (e.g.,

muscle cells end are of the which prominent Golgi and reticulum each contain rough apparatus, endoplasmic a at nucleus. centrally located Smooth protein These structures significant functions. and secretory reflect synthetic consumed the scattered to oxidative contraction. mitochondria (ATP) adenosine for generate The increased triphosphate during sufficient phosphorylation are

tightly of than their muscle diameter and smooth times are The about cells thick 10,000 and filaments packed. longer thin are of probability intact by low. filament electron the extremely is observing an Therefore microscopy transverse and filaments uniform in thick contractile striations, alignment smooth skeletal that has thin in and no thus muscle alignment, are a the results contains transverse filaments striations. smooth to of not muscle contrast muscle, In in which The does in muscle smooth lack of a order. not lack striations imply of The and units in to thin sarcomeres. thick contractile filaments that are are analogous organized

that thin to skeletal smooth have The muscle. filaments and composition in structure an and of muscle actin tropomyosin similar is twice smooth that in and actin about content tropomyosin the muscle muscle. However, of cellular of striated muscle: two found and not proteins contains caldesmon troponin lacks in striated Smooth nebulin and but calponin. muscle of proteins do unknown, fundamental be to cross-bridge appear The but roles cycling. to these are not precise they of has smooth and suggested caldesmon muscle. may both that It been calponin contractility regulate the part inhibiting ATPase actomyosin by activity). (in the myoplasm the cell. filled filaments aligned of of are Most that axis along the is long thin roughly with smooth that muscle fourth is myosin of only of The muscle. striated a content are thin by and aligned thick five of surrounded to three Small filaments. many groups filaments filaments with or thick thin of filaments to are bodies interdigitating These groups dense ( connected areas

Fig. 14.4

Fig. ) represent and of equivalent 14.3A–B the sarcomere. the cells membrane-dense by links contractile of The apparatus between the adjacent coupled is mechanically areas.

of cell. serves muscle attachment force in cytoskeleton transmission smooth filaments point as The the for the ends cells of and permits the an thin to Z smooth the apparatus In skeletal is contractile myofibrils, not lines in contrast muscle, to lacking. into and organized muscle are The Z •Fig. muscle lines in of functional the cells smooth equivalents Apparentorganizationofcell-to-cellcontacts,cytoskeleton,andmyofilamentsinsmoothmusclecells.Smallcontractileelementsfunctionallyequivalenttoasarcomereunderliethesimilaritiesinmechanicsbetweensmoothandskeletalmuscle.Linkagesconsistingofspecializedjunctionsorinterstitialfibrillarmaterialfunctionallycouplethecontractileapparatusofadjacentcells.Densebodies,thefunctionalequivalentofZlinesinstriatedmuscle,areinterconnectedbyintermediatefilaments.Themyofilamentsareorientedlargelyinparallelwiththelongitudinalaxisofthecell,thoughanobliqueorientationhasbeenobservedinsomearteries. 14.4

and areas myoplasm the are dense ellipsoidal that bodies dense bands sarcolemma the along in (see form

Figs. 14.4 14.3A–B ). contain points as These a found and serve filaments of for in thin striated α-actinin, the lines Z the muscle. protein structures also attachment nm) (15 and thick of (7 muscle. filaments nm) prominent filaments filaments in those diameters are smooth between with thin Intermediate These cytoskeletal bodies filaments network. the link dense a and into areas protein vimentin. or polymers filaments of consist desmin of intermediate The

Activity Smooth of Muscle Control

be and smooth muscle numerous activity activity, a variety factors, pacemaker of including The contractile hormones, nerves, controlled can of autonomic by drugs. increasing is muscle by Ca++ of skeletal the just smooth contraction cardiac and listed , on induce muscle, intracellular agents contraction Like [Ca++]. dependent muscle or smooth However, in initiate or not action and muscle, to smooth to muscle skeletal cardiac always highly variable contraction. in potentials needed contrast are changing without membrane Moreover, muscle agents several can hence intracellular smooth potential. contract the increase [Ca++] and

Fig. force. corresponding types in muscle in potentials various action smooth and the 14.5 of changes shows in An action muscle action the twitch-like of during summate forces skeletal repetitive potential slow tetany response, in (i.e., potentials can twitch muscle). be and similar to can smooth a with periods associated pattern many of a is Such viscera. in characteristic muscle single-unit of smooth activity

result of in the in the occur a activity membrane changes oscillations can Na+,K+-ATPase potential of in as Periodic sarcolemma. membrane cell. trigger action potential multiple can in the potentials oscillations in These generation membrane potential. be of muscle a action in even or the of not potentials may Alternatively smooth activity with associated contractile change can influx resting many −40 depolarized significantly inhibit smooth potential membrane a Ca++ (−60 that Ca++ decrease the sarcolemma. in in to muscles potential is voltage-gated the through membrane mV) of sufficiently channels In small by Ca++ muscle influx, decreases. the By force developed smooth decreasing the tension changes vascular muscle). in multiunit graded that membrane is common Such a smooth potential maintain resting smooth muscles to response constant in slight (e.g.,

the reflects messenger an and level to potential Contraction the smooth pharmacomechanical the the termed to ability agent response membrane change that a typically intracellular produce does of increase not in of muscle second coupling is agent in of InsP3. Other in decrease potential. a in agents without a also membrane tension, result in change typically These levels (cAMP). monophosphate adenosine cyclic the (cGMP) messengers second cyclic agents or increase guanosine of monophosphate intracellular Ca++ molecular force of the which cAMP, presented muscle later. alter contractile by InsP3, The mechanisms cGMP, are smooth and

actin, which a both the of light-chain plays although this degree myosin of dependent myosin relative promotes kinase and promotes with hence myosin the activities phosphorylation dephosphorylation). phosphorylation) is (and Ca++dependent level light role and Phosphorylation myosin of in chain which the contraction) of myosin on of required interaction for phosphatase process, (MLCK, key a (MP, is the phosphorylation its a RhoA MLCK [Ca++] simultaneously (ROK). through involving the in signaling by Rho phosphorylation an increase cascade kinase of and G through and level the effector Several MP light-chain increase intracellular agonists/hormones protein monomeric activating myosin inhibiting RhoA/ROK signaling and conditions various hypertension (discussed of implicated been such this in pathological hyperactivity Moreover, later). has as vasospasm cascade

Muscle Smooth of Innervation

and cells, contraction muscle the •Fig. muscle the type of on the the Neural proximity innervation smooth depends nerves and of released, neurotransmitters of to regulation the 14.5 Relationshipsbetweenmembranepotential(Em)andgenerationofforce(F)indifferenttypesofsmoothmuscle.A,Actionpotentialsmaybegeneratedandleadtoatwitchorlargersummedmechanicalresponses.Actionpotentialsarecharacteristicofsingle-unitsmoothmuscles(manyviscera).Gapjunctionspermitthespreadofactionpotentialsthroughoutthetissue.B,Rhythmicactivityproducedbyslowwavesthattriggeractionpotentials.Thecontractionsaregenerallyassociatedwithaburstofactionpotentials.Slowoscillationsinmembranepotentialusuallyreflecttheactivityofelectrogenicpumpsinthecellmembrane.C,Toniccontractileactivitymayberelatedtothevalueofthemembranepotentialintheabsenceofactionpotentials.GradedchangesinEmarecommoninmultiunitsmoothmuscles(e.g.,vascular),whereactionpotentialsarenotgeneratedandpropagatedfromcelltocell.D,Pharmacomechanicalcoupling;changesinforceproducedbytheadditionorremoval(arrows) ofdrugsorhormonesthathavenosignificanteffectonmembranepotential.

muscle the and cell receptors on of the distribution type neurotransmitter ( membranes

Fig. 14.6 ). innervated by smooth muscle nervous autonomic is general, In the system. sympathetic innervation. whereas The in other both can arteries muscle have primarily smooth sympathetic and parasympathetic the fibers, muscle tissues innervated smooth is by in system. plexuses tract, that innervated enteric In muscle smooth GI nervous by make the nerve the up is (e.g., smooth innervation. have of cells uterus) tissues The some muscle no

structurally junctions neuromuscular smooth of comparable skeletal neuromuscular are that muscle to in The transmission muscle complex. less functionally but and have that muscle of varicosities, autonomic spaced or smooth a that The areas, are nerves intervals supply the at swollen along series axon. varicosities These (see neurotransmitter the for contain vesicles

Fig. 14.6).

postsynaptic with muscle specialization smooth ). of when muscle compared exhibits membrane The of skeletal little that (see nm to as nm or about cleft be synaptic 6 20 is to typically greater 120 narrow 120 than even as but 80 The wide nm. can of synapses smooth In cells. found, release muscle synaptic neurotransmitter which in cleft multiple can wide affect a is are smooth muscle number large affect that activity. of a There neurotransmitters is in listing provided A partial

14.1 Table

Contraction Regulation of

phosphorylation chain. of light requires Contraction smooth muscle a myosin of or in either a presence the an Typically hormone/agonist. after to phosphorylation in in intracellular action rise [Ca++], potential occurs a response of this As depicted in

Fig. the Ca++-calmodulin muscle in ions regulatory in binding 4 protein rise intracellular of calmodulin, the , the smooth chain in of myosin. light which a phosphorylates activates results then the complex and to Ca++ MLCK, [Ca++] 14.7 with the myosin of is This smooth muscle for step interaction phosphorylation critical actin. In phosphorylation smooth to addition muscle, this step in

neurotransmitter •Fig. vesicles Varicosity with .Theresponseofthecellsdependsontheconcentrationofthetransmittersorhormonesatthecellmembraneandthenatureofthereceptorspresent.Hormoneconcentrationsdependondiffusiondistance,release,reuptake,andcatabolism.Consequently,cellslackingcloseneuromuscularcontactswillhavealimitedresponsetoneuralactivityunlesstheyareelectricallycoupledsothatdepolarizationistransmittedfromcelltocell.A,Multiunitsmoothmusclesresemblestriatedmusclesinthatthereisnoelectricalcouplingandneuralregulationisimportant.B,Single-unitsmoothmusclesarelikecardiacmuscle,andelectricalactivityispropagatedthroughoutthetissue.Mostsmoothmusclesprobablyliebetweenthetwoendsofthesingleunit–multiunitspectrum.C,Scanningmicrographofvaricosenervelyingoverratsmallintestinescalebar= 14.6 Controlsystemsofsmoothmuscle.Inbothmultiunitsmoothmuscle(A)andsingleunitsmoothmuscle(B),neurallyreleasedtransmittersorcirculatingorlocallygeneratedhormonesorsignalingmoleculescaninducecontractionorrelaxationofthesmoothmuscle.Thecombinationofaneurotransmitter,hormone,ordrugwithspecificreceptorsactivatescontractionbyincreasingcellCa++ 10µm.E,Depictionofdistributionofsympatheticnerves(in black) 3µm.D,Fluorescentimageofcatecholaminesinsingleadrenergicaxoninguineapigmesentery.Scalebar= invasculature.Sympatheticnervesareassociatedwithsmallarteries(SA),largearterioles(la),smallveins(SV),largevenules(lv),smallarterioles(sa),andterminalarterioles(TA).Capillaries(c),post-capillaryvenules(pcv),andsmallvenules(svl)appeartolacksympatheticinnervation.(C,FromBurnstockG:Autonomicneuralcontrolmechanisms.Withspecialreferencetotheairways.InKalinerMA,BarnesPJ(Eds.),TheAirways.NeuralControlinHealthandDisease,MarcelDekker,NewYork(1988),pp.1–22.D,FromChamleyJH,MarkGE,CampbellGR,BurnstockG.(1972)Sympatheticgangliainculture.I.Neurons.Z.Zellforsch.Mikrosk.Anat.135,287-314.) aThepredominanteffectofsympatheticstimulationissmoothmusclecontractioncausedbytheabundanceofα1-ARrelativetoβ2-ARinsmoothmuscle.bActivationofβ2-ARonsmoothmusclemodulatesthedegreeofsmoothmusclecontractionduringsympatheticstimulation.Therapeuticβ2-ARagonistsareimportantfortherelaxationofbronchialsmoothmuscleduringasthmaticattacks.cVascularsmoothmusclesarepoorlyinnervatedbytheparasympatheticsystem.Duringvagalstimulation,however,acetylcholine(ACh)canbecomeelevatedinthecoronarycirculationandresultincoronaryrelaxation(mediatedbybindingofAChtoendothelialcells).NotethatthiseffectofAChisindirectbecausebindingofAChtoendothelialcellsresultsinreleaseofthesmoothmusclerelaxantnitricoxidefromtheendothelialcells.Inregionsofthecoronarycirculationwithdamagedendothelium,bindingofAChtocoronarysmoothmusclecouldpromotecontraction(vasospasm;directeffect).dAvarietyofhormonescanelevateInsP3insmoothmuscleandtherebyresultinsmoothmusclecontraction.SuchhormonesincludeangiotensinII,vasopressin,andendothelin,alongwiththeneurotransmittersnorepinephrineandacetylcholine.Asnotedabove,however,eachhormone/transmitterbindstoaspecificreceptortype.eDuringperiodsofintensemuscularactivity,adenosinecanbereleasedfromtheworkingmuscle,diffusetotheneighboringvasculature,andpromotevasodilation.Thus,adenosineisactingasalocalfactortoincreasebloodflowtoaspecificregion(i.e.,workingmuscle).AR,adrenergicreceptor;EC,endothelialcell;InsP3,inositol1,4,5-trisphosphate;SMC,smoothmusclecell.

development of the cross-bridge force. also molecule an energize needed to is myosin for ATP the

disease. TheentericnervoussystemcontrolsmanyaspectsofGIfunction,includingmotility.Somechildrenarebornwithoutentericnervesinthedistalportionofthecolon.Theabsenceofnervesiscausedbymutantgenesthatdisruptthesignalsnecessaryfortheembryonicnervestomigratetothecolon.Inthesechildren,normalmotilityofthecolondoesnotoccurandsevereconstipationresults.ThisconditioniscalledHirschsprung’s Itcanbecorrectedbysurgicallyremovingtheportionofthecolonthatdoesnotcontainentericnerves.

regulation thus thin-filament smooth the be filament. to of said of on sites troponin Contraction with Ca++ is muscle where thick-filament which myosin exposes of regulated, muscle, actin binding striated contrasts the contraction thin to of binding muscle. is isoform in myosin attributable thick-filament of The to regulation a expression smooth distinct

the in of cross-bridge the is in that the filament, the toward to after and a action myosin pulled thick undergoes which to cycle thin muscle muscle is ratchet the smooth similar filament in actin striated center cross-bridge that is generated. The filament attachment in force ATP Pi time, the at and head ADP myosin from this to released are bind. thereby allowing the from myosin decreases affinity for release actin, which of of ATP allows myosin actin. to (i.e., is recocking Energy change myosin head) conformational cycle. a cross-bridge the the in is the head used contraction that produce for so from newly another then bound the ready ATP as cross-bridge long myosin the cycle phosphorylated. as cross-bridge continues The remains of although kinetics be smooth appear for Note cross-bridge same muscle, the four slower the cross-bridge cycle of much basic the is that cycling for steps muscle. smooth to striated and the

myoplasmic the [Ca++] ATP molecule per 1 continues Cross-bridge cycle with hydrolysis of cycling until falls. are and [Ca++], the becomes MLCK cross-bridges (see in With decrease by dephosphorylated the MP inactive,

Fig. 14.7

Fig. of and between bodies thin thick sarcomere like , thin dense myosin in to and reside of of appear the smooth filaments filaments, two muscle. muscle filaments and to thick portion the bodies, overlap 14.4 attached the filaments striated dense the overlap thin are the much in a bipolar the the smooth filaments thought hence is thus toward force. thick arrangement the to developing the pull muscle the allow the myosin to within thick filament and molecules A cross-bridges myosin contracting center actin of filament, of

that and heavy of standpoint, pair From light both of is a similar two to contain striated smooth pairs structural myosin in muscle chains. chains muscle myosin they a sequences. amino gene different different this have they acid Despite similarity, thus products represent and chain myosin, with myosin light actin skeletal muscle the unless thin is unable muscle regulatory of myosin, As the to interact is smooth filament unlike phosphorylated. noted, filament Moreover, thin muscle •Fig. troponin, plays the a lacks smooth which in 14.7 RegulationofsmoothmusclemyosininteractionswithactinbyCa++-stimulatedphosphorylation.Intherelaxedstate,cross-bridgesarepresentasahigh-energymyosin-ADP-PicomplexinthepresenceofATP.Attachmenttoactindependsonphosphorylationofthecross-bridgebyaCa++-calmodulin–dependentmyosinlight-chainkinase(MLCK).Phosphorylatedcross-bridgescycleuntiltheyaredephosphorylatedbymyosinphosphatase.Notethatcross-bridgephosphorylationataspecificsiteonamyosinregulatorylightchainrequiresATPinadditiontothatusedineachcyclicinteractionwithactin.

the in critical striated muscle regulation in contraction role thin-filament (see of

for contraction, contraction muscle Although sensitivity is is Ca++ to Ca++ variable. required of smooth intracellular the increase contraction thereby sensitization given in at example, [Ca++], a intracellular of resulting hormones/agonists, Ca++ force submaximal for Several ( the

Fig.

). 14.8 as in contraction muscle of Ca++ shift leftward a depicted is Ca++ the sensitization (see dependence smooth

Fig. activity MP [Ca++]. and occur response activity the 14.8B a of a at in ) in decrease given intracellular can to (see MP of in Ca++ smooth in the activity Ca++ dependence desensitization intracellular [Ca++] resulting contraction, shift muscle Likewise an increase a a at rightward given promotes in

Fig. ). 14.8B MLCK Reciprocal of activities the occur, changes MP and in as can shown in

Fig. and of intracellular Ca++ MLCK the can a given stimulate Ca++ (i.e., sensitivity the [Ca++], at 14.8A , increasing MP an contraction of inhibit where agonist thereby sensitization). simultaneously ROK cascade by stimulation signaling

Fig.

throughactivationofRhoA/ROKsignaling.ROKcanalsobeactivatedbyarachidonicacidandinhibitedbyY-27632,ahighlyspecificinhibitor(see ).RhoAactivatesRhokinase(ROK),whichinturninhibitsMPbybothdirectandindirectmechanisms.DirectinhibitionofMPbyactivatedROKinvolvesROKphosphorylationofthemyosin-bindingsubunit(MBS)ofMP.IndirectinhibitionofMPbyactivatedROKinvolvesphosphorylationofCPI-17, anendogenous17-kDaprotein,whichtheninhibitsMP.Hormones/agonistssuchascatecholamines(actingonα1-adrenergicreceptors),vasopressin,endothelin,angiotensin,andmuscarinicagonistsincreasethesensitivityofsmoothmusclecontractiontoCa++ 14.8A

).Thoughnotshownin Fig.14.8A

inhibitor [GDI]). Fig.14.8 ,inactiveRhoAistypicallylocatedinthecytosol,boundtoGDPandaninhibitoryprotein(Rho-GDP dissociation sensitivityofcontractionofsmoothmuscle,therebypromotingrelaxation(andhencevasodilation). (GEF) toyieldRhoA-GTP,whichlocalizestothesarcolemmaandactivatesROK.Conversely,stimulationofMPactivityreducestheCa++ BindingofagonisttovariousG-coupledreceptorscanactivateRhoAbystimulatingguanine nucleotide exchange factor

HyperactivityoftheRhoA/ROKsignalingcascadehasbeenimplicatedinvariouspathologicalconditionssuchashypertensionandvasospasm.HyperactivityofRhoA/ROKinthevascularsmoothmuscleofhypertensiveanimals,forexample,wasmanifestedbyincreasedlevelsofactivatedRhoA,upregulationofROK,enhancementofagonist-inducedCa++ sensitizationofcontraction,andagreaterreductioninbloodpressurebyROKinhibitorsascomparedwithnormotensivecontrols.Asimilartrendwasobservedinhumans,inthatROKinhibitorsdecreasedforearmvascularresistanceinhypertensivepatientstoagreaterextentthaninnormotensivecontrols.ROKinhibitorshavealsobeenshowntoreverseorpreventexperimentallyinducedcerebralvasospasmandcoronaryvasospasm,aswellastheassociatedupregulationofRhoA/ROKandincreasedmyosinlight-chainphosphorylation.HyperactivityofRhoA/ROKhasadditionallybeenimplicatedinbronchialasthma,erectiledysfunction,andpretermlabor,asevidencedbytheeffectsofROKinhibitors.Inaddition,ROKinhibitorshavedecreasedvascularsmoothmuscleproliferationandreducedrestenosisafterballoonangioplastyinratcarotidartery.

a phasic contraction, reach return phosphorylation, then ( cross-bridge During and force and peak [Ca++], to baseline a myoplasmic

Fig. ). 14.9 to [Ca++] and contrast, an decline but return spike levels. initial contraction, tonic cross-bridge phosphorylation myoplasmic not a during baseline In after do at phase, force During increases is level sustained a high and later slowly (see this

Fig. 14.9).

utilization phosphorylated, cross-bridges to the is 20% This of sustained thus is reduced. only maintained with ATP force 30% and which this is contraction term of during low expenditure. condition at The state refers energy to latch maintained force tonic

Inactive M20 CPI-17 Ca++ GEFs Ins(1,4,5)P3 P Rho Y27632 cat MBS cat MBS MP CaM P Ca++ Active Contraction MLC MLCK SR Rho-kinase GTP P ? M20 MLC CPI-17 PLC •Fig. GqG12/13 AA channelsinthesarcoplasmicreticulum(SR),therebyresultinginCa++-calmodulin–dependentactivationofmyosinlight-chainkinase(MLCK)andsubsequentphosphorylationofthemyosinregulatorylightchain(MLC)andpromotionofactin-myosininteraction(contraction).ActivatedRhoA(depictedasRho-GTP)stimulatesROK,whichinhibitsmyosinphosphatase(MP)byphosphorylatingthemyosin-bindingsubunit(MBS)ofMP.ROKalsoinhibitsMPindirectlybyphosphorylating/activatingCPI-17,a17-kDainhibitorofMP.TheneteffectofROKphosphorylationsisadecreaseinMPactivity,whichresultsinanincreasedlevelofmyosinlight-chainphosphorylation(MLCP)andhencegreaterforceofcontractionatagivenintracellular[Ca++](i.e.,increasedsensitivityofcontractiontoCa++).B,Ca++ dependenceofcontraction.AA,arachidonicacid;CaM,Ca++-calmodulincomplex;cat,catalyticsubunitofmyosinphosphatase;G12/13andGq,heterotrimericG-proteins;GEF,guanine-nucleotideexchangefactor;M20,subunitofmyosinphosphatase;MP,myosinphosphatasecomplex;Y27632,commercialinhibitorofROK. 14.8 sensitization referstoanincreaseintheforceofcontractionatagivenintracellular[Ca++]andisdepictedasaleftwardshiftintheCa++ Rho-kinase(ROK)signalinginsmoothmuscle.A,AvarietyofagonistsofG-coupledreceptorssimultaneouslystimulateInsP3productionandactivateRhoA-ROKsignaling.InsP3(Ins[1,4,5]P3)isproducedbyphospholipaseC(PLC)-mediatedhydrolysisofPIP2.InsP3increasesintracellular[Ca++]byopeningInsP3-gatedCa++ desensitization dependenceofcontractionofsmoothmuscle.Ca++ sensitizationcanresultfromadecreaseinMPactivityand/oranincreaseinMLCKactivityatagivenintracellular[Ca++](asshownintheROKsignalingcascadeinpanelA).Conversely,Ca++ referstoadecreaseintheforceofcontractionatagivenintracellular[Ca++]andisdepictedasarightwardshiftintheCa++ Sci 2001;22:32-39.) (FromFukataYetal.Trends Pharmacol •Fig. Timecourseofeventsincross-bridgeactivationandcontractioninsmoothmuscle.A,AbriefperiodofstimulationisassociatedwithCa++ 14.9 andphosphorylationlevelstypicallyfallfromaninitialpeak.Forceismaintainedduringtoniccontractionsatareduced[Ca++](andhencealowlevelofmyosinlight-chainphosphorylation),withlowercross-bridgecyclingratesmanifestedbylowershorteningvelocitiesandATPconsumption. mobilization,followedbycross-bridgephosphorylationandcyclingtoproduceabriefphasic,twitch-likecontraction.B,Inasustainedtoniccontractionproducedbyprolongedstimulation,theCa++

thought reflect heads maintaining The that at contact a of the tension the low so slowing is in with remain for cost. cross-bridge latch the filament energy longer time, a cycle, to actin myosin state thereby of the contraction, tonic level is intracellular it the phase a during Note [Ca++] still [Ca++]. resting/ that falls low basal to though the above myosin filament, the chain The is actin force contraction of time force-generating to in intracellular the cross-bridge to of involve attached, low spend attached the allowing contributing the the ability conformation. from actin, dephosphorylation maintain at of myosin muscle regulatory resulting a tonic smooth to slowing in light an thought more mechanism myosin is during while rate the [Ca++] the myosin of of dissociation to to the MLCK. the a prevents following chain level occurs smooth contraction when [Ca++] that phosphorylation Relaxation muscle decreases tonic by a of intracellular light to net of regulatory transition to caldesmon also may participate It the in been that proposed latch has state. the

ATP state. is latch already the As consumption reduced during noted, uses same ATP generate condition, than smooth muscle to required skeletal would the less muscle by this be Under 300fold force. cell. ATP Ca++ skeletal the sequester and muscle, maintain potential, to in requires ion SR, like muscle, resting for membrane the transport the from Ca++ Smooth extrude by All phosphorylation. these oxidative metabolic needs are met readily not muscle of unless smooth cell occur does is Fatigue of the deprived oxygen. glycolysis normally However, is ion supports production oxygen aerobic pumps membrane lactic with plentiful. acid even when

Concentration Regulation Myoplasmic Calcium of

sarcolemma to other couple involve mechanisms muscle two one involving contraction smooth activation The in Ca++ SR. the sources: that involving and the the from The the efflux and influx extracellular pool. Ca++ Ca++ regulates sarcolemma the The and movement between myoplasm Ca++ the pool. membranes SR SR determine ). does not muscle (see extracellular contraction require Skeletal Ca++ is smooth muscle important Ca++ In contrast, contraction. for extracellular not Thus ( the sarcolemma [Ca++] myoplasmic but involves only SR regulation the also of

Fig. 14.10). alter can the A of myoplasmic factors number

ATP G Ca++ CM PIP2 CaCM Sarcoplasmic or IP3 Na+ reticulum channel 3Na off G 3 ATP Neurotransmitter MLCK Receptor-activated ? pump Neurotransmitter ATP hormone Ca++ Cell Time Refilling Na+-K+ or CaCM*MLCK 2K+ Ca++ hormone

•Fig. entry[SOCE]),whichappearstoinvolvetheinteractionofaCa++-sensitivestromalinteractionmolecule(STIM)ontheSRandthesarcolemmalCa++ pathwayimportantforrefillingtheSR(i.e.,store-operatedCa++ Principalmechanismsdeterminingmyoplasmic[Ca++]insmoothmuscle.Releaseofcalciumfromthesarcoplasmicreticulum(SR)isarapidinitialeventinactivation,whereasboththeSRandthesarcolemmaparticipateinthesubsequentstimulus-dependentregulationofmyoplasmic[Ca++].Thesarcolemmaintegratesmanysimultaneousexcitatoryandinhibitoryinputstogovernthecellularresponse.Higher-orderregulatorymechanismscanaltertheactivityofvariouspumps,exchangers,orenzymes(theasterisk 14.10 indicatesthattheprocessrequiresATPhydrolysis;thequestion designateswell-establishedinstances).ThelabelATP channelOrai.CaCM,Ca++-calmodulincomplex;G,guaninenucleotide–bindingproteins;IP3,inositol1,4,5-trisphosphate;MLCK,myosinlight-chainkinase;PIP2,phosphatidylinositolbisphosphate;PLC,phospholipaseC. onthesarcolemmareferstotheCa++ mark

Inappropriatecontractionofsmoothmuscleisassociatedwithmanypathologicalsituations.Oneexampleissustainedvasospasmofacerebralarterythatdevelopsseveralhoursafterasubarachnoidhemorrhage.Itisthoughtthatfreeradicalsgeneratedasaresultofthehemorrhageraisemyoplasmic[Ca++]insurroundingarterialsmoothmusclecells.Theriseinmyoplasmic[Ca++]activatesMLCK,whichleadstocross-bridgephosphorylationandcontraction.Thevasoconstrictiondeprivesotherareasofthebrainofoxygenandmayleadtopermanentinjuryordeathofsurroundingneurons.Forafewdaysthecerebralarteryremainssensitivetovasoactiveagents,andthereforetreatmentwithvasodilatorsmayrestoreflow.AnincreaseinROKactivityandMPphosphorylationhasbeenobservedduringcerebralvasospasm.AdministrationofROKinhibitorspromotesrelaxationofthevasospasmanddecreasesthelevelofmyosinlight-chainphosphorylation.Thesmoothmusclecellsceasetorespondtothevasodilatorsafterseveraldays,andtheylosecontractileproteinsandsecreteextracellularcollagen.Thelumenofthearteryremainsconstrictedasaresultofstructuralandmechanicalchangesthatdonotinvolveactivecontraction.

smooth muscle. of [Ca++] apparatus. Ca++ fully SR release potential–induced in muscle, This of action skeletal from which activates the from differs the contractile

is role The regulating of SR of comparable to myoplasmic smooth muscle [Ca++] in that muscle. skeletal SR rapidly. Ca++ myoplasmic the channels, opens [Ca++] cell of Stimulation increases and that sensors, that as to acts the InsP3 is a to is a the to sarcolemmal SR. in of (PLC) case coupled second messenger (G are (see on receptors voltage via This phospholipase protein) not muscle, C to ). in nucleotide–binding skeletal InsP3 the receptors by is activate stimulus binding release linked but guanine generated protein hydrolyzes bisphosphate membrane phosphatidylinositol and PLC (PIP2) into InsP3 the phospholipid diacylglycerol. myoplasm. then SR to the of InsP3 resulting Ca++ from the release opens the the channel, Ca++ into SR thereby and InsP3-gated diffuses in from SR different Ca++ and permit smooth neurotransmitters graded hormones may release This process also enable to the many of muscle effect complex contraction. and although the to Ca++ contributes of smooth the from activity SR the indicated reaccumulated of muscle also is in through cell Calcium as the later, extrusion SERCA, the [Ca++]. reduction myoplasmic by [Ca++]. but reaccumulation the cytosolic with involves of only also Ca++ of on extracellular not Refilling depends the SR Ca++ thought SR [Ca++] dependence sarcolemma junctional Ca++ points a extracellular the to on SR. “store-operated” the underlying channel is of The at near present reflect operation in called

myoplasmic elevate by production. of InsP3 neurotransmitters stimulating A hormones and variety [Ca++] autonomic innervated nervous is of the example, sympathetic fibers smooth Vascular by system. for muscle, which protein–dependent as G α1-adrenergic smooth on binds results vascular These PLC. to cells fibers and muscle of neurotransmitter, activation use when a norepinephrine released in receptors causing in PLC elevating [Ca++] channel of in Ca++ activates of Activation results thereby myoplasmic SR, which the InsP3, the and production InsP3-gated vasoconstriction. activating promote II vasopressin. InsP3 that by Other angiotensin and include agents cascade the vasoconstriction failure. that block drugs or of is angiotensin-converting enzyme II a angiotensin that provides for vasodilation individuals production [ACE] of means important Development hypertension (e.g., heart of with inhibitors) promoting congestive of smooth a altering membrane variety potential produce (i.e., pharmacomechanical contraction without agents As previously, of mentioned coupling). can muscle cascade the coupling. activation of represents an of InsP3 pharmacomechanical Agonist-induced example activation that protein– G through Many of influx and promote also activate sarcolemmal the RhoA/ROK. Ca++ hormones/agonists coupled PLC receptors of activates ROK effect MP, net of rise which to inhibits both [Ca++], a increase in act a light-chain The MLCK, which with activity, rise intracellular is level concomitant phosphorylation. complementarily myosin in which the

sparksinturnactivatealarge-conductanceK+ Fig.14.11 channelsinthesmoothmuscle,therebydecreasingintracellular[Ca++]andhencerelaxingthesmoothmuscle,asdescribedearlier. ).Specifically,EDHFappearstobeanarachidonicacidmetabolite(e.g.,epoxyeicosatrienoic influxthroughvoltage-gatedCa++ channelinthesarcolemma(BKCa),andthesmoothmusclecellbecomeshyperpolarized.HyperpolarizationinturndecreasesbasalCa++ acid (e.g.,TRPV4)inthesarcolemmaofsmoothmusclethatleadstotheinfluxofCa++ sparks.TheCa++ ,whichthenopensRYRchannelsintheSRandresultsinCa++ receptor [EET])thatisproducedbyendothelialcellsinresponsetovariousstimuliandthenreleasedtotheunderlyingvascularsmoothmuscle.EEThasbeenshowntoactivateatransient channel

Ca++-gated also receptor, In also the of may the to the the influx through RYR, be Ca++ the Ca++ activated channel, called SR sarcolemma. periods contains during InsP3 which addition Short-lived the •Fig. opening COOH 11,12 spontaneous of EET RYR channelsinthesarcolemmabycalciumsparksresultsinhyperpolarizationofthesmoothmuscleandhencevasodilation.BKCa,largeconductanceCa++-activatedpotassiumchannel. sparks)localizednearthesarcolemma.OpeningofCa++-activatedK+ ,whichinturninitiatesbriefopeningsoftheSRryanodinereceptor(Ca++ 14.11 Anarachidonicacidmetabolite(11,12-epoxyeicosatrienoicacid[11,12EET])releasedfromendothelialcellscanopenthetransientreceptorchannelTRPV4intheunderlyingsmoothmuscletopermittheinfluxofCa++ Res (FromEarleySetal.Circ 2005;97:1270-1279.) resulting in in muscle. [Ca++] in occurs elevations including localized many myoplasmic cells, smooth these Ca++-sensitive produce observed elevations with When myoplasmic light result spontaneous flashes are a and localized sparks. [Ca++] brief dyes, Ca++ as in named fluorescent the muscle increase near in been has SR the In to associated close proximity perhaps cAMP smooth in Ca++ an the junctional caveolae). frequency SR, sarcolemma sparks, is in with in increase in an situations of which (i.e., particularly sparks of channel vascular Ca++-gated large-conductance sarcolemma. these the by in An smooth of muscle activation increase frequency hyperpolarizes the a in K+ relaxation This occurs. [Ca++], hyperpolarization then myoplasmic decreases overall and

Ca++ the each by is (i.e., ions enter Na+ extruded and antiporter muscle sarcolemmal by smooth of the ion 3 for Calcium the cell activity cell extruded). a Ca++-ATPase from 3Na+-1Ca++ sequestration Ca++ the in the Ca++ of reduces of in with of SR. SR by thus the accumulation from competes Extrusion the Ca++ cell and SERCA (SOCE) the into facilitate to the SR. cell is of influx SR initiate [Ca++] refilling SR decreases, When entry process called store-operated thought a the Ca++ in through Ca++ the to the initiate interaction. through sarcolemmal hypothesized stromal interaction [Ca++] then SR monitor Orai SR in and 1 a influx to molecule (STIM1) Specifically, Ca++ the the channel is protein-protein through protein confined in occur SR between the SOCE and of the peripheral caveolae of muscle. during the thought to space Thus Ca++ influx smooth is transient muscle the also the possibility receptor smooth intracellular SOCE Recent that α1-adrenergic STIM1-Orai–mediated raise studies may stimulation. following in rise Ca++ contribute to in as has been smooth implicated pathological angioplasty. balloon The following muscle in Stim1-Orai complex restenosis in of also conditions such remodeling

and there the several cascades, addition smooth sarcolemma [Ca++] In lower of relax thereby InsP3 inhibitory channels stimulatory on effects muscle. and that to Ca++ factors are agents various myoplasmic reduces class of voltage-gated drugs influx Ca++ tone. channel decreases vasomotor Ca++ of and the sarcolemmal For Ca++ L-type dihydropyridine example, blocking the channels through potential, K+ Ca++ drugs in the the channels relaxation that the (e.g., membrane Ca++ by voltage-gated channels. hydralazine) through Similarly, of which sarcolemma promote vasodilation) influx open (e.g., reduces hyperpolarizing sarcolemma membrane inducing by increases voltage-gated then vasoconstriction these depolarization, of the of through Conversely, promote decrease Ca++ which Ca++ permeability same channels. agents K+ that may influx also Smooth receptor-activated contains channels. muscle Ca++ these to receptor Conductance is of channels occupancy. linked Ca++ receptor-activated

of concentrations smooth by increasing variety the of relax cGMP. and muscle cAMP or drugs A cellular hormones

smooth cells relaxes produced vascular (NO) by is by oxide Nitric ( increasing muscle cGMP and and nerves endothelial

Fig. 14.12 ). Acetylcholine result causes from parasympathetic released as production of beds of the by a some vascular NO vasodilation stimulating fibers cells. endothelial vascular in stress muscle) may released and from (e.g., adenosine Shear cells. release also NO promote endothelial vascular exercising from through of relaxation molecular smooth inhibition which underlying promotes are Ca++-activated channel the channels. vascular light-chain mechanisms and Ca++ of muscle the K+ and of inhibits thus the complex (2) and have myosin activation (BKCa), cells to InsP3 cGMP-dependent involve of voltage-gated reported InsP3 (1) activation production, of The receptor, (3) phosphatase, been Ca++ (4) influx hyperpolarization of inhibition the

promotes (3) vascular decreased through MLCK activation concentration, Ca++/ increased (1) elevation β-adrenergic Similarly, vasodilation cAMP adenosine [Ca++] in including or by for cytosolic multiple MP mechanisms, receptors (2) of smooth activity. and/or calmodulin, decreased receptors of muscle affinity of kinase of involves of phosphorylation MLCK. decreased of The affinity A protein (PKA)-dependent Ca++/calmodulin cAMP MLCK for elevation following involve can channels), of of decreased (e.g., smooth in complex voltage-gated cytosolic influx activation hence channels hyperpolarization PKA and resulting ability is and channels. through to ATP-dependent potassium [Ca++] reduce of potassium The Ca++ Ca++ muscle the membrane also of to increase hyperpolarizes shown vascular of Ca++ muscle, Ca++ the smooth channels, cAMP activation channels. K+ frequency sparks potential by as the reducing influx voltage-gated thereby in earlier, been which through the has of Ca++ described Ca++-gated inhibition muscle cAMP of can (through smooth of MP of either activity MP the by ROK). promote of or phosphorylation increasing subunit through PKA-dependent of a also relaxation or pathway occur ROK of directly cAMP-modulated guanine cAMP) through the phosphorylation activated a Epac exchange signaling involving PKA-dependent Inhibition protein can nucleotide by factor (exchange through

asthmatics β2-adrenergic cAMP reversing a of use of means of Relaxation muscle afforded with agonists. elevation has by of constriction smooth bronchiolar adenosine receptors the least during cAMP secondary of purinergic levels periods of been also attributed muscle of of on to smooth smooth to elevated at exercise muscle. sarcolemma has The stimulation in muscle produced effect working vasodilatory local vascular in part vascular intense adenosine-induced in channels noted may channel Adenosine voltage-gated vasodilation. activate and influx hyperpolarization, K+ Ca++ membrane already as will which induce to sarcolemmal cause the decrease Ca++ through of a also only and cells diffusible cells muscle of hormones under nervous be muscle the circulating Thus and tone not and regulation also skeletal adenosine. NO of may system autonomic via such as smooth influence substances the neighboring endothelial but

LZ Actin/myosin NO MYPT1 °˛G˜q ER IRAG PLC°12354 Hyper-polarization IP3 LZ cGMP MLCP GTPGPCR sGC ˜˜˜°PKG1 pGC GMP •Fig. PDE5 RGS2 NucleuscGMP-A/B Cat.Cat.Ca2˜Ca2˜IP3RICa2˜Ca2˜K˜CaV1.2BKCaCaMMLCK cGMP-A/B release, Signalingmechanismsbywhichnitricoxide(NO)andnitroprusside(NP)promoterelaxationofvascularsmoothmuscle.Nitricoxidestimulatessolubleguanylcyclase(sGC)inthevascularsmoothmusclecell,resultinginproductionofcGMP,activationofproteinkinaseG(PKG1),whichinturnphosphorylatesvarioussubstratesthat(1)inhibitInP3production,(2)inhibitInsP3-inducedCa++ channel(BKCa),whichhyperpolarizesthecellandthusinhibitsthevoltage-gatedCa++ channel(Cav1.2)(5).BKCa,calcium-activatedmaxi-Kchannel;CaM,calmodulin;Cat,catalyticdomain;Cav1.2,L-typecalciumchannel;ER,endoplasmicreticulum;GPCR,Gprotein–coupledreceptor;IP3RI,inositol1,4,5-trisphosphate(IP3)receptorI;IRAG,inositoltrisphosphatereceptor-associatedcGMP-kinasesubstrate;LZ,leucine/isoleucinezipper;MLCK,myosinlight-chainkinase;MLCP,myosinlight-chainphosphatase;MYPT,regulatorymyosinphosphatasetargetingsubunit1;PDE5,phosphodiesterase5;pGC,particulateguanylylcyclase;PLCβ,phospholipaseCbeta;RGS2,regulatorofG-proteinsignaling2;sGC,solubleguanylylcyclase. 14.12 (3)activatemyosinlight-chainphosphatase,(4)activatethelargeconductanceCa++-activatedK+ Physiol 2011;301:H672–H682.) Physiol J Heart (ModifiedfromSchlossmannJ,DeschM.Am Circ

a autoregulation. maintained the blood tissues wide such constant range through process to relatively at brain over pressures of as a Blood called is flow a flow underlying vasoconstriction, of in a in distending transmural pressure a pressures). in pressure artery decrease a involves of (over autoregulation an results given an blood wherein vasodilation response, flow the increase results myogenic mechanism in range whereas in The in shown As

Fig. to maintain 14.13 of distention an the vasoconstriction resistance [Ca++], followed constant artery by resulted relatively intracellular effort immediate an in elevation in flow. , of complex. this The of intracellular elevation [Ca++] and mechanism subsequent vasoconstriction is underlying rise in been stretch Ca++ and intracellular response The reported channels, voltage-gated stretch-activated channels. [Ca++] to in to InsP3-signaling, involve

During increases ( growth, and of cells the muscle development smooth number

Fig. ). 14.14 sustained muscle a in is also Smooth if to increases mechanical increase subjected mass work. tissue organ an increase hypertrophy. is This compensatory in mass called the tunica striking occurs patients. in with cells media A artery) (i.e., muscle the smooth in of example arterial hypertensive cells increased this induces The on the hypertrophy. load that common to the factor appears muscle be mechanical polyploid result of cells. in replication numbers significant Chromosomal muscle can number polyploid of chromosomes. contain the cells of sets multiple normal The contractile the They (see the thus more increase and size of proteins cell synthesize

Fig. 14.14

as smooth of The uterus, (birth) hypertrophy the is undergoes parturition approaches. muscle component myometrium, which the play this an in role important Hormones response. smooth pregnancy progesterone muscle gap The that present. the junctions couple electrically muscle few is and predominates, the are smooth during hormone when cells quiescent of influence dominant the the At term, hypertrophy. estrogen, under myometrium undergoes marked convert junctions contraction form coordinate to single-unit parturition. and to Large the tissue of just a birth myometrium numbers before during gap

1.4 •Fig. with muscle of 1.0 0.6 tissue associated growth are 0.0 smooth 0.8 contain increases that connective tissues 1.2 the and The development in logicalresponsessuchasformationofatheroscleroticplaque.B,Cellsmayalsohypertrophyinresponsetoincreasedloads.Chromosomalreplicationnotfollowedbycelldivisionyieldscellswithagreatercontentofcontractileproteins.C,Smoothmusclecellsalsosynthesizeandsecretetheconstituentsoftheextracellularmatrix. 14.14 Smoothmusclecellscarryoutmanyactivities.A,Theyretainthecapacitytodivideduringnormalgrowthorincertainpatho

Althoughsmoothmuscleisinvolvedinphysiologicaladjustmentstoexercise,sustainedchangesinthe mechanicalloadingthatinducecellularadaptationsareusuallytheresultofapathologicalcondition(e.g.,hypertension).Afairlycommonexampleinmenisurinary •Fig. enlargementoftheprostategland,whichobstructsthebladderoutlet.Theclinicalresultisdifficultyurinating, bladder hypertrophy causedbybenignorcancerous resultinginavasoconstriction(bottom panel) panel). 14.13 elevatesintracellular[Ca++](middle Myogenicresponseinvascularsmoothmuscleisanautoregulatoryresponsetomaintainconstantflowtoatissue.Anincreaseintransmuralpressure(TMP; panel), top butthisisquicklyfollowedbyvasoconstriction. Notethattheincreaseintransmuralpressureinitiallystretchestheskeletalmuscleresistanceartery(bottom panel), Res (FromSchubertRetal.Cardiovasc 2008;77:8-18.) matrix. the make and muscle Smooth collagen, up including synthesize and can elastin, matrix, secrete cells this (see that materials proteoglycans

Fig. ). 14.14 smooth muscle secretory are cells placed capacities in isolated and when are and synthetic evident culture. The tissue rapidly mobilizationandcross-bridgephosphorylation.Fortunately,normalstructureandfunctionareusuallyrestoredaftertheobstructionisalleviated. cells The distentionofthebladder,andimpairedemptying.Inthissituationtheabilityofthebladdersmoothmuscletocontractanddevelopstressisdiminished.Thereasonsforthisremainunexplained,butphenotypicmodulationofthesmoothmusclecellswithalteredcontractileproteinisoformexpressionandgrossanatomicdistortionofthebladderwalloccurs.NeuromuscularchangesalsoaffectmyoplasmicCa++

and lattice, the rough and expansion lose the of Golgi apparatus. thick reticulum and thin-filament endoplasmic there much myosin of is filaments connective down phenotypically tissue. cells and lay The altered multiply degree formation some is and of cell process the thick reversible, occurs after redifferentiation with ceases. filaments of This replication of blood, cell in cells, Determinants modulation. hormones unknown, as growth smooth phenotype been factors phenotypic have the loads mechanical largely in well control the as are implicated of on muscle and but

Atherosclerosis isadiseasecharacterizedbylesionslocatedinthewallofbloodvessels.Thelesionsareinducedbydisordersthatinjuretheendothelium,suchashypertension,diabetes,andsmoking.Threeformedelements(monocytes,Tlymphocytes,andplatelets)thatcirculateinthebloodstreamactonthedamagedvascularendothelium.There,theygeneratechemotacticfactorsandmitogensthatmodifythestructureofthesurroundingsmoothmusclecells.ThelatterlosemostoftheirthickandthinfilamentsanddevelopanextensiveroughendoplasmicreticulumandGolgicomplex.Thesecellsmigratetothesubendothelialspace(i.e.,thetunicamediaoftheartery),proliferate,andparticipateinformationofthefattylesionsorthefibrousplaquesthatcharacterizeatherosclerosis.InhibitionordownregulationofRhokinase(ROK)hasbeenshowntopromoteregressionofatherosclerotic-likelesionsinananimalmodel.ThemechanismormechanismsunderlyingthisbeneficialeffectofROKinhibitionareunclearbutmayberelatedtoregulationofbothendothelialpermeabilityandmonocytemigrationbyROK.Thatis,hyperactivityofROKhasbeenimplicatedinvariouspathologicalconditions,includingincreasedtransendothelialpermeability(perhapssecondarytoincreasedactomyosinactivity),whereasinhibitionofROKhasbeenshowntodecreasetransendothelialmigrationofmonocytesandneutrophils.

of Smooth Biophysical Properties Muscle

of muscle fibrils large elastin extensible fibrils. of contains and amounts inextensible tissue collagen connective Smooth composed for extracellular or relaxed Because withstand measured matrix is this high it loads, forces can the distending passive tissues. length-tension in curve responsible organ of matrix the limits volume. also This ability

and lengths for development When (i.e., smooth skeletal L0), for the are length-tension length of force muscle very to ( optimal are the normalized similar curves

Fig. 14.15 ). differ length-tension quantitatively. of muscle curves smooth However, striated and the cells skeletal smooth example, do. shorten than For muscle muscle more cells activated, is smooth the In addition, characteristically stimulus. muscle attained the only isometric and partially varies with peak force In contraction. (i.e., muscle action stimulus full potential) skeletal the always produces twitch a to skeletal comparable fourth contains much myosin. of a only smooth though Smooth muscle, that can generate muscle about as active force even muscle in the capacity. does imply not muscle greater smooth This that cross-bridges force-generating have •Fig. 11 = muscle much × be dynes/cm2 Instead, more Po in are active 0.8 0.4 106 0.17 N 1.2 ± 2.4 to in 2.0 likely = 1.6 1.2 smooth 0.8 0.6 2.22 1.0 cross-bridges 14.15 Lengthdependenceofcontractionofsmoothmuscleshowsabell-shapedresponsesimilartothatseeninskeletalmuscle.Thesmoothmusclestripswereobtainedfromhogcarotidartery.Contractionwasinducedbypotassiumdepolarization.Optimalmusclelength(Lo)wasgraphicallydeterminedasthelengthatwhichmaximaltension(Po)wasdeveloped.Redcircles,passivetension;bluecircles,activetension,triangles,totaltension;(FromHerlihyJT,MurphyRA.Circ. Res. 1973;33:275-283.) attached of configuration the because cycling their slow force-generating kinetics.

muscles Smooth and hyperbolic exhibit shortening a load. velocity both of striated dependence on velocities than in However, muscle are striated smooth slower in far contraction muscle. that these the slow has that isoform factor One cells low is underlies velocities muscle myosin in activity. smooth ATPase

load in force-velocity (see which the shortening determined muscle velocities and isoform Skeletal only are a myosin have cells curve by ). cycling the their and cycling shortening smooth and in velocity, cross-bridges which contrast, reflect rates, number of force vary muscle. In both changing by altered, of is stimulation smooth of a hormone nerve example, When can curves muscle for of or frequencies be “family” different activation velocity-stress ( concentrations, derived

Fig. ). 14.16 cross-bridges implies cycling that way, both some and the regulated active rates are This of smooth number in cross-bridge in muscle

of max) Vo(%

Velocity of (% max)

max) •Fig. Stress (% of A,Force-velocitycurvesforfastandslowhumanskeletalmusclecellsandsmoothmuscle.B,Smoothmuscleshavevariableforce-velocityrelationshipsthataredeterminedbythelevelofCa++-stimulatedcross-bridgephosphorylation.C,Maximalshorteningvelocitieswithnoload(Vo,whichrepresentstheinterceptsontheordinateinB)aredirectlydependentoncross-bridgephosphorylationbyMLCK.D,Activeforce/stress(abscissainterceptsinB)risesrapidlywithphosphorylation;nearmaximalstress,itmaybegeneratedwithonly20%to30%ofthecross-bridgesinthephosphorylatedstate. 14.16

to is marked in which contrast striated muscle. on regulatory phosphorylation on system This a myoplasmic [Ca++]. is of depends in depends turn that cross-bridges, by conferred which difference actin-myosin degree myosin force phosphorylation force expected Because myosin in in light-chain hence the smooth on interaction actin-myosin is phosphorylation generated). a molecules of phosphorylation more for muscle, results maximal dependence (i.e., of required and more of myosin interactions more is rate maximal phosphorylation levels shortening of to reflect detachment may of thus myosin degree of of chain function actin, the low myosin The is as latch at light a still velocity (i.e., variation phosphorylation. myosin the state) attached the slowing dephosphorylation the the in of while cross-bridges from released yielding velocity actin, all would be the more shortening the thereby would states latch higher of likelihood of At reduced loads quickly higher levels be phosphorylation, myosin a at (see and

Fig. 1. 14.16B

linked communication junctions variety and a muscle both Smooth are roles. that by of cells serve mechanical essential linkages that must contract cells These in are uniformly.

2.

role important and myoplasm. extracellular plays Ca++ The between in sarcolemma an fluid exchange contribute sarcolemma also smooth intracellular of contains muscle The scaffold to caveolae regulation numerous and as molecules. to for of [Ca++] appear serve a signaling that sarcoplasmic contains The be (SR) mobilized an can intracellular that pool reticulum increase Ca++ [Ca++]. myoplasmic to transiently [Ca++] is . Myoplasmic extracellular Ca++ dependent on Ca++ Ca++ Transporters channels, sarcolemma in antiporter. voltage-gated myoplasmic and channels, receptor-mediated regulate [Ca++] the 3Na+1Ca++ the Ca++-ATPase, that include [Ca++]. regulates The SR myoplasmic also response chemical. the to The a Ca++ in SR in open channels followed the Neurotransmitters hormones or second C by 1,4-triphosphate (PLC), activate sarcolemma via can (InsP3). that in generation of act receptors inositol the messenger phospholipase SR. activates Ca++ then InsP3 the InsP3-gated on channels activate agonists to also Many thereby of the kinase RhoA/Rho the increasing smooth contraction activate protein–coupled sensitivity G through Ca++ . cascade, receptors PLC signaling that (ROK) muscle muscle also Smooth SR contains Ca++ channels Ca++-gated (ryanodine [RYR]). receptor reticulum reaccumulates (sarcoplasmic via the Ca++ Ca++ endoplasmic SERCA ATPase). in SR

3.

dense contractile myosin filaments Z-line of thick thin of equivalents contain areas. termed muscles units that of that bodies or interdigitate membrane-dense to numbers groups large filaments consist Smooth small with attached evident. striations are No filament–crossbridge is sliding mechanism. caused a by Contraction

4.

Contraction muscle release smooth the both SR is the across of of dependent and Ca++ entry from of sarcolemma. Ca++ on troponin. Smooth lacks muscle of myosin the by for (MLCK) light necessary thin cross-bridges attachment to filament. Phosphorylation chain kinase Ca++-dependent is a phosphatase cross-bridge rates. an by of its (MP) myosin attached slows cycling Dephosphorylation the of the activity, cross-bridges more throughout MLCK of increases MP ratio the remain with phosphorylated myoplasmic result that Higher cycle. a [Ca++] to velocities. shortening increases This

5.

smooth Smooth is nerves (principally locally cells, hormones, other controlled activity non–smooth with substances, junctions by muscle junctions cells. and muscle signaling with circulating muscle autonomic), even other generated reciprocally the A of a muscle Ca++ activity activity to given intracellular reducing variety agonists MLCK at smooth of hormones/ MP and [Ca++]. of sensitivity by of contraction increasing increase the the of Activation to signaling and MP the hence increase sensitivity to cascade RhoA/ROK . of inhibition contraction smooth in muscle stimulation contributes the of MLCK, of Ca++ to this and flow stretch, to intrinsic also autoregulation of respond Smooth for has ability tissues. important to which blood muscle an to is various

6.

of rapid ATP contraction force with is response reduced rates or sustained The stimulation by maintenance followed a and consumption. cross-bridge to sustained tonic cycling blood may This be vessels, must force, continuous that withstand muscles state, withstand pressure. as for advantageous which able called is to latch behavior, the such blood external to need less consumed 1/300 latch rate the is force maintain the state, to the than skeletal ATP in muscle. same needed at During

7.

and comparable curves, to length-tension skeletal power imposed those are resist relationships, The loads of output muscle. ability relationships, to velocity-load hyperbolic a in very low with and expression consumption are of muscle, low isoform keeping smooth Shortening with myosin in activity. rates ATP velocities to which both their muscles Smooth number relationships, of average rates also alter reflects (determining and a cycling given (determining velocity-stress cross-bridges load ability the the of force) velocity). unusual have active for regulation

Purinergic Burnstock V. disease. health and in Ralevic G, and blood vessels signaling Pharmacol Rev. 2014;66:102-192.

Casey Joyner DP. MJ, of physiological during flow competing blood hierarchy to of increased exercise: (hyperemia) a needs. Regulation muscles Physiol Rev. 2015;95:549-601.

et al. TA, Longden Ion flow. channel the of networks in control blood cerebral Blood Flow Metab. J Cereb 2016;36:492-512.

K, Momotani AV. Somlyo smooth q-mediated switch p63RhoGEF: for of activation muscle. new a G Med. Trends Cardiovasc 2012;22:122-127.

C. OL, in the Dart by activated of signalling Epac (exchange cAMP). protein Roberts vasculature: role directly cAMP the Trans. Biochem Soc 2014;42:89-97.

8. and extensive role synthetic formation of also links major the the and a a muscle secretory that cells. matrix in is with Smooth cell surrounds extracellular muscle retain physiological response Cellular occurs the in smooth divide. and to to cells needs, potential hypertrophy

Desch system. PKG in and IRAG Schlossmann novel the cardiovascular M. targeting J, Am Heart Physiol J Physiol. Circ H672-H682. 2011;301:

al. Shimokawa et H, RhoA/Rho-Kinase System. in Cardiovascular the Circ Res. 2016;118:352-366.

Somlyo Somlyo AV. AP, smooth proteins, and sensitivity G modulated phosphatase. myosin kinases, nonmuscle of by muscle and II: Ca2+ myosin Physiol Rev. 2003;83:1325-1358.

smooth Trebak muscle. Spinelli Ca2+ M. AM, vascular ORAI airway and channel-mediated in signals J Physiol. Am Cell Physiol 2016;310:C402-C413.

Tinker al. et A, ATP-sensitive function and protection in channels system. the cellular cardiovascular The role of in potassium Pharmacol. J Br 2014;171:12-23.

SECTION 4The GIL WIER J. PAPPANO System ACHILLES AND Cardiovascular WITHROW

Circulation the Heart of and Regulation of Overview Vasculature

System the of Control 19 Cardiac of 16 Function Properties Chapter Chapter Vasculature 17 the Chapter of Integrated Elements Cardiovascular

answer the student to chapter, following this be 1. Upon the questions: completion able should of

enable vessels unidirectional blood the the to of and flow well-oxygenated body? arrangement How does of heart

2.

relation flow the What and the vascular between cross-sectional velocity of area? blood is reciprocal advantage

3.

elastic functions? to and their respective How fibrous do contribute (smooth blood compositions the tissue) vessels muscle, differing of

tissues distributes system essential and transports byproducts. circulatory substances and removes he metabolic to various supply adjustment and also maintenance system nutrient such fluid states. body of physiological This and of homeostatic as in temperature, participates balance, of O2 mechanisms in regulation heart), tubes distributing the exchange vascular of that system, and accomplishes channels. series rapid enable thin collecting of (capillaries) vessels), a a which these extensive (blood pump vessels is of an (the between composed tissues cardiovascular system The and tasks, and for vessels. throughout the the with (blood) body a heterogeneous vessels processes transport by the that essential Blood are heart performed is fluid and filled blood the heart much whose This analyzed functions are greater and is overview general, in chapters. of functional in vessels, subsequent blood chapter detail a

Heart The

series: other pump O2 propels The lungs circulation). two consists and body (the the other the blood the one and of of of tissues exchange pulmonary systemic to for CO2 (the pumps heart pump propels circulation) blood through all in (unidirectional). through direction Flow of heart one is the blood in flap appropriate through the the Unidirectional of is by arrangement heart valves. flow achieved by (systole) aorta elastic (diastole). cardiac the of propulsion of body of continuous contraction arteries walls its (periphery) during occurs tissues the relaxation the during forward recoil intermittent, the is and output Although branches with ventricular of and to by large flow blood ventricular distention

The Cardiovascular Circuit

be blood of must In the decrease another. one in is in in volume volume blood circulation, a constant, total the increase an area and accompanied normal of intact the by the distribution the state regions of of the by vessels different by of circulating the left to of resistance However, the output ventricle is contractile (arterioles) regions. the body determined and of blood the these conduits in series circulatory of and system ( parallel in composed The arranged is

Fig.

). 15.1 discussed terms subsequent in in chapters, important This has resistance, arrangement, implications pressure flow, vessels. in blood is which of and

ventricle mean right via one the Blood in seventh that the system is the pumped about pressure the entering right atrium at systemic pulmonary a arterial arteries. through in the taken which is O2 is blood and CO2 then passes lung blood the capillaries, up. through The in released from returns periphery, is ventricle left atrium, veins blood cycle. the the the The the it completes thus O2-rich the pulmonary where which via to pumped to

Blood through moves branches. the arterial its and rapidly aorta these walls the narrow, branches branches the their As thinner. periphery, become approach and They histologically. change also The elastic arterioles, at become the is layer peripheral until, ( more the but aorta predominantly arteries muscular predominates a muscular structure, the

Fig. 15.2

only relatively the large In pressures is small, resistance slightly frictional are in than the aorta. and less those arteries, to on the other offer moderate arteries, hand, flow. The small blood resistance arterioles, “stopcocks” a the level the the system. resistance to maximal which vascular in of referred reaches are sometimes as This the segment arterioles terminal ( of greatest Hence, small the arteries the across drop and is pressure the

Fig. 15.3 ). these tissue flow blood the of pressure. of contraction control regulation degree Adjustment the circular of small of in in and vessels arterial the allows muscle blood aids of

(see change arterioles, steady a In to addition flow blood from the is there along pressure the to in pulsatile reduction

Fig. ). 15.3 • Fig. Pulsatile blood caused arterial by damped flow, from the heart, ejection is intermittent of blood the • of Flow, Pressure, Fig. 15.3 Velocity and Cross-Sectional Phasic the Circulation. Schematic Systemic Parallel of of the Series Diagram 15.1 and Arrange-Area Constitute features System. of That major important Circulatory are Vessels the the The the ment arteries lines the (on veins and The and between cross-sectional flow the right) area, are the across inverse arterioles, thin small connecting (on the arteries velocity capillary relationship represented pressure drop left). by the blood and beds the with flow rate proximal (From beds The area arterioles thicken-the maximal in minimal represent capilings laries. Levick the (resistance the to the and JR. crescent-shaped cross-sectional capillary An Cardiovascular vessels). (Redrawn HD. from to Glasser In: Physiology. Introduction [ed]. O Green 1944.) Physics. ed. 5th London: Book; 1. 2010.)Vol Arnold; Year Chicago: Hodder Medical Fig. • tissues not Thickness, capillary. Various Relation Wall aorta Internal Principal cavae of of to vessels. Walls Blood Vessel wall Vessels the vessels of because to System. Constitute AC. function size and of the the are (Redrawn drawn Circulatory the from Amounts scale of of the the Relative of That Diameter, blood and 15.2 from range Burton Cross-sections structure of the of to the venae huge Components in Physiol Rev. 1954;34:619.) capillary two in arteries the frictional a small factors: distensibility and of the level resistance arteries large at and of the combination arterioles. by

arteriole. capillaries from each Many arise the of than the each despite very the cross-sectional is of bed The that each large capillary capillary is arteriole. area cross-sectional total that area fact of less a in As slow quite velocity capillaries blood result, the (see flow becomes

Fig. is a of river. velocity wide in regions 15.3 in ), decrease of the which the to flow analogous because in short one flow thick that capillaries between are with ideal low. the tissue only is exchange for are substances in of capillaries and and Conditions velocity walls which tubes cell diffusible consist the blood of

through and veins On increasing the size. from return blood venules the its of heart then capillaries, through passes to these the Pressure right reaches vessels the decreases within blood progressively until (see atrium

Fig. 15.3 ). thickness of the of composition decreases, Near (see change heart, walls the veins the and number vein the

Fig. cross-sectional increases area the (see flow blood 15.2), the channels the and velocity of venous of total diminishes,

Fig. 15.3 ). mirror images level area velocity (see of of blood essentially vasculature flow are the and each cross-sectional at the The

Fig. 15.3

that aorta about the increases cross-sectional area Table ) the capillaries, 500-fold. and total between indicate 15.1 the the The in greatest veins and is systemic system (64%). vascular venules of volume in the blood capillaries, total is and volume 14% arterioles. blood and of total volume aorta, in the exists 6% found the Only arteries, of in blood arterial, contrast, is bed vessels. in and among the blood In divided capillary, vascular venous pulmonary volume the about equally the of venae the The area is of than aorta. that cavae cross-sectional larger the velocity than the the in Therefore, of venae aorta slower is cavae flow (see in

Fig. 15.3

Aortaandlargearteries3006.0Smallarteries4008.0Capillaries3006.0Smallveins230046.0Largeveins90018.0Total420084.0

3607.2 (End-Diastole) Arteries1302.6Capillaries1102.2Veins2004.0Total4408.8Heart

Physiology. DatafromBoronWF,BoulpaepEL.Medical 2nded.Philadelphia:ElsevierSaunders;2009. *Valuesrefertoa70-kgwoman.

basalmetabolismiselevatedandoftenassociatedwitharteriolarvasodilation.Thisreductioninarteriolarresistancediminishesthedampingeffectonpulsatilearterialpressureandismanifestedaspulsatileflowinthecapillaries,asobservedinthefingernailbedsofpatientswiththisailment. disease), Inapatientwithhyperthyroidism(Graves’

should student 1. of answer Upon chapter, the this be following to able completion questions: the

contraction muscle? to heart contribute excitability in does How the potential and action

2.

excitability? is differ how automaticity, and it What does from How do contribute arrhythmias? properties of derangements these to

3.

electrocardiogram? of What is the basis the structural

4.

for contraction to skeletal the afterload, How heart? the are and the muscle, developed preload applied concepts of of

5.

excitation-contraction is the role in Ca++ coupling? of What

6.

a what pressures and cardiac during temporal relation to and volumes atrial the is and occur in their cycle, What ventricular changes electrocardiogram?

7.

cardiac end-diastolic law the heart the Frank-Starling developed and between and left contraction? How does the of relation pressure ventricular volume regulate the define force of

8.

ventricular ventricle, the it left What how define changes function? is left the does and loop in pressure-volume of

9.

affected consumption, in cardiac cardiac how work? are and by processes linked O2 to metabolism is these changes How

Heart Properties the of Electrical

the The of neurons, and action potentials. heart, are generate excitable cells like thus the heart potentials determine and action initiate rate. These contraction and activity can disturbances electrical Disorders in induce lethal in rhythm. cardiac sometimes serious

of described. In this the properties are electrical section, cells cardiac properties is considered. for addition, account the electrical (ECG) how In these electrocardiogram properties of cells later as of the in is initiation The a contraction section. electrical a considered cardiac result of

Potential Cardiac Action The

Fig. cardiac found cells. illustrates different in potentials action 16.1 and occur the of main are in heart Two depicted. types action potentials and fibers myocytes response, phases. in atrial heart) five One the in occurs ventricular is the fast (Purkinje type, the fibers normal divided into and of and specialized conducting upstroke designated The the potential phase action is rapid of 0. to period for is (phase and early followed 0.1 that upstroke second. 0.2 by plateau repolarization The (phase 2) brief of by approximately persists 1) then partial, a a membrane polarization repolarizes (phase 4) state (phase of 3) then is the again resting until attained. The more slowly repolarization (phase develops 0). Final 3) (phase depolarization than tissue potential, other the to (AV) the and occurs the the heart, the the of node, from natural type the node, (SA) response, impulse in of conducts the region atria specialized which atrioventricular which in The pacemaker is cardiac ventricles. slow action the is sinoatrial that phase early repolarization the cells (phase 1). lack slow-response The

slow-response slow-response between negative the more fast-response 4) of the membrane (phase cells The cells. resting properties and Other the differences of the is of electrical cells considerably that fast-response include the than potential following: to positive the 0 overshoot slope voltage mV) action of greater in the fast-response upstroke than and potential, the (phase 0), slow-response Moreover, amplitude cells. the (membrane the are the cells of in the are myocardial the along velocity steepness action potential important amplitude determinants upstroke and propagation The the the of of fibers. slow-response potential propagated more in tissue. slowly cardiac likely blocked is is In fast-response the than cardiac tissue, to and more action be conduction likelihood block and rhythm conduction increase Slow disturbances of the tendency some section the (see conduction “ a toward

action The potential contraction myocyte. of the initiates potential contraction action of cardiac the a and is between The myocyte shown in relationship

Fig. . 16.2 repolarization and shortening. (phase depolarization peak completion Rapid shortening, precedes occurs of before just cell 0) muscle of action phase 4 mainly takes potential. the Relaxation during place of the potential. action of duration The contraction duration the parallels usually the of

potential of mainly and Na+, membrane K+, associated cell changes The by various ions. Ca++ are with the permeability, cardiac in action phases membrane in membrane membrane and of movement (Vm). of the the change across rate permeability thereby ions these cell the Changes alter voltage ions that closing for channels and are changes the (see ion of These permeability accomplished individual specific by in are opening

inside in K+ cardiac with concentration [K+]). [K+]) As of body, cell cells all muscle (extracellular other the the cell concentration a the the exceeds outside (intracellular Na+ reversed and for The gradient concentration is Ca++ . potentials (see intracellular of the and the concentrations equilibrium Estimates and Na+, Ca++ K+, extracellular of and Nernst

Eq. for are these ions 1.5b compiled ) in

Table 16.1

membrane and is high for relatively Ca++ permeability less. K+; has much permeability resting The a Na+ for cell to the diffuse for outside inside of Because K+ Vm, chemical gradient the cell. and from K+ tends to the existing the of

3 diffusion place K+ specific the (i.e., at during mainly resting channels. potential 4) Any membrane through phase 4 potassium takes occurs that of types channels cardiac in exist of potassium Several cell membranes. and –120 Opening

whereas of ERP RRP signal concentration). regulated Vm, others the a closing channels chemical are are these extracellular controlled acetylcholine by of some by (e.g., more inward is voltage-regulated is discussed rectifying (iK1), later. that The K+ conducts the channel specific a detail which current 4 in For to is now, only established. it is know how current this necessary

concentrations other ions extracellular equation and and by intracellular the The K+, and of Vm the on Na+, described of are conductance conductance •Fig. chord dependence andcellshortening(bottom trace) 16.2 inasingleventricularmyocyte.Thevalueof0mVmembranepotentialisindicatedby“0.”(FromPappanoA.unpublishedrecord,1995. trace) Temporalrelationshipbetweenthechangesintrans-membranepotential(top msec )0 •Fig. 50 mV 400 7˜m 16.1 of Potentials Fibers. Cardiac Action A, Fast-responsecardiacfibers.B, Slow-responsecardiacfibers.Thephasesoftheactionpotentialsarelabeled(seetextfordetails),asaretheeffectiverefractoryperiod(ERP)andtherelativerefractoryperiod(RRP).Notethatincomparisonwithfast-responsefibers,therestingpotential ofslowfibersislessnegative,theupstroke(phase0)oftheactionpotentialislesssteep,theamplitudeoftheactionpotentialissmaller,phase1isabsent,andtheRRPextendswellintophase4afterthefibershavefullyrepolarized.

Eq. 2.7 ). is approximately (gNa). Na+ conductance K+ a 100 resting greater cardiac than cell, conductance In (gK) times equilibrium Nernst is similar K+ . the Vm potential Therefore, to for can hyperkalemia hyperpolarization, alterations [K+] extracellular result, and As depolarization. Vm: change significantly Hypokalemia causes a in causes is resting in extracellular gNa the contrast, changes because not cell, In Vm. small significantly so [Na+] affect do in

Fastresponsesofcardiacmusclemaychangetoslowresponsesincertainpathologicalconditions.Forexample,incoronaryarterydisease,aregionofcardiacmusclemaybedeprivedofitsnormalbloodsupply.Asaresult,[K+]intheinterstitialfluidthatsurroundstheaffectedmusclecellsrisesbecauseK+ islostfromtheinadequatelyperfused(orischemic)cells.Theactionpotentialsinsomeofthesecellsmaythenbeconvertedfromfasttoslowresponses.Conversionfromafasttoaslowresponseasaresultofincreasinginterstitial[K+]isillustratedlaterin

Fig.16.13

Upstroke 0) the Genesis (Phase of

stimulus action (the elicits value depolarizes Any critical a that an to potential. threshold) Vm abruptly are action characteristics in The fast-response shown of potentials

Fig. 16.1A.

as almost Na+ is The result of gNa. myocyte (phase exclusively rapid depolarization sudden a a the increase the 0) in into related influx of to extracellular potential is (the 0) potential membrane during dependent on action amplitude The change [Na+]. phase excitable. extracellular cell longer it decreases, approximately of potential is When normal approximately when decreased, the is no action of and [Na+] value amplitude 140 to mEq/L, mEq/L the from 20 the reduced is its

cell the mV resting the of depolarized dramatically. −90 level to approximately Vm, from When properties mV, threshold potential, −65 membrane is membrane suddenly change the sodium exist specific myocyte fast (see Na+ in channels the membrane the enters through that voltage-activated

Fig. 5.7). channels the can puffer by toxin fish be tetrodotoxin. blocked These addition, fast channels. to by many arrhythmias) blocking disturbances drugs In (cardiac treat cardiac certain these sodium act rhythm used

increase gNa. (in ≈0.1 thereby sodium msec), abrupt in an rapidly, The very resulting activate open or channels in sodium (time gNa msec), channels decreases However, once and ≅ the 1 course open, (Fig. inactivate to 2 rapidly ). 16.3 inactivated membrane channels to until begins The remain the state repolarize. in the sodium the can by to closed then the to state, it of from Vm reopened be channel transitions repolarization, With depolarization the threshold. which another are of sodium of basis action These the potential. of the channel refractory the the properties period cannot inactivated channels cannot in the another When be the be action generated. are they and state, sodium reopened, potential this be effective period. refractory the the in said period, is cell to During the pumping prevents interfere the and normal ventricular a heart. tetanic cardiac which therefore retard sustained, with muscle, action relaxation This intermittent of of contraction would cell the state. 3), closed the As inactivated to the to begin (phase channels repolarizes transition a of larger-than-normal can called refractory period, but period, another the this depolarization During it Vm. be potential action requires generated, relative by and normal the resting returned (phase the to channels are Only when depolarization sodium the reactivated level of Vm. able thus be all Vm 4) to has closed

Anioniccurrentthroughonemembranechannelcanbemeasuredwiththepatchclamptechnique.Theindividualchannelsopenandcloserepeatedlyinarandommanner.Thisprocessisillustratedin

Fig.16.4 ,whichshowsthecurrentflowthroughsodiumchannelsinamyocardialcell.Beforethetimeindicatedbythearrow,themembranepotentialwasclampedat−85mV.Atthetimeindicatedbythearrow,thepotentialwassuddenlychangedto−45mV,atwhichvalueitwasheldfortheremainderoftherecording.

indicatesthatimmediatelyafterthemembranepotentialwasmadelessnegative,onesodiumchannelopened(1.5pAinamplitude),andthenasecondsodiumchannelopened(3pAtotalcurrentfrombothchannels),whereuponbothchannelsclosed(i.e.,thecurrentreturnedto0).Bothchannelsclosedforapproximately4or5msec,andthenbothchannelsopenedatthesametime.Thereafter,onechannelclosedandthenthesecondrapidlyclosed.Finally,afterseveralseconds,onechannelopenedandthenclosed.Thereafter,bothchannelsremainedclosedfortherestoftherecording,eventhoughthemembranevoltagewasheldconstantat−45mV. Fig.16.4

1) (Phase of Early Genesis Repolarization

of period prominent brief an repolarization. 1 is have phase early, In limited cardiac many that cells a plateau, This and of results of in the brief repolarization end beginning the plateau the between upstroke the the notch (see

Figs. 16.1 16.3).

of K+ Repolarization (ito) outward of a current brief . mainly because transient carried is by activation during Activation greatly exceeds [K+] extracellular because charged 1 of [K+] the the a potassium is causes positively cell intracellular interior efflux and cell from K+ phase channels of brief (see

Fig. ). 16.3 and partially The as this efflux a repolarized cell briefly . of result of is transient K+

The notch varies of size phase the cardiac 1 among cells. midmyocardial in It regions and left myocytes ( in of epicardial ventricular the is prominent wall the

Fig. Purkinje ventricular 16.5 ) and fibers. in negligible the left the region in (see endocardial of notch the However, ventricle myocytes is from

Fig. to these i less is in density of channels cells. because the 16.5) + – 1 + + Channels (iK, + K+ K+ K+ – – – + – – + – – – presence + Na+ + – – – K+ – Ca++ Na+ – 4 + – – – 0 3 – + + – + Chemical – 1 – K+ + K+ (iK, K+ + + + – + + Channel – – – – 2 – + + + – – Electrostatic – – – 3 + K+ – + Ca++ – iK1) K+ + + The + K+ 2 iK1) + 0 is 4 – notch (ito) – – – – K+ – + – – – + + Na+ + + Fast – – – + – – + + + – – – – – – Channel + in Channels – the + – + – + less – also + Ca++ + + – – prominent

(iK, Channels K+ •Fig. iK1, ito) Cell. and of Principal Phases in Channels Various the 16.3 Ionic Action a Potential the That Cardiac Currents Generate throughthesesamechannels.Phase throughcalciumchannelsisbalancedbytheeffluxofK+ 2, throughtransientoutwardcurrent(ito)channelstogenerateearly,partialrepolarization.Phase 1, throughthesesamechannels. ThechemicalandelectrostaticforcesbothfavortheentryofNa+ throughiKandiK1channelsveryslightlyexceedtheelectrostaticforcesthatfavortheinfluxofK+ Duringtheplateau,thenetinfluxofCa++ ThechemicalforcesthatfavortheeffluxofK+ throughiKandiK1channelspredominateovertheelectrostaticforcesthatfavortheinfluxofK+ throughoutwardrectifyingcurrent(iK),inwardrectifyingcurrent(iK1),anditochannels.Phase BoththechemicalandelectrostaticforcesfavortheeffluxofK+ 0, ThechemicalforcesthatfavortheeffluxofK+ 3, 4, intothecellthroughfastsodiumchannelstogeneratetheupstroke.Phase Phase

#1 3 1.5 Channel •Fig. Channel msec 10 #2 pA 0 current 4.5 current Technique. [pA]) in Sodium Picoamperes Individual Recorded a Channels Current Through Cell, With (in Patch Heart Clamp Two 16.4 the Cultured andheldatthispotentialfortheremainderoftherecord. Membranevoltagewasheldat−85mV,thenabruptlychangedto−45mVatthetimeindicatedbythearrow, Physiol. (RedrawnfromCachelinAB,etal.J 1983;340:389.) potassium blocks that the 4-aminopyridine, which of ito. carry channels

2) Genesis (Phase Plateau the of

Ca++ through more slowly much channels enters plateau, action calcium next do. potential than myocardial the During cells inactivate (described that channels activate sodium the fast in paragraph) and of portion the (see 2 phase During flat

Figs. counterbalanced K+ 16.3), of Ca efflux this influx 16.1 ++ by is of the . ito, channels mainly and conduct K+ the currents. exits through that iK1 iK, phase 2 inactivated current not it expired. until after phase as is completely but 1, ito responsible is The for described has previously, The iK and section this of later iK1 the in are chapter. described

cell Ca++ as less potential becomes the which negative voltage-regulated progressively activated are upstroke. channels, action Vm during the enters via calcium types (L-type Two and of in tissue. channels been cardiac calcium identified T-type) have illustrated important in Some are characteristics their of

Fig. . 16.6 channels (see are slowly open, designated once because they L-type so inactivate

Fig. and panel) Ca++ current. long-lasting 16.6, a enable lower the of calcium −20 the activated reaches channel in predominant Vm when mV. are and approximately action are during the heart, type potential they upstroke They calcium channel amlodipine, as are channels antagonists verapamil, and such ( blocked diltiazem L-type by

Fig. 16.7

much T-type calcium the “transient”) in heart. channels abundant (or less are negative that They activates the at (−20 that (approximately L-type −70 are mV) are potentials channels membrane mV). more activated potential than L-type inactivate channels quickly more do They than also (see

Fig. compare 16.6 the lower panels). and ; upper

an current •Fig. results (gCa) conductance in Ca++ Opening calcium and of in increase (iCa) soon calcium after channels regionsofthefreewalloftheleftventricle.Thepreparationsweredrivenatabasiccyclelength(BCL):thatis,atinterstimulusintervalsof300and8000msec.Thevalueof0mVmembranepotentialisindicatedby“0.”(FromLiuD-W,etal.Circ midmyocardial(Mid)(B), Actionpotentialsrecordedfromtheepicardial(Epi)(A), 16.5 andendocardial(Endo)(C) Res. 1993;72:671.) the action upstroke (see potential

Fig. 16.3 ). of lower Because of Ca++ much than the Ca++ concentration (see concentration extracellular intracellular is the

influx the promotes cell the Table throughout the Ca++ the plateau. into of gCa 16.1 increase in ), influx coupling, Ca++ This during excitation-contraction the the “ involved is as in described in section plateau

neurotransmitters substantially drugs influence and may gCa. Various isoproterenol, norepinephrine, The receptor β-adrenergic gCa. parasympathetic neurotransmitter neurotransmitter enhance various the acetylcholine and whereas agonist catecholamines gCa, other adrenergic decreases the is contractility. catecholamines the cardiac which by mechanism Enhancement by of enhance gCa they principal muscle

it the concentration is across During that the K+ is (phase membrane as plateau phase potential, virtually however, for the during cell time, action of 2) gradient is the Vm 4; positive. the at same cell a is of large there K+ gradient favors Therefore, from the that (see efflux

Fig. 16.3). g If

K efflux plateau during a the , were during phase be not during Ca++ sustained could achieved. of of K+ the same greatly phase and is would influx it the exceed 4, plateau 2 as

•Fig. on Isoproterenol Currents. 16.6 Ca++ of the Effects Themembranepotentialwaschangedfrom−80to−20mV.Lower panel) panel, panel) ThecurrentswereconductedbyT-type(upper Themembranepotentialwaschangedfrom−30to+30mV. calciumchannelsinatrialmyocytes.Upper panel, andL-type(lower Gen Physiol. (RedrawnfromBeanBP.J 1985;86:1.) •Fig. Effectsofdiltiazem,acalciumchannelantagonist,ontheactionpotentials(inmillivolts[mV])andisometriccontractileforces(inmillinewtons[mN])recordedfromapapillarymuscleinvitro.Thetrac-ingswererecordedundercontrolconditions(C)andinthepresenceofdiltiazeminconcentrationsof3,10,and30µmol/L. 16.7 Cardiol. (RedrawnfromHirthC,etal.J Cell Mol 1983;15:799. msec mV )20 3 30 potential 10 10 3 30 0 Force Action 50 mN msec 50 0.5 and C C

Vm potential upstroke, approaches ( and near peak attains the gK the However, decreases of positive values then suddenly as action

Fig. 16.8 ). with current K+ during in the reduction the the plateau. K+ associated prevents cell of loss The diminished from gK excessive

).TheriseincAMPactivatescAMP-dependentproteinkinase,whichinturnpromotesphosphorylationofL-typecalciumchannelsinthecellmembraneandthusaugmentstheinfluxofCa++ ToenhancegCa,catecholaminesfirstbindtoβ-adrenergicreceptorsinthecardiaccellmembrane.Thisinteractionstimulatesthemembrane-boundenzymeadenylatecyclase,whichraisestheintracellularconcentrationofcyclicadenosinemonophosphate(cAMP;seealso intothecells(see

Fig.16.6 ).Conversely,acetylcholineinteractswithmuscarinicreceptorsinthecellmembranetoinhibitadenylatecyclase.Inthisway,acetylcholineantagonizestheactivationofcalciumchannelsandtherebydiminishesgCa.

Calciumchannelantagonistsaresubstancesthatblockcalciumchannels.Examplesincludethedrugsverapamil,amlodipine,anddiltiazem.ThesedrugsdecreasegCaandtherebyimpedetheinfluxofCa++ intomyocardialcells.Calciumchannelantagonistsdecreasethedurationoftheactionpotentialplateauanddiminishthestrengthofthecardiaccontraction(see

drugs. .Hence,vasodilatordrugssuchasthecalciumchannelantagonistsareoftenreferredtoasafterload-reducing Fig.16.7 ).Calciumchannelantagonistsalsodepressthecontractionofvascularsmoothmuscleandtherebyinducegeneralizedvasodilation.Thisdiminishedvascularresistancereducesthecounterforce(afterload)thatopposesthepropulsionofbloodfromtheventriclesintothearterialsystem,asexplainedin

values The both negative at called positive is gK rectification. of inward low Vm and reduction in ( iK1 including several is of rectification Inward currents, a characteristic K+

Fig. ). 16.9 For gK (i.e., flow channels, at Vm large values large). negative K+ of currents these is no gK current during the near mV flows or However, Vm is 2), as (i.e., little plateau or is when positive, 0 K+ occurs (phase small). 4 Thus action cardiac substantial the that of during phase the prevails (see gK potential

Fig. is current is ) large of diminished channels iK1 during channels, (see greatly because plateau the these the through 16.8 but

Fig. 16.9

play in action Other the role channels potential. potassium a of 2 phase These potassium characterized are channels channels. iK delayed as slowly and that prevail toward are phase closed 4 potentials the during They 0. are very by end activated of the phase tends activation these phase gK increase Hence, very during channels 2. gradually to of a described they (phase repolarization contribute phase 3), only in but the minor play process as section These 2, during to role channels final of “ the

rates is channels, channel (Phase designated more the Genesis types Repolarization of is designated activating to classified according exist their channel of activation: rapidly .” and more of the activating iKs (see iK 3) channel two iKr There the channel, slowly The

Fig. 16.8). The

Nav1.5 SCN5A

Cav1.2 CACNA1C

ICa,L

Ito,1 IKr IK1 Ito,2 IKs

Kv1.4/1.7 Kv4.2/4.3 Kir2.1/2.2 •Fig. in During Action 16.8 Cell. Cardiac Ion in a of Ventricular Various Changes Potential the Fast-Response Currents Phases the panels, Repolarizingioncurrents.TheinwardcurrentsincludethefastNa+ (iNa)andL-typeCa++ currents.Theclonesandgenesfortheprincipalioniccurrentsarealsoincluded. Depolarizingioncurrents.Lower (iCa,L)currents.OutwardcurrentsareiK1,ito,andtherapid(iKr)andslow(iKs)delayedrectifierK+ panels, Upper (RedrawnfromTomaselliG,MarbánE.Cardiovasc Res. 1999;42:270.) ventricular part iKr the and relative is of these myocardium of channels. duration in action of in regions in by distributions determined various potential iKs the myocytes the

. by charge plateau carried influx action of the is carried charge The by of Ca++ mainly by as long mainly balanced efflux persists the K+ potential as by diltiazem balance (see of the altering calcium action antagonist muscle preparation channel of this a papillary in The the are exemplified effects

Fig. ). 16.7 concentrations positive progressively and duration becomes of With voltage plateau less plateau diltiazem, the the diminishes. increasing channel of the certain substantially. antagonists plateau Conversely, potassium prolongs administration

Repolarization (Phase of 3) Genesis Final

•Fig. starts 3) end The final (phase of repolarization the at process Ca++ influx to phase of Was Rectified of a From 16.9 Holding efflux of . begins 2, exceed Inward the K+ the Changed when Potential K+ tricular Myocyte When cell cardiac from outward K+ at noted, three least As

Potentials. mV Test Potential Various to of −80 and iK, (see the final to the tion 3) (phase cell of cardiac repolariza (ito, Positivevaluesalong iK1) currents contribute

Figs. 16.8 iKs itdenotestheNernstThe 16.3 circle); iKr, x-axisisthereversalpotential(open currents initiate inwardcurrents.Thepointatwhichthecurrenttraceintersectsthe and help ito, repolarization. important equilibriumpotential(EK),atwhichpointthechemicalandelectrostaticThese forcesareequal.Vm,membranepotential. are therefore currents determinants of the the plateau. duration (RedrawnfromGilesWR, of the For example, duration of

[Lond]. Physiol ImaizumiY.J 1988;405:123.) atrial is in ventricular in ( the than less plateau myocytes substantially myocites

Fig. the •Fig. magnitude because ) 16.10 (in Typical y-Axis). Millivolts, Action Potentials 16.10 andatrium(C). Thesepotentialswererecordedfromcellsintheventricle(A), sinoatrial(SA)node(B), differsfromthatinA NotethatthetimecalibrationinB andC. Numbersonthecurvesdenotethephasesoftheactionpotential. (FromHoffmanBF,CranefieldPF.Electrophysiology of Heart. the NewYork:McGraw-Hill;1960.) is the myocites ventricular in ito atrial than myocytes. in during greater plateau of ventricular the the myocytes As already myocytes (see walls considerably in of potential of in location duration noted, these with varies the ventricular the action

Fig. 16.5). account and mainly differences. to The these currents i for iK the endocardial in action of is the myocytes, of is potential magnitude greatest. least, In iK the which duration midmyocardial applies the to myocytes. The converse for potential myocytes. of of magnitude The epicardial intermediate duration and action the iK are the

the Vm initiation these of that repolarization small not plateau. participate during in does iK1 current the prevail of the values very the because The is over of range channels conductance has to repolarization been of once substantially 3 rate iK1 the phase channels initiated. the However, contribute conductance the Vm current the becomes As and phase iK1 carry channels thereby that repolarization during accelerates progressively (see 3, of the increasingly increases negative

Fig. 16.3

4) Concentrations of (Phase Restoration Ionic

the inward membrane Na+,K+-ATPase, more slowly the The throughout located during it ). voltage of resting cell leak Na+ and is rapidly which cell for cardiac in membrane gradually enters would depolarize were not the 0 cycle steady the phase that (see ion. excess which 3Na+-Ca++ most eliminated Ca++ cell three ions entered antiporter, Similarly, for the of during one ions the had a mainly principally Ca++ Na+ by that 2 exchanges are phase an eliminated are Ca++ ATP-driven ions the of However, pump. some by Ca++

withSAP97.ThislinknotonlyaffectsthelocalizationbutalsoallowschangesintheabundanceofKir2.1channelstoproducereciprocalchangesinNav1.5abundance;theconverseisalsoobserved.ThusthecomplexcontainsKir2.1,whichsetstherestingmembranepotential,andNav1.5,whichaccountsforrapidexcitation.Colocalizationofthesetwochannelsthereforeexertsapowerfuleffectonexcitabilityanditsregulationundernormalandpathologicalconditions(arrhythmias). Cardiacionchannelsareconnectedtocellularproteinstoformmacromolecularcomplexes.Thesecomplexesareinvolvedinmodulatingthetransport,membranelocalization,operation,posttranslationalmodificationandturnoverofparticularionchannels.ThecarboxyterminalsofionchannelslinkthemwithseveralintracellularproteinssuchasPDZ(postsynapticdensity,disclarge,andzonulaoccludens-1)domainproteinswhosebindingsitesinteractwithsynapse-associatedprotein(SAP97),syntrophin,andA-kinaseanchoringprotein(AKAP5)amongothers.Differentmacromolecularcomplexesarefoundindistinctcellularlocations,andthisisthoughttounderlieionchanneldistribution.Thevoltage-sensitivesodiumchannel(Nav1.5)islinkedwithsyntrophin/dystrophinatlateralcellmembranesandwithankyrinB,plakophilin-2,andcalmodulin-dependentproteinkinaseIIattheintercalateddisk.Also,differentionchannelscanfoundinthesamecomplex.ThusNav1.5channelsandinward-rectifyingK(Kir2.1)channelscanbeconnectedinacomplex,orchannelosome,

Fig. 3). an a 2), (phase repolarization upstroke (phase final a 16.1A early plateau an 0), and of partial consist four repolarization 1), (phase (phase ) components: principal slow-response (see the action in potential However,

Fig. absent, and the upstroke the the early is and ), steep, flat, prolonged from is plateau 16.1B as (phase is less not less the repolarization is transition to less much 1) plateau repolarization distinct. the final

fast conditions. fast-response Blocking under sodium responses tetrodotoxin slow a channels with fiber generate appropriate in can action The fiber potentials in shown Purkinje

Fig. types. response clearly the two exhibit 16.11 fast-response that as of the the the tracing from displays typical a the potential plateau. In action upstroke ito, a separates result (A), prominent notch, control sodium B this are typical the a higher the E. in to D. upstroke is disappeared, very produce tetrodotoxin tracing of fast in and slow notch prominent Progressively progressively response. tracings B concentrations to and a In demonstrated tracings has channels, gradual; as action the potential The less resembles upstroke graded blockade E, of notch

•Fig. Blocks Fast Potentials a Sodium (Tracings Fiber. to in Tetrodotoxin, of Channels, Effect the A Recorded 16.11 E) Which Purkinje on Action Theconcentrationsoftetrodotoxinwere0mol/LintracingA,3×10−8mol/LintracingB,3×10−7mol/LintracingC,and3×10−6mol/LintracingsDandE;EwasrecordedlaterthanD. Arch. (RedrawnfromCarmelietE,VereeckeJ.Pflügers 1969;313:300. 1 B C mV sec D A )100 E

in in and nodes, notably potentials. Certain heart, slow-response SA AV the exhibit action those the cells instead by channels cells, Na+ is these through depolarization through influx sodium of channels. L-type achieved Ca++ In fast calcium mainly of influx of by and is K+ conductance in by through channels fibers and accomplished the these Repolarization increased (see channels iK1 the calcium iK of inactivation the

Fig. 16.3).

it nerve much An ). local is (see along is action muscle propagated by fiber muscle and potential currents, in cardiac skeletal circuit a as fibers traveling through of the cell, the depolarization the When is wave adjacent reaches impulse the gap of (see cells junctions end conducted to

Chapter 2).

the at because the (anisotropic) located more pass cell. from length the readily of (isotropic) ends preferentially are the cell laterally junctions Impulses than cell cell gap to of along permeability have ionic one cell electrical ions and nonselective a from in low current to resistance Gap junctions to that by allows their another. are pass rather resistance similar electrical of cytoplasm. gap The to is that of junctions follows allows of circuit local the of cell and therefore the flow currents The charge to impulse. from cell principles propagation intercellular of

the of Response Fast Conduction

the fast-and differ. characteristics fibers, conduction of In slow-response are channels In fast-response fast when activated sodium potential •Fig. fibers, the transmembrane 16.12 Theroleoflocalcurrentsinthepropagationofawaveofexcitationdownacardiacfiber.

suddenly of the mV mV. resting to −65 region −90 approximately of fiber changes the value value one of a approximately of threshold from depolarizes current that site. rapidly cell the then Na+ The inward at accordingly. becomes border depolarized subsequently fiber the part of This displaced zone, portion of and the is the process the border. then same at new The begins moves is a border as the again repeated continuously again, down ( wave process and depolarization and the This of fiber

Fig. 16.12

velocity the with change along of conduction fiber the directly amplitude of action The (dVm/dt) rate the during 0. the varies and phase potential potential potential between fully is fully the difference The the polarized regions the the and interior. depolarized amplitude potential cell action of The to proportional potential ). local is current magnitude difference the this (see of currents depolarize potential threshold its resting adjacent local Because these toward threshold resting to the of potential. the fiber are the of local that value, stimuli zone the they the portion shift more the depolarization action of (i.e., depolarize between the rapidly the regions potential down parts the the local amplitude), fiber. difference the depolarized can wave more the greater stimuli membrane, greater of potential the the The propagated effectively polarized and and adjacent is

important dVm/dt 0 an of also The during determinant conduction phase velocity. is active the between fiber region gradually, local and portion If neighboring depolarizing depolarizes small. are currents of the the the region resting the to each gradually, depolarized region to new threshold. reach time and required therefore adjacent is fiber for more The is zone active the resting of the section channels to allows inactivate. This sodium some

is membrane important conduction determinant another resting potential of The velocity. potential of the alter action the influence turn (Fig. dVm/dt, which velocity in potential resting Changes both conduction in and the amplitude membrane the ). 16.13 fast turn a Vm in consequence inactivates the amplitude potential the is as decreases the the dVm/dt, and of Depolarization which action conduction channels, and of velocity slowed. sodium a cell changes [K+], repolarized addition in not also in In •Fig. has that results a premature to completely of extracellular excitation Potentials Fiber. Recorded Effect [K+]) Action the in Potassium 16.13 a on From Concentration of (Extracellular Changes Purkinje Extracellular lines nearthepeaksoftheactionpotentialsdenote0mV.Whenextracellular[K+]is3mmol/L(“mM”;tracingsAandF),therestingmembranevoltage(Vm)is−82mV,andtheslopeofphase0issteep.Attheendofphase0,theovershootattainsavalueof+30mV.Hence,theactionpotentialamplitudeis112mV.Thedistancefromthestimulusartifacttothebeginningofphase0isinverselyproportionaltotheconductionvelocity.Whenextracellular[K+]isincreasedgraduallyto16mmol(tracingsBtoE),therestingVmbecomesprogressivelylessnegative.Atthesametime,theamplitudesanddurationsoftheactionpotentialsandthesteepnessoftheupstrokesalldiminish.Asaconsequence,conductionvelocitydecreasesprogressively.Atextracellular[K+]levelsof14and16mmol(tracingsDandE),therestingVmattainslevelssufficienttoinactivateallthefastsodiumchannelsandleadtothecharacteristicslow-responseactionpotentials. dashed Thestimulusartifact(StintracingD)appearsasabiphasicspiketotheleftoftheupstrokeoftheactionpotential.Thehorizontal (FromMyerburgRJ,LazzaraR.In:FischE[ed].Complex Electrocardiography. Philadelphia:FADavis;1973.) velocity. decrease in conduction fraction is to Na+ when current thus fast sodium fact during conduct the inward sodium are of phase more Vm are a This channels inactivated, channels that the available only reflects 0. too depolarized, the and

Conduction Response of the Slow

Fig. slow of the ) 16.12 characteristics fast quantitatively response. the also propagate response, from those whose conduction differ potential than much for The fast response, slower is slow is and the mV −40 threshold approximately conduction the response. for nodes the The velocities and 0.10 approximately AV conduction to the slow of response m/sec. are SA 0.02 in 1.00 are 1.00 myocardial 0.30 approximately for for The and in velocities 4.00 specialized to m/sec to cells fast-response conduction m/sec the the ventricles. fibers (Purkinje) conducting conduction that readily more the fast responses blocked of before are the reaches the myocardial Slow are than ceases impulse is, responses; fiber. end fibers rates fast-response those of are than can much at slow-response that repetition faster Also, respond fibers.

Fig.16.13 andloseK+ andK+ tothesurroundinginterstitialspace.Asaconsequence,[K+]intheextracellularfluidsurroundingtheischemicmyocytesiselevated.Suchchangesinextracellular[K+]may,ifsufficientlylarge,disturbcardiacrhythmandconductioncritically(see alsotakeplaceinthecardiactissueofpatientswithcoronaryarterydisease.Whenregionalmyocardialbloodflowisdiminished,thesupplyofO2andmetabolicsubstratesdeliveredtotheischemictissuesisinsufficient.TheNa+,K+-ATPaseinthemembraneofcardiacmyocytesrequiresconsiderablemetabolicenergytomaintainthenormaltransmembranegradientsofNa+ .Whenbloodflowisinadequate,theactivityofNa+,K+-ATPaseisimpaired,andtheischemicmyocytesgainexcessNa+

Fig.16.13

devices essential. rhythm pacemakers development Because artificial cardiac of of knowledge other and excitability the electrical of is cardiac for detailed correcting rapid disturbances, characteristics excitability or cells action considerably, on the depending differ potentials whether of cardiac of types various responses. The fast are slow

repolarized longer been response fast has depolarized it has excitable cell until partially Once the (see initiated, no is the

Fig. ). 16.1A conduct potential the of action 0 point able effective which the fast the fiber the potential another which to beginning −50 action the to interval in repolarization period is has response, the a phase until is 3 mV. from extends approximately refractory the phase from beginning at In of reached called channels the the the of to inactivated transitioned approximately fast state. many have of closed At sodium state Vm, from value this been fiber until excitable cardiac it is repolarized. the has However, completely fully not may stronger stimulus a repolarization the could that relative when action be Before (i.e., the elicit stimulus than refractory is during a evoked period), 4. complete potential phase only during response an

its potential is a a response When that period the membrane refractory evoked relative fast the at excitation, with of vary previous the ( exists during time of characteristics stimulation

Fig. 16.14).

refractory the relative are The the in amplitude increases of channels period from and is the fiber repolarization number the of the upstroke that recovered the sodium greater as increases proceeds. the because the have later that fast slope stimulated, inactivation of the in response the is later consequence, the that in velocity the As stimulated. refractory relative also a period propagation fiber increases fully 4 constant repolarized, response the fiber matter is time no stimulus what the phase in is the is applied. Once

•Fig. Excitation the of 16.15 Initiation at Potential Slow-Response an in Times Effects a Action of Fiber. Various After fiber,excitationverylateinphase3(orearlyinphase4)inducesa Inthis •Fig. small,nonpropagated(local)response(wavea).Laterinphase4,a Changesinactionpotentialamplitudeandupstrokeslopeasactionpotentialsareinitiatedatdifferentstagesoftherelativerefractoryperiodoftheprecedingexcitation. 16.14 J. (RedrawnfromRosenMR,etal.Am Heart 1974;88:380.)

refractory relative In phase beyond 3 extends well (see slow-response frequently fibers, period the

Fig. 16.1B ). propagated evoke be may some response has cell repolarized, the a Even completely time. to for difficult after it This refractoriness. called postrepolarization slow-response of fibers characteristic is

propagatedresponse(waveb)canbeelicited,butitsamplitudeissmallandtheupstrokeisnotverysteep;thisresponseisconductedveryslowly.Stilllaterinphase4,fullexcitabilityisregained,andtheresponse(wavec)displaysnormalcharacteristics. Dis. (ModifiedfromSingerDH,etal.Prog Cardiovasc 1981;24:97.)

Fig.16.32 ),thetimingoftheseearlybeatsmaydeterminetheirclinicalconsequence.Iftheyoccurlateintherelativerefractoryperiodoftheprecedingdepolarizationorafterfullrepolarization,theprematuredepolarizationisinconsequential.However,iftheprematuredepolarizationsoriginateearlyintherelativerefractoryperiodoftheventricles,conductionoftheprematureimpulsefromthesiteoforiginisslow,andhenceacardiacimpulseismorelikelytoreexcitesomemyocardialregionthroughwhichithadpassedpreviously(aphenomenonknownasreentry).Ifthatreentryisirregular(i.e.,ifventricularfibrillationensues),theheartcannotpumpeffectively,anddeathmayresult.

upstrokes steep the are refractory the very in relative small, potentials evoked (Fig. and early Action period not are

). 16.15 the progressively improve as amplitudes potentials slopes relative and upstroke The period. refractory action in are elicited later is of slower fast than full the recovery of much excitability Recovery response. that Impulses in those more late slowly refractory period arrive in that than relative are the early much period. conducted that arrive blocks. to also periods refractory long The conduction lead certain only the impulses; may when propagated. fraction be these for recur responses able example, impulses frequency, of low Even fiber to a only conduct at in conditions, may slow be alternate

•Fig. Effectofchangesincyclelength(CL)ontheactionpotentialduration(APD)ofPurkinjefibers. 16.16 (ModifiedfromSingerD,TenEickRE.Am Cardiol. J 1971;28:381.)

Length Effects of Cycle

time length action the is successive between potentials. Cycle the of in length in Changes cardiac duration alter cells action cycle ( the potential

Fig. 16.16

Fig. refractory ) their thus and periods. 16.5 change length heart factors (irregular cycle a in often in initiation As certain arrhythmias of the rhythms). changes important are termination or consequence,

duration potential are fiber stepwise to The Purkinje in cycle in reductions length in a produced 2000 from in action msec changes by shown 200

Fig. . 16.16 duration the decreases. cycle Note of action potential the as length diminishes, that current currents and delayed and potential cycle length is that the transient of gK conduct (iKr K+ potassium that by This duration involve those between at types two conduct the namely, iKs) action correlation channels: mediated that K+ rectifier changes (ito). outward those least and direct in

zero, activates of the for hundreds and very Vm of but remains at near iK values slowly. The inactivates current current activated milliseconds, is slowly, also activated period each initiated the the iK consequence, a action the earlier diminishes, As length tends basic in potential. the preceding action as potential of current by to occur cycle inactivation basic action K+ the shorter and the length, cycle current shorter during the the hence phase the potential the greater outward 2 duration. Therefore,

and influences length duration. the potential ito action The also relationship current between cycle cardiac near at current zero frequency. potential, also is inversely activated and varies with The ito its magnitude in the as K+ plateau. increase the shortens outward the cycle length Therefore, decreases, current consequent

Electrocardiogram and Heart of Natural the the Excitation

heart effective the blood. pumping occurs which an of normally manner, of Excitation in allows ordered excitation ( This conduction occurs heart’s via ordered system the

Fig. 16.17 ). initiates potentials heart the SA of of pacemaker action is the throughout the spread the The node atria. and of node, excitation ventricles occur atrial This be and adequately so can reaches slowed the that can contraction filled. the where AV is spread conduction contract in the ventricular fibers the Purkinje Excitation manner. spreads ventricles coordinated throughout that so the myocytes then rapidly a via conduction heart’s described properties the of sections. of the next component are system each in The

•Fig. 16.17 Thecardiacconductionsystem.

Function Cardiac of CHAPTER Elements 16

autonomic cardiac and such controls strength. of function, aspects system various as heart the contraction rate nervous The does intact require not function However, innervation. cardiac heart well denervated, is with a whose patient completely Indeed, adapt situations. may stressful to still a transplant, cardiac conditions properties The to lies transplanted to especially cardiac of adapt a automaticity. of its in ability intrinsic heart certain denervated, tissue, changing

of removed initiate own it The when from automaticity properties and even body. to ability heart regularity a completely allow pacemaking (the its is activity) of perfused the rhythmicity beat to beat) (the heartbeat is The in origin. myogenic vertebrate for persist is excised artificially coronary with contractions rhythmic cardiac of or perfused hours. vasculature may solution, an heart the oxygenated many blood If electrolyte an initiate ventricles beats; reside Some of the nodal the conducting in such cells in fibers cells or and can heart. mainly specialized atria tissues

node; cardiac main region at As is the that greatest it heart of SA impulses the pacemaker. the noted, frequency the ordinarily generates is the mammalian cm located three an of the on SA 2 SA mapping from with 1 right complex. has sites node of or the atrial Detailed along atrium automaticity, itself, the as two node serve the of surface potentials revealed that or the electrical pacemaker these times, simultaneously. At all initiate loci impulses neural such level of excitation shifts to At earliest conditions, as activity. of other depending times, certain locus, site on locus from the autonomic the

cava in groove and the the posteriorly and and node SA it long is junction right In the lies thick, 8 the vena humans, atrium. between at superior the mm mm 2 approximately The sinus node. of through lengthwise the node artery runs the center (2) The cells between cells types: two principal are “ordinary” few SA cell intermediate round elongated the slender, appearance small, round contains organelles and and have atrial myofibrils myocardial that that (1) in node cells. and nodal and cells node slender, pacemaker The round within the the to the cells conduct are the probably margins. the elongated probably impulses cells;

in action is node typical depicted A transmembrane SA cell from potential an recorded

Fig. 16.10B.

the (see a transmembrane In cell recorded potential comparison from ventricular myocardial with

Fig. sustained, and 0) repolarization (phase is of usually the not less 3) is plateau node is is the ), more gradual. (phase action SA the negative, less the potential of the steep, 16.10A potential upstroke resting cell These slow attributes are characteristic the response. of channels. potential not an blocks potential no produced (which Tetrodotoxin by current is Na+ influence has SA the action on action fast inward the the Na+ upstroke nodal current) fast through because has slow cells exhibit no Thus that response. effect on tetrodotoxin the

exertion,anxiety,orcertainillnessessuchasfebrileinfectiousA activity.Thistypeofsyncopeisareflexresponsetopainor acetylcholine,diminishestheheartratebyhyperpolarizingthepacemakercellmembraneandreducingtheslope tocertainpsychologicalstimuli. oftheslowdiastolicdepolarization.Thesemechanisms Ordinarily,thefrequencyofpacemakerfiringiscontrolled increasingtheslopeoftheslowdiastolicdepolarization.Thismechanismofincreasingheartratefunctionsduringphysical diseases.Increasedvagalactivity,throughthereleaseof isvasovagalsyncope,abriefperiodoflightheadednessorlossofconsciousnesscausedbyanintenseburstofvagal releaseofnorepinephrine,raisestheheartrateprincipallyby predominantoversympatheticactivity.Anextremeexample system.Increasedsympatheticnervousactivity,throughthe

•Fig. Firing. of 16.18 in the Changes in Involved Pacemaker Mechanisms Frequency Areductionintheslope(fromwaveatowave b)ofslowdiastolicdepolarizationdiminishesthefiringfrequency.TP,thresholdpotential.B, Anincreaseinthethresholdpotential(fromTP-1toTP-2)oranincreaseinthemagnitudeofthemaximumdiastolicpotential(fromwavesegmentsatod)alsodiminishesthefiringfrequency. A, Heart. (FromHoffmanBF,CranefieldPF.Electrophysiology the of NewYork:McGraw-Hill;1960.)

type in the lack during of channel. phase because 4 rectifying) AV) (and than atrial The nodal potassium nodal negative SA in iK1 much is or transmembrane (inward cells potential less ventricular cells automatic myocytes is than to ratio of in less gNa Thus 4 much phase myocytes. in gK during cells the nodal in nodal much potential equilibrium (EK) phase deviates K+ cells during does Vm in Nernst myocytes. the it Hence, from 4, more than

4. other that principal cells of it from distinguishes the phase manifests cell The pacemaker feature in a constant the depolarization cells, fiber throughout is slow nonautomatic In by this a potential pacemaker phase 4. characterized whereas remains during diastolic phase, is action an triggered. rate threshold Depolarization then at a attained, is proceeds steady until and a potential

in a (2) the be Pacemaker or during phase by maximal threshold the rate phase potential negativity (1) 4, cell ( varied 4, change the frequency depolarization during may (3) of

Fig. 16.18). the threshold diastolic rate the increased, When rate slow earlier, heart increases. and of is depolarization attained potential is the heart phase reduced. is onset 0, rate threshold delays rise the the of A the in and potential slope remains diminishes. unchanged, when the phase reach to required Similarly, of and when potential, the negative threshold maximal is therefore the heart increased, time potential rate 4 is the more

Automaticity Basis Ionic of

in characteristically Several automatic slow the currents occurs diastolic to depolarization contribute the that ionic

ChangesinautonomicneuralactivitydonotusuallychangetheheartratebyalteringthethresholdlevelofVminthenodalpacemakercells.However,certainantiarrhythmicdrugs,suchasquinidineandprocainamide,doshiftthethresholdpotentialoftheautomaticcellstolessnegativevalues.

in heart. the cells ICa SA ionic at K+ (1) the Ca++ and outward diastolic currents a slow least (3) of current, an depolarization: mediate current, three inward In node, current, (2) hyperpolarization-induced if; pacemaker the inward an ( cells the iK;

Fig. 16.19

the The pacemaker repetitive of with the cell begins firing iK current. upstroke potential. after repolarize Efflux to the cell tends the the of K+ action of out but diminishes well efflux move K+ (see continues the repolarization, of throughout maximal to time 4 phase beyond its

Fig. ). 16.19 its two inward opposition As also current and decreases. of the (if the gradually to diminishes, the effects depolarizing currents iCa) which repolarizing by effect diastolic The current. the oppose the depolarization iCa the progressive of if and currents, mediated iK is

The the current fast specific by inward the Na+ carried from end channels through mainly activated if channels. sodium is is differ and that near of repolarization “funny” current discoverers had expected because to cells dubbed its inward in pacemaker current was not repolarization. The Na+ detect end the of an at −50 becomes is beyond membrane potential hyperpolarized current the mV. This as activated more greater potential The the if. membrane negative at time, the this the activation of

current, depolarization inward is for current the responsible Ca++ iCa. second The diastolic rectifying toward reaches activated as end the of 4 −35 current a the potential This (see phase is membrane mV of value approximately

Fig. 16.19 ). activated, the into cell calcium influx Once the increases. Ca++ are of channels depolarization, the rate of potential to then This the upstroke. action leads which accelerates influx diastolic decrease in extracellular •Fig. A half) 16.19 trace theinwardCa++ showsnetmembranecurrentandtheapproximatetimecourseoftherepolarizingoutwardK+ thatoccurinsinoatrialnodecellsareproducedbythreeprincipalcurrents(green bottom trace, half): trace, current(iCa).Thethick bold Themembranepotentialchanges(blue inthecurrenttraceindicatesthemagnitudeanddirectionofestimatedIf. top current(iCa);ahyperpolarization-inducedinwardcurrent(if),andanoutwardK+ line red current(iK),thehyperpolarization-inducedinwardcurrent(if),andtheL-typeCa++ current(iK).Thethinnoisygreen Physiol. (RedrawnfromvanGinnekenACG,GilesW.J 1991;434:57.)

gene.MutationsinaminoacidsinS4andintheS4-to-S5linkercausemarkedchangesinthevoltagedependenceofactivation,insuchawaythatgreaterhyperpolarizationisneededtoopenthechannel.Thiseffectislikethatofacetylcholine,andithasbeenpredictedthattheoccurrenceofsuchmutationsinthehumanheartcouldunderliesinusbradycardiaandsicksinussyndrome. Theso-calledfunnycurrent(if)incardiacSAnodecellsisactivatedbyhyperpolarizationandgatedbycyclicnucleotides,anditschannelisdesignatedHCN.TherearefourmembersoftheHCN genefamily,andsuchchannelsarefoundincentralnervoussystemneuronsthatgenerateactionpotentialsrepetitively.Transmembranesegment4(S4)ofHCNhasmanypositivelychargedaminoacidsthatactasvoltagesensors,whicharealsopresentinvoltage-gatedsodium,potassium,andcalciumchannels.ThedominantchannelexpressedintheheartisderivedfromtheHCN4

•Fig. From an 16.20 Membrane Pacemaker Potentials Node Sino-atrial Recorded Action Cell. TheconcentrationofCa++inthebathwasreducedfrom2to0.2mmol/L(“mM”). (ModifiedfromKohlhardtM,etal.Basic Res Cardiol. 1976;71:17. mM )–60 Ca++ 0.2 msec 2 0 500 Ca++ mM mV

Fig. diastolic in SA depolarization diminishes 16.20 of of slope cells. addition ) the channel or the the slow potential the action the and amplitude calcium of node antagonists (background) T-type that current, Ca++ Research of involved sarcoplasmic also the Na+ additional be reticulum—may Ca++ triggered exchange currents—including spontaneous Na+/Ca++ the sustained and a indicates from pacemaking. evidence in current current inward release ion the (iNa), by ways this to vital function. observations many sustain illustrate These the

foci pacemakers. RegionsoftheheartotherthantheSAnodemayinitiatebeatsinspecialcircumstances.Suchsitesarecalledectopic orectopic Ectopicfocimaybecomepacemakerswhen(1)theirownrhythmicitybecomesenhanced,(2)therhythmicityofthehigherorderpacemakersbecomesdepressed,or(3)allconductionpathwaysbetweentheectopicfocusandregionswithgreaterrhythmicitybecomeblocked.Ectopicpacemakersmayactasasafetymechanismwhennormalpacemakingcentersfail.However,ifanectopiccenterfireswhilethenormalpacemakingcenterstillfunctions,theectopicactivitymayinduceeithersporadicrhythmdisturbances,suchasprematuredepolarizations,orcontinuousrhythmdisturbances,suchasparoxysmaltachycardias(seethesection“

affect by altering The ionic neurotransmitters autonomic currents. automaticity membrane transmitters increase all in nodal SA three The involved automaticity. currents adrenergic the diastolic slope the by To iCa same if transmitters adrenergic must increase enhancement of iK transmitters. by exceed depolarization, augmentation the these of and of

SA the the achieved specific node ionic cells. pacemaker for that in by automaticity is cells aThe released by from The hyperpolarization potassium the vagus channels: nerve of heart in basis node activation endings induced AV acetylcholine resembles in ventricular Similar mechanisms rather current automaticity the involved. Na+ Purkinje is in that for fast than iCa fibers, also except account to the been however, time-dependent suggested to hyperpolarization-induced a the mediate rather be current clarified. remains voltageand diastolic current inward has than depolarization; this K+ slow if Also,

potassium channels (KACh). acetylcholine-regulated if also currents. the and iCa depresses Acetylcholine cells effects neural The described in on are cardiac autonomic detail in greater

the other entire cells the When the for SA excised over atrial are the heart. destroyed, AV in the function generally node or complex take or of junction pacemaker components pacemaker pacemaker vary days, some from cells function. atria and to which usually automatic After minutes resume become again their in time, dominant pacemaker the may conduction system ventricles of the display specialized also the automaticity. in Purkinje fibers slow characteristically These very at fibers a fire rate. a the from contractions, in pacemakers per the Purkinje ventricles, only atria the AV ventricular idioventricular impulses but beats at conduct 30 40 of cardiac the minute. fiber the cannot to frequency network these When to initiate junction

time. Ifanectopicfocusinoneoftheatriasuddenlybegantofireatahighrate(e.g.,150impulsesperminute)inanindividualwithanormalheartrateof70beatsperminute,theectopicsitewouldbecomethepacemakerfortheentireheart.Ifthatrapidectopicfocussuddenlystoppedfiring,theSAnodewouldremainbrieflyquiescentbecauseofoverdrivesuppression.TheintervalfromtheendoftheperiodofoverdriveuntiltheSAnoderesumesfiringiscalledthesinus node recovery Inpatientswithsicksinussyndrome,thesinusnoderecoverytimeisprolonged.Theconsequentperiodofasystole(absenceofaheartbeat)maycauselossofconsciousness.

a have pacemaker at high excited after automaticity The cells these of been frequency. diminishes cells overdrive is as phenomenon suppression. This known loci. the other greater the the than the tends rhythmicity is firing SA automaticity in heart, suppress that node other of latent SA to of sites node in Because intrinsic pacemaking of the the

Overdrive the suppression of membrane Na+,K+-ATPase. results activity from A Na+ cell cardiac each the enters certain of amount depolarization. during the enters minute. depolarized, cell cell Na+ is the The more frequently per more the activity of extrude high from this Na+ At to excitation the larger Na+,K+-ATPase amount frequencies, of the cell. increases extruded for Na+,K+-ATPase are of because ions K+ by pump Na+ hyperpolarizes three activity (see in ions the the enter cell exchange two cell the The that ). diastolic reach to the more threshold. depolarization Therefore, slow requires time firing not of overdrive when activity temporarily does instantaneously remains ceases, slow the Na+,K+-ATPase the In suddenly overactive. addition, but the during automaticity. 4, This temporarily the depolarization Na+ gradual and of it cell the suppresses phase intrinsic cell’s of pacemaker opposes extrusion continued

the the node, right From atrium throughout spreads the radially cardiac (see SA impulse

Fig. 16.17 of fibers at conduction along m/second. approximately a ordinary velocity atrial ) myocardial 1 directly A node anterior impulse left the interatrial the myocardial band (or Bachmann’s bundle), atrium. pathway, SA conducts special to the the ultimately of (see and atrium proceeds wave inferiorly reaches node excitation AV right through the The

Fig. 16.17 ), is route impulse to sole cardiac the of normally entry the the ventricles. which

”),theycanbeassociatedwithseriouscardiacrhythmdisturbances.Wolff-Parkinson-Whitesyndrome,acongenitaldisturbance,isthemostcommonclinicaldisorderinwhichabypasstractofmyocardialfibersbecomesanaccessorypathwaybetweentheatriaandventricles.Ordinarily,thesyndromecausesnofunctionalabnormality.ThedisturbanceiseasilydetectedonanECGbecauseaportionoftheventricleisexcitedviathebypasstractbeforetheremainderoftheventricleisexcitedviatheAVnodeandtheHis-Purkinjesystem.Thispreexcitationappearsasabizarreconfigurationintheventricular(QRS)complexoftheECG.Onoccasion,however,areentryloopdevelopsinwhichtheatrialimpulsetravelstotheventriclesviaoneofthetwoAVpathways(AVnodeorbypasstract)andthenbacktotheatriathroughtheotherofthesetwopathways.Continuouscirclingaroundtheloopleadstoaveryrapidrhythm(supraventriculartachycardia).Thisrapidrhythmmaybeincapacitatingbecauseitmightnotallowsufficienttimeforventricularfilling.TransientblockoftheAVnodebyaninjectionofadenosineintravenouslyorbyareflexiveincreaseinvagalactivity(bypressingontheneckoverthecarotidsinusregion)usuallyabolishesthetachycardiaandrestoresanormalsinusrhythm. SomepeoplehaveaccessoryAVpathways.Becausethesepathwaysoftenserveasapartofareentryloop(seethesection“

and less developed, (see 3) and (phase atrial (phase 2) slower is is repolarization The plateau briefer

Fig. 16.10 ventricular fiber. typical in a than ) action the myocytes in ventricular that atrial efflux is briefer in atrial of in during is potential in The K+ greater myocytes. duration than plateau ventricular than myocytes because myocytes ultrarapid presence The K+ not myocytes. action potentials an (IKur) and greater atrial atrial contributes to of in myocytes, efflux myocytes, in current shorter but ventricular in K+

excitation via ventricles The the AV reaches atrial wave the node. mm approximately adult 15 is 10 In wide, thick. mm mm humans, and long, this node 3 coronary of interatrial posteriorly the near on The septum node the the side is ostium sinus. situated the of right the as node, node AV round •Fig. but two types same contains cell the the cells The SA Membranepotentialsrecordedfromanatrioventricularnodecellundercontrolconditions(C)andinthepresenceofthecalciumchannelantagonistdiltiazematconcentrationsof0.1,0.3,and1µmol/L. 16.21 Mol Cardiol. Cell (RedrawnfromHirthC,etal.J 1983;15:799. predominate. cells 0 1 msec 0.3 )–25 are less AV and 25 C elongated abundant the node mV 0.1 the in conducting of (NH) node; regions: functional (2) midportion made the specialized merge gradually system nodal-His with upper the region, the the AV the and of the zone the and is the of or (AN) nodal which the portion fibers region, remainder up ventricles of or or The three the bundle transitional is in of atrium atrionodal node; zone region, AV the (see nodal which for His, the the the node (N) between

Fig. 16.17). are bundle the travels Normally, the cardiac of along to the only pathways ventricles. node His from impulse the AV and which atria

physiological AV features Several of and of clinical conduction significance. are ventricles the to in impulses atria the The of and node. N regions the in AV the from of AN delay principal occurs conduction region AN less velocity actually N in region. in than Conduction is the the the is AN path in length greater region. the However, than substantially N in region the start atrial and AN excitation) (the manifestation between of excitation) “ of Conduction on manifestation (the for complex electrical section wave P N account regions QRS the electrical delay and ventricular through the an the ECG the the the of (see times

Electrocardiography”).

optimal and the contraction. atrial atrial function, filling excitation ventricular of during between In delay terms enables ventricular

potentials the In slow-response region, action prevail. N −60 low is V/sec), approximately is 0.05m/sec. upstroke conduction velocity the mV, is The velocity approximately and the (≈5 potential resting

in other (or slow-response fast blocks action this Tetrodotoxin, virtually which on channels, no the potentials has sodium on effect fibers). any region action calcium amplitude the of and antagonists potentials Conversely, channel decrease duration ( the

Fig.

) AV and conduction. 16.21 depress

in potentials the are the between region bThe shapes N the in region the of atria. AN those those action in intermediate and NH His. the in Similarly, the those of those and in transitional the in region bundle between are region action N potentials

16 Elements Function of CHAPTER Cardiac

of N of cells refractoriness the potentials, these (see slow-response is, Like well region other period repolarization; action in postrepolarization extends refractory cells complete period that the display beyond the relative

Fig. 16.15 ). As the atrial AV between the through slows. rate time heart the decreased, is conduction and junction increases, depolarizations successive AV (see of prolongation block time is AV ”). a section Abnormal first-degree called conduction the the of induced the AV the AV node. frequency by in of the increase of place atrial takes conduction N an region of Most prolongation

frequencies that the easily at stimulation Impulses the other of regions be tend blocked in are in to node conducted AV heart. If of ventricles. impulses fraction might through the at the a atrial conducted repetition depolarized a half) the (e.g., rate, high the are only be to atria AV junction only atrial block conducted The the fraction to called the are second-degree impulses a (see pattern conduction ”). of AV section the in is which ventricles a ventricles excessive the protect type wherein This inadequate. filling of frequencies, between from be time the contraction contractions may might block

conduction Retrograde AV node. occur can through the significantly the conduction conducted impulse repetition the is at when blocked direction. retrograde impulse and rates time is is However, in the ante-grade lower of the the instead longer, In site the addition, (see a common AV section reentry “ is for the node

conduction. the regulates autonomic nervous system As node, the AV SA in may vagal activity time. conduction Weak prolong AV the simply prolonged given atrial atrium-to-His vagal stimulation. length, Thus the time for any by or cycle is atrium-to-ventricle conduction the may some all in node. from blocked or be to impulses arriving vagal atria Stronger the cause the activity of degree, block complete, called section none the third the a atrial ”). AV ventricles the is of reaches in or pattern conduction which (see The impulses The occurs absence of in or vagally node the the delay induced conduction mainly AV region. N through region the N action effect vagal of reflects the This hyperpolarize to of conducting fibers in of the (Fig. stimulation membrane the acetylcholine ). 16.22 the of greater impaired atrial arrival hyperpolarization of the the AV conduction. The time the the impulse, more at

facilitate conduction. Cardiac AV in nerves, sympathetic contrast, junction. and of the AV in They rhythmicity pacemakers decrease conduction latent the enhance time AV the in terminals the and norepinephrine slope sympathetic the released AV the of regions at AN N increases postganglionic action node. of the of potentials, principally the The nodal upstroke and amplitude nerve the

cm side bundle 1 •Fig. the right septum down The of the for subendocardially His approximately interventricular passes of a Brief Effects (St) Transmembrane Potential. Vagal on Stimulus 16.22 of the Thisresponsewasrecordedfromanatrioventricular(AV)nodalfiber(red trace). Compoundactionpotentialswererecordedfromtheatrium(A1,A2,A3;upper blue blue trace).Notethatshortlyaftervagalstimulation,themembraneofthefiberwashyperpolarized.Theatrialexcitation(A2)thatarrivedattheAVnodewhenthecellwashyperpolarizedfailedtobeconducted,asdenotedbytheabsenceofadepolarizationintheHiselectrogram(H).Theatrialexcitationsthatpreceded(A1)andfollowed(A3)excitationA2wereconductedtotheHisbundleregion. trace)andfromtheHis-Purkinjesystem(H;lower (RedrawnfromMazgalevT.etal.Am J Physiol. 1986;251:H631.) the branches then right bundle divides left and and (see into

Fig. 16.17 ). the a The of His, bundle direct bundle continuation septum. right branch, interventricular of right side down the the proceeds of bundle which than arises branch, considerably left the and the perpendicular almost is right, from interventricular septum. His The the perforates of thicker bundle left subendocardial a interventricular surface side posterior branch the into division anterior of the the the and splits On thin of division. septum, a thick left bundle

orleft branch bundle block. Conductionofimpulsesintherightorleftbundlebranchorineitherdivisionoftheleftbundlebranchmaybeimpaired.Conductionblocksmaydevelopinoneormoreoftheseconductionpathwaysasaconsequenceofcoronaryarterydiseaseordegenerativeprocessesassociatedwithaging,andtheygiverisetocharacteristicECGpatterns.Blockofeitherofthemainbundlebranchesisknownasright anterior orleft hemiblock. posterior Blockofeitherdivisionoftheleftbundlebranchiscalledleft

the both ultimately the called surfaces of of the bundle fibers, complex of into spread Purkinje a fibers, right divisions over conducting that subendocardial The network left two bundle subdivide out branch branch ventricles. and abundant, myocytes. do Purkinje linearly fibers as have sarcomeres, arranged transverse which (T) is system, Purkinje species. absent developed in However, tubular myocytes, is the of in the well many fibers to diameter, ventricular Purkinje the of in fibers to with 15 µm for the myocytes. cells 80 broadest in diameters 10 comparison 70 heart: µm are in of because any diameter heart. m/second) the in fibers, (1 large Partly of exceeds to Purkinje that 4 the these type fibers fiber other velocity conduction the within in velocity increased ventricles. the endocardial conduction the of rapid enables of entire surface activation The

ordinary recorded action from Purkinje myocardial resemble those fibers. potentials of The fibers ventricular However, the Purkinje blocked by then junction through excitations of because fiber long AV fibers. refractory period potentials, the premature the but are of are of the conducted atria action Purkinje many prevents premature of of the excitations contraction atrial these Blockade ventricles. potential the is of depolarization rates the at refractory This vary function and rate heart of effective heart fibers the atrial ventricles premature pronounced slow the because (see the protecting action duration, especially period, against Purkinje inversely hence with effects the of

Fig. ). 16.16 period the the of At slow prolonged. refractory effective especially Purkinje fibers heart rates, is

increases fibers, very of appreciably refractory period the normal AV In heart effective and rapid to Purkinje at heart rates the cells of contrast range not does node rates. over actually change frequencies. normally the rates, AV it excessively is node is that high when atrium from ventricles Therefore, at excited repetition the these the protects high

first portion) (except and the are by be node the muscles. septum to excited of the AV The portions the from the impulses basal arriving interventricular ventricles papillary endocardial spreads and left substance its into the both from the wave of right surfaces. The activation septum makes anchor Early to serve it of remaining point the an ventricular for allows of as it septum more myocardium. the contraction rigid and contraction of the muscles valves Furthermore, papillary of contraction prevents the the during eversion atria into systole. early AV ventricular

0.4 m/sec). epicardium a surfaces but to slower spreads rapidly, the excitation from wave ventricles The both velocity are activated at of of endocardium endocardial (≈0.3 to right ventricle ventricular epicardial left. ventricle the the than activated right of because is that the earlier wall appreciably left is thinner than of the surface The of are addition, the activated regions. In somewhat regions earlier than their central ventricles epicardial apical basal respective and both of last septum. epicardial the interventricular are small zone a ventricles basal and the excited posterior be the of to The basal the regions portions in portion

illustrated in in for conditions (defined the The necessary reentry following box) are

Fig. 16.23 . single a splits branch cardiac In panels, of a branch. bundle each fibers the left four and of a right into to in myocytes in refractory response changes directional cSimilar A also heart rate. occur in changes the connecting runs in ventricular bundle period

•Fig. Unidirectional The Reentry. 16.23 Role of in Block AunidirectionalblockexistsintheRbranch.Theantegradeimpulseisblocked,buttheretrogradeimpulseisconductedthroughandreenterstheSbundle. ThewaveisblockedintheLandRbranches.C, AbidirectionalblockexistsintheRbranch.D, Anexcitationwavetravelingdownasinglebundle(S)offiberscontinuesdowntheleft(L)andright(R)branches.Thedepolarizationwaveenterstheconnectingbranch(C)frombothendsandisextinguishedatthezoneofcollision.B, A,

the branches. two between left Normally, (see moving conducted right down the single branches impulse is the the and along bundle

Fig. ). 16.23A bundle connecting the reaches link impulse the the ( As to

Fig. becomes it and 16.23C), collision. the at enters both from sides extinguished point of depolarized direction. been just from because from left the other has side the absolutely the beyond cannot refractory; impulse The is it tissue proceed the also the right bundle for through pass reason. connecting same from the impulse cannot The

Fig. branches circuit impulse block if an complete left the 16.23B bundle. cannot shows right that in fiber exists the and antegrade of the the bidirectional any in a block Also, loop point in (e.g., the at if exists R branch

Fig.

also impulse reenter. 16.23C cannot the ),

isresponsibleformanyclinicalarrhythmias(disturbancesincardiacrhythm).Thereentrymaybeorderedorrandom.Inorderedreentry,theimpulsetraversesafixedanatomicalpath,whereasinrandomreentry,thepathcontinuestochange. Incertainconditions,acardiacimpulsemayreexcitesomemyocardialregionthroughwhichithadpassedpreviously.Thisphenomenon,knownasreentry,

some in point condition the the loop one that but pass at direction reentry A for other. not necessary in in the can impulse is unidirectional called phenomenon is block. This As in shown

Fig. 16.23D impulse , down travel the may

in pathological Elements some branch. the Function branch antegrade myocardial the 16 right the of blocked that but of CHAPTER left normally cells the branch in because Cardiac direction in is in change branch impulse at of impulse conducted bundle the depressed blocked branch retrograde to been down penetrate region antegrade able The the connecting be right the though even was the that direction, connecting the then may branch and from site. the had left the this previously through in same retrograde the Why blocked the impulse impulse? antegrade is not but impulse depressed impulse region than whereas antegrade the ante-grade much at earlier length of the retrograde longer is path. the short, that The impulse arrives reason branch right impulse the the very path in is because a retrograde traverses the the region its simply blocked be during arrives the because refractory it at antegrade effective impulse may the depressed Therefore, period. back impulse is and conducted then region, in be through region the single return delayed the can this the and If affected the period retrograde may ended the refractory bundle. to impulse sufficiently, have

is a cause condition it Although necessary alone reentry. for reentry, cannot block unidirectional be loop. conduction refractory effective the occur, the of time period the to For region the reentry than must reentered around shorter In

Fig. depolarization, branch be single depressed not from bundle retrograde the , is branch. conducted impulse right the ante-grade tissue in the still if zone will into refractory just the the 16.23D the beyond are time promote Therefore, shorten period. prolong conduction that effective that the refractory those the conditions the reentry or

cardiac for specific reentry the various functional components of the of characteristics diverse. responsible are arrhythmias loops The whereas entire and Some large are bundles, others loops are microscopic. conduction involve specialized nodal myocardial loop conceivable tissues and The arrangement. fibers, any include junctional cells, may fibers, conducting in almost specialized or the be various abnormal. the may In addition, cells loop in cardiac normal

junctions a gap along fibers. fiber cardiac The multicellular that conduction is consecutive facilitated conducting lie by normally propagation between velocity the the connexins velocity gap of these in the affect fibers. in structure protein the Variations junctions along propagation can local cardiac specific can locally propagation velocity. as in can result, chemical tissues establish variations connexins vary structure the of in and, The a variations velocity include topical of that reentrant regions disturbances. might Such unidirectional block induce in rhythm

named always Triggered it preceding is is coupled action a to so activity because potential. by to arrhythmias action coupled the activity to reentrant a usually from activity preceding is induced difficult are triggered reentry. potential, those induced Because also distinguish by is which types Triggered by caused two of afterdepolarizations, •Fig. activity Afterdepolarizations Early Different of (CL) 16.24 Purkinje (EADs) in Effect a Cesium-Induced Lengths Cycle Pacing at on Fiber. EADsfirstappear(arrows). A, EADsarenotevident.B, ThethirdEADreachesthresholdandtriggersanactionpotential(third arrow). Triggeredactionpotentialsoccurinsalvos.(ModifiedfromDamianoBP,RosenM.Circulation. C, EADsthatappearaftereachdrivendepolarizationtriggeranactionpotential.D, 1984;69:1013.) early recognized: (EADs) afterdepolarizations (DADs). afterdepolarizations delayed are and occur or either of very 3), repolarization DADs repolarization repolarization the end at appear after near (phase potential or just 2) full (phase end action plateau 4). through of the EADs (phase midway approximately the may whereas

prevailing likely more slow; rate suppresses EADs EADs a the ( rate is heart are rapid heart occur to when

Fig. ). 16.24 cells prolonged in occur action than are in also cardiac shorter action with potentials. more EADs potentials cells to with likely potential in in of induced longer because ventricular action myocytes the myocytes more (see example, readily the of from epicardial of midmyocardial endocardial walls the can region EADs from the myocytes than or midmyocardial regions be For

Fig. ). 16.5 Certain drugs, quinidine, antiarrhythmic potential. as the such action prolong As increase the drugs consequence, occur. a may such likelihood that EADs Hence, drugs antiarrhythmic are also proarrhythmic. some

underliethedevelopmentofatrialfibrillation.Thismutationimpairstheassemblyofgapjunctionsinmyocytesandthereforereduceselectricalcouplingofthecells,asdescribedbyGollobMHandcolleagues(2006). Insomecases,mutationsintheconnexin40gene(GJA5)

calcium is channels recover EADs cell’s between duration its action correlation time membranes in a to the related to required cell inactivation. direct and potential susceptibility to from The for the channels action be time before are may calcium repolarizes. to that have When activated were recover sufficient fully potentials plateau beginning from the the prolonged, sufficiently reactivated cell of inactivation the and at thus the secondary activation This EAD. trigger an could then

pointes. ThepathologicalsignificanceofEADswasrecognizedinconnectionwiththecongenitalanddrug-inducedlongQTsyndrome.Astheactionpotentiallengthens,EADsoccurandcausetriggeredautomaticity.Intheelectrocardiogram,thisproblemismanifestedaspolymorphicventriculartachycardia,alsocalledtorsades de Episodesoftorsadesdepointescanbeself-limitedbutmayprogresstoventricularfibrillationandsuddendeath.Hypokalemiaandbradycardia(see

areclinicalhallmarksofthiscondition.RestoringextracellularK+ Fig.16.24) tonormallevelsandincreasingheartratearetwoapproachesusedtoovercomethepropensityfordevelopmentoftorsadesdepointes.

high when to DADs (Fig. more rate are is likely the to contrast In occur EADs, heart 16.25 ). are intracellular elevated [Ca++]. with DADs associated administering of that [Ca++], amounts extracellular [Ca++] and The by digitalis intracellular as are interventions DADs toxic increasing of increased glycosides. raise amplitudes such Ca++ release the reticulum. of from Ca++ elevated of provoke oscillatory levels intracellular the The sarcoplasmic cells, in are in Hence, the myocardial force by developed. rhythmic small accompanied changes DADs allow intracellular K+ activates Na+ channels membrane the high . passage of and also certain The [Ca++] that constitutes cations DADs. of current the inward The these to transient a of appearance (iti), that flux net contributes may intracellular elevated the The [Ca++] 3Na+-Ca++ activate also antiporter. ion three electrogenic contributes cation moves also which creates the releases, the ions net Ca++ Na+ appearance that DADs. it into inward that This of a for cell current each antiporter, to

the The infer to electrical surface potential loci by impulses at various on recording variations cardiac enables of electrical ECG the in of the physicians body. course the effects in ischemic into (3) of extent, the the the progress and analyzing relative in orientation conduction; (2) the disturbances potential, By of details various sizes physician insight anatomical •Fig. its the (5) of location, myocardium; these of (4) rhythm valuable electrical the gains heart; chambers; and (1) the damage to the fluctuations of Action Purkinje Recorded Potentials From 16.25 Fibers. Transmembrane toD. and500(D) 600(C), 700(B), Acetylstrophanthidin,adigitalisglycoside,wasaddedtothebath,andsequencesofsixdrivenbeats(denotedbythedots)wereeachproducedatabasiccyclelength(BCL)of800(A), msec.NotethatdelayedafterpotentialsoccurredafterthedrivenbeatsandthattheseafterpotentialsreachedthresholdafterthelastdrivenbeatinB Res. (FromFerrierGR,etal.Circ 1973;32:600.) altered antagonists). agents, electrolyte the antiarrhythmic and influence (6) certain of calcium and (notably channel concentrations; drugs digitalis, in considered this and is electrocardiography Because the complex elementary discipline, extensive principles are only section. an

ST QT •Fig. 0.1 P R T P-R Q S sec QRS 16.26 Importantdeflectionsandintervalsofatypicalscalarelectrocardiogram.

the heart. activity is a a that In of skin patient’s from to electrocardiography, (electrocardiograph) the lead connection measures electrical the the recording electrical device planes is of in of the body. The ECGs leads used routine certain system record oriented to by represented vector at be events three-dimensional (a in direction). quantity magnitude The that heart exist electrical can moment with diverse and a the any three-dimensional system that vector given oriented detects only of A of plane. the a plane the leads on projection in recording leads. electrodes represents the on vector line two of the recording potential two between difference the between projection the The on direction). (having scalar but projected quantities lines vectors such vectors are but Components not magnitude not of potential over called in ECG. is points in of Hence, two difference skin between recording time surface a the on changes the scalar a

surface. electrode of or point of A an skin temporal and indifferent pairs electrical between between the skin the potential surface on ECG on in detects the points changes scalar the some through a in complex progresses the pattern. three-dimensional impulse cardiac The heart the the ECG given precise individual, any individual, pattern of to and with Hence, of in varies leads. individual the from varies configuration the anatomical location the graphic The called an electrical of ECG impulse recorded in a display the is tracing.

general, a QRS, consists tracing T and P, waves In of (

Fig. 16.26). the the T depolarization atria The of through complex) is reflects depolarization ventricular of (repolarization and atria, reflects wave the therefore during wave QRS represents occurs, the (or the ventricles, spread the the depolarization). and ventricles masked, of P repolarization of wave (or of normally The of PQ the the of it time activation ventricular is PR onset measure a 0.12 to activation; ranges from atrial onset interval more interval) to the 0.20 precisely, the from second. large A time conduction system. fraction impulse involves of this through passage the of the AV PR are prolongations interval disturbances Pathological in conduction. AV of the with associated produced neuronal inflammatory, or pharmacological, by mechanisms. be Such circulatory, disturbances may

the considerably The of and vary amplitude complex QRS among individuals. configuration 0.06 The second. is usually between 0.10 duration and ventricles normal block of branch). QRS may pathways the indicate right prolonged in left the complex a or conduction An block the as bundle (such through abnormally a the ST the myocardium During is entire interval, ventricular depolarized. normally ST segment the lies Therefore, isoelectric line. on the appreciable may myocardium. segment isoelectric deviation to indicate from ST the damage ischemic the the line of Any the “electrical to duration the interval, QT closely with The correlated as of the ventricles, is systole” potential mean ventricular sometimes myocytes. period of the of action referred duration approximately the with the The inversely cell’s (see QT it rate, varies rate with varies but heart inversely of 0.4 duration because is myocardial potential heart of second, the interval the the mainly action

Fig. 16.16

T the waves In directed) component the perfectly complex, isoelectric from biphasic direction in (i.e., is are the most as leads. QRS normal in leads, although major deflected the certain the of line oppositely T wave same the indicates to complex of depolarization of process. in same the direction Deviation repolarization QRS and that the the process from T is a proceeding in isoelectric that direction counter wave line the direction are amplitude damage, or indicate in abnormal may or disturbances, in hypertrophy. that T cardiac either electrolyte waves myocardial

The 20th at ECG century. Einthoven by beginning of lead the was Willem devised original system the In system, activity called vector of moment cardiac vector. is any the resultant at electrical this all sum cardiac the located apices ( left considered pubic an lie directional equilateral to This electrical whose in triangle force and the shoulders region in the is of and the center are right

Fig. ). 16.27 the called Einthoven’s the oriented is This in plane frontal body. of triangle, triangle, projection cardiac plane system detected is vector frontal the leads. Hence, resultant the only the of on this of by simple arms shoulders. to the the than of represent right and For the rather electrical corresponding leads convenience, forearms connected the extensions the because electrodes from left are shoulders to the generally from lead thus the to represents is the third the of one). pubis, connected electrode (usually Similarly, and the an left extension an ankle system leg

leads in the dictate electrocardiograph. limb are manner to connected these which standard Certain the conventions potential the between right arm. the arm the Lead difference records and left I connections are the such •Fig. when that The 16.27 Einthoven’striangle,illustratingtheelectrocardiographicconnectionsforstandardlimbleadsI,II,andIII.

the deflected isoelectric upward at from left exceeds line. the the right the is arm (VLA) arm (VRA), potential tracing the potential at In

Fig. 16.27

Fig. sign arrangement minus of , arm by connections is the and by for lead this left designated at 16.28 arm. a at sign plus I the a right deflected and the (VLL) records at when potential and the left VRA. exceeds tracing the potential right leg arm left the between Lead the leg, II difference is upward the VLL the VLA. potential exceeds the lead when and Finally, upward is tracing difference between III left the the leg, deflected arm registers left and arbitrarily that standard all normal These were complexes most upright chosen limb so three the QRS individuals. in in connections are leads

head an of arrow frontal moment positive), projection in a by If (tail vector negative, is the resultant some at as cardiac represented

Fig. difference, , the projected the right component horizontal lead I 16.27 shown arm of in line the potential represented VLA along is and arm, left also between the the vector VRA, − by recorded the in

Fig. 16.27 . makes with line the (as degrees If horizontal angle the an (θ) vector 60 of in

Fig. to the recorded 16.28A), than upward arm. arm positive lead lies right to left the is because arrowhead deflection I closer the the in arrowhead than closer The leg also left deflection because is •Fig. lead in the upright II lies the to MagnitudeanddirectionoftheQRScomplexesinlimbleadsI,II,andIIIwhenthemeanelectricalaxis(θ)is60degrees(A), 120degrees(B), 16.28 and0degrees(C).

to right arm. the greater exceeds direction lead lead II; lead deflection II lead that this the that than I. magnitude example, parallels II in is of I that of projection on because the therefore, the of vector in lead of The on the the magnitude is magnitude lead equals III, lead upright that I. Similarly, its in and deflection the in

vector If the in

Fig. orientation this of in peak mean the result the electrical electrical events of axis that represent heart plane. the the the 16.27A complex, during to said of is occur frontal the is of the QRS vector plane from direction horizontal the positive to this the in is clockwise the convention). rotatory direction assumed usual mathematical of to be (contrary The axis individuals, degrees electrical average approximately In the axis normal is (as mean +60 in

Fig. 16.28A ). are leads usually II. in and QRS three lead complexes in upright Therefore, largest all

electrical If the right (as to axis shifts in mean substantially the

Fig. the which 120 complexes 16.28B the θ= degrees), leads change , in on of considerably. QRS projections standard to the right I lead III, the in deflection in largest arm to inverted the arrowhead is this and arm. the deflection closer the upright because case, left lead In is than is axis shift a hypertrophy thickness) Such deviation (i.e., occurs right is termed with increased the right ventricle. and of left When ventricle (see as the the to axis shifts occurs of hypertrophy left, the with

Fig. 0 in upright and in lead complex is III inverted. I, degrees), 16.28C the , where is lead deflection θ= the QRS largest

I, that in In in oriented other leads are plane patients. and frontal limb routinely leads are limb III, recorded II, to also the addition are the is is leads for arm left defined negative is positive which lead (2) negative leads arm is (foot) lead (i.e., the which the arm connected which the lead the as aVL, and together). and aVR, of the connected the positive two middle defined as connected defined middle lead negative lead and arm together); middle the positive left (3) as together); are the right are heart and for and the defined the (1) ankle of (i.e., heart as heart of arm as are is the aVF, leads right the and the defined the the ankle the These lead leads for is ankle (i.e., horizontal respect −150 degrees and for (all the aVF, these for +90 degrees The aVL, of to axis). for axes −30 aVR form leads angles degrees with of

vector to surface body. the can the to on of determine the be applied projections the also the planes the transverse and of leads, chest, sagittal of cardiac precordial Leads so-called recorded points surfaces the from the vicinity These are on leads selected of and the in six anterior the chest of precordial lateral heart. to the line) border extend V1) left the (lead in the leads the in arm V6). from fifth sternum the (midaxillary intercostal of The fourth (lead space space under right intercostal as lead, the Each as a defined (V1 V6) to is the the positive of defined whereas middle precordial negative is lead heart lead. various of the described, lead as of ECG, just beyond the is systems detected book. scope Detailed this by analysis the are students on to for electrocardiography Interested referred more textbooks information.

Changesinthemeanelectricalaxismayoccuriftheanatomicalpositionoftheheartisalteredoriftherelativemassoftherightandleftventriclesisabnormal,asitisincertaincardiovasculardisturbances.Forexample,theaxistendstoshifttowardtheleft(morehorizontal)inshort,stockyindividualsandtowardtheright(morevertical)intall,thinpersons.Inaddition,inleftorrightventricularhypertrophy(increasedmyocardialmassofeitherventricle),theaxisshiftstowardthehypertrophiedside.

or propagation. Cardiac are either in initiation impulse arrhythmias disturbances impulse initiation node in impulse •Fig. the from arise and Disturbances that include those SA Electrocardiographic Rhythms. 16.29 of Heart Tracings Sinus Sinusbradycardia. A, Normalsinusrhythm.B, tachycardia.C,

ectopic foci. that from those various originate are impulse propagation reentrant blocks. principal in The disturbances rhythms and conduction

of cells Mechanisms pacemaker firing were the that cardiac frequency vary previously. described of nerves. rate are the the produced node firing usually Changes SA in autonomic by cardiac node of also When is rate the the rate SA (bradycardia). heart decreased, firing decreases the (tachycardia). in results Conversely, firing heart increased the rate elevation of node SA shown and bradycardia in sinus sinus ECGs are tachycardia Examples of of

Fig. 16.29 . duration and cardiac The deflections are cycle but of T normal, PP is QRS, (the P, altered. the interval) all characteristically gradual. cardiac in changes frequency are The interval frequency of a arrhythmia) respiratory respiratory the variation rhythmic is the occurrence A common PP sinus (i.e., (see at a normal,

Fig. 18.7

Various pathological an can pharmacological, physiological, impede of processes through transmission node. AV and the impulse site His be the bundle (Fig. localized of of can The electrocardiogram by more precisely block an

16.30 ). centrally an right into until heart and a tracings, lies advanced is electrode peripheral the catheter obtain side the region. the such To junctional electrode of into inserted AV in vein the When a is deflection electrode distinct properly in (H positioned, the

Fig. 16.30 the impulse of the His. through is as passes bundle cardiac registered ) may the interval) from required and intervals The His His ventricles the measured of time bundle to atrium to of the bundle for the (His-to-ventricle propagation accurately. be from respectively. below interval of block bundle the His, indicates above atrium-to-His the or Abnormal of His-to-ventricle prolongation or

in most certain depolarizations conditions. arise abnormal commonly occur but in occasionally individuals, more Premature normal they AV originate may junction, the ventricles. depolarizations or in Such atria, One coupling at of conducted constant a interval a type interval). depolarization time normally premature follows depolarization (the suppressed is If way premature in stimulation), the normal some by abolished. (e.g., depolarization also depolarization is vagal the extrasystoles, and are premature they extrasystoles, called Such or coupled depolarizations simply

P •Fig. T V H 0.2 A QRS sec tracing). tracing, 16.30 ElectrocardiogramoftheHisbundle(lower retouched)andleadIIrecordingofthescalarelectrocardiogram(upper andtheventricular(V)deflections.TheconductiontimefromtheatriatothebundleofHisisdenotedbytheA-Hinterval;thatfromthebundleofHistotheventricles,bytheH-Vinterval. ThedeflectionH,whichrepresentsconductionoftheimpulseoverthebundleofHis,isclearlyvisiblebetweentheatrial (CourtesyofDr.

J.

Edelstein.)

ThreedegreesofAVblockcanbedistinguished,asshownin

3:2).ThesiteofblockmaybelocatedaboveorbelowtheHisbundle.Ablockbelowthebundleisusuallymoreseriousthanoneabovethebundlebecausetheformerismorelikelytoevolveintoathird-degreeblock.Anartificialpacemakerisfrequentlyimplantedwhentheblockisbelowthebundle.Third-degreeAVblockisoftenreferredtoascomplete block heart Fig.16.31 becausetheimpulseiscompletelyunabletotraversetheAVconductionpathwayfromatriatoventricles.ThemostcommonsitesofcompleteblockaredistaltothebundleofHis.Incompleteheartblock,theatrialandventricularrhythmsareentirelyindependent.Becauseoftheslowventricularrhythmthatresults,thevolumeofbloodpumpedbytheheartisofteninadequate,especiallyduringmuscularexercise.Third-degreeblockisfrequentlyassociatedwithsyncope(pronouncedlightheadedness),whichiscausedprincipallybyinsufficientcerebralbloodflow.Third-degreeblockisoneofthemostcommonconditionsthatnecessitatetheimplantationofartificialpacemakers. .First-degreeAVblockischaracterizedbyaprolongedPRinterval.Inmostcasesoffirst-degreeblock,theatrium-to-HisintervalisprolongedandtheHis-toventricleintervalisnormal.Hence,thedelayinafirst-degreeAVblockislocatedabovetheHisbundle(i.e.,intheAVnode).Insecond-degreeAVblock,allQRScomplexesareprecededbyPwaves,butnotallPwavesarefollowedbyQRScomplexes.TheratioofPwavestoQRScomplexesisusuallytheratiooftwosmallintegers(suchas2:1,3:1,or

•Fig. Atrioventricular 16.31 (AV) Blocks. Second-degreeblock(ratioofPwavestoQRScomplexes,2:1).C, Third-degreeblock;notethedissociationbetweenthePwavesandtheQRScomplexes. First-degreeblock;thePRintervalis0.28second(normal, A, <0.20sec).B,

•Fig. Premature Depolarization. Atrial Premature and 16.32 Ventricular Depolarization secondbeat)ischaracterizedbyaninvertedPwave(justbelowthesecond“P”)andnormalQRScomplexesandTwaves.Theintervalaftertheprematureatrialdepolarizationisnotmuchlongerthantheusualintervalbetweenbeats.Thebriefrectangulardeflectionjustbeforethelastatrialdepolarizationisastandardizationsignal.Theprematureventriculardepolarization(B) ischaracterizedbybizarre,invertedQRScomplexesandelevatedTwavesandisfollowedbyacompensatorypause. Theprematureatrialdepolarization(A;

phenomenon. generally a reentry reflect enhanced depolarization result of type the of automaticity second premature A focus. some as ectopic in occurs zone impulse. and unidirectionally may fire being the protect center may from conducts cardiac that depolarized ectopic a This center regularly, normal by this of tissue parasystole. of regular a depolarization interval, premature multiple interval this occurs at called that disturbance is If integral an at or the

is tracing depolarization of in atrial premature a A shown

Fig. 16.32A . With shortened. normal is interval atrial beats between premature the depolarization, a differs waves at normal which the other of spread node. the the ectopic of originates the differs normal of excitation, In of wave some focus from which from premature SA addition, in originates configuration at P because that P course atrium, the excitation, the the atrial premature The usual spreads complex ventricular the generally is the QRS excitation because normal the of depolarization pathways. over

depolarization shown premature of is ventricular a A tracing in

Fig. 16.32B . at wave configuration originates Propagation QRS focus different ventricles. impulse complex the and the ventricular entirely some T abnormal, the the is and premature from of ectopic deflections normal in the because excitation the is of between the and whereas the the preceding QRS a interval QRS normal complex complex time prolonged shortened, is pause. complex QRS the QRS premature and is after next the The interval by compensatory complex normal premature cycles. after QRS to the the is complex just excitation to the premature the normal duration from cardiac The of before virtually complex it QRS two just interval equal

•Fig. ventriculartachycardia;Pwavesnotreadilyobserved. 16.33 supraventriculartachycardia;PwavesprecedeeachQRScomplex.B, Paroxysmaltachycardias.A,

ventricular noted, pause usually a premature follows As a compensatory depolarization. ectopic of pause occurs the disturb rhythm the does because impulse ventricular not This node. SA the natural not possible had the reasons conducted two interval prematurely. it system, There fired natural are impulse ectopic the conduction direction its through or ectopic a depolarized the retrograde SA node before impulse reached The and AV could this: already for have is ventricular in at from the Likewise, because or excitation. AV ventricular the junction the the nodal ventricles affect ventricle after perhaps before refractory also does still SA and premature extrasystole the the are generally generated ventricular impulse not just

Fig.16.33A supraventricular tachycardia )areusuallyindistinguishable,andthereforethetermparoxysmal referstobothtypes.Inthistachycardia,theimpulseoftencirclesareentryloopthatincludesatrialandAVjunctionaltissue.TheQRScomplexesarefrequentlynormalbecauseventricularactivationproceedsovertheusualpathways.Asitsnameimplies,paroxysmalventriculartachycardiaoriginatesfromanectopicfocusintheventricles.TheECGischaracterizedbyrepeatedbizarreQRScomplexesthatreflecttheabnormalintraventricularimpulseconduction(see

Fig.16.33B ).Paroxysmalventriculartachycardiaismuchmoreominousthansupraventriculartachycardiabecausetheformerisfrequentlyaprecursorofventricularfibrillation,alethalarrhythmiadescribedinthenextsection.

characterize tachycardia, from the contrast to and In focus changes begin that ectopic typically rate tachycardias end an sinus abruptly. gradual originate that generally Such paroxysmal called are ectopic tachycardias. tachycardias for tachycardia of only and or hours beats may days, or recur. Episodes persist often for paroxysmal a few many episodes (1) (2) activity that that secondary triggered ectopic or threshold, impulse an repetitively. loop a firing may from to rapid pacemaker, reach tachycardias result an circles (3) Paroxysmal reentry afterpotentials of

that undergoes in muscle Under is an conditions, cardiac ineffectual irregular certain blood. contraction propelling type of disturbance ventricles. an the either fibrillation, Such the may termed involve arrhythmia is or and atria the in represents probably a which phenomenon the into reentry reentry Fibrillation fragments loop circuits. irregular multiple,

in are shown electrocardiographic atrial The fibrillation changes in

Fig. . 16.34A in heart arrhythmia This occurs chronic types various disease. of atria during filling. contribute and they sequentially to do do and cardiac each not ventricular contract relax not thus The cycle, uncoordinated atria undergo a continuous, motion. rippling Instead, the the appear the irregular in tracing P not fluctuations continuous shows ECG; instead, f waves on potential waves. called do is The activated at cycle. considerably cycle AV from vary intervals node may that to contractions. occurs constant no successive successive Hence, between between ventricular or complexes QRS interval ventricular rhythm and between irregular. the (see contraction interval of beats the are depends Because pulse the the volume on ), strength of the of regular reentry In pattern conduction than atrial many and loop they the fibrillation. more in affected atrial AV are patients, are The as is to referred flutter. rhythm atrial then

•Fig. 16.34 Atrial(A)andventricular(B)fibrillation.

Atrialfibrillationandflutterarenotusuallylife-threatening;somepeoplewiththesedisturbancescanfunctionnormally.However,becausetheatriadonotcontractandrelaxrhythmically,bloodclotstendtoformintheatria.Suchclots,ifdislodged,maythentraveltothepulmonaryorsystemicvascularbeds.Patientswithatrialfibrillationorflutteraregenerallytreatedwithanticoagulantdrugssuchasdicumaroltopreventtheformationofsuchclots.Ventricularfibrillation,incontrast,leadstolossofconsciousnesswithinafewseconds.Theirregular,continuous,uncoordinatedtwitchingoftheventricularmusclefiberspumpsnoblood.Deathensuesunlessimmediateresuscitationisachievedortherhythmspontaneouslyrevertstonormal,whichrarelyoccurs.Ventricularfibrillationmaysupervenewhentheentireventricle,orsomeportionofit,isdeprivedofitsnormalbloodsupply.Itmayalsooccurasaresultofelectrocutionorinresponsetocertaindrugsandanesthetics.OntheECG(see

Fig.16.34B ),thefluctuationsinpotentialarehighlyirregular.

cycle. fibrillation cardiac the is when during impulse a the initiated period vulnerable Ventricular of often premature arrives downslope with T the ECG. This on the coincides the period wave of During of period, cells excitability cardiac the this varies spatially. their periods, fully effective able their velocities. excitability, and fibers others still are refractory conduction conduct recovered impulses, very have at only to in are slow others almost but still Some circuitous various are many along the at action As over chambers in a travel potentials conduction velocities. that and propagated irregular paths consequence, wavelets the traveling cells ultimately wave fronts the excitable by is around of cardiac As it the again, activated one a region of chamber. becomes Hence, is the process self-sustaining.

•Fig. 16.35 andfromapatientwithlongQTsyndrome(B). Electrocardiogramsrecordedfromanormalsubject(A) 1 R R Q P PT SQ T sec. S T R P Q S Long A Normal R QT P B SQ

Insomeindividuals,theintervalbetweentheQRScomplexandtheTwaveisabnormallyprolonged,aconditiontermedlong ).SeveralcongenitalformsoflongQTsyndromehavebeenidentifiedinhumansubjects.TwoofthemanygenesthathavebeenidentifiedasabasisforthissyndromearetheHERG gene(aNa+ gene),locatedonchromosome3.PatientswithcongenitalformsoflongQTsyndromemayhaveperiodicepisodesofsyncope(fainting),andapproximately10%ofpediatricsubjectswiththisdisordermaydiesuddenly,withoutanyprecedingsymptoms.Insomeindividualswithsilentionchannelmutations,longQTsyndromemaynotbeevidentuntiladrugistakenthataffectstheionchannelinvolved.Manydrugs,includingseveralantiarrhythmicagents,havebeenidentifiedascausingacquiredlongQTsyndrome. gene(aK+ channelgene),locatedonchromosome7,andtheSCN5A QT syndrome (Fig.16.35

drugs changed by prolong may that sinus period. normal the rhythm be fibrillation a to refractory Atrial the impulse loop, myocardial it then reentry may As fibers. refractory completes cardiac encounter the used to fibrillation drugs, correct electrical be respond this may not adequately to does When atrial defibrillation condition.

for fibrillation. therapy is required ventricular Dramatic state. a current a a briefly accomplished entire that is by means strong electrical to the of sinus in normal refractory rhythm myocardium places Conversion the Techniques developed current administer intact wall. to through the been have safely chest node function the heart. for In again over successful SA cases, pacemaker entire normal the the takes

Cardiac Pump The

of is the over The lifetime performed amount by an great heart individual’s impressive. work useful A way to

Implantablecardioverter-defibrillator(ICD)deviceshavebeendevelopedtopreventdeathinpatientsinwhomeitherventricularfibrillationorparoxysmalventriculartachycardiahassuddenlydeveloped.Theformerislethalunlessitistreatedimmediately,andthelatteroftenleadstoventricularfibrillationandsuddendeath.TheICDdeviceisimplantedsubcutaneouslyintheleftsubclavicularregionofthechestwall.Atrialandventricularleadsenablerecordingoftherightatrialandrightventricularelectrocardiogramsandprovidetheabilityforrightatrialorrightventricularpacing,orboth.Thedefibrillationcoilintherightventricleenablestheapplicationofastrongelectricalcurrenttotheventricleandtherebyusuallyterminatesthelethalarrhythmia.

structure components. is consider to between function the relationships understand the heart the its how important task accomplishes and of its

Relationship Function to Heart Structure of

Cell Myocardial ). The that both and mechanism). contractile sliding result and of their arrangement result a Of proteins of of muscle of fiber as the generation are myosin, occur contraction a as is filament striated force actin importance and (i.e., interactions regular of

muscle relationships. show cardiac and length-force similar Skeletal muscle the relationship , As graphically, expressed in be shown this for as may in heart

Fig.

substituting for ventricular end-diastolic volume by resting 16.36, pressure hence and sarcomere) ventricular fiber force length. myocardial (and for systolic curve The lower in

Fig.

when in represents 16.36 in heart by increment pressure each in increment is produced diastole. the the volume curve by fiber function The a (or or ventricle peak represents upper the length force developed the diastolic pressure pressure). systole as filling during initial of the heart. curve illustrates the Frank-Starling of law This

accommodated increases curve only large pressure. can diastole which increases quite small initially be pressure-volume during The that in flat volume is with in indicates (compliant), contrast, of considerable systolic the In is development pressure pressures. lower filling at the large with diastolic curve filling, the becomes intraventricular rise evidenced volumes. as much greater sharp ventricle in However, less the pressure by at distensible the

heart, force at a mm peak a be filling approximately In normal intact of may attained pressure 12 Hg. diastolic upper heart, At pressure, near resting the a length its which this limit 2.2 observed in is near is µm. intraventricular normal of sarcomere length as high force pressures the causes peak filling to Hg. 30 However, mm as sarcomere than pressures mm even higher is diastolic Hg), At length (>50 µm. no greater 2.6 and resist factor of heart stretch the the as overloading (connective ability may of heart filling to diastole. in tissue), myocardium a it noncontractile the safety against probably high constituents This pressures of at the tissue serve in resides to diastolic and is 7 average µm. the length Usually, 2.2 pressure Hg, sarcomere is mm approximately approximately 0 ventricular diastolic of the curve, Thus ascending as portion the normal in depicted Frank-Starling heart on a operates

Fig. •Fig. 16.36 16.36 Relationshipofmyocardialrestingfiberlength(sarco-merelength)orend-diastolicvolumetotheforcedevelopedorpeaksystolicventricularpressureduringventricularcontractioninanintactheart. (RedrawnfromPattersonSW,etal.J Physiol. 1914;48:465.)

to a is, any of muscle applied syncytium; as functions a entire stimulus the Cardiac muscle cardiac that in contraction part of the results muscle. from to one cells in cell facilitate conductance and between next. cardiac Gap adjacent present are high of the impulse the junctions the intercalated disks conduction with

must Cardiac muscle a continuous it of requires and contract hence a lifetime, supply for repetitively O2. therefore muscle very Cardiac rich mitochondria. is in mitochondria of large number The (see

Fig. 13.1

rapid allows energy thus and have ATP oxidation for substrates the requirements. necessary myocardial B), and oxidative enzymes of of sustains the phosphorylation, which synthesis

of Elements Function Cardiac 16 CHAPTER

one per supply, with is rich substrate for provide myocardium also a and O2 metabolic machinery, the its fiber. approximately capillary To capillary endowed adequate are short, and capillary. material myocardial Thus O2, can distances waste move rapidly and between substrates, CO2, cell the and diffusion myocardial described blood coupling). between participates system this in system cells tubule also role excitation-contraction later, T (as The key the and transverse a capillary in (T) plays within tubular cells substances of exchange myocardial developed T system of mammals. cells in The or many poorly the is tubular absent atrial

of muscle. and in isolated earliest , fluid cardiac studies that the , indicated necessary K+ of concentrations extracellular contraction hearts are of Ca++ on Na+ Results optimal for heart excitable Na+ Without not and is the not , beat. does As membrane is extracellular potential [Na+] independent described, extracellular already the but the gradient on [K+]. very resting across of dependent membrane much the to cells, myocardial of quickly, of increases or extracellular especially they if can occur Decreases arrest. are loss lead even and the excitability large cardiac [K+], arrhythmias, or in contraction. also for essential Ca++ cardiac is decreased from Removal extracellular in the eventual of Ca++ force results in diastole. arrest fluid contractile and systole cardiac [Ca++] very arrest extracellular contractile (rigor). and Conversely, increase extracellular induces force, enhances in high [Ca++] in an responsible principally the for contractile state the [Ca++] factor of free The the is intracellular myocardium.

cardiac excitation-contraction (see myocyte to contraction The the process coupling also termed is action of leads the by potential which

Chapter 13). via a myocardial excited spreads gap cell the to Cardiac excitation of along rapidly sarcolemma muscle wave when cell from is junctions. the T at of invaginate the also cells Z which Excitation cardiac into spreads fibers interior the the lines. via tubules, the stimulation the (whose line skinned lines removed) cardiac to Electrical myofibrils. localized the the of at elicits Ca++ or sarcolemma is a fiber Z adjacent in Z of application the contraction the Ca++ 2) by sarcolemma plateau permeability of increases. (phase the potential, action During the of and electrochemical channels tubules. the in through down Ca++ the enters cell calcium and T its the flows in gradient sarcolemma

the action Ca++ During the potential, cell enters channels calcium (L-type). via cell not the myofibrils. However, Ca++ enters of contraction the fluid sufficient induce the the is that from amount to of interior interstitial extracellular/ Ca++ Instead, acts a Ca++) the where release from intracellular is the (see it to trigger reticulum, sarcoplasmic stored Ca++ (trigger as

Fig. 13.2 ). which the ryanodine through channels, called are the release because binds Ca++ sarcoplasmic receptors leaves avidly. reticulum ryanodine channel protein Ca++ approximately 10−5 level Cytoplasmic levels resting from to approximately of excitation. mol increases 10−7 [Ca++] during mol a of Ca++–troponin the troponin with active binds filaments. protein unblock myosin tropomyosin complex Ca++ then to to C interacts and the This C. actin sites between The This and myofibrils. unblocking cross-bridge hence initiates contraction the cycling of

decrease force those cytosolic that and [Ca++] cytosolic increase the force raise that developed. lower the Mechanisms [Ca++] developed, kinase example, (see catecholamines protein of Ca++ cAMP-dependent by channels For calcium the cell the sarcolemmal of phosphorylation a increase into via the movement

Fig. 13.4). and sarcoplasmic more release force turn contractile causes Ca++ from result, the as in increases. of reticulum, a the This force the the as calcium channels increases increases [Ca++] Increasing that and extracellular cell amount just described. Ca++ thereby of via contractile enters the the normally 3Na+-Ca++ Reducing an gradient mediated Na+ the the sarcolemma contractile effect that across by Ca++ force, increases cell extrudes the from also (see antiporter

Fig. ). 13.2 causes less Ca++ intracellular exchange , in the thus for Na+ enter force. contractile cell which For results reducing extracellular to and in [Na+] in increase an [Ca++] example, a has Raising [Na+] intracellular similar effect. is by this cardiac the glycosides force. fact, In increase mechanism contractile which the raise intracellular cells. in Cardiac [Na+] thereby and glycosides Na+,K+-ATPase inhibit of direction is from 3Na+-Ca++ [Na+] reverses and cell. therefore less Ca++ The the the removed the elevated cytosolic antiporter, in in contractile intracellular results in [Ca++] force. increase an The increase in contractile by increase that diminished intracellular entering [Ca++] [Ca++], is by by Na+ cell. antagonist gradient administration force the is reduction when a channel Finally, of myocardial sarcolemma, a the an across in the calcium Ca++ extracellular or the prevents from decreased

and the . Ca++ is the influx of Ca++ end reticulum At the to release no of systole, longer stimulated sarcoplasmic stops, fact, means Ca++ takes avidly sarcoplasmic Ca++-ATPase. reticulum the of up In by sarcolemma. is the distinct sarcoplasmic the reticulum but The in to found from the in Ca++-ATPase Ca++-ATPase similar a in well by the during the diastole as also of reduced (see Ca++-ATPase is Cytosolic sarcolemmal the [Ca++] antiporter 3Na+-Ca++ sarcolemma, through as action

Fig. 13.2

contraction and by Both (see catecholamines are accelerated cardiac relaxation

Fig. 13.3 ). then activated, intracellular cAMP receptor their leads to is thereby When adenylate cAMP-dependent (β1-adrenoceptor), increasing to activation A. levels, bind kinase cyclase which catecholamines of protein cell. A effects in kinase has the multiple Protein contraction. entry phosphorylates Ca++ thus sarcolemma calcium increasing channel increased the the force described, cell, and the of the of into As causes already in it addition, kinase phosphorylates protein relaxation. A that other facilitate In proteins is One phospholamban. such protein the the normally Phospholamban of inhibits reticulum. sarcoplasmic Ca++-ATPase phospholamban action inhibitory is when the reticulum and sarcoplasmic phosphorylated, into is its is However, Ca++ uptake enhanced. reduced, of increased reticulum [Ca++], intracellular the relaxation. thereby The the causing Ca++-ATPase sarcoplasmic decreases in activity of actin by myosin-binding result, binding also and relaxation Protein the position inhibits I, of the a troponin blocking C. As results. kinase Ca++ to tropomyosin of A sites troponin phosphorylates in which turn its on returns filaments,

afterload is cardiac both of influenced muscle ( and preload by Contraction

Fig. 16.37 ). resting length Preload stretches muscle (see that the fibers, increasing force relaxed the is their thereby

Fig. 16.37B ). the the In wall preload. the ventricle, represents for of and blood during left example, diastole thus filling the stretching the (see added the Afterload to force is the muscle

Fig. which against ) act muscle (see 16.37C must contracting the

Fig. ). 16.37D Again aortic muscle ventricle, contracting the the eject blood. ventricular the the must the to by left from open the of the and valve afterload in pressure is aorta overcome left that be perspective

of left ventricle can the Preload greater volume). by be end-diastolic increasing filling (i.e., increased diastole during From pressure filling volumes, a the resting subsequent fiber contraction (see greater pressure and elicit initial during length lower increments in end-diastolic systolic diastole increase during

Fig. ). 16.36 increases Systolic pressure is until reached a the (see pressure preload optimal maximal at systolic

Fig. 16.36 ). no developed filling will this pressure the increase. longer point, beyond diastolic If continues is development filling pressure high At very actually pressures, in peak reduced. systole

by increasing of the (e.g., pressure increase arterial preload, by be in blood a restricting ventricular to contractions periphery). afterload aortic pressure higher can the runoff At systolic during constant an reached the afterload peak progressively higher systolic in produce increases Incremental pressures. to increase, ventricle if great longer becomes no to enough that it force continues can However, the generate aortic afterload the so the open valve. totally blood), there occurs ejection is At systole ventricular in is point, this isometric (i.e., during volume ventricular thus change no systole. no and of conditions maximal of a at pressure maximal left The generating these capable ventricle the that preload. is isometric ventricle developed force the under the given by is (see yield in volume, increase filling maximal can isometric below optimal an preload the preloads force At greater

Fig. 16.36

the of and of and Preload the certain the heart. behavior depend characteristics vascular on afterload system resistance venomotor and influences of peripheral the afterload. regard With tone and to vasculature, preload degree the alter and regard the rate heart, preload or also to in With stroke afterload. a change can volume cardiac •Fig. and Hence, and a Muscle. 16.37 in Papillary Afterload Preload AL,totalload. Supportedpreloadplusafterload(AL)intheintactheartjustbeforeopeningoftheaorticvalve.D, Restingstage(noload)intheintactheartjustbeforeopeningoftheAVvalves.B, Liftingpreloadplusafterloadintheintactheartduringventricularejection,withadecreaseinventricularvolume.PL+ A, Preload(PL)intheintactheartattheendofventricularfilling.C,

vascular preload to other interact affect (see factors each with and afterload

cardiac Contractility afterload. and a given defines at preload performance fiber initial given pressure) peak volume). a force the Contractility at (end-diastolic (isovolumic length determines change isometric in or an digitalis, drugs, in frequency such norepinephrine contraction or as can Contractility be increase (tachycardia). by augmented by produced of velocity The reflected is developed in inotropic these (positive contractility effect) force increase by and interventions the by contraction. in incremental in the increases

Indices of Contractility

pressure be of A ventricular myocardial index from of derived contractility ( can contour reasonable curves the

Fig. ). 16.38 a somewhat and in slowly heart ventricular A (curve C pressure, characterized is reduced rising phase elevated hypodynamic ejection pressure, by end-diastolic

Fig. 16.38 ). A B (curve hyperdynamic heart in

Fig.

by reduced a ) 16.38 is brief characterized pressure, phase. fast-rising ventricular pressure, ejection and end-diastolic ascending the development of maximal curve force The of slope the indicates rate of ventricular limb the the pressure ventricle. by tangents curves portion pressure limbs the pressure The steepest with by the illustrated time—that in maximum ascending ventricular change of rate dP/dt—is to maximal the is, the in of of the

Fig. 16.38 . the limb isovolumic (see the systole ascending is slope The during phase of of maximal

Fig. ). 16.38 At an index contractility. of contraction of index of degree velocity hence the the an any and slope ventricular initial given filling, provides

the blood myocardium from Similarly, be ( during the aorta initially contractile ascending of cycle can the that velocity the in cardiac the of occurs state calculated flow

Fig.

). 16.39 of per left (stroke ejected used ventricle is blood the which is of the addition, contractility. (end-diastolic ratio volume an of widely the at blood ejection fraction, left ventricle in of clinically diastole to volume) as volume volume), the the end from In the the index beat of

•Fig. 80 control;B(dashed ventricular Max red dashed Left 0.4 (sec) Time 0.6 A (mm 0.2 16.38 hyperdynamicheart,aswithadministrationofnorepinephrine;C(green 0 curve), pressure 40 B hypodynamicheart,asincardiacfailure.160 dP/dt curve), 0 Hg) curve), 120 Leftventricularpressurecurveswithtangentsdrawntothesteepestportionsoftheascendinglimbstoindicatemaximalratesofchangeinpressurewithtime(dP/dtvalues).A(blue C

for important that propulsion for as more respective of than blood. conduits forward blood are of the The thin-walled, chambers pumps their as low-pressure function atria ventricles large-reservoir (chiefly the orifice). The the around heart aortic skeleton continuum fibrous ventricles of comprise of fibers at from the a originating muscle base the epicardial surface. the cardiac apex sweep the fibers at These toward to epicardial and the direction the papillary undergo change toward and fibers pass and 180-degree the They muscles. form in to to endocardium gradually a endocardium parallel lie

papillary inward the apex to form turn the of the heart, twist and fibers muscles. At in the the the these thick, of form the decreases ventricular mass blood circumference At valve. not also AV closure the muscle but which the only narrows to myocardial aids of around that and ejection orifices, heart powerful orifices, valve of fibers valve a the base implement decrease Ventricular as heart a ejection longitudinal axis begins the narrow is also base. to the the accomplished toward in by propels the toward of outflow walls, the the part ventricles, the tracts. blood apical approximation of coupled the with ventricular the ventricular of contraction The early a left The pressure by the ventricle. approximately right that the one develops is thinner seventh considerably which that ventricle, left mean developed ventricle, than is

flaps rings. are fibrous the tissue of at consist tough, that endothelium-covered flexible, firmly thin cardiac the valve to The leaflets fibrous of base attached valve essentially leaflets valves of of cardiac the orientation for is valve responsible and is the through the the passive, heart. the flow unidirectional of Movement blood are There valves types semilunar atrioventricular ( the heart: and two in of

Figs. 16.41 16.40

cusps, valve, is mitral whereas ventricle, of has and the the located between atrium the cusps. between the up left which valve, and The lies made ventricle, two three right right left tricuspid atrium the overlap twice The cusps total area the the the closed AV when orifice, valves of so the and that in approximately respective is of of leaflets position. AV considerable the are of valve occurs each valves to from cordis) edges Attached ventricles. respective arise of that are papillary the fine, strong free of tendineae powerful the ligaments (chordae these the muscles the ventricular from ligaments everted These during prevent becoming valves

Atrial systoleIsovol. ejectionReduced ejectionIsovol. contractionRapid v Heartsounds opens relaxationRapid atrial Mitral 0.60.5 valve valve T pressure P opens Aortic closes Aortic valve 0.3 0.7 0.1 •Fig. a systole 0.8 Left Left filling 4 VenouspulseElectrocardiogram pressure ventricular Ventricular 1 (sec) 2 ventricular 0 Q c 0.4 pressure S R valve 3 Mitral closes P Time 0.2 Aortic 16.39 Leftatrial,aortic,andleftventricularpressurepulsescorrelatedintimewithaorticflow,ventricularvolume,heartsounds,venouspulse,andtheelectrocardiogramforacompletecardiaccycleinahumansubject.Isovol,isovolumic.

systole.

heart, close leaflets ventricular a normal together the filling. remain valve In relatively during by the currents muscles. exerted that The during the of and prevail by eddy and behind is leaflets diastole papillary chordae the partial caused approximation surfaces valve by tension that tendineae cordis is

Function Elements CHAPTER •Fig. 16 Cardiac of coronary vena •Fig. arteries atrium valve—anterior Illustrationofaheartsplitperpendiculartotheinterventricularseptumtodepicttheanatomicalrelationshipsoftheleafletsoftheatrioventricularandaorticvalves.Pulmonary appendage muscle Mitral posterior Aorta muscles Papillary Left Pulmonary auricular cusp artery ventricle cusp cava 16.40 Right Left Posterior veins Anterior Left valve— cusp cusp of Superior Mitral ventricle appendage ventricle Orifices Aorta Papillary Left cusp Left cusp Posterior Medial cusp valve Right fibrosus cusp cusp Illustrationoffourcardiacvalvesasviewedfromthebaseoftheheart.Notehowtheleafletsoverlapintheclosedvalves.Anterior 16.41 Anulus

valves ventricle between the between aortic respectively. and the right ventricle and The and left the the pulmonary aorta, located artery and are pulmonic three valve These that cup-like are valves cusps rings to consist (see of attached the

Figs. 16.41 ). 16.40 of ejection blood the flow the the toward reduced At of phase reverses ventricles. ventricular briefly end systole, regurgitation flow the of This reversal blood of snaps together blood prevents ventricles. and cusps the into their lie instead, the the and bloodstream During walls of in back the and the midway position. point at do between walls the ventricular systole, not vessel aorta; against pulmonary cusps a they float approximately closed artery artery pulmonary of and semilunar outpocketings Valsalva) are valves small the the Behind of aorta. (sinuses which from tend sinuses, the the cusps keep develop, vessel currents away to these In walls. valve eddy arteries the and valve. of Furthermore, coronary right left the of cusps, the and aortic right behind left respectively, are the orifices the presence the eddy coronary blocked by currents valve of and not Valsalva could it blood coronary therein, the flow the sinuses would for be cusps, and ostia the developed cease. the Were of

The Pericardium

as and reflected is surface it and the cardiac the cardiac the The onto entire epicardium. the of heart vessels, the great pericardium portion invests the heart. sac which small fluid, provides of for enclosed The continuous amount of lubrication contains the movement normally a of heart. pericardium size large, sudden not of and strongly The is distensible; in the chambers overdistention resists rapid it cardiac hence increase prevents a very the surgical of after pericardium removal, function is its absence affected. cardiac the congenital seriously not in or However, and with other Nevertheless, intact, the the diastolic of compliance one in decreases the pressure ventricle. increase increases an ventricle in the pericardium pressure

by two stethoscope. through Four usually heart, audible sounds ordinarily only but generated are a the are a can recorded With electronic less the as graphically phonocardiogram. detected be and sounds intense amplification, delineate the in helps other in cardiac cycle. precise relation registering sounds events heart to the This faint sounds heart of the timing means of

The sound ventricular is at initiated the heart systole of onset ( first

Fig. ) 16.42 and the reflects closure AV of valves. is the loudest the of and the region has quality, heard apical crescendo-decrescendo the longest heart It over best and a heart. sounds, is of the fifth best sounds heard to in the sounds mitral just best intercostal fifth of the in at are cardiac the sternum; tricuspid heard the are space The space intercostal valve apex. left the

•Fig. tracing) Thefirstandsecondheartsoundsofthephonocardio-gram(bottom tracing). 16.42 areshowninregardtotheirrelationshiptotheP,R,andTwavesoftheelectrocardiogram(top 0.2 R 0 T 1.2 2 Time 1.00.4 1.6 Phonocardiogram ElectrocardiogramP (sec) 1.40.8 0.6 1

heart (see closure sound, with the valves which occurs The of semilunar abrupt second

Fig. first higher duration and sound. pitch) ), 16.42 is the of vibrations lower heart of shorter composed than is (higher frequency and is intensity same sternum, second sound to heard the just caused left but the is by the the to valve thoracic in that caused closure the is right the in best of portion aortic by of best closure the of The heard space intercostal whereas pulmonic the interspace of valve of sternum. second the of pulmonary the valve, louder but cases pulmonic is generally is hypertension, true. reverse sound than the aortic valve in The changes respiration. the with sound heart The second nature of heart pulmonic closing a is heard expiration, simultaneous valves. sound that single During aortic reflects the and of increased as inspiration, pulmonic in venous a an However, the blood delayed, during return. valve flow result increase of from mainly inspiration-induced of closure is

this heard pulmonic of is heart as sound two this physiological sound. closure valve, can the components; With second splitting second of the heart delayed be termed the

thin failure. children A heard heart sometimes sound with chest ventricular walls is with in or in patients left third apex. cardiac few low-frequency heard a region consists It vibrations low-intensity, the the of of best in entering the in diastole by caused early cessation and ventricular blood by abrupt of the vibrations distention The occur and of ventricles. deceleration the are atrial, consists few A oscillations. sound fourth, low-frequency a or of sound in occasionally with heard hearts. individuals normal This is by result atrial is of blood and as the of oscillation cardiac It contraction. caused a chambers

Cycle The Cardiac

systole is contraction of pressure start (literally, the the valves the isovolumic semilunar ventricular called opening (when The volume”) between and abruptly) “same period. rises of phase ventricular period (see brief appropriate volume constant during this term This is because ventricular remains

Fig. ). 16.39 isovolumic heart ECG, with the ventricular rise of pressure ventricular sound, onset pressure in atrial and R after curve The of contraction of also the wave an on earliest the the initiation peak the on first contraction. coincides

pressure ventricular the dWith be semilunar is of the of (see Opening reduced valves which subdivided the phase, onset may marks ejection inspiration, intrathoracic

which to atrium. increases 21), the then Chapter venous blood right flow

Inoverloadedhearts,asincongestiveheartfailure,whenventricularvolumeisverylargeandtheventricularwallsarestretchedmaximally,athirdheartsoundisoftenheard.Athirdheartsoundinpatientswithheartdiseaseisusuallyagravesign.Whenthethirdandfourth(atrial)soundsareaccentuated,asoccursincertainabnormalconditions,tripletsofsoundsresemblingthesoundofagallopinghorse(calledgallop rhythms)mayoccur.Mitralinsufficiencyandmitralstenosisproduce,respectively,systolicanddiastolicmurmursthatareheardbestatthecardiacapex.Aorticinsufficiencyandaorticstenosis,incontrast,produce,respectively,diastolicandsystolicmurmursthatareheardbestinthesecondintercostalspacejusttotherightofthesternum.Thecharacteristicsofthemurmursserveasanimportantguideinthediagnosisofvalvulardisease.

ejection). a into an and shorter later, earlier, ejection) longer phase phase (rapid (reduced characteristics: is three rise aortic reduced and abrupt pronounced by phase sharp the distinguished ventricular (3) and increase phase ventricular a ejection and ejection at pressure pressure, in (1) volume, aortic ventricular a (see peak terminates blood aortic in decrease (2) that from in an flow The rapid

Fig. ). 16.39 consequent and descent stretching heart ventricular base atrial of the the onset ejection of the atria. left decrease of results from The the in pressure at sharp of pressure runoff of output, of aortic vessels rate period, to aorta the the peripheral reduced ventricular the ejection the blood therefore During from exceeds blood and declines. the produces atrial blood to Throughout in atria progressive the the a systole, returning increase ventricular pressure. from peripheral veins

slightly and the the aortic to period, flow and exceeds pressure ejection during During phase, blood blood whereas accelerates rapid increase), ventricular aortic (continues reduced decelerates. pressure left ventricular ejection higher flow is aortic aortic pressure the gradient blood pressure the of of storage ventricular-aortic the presence of to stretched of reversal potential in flow the of the is aorta This result the walls. from ventricle energy in left arterial continuous decelerate. blood into from ventricle stored left energy aorta This the to flow causes potential the the peak the which The flow point the ejection. intersects the curve aortic curve left pressure at with ventricular during pressure curve of coincides (continues reversed. Thereafter, flow decelerates has pressure the decrease) been gradient to because

Fig. jugular a shows a a of curve venous vein. 16.39 pulse tracing recorded from apparent. waves are Three rise pressure by contraction. the occurs with atrial a wave The caused in closure systole. early abrupt is by some wave of with and, the artery the extent, jugular in valve tricuspid by the c common adjacent impact vein carotid to of the The ventricular caused in rise reflects pressure associated filling. the wave v with The atrial c the Except wave, the for

venous atrial Elements 16 curve. curve resembles pressure the of CHAPTER left closely Cardiac pulse Function

ventricular to of volume ventricular ejected remains blood in the during the cavities. equal a that systole of approximately ejection, At end in normal fairly This constant volume residual hearts. is when somewhat rate vascular volume resistance decreases However, residual peripheral heart the diminished. or when has increases

characteristic also the atrial produces sound descending Closure the vibrations on (notch) limb aortic pressure some (with of second produces valve curve, heart evident the pressure the of curve). the aortic the incisura on and it The ventricular marks systole. incisura end of the the of valves opening termed of valves isovolumic semilunar period AV and the relaxation. is The between closure ventricular precipitous characterized in by volume. a fall is change It a without pressure in ventricular

of valves immediately filling ventricular after AV portion The occurs open. the major ventricular previous abruptly ventricles. returned atria relaxing into this At during the systole is point, to blood the the that released the the rapid filling called is ventricular This period phase. filling of In

Fig.

in ventricular by of pressure decrease atrial , filling left the the the is onset indicated left 16.39 phase pressure. rapid below This mitral the valve. reversal pressure opens from ventricular increase transient volume. sharp ventricles atrial The ventricular atria decreases rapid relaxing of in in and flow and produces to a pressures blood

The diastasis. filling phase of phase a ventricular followed slow called ventricular filling is rapid by blood into diastasis, flows peripheral ventricle. the flows and During left veins right from the from blood the lungs the into returning ventricle ventricular in volume This ventricular to is in rises small, ventricular, (see indicated by filling gradual pressures slow and and atrial, addition venous

Fig. 16.39

Anincreaseinmyocardialcontractility,asproducedbycatecholaminesorbydigitalisinapatientwithafailingheart,maydecreaseresidualventricularvolumeandincreasethestrokevolumeandejectionfraction.Inseverelyhypodynamicanddilatedhearts,residualvolumecanbecomemuchgreaterthanstrokevolume.

depolarization) the soon onset the after of systole the atrial ECG. beginning The of occurs (atrial wave of P ventricular period The by atrial achieved blood ventricle completes of filling. to of contraction the from atrium transfer

systole (see responsible ventricular, is as venous volume well the pressure, and for in Atrial small ventricular increases as atrial, in

Fig. ). 16.39 barely ventricular Throughout pressure pressure. atrial exceeds diastole, ventricular valves difference that indicates This pressure through ventricular the pathway the AV small low has open resistance. during filling

of blood of pulmonary cavae the or the no force the junction Because are contraction both atrium at junction and left in atrial and may veins right valves venae atrium, the there directions. at into brief of the of is because blood. the contraction, inertia during mainly little back blood inflowing tributaries the venous pumped actually the However, atrial

to of is heart great atrial and valves. of The contraction the contribution governed rate AV position filling the a to the ventricular extent by filling. the atrial rates, diastasis, ceases At end additional of filling toward heart contraction little and practically contributes slow can however, substantial. the tachycardia, and become During is diastasis atrial contribution abbreviated into in phase attenuated, of blood brief great cycle. that become atrial the filling is so cardiac assumes rapid period tachycardia during contraction ventricle severe importance this the Should rapidly the propelling provide contraction so the impaired, atrial even period of is seriously relaxation adequate If that cannot ventricular filling is brief filling. ventricular The (fainting). in result in output consequent reduction syncope cardiac may

Atrialcontractionisnotessentialforventricularfilling,ascanbeobservedinpatientswithatrialfibrillationorcompleteheartblock.Inatrialfibrillation,theatrialmyofiberscontractinacontinuous,uncoordinatedmannerandthereforecannotpumpbloodintotheventricles.Incompleteheartblock,theatriaandventriclesbeatindependentlyofeachother.However,ventricularfillingmaybenormalinpatientswiththesetwoarrhythmias.Incertaindiseasestates,theAVvalvesmaybemarkedlynarrowed(stenotic).Insuchconditions,atrialcontractionplaysamuchmoreimportantroleinventricularfillingthanitdoesinanormalheart.

pressure ventricular volume the in summarized are in changes cycle and throughout The left cardiac

Fig. . 16.43 opens A starts filling valve (point the Diastolic in when mitral

Fig. mitral C). valve the ), terminates when it 16.43 (point closes and rapid attributed despite ventricular left to and (from in the ventricular left inflow of decrease The B), from progressive to atrium, initial the is pressure A distensibility. blood points relaxation diastole the remainder of increase passive the the to B reflects of and (from characteristics C), elastic points ventricle. changes pressure in filling the ventricular ventricular During in accompanies pressure substantial that a the in small in during C). increase to points ventricular only (from diastole volume B increase Note

•Fig. Schematizedpressure-volumeloopoftheleftventricleforasinglecardiaccycle. 16.43

diastole. increase compliance ventricle during small left the reflects the pressure The of point in is the pressure by of mitral just (to The before caused increase C) ventricular small the the filling. to contraction closes atrial valve left contribution of pressure but rises the contraction (from because isovolumic closed. and aortic not ventricular are both With D), does to valves C mitral points steeply, volume change E), increase opens the D of in the When and phase valve is ventricular to large the a volume (rapid) pressure. in with aortic ejection first during D), associated points (point (from reduction steady followed This reduction E is ventricular points ejection pressure. in decrease reduced in small F) a volume and by (from to isovolumic F points relaxation of (from A), by aortic the characterized Closure is in by is valve followed pressure. sharp to (point drop F) which a to closing F valves and opening does the aortic of both change are mitral the volume of not the valve Ventricular during valve points interval because mitral and closed. (from A) the aortic between mitral one to opens The cardiac complete valve A) cycle. (point

or ventricular loop calculated parameters may evident loop), cardiovascular left pressure-volume (P-V from a be Several are on key system it. in C mitral (point volume is closure obtained End-diastolic valve at

Fig. (point A). and mitral the end-systolic ) valve opening 16.43 volume at is apparent the is as loop then “width” calculated and of as stroke The the follows: volume P-V

the pressure when is ventricular valve of the closes end-diastolic as left (point considered ventricle, C here preload mitral left The coordinate in pressure, the

Fig. ). 16.43 •Fig. The Leftventricularpressure-volumeloopsrecordedinahuman.Theleftventriclewassubjectedtodifferentpreloadsbytransientocclusionofbloodflowintheinferiorvenacava.Aspreload(leftventricularend-diastolicpressure[LVEDP])wasdecreased,bothend-diastolicvolumeandend-systolicvolumedecreased,butend-diastolicvolumedecreasedmore,whichresultedindecreasedstrokevolume.B, 16.44 aheartwithincreasedcontractility(red line). CardiacfunctioncurveswhenstrokevolumeisplottedasafunctionofLVEDPforanormalheartinthebasalstate(blue andaheartwithreducedcontractility(green line), line), A, Atanygivenpreload,strokevolumeishigherinheartswithincreasedcontractilityandlowerinheartswithdecreasedcontractilitythanstrokevolumeinthenormalbasalstate. FromSenzakiH,etal.Single-beatestimationofend-systolicpressure-volumerelationinhumans.Anewmethodwiththepotentialfornoninvasiveapplication.Circulation. (A, 1996;94[10]:2497-2506.) approximate during systole pressure read pressure approximate valve blood arterial blood and the the be opens aortic may “systolic” (point arterial D), (point is when E). read “diastolic” ( loops Left P-V recorded a from human ventricular

Fig.

(see the 16.44A version are to ) similar schematized

Fig.

16.43 ). P-V the dot (line in slope extending end-systolic from relation The of the

Fig. contractility. ) a defines steeper contractility; increased 16.44A slope indicates left the ventricle) reduced, smaller of and occlusion on reduced volume the the (as beats left return the the right subject, ventricle to consequence this the ventricle the stroke of was blood inferior preload cava successively In partial effect inflow left as of of successive a of the of was the vena reduced blood to ventricle.

heart the in This operation of ( law Frank-Starling the humans, the illustrates, of

changes preload well and ventricular of (left as length, the 13), stroke thus Chapter as strength subsequent contraction, in myocardial fiber produced. volume) change volume the whereby cardiac important This curve by function (see is phenomenon characterized the

Fig. 16.44B).

As stroke volume blue line). (solid increases preload increases, able the the becomes larger end-systolic contractility as If the which at the is now that red a cardiac and fact the action the slope in of heart steeper, to entire a ventricle function volume P-V curve reflects (solid is of norepinephrine, given stroke relation of produce upward increased, shifts the preload. line), preload extent. down” increased Hearts stroke “squeeze volume by able The greater a at produced decreased volume: to are with a contractility increased given to largely end-systolic is any calcium stroke Conversely, downward after the as is after preload. function damaged, is cardiac if a (green (as any if cardiac the from contractility reduced volume line), which otherwise shifted ventricle or given reflects ischemia, is channel its reduced curve blockade), at normal The cardiac is also or known curves. function as curve Starling ventricular curves function assess To preload pressure output, integrated ), is ventricle, stroke be usually or (Pra), venous cardiac typically as the volume, considered of cardiovascular mean filling to of is central measured; system the atrial heart pressure. rather the measured the than ( functioning right of the right pressure

Measurement Output Cardiac of

Principle The Fick

Adolph physiologist for people. method measuring first animals in intact Fick German contrived and 1870 the the cardiac output In of The the principle, law basis is an mass. conservation called for Fick of this application method, of simply the the to derived capillaries delivered fact of is from O2 pulmonary principle the The via quantity that the

q1 blood q3 0.15 /mL q2 consumption artery mL /min pa blood bronchiole pulmonary O2 pv Pulmonary q3 250 Terminal /mL Alveoli O2 + q2 O2 0.20 ] veins ] Alveolus = [O2 q1 mL O2 artery mL From Pulmonary [O2 pulmonary vein •Fig. To 16.45 the Cardiac Illustrating Schema Principle Fick for Measuring Output. Thechangeincolorfrompulmonaryarterytopulmonaryveinrepresentsthechangeincolorofthebloodasvenousbloodbecomesfullyoxygenated.

is of alveoli, pulmonary by the equal the the veins. artery, O2 enters capillaries the that from quantity that away the pulmonary O2 pulmonary carried of must the quantity plus Fick depicted The schematically in principle is

Fig.

16.45.

(q1) rate equals equals the is, blood O2 The arterial in ([O2]pa), of lungs which that blood to by delivery pulmonary pulmonary output; the O2 (Q), cardiac arterial concentration multiplied flow

Equation 16.1

state, q2 uptake then equals O2 the the rate consumption O2 capillaries from pulmonary the If of net is at by alveoli, steady the the body. q2 of in veins virtually flow total ([O2]pv), pulmonary arterial by (q3) that which is which the is, O2 pulmonary at the away flow, equal The to is rate pulmonary by concentration multiplied venous equals (Q); carried blood O2 blood venous pulmonary

16.2 Equation

of of the From mass, conservation law

Equation 16.3

Therefore,

16.4 Equation

for When solved is output, this cardiac

Equation 16.5

Eq. principle. 16.5 is of the Fick the statement

pulmonary determine be output the this known: body, (2) method, cardiac blood by O2 in arterial concentration venous ([O2]pv), O2 blood of (3) ([O2]pa). and the must consumption concentration (1) pulmonary the O2 values in three To a of given interval. from volume computed consumption the air O2 is of measurements content O2 expired over and to veins, is peripheral of peripheral with O2 essentially blood of needle concentration puncture. [O2]pv by arterial blood arterial a identical pulmonary determined withdrawn the in is that sample the Because blood venous systemic another. identical compositions arterial The mixed virtually and pulmonary to one are of blood pulmonary or a are analysis O2 through artery obtained catheter. the right from ventricle Samples for small balloon very A flexible the can with catheter be a vein. tip a near into inserted peripheral flexible toward the carries is the heart. flowing blood advanced, tube it the As pulmonary into artery. monitoring advance pressure the the tip By changes, the can physician the catheter

values the depicted With in

Fig. 16.45 , mL/minute. per mL venous is mixed cardiac mL O2 0.15) blood, of O2 If output (pulmonary and 250 (pulmonary can output 0.20 the the O2 arterial O2 equals arterial) milliliter is = of 250/ content follows: of 0.15 consumption content (0.20 5000 O2 calculated mL/minute, is be − as blood, the of venous) per cardiac milliliter

consumption O2 and to Fick estimate the when the determined. and venous organs O2 also of flow is principle The arterial blood blood content of can used be that the reveals O2 O2 arteriovenous consumption rearrangement equals blood flow difference multiplied concentration. in the Algebraic by of mL/minute, per the mL (0.20 is if must through O2 example, of minute. 0.20 venous O2 of 14 consumption 0.18) flow = of 0.18 blood, milliliter content O2 O2 kidney per and O2 be of of kidney the one is For renal the mL − that per milliliter O2 mL by 700 rate 700 arterial blood, content blood is

Doppler commonly clinic, cardiac In noninvasively with output most is the echocardiography. measured blood of ascending this the in By aorta is measured. velocity method, the a stroke the ejected of in the to single be cross-sectional aorta echocardiography) (i.e., volume) beat of measured Obtaining area allows determined (also the by (see volume blood

Eq. 17.1 ). rate the liters yields for stroke Multiplying output volume in cardiac per by value a minute. then heart

amount depends heart performs. on that of the by of type O2 and heart Consumption the activity the is approximately of heart. myocardial 8 to 10 (V˜O2) Under basal mL/minute/100 g consumption conditions, O2 in severalfold decrease as and hypotension hypothermia. such It increase can conditions moderately exercise and during The myocardium O2 is by mL/ further can of coronary additional content the O2 receive dL), blood from blood. of low extraction little O2 and venous normally cardiac (≈5 blood by must be flow heart an of demands O2 in ). increase increased coronary the mainly Therefore, (see met heartbeat arrested maintained, which is is consumption greater less, still 2 coronary than O2 skeletal the muscle. perfusion g In six minute/100 the is falls to times consumption of O2 or but which mL/ resting to in experiments seven

and external components. work internal Cardiac has ventricle. mean volume ejected beat approximately and per the by against stroke is aortic the product the ventricular is equal the which work to Left left blood (stroke pressure of work) (We) defined cardiac as follows: be may work External

16.6 Equation

is associated − time work. in integrated the of that over t1) pressure the interest each (PdV) (P), by (dV) to are is products and multiplied interval (t2 is, small volume increment total pumped, the That calculate blood. blood density and to to is of velocity due this the kinetic work Added the (v) (ρ) flow of to simplify The pressure during mean used to expulsion this is

16.7 Equation

cardiac is kinetic negligible. output, energy component resting the of At levels in strenuous 50% up output, cardiac exercise, account kinetic with to of the energy high cardiac as However, total component work. can for

(Wi) The internal as of heart work be written can the

time. where T dt of constant converts tension, that units dt wall work, a is T α and 16.8 Equation is is proportionality into and are closely power Clinically, both and of V˜O2 difficult the to to ventricular are index, systole. integral left during ventricular related measure; systolic pressure, the time pressure–time left however, measurements important Such myocardial is because determinant of a are internal need. work large O2 developed in its consumption cardiac (see has been evaluate and P-V O2 alternative An approach work relation to loops to which

Fig. preload constant. maintained contractility varied in ) afterload; examined conditions is 16.44 and with are

same vice halving value doubling in the cardiac pressure cardiac work. for result Simultaneously output, or and aortic versa, cardiac amount opposed when major work, greater volume work proportion as are of requirements any is for given the of O2 to work However, pressure work. the a (volume consumption, with cardiac a a An is small in output only left pressure O2 in increased ventricular increase aortic accomplished whereas work) increase constant at

CHAPTER cardiac is at of arterial O2 work) constant large increase in 16 accompanied (pressure a by Cardiac Elements consumption. pressure myocardial output Function Thus overall well myocardial O2 be work. with cardiac correlated consumption not may correlated ventricular of magnitude left The consumption. pressure with ventricular O2 duration and are left is ventricle right of resistance. the systemic much of that than less The pulmonary is left ventricle resistance vascular because the one-seventh work vascular

energy efficiency total be work The calculated of the heart the may used. accomplished ratio as the to the of g 27 be O2 for 300-g will O2 consume heart assumed 9 mL consumption mL/minute/100 the If average per two ventricles, the is of a to minute. This 0.82. the is to calories 130 value small when respiratory is quotient equivalent Together, ventricles of equivalent per work is which minute, calories. do to 8 small approximately 18.7 the kg-m two Therefore, is 14%: approximately of efficiency the the heart gross

Equation 16.9

Thegreaterenergydemandofpressureworkthanofvolumeworkisclinicallyimportant,especiallyinaorticstenosis.Inthiscondition,leftventricularO2consumptionisincreased,mainlybecauseofthehighintraventricularpressuredevelopedduringsystole.However,coronaryperfusionpressure(andhenceO2supply)iseithernormalorreducedbecauseofthepressuredropacrossthenarroworificeofthediseasedaorticvalve.

in actual the efficiency (asystolic) (≈2 mechanical value g) gross determined of higher calculation The calculated from is through and consumption nonbeating slightly is of heart O2 than subtracting the total mL/minute/100 efficiency. O2 (18%) the of the the heart consumption the cardiac as heart relatively low. is pump efficiency the of The a blood does a output efficiency O2 change appreciably, During exercise, cardiac consumption. without not increase considerably, myocardial whereas work proportional improves in because increase physical and pressure mean Of estimate rather from the efficiency the 60% efficiency high, of phosphorylation. of heart of chemical that as ATP generating interest for by the the is is oxidative indicated The propulsion metabolism expended in body energy to the appears not heat. of through blood in the cardiac does that contribute form of the as dissipated heat. energy flowing blood also The of is

Function to Mechanical Adenosine Triphosphate Relation Its and Myocardial

The fuels contractile chemical and is from relaxation derived cardiac work ( energy that hydrolysis ATP

Fig. 16.46 •Fig. Production of Overall Cardiac (ATP) for Within a Scheme 16.46 Adenosine Utilization and Myocyte. Triphosphate Electron H+ ADP Pyruvate GLUT Contractile PDH Chain Pathwaysforutilizationofglucose,fattyacids(FA),andlactateareindicated,asaretherequirementsforO2andH+bytheelectrontransportchaininmitochondria.ADP,adenosinediphosphate;CoA,coenzymeA;CPT-I,carnitinepalmitoyltransferase;G-6-P,glucose-6-phosphate;GLUT,glucosetransporter;NADH,nicotinamideadenosinedehydrogenase;PDH,pyruvatedehydrogenase;Pi,inorganicphosphate;SR,sarcoplasmicreticulum;TG,triglyceride.ATPase Transport Acetyl-CoA G-6-P Glycogen Fatty ATP Lactate ˛-Oxidation ADP Citric uptake, SR + CycleCO2 O2 FACPT-I NADH + Acetyl-CoA Ca++ + ADP Mitochondrion GLYCOLYSIS Acid — Acid NADH Cardiomyocyte ATP lon homeostasis Pi Cytosol TGATP Pi Pi work,

weight) extremely of relatively an wet ATP rate high level (≈0.3µmol/g−1/second−1). healthy constant (≈5µmol/g ATP heart The hydrolysis a of has despite to at the production; and tissue content complete ATP of of relation heart seconds the content ATP rest. turnover in 12 occurs in rate the approximately low myocardial breakdown every of The is (see ATP hydrolysis

Fig. gradients maintaining (low normal back of and high into the pumping sarcoplasmic energy reticulum 16.46) contractile interaction shortening), end at Ca++ in the the cell). and K+ cell systole ion and (actin-myosin provides work Na+ for contractile Approximately ATP as such of acids. and the hydrolyzed work, remaining thirds fuel and nucleic is functions and pumps proteins ion to the for the used “housekeeping” third synthesis of is by used heart two Ca++-ATPase consuming primary of reticulum the ion is sarcoplasmic ATP. the The pump during sarcoplasmic to diastolic is reticulum systole, when relaxation. process the sequestered of rapidly the occurs end This into initiate Ca++ cytosolic matched the is to exquisitely rate ATP In rate the ATP the heart, healthy of resynthesis. of hydrolysis ATP of is no the even of with onset ADP concentration significant change heavy in the There or exercise.

small (<2%). through oxidative occurs primarily in to resynthesis ATP phosphorylation degree, glycolysis and, a through (>98%) mitochondria Oxidative O2 H2. and phosphorylation requires carbon of the the fatty delivered H2 acids, make of the to the consumed and O2 lactate) of is in metabolism from the the The reduced generation is adenine and nicotinamide glucose, H2O, (mainly form fuels mitochondria (NADH). myocardium and and dinucleotide to dehydrogenase regulates Pyruvate and the of oxidation glucose lactate. (PDH) product inhibited of is by A and from activity The PDH NADH. inhibition acetyl–coenzyme by phosphorylated activity dephosphorylated PDH by when phosphatase. activated is kinase inhibited PDH and PDH when Also, inorganic ADP formed the with H+ . is from use phosphate and ATP of function blood. flow to arterial myocardium, of is importance blood Of the breakdown oxygenation that ATP of O2 of an rates the of a delivery is and on myocardial and adequate formation which depend such the as myocardium, systolic demand increased exercise), occurs in ATP. An necessitates increase ATP rate, delivery in to sufficient contractility phosphorylation the the O2 when to blood the pressure, so that can for an generate meet oxidative ATP heart breakdown by myocardium are and increase in mitochondria during (as of consumption to is myocardial rate (or O2 the linked of work Thus power) the the tightly myocardium. rate

proportional in certain uptake of and substrate is directly its particular limits, is substrates, of arterial concentration. to use heart its a versatile within The of heart other absence influenced by of one is also The the use by or presence the substrate substrates. and lactate example, uptake a vice leads to heart glucose blood to in addition of glucose the that versa. perfuses metabolizing the reduction For a concentrations, approximately are and normal lactate at rates. consumed equal blood glucose At

is concentration. low, its uptake contrast, very as In arterial of is pyruvate For 4 approximately concentration mmol/L. glucose, threshold is the Below is level, glucose myocardium. this taken the no up blood by of uptake heart. increases Insulin the glucose and by glucose rate the the threshold reduces most in not utilization occurs does circumstances; myocardium. uptake affect lactate insulin of Cardiac by the its is of glucose transport rate in facilitated Under the by across increase conditions, wall. the an utilization cell hypoxic myocardial cannot However, anaerobic lactate is metabolized hypoxic by the be under heart and the heart conditions. by produced of the the production with Associated glycogen. by is hypoxic breakdown heart cardiac lactate

Of the for the by 35% oxidation to carbohydrate. O2 cardiac can total of only be 40% accounted consumption, heart the oxidation from sources: the in account namely, part the of postabsorptive its myocardial Thus energy fatty noncarbohydrate derives the 60% of for in of approximately people state. major and O2 which nonesterified the consumption esterified acids, different these but have thresholds myocardial uptake, for Various fatty acids

arterial generally concentration. direct 16 in Function their used proportion of acids are CHAPTER Cardiac Elements to major are acetoacetate, energy in and a diabetic are oxidized the of acidosis. especially heart, Ketone bodies, they by readily source presence of true whether or noncarbohydrate is the of carbohydrate. use substrates, substrates, by other of As carbohydrate a noncarbohydrate influenced specific is preferentially in substrate within available that certain uses Therefore, the limits, the is the largest heart concentration. acids amino expenditure. makes The of small contribution to a myocardial energy oxidation

which derives ATP. energy by its Normally, the 36 mol yields oxidative of of mole glucose each phosphorylation, in heart by curtailed. ATP during is However, of mole each glycolysis of hypoxia, provided glucose; and is 2 acids fatty β-oxidation over, mol of also takes If and depleted. cellular is prolonged, eventually ATP are creatine hypoxia phosphate

In intracellular lactic and pH. decreases ischemia, acid accumulates and in glycolysis, fatty cellular condition use, and inhibits eventually protein cells. it necrosis acid myocardial damage therefore results This and of synthesis,

1. sodium rapidly action potential following when cardiac by The upstroke stimulus from activating The 0: suprathreshold the may depolarizes is five the myocytes recorded fast transmembrane phases: a potentials membrane initiated contain Phase action the channels. The achieved (ito). by channels an current conduct transient the that efflux 1: of notch is partial the early repolarization that K+ is Phase through outward channels. 2: several Ca++ of potassium of calcium balance efflux represents types Phase plateau and through between the a the through The channels of influx K+ Ca++ is influx exceeds 3: repolarization the . of Final the Phase K+ of when initiated efflux The conductance repolarization. repolarization partial and increases rapidly K+ full resultant restores

cell the fully Phase through membrane determined resting potential cell of of to The mainly the is repolarized K+ by , 4: iK1 channels. conductance

2. and are conducting atrial ventricular recorded and from specialized from Fast-response fibers potentials (Purkinje) myocardial ventricular action fibers. long a upstroke, and large characterized potential Such is a plateau. an steep amplitude, a relatively by action until the through fast-response action The period 3. the begins of persists of at refractory fibers upstroke effective and potential midway phase regains is remainder repolarized refractory 3, excitability (phase it and 4). is relatively it during fully the phase soon of fiber The full after

3.

that partially cells abnormal action are and and recorded depolarized. myocardial from have normal Slow-response nodal been SA from potentials AV cells less of The a action is potential, smaller action steep upstroke, characterized than less by a potential. amplitude, negative the a shorter is typical potential plateau and fast-response a resting The upstroke fibers is calcium slow-response the produced of in channels. activation by upstroke, be in regained partial may absolutely repolarized. excitability fibers at and not become late refractory the of phase or is Slow-response the very the until fully 3 after beginning fiber until

4.

node the serves Normally, SA the initiate the impulse. cardiac pacemaker cardiac as to and the the node propagated reaches atria ultimately AV the SA to impulse from node. is This AV is node, the After impulse cardiac in delay the propagated ventricles. the a throughout cells automatic SA foci of the propagated the or ectopic rhythmicity the AV suppressed or in are if atrium, initiate the may abnormally cardiac Ectopic node, the enhanced. node if the His-Purkinje pacemaker in system normal the cells impulses is

5.

otherwise be potential. may Under normal certain abnormal conditions, action afterdepolarizations triggered an by normal phase 3 action early potential. a arise in of EADs prolonged. length when beats They the cycle is and basic potentials when cardiac long of to abnormally are more occur the the action initiating likely very are phase DADs in phase or appear 3 4. late in occur They overloaded cycle of Ca++ length cells when to basic more is likely . the and are the when initiating with the beats cardiac short are

6.

Reentrant the and in and occur when loop, tissue, traverses is loop loop. some around previously slowly a reenters is cardiac cardiac the a impulse excited the when conducted section when impulse impulse the unidirectionally fibers of blocked of arrhythmias

7.

is ECG, the impulse cardiac conduction The the of which throughout the recorded the the from body, surface heart. traces of AV fibrillation. tachycardias, and depolarizations, used detect premature arrhythmias, rhythms, certain to blocks, as and atrial The ventricular and such altered analyze may conduction SA ectopic ECG be cardiac

8.

into voltage-gated cardiac extracellular open On to channels the Ca++ calcium myocytes. admit excitation, influx sarcoplasmic The from of the release reticulum. the triggers Ca++ of Ca++ elevated [Ca++] the of The myofilaments. intracellular contraction elicits sarcoplasmic Ca++ extracellular through resting restoration and pumping into for of the Na+ is of cytosolic across of the by exchange the the Ca++ back reticulum the [Ca++] Relaxation accomplished sarcolemma. Velocity intracellular and force of [Ca++]. functions are of contraction and are is velocity and maximal. no velocity with load, so related, inversely Force In

cardiac J-S, complexes in Roles in J. cardiomyocites: Rougier Jalife Abriel Ion channel death. H, sudden macromolecular Res. Circ 2015;116:1971.

Guo cardiac myocytes. Calcium DM, T. signaling in ventricular Bers Sci. Y Ann Acad N 2005;1047:86. CH. MB, Kong Cannell coupling. in E-C control Local cardiac Cell Mol Cardiol. J 2012;52:298.

isovolumic an contraction, shortening external occurs. no

9.

preload stretch fibers In filling. is contraction, of blood during the ventricular by ventricular ejects arterial Afterload pressure is ventricle the which against the the blood. (preload) ventricular An myocardial as produces filling diastole, more a forceful occurs ventricular contraction. during augmented in fiber increase with length, known is fiber relationship the length This heart. and Frank-Starling as law of of contraction strength between the

10.

preload and given at a afterload. is performance expression Contractility of cardiac an Contractility autonomic by be the system. nervous modulated can

11.

according measured. to the arterial O2 body consumption (q2) Fick of ([O2]a) are determine the and and output, oxygen blood To the mixed principle, venous of the ([O2]v) content cardiac blood Cardiac q2/([O2]a = [O2]v). − output by noninvasively be echocardiography. Doppler It measured can also

12.

In by heart, the of of the is rate hydrolysis matched normal ATP rate the synthesis. ATP requires and of fatty glucose, is acids generated oxidative by ATP process O2. that phosphorylation a hydrolysis the When as ATP phosphorylation for increases, oxidative of the O2 consumption of during also increases. rate exercise, O2 cardiac utilization work. thereby coupled is The rate of rate the to of only and functions The in substrates aerobically, concentration. their myocardium proportion general arterial it in to uses

Y. of Ionic waveforms. K, electrocardiographic Rudy basis current Gima Res. Circ 2003;90:889.

Priori SG. electrophysiology: for shaped The years time appraisal. fifteen discoveries molecular of that Circ Res. 2010;107: 451.

this chapter, should to the completion student answer Upon following of able questions: 1. be the

by blood hemodynamics, determine law? they and of vessels how are Poiseuille’s physical blood and properties What defined

2.

compliance stroke arterial pulse pressure? and to How is related volume does How pulse and the wave arterial compliance arterial cardiac work? affect

3.

systolic, diastolic, they how pulse are and and What measured? mean, pressures, are

4.

the microcirculation? constitute What vessels in blood How the large into arteries is flow flow in steady pulsatile microcirculation? converted

5.

underlie capillary for function? Starling’s are the osmotic factors hydrostatic What that and hypothesis

6.

these modulate factors affect and factors how How do particular organs? peripheral extrinsic flow do circulation, in intrinsic blood and

7.

account hypothesis for the myogenic of blood autoregulation flow? How does What is tissue the effect on of metabolism autoregulation?

blood of system distributes the vessels a returns heart. heart to of from he tissues blood tissues that to the vasculature consists tubes closed from or the and the into venous to system, the takes microcirculation, distributes the the and blood between and heart the site waste blood are systems blood exchanged the cellular tissues. heart; arterial products components: and venous returns the separates from system, tissues be to and which the tissues; can it which It which nutrients where and the the divided and from arterial three is are the in described vasculature components this These chapter. of vascular to specific flow In addition, beds considered. properties blood of the tissues are and vasculature the (i.e., blood/fluid introduction hemodynamics) flow the an physics this material, As reviewed. of to is through

they (i.e., fluid a not distensible) blood basis a blood simple even rigid tubes and through understanding are blood flow of not the homogeneous through flow blood are vessels, fluid. though for is tubules vessels provides of rigid the The physics velocity the blood the among Knowledge of dimensions circulation. these of systemic and flow, understanding principles of underlies components physical of pressure, blood the of various interrelationships the

Bloodstream Velocity of the

is a and movement, of distance per centimeters distance relates is to as in to fluid that of with regard (e.g., Velocity, expressed time particle per units it the unit time, travels second). fluid (e.g., fluid, Flow, is volume of units expressed a it of per centimeters second). per contrast, cubic the of volume displacement rate of is in in unit time and velocity flow by rigid are related another (Q) cross-sectional one the area (A) tube: tube, of the In a to (v) and

Equation 17.1

in and The velocity, shown flow, area are interrelationships among

Fig. 17.1 . conservation cross-sectional fluid through a of mass rigid inversely that the tube varies fluid the flowing area. the be of constant, with requires velocity Because the greatest and the the tube the with of section flow in is in of the tube area cross-sectional the smallest greatest the Thus velocity slowest with area. fluid cross-sectional section

Fig. system. traverses velocity decreases the arterial , as progressively 15.3 blood velocity the In value. minimal decreases a to capillaries, system venous progressively centrally the the velocity increases As the through toward again. passes heart, then blood velocities areas. in are relative the various to system the cross-sectional of respective circulatory components the The only related

pressure, gravity, a total energy The and of in three velocity. system consists hydraulic components: tube. effect pressure important the have can velocity flow on an blood The of within the pressure ( with effect areas of tube velocity Consider on cross-sectional in different the a

Fig. ). 17.2 remains constant. energy this system, In total the equals within The pressure total dynamic (static) tube plus the the pressure the lateral pressure. be because neglected the component tube is gravitational horizontal. can The and are •Fig. in B, A, C pressures total provided The that segments equal, 17.1 Asfluidflowsthroughatubeofvariablecross-sectionalarea(A),thelinearvelocity(v)variesinverselywiththecross-sectionalarea.Q,flow.

= Hg ˜v2/2 3.8 •Fig. mm mm 3.8 mm Hg Hg 15 17.2 Inanarrowsection(B)ofatube,thelinearvelocity(v)andhencethedynamiccomponentofpressure(ρv2/2)aregreaterthaninthewidesections(AandC),ofthesametube.Ifthetotalenergyisvirtuallyconstantthroughoutthetube(i.e.,iftheenergylossbecauseofviscosityisnegligible),thelateralpressureinthenarrowsectionislowerthanthelateralpressureinthewidesectionsofthetube(seetheheightsofthecolumnoffluidabovecompartmentsA,B,andCeach,whichreflectpressure).

an the negligible fluid”). “ideal from is (i.e., this fluid viscosity is loss energy component be (Pdyn) of estimated the can velocity follows: effect as on dynamic The

and velocity Equation per the 17.2 (grams where v fluid density (centimeters per cubic the ρ of centimeters) second). is is Assume that of has a density the fluid g/cm3. 1 section in In A

Fig. mm equals Hg; is note 1330 lateral Hg mm dynes/cm2. that the pressure , 100 1 17.2 to According

Eq. 5000 or 17.2, Hg. = 3.8 dynes/cm2, mm dyn P the cm2, dynes/ 15 = Pdyn or mm as velocity 20,000 B twice section the tube, the Hg. where of In high, narrow is B pressure than only and C mm pressure, are in Hg in sections the 3.8 Thus is Hg the mm pressures lateral total the 15 section A whereas lower lateral lower. pressure. fraction the locations, dynamic component most a of arterial negligible is total In the at associated increase sites flow constriction an may dynamic therefore kinetic is high significantly. arterial with obstruction, pressure and However, of large the energy, or velocity the component decreased. the would correspondingly segments be distal reduced, would perfusion be and pressure Hence, of is atherosclerosis narrowed vessel •Fig. pressure blood by example changes explain of a or spasm This the vessel helps how in that Flow. and 17.3 Laminar Turbulent Whenflowislaminar,allelementsofthefluidmoveinstreamlinesthatareparalleltotheaxisofthetube;thefluiddoesnotmoveinaradialorcircumferentialdirection.Thelayeroffluidincontactwiththewallismotionless;thefluidthatmovesalongthecentralaxisofthetubehasthemaximalvelocity.B, Inturbulentflow,theelementsofthefluidmoveirregularlyinaxial,radial,andcircumferentialdirections.Vorticesfrequentlydevelop. A,

velocity tube, kinetic energy. associated narrowed flow a with is significantly increases is, dynamic the sections wall: large that of in component because the

was fluids in Jean Marie through law the of empirically The fundamental flow 1840s. the derived most by governs physiologist the Poiseuille French Léonard cylindrical that tubes primarily flow, glass determinants but capillary replaced tubes. with his was measurements physical the liquids simpler through interested blood blood flow in he He of in of precise work law. His been was designated and important Poiseuille’s observations have that his so

cylindrical rigid tubes. applies through laminar fluids of the nonpulsatile) to flow steady law (i.e., newtonian Poiseuille’s series of neighboring from of laminar its flow remains at layer A moving individual each velocity in that fluid fluid with different is the newtonian ( is as viscosity constant, which type whose and moves a one motion layers a layers, of the

Fig. ). 17.3A consists series one velocity. has of another, central highest through tubes of In which tube, the of fluid infinitesimally the concentric flow the tube a past thin case a laminar the sliding of towards vessel the wall. parabolically concentric the decrease The of velocities laminae cylinders, into and does not provide pulsatile, determinants is newtonian is differences fluid), the the flow vascular system. between (i.e., the the valuable vessels through a system Despite blood the flow vascular law not rigid Poiseuille’s are of blood insight In certain situations, however, become unusual can (see flow turbulent

Fig. than rather ), laminar. 17.3B the present, chaotic. vortices Under conditions, and (swirls) flow is velocities of these are distribution detail described chapter. this condition This is later in more in

the pressure, tubes terms and of the Poiseuille’s fluids tube, describes cylindrical flow the of the laminar through liquid: in dimensions of of law viscosity

17.3 Equation

(o) inlet of l = tube outlet the the the Po tube Pi the η= r length gradient to tube of = viscosity the the fluid = of (i) from of radius − pressure

the as the the from pressure of it decreases As and length viscosity increases gradient through the is flow the clear tube is fluid of increased, increases. tube the equation, the either or as power. in radius it raised tube critical is of The the is the fourth a determining factor to because flow

Flow Resistance to

electrical drop flow the voltage theory, the that (R) (E) (I). is equals of ratio resistance In Ohm’s current law to

17.4 Equation

to mechanics, ratio may Similarly, hydraulic pressure − the defined resistance Po,) (Pi in the of (Q): drop fluid be flow as (R)

Equation 17.5

hydraulic of rearranging newtonian resistance laminar cylindrical be components hydraulic equation: to the through Poiseuille’s flow physical For of by the steady, law a yield may of fluid the a the resistance tube, appreciated

17.6 Equation

of characteristics Thus to of and flow dimensions when law only depends resistance the Poiseuille’s the the tube the on the fluid. applies,

any varies determinant to inversely the as of the because tube. the of the resistance radius caliber power fourth vessel is through of resistance of flow principal blood vessel the The In

Fig. against per is diameter. unit vessels the plotted , measured, the and vessel (R/l) through resistance of the resistance is to blood 17.4 flow small vessel length 187 1000 Hg/[mm3/sec])/µm 0.1 1 the is (µm) of as side Capillaries it 58 diameter side 7 in vessels Arterial diminishes capillaries As diameter 4234 increase 5042 highest 3426 R/l(mm µm), 10 5850 Vessel Venous and shown, the •Fig. resistance (diameter 0.01 100 in 2618 17.4 Resistance of Blood Individual Unit (R/l) Per Vessels. Small Length Thecapillaries,withadiameterof7µm,aredenotedbythevertical line. dashed Resistancesofarteriolesareplottedtotheleftoftheverticaldashedline,andresistancesofvenules,totherightoftheverticaldashedline.Forbothtypesofvessels,theresistanceperunitlengthisinverselyproportionaltothefourthpowerofthevesseldiameter. Res. (RedrawnfromLipowskyHH,etal.Circ 1978;43:738.) on arterial and the sides the capillaries. venous of the both the (or are radius) sides fourth the Values diameter power of of on of capillaries. vessels larger to virtually proportional inversely R/l of the

of the resistance Changes occur when vessels vascular in changes. caliber contraction change wall. in vessel is cells circular of The most factor a smooth leads that the important caliber vessel to muscle in the blood therefore to resistance these blood alter of Changes in also through flow the pressure internal and vessels caliber alter the vessels. elastic vessels tubes. are Blood external pressure resistance. vessel internal the wall and the vessel, the a of of the greater the between its the less pressure) caliber and hydraulic difference transmural Hence, greater (i.e., the across the

is It from apparent

Fig. the drop pressure small in 15.3 arterioles. that very occurs in arteries the greatest and the approximately µm, However, greatest flow. have which have a mean blood capillaries, of 7 to diameter resistance another (as vessels varieties the all one different series of that with in of Nevertheless, in lie blood

Fig. capillaries, not ), 15.3 greatest arterioles, the the the resistance. have across arterioles: parallel is in arranged across related relative fewer arranged of seeming than parallel systemic capillaries the total and in and more parallel This resistance resistance the parallel. less arterioles much in many total arterioles capillaries numbers capillaries are paradox to There the far circulation, is than the smooth the have addition, lumen radius. a of arranged can thick muscle circularly In that arterioles fibers vary coat greatly, from alter as seen •Fig. changes the resistance hydraulic small radius in be can Even Forresistances(R1,R2,andR3)arrangedinseries,totalresistance(Rt)equalsthesumoftheindividualresistances.P,pressure;Q,flow. 17.5

Eq. varies wherein inversely r4. 17.6 with ), R

the horizontal types listed in of axis cardiovascular system, the In the various along vessels

Fig. series another. in lie with 15.3 one individual (see of arranged one of another in members parallel category ordinarily The with each are vessels

Fig. ). 15.1 (in which hepatic capillaries each instances capillaries the parallel series in in with splanchnic with other). vasculature intestinal and aligned are the throughout series Thus most the are the and capillaries which (in peritubular body, the the elements capillaries) vasculature except are glomerular in renal in electrical manner for of same parallel be hydraulic analogous combinations in the arranged those derived as components resistance The of or can series resistance. in total in

in Series Resistance of Vessels

In in the system depicted

Fig. three R1, R2, R3, resistances, and 17.5 are hydraulic in , arranged series. the difference [Pi] entire (i.e., each the pressure the pressure across drop drops the outflow a consists and between resistances of inflow across individual sum The pressure [Po]) of (equation system of pressure in the

Fig. ). 17.5 other state, equal given (Q) must cross-section. the In the any any flow through cross-section the flow steady through equation (a) in each When is component divided (equation by in Q [b]

Fig. it 17.5 of is from ( resistance ), the evident definition

Eq. the for the resistances; 17.5 of system sum that the of resistance is, total individual in resistances equals series, (Rt) the that ) entire

Equation 17.7

Vessels Parallel of Resistance in

in illustrated in For parallel, as resistances

Fig. tubes. , all and same the 17.6 is pressure inflow outflow for system (equation of total parallel (Qt) in state, the [a] flow equals the elements through the steady the through individual the In sum flows

Fig. 17.5).

•Fig. is gradient term Because elements, each (Pi Po) the pressure identical parallel − all for Forresistances(R1,R2,andR3)arrangedinparallel,thereciprocalofthetotalresistance(Rt)equalsthesumofthereciprocalsoftheindividualresistances.P,pressure;Q,flow. 17.6

may to that pressure equation divided by gradient yield (b). be (a) equation in the From equation in of resistance, (c) definition

Fig. 17.5 be may derived. equation, of is, reciprocal sum this the resistance resistances; the the of individual reciprocals the total the to equals resistances of in (Rt) for parallel, that According

17.8 Equation

parallel simple illustrations, fundamental In hydraulic apparent. systems of some properties few of a become the elements the example, resistances in if the parallel of three For

Fig. equal, 17.6 were all then

17.9 Equation

from Therefore,

Eq. 17.8,

17.10 Equation

these the are of terms, equated, reciprocals When

17.11 Equation

individual the than the total is resistances. resistance less Thus total individual the that than must For any resistance arrangement, component. of parallel be less any system with added low-resistance parallel is a high For consider tube resistance which example, a a to in very tube. in an pathway, because less must of component The conductance, resistance low-resistance fluid. high-resistance itself additional than by for of of or affords the total system component be the the flow that

and physiological entire of the components, one vasculature. as the such the peripheral systemic Consider of bed total the its vascular (TPR) resistance relationship the resistance renal of between (i.e., systemic of bed output the [Pv]) the venous the [Pa] entire is ratio [Qt]). pressure pressure the the vascular to pressure TPR arteriovenous flow (AV) cardiac − difference through (arterial pressure vascular resistance For the example, AV (Rr) would the flow ratio renal difference renal of Pv) the same (Pa − be blood to (Qr).

a 0.02 (PRUs). with 5000 Pv an output of is units 100 of mm and mm a cardiac an Hg, or peripheral Hg/mL/minute, 0 Hg, mL/min, In of Pa 0.02 peripheral resistance TPR mm individual Normally, be through minute. mL/ rate kidney approximately would of one the blood 600 flow would ÷ mL/minute, the 8.5 PRUs, 600 100 mm Hg than resistance TPR. greater or be times 0.17 is which Renal therefore systemic vascular such entire weighs only body, than the organ whole as as as which the 1% the kidney, circulation. resistance much much that In an greater approximately is of the Hence, more kidney, as component the resistance surprising the the would not be because the one for greater that flow. is systemic circulation for systemic only flow not also blood such entire circulation a kidney but pathways alternative than it has many to to organ, for

Fig. fluid hence a is contact the in with adheres ), to wall the tube and of 17.3A motionless. layer thin wall of slowly the a layer layer moves finite central to lamina just therefore fluid against motionless but external that this The with and velocity. shear must layer, the more (see moves profile central a of more velocity rapidly; paraboloid that next longitudinal is still the layer Similarly,

Fig.

). 17.3A that lamina moves given any the the elements fluid tube. lamina in The longitudinally along in remain as fluid the at maximal the and mean The tube. is the across cross-section center velocity of entire the of equal of twice to flow velocity stream the

elements the flow may fluid tube; Irregular fluid develop in such of of called through turbulent. is a flow motions the remain instead, laminae; elements rapid, this confined (see not do to specific occurs In mixing condition, radial fluid a

Fig. ). 17.3B the turbulent a is of when force flow given pressure when it through same necessary tube is laminar. flow to fluid the than is Greater proportional of pressure In the square to the approximately turbulent rate. rate, of the flow, to is flow the in drop the laminar flow, the proportional is power first pressure drop whereas flow a turbulent flow, the Hence, heart if must develops. produce such do more to as considerably flow given work pump a

given exists conditions may under (NR). Reynold’s a of predicted in called tube the Whether turbulent or number flow a laminar basis be on number dimensionless the to number of viscous ratio This inertial represents forces. For fluid a cylindrical flowing tube, a through

where v = 17.12 tube D mean velocity, = diameter, fluid Equation η= viscosity. ρ= and density, 3000, or is laminar; and the between greater, less, is transitional turbulent. and is is usually NR the and flow the when 2000 flow is NR 3000 NR When or turbulent; between 2000 flow laminar when is

Eq. densities, indicates fluid high tube fluid velocities, high small predispose low to and viscosities diameters, that turbulence. 17.12 flow abrupt in addition In may variations the factors, tube turbulence. irregularities dimensions walls or to these tube produce in

the Wall Stress Shear on Vessel

the it blood vessel vessel, the a on As exerts through flows to parallel force wall a wall. is This shear force (τ). a called stress stress of the the to flow fluid: directly viscosity Shear is and rate proportional

17.13 Equation

whenitoccursinavessel,thesoundistermedabruit. Turbulenceisusuallyaccompaniedbyaudiblevibrations.Turbulentflowwithinthecardiovascularsystemmaybedetectedthroughastethoscopeduringphysicalexamination.Whentheturbulenceoccursintheheart,theresultantsoundistermedamurmur; (2)thehighflowvelocitiesassociatedwiththehighcardiacoutputthatusuallyprevailsinanemicpatients.Bloodclots,orthrombi,aremorelikelytodevelopinturbulentflowthaninlaminarflow.Aproblemwiththeuseofartificialvalvesinthesurgicaltreatmentofvalvularheartdiseaseisthatthrombimayoccurinassociationwiththeprostheticvalve.Thethrombimaybedislodgedandoccludeacrucialbloodvessel.Itisimportanttodesignsuchvalvestoavertturbulenceandtoincludeanticoagulantsasapartoftherapy. Insevereanemia,functionalcardiacmurmurs(murmursnotcausedbystructuralabnormalities)arefrequentlydetectable.Thephysicalbasesforsuchmurmursresidesare(1)thereducedviscosityofbloodinanemiaand

Incertaintypesofarterialdisease,particularlyhypertension,thesubendotheliallayersofvesselstendtodegeneratelocally,andsmallregionsoftheendotheliummaylosetheirnormalsupport.Theviscousdragonthearterialwallmaycauseatearbetweenanormallysupportedregionandanunsupportedregionoftheendotheliallining.Bloodmaythenflowfromthevessellumenthroughtheriftintheliningandbecomedissectedbetweenthevariouslayersoftheartery.Suchalesioniscalledadissecting aneurysm. •Fig. Itoccursmostoftenintheproximalportionsoftheaortaandisextremelyserious.Onereasonforitspredilectionforthissiteisthehighvelocityofbloodflow,withassociatedlargeshearratevaluesattheendothelialwall.Shearstressatthevesselwallalsoinfluencesmanyothervascularfunctions,suchasthepermeabilityofthevesselwallsbylargemolecules,thebiochemicalactivityofendothelialcells,theintegrityoftheformedelementsinblood,andbloodcoagulation.Anincreaseinshearstressontheendothelialwallisalsoaneffectivestimulusforthereleaseofnitricoxide(NO)fromvascularendothelialcells;NOisapotentvasodilator(seethesection“ 17.7 Therelativeviscosityofwholebloodincreasesataprogressivelygreaterrateasthehematocritratioincreases.Foranygivenhematocritratio,theapparentviscosityofbloodislowerwhenmeasuredinabiologicalviscometer(suchasahindlegbloodvessel)thaninaconventionalcapillarytubeviscometer. Res. (RedrawnfromLevyMN,ShareL.Circ 1953;1:247. 2 4 viscometer 5 7 Hematocrit 1 Relative Capillary 50 6 Hind viscosity leg 3 ratio 7030 8 )9010 tube

Blood of Properties Rheologic

of a constant over dimensions at stays tube of wide temperature and viscosity fluid a specified The flows. given newtonian range a vary a viscosity and considerably of nonnewtonian may function as fluid as tube dimensions for However, such blood, flows. a viscosity a unique term Therefore, does meaning not have for the blood. of frequently The term is blood derived obtained conditions of the for value particular measurement. viscosity under used the viscosity apparent

is erythrocytes, the principally a liquid, formed plasma. relatively Rheologically, homogeneous elements, a suspension in blood blood of function volume a the of red hematocrit blood blood blood cells a the of to whole viscosity Because as volume is varies of blood). suspension, the apparent the (ratio of of is water. The 1.3 times of of viscosity plasma to 1.2 that The upper curve in

Fig. viscosity plasma. 45% times 2.4 of the with of a normal ratio that hematocrit apparent that of blood is 17.7 shows

anemia, severe low. In viscosity is blood especially progressively; curve As concentrations the slope of increases, the of it hematocrit the (see is range upper increases at steep erythrocyte the

Fig. 17.7

of of For on blood the estimating the given hematocrit, depends the dimensions the any used in apparent viscosity tube viscosity.

Fig. diameter to 0.3 that approximately as mm. demonstrates blood progressively than decreases apparent of the diminishes less tube viscosity 17.8 this resistance, critical value. are The blood with than the considerably the of arterioles, vessels less diameters highest the phenomenon This

Fig. tube of in is tissues, of the that conventional measured measured than 17.7 living when less same viscosity capillary blood, the blood viscosity apparent a apparent in considerably viscometer. illustrates also the

2 diameter Relative 1 0.40.3 6 (mm) 5 4 •Fig. 0.50.20.1 viscosity 0.60 Tube 3 17.8 Therelativeviscosityofbloodrelativetothatofwaterincreasesasafunctionoftubediameteruptoadiameterofapproximately0.3mm. Physiol. (RedrawnfromFåhraeusR,LindqvistT.Am J 1931;96:562.) flow reduces greatest to therefore resistance. possess in that resistance vessels blood the the by viscosity blood the explained The change influence apparent in it part in is actual on diameter through composition tube flows tubes. of small as to of flow changes cells stream, whereas The in axial red the slower plasma layers. tend to tends accumulate blood the in faster the because composition marginal blood axial red the blood moves portions tube contain greater a cells at of of axial bloodstream cells the greater in red Because this proportion and the portion does. less velocity, tend to the than traverse plasma time lower the is blood blood in arteries in small the than hematocrit of in or Furthermore, veins. contained vessels large that blood

the and axial blood are forces not away The fully the walls responsible is physical drift for vessel at from erythrocytes normal when rates the of toward flowing understood. stream is cells. blood great of factor flexibility the One red in whereas the do do. microcirculation, low particles those toward central the particles not tube, like flexible migrate flow rigid axis of a rates, At tube’s The by near the the is of increase particles enhanced in axis concentration central an flexible rate. shear

increased shear ( as rate diminishes is the viscosity of blood The apparent

Fig. 17.9 called a thinning. phenomenon ), shear lamina the that rate greater one adjacent fluid against an The flow, amount the of the lamina. shears of greater at to rates the greater partly flow axial laminae nonnewtonian responsible in accumulate for this higher The erythrocytes tendency behavior. is for aggregation increases such important more However, flow cells blood at aggregates; factor very that tend a is viscosity. form slow rates, suspended the to decreases, of (see increased, and the viscosity blood this flow As is apparent does so aggregation

Fig. 17.9

plasma, low especially rates tendency The at flow the in fibrinogen. the aggregate molecules depends for erythrocytes of protein on concentration to larger fibrinogen are For concentration of changes blood with much is reason, the high. more viscosity pronounced in rate this flow when apparent viscosity the of endothelial adhere microvessels the the low to flow tend addition, at blood. In to thereby increase rates, the of leukocytes and cells

•Fig. 17.9 Decreaseintheviscosityofblood(cp,centipoise)atincreasingratesofshear(sec−1).Theshearrateisthevelocityofonelayeroffluidinrelationtothatoftheadjacentlayersandisdirectionallyrelatedtotherateofflow. Physiol. (RedrawnfromAminTM,SirsJA.Q Exp J 1985;70:37. 5 4 •Fig. 18060 )2400 rate/sec–1 120 (cp) 7 3 6 Shear Viscosity 17.10 Effectoftheplasmafibrinogenconcentrationontheflexibilityofhumanerythrocytes. Physiol. Exp (RedrawnfromAminTM,SirsJA.Q J 1985;70:37. concentration 4 Erythrocyte 8 (% flexibility 2 0 2 min–1) 6 (mg/mL) 31 )40 Fibrinogen

factor thinning, also is in a when erythrocytes is the of especially deformability shear hematocrit high. The are diameter µm, of approximately pass but of The mean human 7 to 3 blood through with µm. openings cells they able is only red diameter a and the deformed. progressively erythrocytes become rates, more blood with flows As at densely more erythrocytes packed greater deformation Such the apparent viscosity blood. diminishes of as human flexibility of ( increases concentration fibrinogen enhanced plasma erythrocytes is of in the The

Fig. ). 17.10 If thinning certain become in cells spherocytic the are diminish. shear as they blood red hardened, may anemias,

Arterial System The

systems to body. beds pulmonary the distribute systemic blood capillary arterial the throughout The and of the vessels regulate various The to beds. of are this high-resistance flow distribution system the arterioles that capillary large have the these artery, in of their walls, and branches major elastin highly amount aorta, compliant). distensible a makes The their vessels which pulmonary (i.e., This blood heart dampen that of results to flow nature the pulsatile intermittently. blood distensibility as serves the pumps vessels distend, ventricles the diastole, forward propel these the from recoil blood during blood (Fig. is during they When ejected and and systole, ). 17.11 is converted to of flow Thus capillaries. output heart the the through intermittent the steady a

also large the reduces arteries The the the nature heart. elastic of work of would during rise dramatically were If these rigid the arteries compliant, systole. rather than pressure large work the of against heart. load pump afterload) ventricles require would increase (i.e., pressure This and thus to the the a increased vessels, distend, reduced. as is blood ejected work and systolic into thus resultant heart, and the pressure, in the are they these the Instead, increase of

Aspeopleage,theelastincontentofthelargearteriesisreducedandreplacedbycollagen.Thisreducesarterialcompliance(

Fig.17.12 (describedinthenextsection). ).Thuswithage,systolicpressureincreases,asdoesthedifferencebetweensystolicanddiastolicbloodpressure,calledthepulse pressure

Pressure Blood Arterial Determinants of

it status. of cardiovascular their useful in is measured patients, provides estimate a Arterial pressure routinely and blood over arterial as pressure pressure arterial within systolic diastolic which and (maximal) as defined (Pa), time, (minimal) Arterial and ( pressure be is cycle pressure the cardiac averaged mean can the

Fig. 17.13 ). is between systolic difference pulse The and diastolic termed pressure pressure.

“physical” The pressure determinants and “physiological” factors. divided into blood arbitrarily of arterial are two The

blood Arterial flows Systole through the

flow throughout systole. Diastole blood Arterial capillaries continues to through

throughout diastole. the capillaries

When stroke is A stretched the diastole ventricular compliant, volume arteries the previously of arteries B substantial the a fraction normally are recoil. During volume The arteries ventricular systole. the stored in during blood of is by The arterial that displaced walls recoil are furnishes stretched. the continuous diastole. capillary flow throughout

ventricle Capillaries Left equal Systole atrium atrium Aorta capillaries volume Left Left ventricle flow volume Capillaries through Aorta the A during entire stroke the Left systole. of must to blood Diastole capillaries diastole. ceases during Flow the through

appreciably the diastole. C recoil in none the D When virtually arteries during stored arteries Rigid of are the can be stroke volume cannot rigid, arteries.

•Fig. Whenarteriesarenormallycompliant(A 17.11 (C),butflowceasesduringdiastole(D). andB),bloodflowsthroughthecapillariesthroughoutthecardiaccycle.Whenthearteriesarerigid,bloodflowsthroughthecapillariesduringsystole

volume) fluid system. fluid the of within (i.e., characteristics static factors, (compliance) the physical arterial characteristics, blood or system and are elastic mechanical volume the equals stroke factors cardiac × (which heart are rate physiological peripheral and output resistance. volume) The

divided To area is by an under pressure time the blood pressure (see the interval arterial from the estimate involved curve Pa tracing,

Fig. ). 17.13 from of values can Alternatively, measured the means and pressure approximated by systolic pressure formula: (Pd) of (Ps) the Pa following diastolic be

17.14 Equation

the compliance volume Consider on factors: arterial and Pa arterial only depends system two mean in physical that blood (

Fig. 17.14 ). resistance of from output) heart from arteries turn, (Qr) of the the outflow rate depends (cardiac inflow, the (Qh) (Va), the on vessels rate and on (peripheral the through in the Arterial volume into arteries runoff). These mathematically relationships expressed as are

where arterial 17.15 time. per blood of unit the in volume change Equation is dVa/dt further, If volume exceeds arterial increases, Qh are Qr, and arterial the rises. stretched walls pressure Qr exceeds converse The happens Qh. when remains When equals Pa constant. Qr, Qh increases output increases resistance. Thus raise cardiac do as in peripheral in Pa, decreases output or resistance peripheral Pa. cardiac decrease in Conversely,

pressure Arterial diastolic is systolic minus pulse pressure. pressure factor, of volume systole. physiological arterial function which factor) one ventricular the in stroke volume, a change is just (a principally blood determines physical It during This compliance), a to second pressure the arterial (see factor factor, in (arterial physical physical addition pulse determines

Fig. 17.14

depends Pa on resistance. As previously, cardiac peripheral described and output through volume rapid the the introduced the the arterioles. volume the systole, During blood system arterial the into of exits that phase system ejection exceeds of peak; the therefore pressure Arterial systolic pressure. is pressure volume arterial and peak ventricular cardiac the ejection. cycle diastole), exceeds cardiac remainder the During (i.e., of pressure arterial to causes which blood minimum, fall volume is The diastolic a to thus in resultant decrement pressure.

Fig. of 17.15 compliance effect runoff arterial is on stroke and cardiac constant. illustrates the volume is now peripheral when pressure greatly pulse ejection zero,

•Fig. autopsyfromhumansindifferentagegroups(denotedbythenumbers•Fig. 17.12 Pressure-volumerelationshipsofaortasobtainedat 17.13 Pulse, Mean Arterial Diastolic, and Systolic, Pres-attherightendofeachofthecurves).Notethatcompliance(ΔV/ΔP)sure. Meanarterialpressure(P)representstheareaunderthearterialdecreaseswithage. Clin Invest. (RedrawnfromHallockP,BensonIC.J red) pressurecurve(dark dividedbythedurationofthecardiaccycle1937;16:595. t1). )(t2−

•Fig. Thetwophysicaldeterminantsofpulsepressurearearterialcompliance(Ca)andthechangeinarterialvolume.Thetwophysiologicaldeterminantsofmeanarterialpressure(P)arecardiacoutputandtotalperipheralresistance. 17.14

volume of Arterial to (see blood blood (Ca), the compliance ratio mean pressure

Eq. 19.1 pulse affects ), also pressure. in is This relationship illustrated

Fig. . 17.16 arterial TPR decrease output constant, an cardiac pressure. pulse are in and results increase in a When in compliance on arterial ventricle stroke left imposes the increased also and are compliance Pa greater even volume, equal (i.e., afterload), two a TPR, workload the if individuals. Diminished in

TPR volume Pa As increase to previously discussed, increase. constant, heart stroke causes rate and in an remain if the

•Fig. Change 17.15 Arterial Over a Pressures Effect Range in Pulse Remains Which of of on in Stroke the a Pressure Volumes. System Constant Compliance in and Prevailing Volume (P2− V3)> P1). (V2− Alargerincrementinbloodvolume,whereby(V4− P3)> PA)andagreaterpulsepressure,sothat(P4− > V1),resultsingreatermeanbloodpressure(PB

is leads pressure increases the unchanged proportional (Fig. and diastolic is arterial systolic constant, so an TPR increase pressure to in pulse When in compliance that 17.17A ). compliance is not However, linear. arterial decreases stressed, is artery the and (see Pa increases compliance As

Fig.

17.17B ). of increased pulse compliance in with Because Pa arterial when decrease elevated. pressure Pa, is increases the

Compliance Energy of Effect Consumption on Arterial Myocardial

system cardiac energy requirement is imposed by increased a arterial in illustrated rigid The

Fig. . 17.18 In the depicted in data

Fig. ventricle either left output the was stiff peripheral was flow natural tube the through (the to arteries. aorta) the 17.18 from a the to cardiac directed , or through route plastic allowed TPR were In pathway of experiment, the •Fig. values identical, virtually this which regardless 17.16 complianceA[HighCa])resultsinincreasedpulsepressure,whereby(P4− Foragivenvolumeincrement(V2− (P3− P1)> P2).Pa,meanarterialpressure. V1),reducedarterialcompliance(complianceB[LowCa]<

•Fig. orcurvilinear(B). 17.17 Comparisonoftheeffectsofagivenchangeinperipheralresistanceonpulsepressure(P)whenthepressure-volumecurveforthearterialsystemiseitherrectilinear(A) Theincrementinarterialvolumeisthesameforbothconditions;thatis,(V4−V3)=(V2−V1).PressureABVolumeP1V1V2V3V4P3P6P4P2–P5–PressureP1V1V2V3V4P3P6P4P2–P5– •Fig. Therelationshipbetweenmyocardialoxygencon-sumption(1mL/100g/beat)andstrokevolume(inmilliliters)inananesthetizeddogwhosecardiacoutputcouldbepumpedbytheleftventricleeitherthroughtheaortaorthroughastiffplastictubetotheperipheralarteries. 17.18 Res. (ModifiedfromKellyRP,TuninR,KassDA.Circ 1992;71:490. 0 O g/beat)0.1 consumption Native 15 tubing selected. 10 0.05 volume (mL) )Plastic 2 (mL) 5 was aorta Stroke O2/100 the stroke the given than the was through volume, it The diverted results when was aorta. consumption for that through blood when plastic tubing flowed myocardial substantially any oxygen showed greater less pump significantly the has that conduit through oxygen more ventricle left through The compliant increased consumption energy to compliant more a a than expend indicates to conduit. blood

Arterialpulsepressureprovidesvaluableinformationaboutaperson’sstrokevolume,providedthatarterialcomplianceisessentiallynormal.Patientswhohaveseverecongestiveheartfailureorwhohavesufferedaseverehemorrhagearelikelytohaveaverylowarterialpulsepressurebecausetheirstrokevolumesareabnormallysmall.Conversely,individualswithlargestrokevolumes,asinaorticvalveregurgitation,arelikelytohaveanincreasedarterialpulsepressure.Similarly,well-trainedathletesatresttendtohavelargestrokevolumesbecausetheirheartratesareusuallylow.Theprolongedventricularfillingtimesintheseindividualsinducetheventriclestopumpalargestrokevolume,andhencetheirpulsepressureislarge.

the down about the and is radial wave propagated stretch by ejection initiates that pressure a its aorta ventricular branches. The ascending brought of aorta left the (≈4 12 itself wave travels m/second) faster to does. than The much blood pressure pressure palpation be This is a detected that of peripheral wave the can artery. through “pulse”

Inchronichypertension,aconditioncharacterizedbyapersistentelevationinTPR,thearterialpressure-volumecurveresemblesthatshownin

. Fig.17.17B BecausearteriesbecomesubstantiallylesscompliantwhenParises,anincreaseinTPRcausessystolicpressuretobemoreelevatedthandiastolicpressure.Diastolicpressureiselevatedinsuchindividualsbutordinarilynotmorethan10to40mmHgabovetheaveragenormallevelof80mmHg.Notuncommonly,however,systolicpressureiselevatedby50to100mmHgabovetheaveragenormallevelof120mmHg.

Thevelocityofthepressurewavevariesinverselywitharterialcompliance.Ingeneral,transmissionvelocityincreaseswithage,whichconfirmstheobservationthatthearteriesbecomelesscompliantwithadvancingage.Velocityalsoincreasesprogressivelyasthepulsewavetravelsfromtheascendingaortatowardtheperiphery.Thisincreaseinvelocityreflectsthedecreaseinvascularcomplianceinthemoredistalportionsthaninthemoreproximalportionsofthearterialsystem.

ThePacontourbecomesdistortedasthewaveistransmitteddownthearterialsystem.Thisdistortioninthepressurewavecontourofthehumanarterialtreeisdemonstratedasafunctionofageandofrecordingsitein

Fig.17.19 .Dampingofthehigh-frequencycomponentsofthearterialpulseiscausedlargelybytheviscoelasticpropertiesofthearterialwalls.Thepulsepressurewavetravelsmorerapidlyinolderpeoplethanintheyoungerpeople,asaconsequenceofreducedcompliance.Severalfactors—includingwavereflectionandresonance,vasculartapering,andpressure-inducedchangesintransmissionvelocity—contributetopeakingofthePawave.

of indirectly pressure commonly, Most sphygmomanometer. blood by estimated a is means patients by be directly peripheral strain of needles In introduced into intensive care pressure of units, the blood may arteries hospital catheters arterial measure or means gauges. to readings may systolic radial arm, blood artery the of from are method). the (palpatory pressure palpation be wrist pressure by estimated When the taken at systolic no the perceived. cuff in exceeds pressure is level, pulse While the falls pressure below systolic just As the level (

Fig. slight under of the systole, a at and a the during the artery blood the ), brachial of peak pulse is passes 17.20A wrist. felt through spurt cuff

more to method estimated. pressure, sensitive precise also be it measuring The enables more diastolic and a therefore auscultatory technique for systolic and pressure is of The space the to a stethoscope the practitioner with antecubital applied brachial skin the artery. listens over in pressure, brachial heard (see the occluded, the While and are artery exceeds sounds pressure the is systolic cuff no

Fig.

17.20B ). (120 just in pressure inflation Hg below systolic falls mm When the the level

Fig. the of Korotkoff of and slight blood escapes are sounds) pressure tapping 17.20A spurt ), heard (called each small cuff, the with occluding sounds heartbeat. a •Fig. pressure the first The is which detected sound at Trees Arterial Various at Pressure in the From Pulse of Sites Humans Curves Different 17.19 Recorded Ages. Inthe24-yearold,thearterialpulsedisplaysstrikingchangesinthepulsepressureamplitudeandcontourasitpassesdownthearterialtree.Thepulsepressurewaveinthe68-year-oldshowslittleamplificationandisrelativelyunchangedasthepulsetravelsbecausethereislesswavereflection. Principles. Experimental Clinical in Blood and Arteries: (ReproducedbypermissionofHodderEducationfromNicholsWW,O’RourkeM,eds.McDonald’s Flow Theoretical, 5thed.London:Arnold;2005.) represents systolic pressure. corresponds usually measured It directly systolic pressure. to the closely pressure the under sounds become As more per louder. blood the fall, of continues the to and cuff the cuff inflation escapes beat the the approaches sounds level, diastolic Korotkoff inflation the When become pressure muffled. just Hg diastolic below level falls (80 mm the When inflation the pressure in

Fig. point this 17.20A disappear; the ), at pressure. reading sounds pressure the indicates diastolic The that spurts pass discontinuous the origin cuff the and beyond the the vibrations. cuff; Korotkoff the a of audible related blood static blood and generate of is column meet to sounds turbulence under impact of Once (see artery, the longer are brachial the no is continuous pressure flow heard is and pressure, than in diastolic sounds inflation less

Fig. 17.20C

The System Venous

of circulatory the to system return are that elements heart Veins blood tissues. the from in up of the the very to blood a large 70% constitute reservoir circulation. that Moreover, contains veins blood of to reservoir the makes the them volume The adjust able heart, returning function to of veins

Theankle-brachialindex(ABI)istheratioofsystolicbloodpressuresattheankle(dorsalispedisartery)tothatinthebrachialartery.TheABI,whichisobtainedbysimplemeasurements,isanindicatorofpossibleperipheralarterydisease.TheABIhasalsobeenproposedasapredictorofriskforcardiovascularandcerebrovasculardisease.PeoplewithanormalABIratioof1.1to1.4havealowerincidenceofeithercoronaryorcerebrovasculareventsthandothosewitharatioof0.9orlower.Inaddition,astherateofABIincreaseswithtime,theincidencesofcardiovascularmorbidityandmortalityalsoincrease.

cardiac matched is output preload, be of the (see needs altered that so or body can the when

19). Chapter capacitance property important This of an is high veins.

venules in decreases thoracic Hg, and postcapillary venae 0 is atrium. hydrostatic it to 20 cavae mm approximately approximately the The right mm and pressure Hg in venae the termed thoracic Hydrostatic and in pressure cavae right venous also is pressure. atrium central flow. to very and very Veins blood distensible are low resistance have resistance allows blood of from movement Such low

a whose blood mm is pressure the arterial that blood patient Hg. pressure in being is 120/80 Consider measured fall 80 in (point the line) cuff C) in to from about (represented B) arm The seconds. oblique greater the allowed mm pressure around than patient’s a Hg 6 mm below to is Hg 120 (point by

and through detected no be placed distal by under can mm the the exceeds pressure to (120 no cuff, arm progresses the arterial Hg), the bell arterial systolic on When segment the cuff. cuff stethoscope pressure blood a the sounds

the the below of the flow sounds continuous, When pressure, past is arterial cuff falls region pressure no arterial are diastolic the audible. and cuff stethoscope. segment artery with is the sounds traverse the of through 80 120 the under and between mm heartbeat, heard the spurts are blood pressure and Hg, each Korotkoff cuff the cuff When

•Fig. 17.20 A Measurementofarterialbloodpressurewithasphygmomanometer. toC,

in reductions the to with only heart small central peripheral venous veins pressure. adjusting ”) that Moreover, accompany resistance the by and “ filtration body the in in postcapillary adjustments and absorption control (see cardiovascular changes section assist veins position.

various on in these The veins participate their functions ability depends to distensibility, or compliance. of those or the level in varies the limb compliant the lower with position than of at the in in body heart. that above way less such the veins compliance a are Venous limbs than also in or thicker those are in limbs. Veins lower brain upper the the the accompanied and reduction compliance an of and of occurs is collagen with in decreases vascular arteries, a content. that age, thickening by The that elastin in increase like veins,

are respiratory Variations achieved tone, (see by in activity adjustments in venous return venomotor

stress orthostatic 19), Chapter or gravity. and

may amount influence Gravitational profoundly blood cardiac system and output. the in affect forces the venous of therefore For vessels, blood because blood causes at the which pool soldiers in may example, standing for time dependent reduces gravity a long attention cardiac to output. faint these absence the of compensatory Warm temperatures reactions, with muscular and activity effects. interfere the ambient vasomotor exaggerates pilots effects airplane amplified during are Gravitational dives. in pullout from footward the greater be the may force direction several in of gravity. force than The centrifugal times lower the parts body. as out momentarily and from black characteristically pooled blood the is the pullout of the in drained maneuver regions during Pilots cephalic

been the but to explanations are in output, inaccurate. have gravitationally reduction explain induced advanced cardiac Some they been the regions is the example, individual to when body. gravity has For that of standing, the force venous return argued impedes an dependent heart from it of the the counterforce it on facilitates arterial same and because does not incomplete return. is explanation gravitational venous side this the of vascular circuit, account for This the counterforce Moreover, the account does for in of it not gravity effect pooling. causing venous and both and person the When extremities arteries veins. upright, to the is in accumulate standing lower a distend gravity causes blood compliance side the is much side arterial circuit. venous the than so compliance, arterial the of more venous this than distention Because on greater on occurs

effects pooling) volume an of The from hemodynamic distention such resemble the by caused those blood venous (venous of body. hemorrhage of equivalent the the position adult in to shifts a When to 800 from an mL 300 standing position, a of legs. supine blood pools relaxed output L/min. may cardiac 2 pooling This approximately reduce by rate made heart increases the The loss to standing compensatory and adjustments There to also adjustments assume a similar cardiac position (see reflex ): in blood to are contractility. are the are both arterioles affected veins the arterioles to addition, constrict; extent In than are veins. a greater and

dependent the in but at When ( rises remains a in recumbent regions stands of the veins body the pressure person the rest,

Fig. 17.21 ). increases 1 Pv legs does and gradually begins after equilibrium until person standing. in reach the The value minute the not almost an only in heart. is allow toward the rise attributable venous to of this slowness valves, flow the Pv The which from in blood a falling toward veins valves prevent stands, the person When the the feet. column at numerous levels by venous Hence, of the supported blood valves. these is be of Because many of the as venous consisting valves, thought discontinuous of column segments. can these to and blood enter venules small the continues However, rise. veins, many continues the tributary to column pressure and from it, that As segment just above one exceeds soon in open. as in the segment pressure intervening the is valve the forced the all Ultimately, column is and the are continuous. valves open,

•Fig. 17.21 Meanpressures(±95%confidenceintervals)inthefootveinsofhumansubjectsduringquietstanding,duringwalking,andduringrunning. Appl (FromStickC,etal.J Physiol. 1992;72:2063. (mm pressure Standing Hg) Walking Venous 80 km/hr) (6 Running km/hr) 0 km/hr) 60 40 Walking (3 20 )100 (10

hypotension, whichmaycauselightheadednessorfainting. Someofthedrugsusedtotreatchronichypertensioninterferewiththereflexadaptationtostanding.Similarly,astronautsexposedtoweightlessnesslosetheiradaptationstogravityafterafewdaysinspace,andtheyexperiencepronounceddifficultieswhentheyfirstreturntoearth.Whensuchastronautsandotherindividualswithimpairedreflexadaptationsstand,theirbloodpressuremaydropsubstantially.Thisresponseiscalledorthostatic

Thesuperficialveinsintheneckordinarilyarepartiallycollapsedwhenanormalindividualissittingorstanding.Venousreturnfromtheheadisconductedlargelythroughthedeepercervicalveins,whichareprotectedfromcollapsebecausetheyaretetheredtosurroundingstructures.Whencentralvenouspressureisabnormallyelevated,thesuperficialneckveinsaredistended,andtheydonotcollapseevenwhenthepersonsitsorstands.Suchcervicalvenousdistentionisanimportantclinicalsignofcongestiveheartfailure.

Theauxiliarypumpingmechanismgeneratedbyskeletalmusclecontractionsismuchlesseffectiveinpeoplewithvaricoseveinsintheirlegs.Thevalvesinthesedefectiveveinsdonotfunctionproperly,andthereforewhenthelegmusclescontract,thebloodinthelegveinsisforcedinboththeretrogradeandantegradedirections.Thuswhenanindividualwithvaricoseveinsstandsorwalks,Pvintheanklesandfeetisexcessivelyhigh.Theconsequenthighcapillarypressureleadstotheaccumulationofedematousfluidintheanklesandfeet.

final slightly that feet. is right in than feet reveals the to measurement static blood the the quiet standing greater of that during from atrium Pv extending Precise only column in level of a the small. caused to the veins very blood drop flow indicates atrium by pressure the right This finding the that from is foot model common resistance, the in veins as venous of this in can system a compliance low the of having very illustrated . the Because viewed all circulatory be the has begins an walk, decreases Pv standing When legs quietly been (see individual to in who appreciably

Fig. ). 17.21 valves, Because the muscles, leg from venous the venous exerted contracting the is the of intermittent compression and the heart. operation because veins blood of the forced toward of by auxiliary muscular contraction lowers serves in and as Pv the mean an the pump. legs Hence, hydrostatic pressure. Furthermore, pooling capillary lowers venous contraction prevents muscular and In during muscular collect the this edematous feet reduces standing. the contraction way, to fluid tendency in for

tissues in circulatory O2 that requirements and supplies system for with nutrients. amounts body’s meet The blood the the with allow layer whose The exchange interstitial of rapid single solutes fluid. of water, a capillaries, endothelial consist gases, cells, walls and of muscular blood regulate capillary beds. flow the major regional to resistance vessels, are which The arterioles, the serve vessels. primarily as and storage and channels veins collecting Venules vessels, lymphoid lymphatic nodes, is system and lymphatic of The composed tissue. proteins in blood. and collects This and veins the fluid recirculation blood the that them transports for escaped back have into from system lymphatic In vessels are of the as this detail. vessels, in examined well the of network the body, the smallest blood as section,

body: as microcirculation defined capillaries, the the vessels through blood circulation The is arterioles, and venules. of the of smallest diameter) Arterioles thin to 100 (see in layer, an lining µm thick and adventitial endothelial layer, smooth a a muscle (5 have

Fig. ). 15.2 10 metarterioles in (10 to Arterioles some to give diameter), which rise in rise 20 diameter) µm to to µm ( (5 capillaries or, to directly in capillaries then tissues, give

Fig. ). 17.22 connect capillary connect venules, or can to bed to capillary directly and can the Metarterioles the bed. they bypass regulate capillaries flow Arterioles dilation. rise give constriction capillaries these to directly or that through by of average of The tubes 1 capillaries form to length an with network mm. 0.5 interconnecting an

of Capillaries Functional Properties

organs, is high. metabolically In glands, capillary heart, muscle, as such skeletal the density active and cartilage, is tissues, In less or such density capillary low. subcutaneous as tissue active Capillary diameter also varies. Some diameters those of have erythrocytes. than capillaries smaller vessels erythrocytes deformed. through to become the temporarily requires these tiny Passage erythrocytes quite are Fortunately, flexible. normal

of the capillaries Blood arterioles. in flow depends contractile state on chiefly flow average blood The velocity •Fig. of the of Microcirculation. Composite Schematic 17.22 Illustration indicatethedirectionofbloodflow.AV,arteriovenous. solid lines structures Thecircular representsympatheticnervefibers.Thearrows onthearterioleandvenulerepresentsmoothmusclefibers,andthebranching

within in several from the vessel a zero can vary second period. same 1 in per is to however, approximately mm/second; brief capillaries it millimeters blood or These random in rhythmic. be may flow capillary changes relaxation caused of the (vasomotion) (i.e., behavior The by arterioles rhythmic is of oscillatory arteries). vessels precapillary contraction small and the capillaries and

muscle intrinsic vascular independent of contractile behavior input. of external is an is Vasomotion smooth and vessels. Changes also in state (intravascular of transmural pressure) extravascular pressure influence contractile precapillary the pressure minus transmural an or An pressure, results the terminal increase Pv either of in by arterioles. by dilation arterioles, increase in caused contraction in of pressure in A transmural precapillary decrease vessel causes relaxation. factors also and neural Humoral affect vasomotion. possibly and causes when be vasomotion to transmural For precapillary pressure the contract, increased overridden can the vessels contractile abolished. response example, during occurs accomplished skeletal effect in for O2 becomes exercise. the parenchymal muscle requirements of tissue, low supply This factors the metabolic as (humoral) when is by too

the intravascular in the increase the of in relaxes transmural a pressure caused arterioles, terminal through constriction Although by blood reduction capillaries cannot upstream pressure severe reduction is the if flow microvessels. also Large vasomotion. exhibit arterioles and metarterioles the arrest flow. vessel flow, completely not does their contraction blood usually lumen the arrest and occlude of may contraction blood the arterioles terminal whereas However, of in rate small Thus contraction altered by flow of may and be arterioles, relaxation arteries, capillaries metarterioles. and the

and for provides nutritional capillaries because it of between through been and the has flow flow exchange blood called solutes gases tissue. Blood of or the it via the flow the that metarterioles nonnutritional, flow (see shunt, termed Conversely, been passes has capillaries venous from bypasses side to arterial as circulation blood the

Fig. ). 17.22 some (see fingertips, shunts (e.g., In body the areas of ears), exist true AV

Fig. ). 17.37 such as in tissues, anatomical muscle, lacking. many However, are shunts of nonnutritional absence occur. Even shunts, flow these can in the precapillary low flow tissues vessels metarterioles, many from may to with activity, arteriole are during closed. continuous be nonnutritional In venule metabolic when open tissues, metabolic precapillary these increases in activity allow to perfusion. When capillary more vessels

and lack incapable muscle are capillaries True constriction. of smooth active therefore capillary shape wall that stimuli. Nevertheless, the to they cells certain form can myosin, response and chemical their actin the endothelial contain in and alter

without pressures radius), capillary lumen bursting. high of Because a small internal narrow (i.e., can its thin-walled withstand Laplace: explained of in law Pierre-Simon property terms of This can the be

Equation 17.16

= T in the the = r of vessel radius wall tension vessel

such thin-walled vessels, Laplace’s to capillaries. as equation applies very vessel opposes ( to distending theoretical a Wall apart the tends (ΔPr) longitudinal the that slit pull tension in force

Fig. ). 17.23 in a equal essentially vivo Transmural pressure to pressure generally negligible. blood vessel because is intraluminal in is extravascular pressure P and is g calculate Hg ρ equation is = an to hρg, wall the where acceleration density height centimeter to per square is g/cm3, To in of according the Hg mm the in in dynes tension, of pressure gravitational is in converted cm/s2. centimeters, column Hg h 3.33 g/cm3 capillary of 25mmHg 104 the 10−4 cm, of × × 13.6 and 980 pressure For pressure with a × a is •Fig. a (2.5 × Hg 5 cm radius cm/sec2) Small Diagram Law the Laplace. of of a Illustrate to Vessel Blood 17.23 T=Pr,whereP=intraluminalpressure,r=radiusofthevessel,andT=walltensionastheforceperunitlengthtangentialtothevesselwall.Walltensionpreventsrupturealongatheoreticallongitudinalslitinthevessel.

dyne/cm2. tension Wall 16.7 is then dyne/cm. mm 1.5 × a dyne/cm. of a of wall pressure Hg For is 2 cm, with 105 radius aorta and an 100 tension the aorta than capillaries, greater normally and of the approximately the in that 12,000 at the Thus of the is capillaries. tension found aorta times wall pressures pressure a Hg. in In person feet may 100 mm quietly, the capillary reach standing tension aorta that pressure. same capillary the a one the the only tension is three-thousandth increases to such internal wall value Even wall at under conditions, in still of

muscle produced is the diameter force smooth the determined resistance vascular of balance the distending the of and The (arterioles) force pressure. between the intraluminal by from contractile vessels smaller an activity the vascular the the diameter. contractile arteriole, muscle of smooth its of greater The at to vessel contraction arterioles, point continue can In the which small is occluded. the completely blood in of the endothelium trapping is by cells of infolding caused by vessel. the Occlusion and

although the greater diameter With blood law of to pressure. according Laplace) tissue vessel decreases than progressive the wall reduction pressure a pressure, is (as intravascular within eventually tension, and does flow in ceases, arteriole still vessel the to pressure unclear. been is causes closing cease flow called The its still that mechanism has and pressure, critical sympathetic of enhanced nerve pressure closing when vasomotor activation low tone fibers. reduced critical is the vasomotor sympathetic The and by nerve increased vascular is vessel activity of is inhibition activity is by the in when

radius,andw= Iftheheartbecomesgreatlydistendedwithbloodduringdiastole,asmayoccurwithcardiacfailure,itfunctionslessefficiently.Toejectagivenvolumeofbloodperbeat,moreenergyisrequired(walltensionmustbegreater)forthedistendedheartthanforanormalundilatedheart.ThelessefficientpumpingofadistendedheartisanexampleofLaplace’slaw,accordingtowhichthetensioninthewallofavesselorchamber(inthiscase,theventricles)equalstransmuralpressure(pressureacrossthewall,ordistendingpressure)multipliedbytheradiusofthevesselorchamber.Laplace’srelationshipordinarilyappliestoinfinitelythin-walledvessels,butitcanbeappliedtothespherical,dilatedheartifcorrectionismadeforwallthickness.Undertheseconditions,theequationisσ=ΔPr/2w,whereσ= wallstress,ΔP= wallthickness. transmuralpressuredifference,r=

Vasoactive Role the Endothelium Capillary of

that of The is an smooth relaxation substances muscle. or endothelium cause source of important contraction vascular (PGI2). substances One prostacyclin, of is prostaglandin these or I2 adenosine vascular muscle (cAMP; PGI2 in smooth monophosphate relax an cyclic can via increase

Fig. ). 17.24 is endothelium PGI2 formed is muscle; from the not action mediated. its in endothelium K+ adenosine, on as and be vessels tissue H+, agents act parenchymal Vasodilator such resistance from released CO2, (see and may locally

Fig. 17.24

NO Lumen NP Relaxation GCyc space Adenosine Parenchymal RelaxationcGMP tissue AMP Interstitial L-arg. Basement ACh membrane ADP Endothelium ATP cAMP PGI2 OxPGI2Syn Vascular AA H+, CO2, K+ smooth Cyc muscle

Injurytotheendotheliumofbloodvesselsprecedesatherosclerosis.Theprotective(antiatherogenic)effectoftheendotheliumresidesinseveralproperties.Forexample,theendotheliumregulatesadhesionofleukocytestothevesselwall,suppressestheproliferationofvascularsmoothmusclecells,maintainsavesselliningthatresiststheformationofthrombi,andregulatesvascularsmoothmuscletone.AllthesefunctionsinvolvetheactionofNO.Asindicatedpreviously,productionofNOisregulatedbymanysubstancesandbyshearstressactingonthevesselwall.

•Fig. Vasodilation. Non–Endothelium-Mediated and Endothelium-Mediated 17.24 canariseintheparenchymaltissueandelicitvasodilationbydirectactiononvascularsmoothmuscle.ADP,adenosinediphosphate;AMP,adenosinemonophosphate;ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;cAMP,cyclicadenosinemonophosphate;cGMP,cyclicguanosinemonophosphate;L-arg,L-arginine. ,CO2,andK+ Prostacyclin(PGI2)isformedfromarachidonicacid(AA)bytheactionofcyclooxygenase(CycOx)andprostacyclinsynthase(PGI2Syn)intheendotheliumandelicitsrelaxationoftheadjacentvascularsmoothmuscleviaincreasesincAMP.Stimulationoftheendothelialcellswithacetylcholine(ACh)orotheragents(seetext)resultsintheformationandreleaseofanendothelium-derivedrelaxingfactoridentifiedasnitricoxide(NO).NOstimulatesguanylylcyclase(GCyc)toincreasecGMPinthevascularsmoothmuscletoproducerelaxation.Thevasodilatornitroprusside(NP)actsdirectlyonvascularsmoothmuscle.Substancessuchasadenosine,H+

acid, PGI2 is arachidonic the process by catalyzed and synthase. The not of synthesis triggers mechanism that known. is PGI2 PGI2 by may be accelerated released stress by caused However, in blood flow. shear increase an formation. intravascular function PGI2 clot inhibit is and and thus aggregation of the platelet adherence to The to prevent primary endothelium platelet smooth vascular also relaxation causes of PGI2 muscle.

Of release of importance endothelium-derived relaxing in far nitric factor and the a is of endothelium-mediated dilation oxide vascular component (see greater (NO), formation

Fig. ). 17.24 histamine), released. substance triphosphate bradykinin, stimulated cells adenosine endothelial NO When acetylcholine is (e.g., [ATP], other serotonin, or agents by P, vasodilator are cause blood do the vessels in lacking vasodilation agents These not endothelium. sensitivity myofilament (cGMP), increase relaxation [Ca++]. in concentration to (synthesized which cyclase monophosphate NO cyclic L-arginine) decreasing smooth guanosine guanylyl of by from activates the to muscle vascular produces NO stress flow shear of the stimulated the of endothelium. on be blood by can Release The by smooth also on acting nitroprusside drug vascular directly cGMP increases

the also of of factor relaxation underlies the an stimulates Acetylcholine adjacent endothelium-dependent release muscle. that smooth hyperpolarizing been acid remains factor arachidonic Although suggested, metabolites have the unknown. (diffusion how space junctions) the through is factor extracellular smooth via Moreover, vascular or unclear. reaches the myoepithelial muscle passage muscle. smooth ways vascular by there are cells with Nevertheless, communicate endothelial diverse which

peptide. The endothelin, also endothelium can a potent synthesize vasoconstrictor may failure, and and renal in states, atherosclerosis, and blood pulmonary failure. vascular affects pressure be hypertension, including involved heart Endothelin tone pathological congestive

Capillary Role Endothelium of the Passive

processes: capillary by and filtration, solute across diffusion, move wall and endothelial the three Solvent pinocytosis. Diffusion the process the is for pinocytosis transcapillary and important. exchange, important least is most

Diffusion. the water of filtration. of a 100 normal only minute capillary as mL across wall moves result Under per g approximately per of tissue 0.06 conditions, of of contrast, water In mL capillary moves across per per by 300 minute diffusion. 100 tissue g wall the capillaries is waste cells. in exchange tissue providing gases, of the Thus and and between products factor diffusion key substrates,

law The is Fick’s diffusion described of also process by (see

17.17 Equation

of per moved J unit quantity time = substance a

cross-sectional A area of pathway the diffusion =

ΔC = the concentration solute •Fig. of gradient From Capillaries (Cap) 17.25 Diffusion-Limited Flowand to Tissue. Transport dots) reachnegligibleconcentrationsafterpassingonlyashortdistancedownthecapillary.Largerparticles(brown Diffusion-limitedtransport.Whenthedistancebetweencapillariesandparenchymaltissueislargeasaresultofedemaorlowcapillarydensity,diffusionbecomesalimitingfactorinsolutetransportfromcapillarytotissue,evenathighratesofcapillaryflow. circles) dots) Flow-limitedtransport.Thesmallestwater-solubleinerttracerparticles(blue withsimilarpropertiestravelfartheralongthecapillarybeforereachinganinsignificantintracapillaryconcentration.Bothsubstancescrosstheinterstitialfluid(ISF)andreachtheparenchymaltissue(Cell).Becauseoftheirsize,moreofthesmallerparticlesaretakenupbythetissuecells.Thelargestparticles(red cannotpenetratethecapillaryporesandhencedonotescapefromthecapillarylumenexceptbypinocytoticvesicletransport.Anincreaseinthevolumeofbloodfloworanincreaseincapillarydensityincreasestissuesupplyofthediffusiblesolutes.Notethatcapillarypermeabilityisgreateratthevenousendofthecapillary(alsointhevenule,notshown)becauseofthelargernumberofporesinthisregion.B, A,

wall, be For as expressed capillary diffusion a law also Fick’s can across

Equation 17.18

the capillary substance = P by permeability

Co the the of = outside substance concentration

the substance concentration Ci capillary the = of inside

is permeability physiological capillary area product under the rarely expression of convenient PS because much capillary provides The of surface the conditions. a altered intrinsic available However, capillary with bee in permeability as conditions, be pathological sting, may altered. a

pores. to or diffusion of is channels lipid-insoluble In water-filled molecules restricted capillaries, is pore to solute molecules, the molecules capillary between for and attractions solvent solute relation interactions and solute in charge molecules, of Movement cells. on charge endothelium involves between and across the on corrections endothelial the configuration, complex a is solute not movement Such a thermal of gradient. random seemingly motion run simply of down concentration that matter molecules molecules, ”). small little the as For (i.e., capillary reflection and pores such they coefficient; section diffusion restriction a offer to see the urea, have water, “ glucose, NaCl, low endothelium the that across rapid the capillary extremely Diffusion gradient is of small. concentration these so is substances mean The diffusion are, lipid-insoluble molecules more capillaries. is larger restricted the their the through molecules exceeds 60,000. of Diffusion becomes approximately when minimal eventually weight molecular the the molecules to With the capillary. movement small rate net to only at wall molecules, is the limitation the blood capillary the across flow which transports the flow molecules is Transport these of be to limited. said

from fluid interstitial With of at parent in arteriole. the molecules, with molecule a its flow-limited the concentration in its of blood the concentration origin the location reaches small capillary near equilibrium levels of the negligible falls arterial end Its ( concentration to the near capillary

Fig.

). 17.25A is present small downstream still molecule distant If the at locus can flow be a in the the large, capillary. farther larger it moves A somewhat reaches the in along an molecule concentration blood. insignificant before capillary still number of end the capillary arterial leaves larger capillary Furthermore, pores end of through that enter capillary molecules that the of the (see the but number venous the equals the pass the cannot

Fig. 17.25A

the molecules, the (diffusion to large the capillaries limited); solute permeability factor transport limits across the is, wall. molecule With a capillary of limiting diffusion its across large that a capillary becomes as edema capillary so between rapid cells or see small are limits that molecules is distances capillaries parenchymal very density; lipid-insoluble Diffusion only tissue exchange low diffusion in blood-tissue great and of when (e.g.,

Fig. 17.25B

(only it molecules of ≈0.02% entire to pores wall of of directly Movement membranes is capillary the capillary the through surface); not the lipid capillary lipid-soluble limited endothelium. occurs the also capillary across move and lipid-soluble molecules tissue. between Consequently, blood rapidly transfer lipid ease of the through degree lipid capillary of good of partition a coefficient) The the endothelium. solubility molecules (oil-to-water index of provides

they O2 and lipid CO2 pass through readily cells. endothelial and soluble, are Both for capillary flow, O2, on the capillaries. diffusion and density is of tissue the and by of rest (2) tissue activity coefficient indicate not during at supply number limited (3) O2 and the (4) blood O2 Calculations distances, that (1) or open consumption based diffusion by diffusion normal

blood diffusion the has O2 the of Measurements indicate saturation many approximately entrance decreased O2 that pressure of arterioles small and in and tissues, capillaries arteries. saturation from to of of partial (PO2) result O2 microvessels 80% in as a O2 at of of oxyhemoglobin resulting the precapillary Moreover, intravascular in CO2 dissociation in curve shifts loading vessels. and the the occur O2 and Hence, arteries and and capillaries, between exchange). exchange arterioles venules and directly between (countercurrent pass veins at CO2 the in addition possibly gas to adjacent exchange may represents away limit supply capillaries; the shunting shunting rates. this to blood of the low from the gas diffusional countercurrent The a O2 flow tissue of at

Capillary Filtration. The is capillary endothelial the not permeability of membrane uniform. rate times are albumin escapes than less and at quite greater from capillaries several example, For the that permeable, them liver permeable muscle a capillaries. from the the permeability along capillary. is Furthermore, of uniform not length than are the of the more a permeable arterial ends venules, and greatest property regions. these attributed ends, number to is the pores permeability in greater The in venous

Where occur? filtration does membranes, Some through walls the through but endothelial the flows capillaries apertures of cell endothelial most (pores) water in the capillary ( passes

Figs. 17.26 ). 17.27 diameters have cardiac of pores nm. muscle in capillaries 4 approximately skeletal and The cells the cardiac is gap adjacent muscle, point between 4 are in There clefts and narrowest at endothelial the nm. approximately capillary approximately represent sparse clefts (pores) of surface area. are 0.02% only and The the molecules. the Pores in cerebral blood-brain many of barrier entry capillaries, the small absent are where blocks

(e.g., to some the those porous to capillaries in intestines) have clefts, kidneys (e.g., the 20 In (see discontinuous more endothelium a wide, the fenestrations those and capillaries in addition liver) whereas nm other contain of 100

Fig. 17.27 ). that of and are the large pass molecules too Fenestrations passage clefts to through the allow discontinuous endothelium. intercellular endothelia the of

The wall capillary the be of magnitude movement osmotic the hydrostatic estimated sum exists direction that and the of water can across and the as algebraic wall. pressure across the vessel pressure An the concentration the intracapillary to whereas from fluid of an movement in in space, increase favors interstitial interior increase hydrostatic

within osmotically movement Vasculature the into fluid interstitial space from of of the 17 particles Properties vessels ( the active vessels favors of CHAPTER

Fig. 17.28

Forces. Hydrostatic within not pressure) constant. capillaries (blood is Hydrostatic pressure and venules (in pressure it and small precapillary Instead, the the on depends (in arterioles) and resistance arterial venous and veins). on resistance postcapillary has venous or pressure, the increase elevates arterial hydrostatic capillary arterial whereas in effect. a venous in or pressure reduction opposite An pressure or of resistance greater capillary pressure, increase in flow reduces to veins arteries pressure. whereas resistance arteriolar in increases capillary An venules and closure a

in Hydrostatic the capillary force is filtration. principal pressure effect hydrostatic change the Pv in given Pa. capillary on same produces pressure greater A does a in change than Approximately to Pv back is increase the 80% an capillaries. transmitted of in

Capillary from tissue. (Pc) to varies hydrostatic pressure tissue Hg in at heart end mm skin, 32 level Hg human of measurements from values, the capillaries mm and the the obtained are (see capillaries venous end Average approximately 15 at of the at approximately arterial of direct

Fig. 17.28 ). hydrostatic in in decreases and stands, pressure a legs increases previously, the the head. discussed when person As

(Pi) capillaries, pressure specifically, filtration. fluid more the or, capillary pressure, interstitial outside Tissue opposes force for constitutes difference filtration. The and driving Pc the between Pi and Normally, hydrostatic driving essentially represents Pc zero, Pi the so force. to is close

Osmotic Forces. albumin). proteins The (such pressure factor fluid restrains capillaries of osmotic the that from key as plasma is loss is pressure oncotic This or osmotic called pressure colloid osmotic pressure (πp). as total presence of molecules, proteins), whereas well the The is osmotic mm plasma 25 pressure plasma approximately 6000 is only Hg approximately (reflecting pressure mm oncotic of and Hg. as other electrolytes small concentration the on of across because the in factor the equal in sides of low space, whereas plasma are virtually capillary electrolytes confined both to This is endothelium. an are intravascular pressure oncotic exchange fluid capillary proteins level essentially important of of actual solute permeability pressure. relative The influences the magnitude water osmotic by to reflection of the The relative substance (σ) the a membrane. through the passage capillary impediment is coefficient and 1. which 0, coefficient is that endothelium albumin impermeable) essentially is water reflection is of of the (to The solutes and reflection between 0 Filterable have coefficients 1. different In different reflection the tissues addition, same coefficients have for molecule. wall movement tissue. across varies with solute the of endothelial a Hence, given the the The the following by pressure also oncotic (see is plasma (πp) of actual defined equation

BM PC •Fig. 1 Equation µm A D µm0.1 0.1 C CT GJTJ * 17.19 Nu µm µm B 0.5 V V A, DetailoftheendothelialcellinA Electronmicrographofacross-sectionofacapillaryinamouseventricle.Theluminaldiameterisapproximately4µm.Inthissection,thecapillarywallisformedbyasingleendothelialcell(Nu,endothelialnucleus).Thethinpericapillaryspaceisoccupiedbyapericyte(PC)andaconnectivetissue(CT)cell(“fibroblast”),whichformsafunctionalcomplex(arrow)withitself.V,plasmalemmalvesicles.B, showingplasmalemmalvesicles(V)attachedtotheendothelialcellsurface.Thesevesiclesareespeciallyprominentinvascularendotheliumandareinvolvedintransportofsubstancesacrossthebloodvesselwall.Notethecomplexalveolarvesicle(asterisk). 17.26 Interendothelialjunctioninamusculararteryofapapillarymuscle.Althoughtightjunctionssimilartothoseofcapillariesarefoundintheselargebloodvessels,extensivejunctionsthatresemblegapjunctionsintheintercalateddisksbetweenmyocardialcellsoftenappearinarterialendothelium(exampleshownatGJ). BM,basementmembrane.C, Junctionalcomplexinacapillaryofamouseheart.“Tight”junctions(TJ)typicallyforminthesesmallbloodvesselsandappeartoconsistoffusionsbetweenapposedendothelialcellsurfacemembranes.D,

17 365 of Properties CHAPTER the Vasculature

• Fig. Discontinuousendothelial cells two of Junction endothelium a Illustration electron an of of 17.27 micrograph capillary cross-section. in

from thus and exceeding standing, leading enhanced, associated of pregnancy capillaries particularly as legs of filtrate the the congestive greatly with to (such system heart lymphatic the is interstitial the space prolonged elevation With filtration when that by to capacity Pv in caused edema. and remove across the failure),

conditions diarrhea). of plasma less from of across to and osmotic force increased dehydration is plasma water moves the water in vascular change the protein The several severe proteins concentration and the (e.g., condition, may pathological membrane. concentration fluid tissues prolonged In deprivation, force the of of decreasing volume fluid. sweating, compartment, osmotic thus vomiting, in the alter movement capillary states the this interstitial thereby The by contrast, because the reduced is concentration protein occur. in diseases In loss and plasma some of edema may in urine, renal its

space protein in the vessel leak lumen fluid. intravascular capillary from protein the fluid severe interstitial interstitial into the tissues. pressure that the of escapes in the and injury The damaged plasma increases When burns, as extensive, is oncotic possibly This outside greater to loss dehydration. force to leads additional osmotic and the capillaries severe fluid

Hydrostatic of Balance Forces. Osmotic and in role were endothelium fluid the Frank across regulating the pressure these and of The passage forces capillary by sure expounded

in 1896. Starling constitutes Starling’s This • relationship Fig. and Schematic 17.28 representation the responsible and filtration the capillary formation of lymph. the absorption wall for factors across of

most that Albumin protein important is oncotic pressure. determines plasma the in force 69,000 plasma. an greater molecular solely accounted is can basis on weight its D. Albumin Its for osmotic the concentration be exerts of than such on it be replaced cannot inert size, as substances molecular by Therefore, dextran. appropriate basis a of mole-bymole interstitial of disproportionately solutions to in in This (as force in absent fluid). dilute this is concentrations force of (as albumin osmotic weak high additional becomes at and plasma), great albumin normal and vascular effect). and of is albumin the at for this (Gibbs-Donnan charge of retention Na+) cations in compartment pH The reason negative the attraction activity its (principally blood

hypothesis. expressed It be can follows: as

algebraic occurs Equation for capillary absorption occurs filtration k 17.20 it constant is interstitial πi= oncotic when Filtration pressure positive; = sum negative. fluid is the when membrane the

the the end of to occur end hydrostatic its Traditionally, filtration arterial the capillary. occur at was pressure because of capillary, of to thought absorption thought was at the and gradient along venous is an capillary idealized This scheme for (see true

Fig. ). 17.28 well-perfused occur absorption can in arteriolar arteriolar vasoconstriction in capillaries, However, the at such way can transiently. that reduce end Pc a time with diminishes vasoconstriction, With continued because absorption increases. Pi capillary filtration renal the along beds pressure vascular (e.g., the length In some in capillary. is of enough high entire cause the glomerulus), the hydrostatic to other whole the beds and absorption mucosa), are the such vascular occurs capillary. oncotic the (e.g., forces intestinal hydrostatic along that In

interstitial Pa, oncotic are fluid, and and hydrostatic of oncotic postcapillary Pv, resistance, pressure pressure relatively the constant. In steady-state plasma of are absorption Hence, the well across the capillary wall normal and balanced. state, filtration in a fluid in resistance precapillary movement the across wall. influences capillary However, change vasodilation increases and filtration. net filtration, reduces Vasoconstriction

).Becauseplasmaoncoticpressureis25mmHgandpressureoftheinterstitialfluidinthelungsisapproximately15mmHg,thenetforceslightlyfavorsnetabsorption(i.e.,fluidleavestheinterstitialspace).Despitenetabsorption,pulmonarylymphisformed.Thislymphconsistsoffluidthatisosmoticallywithdrawnfromthecapillariesbythesmallamountofplasmaproteinthatescapesthroughthecapillaryendothelium.Inpathologicalconditions,suchasleftventricularfailureormitralvalvestenosis,pulmonarycapillaryhydrostaticpressuremayexceedplasmaoncoticpressure.Whenthisoccurs,itmaycausepulmonaryedema,aconditioninwhichexcessivefluidaccumulatesinthepulmonaryinterstitium.Thisfluidaccumulationseriouslyinterfereswithgasexchangeinthelungs. Inthelungs,meancapillaryhydrostaticpressureisonlyapproximately8mmHg(see

Coefficient. Filtration Capillary (η) forces depends The only (Qf) the membrane. wall, (Am) and the filtration the the across capillary the of hydrostatic (k) the but wall the also filtrate, sum the area on rate distance movement (Δx) constant of fluid and the for not filtration, across capillary on (ΔP) osmotic endothelium of of across the algebraic capillary membrane the viscosity of the available follows: be factors may expressed as These

17.21 Equation

tubes. is through fluid the membrane law This essentially of the through Poiseuille’s describes which pores, expression, flow for flow

capillary the tissue. included rate be weight of of are viscosity the filtration the filtrate the expressed they k. is the thickness filtration not the the of area of capillary relatively If in of per membrane Because wall and can constant, unit constant can known, be the equation as be the simplified can Hence,

tissue. minute g Equation the filtration the 17.22 and for milliliters is given for per 100 coefficient tissue per are of capillary a Qf where units kt

as by various the such or distention, per reduced of and hypoxia, dilation any hypercapnia, adverse capillary filtration is or such pH. area In capillary as changed arteriolar tissue, given capillary surface, hence and unit conditions physiological coefficient by not conditions, permeability, capillaries significant toxins by out leak severe interstitial are (as of the into the and burns), When amounts fluid space. injured protein of or capillaries This reflected coefficient. increase in in filtration permeability is capillary an by the increase

relative the conditions, (i.e., filtration permeability in coefficient can the constant Because number area of determine tissue). filtration available be used to capillary open under capillary normal surface is capillaries for the the precapillary skeletal more example, hence activity For increased capillaries. and opens of metabolic the muscle relaxes vessels contracting resistance called area. filtering process, the This increases recruitment, surface capillary

Hydrostatic-Osmotic Disturbances in Balance. small in Relatively may Pa effect changes on little filtration. have that (autoregulation; the change by capillaries. constant pressure in ) hydrostatic see open so adjustments The may pressure in countered in be resistance vessels remains precapillary the system. severe mediated Pa constriction nervous usually by However, sympathetic a arteriolar reduction evokes in Pv. may in by it This fall is occur accompanied in response often and hemorrhage, a reduce changes pressure. These capillary hydrostatic a metabolites and decrease hence However, tissue, with the the the that supply) the relax result flow of arterioles. vasodilator (and in hemorrhage accumulate to lowering causes in in blood blood pressure O2 (autoregulation; transmural reduced the also pressure relaxation ). of occurs vessel see Precapillary because the the moves predominates into from fluid filtration, and Consequently, interstitium over capillary. absorption hemorrhage used to by to constitute (see compensatory These blood of restore volume body mechanisms the one the responses

capillary An in and elevate increase alone, pressure enhance a in person stands feet when filtration. occurs up, would the as Pv the (myogenic mechanism; and transmural capillary decreases. precapillary see coefficient hence ), the However, in pressure actually increase closes vessels filtration in of available amounts This large and leaving the filtration prevents the interstitial from capillary capillaries entering space. reduction fluid for surface

coefficient whole In of approximately mL/minute/100 the the healthy individual, a filtration body 0.006 Hg. tissue/mm is g for (kt) by in mL. 70-kg 10 Pv mm an from filtration Hg For would 420 capillaries minutes a of elevation man, for increase 10 not lymphatic usually does occur to fluid vascular the because returned Edema vessels. the compartment the by is type and pressure the in develops, appears are body, of the its tissue. is the but dependent the magnitude by parts hydrostatic usually location edema where it of also greatest, When determined than interstitial a Loose tissue as larger subcutaneous more scrotum, are tissues, collect as the to kidney, as the tissues, prone fluid. in the of structures, quantities eyes or around in a or such in encapsulated firm muscle,

Pinocytosis. the can occur of in vesicles. across tiny transfer Some capillary substances pinocytotic wall These vesicles (see

Figs. 17.27 by the across pinching take up 17.26 of other energy, move cell their contents substances side. deposit capillary endothelial the membrane, kinetic wall, ), formed cell and on the them one off the by the can on side of is process transcytosis. termed This diffusion. amount to transported relation The is that of by this in way moved material small very in molecules responsible of movement large the interstitial and blood for (30-nm) be between However, lipid-insoluble pinocytosis may fluid. (amount > and end muscle capillary. tissues The vesicles in number to from number the amount among brain), in endothelium varies in arterial of of in lung the venous the end > increases pinocytotic the amount

consist The capillaries. of system terminal a permeable lymphatic closed-end vessels the network of distributed, highly of widely lymphatic vessels differences: connective junctions tissue. two not capillaries with endothelial present and the blood to are fine tight anchor These between lymphatic important lymphatic cells, capillaries, surrounding resemble filaments the the and these spaces large cells into protein With the vessels pull to vessels. endothelial particles lymphatic and fine strands of open muscular enable on contraction, between lymphatic the entrance enter where internal The respective jugular capillaries that veins. drain larger veins, lymphatic connect they and right finally into the the vessels with left subclavian

lymphatic lack the nervous epithelia, tissues central vessels. bone, and cartilage, of system Only vessels plasma the capillary the filtrate These return circulation. to and skeletal tissue of one-way is This task pressure, and contractions, by by it intermittent means system muscle valves. accomplished of facilitated is an vessel lymphatic extensive activity, do lymphatic elastic have amount the they small although vessels and veins, muscle. regard, a lymphatic smooth do only tissue resemble than corresponding this veins, contain In of thinner the walls and larger vessels

is the in approximately the plasma body’s The lymphatic to through of equal transported 24 hours fluid vessels volume volume. total the vessels filtered approximately back proteins one proteins in the of lymphatic return all account half proteins circulating of to the the to fourth blood; these plasma blood. for The vessels to can The blood. be vascular returned that leaves only the the are lymphatic the protein compartment which by means backward cannot against occur gradient. protein Net capillaries diffusion of concentration the into the large protein fluid force as and act capillaries protein from the by produces the fluid were interstitial it draws an that vessels, not oncotic If in and the lymph blood removed accumulate would edema.

such as nodes addition particles to protein the vascular the removes and fluid In to lymphatic lymph at foreign filters returning lymph and the bacteria. the system bed, The

through returns the 17 liver permeable thoracic not lost duct, CHAPTER lymphatic drains the of the the protein Properties extremities but capillaries. vessel, also the largest Vasculature only lower thoracic duct tract. carries the from gastrointestinal absorbed substances the Moreover, form substance is The the chylomicrons. of in fat, principal

flow varies Lymph considerably. it increases nil, to flow The and of activity. exercise muscle degree the almost from during muscular skeletal proportion in is resting blood plasma rate the by and permeability oncotic that increased or filtration; pressure. is of increased include capillary capillary mechanisms decreased enhances pressure It mechanism such any volume interstitial accumulates of rise fluid vessels the clinical to When drainage lymphatic blocked, lymphatic the when or exceeds and vessels, gives the the capacity become fluid of edema. interstitial

Anatomy Functional Vessels of Coronary

left the aortic arteries root respectively. left right and of valve, The aorta arise coronary the cusps and right at the of the behind blood to the entire These provide supply arteries myocardium. the artery mainly atrium. the ventricle The right coronary right and supplies coronary and the descending the atrium. ventricle circumflex the divides left near The supplies anterior which branches, and into left artery, mainly its origin arteries. the supplied between overlap is the by There some left right regions and (supplying coronary is In of 50% individuals. the of right approximately humans, dominant most in the artery myocardium) artery approximately is the flow remaining is artery main coronary The delivered another 30%. in 20%, and each equal by the in left dominant and illustrated of is the veins The in coronary distribution arteries epicardial

Fig. 17.29

it the blood Coronary atrium coronary right the returns arterial capillary through the to sinus. through passes most of beds; (<0.1 in are to arteries, in in the mm (2 (1.0 epicardial in largest medium large arterioles to are diameter), small arterioles size 5 and diameter), 0.5 diameter). coronary mm arteries mm smallest are Of venous Some the coronary reaches the right blood via of veins. atrium coronary the anterior directly these In the with vascular vessels arteriosinusoidal, chambers; link vessels. cardiac addition, communications the arterioluminal, the thebesian myocardial are communications and sinuses. consist chamber of irregular, that or penetrate they lose into divide channels small arterioles The arteriosinusoidal structure where their they arteries the walls, as endothelium-lined arterial sinuses and communicate and other with sinuses chambers. cardiac capillaries, These anastomose with they the with The ventricles. vessels the open atria into arterioles or small are arteries that arterioluminal and directly directly and with small the veins. also the connect vessels The capillary with cardiac are beds communicate cardiac chambers thebesian veins that myocardium the an All form minute of in the communicate extensive of the vessels

right branch artery coronary Fig. • of Posterior descending anterior heart, the vessels. 17.29 and posterior the Illustrations surfaces of principal depicting and coronary of the distribution of the location

subendocardial vessels. plexus of flow cardiac the from chambers. not receive nutritional myocardium directly blood significant the does However,

is aortic of primary factor for the The perfusion myocardium responsible pressure. evoke directional coronary Changes parallel pressure in in flow. changes aortic generally blood in perfusion part is by changes pressure. in caused coronary This by in the the arteriolar the a change in is of of major metabolic flow in heart. factor regulation changes the resistance activity coronary blood However, engendered of increases cardiac decreases, When activity metabolism coronary resistance (see heart coronary metabolic the resistance decreases; the increases, when

heart autoregulated. in flow is the Blood a If perfused work. cardiac artery without pressure a cannulated reservoir, pressure-controlled altered aortic coronary pressure by from be change can perfusion in a blood is and experiment relationship the initial and flow steady-state is The in shown between depicted blood in

Fig. 17.30 . which blood ). myogenic ( in mechanism This an mediated is autoregulation is flow, a by and arterioles large of small example of in endothelium muscle modulate and arterioles small of activity the autoregulation. cardiac The metabolic the adapting resistances within O2 requirements. blood microvasculature flow adjusts to serial The circulation coronary thereby Time kept pressure within 0.4 is (sec) 1 0.6 •Fig. Blood 0.2 0.8 narrow Coronary Relationships 17.30 in Pressure-Flow the Vascular

Bed. circles resultedimmediatelyafterthechangeinperfusionpressure;theopen circles representthesteady-stateflowsatthenewpressures.Thereisatendencyforflowtoreturntowardthecontrollevel(autoregulationofbloodflow),andthisismostprominentovertheintermediatepressurerange(≈60to180mmHg). rate,andcoronaryarteryperfusionpressurewereabruptlyincreased Asaorticpressurewasheldconstant,thecardiacoutput,heart representtheflowsthat ordecreasedfromthecontrollevel,whichisindicatedbythepointatwhichthetwolinescross.Thesolid The Cardiovascular Heart. 2: (FromBerneRM,RubioR.Coronarycirculation.InPageE,ed.Handbook of System: Section The Physiology: Vol1.Bethesda,MD:AmericanPhysiologicalSociety;1979.) by mechanisms. reflex limits baroreceptor Hence, the heart. response coronary the in blood caused coronary flow vessels of are in mainly to diameter by metabolic of the in changes resistance changes demands

•Fig. Coronary in Phasic Arteries. Blood the Right Comparison 17.31 Coronary Left and of Flow Extravascularcompressionissogreatduringearlyventricularsystolethatthedirectionofbloodflowinthelargecoronaryarteriessupplyingtheleftventricleisbrieflyreversed.Maximalinflowintheleftcoronaryarteryoccursinearlydiastole,whentheventricleshaverelaxedandextravascularcompressionofthecoronaryvesselsisvirtuallyabsent.Afteraninitialreversalinearlysystole,bloodflowintheleftcoronaryarteryfollowstheaorticpressureuntilearlydiastole,whenitrisesabruptlyandthendeclinesslowlyasaorticpressurefallsduringtheremainderofdiastole.

blood In to the by vessels, supply own myocardium compression) heart its contracting vessels. of also move addition the the providing effect affects to blood through (extravascular blood squeezing the coronary its on pressure the in of right left The and are patterns shown the coronary arteries flow in

Fig. 17.31 . aortic coronary the left pressure. between the is pressure In end-diastolic diastolic left and difference ventricle, ventricular pressure perfusion

near endocardium near the is pressure highest of ventricular (pressure and the Left ventricle) epicardium. the the lowest myocardial wall within left flow endocardial during blood the blood the compensates not greater pressure epicardium during to systole. endocardium does impair because gradient the the normally to diastole This flow greater blood flow for approximately halves blood receive epicardial that left indicate flow under of blood normal Measurements of ventricle the flow the equal and conditions. coronary endocardial is resistance less greatest the tone endocardial that extravascular that the epicardial flow the compression of blood at and epicardial vessels the of the indicates Because is endocardial ventricle, of equality endocardial surface vessels. the than of

aninflatableballoonisinsertedintothethoracicaortathroughafemoralartery.Theballoonisinflatedduringeachventriculardiastoleanddeflatedduringeachsystole.Thisprocedureenhancescoronarybloodflowduringdiastolebyraisingdiastolicpressureatatimewhencoronaryextravascularresistanceislowest.Furthermore,itreducescardiacenergyrequirementsbyloweringaorticpressure(afterload)duringventricularejection. Theminimalextravascularresistanceandabsenceofleftventricularworkduringdiastolecanbeusedtoimprovemyocardialperfusioninpatientswithadamagedmyocardiumandlowbloodpressure.Inamethodcalledcounterpulsation,

(see in in the right similar the to flow that coronary left is pattern The artery coronary artery

Fig. 17.31 ). blood during ventricle systole. ventricle, In in occur lower thin the left right is ventricle in early reversal does to systole pressure of because not contrast right in the flow the of inflow flow left in Hence, does proportion it artery. coronary constitutes much total coronary blood a than systolic greater the

•Fig. 17.32 A, Unmaskingoftherestrictingeffectofventricularsystoleonmeancoronarybloodflowbyinductionofventricularfibrillationduringperfusionoftheleftcoronaryarteryatconstantpressure.Withtheonsetofventricularfibrillation,coronarybloodflowincreasesabruptlybecauseextravascularcompressionisremoved.Flowthengraduallyreturnstowardandoftenfallsbelowtheprefibrillationlevel.Thisincreaseincoronaryresistancethatoccursdespitetheremovalofextravascularcompressiondemonstratestheheart’sabilitytoadjustitsbloodflowtomeetitsenergyrequirements.B, EffectofcardiacsympatheticnervestimulationoncoronarybloodflowandonbloodO2tension(PO2)inthecoronarysinusinafibrillatingheartduringperfusionoftheleftcoronaryarteryatconstantpressure.(BerneRM.Unpublishedobservations.)

induction or which the ventricular readily restricts extravascular of coronary the arrested when inflow heart extent fibrillation. suddenly can diastole to is in observed The be compression with

Fig. from constant 17.32A coronary vessel depicts the was a perfused at pressure blood when mean with left reservoir. flow a immediately substantially. fibrillation When flow and ventricular was induced, blood electrically increased (see before a many induction fibrillation in resistance the flow myocardial of to below existed increase over coronary subsequent minutes reduced level of A period that blood ventricular

Fig. , ganglion stellate stimulation). just before 17.32B

1. the artery stenosis), a occlusion, ratio blood to in epicardial falls abnormally endocardial severe severe partial value When hypotension, pressure flow or of aortic the of (as arteries low coronary diastolic coronary below in is epicardial regions blood that indicates flow ventricle. to endocardial to that of is than severely impaired regions the ratio the This more the increase an also and epicardium in endocardium. There acid the to concentrations is adenosine from myocardial lactic of myocardial gradient greatest myocardial wall in inner the left reason, of heart damage the the in this ventricle. coronary after atherosclerotic (e.g., is disease For observed occlusion)

dual flow. blood on have and bradycardia coronary Tachycardia effects diastole. A rate change mainly heart in alters and proportion In time spent tachycardia, period systole, restricted of the of in inflow, increases. the consequently rapidly activity resistance beating the coronary the heart. is the vessels more effect However, mechanical of of associated by this with increased dilation metabolic overridden Coronary (O2) in (more but time the spent inflow of less diastole), the so requirements myocardium. occurs: With bradycardia, restricted are metabolic is opposite the

coronary increases markedly of cardiac flow. blood sympathetic Stimulation nerves in rate an more increased is the increase heart forceful However, associated systole. with flow and stronger tachycardia flow. and the The coronary to tend contraction restrict activity, however, in tends to coronary myocardial metabolic increase vessels. dilate The resistance evoked cardiac sum these flow by stimulation nerve coronary increase blood in reflects of factors. the sympathetic The or vessels eliminated observed. ventricular extravascular often of the cardiac is fibrillation, which by mechanical effect is by perfused initial arrest compression In vasoconstriction coronary coronary of an in hearts the vasodilation initial this the metabolic effect vasoconstriction, evokes (see After

Fig. 17.32B

when positive sympathetic resistance. of chronotropic β-adrenergic blockade inotropic cardiac coronary the nerves eliminates receptor the and activation effects, Furthermore, increases that vasoconstriction. observations coronary on These the the of resistance indicate nerve sympathetic direct action is fibers the vessels

receptors Both (dilators) α-adrenergic vessels. receptors β2adrenergic on the present coronary (constrictors) are and participate the sympathetic such baroreceptor and vessels chemoreceptor can coronary arterioles the by reflexes. of reflexes, also modulated the be and in tone resistance constrictor Coronary Nevertheless, is predominantly coronary control. under nonneural local resistance

causes chemoreceptors of the vagus a dilation to the Vagus slight stimulation coronary and vessels, decrease nerves resistance coronary carotid of heart. nerve in slight activation cause the the via resistance can aortic and elicits vasodilation. on intracoronary of due Failure marked acetylcholine is muscarinic resistance coronary the coronary of of administration blood stimulation vessels strong not because to lack receptors to flow increase vagal when of of coronary coronary human evidence administered the acetylcholine disease. directly no In descending with the left artery artery into subjects anterior heart, caused vasodilation been had vasoconstriction atherosclerosis. endothelium damaged the whose coronary caused artery and rendered in However, subjects acetylcholine of by dysfunctional

relationship striking circulation of metabolic activity blood close the magnitude (Fig. is of myocardial flow A coronary level the characteristic between of the the coronary and

17.33 ). denervated the state in and fibrillating beating a completely in also This a relationship heart state. either isolated in in heart, the or found is many when external are arteries can hours source. arterial for coronary the from Ventricles with blood perfused fibrillate some already As pumping does, myocardium to than heart is accordingly. fibrillating O2 the reduced and a blood uses a noted, less flow heart

link mechanisms remain metabolic coronary blood The cardiac unsettled. flow that the and rate coronary cells releases the O2 the myocardial substances that they of it vessels. resistance interstitial into supply where decrease ratio a the relax vasodilator from fluid, However, to in the O2 demand appears increases coronary in in supply/demand blood flow arterial blood in or ( all ratio metabolic O2 O2 Decreases the and rate decrease content

Fig. 17.34 ). substances adjust to released and the thereby supply consequence, O2 the As demand. arterioles are the that a O2 dilate basal demand release of greater tone. of the in vasodilators A decrease expression and diminishes enables O2

the increased Numerous metabolites accompanies that participate cardiac in work. vasodilation flow reactive a account hyperemia; brief can see ). of period blood (i.e., in the that ischemia from increase vasoactive of for results metabolites also Accumulation period after to vessel proportional enhanced of release The the occlusion. certain duration of the limits, within duration the of briefly is, occluded coronary the of flow and reactive potassium hyperemia K+, hypoxia, H+, ATP-sensitive the adenosine. factors implicated H2O2, (KATP) in NO, CO2, are channels, Among

these opening NO, and H2O2. appear to channels, key KATP adenosine, the agents, of the Of factors be •Fig. increased under each and interaction their agents and of basal contributions conditions The myocardial these during of RelationshipbetweenmyocardialO2consumptionandcoronarybloodflowduringavarietyofinterventionsthatincreaseordecreasethemyocardialmetabolicrate. 17.33 Section 2: The Physiology: (FromBerneRM,RubioR:Coronarycirculation.InPageE,ed.Handbook of Cardiovascular System: Heart. The Vol1.Bethesda,MD:AmericanPhysiologicalSociety;1979. Myocardial consumption(mL/min/100 12 oxygen g) 8 •Fig. flow 120 30 Coronary 50 80 2 g) 14 60 16 4 10 90 110 )18 blood 70 100 20 40 (mL/min/100 6 ImbalanceintheO2supply–O2demandratioalterscoronarybloodflowbytherateofreleaseofavasodilatormetabolitefromcardiomyocytes.Adecreaseintheratioelicitsanincreaseinvasodilatorrelease,whereasanincreaseintheratiohastheoppositeeffect. 17.34

SECTION4Berne Levy & 372 Physiology •Fig. Representation Coronary Schematic 17.35 Resistance. or of Factors Vascular (−) (+) Increase Decrease That KATP ˛-Receptors – channels nerves Myocardial control Other Sympathetic PO2 compression Vagus activity Myogenic metabolic ˜ PCO2, Intravascularpressure(arterialbloodpressure)stretchesthevesselwall.KATPchannels,adenosinetriphosphate–sensitivepotassiumchannels;NO,nitricoxide;PCO2,partialpressureofcarbondioxide;PO2,partialpressureofoxygen.˜ K+ NO PO2, Oxygen +± Metabolism – Systolic are Autonomic complex. factors supply mechanism contractile H2O2 ˝ – + Myocardial – + nerves: Adenosine H+, activity °-Receptors vascular causes in muscle opens KATP smooth synthesis, hyperpolarization. channels turn ATP in which in and metabolism reduction reduces A oxidative Ca++ muscle increase entry coronary to This in relaxes smooth change vascular of flow. and reduces potential that current reduction outward during the in duration action potential. muscle and cardiac limits an Ca++ A in phase action of entry channels KATP ATP potential reduces and generates also opens 2 demand. O2 be imbalance may action and periods protective between supply This during of and increases, relaxation as activates smooth of causes work channels muscle. which vascular In thereby cardiac hyperpolarization membrane addition, muscle production H2O2 of and rises, Kv1.5 Moreover, demand. and adenosine and the O2 supply of arterioles dilates O2 thereby the the NO to adjusts the release NO. low concentrations, channels to activate At and appears enhance of endothelial to adenosine KATP release vascular by concentrations, smooth KATP at muscle Conversely, adenosine channels. activating higher acts on directly as allows substances ATP reduce of would as greater O2 the and amount level, of sustain well demand released, expression the Decreased basal vasodilator tone. at is If coronary all exercise. inhibited, production is reduced, these during rest agents both and flow of blood Furthermore, dysfunction and evident. myocardial become of signs ischemia contractile

myocardium. adenosine activity hypoxemia, of tension release to the the in hypothesis, myocardial heart to reduction O2 produced metabolic a or from coronary by adenosine of flow, the inadequate increased leads According blood to vasodilation the adenosine by fluid the enters space vessels activating receptors. Adenosine interstitial induces and coronary resistance reach enhancement muscle during responsible of cardiac flow from coronary increased the is However, cardiac activity for adenosine transitory. prolonged be it observed metabolic because release cannot of in illustrated that are coronary Factors resistance alter vascular

Fig. 17.35

Blood Coronary Diminished Effects Flow of

capillaries. O2 of Most during extracted myocardial the one is the through coronary arterial passage blood in O2 because blood O2 blood flow is when Thus maximal of limited; reduction the even in delivery flow nearly substantial is curtails normal. the myocardial to any O2 coronary flow myocardium to is extraction cells supply

substantial neither coronary heart. induce nonetheless too A dysfunction too is reduction temporary) that the (but necrosis in myocardial severe flow of can cause prolonged nor to by period stunning). A mechanical of followed can result ischemia severe in relatively dysfunction brief (myocardial pronounced reperfusion from dysfunction. recovers However, the heart fully the eventually the the period the to radicals generation and for The basis appears free intracellular in OH− combined during period with early reperfusion. of overload, of ischemia, Ca++ be stunning initiated superoxide myocardial of pathophysiological the . impair Ca++ These responsiveness myofilaments to of changes

heart, there human virtually intercoronary are no In the channels. functional normal the its leads the by branches vessel. areas eventual necrosis Abrupt supplied artery occluded a of one coronary of myocardium and fibrosis to of of ischemic or occlusion develop to may if artery weeks, vessels furnish a coronary ischemic slowly to of However, and sufficient or and the period or progressively blood reduce extent days myocardium over collateral of the necrosis. a prevent narrows and branches of develop vessels occluded may between nonoccluded arteries. Collateral smooth endothelium vessels small that muscle. preexisting They the of and from undergo changes proliferative originate chemical occur to may and response released including to endothelial ischemic wall factors agents, (VEGFs) by changes the in tissue. vascular stress These growth which at are are five in of glycoproteins. least VEGFs, there mammals, The VEGFs vasodilation increase and permeability. induce The angiogenesis, elicit endothelial by of opening junctions causing capillary by VEGFs By between and endothelial more capillaries perfusion increase tight vasodilation, fenestrations. cells enable and adding permeability

Myocardial stunning, prolongedventriculardysfunctionwithoutmyocardialnecrosis,maybeevidentinpatientswhohavesufferedanacutecoronaryarteryocclusion.Ifthepatientistreatedsufficientlyearlybycoronarybypasssurgeryorballoonangioplasty,andifadequatebloodflowisrestoredtotheischemicregion,themyocardialcellsinthisregionmayrecoverfully.However,formanydaysorevenweeks,thecontractilityofthemyocardiumintheaffectedregionmaybegrosslysubnormal.

,lacticacid,H+)inthecardiactissues.Ifthereductionincoronaryflowtoanyregionoftheheartissufficientlysevereandprolonged,necrosisoftheaffectedcardiaccellsresults. Prolongedreductionsincoronarybloodflow(myocardialischemia)maycriticallyandpermanentlyimpairthemechanicalandelectricalbehavioroftheheart.Diminishedcoronarybloodflowasaconsequenceofcoronaryarterydisease(usuallycoronaryatherosclerosis)isoneofthemostcommoncausesofseriouscardiacdisease.Theischemiamaybeglobal(affectsanentireventricle)orregional(affectssomefractionoftheventricle).TheimpairmentinmechanicalcontractionoftheaffectedmyocardiumisproducednotonlybythediminisheddeliveryofO2andmetabolicsubstratesbutalsobytheaccumulationofpotentiallyharmfulsubstances(e.g.,K+

describesthephenomenoninwhichcellularmetabolismisdownregulatedincellswhosefunctionisimpairedbyinadequatedeliveryofO2andnutrients.Myocardialhibernationoccursmainlyinpatientswithcoronaryarterydisease.Thecoronarybloodflowinsuchpatientsisdiminishedpersistentlyandsignificantly,andthemechanicalfunctionoftheheartisimpaired.Ifcoronarybloodflowisrestoredtonormalbybypasssurgeryorangioplasty,mechanicalfunctionreturnstonormal. hibernation Myocardial

relatively of small. the and skin requirements are O2 The nutrient Unlike supply other flow. the blood regulation nutrients chief cutaneous tissues, factor in and of the not of body O2 the is the to a temperature. constant circulation of function body primary cutaneous maintain The is fluctuations lose the to undergoes whether blood conserve Thus body heat. flow, in depending the on or skin wide needs body activate temperature internal ambient for mechanisms skin in flow. and responsible in Changes alterations blood

coronaryartery(Fig.17.36 Numeroussurgicalattemptshavebeenmadetoenhancethedevelopmentofcoronarycollateralvessels.However,thetechniquesuseddonotincreasethecollateralcirculationoverandabovethatproducedbycoronaryarterynarrowingalone.Whendiscreteocclusionsorseverenarrowingoccursincoronaryarteries,asincoronaryatherosclerosis,thelesionscanbebypassedwithanarteryoraveingraft.Frequently,thenarrowsegmentcanbedilatedbyinsertionofaballoon-tippedcatheterintothediseasedvesselviaaperipheralarteryandtheninflationoftheballoon.Distentionofthevesselbyballooninflation(angioplasty)canproducelastingdilationofanarrowed ),particularlywhenadrug-elutingstent(thedrugshelppreventrestenosis)isinsertedduringangioplasty.

)andmyocardialO2requirements.Inaddition,NOdilatesthecoronaryarteriestoincreasecollateralflow.Ofimportanceisthatorganicnitrates/nitritesdonotinterferewithcoronaryautoregulation.Calciumchannelantagonistsalsocausevasodilation;noneselectivelydilatesthecoronaryvessels.Theβ-adrenoceptorantagonistsreducetheheartratetoindirectlyincreasecoronaryflowandopposethereflextachycardiathathasbeenobservedwithorganicnitrates/nitrites. Manydrugsareavailableforuseinpatientswithcoronaryarterydiseasetorelieveanginapectoris,thechestpainassociatedwithmyocardialischemia.Thesecompoundsincludeorganicnitrates/nitrites,calciumchannelantagonists,andβ-adrenoceptorantagonists.Organicnitrates/nitritesaremetabolizedtoNO.NOdilatesthegreatveinstoreducevenousreturn(preload),therebyreducingcardiacwork(see

steal, occursbecausedipyridamoleactsbyblockingthecellularuptakeandmetabolismofendogenousadenosine.Ofnoteisthatdipyridamoleinterfereswithcoronaryautoregulation. Inpatientswithmarkednarrowingofacoronaryartery,administrationofdipyridamole,avasodilator,canfullydilatenormalvesselbranchesthatareparalleltothenarrowedsegmentandtherebyreducethepressureonthepartiallyoccludedvessel.Thereducedpressureonthenarrowedvesselfurthercompromisesbloodflowtotheischemicmyocardium.Thisphenomenon,knownascoronary

Skin Regulation Flow of Blood

resistance contains and types skin arteriovenous arterioles anastomoses. essentially vessels: two The of anastomoses venules and shunt the to plexuses; hence, they blood venous from the the arterioles bed. AV capillary bypass the of palms feet, fingertips, Such and nose, anastomoses soles the hands, ears, lips. in found toes, the of are coiled arterioles; nerve ( walls to supplied in vessels, AV or anastomoses straight approximately 20 luminal and long from have and short differ fibers anastomoses µm 40 morphologically they muscular the diameter, thick are either richly with

Fig. ). 17.37 and are almost dilate sympathetic maximally neural nerve These under when control, they exclusively their vessels

Fig. 17.36 A, Angiogram(withintracoronaryradiopaquedye)ofmarkednarrowingoftheleftanteriordescendingbranchoftheleftcoronaryartery(white arrow). arrow) afterangioplastyandinsertionofadrug-elutingstent.(CourtesyofDr.MichaelAzrin.) B, Thesamesegmentofthecoronaryartery(black

Fig. Arteriovenous Ear in 17.37 Dye. Injected (AV) Blue Anastomosis the With Berlin A,artery;V,vein;arrowpointstoanAVanasto-mosis.ThewallsoftheAVanastomosisinthefingertipsarethickerandmorecellular. (FromPritchardMML,DanielPM.J Anat. 1956;90:309.) supply is interrupted. of and reflex sympathetic the Conversely, the them to vessels obliterate lumen. these may vascular fibers stimulation constrict anastomoses they to are Although agents such tone, sensitive basal AV not exhibit and norepinephrine. as vasoconstrictor do epinephrine highly reactive control, and of flow. are metabolic under show auto-regulation not AV do or hyperemia they blood Furthermore, not anastomoses in principally receptors the higher is system channels nervous governed through nervous by the flow to centers of response or Thus of from central system. blood these anastomotic temperature regulation activation reflex by

the system nervous Most and the of and sympathetic basal skin factors. vessels in the of regulatory exhibit local under are control tone some dual resistance control neural predominates. However, fibers of nerve Stimulation sympathetic

Thefingersandtoesofsomeindividualsareverysensitivetocold.Onexposuretocold,thearteriolestothefingersandtoesconstrict.Theconsequentischemiaresultsinlocalizedblanchingoftheskinassociatedwithtingling,numbness,andpain.Theblanchingisfollowedbycyanosis(adarkbluecoloroftheskin)andlaterbyrednessasthearterialspasmsubsides.Thecauseofthiscondition,calledRaynaud’sdisease,isunknown.

sympathetic vasoconstriction, of and nerves vasodilation. induces induces cutting the of weeks. degree over the cutaneous a of before After tone existed chronic blood of vessels, gradually that denervation denervation the is regained several period restoration enhancement of an by This is tone. of accomplished basal tone Denervation enhanced vessels of skin results in hypersensitivity). catecholamines to (denervation sensitivity circulation in the

not innervate Parasympathetic fibers cutaneous vasodilator blood nerve do vessels. resistance cholinergic the stimulation vessels. are of innervated which dilates glands, fibers, However, skin sweat the sympathetic by polypeptide tissue with the protein enzyme produce lyses that contains in fluid (kallidin) properties. vasodilator a to Sweat bradykinin, an a potent arterioles locally, to and the formed skin. flow the Bradykinin, blood dilates increases

upper head, in by regulated are Certain chest, particularly skin the brain. those shoulders, neck, vessels, the and in centers of part higher the affected are to the examples the or blanching, stimulation, fear of inhibition in response sympathetic regions. Blushing, response or and to of in embarrassment cerebral to fibers anger, cutaneous nerve anxiety, and respectively,

display autoregulation contrast in AV resistance the vessels of and the hyperemia. In flow blood to anastomoses skin, reactive briefly when the to is is by stopped cuff, blood below a bright the deflated. vascular arterial becomes subsequently red inflation pressure If of cuff the skin of occlusion the inflow limb point a increased by of hyperemia) extremity. in distention (reactive blood manifested affected veins is cutaneous flow superficial The the also the

The Blood of the in Skin Temperature of Regulation Role Flow

adverse to the a primary constant of is maintain function environment body internal The and skin the protect from changes. temperature most the with is of must contend. body the variables Ambient important one which external is to hands feet. a elicits especially cold generalized and vasoconstriction in that Exposure cutaneous pronounced the system. This nervous response mediated is chiefly the by to other by are the pressure immersion water induces that the temperature. a extremities a to room cuff vasoconstriction skin of plus in that circulation the of of cold hand hand in Arrest exposed the to the reflex-generalized part hand the chilled returns vasoconstriction is to not that the circulation. caused When circulation is occluded, blood the in by general cooled stimulates the center anterior vasoconstriction. the then temperature-regulating heat This in then which cutaneous hypothalamus, activates posterior hypothalamus returned evoke the blood centers in to preservation

cold. also of cooled respond to hand vessels directly the The skin 15°C) to or the brief the severe including cooling anastomoses. vessels, to Moderate a constricts capacitance AV exposure (0°C and resistance cold secondary cold Prolonged vasodilator exposure a severe response. to evokes severe immersion are hand ice elicited in of by pain Prompt and water. the vasoconstriction is with the However, pain. part vessels, this of by skin followed alleviation the the dilation and immersed response of soon of reddening hand, immersion but alternating rarely dilation constriction With drops in response temperature as to vasoconstriction. it periods the and did as of much initial of the occur, the continued skin cold, Prolonged severe tissue. of course, damages of of cold-induced rosy exposed cold are a examples The faces environment people to vasodilation. the the appearance. of blood greatly flushed face despite the through reduced skin flow be may However, the dissociation (see of slowly blood left oxyhemoglobin cold the of O2 the caused mainly flowing red by uptake cold-induced color The the to by the and is curve reduced skin shift

and but application dilates heat resistance not and Direct local blood other capacitance the AV vessels to in of body. only dilates vessels also of the anastomoses the the parts skin reflexively whereas local nerve response the vascular regions the of supply, anterior warmed the to skin. returning is the cutaneous The heat of is of heated blood receptors reflex a effect stimulation by combined hypothalamus of stimulation independent in and the vasodilation the

The the countercurrent them. proximity allows major veins of between arteries exchange and heat close from that up cools the veins cooled the arteries; blood. blood a takes adjacent heart from Cold venous in and flows this toward heat arterial hand the blood warms extremity place heat. in the opposite when is exposed Heat takes direction the to exchange enhanced is warm environments, to extremities during is of to of cold heat exposure during Thus environments. and extremities conservation heat the conservation minimized exposure

and Skin Color: Volume, Flow Blood Blood Relationship to Oxyhemoglobin, Skin

determined content. Skin mainly by the color is pigment the skin, a of is dark. degree function of pallor amount of in when mainly the However, skin the ruddiness blood except is very the or blood With color. with quantities skin plexus, in displays of appears the the little pale, whereas large moderate skin plexus, the in the blood to venous a venous be shade some or This blue, may red, depending color between,

of of CHAPTER 17 blood. of the on Properties degree Vasculature the oxygenation the an gray combination skin. vasoconstriction hemoglobin impart color A the ashen reduced and can to of reduced hue. and purple of a combination content venous engorgement impart dark hemoglobin can A

about blood flow. cutaneous Skin of provides rate the information color little skin when skin the AV accompanied may are exposed flow may anastomoses by Rapid ruddiness pallor blood be flow blood cold. skin be open, to and when the with is slow associated

flow directly the varies rate blood muscle of activity The of with tissue type the the muscle. contractile skeletal in of and greater density high muscle capillary muscle oxidative with (slow-twitch capacity). red in and muscle white than (fast-twitch muscle with Blood are oxidative low in capacity) flow relax contract precapillary and arterioles intermittently. In the resting muscle, and not Thus 4.5 through the at skeletal any (1.4 given flow most mL/ total of moment, g). minute/100 perfused, capillary quiescent muscle low blood to bed is is resting the increase muscle exercise, flow relax, 15 level, to vessels may and the the blood of exercise. During to resistance 20 depending on the times intensity

Muscle Blood Regulation Flow Skeletal of

Neural muscle and local factors circulation. regulate blood Pa, and blood tissue influence as Physical factors such flow. viscosity pressure, muscle the in factor, physical skeletal However, effect blood the affects another squeezing flow of muscle, vessels. active the venous restricted, enhanced. contractions, outflow inflow is is previously With intermittent and described, as and prevent The of the blood. in propulsion forward contractions flow valves thereby aid backward between of blood venous to With which strong as the sustained bed contractions, actually exercise, vascular ceases flow occur blood compressed the point at can during be temporarily.

muscle a basal in low-frequency vessels of vasoconstrictor nerve of display tone; in fibers. the The also to they continuous resistance tone activity possess degree sympathetic response high vasoconstrictor to 10 of maximal 2 basal per frequency approximately fibers at per sympathetic second, of approximately firing is frequencies 1 The second. only vasoconstriction and occurs

sympathetic by evoked local Vasoconstriction the caused by release norepinephrine. nerve activity is of Intra-arterially receptor). injected only norepinephrine vasoconstriction elicits (α1adrenergic doses large of vasoconstriction. receptor), In produce whereas cause doses low (β2-adrenergic epinephrine vasodilation contrast,

Baroreceptor greatly the influence tonic activity the reflexes sympathetic nerves. of pressure in muscle dilate, elicits carotid An a to vasoconstriction increase ( in carotid causes bed decrease vascular whereas sinus the sinus pressure

Fig. ). 17.38 the large. of blood small, decrease evoked tone constrictor but release carotid the by is common flow artery occlusion occlusion high, sympathetic is in flow increase the after in is When is by caused of baroreceptor vasoconstrictor activity. stimulation produced The by inhibition sympathetic vasodilation

blood significantly muscle muscle in to constitutes mass, contribute arterial a skeletal fraction muscle The body’s vasculature thus bed. because resistance of of the maintenance constitutes vascular largest and pressure skeletal vessels the the large maintaining skeletal of reflexes Participation normal pressure. in muscle is vessels important the in arterial blood vascular

vessels muscle on of in sympathetic is and neural A the blood skin comparison the summarized effects of

Fig.

17.39.

vasodilation. also the the vessels, lower Note skin tone constrictor their note that response; the basal the of active absence the of cutaneous greater

by In blood flow skeletal muscle, is meta- regulated active factors. bolic factors predominate, neural In muscle, resting

Fig. ). 17.39 sympathetic component it intrinsic nerves abolishes the basal of unmasks muscle to tone neural and of Cutting vascular the the tone, blood of the vessels. regulate local other, the The contraction, and vasodilator muscle supervenes. during each flow blood neural and that mechanisms local oppose mechanism sympathetic nerve released the slightly locally induced strong metabolites. by stimulation However, exercise, during vasodilation attenuates

•Fig. After Occlusion the Muscle of Bed Carotid by Artery. the Vasodilation Common and Mediated of Vasoconstriction Participation of the in and Vascular Sinus 17.38 Baroreceptors Carotid Evidence Release Inthispreparation,thesciaticandfemoralnervesconstitutedtheonlydirectinnervationofthehindlegmusclemass.Themusclewasperfusedwithbloodataconstantpressure. J Physiol. (RedrawnfromJonesRD,BerneRM.Am 1963;204:461.)

through internal arteries. reaches and Blood the vertebral brain carotid the artery, branches arteries the form basilar vertebral to in •Fig. join of with the conjunction which, The andskin(shaded areas) Basaltoneandtherangeofresponseofresistancevesselsinmuscle(dashed tostimulationandsectionofsympatheticnerves.Peripheralresistanceisplottedonalogarithmicscale. 17.39 lines) (RedrawnfromCelanderO,FolkowB.Acta Scand. Physiol 1953;29:241.) arteries, Willis. forms of carotid the internal circle the brain parenchyma. Arteries that penetrate surface on differ those from the brain nerves, innervation arterioles ganglion, Pial have via arterioles an intrinsic sphenopalatine cervical nerve); have innervation cerebral (e.g., (via trigeminal neurons). superior parenchymal extrinsic and an arteries arterioles. parenchymal do cells smooth than have arteries more muscle Pial parenchymal not. arterioles arterioles arteries branches, pial do Also, collateral and have whereas regulate significantly. parenchymal reduce can occlusion blood flow their cortical discrete blood flow arterioles regions, to Therefore, and

a The is rigid because cranium. structure, lies it unique cerebral the circulation within increase inflow the in a contents compressed. arterial cannot must venous intracranial with Any outflow associated in be increase be comparable because volume extravascular tissues. blood The considerably and of can vary body in fluid most must one in change of the the a and fluid blood fluid in accompanied change is by a these brain, other. however, volumes the volume be extravascular In reciprocal of constant; relatively g a narrow blood maintained of The averages within mL/minute/100 range; rate is tissue. humans, 55 of cerebral it flow brain in

Flow Cerebral Blood Regulation of

consumes the rest, glucose. total total of 20% brain oxygen of At body 25% and body tolerant brain the of all tissues, the is ischemia. Of body least flow of for seconds Interruption loss 5 as little of blood consciousness. results cerebral as in just Ischemia irreversible damage. may lasts tissue cause a few that minutes itself. is of primarily under direction Fortunately, the the regulation the of circulation cerebral brain brain humoral vasomotor in originate in reflexes a circulating vasoactive circulation cerebral that presence the of relatively pressure. activity, blood mechanisms adverse effects regulatory such as constant agents, and in Local tend arterial to nerve changes maintain sympathetic and the Under pressure. blood brain also changes certain conditions, in by initiating its systemic regulates flow the blood

Changes blood “functional associated flow capillaries. in of are recruitment” with cerebral each flow the to the Thus organ. of through needs rate is the meet capillary of adjusted to recruitment,” accommodate “capillary In blood flow. more capillaries are contrast, open in greater

brain several The protective flow. blood that regulate mechanisms has the circulation, brain functional is increases regulation to hyperemia, flow (autoregulation) barrier, extrinsic intrinsic of control of which blood cardiovascular include blood-brain active. centers, a mechanisms and that These central in region

substances regulates the nutrient the the the brain blood barrier The of also from brain. and the limits blood-brain between transport harmful into and blood entry and ion •Fig. The Neuron Linking Microcirculation. Unit the an a Astrocyte 17.40 Arteriole Diagram With an of a Neurovascular to of Brain

Arteriolartoneismodulatedbyvascularsmoothmuscleandbytheactionofpericytes.Theendothelialcellrestrictsdiffusionofsubstancesbyvirtueoftightjunctions.Theneurovascularunitisacomponentoftheblood-brainbarrierandalsoservesasaregulatorofbloodflowduringneuronalactivity.

blood-brain adhesion which a substances claudins), molecule-1, to are tight blood form junction to of the barrier occludins, from connected to barrier includes that opposes cytoskeleton paracellular endothelial movement (junctional proteins cell brain. barrier the matrix, pericytes, and neurons; astrocytes, extracellular unit the blood-brain addition, includes (microcirculation, the neurovascular In

Fig.

17.40 ). endothelial and they blood in by of expression that vascular a diameter, the cells. Pericytes adjusting factor growth angiopoetin, regulate flow stimulates secrete occludins in endothelial their brain cells, are expressed in distribution Occludins sparse endothelium. contrast in prominently nonneural to neurovascular The unit flow regulates permeability. capillary blood and by blood-brain hypoxia, states, Thus including the that inflammation, characterized and are in unit involved dysfunction the diseases, is of neurovascular neurodegenerative barrier. pathological

vessels The system. consists components the autonomic (pial) of nervous of extrinsic of innervation cerebral fibers that accompany arteries sympathetic the innervate vessels. cranial and Cervical nerve carotid into cerebral cavity the the internal vertebral primarily depends muscle on cerebrovascular vascular and control the state factors. beds, to the contractile cerebral vessels local smooth comparison the metabolic of weak, In other sympathetic of is of other vascular receptors The beds. α1-adrenergic in less is than density that from parasympathetic nerve vessels receive facial a Cerebral fibers vasodilation produce the slight

rest •Fig. Controls: 1 Sens Sens 2 Different Human in Contralateral of on Blood Flow Regional Effects 17.41 the Cerebral Cortex. Stimuli Sens1,low-intensityelectricalstimulationofthehand;Sens2,high-intensity(painful)electricalstimulationofthehand.Otherstimuliareasnoted. (RedrawnfromIngvarDH.Brain Res. 1976;107:181.) stimulation. on effect exerts pathophysiological flow during system blood prominent cerebral most nervous The on the conditions. sympathetic

blood In cerebral total is relatively autoregulated. is general, and constant flow neural metabolic, (see involves interplay ). blood flow cerebral vessels described of myogenic, and Autoregulation among for as much peripheral mechanisms flow activity. regional brain However, is with in blood the regional associated neural results contralateral in increased one cortex. in of hand For example, only and premotor movement the sensorimotor area the blood of hand flow in cortex the the and cortex blood of cerebral flow stimuli increased ( other Talking, are the also regions to with reading, contralateral appropriate associated

Fig.

). 17.41 activity. to regional neuronal uptake Glucose also corresponds cortical the visual of in cortex. glucose uptake retina the enhanced by is stimulated Thus light, when is

flow. integral regulation of The neurovascular plays in unit the blood an role discrete couples uptake vasoactive glucose. of to compounds Production and activity neuronal oxygen of increased greater with the astrocytes Within neurovascular microcirculation neurons (see unit, link the

Fig. 17.40 ). At and astrocytes pole, presynaptic synapses. surround one neurons at postsynaptic other muscle the vascular converge endothelial on cerebral At and cells vessels. pole, astrocytes smooth of which the Ca++, (IP3), acetylcholine, the produce of which, channels. potassium activated conductance activates inositol glutamate astrocytes release by (BKCa) or When trisphosphate causes large in neurotransmitter turn, to K+ extracellular smooth 15 [K+] The astrocyte in arteriolar between released raises 8 to mEq/L the the and space muscle. of inward-rectifying of channels. K+ increasing elevated Na+/K+-ATPase and muscle by [K+] also hyperpolarization the smooth conductance causes The activating extracellular by the away shifted Ca++ potential reduces threshold. entry muscle The from hyperpolarization because smooth the vascular is into membrane and the Hence, flow parenchymal increases. arteriole blood dilates,

stimuli flow, increases and and K+ K+ increases elicit regard cerebral stimulation are they With seizures associated such rapid blood perivascular brain, of to , electrical in in . the as hypoxia, with in when dilation are The to those topically that to vessels. is K+ produce these arteriolar applied similar increments K+ pial and When cells depolarize, mEq/L, K+ increased to smooth and is muscle Ca++ exceeds entry contraction vasoconstriction. extracellular 15 cause gradient. Thus and actions on effect K+ the is muscle on that concentration from Na+/K+-ATPase, derived conductance, the a its has [K+] dual K+ extracellular smooth function

The regulated vessels also cerebral CO2. are by Increases arterial 7% CO2 of marked flow example, cerebral inhalation elicit cerebral in blood CO2 for increases vasodilation; tension twofold. (PaCO2) blood by blood hyperventilation, caused diminish Conversely, flow. decreases in PaCO2, cerebral resistance by pH. altering arteriolar in changes evokes perivascular CO2 the pial PaCO2 −]. flow changed, of When level [HCO3 of PaCO2 blood and vessel to are and diameter regardless are HCO3 inversely related concentration independently or the pH, − Acidosis marked arterioles. initiates brain a of vasodilation mediated is endoplasmic of localized vasodilation very (Ca++ a from “sparks”). Ca++ release by the The reticulum local the hyperpolarization and ensuing signal Ca++ activates BKCa muscle stabilizes vasoconstriction. smooth channels; large vascular conductance the opposes This cell

phenomenon, isevokedbyischemicstimulationofvasomotorregionsinthemedulla.Cushing’sphenomenonhelpsmaintaincerebralbloodflowinconditionssuchasexpandingintracranialtumors. Elevationinintracranialpressure,causedbyabraintumor,resultsinanincreaseinsystemicbloodpressure.Thisresponse,calledCushing’s

or lumen diffuses blood tissue from of from vascular dioxide smooth blood-brain is into prevented the H+ muscle smooth whereas Carbon muscle in arteriolar the blood reaching by vessels, from barrier. brain dilate dilate the increase cerebrospinal to minimally of vessels arterial an Hence, these when in only increased, response is in [H+] but the [H+] blood. fluid cerebral of vessels and roles cerebral hypertension); Chemical relative dysfunction to PaCO2 blood are endothelial in in (e.g., by clear. the regulation diabetes, H+ response changes with humans of of of PaCO2 is flow impaired not NO

concentration affects flow. also blood cerebral Potassium of perivascular seizures [K+]. in elicit stimulation in flow the increases brain, rapid blood electrical Hypoxia, and cerebral and magnitude that these vessels. those produce K+ in pial to [K+] to The in when similar is arteriolar topically applied dilation are increases not in is throughout However, increase sustained stimulation. the period [K+] of cerebral the the attributed the flow . blood K+ in of release to Thus cerebral be only initial increase can

also has on Adenosine major cerebral effect flow. a blood ischemia, brain to hypotension, the hypoxemia, in of brain, hypocapnia, stimulation response and increase seizures. electrical in Adenosine induced levels the Topically of a is arterioles. adenosine dilator the applied potent pial requirements Any to 5 the tissue. O2 in the (within increases results the of of supply the brain adenosine or brain O2 the either intervention in cerebral seconds) formation rapid that reduces supply, of imbalance. adenosine increases changes Unlike the O2 and with of change it pH remains concentration throughout the period the the [K+], in in O2 or initiation the brain in elevated adenine cerebrospinal into nucleotides incorporated during tissue. becomes adenosine cerebral is ischemia that The cerebral in released fluid into activity to of metabolic to K+, brain. pH, in factors, act blood adjust the the including These flow adenosine, local and concert cerebral hyperemia circulation cerebral reactive displays The

17 pressure when autoregulation blood CHAPTER Properties is arterial of and 160 the 60 between Hg. Vasculature and excellent mm arterial pressures may flow reduced edema. increased blood-brain Hg and Mean result cerebral consequently to cerebral and then barrier of the above syncope, 60 mm mm in blood mean 160 lead permeability pressures to whereas below Hg cerebral or flow. of potent other Hypercapnia any vasodilator blood autoregulation abolishes that blood cerebral component. by mediated flow by a myogenic probably is Autoregulation mechanism a of modulated is metabolic

by gastrointestinal superior is arteries. inferior The the mesenteric and supplied celiac, tract mesenteric, artery The 10% than the output. cardiac mesenteric carries of superior more mesenteric an of tract. the in form Small submucosa gastrointestinal vascular the network extensive arteries give they layers and rise tract, and fourth-order muscle The arterial longitudinal circular arterioles. penetrate to branches thirdand of the the the the villi third-order in Some arterioles submucosa the tips of supply (

Fig. 17.42

in capillaries flow and venules of arteriole the is in the opposite that The a in blood main direction (see villus

Fig.

). 17.42 a exchange system. arrangement is This countercurrent diffusion to countercurrent enables arterioles of venules. O2 Effective exchange from the the portion a of to the rates, shunted villus. At flow arterioles venules base may O2 blood substantial be from of near low the mucosal supply to reduces villus. This the tip cells O2 at the the of of flow intestinal is When extensive necrosis great takes intestinal very is the villi so that shunting O2 low, of blood place.

is of almost Neural mesenteric control exclusively sympathetic. the circulation receptors, arterioles capacitance through activity, the α1-adrenergic sympathetic constricts Increased mesenteric and vessels. receptors are mesenteric preeminent the circulation. These in agonist However, isoproterenol also vasodilation. are present, β2-adrenergic so causes and the receptors

occurs vascular “defense” mesenteric hypothalamic response or vasoconstriction In artificial in to bed. stimulation aggressive behavior of area, the the pronounced to to crucial brain. skeletal circulation vasoconstriction flow the from more muscles, intestinal less and This important blood heart, shifts the

in vascular beds. the blood flow well of intestinal in other not circulation Autoregulation developed as is as The autoregulation also metabolic, myogenic is mechanism a principal mechanism although responsible for probably

cells goblet epithelium columnar with Simple •Fig. Pattern 17.42 Microcirculation Intestine. the Small of Capillaryplexusesarisefromarteriolesinthevillusandalsointheintestinalcrypt.Bloodleavestheintestinalcryptviavenulesthatentertheportalcirculation.B, A, Lymphaticvessels(lacteals)originatewithinthevillusandeventuallyformaplexusatthebaseofthevillus. Biology: and Introduction (RedrawnfromKierszenbaumA.Histology to Pathology. Cell An Philadelphia:Mosby;2002.) ). fourfold mesenteric venous rises occlusion. concentration The brief adenosine arterial blood after in absorption rises also during of during activity intestinal mucosa, metabolic food. of such the as It enhanced of mediator in mesenteric metabolic bed, may vasodilator principal a vascular Adenosine, the be the potent autoregulation. osmolality However, altered to autoregulation. also may plasma contribute [K+] and

flow. is blood consumption by more Oxygen the small is rigorously than intestine controlled O2 is remains constant Experiments have Hg. 30 mm uptake perfusion the varied 125 between and pressure of when intestine that shown arterial small

flow. increases blood ingestion Food intestinal certain hyperemia. hormones contributes of gastrointestinal to Secretion this and flow, they blood secreted intestinal food cholecystokinin are and Gastrin ingested. when is augment also affects flow. food intestinal of Absorption blood no has vasodilators. potent products whereas are influence, Undigested digestion of food vasoactive several constituents glucose chyme, and mediators the are Among various of of mesenteric hyperemia principal acids. the fatty

blood cardiac approximately the 25% liver is flow output. Normally, of to artery. is and two the sources: supplied flow portal vein (≈75%) the by blood hepatic Hepatic Because the portal flow portal gastrointestinal has the of of O2 been venous already has passed through already bed, blood extracted. the capillary much blood vein of with hepatic blood, O2. the delivers The artery is 25% the fully remaining saturated which by approximately liver hepatic fourths from the used blood. arterial the Hence, derived O2 of is three

portal arterioles small the venules terminal hepatic to The vein rise artery and of portal give branches and ( hepatic

Fig. 17.43 ). the functional of enter terminal the hepatic acinus (the These vessels center. unit its liver) at sinusoid which vessels terminal constitute Blood capillaries, into flows the the network liver. the these of from capillary hepatic venules. radiate periphery capillaries toward of they acinus, sinusoid terminal with the connect the the The where hepatic drains veins, progressively these larger terminal the branches of vena inferior of which Blood are tributaries venules from cava. the into

•Fig. Acinus. the 17.43 Hepatic Microcirculation of Arrows indicatethedirectionofbloodflowfromtheterminalportionsofthehepaticarteryandportalveintothesinusoidcapillaries.Themixtureofarterialandvenousbloodflowsintothecentralveinandthenpassesintothesublobularvein. Biology. (RedrawnfromRossMH,PawlingW.Histology:A Cell and Atlas: With and Correlated Text Molecular Philadelphia:LippincottWilliams&Wilkins;2006.) sinusoid (central canal portal Mall) of venule Periportal ductule Terminal vessel branch artery Inlet vein) Lymphatic branch Portal vein Sublobular Terminal space of Terminal venule vein Bile Arteriosinusoidal hepatic of Hepatic branch hepatic Capillary (space

mm portal in Mean approximately the Hg. and mean in hepatic approximately pressure blood mm vein 10 pressure is the blood is 90 Hg, artery the to The greater considerably than the resistance vessels capillaries the that is of downstream hepatic sinusoid of upstream vessels. 3 vena 2 cava. and than greater hepatic Hg or pressure capillaries sinusoid the Consequently, the the mm in is inferior that veins only in other almost greater to the presinusoidal bed. than much of vascular in The resistance in postsinusoidal is any ratio liver capillaries and sinusoidal alter pressure sinusoid affect in other the exchange interventions wall drugs resistance and presinusoidal across Hence, slightly. only the usually that fluid to transmitted capillaries, of fluids. quantitatively affect pressure the hepatic the they and almost venous exchange hepatic in However, profoundly central and sinusoid are changes transsinusoidal

of Flow Regulation

systems reciprocally. hepatic and Blood in arterial flow venous the portal varies in one the in other increases not for fully the system. compensate decreased does first is in the but blood system, flow flow flow When curtailed

is system autoregulated. venous The portal not Pv As are raised, or either decreases. portal constant remains flow and resistance however, this involved arterial and of adjustment The flow. autoregulated, hepatic be in adenosine blood system may is

efficient. from O2 because to hepatic very O2 consumption liver The is maintain constant tends blood extraction blood. compensates appropriate O2 varies, of the the fraction from rate of extracted change in to O2 As by the liver liver delivery the an the extraction and presinusoidal vessels the center the Such acinus (see the postsinusoidal between acinar by at of distance vessels is periphery the at facilitated the

Fig. 17.43 ). intestinal occurs O2, exchange contrast in in The countercurrent villus. countercurrent the of vessels prevents to that these an between exchange of types distance substantial

in constrict sympathetic vessels arterial systems. the presinusoidal resistance The hepatic and nerves venous the portal capacitance vessels Neural more are important, however. on effects the the approximately blood contains the The of liver total body. 15% volume of the appropriate blood In vessels by response conditions, of approximately as volume can also rapidly hemorrhage, be in capacitance (see expelled half ). of the hepatic to constriction an in Hence, important liver blood the humans. reservoir is

Whencentralvenouspressureiselevated,asincongestiveheartfailure,largevolumesofplasmawaterdiffusefromtheliverintotheperitonealcavity;thisaccumulationoffluidintheabdomenisknownasascites. Extensivefibrosisoftheliver,asinhepaticcirrhosis,markedlyincreaseshepaticvascularresistanceandtherebyraisespressuresubstantiallyintheportalvenoussystem.Theconsequentincreaseincapillaryhydrostaticpressurethroughthesplanchniccirculationalsoleadstoextensivefluidtransudationintotheabdominalcavity.Thepressuremaylikewiserisesubstantiallyinotherveinsthatanastomosewiththeportalvein.Forexample,theesophagealveinsmayenlargeconsiderablytoformesophagealvarices.Thesevaricesmayruptureandleadtosevere,frequentlyfatalinternalbleeding.TopreventthesegraveproblemsassociatedwithelevatedportalPvincirrhosisoftheliver,ananastomosis(portacavalshunt)isofteninsertedsurgicallybetweentheportalveinandtheinferiorvenacavatolowerportalPv.

circulation in Fetal circulation the postnatal infants. differs from are Of depends that functionally and importance fetal the on placenta nutrients. the for lungs the is and completely fetus inactive, O2 most umbilical blood the the fetal liver. the from vein passes through to fetal Oxygenated placenta the the remainder placenta the the cava the venosus liver reaches and fetal through inferior liver, the (Fig. half and through bypasses passes from Approximately vena the flow ductus 17.44 ). Blood of the vena the returning joins the cava. extremities the part in inferior the blood and from venosus lower fetal the ductus trunk from veins. the This from the through blood with liver hepatic blood merges fetal

to cava inferior divided two in dividens). of and into their streams maintain are septum tend size edge by of (crista streams the the The blood characteristics vena the unequal interatrial of the atrium shunted from which umbilical the the (see left contains larger inferior foramen is ovale vena to the from mainly cava The stream, through vein, blood

Fig. 17.44 ). right fetal the cava vena blood stream myocardium. from with returning blood merges where the into body the atrium, it passes with parts of the The superior from other upper and through the

adults, in a Unlike fetus operate ventricles in in the those parallel. essentially of output high. fetus passes in Only lungs the right ventricular vascular resistance because a the is the tenth pulmonary through from arteriosus artery arteries to extremities. origins the aorta distal head a fetal of the to point remainder passes through the pulmonary upper the at fetal The the and the to ductus as the from aorta. the that descending the high, is of aorta ductus diameter pulmonary flows pulmonary and as to resistance is arteriosus large the because of vascular Blood the artery

volume aorta. foramen ventricle blood left into the the lungs, The atrium left blood that out passes is fetal through into and it returning is joined by from the of pumped the large the ovale by to ascending upper goes fetal blood the ductus body. and the arms; of of supplies thorax, remainder joins blood arteriosus the the from the aorta rest and the the head, in Most pumped by by The the the right blood half ventricle. ventricle of pumped is that amount left approximately descending the blood aorta the two the of the placenta. and ventricle major flows and The to that from by ductus umbilical comes passes arteries the way down of right arteriosus fraction

at of fetal (see various loci saturation occurs Oxygen blood

Fig. ). 17.44 receive including the most that the of blood body, fetal saturated are the parts liver, the Thus the and tissues highly heart, head. upper

into membranes. across villi the and and At the waste maternal placenta, CO2, are chorionic nutrients, O2, the products exchanged sinuses, metabolic dip the prevents O2 of normal exchange at of equilibration barrier circulations between rates the The flow. blood two to low. fetal PO2 placenta the of is leaves the Therefore, the that blood very Were for adequate does, an for fetal fetus greater O2 would fact affinity receive has that than hemoglobin O2 the adult a the it not not supply. hemoglobin the shifted to is dissociation fetal curve left. The oxyhemoglobin of blood than fetal more blood Therefore, does. O2, O2 significantly at equal pressures maternal carries

glycogen gestation, early acute hypoxia. may from protect myocytes In levels prevail in heart the of cardiac that high periods the in they gestation, adult levels decrease levels reach and by Glycogen term. late

muscular to have tension, bradykinin, in The trauma, umbilical PO2. that amines, and changes react walls angiotensin, sympathomimetic vessels thick to these the of tied, by in of In large umbilical an the minimized increase in umbilical the arteries not which is cord systemic vessels umbilical animals in associated and of PO2 newborn in arteries. stretching response by hemorrhage constriction is

arterial the and of umbilical total resistance peripheral infant. pressure the the increases Closure blood vessels of the a muscular ceases, vein through sphincter, venosus, with the umbilical flow a vessel thick-walled When blood closes. ductus that of unknown. the ductus factor closure The is initiates venosus

Ifapregnantwomanissubjectedtohypoxia,thereducedbloodPO2inthefetusevokestachycardiaandanincreaseinbloodflowthroughtheumbilicalvessels.Ifthehypoxiapersistsorifflowthroughtheumbilicalvesselsisimpaired,fetaldistressoccursandismanifestedinitiallyasbradycardia.

•Fig. Fetal Circulation. Schematic Diagram 17.44 the of indicatethedirectionsofflow. representthepercentageofO2saturationofthebloodflowingintheindicatedbloodvessel.Fetalbloodthatleavestheplacentais80%saturated,butthesaturationofthebloodthatpassesthroughtheforamenovaleisreducedto67%.ThisreductioninO2saturationiscausedbythemixingofsaturatedbloodwithdesaturatedbloodreturningfromthelowerpartofthefetalbodyandtheliver.AdditionofthedesaturatedbloodfromthefetallungsreducestheO2saturationofleftventricularbloodto62%,whichisthelevelofsaturationofthebloodreachingthefetalheadandupperextremities.Thebloodintherightventricle—whichisamixtureofdesaturatedsuperiorvenacavalblood,coronaryvenousblood,andinferiorvenacavalblood—isonly52%saturatedwithO2.Whenthemajorportionofthisbloodtraversestheductusarteriosusandjoinsthatpumpedbytheleftventricle,theresultingO2saturationofthebloodtravelingtothelowerpartofthefetalbodyandbacktotheplacentais58%.Theinset atupperleftillustratesthedirectionofflowofamajorportionoftheinferiorvenacavalbloodthroughtheforamenovaletotheleftatrium.Arrows Thenumbers Physiol. (DatafromDawesGS,etal.J 1954;126:563.)

of by body, center activates Immediately birth, of infant. of constriction clamping cooling vessels, respiratory the or the together caused the asphyxia umbilical newborn the after the with with of value pulmonary approximately expansion. vascular lung As that the fill air, resistance to before the existed decreases lungs 10% filled the not as with presence because change lungs if This vascular O2 in lungs the are the resistance is great of in is change by N2. caused just the not filling with However, liquid the resistance. reduce does lungs pulmonary vascular

the atrium in of decrease by caused increased flow to blood resistance umbilical the birth, by right vein; that left atrial the through large arteries. of atrium; the of of to After the the vena and the output to (1) occlusion pulmonary raised reduction left umbilical the flow above consequent with by resistance, the is cava right inferior and the in pressure atrium ventricular lungs (2) (3) left produced occlusion foramen gradient pressure fuse leaflets of valve and atria closes over the period the septal the across the several ovale, a Reversal days. of the abruptly over

vascular ≈35 previous decrease resistance artery pulmonary in (to the mm in level pulmonary to The pressure causes half approximately Hg). the its fall to with ductus reverses the increase in the coupled a aortic flow arteriosus. change blood in pressure, slight through This pressure, of to large the constrict. minutes, within begins arteriosus several ductus However, which turbulent infants. in newborn is This as a manifested murmur flow, constriction produces the complete after 2 1 usually days and of Constriction within is arteriosus to ductus birth. progressive shunt whereas this high with PO2 with to low arterial O2 the Closure arteriosus it; of appears the air ventilation closes vessel. of passing through ductus, ductus by the O2 ventilation blood be the pulmonary in initiated opens the through or release O2 vasoconstrictor substance the Whether not known. on acts is a of directly ductus

ventricles equal two have of At birth, approximately the thickness. the walls this layer vascular the high the of pulmonary muscle fetus. thick; the pulmonary resistance the arterioles is is In addition, thickness for of partly responsible right birth, of layer of pulmonary walls the of the muscle the ventricle thickness the After as does diminishes, the arterioles. In thicker. left become ventricular the walls contrast, on and the reflect a of after of the period weeks two birth progress ventricles. (e.g., vascular different forces changes over These resistance) hemodynamic effects growth period the underlies increase Cardiac weight heart birth. of normal hypertrophy during the after ventricular factor-1), from together demands by left physiological during The hypertrophy system, levels to imposed period birth with soluble cardiovascular growth the developing hormone, adulthood. which of increased doubles insulin-like physical mass than early the by (e.g., more for growth account factors

arteriosus, cansometimesbecorrectedbytheadministrationofnonsteroidalanti-inflammatoryagentssuchasibuprofen.Ifthisdoesnotresultinclosureoftheductusorifthechildisolder,closuremustbeachievedsurgically. Theductusarteriosusoccasionallyfailstocloseafterbirth.Inthenewborn,thiscongenitalcardiovascularabnormality,calledpatent ductus

1.

the and the system vascular systemic major composed pulmonary of circulation subdivisions: The circulation. two is with and capillaries) series other with are of are arterioles, These arteries, in a of each are composed series number that (e.g., subdivisions in one aligned another. types vessel each type arranged general, the In of with parallel other. a in given are vessels

2.

proportional to type. it and (v) the in cross-sectional that total of parallel velocity pumped is mean given type of vessels blood of to the blood vessel is the the inversely flow all proportional being The directly of area a flow by heart,

3.

law arterioles. flow laminar larger is characterizes that and than vessels Poiseuille’s in blood steady nonnewtonian However, flow applicable). blood in small Poiseuille’s law is is blood not vessels (i.e., very

4.

viscosity diameter velocity turbulent fluid (1) is great, when is to is (5) high, tends the (3) is low, the vessel is become fluid wall density (2) Flow flow (4) irregular. of or vessel large,

5.

but from also to the ejected blood the blood not some capillaries during only each of store Arteries conduct cardiac systole. the heart flow capillaries the Hence, during diastole. through continues blood cardiac have resistance them enables for a as from the high reservoirs blood low blood. heart the capacitance relatively and serve return and that to capillaries to Veins

6.

well aging as the the process of diminishes veins. as arteries, The of compliance the less heart do work must compliant more the given a achieve The output. the are, cardiac to arteries veins to store are, their is The compliant blood. the less the poorer ability

7.

with Mean peripheral pressure output varies and cardiac total directly arterial resistance. inversely Arterial volume arterial varies directly compliance. pressure with but stroke with pulse

8.

by of contraction chiefly flow (resistance arterioles Blood is regulated through vessels). capillaries of and The smooth is which muscles. capillary vascular the NO endothelium source PGI2, relax

9.

vascular by by mainly compartments diffusion fluid move but interstitial Water capillary filtration through absorption. and between also the small and solutes and pores are to confined compartment. kD 60 the essentially larger approximately Molecules than vascular their substances, Lipid-soluble of CO2 rate through lipid O2, directly the the proportional pass membranes to lipid directly is such of as capillary; and transfer solubility. the vesicles the across molecules can wall by Large capillary in move pinocytosis. from vesicles membrane The of the are formed lipid capillaries. the

10.

absorption and are Capillary by filtration Starling’s equation: described

absorption the when is these Filtration negative. occurs is of terms it occurs sum when positive; algebraic

11. protein blood blood and transported to escaped compartment. capillaries from that enter and the lymphatic lymphatic via back the system are capillaries vascular have Fluid

12.

the the and are Physical coronary aortic vessel left blood resistance that blood, ventricle. of of arterial within the compression frictional extravascular vessels the influence factors pressure, the of the viscosity walls walls, flow of blood diastole, during when flow extravascular by vessels intramyocardial the and coronary restricted the compressed. arterial compression, systole Left are not greatest ventricular is flow is during less is metabolic much coronary important Neural arterial than of regulation. flow regulation blood resistance cardiac vessels. of nerves sympathetic the constricts Activation coronary the sympathetic stimulation. produces effect the force constrictor rate However, heart the overrides nerve the by which vasodilation, contractile direct enhanced caused metabolism and associated in myocardial of increase of branches arterioles. cardiac the causes the of Stimulation coronary slight vagus the dilation nerves of coronary of striking parallelism the metabolic A exists heart flow. blood and activity arterial between A vasodilators releases that arterial coronary decrease O2 in O2 supply increase apparently an decrease demand resistance. or in NO, and O2, the out. H+ H2O2 and cannot ruled O2, H+ channels, (CO2, candidates, although the , likely factors adenosine) response, be most , KATP can adenosine are H2O2, CO2, Of that K+ mediate known this

13.

system nervous under and metabolites. dual the vasodilator Most in skin of of sympathetic control local vessels are the the resistance however, AV hands, are in solely and under The anastomoses face, control. the found neural feet, dilating of temperature in aid skin by function the blood lose conserve body to by and heat. heat is to of regulation vessels to The constricting main constrict in reflexively heat, response response they Skin directly blood dilate in and to to reflexively and cold. directly vessels and

14.

Blood metabolites. sympathetic release and locally in centrally of by the is regulated vasodilator flow muscle skeletal nerves by persons In neural at rest,

PG, Coronary and G, Rimoldi functional microvascular O. Camici mechanisms d’Amati dysfunction: assessment. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2015;12:48.

on perspectives. of and Effects vascular endothelium: clinical pathophysiological Chien Chiu flow basis J-J, disturbed S. Rev. Physiol 2011;91:327.

M, Edwards AH. Weston Félétou G, factors Endothelium-derived synopsis. pathways: and a hyper-polarization associated Arch. Pflügers 2010;459:863.

Kara T, VK. Somers K, Narkiewicz and implications. Chemoreflexes—physiology clinical Physiol Acta Scand. 2003;177:377.

it paramount, (as regulation metabolic flow regulation yields contractions exercise). is during but of during muscle to blood

15.

CO2, is blood especially flow by factors, predominantly metabolic Cerebral adenosine. K+ and regulated , activated The by in blood as stimuli produced cortex. area and with flow associated reasoning, such motion, cerebral the regional contralateral cerebral solving pain, hand activity of increased problem reading, are enhanced the touch, talking, extracellular blood unit flow the matrix, increased blood-brain oxygenation. The brain the and activity barrier, with pericytes, neurovascular to and is component astrocytes neurons), a (microcirculation, thought of link

16.

microcirculation villi O2. a in exchange system countercurrent for intestinal The constitutes exchange jeopardy of are of blood states low in in flow. countercurrent villi the presence system, of Because the this sympathetic to splanchnic in neural responsive very and changes vessels activity. The resistance are capacitance

17.

cardiac of artery. is the output three the vein 25% liver this The approximately fourths from portal approximately output; fourth a and from receives of hepatic approximately portal hepatic but the diminished increases, either other usually When flow in not proportionately. flow or is in system the system, maintain O2 from blood to for tends constant extracting its in so O2 is efficient. mechanism The part consumption, because liver of normally the 15% The blood contains approximately total volume. liver blood reservoir important It body. the an serves as for

18.

aorta. the In the large through percentage foramen a the left passes of passes the a pulmonary arterial blood percentage ductus to right arteriosus of blood to the fetus, and large atrium, atrial ovale through arteriosus and by their muscle contraction the close birth, of venosus, umbilical layers. ductus vessels, ductus At and resistance lung ovale in that inflation atria between causes is vascular thereby reduction factor pulmonary pressure foramen close. gradient The the the reverses caused to the the main by

Selwyn TL, Ludmer Shook AP, al. PL, et arteries. acetylcholine induced atherosclerotic Paradoxical coronary vasoconstriction by in N Engl J Med. 1986;315:1046.

et R, al. V, Bardakjian L, Ohanyan Yin of metabolic Kv1.5 Requisite role channels in dilation. coronary Circ Res. 2015;117:612.

of M, angiogenesis. Carmeliet therapeutic and P. H, aspects Potente Basic Gerhardt Cell. 2011;146:873.

al. Shay-Salit Resnick A, Yahav H, et N, worse. for better vascular the shear endothelium: Fluid and and stress for Mol Biophys Prog Biol. 2003;81:177.

1. Upon completion questions: should student of the chapter, be able answer following this to the

How regulate parasympathetic vasculature? nervous do functions the the systems sympathetic and heart and of

2.

differential vessels? sympathetic What capacitance the regulation of factors and resistance affect

3.

mimic proprioceptor does muscle of How skeletal operation baroreceptor-mediated reflex the reflex? the

4.

are regulate two What heart major performance? myocardial that muscle, the to intrinsic mechanisms,

5.

are the major myocardial performance? hormones What that regulate

6.

the by in H+? performance is blood O2, CO2, arterial of and changes myocardial concentrations How affected

7.

and the tissue flow? of does it in vascular of regulation muscle, is how blood mechanism myogenic What participate smooth

8.

and blood in humoral participate are that actions? of their What flow, regulation factors what the are

Heart Myocardial Rate Performance of Regulation and

pumped Cardiac quantity defined each the heart minute. blood the by of output as is the volume Cardiac output this rate the or volume stroke by called blood ejected may is varied each change a of in with either ventricle be from heartbeat; volume. the heart and (SV): (CO) as cardiac expressed the Mathematically, product can output (HR) heart volume rate of be stroke

18.1 Equation

activity controlled, understand how cardiac are rate regulated. volume heart the how Thus is stroke consider to and pacemaker. the cardiac the intrinsic by regulated is nervous the modulate autonomic of Heart activity system rate to is cardiac determined the loads is contractility) performance by by cell heart. and myocardial on Stroke determined the (which hemodynamic by volume as almost cardiac determinant output one are another. in of of a alters interdependent, invariably determinants inasmuch these All change

of Control Nervous Heart Rate the

autonomic stretching such the the is heart rate, certain tissue, affect temperature which the is changes rate the as and system principal Although of heart can means by nervous controlled. local factors,

faster heart The it minute approximately in children. normal rate 70 average resting is per in significantly beats adults, and is During 10 to minute. heart per rate decreases sleep, 20 the beats by 150 muscular increase emotional rates exercise, excitement, increase may it and during per well may above minute. to during beats It per minute. usual beats well-trained 50 is rate resting approximately only the athletes, In

system pacemaker, Both normally is sinoatrial the which influence the tonically cardiac (SA) autonomic divisions of nervous the node. parasympathetic nervous enhances whereas the nervous system sympathetic system automaticity, it. inhibits The usually of heart involve these nervous of in Changes divisions rate two a autonomic action the reciprocal system. combined a in heart rate the increases opposite rate Thus ordinarily autonomic in in changes the with activity activity. heart with parasympathetic the and decrease activity; sympathetic increase neural decreases

individuals. Parasympathetic resting tone healthy, usually predominates in atropine, the that heart substantially. increases resting a When a antagonist effects, individual receptor rate is blocks muscarinic generally given parasympathetic propranolol, is the β-adrenergic a usually individual that slightly If blocks resting given antagonist heart a decreases sympathetic only receptor effects, ( rate

Fig.

). 18.1 both divisions per When heart blocked, the rate of nervous autonomic system 100 young averages are of adults approximately minute. the beats called heart rate blockade rate. is prevails that complete the after intrinsic The autonomic

•Fig. Effectsoffourequaldosesofatropine(muscarinicrecep intheotherhalf,propranololwasgivenfirst(bottom 18.1 curve). wasgivenfirst(top curve); (β-adrenergicreceptorantagonistthatblockssympatheticeffects)ontheheartratesof10healthyyoungmen.Inhalfthetrials,atropine Physiol. Appl (RedrawnfromKatonaPG,etal.J •Fig. 1982;52:1652.) Changesinheartrateevokedbystimulation(horizontal 18.2 andsympatheticnerves(B). ofthevagus(A) bars) Physiol. Appl (ModifiedfromWarnerHR,CoxA.J 1962;17:349.)

(see oblongata, or medulla nucleus the that nerve vagus of originate the fibers nucleus parasympathetic cells cardiac dorsal ). The motor lie the in in in ambiguus in the centrifugal vagal mediastinum and inferiorly neck the synapse cells. carotid In to postganglionic fibers through the through with the common then near humans, vagal arteries pass either within of heart. or on cells the These located are walls the surface the epicardial vagal Most (AV) the near ganglion atrioventricular and of cells located SA the epicardial pads are in nodes. fat

different are to right and vagus left The nerves structures. distributed cardiac even for SA nodal vagus affects the right nerve slows of nerve stimulation the seconds. can node predominantly; this firing firing and stop several The SA mainly tissue ). block conduction to degrees of AV various produce (see nerve inhibits left vagus The AV that vagal way stimulation efferent left However, overlapping •Fig. distribution a the of such is vagal the fibers in also and Heart Changes in Rate Cardiac Vagus 18.3 When the

Stimulated Sympathetic Simultaneously. Are Nerves impedes vagal stimulation Thesympa the AV right SA depresses conduction. and node

hydrolyzes neurotransmitter SA the acetylcholinesterase, nodes acetylcholine that an AV The are rapidly in enzyme and rich (ACh). stimulus vagal ( of The a quickly effects very given decay

Fig. ) is discontinued stimulation rapidly 18.2A when destroyed. ACh because is vagal cardiac effects special in channels nodal (≈50 released on and vagal cells. function addition, ACh activates potassium a quickly In the to (KACh) msec) latency the very SA short ACh-regulated because have 100 AV is protein. coupled quickly channels a KACh muscarinic These receptor the the to channel by directly guanine open because nucleotide–binding nerves—brief theticnerveswerestimulatedat0,2,and4Hzinthepresenceofvagalnervestimulation(Vag)at0,4,and8Hz. latency and the These two vagus of rapid features Appl Physiol. (ModifiedfromLevyMN,ZieskeH.J 1969;27:465.) beat-by-beat decay response—enable exert of and nodal SA of to function. control AV them the

effects shown as usually sympathetic SA influences at node, over the predominate Parasympathetic in

Fig. 18.3 . absence 80 by of the stimulation minute in approximately the nerve 0 increases Hz). stimulation the vagal rate from of heart increases sympathetic beats 4 When frequency Hz, per (0 to 0 to at nerves when negligible a stimulated influence rate. the the 4 are vagus increasing 8 Hz on However, frequency stimulation has from Hz, sympathetic only heart

). originate five two sympathetic upper fibers columns the thoracic intermediolateral cardiac the in segments the cervical The of of the cord or or six spinal (see lower one segments and the from emerge of and fibers through chains white column branches paravertebral ganglia. spinal These the the communicating enter synapse mainly postganglionic or preganglionic and species. on cervical neurons middle The ganglia, the stellate depending the in efferent join mixed and a preganglionic In plexus of nerves the form postganglionic parasympathetic heart. the to fibers complicated mediastinum, to sympathetic

postganglionic The base the fibers the cardiac in great plexus the the approach adventitial of vessels. along this surface heart of sympathetic heart, distributed the the base extensive of these various From the an are plexus. fibers epicardial to as chambers usually myocardium, the vessels. then the penetrate coronary They accompanying

sympathetic decay after the gradually termination In stimulation contrast effects stimulation activity, is (see to the stopped abrupt response of after of vagal

Fig. 18.2B ). the 70% of remainder take is Nerve the terminals by bloodstream. released during of much stimulation; away norepinephrine the to up sympathetic carried slow. These are processes sympathetic the steady-state than vagal inhibitory the values stimulation much effects effects heart do of on Furthermore, more facilitatory slowly the stimulation. of attain cardiac sympathetic response The of begins main for reasons. two slowly onset stimulation to the norepinephrine released be nerve the sympathetic to First, appears from terminals. slowly of second cyclic adenosine relatively messenger the released are mainly mediated cardiac a involving system ). neurally norepinephrine (cAMP; the by Second, monophosphate slow effects see rate AV sympathetic alters and more much the activity conduction vagal does. than Hence, heart activity slowly vagal activity sympathetic Whereas cardiac beat-by-beat of control can activity function, cannot. exert

). Stimulation brain can of significant on rhythm, effects various cardiac contractility have (see rate, regions and gyrus. the and frontal the lobe, brain, in function the half located that centers the the anterior cingulate motor the cortex, premotor In in cardiac orbital the are principally anterior of cerebral the the insula, lobe, regulate of portion temporal cortex, cortex, and the tachycardia. of the the medial nuclei elicits ventral, of thalamus and Stimulation midline, change posterior of the and heart regions of also posterolateral hypothalamus can rate. the Stimulation the field evoke associated Stimuli tachycardia these the movements; resemble limb changes the to Forel hypothalamus various during applied in exercise. muscular H2 observed cardiovascular of and including responses, posterior those states. the cardiac anxiety, excitement, Undoubtedly, cortical other during centers and reactions that hypothalamic the and emotional occur initiate to environmental The alterations hypothalamic also response in initiate the centers temperature. cardiac alter peripheral the rate the temperature hypothalamus changes preoptic resistance. in and anterior heart Experimentally induced

cardiac inhibits activates parasympathetic reciprocally the pathways medulla area parahypoglossal pathways. and cardiac Stimulation the sympathetic of of cardiac nerves. and distinct transected cardiac with detected (increase sites dorsal have certain animals sites of accelerator medulla, rate) the augmentor (increase In the heart contractility) vagus in regions been more prevalent whereas augmentor side, are left. the on accelerator the the right regions sites abundant more The on are A hypothalamus. in also distribution the exists similar mainly through sympathetic Therefore, the ipsilaterally descend the brainstem. fibers

Corticalcentershaveimportanteffectsonautonomicfunction.Theinsulaexertsdistinctregulationofthebalancebetweensympatheticandparasympatheticactionsonthecardiovascularsystem.Inpatientssubjectedtoelectricalstimulation,stimuliappliedtotheleftinsularcortexelicitpredominantlyparasympatheticresponses(bradycardiaandvasodepression),whereasstimuliappliedtotherightinsularcortexevokesympatheticactions(tachycardiaandvasopression).Aspredicted,patientswithacute,stroke-induceddamageoftheleftinsularcortexdisplayincreasedsympathetictoneandanincreasedriskofarrhythmiasandcardiovascularmortality.Whentherightinsularcortexisacutelyinvolvedinthestroke,theincidenceofcardiovascularmortality/morbidityisunchanged.

Fig. 18.4 ). responsible and the for located Baroreceptors ”). carotid reflex sinuses the section (see are aortic in this arch relationship most and arterial pressures. is pronounced blood of pressure range an heart over blood between generally rate inverse arterial The intermediate high a this range, maintains pressure above value. rate Below constant, heart the intermediate this maintains low rate a constant, the range, value; heart

nerves in of The changes carotid activity effects in in on sinus described pressure autonomic are cardiac the

Fig.

in neural , sympathetic changes range carotid efferent that to pressures activity. reciprocal sinus Hg), vagal an 180 shows 18.5 which (100 intermediate over of are mm and evoked virtually is is intense, sinus activity carotid activity range this Below vagal sympathetic of absent. pressure, and above sinus intense minimal. vagal is the and sympathetic intermediate activity range activity carotid pressure, Conversely, is of

Peptide Atrial Bainbridge Atrial Reflex, Receptors, and Natriuretic

saline into their Francis that heart rate. or Bainbridge dogs blood A. accelerated In infusing 1915, reported did seem not not This did blood of because did to pressure rose arterial rate pressure or blood increase whether the to heart arterial tied be change. regardless rate rose the increased heart. distend However, the to pressure whenever venous sufficiently central noted also the that heart side right of Bainbridge response termed Bainbridge is reflex. This the the transection Bilateral of vagus this abolished response. nerves

direction the and observations of Many have Bainbridge’s on confirmed rate. response heart investigators have magnitude prevailing depend the the noted and that slow, the heart. accelerate blood is When infusions the of electrolyte rate heart or solutions usually intravenous infusions rates, slow heart heart. more however, such the ordinarily At rapid for responses? accounts different these What reflex). reflex also evoke Increases baroreceptor note, the activate but not Bainbridge blood volume other only reflexes in (of in tend These rate. elicit heart opposite other to reflexes changes an these rate volume heart antagonistic effects in reflex blood are alteration result ( Therefore, of in evoked changes the by

Fig. ). 18.6 Bainbridge baroreceptor prevails diminishes. when Bainbridge reflex over baroreceptor but the predominates the blood reflex reflex Evidently, reflex rises, when volume the the over volume blood

•Fig. 18.4 Experimentaldatashowingthatheartratedecreasesasarterialpressureisincreased. Physiol. (AdaptedfromCornishKG,etal.Am J 1989;257:r595. )250 150 Arterial Heart Hg) rate 150 (mm 125 50 100 200 pressure 75 (beats/min) 100 50

that by atria have blood receptors rate. Both changes that in the volume are heart and affected influence and its the These left in atrium its atrium venoatrial pulmonary principally are junctions with at cavae at receptors the with the veins. venae junctions junctions: located the in the right in the nerves. receptors these in Distention vagus brainstem impulses afferent sends the of to atrial from impulses autonomic SA carried by the are efferent the fibers to from brainstem The divisions. both node

changes selective. to cardiac is The activity these autonomic neural highly response in heart contractility when in ventricular rate are changes reflex is Even generally in negligible. the large, increase increase increase in activity an by in is accompanied in sympathetic usually heart not the arterioles. neurally peripheral rate Furthermore, induced the

•Fig. Experimentaldatashowingthatincreasesincarotidsinuspressureresultindecreasedsympatheticefferentnerve(Symp)activityandincreasedcardiacvagalnerveactivity. 18.5 (AdaptedfromKollaiM,KoizumiK.Pflügers Arch. 1989;413:365. 140 0 (mm Symp. pressure 0 max) activity Hg) 100 220 180 Vagal 50 (% 100 )100 Sinus 50 of 60 activity •Fig. (% of max) and Decrease Baroreceptor or the Rate Infusions Intravenous the 18.6 Electrolyte the Reflex. to Through Tend Rate the Heart Solutions of Heart Blood Increase Through Bainbridge Reflex to output pressure arterial Increases Increases Heart reflex right rate Baroreceptor – Atrial cardiac Increases Bainbridge reflex infusion pressure atrial receptors + Theactualchangeinheartrateinducedbysuchinfusionsistheresultofthesetwoopposingeffects.Intravenous stimulated

Stimulation the but volume. increases also heart only of receptors not the urine rate atrial may for account this diuresis. renal activity the fibers nerve Reduced sympathetic partially in be (see appears neurally the to secretion (antidiuretic mediated hormone) ). by vasopressin principal However, mechanism gland in the posterior reduction a pituitary natriuretic the from the walls peptide atrial (ANP) also Stretch atria. of atrial releases

natriuretic vasodilator 28–amino and exerts potent the ) capacitance resistance ANP, acid effects also effects kidneys and a the and diuretic on vessels. (see peptide, on important blood volume and of regulator ANP pressure. Thus is an blood

Incongestiveheartfailure,NaClandwaterareretained,mainlybecausestimulationbytherenin-angiotensinsystemincreasesthereleaseofaldosteronefromtheadrenalcortex.TheplasmalevelofANPisalsoincreasedincongestiveheartfailure.ByenhancingtherenalexcretionofNaClandwater,ANPgraduallyreducesfluidretentionandtheconsequentelevationsincentralvenouspressureandcardiacpreload.

and most detectable the variations frequency more in children. Rhythmic pronounced individuals to in respiration, of heart at tend be in rate, are occurring inspiration expiration decelerates accelerates heart and typically during The (Fig. during rate response stretch. secrete 18.7 peptide myocytes *The a to related the in ventricles of those discovery of central ANP because (BNP) to of natriuretic system, initial in •Fig. actions its nervous termed (see peptide, similar peptide the brain has This Sinus Arrhythmia. Respiratory 18.7 Notethattheheartrateincreasesduringinspirationanddecreasesduringexpiration. Physiol. J (ModifiedfromWarnerMR,etal.Am 1986;251:H1134. 110 Time 3 6 Inspiration 150 80 (sec) 9 140 12 rate(beats/min) Expiration )50 Heart

fibers from inspiration that vagal in the sympathetic increases in during neural activity fibers expiration. and the during Recordings autonomic cardiac increases nerves reveal rapidly by response to quick of is nerves because, is released rate The ACh cessation hydrolyzed from acetylcholinesterase. vagal stimulation the very vagus as already noted, heart enables rate rhythmically at heart short the the This vary to respiratory frequency. latency is released removed at norepinephrine endings very sympathetic periodically the slowly. Conversely, the inspiration variations appreciable the changes oscillatory in any in accompany rhythmic heart Therefore, sympathetic do activity rate. that not induce respiratory changes arrhythmia almost brought vagal by activity. entirely Thus sinus is about in arrhythmia when is In tone vagal sinus enhanced. fact, exaggerated is respiratory

Fig. 18.8 ). leads are in action the and heart receptors stimulated lungs inspiration, during this reflex increase to Stretch rate. a in vagus The this reflex limbs and nerves. in of afferent located are the efferent side Intrathoracic return decreases right the thereby increases of to also heart the during ). and pressure venous (see inspiration elicits consequent The right the of reflex. atrium stretch the Bainbridge required of arterial blood return the the left the to pressure. left reach for After side output venous time and increases heart, the ventricular increased raises delay through reduces blood in the This heart rise turn rate in reflex. baroreceptor the pressure

for responsible are Central respiratory cardiac factors also arrhythmia. autonomic cardiac respiratory the directly medulla centers The influences (see center in the

Fig. 18.8). pump-oxygenator, to opened, chest constant blood lungs a heart-lung diverted pressure In and venous the return at level. is arterial studies, collapsed, is is a the are maintained bypass the centers, the the of at in and rate respiratory such rhythmic movement of activity to rib respiratory often studies, rhythmic In medullary is heart the by changes accompanied attests frequency. cage in is arrhythmia the centers between certainly medulla. respiratory the This a interaction by respiratory direct almost induced and cardiac cardiac

two may ensue the chemoreceptor organ systems one peripheral cardiac response stimulation simultaneously. illustrates when excites to The complex that stimulus interactions and only (see of Stimulation depth consistently rate carotid but heart the changes ordinarily chemoreceptors increases slightly. it rate ), ventilatory a the increases rate the heart determines of result ventilatory whether of The or carotid stimulation. decreases chemoreceptor response magnitude as heart only the stimulation respiration decreases pronounced moderately; stimulation slightly. the heart rate of chemoreceptor-induced Mild more rate increases greatly the rate exaggerated, heart later. blocked, response be chemoreceptor If described is as stimulation to may the pulmonary response

•Fig. Is Heart Thus Cardiac Decrease to the of to Effect The the on Medulla Vagal Rate. 18.9 Stimulation in Chemoreceptors and Heart of Rate Center the Peripheral Primary the Excite (–) lung Secondary Heart •Fig. Peripheralchemoreceptorstimulationalsoexcitestherespiratorycenterinthemedulla.Thiseffectproduceshypocapniaandincreaseslunginflation,bothofwhichsecondarilyinhibitthemedullaryvagalcenter.Thusthesesecondaryinfluencesattenuatetheprimaryreflexeffectofperipheralchemoreceptorstimulationonheartrate.Medullary Increased Hypocapnia (–) (–) rate Respiratory effects Peripheral chemoreceptors (+) stretch effect (+) vagal Primary center activity intrathoracic center Change pressure in center reflex arterial volume Bainbridge return (stretch rate Change Baroreceptor venous (medulla) reflex pressure receptors) in Respiratorysinusarrhythmiaisgeneratedbyadirectinteractionbetweentherespiratoryandcardiaccentersinthemedulla,aswellasbyreflexesthatoriginatefromstretchreceptorsinthelungs,fromstretchreceptorsintherightatrium(theBainbridgereflex),andfrombaroreceptorsinthecarotidsinusesandaorticarch.Cardiac vagal Change (medulla) Respiratory 18.8 lung Change Heart in in

is primary reflex mechanisms secondary of result to stimulation The chemoreceptor response and cardiac the peripheral (

Fig. 18.9). center is reflex The the the effect medullary vagal to rate. primary stimulation heart excite principal of the decrease and thereby mediates respiratory reflex The secondary system effects. tends arterial by The vagal center. chemoreceptors respiratory the inhibit stimulation medullary to varies respiration concomitant large more the inhibit whereas in center of increases stimulation respiration; center ventilation inhibit vagal profoundly. small the in vagal inhibition the with level of increases This slightly,

of in primary An inhibitory example shown is influence the

Fig. . 18.10 blood In completely is oxygenation accomplished oxygenator. the example, artificial with collapsed, and this lungs an are block When the bradycardia some and ensue. degree carotid are AV chemoreceptors stimulated, of intense by Such are vagal fibers. efferent mediated effects primarily

The that evoked by chemoreceptor producing (see secondarily, heart reflexes pulmonary influences pronounced is both ordinarily hyperventilation carotid rate inflation and hypocapnia initiating by by more stimulation pulmonary the

Fig. 18.9). heart the rate. tend thereby to and the stimulation depress to accelerate Both cardiac response chemoreceptor influences primary and Hence, each and neutralize carotid other, prevented, not primary pulmonary hyper- is rate ventilation when stimulation chemoreceptor heart the only secondary the effects affects moderately.

surfaces endocardial •Fig. ventricles initiate reflex near the effects located to the those similar of Sensory receptors elicited Heart During Stimulation Chemoreceptor Rate Carotid 18.10 Heart With Total in Bypass. Changes Thelungsremaindeflated,andrespiratorygasexchangeisaccomplishedbyanartificialoxygenator.Thelowertracingrepresentstheoxygensaturationofthebloodperfusingthecarotidchemoreceptors.Thebloodperfusingtheremainderofthebody,includingthemyocardium,isfullysaturatedwithoxygen. Res. (ModifiedfromLevyMN,etal.Circ 1966;18:67.)

Fig.18.11 wasrecordedfromaquadriplegicpatientwhocouldnotbreathespontaneouslyandrequiredtrachealintubationandartificialrespiration.Whenthetrachealcatheterwasbrieflydisconnected(nearthebeginningofthetopstripinthefigure,indicatedbythearrow)toallownursingcare,profoundbradycardiadevelopedafter9heartbeats.Thepatient’sheartratewas65beatsperminutejustbeforethetrachealcatheterwasdisconnected.Inlessthan10secondsaftercessationofartificialrespiration,hisheartratedroppedtoapproximately20beatsperminute.Thisbradycardiacouldbepreventedbyblockingtheeffectsofefferentvagalactivitywithatropine,anditsonsetcouldbedelayedconsiderablybyhyperventilationofthepatientbeforethetrachealcatheterisdisconnected.

the arterial baroreceptors. by Excitation and the heart causes of receptors rate endocardial to resistance diminish. these peripheral regions epicardial sensory been of identified receptors have in the ventricles. Other the excited mechanical ventricular these functions stimuli, remain chemical exact physiological are receptors by various unclear. their all and Although

Myocardial Regulation of Performance

Myocardial Regulation of Intrinsic Performance

beat the any noted As nervous in or its control. previously, initiate the heart own can hormonal absence of changing to can means intrinsic muscle mechanisms by of cardiac hemodynamic are to also conditions that adapt myocardium itself. The with example, •Fig. greyhounds For racing Required and Artificial Man Who Not Intubation Breathe 18.11 and Could 30-Year-Old Quadriplegic Respiration. Spontaneously of Electrocardiogram a Tracheal Thetwostripsarecontinuous. (ModifiedfromBerkJL,LevyMN.Eur Surg Res. 1977;9:75.) perform as hearts intact as with innervation. almost denervated well those maximal cardiac 5% running decreases by speed complete after Their denervation. only output an In increase race cardiac in dogs, in is stroke during these principally a by increase to the volume. fourfold achieved threefold exercise by ). increase accompanied with in heart Normally, (see the stroke does much in rate; volume not proportionate is a cardiac change increase output is not This mechanisms; by circulating denervated catecholamines achieved in the adaptation undoubtedly contribute. heart entirely intrinsic their receptor For with severely racing if to denervated given greyhounds performance is β-adrenergic hearts, impaired. are antagonists example,

afeelingoflightheadednessorbrieflossofconsciousnessthatmaybetriggeredbypsychologicalororthostaticstress.Theventricularreceptorsarebelievedtobestimulatedbyreducedventricularfillingvolumeincombinationwithvigorousventricularcontraction.Inapersonstandingquietly,ventricularfillingisdiminishedbecausebloodtendstopoolintheveinsintheabdomenandlegs,asexplainedin syncope, Ventricularreceptorshavebeenimplicatedintheinitiationofvasovagal

Chapter17.

Consequently,thereductionincardiacoutputandarterialbloodpressureleadstoageneralizedincreaseinsympatheticneuralactivitythroughthebaroreceptorreflex(see

Fig.18.5 ).Theenhancedsympatheticactivitytotheheartevokesavigorousventricularcontractionthatstimulatestheventricularreceptors.Excitationoftheventricularreceptorsinitiatestheautonomicneuralchangesthatevokevasovagalsyncope:namely,acombinationofprofound,vagallymediatedbradycardiaandgeneralizedarteriolarvasodilationmediatedbyareductioninsympatheticneuralactivity.

Theheartispartiallyorcompletelydenervatedinvariousclinicalsituations:(1)asurgicallytransplantedheartistotallydenervated,althoughtheintrinsic,postganglionicparasympatheticfiberspersist;(2)atropineblocksvagaleffectsontheheart,andpropranololblockssympatheticβ-adrenergicinfluences;(3)certaindrugs,suchasreserpine,depletecardiacnorepinephrinestoresandtherebyrestrictorabolishsympatheticcontrol;and(4)inchroniccongestiveheartfailure,cardiacnorepinephrinestoresareoftenseverelydiminished,andanysympatheticinfluencesareattenuated.

myocardium regulation, the mechanism Frank-Starling mechanisms, enable in rate-induced to to the conditions. and changes Two hemodynamic intrinsic adapt principal law to heart) invoked mechanism length changes in The Frank-Starling of is the in resting response the myocardial of (Frank-Starling fibers. by the evoked regulation the in heartbeat. frequency Rate-induced is changes of

Regulation and CHAPTER Heart of 18 the Vasculature

the the Starling 1910s, changes Ernest In physiologist Otto studied (see hearts in isolated English physiologist Frank the afterload of and and response independently German preload to the

16). Chapter

after larger. ventricular and beats, is and constant filling several volume (preload) When pressure increases becomes progressively, increased, ventricular increases the by volume (stroke of the with blood heartbeat each quantity volume) equal of ejected venous At to equilibrium, return atrium. ventricles the right greater to the

volume greater ventricular facilitates enables a The ventricular ventricles volume. stroke and contraction increased pump the to an increase increase individual cardiac ventricular in in This length ventricular associated the volume is with of fibers. fiber The cardiac that performance mainly increase number of interact the (see altering in myofilament cross-bridges length by alters

Chapter 16).

of in the (see indicates ). stretch-induced evidence myofilaments sensitivity principal change to recent cardiac the Ca++ involves a mechanism More that fiber optimal exists however. length, an There capacity high pressures depress ventricles than the that may the the (see pumping filling enhance fibers overstretch of rather myocardial Excessively

Fig. 16.36

showed preparations isolated to could counterforce systole of the ventricular (i.e., to adapt during changes also ejection heart Starling the afterload). that in blood pressure the ventricle does a not eject (see until has exceeds contracts, ventricle the As blood pressure it the into aortic just aorta prevailing the developed left that

Fig. 16.39 ). during constitutes the left essentially aortic afterload. pressure ventricular ventricular ejection The by a in controlled led Starling’s the experiments, atrial hydraulic pressure aorta arterial that blood In the the device reservoir. right from to tubing ascending was the the reservoir atrium hold level constant, right hydrostatic blood return the to venous of To maintained. was first stroke the to pressure responded As increased a by new ventricle level, raised arterial pumping afterload left diminished constant at Starling volume. the to a held diastolic venous volume, volume return well fibers. the by accompanied constant, diminution rise stroke was length in an in Because the a as in ventricular myocardial was the as by increase of pump end-diastolic enabled to the volume the stroke change normal greater length finally in This resistance. fiber against ventricle peripheral a to . cross-bridges to the Ca++ contractile and proteins major sensitivity contributes be factor this a As thin number of a stretch-induced appears in filaments in the to probably of the mentioned, adaptation, the but thick change change the between

in adaptation in changes rate also Cardiac alterations involves heart ventricular to volume. diastole filling. ventricular greater of example, bradycardia, allows increased for the duration During fiber myocardial volume. in The length increases increase stroke consequent remain the reduction heart by rate stroke and cardiac output Therefore, increase may volume, may the compensated therefore in be in constant. fully

compensation involves generation increased intraventricular size ventricular ventricle the cardiac must be the of of effect When considered. on dilation, the of pressure the Laplace’s According to (see relationship

pressure required if that enlarges, of than ventricle to given greater intraventricular Chapter myocardial appreciably 17), in the the a must be a generate by force each systolic fibers by fiber normal the developed size. ventricle more is external of than heart required do a amount to work energy a to for heart for so. dilated Thus a normal-sized perform given along computation aortic) fibers ventricles with of afterload pressure. Hence, myocardial contracting must (and in intraventricular for on ventricular the walls of account the dimensions

levels volume. pressure and at the that the determines heart The pressure-volume pericardium encloses rigid high relationship of relatively pericardium conditions, individual normal heart is when at slow. under limits heart and rate is an the rest volume The even dilation stretch may failure, In the sustained and cardiac chronic the considerably. patients hypertrophy congestive pericardium with heart limitation volumes and at such patients, pericardial cardiac different is entirely exerted individuals. In from those the filling normal of in pressures

by changes To is function performance, in a ventricular mechanism represented ventricular Frank-Starling family curves. assess often the of volume (i.e., for construct is volume blood control measured arterial ventricular stroke at pressure) and each mean To are stroke ventricular a × function altered step. values, curve, over end-diastolic a and example, pressure of work range experimental Similar made the during desired are intervention. observations then to curve lies of function the control and above of curve ventricular left example, obtained For ( ventricular the during norepinephrine infusion function the

Fig. 18.12). performs given ventricle (an ventricular work pressure left for of end-diastolic of a conditions. the than control during preload), during infusion norepinephrine the left more level index Clearly, ventricular Hence, signifies ventricular improved and function curve contractility. the of upward shift the leftward a the downward right indicates shift Conversely, failure. cardiac and toward and tendency to contractility a impaired

is well match The mechanism return. Frank-Starling output suited to cardiac venous to return ventricle ventricle. second in increase an Any excessive one output to causes by sudden, the venous soon the its fiber correspond ventricle to augments length of consequent to of that increase in second output output the ventricle The the in mate. diastolic the between balance right left and ventricles. the In maintains output of mechanism the Frank-Starling precise this way, a but would ventricles a ventricles two in of were not the in series two imbalance in the circuit, catastrophic. closed arranged any If small output be maintained

•Fig. Aconstantinfusionofnorepinephrineshiftstheventricu-larfunctioncurveupandtotheleft.Thisshiftsignifiesanenhancementinventricularcontractility. 18.12 (RedrawnfromSarnoffSJ,etal.Circ Res. 1960;8:1108. Control H2O) 10 40 30 )0 10 (g•m) Left 60 20 ventricular 50 0 end-diastolic ventricular 35 40 5 stroke Left 30 25 pressure 15 20 Norepinephrine (cm work

the that to the the that ventricle the usually for right pressure curve for for mean atrial ( The curves ventricle two left cardiac ventricles below do coincide; output relate not lies

Fig. 18.13). At atrial equal left and right pressures

Fig. 18.13 left output. ventricular ), ventricular right output exceeds return the pressure left output, of volume diastolic left ventricular rise. left output) exceeds venous ventricle (a Hence, ventricular ventricular and to function and right (from mechanism, in the therefore B Frank-Starling point C left increases ventricular toward According to output point

Fig. 18.13 ). reached. both ventricles output (points A is C) Only when the and identical equilibrium of is C) such (point right Under however, atrial left A). exceeds pressure atrial pressure conditions, (point is This precisely ordinarily that the prevails. relationship

Thefactthatleftatrialpressureexceedsrightatrialpressureaccountsfortheobservationthatinindividualswithcongenitalatrialseptaldefectsinwhichthetwoatriacommunicatewitheachotherviaapatentforamenovale,thedirectionofshuntflowisusuallyfromlefttotherightsideoftheheart.

•Fig. and and Relationships in Ventricles of Mean Pressure Left Atria, Right Right the Output the and Respectively. Left 18.13 Between the Right C Cardiac A pressure B Atanygivenlevelofcardiacoutput,meanleftatrialpressure(e.g.,pointC)exceedsmeanrightatrialpressure(pointA).Atrial Left output

Force0.632020 •Fig. Changesindevelopmentofforce(y-axis)inanisolatedpapillarymuscleastheintervalbetweencontractionsisvariedfrom20secondsto0.63secondandthenbackto20seconds. 18.14 (RedrawnfromKoch-WeserJ,BlinksJR.Pharmacol Rev. 1963;15:601.)

the also in changes Myocardial myocardial fibers which contract. the at performance is frequency regulated by shown on isometrically an are developed changes in in papillary the The effects of frequency muscle contracting in force contraction

Fig. 18.14 . cardiac Initially, is to 20 once stimulated every contract seconds. the muscle the to increases beats. force suddenly When developed several contract is the seconds, next every progressively over muscle 0.63 made the once than times than the more at greater is larger the force contraction interval. developed the steady five state, the new At force A seconds) of the force. return on interval the larger influence to development has opposite (20 the

a in [Ca++]. The in is caused increase contraction is when decreased interval gradual the the by force intracellular rise developed an minute inward increase the per per depolarizations of depolarization. the Two an rise intracellular number [Ca++]: Ca++ to increase in contribute in current in and mechanisms the

the first mechanism, potential each plateau enters action In (see myocardial Ca++ during cell the ). As per plateaus the increases. diminished, of beats number minute between is interval the •Fig. of the Although duration and During Calcium First Induced Depolarizations. in Consecutive a (Labeled Sequence in 7) the 18.15 a Currents (Labeled Depolarizations Seventh 1) Myocyte of Thearrows indicatethehalf-timesofinactivationofthecalciumcurrent,asobtainedfromkineticanalysis.Bytheseventhdepolarization,themaximalinwardrectifyingcalciumcurrenthadincreasedbymorethan50%,andthehalf-timeofinactivationhadincreasedby20msec. U (ModifiedfromLeeKS.Proc S Natl A. Sci Acad 1987;84:3941.) of effect the intracellular is minute of plateau) overriding number influx decreases (and prevails, beats and the interval potential per [Ca++] increased increases. each of action of reduced, Ca++ the on between plateaus as each the

until new with beat steady beats the a cycle is second attained the basic progressively increases state the each new at In the (iCa) successive suddenly inward interval diminished, rectifying length. as is current between calcium mechanism, ventricular isolated depolarizations ( In into myocyte, of the successive increases influx myocyte Ca++ on an

Fig. ). 18.15 the greater first iCa result during the during depolarizations of inactivation in depolarization. increased the later than into myocyte the the influx slowed Both Ca++ and magnitude contraction. This Ca++ greater strengthens influx

the beats of in also Transient between affect strength contraction. intervals profoundly the changes ( ventricle contracts the left When prematurely

Fig. weak, (postextrasystolic very (extrasystole) whereas contraction) compensatory is pause is the premature itself strong. , contraction the B beat contraction A), 18.16 after partly the this on intact circulatory mechanism. depends response system, In the Frank-Starling time premature filling ventricular for premature in results contraction. the Inadequate the before beat just weak pause degree (see filling the associated of Subsequently, compensatory the exaggerated long with

Fig.

18.16 to postextrasystolic contraction. , B) contributes beat the vigorous

the degree force its directly related beat contraction. prematurity: premature beat, The of of The earlier the is the of premature weaker to its weakness relation mechanical coupling beat a interval contraction that curve The in is a strength curve. of represents premature restitution to the called of

Fig. obtained shows were in restitution the intervals test when coupling muscle an isolated preparation. beats curve ventricular 18.17 isolated the of

2.8 1.4 1.6 0.6 2 (sec) 0.8 1 3 1.8 Time 0.4 1.2 •Fig. 2.2 2.4 0.2 2.6 18.16 Inanisovolumicleftventriclepreparation,aprematureventricularsystoliccontraction(beat

A)istypicallyweak,whereasthepostextrasystoliccontraction(beatB)ischaracteristicallystrong,andtheenhancedcontractilitymaydiminishoverafewcontractions(e.g.,beatC).(FromLevyMN.Unpublishedtracing.) beat Test (% of 0.8 taken 60 the beginning from force 0.6 of large 1.0 the of end up relatively 0 40 0.2 the by the max) Test it Ca++ during the last beat. time postextrasystolic interval 100 beat that regular 0.4 elapsed 20 had 80 of amount beat (sec) until 0

Myocardial Performance of Extrinsic Regulation

various completely factors an to heart in a heart isolated adapt also extrinsic can influence afterload, in individual. Although the well preload and changes regulatory intrinsic overwhelm these Often, mechanisms. the may extrinsic mechanisms and extrinsic into factors may subdivided be components. regulatory The chemical nervous

•Fig. Preparation. Isolated Force 18.17 an Ventricular Muscle in Premature During Generated Contractions Themusclewasstimulatedtocontractoncepersecond.Periodically,themusclewasstimulatedprematurely.Thescalealongthex-axisdenotesthetimebetweenthedrivenandtheprematurebeat.Thescalealongthey-axisdenotestheratioofthecontractileforceoftheprematurebeattothatofthedrivenbeat. Res. (ModifiedfromSeedWA,WalkerJM.Cardiovasc 1988;22:303.)

time course contraction the depends the force cardiac relaxation. contraction of the intracellular during Restitution myocytes circulation on in Ca++ of of and of proteins sarcoplasmic the dissociates Ca++ from taken subsequent release. the the by is contractile for During up relaxation, reticulum that to 800 to the next there from a available of before msec sarcoplasmic is Ca++ is reticulum for in this lag release approximately However, 500 response the depolarization. the of become Thus available is the strength insufficient relaxation the the reduced much Ca++ allow time the premature during to premature reticulum of release sarcoplasmic beat beat. during up by the is to taken the for preceding because the released a stronger beat considerably the normal Conversely, Ca++ sarcoplasmic is than result because more is from postextrasystolic reticulum as of the

and Sympathetic contractility. enhances ventricular nervous activity atrial contraction are of an stimulation in left alterations isovolumic shown The electrical stellate by ventricle the ganglion ventricular preparation evoked in in left

Fig.

. 18.18 the diastole; increased is ventricular filling. Note these is duration of rate that during ventricular and reduced assist the phases relaxation early systole of of effects both the length, any the hence and more for diastole allows filling. cardiac systole ventricular cycle time For abbreviated for given

). interact cell Neurally β-adrenergic with catecholamines cardiac the or released norepinephrine membranes receptors circulating on (

Fig. 18.19 ). This raises which intracellular adenylate cyclase, cAMP (see interaction of ). activates levels promote kinases proteins within phosphorylation the cells. the of activated that Consequently, are protein myocardial various of reticulum, facilitates to and of of Ca++ sensitivity proteins Phosphorylation phosphorylation the by sarcoplasmic Ca++ reuptake contractile I the troponin . reduces of phospholamban effects facilitate These reduce ). (see end-diastolic relaxation and pressure calcium cells. channels specific the myocardial membranes of also sarcolemmal of Phosphorylation proteins in activates

is plateau, increases Ca++ reticulum of Activation to response released action and of potential cardiac channels sarcoplasmic the excitation. during Ca++ each influx calcium from the the in more thereby increased. of heart the contractile The strength is

Fig. isoproterenol contractile concentration the (a thin muscle the correlation the myoplasm (see between free 18.20 (indicated in shows ventricular signal) light strip β-adrenergic the also of aequorin by is increased and [Ca++] the agonist) force the a in of as

Fig. 13.3

0.5 activity 0.6 0.2 (sec) 0.2 be 0 0.4 increased 0.1 0.3 animals The intact Time effect •Fig. cardiac 0.5 overall 0.3 in 0.4 0.1 can best 0.6 in of appreciated sympathetic terms of Inanisovolumicleftventriclepreparation,stimulationofcardiacsympatheticnervesevokesasubstantialriseinpeakleftventricularpressureandinthemaximalratesofriseandfallinintraventricularpressure(dP/dt).(FromLevyMN.Unpublishedtracing.) 18.18 curves. ventricular function families of the function electrical ventricular shift to increases, the curves the progressively stellate When the ganglion of left frequency stimulation applied to left. The norepinephrine those produced by parallel infusions (see changes of

Fig. 18.12 ). left given •Fig. any Hence, for the and Interneuronal in Systems 18.19 of Cardiac Control and Responsible Between the Neural Intracellular Parasympathetic Mechanisms Function. Interactions for Sympathetic AC,adenylatecyclase;ACh,acetycholine;ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;β,β-adrenergicreceptor;βγ,beta/gamma;cAMP,cyclicadenosinemonophosphate;GsandGi,stimulatoryandinhibitoryGproteins;M,muscarinicreceptor;NE,norepinephrine;NPY,neuropeptideY.(ModifiedfromLevyMN.In:KulbertusHE,FranckG,eds.Neurocardiology. Mt.Kisco,NY:Futura;1988.) •Fig. Signal 18.20 Ventricular Square Rat of Effects a Per Muscle Millinewtons Injected Contractile Light (Iso) Aequorin Concentrations Isoproterenol Millimeter) (in Nanoamperes) on and Aequorin. With Various in of (in the Force Theaequorinlightsignalreflectstheinstantaneouschangesinintracel-lular[Ca++].µM,micromolar. Arch. (ModifiedfromKuriharaS,KonishiM.Pflügers 1987;409:427. pressure, µM Aequorin signal increased. Iso.Control as light mm2 Iso.0.1 activity is nA µM 0.2 C 5 work more A sympathetic B µM ventricular )0.1 nervous sec end-diastolic 20 perform D can Iso.0.05 Force mN ventricle the

myocardium, pacemaker, cardiac inhibit tissue. conduction and the nerves atrial AV The vagus atria. the less depress the myocardium, but are vagus pronounced ventricular in The also effects nerves the than heart contractility. shifts ventricular an In preparations, the to right indication the vagal stimulation, during pumping curve of reduced function ventricle. left suppresses force contractile Vagus in the the nerve stimulation obtained curves at ventricular rate pressure-volume is shown in ( constant This

Fig. ). 18.21 relation, depicted slope The by is receptor of antagonist. by negative opposed a the pressure-volume effect as end-systolic vagus reduced antagonist the a β-adrenoceptor of and nerve diminished stimulation, inotropic muscarinic vagus pathways. by two at nerve heart stimulation so results and The that in indicate does the reduces contractility least

in myocardium shown Mechanisms ventricular effects the for are the vagal on

Fig. . 18.19 with cAMP/protein on inhibit the vagal released the muscarinic cascade. adenylate A cyclase and kinase ACh nerves the ventricular interact to receptors membrane by cell cardiac cell phosphorylation This the calcium decreases channel, contractility. direct myocardial the conductance the inhibition and of diminishes reduces membrane, of hence Ca++ from released indirect inhibit nerves, receptors can neighboring a release The muscarinic vagal sympathetic activating mechanism norepinephrine by on of nerves ACh inhibition. also may decrease ventricular Thus sympathetic effects any can concomitant ventricular by be on contractility partly contractility. activity vagal antagonizing exerting that stimulatory activity ACh certain inhibits Y, and vagal neighboring which neuropeptides, nerves sympathetic release (see release the neuropeptide fibers norepinephrine including of Similarly, from

Fig. 18.19

The medulla auto ). the adrenal component essentially is a of is released. medulla adrenal by is The also principal epinephrine; norepinephrine hormone the secreted some of secretion activity adrenal that these regulated sympathetic mechanisms the the the The system. of nervous by by medulla rate of control catecholamines is in activate under of system. Concentrations thus that catecholamines sympathetic the the blood nervous same conditions rise probably under cardiovascular However, conditions. the circulating of effects normal catecholamines minimal are changes exercise, sympathetic fibers rather adrenal example, from contractility from medulla. in the by nerve by mainly the with are myocardial the mediated norepinephrine Moreover, the released cardiac released catecholamines for pronounced than

adrenocortical controversial. contractility influence myocardial How steroids is Cardiac response fatigue than cardiac in likely to muscle a adrenalectomized from taken and is is animals. in obtained to normal more tissue from animals bath placed stimulation muscle some however, enhance In adrenocortical hormones species, contractility. catecholamines. addition, effects the glucocorticoid of potentiates the hydrocortisone In cardiotonic extraneuronal in of is This by uptake adrenocortical part steroids inhibit mechanisms. mediated ability to the potentiation catecholamine the

•Fig. Reduces Con tractility. Vagus Nerve 18.21 Stimulation Ventricular ratebeforeopenheartsurgeryinhuman.A, line, measuredapproximately4mmHg/mL.B, Duringstimulationoftheleftvagusnerve,theslopeoftheend-systolicpressure-volumerelationdecreasedtoapproximately3mmHg/mL,anindicationthatcontractilityhaddecreased.LV,leftventricular. Controlpressure-volumecurveswerecalculatedduringocclusionoftheinferiorvenacava.Theend-systolicpressure-volumerelation,definedbytheslopeofthestraight Pressure-volumecurvesobtainedatconstantventricular Physiol. (RedrawnfromLewisME,Al-KhalidiAH,BonserRS,etal.Vagusnervestimulationdecreasesleftventricularcontractilityinvivointhehumanandpigheart.J 2001;534:547.)

hormones myocardial contractility. Thyroid enhance uptake Rates of the reticulum the occur and ATP Ca++ opposite hydrolysis increased effects in are sarcoplasmic hypothyroidism. hyperthyroidism; in by response hypertrophy. leads cardiac protein this increase synthesis, to hormones Thyroid and cardiac composition cardiac affect of muscle. myosin also These hormones isoenzymes the in increasing hormones myocardial with enhance thyroid isoenzymes By the contractility. greatest activity, ATPase

Cardiovascularproblemsarecommoninpatientswithadrenocorticalinsufficiency(Addison’sdisease).Bloodvolume

The changes mechanisms. depend indirect on in dysfunction thyroid also cardiovascular Thyroid hyperactivity tendstofall,whichmayleadtoseverehypotensionandcardiovascularcollapse,theso-calledaddisoniancrisis(see

Thyroidhormoneexertsitscardiacactionsbytwopaths:genomicandnongenomic.Thegenomicrouteinvolvesinteractionofthyroxine(T3)withnuclearreceptorsthatregulatethetranscriptionofT3-responsivegenes.Inhyperthyroidism,messengermRNAforcardiacmyocyteproteinsinvolvedinregulatingintracellular[Ca++](e.g.,sarcoplasmicendoplasmicreticulumcalcium-ATPase[SERCA],ryanodinechannel)isincreased,asareamountsofcontractileproteins(e.g.,myosinheavychain,actin,troponinI).Consequently,theratesofcontractionandrelaxationincreaseasATPhydrolysisandO2consumptionincrease.Inthehyperthyroidstate,theuseofATPislessefficient,andthefractionallossofheatisgreater.Ifuntreated,severehyperthyroidismcanresultinheartfailure.

).Inexperimentalanimals,thecardiovascularmanifestationsofhyperthyroidismmaybesimulatedbytheadministrationofexcessthyroxine. Cardiacactivityisdepressedinpatientswithinadequatethyroidfunction(hypothyroidism).Theconverseistrueinpatientswithoveractivethyroidglands(hyperthyroidism).Characteristically,patientswithhyperthyroidismexhibittachycardia,highcardiacoutput,andarrhythmiassuchasatrialfibrillation.Insuchpatients,sympatheticneuralactivitymaybeincreased,orthesensitivityofthehearttosuchactivitymaybeenhanced.Studieshaveshownthatthyroidhormoneincreasesthedensityofβ-adrenergicreceptorsincardiactissue(seealso

body’s turn in rate, in the arteriolar results vasodilation. metabolic which increases in resistance output, consequent reduction as explained cardiac total peripheral The increases in

positive on the a effect inotropic Insulin heart. has and when when infusions is even prevented evident receptors glucose is insulin hypoglycemia effect by of β-adrenergic are The

and 18 blocked. Vasculature CHAPTER Regulation the Heart of insulin is positive by the effect receptor Indeed, potentiated of antagonists. β-adrenergic inotropic augmentation The enhanced concomitant the myocardial by explained cells. glucose into of satisfactorily transport contractility cannot be

chronotropic the potent heart. positive and on has effects inotropic Glucagon endogenous cardiac system, the but hormone important is performance. enhance it not cardiovascular in clinically This to normal probably regulation used of has been on are The the glucagon of and to effects of similar catecholamines. certain heart metabolic those effects levels adenylate glucagon of to cyclase cAMP. Both myocardial increase activate catecholamines and a cyclase enzyme activate interacting with glucagon adenylate different but mechanism. catecholamines by activates this β-adrenergic by receptors, The sarcolemma influx in and calcium the catecholamines the the cAMP of as release by Nevertheless, in channels facilitates Ca++ Ca++ through rise reuptake of and increases reticulum, sarcoplasmic just do.

deficiencies in the derangements thyroid The in adrenocortical function. and cardiovascular hypopituitarism associated to principally related are with least thyroxine. Growth myocardium, hormone in combination at the affects on has depressed performance under thyroxine whereas hypophysectomized growth the In restores itself basal cardiac adequate by little hormone alone conditions. effect animals, heart, reestablishes cardiac when and peripheral increased, growth thyroxine not alone combination is restore thyroxine of volume or function, hormone normal cardiac performance. but However, resistance blood the adequate does increases contractility. failure, In and alone administration of output animal certain cardiac hormone of models heart growth myocardial

chemoreceptors of in a in have been described previously result peripheral chapter. and performance Changes as of cardiac this central stimulation effects predominate. usually These direct However, effects and have CO2 the O2 myocardium. do on

has Hypoxia performance. a on myocardial effect biphasic more performance because oxidative severe hypoxia limited. Mild stimulates hypoxia performance, metabolism is depresses but

depressant of carbon a increase (PCO2)— the decrease direct in a on An results which in heart. pH—has effect pressure in dioxide partial is by effect intracellular pH. changes This mediated in the diminishes released Ca++ the induced response of excitation. reduction from in pH, in intracellular in amount by PCO2, A sarcoplasmic increase reticulum an to myofilaments pH diminished The decreases sensitivity of the to . also the Ca++ opposite they . the is, effect; pH have intracellular that Ca++ to enhance in sensitivity Increases

of the Peripheral Regulation Circulation

circulation locally nervous through The under surrounding control: and blood system vessels. is in by the tissues the conditions centrally dual essentially peripheral described humoral Nervous regulation vascular of smooth and muscle in is

Fig. 14.7

hormones Table their which in are 14.1 ), receptors and discussed. transmitters, is tissues. control , different control which in Aspects are in in relative importance discussed these of local of to the mechanisms shown two vary

blood of throughout in the body. rate regulating the are arterioles involved flow The These maintenance vessels thus blood resistance these in of the arterial to and offer vessels of tissues are to pressure. the flow blood the greatest by important heart, the the pumped of diameter lumen of The (see in to allow the arteriole composed vary are vessel walls muscle fibers large the that smooth part

Fig.

). 15.2 the When endothelial obliterates this contracts strongly, the vessel lining smooth muscle completely and inward folds lumen. is smooth the vessel the maximally is When lumen relaxed, muscle dilated. completely Some time. vessels resistance closed are at given any muscle for smooth vessels). tone partially (which these accounts addition, in of the is the In these contracted vessels in the all blood fall simultaneously, pressure arterial body vessels the If precipitously. would resistance dilated

controls muscle arterial flow the tone, smooth the body. Vascular distribution peripheral blood resistance, throughout venous total of and and smooth are . vascular The discussed muscle in of properties is muscle the perfusion following tone, and of control sections, peripheral reviewed. smooth thus and extrinsic vascular tissues, intrinsic of In

Control Flow Local Intrinsic of or Peripheral Blood

certain tissue. adjusted tissues, the is of flow metabolic activity the to existing blood In changes pressure that flow. pressure) vascular tissue is changes steady, to resistance evoke in when perfusion tend (arterial constant in maintain blood Furthermore, blood metabolism a graphically is in which This illustrated mechanism, myogenic

Fig. blood 18.22 commonly is autoregulation referred , flow. of to as increases abruptly decreased of decreases, respectively. mm Hg, flow is or increased pressure pressure a control or When from 100 to within the pressure 30 seconds. at new level, flow control level its returns maintained blood 60 toward even However, with

•Fig. Pressure-flowrelationshipinthevascularbedoftheskeletalmuscle.Filled representtheflowratesobtainedimmediatelyafterabruptchangesinperfusionpressurefromthecontrollevel(thepointwherelinescross).Open circles circles 18.22 (blue) (red) representthesteady-stateflowratesobtainedatthenewperfusionpressure. Res. (RedrawnfromJonesRD,BerneRM.Circ 1964;14:126. 8 180 140 pressure Hg) 0 Perfusion 12 160 10 g) 120 Muscle 40 (mm 10080 blood 6 2 4 60 20 (mL/min/100 )0 flow

120 Hg, to relatively 20 steady-state constant. the pressure flow mm range Over of is the steady-state hydraulic vessels that elevation during (pressure/flow) the the resistance with perfusion constrict an a pressure. resistance pressure in vascular Calculation with dilate perfusion bed reduction in but conditions shows of across that vessels vessels identical have independent the it intact is response pressure stripped endothelium in in of been is This endothelium. and their because perfusion of to the pressure), myogenic to mechanism, wall across it (transmural According the vascular difference pressure. blood increase to the in in in transmural of and smooth a a response response pressure contracts relaxes decrease to an in muscle vessel The signaling contraction a distention unknown. to elicit mechanisms are vessel allow that of smooth [Ca++], is activate believed membrane pressure an raise of to increase muscle channels. vascular stretch transmural has been shown to intracellular in calcium However, because

→ Transientreceptorpotential(TRP)channelshavebeenimplicatedinthemyogenicmechanism.ThesechannelsaremammalianhomologuesofaDrosophila synthesisofdiacylglycerol→ melanogaster increasedphospholipaseCactivity→ activationofTRPchannel→ genethat,whenmutated,allowsonlyatransientresponsetoasustainedlightstimulus.Thepressure-inducedvasoconstrictiveresponseofanartery(myogenicresponse)appearstohavethefollowingsignalpath:pressure smoothmuscledepolarizationandopeningofL-typecalciumchannelsthatincreaseintracellular[Ca++]andmuscletone.Thisisameansofregulatingvascularresistance.OtherTRPchanneltypeshavebeenproposedtoparticipateinchronichypoxicpulmonaryhypertensionandinthevasoconstrictioncausedbytheα-adrenergicagonistnorepinephrine.

In is baroreceptor at a normal via blood constant maintained fairly level subjects, pressure the reflex. may myogenic regulating mechanism flow blood Hence, under tissues in conditions. to role little play normal the stretch. changes the a in a a transmural in precapillary this to imposed and the standing rises position, pressure response extremities, from person constrict to lower lying when vessels However,

oxide) relax number or (e.g., nitric vascular lining endothelium (e.g., endothelin) produces muscle. contract angiotensin smooth and a vasculature , that can the II substances of the the endothelium vascular flow to in specific beds. blood regulating important role Thus plays an

blood that metabolic tissue. in activity flow governs tissue The a of resistance the vessels. prompts locally the of results Any intervention O2 act dilate are that metabolites in to formation inadequate tissue supply vasodilator that from released the and of decreases, tissue increases, (see metabolic released more When are vasodilator when the to substances tissue the O2 rate delivery the or

17). Chapter

fluid inorganic phosphate Potassium, osmolarity induce ions, vasodilation. interstitial and are skeletal K+ and muscle osmolarity released (2) During and both is increased. (1) contraction, phosphate (increase flow blood in active these tissue hyperemia may Therefore, enhanced to factors activity). caused contribute by and contraction, in muscle osmolarity blood only increases always However, transiently. they significant may during flow observed increase are concentration not in phosphate and the do observed probably mediate the muscular not Therefore, they vasodilation activity. during

Potassium with skeletal muscle in contraction muscle increase of an the onset is released activity. at cardiac or of response observed decrease in could resistance in work. vascular the to physical cardiac or initial increased K+ to underlie Hence, exercise release sustained, throughout of not persists but of enhanced the activity. arteriolar However, muscle release dilation period K+ is is cardiac does elicit vascular blood when infused from Furthermore, blood and the venous into test reoxygenated a bed. obtained not active muscles skeletal vasodilation content unlikely that its alters its of venous vasodilator or phosphate and its K+ neutralizes It oxygenation or thereby osmolarity effect. blood is other mediate activity associated of some the must with agent tissue. than Therefore, the K+ metabolic vasodilation

in skeletal contributes blood resistance the of also in Adenosine, regulation flow, muscle. which participate the vessels coronary control may of to addition, mediators beds. some important vascular in may vasodilator certain prostaglandins In be Many prostaglandins thus been have

proposed of be Heart Vasculature of Regulation relative to 18 CHAPTER contribution each the as mediators and remains vasodilation, of metabolic determined. the and

the vessel of tone. substance vasodilator by a Metabolic the requires of a resistance existence control basal of release vascular is independent the demonstrable, the vascular tone contrast vascular smooth muscle activity muscle, to nervous is system. but of muscle in in in in smooth tone readily Tonic skeletal responsible this Thus tone. factor be maintaining must for metabolic some The may (1) . by oxygen blood or partial (3) of the to be imposed following involved: of Ca++ the myogenic arterial stretch blood pressure (2) pressure, (PaO2), presence the in response high the factors

is the immediately that occlusion arterial and blood gradually occlusion, before exceeds bed to flow the level. If of inflow the stopped the on vascular a flow flow to control returns temporarily, prevailed release called flow increase hyperemia. in blood reactive This is regulates of This a evidence of for metabolic flow. blood event the factor tissue local that type existence provides

experiment in In shown the

Fig. of clamping leg femoral 15, for and seconds. flow the artery 60 18.23 was the by stopped 30, to , blood a blood in the to was peak Release of level returned that greater flow, control flow the seconds. the occlusion resulted control 70% than and 60-second 110 flow within the

the particularly the (see Within of proportional duration occlusion reactive of to duration flow limits, the hyperemia are peak and

Fig. ). 18.23 extremity increased. occlusion the is period, exercised If hyperemia during the reactive is notion and blood consistent mechanism regulation blood of the a an of unoccluded metabolic flow. close activity local observations between in with the tissue relationship flow metabolic and in limb the These are

•Fig. Graphsofreactivehyperemiainthehindlimbofthelegafter15-,30-,and60-secondocclusionofthefemoralartery.(FromBerneRM.Unpublishedobservations. 18.23 120 2 100 (min) Femoral 80 60 4 40 pressure(mm 80 arterial 20 100 blood 40 Time 0 0 60 )0 Femoral flow(mL/min) 20 10 6 Hg) 8

Coordination Arteriolar of and Dilation Arterial

arterioles by the metabolites release ratio supply feed vasodilator these muscle vascular of in tissue, to of the O2 concomitantly may response is of O2 in When upstream diminish whose to relaxes caused arterioles. arteries the the decrease a demand in smooth resistance small that produced flow dilation The by than blood result arteriolar is alone. that greater are coordination and mechanisms of this possible arteriolar dilation. for two There arterial dilation initiated back when and propagate the microvessels the the First, propagated, to the can from vessels it arteries. is arterioles, in vasodilation the may arterioles be the in small along the metabolite-mediated the arteries. accelerates Second, feeder arterioles in of blood the flow dilation the nitric (e.g., acid). can of greater oxide, in stress increases blood flow shear vasodilation the by which more vasodilators velocity prostacyclin, This on turn H2O2, release induce or arterial epoxyeicosatrienoic one endothelium, flow-mediated

Inthelegs,diseaseofthearterialwallscanleadtoobstructionofthearteriesandsymptoms,aconditioncalledintermittent claudication. Thesymptomsconsistoflegpainwhenthepersonwalksorclimbsstairs,andthepainisrelievedbyrest.Thediseaseiscalledthromboangiitis obliterans, anditappearsmostfrequentlyinmenwhoaresmokers.Withminimalwalking,theresistancevesselsbecomemaximallydilatedbylocalreleaseofmetabolites;whentheO2demandofthemusclesincreaseswithmorerapidwalking,bloodflowcannotincreasesufficientlytomeetthemuscleneedsforO2,andpaincausedbymuscleischemiaresults.

Peripheral Control Blood of Extrinsic Flow

Several the regions medulla in influence cardiovascular cerebral activity. and myocardial evokes vasoconstriction, (pressor the acceleration, medulla region) contractility. dorsal lateral enhanced of Stimulation cardiac region of blood to caudal centers arterial pressor pressure. and cerebral the Stimulation decreases ventromedial by pressor inhibition the its area by and depressor region. exerts spinal This inhibition effect of medullary regions of direct cells anatomical These areas they not true “physiological” but a group of constitute centers in are discrete discernible, which centers. is

The cerebrospinal vasoconstrictor are tonically active. regions branches humoral the that that terminal Reflexes this enhance activity impulses of or the the vessels. reach increase neural frequency to stimuli constrictive resistance at constrictor is neurohumor the to α-adrenergic A a on terminals effect (norepinephrine) vessels. elicit released the vasodilation impulse vasoconstrictor efferent frequency fibers, the diminishes and the nerve of the in areas results. Inhibition blood achieved is peripheral the frequency by the vessels. Thus neural impulse in regulation mainly alteration the to in nerves the circulation sympathetic of limb. sympathetic increases sympathetic to the an extremity that flow to tone Surgical and thereby blood nerves vascular abolishes of section is tone an regained With (intrinsic) by in basal vascular increase tone. time,

regions are depressor the pressor pressure. manifested undergo Both in oscillations may as activity that and rhythmic in changes arterial tonic the Some changes of frequency to waves) cyclic a vessels. impulses respiration in rhythmic resistance are by and caused (Traube-Hering the at sympathetic occur fluctuation sympathetic activity waves) lower Other a in at frequency fluctuations occur than (Mayer respiration. that of

on veins; of sympathetic on arterioles influence system Vasoconstrictor vessels than neural the and nervous small less arteries, larger fibers the arteries. is and arterioles, much supply the nerve vessels; resistance than stimulation a resistance the maximally to capacitance constricted the Capacitance stimulation lower vessels. more sympathetic than frequency respond (veins) do are vessels at are vessels lack However, receptors, capacitance less metabolites. vasodilator β-adrenergic vessels to and respond they the is neurotransmitter nerve blood the in sympathetic Norepinephrine vessel. terminals released at the Factors such terminals. norepinephrine nerve as circulating release of from locally released particularly hormones substances the mediate and

vessels and of of is resistance The capacitance to sympathetic response in stimulation fibers the illustrated

Fig.

18.24 . of flow held sympathetic volume tissue (constriction fibers capacitance decreases of constant, blood the of blood stimulation the is pressure resistance When vessels) arterial (constriction and reduces vessels). of across new filtration resistance the responsible of the Constriction capillary for the a of equilibrium wall forces and absorption (see establishes vessels

Eq. 17.20

in passive smooth by addition In in and vascular (contraction changes to changes caliber, also alterations active muscle) pressure. vessel caused relaxation are intraluminal of reduces of increase the intraluminal caliber vessels, a elastic the pressure the distends decrease walls. of a vessels and in of as consequence the vessel recoil An

be stimulated a when tissue mobilized frequencies. a of physiological the the of vascular blood third approximately can volume nerves At are tone, at basal sympathetic experimentally, capacitance in if increases low evoked very vessels is vessels; tone denervated volume are Basal in these the

tissue flow volume •Fig. Arterial (mL) pressureBlood Hg) of (mm Change (2 18.24 on Flow Tissue Blood Sympathetic of Volume and Limb. Lower Hz) Nerve Stimulation of the Effect denotesthechangeinslopeofthetissuevolumecurveatthepointatwhichthedecreaseinvolumecausedbyemptyingofcapacitancevesselsceasesandlossofextravascularfluidbecomesevident.Theabruptdecreaseintissuevolumeiscausedbymovementofbloodoutofthecapacitancevesselsandoutofthelowerlimb.Thelate,slow,progressivedeclineinvolume(totherightofthearrow)iscausedbythemovementofextravascularfluidintothecapillariesandhenceawayfromthetissue.Thelossoftissuefluidresultsfromtheloweringofthecapillaryhydrostaticpressuresecondarytoconstrictionoftheresistancevessels. Theupward arrow (FromMellanderS.Acta Physiol Scand Suppl. 1960;50[176]:1.) maximal by small. doses are of ACh the the vascular tone, at Therefore, close volume maximal blood is to basal volume of tissue. blood skin can the blood the More from those than in capacitance from vessels the in muscle. mobilized be the to in sensitivity greater on tone stimulation, it of sympathetic This part also in is disparity skin muscle in skin basal but the than vessels. vessels because vessels depends occurs lower absence the contain do blood vessels more muscle influence, a of neural Therefore, capacitance than skin vessels. capacitance in

from mobilize capacitance blood Physiological stimuli vessels. sympathetic For the during pressure. activation augments filling example, hence of nerve constricts fibers and veins exercise, peripheral physical cardiac In the central constrict associated thereby decreased loss. capacitance in and vessels with correct blood venous (as hemorrhage), hypo-tension pressure occurs arterial the

sacral nervous division division parasympathetic the of viscera, cranial bladder, the of the innervate fibers of the whereas innervate genitalia, fibers blood the blood some efferent The system the of and of head of vessels the vessels

of bowel. 18 CHAPTER and the Regulation Vasculature and large Heart Skeletal receive not muscle do skin and innervation. parasympathetic because the a parasympathetic resistance body of The small proportion of resistance fibers. is of only fibers total vessels on the receive vascular cholinergic small effect

Inhemorrhagicshock,theresistancevesselsconstrictandtherebyassistinthemaintenanceofnormalarterialbloodpressure.Witharterialhypotension,theenhancedarteriolarconstrictionalsoleadstoasmallmobilizationofbloodfromthetissuebyvirtueofrecoilofthepostarteriolarvesselswhenintraluminalpressureisreduced.Furthermore,extravascularfluidismobilizedbecauseofgreaterfluidabsorptionintothecapillariesinresponsetotheloweredcapillaryhydrostaticpressure.

to glands vasodilation. induces parasympathetic fibers the of Stimulation marked the salivary vasodilator the action A a the bradykinin, plasma from glandular an mediates vessels, enzyme of protein formed vasodilation. substrate polypeptide, locally on this in lymphatic glands. formed Bradykinin in as sweat the lacrimal such glands, exocrine other is and cutaneous partly Its dilation for vessels. responsible of in blood the sweat presence be may

norepinephrine Epinephrine powerful blood vessels. effect peripheral and exert a on concentrations concentrations noted (β2-adrenergic In effect), muscle, as produce effect), vessels of dilate but (α1adrenergic high skeletal constriction in resistance epinephrine low

Table 14.1.

primary norepinephrine vasoconstriction. In of beds, all effect vascular the is the circulation. into adrenal When systemic gland release norepinephrine the can stimulated, epinephrine and under is release nerve medulla less sympathetic from release of norepinephrine adrenal catecholamine physiological conditions, from important the endings. the effect However, than

). Table 14.1 angiotensin whereas are others histamine, Some are perivascular (e.g., A2), (e.g., the II). oxide, endothelium from adenosine, derived endothelin, tissues released thromboxane nitric from

effects cerebral the are the baroreceptors, cerebral that chemoreceptors, cortex, in hypothalamus, mediate the and Areas vagal and neural impulses of of sympathetic under influence skin. medulla that originate concentrations the the of These medulla CO2 blood changes and of also in by areas affected are O2.

stretch the the arch ( in sinuses located The aortic (or baroreceptors pressoreceptors) in and carotid receptors are

Figs. 18.26 18.25 ). the carotid are sinuses The slightly

Fig. Diagrammaticrepresentationofthecarotidsinusandcarotidbodyandtheirinnervation. 18.25 and Carotid Comparative of Sinus. the Morphology Carotid (RedrawnfromAdamsWE.The Body

Fig. 18.26 Anteriorviewoftheaorticarchshowingtheinnervationoftheaorticbodiesandbaroreceptors. (ModifiedfromNonidezJF.Anat Rec. 1937;69:299.)

Springfield,IL:CharlesCThomas;1958. )Left stellate Left of arteries. the of areas ganglion nerve vagus subclavian artery ganglion Aortic ansa ganglion cervical Recurrent ganglion vagus inferior artery artery vagus Pulmonary fibers Brachiocephalic bodies branch stellate at carotid Left cervical the Vagosympathetic widened right artery arteriosus left subclavian Cardiac Left Right coronary Vagosympathetic nerves Right vagus origins Left fibers Ductus Baroreceptor branch nerveRight inferior Recurrent of Vagosympathetic Right fibers Aorta fibers internal the Impulses of carotid that nerve nerve to (nerve up (cranial sinus latter, travel tractus Hering) (NTS) solitarius to sinus the the the medulla. and, glossopharyngeal the nerve of carotid in in arise the IX) via nucleus the baroreceptors. and NTS site is of the The projections of the chemoreceptors the central of to nerve blood effect). NTS (pressor produce whereas effect), NTS of Stimulation the peripheral inhibits sympathetic the vessels the lesions outflow (depressor vasoconstriction fibers the in afferent reach the that aortic the nerves. in vagus arise Impulses via NTS arch baroreceptors

nerve arch pressure. and walls Baroreceptor carotid stretch and sinus deformation in blood of by in the terminals vascular induced the to arterial respond aortic changes the arterial enhanced diminished a blood pressure. arterial blood in these an is of frequency nerves of pressure and by by reduction firing increase The in vasoconstrictor inhibits An of blood rise and peripheral as with in cerebral arterial the regions results frequency, impulse a vasodilation increase in and pressure, pressure. in occurs lowering arterial the nerves this of of of activation about the Bradycardia cardiac contributes lowering pressure. vagus blood to branches by brought

are arch. sinus carotid sensitive aortic the in than more The baroreceptors those changes evoke pressure. arterial in aortic carotid than pressure resistance in greater peripheral arch systemic equivalent and pressure do in changes sinus Changes

the more constant respond receptors sinus to to pulsatile carotid in than pressure. The walls pressure in This illustrated is

Fig. normal 0 shows 1.0 which 18.27 levels •Fig. , at 2.0 1.5 that 0.5 Relationshipofphasicaorticbloodpressureinthefiring 18.27

impulses only of CHAPTER single of rise; 18 and late spikes a systole pressure of the early from Vasculature by of few fiber (≈100 arterial during Regulation Heart diastole. in a and sinus occur pressure blood mean barrage the is nerve the early Hg), initiated systole a mm pressure, lower these the more are is phasic but reduced. arterial evident, frequency At discharge even overall changes at 50 approximately threshold is evoking Hg; for nerve 200 firing impulses blood Hg. sustained mm is The reached approxi mm maximal sinus mately pressure pulse pressure. baroreceptors any a their Because high at pressure response level pressure mean adapt, low to pulse a than the to arterial greater is

in pressure in increases bed The vascular another. sinus to occur that one response carotid vary the reduced in to from resistance peripheral These flow allow variations to blood be redistributed. in least vessels, in sinus altering the mesenteric the vessels. are elicited pressure carotid The resistance renal in vessels, the and by femoral less and celiac greatest changes

of In the be sinus altered. sensitivity carotid can reflex the addition, of sinuses that its a carotid enhances of stimulation or a pressure greater given in fibers response. depressor sensitivity receptors in produces to way increase norepinephrine sympathetic nerve the Local of the application a such intrasinus the sinuses pressure. of in a carotid the hypertension Baroreceptor stiffer sensitivity become intra-arterial decreases result as because high carotid elicits of than smaller pressure given a a increase it arterial systemic pressure a normal pressure. sinus does Consequently, in level at blood decrease in raised threshold point less baroreceptors pressure. is in of pressure the and to are that changes Thus transmural the the is way such in the hypertension receptors in a increased set sensitive be can sinus some expected, As would carotid temporary of produce hypertension. in denervation instances, and, prolonged the

cardiac changes (as relatively adjustments to exercise). short-term baroreceptors role The peripheral abrupt in arterial play a response blood in key output, pressure in in or volume, in blood resistance balance fluid of or of control intake the fluid and days output. individual: the the between balance namely, determined a by of weeks—is long-term However, blood pressure—over fluid period the of volume, important far, organ pressure, control fluid the most body is and the in (see blood By also hence kidney

and atria, receptors ventricles, vessels. pulmonary Cardiopulmonary the are located in and sympathetic innervated baroreceptors afferent vagal These by are nerves. Cardiopulmonary can are changes in venous, vascular intracardiac, in active to and pulmonary resistance or pressure. alter response peripheral reflexes tonically

A baroreceptors: developed The activated receptors) diastole two tension (type of by ofmeanarterialpressure.stretch B systole activated contain (type during and those types by of the the during atria cardiopulmonary those atria atrial atrial receptors).

the to vagal impulses in Stimulation these up of medulla. atrial sends fibers the vagal receptors center decreased is the Consequently, sinus and to increased the to sympathetic node. kidney activity flow, in heart activity sympathetic renal rate. changes and flow, urine increase blood These

of the initiate by center cerebral in arterial cardiopulmonary vasoconstrictor also can Activation reflex that lowers a blood pressure inhibiting receptors the the medulla. angiotensin, pathway release reflex cardiopulmonary the inhibits of of Stimulation has the hormone); receptors opposite effects. of aldosterone, interruption the and (antidiuretic vasopressin

in responses the to these role plays baroreceptors is of The body’s apparent hemorrhage. that the activation blood volume regulation in of of in angiotensin, (see The secretion renin, reduction vasopressin in ). also aldosterone, enhances volume the and increases (hypovolemia) the vasoconstriction blood kidney sympathetic and filtration renal vasoconstriction release from reduces afferent the increases glomerular of renin (primarily kidney. and The arterioles) adrenal stimulates Renin aldosterone yield on which secretion cortex. by angiotensin substrate II, plasma to acts a the excretion. decreases excretion, water of decreases release aldosterone release The renal the enhanced of renal and vasopressin NaCl water, and hence volume salt The and retain kidneys blood increases. I enzyme) (see systemic arteriolar by (formed angiotensin angiotensin-converting tone II also from raises Angiotensin

14.1 Table

Insomeindividuals,thecarotidsinusisabnormallysensitivetoexternalpressure.Hence,tightcollarsorotherformsofexternalpressureovertheregionofthecarotidsinusmayelicitmarkedhypotensionandfainting.Suchhypersensitivityisknownasthecarotid sinus syndrome.

chemoreceptors highly see of the the small, in consist of region vascular (aortic bodies; aortic Peripheral arch bodies

Fig. to 18.26 the and carotid ) see medial bodies; just (carotid sinuses

Fig. ). 18.25 of are to arterial pH PO2, These the blood. changes and vascular bodies in sensitive PCO2, also they primarily vasomotor they Although respiration, regions. influence regulate the the PaO2 in chemoreceptors. stimulates reduction A tone aortic in The from activity the of nerve and vessels. capacitance afferent increases the regions resistance and thereby carotid bodies stimulates fibers increased vasoconstrictor and the

chemoreceptors pH. increased and by stimulated The are also by reduced blood PCO2 arterial (PaCO2) the effect PaCO2) the the effects is regions vasomotor However, of hypercapnia comparison on direct and the to medulla. small in (high acidosis reflex in sum occur the the greater alone. hypercapnia act of than effects when the When of each of stimuli chemoreceptors effects simultaneously, and the are hypoxia they two of the

heart. also the Chemoreceptors located are in blood to supply the cardiac associated the ischemia pectoris) cardiac myocardium. These activated transmit of by (angina pain muscle, an are chemoreceptors they with and precordial inadequate

hypothalamic of pontine the and cardiovascular requires of Optimal structures. reflexes the function integrity behavioral Furthermore, ). and the (see of emotional these control for cardiovascular also responsible are system structures anterior hypothalamus the whereas blood produces of the rate. a fall region both posterolateral of hypothalamus pressure of Stimulation the in pressure stimulation the and increases and both blood bradycardia, heart affects the skin. vessels blood hypothalamus The a temperature-regulating also that center contains in conservation, perfusing in heat or warm skin loss. vessels hypothalamus blood application of in of to the vasodilation and by stimuli of results the heat whereas enhanced constriction cooling the by the the to skin Stimulation and skin the cutaneous cold result

the also The cortex flow body. distribution cerebral blood in affects pressor the blood affects Stimulation occurs. motor response and pressure; premotor a of areas usually, emotional or to stimulus. response as in in However, fainting, evoked, vasodilation be and an depressor blushing responses may

depending either of depressor the can responses, pressor elicit Painful on magnitude and stimulus. the or location stimuli body surface evokes response, whereas to viscera generally depressor pressor stimuli response. a of evoke the often the Distention a painful

and Inflation that a reflex arterial systemic induces a lungs pressure. decrease the initiates in of vasodilation blood the of systemic collapse Conversely, lungs vasoconstriction. evokes fibers this nerves. sympathetic that in are mediate reflex the Afferent the also and possibly vagus in nerves areas. of these Stimulation by of lungs fibers inhibits the stretch the vasomotor inflation inflation the and to level to (see tone directly the the also to existing vasoconstrictor lung of is magnitude related of response depressor The degree of

increased peripheral chemoreceptors), (the stimulate vasoconstriction central Increases the of medulla and they resistance. and PCO2 chemosensitive in elicit regions in (in peripheral thereby resistance. subnormal decreases these tonic hyperventilation) activity to medulla response areas to and levels in the decreases PCO2 reduction A in also regions changes The chemosensitive by in pH. affected are cerebral stimulates rise them. pH Lowering blood areas, a these inhibits in and pH blood of operate center. of blood changes These cerebrospinal pH may and PCO2 the also effects fluid through in in may as pH, changes respiratory

effect on direct PaO2 region. vasomotor little has medullary the is and aortic mediated by of chemoreceptors. reflexes primary via the hypoxia carotid effect The by the reduction same depresses which in the PaO2 severe manner vasomotor moderate low but reduction areas very of stimulates a A tension. in region, by vasomotor depressed activity the are other O2 brain

Extrinsic Factors Intrinsic Blood Peripheral and Flow of Between Balance in Regulation

extrinsic and a intrinsic number adjustments. peripheral evokes vascular of by mechanisms important vessels control of Dual that have enable needed direct the is body it regulatory from and areas mechanisms where away flow requirements. most Such areas fewer to to blood of depends are extrinsic tissues, intrinsic of is tissue. changeable some and In of that fixed; effects in the the and on ratio activity state the other tissues, the mechanisms

Cerebralischemia,whichmayoccurbecauseofexcessivepressureexertedbyanexpandingintracranialtumor,resultsinamarkedincreaseinperipheralvasoconstriction.ThestimulationisprobablycausedbylocalaccumulationofCO2andareductioninO2andpossiblybyexcitationofintracranialbaroreceptors.Withprolonged,severeischemia,centraldepressioneventuallysupervenes,andbloodpressurefalls.

and Vasculature CHAPTER the Heart 18 of Regulation

intrinsic limited for which vital In are with tolerance structures supply, a are the blood heart, brain and flow-regulating mechanisms reduced dominant. on renal, the in cerebral greatly constricted. occur nerves, vessels whereas For of the and the become cardiac splanchnic and which severe, effects region sympathetic vasoconstrictor discharge via vessels, instance, might has acute massive resistance negligible hemorrhage, cutaneous, the blood

is vascular control the In dominant. skin, extrinsic via of The heat not functions body a participate pathways selectively required subserve and hypothalamic to only the but discharge loss also vasoconstrictor in conservation strongly cutaneous for temperature. regulation general heat respond vessels of and also central capacitance the intrinsic However, modify temperature elicited influence resistance by vessels override control be on or that local changes can (see

interact. muscle, mechanisms and the In extrinsic intrinsic skeletal is can be immediately increase sympathetic neural In dominant, the nerves muscle, by occurs (vasoconstrictor blood the section large as tone) resting after in demonstrated that control skeletal tissue. flow the to of onset mechanism in assumes flow-regulating the the After increase in of vasodilation exercise, active because local control, occurs metabolites. the the and intrinsic of muscles occurs inactive a general sympathetic the tissues in discharge. as manifestation of the Vasoconstriction the vessels active metabolic local effect. that are of the the constrictor However, resistance overridden reach by muscles impulses Operation (see flow control areas this where from increases away is required of it thus dual relatively mechanism it blood shunts and inactive also

Chapter 17).

achieved effects to Similar response an be in PCO2. in may increase associated keeps exercise normal Normally, PCO2 levels. hyperventilation the with at stimulates increased, would is vasoconstrictor if the PCO2 CO2 generalized because However, region. medullary vasoconstriction occur of PCO2. arterioles muscle smooth be muscles, [CO2] would in the highest, local the relax response the active In to would where are and by region affected affect that summarized in vasomotor the are Factors

Fig. & Physiology 408 •Fig. 18.28 Levy SECTION4Berne the of (VR). Illustrating Vasomotor Neural Region and Diagram 18.28 Input Schematic Output node ° ° indicatedirectionofneuralinputandoutput.IX,glossopharyngealnerve;↑PCO2,increasedpartialpressureofcarbondioxide;↓PCO2,increasedPCO2;↑PO2,increasedpartialpressureofoxygen;↓PO2,increasedPO2;SA,sinoatrial;X,vagusnerve.Aortic 1. chain PO2 PCO2 X R X PO2 V bodies Carotid ˜ Arrows PCO2 PO2 ° PCO2 SA ˜ Sympathetic ˜ body IX

intrinsic function is and mechanisms. Cardiac of by extrinsic a regulated number contraction are the myocardial The Frank-Starling and intrinsic rate-induced regulate that mechanisms principal mechanism regulation.

2.

rate The heart autonomic is nervous mainly the system. regulated by the the activity (vagal) whereas rate. Sympathetic rate, parasympathetic nervous decreases heart increases activity heart active, the usually both When are vagal effects systems dominate. system. The adenylate myocardial mainly nervous system the conductance Ca++ regulates via of by varying cyclase performance the membrane the cell autonomic

3.

heart the baroreceptor, are regulate receptor and inflation, ventricular (Bainbridge), chemoreceptor, reflexes. the receptor reflexes that pulmonary atrial The rate

4.

hormones—regulate epinephrine, hormones, pituitary steroids, insulin, glucagon, as adrenocortical and hormones—such anterior thyroid performance. myocardial Certain chemoreceptors, through function cardiac of CO2, concentrations Changes arterial O2, and the indirectly. blood directly H+ in and, alter the

5. arterioles (resistance mainly capillaries. flow downstream through blood vessels) regulate their The in and makes the response muscle, to arterioles, and of contracts Smooth of which neural most stimuli. relaxes walls up humoral almost regulation Neural by accomplished is sympathetic of blood flow system. completely nervous the to active; in the resistance. nerves center inhibition tonically medulla vascular reduces Sympathetic vessels peripheral blood are the vasoconstrictor of Stimulation the resistance sympathetic and the (veins) nerves vessels. constricts capacitance of they head, skin and innervate viscera, muscle. innervate fibers do not Parasympathetic the genitalia; and the

6.

Autoregulation of tissues. blood occurs most in flow flow blood a in This characterized pressure. of perfusion presence in the change a is by constant process smooth increase a mechanism muscle elicits an elicits is a a of and myogenic contraction pressure transmural whereby a by transmural mediated Autoregulation in pressure relaxation. decrease vascular in

7.

indicates and flow The by a tissue regulated flow blood striking blood is mechanism. consumption that tissue O2 parallelism metabolic largely between in O2 and arterioles tissue enhance decrease to vasodilator O2 the metabolites that supply O2 releases of of a ratio the demand supply. thereby dilate A

8.

moment-to-moment on the blood aorta internal regulate pressure tonically and a carotid baroreceptors arteries active and are basis. The in in these to and An a that inhibits center vasodilation. initiate receptors the arterial increase induces stretches reflex medullary pressure vasoconstrictor and a in decrease vasoconstrictor the pressure arterial Conversely, center induces disinhibits vasoconstriction. in the carotid internal baroreceptors The arteries

Fukuda Aizawa et H, al. K, Y, Kanazawa Cardiac and cardiac sudden innervation death. Res. Circ 2015;116:2005.

RV, Iancu Jones Harvey SW, RD. cardiac of signaling in myocytes. cAMP Compartmentation J. Biophys 2007;92:3317.

Y, AH, Mendoza Bubolz et al. S, Liu mediating factor H2O2 is flow-induced dilation in arterioles. human the coronary transferrable Circ Res. 2011;108:566.

elevated respond nonpulsatile aorta, reduced over or changes they pressure (stretch) vigorously pressure. to those predominate in in and the than to more

9.

medulla PCO2. Peripheral by in and chemoreceptors central PaO2 are decrease (carotid by and aortic a increase and oblongata bodies) blood stimulated in the blood an chemoreceptors in depth it peripheral the of also Stimulation rate vasoconstriction. of these respiration, but produces and chemoreceptors increases baroreceptors chambers large in cardiac Cardiopulmonary pulmonary also and vessels. the present are participate on influence blood less but They have volume. pressure do of in blood regulation

10.

viscera, skin, resistance stimuli by lungs, the that and brain. arise Peripheral pressure are hence blood and in affected factors and active combined of local tissues and distributes inactive it neural tissues. effect from The diverts to blood metabolic predominate. skeletal the such in muscle, the and vital and structures, brain metabolic heart as in contracting In factors

IJ, Llewellyn-Smith AJM, Verberne eds. Autonomic Functions. of Regulation Central University York: New Press; Oxford 2011.

Wieling et Karemaker Timmers JM, al. HJ, W, in Cardiovascular stress after baroreceptor denervation humans. carotid responses to Ann Sci. N Y Acad 2004;1018:515.

Mende U. Zhang P, Regulators of heart therapeutic in the G-protein their targets. signaling and as potential Circ Res. 320. 2011;109:

able should of chapter, the completion student answer following 1. this Upon to be the questions:

the factors four that major determine cardiac are What output? reason factors,” of factors these two are said the to what and “coupling for that is be Which description?

2.

What mechanism? to and cardiac is related Frank-Starling curve, the it function how is a

3.

curve, venous vascular affected how is a function volume, changes total tone? by and in is and blood peripheral resistance, it What

4.

cardiovascular vascular of the occur the and function the the at intersection Why point curves? of does operating cardiac system

5.

function clinicians changes and output? cardiac enable the does to effect vascular determine How evaluation and tone, the volume, of on curve vascular in contractility the function cardiac curve blood of

6.

mechanisms during in What output central and allow cardiac exercise? the heart, the nervous increase systemic necessary to vigorous system, levels vasculature to

7.

the cardiovascular hemorrhage, tend are restore compensatory are that mechanisms and arterial cardiac output? What and consequences to the what of pressure

Cardiac Output Blood Regulation of and Pressure

rate, preload, Four control ( factors contractility, afterload and myocardial heart cardiac output:

Fig. 19.1). various and although rate factors, and myocardial controlled cardiac contractility are mechanisms. they neural are strictly by humoral Heart heart important on mutually factors cardiac dependent Preload that are determinants of of and function are vasculature the and the afterload and are output. output by by themselves certain determined cardiac afterload vascular and are and characteristics. Preload called are vessels. the constitute because a and heart between functional Preload factors they coupling and coupling blood afterload

be appreciated. understand of output, between heart the vascular system cardiac To coupling must nature regulation the and of the the

circulatory of system. two components cardiac used interactions vascular the graphed to and are kinds chapter, analyze the of In between curves this illustrates or atrial Frank-Starling of cardiac pressure). expression an curve, the is (i.e., preload the function on The it cardiac venous right output the first curve, of dependence central and relationship, well-known the completely rest a of itself the from studied curve isolated function The is the and cardiac usually hearts characteristic is circulation. in heart of . discussed already been This detail curve in in has this Later between is curve, the in the discussed vasculature. in other curve, and this heart association analyze with the function chapter, vascular interactions curve the to characteristic of vascular cardiac pressure central the venous output. function dependence on curve The defines depends venous and blood including arterial relationship volume. characteristics, system peripheral This vascular only several on compliance, vascular resistance, and The heart. of the characteristics is curve entirely of independent function vascular the it mechanical replaces of experimentally can be this pump if the heart. derived a Because independence, even

output. changes changes defines cardiac The caused in (Pv) the venous curve function by that in vascular central pressure are response), In stimulus). independent variable (or Pv (or variable and cardiac output curve, this the the dependent is is variable is opposite cardiac Pv independent which in of output the the those (or These preload) the curve, variables are function variable. is and dependent cardiac

circulation in simplified model shown of The the

Fig.

of helps determines the Pv. output level explain 19.2 cardiac how cardiovascular elements. four model, In system essential all have the into components been lumped of this basic used pump-oxygenator, the and bed, heart, as vascular •Fig. pulmonary right the like to The left constitute machine perfuse of sides an much as heart-lung a well artificial Thefourfactors(inblue 19.1 squares)thatdeterminecardiacoutput.

during open heart body the surgery. designated microcirculation the resistance. is high-resistance peripheral The subdivided arterial and the (Cv). is (Ca) system compliance Finally, venous compliance the into compliance of vessel defined the unit is, As in blood (ΔV) change change vessel in , is volume in that accommodated the that compliance pressure transmural of a in that (C) per is (ΔP);

19.1 Equation

greater 20 times compliance arterial compliance. approximately is Venous than the example in In

Fig. 19.2, Ca to the to calculations. at simplify of set ratio is 19:1 Cv

mimic show model To an how an that adult output change of (see in hypothetical those has cardiac the change a inverse causes average in certain Pv, characteristics

Fig. 19.2A ). Pv The cardiac output; is mean pressure the Hg. mm heart is is arterial (Pa) generated by Qh) 102 flow (i.e., 2 mm L/minute; Hg; 5 and ratio is to is this resistance Pv) to vessels; mm Hg/L/minute. pressure the equal arteriovenous of − through difference ratio Peripheral resistance the flow (R) 20 (Qr) the (Pa

pressure force to peripheral Hg mm of is sufficient 100 flow L/minute Hg/L/minute 20 (Qr) mm rate of resistance An of arteriovenous a difference through a (see 5

Fig.

19.2A ). rate this heart. by flow to the the is (Qr) equal flow equilibrium precisely pumped rate (Qh) conditions, Under heartbeat that veins. the the volume flows remain volume arteries vessels by and from the resistance from (Va) through blood blood the the the the the the blood veins the transferred heartbeat, heart volume (Vv) of of veins and into From is volume to constant arteries blood equal of arteries to to because the in of in the

the by venous in raise mL it 1–mm amount. arterial of *Thus x to of added 19x to if to arterial be the produce same necessary need mL increase pressure venous add to system pressure, a would blood the blood to to were Hg system

of and Arterial on Pressure Venous Effects Arrest Cardiac

Fig. of = is, episode circulation 19.2B of cardiac beginning 0. that the Qh at arrest; an the depicts very volume (Va) heart, veins the the of the had (Vv) has of in arrest the appreciably. blood time and change In not to after arteries instant immediately depend and venous Vv, to arterial these pressure are on identical and in pressures respective respectively, Va the Because pressure pressures

Fig. 102 = and = 2). 19.2A (i.e., Pv Pa flow of through (Qr) 5 forces of resistance 100 This Hg/L/minute. rate Hg the a peripheral of L/minute mm pressure mm arteriovenous 20 gradient through pumping is Thus 0 arteries cardiac preceding the L/minute in point veins. of (Qt) (Qh) the that the potential from at stored 5 because be heart flow by the minute, microcirculation the action transferred rate although output to blood arteries the energy causes of L/ is to transfer arteries. veins the initially (steady-state) rate, the even the though blood the control can at longer from This no occurs heart to transfer

the in volume blood rate. in to increase veins causes absolute the the to the continues, arrest resistance volume same vessels through As arteries cardiac blood decrease the and at progressively blood the flow progressively are gradually. and rises arterial veins structures, venous pressure pressure falls elastic Because arteries and the gradually, the equal pressures continues venous arterial (see process become This until and

Fig. ). 19.2C is the is is the flow the L/minute, veins to condition from through reached, as Once (Qr) Qh. resistance of this the 0 arteries rate vessels

effects (see cardiac reach the this of When state arrest equilibrium

Fig. on veins the ), these pressure the arteries in of and vessels. the compliance depends 19.2C relative attained and equal mass). the to in venous (Ca) Pv conservation Pa increase to If volume be the equal, compliance because (Cv) in the in are (according to arterial in principle compliance of of would the equal volume the rise venous arterial decrease decline is Pa and average the combined in of values their Both attain would Pv

Fig. (102 = = mm that is, 2)/2 Pv ; = + 52 19.2A Pa Hg. equal. are Ca person not in a living and Cv However, arteries; is approximately assumed the the much (Cv/Ca) 19, than for more compliant Veins model ratio the are in ratio compliance

Fig. . 19.2 and are average of is arrest arteries mm equilibrium effects 52 Hg reach and the the occurs in equal. an Ca in cardiac lower veins the Cv pressure that when intact subject, of value than When much the of the veins concomitant than transfer pressure. equilibrium to in venous from pressure 19 greater fall rise at Hence, in blood arterial a times induces arteries As

Fig. shows, 19 Pv Hg Hg). 5 whereas 7 7 5) Hg mm would (to 19.2C (to mm Hg), 95 mm by fall increase mm (i.e., × by Pa would which pressure equilibrium flow, referred static to prevails of pressure. either is as or mean This circulatory absence in the pressure, the of and system. system pressure the total The the in system volume in compliance overall static the reflects the blood

•Fig. Simplifiedmodelofthecardiovascularsystem,consistingofapump,arterialcompliance(Ca),peripheralresistance,andvenouscompliance(Cv). toD, 19.2 A

vascular arrest the of cardiac understanding example curve. function of The the aids in clinician ( can The vascular now function assemble a to begin curve

Fig. 19.3 ). along is Pv. y-axis) (plotted x-axis) the cardiac output, dependent variable the (plotted is and variable along independent The the derived from the can be in points this on Two curve important example

Fig. . 19.2 in (A point One

Fig. is cardiac 5 19.3 output is, that 2 the state; L/minute, mm is represents Hg. Pv when ) control Hg When arrested the is (see output becomes at 7 heart 0), = Pv mm (cardiac equilibrium

Fig. is 19.2C this circulatory pressure the pressure. mean );

The which heart output veins decreased, from cardiac veins flows greater output inverse the and relationship back when between pumps suddenly which rate capillaries temporarily at that from means through arteries than the •Fig. is blood the to rate at Pv cardiac the simply the blood is Changes in 19.3 Produced Pressure Output. Changes Cardiac in Central Venous by Themeancirculatory(orstatic)pressure(Pmc)istheequilibriumpressurethroughoutthecardiovascularsystemwhencardiacoutputis0.PointsBandArepresentthevaluesofvenouspressureatcardiacoutputsof1and5L/minute,respectively.

arteries. the into a period, transferred hence, to falls Pv transient is arteries that from rises. blood and net volume veins; Pa of During

output cardiac increases. suppose suddenly that Now This point example how in (B a third illustrates

Fig. on 19.3 function derived. the curve vascular is ) the into of 1 restarted pumping (see begins arrested at is the rate that Consider suddenly and immediately a veins from arteries heart L/minute the blood

Fig. 19.2D ). is to begins veins. from heart pressure capillaries into first gradient the the blood and When no beat, and through arteriovenous the arteries the is 0, transferred the blood blood blood the same veins L/minute, Thus 1 rate is beating is at and rate. that venous resumes, at when replenished from depleted the volume of from absolute arterial volume Pa begins to begins and rise. Hence, Pv to fall arterial at and the a compliance, rate rate than faster difference at Because Pv 19 which venous the in times of Pa rises falls. vessels. blood to causes through The arteriovenous resultant resistance pressure peripheral flow gradient the 20 a until the mm continues pressure and 1 to maintains fall If Hg. output Pa L/minute, becomes of gradient the Pv heart to rise continues constant resistance forces Hg/L/minute. of of a 1 flow gradient mm 20 of a rate L/minute This through peripheral 19–mm 1–mm 26 fall Hg (to mm 6 is Hg mm a in Hg) by in (to gradient Pa achieved a Hg) and Pv. This rise on 1 a appears output value cardiac also the This equilibrium mm of vascular of function for (6 of curve Hg) Pv L/minute

Fig. 19.3 B). (point reduction arteries net from transfer circuit. The the the Hg blood to of Pv 1–mm in reflects the a of veins

increase in can a by Pv that reduction evoked in is The sudden output limited. be cardiac below from sufficient to output, is fluid veins Pv fall for value the of ambient the At cardiac maximal to transferred pressure. critical some arteries circuit the of system as venous ). pressure vessels very system, collapse In vessels, greater the the the such to external distensible (see causes of a •Fig. This curve) anddecreasedbloodvolume(hemorrhage Effectsofincreasedbloodvolume(transfusion curve) 19.4 onthevascularfunctioncurve.Similarshiftsinthevascularfunctioncurvecanbeproducedbyincreasesanddecreases,respectively,invenomotortone.

venous impedes the return venous collapse to heart. 7 output limits this Hence, to of (see maximal example cardiac value it in the L/minute

Fig. the the regardless 19.3 ), of of pump. capabilities

Curve Function Vascular Influence Factors That the

Venous of Pressure on Output Cardiac Dependence

the observations, Pa been According alterations do in evoke indeed experimental and that clinical in and changes model by simplified output have in to predicted Pv cardiac the

Fig. 19.2

in affected curve The function is by blood volume. vascular total variations and vascular circulatory output), pressure only (zero circulatory on total blood cardiac standstill compliance mean volume. depends During volume (hypervolemia) when mean vascular decreased pressure compliance, For increased volume diminished is blood a given (hypovolemia). when circulatory is is and expanded is blood relationship is illustrated This the intercepts by in y-axis

Fig.

9 circulatory or hemorrhage mm of Hg is volume with after (normovolemia a transfusion, pressure and normal after Hg mm blood euvolemia). value 5 mm Hg which 7 at 19.4 in comparison , mean in

those in effects volume. on tone in venomotor vascular curve of changes blood closely changes The the function resemble of In

Fig. tone, the curve , tone. transfusion venomotor curve hemorrhage could could represent the also whereas represent increased decreased example, 19.4 for During

failure infarction (deathofmyocardialtissue)isusuallyaccompaniedbyafallinarterialbloodpressureandariseinPv.In Cardiacoutputmaydecreaseabruptlywhenamajorcoronaryarterysuddenlybecomesoccluded.Theacute heart thatoccursasaresultofmyocardial

within as and circulatory rises increases vascular muscle for contractile vascular a itisalsoapparentthatthecardiacoutputatwhichPv= Fig.19.4 smooth the nervous venous arteriolar volume, given humoral muscle exerted within under in the control). system walls blood 0variesdirectlywithbloodvolume.Therefore,themaximalvalueofcardiacoutputbecomesprogressivelymorelimitedasthetotalbloodvolumeisreduced.However,thePvatwhichtheveinscollapse(illustratedbythesharpchangeinslopeofthevascularfunctioncurve)isnotsignificantlyalteredbychangesinbloodvolume.Thispressuredependsonlyontheambientpressuresurroundingthecentralveins.Ambientpressureisthepleuralpressureinthethorax(see changes smooth are the pressure standstill, tension (these and blood the total volume whereas fraction of small, volume percentage the (see within of arterioles in the large volume The blood located very blood veins is is the

15.1 ). Table no in tone on mean (arteriolar effect but pressure, changes can pressure venous have mean significant appreciably. circulatory peripheral tone) in alter changes Thus circulatory resistance increased circulatory pressure tone. falls venomotor Hence, rises with with tone diminished mean and venomotor

circulatory usually standstill circulatory blood normal. when attained approximately minute is Hg, 1 even experiments, substantially mean In 7 pressure volume is above abrupt the after mm excitation cerebral venoconstriction elevation the this ischemia, to attributable is that baroreceptors. activation of The chemoreceptors, reduced is pressure by and to of generalized caused level ceases, as falls response pressure nervous mean to Hg. mm reflex If to then fails, circulatory usually and value activity central subsides resuscitation a this 7 close

is others. greater certain in regions of in than the body considerably Venoconstriction venoconstriction effect, that reservoirs. blood beds In undergo significant vascular constitute vascular bed in The one is reservoirs major humans. the blood skin’s of response loss subcutaneous the in evokes skin pale hemorrhage. Blood venoconstriction, profound to appearance which rise to the of gives characteristically can of milliliters of the from hundred perfused vital be more skin that regions blood through of Diversion frees away blood the several body. vascular and reservoirs. beds lungs, are important of The liver, spleen also blood the the “ extensive the •Fig. are less sections In changes spleen (see in humans, the considerably however, volume also Effectsofarteriolardilationandconstrictiononthevascularfunctioncurve. 19.5

vascular the The tone induced by in function in arteriolar are changes depicted curve in alterations

Fig. . 19.5 these the amount only of contain vessels of approximately The arterioles in ). small; 3% (see blood total blood volume is not arterioles Changes in of circulatory the alter contractile significantly pressure. state mean do a curves at Thus function represent that peripheral the y-axis point converge (see resistances different vascular common on

Fig. 19.5

resistance with (TPR) inversely peripheral all total Pv remain other factors when varies constant. progressively arterial explained is retained if increase blood follows: the greater Pv a volume be can Physiologically, between to constant, sudden the TPR as in be held causes output of relationship cardiac TPR in a and system. continues a the to cardiac the Pa resistance until in arterial system Blood force to blood of flow vessels. output through rises volume equal increase sufficiently to by an volume. decrease arterial equivalent volume volume does in in blood If this accompanied increase blood is change, total venous not blood an Pv proportionately. Hence, diminishes in increase TPR increased of Pv, (see for the in to mean of clockwise accounts pressure, This the relationship resistance affect rotation constriction TPR inability between vascular peripheral curves response and function together arteriolar the circulatory to with

Fig. ). 19.5 a axis dilation counterclockwise same the rotation intercept. Similarly, produces arteriolar from vertical when is are cardiac higher than dilated they constricted arterioles are when A attainable maximal of level (see the output

Fig. 19.5).

return venous output and Cardiac linked. tightly are is any than system. it to cannot delivered venous transient pump for blood small, the more the heart Except disparities, through over closed equal circulatory return system venous cardiac time interval. circuit, to is heart the any the output Similarly, appreciable because must a system. circuit, The capability total volume on around of fluid depends of closed circuit flow and the pump, the characteristics the the of entire the the the

cardiac simply and are Thus this venous around closed output two flow terms for the return circuit. of Cardiac blood being per the the time. output is by heart unit volume pumped volume unit time. heart the of the is to Venous blood return per returning two equilibrium, these At are volumes equal. techniques flow of the control In discussed certain following insight into to provide are circuit section, of some around the circuit. analysis the

the Cardiac to Curve Function Curve Relating the Vascular Function

the the Heart Coupling Vasculature and Between

right heart, of the In (or atrial with accordance cardiac central the venous) closely Frank-Starling on pressure. output law depends atrium to junction between the right ventricular equal the atrial pressure valve right normal end-diastolic Furthermore, as right approximately pressure tricuspid a because low-resistance ventricle. and acts is curves. may of function curves; Graphs Pv called influences function shifts a output regulatory cardiac be cardiac as in extrinsic expressed such are as of

normal on a curve cardiac function plotted coordinates those A same vascular the typical function curve is in as for

Fig. 19.6 . plotted that variable function to and output) along according cardiac curve the dependent usual is the is x-axis, variable the the plotted The is independent the (cardiac plotted (Pv) convention; along is, y-axis. with reveals in a cardiac accordance that In Frank-Starling output. the the mechanism, function rise Pv cardiac curve increases

relationship diminishes between an and that Conversely, characterizes output is, rise in Pv. cardiac cardiac inverse curve Pv; output the vascular function a for curve. the Pv (or cardiac the stimulus) dependent vascular output function and response) is variable is (or variable independent the x-axis. should vascular manner, Pv in and cardiac a along y-axis to along plot scaled the function curve Therefore, be the output conventional the

these cardiac a function plotting modification curves the of set the To plot requires for one convention curves. and on of axes of vascular same the chapter. arbitrarily convention is curve this violated The the function in for vascular function Note curve the that vascular in

Fig. along Pv x-axis) (scaled in y-axis). varies the change a reflect output response the is to intended how along to cardiac (scaled in 19.6

the system. pair cardiac vascular that point by system is two a curves, function cardiovascular defines these of represented When curves of the given and intersection of the equilibrium point equilibrium represent of The •Fig. coordinates this Coordinate the on Curves Axes. Plotted and Vascular Typical 19.6 Function Cardiac Same Toplotbothcurvesonthesamegraph,thex-axisandy-axisforthevascularfunctioncurveshadtobeswitched;comparetheassignmentofaxeswiththosein

Figs.

19.3,19.4,and19.5.

Thecoordinatesoftheequilibriumpoint,attheintersectionofthecardiacandvascularfunctioncurves,representthestablevaluesofcardiacoutputandcentralvenouspressureatwhichthesystemtendstooperate.Anyperturbation(e.g.,asuddenincreaseinvenouspressuretopointA)institutesasequenceofchangesincardiacoutputandvenouspressurethatrestorethesevariablestotheirequilibriumvalues.

the the output and operate. cardiac of to at system Pv which values tends deviations function cardiac such and output from and vascular of are curves Pv as Only transient long the given the system characterize values possible, accurately. cardiac as

a sudden best be may equilibrium point change. to about tendency this the by response operate to illustrated The a equilibrium by to A in point sudden from changes rise Pv caused in Consider the point the

Fig. . 19.6 an volume change by equal Pv the the rapid ventricular of venous in diastole, caused volume circuit the on from blood a circuit. of vessels be withdrawal vessels injection, during This arterial of of might given and simultaneous the the of Pv total Thus blood volume although constant. rises, remains

by this cardiac in to increase point point B the elevated cardiac output Pv would curve, As A defined (from function

Fig. the 19.6 ) during ventricular systole. next arteries increased of The then from Pv. consequent a reduction cause of circuit, blood the quantity with transfer in veins the would of the output to the cardiac a net the the would venous the would one the heartbeat, to only total fraction (from of heart Pv reduction point in to blood because point small arteries. In C) B a transfer volume be cardiac beat during curve. an (from a the of diminishes Pv, dictated by amount to As result D) very output reduction point point the by in this next C function cardiac than across C pumps to veins rate the peripheral the that to Because the greater which above resistance the at the point from veins. arteries flows a at blood arteries heart still from point, is blood intersection fall. to continues Pv Hence, until •Fig. point steps process of This the diminishing in continues thatrepresentstheresponsetosympatheticstimulation. totheintersection(pointD)ofthesamevascularfunctioncurvewiththecardiacfunctioncurve(dashed Enhancementofmyocardialcontractility,asbystimulationofcardiacsympatheticnerves,causestheequilibriumvaluesofcardiacoutputandcentralvenouspressure(Pv)toshiftfromtheintersection(pointA)ofthecontrolvascularandcardiacfunctioncurves(continuous curve) 19.7 curve)

is reached. intersection of function venous coordinates point, the by the and which curves simultaneously. pressure—the of cardiac vascular one curves output cardiac Only denoted equilibrium combination the and the specific point requirements intersect—satisfies at of the stable. cardiac the is return, At the equilibrium and system venous point, equals output

of and help explain cardiac of Combinations vascular Pv. in alterations output and function contractility cardiac effects the also curves on ventricular In

Fig. myocardial influence the whereas upper contractility. function 19.7, reflects state, lower cardiac control of represents curve the increased curve the the pair in ventricular the function to curves analogous This of shown curves is

Fig. 18.12.

The upper in by ventricular represented contractility enhanced the curve

Fig. stimulation 19.7 be the produced electrical of can sympathetic nerves. cardiac by such the is function the heart, are unaffected. of curve vascular stimulation effects restricted neural When the to needed intervention this Therefore, only curve one for hypothetical (see function is vascular

Fig. 19.7

point of During the the output for values A Pv equilibrium control and cardiac designated by the are in state model,

Fig. 19.7 . point stimulation of the enhanced because cardiac abruptly Cardiac B output nerve sympathetic to raises myocardial contractility. this causes transfer circuit, an a begins fall of as net blood of in consequence, Pv the output and point However, the cardiac veins the (to to C). high the subsequently from increase arteries to to a then cardiac The small in reduction decrease output. Pv leads in is sufficiently still cardiac high However, output •Fig. to effect Duringelectricalstimulationofthecardiacsympatheticnervefibers,aorticbloodflow(cardiacoutput)increased,whereaspressuresintheleftatrium(PLA)andrightatrium(PRA)diminished.Thesedataconformtotheconclusionsderivedfrom 19.8

,inwhichtheequilibriumvaluesofcardiacoutputandvenouspressureareobservedtoshiftfrompointAtopointD(i.e.,cardiacoutputincreased,butcentralvenouspressuredecreased)duringcardiacsympatheticnervestimulation. Fig.19.7 Res. (RedrawnfromSarnoffSJ,etal.Circ 1960;8:1108.) the to of blood circuit. the of arteries from net the transfer veins the output to reached. until cardiac (point equilibrium fall Pv Thus new both point continue gradually a and is D) and cardiac equilibrium at vascular is of the located new curve. This the the point curve intersection function function In

Fig. the left lies control D despite equilibrium lower indicates of point that the evoke output the 19.7 sympathetic above and greater and point cardiac A) to level can of Pv. stimulation , (point

in by mimicked predicted the response chapter. contractility is to myocardial enhancement change of model biological The hypothetical this by the As depicted in

Fig. the arrow. time double-headed 19.8 by nerves are stimulated heart denoted innervating , during sympathetic the the output value control significantly cardiac higher During steady-state falls neural level. peak stimulation, to then to value than a quickly gradually flow) a rises (aortic the and aortic increase in is atrial in The pressures. left reductions and flow by right accompanied

blood Changes they not the vascular manner influence in directly contractility, do in in volume the affect but curve myocardial shown function do

Fig. . 19.4 volume the changes in Thus Pv, appropriate cardiac with vascular plotted function represent and understand control along curve the states how and function ( curves affect blood the to that output cardiac is experimental

Fig. ). 19.9 point B volume the is increased blood transfusion, by (point in equilibrium blood When a

Fig. values and the (point A). denotes point lies output ), the after transfusion, equilibrium 19.9 and above Pv of to cardiac of right control which the output and Thus cardiac increases Pv. both transfusion opposite the Hemorrhage effect. causes blood prevailing pressure volume ). filling the intracellular of (see contractile given in in proteins the alters change (Pv) to output the a the ventricular Ca++ cardiac change by Mechanistically, concentration evoked by sensitivity of changing explained decreases those elicit increases increases reasons decreases, are volume. pure tone in blood or by respectively, responses like or earlier, venomotor that in For total evoked

•Fig. Central Transfusion 1086420 4 pressure 2 19.9 0 6 8 B venous 10 (mm Afterabloodtransfusion,thevascularfunctioncurveisshiftedtotheright.Therefore,bothcardiacoutputandvenouspressureareincreased,asdenotedbytranslocationoftheequilibriumpointfrompointAtopointB.–2 A (L/min) ControlCardiac output Hg)

effects the function complex resistance in vascular changes peripheral cardiac the and both cardiac because shift. on of curves output is Analysis Pv of and peripheral When resistance ( increases

Fig. as the the Pv curve control axis the intercept it ), 19.11 converges function on rotated curve vascular same is but does. counterclockwise, the that causes rotation function vascular Note counterclockwise in curve vasoconstriction a of

Fig. 19.11

Fig. . 19.5 because were as of the explained figures, direction switched the in vascular function curves differs The rotation axes two earlier. these for The cardiac function in curve

Fig. shifted is given cardiac blood the imposed at is to greater downward peripheral less the also because afterload 19.11 heart Pv, resistance. any increased pump the against by able both in curves Because

Fig. below downward, an cardiac is, that are (point is new displaced B) output. resistance the diminishes peripheral 19.11 in increase control (point the equilibrium point A); point

each right lies left slightly point or Whether or below directly in depends shift falls it B magnitude the point the of to the A of curve. on increase if a given example, For •Fig. 19.10 Moderateorsevereheartfailureshiftsthecardiacfunctioncurvesdownwardandtotheright.Beforechangesinbloodvolume,cardiacoutputdecreasesandcentralvenouspressurerises(fromcontrolequilibriumpointAtopointBorpointC).Aftertheincreaseinbloodvolumethatusuallyoccursinheartfailure,thevascularfunctioncurveisshiftedtotheright.Hence,centralvenouspressuremaybeelevatedwithnoreductionincardiacoutput(pointD)or,insevereheartfailure,withsomereductionincardiacoutput(pointE).

failure isageneraltermthatappliestoconditionsinwhichthepumpingcapabilityoftheheartisimpairedtotheextentthatthetissuesofthebodyarenotadequatelyperfused.Inheartfailure,myocardialcontractilityisimpaired.Heartfailuremaybeacuteorchronic.Consequently,inagraphofcardiacandvascularfunctioncurves,thecardiacfunctioncurveisshifteddownwardandtotheright,asdepictedin Heart

Fig.19.10

Acuteheartfailuremaybecausedbytoxicconcentrationsofdrugsorbycertainpathologicalconditionssuchascoronaryarteryocclusion.Inacuteheartfailure,bloodvolumedoesnotchangeimmediately.In

Fig.19.10 ,therefore,theequilibriumpointshiftsfromtheintersection(pointA)ofthenormalcurvestotheintersection(pointBorpointC)ofthenormalvascularfunctioncurve.

Chronicheartfailuremayoccurinconditionssuchasessentialhypertensionorischemicheartdisease.Inchronicheartfailure,boththecardiacfunctionandvascularfunctioncurvesshift.Thevascularfunctioncurveshiftsbecauseofanincreaseinbloodvolumecausedinpartbyfluidretentionbythekidneys.ThefluidretentionisrelatedtotheconcomitantreductioninglomerularfiltrationrateandthedecreasedrenalexcretionofNaClandwater(seealso ).Theresultanthypervolemiaisreflectedbyarightwardshiftofthevascularfunctioncurve,asshownin

Fig.19.10.

Hence,withmoderatedegreesofheartfailure,Pviselevated,butcardiacoutputmaybenormal(pointD).Withmoreseveredegreesofheartfailure,Pvisstillelevated,butcardiacoutputissubnormal(pointE).

does peripheral output below it shifts vascular more curve that function and A; function is the equilibrium in cardiac to is, cardiac B point point resistance curve, of the the left Pv than both diminish. and the vascular function cardiac function than curve is the displaced more Conversely, if •Fig. Anincreaseinperipheralresistanceshiftsthecardiacandvascularfunctioncurvesdownward.Atequilibrium,cardiacoutputisless(pointB)whenperipheralresistanceishighthanwhenperipheralresistanceisnormal(pointA). 19.11

•Fig. Simplifiedmodelofthecardiovascularsystemthatconsistsoftheleftventricle(LV)andrightventricle(RV),systemicvascularresistance(Rs)andpulmonaryvascularresistance(Rp),systemicarterialandvenouscompliance,andpulmonaryarterialandvenouscompliance.PsaandPsvarethepressuresinthesystemicarteriesandveins,respectively;PpaandPpvarethepressuresinthepulmonaryarteriesandveins,respectively. 19.12

to output curve, point decreases, falls right and rises. below A; of point Pv the that is, cardiac B but

More Two-Pum﻿p A Model: Theoretical System﻿ The Com﻿plete

in includes one oversimplified an and preceding circulation. and even systemic output just pump cardiac the shows that interrelationships discussion complex, only between that circulation Pv The the model are circulations ventricles. right two the systemic and the the pumps: and pulmonary and includes cardiovascular In left system reality, output, arterial much pressure, pressure the more complex. atrial ventricular are Thus and interrelationships among

Fig. (the series and (the two in (but ventricles) vascular more cardiovascular still model beds series 19.12 complete system right left vasculature). two pumps in a and that has systemic depicts and pulmonary oversimplified) the otherwise, would substantial the of blood period; systems. vascular the to by virtually over all in or accumulate flow the two other each that be ultimately arrangement series requires the The other any one ventricles pumped equal filling Because two pressures ventricles ensure cardiac differ (atrial) for two must the volumes curves appropriately (see stroke equal function differ ventricles the to the substantially, for the

Fig. 18.13

Anychangeincontractilitythataffectsthetwoventriclesdifferentlyaltersthedistributionofbloodvolumeinthetwovascularsystems.Ifacoronaryarterytotheleftventriclebecomesoccluded,leftventricularcontractilityisimpaired,andacute ventricular left whichmaybelethal. ).Furthermore,thehighpulmonaryvenouspressurecausesanelevatethehydrostaticpressureinthepulmonarycapillariesandmayleadtothetransudationoffluidfromthepulmonarycapillariestothepulmonaryinterstitiumorintothealveoli(pulmonary failure edema), ensues.Intheinstantafterocclusion,leftatrialpressuredoesnotchange,andtheleftventriclebeginstopumpatadiminishedrateofflow.Iftherightventricleisnotaffectedbytheacutecoronaryarteryocclusion,therightventricleinitiallycontinuestopumpthenormalflow.Thedisparaterightandleftventricularoutputsresultinaprogressiveincreaseinleftatrialpressureandaprogressivedecreaseinrightatrialpressure.Therefore,leftventricularoutputincreasestowardthenormalvalue,andrightventricularoutputfallsbelowthenormalvalue.Thisprocesscontinuesuntiltheoutputsofthetwoventriclesagainbecomeequal.Atthisnewequilibrium,theoutputofthetwoventriclesissubnormal.Theelevationinleftatrialpressureisaccompaniedbyanequalelevationinpulmonaryvenouspressure,whichcanhaveseriousclinicalconsequences.Thehighpulmonaryvenouspressurecanincreaselungstiffnessandleadtorespiratorydistressbyincreasingthemechanicalworkofpulmonaryventilation(see

(1) ventricle ventricle Two through that about the pulmonary ventricular right remember blood blood pumps vasculature, left (2) the function the and are principles basic pumps systemic the through to vasculature. both are adequately. the pulmonary principles essential However, imply necessarily ventricles to and vascular systemic not beds do perfuse that these in right vascular the better and examined more follows. relationships between the To function ventricular the two two beds, ventricles is understand detail the as

In in the shown system model circulatory

Fig. 19.12, right as occur veins hemodynamic if ventricle low-resistance consider the ceased conduit between but its the function served merely suddenly passive, the pump a the pulmonary arteries. and instead would systemic that consequences to ventricle, be pump which the blood required right negligible). functional inactive the resistance the pulmonary of discussion, to would consider of and ventricle be through pump be to the the flow only (for left Under systemic purposes conditions, blood then these both this through resistances the the would

is Normally, approximately resistance. 10% systemic great vascular resistance as pulmonary vascular as total in than with the series another, be are 10% resistance systemic one two greater (see Because ). would resistance resistances alone by approximately In cardiovascular 10%. a afterload) normal system, a left hence ventricular (and 10% affect This drastically would increase function. not left ventricular conditions, Under in function alter this however, of Pa cardiovascular the could system. increase the certain significantly of much achieved from and separated a impair the pulmonary venous increase small resistance compliance resistance by the (i.e., and the compliance), degree larger resistance adding the drastically system. resistance) 10% increase operation pulmonary by total the cardiovascular systemic 10% of that pulmonary resistance, resistance if (the of arterial If the vascular total degree could large of is a to is resistance systemic in combined vascular systemic in

of inactivating in circula The shown are ventricle analogue the right hydraulic of tory a the simulated effects in action system pumping the of

Fig. . 19.13 outputs filling In cardiac and vary right pressures. left the model, ventricles that generate their with directly the respective is the left Under conditions the outputs (when of ventricle are L/ control normally), minute). the equal and right (5 functioning ventricles right pulmonary the an at the through (not ventricular pressure fluid vascular rate to forces exceed in in shown) pulmonary the by right veins The a causes 5 action resistance (Ppv) L/minute. pressure amount that artery the pumping pulmonary the of right ventricle pumping in the (arrow ceases 1 When

Fig. with along arterial 19.13 with venous a common conduit systems, the right large compliance. passive the itself, become ventricle and pulmonary systemic ), a systemic decreases pressure blood Hg). common a rapidly venous veins to systemic ceases to rapidly (≈5 right pulmonary actively the ventricle (Ppa) shown) value from (Psv) arterial rises the arteries, When mm transfer the and pressure to (not pulmonary to flows however, the At this veins a pulmonary at pulmonary low rate. greatly from the pressure, reduced arteries fluid

of from the the start right to at once to left ventricle ventricular pulmonary right is exceeds 5 veins systemic which the At arteries ventricle rate the returns blood arrest, rate at the pumping the of L/minute, to the pulmonary operate. ceases the control greatly fluid veins which drops pressure Hence, (Ppv) pulmonary venous sharply. ventricular (cardiac) venous the pulmonary drops ventricle, steady-state as left 2.5 for L/minute. the well attains Because a output of value approximately and pressure left preload abruptly is rapid in to systemic in a effect reduction This (Psa). arterial leads pressure turn pumping arterial stoppage In cardiac and of venous right markedly short, systemic pulmonary •Fig. curtails pressure, output, ventricular Changesincardiacoutput,systemicarterialpressure(Psa),systemicvenouspressure(Psv),andpulmonaryvenouspressure(Ppv)evokedbysimulatedrightventricular(RV)failureandbysimulatedinfusionoffluidinthecirculatorymodelshownin 19.13

Fig.19.12 .Atarrow 1, 2, thefluidvolumeinthesystemwasexpanded,andtherightventriclecontinuedtoserveonlyasaconduit. thepumpingactionoftherightventriclewasdiscontinued(simulatedRVfailure),andtherightventricleservedonlyasalow-resistanceconduit.Atarrow Heart (ModifiedfromFureySA,etal.Am J. 1984;107:404.)

Fig. 19.13).

fluid in hemodynamic system the the (blood) by the an ventricle the (arrow of inactivation Most be problems induced increase in by can 2 of volume of right reversed

Fig.

19.13). almost abnormally ventricular but is pulmonary pressure (left systemic preload) are its to elevated. value, raised to is systemic and added normal, pressure is pressure until If venous restored fluid output control arterial venous cardiac function ventricular left normal adding normal ventricular left normal, output. If is ventricular a preload left evokes resistance by that to the burden ventricular on adding a serious peripheral The 10% the vascular caused resistance not left does vascular pulmonary capacity. impose in increase systemic resistance of pumping

prevails. gradient flow is inoperative, 15 the unless normal not mm blood ventricle pulmonary however, the pulmonary usual is When right to arteriovenous Hg) (≈10 pressure (Ppv) this must amount. systemic exceed venous venous by Hence, pulmonary pressure pressure (Psv)

the in finding (edema) of to a patients dependent of lead systemic body, tissue with failure. of right may accumulation regions venous fluid pressure the high in ventricular characteristic heart Maintenance be information, as this may With of ventricle as follows. principal the the characterized function right of out left providing of carry the From ventricle blood function. can viewpoint in the alone the sufficient to body, this all tissues flow ventricles in flow adequate two to series not tissues. the provide essential blood the Operation to is of force cardiac pressure required the systemic (and crucial the in arterial) to be The the would output prevent resistance. venous of ventricle pulmonary pulmonary normal to that through the is rise right function vascular in regions in rise systemic abnormal right by A edema the the development normal venous preventing an extensive prevents dependent body. pressure, of ventricle, of

heart suchasseverenarrowingofthetricuspidvalveormaldevelopmentoftherightventricle.Theeffectsofacuteright-sidedheartfailureorrightventricularbypassaredirectionallysimilartothosepredictedpreviouslyfromanalysisofthemodelshownin ventricular maybecausedbyocclusivediseasepredominantlyofthecoronaryvesselstotherightventricle.Thesevesselsareaffectedmuchlesscommonlythanthevesselstotheleftventricle.Themajorhemodynamiceffectsofacuteright-sidedheartfailurearepronouncedreductionsincardiacoutputandarterialbloodpressure,andtheprincipaltreatmentisinfusionofbloodorplasma.Bypassoftherightventricle(byanastomosisoftherightatriumtothepulmonaryartery)maybeperformedsurgicallyinpatientswithcertaincongenital cardiac Clinically,right defects, failure

Fig.19.13

Heart Control of Output Rate Cardiac of in Role the

the of and volume heart Cardiac is stroke output rate. product of heart of Analysis control role cardiac to rate of considered. of far been and output not been control thus the stroke the has the volume, has restricted the change the effect heart of and (preload, in in Analysis rate determine is stroke afterload, a volume heart on alters change other that because contractility) factors rate (see three a myocardial complex output cardiac of

Fig. ). 19.1 diastole. of increase duration for shortens the An heart example, rate, in is diminished; filling Hence, is, is that reduced. ventricular preload If change; heart would output, that cardiac arterial increase rate afterload in an is, pressure be altered altered. would influx would in cells myocardial myocardial would contractility. also rate per net into A this heart of the and ), enhance Ca++ minute rise increase (see influx

on and rate results output those extensively, The changes heart studied shown to in the have cardiac in been effects of are similar

Fig. 19.14 . As is pacing frequency atrial •Fig. Changesinstrokevolume(A) inducedbychangesintherateofatrialpacing. (B) 19.14 andcardiacoutput Physiol. J (RedrawnfromKumadaM,etal.Jpn 1967;17:538.) diminishes volume gradually increased, progressively (see stroke

Fig. ). 19.14A the time ventricular is by volume caused filling. reduced decrease in for stroke The proportional not rate the (Qh) in the volume The the actual the (see direction in inversely output by change in to is rate because stroke heart markedly heart change change of influenced cardiac is

Fig. ). 19.14B beats/minute, increased is pacing augments to from For example, rate 50 heart frequency as the Qh. increase in 100 in (SV) less range decrease (HR). the over heart the frequency rate be Qh this than stroke = increase × proportionately HR, must SV in volume Because

Over frequency however, beats/minute, changes from output cardiac pacing (see approximately frequency 100 significantly not range by in to affected is the 200

Fig.

19.14B ). stroke be increase is as volume decrease approximately Hence, equal pacing to the heart in must the in frequency rate. increased, tends blood In generalized ). tissue addition, constant flow (see keep to also vascular autoregulation This adaptation leads also that and changes constant. to in keep preload nearly output afterload cardiac

high Moreover, (above at excessively beats/minute; see 200 frequencies pacing

Fig. output. cardiac rate decrease 19.14 ), further increases in heart frequencies. range in must the Therefore, volume at pacing exceeded have heart this high in rate of decrease the induced stroke increase that cardiac filling severely compensation inadequate, so decreases frequencies, pacing ventricular high such and output is is sharply. At time the restricted subjects in varies heart relationship of output and characteristically population, of Although relationship among that the among physiological the rate U states. an quantitatively cardiac is the inverted to general

between correlations interpreted must cardiac and heart cautiously. be rate Strong output usually only who (see exercising, the remain volume stroke ”). cardiac and later may output are for example, constant people section or slightly rate proportionately, increase increase and In heart to conclude caused tempting must be increase is observed the in It increase during rate. in output that the by solely cardiac exercise heart However,

Fig. on influence little may over change a in cardiac 19.14 output. shows wide a rate heart rates, range that heart have of attributed The factors. increase therefore to in exercise during be other principal cardiac output must vasodilation the include vascular sympathetic the activity. the neural muscles increase pronounced cardiac of associated of contractility resistance muscle factors reduction the the peripheral increased Such generalized because and ancillary in with active in in skeletal Nevertheless, heart increase rate in an still important is the factor. rate during data normally limited. capacity augmentation the are show the Abundant cardiac if exercise, severely increase cannot heart for exercise output the in and that permissive stroke exercise, during in exercise. cardiac output augmenting the increase only important heart play may physical in volume rate changes Because role slightly an during

block. syndrome (slowrate)mayoccurasaresultofaveryslowsinusrhythminpatientswithsick atrioventricular sinus orasaresultofaslowidioventricularrhythminpatientswithcomplete Thecharacteristicrelationshipbetweencardiacoutputandheartrateexplainstheurgentneedoftreatmentbypatientswhohaveexcessivelysloworexcessivelyfastheartrates.Profoundbradycardia tachycardia, excessivelyhighheartratesfrequentlynecessitateemergencytreatmentbecauseinsuchpatients,cardiacoutputmaybecriticallylow,andthefillingtimeissorestrictedatveryhighheartratesthatevensmalladditionalreductionsinfillingtimecausedisproportionatelyseverereductionsinfillingvolume.Slowingtheheartratetoamorenormalrhythmcangenerallybeaccomplishedpharmacologically,butelectricalcardioversionmayberequiredinemergencies(see orventricular Ineitherrhythmdisturbance,thecapacityoftheventriclestofillduringprolongeddiastoleislimited(oftenbythenoncompliantpericardium).Hence,cardiacoutputusuallydecreasessubstantiallybecausetheveryslowheartratecannotbecounterbalancedbyasufficientlylargestrokevolume.Asaconsequence,suchbradycardiaoftennecessitatestheimplantationofanartificialpacemaker.Inpatientswithsupraventricular

Cardiac the System﻿ Factors That Venous Affect Ancillary and Output

interrelationships of effects of In the the simplified earlier and between by output were variables. evoked chapter, the to the individual this sections restricting cardiac discussion Pv descriptions by by rarely the many is feedback system control However, regulated because so cardiovascular its loops, responses are simple. system aspects and for other venomotor the of triggers atrioventricular cardiac as and volume, alter in output A affects reflexes but example, vascular other resistance rate, only characteristics conduction, directly through cardiac (such and as blood heart mechanism Frank-Starling (such peripheral tone). of also contractility) the not function myocardial that the change gravity ) factors, also regulate respiration, cardiac and Several (see output. especially other

Respiratory of Circulatory Effects Activity

the muscles The causes caval activity vena of periodic respiratory normal, rhythmic in flow variations (Fig. ). 19.15 lumens pressure of to blood respiration, the in reduction the the intrathoracic transmitted vessels. is During thoracic pressure between extrathoracic increases in gradient and the reduction during veins. inspiration The Pv intrathoracic in atrium acceleration consequent in shown return the right to is venous The

Fig. blood from mL/ an flow 5.2 expiration mL/sec increase during during in vena to inspiration. caval as 19.15 superior 11 sec

increase exaggerated (called venous inspiratory effort intrathoracic a closed maneuver) by not in proportionately. return achieved strong glottis against does The reduction pressure Müller’s a the internal the extrathoracic pressures their entry The veins ambient chest collapse when level. into their near fall below momentarily the the As flow chest veins collapse, stops. into pressure which reopen. The flow to to of collapsed upstream segment causes rise, cessation the forces

central flow decelerates. expiration, veins the into normal During exceeds the (cessation rate venous respiration). period However, respiration mean during of flow return the normal apnea of of during brief a normal facilitates venous apparently return more inspiration impedes it. expiration Hence, normal than the return facilitated the part, valves extremities. of is by veins in venous the In flow valves any reversal during prevent of These expiration. pump return. for venous respiratory venous auxiliary valves muscles constitute an the Thus and

•Fig. 19.15 JVP Duringanormalinspiration,intrathoracicpressure,rightatrialpressure(RAP),andjugularvenous(JVP)pressuredecrease,andflowinthesuperiorvenacava(SVCF)increases(from5.2to11mL/sec).AllpressuresaregiveninmmH2O.Femoralarterialpressure(notshown)didnotchangesubstantiallyduringthenormalinspiration.Jugular SVCF 0 –100 5.2 mL/sec 50 vein Atrial 0 mL/sec 11 RAP

Thedramaticincreaseinintrathoracicpressureinducedbycoughingconstitutesanauxiliarypumpingmechanismfortheblooddespiteitsconcurrenttendencytoimpedevenousreturn.Certaindiagnosticprocedures,suchascoronaryangiographyorelectrophysiologicaltestingofcardiacfunction,increasetheriskforventricularfibrillation;therefore,patientsundergoingsuchproceduresaretrainedtocoughrhythmicallyoncommandduringthestudy.Ifventricularfibrillationdoesoccur,eachcoughcangeneratesubstantialincreasesinarterialbloodpressure,andenoughcerebralbloodflowmaybepromotedtosustainconsciousness.Thecoughraisesintravascularpressureequallyintheintrathoracicarteriesandveins.Bloodispropelledthroughtheextrathoracictissuesbecausetheincreasedpressureistransmittedtotheextrathoracicarteriesbutnottotheextrathoracicveinsbecausethevenousvalvespreventbackwardflowfromtheintrathoracictotheextrathoracicveins.

Inmostformsofartificialrespiration(mouth-to-mouthresuscitation,mechanicalrespiration),endotrachealpressureaboveatmosphericpressureisusedtoinflatethelungs,andexpirationoccursbypassiverecoilofthethoraciccage(see ).Thuslunginflationisaccompaniedbyanappreciableriseinintrathoracicpressure.Venacavalflowdecreasessharplyduringthephaseofpositive-pressurelunginflationwhentheendotrachealpressureprogressivelyrises.Whennegativeendotrachealpressureisusedtofacilitatedeflation,venacavalflowacceleratesmorethanwhenthelungsareallowedtodeflatepassively.

return. venous thus impede increase pressure efforts and Sustained expiratory intrathoracic against glottis (Valsalva’s maneuver) heavy closed a occurs regularly during and Straining defecation, lifting. coughing, recorded trumpet of 100 excess Intrathoracic have been observed been during pressures than Hg higher mm coughing. have mm paroxysms in players, in of 400 pressures and Hg the directly increases are pressure intrathoracic lumens the to transmitted in Such arteries. of the blood After preceding coughing arterial return. to fall venous precipitously impediment of pressure stops, because may

the Factors Control of Interplay in of Circulation Peripheral and Central

to The of metabolism remove growth is of the deliver function to the the primary metabolism. for nutrients needed system and circulatory products and tissue physiological different adequate under to system the conditions components previously. perfusion of tissue The discussed the maintain were cardiovascular contributions of In the of interrelationships are various explored. components the system this section, among the circulatory The the the and key cardiovascular chemoreceptors system nervous baroreceptors autonomic regulating roles play system. and in the fluid balance is Control very of constant a by volume, blood maintenance with also kidneys, of important.

the In the system evaluate the is of and to observe well-regulated mechanisms disturb to system, any and steady to state. sensitivity its how it way regulatory extent restores one preexisting operation disturbances, factors. discussed are illustrate of physical Two to such hemorrhage, following and various sections the exercise regulatory in the

a neural of and adjustments The occur exercise consist factors. during that cardiovascular of local (chemical) combination Neural and command, (2) (1) that baroreceptor include originate contracting in (3) central muscle, reflexes reflex. the the factors produces is the myocardial cerebrocortical activation increased peripheral command force, that Central of sympathetic contractile the cardiac vasoconstriction. nervous acceleration, system and products) (by (by contraction. are stretch, and muscle metabolic by to chemoreceptors tension) of mechanoreceptors intramuscularly activated response Reflexes stimulation in fibers. III) centrally small IV) (group nerve travel via Impulses (group unmyelinated afferent these receptors and from myelinated no identified. unmyelinated as muscle morphological inasmuch Group represent chemoreceptor fibers chemoreceptors, the may been IV has connections heart to fibers the of and the blood are efferent central The peripheral nerve limb vessels. unknown, this but sympathetic reflex consists of local that skeletal are and influence The . is blood baroreceptor , reflex flow factors vasodilators) described described muscle in (metabolic in are in exercise. system important Vascular regulation chemoreceptors during cardiovascular of the from PaO2, observations the the the during and that normal Evidence the PaCO2, for assertion blood pH exercise. arterial remain this of comes

Exercise to Mild Moderate

increases or to anticipation discharge. humans vagal and the heart nerve of animals, impulses activity physical sympathetic trained In inhibits is result The rate increase myocardial and heart an in contractility. enhanced and tachycardia cardiac The increase contractility output.

When also in sympathetic stimulation cardiac occurs, changes the system vascular periphery. resistance nervous the splanchnic vascular the vasoconstriction regions, and kidneys, nervous blood skin, and thereby system–mediated away resistance increases Sympathetic diverts from inactive

Muscle 2 Skin Heart 4 O2 1 . Viscera 10 6 3 Maximum 0.25 (L/min) 22 18 14 Cardiac brain uptake (L/min) Vo2 and 2 output

•Fig. 110 100 5 180 ApproximatedistributionofcardiacoutputatrestandatdifferentlevelsofexerciseuptothemaximalO2consumption(V˜O2)in 140 15 10 60 10 140 anormalyoungman. 1600 0.006 180 0 0.014 19.16 15 Mean 60 90 Systolic 800 100 100 pressure pressure 0.010 0 Diastolic 5 Biophysics. and (RedrawnfromRuchHP,PattonTC.Physiology 12thed.Philadelphia:Saunders;1974.)

Fig. 19.16 ). period persists the exercise. throughout in resistance increase of This vascular

output Cardiac intensity the active exercise and increases. to increase as blood of muscles flow to flow Blood flow brain myocardium unchanged. the to the increases, whereas is intensity the body and its temperature decreases decreases nears initially O2 consumption increases of the vessels flow constrict Blood exercise, maximal the and when finally value during in then duration in as total body skin rises with increments (see exercise, as skin

Fig. 19.16

active prolonged of to adjustment muscles. the circulatory in vasculature The exercise the occurs major of formation of metabolites causes marked the vasoactive vessels. resistance dilation Local of in the progresses dilation exercise. increases intensity This with responsible muscle, is vascular one may contracting be released vasodilator the the ion resistance the decrease substances active of by partly this Potassium muscles. for and initial the in in a tissue contributing sustained the factors Other exercise. and may pH of in adenosine during be release decrease and arterioles the flow metabolites the through increase local 15to of terminal resting may above 20-fold blood to relax, causes the muscle The level. accumulation in after precapillary onset exercise. This active very occurs soon vessels of the vasodilation metabolic the of muscles more pumps pump than at if heart (see enables lesser unchanged load, were a blood TPR it decrease more •Fig. The in to and efficiently TPR the Effectsofdifferentlevelsofexercise(i.e.,work)onseveralcardiovascularvariables. 19.17 Muscular Response Exercise Man. to in (DatafromCarlstenA,GrimbyG.The Circulatory Springfield,

IL:CharlesCThomas;1966.)

the during capillary exercise. in changes circulation Marked also occur small in all rest, capillaries only contracting the At the contain actively of capillaries flowing of blood are or a all perfused, percentage (capillary whereas nearly muscle, recruitment). solutes times. gases, area exchange The for increased water, available is and surface many of the is Furthermore, because capillaries hydrostatic the resistance of increased of vessels. relaxation pressure in tissue. muscle Hence, into and move water solutes the carried capillaries; to fluid rises remains continues pressure of elevated the Tissue this exercise vessels. out away during is lymphatic as fluid tissue move by and the muscles result massaging the and increased rise is flow pressure valve-containing effect of on hydrostatic of contracting in the capillary as Lymph lymphatic (see the a vessels the

the thereby increases muscle O2 Contracting and O2 avidly perfusing blood from extracts the arteriovenous difference (

Fig. ). 19.17 during in the blood the release This from of by shift dissociation facilitated exercise. O2 is curve oxyhemoglobin During acid tissue and of of cause lactic formation in exercise, concentration the CO2 high pH. a reduction the to in muscle, to This contracting in the in decrease increase addition the dissociation (see shifts pH, ). right in curve temperature the the oxyhemoglobin Therefore, given more held for red any PO2, hemoglobin the blood O2 available cells, O2 is and is in consequently tissues. less the the by at as 60-fold, in blood increase may with muscle flow. increase as a consumption 15-fold Oxygen much only attached very the myoglobin limited O2 Muscle pressures. during O2 store serve partial may a can low and as at exercise, it release O2 O2 as serving transport to myoglobin also from capillaries carrier. an facilitate However, mitochondria can by

Because and drive sinoatrial sympathetic node exercise, the the parasympathetic enhanced tachycardia persists. during reduced the of continue inhibition of a level throughout exercise. there and rate the reaches If remains certain the period heart constant, is workload moderate the and beats per rate during strenuous workload until approximately the reached heart exercise. minute of the plateau However, increases if 180 concomitantly a increases, is 10% increase increase approximately to the rate, large volume heart individuals in in In (see larger 35%, the trained to values the contrast only in is stroke occurring

Fig. ). 19.17 value. attains distance runners, In six twice times the volume cardiac the seven stroke resting to whose approximately well-trained output can reach resting level,

Cardiacmusclesize(growth)isdirectlyrelatedtotheamountofworkthatisimposeduponit.Duringdevelopmentandinenduranceexercise,cardiacgrowthisachievedataconstantrelationbetweensystolicbloodpressureandtheratioofwallthicknesstoventricularchamberradius.Anechocardiographicmeasurementusedtodistinguishphysiologicalfrompathologicalhypertrophyisrelativewallthickness(ratioofleftventricularwallthicknesstochamberradius).Inphysiologicalhypertrophy,leftventricularmassandradiusincreaseproportionatelysothatrelativewallthicknessdoesnotchangesignificantly.Examplesofphysiologicalhypertrophyoccurinenduranceathletesandinpregnantwomen,inwhomleftventricularenlargementoccurswithvolumeoverloadatconstantrelativewallthickness.Physiologicalhypertrophyisassociatedwithanincreasedarteriolardiameterinexperimentalanimals.Also,capillarydensityincreasesinproportiontothedegreeofhypertrophy.Thisisincontrasttothesituationinpathologicalhypertrophy,inwhichareductionofcapillarydensity(rarefaction)canoccur.Neithermyocardialfibrosisnorderangementofmusclefiberorientationisdetectedinphysiologicalhypertrophy,incontrasttothefindingsinpathologicalhypertrophy.

an increase heart in exercise correlated increase principally during Thus observed rate. in cardiac is output with the baroreceptors baroreceptors. in individuals the with output innervated in the comparison responses with denervated, and heart to are If are exercise small rate normally cardiac those cardiac it much total individuals. still However, as in with increases as does denervation, exercise cardiac output normal chiefly elevated volume. stroke by This of increase output cardiac means an in achieved is exercise β-adrenergic receptor is given is performance hearts, denervated if antagonist However, to dogs impaired. a with receptor antagonist of the prevents circulating amounts acceleration increased catecholamines. caused enhanced by The contractility β-adrenergic cardiac and necessary output the cardiac limited. for performance maximal is Therefore, in exercise increase

made contribution of by mediated vessels by body, the muscles (see both addition action sympathetically respiration also ). the return working venous In in the to aided skeletal muscles capacitance and constriction the of and is nonexercising the of parts pumping the auxiliary exercising of muscles veins course The them. intermittently contracting that compress through the blood (see the heart, the venous contracting the are atrium ). pumps oriented toward Because right valves muscle back toward the and deeper exercise). that and abdominal the flow thoracic during (intrathoracic exercise, blood by pressure aided respirations of increase to negative also veins pressure between more more the the the becomes gradient frequent the heart venous is In

In to humans, much contribute reservoirs not blood the blood circulating volume. do the volume blood evidenced by In reduced slightly fact, as in ratio. rise is a exercise, during hematocrit usually and water loss This through ventilation muscle. into fluid the by is caused in contracting enhanced by and movement blood volume decrease sweating externally However, several in ways. is fluid counteracted loss plateau muscle. opposes fluid interstitial hydrostatic in loss vascular the of Fluid the increased pressure contracting reaches and compartment muscles rises capillaries as pressure active the into from the eventually a regions movement bloodstream. loss splanchnic the inactive partially of by the into from and fluid Fluid muscle offset is of blood of tissues contracting in because plasma decrease osmolarity capillaries an This movement results and pressure of influx from of from the into increase these muscle. active molecules the (2) hydrostatic in a fluid (1) in osmotically helps in conserve by formation the water. urine also body Reduction kidneys

out constant. so and into pumped the returning aorta the heart lungs remains the is volume effectively The of large through to Pv venous essentially blood that Frank-Starling the for a the volume length mechanism of greater moderate greater fiber exercise. account in initial does Thus not stroke of Radiographs at exercise size individuals and reveal a rest decrease in during exercise. during heart and right and during near-maximal exercise, enhanced stroke contributes pressure in mechanism or volume atrial do increase, However, volume very vigorous maximal Frank-Starling to ventricular the the end-diastolic exercise.

•Fig. Cardiacandvascularfunctioncurvesaregreatlyalteredduringstrenuousexercise,whichallowscardiacoutputtoincreasefourfoldtofivefold.TheoperatingpointofthecardiovascularsystemmovesfrompointAtopointB.Thecardiacfunctioncurveduringstrenuousexerciseistheresultofincreasedheartrate,strokevolume,andcontractility.Thevascularfunctioncurvereflectsgreatlydecreasedtotalperipheralresistanceandincreasedmeancirculatorypressure.Atthenewoperatingpoint(pointB),cardiacoutputisincreasedmorethanfourfold,butfillingpressureisincreasedonlyslightly. 19.18

(untrained) ( the output lead in healthy exercise a fourfold to individual, cardiac fivefold described In an vigorous typically increase mechanisms to during active, previously

Fig. ). 19.18 O2 fundamental cardiac exercising the which delivered is muscles means to output is (see more by Increased

Fig. 19.17 ). ≈1.5-fold) function The to exercise rate (up (up reflects heart cardiac curve stroke ≈3-fold). during to increased volume and increased marked during to filling dynamic venous the system B conditions, pressure is respiratory resistance a in in decrease new a increase peripheral circulatory The curve in an these the in the cardiovascular reflects operate mean skeletal and exercise point (changed (tone) vascular constriction and at function slope) able from (point In result intercept), muscle (changed which “pump.” “pump,”

Fig. in pressure little increased filling is while which ), output changed. 19.18 is cardiac graphical (see analysis The

Fig. only fast without ) be strongly beating 19.18 a output. and a function, would increase able the shows in that to produce systemic vascular heart in small even changes cardiac

vascular or considerable. can the total swimming, the be in a body exercise musculature, running If resistance as of proportion large in involves reduction blood arterial of the the onset pressure parallels of rise starts in and exercise to increase severity pressure the performed Nevertheless, exercise, approximately the (see with

Fig. 19.17 ). than the the cardiac in Therefore, is in TPR. output increase decrease greater proportionally adrenal The the important the inactive maintenance from extent or sympathetic in tissues for pressure. of by blood to catecholamines the system nervous of by some produced vasoconstriction is increased medulla) the release normal (and blockade arterial fibers (hypotension) nerve sympathetic or exercise. adrenergic the drug-induced Sympathectomy during decreases pressure of

active muscles neural when activity vasoconstriction elicits are skeletal additional recruited. muscle also in Sympathetic in In decreases levels to which leg. working the is flow then work, maximal in blood at leg leg starts first one other experiments and working the blood significantly Furthermore, to released of nerves active norepinephrine during exercise, sympathetic the of levels rise is and muscles. from the most norepinephrine

the the vessels during rises As heat-regulating in TPR dilate hypothalamus, the in temperature exercise, and center response body further. stimulation of decreases skin thermal to constriction arterioles the pressure cardiac and splanchnic, This reduce increased other TPR and the in tissues. renal, it of output not the in blood for would were reduction

a Pa as the in increase general, of during output. In rises exercise cardiac result increases TPR, an cardiac therefore and slightly. mean overall However, of offset in by decrease effect only output enhanced pressure the is blood beds vascular pressure maintain inactive tissues. helps for in the adequate perfusion of blood arterial normal the active Vasoconstriction TPR and represents balance between Pa actual cardiac during output exercise attained a ). (see thus The an pulse usually Systolic increase results pressure pressure, in which (see than in pressure diastolic more increases

Fig. 19.17 ). during volume, diminished and pressure stroke brief of blood is to also larger attributable left pulse runoff to ventricular also the a the (see ventricle The period more greater ejection ejection by but rapid peripheral primarily

fail. mechanisms exercise, to the begin During compensatory exhaustive attains per volume a a maximal minute, plateau. heart reaches beats stroke approximately level and rate of 180 The in which The blood fall heart results pressure. decrease, in rate a then may dehydrated. exercising frequently individual also The becomes vasoconstrictor of on supersedes decreased. vasodilator the is so activity the that skin influence of loss the rate heat vessels Sympathetic temperature exercise. normally elevated Body during is through heat can lead high severe acute body exercise. A cutaneous loss reduction distress very and to vasoconstriction to during in temperatures CO2. acid result as blood a pH increased lactic production of decrease and pH Tissue and of that a reduced determines key factor be may pH •Fig. The nerve;VR,vasomotorregion;X,vagusnerve. indicateincreasedactivity,andminus 19.19 Cardiovascularadjustmentsinexercise.Plus signs indicatedecreasedactivity.C,vasoconstrictoractivity;D,vasodilatoractivity;IX,glossopharyngeal signs

amount given individual the exercise tolerate. that maximal can of a Muscle to will continue of tolerance. the exhaustion, determine exercise feeling subjective a of and pain, loss effects summary is system of on exercise neural in A cardiovascular diagrammed and local the the of

Fig. 19.19

drive sympathetic the exercise and the When decrease: rate stops, output heart The quickly to removed. essentially heart cardiac is muscles low the for metabolites is exercise time vasodilator because remains presumably some have after the contrast, the in exercise In TPR period. during stopped, accumulated persistence output and falls, below cardiac reduced a the levels, preexercise pressure As arterial muscles, for of brief the in often periods. vasodilation of result then at baroreceptor stabilized is levels by pressure Blood the normal reflexes.

Exercise Limits Performance of

that main muscles. use the by and limit O2 O2 The the supply skeletal the performance humans factors to muscle in muscles the two of are rate not by is However, use muscle a critical O2 probably factor. the muscle consumption or During (maximal muscles when body’s of mass slightly only O2 is large activated. increases by percentage unchanged additional a maximal are exercise, V˜O2) fact, produces a during increase in and effort bilateral cardiac maximal the large mass, vigorous only exercise without bicycling, muscle as cycling In change small VO2. of in in arm a of output exercise the addition flow additional blood the to legs. decreases However, the exercise arm prevents caused be centrally mediated active reflex) maximal pressure cardiac This (baroreceptor in blood in fall during vasoconstriction that would the output by induced muscle. the metabolically vasodilation otherwise O2 to were factor, of requirements. significant enhanced the much more muscles O2 of meet by muscles more entail the limiting recruitment would use O2 contracting a If of use

in of of the supply limitation the inadequate blood O2-laden by or muscles. the caused oxygenation the Limitation to blood lungs supply O2 of of could be the fully most blood ruled because level, sea with is lungs at oxygenate exercise saturated Failure even be with can arterial O2. blood the by out to strenuous fully normal) O2 the arterial is delivery limiting because to blood the to muscles factor muscle be performance. the in Therefore, O2 content active appears (or blood flow beyond critical could cardiac caused increase output to the level. a by limitation This be inability volume before inability the heart V˜O2 stroke reaches reached. by maximal limitation because a is turn, is rate levels caused maximal In in this limits the muscle pumping heart. that of capacity factor performance is the major Hence, the

of to to the its O2 to use active to capacity exercise response the ability muscles O2. is deliver and the to regular cardiovascular muscle increase The the system of improve Maximal

the level VO2 varies conditioning. of with physical conditioning. ing level VO2, maximal of progressively highest plateau which reaches a increases Train the at resistance after rate, a had volume, trained deconditioning. peripheral or before they heart training and stroke greater lower athletes than a Highly lower have resting caused and a by sympathetic lower a heart higher resting tone low tone. is The rate vagal of individual is higher of trained that attained maximal exercise. an the heart untrained the as is exercise, rate a but level person, During same a at it in vascular resistance trained low exhibits muscles. person A in the also in over and vascular “trained” higher individual extended leg, one regularly than and other leg is does an maximal the If exercises is lower the in exercise leg. not resistance leg V˜O2 “untrained” period an the

of extraction the O2 with greater (greater by muscles. associated also is arteriovenous conditioning blood Physical from the difference) O2 With density in capillary increases. training, muscle skeletal long-term the may resistance. vascular decrease Also, of increase in account in an arterioles muscle the for number the does number enzymes in of number increases, mitochondria The mitochondria. of as oxidative increase metabolism response in lipid In triphosphatase in to levels (ATPase) and conditioning. of activity, enzymes involved addition, physical myoglobin, adenosine

Endurancetraining,suchasrunningorswimming,increasesleftventricularvolumewithoutincreasingleftventricularwallthickness.Incontrast,strengthexercises,suchasweightlifting,increaseleftventricularwallthickness(hypertrophy)withlittleeffectonventricularvolume.However,thisincreaseinwallthicknessissmallinrelationtothatobservedinchronichypertension,inwhichafterloadispersistentlyelevatedbecauseofhighperipheralresistance.

blood. system mainly affected of who in individual cardiovascular system has is lost quantity large a an the The rapid decrease, is and diastolic, feeble. pulse pressures and systolic, pulse and the arterial Arterial they centrally. slowly compressed The when cutaneous veins and collapse, fill The is pale, moist, and cyanotic. skin slightly may shallow but Respiration be is or rapid deep.

Pressure Blood Arterial of Course Changes

blood Cardiac a output loss. decreases of as result of it mean approximately tolerated, total and is blood is 10% well of volume; removed donated amount its pressure The blood changes when removal is arterial blood little. case is circulation. are greater the This when lost the amounts not from changes in in by are Pa acute hemorrhage illustrated evoked The

Fig. . 19.19 50 the the 30 rise or Hg, pressure over toward to mm control tends minutes. rapidly If withdrawn the sufficient Pa next level then spontaneously decrease to to is blood 20 in individuals some A (curve In

Fig.

), a hours. regained pressure within normal continues, trend is and 19.20 this few in others In (curve B

Fig. the of ), rises 19.20 initially hemorrhage. after pressure cessation the pressure then fall death begins to continues an rate accelerating at ensues. and to it until decline, The is termed deterioration in shock. progressive cardiovascular hemorrhagic function This At some the the becomes after in time cardiovascular system the irreversible. deterioration hemorrhage, outcome shock be hemorrhagic temporarily lethal including any in prevented A only with of patients known can blood. donor by transfusions massive therapy,

•Fig. 19.20 Mean Changes Rapid Hem-orrhage. Pressure After Arterial in –1 (hr) 50 75 7 100 5 pressure arterial A 1 6 (mm Mean Attime0,rapidlossofbloodcausesareductioninthemeanarterialpressureto50mmHg.Afteraperiodinwhichthepressurereturnstowardthecontrollevel,someindividualscontinuetoimprove(curveA)untilthecontrolpressureisattained.However,inotherindividuals,thepressurebeginstodecline(curveB)untildeathensues.–2 B 0 0 Time 3 Hg) 2 4 25

in loss blood pressure The changes arterial after immediately (see acute

Fig. must mechanisms ) certain compensatory 19.20 indicate operative. that be a arterial normal pressure reduction toward to feedback raises is negative mechanism. in that Any mechanism response blood in a designated pressure loss. the negative This pressure initiating change opposite mechanism secondary change of the in termed after the the direction because the acute direction blood of is is feedback cerebral evoked: ischemia (4) substances, water. The of reflexes, renal following are of vasoconstrictor and endogenous of responses, fluids, release reflexes, and tissue chemoreceptor salt (2) reabsorption (3) conservation negative responses baroreceptor

•Fig. the stimulation the hemorrhage and decrease in baroreceptors pressure carotid Pa pulse during The in reductions of 8% Conditions. Loss an Response Aortic in in 19.21 to Mean Blood Pressure Three Changes in A, Allsinoaorticreflexeswereabrogated.(DatafromShepherdJT.Circulation. Thecarotidsinusbaroreceptorswereintactandtheaorticreflexeswereinterrupted.B, Theaorticreflexeswereintactandthecarotidsinusreflexeswereinterrupted.C, 1974;50:418.DerivedfromthedataofEdisAJ.Am J Physiol. 1971;221:1352.) ). to responses normal Several all thus which arterial evoked, cardiovascular to tend level. pressure restore the of are of tone, tone increased responses enhanced myocardial reduction and sympathetic contractility. include enhancement heart Such of and vagal rate,

generalized consequences hemodynamic increased of produces which venoconstriction, blood sympathetic tone the as same transfusion The has also (see

Fig. 19.9). reservoirs. Sym constricts blood certain pathetic activation vasoconstriction circulation. This autotransfusion acts into the blood an as of and hepatic In principal the constitute blood of branches cutaneous, humans, vasculature pulmonary, reservoirs. the the

response a during stimulation arteriolar constriction Generalized reduced baroreceptor hemorrhage. the to prominent is increase pressure reflex minimizes arterial in the the resistance fall caused peripheral reduction output. The cardiac in in by

Fig. on effect pressure. 8% an the mean of shows 19.21 blood aortic loss vagus both operative carotid were baroreceptors When the arch only nerves (see to aortic were influence of baroreceptors and the the cut eliminate sinus

Fig. this 19.21A), mean hemorrhage 14%. aortic pressure by decreased differ not This the evoked (12%) shown). hemorrhage pressure from change the did by decline same before vagotomy pressure in (not significantly denervated sinuses 38% (see loss mean 8% the aortic baroreceptor aortic were and carotid the When the were pressure reflexes blood decreased by intact,

Fig. 19.21B).

baroreceptors in sinus fall pressure. attenuating effective the baroreceptors than aortic more were the carotid the Hence, in pathways when of baroreceptor (see both However, afferent interrupted sets were

Fig. an 48%. blood by arterial 8% pressure reduced loss 19.21C),

during means constriction widespread is by is it uniform. Arteriolar hemorrhage no but in absent in or response most is the muscle, circulations skeletal hemorrhage. and vascular coronary in beds, and slight splanchnic is and the cutaneous, cerebral to it pronounced Vasoconstriction resistance In vascular instances, cerebral and diminished. many coronary is through The the redistributed brain favor output to and cardiac flow is reduced heart. the

of In renal changes only hemorrhage, the slightly. to early moderate mild resistance stages for to by sympathetic activity vessels ). constrict mechanisms autoregulatory (see counteracted the renal increased is tendency The renal prolonged more severe however, vasoconstriction With becomes intense. and hemorrhage,

severe the is and renal heart brain. in splanchnic during vasoconstriction The and least hemorrhage if persists such too detrimental. However, be may it long, constriction the kidney results ischemia. patients acute of renal severe a later prolonged, survive period days failure die hypotensive hemorrhage, Frequently, only several the that to from from dire also Intestinal have ischemia effects. may hours intestinal of only mucosa extensive the hemorrhagic of hypotension. sloughing after occur example, For can a and bleeding few swells the in diminished flow liver. the splanchnic Furthermore, the cells centrilobular loss. causes the resulting intestinal pressure venous intensifies response this to sinusoids The obstruction hepatic portal rise, and blood of

pressure pressure mm Reductions reflexes 60 below arterial in threshold the Hg responses ). additional stimulation because (see for evoke level do the constitutes any this through approximately baroreceptor not However, peripheral flow hypoxia pressure the to because arterial in tissue. chemoreceptors chemoreceptor low blood may stimulate of local leads inadequacy Chemoreceptor excitation may by the then vasoconstriction enhance peripheral evoked reflexes. baroreceptor existent the already return pumping earlier In respiratory described assists mechanism (see also auxiliary stimulation the by addition, venous

mm resulting as sympathoadrenal system. ischemia activates pressure of a the below loss, blood falls consequence the When approximately cerebral Hg arterial 40 cease greater the The stimulated. maximal discharge to the nerves sympathetic activity several that than times baroreceptors neural by be is when occurs The and vasoconstriction in contractility be increase pronounced. may myocardial ischemia, centers more also become the degrees vagal cerebral activated. With however, severe of the cerebral that resulting aggravates The initiated the bradycardia hypotension ischemia

Reabsorption Tissue of Fluids

in during capillaries hydrostatic hypotension, The hemorrhagic arteriolar the drop. constriction, pressure arterial and hypotension venous cause reduced to pressure the vascular (see promotes the of the fluid The compartment these of reabsorption into balance forces net interstitial ). this response in rapidity The is displayed of

Fig. . 19.22 to is over is nearly estimated blood blood the the volume removed level. restored control arterial period, declines of mean and a rapidly largely When 45% then 30-minute pressure more for markedly bleeding during colloid decrease several hours. to osmotic pressure declines the Plasma continues and gradually little the protein. dilution tissue osmotic The by contain pressure colloid that in blood reflects of reduction fluids

may Considerable drawn hemorrhage. the thus be circulation of during into fluid quantities the of fluid 0.25 per may Approximately be of by minute body mL reabsorbed per capillaries. weight kilogram L approximately interstitial per circulatory Thus acute hour of be system fluid the average blood individual of into the spaces an autoinfused from might 1 loss. after the shift extracellular space. to fluid slowly the Substantial quantities intracellular of space from may mediated cortisol of This by fluid adrenal secretion to in is from hemorrhage. cortex probably the exchange response restoration the plasma essential is hemorrhage. Cortisol for full of after volume

are in widespread same the The epinephrine stimuli (see nervous sympathetic evoke released and medulla that response norepinephrine discharge the catecholamines to from adrenal

43). Chapter are hemorrhage. high catecholamines during levels after Blood of and to of much 40 as increases level loss catecholamines that as pressure such mm arterial blood is is reduced When 50-fold. the Hg, adrenal Epinephrine the is medulla exclusively medulla, comes whereas almost peripheral adrenal nerve norepinephrine endings. from and both derived from sympathetic the the nervous humoral substances activity of the listed reinforce previously. effects These sympathetic

the secreted 41). by Vasopressin a (antidiuretic to in hormone), posterior is vasoconstrictor, hemorrhage pituitary (see response gland potent

rises pressure concentration as vasopressin ( diminishes of blood The progressively plasma arterial

Fig. 19.23 ). for (low receptors vasopressin are of and left baroreceptors the responsible aortic in sinus arch pressure) release the The and stretch atrium (high receptors augmented pressure). the carotid

perfusion diminished leads of juxtaglomerular (see the hypotension apparatus The renal the during renin from hemorrhagic to secretion

35). Chapter

protein, on angiotensinogen, the cleaved angiotensin acts angiotensin-converting powerful the This is form vasoconstrictor. turn II a plasma II a which enzyme angiotensin very enzyme; is active decapeptide to octapeptide in to angiotensin I, by

of Salt and Conservation Renal Water

response to hemorrhage are electrolytes previously Fluid secretion conserved the of various increased stimuli, noted kidneys as in during and including vasopressin, (see by

Fig. ), NaCl increased nerve the activity, enhances by renal and excretion). reabsorption which nephron (decreased sympathetic 19.23 decreases arterial •Fig. The lower pressure osmoticpressureinresponsetowithdrawalof45%oftheestimated•Fig. 19.22 Changesinarterialbloodpressureandplasmacolloid Meanpercentagechangesinarterialbloodpressureandbloodvolumeovera30-minuteperiod,beginningattime0.(Redrawnplasmavasopressinconcentrationinresponsetobloodloss.(RedrawnfromZweifachBW.Anesthesiology. 19.23 1974;41:157. Res. )fromShenYT,etal.Circ 1991;68:1422.) rate, excretion which the curtails water also the filtration electrolytes. and glomerular of described release aldosterone from the of levels addition, stimulate the angiotensin the II, earlier, elevated of In as cortex. adrenal reabsorption the nephrons. of by Aldosterone, turn, stimulates in NaCl is excretion NaCl Thus decreased (see water also and

Chapter 35).

negative latent mechanisms. mechanisms, In contrast to also positive feedback feedback evokes hemorrhage by exaggerate loss. change initiated blood the mechanisms These any primary by and which to to tend loss death. induced blood Specifically, the cycles, aggravate mechanisms may initiate hypotension feedback lead vicious positive

that mechanism. cycle gain vicious Whether to depends on of will feedback a the positive lead mechanism a itself. mechanism secondary change the Gain to initiating is the the a evoked by change given of ratio gain than 1 than not. less cycle; of greater vicious a 1 does induces a A gain Consider of 2. a mechanism feedback with a gain positive Hg, would turn a which feedback positive reduction 20 Hg, by of to a were decrease decrease then Hg. in further Pa with pressure mm in mm mm would a secondary cause 40 of 10 evoke of a If mechanism gain 2 a great. subsequent induce as change Thus twice each one would that is death would decline occurred. at Hence, rate ever-increasing Pa until an is This in B depicted curve in process

Fig. 19.20

change not change would also the a lead positive mechanism a Conversely, exaggerates but any 0.5 to with death. necessarily in feedback Pa, of gain a pressure by 5 feedback 10 additional a If Hg, fall Hg. mm decreased secondary, initiate suddenly mechanism positive would arterial mm of of decrease, Hg. mm 2.5 This further in would decrease provoke a turn, pressure arterial steps would approached process in value. The equilibrium continue an until ever-diminishing

and evident of cardiac (3) (5) phagocytic hemorrhage in mononuclear nervous of (MPS). during Some include important acidosis, the feedback depression, blood that the (4) central clotting, (1) depression positive aberrations system mechanisms (2) are failure, system more

are These mechanisms discussed next.

to the stages ventricular later the right particularly in ( function shock in curves, hemorrhagic of Shifts

Fig. 19.24 of ), during in hemorrhage. contractility provide a myocardial depression progressive evidence

that distributed called throughout reticuloendothelial *The macrophages consists MPS of the are (previously system) the body. exist blood period as are from a marrow They bone derived and in for short monocytes. circulating phagocytose lymphocytes into and tissues, to response. then migrate foreign material they initiate immune They to the where adaptive present antigens alveolar cells Langerhans Kupffer and Cells liver, the of macrophages, cells. include of the MPS microglia, the

•Fig. the Ventricular During Hemorrhagic Curves Course Ventricle 19.24 the of for Shock. Left Function 247minutes(curve representsthecontrolfunctioncurve;curves Curve C), representtimeafterthehemor-rhage:117minutes(curve B), D), 295minutes(curve F). B A and310minutes(curve 280minutes(curve E), toF J Physiol. (RedrawnfromCrowellJW,GuytonAC.Am 1962;203:248. Hg) 4 800 F 400 200 C 12 (mm (mL/min) 1400 pressure 1600 1200 0 600 E Left D Cardiac 8 1000 6 2 )–2 A 0 output atrial 10 B

hypotension by ventricular induced depresses coronary flow The function. reduces and blood hemorrhage therefore mechanism. in pressure, a output positive The a example consequent classic feedback reduces cardiac reduction arterial further of therefore of fall Furthermore, tissues to an pressure. resistance reduced vasodilator the that flow blood to in peripheral leads and peripheral accumulation metabolites arterial decrease aggravate

blood flow the during affects cells. of inadequate all The hemorrhage metabolism delivery to The metabolites. of tissue cells accelerates production decreased lactic and other O2 acid acid function adequate metabolic prevents acidosis , Moreover, H+ the of ensues. excretion kidney impaired excess generalized and a aggravates The resulting the is which the further of heart effect reduction in perfusion, tissue depressant acidosis. on acidosis metabolic to hypotension. the catecholamines neurally Acidosis reduces the thereby heart resistance intensifies and reactivity also released and circulating vessels of and the

shock reduces cerebral flow. The hypotension in blood pronounced of of nervous ischemia sympathetic noted stimulation as induce earlier. degrees arterioles, Moderate the heart, and cerebral veins, the flow. cerebral become In in because however, depressed the severe of brainstem centers blood hypotension, cardiovascular eventually inadequate reduces output cardiac and then loss peripheral sympathetic of tone resulting resistance. The the inadequate intensifies in perfusion. The reduction cerebral Pa consequent

released response same Endogenous to such brain and and substance circulation be as that may into circulatory shock. provoke opioids, the the into βendorphin, enkephalins in stresses the Opioids adrenal released terminals, nerve and are response with medulla are secretory in in and in they stored, stress. in the to sympathetic together along granules catecholamines, adrenocorticotropic from stimuli release anterior the Similar pituitary and of the cause β-endorphin gland. hormone the of blood the to centers other mediate that autonomic Opioids endotoxemia, depress loss, stress. some shock-provoking adaptations brainstem and compensatory shock. rates opoid improves Conversely, forms in function the of survival of cardiovascular and naloxone antagonist various

typically The alterations clotting biphasic. after in are hemorrhage blood phase hypocoagulability and is by of initial hypercoagulability followed An of phase fibrinolysis. secondary a initial within of hemorrhage. In severe and develop the minutes a intravascular few thrombi, leukocytes the vascular endothelium, the platelets clots, of to or adhere and phase, onset phenomenon, causes occurs disseminated vessels. widespread is deposition thrombin and intravascular within medium-diameter fibrin narrow coagulation (DIC), when called This and activated of

by release thromboxane further of tissues. ischemic phase enhanced the initial from A2 is The various platelets. A2 aggregates Thromboxane is more more released thromboxane trapped. A2 are platelets platelets As and aggregate, more form clotting the and intensifies feedback tendency. prolongs of This positive tumor necrosis to Inflammatory factor) contribute DIC. also (interleukin-6, cytokines of as heparin. standard such mortality administration reduced considerably procedures been certain of shock-provoking has The by rate anticoagulants the from

prominent. hemorrhagic is the In stages of fibrinolysis the hypotension, time clotting and prolonged, is later when clotting depleted. and are factors platelets Fibrinolysis occurs

System﻿ Mononuclear the Phagocytic of Depression

During course becomes the hypotension, MPS of depressed. hemorrhagic function modulated protein. The an phagocytic MPS by is of the activity opsonic change for during may opsonic in diminishes this shock, the activity depression in and MPS part The in plasma account function. and As antitoxin a impaired. mechanisms result, antibacterial defense are function the junctions of and in junctions adherens the Hypoperfusion tight barrier 1. suppresses also the (Qh) cardiac venous Two important and between pressure central in output prevail (Pv) system. relationships cardiovascular the regard With range directly with Qh wide Pv. to preload) of the heart, Pv a very over (or varies This the relationship mechanism. the cardiac curve, function by Frank-Starling represented and it expresses is epithelium. In Pv system, vascular intestinal varies the from constantly the bacterial circulation. intestine flora the Endotoxins the enter of normal liver. they are in by the Ordinarily, the MPS, inactivated principally of the Disruption the epithelial the of with barrier, intestinal to these invade MPS, depression endotoxins together circulation. allows general body. isoform smooth of Endotoxins muscle of nitric synthase profound, throughout vessels the synthesis oxide of produce the the vasodilation, mainly generalized blood in an by inducing blood The aggravates vasodilation loss. by the hemodynamic caused profound changes

their In release the mediators shock. endotoxin, role addition to with of in macrophages inactivating many associated hydrolases, derivatives: acid radicals, mediators factors, and certain free These the following acid leukotrienes. arachidonic coagulation neutral prostaglandins, include and thromboxanes, proteases, oxygen modulate temperature hormone system. and certain the that also metabolism, release monokines Macrophages immune intermediary regulation, secretion,

and Positive Feedback Mechanisms of Negative Interactions

circulatory and Hemorrhage a derangements. provokes multitude metabolic of of compensatory, and changes are Some decompensatory. others are these feedback high Some mechanisms and these low others possess gain possess of gain. the of the hemorrhage. any severity varies with specific mechanism Furthermore, gain the of high. example, only and reflexes the the For within maintained is a blood, of range with is normal baroreceptor gain Pa slight the of loss mm blood, the in influence additional losses reductions have With 60 Hg (i.e., threshold through when the baroreceptors), of for baroreceptor is below no Pa greater pressure the further reflexes. below baroreceptor Hence, or is critical pressure, gain this below near reflex the zero. zero

with positive are general, mechanisms of negative are In of feedback low. degrees loss, high, gains of mechanisms whereas the feedback blood those minor with The true opposite severe hemorrhage. more is the of algebraically. mechanisms various gains add The depends Therefore, negative develops exceeds whether on vicious whether positive sum gains and 1. the a of cycle the blood. Total severe 1 likely are, of to gains course, occur of in losses with more of excess before process treated cycle, transfusion, preferably serious must hemorrhages becomes by be intensively, irreversible. whole quickly to the Therefore, blood avert vicious a and

inversely with Qh. of total the in the it the arteries represented a volume the a fraction function Qh curve, that veins. blood relationship resides fact resides vascular is increases, reflects by the and and This greater as in volume smaller

2. of the cardiac cross-bridges in changes mechanisms that and cardiac the that in affinity of the contractile are interact numbers principal for . proteins output Ca++ myocardial govern The that peripheral factors venous vascular vascular blood compliance, volume. principal total govern The are and and curve function resistance, arterial the

3.

equilibrium of conditions a of and Pv the intersection Qh curves. values are cardiac determined function The the that vascular by and set given under prevail of low high At heart unable to heart and rates, very produce is very the adequate Qh. during minute. contractions cannot heart increase compensate diastole rates, filling low per number the in for At very cardiac small of the the high large compensate contractions per inadequate very of filling rates, the number cannot for minute time. At heart

4.

quantities to blood so Gravity Qh substantial influences tend veins dependent veins of of pool compliant, in portions the of and the are body. because the gradient the and extrathoracic changes pressure between intrathoracic the Respiration veins. which cycle. phases rhythmic the Qh during in mean and stroke may respiration the an auxiliary of volume Hence, induce level affect pump, various the serves as changes respiratory of

5.

nerve sympathetic impulses inhibited In central are anticipation heart activated the by exercise, command. nervous system is of to the and vagus result force, vascular regional resistance. heart and myocardial contractile The is rate, an increase in muscles. muscles the the increases resistance and skin, markedly inactive in regions, kidneys, and active vascular In in splanchnic addition, decreases reduction in is a total The pronounced resistance, overall effect peripheral

AB, TMH, PD. Fernandez Thompson Eijsvogels cardiac there and deleterious of effects Are chronic endurance acute exercise? Rev. Physiol 2016;96:99.

T, CE, Negrão Fernandes Baraúna et al. VG, training cardiac set exercise promotes involving remodeling microRNAs. of physiological a Aerobic Physiol. J Am 2015;309:H543.

Schreiber M, RL, al. K, et Brohi Gruen control Haemorrhage injured patients. severely in Lancet. 2012;380:1099.

skeletal of action which, the auxiliary contracting increases muscles, along pumping the return. greatly with venous nerves, and circulations, the of transfer cardiac to in output. and heart sympathetic increasing induced systemic by thereby increases rate enables blood the pulmonary to cardiac activation The heart the both contractility, myocardial only Stroke slightly. increases volume slightly. blood O2 mean and blood extraction pressure increase, systolic and increase consumption and O2 pressure temperature As during vessels the blood dilate. exercise, skin rises body the becomes exercise, constrict. severe during the However, skin heart rate when maximal vessels but body causes of the in increases volume exhaustion. a This feeling and increases effective greater temperature blood the factor muscles. blood is The exercise performance to active in limiting of delivery

6. generalized loss and tachycardia, arteriolar induces Acute generalized constriction, venoconstriction. blood hypotension, Acute chemoreceptor endogenous of water electrolytes. reabsorption such and tissue (compensatory) blood moderate and fluids, release of feedback mechanisms, of as number to conservation cerebral responses renal ischemia, of negative vasoconstrictors, a invokes reflexes, baroreceptor loss and also phagocytic acidosis, (decompensatory) a system mononuclear such of of coagulation, nervous in as feedback invokes aberrations system. loss depression, failure, and Acute positive the blood number mechanisms, central blood cardiac depression feedback The sum of mechanisms on between the and of these the and blood of loss depends negative positive the on gains outcome mechanisms. acute interactions

Laughlin et MH, Duncker al. DJ, Korthuis RJ, blood flow and of skeletal to cardiac muscles exercise. Control during Rowell eds. LB, In: JT, Shepherd Multiple Handbook 12: Exercise: Systems. of of Regulation Integration and Section Physiology, Press; Oxford University Bethesda, MD: 1996.

CJ, DL, R, Swift et Lavie al. Arena Exercise clinical science the system: and outcomes. cardiovascular and cardiovascular Res. Circ 2015;117:207.

BA, AP, Bograd DA, Vicente et al. Valparaiso traumatic injury. Modeling acute Res. Surg J 2015;194:220.

MICHELLE SECTION System THRALL ROGER S. 5The AND CLOUTIER Respiratory M.

1. this questions: of able to be Upon following chapter, completion answer student the the should

anatomical the and respiratory Explain relationships the structure/function of components of upper lower system. the

2.

contrast and Compare pulmonary circulatory the and bronchial systems.

3.

control and in the of the between relationships innervation muscles respiration. Explain

4.

respiratory conducting and the of of roles contrast unit. airways Compare the and the components

5.

parasympathetic effects the stimulation respiratory and of sympathetic systems responses. Compare nervous of and on the contrast

development and Describe to injury regeneration 6 architecture. repair lung normal of alveolar after

gas consists lungs body carbon he of is into the movement the which of function removal (O2) of (CO2). of primary exchange, dioxide oxygen and relationships of the throughout and embryo function anatomical circulatory upper (i.e., structure/ lung chapter This and the innervation, systems, development airways, lung overview life), two (at and an and lung provides stage lower muscles), repair. broad designed of This comprehensive conceptual a is individual is structures anatomy. intended and interactions lung not of understanding a understanding provide afford and to to chapter structure/function

approximately L, The space m2). court gas size a of but exchange 4 tennis for the they that a with have surface in of a is volume contained (≈85 are area a lungs of independently functioning This respiratory units. area is composed of surface myriads large unit like the other heart, each unity; is lungs but Unlike functions structurally like and kidneys, is, the the unit. demonstrate that just identical every functional upper locations right comprehend in their the the of in essential designated pathophysiological of and lung lower lobe), it divisions alterations anatomical anatomy diseases. order and the lobe, by to sites are pulmonary physiology Because is respiratory left to (e.g., understand respiratory disease

Upper Pharynx Airways: Sinuses, and Nose,

most nose the The alveolus. and respiratory ends begins in distal the system at the the and and in nasal tracheobronchial are the the vocal pharynx, cords, the system. of all the tree Thus posterior divisions included cavity, respiratory trachea, glottis structures vocal larynx, cords, lower nose the trachea, and to of of consists airway alveoli. consists whereas the the The and sinuses airways, from including upper all the the airway fully that time reaches temperature air and trachea, humidified. The the inspired by airways at the “condition” so air upper inspired body air is clear 10 µm than nose functions filter, particles in size. larger to also entrap, and The the of cells. interspersed The epithelial lined surface by respiratory interior secretory nose is cells with line and cells first inflammatory produce are host important These immunoglobulins, of mediators, which interferons, defense. secretory the

and the epithelial (frontal, sphenoid, by The ( passages sinuses cells lined maxillary, and ciliated are ethmoid) surround nasal paranasal

Fig. 20.1A).

airways facilitate upper passages main mucus the movement cilia of The from approximately and every clear minutes. 15 nasal the the the (3) makes to sinuses easier; lessen which from (1) frontal upright voice; to are to trauma. The protect posture skull, the functions (2) offer brain of of and weight the the resonance to the fluid is the into surfaces nose. being The their propelled covering continually retention opening sinus), the to In the some particularly is upper sinuses (e.g., susceptible mucus. maxillary the which them at of edge, (ostium) makes and (swelling), infection retention edema The readily secondary can nasal and result. (sinusitis) obstructed secretions are ostia of by approximately greatly continuous its volume the is ribbons adult but protrude of nasal turbinates, three is nose area increased are surface a nasal the of by which tissue in mL, that The the 20 (see of cavity an into series

Fig. 20.1B ). nose the smell. sense The of enables in the plate to impulses the cribriform bulb. through endings the roof superior carry of Neuronal above nose turbinate olfactory the the

is laryngopharynx. the pharynx divided oropharynx, The sections: nasopharynx, into and three • Fig. Important sinus view turbinates Illustrations nasal ostia. of and Anatomy.A, superior, of paranasal sinuses. inferior of Lateral the the structures and passage the B, the view Airway Upper 20.1 Anterior middle, demonstrating pharynx Lateral C, upper structures. section the laryngopharynx) (nasopharynx, view head oropharynx, midsagittal surrounding showing and the and of three of the airway and neck, divisions

epiglottis, cords include which Introduction within is to attached the 20 structures Respiratory the vocal 435 CHAPTER (see regions System these the and to cords, vocal cartilage arytenoid

Fig. ). 20.1C 3 The (2 4 to is cm the cm nose. anterior wide lies 3 behind most nasopharynx long) and the to and are mouth nasal enables the isthmus both (canals) connected via an that In and oral breathing. and nose region, this Also, nasopharynx tissue pharyngeal infections. small fight which of lymphoid also contains as tonsils, known masses (adenoids), the thus nose, cavity The represent in which and connected the pathway is a ear middle equalizing drainage fluid atmospheric tubes, via pressure; pressure to they the aid in of to the between ear throat, ears. eustachian lymphatic nasopharynx the means is provides but the of infections infections also This location of network in head. a structures for fighting common a

The at palate ends the nasopharynx epiglottis. soft the and the which separates oropharynx, the begins at epiglottis at and ends laryngopharynx the The esophagus. major esophagus help Its into is of the and lungs. to the passage air the food into role regulate some infections, With can structures to resistance. become significantly and airflow edematous contribute these to act a The swallowing. the arytenoid over cover epiglottis vocal during hood cords) or (attached cartilage vocal the and cords as aspiration the under the circumstances, prevent tract. respiratory arytenoid to into and liquid lower Thus of and normal epiglottis food cartilage function coordinate it airway. and that synchronized mastication (chewing) opening within closing reflexes the muscle and is of act with The swallowing after occurs 2 food seconds, usually closely of and kept to airways, Hence, are the is lower liquids allowed enter out. air and food with muscle this have altered lose neuromuscular diseases reflexes Patients some mechanism. coordinated and swallowing can become susceptible and a food pneumonia. poses for to patients Such of liquid, which aspiration risk may

Lower Unit Airways: and Bronchi, Bronchioles, Respiratory Trachea,

the three tongue-like (upper, left The oblique by lobes of hemithorax, and is divided projection in horizontal), including in ( right anterior an fissures fissure lung, upper lower) the lower) the lingula, two located whereas middle, and two located lung, hemithorax, left (upper, lobes is the divided (oblique, the into lobe, right a aspect of interlobular into the by

Fig. 20.2 ). called the called encased pleura left and another parietal lungs membrane the right the and are covered membrane Both thin a pleura. are by visceral by potential two expands The it of chest for lung a the allows these of the interface gliding produces pleurae space. smooth as and in the alveoli; condition trauma, a of parietal pleurae group rupture between resulting is the by a Air can enter visceral pneumothorax. and surgery, of or empyema. and case space effusion can a create pleural enter in the or, this also infection, severe an of Fluid

•Fig. Lobes, of Illustrations of Lung With Fissures. the and Views, Demon-strating Segments, and Anterior 20.2 Topography the Posterior the Thefissures(orchasms)demarcatethelobesineachlung.Numbersrefertospecificbronchopulmonarysegments,asdepictedin

Right Aortic 10 6 Anterior basal Oblique Left basal 1 Medial POSTERIOR Superior 4 Posterior 9 3 Apical 8 Apical 2 Lower basal Superior 1 Anterior SVC Lower lobe VIEW fissure 1 VIEW lobe Lower 8 9 Apical Trachea 5 Upper Upper basal basal Lateral arch lobe 10 Posterior Anterior lobe ANTERIOR Lower lobe 4 Posterior Anterior lobe lobe lobe Apical lobe 1 5 basal Upper Heart 6 .SVC,superiorvenacava.Lateral Posterior basal Upper 2 Superior Fig.20.3 Anterior LeftRight Oblique Inferior Middle fissure Horizontalfissure 8 3 Lateral

The ( branches two trachea bronchi into main stem

Fig. 20.3 ). which of lobe), the (like segmental lobar then for divide divide branches in into each stem into turn tree) bronchi bronchi These bronchi a main (one (Fig.

20.4

Fig. until smaller 20.3 ending alveolus in smaller ( the into then and (bronchioles) and branches )

Fig.

). 20.5 Bronchi only in the not ( also the blood bronchioles supply their by and of but size differ of cartilage, type epithelium, and presence

Table 20.1). asymmetrical in airways pattern. segmental or Beyond bronchi, divide dichotomous branching the the a without by terminal alveoli. their smallest distinguished of bronchioles, and are eventually size cartilage, the airways which presence become the Bronchi, in for of the Each diameters; result, number generation smaller of as in an total increases. next area the an airway branching with branches a results of increase the surface airways of opening alveoli terminate and Terminal bronchioles. an respiratory to are (duct) in group a bronchioles called

anatomical by called a supplied bronchus is segment and bronchopulmonary unit lung. The lung region of segmental functional is of the the a the Because their of that can be surgically. become segments diseased have structure, easily irreversibly bronchopulmonary removed The the the bronchioles, ducts, and is gas-exchanging physiological (see (respiratory alveoli of respiratory lung basic the the the unit consists which unit), alveolar of unit

Figs.

20.4 20.5). from the and as which cartilage, move the contain The terminal bronchioles to are alveoli which to is airways absent, serve and the to lacking in airways. referred (i.e., alveoli), conducting the cartilage bronchi, gas dead exchange the anatomical and not volume) in does the participate (≈150 This of mL gas lung in area space. forms with •Fig. alveoli The bronchioles and beginning respiratory area the Segments, Bronchopulmonary of Anterior 20.3 Illustration View. Thenumberscorrespondtothosein

Fig.20.2 :1,apical;2,posterior;3,anterior;4,lateral(superior);5,medial(inferior);6,superior;7,medialbasal;8,anteriorbasal;9,lateralbasal;10,posteriorbasal.Themedialbasalregions(7)arelocatedintheupperregionoftheposteriorbasalregions(10)in

bronchus .Upper 1 6 main •Fig. 5 Lower cartilage 9 8 Right cartilage 12 4 2 stem 8 stem 3 lobe 10 main 5 Fig.20.2 77 lobe lobe Left 3 6 Trachea Upper bronchus Cricoid 4 10 Middle Thyroid 9 Lingula lobe Airways and Alveolar the Lung. Units Conducting of of Illustration 20.4 Therelativesizeofthealveolarunitisgreatlyenlarged.Numbersatthebottomindicatetheapproximatenumberofgenerationsfromtracheatoalveoli,whichmayvaryfromasfewas10toasmanyas23. (FromWeibelER.Morphometry Lung. the Human of Heidelberg:Springer-Verlag;1963.) with the are gas bronchioles exchange to all respiratory alveoli occurs. where the only with of lung, resting and are but the at approximately it is and when mm the volume 2500 70 m2 of a long, a lung surface at of the mL chest largest volume area the is approximately This 5 (see volume wall region

20.1 Table

µm diameter. alveoli 250 and The in in shape polygonal are approximately Alveolar spaces spaces are interstitium. tissue for volume; most the known these the of as collectively by divided responsible are lung’s collagen can of lung and a composed fibers and interstitium The in cells primarily which is potentially is accumulate. space fluid 108 An × approximately ( adult alveoli 5 has

Fig. type II are which type 20.6 ), and cells. epithelial composed of I 1 type in exist cells : ratio. type 1 Under a and I normal conditions, II The alveolus, site for is of 98% cell exchange. type to occupies the area it and the surface primary I of gas 96% the The for optimal of cells I cytoplasm is gas diffusion. ideal type thin the type In gas distance thereby capillary diffusion of fused, for the cells minimizes I addition, are facilitates endothelium and the exchange. basement membrane which gas and

alveolus, II cells in of and the surface they 2% occupy to usually the found 4% area. cuboidal “corners” of the are Type where very cells, During epithelium do late differentiate they entirely and in form alveolar of “normal” type composed cells into gestation for development, I the is embryonic epithelium only gas type the II and alveolar optimal exchange. thereby synthesize resistance the promotes surfactant cells which less during pulmonary inhalation Also, and type surface (nonsticking in ), II alveolus reduces properties) exhalation. tension and (see network. Gas of network called occurs the and alveoli the a mesh-like dense exchange alveoli in alveolar-capillary through capillaries 2 alveolar in µm I the membranes. barrier type and epithelial only basement gas consists blood endothelial alveoli The capillary and is thick cells, their cells, red of cell to between and 1 respective the across passively red diffuse CO2 this and cells into blood barrier plasma and O2 (see

Chapter 24). exchange. cells and gas CO2 time less which in blood is for pass the second, through 1 network sufficient than Red O2

Lung Systems the Circulatory in

at unique circulation volumes The in pressure. lung ability accommodate the its blood to and large of is low duality to supplies, two has blood •Fig. one separate lung The the Alveo-lus. Bronchiole From The 20.5 the Terminal to Airway Notetheabsenceofalveoliintheterminalbronchiole.A,alveolus;RB,respiratorybronchiole;TB,terminalbronchiole.

isadiseaseofthebronchiolesthatusuallyoccurinyounginfantsandiscausedbyviruses,primarilyrespiratory virus. includingasthma,bronchiolitis,chronicbronchitis,andcysticfibrosis.Obstructionofairflowthroughtheairwaysiscommonlycausedbyincreasedamountsofmucus,airwayinflammation,andsmoothmuscleconstriction.Asthma Theconductingairwaysareinvolvedinseveralmajorpulmonarydiseasescollectivelyreferredtoasobstructive syncytial disease, pulmonary isachronicinflammatorydiseaseofthelargeandsmallairways,mediatedpredominantlybylymphocytesandeosinophils,andisassociatedwithincreasedamountsofmucusintheairwaysandwithreversibleconstrictionoftheairwaysmoothmuscle(bronchospasm).Bronchiolitis bronchitis, genecauseareductioninchlorideandwatersecretionintothemucusoverlyingtheepitheliacells,whichincreasestheviscosityofmucus.Thissituationresultsinmucusaccumulationandchronicpulmonaryinfections,primarilybyPseudomonas ionchannelofthecysticfibrosistransmembraneconductanceregulator(CFTR).MutationsintheCFTR isanautosomalrecessivegeneticdiseasecausedbymutationsintheCl− Chronic aeruginosa. adiseasetypicallyofpeoplewhosmoke,isassociatedwithamarkedincreaseinmucus-secretingcellsintheairwaysandanincreaseinmucusproduction.Cystic fibrosis

deficiency, Notallimportantobstructivelungdiseasesinvolvetheairwaysdirectly.Emphysema isanirreversible,obstructivelungdiseasecommoninpeoplewhosmoke.Thepathogenesisinvolvesaprogressivedestructionoftheelastictissuesinthelungwithalossofalveolar/capillarystructure.Themechanismsoftissuedestructionareunclearbutmayinvolveproteolyticenzymesandothertoxiccompoundsincigarettesmoke.Emphysemaalsooccursinnonsmokingindividualswiththegeneticdisorderα1-antitrypsin causedbytheinabilitytoregulateproteolyticenzymes,particularlyelastase.

the removal CO2 and supply circulation) the and the tissue (pulmonary of other to O2 circulation; O2 body to of for from (bronchial lung uptake

Fig. 20.7

atrium begins The the in heart. the pulmonary of right circulation R it Deoxygenated C (pulmonary PV I right AD 200 right E I artery ventricle is •Fig. E PV and C Nu into A cm is Hg) pulmonary the A via 200 the blood mm µmB C (9 EL approximately atrium valve, pumped COL C A * from µm 1.0 I µmPVCTB A the trunk), A then M10 I to µm PAPA low PARB enters I 3 A tricuspid which II the pressure 24 A under 20.6 Alveoli. Theterminalrespiratoryunitconsistsofthealveoli(A)andthealveolarducts(AD)arisingfromarespiratorybronchiole(RB).Eachunitisapproximatelyspherical,assuggestedbythedashed A. outline. consistsoftypeIepithelium(I),interstitium(asterisk) arrow) formedbythefusedbasallaminaeoftheepithelialandendothelialcells,capillaryendothelium(E),plasmainthealveolarcapillary(C),andthecytoplasmoftheredbloodcell(R).Thethicksideofthegas-exchangebarrier(long Pulmonaryvenousvessels(PV)haveaperipherallocation.PA,pulmonaryartery;TB,terminalbronchiole.Inset, double hasanaccumulationofelastin(EL),collagen(COL),andmatrixthatjointlyseparatethealveolarepitheliumfromthealveolarcapillaryendothelium.Nu,nucleusofthecapillaryendothelialcell. typeIandtypeIIalveolarepithelialcells.Alargefractionofthealveolarwallconsistsofcapillaries(C)andtheircontents.B.Illustrationofacross-sectionofanalveolarwall,showingthepathofdiffusionofO2andCO2.Thethinsideofthealveolarwallbarrier(short double arrow)

supply and arteries, the (diameter, of (5 branching vessels—arteries series the diameter, 200 and the respectively. >500 to arterioles progressively right right (diameter, ventricle) lungs, cm left into blood which in quickly µm); and from main pulmonary left to 10 smaller µm); branches right pulmonary a The <10 complex arter-mesh-like in circulation and the are end capillaries. the of network (diameter, capillaries of arteries only µm)—that branching deoxygenated in the body The that carry blood. sequential ies pattern blood in deoxy-pattern pulmonary of passes branching. arteries the of follows airway through the arteries pulmonary a genated the The

•Fig. A Pulmonary Illustrationoftheanatomicalrelationshipofthepulmonaryartery,thebronchialartery,theairways,andthelymphaticvessels.A,alveoli;AD,alveolarducts;RB,respiratorybronchioles;TB,terminalbronchioles.AD nerves AD TB A RB Vasomotor Lymphatics Bronchial Bronchus A Pulmonary vein nerve A AD AD 20.7 artery artery Bronchomotor Lymphatics A

the (2) and system aid the and lung. the circulatory in pulmonary to to functions from release (1) metabolic blood (3) products to the reoxygenate balance CO2, distribute The and are lung, in fluid to of are cells and come bed in oxygenated capillaries Red alveoli the alveolar pulmonary the together that capillary the alveoli, in the exchange. for blood the in gas wall a configuration where surround optimal unique alveolar-capillary (see occurs network exchange this through Gas

blood 10% is the volume approximately the blood approximately circulation total volume. is 500 of mL, which circulating of The pulmonary of 75 Approximately the any healthy of at in mL time. one blood network present adults is alveolar-capillary pulmonary is capillary body. largest the The the bed in vascular bed of covers as nearly surface which 80 It the area. surface to 70 as alveolar m2, a area large is volume During pulmonary capillary blood of increase from of pressure and as 75 new increases the recruitment high because capillaries an mL the exercise, mL flow. the as as result in of to 200 and lungs, of in unique of for This a compensation case feature recruitment of allows is as periods capillaries the the in new stress, of exercise. it

the and network in leaves (15 venules µm The blood diameter) 500 to oxygenated a veins. alveolus of small pulmonary through pulmonary coalesce the veins small of diameter), blood atrium vessels the which larger quickly form µm returns (>500 oxygenated the heart. to in These through left to closely the capillaries, of run veins arteries, patterns arterioles, follow In contrast which distant the the quite to venules airways, and and airways. branching from

the of Circulation Structure Pulmonary

The minimal thin circulation arteries of muscle. pulmonary the with have walls, smooth are than more They easily seven systemic compliant vessels, they times distensible. and are for pulmonary systemic circulation flow through the the arterial blood pulmonary the than state muscular, compliant do of This highly arterial circulation. requires pressure walls noncompliant of lower more vessels the normal have do circulation, than pulmonary systemic system. larger the in and vessels state in circumstances, are dilated in arteries diameters the similar a The under a flow of weak right contribute system, low-resistance circulatory blood via compliant, the very which pulmonary ventricle. circulation through relatively factors All action of the to these the aids in of the pumping muscular right ventricle. the low-resistance, the explains system This than also low-work why ventricle less is left for Hg circulation (14 left The the differential atrium). the in mm only left minus from pulmonary pressure artery pulmonary pulmonary Hg the 6 the in artery Hg mm is 8 to gradient atrium mm the mm pressure of pressure (90 gradient mm systemic is in in than Hg Hg atrium). 7% circulation the This in differential less 3 Hg mm aorta right of the 87 the present gradient differential minus the

of and the Alveolar Structures Pulmonary the Microcirculation Extra-Alveolar and Vessels

and alveolar, the physiological in their of vessels pulmonary differences can basis divided the well properties. Although (extra-alveolar, anatomically, microcirculation) in be defined into categories on three not circulation larger systemic (arteries, The are and venules) veins, extra-alveolar arterioles, than their counterparts. vessels are they changes, changes. but not and affected pressure intrapleural are interstitial by They pressure by influenced alveolar vessels is elastin. volume by and caliber of extra-alveolar lung Thus affected by the lung lung caliber. decreases At increase in whereas the in extra-alveolar pleural pressure of caliber increases low high volumes, decrease at pleural vessel volumes, an vessels, lung pressure the pressure In are and in or to the pressure. but changes very reside alveolar contrast, to interstitial interalveolar sensitive capillaries septa, they not pleural in alveolar within changes flow. thus blood Positive-pressure pressure ventilation blocks capillaries compresses increases alveolar and and these balance liquid participate in the maintenance in The microcirculation and exchange that small pulmonary comprises of fluid lung. in the solute vessels

Network the Alveolar-Capillary Structure of

of in sequential culminates branching pulmonary surround capillaries The the mesh-like dense alveoli. a arteries of network that has the their cells of size (the This epithelial alveolar an tennis network 85 endothelial matrix, and vessels approximate and of and surface the it a is of thin alveolus of supportive approximately alveolar-capillary area cells composed court). m2 of network airway capillary. between the in provide blood the components this only structural of The gas in the barrier tissue the alveolar-capillary matrix and and back thick, include and 2 which of their cells, this respective The type endothelial epithelial cells (see back alveolar I which cells, µm to are 1 barrier, membranes, basement to is capillary

Fig. 20.6B ). for by gas this is ideal network exchange. alveolar-capillary Surrounded mostly an environment air, Red capillary this O2 blood than second, exchange. in sufficient for network file pass CO2 which time less the gas is and through of cells 1 component single in

of lung. network regulates In amount fluid addition within the the the exchange, to gas alveolar-capillary vessels of the At in the the across space. a interstitial level, the movement small of the into capillary net out oncotic capillary the fluid balance wall hydrostatic between of pressure results pulmonary and enters from vena in lung removed system the the of cava lung is the the lymphatic interstitium area then and by fluid the The circulation via the hilus. of fluid 30 per to an circulation In normal route. the this via is returned average adults, mL of hour

in lung, nerves, The cells, nodes, and pleural pulmonary bronchial circulation system, a to circulation secretory veins. that upper systemic visceral is from pulmonary distinct arterial separate provides pulmonary surfaces, blood the glands, lymph the surface trachea, the airways, arteries, the reach tract; does system perfuses The upper structure or similar bronchioles circulation the terminal is it respiratory to circulatory bronchial or and the systemic in not the respiratory

20 to Respiratory CHAPTER System the alveoli. Introduction heart veins blood veins. through circulation bronchial or bronchial flows either from of the Venous bronchopulmonary capillaries the to the true right region into in veins before the flows intercostal and hemiazygos, hilus, blood azygos, the the entering True lung atrium. the of are or present bronchial veins and from that The with systems. formed of admixture network tributaries bronchopulmonary vessels both through circulatory bronchial form an veins are circulatory the blood and anastomose from pulmonary vessels of a returns through left veins. pulmonary vessels to anastomosed Blood atrium the from these via and anastomosis two veins Approximately bronchial heart the total the to thirds this returned of route. pulmonary the circulation is

receives in 100%. bronchial the output; approximately circulation circulation only total The almost receives 1% comparison, of cardiac pulmonary only output. as cardiac the as the in size of of as fibrosis, 10% and presence output, bronchial such receive of (hypertrophy) cystic to In arteries, cardiac increase normally 20% 2% much which to receive the 1% diseases these erosion of occur inflamed into for of (coughing responsible the as infection can this result blood) in disease. The vessels tissue hemoptysis that up a bacterial is

and under system nervous central control (CNS). of automatic Breathing the is nervous lungs control is CNS peripheral nervous system under which of (PNS), the the autonomic The ( innervated are system by

Fig. 20.8).

four has nervous noncholinergic components: and The stimulatory. autonomic inhibitory, nonadrenergic distinct system sympathetic, nonadrenergic parasympathetic, noncholinergic

increased stimulation system the (see of cell of leads blood the secretion, glandular constriction Stimulation and inhibition parasympathetic to dilation, causes relaxation blood muscle and secretion the vessel whereas of airway smooth sympathetic airway muscle, of of glandular constriction, smooth system vessels,

Fig. 26.1 ). autonomic and organ. functional of the of is system in and preganglionic CNS specific postganglionic in of neurons composed the The the unit postganglionic ganglia nervous the neurons with most to homeostasis. organ PNS maintain the work As concert in systems, CNS and lung, there nor no pain is innervation in fibers. There motor are the voluntary in Pain pleura. are found the fibers only

brainstem innervation in the originates vagus (cranial X, from the the nerve). nerve lung parasympathetic The medulla of the and the the descend fibers vagal to the vagus from adjacent nerve blood nuclei airways to lung. vessels in ganglia Preganglionic in goblet by vessels, muscle smooth bronchial network (including submucosal innervating complete and cells blood from cells the then ganglia cells, glands). and fibers epithelial Postganglionic the and the •Fig. both preganglionic fibers postganglionic In lungs, of the Lung. 20.8 Innervation Theautonomicinnervation(motorandsensory)ofthelungandthesomatic(motor)nervesupplytotheintercostalmusclesanddiaphragmaredepicted.

(cholinergic) and excitatory motor neurons. contain (nonadrenergic) inhibitory substance neurons; neurotransmitters neurons. of neurotransmitters Acetylcholine and motor P intestinal motor excitatory inhibitory dynorphin vasoactive peptide are of and are resting normal for nerve muscle smooth constricted a lung. vagus responsible the through Parasympathetic in stimulation tone is the slightly of these glycoprotein, which of viscosity innervate and stimulated, Parasympathetic mucus the mucus. fibers synthesis glands, bronchial when also increase increases fibers, the the larger conducting the is in airways the periphery. smaller and airways limited most in in innervation Parasympathetic greatest the

the be to general. of the and local, the parasympathetic more the response system tends nervous response sympathetic of very specific nervous is system Whereas heavily not. glands are Mucous muscle vessels blood is smooth sympathetic by airway and the system; innervated nervous however, include influence dopamine, nerves the lung. of the on adrenergic no and Neurotransmitters has norepinephrine dopamine although sympathetic secretion. mucous increases water of the Stimulation glands nerves in sympathetic and This water of parasympathetic increased the balanced the pathways. increased viscosity and disrupts between response in are Adrenergic humans. absent fibers systems, and to lung. the sympathetic are parasympathetic present the smooth nerve the and cells those In in addition in endings in in afferent muscle epithelium

Respiration Control Central of

automatic, centrally regulated is process control. rhythmic, an with and voluntary Breathing ( The main as control brainstem, the particularly the for center CNS, respiration functions

Fig. 20.9 ). while (2) recruitment this to (1) maintenance loops and respiration various can that allow and of requires appropriately of generation (3) adaptation minimizing feedback sensory by energy contract respiratory a reflexes of modulation muscles rhythm of respiratory rhythm; for and conditions costs; exchange. Regulation that gas of detail respiration described in Control greater in is

wall Ventilation PCO2, medulla Lung and impulses BloodPerfusion •Fig. Diffusion PO2, muscles chest Chemo-receptors cortex Respiratory Respiratory impulses Cerebral Nerve center, pH cord barrier displacement Nerve Spinal Mechano-receptors Alveolar-capillary Force System, of Center the and Between Block 20.9 Respiratory the Respiratory Respiration. of Control Muscles Control Relationships Demonstrating Diagram Therespiratorycenterneurons,dispersedintoseveralgroupsinthemedulla,demonstratespontaneouscyclicactivitybutarestronglyinfluencedbystimulidescendingfromthecerebralcortex(volitionalcontrol)andfromtwosensoryloops:mechanoreceptorandchemoreceptorpathways.Ventilationandperfusionoccurtogetherneartheendofthecycle,andtheiroutputdeterminespartialpressuresofarterialandalveolarcarbondioxide(PCO2)andoxygen(PO2)and,inpart,arterialhydrogenionconcentration(pH).Theseoutputsfeedbacktotherespiratorycenterviachemoreceptorandmechanoreceptorsensorypathways.

Respiration Muscles of

major include diaphragm, the muscles. muscles, respiration muscles external skeletal The intercostal all the scalene which the muscles, of of and are force are stretched of shortened. force when Skeletal they for decreases the provide contraction ventilation; and the they muscles increases are when driving of contraction The force volumes. muscles respiratory at of lung larger increases

major the The cavity abdominal respiration, thoracic from divides cavity the is and the diaphragm it ( of muscle

Fig.

20.10). of diaphragm Contraction forces the the downward forward. abdominal contents and the dimension of difference pressure increases thorax chest and the and creates abdomen. This between vertical a cavity the diaphragm to effort. H2O during In cm can the adults, 150 of maximal airway 200 inspiratory generate pressures to up cm. diaphragm however, approximately maneuvers (vital the breathing (tidal cm; quiet as much can capacity), 10 breathing), as move during deep-breathing During 1 the diaphragm moves diaphragm The

the to the is CHAPTER segments to fifth of nerves, right cervical C5). cord origins phrenic the at 20 are innervated to left by (C3 spinal Introduction System whose Respiratory the third and

The upward intercostal of the other (see ribs forward are during pull external muscles, and inspiration the which muscles inspiration important

Fig. 20.10 ). the lateral in This of increase anteroposterior the causes an and both thorax. diameters muscles T2). same cord the and of nerves from originates (T1 external intercostal level Innervation of the that intercostal spinal arise the from of dependent has is respiration respiration the Paralysis on on because primarily these effect significant no muscles diaphragm. breathe when a why an above is C3 dependent individual individuals cord only their is the the injuries spinal is on it to on injury that lower This ventilator. with own; is can completely

muscles; and head) not do during contract in breathing. which the alae inspiration cause of sternocleidomastoid normal Accessory neck which the small elevate (the nasal muscles muscles, and scalene the nasi, muscles flaring; significant, obstruction do exercise, airway is rib cage. actively during the and contract pull they when up However, vigorously they breathing, During upper ribs. and anchor sternum they the normal muscles considered also Because (genioglossus inspiration. must and pharyngeal muscles patent are wall remain during of the the airway inspiration, arytenoid) upper supplied and innervated by veins and intercostal cage muscles arteries and rib are motor nerves. the All muscles intercostal sensory are by that voluntary

during it is becomes passive, during hyperventilation. active but exercise Exhalation and breathing normal downward abdominal The intercostal abdominis, (i.e., inward). and the internal the muscles exhalation (rectus which internal ribs external of are muscles, they the oppose wall the abdominis) and muscles intercostal pull oblique, most of transversus important and those and external inspiratory breathing. the muscles work do of The During reserve. significant this the low, is inspiratory workload normal breathing, have muscles and that trained is perform. a work, limit can muscles the but can more work to Respiratory there do be they to wall, a in respiratory major weakness is fatigue the failure. factor Respiratory respiratory of chest impair the and muscle development muscle movement can of

Embryology, Development, Repair Aging, and Lung

after days the 26 primitive foregut of The from lung to as the the of at ovum. fertilization epithelium a arises 22 pouch approximately lung lungs. and branches into This bud primitive left right single Over irregular next weeks, the create pattern. further to branching branching occurs dichotomous 2 to 3 the The lung developed week laws The intrauterine “three pathologist Lynne of of by bronchial (1) has Reid development”: 16 described tree

chest longitudinal of increasing ribs) dimension Diaphragm elevating lower and (domes descend,

inspiration A of Muscles

parasternal intercartilaginous muscles (depress except intercostals, ribs) Internal

Abdominal (depress contents) compress ribs, abdominal muscles lower

of expiration Muscles

of the Because for of muscles affect mechanical lung driving that force the muscles respiration. the diseases affect the respiratory provide ventilation, properties chronic muscle disease in example, no expiratory longer active, contraction. work For pulmonary airflow increased obstruction. secondary instead is (COPD), of the but Exhalation is obstructive requires passive breathing to addition, is ). (see In lung total increased capacity the develop after the The parallels downward, 8 and (2) until shortens of fibers, chest (3) age alveoli. of intra-acinar of larger adulthood; veins) alveoli increases of at birth, (arteries forces the increases is that growth of years, lung until airways, preacinar of parallels whereas number alveoli of the and the the life; development muscle the of the diaphragm size wall that capacity the that vessels total alveoli completed vessels and

can result, the do fatigue muscles Respiratory other As decreases the are function the workload just of and radius a decreased. as skeletal when and of increases. diaphragm the curvature. muscles efficiency can weaken muscles (e.g., Guillain-Barré diseases Respiratory myasthenia in also neuromuscular syndrome, gravis). patients with and respiratory chest wall failure, are diseases, and lung mechanical these of wall chest can the the of sufficient though weakness the movement properties result of in even the respiratory impair normal. muscles In

will occur of airways. gestation 16 Thus weeks the intrauterine affect number events of before that condition example disease. congenital an diaphragmatic a of as is congenital lung hernia known A canal hemithorax due number presence the 6 occurs of to weeks with the is a growth airways in lung of lung results gestation It abdominal and the pleuroperitoneal decrease of of to close chest in and the 8 abnormal the abdominal contents in cavities; alveoli. and the failure thereby to and at separate II of cells affected epithelium of that it differentiate and until is these alveolar birth birth epithelial is into I cells. the infant, solely type not composed an type cells, epithelial the Before

stature. to in and Growth proportional is similar growth and length body of lungs the relatively girls’ years earlier of is than and the neonatal mature of boys’. rate preadolescent development periods and age), in (≈11 lungs fastest The in and increase until Although the body growth rate adolescence, lung after adulthood. the of slows size lung steadily the however, size with Improvement decline age. growth to in years once attained has occurs lung age), early been in stages of development; of starts optimal (20 lung to function at function 25 all adulthood individuals environmental 1% decrease lung with proceed appears The to estimated per faster less year, function in and than or to factors. smoke are who begin in toxic age, at exposed earlier and especially caused capacity exercise, in during ventilatory The they and major abnormal aging responses, with ventilation physiological perfusion. result by insufficiencies involve normal decrease alveolar gas decreases a result surface In area. addition, in with of age, diffusion a as probably altered of which lung and the abnormalities. parallel explain lung, in within structure levels Age-related of function observations some biochemical functional the decreases increased elastin could of

TypeIcellslackfreeradicalscavengers(i.e.,superoxidedismutase)andaresusceptibletoinjuryanddeathinducedbytoxicO2compoundsandfreeradical(i.e.,H2O2,OH− ,andO2−).Invariousinflammatorylungdiseases,typeIcellsdie,andthealveolarepitheliumtherebybecomesdenuded,withincreasedvascularpermeabilityandensuingfluidaccumulation(impairedgasexchange).TypeIIcellshavesuperoxidedismutaseandarethusmoreresistanttothetoxicoxygenradicals.TheycansurvivetoproliferateanddifferentiateintotypeIcellstorestorethenormalalveolararchitecture.ThistypeofresponseisdependentonanintactbasementmembranetosupporttheproliferationoftypeIIcellsandisanexampleof“phylogenyrecapitulatingontogeny.”Ifthebasementmembranecannotberepopulated,thenthebody’srecourseforrepairiscollagendepositionandscarformation,whichisnotconducivetogas 1.

and lungs functions each identical every unit. other segment) is structurally like physiological and demonstrate unit that (bronchopulmonary The unity; is, anatomical just

2.

temperature, atmospheric the flow pressure, via and airways and humidity, inspired epiglottis, into esophagus. control, upper (nose, The lungs air air they the food/fluids and of the sinuses, condition for the into pharynx)

3.

alveoli. and transported gas-exchanging air are which composed of units respiratory bronchi, respiratory in bronchioles, alveolar ducts, (trachea, is the bronchioles) airways to Components of the conducting considered airways lower

4.

have systems. circulatory lungs dual unique, The at ability pulmonary and to the low has system accommodate volumes right from large ventricle blood deoxygenated brings the The circulatory gas-exchanging pressure units of blood the to the lung. in The exchange.Inlungdiseasethatinvolvesscarformation(i.e.,pulmonaryfibrosis),thetotallungvolumedecreasesasaresultofthelossofalveoliandimpairmentofO2diffusionintothecapillariesbyathickened,nonpermeablematrix.Historically,idiopathicpulmonaryfibrosishasbeenverydifficulttotreatbecauseofthelackofspecifictherapeutics,whichcaninhibitcollagendeposition.Twotherapeuticcompounds(pirfenidoneandnintedanib)havebeenshowninclinicaltrialstoslowtheprogressionofthediseaseandimproveoutcomesinpatientswithidiopathicpulmonaryfibrosis.Pirfenidoneisasmalllow-molecular-weightcompoundwithanti-inflammatoryproperties(itdecreasesprocollagentypesIandIIsynthesis),andnintedanibisatyrosinekinaseinhibitor(inhibitsvascularendothelialgrowthfactorandfibroblast-derivedgrowthfactor).

provides (O2) the lung aorta parenchyma. to nourishment from bronchial arises and circulation the

5.

the by automatic; Breathing control of nervous is the the autonomic the system under PNS CNS. lungs innervated of while are the Parasympathetic airway constriction smooth in muscles (airway results relaxation (airway airway of in opening). stimulation results whereas sympathetic stimulation smooth of muscles narrowing)

6.

Inspiration of is the active breathing. phase a muscle diaphragm contraction in chest), major The (mechanoreceptor respiration, thorax diaphragm pressure creates pressure and between response) inspiration. the induces is of which the (negative and the its difference

7.

input in loops. medulla center The feedback respiration the and with is respiratory chemoreceptor) from and located regulates (mechanoreceptor sensory

Burri PH. and formation of development—alveolar aspects Structural lung growth. postnatal Neonate. Biol 2006;89:313-322.

MA, review. R. Hussain Sherkheli Ul-haq a developmental A, of Molecular biology: physiological pulmonary A, Hameed determinants and Am Res. Biomed J 2013;1:13-24.

Pinkertton R, eds. Harding KE, and Environment. Lung: The Aging Development, the ed. 2nd 2014. Academic London: Press;

Hattrup SJ. CL, Gendler surface (tethered) the cell and Structure of function mucins. Annu Physiol. Rev 2007;70:431-457.

HY. Reynolds inflammation alveolar macrophage-centered perspective fibrosis: and 1980s. the Lung 1970s an from to Care J Crit Respir Am Med. 2005;171:98-102.

Christensen cilia. ST. mammalian structure P, Satir Overview of and function of Rev Annu Physiol. 2007;69:377-400.

Hyatt BA. Shannon JM, developing interactions in lung. cell-mesenchymal the Epithelial Rev Physiol. Annu 2004;66:625-645.

D, A, Carraro El-Hashash et al. Warburton G, organogenesis. Lung Bio. Top Devel Curr 2010;90:73-158.

be able Upon chapter, the questions: answer the 1. student following to of completion should this

the system. pressures the different Define respiratory in

2.

gradient created. a Explain how is pressure

3.

they measured. describe different in the volumes Define how lung, are and the

4.

lung Explain lung determines static how mechanics volumes.

5.

Define compliance. lung

6.

maintaining affects Explain in importance lung describe unequal its surfactant volumes. and compliance, how alveolar

gas achieve o and must be of moved lung. its of primary exchange, function in out air the ease the air the lung of determine or properties movement. difficulty wall mechanical and The this of chest of the wall is mechanical muscles). diaphragm, anterior the chest of cavity, abdominal study the and Lung properties (including mechanics and abdominal the lung and most of the how normally or the work is in mechanical inasmuch the presence as properties lung mechanics wall, lungs both disease, chest diseases lungs, Lung important affect for of the both. respiratory of almost wall, muscle or disease In chest lung results always to overcome from due death the which altered fatigue, muscles the of mechanical lungs, the to is from properties both. inability addition, an respiratory is not time). lung volume mechanics a with changing a whose lung is static (the (properties properties Lung and of includes with mechanics dynamic volume time) changing mechanics whose mechanical of the chest are Dynamic and of lung described in mechanics wall

22. Chapter

the Pressures Respiratory System in

wall a as move unit. and In chest together lungs healthy people, the best thought of is pleural conditions space. as (or is under a potential virtual) the which normal structures space, these Between the chest Because are inspiration changes equal together, respective and lungs and their wall during move volumes exhalation. in pressure. by chest the lungs the wall changes changes Volume in surrounding and are driven in the pressures considered convention, accordance referenced atmospheric relation is chest In are wall pressure, lungs to which inside in and with 0. is space lower pressure than that pressure. atmospheric is pleural in the Thus pressure a negative a pressures with as defined chest Also outside surface. surfaces as between the such or have the the convention, across been pressure inside lungs wall and pressure the difference in the accordance as wall or surface) transmural chest the across a lung the differences (across defined pressures. The the wall are pressure and across this lung, pressure the (alveolar air pressure [Ppl]): For called transmural the it (pleural defined between and as and lung pressure translung) the pressure difference pressure (or (PL), pressure spaces is the the the transpulmonary is surrounding [PA])

Equation 21.1

is pressure pressure chest transmural difference body the which pressure atmospheric the the the surrounding (inside) between The (Pw) pressure: the and wall across chest or (Pb), pleural pressure surface (Ppl) is wall

21.2 Equation

the the and is the pressure chest of the sum across pressure pressure (Prs) across lung respiratory The system across wall: the the

Equation 21.3

to out of of flows and pressure. higher from of areas areas Air the lower into lungs pressure no a there In of gradient, is the pressure airflow. absence of is PA airflow, of there no is are and 0). at there (Pb which same and no exhalation, time − pressure when periods alveolar at (PA) Thus as the end is the pressure (Pb), inspiration = atmospheric pressure end gradient however, is Pleural 0. pressure at these times, same not pressure the approximately H2O. to −5 Before in normal begins, individuals cm is pleural −3 inspiration in pressure the space Therefore, atmospheric in pressure. pleural is negative to the relation chest recoil acts created inward elastic and away the the wall. is from pressure the it lung” negative of “pull by lung, to This pressure the as chest to two away is able, function The the lung as a unit. from wall, however, not inasmuch the pull the chest is of elastic pressure Thus wall. outward lung the inward by balanced of recoil recoil the the

a of the which onset downward With wall movement the contract, movement of diaphragm of upward chest the cage. the and outward the and inspiration, diaphragm an and of rib causes muscles pressure during result, inspiration. decreases pleural As a alveolar a in negative transmitted is pressure lung pressure. tissue results and the in across decrease pleural This 0 As to airways when is into gas open. (i.e., a pressure pressure), moves below decreases from glottis alveolar the the pressure lower atmospheric pressure flows there the into and airways gas flow is stops decreases, from gradient to no along to gradient pressure pressure. when the As alveolar atmospheric the airways the a longer alveoli, (atmospheric) again lower from secondary decrease is flows at gas to inspiration higher muscle The pressure (alveolar) to inspiratory in the a pressure. a and pressure pleural of contraction start ). elastic is the force sum alveoli, pressure the for lungs the of recoil driving pleural of In exhalation the the and (see exhalation relationship This changes changes is pressure, inspiration and in in in volume in between airflow, and displayed during changes

Fig. 21.2.

is in start pressure cm decrease (1 alveolar breathing H2O). individuals, of During in tidal volume 3 to the at small the normal inspiration obstructed the larger obstruction airway airways. of much pressure drop across in that occurs with larger It because individuals is Airflow occurs equal. pressure gradient, and of the in atmospheric stops which whenever are a pressure alveolar absence pressure

(Fig. of pressure, the alveolar pressure factors these fall transmitted than of inspiration 21.3 are greater start lung positive volumes determine ) (see transpulmonary mechanics result, 0.5 important is as a the and, that and the in at components

Eq. 21.1). lung Positive to transpulmonary volume transpulmonary ( volume, necessary pressure lung increase is pressure increases with and increasing 0.4

Fig.

21.1 ). larger during inspiration, volume. Similarly, wall the to chest expands a Because in pressure transmural the 0.1 during to pleural chest is negative is wall the 0 pressure quiet across pressure atmospheric negative relation breathing,

Eq. 21.2

alveolar •Fig. pressure exhalation, becomes chest, higher the –0.5 less into the positive, tive), nega On pleural diaphragm pressure moves the (i.e., opens, becomes glottis increases +0.5 Function in Transpulmonary of as the Disease. of Health the a Lung Pressure 21.1 and Volume Asthetranspulmonarypressureincreases,lungvolumeincreases.Alsoshownarethechangesinlungvolumeinthepresenceofemphysemaandpulmonaryfibrosis.Notethatforthesamechangeintranspulmonarypressure,inthepresenceofeitherofthesetypesofdiseases,thechangesinlungvolumearedifferent.TLC,totallungcapacity(thetotalvolumeofgasinthelung).

0.2 0.3 •Fig. Quiet Changes in and Volume). Pressure (Tidal 21.2 Breathing Alveolar During Pleural dotted dotted line, line, Inspirationisrepresentedtotheleftofthevertical andnegativepressuresarerepresentedbelowit.Seetextfordetails.Atpointsofnoairflow(pointsAandC),alveolarpressureis0.FRC,functionalresidualcapacity. andexhalationisrepresentedtotherightofit.Positive(inrelationtoatmospheric)pressuresarerepresentedabovethehorizontal

•Fig. 2 1.2 Lung The Capacities. Volumes Various and 21.3 ERV,expiratoryreservevolume;FRC,functionalresidualcapacity;FVC,forcedvitalcapacity;IC,inspiratorycapacity;IRV,inspiratoryreservevolume;RV,residualvolume;TLC,totallungcapacity;VC,vitalcapacity;VT,tidalvolume.

breathing major role in ). a work play (see and of the total contained subdivisions the (TLC), of that of lung the volumes air in total All at are capacity maximal lung the inspiration. lung volume of point is volumes in or as either Lung are capacities. volumes liters as reported of or composed A volumes. capacity more two is are spirometer. measured volumes with lung Many a and is volume [VT]) into the first the The that volume out air of into and is patient (the breathe to breath quiet asked measured. of spirometer, normally moved is tidal lungs with the each maximally and of then and forcefully exhaled patient inhales measured. and completely, is air the exhales volume The vital from The volume a maximal (VC). a the exhaled of total maximal to inspiration exhalation, is capacity air, after the remaining exhalation. a air (RV) volume the is lungs in Residual complete and be TLC is sum it volume (trapped) the in (VC) VC that the moved of volume at air can in the air is the end volume air the of and of contained and (RV). lungs it the lungs is present of total maximal inspiration, RV; that includes always of the residual (FRC) exhalation called of volume at also capacity the Functional in end volume air is is during lungs resting quiet the breathing of of the the and lungs. the and reserve composed FRC of that RV). can of volume exhaled the expiratory is (the FRC be volume to RV from air

Volumes of Measurement Lung

measured two and plethysmography. by dilution ways: body and in can be helium by TLC RV Both lung and provide lung methods used function information are valuable clinically disease. about and less and dilution often and simpler plethysmography, older requires is The than equipment. which body technique sophisticated it expensive method, is helium accurate but the

21.1

theelevationintheRV/TLCratioiscausedbyadecreaseinTLC. Pulmonaryfunctiontestsareoftenusedtodiagnoseabnormalitiesinlungfunctionandtoassesstheprogressionoflungdisease.Theycandistinguishthetwomajortypesofpulmonarypathophysiologicprocesses:obstructivelungdiseasesandrestrictivelungdiseases.Forexample,innormalindividuals,theratioofRVtoTLCislessthan 0.25.Thusinahealthyindividual,approximately25%ofthetotalvolumeofairinthelungistrapped.Inobstructive pulmonary lung diseases, anelevationinRV/TLCratioissecondarytoanincreaseinRVoutofproportiontoanyincreaseinTLC.Incontrast,inrestrictive diseases,

FRC the FRC by the measured are and individuals, dilution plethysmography In same ( measured by the helium normal

21.1 ). Table disease. not true is in This with individuals lung the by with gas of The lung the in is that FRC volume dilution helium measured the communicates •Fig. Volume Measurement Helium by Dilution. 21.4 of Lung C1,knownconcentrationofaninertgas;C2,new(previouslyunknown)concentrationofthegas;V1,knownvolumeofabox;V2,lungvolume(initiallyunknown).

gas by at whereas the volume measured a end the the in plethysmography FRC the airways, of of lungs total exhalation. is normal ), If determined lungs plethysmography FRC by by in dilution. determined that is helium a the higher amount the premature gas closure; see airway (because significant of of considerably is trapped than

Intheheliumdilutiontechnique,aknownconcentration(C1)ofaninertgas(suchashelium)isaddedtoaboxofknownvolume(V1).Theboxisthenconnectedtoavolume(V2)thatisunknown(thelungvolumetobemeasured).Afteradequatetimefordistributionoftheinertgas,thenewconcentration(C2)oftheinertgasismeasured.Thechangeinconcentrationoftheinertgasisthenusedtodeterminethenewvolumeinwhichtheinertgashasbeendistributed(

).Specifically, Fig.21.4

Inbodyplethysmograph(bodybox),RobertBoyle’sgaslaw—thatpressuremultipliedbyvolumeisconstant(ataconstanttemperature)—isusedtomeasurelungvolumes.Thepatientsitsinanairtightbox(

Fig.21.5 whereP1andP2aremouthpressuresandVisFRC.FromthemeasurementofFRC,inspiratorycapacitycanberecordedasthevolumeofairinspiredaboveFRC,andexpiratoryreservevolumecanbedeterminedasthevolumeofgasexhaledfromFRC.Thesemeasurementscanthenbeusedtodeterminetheotherlungvolumes. )andbreathesthroughamouthpiecethatisconnectedtoaflowsensor(pneumotach).Thepatientthenmakesapantingrespiratoryeffortagainstaclosedmouthpiece.Duringtheexpiratoryphaseofthemaneuver,thegasinthelungbecomescompressed,lungvolumedecreases,andthepressureinsidetheboxfallsbecausethegasvolumeintheboxincreases.Oncethevolumeoftheboxandthechangeinpressureoftheboxatthemouthareknown,thechangeinvolume(ΔV)ofthelungcanbecalculated:

•Fig. Plethysmograph. Body 21.5 The Notethattheboxinwhichthepatientsitsisnotdepicted.

of Determinants Volume Lung

or TLC of the the at RV? What in air lung volume determines at the between in the chest lungs properties the and lung interaction of in wall. the parenchyma The answer lies the and wall a healthy move The in as chest lungs unit together individuals. always and decrease lung this stress in that (1) which applied, when volume, released, contains in results elastic in when in lung increase recoil lung stress fibers The an results a volume. is passively is stretch which (2) and parenchyma is The very of the lung recoil high. elastic become (10% wall), the absence of the of by external lungs almost the forces TLC). In chest as airless generated the force (such shortened. length the and chest decrease can is when respiratory are when stretched muscle increase wall Similarly, respiratory volume muscles 60% theoretical the absence parenchyma, of of lung resting the the chest is approximately volume and of TLC. wall the In increases

of the properties the are the properties and between by of volumes muscles elastic determined Lung balance lung’s wall. the chest the The lung of volume maximum controlled TLC) wall and the the inspiration the ). chest of (i.e., muscles is by within contained (see air volume, increasing wall the muscles chest progressively. lung lengthen With As their force generate decreases. these ability to muscles lengthen, and muscles to wall. force the TLC the are the chest needed further chest to inspiratory occurs when wall distend unable generate additional lung minimal air or the of (PL, Pressure 40 •Fig. ) Similarly, in 0 –40–20 20 the P P H2O) (cm , volume Relaxation and System. Lung, of Wall, Curve Chest Respiratory 21.6 the Pressure-Volume Thecurvefortherespiratorysystemisthesumoftheindividualcurves.Thecurveforthelungisthesameastheoneforthenormallungin

Fig.21.1 .FVC,forcedvitalcapacity;PL,transpulmonary(ortranslung)pressure(PL);Prs,thepressureacrosstherespiratorysystem;Pw,thetransmuralpressureacrossthechestwall;RV,residualvolume;TLC,totallungcapacity.

lung (i.e., expiratory is by the muscle force. RV) controlled in shortening expiratory volume results decrease of muscles, the which, Decreasing in force. muscle lung in turn, results a in volume with the outward the of increase is lung decrease also in wall. The an chest pressure associated recoil in reduce when insufficient muscle chest volume. expiratory wall further RV to force occurs is

pressure chest of smaller determined and between the exhalation, normal end (inward volume recoil) larger to wall the the a parenchyma FRC, the recoil by lung the the or become to (outward is pressure the lung recoil). the generated by become elastic at balance by generated of FRC weak, decreases are chest elastic recoil muscle muscles chest > When wall wall (lung the force). of increases (see traps closure, premature in air the obstruction, FRC the airway presence which lung of In airway because

from and observations curves system important number can an respiratory of of the chest examination lung, wall, A made the of pressurevolume be (Fig. ). 21.6 outward volume. acts wall, resting of but volume, lung lung of the recoil recoil increase (FRC), to the lung decrease elastic is which the recoil inward the this At the the lung volume chest of offset acts to by these equal and relaxed. and are are opposite, the forces At muscles FRC, respiratory (Prs) across transmural system a the 0. result, FRC at is the pressure As positive, and TLC, distending require chest both positive pressure and pressure. pressure At transmural are lung wall both absence 0, transmural in the at the is volume TLC. The the it of is for which chest volume pressure resting lungs, approximately the 60% and wall, of the is chest wall the of wall volumes TLC, greater to TLC, 60% outward. of needed, At inward the pressure and whereas volumes chest the is recoil wall transmural recoils of positive chest 60% below tends than at

smallest when alone are 0. transpulmonary The is lungs pressure pressure 0 the transpulmonary devoid (see the air when are totally lungs, properties not surfactant of tension–lowering section of of The because “ ”). surface is however, pressures higher flattens elastic The lung for healthy lung H2O than transmural alone cm been the because 20 reached. have of pressure a at limits the section the in (see further pressure produce in is little compliance Thus low. increases ”) volume, transmural change and is tissue limited lung. Further elastin) connective the of the by distention (collagen, and further the air alveoli the applied, can near pressure rupture, space. lung surface can into is If escape pleural the is a pneumothorax. This called a as lungs a opened, pneumothorax no chest when chest as In or and during is unit. longer the surgery, function single thoracic wall the trans is in wall the wall is pressure recoil size transpulmonary The increases until 0. until 0; chest pressure chest lungs then

relationship and The in elastic is pleural, recoil pressure between depicted and transpulmonary alveolar, pressures

Fig. 21.7 . and Alveolar of sum the pressure recoil lung: the pressure elastic (Pel) pressure pleural of the is

Equation 21.4

Because PA Ppl, = (PL) transpulmonary pressure +

21.5 •Fig. Equation 21.7 Relationshipbetweentranspulmonarypressure(PL)andthepleural(Ppl),alveolar(PA),andelasticrecoil(Pel)pressuresofthelung.Alveolarpressureisthesumofpleuralpressureandelasticrecoilpressure.Transpulmonarypressureisthedifferencebetweenalveolarpressureandpleuralpressure.

pressure the to the Pel distending the is the is that general, lung. collapse pressure whereas In tends PL lung, the Lung increases recoil as elastic lung inflates.

is (CL) of compliance of the properties a lung. Lung measure elastic the reflects how distended. the lung easily It is volume of from as 1–cm the distending is a change lung. H2O change the in compliance the defined resulting Lung in pressure lung units compliance in water. per of centimeter The milliliters are of liters) (or readily the is compliance is high, distended. lung When lung compliance low easily is lung the lung not (“stiff” When lung), distended. is is lung (CL) The the as compliance expressed of

is the 21.6 Equation is pressure. ΔP volume change change the in where ΔV in and points the two compliance any is limb on of loop line pressurevolume the lung slope deflation between Graphically, ( of the the

Fig. 21.8 ). is volume. 0.2 of lung approximately a human but H2O, The it with varies lung compliance L/cm normal volumes. Note less high the lung that at lung is distensible it (specific lung compliance; corrected For measured compliance reason, this volume for which the is at is

Fig. ). 21.9 often Compliance it an requires because placement esophageal measured purposes for of clinical is not balloon. pressure directly. very pressure, for to marker is The is an difficult surrogate a esophageal transducer, excellent which balloon, measure pleural to connected is which =ΔV/ΔPplor change The =ΔCL. a pressure in is, volume; lung measured in the of change is pleural .ΔPpl function as that (Ppl) CL

and properties surfactant •Fig. to of another its addition lungs, of compliance is the elastic determinant In the major lung Deflation Curve. 21.8 Pressure-Volume 2.Theslopeofline2islesssteepthantheslopeofline1,andsothecomplianceislessatthishigherlungvolumethanitisatthelowerlungvolume.Inaccordancewithconvention,lungcomplianceisthechangeinpressurefromfunctionalresidualcapacity(FRC)toFRC+1L.MV,minimalvolume;RV,residualvolume;TLC,totallungcapacity. anditiscausedbytheactionofsurfactant.Inaccordancewithconvention,thedeflationpressure-volumecurveisusedformeasurements.Complianceatanypointalongthiscurveisthechangeinvolumeperchangeinpressure.Thecurvedemonstratesthatlungcompliancevarieswithlungvolume.Alinecanbedrawnbetweentwodifferentvolumesonthecurve,andtheslopeofthislinerepresentsthechangeinvolume(ΔV)forachangeinpressure(ΔP).Comparethecomplianceatline1versusline Thepatientinhalestototallungcapacity,andtranspulmonarypressureismeasuredwiththeuseofanesophagealballoon(whichmeasurespleuralpressure).Thepatientthenexhalesslowly,andpressureismeasuredatpointsofnoairflow,whentherespiratorymusclesarerelaxed.Thepressure-volumecurveofthelungisnotthesameininspiration(notshown)andexhalation.Thisdifferenceiscalledhysteresis,

Thecomplianceofthelungsisaffectedbyseveralrespiratorydisorders.Inemphysema,anobstructivelungdiseasethatusuallyoccursinpeoplewhosmokeandisassociatedwithdestructionofthealveolarseptaandpulmonarycapillarybed,thelungismorecompliant;thatis,forevery1–cmH2Oincreaseinpressure,theincreaseinvolumeisgreaterthanthatinanormallung(see

Fig.21.1 ).Incontrast,inpulmonaryfibrosis,arestrictivelungdiseaseassociatedwithincreasedcollagenfiberdepositionintheinterstitialspace,thelungisnoncompliant;thatis,forevery1–cmH2Ochangeinpressure,thechangeinvolumeisless.Thesechangesincomplianceareofclinicalsignificancebecausealungwithlowcompliancerequireslargerchangesinpleuralpressuretoeffectchangesinlungvolumes;asresult,theworkofbreathingisincreasedforeverybreaththattheindividualtakes.

= 0.2 = = 0.2 liter •Fig. 0.1 0.02 = 0.2 5 0.02 H2O liter 0.2 0.1 liter = 0.5 0.1 cm 0.2 0.5 1 liter 0.1 liter = 21.9 Relationship Volume. Between Lung Compliance and Imaginelungsinwhicha5–cmH2Ochangeinpressureresultsina1-Lchangeinvolume(situation1).Ifonelungisremoved(situation2),thecompliancedecreases,butwhencorrectedforvolumeofthelung,thereisnochange(specificcompliance).Evenwhentheremaininglungisreducedby90%(situation3),thespecificcomplianceisunchanged.

effect tension. on surface tends inflating by makes tension at water the more force interface is to lungs Surface that surface which airliquid the a molecules area, difficult. minimize caused tension lung volumepressure by lung. of the an effect of surface The and a lung of on illustrated is a curves of salinefilled comparison inflation airfilled than because lungs. is Higher the airfilled with in inflate in with salinefilled surface the lung lungs air pressure of to than forces necessary higher tension fully saline the of attached. a are force length per tension the to is material unit molecules of they attractive of measure surface which Surface surface a force unit length. per units those of The of are applied tension as between wall tension by the the For is relationship (Ps) a the (such the law the and pressure an alveolus), Laplace: within the described sphere in of sphere

where is (in r the and per wall sphere. 21.7 T tension radius of is Equation dynes the centimeter) the

lined lipidbased a substance with The predominantly surfactant. called alveoli are preventing (2) that by tension. and stabilizing exhalation; especially at serves including low roles, on forces; (1) and tend the surface of alveoli, Pulmonary those sticking alveoli to surfactant physiological tension of deflate (3) reducing collapse breathing several surface decreasing work alveolar the interface be that absence it pressure constant, keep at In the and volumes transalveolar of are would at airliquid to when higher volume the surfactant, would tension ( lower needed surface remain the

Fig. ). 21.10A produce higher at higher be volumes necessary in Therefore, lower increase lung a volume pressure given transalveolar would at than lung alveolar to volumes. larger stabilizes it surface become (see inflation increase to allows alveoli the of Surfactant tension because the alveoli the as

Fig. ). 21.10B the increases, and as As result, it volume to inflated keep lung necessary lung and a an decreases as transalveolar alveolus transpulmonary increases pressure volume decreases. pressure the at high lung tension surface decreased volume. volume and In lung increased surfactant, of low presence is at many can is lungs alveoli result at that the volumes. maintain The different alveoli. Otherwise, small into large the alveoli gas empty would in

attains spreads the stored cells, form synthesized its II in the Pulmonary from the cell bodies, surfactant alveolar entire in surface decrease alveolar a to lamellar and alveolar is by type in into where secreted myelin), precursor surface ability tension. space throughout it (tubular and phospholipids, Surfactant and ( to 15% proteins to predominantly 90% 10% lipids, 85% is

Table 21.2). dipalmitoyl major of approximately phosphatidylcholine, phosphatidylcholine as The present (DPPC). 75% which is phospholipid is and surfactant. component surface decreases major surfaceactive tension in the DPPC is •Fig. which The is abundant for accounts second phospholipid phosphatidylglycerol, most the Surface Area a Within Forces Generate Sphere Pressure 21.10 the Reduce the in Sphere. Surface to of and Attempt thandothoseinthelargersphere(lighter purple arrows). Intheabsenceofsurfactant,surfaceforcesinthesmallerspheregeneratehigherpressure(heavier ByLaplace’slaw,thepressuregeneratedisinverselyproportionaltotheradiusofthesphere.A, arrows) purple arrow).Thiscausesthesmallspheretocollapseandthelargespheretobecomeoverdistended.B, Asaresult,airmovesfromthesmallsphere(higherpressure)tothelargersphere(lowerpressure;black lowerssurfacetensionandlowersitmoreinthesmallerspherethaninthelargersphere.Thenetresultsarethatthepressuresinthesmallandlargerspheresaresimilar,andthevolumesofthespheresarestabilized. Surfactant(shaded layer)

total of 10% 1% surfactant. to important phosphatidylglycerol These surface monolayer of surfactant formation important in lipids spreading alveolarair a of over in the are and the on interface, large area. the is in protein expressed in is in cells and most Surfactant which protein the II Clara studied, alveolar is cells A, lungs. the type is formation and protein myelin. of the in in tubular in surfactant the regulation Surfactant lungs, A involved immunoregulation the of within turnover,

by of through secreted exocytosis airway constitutive Surfactant and mechanisms. into regulated is lamellar the body the Numerous agonists, activators leukotrienes, protein kinase stimulate including βadrenergic C, surfactant. of purinergic exocytosis of agents, agonists, and the The into reuptake major pulmonary within lung surfactant and macrophages. the absorption are the alveolar by routes of cells, of by clearance lymphatic II vessels, clearance type infection, in a results is inactivated readily decrease hypoxia, in which lung and Surfactant fluid, by edema compliance.

addition another interdependence, alveoli. of stability to mechanism, contributes the to In surfactant, other for surrounded are Alveoli, the on surface, those except alveoli. by pleural traction is alveolus opposed exerted alveoli. the collapse tendency to by of one The surrounding by the alveoli, a causes which Thus single surrounding collapse to connected of the and in alveolus are alveoli. other stretching turn of distortion to of connect walls whereas terminal the airways alveolar (pores the alveoli. of adjacent Kohn) alveoli, adjacent canals the openings connect in Small Lambert pores Lambert alveolar (atelectasis). and canals collateral ventilation and The prevent provide the of collapse of Kohn

syndrome, 1. ischaracterizedbyprogressiveatelectasisandrespiratoryfailureinprematureinfants.Itisamajorcauseofmorbidityandmortalityintheneonatalperiod.Themajorsurfactantdeficiencyinpremature distress In1959,AveryandMeaddiscoveredthatinprematureinfantswhodiedofhyalinemembranedisease(HMD),thelungsweredeficientinsurfactant.HMD,alsoknownasinfantrespiratory

of of pressure. Gas pressure from areas lower to higher flows areas transpulmonary increase volume. to lung is Positive pressure needed at across of no and is airflow inspiration respiratory system exhalation). The pressure points 0 end the (end are wall decrease difference the (FRC), pressure and to recoil across residual respiratory the lung elastic 0, functional and generated system by the and pressure, volume, lung is the which opposite. equal larger pressure become operates At to capacity chest

2.

gradients the Pressure of by in created respiratory of relaxation contraction active and respiration. are the system the subsequent muscles

3.

chest balance the Lung recoil determined by volumes muscles the the of and elastic the of between properties properties wall. are lung’s the

NB. GJ, Pride Gibson Lung its distensibility: of pressurevolume lungs curve the and static clinical assessment. use the in Dis Chest. J Br 1976;70:143184.

Jobe AH. studies of pulmonary The on mechanics alveolar 1962:30:324330. of role layer: Ellen by a review Mary pathogenesis atelectasis, lining Avery, Pediatrics, and its the in in MD, Pediatrics. 1998;102(S1):234235.

infantsislackofphosphatidylglycerol.Ingeneral,asthelevelofphosphatidylglycerolincreasesinamnioticfluid,theinfantmortalityratedecreases.ResearchinthisfieldhasculminatedinsuccessfulattemptstotreatHMDinprematureinfantswithsurfactantreplacementtherapy.Today,surfactantreplacementtherapyisstandardcareforprematureinfants.

4.

the Total the air exhaled lung a after lung maximal to a that (TLC) (vital volume in the exhalation capacity of [VC]) be maximal can after capacity volume total air (residual [RV]). equal and is inspiration remaining

5.

properties compliance the is the of lung. a Lung measure of elastic in compliance with patients associated whereas recoil lung loss is pulmonary and decreased. this lung is an emphysema, Elastic compliance, diseases with is fibrosis, increase in associated in lost with

6.

of lung breathing, work compliance, the increase tensionreducing different help of surfactant decrease of and antisticking properties The stabilize surface alveoli size. and

Lumb AB. Respiratory Physiology. Applied Nunn’s ed. 8th St. Elsevier; Louis: 2016.

PT, eds. vol Mead J, Macklem of System, Physiological Handbook vol. Physiology: Respiratory The Society American Mechanics. 3: Society; Physiological American MD: Bethesda, 1986.

AB. Otis respiratory mechanics. of perspective A Appl J Physiol. 1983;54:11831187.

Mechanics AB, man. Rahn in Fenn WO, breathing Otis of H. Physiol. Appl J 1950;2:592607.

chapter answer following able the 1. the questions: student completion should of be to this Upon

air airways. in the flow Describe

2.

affect airflow Define its in resistance upon and the airways.

3.

categories and factors two contribute resistance. to describe that List of airway

4.

volume flow of and a the curve. features List spirogram

5.

airway point compression occurs flow limitation the role of at equal dynamic and how Describe limitation. the flow in pressure

6.

components work breathing. Define the of of

7.

compliance dynamic its is work compliance different of from contribution and Understand breathing. static how to

into control of the principles movement and In out chapter, air the are lungs examined. this that is for systems of respiratory the mechanics system study is time. the lung Dynamic and physical a with properties is of study the the changing volume motion, whose of in it

of there Air the into pressure out and flows at a when the an airway. difference of is airway ends two lung diaphragm the flows into becomes way By contracts, the pressure inspiration and of more during (see review, gas negative, pleural

Fig. ). 21.2 the the which at brought with meet (i.e., gas are metabolic removed. the CO2) is and To metabolic needs products depends of body, respiration speed alveoli fresh rapidity changing of gas which on the the the to exchange flow speed by major which a pattern the given gas for pressure of at gas change: the airflow the Two airways resistance the into to and flows the determine airways. factors

of Patterns Airflow

gas the and are major two of flow laminar There turbulent. in airways— patterns flow is low and flow rates. parallel to is the Laminar walls airway present at unsteady particularly as airways becomes rate divide, increases flow eddies and and develop. stream the the small flow As the higher the At turbulence and disorganized flow flow rates stream occurs. is

air. first described the and flow both were of apply physician liquids and Poiseuille by The laminar pressure-flow characteristics to French straight ) In tubes the following equation: defined is flow by rate (V̇ the circular

length the radius the is fluid, r is is tube. Equation the where is of 22.1 tube, the η l driving viscosity the and the pressure, P of the of ); the It pressure can greater flow thus be that pressure, (V̇ the driving flow. (P) rate the proportional seen to greater the is the

change a set resistance driving rate, defined (R) of or: pressure flow (ΔP) The tubes across by flow is the as the divided in

22.2 Equation

cm are resistance H2O/L•sec. units of The that and for equation resistance. most important the the demonstrates radius This is the tube determinant of is laminar flow of 16-fold. increase will the the of by the radius resistance is tube reduced half, If increase If, twofold. only the resistance tube twofold, increased however, length is will of radius resistance. principal of Thus determinant tube the is the the of and and inversely radius, proportional the Stated length to fourth of the the to is another the the resistance power proportional way, the directly it of is viscosity gas. to tube

flow, the of occurs In and gas parallel tube. axis turbulent movement both the perpendicular to the Pressure is flow rate proportional squared. to flow. therefore gas The given viscosity density, for gas with a pressure the the drop and of increases increases increasing gas generating is blunted movement. because energy chaotic process is the eddies and velocity Overall, in consumed of to a needed laminar to higher a similar As given driving flow turbulent pressure support support a is flow. consequence, than

number. the on laminar or Whether through tube flow is a Reynolds depends turbulent in expresses two (Re) as number equation: dimensionally dimensionless of the is the (kinematic/viscosity), seen terms equivalent value Reynolds that a ratio The

22.3 the d Equation is the is is average radius, r velocity, v fluid and density, viscosity. the is η where the straight number is greater occurs tubes, than when Reynolds 2000. turbulence In the to gas it radius is high large. the most flow relationship seen is turbulence occur can of this is and that velocity likely From be average the when the as low-density helium contrast, a less flow. gas cause such is In to turbulent likely helium states in in gas clinically air) is decrease nitrogen density increased This substituting airway resistance where can for improve relevant in airflow. inspired (e.g., of a

such cylindrical difficult. as relationships the principles smooth to these well complicated apply of Although these application is tubes, of tubes system to airways a flow result, laminar in flow. demonstrates of the turbulent characteristics both of As a much the and airways breathing In than for example, quiet number 2000. trachea, the Reynolds during is even greater the breathing. quiet flow the during in even Hence turbulent trachea occurs in some the the cords, vocal promoted and also is which obstruction produce irregularity airways. by glottis and Turbulence distally decrease cross-sectional significantly. flows total gas As area increases dramatically, the and gas velocities result, maximal laminar ventilation. flow airways becomes during gas even smaller in a more the As gas turbulent, the is and bronchi) the airways laminar. flow in whereas mouth, smaller in is the (nose, the gas airways glottis, flow larger Overall heard airflow. Breath sounds a turbulent reflect stethoscope with why small is with a stethoscope. to Laminar disease it is which is “hear” airway flow difficult silent,

second that major the of determines Airflow the resistance airflow airways. rates is in factor the in airways (Raw) differs resistance airways Airflow size. of in different the number increases toward become the alveolus, the dramatically. trachea smaller airway individual branches airways from moving while of In = of Rmedium airways + of Rlarge equal to resistance Rsmall). Raw is Raw each + (i.e., the of sum the these the conclude might of major in Poiseuille’s site From the that airway equation, airways. one resistance is smallest the site resistance however, bronchial the In of major along in first tree the of airways. is eight fact, generations

generation 15 .06 Respiratory 20 .08 10 H2 0 O/L/sec) (cm 5 zoneConducting Airway zone .04 0 •Fig. .02 Resistance 22.1 Airwayresistanceasafunctionoftheairwaygeneration.Inanormallung,mostoftheresistancetoairflowoccursinthefirsteightairwaygenerations.

of tree (Fig. overall little the to contribute very smallest The total bronchial resistance airways the 22.1 ). the (1) effective The flow importantly, in substantially each series. this airway generation is than increases in for most velocity branches parallel area (2) the twofold: airflow as becomes laminar), in rather exist reason and (i.e., cross-sectional decreases the The small individual airways the contribution is sum of parallel therefore resistance very airways overall resistance of inverse is resistances; in to the the of small. of the tubes resistance that has of 3 an a of three As cm assume example, each H2O. of total individual in sum the If resistance is the series, (Rtot) are the the resistances: tubes

22.4 Equation

the resistances: is small of the of the sum they are inverse tubes resistance If in are parallel (as individual the in airways), the total

Equation 22.5

located the in This vessels, of relationship resistance pulmonary most is to ). which marked blood the in is small vessels (see contrast in the by offered increase Thus each diameter cross-sectional the resistance and but large as of generation in of airway pathways decreases, the the each the individual airway increases, reduces branching. resistance at area number parallel

During resistance the constriction (recall (FRC) directly muscle). that of ) breathing, secondary either reflexively, of efferent normal to residual vagal 80% the airflow increases airway to innervates capacity or functional nerve approximately vagus at fibers, smooth airway norepinephrine and release sympathetic stimulation trast, the neurotransmitter of postganglionic In of constriction. inhibits con nerves airway can constriction of irritants inhalation the of nerve other vagus stimulation and airway air, result smoke, by Reflex cold or in dust, also coughing. and are and airway (LTB4, mast and viral recruited cells) cells LTC4, released Agents (e.g., prostaglandin such various in thromboxane LTD4) allergens as epithelial cells, neutrophils, response eosinophils) such resident to and histamine, F2, leukotrienes infections. cells (e.g., as triggers by A2, acetylcholine, agents in airway resistance. increase to an directly These on airway muscle cause constriction smooth and act •Fig. Inhalation Airwayresistance(AWR)andconductance(Cond. 22.2 )asafunctionoflungvolume.

greater than airways diameters 2 with in occurs mm. to for a airways small airway little small resistance, the airway Because test is of total resistance contribute measurement lung poor detecting so obstruction.

That Airway Resistance Contribute Factors to

H2O/L 1 sec. healthy • individuals, cm In approximately airway resistance is of affecting volume. One lung most is factors resistance important the Increasing airways lung creates transairway pressure. positive it the volume a of the increases caliber because with lung increasing airflow increases to decreases result, and volume volume. As with resistance decreasing lung a lung linear lung the If between (i.e., (Fig. is against reciprocal conductance resistance conductance) the volume of plotted is and relationship volume,

22.2 ). airway airways. and resistance the factors edema, mucus, that caliber airway include Other the decrease contraction smooth bronchial which all of of of increase muscle,

airway affect of inspired gas the The resistance. and also density viscosity diving, this obstructive When individuals disease. gas and increase resistance; can scuba for problems pulmonary density an increase results and asthma airway cause with in in rises due a as exploited decrease resistance hypersecretion increased resistance asthmaticus, and treatment a a has in results inflammation, with low-density been oxygen-helium the in a Breathing of of such combination mucus. status mixture gas associated bronchospasm, condition to and airway of airway an airway in

Regulation Resistance of Airway Neurohumoral

neural of airway humoral agents. resistance effects by the addition disease, is to various regulated and In hyperresponsiveness, asthma features a used certain airway to derivative the is is of cardinal which acetylcholine, methacholine, of Stimulation of phenotypes. of one diagnose develops methacholine, in individuals with of everyone capable responding concentrations lower methacholine. obstruction inhaled airway of at much Although asthma to is

Expiratory of Flow Measurement

and an expiratory and respiratory diseases. is rates tool clinical volumes of important expiratory monitoring evaluating for Measurement flow and volume completely Commonly tests then capacity to total exhale as patient (RV). as inhale clinical maximally (TLC) residual lung the and to rapidly possible used have a ( test displayed The results are as spirogram either

Fig. curve/ ) flow-volume or ( a 22.3A loop as

Fig. ). 22.3B healthy are with results normal from suspected disease Results compared lung volunteers. with predicted individuals from ( normal vary lesser Predicted extent, height, to a values age, with ethnicity, weight or sex, and

22.1 ). Table gas Abnormalities be to values can indicate used abnormalities and abnormal function in pulmonary predict exchange. in response lung These develop, before to function and respiratory the used severity be long disease symptoms detect of the therapy. and presence values can determine they can abnormal to

Spirogram The

time A (see exhaled a of as function of volume displays spirogram the gas

Fig. (FEV1/ (FVC), and flow average (1) (3) the the volume in capacity (2) ) FEV1 FVC expiratory second midmaximal (FEF25-75). FVC), expiratory to 1 of forced ratio measures: and vital forced (4) 22.3A (FEV1),

a total TLC forced is is from maximal volume The to called RV the FVC. that during air exhaled of exhalation in that air The FEV1. called second is maneuver first the the during of exhaled volume is the the be 70% exhaled can the second. age) individuals, of FVC in normal on 85% to first (depending In than greater ratio adults. in 70% the healthy normal Thus FEV1/FVC is ratio suggests A 70% less •Fig. than 22.3 Theclinicalspirogram(A)andflow-volumeloop(B).Theindividualtakesamaximalinspirationandthenexhalesasrapidly,asforcibly,andasmaximallyaspossible.Thevolumeexhaledisplottedasafunctionoftime.Inthespirogramthatisreportedinclinicalsettings,exhaledvolumeincreasesfromthebottomofthetracetothetop(A).Thisisincontrasttothephysiologist’sviewofthesamemaneuver(see

expiratory Fig.21.3 ),inwhichtheexhaledvolumeincreasesfromthetoptothebottomofthetrace.Intheflow-volumeloop(B),exhaledvolumeisplottedasafunctionoftheinstantaneousflowrate,whichismeasuredusingapneumotachometer.Themaximalexpiratoryflowrateachievedduringthemaneuveriscalledthepeak rate. flow NotethelocationsofTLCandRVonbothtracings.

difficulty obstruction of because pulmonary a of is and exhaling hallmark disease. obstructive the from be rate flow middle average of the rate—the expiratory One VC—can flow calculated over section spirogram. the This several flow (forced 25%–75% (midmaximal and from VC). MMEF flow flow) expiratory has including rate expiratory FEF25-75 of expiratory names, calculate can be Although spirogram, from spirometers it today’s automatically calculated the FEF25-75.

the Another loop. measuring lung clinically curve or of way function flow-volume is rate A gas. instantaneous a forced flow-volume is flow as of volume the the of loop a displaying by or curve function during created maneuver flow-volume during both be (see and (inspiratory (expiratory curve) This flow flow-volume inspiration displayed curve) exhalation can during rate instantaneous

Fig. 22.3B ). line, flow horizontal below are above rates and rates flow are displayed Expiratory horizontal the inspiratory the line. displayed (2) (PEFR), the rate flow-volume flow rates various maneuver, greatest flow expiratory during (1) and multiple loop rate flow the lung (3) the expiratory achieved measures: expiratory FVC, volumes. the peak The called at has been the V̇ rate into is FEF75 at flow at 50% max50), the known flow-volume instantaneous quarters, which (also 75% expiratory max25). which and remains to the When the the which FEF25 25% the the exhaled FEF50 instantaneous divided exhaled exhaled the is been be at of VC has of as VC of curve rate is called rate the the called the instantaneous flow max75), flow is called VC (V̇ (V̇

•Fig. Isovolumecurves.Threesuperimposedexpiratoryflowmaneuversaremadewithincreasingeffort.Notethatpeakinspiratoryandexpiratoryflowratesaredependentoneffort,whereasexpiratoryflowrateslaterinexpirationareindependentofeffort. 22.4

Inamethacholinechallengetest,spirometrymeasurementsaremadeafterthepatientinhalesincreasingconcentrationsofthemuscarinicagonistmethacholine.ThetestisstoppedwhenFEV1fallsby20%ormoreorwhenamaximumconcentration(25mg/mL)ofmethacholinehasbeeninhaled.Theconcentrationofmethacholinethatproducesa20%decreaseinFEV1iscalledtheprovocation concentration (PC)20. ThelowerthePC20,themoresensitiveanindividualistomethacholine.MostindividualswithasthmahaveaPC20lessthan8mg/mLofmethacholine.

Flow of Maximal Determinants

physiology loop reveals of disease. the lung altered about be The flow-volume can important normal by shape information that flow the of loop maximum reveals same is greater the inspiratory or expiratory flow-volume the that than Inspection the slightly flow. maximum for are the maximum flow. responsible inspiratory Three factors First, inspiratory as RV. volume increases the generated muscles by decreases force lung the above pressure the volume increases as lung RV. the recoil above of lung Second, increases the inspiratory maximum reduces This the force flow. generated opposes by inspiratory the muscles and increasing However, lung as resistance airway caliber with airway decreases increases. the volume inspiratory halfway inspiratory of force, lung, to combination and RV. and TLC flow about changes of recoil between causes the maximal airway muscle The occur in resistance

and the decrease 20%) flow the flow progressively first occurs During early maximal toward exhalation, maneuver, (in RV. rates in as flow increasing effort, approached. with maximal Even is RV decreases can asking as This demonstrated individual and effort. to limitation expiratory three flow by be an forced perform is known maneuvers with expiratory increasing

Fig. results 22.4 maneuvers. the of shows three these increases, As peak increases. effort flow expiratory lung maximal expiratory achieved. volumes at with indicates the flow this flow However, that lower rates effort, is modest converge; amount of as will increase rates No flow volume effort lung decreases. the be beyond is with limited expiratory For effort effort and flow limit. lung are flow rate effort, said this can no modest of lower the additional independent at flow this amount maximal volumes because achieved increase to reason, flow rates and early In effort expiratory the to effort are rates. contrast, be maneuver events dependent; that flow increasing in increasing generates is, said general of in the In loop 20% flow flow-volume the the expiratory effort dependent. first is

Limitation and Flow Point Pressure the Equal

independent? reasonably is expiratory Why and effort flow limited lung important flow thus are many out lung. because moved which and these affect is air of diseases that the affect volume limit Factors expiratory and speed with factors and into the occurs become when are limitation airways, Flow floppy the intrinsically which distensible tubes, compressed. pressure the compressed the become The airway pressure airways exceeds the the airway. when inside outside How disease. this and to occurs when understanding lung is important

Fig. 22.5 shows the events that

no TLC, flow •Fig. 22.5 Flowlimitation.A,Endinspiration,beforethestartofexhalation.B,Atthestartofaforcedexhalation.C,Expiratoryflowlimitationlaterinaforcedexhalation.Expiratoryflowlimitationoccursatlocationswhereairwaydiameterisnarrowedasaresultofnegativetransmuralpressure.Seetextfordetails.

at during expiratory two limitation different occur volumes. lung flow and the wall. The space surrounded the pleural airways and by are chest alveoli decreases airways to area shown alveoli as The from the the or collective cross-sectional total tubes airway the trachea. because are tapered pleural exhalation pressure inside (PA) (in the −30 occurs, flow is (no is zero airflow) H2O. the cm this any and pressure gas At of before the but example) start alveolus H2O Ppl). − PA = is cm +30 thus (PL Transpulmonary pressure and Because cm +30 across (Pta, Ppl airways the pressure flow, is the H2O pressure Pairway the 0 transairway = (−30 = [Pta − airways no cm is H2O)]. inside is pressure) the − there zero positive This alveoli airways the open. and pressure transpulmonary holds and transairway

example). this exhalation expiratory pressure (in an +60 contract, muscles H2O When the begins rises to and cm pleural active because cm that in (which the Alveolar and because (+60 at cm also pressure pressure lung in part rises, this the the pressure is increase in volume case pleural part of of recoil in lung H2O). of H2O) 30 elastic Pel cm Alveolar 60 = 90 H2O is this pleural + = elastic in H2O H2O + recoil (i.e., PA of Ppl pressure and the = pressure cm example). 30 cm pressure sum driving flow. for gas This the pressure expiratory is the alveolus the Because from pressure begins exceeds gas glottis opens. to alveolar flow pressure, mouth to atmospheric when the for transmural alveoli, airways out gas As the pressure the (i.e., the pressure the across head gas flow flows expiratory of decreases dissipates). flow the for caused three elastic flow (3) the of This by resistive lung airflow loss decreases pressure decreases increases decreases. resistance); the there further occurs gas as acceleration drop toward reasons: frictional as airways and this associated pressure; a decreases, of area pressure (expiratory velocity trachea, (2) pressure recoil (1) and with the the is the volume cross-sectional gas

Thus out the driving pressure the expiratory air flow moves for lung, gas as decreases. of lung high the at as lung diminishes In decreases. volumes the airways volume that holds open addition, tethering mechanical is airways. the the alveoli the pressure mouth the equals that point and pressure the a which inside at surrounds There the airways between pressure is equal the This point. called point the but Airways pressure still the inside the outside compressed compression). the toward is airway wall pressure than (dynamic chest become because mouth inside greater = Ppl pressure (+60) 58 As [Pta point. − a Paw − becomes equal cm pressure consequence transairway H2O] = now the =−2 beyond just negative the to tends amount increase flow. of it gradient the as will flow the at pleural pressure further gas point, higher expiratory increase just equal also pressure to effort for airway collapse the tends the No because the of conditions, pressure. total airflow these independent is the Under driving flow limited. flow independent is Hence effort expiratory and the It is inspiration. resistance also is exhalation airway greater during during than why resist and the lung airways the thus in disease, they occurs of point pressure that In absence cartilage, collapse. equal contain static. equal point, however, not The is pressure decreases, the closer volume As pressure equal pressure moves recoil to point and as alveoli. decreases the elastic lung

dynamic One additional of be dynamic and mentioned, lung measurement of mechanics the measurement should compliance. is this over lung created breathe L). FRC be a curve dynamic (usually individual from volume +1 pressure-volume having FRC A by range an normal can to The

Whathappensinindividualswithlungdisease?Imagineanindividualwithairwayobstructionsecondarytoacombinationofmucus accumulationandairwayinflammation(Fig.

22.6A ).Atthestartofexhalationthedrivingpressureforexpiratorygasflowisthesameasinanormalindividual;thatis,thedrivingpressureisthesumoftheelasticrecoilpressureandpleuralpressure.Asexhalationproceeds,however,theresistivedropinpressureisgreaterthaninthenormalindividualbecauseofthegreaterdecreaseinairwayradiussecondarytotheaccumulationofmucusandtheinflammation.Asaresulttheequalpressurepointnowoccursinsmallairwaysthataredevoidofcartilage.Theseairwayscollapse.Thiscollapseisknownaspremature airway trapping.Theincreaseinlungvolumeinitiallyhelpsoffsettheincreaseinairwayresistancecausedbytheaccumulationofmucusandinflammationbecauseitresultsinanincreaseinairwaycaliberandelasticrecoil.Asthediseaseprogresses,however,inflammationandaccumulationofmucusincreasefurther,thereisagreaterincreaseinexpiratoryresistance,andmaximalexpiratoryflowratesdecrease. closure, whichresultsinaless-than-maximalexpiratoryvolumeandproducesanincreaseinlungvolumeknownasair

Fig.22.6B ).Atthestartofexhalationthedrivingpressureforexpiratorygasflowisreducedsecondarytoalossofelasticrecoil.Whiletheresistivedropinpressureisnormal,thesmallerinitialdrivingpressureresultsinanequalpressurepointthatoccursclosertothealveolusinairwaysthatdonotcontaincartilage.Prematureairwayclosureagainoccursbutforaverydifferentreasonthantheprematureairwayclosureobservedinindividualswithanincreaseinairwayresistance.

Individualswithprematureairwayclosurefrequentlyhavecrackles, apoppingsoundusuallyheardduringinspirationonauscultation.Thesecracklesareduetotheopeningofairwaysduringinspirationthatclosed(i.e.,werecompressed)duringthepreviousexhalation.Cracklescanbeduetomucusaccumulation,airwayinflammation,fluidintheairways,oranymechanismresponsibleforairwaynarrowingorcompression.Theyarealsoheardinindividualswithemphysema,inwhichthereisadecreaseinlungelasticrecoil.Infact,acuteandchroniclungdiseasescanchangetheexpiratoryflow-volumerelationshipbychangesin(1)staticlungrecoilpressure,(2)airwayresistanceandthedistributionofresistancealongtheairways,(3)lossofmechanicaltetheringofintraparenchymalairways,(4)changesinthestiffnessormechanicalpropertiesoftheairways,and(5)differencesinseverityoftheaforementionedchangesinvariouslungregions. alsosometimescalledrales,

dynamic is compliance of as end-inspiratory slope the calculated ( points of CL) the that line joins flow lung (dyn the end-expiratory and of no mean the

Fig. 22.7

than it exercise. always is compliance static Dynamic during increases less and compliance, change surface and less lung the area thus molecules to during surface, compliant. bring to is tidal the is small This in volume insufficient alveolar because surfactant breathing, a additional is large opposite occurs; changes there are the in During exercise

cm PL H2O = Mucus, 90˜60 Bronchoconstriction 30 = Edema,

Fig. A,Flowlimitationinthepresenceofincreasedairwayresistance.B,Flowlimitationinthepresenceofalossofelasticrecoil. 22.6

Fig. Inflation-deflationpressure-volumecurve.Thedirectionofinspirationandexhalationisshownbythearrows.Thedifferencebetweentheinflationanddeflationpressure-volumecurvesisduetothevariationinsurfacetensionwithchangesinlungvolume.Notetheslopeofthelinejoiningpointsofnoairflow.Thisslopeislesssteepthantheslopefromthedeflationpressure-volumecurveatthesamelungvolume. 22.7

and air-liquid is interface. into the tidal surfactant volume, more material incorporated is Therefore the lung compliant. more

dynamic Sighing by volume increasing layer. increase normal compliance yawning surfactant and tidal the and restoring Both respiratory important activities maintaining of lung are these compliance. normal D for the contrast from its significantly 1000 compliance. lung, not dynamic static In compliance the wall is to the of different chest

EF Insp. Exp. B

Breathing of Work

of muscles etc. Breathing the respiratory requires (diaphragm, use intercostals, which expends ), energy. and wall. properties the the (i.e., overcome and inherent to mechanical of Work move lung the and forces) flow-resistive chest elastic is both the required lungs to work known work the as is This of breathing. wall increase the chest both) an in of in lung disease of work presence result the breathing. or Changes the in of the in mechanical (or properties increased muscles can long Respiratory over work perform periods. However, body. the the In volume multiplying breathing calculated is work the by across the exerted system, system: change the in respiratory respiratory the by pressure of

= fatigue, muscles they other failure Pressure (P) ensue. and may (W) can like Work breathing DC skeletal respiratory of of which metabolic gas common the process exchange needs a muscle in Respiratory cause is most respiratory is meet failure, the inadequate to of fatigue

the available amount estimate to and can of the by cycle. pressure in measure the respiratory methods measuring total work during volume a one are not work Although changes mechanical breathing, involved illustrate points. used be curves of Analysis can these pressure-volume to

Fig.

a represents of 22.8A a lung. normal respiratory cycle

line is by curve represented The inflation-deflation ABC. static represented mechanical The trapezoidal OAECD. by total area is workload the

the right. to is the pressure-volume restrictive and lung fibrosis, as decreased is In diseases, shifted pulmonary lung curve such compliance This in a in breathing (see work the increase of results significant

Fig. by as the OAECD. increase 22.8B ), the in of area trapezoidal indicated obstructive elevated or In diseases, an bronchitis, resistance asthma such lung airway exacerbation as during chronic (see is

Fig.

rates. negative pressure maintain inspiratory to flow needed ) pleural normal greater is 22.8C and in in increased pressure increase as pleural workload, (OAECD), disease obstructive during total increase of the DFO. an exhalation increase with In individuals visualized have inspiratory positive which in is the work and the expiratory lung area resistance because addition to of energy, stored ABCF The by area represented elastic

Fig. is not sufficient, energy is needed 22.8A additional , exhalation. and for respiratory disease With muscles in progression, and can fatigue failure. or time respiratory these result increases (an respiratory minute deeper of is The work when the increase when to rate volume taken tidal in are and overcome) increase elastic requires breaths in increased (an also breathing more work •Fig. 22.8 Mechanicalworkdoneduringarespiratorycycleinanormallung(A),alungwithreducedcompliance(B),andalungwithincreasedairwayresistance(C).Breakdownofthetrapezoidalareasenablesonetoappreciatetheindividualaspectsofthemechanicalworkload,whichincludethefollowing:OABCD,worknecessarytoovercomeelasticresistance;AECF,worknecessarytoovercomenonelasticresistance;AECB,worknecessarytoovercomenonelasticresistanceduringinspiration;ABCF,worknecessarytoovercomenonelasticresistanceduringexhalation(representsstoredelasticenergyfrominspiration).

resistance overcome) to flow more ( ventilation force requires

Fig. ). 22.9 Normal breathing. that individuals work the disease of individuals adopt minimize with patterns lung respiratory and (normal For work) rapidly, slowly this more and work those more breathe with obstructive reason, shallowly individuals elastic disease and breathe but elastic pulmonary resistive with lung (increased deeply. fibrosis increased work) and

work (no./min) 50 20 Nonelastic rate 30 (kg-m/min) Mechanical Elastic work Respiratory 40 10 30 60 10 work Total 40 20 work

Chronic disease pulmonary (COPD)isageneraltermthatincludesdiseasessuchasemphysemaandchronicbronchitis.COPDmostcommonlyoccursinindividualswhosmoke,inwhompathologicchangesinthelungconsistentwithbothemphysemaandchronicbronchitiscancoexist.ForindividualswithCOPDinwhomemphysemaisamajorcomponent,theelastictissueinthealveolarandcapillarywallsisprogressivelydestroyed,whichresultsinincreasedlungcomplianceanddecreasedelasticrecoil.Thedecreaseinelasticrecoilresultsinmovementoftheequalpressurepointtowardthealveolusandprematureairwayclosure.ThisproducesairtrappingandincreasesinRV,FRC,andTLC.Airwayresistanceisalsoincreased.Theseincreasesinlungvolumesincreasetheworkofbreathingbystretchingtherespiratorymusclesanddecreasingtheirefficiency. obstructive

Inchronicbronchitis,accumulationofmucusandairwayinflammationcausetheequalpressurepointtomovetowardthealveolus,whichleadstoprematureairwayclosureandincreasesinRV,FRC,andTLC.Airwayresistanceandtheworkofbreathingareincreased,butlungcomplianceisnormal.

Inrestrictivelungdiseasessuchaspulmonaryfibrosis,lungcomplianceisdecreased.Lungvolumesaredecreased,butflowratesarereasonablynormal.Someofthechangesinpulmonaryfunctionvaluesinobstructiveandrestrictivepulmonarydiseasesareshownin

Table22.1

Inthethirdtrimesterofpregnancy,theenlargeduterusincreasesintraabdominalpressureandrestrictsmovementofthediaphragm.TheFRC,asaresult,decreases.Thischangeinlungvolumeresultsindecreasedlungcomplianceandincreasedairwayresistanceinotherwisehealthywomen.

•Fig. Effectoftherespiratoryrateontheelastic,nonelastic,andtotalmechanicalworkofbreathingatagivenlevelofalveolarventilation.Individualstendtoadopttherespiratoryrateatwhichthetotalworkofbreathingisminimal(arrow) forthosewithoutlungdisease. 22.9

1.

the There gas two laminar. major of turbulent airways: in patterns flow and are

2.

the unit pressure airflow is flow. change of per Resistance to in of than inverse Airway varies with the resistance power flow. is radius in the turbulent and laminar fourth in of higher the resistance The generations. airway is eight airway of the first major site volume decreases density. in lung decreases with resistance gas Airway in increases with and also is neural regulated by agents. Airways and humoral resistance

3.

detect tests symptomatic. in flow-volume Pulmonary function before body loop, (spirometry, plethysmography) lung can individuals become function abnormalities height. with sex, normal vary are results and with in ethnicity, obtained Test compared individuals and results age, and in is by and COPD volumes decreases resistance characterized increases airway flow lung in by rates. expiratory COPD, further Emphysema, compliance. is characterized of specific by type increased lung a decreases resistance, lung expiratory Restrictive rates in marked compliance. by lung are decrease normal lung diseases characterized and a flow volume, and in

4.

inside the surrounding and is the The equal same. pressure is at the which point pressure point the airway point equal the is pressure dynamic. The location of lung moves the normal point Specifically, pressure toward the as and decrease, recoil individuals. equal alveolus in volume elastic the any with alveolus. is pressure to In at closer lung individuals disease (COPD), chronic pulmonary the volume obstructive equal point Expiratory limitation occurs the pressure at flow equal point.

5.

the during properties Energy to mechanical is inherent the lung. breathing expended of overcome of respiratory most common is failure. muscle fatigue Respiratory the cause to rate minimize Individuals a respiratory at work. breathe at increased resistance, with individuals airway frequencies. minimized by breathing lower For is work breathing work shallow is lung minimized diseases, frequencies. by at restrictive high individuals with For

6.

is yawning. lung less the and The compliance sighing, always and of compliance increases the than dynamic static during exercise,

PMA, NG. Calverley Koulouris hyperinflation: and limitation Flow respiratory concepts physiology. modern dynamic in key Eur J. Respir 2005;25:186-199.

al. et RO, Crapo values recommendations. techniques and Reference ATS meet that spirometric using equipment Rev Dis. Respir Am 1981;123:659-664.

Otis AB. mechanics. perspective A of respiratory Physiol. Appl J 1983;54:1183-1187.

Otis al. et AB, of man. Mechanics breathing in Appl Physiol. J 1950;2:592-607.

Schumacker AR, Leff PT. Applications. Basics Physiology: Respiratory and Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993. AB. Lumb Applied Nunn’s Respiratory Physiology. 8th ed. Louis: Elsevier; 2016. St.

MacKlem Mead J, PT. of Mechanics breathing. Physiology. Handbook of In: Section System. 3, Respiratory The 1986. Bethesda, MD: Society; American Physiological Library doi:10.1002/cphys.cp0303fmo1. Wiley Online

Perfusion Perfusion, Ventilation/ and Ventilation, Relationships

be the answer the following this questions: able completion Upon student should 1. to chapter, of

space dead dead changes space how types and with Define describe ventilation tidal two of volume. ventilation,

2.

how barometric and the in fraction the understand alveolus, composition trachea, and and gas Describe of oxygen pressure. composition in changes changes this air, the ambient with

3.

oxygen the to alveolar alveolar-arterial Use the (AaDO2). difference air equation calculate for

4.

equation alveolar alveolar and how identify dioxide Understand it ventilation. with alterations in carbon the changes

5.

the pulmonary of Compare blood distribution distribution ventilation. the of flow to

6.

hypoxia. causes hypoxic categories six the and hypoxia the List of and of four define

7.

hypoxic the hypoxia to of Distinguish causes the response basis of O2. the 100% on

8.

the Describe of hypercapnia. causes two

the and exchange is ) (V̇ in normal PO2 blood major ). gas PCO2 perfusion of relationship thus he determinant between level the of and ventilation and (Q̇ ventilation/perfusion ratio. This relationship the is (V̇ /Q̇ called )

air out in process which and Ventilation the is of the by lungs. moves the ventilation). The that conducting incoming a composed space (dead alveoli is (alveolar the of that fills air volume airways ventilation) portion and a fills is enters air of ventilation per minute: the (or E) Minute the or (V̇ that leaves total) lung volume

tidal exhaled) the as TV) frequency or known f Equation inspired volume, is per and number the breaths 23.1 or volume of air minute per is (or VT (also where of breath. with position, sex, varies volume Tidal activity. and body age, metabolic mL. an at In 500 tidal is rest, adult average-sized volume is In it to 5 children, mL/kg. 3

Ventilation: and Anatomical Space Dead Physiological

ventilation participate exchange. do is gas Dead not in ventilation that space airways to types space: There anatomical space of dead dead space. are two and physiological dead dead conducting is Anatomical composed the of gas space that volume the fills (VD) airways: of

and dead refer alveolar. space, subscripts tidal, refers where and D, T, V A and to Equation 23.2 to volume the of A V denotes “dot” time volume a per unit above (n):

23.3 Equation

is of ventilation per total the D called from minute 23.4 (also gas dead is in V̇ V̇ per volume A per minute, minute minute. Equation exhaled the where space lungs liters expelled alveolar ventilation the V̇ is and E volume),

healthy gas mL, contained airways functional with at is the of residual 200 of in comparison conducting lung. entire approximately to gas 3 capacity in the an a 100 in volume the adult, (FRC) In L space) of volume (dead each tidal airways. that conducting to of is the fraction airways filling in ratio The represents “wasted” the the breath the volume conducting of following ventilation way: minute This exhaled E) to is (V̇ and in to volume tidal volume related the (VT)

23.5 Equation

Ventilation/Perfusion Relationships 23 and Ventilation, CHAPTER Perfusion,

ventilation? mL 600 dead If space and mL increases is space from 150 on effect to is what volume dead the same volume tidal the exhaled the for 500 ventilation, minute

0 3. = VE similarly, × and,

blood occur ventilation periods alveolar or is stress. gas tidal an values), effective to of Increasing way normal as exercise increase might during volume thus (and volume the dead space ventilation same As minute tidal of decreases exhaled increases, the ventilation. the fraction for

(VT). tidal Dead space (VD) varies inversely ventilation with volume dead volume, The smaller space the ventilation. tidal proportion the larger the of VD/VT Normally, to ventilation. of exhaled 20% 30% minute is Changes of in work space to are breathing. important dead contributors a normal inspire blood must levels maintain gases. of If dead volume to larger the the tidal space increases, individual respiratory of work and to respiratory fatigue the breathing This can adds to and contribute muscle failure. disease increase be to or metabolic exercise during with volume able not tidal If sufficiently. with (e.g., fever), demands may individuals increase lung

of physiological space. dead type second dead space The is alveoli not diseased perfused in Often are ventilated. some but lungs, in in total the gas that does is dead each space. not volume breath called exchange of gas The participate physiological alveoli. dead the dead but space unventilated secondary and includes volume space to anatomical perfused This the dead the physiological in The always at is of dead large disease, presence as anatomical the space considerably larger. may it be as and least space,

but be dead course anatomical Both measured are not patient the and physiological in routinely they space of measured, care. can

Composition Air of

and ambient brings O2 air or alveoli, atmospheric up Inspiration the excreted. taken where CO2 is to is a Ambient is air

dead obstructive with is (COPD), individuals certain increased. space of In chronic types pulmonary such as emphysema, physiological disease increase of doubles, in space must volume If order ventilation. alveolar to tidal level dead same maintain the volume 0.25, is 500 then tidal and VD/VT If is mL

250 of mixture gas argon, increase a 375 gases. If inert CO2, normal ventilation (VT) = quantities example, mL): minute in of to volume VA (i.e., to with composed maintain must increases 625 this mL mL VD to and and O2, alveolar N2 tidal fractions or corresponding pressure. can composition this The gas the of mixture in described gas of either partial terms be

important laws applied, arise. ambient a be can principles air from Because which gas gas, the two is fractions the terms gas gas is of individual of (F), that equal the viewed sum first the one: in components The must are fractions when

Equation 1 0. 23.6 gases = Fargon + FO2 other FN2 and +

then, known also gas, a that must pressure. millimeters It follows, the as total of (in sum be torr), the mercury) the pressures of to tension of the (in partial gas equal barometric follows: as atmospheric Thus level, are [Pb]) pressures known of pressure partial gases is sea mm the at (also where pressure 760 air in Hg, as the

23.7 Equation

ambient alveolar air Three important gas laws govern ventilation. and and related; temperature law, pressure constant, to volume (V) when According are (P) is that is, inversely Boyle’s

the in volumes of used measurement is lung (see Boyle’s law

Fig. ). 21.4 volume of gas exert the the occupied components. it law is absence the mixture in the total that of the a the pressure gas the that mixture is in other Dalton’s gas pressure partial would of if a

Eq. Dalton’s is the an in example used of is how law 23.7 lung. proportional concentration gas According is liquid its dissolved a the law, a pressure. in to of to partial Henry’s

pressure atmospheric mixture gas that second is in fraction that pressure: of (Fgas) of to multiplied gas important equal principle gas (barometric) the partial is The by the the the (Pgas) a

23.8 Equation

and air Ambient approximately composed is of O2 21% 79% N2. Therefore, air calculated follows: O2 as inspired is pressure ambient (PO2) partial the in of

where of oxygen air. fraction (FiO2) inspired the in Equation is 23.9 159 torr. ambient mouth of the O2, The is at therefore 159 oxygen start in or air at mm the pressure partial tension, Hg, of or inspiration changing by O2 or by ways: changing be the at of can in one two barometric air in The (FiO2) of fraction inspired O2 tension mouth pressure. altered the decreased and of is through tension altitude. ambient at Thus administration be supplemental increased O2 O2 the high can

The altitude. ambient air O2 varies in of with pressure partial and (282 mm contiguous Valley Badwater in United in are Hg). Park Death barometric Whitney Park/ The Mount 768 Forest feet; in feet; Hg) National lowest highest mm pressure, Inyo States 437 and (14,505 Basin pressure, National National the Sequoia points barometric is as Whitney, the of . Mount partial in O2 ambient On calculated air pressure follows: is oxygen pressure the calculated Valley Death whereas mm in Hg as follows: Badwater partial Basin, of . 92 = Hg = 161mm

FiO2 different Note varies. not altitudes; at pressure does only vary that the barometric the gas These values. tension differences arterial effects profound on oxygen in blood have

warmed where temperature to and air laryngopharynx, inspiration As and brought is into body the ambient humidified. nasopharynx begins, becomes it glottis. time reaches water air the by with saturated it becomes vapor Inspired the the vapor are a in other the dilutes Water total which exerts partial pressure gases distributed. pressure and mm 47 Water body at Hg. vapor temperature pressure is in must partial O2 a pressure. pressure humidified water N2 the the from vapor mixture, of To calculate and be pressures barometric total partial subtracted the which the in conducting follows: O2 of pressure the is in partial airways, the as calculated Thus trachea, begin

23.10 Equation . = Hg calculated mm and is N2 the partial = of 150 pressure similarly:

and Hg mm + the O2 N2 = at unchanged. 563 760 and + that (150 fractions mm 563 constant the Hg total remains are Note mm pressure 47 that 23.11 Hg) Equation of O2 of reduces pressures pressure, vapor Water however, N2. partial and the also the the that ambient in partial Note pressure of ( calculation air of

Eq. do not “dry.” in water and participate air is ambient 23.9), gas considered ignored, conducting airways is vapor exchange. The in N2, the partial the reaches air until remain airways alveolus. unchanged vapor Therefore, water of pressures and the the O2,

bed inspired from transported is capillary O2 the and into When across the into alveolus, the the capillary CO2 air moves alveolar reaches membrane the alveolus. bed, the occurs which The described process . this by in is pressure in open, atmospheric. in equal end alveolus partial inspiration gases which of At atmospheric; the glottis the thus, total with the is total must the and this the in case is the alveolus pressure, the of pressures the the mixture, of can follows: changed described composition is be gas as however, and The

23.12 Equation 1 0. of are argon gases, in fractions. ambient these + gases alveolus + FCO2 change = FH2O from Fargon therefore N2 other and and the where the fraction does not + gases + FN2 FO2 inert and at already change with water does gas fraction is inspired vapor of and The not is because temperature. water the saturated fully vapor body also decreases, of consequence however, As CO2 the alveolus exchange, in the increases. a the fraction and the of gas alveolus in of O2 fraction Because in also gases change. of the these partial O2 fractions changes of pressures exerted CO2, and by the alveolar equation, given by equation: partial in ideal O2 the is gas oxygen of The the also (PAO2) the alveolar pressure which is alveolus called

Equation 23.13

and Perfusion, Relationships Ventilation/Perfusion CHAPTER Ventilation, 23

40 47 37°C 601 0 PN2 102 40 571 47 PO2 0 040 46 159 47 150 47 PH2O, 90 563 PCO2

nitrogen; pressure of PN2, PTOTAL, carbon water; partial parameters; all of pressure quotient. PO2, PCO2, PH2O, partial partial R, of of pressure dioxide; pressure respiratory partial of pressure partial oxygen; alveolar normally 1% gas less 1. than *PN2 is R in is by increased because

has in PO2 in less because more †Ptotal than than decreased venous is increased. PCO2 blood has arterial

partial respiratory PiO2 which the vapor respiratory pressure where (Pb) is of inspired of (PH2O); CO2; water pressure multiplied pressure ratio, O2, minus the the PACO2 is partial of R fraction pressure or equal by the and quotient. barometric O2 is alveolar (FiO2) is to exchange the The quotient is of taken O2) amount to of O2 respiratory the CO2 the the amount excreted CO2) the (V̇ up lungs. of by ratio (V̇ on by of in O2 the intake. of relation to quotient is metabolism is caloric dependent amount the amount consumed This produced CO2 and fatty exclusive quotient metabolism. exclusive and and between in states carbohydrate of in metabolism varies respiratory 0.7 states The acid 1.0 it of 1.0; 0.7 is quotient respiratory dietary 0.8. the normal to assumed Under is conditions, be Thus in CO2 that O2 quantity alveoli. of is the up the the taken released quantity of exceeds in from and to shown partial are CO2, air ambient level N2 alveolus pressures sea the of at The O2,

23.1 Table

can similar be PACO2. estimated approach to the A calculate used function alveolus rate the the eliminated of the fraction and The is production CO2 of alveolus. by a during the is at metabolism which cells CO2 the of the CO2 from in rate CO2 as ventilation. process of of elimination alveolar known This is between and by CO2 defined ventilation is the equation: production carbon relationship alveolar alveolar The dioxide

body, alveolar by in minute, the where production the gas. is V̇ A of is alveolar CO2 rate dry CO2 fraction per the FACO2 of and Equation ventilation is V̇ 23.14 CO2 alveolus elimination fraction of alveolus. to CO2 from that of rate the to in demonstrates the CO2 is and the the relationship related This of ventilation alveolar the gas any of (see partial Like pressure other

Eq. following: ), 23.8 defined the PACO2 by is

Equation 23.15

following previous relationship: for FACO2 in equation the yields the Substituting

Equation 23.16

This relationships. equation several important demonstrates is in minute First, there between the ventilation (V̇ the CO2 exhaled inverse of (PACO2) CO2. regardless the an and pressure relationship alveolus A), alveolar per of partial if 50%. is by doubled, Specifically, ventilation decreases PACO2 the is PACO2 by decreased doubles. if half, ventilation Conversely, of the CO2) double. CO2 PACO2 A), metabolic doubling causes production minute alveolar ventilation (V̇ a Second, at constant per to of (V̇ the and A relationship V̇ depicted between is The in PACO2

Fig. 23.1

normal is ± maintained 2 PaCO2 tightly and Hg. regulated at mm 40 In lungs, in associated arterial decreases profound and on enzyme have or changes protein effects activity. particularly in with pH, PaCO2, cell function, including Increases when monitor and the chemoreceptors brainstem ( PaCO2 ( exhaled minute Specialized in ventilation ),

Eq. the with in varies 23.1 of level accordance ) PaCO2.

an acute (pH PaCO2 > results < respiratory respiratory acidosis (pH increase 7.45). in in acute PaCO2 in alkalosis whereas An decrease in 7.35), results PaCO2, it (hypoventilation). occurs Hypercapnia when an CO2 alveolar exceeds elevation in defined is and ventilation production as when CO2 production, exceeds occurs and hyperventilation it (hypocapnia). PaCO2 ventilation Conversely, alveolar decreases

• Fig. Partial Ventilation 23.1 Carbon Alveolar (PCO2; a Function of as x-axis) per Fig. • Alveolar y-axis) of Minute Pressure The Dioxide (VA; Distribution of Including in the 23.2 Volume, Lung. Regional Lung Each given metabolic line to a asso- rate corresponds

Size line). ciated isometabolic a CO2 Location with production (Circles) CO2 the constant Pressure-Volume on Alveolar of and

Lung of at Volumes. Lung Different the Curve are the are and lungs the base. the pressure pleural translung apex pressure greater those the of Because (PL) than upright at at position, suspended (Ppl) the lung units in any base. units are lung the lung volume at than at These are those larger (TLC). effect greatest at capacity is volume total capacity lung absent (RV), (FRC), residual functional and at at less residual The so smaller and the those an pressure-volume is at also alveolar Hg. these of their because less of ventilation apex to alveolar PCO2 inspired controlled is distributed are curve, 40 mm approximately maintain Normally, on the to “location” receive that units; a differentially Note lung compliant air is 250 ventilation L/minute at when VCO2 mL/minute, Thus alveolar of in results an rest, alveolar approximately 5

PCO2 of 40 Hg. mm 2.5 in 50% at rest decrease PCO2. to ventilation A results in doubling (i.e., 5 from alveolar of L/minute) exercise, During

CO2 ventilation (V̇ increase alveolar mL/min), CO2 must and = production L/ is maintain to normal 750 this PCO2, (in case, minute). 15 increased to (from of in L/minute) to PCO2. 50% results the Again, 15 ventilation a doubling however, 7.5 in reduction alveolar

units more part the do which are the than base, the of represented proportion at a of compliant are at air inspired the (i.e., lung steeper

of Distribution Ventilation

uniformly of gravity. largely the is distributed because effects the not lung, of Ventilation in upright more position, alveoli lung most the expanded the apex than base. the at near are lung alveoli of the are In volumes, at downward from away pulls the and chest the lung Gravity wall. a volume static at lung, = than the at results As the is (i.e., and the base of in more pleural apex translung PA result, apex. pressure the − lower in increase increased; at is Ppl) pressure an (PL alveolar negative) this at alveolar Because (Fig. the at the the base volume and difference of lung of apex the in

have portion the ventilation compliance). alveoli lung they pressure-volume the steep receive at more greater and the along represented curve, (i.e., ), 23.2 they the base of are of apex are the the contrast, of represented alveoli curve. the In or flat portion at top pressure-volume to closer the the of and compliance volume. less lower thus have proportionately They tidal receive than supine when and of curve). less effect less rather upright, The is person pronounced is it a pressure-volume gravity is

time constants fill with empty units slowly. Alveolar and long longer compliance increased empty. fill alveolar takes increased to and Thus an to airway longer resistance or with unit is is In time is per breaths and the approximately inspiratory seconds, 3 normal time adults, the the approximately 2 minute, seconds. respiratory approximately rate expiratory 12 to ( lungs, equilibrium normal In this is time approach volume sufficient

Fig. 23.3 ). the equilibrium reached. In of resistance presence not volume or increased is however, compliance, increased

when COPD as with prone. long a time than Adults constant is rather have supine result person a a very it is size of and affects person all when direction the a in because of a pushed supine, is the cephalad alveoli. diaphragm is This the

gravitational distribution on alveoli effects ventilation, In ventilation is uniform. addition the not to in of (R) resistance time (C), it is variable the is reason quantitatively The by this or constant airway (τ): compliance for described and

increase resistance with individuals in and, emphysema, 23.17 Equation of the case of compliance. an an in increase in As rate. respiratory low such tend breathe result, at to a adults affected a stairs. now flight of climb what Imagine when individuals a happens with COPD respiratory exhalation, full ( dynamic allow does sufficient called a for increase not time and The hyperinflation rate occurs process a in

Fig. already breathing very and lung less compliant, the are which becomes lung further, is ); the 23.4 volumes, work high. of increase increased,

C=0.4 Increased Fig. R=0.7 ˛=1.12 C=0.8 Relationships Ventilation/Perfusion ˛=0.28 Decreased and CHAPTER R=1.4 ˛=0.56 • Perfusion, compliance R=0.7 resistance 23 Ventilation, 23.4 Hyperinflation. Dynamic exhalation total the time for (Ttot) is (Ti) for inspiration composed The (Te). for the respiration time time of and the during exercise), respiratory rate increases Ttot When decreases. (e.g., individuals In with chronic pulmonary disease obstructive

with the (COPD), (air is volume lung Ttot in there trapping). succeeding each Te breath, the on not for and alveoli Normal increase may long C=0.8 of emptying effect an constant, time a with complete the of allow the in increase do This high a at work the compliance this is no lung longer decreased to the increase the affected such able hyperinflation lung to results needed of lung degree in eventually in volume volume. the overcome person of that breath of In of with individuals, major activity. shortness it cause is such a residual functional capacity. FRC,

• Fig. of the Compliance of Resistance (C) of Lung Result Ventilation Individual Examples a in Local (R) 23.3 Variation or Units. of as Regulation three values different and compliance The of units resistance Top, illustrated. individual lung are volume units a the Bottom, illustrates of lung as graph time. of three these function The the In upper time second. a the constant has schema, normal of 0.56 lung (τ) in inspiratory seconds, is volume 97% the time. 2 equilibrium normal unit lung This of reaches which final lung a time is doubled. in resistance; increase at twofold The right its hence has constant unit the time this volume only thus slowly lung normal inspiratory 80% reaches during equilibrium lung underventilated. unit unit (see and more is graph); fills That a compliance constant. acts its reduce (is left “stiff”), unit which The has the to lung on decreased time a within unit. unit normal This of only second, half quickly, ventilation fills but reaching its the receives lung volume 1 lung maximum

(PVR), arterial-to-venous pulmonary the in gradient. alveolar pulsatile and pressure, influenced vascular resistance gravity, Blood by the flow is circulation pressure and pulmonary change artery left output: divided pulmonary PVR (PPA) the as atrium cardiac which is (QT), (PLA), the the flow the pressure by calculated from to in is

23.18 Equation

circumstances, normal Under

Equation 23.19

is This 10 about circulation. that less than in times the systemic resistance pulmonary that diameter circulation (1) has an normally unique only the pulmonary demand, allow or (2) closed that as pressure. increase are exertion the and highly The without with their are increase circulation minimal and in features distensible, in increased pressure: flow on recruited; exercise, increased increases blood are a during two vessels demand vessels blood With arterial pulmonary in pulmonary

Fig. 23.5). compress and increase capillaries air-filled end PVR. At inspiration, the alveoli the alveolar the circulation, lungs approximately In PVR. 40% for beds to systemic in beds contrast the account the capillary the of in capillary at recoil, extra-alveolar volume. elastic lower the traction and at The inspiration their larger higher increase diameters PVR end and lung radial vessels is of because of extra-alveolar the diminished, the higher PVR increases during their of least the resistance exhalation deflated apply capillaries alveoli exhalation, and pleural pressure During PVR the to is alveolar vessels. whereas the on PVR FRC. in the is of volume As these of effects a lung lowest total at result PVR, opposite lung

Fig. • Pulmonary Extra-Alveolar on the Changes Resistance and Representation Vascular Schematic Total Total and the Capacity Alveolar Afforded by 23.5 Effects of the in Vital of Vessels. Contributions to (RV) increases, inflation to from resistance During total flow through residual to decreases. resistance through lung extra-alveolar alveolar vessels capacity (TLC), blood vessels volume whereas curve changes plotted vascular the with residual in a during U-shaped Thus total capacity resistance inflation, (FRC). are lung functional nadir pulmonary at as

Flow of Pulmonary Distribution Blood

systemic pulmonary dramatically circulation. low-pressure/lowresistance it is more than influenced is much the gravity circulation is Because a by the system, blood uneven to flow of distribution in This gravitational contributes the an lungs. effect flow of the the the the to the where increases of normal greatest. rest, from lung upright at base of blood In it persons apex volume is lung, flow is in lower (posterior) individual, greatest a the the in Similarly, regions blood in and regions. (anterior) supine uppermost least upright the such lung less, persons flow increase apex of becomes in in of pressure. difference in the exercise, mainly the conditions stress, of in Under as base and because arterial the blood

blood travel the the pulmonary artery, to lung apex people. On must gravity against the of leaving upright in a heart, location segment increase artery in in there decrease Hg. the 0.74 a above corresponding mm is 1-cm For pressure pulmonary hydrostatic of equal to every above segment a in heart. the level the the pressure a pressure segment is cm less the at in the is pulmonary Hg 10 of 7.4 than that mm Thus heart artery 5 artery heart pulmonary pressure. arterial Hg 3.7–mm a pulmonary Conversely, a below has segment in increase cm the flow venous affects on pressure the from • blood to variations in equally apex arteries and arterial and veins in gravity results and effect of Fig. wide This Explain the 23.6 Pressures the the Model in Affecting Blood the Uneven to Lung Distribution to Capillaries. According Flow of

pressure; PA, Pa, pulmonary alveolar pulmonary venous pressure; Pv, pulmonary arterial pressure. al. et JB, West (From J Physiol. Appl 1964;19:713.) lung. the base the of ventilation/perfusion and These relationships. flow influence both variations

to pressure blood in the pulmonary lung. (Pv) venous flow in (Pa) pulmonary addition differences influence pressure alveolar gradients, In arterial the (PA) pressure pulmonary to also be thought ( been into three has to zones the functional lung divided Classically,

Fig. ). 23.6 so apex, the Zone 1 exceeded by low be Pa is can that lung it where PA. represents The and greater ceases. the capillaries PA, blood collapse because of external flow ventilation volume). normal marked sufficiently does decrease not as positive-pressure if reached a conditions, could state Under (such this be with might however, in occur this exist; mechanical Pa zone during decreases or blood lung, is 2, is Pa upper In greater of or the in greater Pv. PA, is than third zone the than which turn the PA “damming” external the is effect. Pv, Because capillaries greater causes PA a collapses partially than greater and referred to as phenomenon is This often waterfall the effect. Pa 3, than which blood in is Pv, area the greater PA, and pressure flows with gradients. than this In greater in zone accordance is flow the pressure distends trans-mural is in the lowers of lung the vessels pulmonary Thus, base blood the resistance. greater because and increased the

Flow Regulation Active Blood of

described the the previously. passive mechanisms in is flow primarily lung Blood regulated by mechanisms active however, are, that several regulate There flow. blood is pulmonary smooth that vessels, and Although systemic around vessels sufficient is thinner PVR. the to it vessel caliber thus than much around muscle affect on a flow. major Oxygen effect blood have levels occurs arterioles in to response decreased Hypoxic in PAO2. vasoconstriction the and from result blood is The local, shifting of the flow is response

Relationships CHAPTER Ventilation, Ventilation/Perfusion 23 Perfusion, and

AT Pulmonary effort Regulate well-perfused in an Hormones • to LEVEL areas and enhance exchange. 23.1 to Blood BOX CELLULAR That hypoxic gas areas Flow Factors THE Isolated, measured. be before change PVR; must a in does 20% of be hypoxia the not approximately vessels alter hypoxic local PVR can are Low a result altitude affected. on as greater inspired levels O2 high PVR of because have vessels a all effect inspired can vessels decrease and PVR. pulmonary of High levels dilate O2 factors hormones and Other ( some

vessel but local, usually are also can Box their important ) influence effects in pathological conditions. 23.1 and caliber, only brief, affected smooth Pulmonary capillaries are thus mechanisms. muscle and not these lack by subsequently artery apparent consequence In individuals, no and or (pulmonary artery pulmonary rise reason, collagen pressures chronic vascular a as or disease, some pulmonary resistance artery hypertension). vascular hypoxia of for

of exchange. but ) insufficient two ventilation between gas and to perfusion (Q̇ normal normal components essential gas ensure Both the a relationship components normal are is ) (V̇ exchange, lung as ventilation to referred (also ratio flow. The the blood ratio) to of the is as /Q̇ ratio V̇ defined ventilation/perfusion defined lung. for alveolus, single for alveoli, a group entire ratio the This for can a be or of defined single divided the of At is a minute (Q̇ by (V̇ alveolus, ventilation alveolar flow c). level the A) capillary per ratio as divided by lung, ventilation the as of total level defined cardiac At alveolar the is ratio the output. 4.0 alveolar In ventilation is L/min. 5.0 whereas pulmonary is blood normal flow approximately approximately L/min, lungs, Thus

produced by peptide amino endothelium. vascular that the an Endothelin-1 acid is is with has of arteries, of hypertension. the tone pulmonary increased in expression and artery Endothelin individuals found pulmonary endothelin-1 regulates been an of oxide decreases also endothelial endothelial oxide, nitric Endothelin-1 vasodilator. nitric expression levels of reduces which synthase, of arterial been are important have produced pulmonary the sitaxentan) antagonists in (e.g., treatment hypertension. and Endothelin-1 drugs bosentan,

in ventilation/perfusion the V̇ widely approximately the varies of normal is a lung, range 0.8, lung ratio /Q̇ in ratios different overall but units. perfusion 1 less > when (V̇ ratio ventilation, than 1), ratio ventilation/ than ventilation/perfusion is (V̇ 1 < exceeds 1). perfusion perfusion, greater ventilation /Q̇ When is the and the exceeds /Q̇ transfer. impaired Mismatching pulmonary ventilation and blood of results flow CO2 O2 in and mismatching individuals In (reduced and PaO2). blood arterial is systemic cardiopulmonary frequent disease, of hypoxemia the cause flow with ventilation alveolar of most pulmonary general, V̇ 1 with /Q̇ than ratios hypoxemia. In not are associated greater

unit normal; that perfusion and ventilation/perfusion perfusion between ratio ventilation not normal. does of simply the lung means are it A mean is and that relationship ventilation normal that lobe lobar pneumonia, ventilation to decreased. affected in the example, is For ventilation/perfusion perfusion ventilation; to (V̇ be would < unchanged, is, area /Q̇ 1 perfusion remains exceed would ratio the this that less 1). If than to this this produces supplying lobe. area in arterial hypoxic ventilation decrease in pulmonary the However, vasoconstriction bed the affected ratio. and a ventilation/perfusion decrease a results in the in perfusion area “normal” more to This but normal two to approach normal is are range. (both between decreased), relationship this the Nonetheless, the nor neither could the the the ventilation area perfusion

areas lung. of The ventilation/perfusion in different varies the ratio less base ventilation than of In in the although apex from both in the ventilation the is increase the perfusion an flow. lung, increase the and increase upright individual, to blood perfusion), As ventilation). of base than apex /Q̇ is exceeds is ratio V̇ at whereas the the result, normal (ventilation much exceeds less the than V̇ lung the the of lung (perfusion ratio much greater a the 1 /Q̇ 1 at apex The perfusion the and of lung the base from ventilation is depicted in the relationship between to

Fig. 23.7 • Fig. in a Lung Position. Ventilation/Perfusion Relationships the Normal in 23.7 Upright clarity. and apical shown basal values Only for are the each base. at on bottom In the represents number at and values the values the the top the on number apex of the column, represents lung, , perfusion alveolar VA, PN2, carbon PO2, Q̇ of of pressure per nitrogen; ventilation minute; pressure of oxygen; partial partial pressure minute. partial per PCO2, dioxide;

the because of and of PaCO2 PACO2 (see solubility CO2 properties equal are ). not same The and is alveolar true arterial for O2. in individuals PAO2 normal lungs, greater Even PaO2. with is than slightly PAO2 alveolar-arterial between the for oxygen (AaDO2). is called The difference and PaO2 difference exchange. is in of O2 hallmark AaDO2 An the abnormal increase a healthy lung the by is This arterial number exchange, caused bypass but that and the into in veins gas directly of empty “imperfect” difference by small individuals not small the circulation. the veins. thebesian sinus The left drain ventricular right directly the atrium), than vessels in mediastinal into of myocardium the the ventricle and the and some drain coronary pulmonary (rather veins left bronchial into into admixture in results and a in venous PaO2. This decrease section (This in example an is output of Approximately the way. this the 2% see an is .”) shunt; shunted 3% of anatomical cardiac to

To of effectiveness PaO2 measured. and clinical gas the exchange PaCO2 the measure lung, in are alveolar air equation calculated is the from PAO2 (

Eq. 23.13 ). AaDO2. and between difference The is measured calculated PAO2 the the the PaO2 room individuals less with air, normal who than Hg. the 15 AaDO2 mm breathing is are lungs In decade rises of life of years approximately value 3 Hg per age. The 30 after mean mm mm normal. an upper limit of the 25 AaDO2 considered is than Hg lower Hence,

individual by is that supplemental mask. Assume receiving pneumonia an 30% O2 face with gas is mm pH 70 and 44 Hg, Arterial is blood mm PaCO2 is Hg. PaO2 7.40, is the patient’s What AaDO2? level sea the is 0.8.) respiratory patient’s (Assume is that patient at and quotient the to the ( equation According air alveolar

Eq. 23.13

R = 44PAO2 3. [0 × 47)] (760 − 8. 0 − 159 = Hg mm

Therefore,

this suggests has case, pneumonia). high This disease lung patient that AaDO2 (in the

occur without can Abnormalities elevation an in PaO2 with AaDO2. in or the administration). to between AaDO2 (particularly relationship is predicting in PaO2 abnormal to the response and in O2 useful therapy determining an of Hence, and PaO2 cause supplemental the effect on (arterial listed a of Causes reduction AaDO2 and hypoxemia) PaO2 are their in in

. Table 23.2 discussed is Each these of detail greater the following in causes in sections.

Hypoxemia, Blood Hypercarbia and Hypoxia, Arterial

Hg hypoxemia breathing an is Arterial at 80 defined room is air adult lower who mm in level. as than a PaO2 sea mm PaO2 out Hypoxia occurs 60 the often carry insufficient Hg. defined to less functions; when than is normal O2 as hypoxia is metabolic major There categories hypoxia. of are four is The most hypoxic first, the hypoxia, common. hypoxic main V̇ in sections conditions abnormalities, pulmonary following /Q̇ physiological with decreased the shunt, mismatching, hypoxia—anatomical associated FiO2, and described hypoventilation—are six in and shunt, The diffusion

Table 23.2 . by A in “ hemoglobin, second the or combination a of anemic the caused carbon with result category hemoglobin hemoglobin, interference oxygen is abnormal is hypoxia, decrease and chemical amount following a (e.g., poisoning; hemoglobin of too functioning little which see monoxide of as the

Clinic” In box). the The hypoperfusion third category which results is from low hypoxia,

Relationships Perfusion, and Ventilation/Perfusion 23 Ventilation, CHAPTER

for inspired of difference of pressure oxygen. oxygen; partial AaDO2, PaO2, arterial alveolar-arterial oxygen; FiO2, fraction

cardiac blood (e.g., output) decreased to and tissues. oxygen reduced delivery flow the Histotoxic that oxygen when category machinery as uses poisoned, energy fourth the hypoxia, cellular cyanide poisoning. the occurs produce in is of to hypoxia, normal In oxygen or not and increased is because PO2 this arterial situation, are utilized. venous being

generated from malfunctioning car a be exhaust, from monoxide building. space a can Carbon burning or from heater, if such recognized, monoxide and and individuals is exposed experience not headache, carbon dizziness, die. nausea, to it Individuals may high with and 100%). (approaching often a oxygen is have They saturation as measured appearance, an cherry-red oximeter on gas, the Even may blood be arterial normal. PAO2 an the O2. of Nevertheless, depleted tissues are the the a use poisoning case monoxide it oximeter. saturation an potential imperative order with of that of carbon oxygen is and measurement clinician recognize carbon a monoxide Thus measurement there carbon If with by has will a oximetry of and carbon oxygen monoxide a patient the that difference poisoning, monoxide saturation be marked oximeter. between measured a

between (Fig. relationship A ventila way to two–lung and is useful tion the perfusion unit with the model examine

23.8 ). each Two alveoli are the which supplied ventilated, by heart. from of is blood the each cardiac and alveolus, each uniform, is when gas uniform, alveolus. half perfusion When half output ventilation inspired the is goes goes to to in this 1. the alveoli of In the to is ratio each the unit, and same is ventilation/perfusion normal equal PaCO2. The perfused are increased that alveoli blood deoxygenated contains and venous is by mixed gradient is this for mixed venous a of O2, into and O2 provides than PAO2 movement blood. higher mixed and PACO2, a CO2 for greater this movement Fig. provides is than • gradient contrast, venous In Lung of Simplified Lung Units. Normal Model 23.8 Two Parallel Both size. their volumes blood flow equal for units of receive air and a person The in normal and resting are pressures partial gas at alveolar level. blood sea values carbon dioxide; of PACO2, of partial oxygen; inspired venous pressure pressure partial PiCO2, mixed partial partial pressure dioxide; blood. partial partial in partial portal venous PpvO2, oxygen carbon dioxide mixed oxygen; of venous PvCO2, PvO2, in pressure oxygen blood; of dioxide in inspired portal of of PiO2, carbon pressure carbon pressure alveolar pressure pressure alveolar partial venous of PAO2, blood; of in blood; PpvCO2,

into the alveolus. of CO2 not that values alveolar-arterial this in O2 Note do ideal differ. model,

directly gas-exchange bypasses goes ( An the anatomical shunt unit arterial blood the into occurs when mixed and venous circulation

Fig. ). 23.9 and gas, but of normal, alveolar changed. is alveolar Alveolar the distribution output ventilation, gas cardiac are the of the distribution composition of the bypasses the directly the goes bed pulmonary the of gas-exchange units, circulation. through rest and of gas-exchange cardiac the goes but arterial Some units supplies the output into capillary it that The this shunted, because gas-exchange deoxygenated, thus shunt. right-to-left is blood that the a called of bypasses unit type bypass is is and blood the Most or from atrium ventricle. mixes within and anatomical atrium septum crosses blood heart, the the when develop blood shunts the left develop from with deoxygenated or right and the ventricle they of effect arterial with in deoxygenated right-to-left hypoxemia. blood, to mix it is blood of and results oxygenated varying degrees this The shunt

• Fig. Right-to-Left 23.9 Shunt. lung with the is blood. of a ventilation mixes and portion cardiac bypasses the but output Alveolar normal, oxygenated shunt. to according of size the PaO2 the varies pressure pressure venous partial dioxide; alveolar PiCO2, PAO2, oxygen; in of of PpvCO2, partial of partial of inspired of carbon PiO2, mixed PvCO2, mixed partial of partial oxygen oxygen; blood. oxygen portal in blood; dioxide blood; venous venous in PpvO2, PvO2, partial dioxide portal pressure alveolar partial venous blood; partial carbon pressure of pressure pressure inspired PACO2, dioxide; carbon carbon in of pressure pressure

severely. blunted O2 of response an is shunt to if an is anatomical the affected individual important that 100% breathe, given feature An is gas-exchanging never it O2, deoxygenated. The that thus is to blood the be enriched bypasses units continues and the to exposed PO2 blood. with The the mixes and not being the increases deoxygenated is shunted blood in that it of varies the response of in blood. Thus the persistent hypoxemia to degree 100% O2 shunted volume with the perfuses ventilated the is that blood the in alveoli the Normally, fully saturated. hemoglobin almost of Therefore, is form dissolved in most O2 O2 of (see added the the

increased an has CO2. of even though in not shunted the anatomical an is blood PaCO2 shunt The usually level elevated ventilation respond CO2 and increase range. to (see the ) PaCO2 in for elevation to this chemoreceptors normal reduce The any an reason central with the in that is the ventilation PaCO2 increased the decrease hypoxemia hypoxemia range. is respiratory normal secondary to severe, the the the can and If to drive below increases

( can A in lung to ventilation absent admixture) physiological venous develop the of is units perfusion known (also when shunt continuing as presence

Fig. ). 23.10 ventilation goes situation, both this is whereas other units. In distributed between model, two–lung the unit, the to lung lung the perfusion all equally in unit lung unit The V̇ has /Q̇ perfusion ventilation but ratio 0. with of a without The unit because is this mixed Fig. • blood; perfusing blood venous 23.10 Schema (Venous a Admixture). Physiological Shunt of PaO2 marked the in PCO2. to in comparison decrease Notice in alveolar-arterial is this difference The mm 85 example for (AaDO2) oxygen Hg. oxygen; PvCO2, of partial carbon oxygen; dioxide; pressure pressure alveolar blood; partial pressure venous partial blood. pressure of PvO2, of mixed in portal inspired pressure PACO2, blood; mixed venous of partial partial alveolar PiCO2, PiO2, PAO2, PpvO2, blood; dioxide pressure venous pressure oxygen pressure oxygen PpvCO2, partial venous of portal inspired in carbon dioxide dioxide; of in partial in partial carbon of carbon of

is is to and blood. the continues the gas this unit no no in exchanged ventilation, there mixed venous leaving unit, blood resemble admixes arterial that and a effect the with to blood. is a shunt; anatomical deoxygenated shunt blood unit an on physiological bypasses of of The effect is, oxygenation gas-exchanging similar of situation 0. in with has (which is loss of an V̇ unit atelectasis is obstruction which a a /Q̇ to of the gas-exchanging of region Clinically, a example volume) lung subsequent ventilation and the mucous airway atelectasis of airway. tumors include plugs, Causes edema, foreign bodies, in

is Mismatching hypoxemia with of arterial most between respiratory and disorders. ventilation the in individuals frequent cause perfusion distribution of example, mixed the blood blood, most total In normal. output), common of (cardiac the the and venous are flow blood composition flow units between distributed the ventilation two However, is gas-exchange alveolar when unevenly (

Fig. 1. ventilation flow of and distributed, a the ratio less decreased blood than with ventilation has /Q̇ increased V̇ unit than /Q̇ the the 1, equally with ) is V̇ has a greater of unit 23.11 whereas causes This and the to alveolar compositions vary. gas end-capillary /Q̇ that from ventilation the blood with O2 CO2 decreased has arterial the content Both abnormal the content and in , come <1). the are (V̇ unit (V̇ unit CO2 content higher content increased because , /Q̇ the has O2 a with >1) is overventilated. The ventilation a being and it lower vary, actual each contribution PaO2 on the depending to relative arterial blood. of these PaCO2 of The units and does unit (AaDO2) gradient the is The of O2 not one fully alveolar-arterial because overventilation increased relative

40.5 space = PvCO2 Fig. Anatomic 77 = PlO2 – • PAO2 PCO2= PpvCO2 PlCO2 105 artery 36 Pulmonary PvO2 = = PAO2 0 150 dead = PpvO2 89 – 45 46 40 = vein Pulmonary PACO2 = 77 = PACO2 45PO2= = = Gas Mismatching of 23.11 Ventilation/Perfusion Exchange. Effects on bronchospasm, lung in edema, airway due foreign body, the obstruction, ventilation to to could a or be decrease one unit tumor. a mucus The oxygen of dioxide; blood; blood; partial alveolar blood. in alveolar mixed partial of carbon PvCO2, venous pressure carbon pressure inspired of pressure PvO2, PpvCO2, venous mixed of PiO2, pressure PiCO2, oxygen; dioxide partial pressure partial in inspired oxygen PACO2, in of carbon venous portal PpvO2, partial dioxide pressure blood; venous of partial partial oxygen; of pressure in dioxide; PAO2, pressure partial portal of carbon

underventilation extra compensate unit. (either addition extra other by removal or by of for the of CO2) O2 of the the of dissociation upper the to of to CO2, flatness the failure curve as greater compensate for The indicated the is (see for of the slope dissociation by O2 curve, oxyhemoglobin contrast than CO2 the in part

24). Chapter

extra blood increased ventilation In little increases O2 but other the close content it PAO2, is saturated in the because overventilated adds to 100% words, hemoglobin being to areas. steeper removal CO2 which case the more the CO2 of curve increases. of CO2, not This the for when is for ventilation indicates slope a as inasmuch CO2 maintained, is long CO2 diffusion moves by occur. then as gradient will CO2 diffusion, as Thus

O2 is of between ventilation. uptake a of by rate PAO2 by and determined rate O2 the the balance The replenishment tissues. demands of flow the lung Oxygen blood on through metabolic the uptake depends the and If decreases, and PaO2 subsequently ventilation decreases. decreases, PAO2 are addition, VA inversely and related. In PACO2 directly but and is does the doubles (see thus When PaCO2 the halved, so ventilation PACO2

Eq. ). 23.16 hypoventilation. normal maintain to levels CO2 insufficient of called is Ventilation decreases and always PaO2 PaCO2. Hypoventilation increases

the of hallmarks is hypoventilation AaDO2. a of One normal in Hypoventilation results decrease a reduces which turn in PAO2, PaO2. in remains Because is normal, normal. AaDO2 the gas exchange drugs associated associated with Hypoventilation muscle that and drive. accompanies is diseases respiratory reduce weakness with the presence of hypoventilation, In areas the atelectasis develop however, of

Perfusion, and AaDO2 and regions atelectasis when the /Q̇ Ventilation/Perfusion with of rises. Ventilation, ratios Relationships occurs, rapidly; this 0, creates V̇

diffusion in potentially alveolar-capillary across barrier Abnormalities result of hypoxia. O2 in could the arterial a it cells the and and pulmonary red in time occurs transit fraction that Equilibration alveolar content capillary O2 capillary to of for the CO2 blood rapidly: between takes network. always red in of Hence, during increases time even lung transit cells almost blood when the normal diffusion the people, exercise, through significantly. equilibrium occurs diffusion persons has altitude increased in exercise disequilibrium) observed during (≥10,000 only An to been feet). at normal (diffusion attributable AaDO2 incomplete high occur disequilibrium with unusual Even in capacity, an rest diffusion diffusion can altitude. at but and during is at individuals abnormal exercise thickening of block, air-blood hypoxemia. capillary Alveolar is or barrier, an the uncommon cause of the diffusion increased. red the there alveolar gas Even wall usually blood time cell when sufficient for is time is unless thickened, transit is

of Mechanisms Hypercapnia

the mechanisms and major of (elevated ventilation. for increased, space wasted, or Two development PCO2): hypoventilation dead hypercapnia account related. noted are CO2 As alveolar inversely ventilation and alveolar previously, ventilation PACO2 When PaCO2 and double. halved, is and hypoxemia increases source always results Hypoventilation O2. to PaCO2 in that enriched of an decreases and PaO2 a responds thereby of blood increased, in flow interrupted Dead ventilation normal or wasted, when pulmonary presence ventilation. is space is the pulmonary blood most is embolus a by that flow. This obstructs often caused areas =∞). with The (V̇ pulmonary normal ventilation to /Q̇ embolus halts blood flow venous mixed of this the situation, is ventilation any fails to wasted the because it oxygenate blood. In “hypoventilation” The of regions in the (i.e., with pulmonary perfused to “normal” all is than less area relative because this to the receives ideal ventilation ventilation). is it situation, the this lung flow there blood not increases compensation and PaO2 does PaCO2 occur, If decreases. Compensation a distribution almost to shifts ventilation and the being perfused. of local pulmonary immediately; embolus, occurs, bronchoconstriction begins the after however, areas are O2 minimized. a CO2 in As content result, and changes arterial

of Arterial 100% Oxygen on Effect Gas Blood Abnormalities

right-to-left O2 be minutes. 15 100% is can a a the for that mask shunt of through from of approximately the distinguished face breathe other One to causes for hypoxemia ways individual non-rebreathing the breathes O2. by the alveolus replaced N2 the is individual all O2, When 100% of in the equation alveolar to air according the Thus ( PAO2,

Eq.

calculated 23.13), follows: as is

23.20 Equation

PAO2 =[1 0. PH2O)]− 8. PaCO2 × (Pb − 0 4 0 =[1 × (760 . 40 − 08 47)]−

normal for gradient rapidly lung, PAO2 capillary the blood. the In into transfer and O2 it a of provides increases, marked is 23.2 a ). in This increase associated with PaO2 (see O2 Similarly, with over O2. is of as period N2 alveolar with very the 15-minute O2, high breathing by replaced areas develop the pressure /Q̇ enriched low even V̇ ratios end-capillary exchange, these gas perfusion blood O2. and the for is the of is presence a areas, there highly normal gradient enriched In to with has that venous blood of normal and presence flow contrast, not oxygenation right-to-left through is because the the in continues perfused In shunt, corrected a to shunt mix mixed blood units. with poorly maintains blood O2 content shunt the the arterial lowers oxygenated The the from and AaDO2. be during that O2 conducted signifies can of study is the properly quantify to magnitude used a AaDO2 AaDO2 (anatomical shunt An elevated presence output shunted. physiological); 100% the the cardiac proportion of the or the with a being of

were and discussed differences the The perfusion between in chapter. and ventilation this relationship regional ventilation earlier perfusion and in (e.g., V̇ hypoventilation) and of arterial physiological various levels also /Q̇ shunt, were O2 mismatch, described. The on effects CO2 abnormalities and from O2 has CO2 the V̇ that end-capillary different regions levels. these regions coming however, of blood in the different varies the ratio because noted should lung, In it be addition, and /Q̇ are These shown in differences

Fig. they the , and lung. 23.7 demonstrate the of complexity the the the volume the lung less at the apex base. recall that than volume is at First, of at in in greater described, differences are at perfusion previously the are base, apex the differences As perfusion the ventilation. the and than ventilation but than less and is at V̇ the the ratio Thus base. low /Q̇ the at high apex apex and is ventilation/perfusion between difference This content associated a in CO2 in difference and the with alveolar O2 ratios the base. in and the base. the is is The in PAO2 than lower apex higher the PACO2 these differences This results end-capillary contents in for in gases. than in lower at apex. blood is base at End-capillary a PO2 the and, content is consequence, end-capillary the the as lung lower, O2 In CO2 variation because is these there addition, capillaries blood regions variation in of the in pH the significant content. end in in lung; difference the becomes the in content flow and the of more the increases lung in a to exercise, and base with of During result, as apex between in gases blood diminishes apex the uniform the the exercise.

1.

dead the called is anatomical volume in The airways air space. of the conducting volume. tidal varies ventilation Dead inversely with space The each dead in volume gas physiological of the does in called breath participate exchange not gas is space. that total dead the but the includes secondary and alveoli. dead space It ventilated anatomical space unperfused to

2.

sum pressure. The gas a pressures equal to of partial total is of the the to equal (Ptotal). the of in mixture pressure the (Pgas) pressure gas by of a the the (Fgas) fraction total gas partial gas multiplied is The do in not participate gas conducting exchange. airways The reaches Therefore, and the in until airways gas humidified air the the the O2, alveolus. of in partial N2, water pressures unchanged vapor remain

3.

O2 partial equation of air given the is the The ( pressure by alveolus alveolar in

Eq. 23.13 ). used O2. a equation arterial abnormal to This of useful calculate measurement is the AaDO2,

4.

and the by production is CO2 between ventilation relationship defined The alveolar carbon alveolar

Eq. 23.14 ). regardless of exhaled between PACO2 the inverse quantity and is There the relationship CO2. VA, an of constant mm PaCO2 is to tightly regulated Hg. around remain lungs, at 40 normal In

5. Because regional are perfusion. of there in the effects of gravity, ventilation and differences (V̇ /Q̇ ventilation ratio the of blood defined ventilation/perfusion ) as ratio is The flow. to overall ventilation/perfusion a approximately is In lung, ratio the 0.8. normal perfusion ventilation/perfusion when ratio and (V̇ the ventilation, exceeds 1 /Q̇ ratio than exceeds 1 When less /Q̇ the greater ventilation (V̇ ventilation/perfusion 1), < perfusion, is > 1). is than lung the ratio base The is the little blood to is the ratio lung apex V̇ V̇ high (ventilation flow), /Q̇ at the relation is /Q̇ at in low. increased of the of whereas very the mm lungs Hg; with Hg. limit normal of individuals AaDO2 is the upper 25 than 15 is In less who normal mm are breathing room air,

and 23 Relationships Perfusion, CHAPTER 6. Ventilation, Ventilation/Perfusion The pulmonary circulation low-resistance is a low-pressure, system. and features of lung allow and Recruitment case unique during stress, of in new exercise. without are arterioles in capillaries increase the an pressure of for adjustments the as dilation of pressure (PLA), is divided Pulmonary (QT). to artery pulmonary in the (PPA) vascular output by from resistance change the cardiac left the atrium This than the resistance systemic times less about is in 10 circulation.

PT. Schumacker Leff AR, and Basics Applications. Respiratory Physiology: Philadelphia: Saunders; 1993. WB

AB. Lumb Nunn’s Physiology. Applied Respiratory 8th ed. St. Elsevier; Louis: 2016.

Mead J, vol PT, eds. Macklem Handbook Physiology: System. of Society American The Respiratory Physiological Vol. 3. Mechanics. Bethesda, Physiological 1986. Society; MD: American

7.

decreased anatomical four There hypoxic of (hypoxic anemic shunt, /Q̇ hypoxia, V̇ hypoxia abnormalities, FiO2, six diffusion shunt, and hypoventilation. hypoxemia: and and categories mismatching, and physiological of hypoxia, hypoxia) are diffusion hypoxia, hypoxia mechanisms histotoxic

8.

the in increase are hypoventilation. hypercapnia: space mechanisms ventilation of and of development two There dead

Whipp K, Wasserman Beaver WL, BI. threshold. (anaerobic) Gas lactic and exchange acidosis theory the Circulation. 1990;81(1 suppl):1114-1130.

West JB. Ventilation/Blood Exchange. Flow and Gas 5th ed. York: 1991. New Blackwell Scientific;

to chapter, the the be 1. Upon this answer student of completion should questions: able following

absorption affect how basic diffusion CO2 gas they and expiration. and O2 and Describe principles the

2.

and contrast in of and CO2 the blood. transport Compare chemical mechanisms O2

3.

of significances Describe the CO2 dissociation basic and curves. clinical and O2 principles the

4.

acid-base balance. synthesis in H+ chemical their of the and regulation of Describe ions the role

5.

diffusion limited. is considered and considered that of Explain O2 that limited diffusion the CO2 of of why perfusion are and CO

6.

and the dissociation curve. shift Compare factors oxyhemoglobin contrast that

7.

and curves. the oxyhemoglobin dissociation significance differences in the carboxyhemoglobin clinical Explain the of

8.

shift CO2 the the Compare Haldane chloride transport. contrast effect and and on

expiration. and for circulatory normal the and to the the dioxide carbon (CO2) together activity function from from (O2) to transport tissues systems to to tissues lungs to he lungs oxygen cellular the respiratory sustain transport cellular where CO2, is lungs, product the (Fig. systemic the it via a is metabolism, expired tissues active veins of to transported from ). 24.1 hemoglobin and uptake specialized mechanisms O2 to lungs transport occur of and HCO3 and uptake binding of CO2 simultaneously. To that evolved and and these gases of transport (e.g., have tissues, expiration between CO2) enable the enhance − O2 uptake specialized CO2. Moreover, of these expiration O2 and of mechanisms facilitate mechanisms, as gas To the and in of diffusion considered. understand well be properties, delivery transport as the must gases, mechanisms involved these transport

throughout the movement respiratory diffusion. predominantly occurs system Gas via gases diffusion: to areas systems (3) tissue distances with diffusion several membrane) physiological travel, gradient anatomical and to exchange differences, contain properties. unique and with surface circulatory capillary features (alveolar The substantial gas for and to facilitate partial short advantageous gas to large (1) (2) pressure capillary respiratory and dependent laws. basic are on diffusion to tissue and delivery and vice of lungs the for Transport CO2 from O2 the gas versa

Gases in Diffusion From Lower of of to the Higher Partial Regions Pressure Lungs

process passive or in similar and gaseous The of gas diffusion liquid is a state. whether diffusion occurs which that of through by and weight. to of gas coefficient rate molecular of inversely law, square the gas root diffusion a solubility to the described states is its of the a liquid The proportional rate directly proportional Graham’s is the properties faster of 20 Calculation diffuses the times than that CO2 for CO2 O2. reveals approximately O2 diffusion and into Fick’s predicted of blood of from and ( lungs diffusion into versa blood tissue, gas vice CO2, for O2 Rates the law by from and diffusion are

Fig. 24.2). to alveolus the from ratio con the blood. gas ductance The of AD:T a represents (DL) is can of its capacity lung; for diffusing Fick’s conductance lung equation, calculated DL as follows: considered when the the The entire thus, with be (A•D/T)

gas diffusion. where Equation V̇ 24.1 = gas

the Fick’s measured. to O2 be the be used partial cannot of could oxygen diffusion capillary in lungs, of except diffusion pressure the of that properties law assess overcome be O2. This monoxide rather with can use limitation (CO) the than of carbon membrane, is solubility CO 0. across in equilibrium rate remains the CO CO capillary the blood pressure of Because of to capillary low has the and slow, partial capillary the close in in the is blood CO high. solubility contrast, of In for the CO the of Thus and membrane, CO diffusion thus •Fig. alveolar-capillary is limitation only is a and Carbon Dioxide Venous (O2) 24.1 (CO2) Transport Oxygen and in Blood. Arterial Oxygeninarterialbloodistransferredfromarterialcapillariestotissues.TheflowratesforO2andCO2areshownfor1Lofblood.

•Fig. 24.2 AccordingtoFick’slaw,diffusionofagasacrossasheetoftissue(Vgas)isdirectlyrelatedtothesurfacearea(A)ofthetissue, thediffusionconstant(D)ofthespecificgas,andthepartialpressuredifference(P1− P2)ofthegasoneachsideofthetissue,anditisinverselyrelatedtotissuethickness(T).

gas useful for calculating DL. in partial The (P2 capillary pressure

Eq. 24.1 the is, measured (V̇ 0 partial essentially that alveolus; pressure and for in of CO) the CO ) CO, diffusion DL can monoxide from and average carbon therefore of is be the

of Equation = for capacity monoxide. DLCO diffusion where lung the carbon 24.2

Assessment DLCO a of alveolar-capillary diffusion the membrane. become the of barrier has of classic measurement It obstructive of lung diseases, as certain emphysema. the differential is diagnosis in useful such

Apatientwithinterstitialpulmonaryfibrosis(arestrictivelungdisease)inhalesasinglebreathof0.3%COfromresidualvolumetototallungcapacity.Heholdshisbreathfor10secondsandthenexhales.Afterdiscardingtheexhaledgasfromthedeadspace,arepresentativesampleofalveolargasfromlateinexhalationiscollected.TheaveragealveolarCOpressureis0.1mmHg,and0.25mLofCOhasbeentakenup.ThediffusioncapacityforCOinthispatientis . × 0 Hg mL/minute/mm = 1. 15 mL/10 seconds Hg mm

ThenormalrangeforDLCOis20to30mL/minute/mmHg.Patientswithinterstitialpulmonaryfibrosishaveaninitialalveolarinflammatoryresponsewithsubsequentscarformationwithintheinterstitialspace.Theinflammationandscarreplacethealveolianddecreasethesurfaceareaforgasdiffusiontooccur,whichresultsindecreasedDLCO.Thisisaclassiccharacteristicofcertaintypesofrestrictivelungdisease.

Oxygen Dioxide Carbon Limited the and Perfusion Exchange in Is Lung

Different have solubility factors. gases different gas chemically in combine gases ether) anesthetic blood equilibrate blood not nitrous between that proteins such rapidly and alveolar insoluble in and are with blood. as do Gases oxide and (i.e., the less blood time). seconds in than transit red bed equilibration (capillary capillary time spends the cell the in 0.75 occurs that The of of the because limited reached gas between has leaving the blood the and blood the capillary The in gas with gas insoluble alveolar the gases is limited is perfusing equilibrium partial diffusion by of alveolus. considered alveolar amount perfusion and blood only pressure contrast, (Hgb). that has solubility solubility In for alveolar-capillary as CO, affinity diffusion blood but gas hemoglobin membrane its limited, is high the because high low in a of such in of transit time. prevent the between blood CO blood alveolar These the red features and equilibration gas during cell

little pressure. be or affinity Hgb large partial amounts of blood to no CO with appreciable of in CO taken for up high increase enables its The in that are blood. to in exert Gases pressure do not chemically partial a Hgb bound CO, but Hgb. solubility to membrane O2 low to alveolar-capillary the solubility ability their because in and in have Like of blood relatively both bind CO2 high of cell sufficiently capillary. equilibration the of their rate the the transit is within However, rapid time to for equilibration occur blood during red complete CO2 Equilibration for O2 seconds. within occurs and 0.25 usually limited. and is CO2 normally Thus perfusion transfer O2 gas CO) limited equilibrium the ( reach pressure spends it that diffusion of not the (i.e., capillary is time The pressure does partial over that the in a with alveolar

Fig. ). 24.3 amount solubility a in approximately takes of O2 blood. in diffusion than lower ratio blood greater and equilibration has a same does, rate CO2 of reach Although to has it time membrane-blood consequently the

Start of

End of capillary .75 0 (sec) .50 •Fig. in .25 Time Oxide in Blood the Pressures Carbon 24.3 Partial the (CO), O2in in the to Red Their Cell Time Capillary. Monoxide Transit of Nitrous of and Uptake (N2O), Relation Blood and Forgasesthatareperfusionlimited(N2OandO2),theirpartialpressureshaveequilibratedwithalveolarpressurebeforeexitingthecapillary.Incontrast,thepartialpressureofCO,agasthatisdiffusionlimited,doesnotreachequilibriumwithalveolarpressure.Inrareconditions,O2uptakecanbecomediffusionlimited.

cells blood than 0.25 limitation CO2 Diffusion and spent the capillary seconds bed. O2 occur red would for in if less exercise the fit in vigorous and during This at occasionally high athletes healthy in case is exercise subjects very altitude. who

to two O2 in Oxygen carried in is blood Hgb. forms: bound and dissolved O2 gas the pressure blood The arterial of oxygen an partial sample dissolved measured clinically form arterial as (PaO2). is in percentage is and Only of a O2 negligible. is under to conditions in almost its O2 blood normal form, in transport the small contribution dissolved can O2 factor hypoxemia. dissolved conditions a become in severe of significant However, to the mechanism O2. is oxyhemoglobin O2 transport within blood form of cells primary of Hgb red Binding to Hgb reduced not or is O2 to to deoxyhemoglobin bound referred Hgb. as times The of blood bind 65 about Hgb. is ability capacity to enhanced O2-carrying its by to

for O2. transport Hgb the is major molecule four major Hgb (Fe+++) a a protein two of site in the The is polypeptide the ferric components: with nonprotein heme which four each form, and iron is groups, of consisting globin molecule binding, portion containing chains. reduced O2 have of which predominantly Hgb and months than two chains children have γ Normal α-globin and chains two age two (HgbF), adults two younger chains 6 fetal whereas (HgbA), of chains. β-globin α consists O2 in in difference its placenta. across of transport aids HgbF increases and for affinity structure of the the the O2 This enhanced. a 2,3-diphosphoglycerate glycolysis; is HgbF further thus product uptake is not (2,3DPG), inhibited by O2 addition, of In

to absorb of O2 alters to light. the ability Binding of Hgb Hgb blood Hgb venous oxygenated the color effect for This between (bright on change and (dark responsible deoxygenated red) is in blood of arterial red-bluish). O2 red only Binding because seconds Hgb and the 0.75 capillaries. of O2 in O2 spend thus milliseconds, facilitating occur cells with in blood dissociation transport There are cell, Hgb transport which mechanism approximately per to red blood molecules 280 O2. efficient an provides million a one of protein subunit similar and structure to Hgb, molecule. has function Myoglobin, in Hgb only the It especially in the blood to muscle and O2-deprived conditions. storage of in O2, is in cells aids transfer from critical the which of O2

polypeptide the Hgb function. in sickle the Abnormalities result in with molecule abnormal disease) of occur (i.e., globin mutations amino arrangement cell and of in spatial or sequence acid chains the the (nitric oxide), as such the can cyanides •Fig. and oxidize Compounds nitrites CO, of and (Po2) Dissociation 24.4 Occupied Molecules Saturation). Binding the Partial Pressure Blood by Hemoglobin Showing in Percentage Oxyhemoglobin That Oxygen Between the the (Percentage Curve Sites Are Oxygen (Hgb) of Relationship Adulthemoglobin(HgbA)isabout50%saturatedwithoxygenataPO2of27mmHg,90%saturatedat60mmHg,andabout98%saturatedat100mmHg.TheP50isthepartialpressureatwhichHgbis50%saturatedwithO2.WhentheO2dissociationcurveshiftstotheright,P50increases.Whenthecurveshiftstotheleft,P50decreases.

iron group molecule and state the state reduces ferric ferrous the (Fe++) the Hgb. (Fe+++), the O2 to reduced ability which of heme in it to change to bind from

cells Hgb. plasma chemically alveoli, in red binds into quickly In majority the and O2 of diffuses to blood the decreases). up is so of Hgb passive gives process through diffusion This reversible, its quickly to in that (the concentration O2 tissue O2 Hgb to the The O2 between and dissociation blood PO2 illustrates oxyhemoglobin molecules number bound the curve in relationship of

(Fig. Hgb ). 24.4 saturation than the 60 at on PO2, lower especially curve Hg. mm S pressures of dependence shape the of Hgb demonstrates partial The level sufficient flat Hgb at 90% Hg) remains effect range to over drop the (100 of (>60 saturation, of curve significance clinical that oxyhemoglobin portion dissociation 60 of a a on wide 100%, mm O2 pressures The to in minimal PO2 is mm which transport partial has a for normal the delivery. and Hg) a portion of which the tissue. facilitates PO2, release of Hg) curve released of change is diffusion mm significance in into a from large (<60 clinical of that O2 a and O2 small the Hgb amount only The with steep is the called Hgb O2 curve it 27 adults. with which on and 50% The saturated point in the Hg the normal mm P50, is at is is

2,3-DPG •Fig. Decreased P50 Increased pH PCO2 ˜˜˜˜°°°°Temperature (decreased 2,3-DPG affinity) PCO2 (increased pH Temperature affinity) P50 Factorsthatshifttheoxyhemoglobindissociationcurvetotheright(decreasedaffinityofHgbforO2)ortotheleft(increasedaffinity).2,3-DPG,2,3-diphosphoglycerate;PCO2,partialpressureofcarbondioxide. 24.5

That Dissociation the Shift Factors Oxyhemoglobin Physiological Curve

numerous or right to clinical to dissociation curve oxyhemoglobin conditions, in the either The the can shift left (

Fig.

). 24.5 curve the is shifted when the to right affinity The of

episode. cell sickle Intheinheritedhomozygousconditionknownassickle affectedindividualshaveanaminoacidsubstitution(valineforglutamicacid)ontheβ disease, cell chainoftheHgbmolecule.ThiscreatesasicklecellHgb(HgbS),which,whennotboundtooxygen(deoxyhemoglobinordesaturatedHgb),cantransformintoastiffgelatinousmaterialthatdistortsthenormalbiconcaveshapeoftheredbloodcelltoacrescent,orsickle-shaped,form.Thischangeinappearancefromsphericaltoasickleshapeincreasesthetendencyoftheredbloodcelltoformthrombiorclotsthatobstructsmallvesselsandcreatesaclinicalconditionknownasacute Thesymptomsofsuchanepisodevary,dependingonthesiteoftheobstruction(e.g.,inthebrain,stroke;inthelungs,pulmonaryinfarction)andarecommonlyassociatedwithintensepain.Thespleenisacommonsiteofobstruction/infarction,andtheensuingtissuedamagecompromisestheimmunecapabilitiesofaffectedindividualsandrendersthemsusceptibletorecurrentinfections.Inthehomozygousform,thisconditionislife-shortening;however,individualswiththeheterozygousformareresistanttomalaria.Thusanindividualwithheterozygousalleleshasasurvivaladvantageinregionsoftheworldwheremalariaisprevalent,whichmayexplainwhythesicklecellmutationhasbeenpreservedthroughevolution.TheincreasedaffinityofHgbFforO2confersadvantagestoindividualswithsicklecelldiseaseinthatthecellsdonotdesaturateasmuchwhenO2isreleasedfromHgbtothetissueandthusarelesslikelytobecomedeformedinthesickleshape.SicklecelldiseaseismostprevalentamongindividualsofAfricanAmericandescent,butitisalsoobservedinHispanic,Turkish,Asian,andotherethnicgroups.

for decreases, which Hgb dissociation. O2 O2 enhances PO2, O2 to given P50 a results decreased at which increase. This to Hgb in binding the causes the curve of the which When decrease. Hgb left, for shifted P50 is the affinity the to O2 causes increases, to tissue and to state, dissociation inhibited. are O2 In this delivery left occur or mm 100 pressures Hg). the to they (80 dissociation within the Shifts the normal effect curve little O2 range of right at when to have partial curve), part oxyhemoglobin Hg 60 partial the transport. in O2 mm the pressures However, curve can (steep influence of dissociation shifts O2 dramatically at below

the Changes (pH) ion concentration oxyhemoglobin shift blood curve. in dissociation hydrogen the hydrogen into production increase and pH. (H+) in decrease by CO2 release An in a in of ions blood and its results generation tissue effect of the has tissues. into which beneficial curve aiding right, to for from by in a This Hgb the O2 diffusion the release shifts dissociation on curve is of in direct the decrease and effect in to Hgb. a to dissociation The right due to the the pH CO2 shift to increase causes in shift in lungs, an in CO2 as blood the pH, which Conversely, is curve turn passes left. through dissociation oxyhemoglobin to exhaled, the results which the lungs tissues. This for is Bohr serves on CO2 Hgb affinity and O2 to O2 as of the delivery effect, enhance it to the uptake the of effect and in of known O2 in to increase during right the O2 more tissues, curve be is as the it to to where temperature, shifts enables released because the dissociation body needed and demand An exercise, increases. oxyhemoglobin occurs decrease temperature, the fingers, cold a toes, the During extremities especially dissociation (higher curve Hgb affinity). to and O2 in shifts (lips, the left in ears), weather, body In not normal, in of these this facilitated. O2 is be but may release instance, PaO2 extremities

2,3-Diphosphoglycerate

anaerobic glycolysis. have red and they mitochondria, blood depend Mature therefore cells do not on glycolysis, for metabolic decreases of levels 2,3-DPG, Large and O2 in as blood cells intermediary, of a increase. affinity during quantities Hgb the red are 2,3-DPG formed right. shifts oxyhemoglobin curve the to the Thus dissociation molecule, an O2 O2. the differ Hgb creates of allosteric on binding effect the binding and 2,3-DPG Although that of 2,3-DPG of binding the sites inhibits decreased Hgb, Conditions pH. and hypoxia, increased that include increase 2,3-DPG because to the to are Decreased in stored of blood observed unloading may the recipients which O2 a thus samples of and for affinity of Hgb 2,3-DPG tissues. O2, present problem transfusion greater inhibits of levels

greater Hgb, the curve thus As affinity dissociation and has shifts adult the discussed than for a left. oxyhemoglobin HgbF O2 previously, to does

•Fig. Hemoglobin 80 O2 PO2 40 0 Hg) 20 saturation Theoxyhemoglobinandcarboxyhemoglobindissociationcurvesclearlyillustratetheincreasedaffinitythatcarbonmonoxide(CO)hasforHgb,incomparisonwithO2.100 (%) CO 60 (mm 24.6 80 hemoglobin 60 + + 100 20 hemoglobin 40 0

as group Hgb and CO same binds heme O2 carboxyhemoglobin forms at site to the (HgbCO). the of molecule the of ability dissociation difference A and to the of is comparison major by between to Hgb O2 bind the that and carboxyhemoglobin CO curves. illustrated of a oxyhemoglobin times CO for of than O2 about greater for 200 ( is affinity The Hgb it is

Fig. ). 24.6 binding of influence amounts Hgb. the greatly O2 small Thus to can CO of for enhanced. is O2 the CO, presence the In of of affinity Hgb shift the curve the tissues. and unloading of to which causes to left, dissociation delivery prevents further the O2 This to to all 1.0 to are Hgb is of Hg, CO, As and O2. occupied bind the PCO by of binding the unable sites mm Hgb approaches blood compatible CO and the death This is life of not is cases in situation poisoning. of cause with who the sites healthy can occupation about of to of binding 2% reside in binding HgbCO in individuals Hgb areas, cigarette increased In individuals, however, 1% sites; be urban Hgb smokers to 10%. traffic occupies and high-density in hazardous. to considered Levels above are 7% 5% as Treatment high or of displace of high those O2 concentrations who CO, a of from consists Hgb. inhaled of individuals with to car have such exhaust burning building, from administering CO levels smoke through atmospheric increases the Increasing chamber, a Hgb. which of the tension, substantially CO promotes O2 pressure use ambient of dissociation from barometric the pressure, above the binds Hgb, gas, great for does. that site and oxide, same than Hgb nitric Another O2 it has greater affinity irreversibly O2) at the times to (200,000 synthesize oxide, nitric Endothelial has which cells vasodilation properties. therapeutically used in to inhalant oxide patients as with reduce is pressure. nitric pulmonary an hypertension Thus long cautious nitric administering be the oxide Although common, nitric for when clinician is oxide poisoning not periods. should therapy is CO to Hgb-bound nitric methemoglobin. referred oxide as and nitric CO 2% of to oxide. conditions, 1% about Hgb Under is to and bound normal

Delivery Content, Oxygen and Saturation,

Hgb to can gram molecule to atoms, can Each bind of and up Hgb up mL bind 1.34 four each O2 O2. of (SO2) bound amount refers saturation O2 O2 capacity) can of maximal O2 bind to relation (100% to to the Hgb. of O2 the in The amount Hgb that term heme At with O2 capacity, are at O2 the the fully the groups and heme of three saturated are occupied. O2, capacity, molecules of 100% four 75% Hgb groups of to Hgb heme the the group to each Binding increases molecule bind additional O2. of O2 affinity the Hgb bound in the is to dissolved O2. content O2 and The of sum blood O2 the content CO2 the anemia ( increased in presence in CO decreased individuals and and Oxygen is of with

Fig. 24.7

including Oxygen the output, oxygenate cardiac of factors, the content delivery lungs Hgb the on to is from the to of the lung ability dependent several tissues blood. blood, and tissue level. Not of blood the carried unloaded in all the at is O2 the actual between the extracted arterial the from cardiac content O2 and is difference O2 blood The content, multiplied venous O2 tissue output. by the by Under Hgb only 75% actually by conditions, O2, tissues. used with leaves is the tissue about 25% and saturated normal increase muscles, of output an and skeletal reduce in O2 relaxation Hypothermia, extraction. cardiac anemia, increase a output, decrease in exercise Conversely, cardiac and extraction. hyperthermia, O2

•Fig. AcomparisonofO2contentcurvesunderthreeconditionsshowswhycarboxyhemoglobin(HgbCO)dramaticallyreducestheO2transportsystem.FiftypercentHgbCOrepresentsthebindingofhalfthecirculatingHgbwithcarbonmonoxide(CO).The50%hemoglobinand50%HgbCOcurvesshowthesamedecreasedO2contentinarterialblood.However,COhasaprofoundeffectinloweringvenouspartialpressureofoxygen.Thearterial(a)andmixedvenous(v)pointsofconstantcardiacoutputareindicated. 24.7

adequate insufficient is O2 in Tissue condition available a to is for cells aerobic maintaining which hypoxia metabolism. H+ increases metabolism lactic subsequent results the and of lactate Thus the is and formation stimulated in acid. of levels and in anaerobic The pH. result significant in decrease can net lead a to blood severe and blue-gray fingertips cases (cyanotic) of hypoxia, In because increased lack toes, deoxyhemoglobin extremities, appear O2 may of of and levels. the histotoxic are (hypoxic hypoxia, discussed major There hypoxia hypoxia), in detail four of hypoxia, hypoxia, tissue in types anemic circulatory

23. Chapter

Hgb number blood depends the oxygenation the red circulation. of thus concentration the in and on on available Tissue of cells is in by cortical hormone production by the bone Red is erythropoietin, kidneys which (erythropoiesis) the the cells. interstitial synthesized in blood marrow controlled cell Although of and decreased concentration, stable, very Hgb levels low the Hgb low PaO2 erythropoietin. delivery, are O2 normally stimulate secretion the red of blood This production increases cells. and Chronic cortical erythropoietin. interstitial to their damages cells disease suppresses thereby ability renal synthesize the decreased with Hgb causes along anemia, of lack erythropoietin. because This the of epoetin increases production. (Epogen, Procrit) alfa replacement using red (Aranesp) alfa therapy darbepoetin effectively blood Erythropoietin cell or

of the CO2 and approximately healthy the rate are at conditions, under mL/minute molecules 200 80 capillary CO2 a by for enter O2 expired of bed. produced of that every lung is typically, 100 molecules 100 molecules to the exchange of CO2 of conditions, expired O2 normal O2). is as ratio uptake (80 and, under to ratio respiratory referred is of The CO2 0.8 to molecules as respiratory to the compartment, tissue where blood is quotient. the is at to referred it similar This ratio

comparison for more in The and is CO2, PaO2 O2, has sensitive to in capabilities body ventilation hence storage than much enhanced changes PaCO2. with is on production. in dependent to several alveolar arterial PaO2 is dependent ventilation solely ventilation, alveolar and CO2 on addition Whereas factors, PaCO2 is an ventilation alveolar relationship is between There and PaCO2. inverse

−) as dissolved and transported blood, bicarbonate (HCO3 In primarily as blood CO2 in is CO2 but also as red cells

= 0.0301 •Fig. H2CO3 ˜ PCO2 Blood. 24.8 Mechanisms in CO2Transport of ThepredominantmechanismbywhichCO2istransportedfromtissuecellstothelungisintheformofbicarbonateanion(HCO3−).H2CO3,carbonicacid;HgbO,oxyhemoglobin;NaHCO3,sodiumbicarbonate;RBC,redbloodcell. v.

to proteins and plasma to carbamino (i.e., binds CO2 protein Hgb; complexes

Fig. 24.8 ). plasma, it through dissolves. Once CO2 enters diffuses quickly and the tissue H2O is of the mechanism blood generation for form The reaction carbonic of in major cells: HCO3 the with acid to − (H2CO3) CO2 red

24.3 Equation

blood the normally however, The proceeds slowly; by red is catalyzed carbonic it quite within anhydrase. cells enzyme reaction cell maintain diffuses red helps a chloride process known the osmotic − HCO3 in of which The in shift, blood cell out exchange the as the for Cl−, its equilibrium. This (see chemical reaction

Fig. the levels. can is HCO3 reduces shifted the CO2 and in lungs, more in 24.8 it which tissues, HCO3 or entering left generate be shifted as be the − exhaled from to response right to to can the − reversible blood is CO2 to ) more free is Hgb. blood The quickly by the binding red H+ within to cell buffered shift reaction the synthesis moving cause HCO3; of critical for (low the toward pH) levels of H+ the keeping reaction to the high of free is left. to H+ Buffering

Regulation Hydrogen Acid-Base Balance Concentration of Ion and

of many (pH) is homeostasis. The H+ pH essential for effect and processes has a metabolic regulation concentration normal cells, within dramatic on concentration H+ assess the is In to blood . the of measured clinical pH setting, 7.45 adults is chemical The to is kidneys, pH 7.35 lungs, normal buffer for and maintained the range by and systems. − concentration illustrated of of , In buffering is conversion (pH): H+ major mechanism CO2 respiratory HCO3 follows, to as the a the and system, regulating

Equation 24.4

and changes, concentration HCO3 as − as does H2CO3, PaCO2. the of so well PACO2 As used equation affect how calculate changes CO2 to is Henderson-Hasselbalch − in The and HCO3 pH:

where solubility. Equation 24.5 α= Thus

]pH Equation 1. − = 6 24.6 log[HCO3 PCO2 × 03 0 +

in the solution. amount of solubility (α) CO2 these and equations, In the its is determined from PCO2 0.03. a 37°C, value has For of α at plasma at of the the overall a plasma reaction the constant has pK′ 37°C. 6.1 negative of for is dissociation value logarithmic Also, logarithm and for

(respiratory alkalosis). hyperventilation thereby increase secondary anxiety and Acute PCO2 causes in an to reduces exercise or pH depressant, a respiratory because pH the secondary of an increases overdose PCO2 decreases hypoventilation acidosis). of to if Conversely, (respiratory ketoacidosis, hypochloremia, doses Acid-base metabolic renal as metabolic (e.g., vomiting, acidosis such by acidosis, alkalosis imbalances disorders and metabolic lactic (e.g., steroids). caused also and failure) of are high hypokalemia,

CO2 is PCO2 dissociation ( related blood curve linear In the for to O2, and contrast to directly in

Fig. 24.9). dissociation a on O2 Hgb CO2 has with degree The of curve. saturation major effect the 1. and bind O2 CO2 to Although Hgb

of have rapid a are rate air-to-blood perfusion limited. helium) Gases equilibration ether, oxide, that (nitrous Gases that equilibration a are have (CO) diffusion air-to-blood limited. slow rate be Under CO2 some situations. exchange perfusion in but and are limited limited O2 can conditions, normal diffusion

2.

and the . in for blood major of The CO2, in the red O2 is HCO3 transport red to is − within of bound cell Hgb, within blood blood cells form mechanism it

3.

with dissociation is the with . generation of within − The H2CO3, is catalyzed for reaction the anhydrase , of HCO3 HCO3 subsequent H2O to CO2 enzyme form major H+ mechanism carbonic red blood reversible its by cells − to and and

4.

O2 S curve is shaped. The dissociation •Fig. 100% only on Hgb has area increasing saturation plateau (>60 or a the from mm decreasing In minimal Hg), PO2 effect Arterial Curves 24.9 and Venous for CO2in Equilibrium Blood. representthevenousequilibriumcurve. VenousbloodcantransportmoreCO2thanarterialbloodcanatanygivenPCO2.IncomparisonwiththeHgbO2equilibriumcurve,theCO2curvesareessentiallystraightlinesbetweenaPCO2of20andaPCO2of80mmHg.Long dashes dashes representthearterialequilibriumcurve;short

Hgb. deoxygenated sites, oxygenated at Hgb than affinity for greater has CO2 different than arterial CO2 up and oxygenated (venous more Thus transports does. freely blood blood takes deoxygenated blood) − readily of the forms compounds free binds . HCO3 during more The carbamino Hgb more and deoxygenated also released formation H+ readily is alveoli O2 the from effect changes cells. the to reversed as of and is transported in on CO2 PCO2 the oxyhemoglobin the The in to content of when red to effect relationship saturation blood Haldane referred lungs is venous blood dissociation in with comparison shift a in blood. arterial the the to in by curve left effect This CO2 illustrated is

to 90%. values. ensures PO2 adequate a range over This large Hgb saturation of

5.

related CO2 linear PCO2. curve dissociation is to and directly The is on CO2 dependent and alveolar PCO2 production. ventilation solely

6.

a H+ role HCO3 of and acid-base critical body. in The − ions regulation the CO2 plays the to pathway in in maintaining balance

7.

oxygenation is on number Tissue subsequently of cells Hgb blood hormone and dependent controlled the within blood is red by red the which cells, (and production) erythropoietin. of kidneys. secretion low O2 erythropoietin concentration, low stimulate the delivery, in PaO2 the Hgb Low and

8.

normal amounts to the aerobic conduct levels occurs of are hypoxia O2 metabolism. Tissue to insufficient of tissue supplied when

Tsuda JP, A. Butler the environment gases alveoli—theoretical foundations. and of between Transport Compr Physiol. 1301-1316. 2011;1:

Koulouris Calverley PMA, NG. modern in Flow dynamic concepts physiology. hyperinflation: key limitation and respiratory J. Eur Respir 2005;25:186-199.

meta-analysis of Hillman limits SS, vertebrates: MS. for exchange. Hedrick TV, aerobic maximal A of respiratory gas Hancock metabolism to cardiovascular comparative and implications Physiol Comp J [B]. 2013;183:167-179.

JM. Hughes Assessing exchange. gas Respir Dis. Chron 2007;4:205-214.

J, Glenny Petersson RW. the Gas ventilation-perfusion in and lung. exchange relationships Eur J. Respir 2014;44:1023-1041.

LM. AW, Romer Sheel and respiratory Ventilation mechanics. Physiol. Compr 2012;2:1093-1142.

Olfert MK, Lindinger MI, al. et IM, Stickland Pulmonary during acid-base gas exercise. balance and exchange Compr Physiol. 2013;3:693-739.

Whipp BJ. CO2 O2 dissociating pulmonary in during Physiological mechanisms exchange humans. dynamics exercise and Exp Physiol. 2007;92:347-355.

student completion this to able should the Upon answer be the of 1. chapter, questions: following

the organization of Describe breathing. central

2.

respiration. central the role regulating chemoreceptors peripheral Explain and in of

3.

and roles chemoreceptors contrast mechanoreceptors pulmonary in Compare of the regulating and respiration.

4.

high circumstances ventilatory and during special control exercise (e.g., Describe altitude).

5.

ventilatory effects control. Describe in of the abnormalities

their willingly and can breathe hold they pattern breathing eople modify breath. thinking, and even their without brainstem the brain input of from higher the systemic in by receptors. Control generation and includes information centers of ventilation modification and breathing by regulation and its the rhythmic the respiratory from center of O2 work from mechanical pressures to and a blood of positive arterial and and, goals (PaO2) are, to of maintain perspective, breathing perspective, minimize physiological from (PaCO2). regulate The a CO2 Another goal maintain acid-base in regulating by breathing PaCO2. brain the balance is to of begins birth. Automatic respiration at organ lung, placenta, of the fetus. utero, is the gas the in exchange In the not PaCO2 the Its fetus uterine circulation, the by PaO2 the and circulation. across from removal transport maternal interdigitate microvilli with maternal occur diffusion passive and

Ventilatory An Control: Overview

chemoreceptors, four (1) mechanoreceptors/sensory control: sites ventilatory central (2) peripheral chemoreceptors, (3) respiratory center, (4) are nerves. major the pulmonary of and There control ventilatory of medulla and composed the control the modify multiple oblongata is nuclei basic and is the located that rhythm. of center in brainstem respiratory The generate chemoreceptors, ventilatory two center rhythmic the and of which rate an generator, (2) the pattern, main generation input pattern, the ventilatory controls of higher centers controls which the brain and amplitude and integrator, pattern This of from parts: and sets consists pattern. a processes (1) from and the arises amygdalae, system cerebral higher the hypothalamus, to including brain cortex, including the Input limbic integrator centers, cerebellum.

of the chemoreceptors system surface below central Central ventrolateral the located just medulla. are the nervous in central and of and in changes in ventilation. pH modulate the These brainstem, fluid the PaCO2 chemoreceptors detect interstitial they and specialized arteries the carotid bodies) (carotid are bifurcation Peripheral at neck. external chemoreceptors bodies) located the and on aortic cells the in in (aortic the internal arch of and the PaO2, medulla pH the arterial to the These carotid and information in which nerves vagus the of back feed chemoreceptors and nuclei peripheral through PaCO2, are the of blood, nerves. integrator nerves, they glossopharyngeal branches sense sinus airways, pattern. mechanoreceptors Pulmonary ventilatory nerve in irritants the the by inflation local to response release stimulation mediators stimulation, in lung or modify or and to sensory of

of rhythmic the in this of located collective the pattern horn respiration, respiratory automatic determines muscles controls output the of control neurons column output center The to motor respiration. the anterior the and spinal of the neurons the the intercostal thoracic column region region in located the spinal cervical spine through control neurons the control other whereas nerves, and muscles in the diaphragm motor respiration. located activity of the accessory the phrenic of Motor muscles the of of

In the respiration, bypasses to the respiration center contrast voluntary automatic control respiratory medulla. in motor activity through in in passes motor the tracts. controlling cortex, neurons and the voluntary neural signaling to the respiration spine directly originates The corticospinal automatic act tract) of control neurons the of voluntary to respiratory as muscles (ventrolateral final (corticospinal tracts) integration site ventilation. the and The motor the of of demonstrated influences the with can neurons, the and of spinal be Voluntary motor these holding. at this by breath control competes level competition muscles automatic the the At motor hold, breath voluntary start neurons. spinal of the dominates control as breath effort the the automatic eventually However, and hold. the ventilatory the control the of hold continues, breath duration overpowers voluntary limits ventilation SECTION5Berne (L/min) Levy also innervate Alveolar muscles 5 10 0 agents Hg) 490 15 35 •Fig. PaCO2 COPD Motor 25 55 Metabolic acidosis Awake Morphine, Physiology barbiturates neurons (mm Sleep 45 & Anesthetic 65 normal during and Anesthesia, Normal of Partial Relationship Awake after Sleep, Ventilation Pressure Metabolic Arterial Deep of the and Presence Ingestion in States, 25.1 Carbon Acidosis. between (PaCO2) Narcotic Dioxide in and Alveolar Boththeslopesoftheresponse(sensitivity)andthepositionoftheresponsecurves(threshold,thepointatwhichthecurvecrossesthex-axis[notshown])arechanged,whichindicatesdifferencesinventilatoryresponsesandresponsethresholds.COPD,chronicobstructivepulmonarydisease.

airway. upper of the control center. are within located the medulla These near the neurons respiratory They muscles nerves. through upper airways in the the innervate cranial the they initiation dilate and at activated, of the pharynx large When inspiration. airways

Response to Dioxide Carbon

by blood. arterial Ventilation and in pH is regulated PaCO2, PaO2, PaCO2 is the of regulators. important these most are to to maintain PaCO2 the controlled and close of 40 breathing Hg. mm rate Both depth normal 40 and ventilation linear reaches exceeds there as rise a is awake mm a individual, PaCO2 in In

Hg (Fig. ). 25.1 ventilatory both in and to anesthetic reduced drugs center the barbiturates, hyperventilation the and by O2, or depress drive CO2 changes to by response be morphine, agents. and such PaCO2 that decrease respiratory The ventilatory can as response and the inadequate instances, In muscles of innervate neurons the to these the motor stimulate stimulus that respiration. is is also sleep. depressed It during reduced (COPD). the chronic is in In in can response with PaCO2 work occur to individuals ventilatory if disease obstructive of increased, the breathing changes addition, is which pulmonary effective primarily effect the promoting neural the as output in occurs result of limitation center ventilation. mechanical because less This a of the ventilation respiratory to is

by information respiratory in peripheral this central centers. Changes chemoreceptors, and to they sensed PaCO2 transmit medullary are the and normal then ventilation The control center range. minute the thereby within regulates PaCO2 and respiratory maintains Hg for 3 1 each in PaCO2. L/minute presence a of normal approximately In rise ventilation by the increases mm PaO2, increased is is to ( in PaO2 when PaCO2 an the response further low increase The

Fig. ). 25.2, PaCO2 given in low for is ventilation PaO2, given any the a is a enhanced. for PaCO2, ventilation and With greater increase increment in to is a of test the the as response of the a is termed inspired CO2 ventilatory minute ventilation response CO2 CO2 function and slope The sensitivity. of this is (see by relationship amplified that to recognize important is O2 It low

Fig. B 25.2, ). low because different for to PaCO2 the responsiveness are O2 PaO2 sensing enhanced in responsible and peripheral The chemoreceptors. mechanisms is asphyxia additive when on Thus hypercapnia-elevated present) called the of (often ventilatory an changes effect output resulting the O2 stimulation. chemoreceptor has on both are hypoxemia-low CO2 and presence both and

Control of The Ventilation: Details

The Center Control Respiratory

maintained, of the breathing originates inherent in medulla. thus rhythmicity breathing periodic between the When is is pons, and transected that the the experimentally brain the demonstrating medulla the within the involved pattern nuclei distinct are no medulla to two found be group of Although neurons been generation respiratory ( of in the single medulla the has “pacemaker,” breathing in

Fig. ). 25.3 is the respiratory solitarius is dorsal of which One the is cells region nucleus medulla. in tractus nucleus group composed the located and dorsomedial of (DRG), in the IX •Fig. input receive nerves the from DRG Cells cranial afferent in Other Hypoxia on The and Varied. Ventilation Effects 25.2 Pressures Hypercapnia the Partial of Gas Are Respiratory as ThesensitivityoftheventilatoryresponsetoCO2isenhancedbyhypoxia. Atagivenpartialpressureofarterialcarbondioxide(PaCO2),ventilationincreasesmoreandmoreaspartialpressureofarterialoxygen(PaO2)decreases.WhenPaCO2isallowedtodecrease(thenormalcondition)duringhypoxia,thereislittlestimulationofbreathinguntilPaO2fallsbelow60mmHg.Thehypoxicresponseismediatedthroughthecarotidbodychemoreceptors.B, A,

intracranial station constitute initial and X, the the this input. for originate processing which and airways lungs afferent and from ventrolateral of group the (VRG), region of the in cells The the is medulla. respiratory ventral medullary group second located the the retrofacialis, groups: nucleus nucleus para-ambiguus. VRG cell caudal is the three nucleus of retroambiguus, composed and The rostral neurons. VRG The inspiratory expiratory and both contains located during nucleus cells cells are The retroambiguus the during nucleus of rostrally caudally are located nucleus active whereas and of exhalation, retroambiguus active the the the retrofacialis inspiration. nerve neurons The muscles. and the vagus in the para-ambiguus to travel has pharyngeal inspiratory and expiratory laryngeal nucleus that •Fig. Discharges Located Respiratory Center the the Most in the Brain. Control 25.3 of The Medulla, Portion Primitive is Theneuronsaremainlyintwoareas:thedorsalrespiratorygroup(DRG),whichconsistsofthenucleustractussolitarius,andtheventralrespiratorygroup(VRG),whichconsistsoftherostralnucleusretrofacialis,nucleusparaambiguus,andthecaudalnucleusretroambiguus.C1referstothefirstcervicalsignalsegmenttothecaudalborderofthepons.Thefourthventricleofthebrainislocatedbelowthecerebellumandabove,andbetween,theponsandthemedulla.

•Fig. Basic of Brainstem Wiring the 25.4 Controller. of Ventilatory Diagram the oftheneuronpoolsindicatewhethertheoutputisexcitatory(+)orinhibitory(−).PoolAprovidestonicinspiratorystimulitothemusclesofbreathing.PoolBisstimulatedbypoolAandprovidesadditionalstimulationtothemusclesofbreathing,andpoolBstimulatespoolC.OtherbraincentersfeedintopoolC(inspiratorycutoffswitch),whichsendsinhibitoryimpulsestopoolA.Afferentinformation(feedback)fromvarioussensorsactsatdifferentlocations:ChemoreceptorsactonpoolA,andintrapulmonarysensoryfibersactviathevagusnervesonpoolB.Apneumotaxiccenterintheanteriorponsreceivesinputfromthecerebralcortex,anditactsonpoolC. Thesignsofthemainoutput(arrows)

in other some cells and cells. areas cells these inhibit from excite

the involve respiratory and inspiration expiratory two center, control and inspiratory ( phases: level the one of At exhalation three

Fig. 25.4 ). cells from with followed Inspiration nucleus nucleus in a the nucleus in solitarius, retroambiguus, throughout para-ambiguus, steady and abrupt an begins inspiration. by ramp-like the increase the rate discharge increase firing in tractus This respiratory contraction the progressive during breathing. to of muscles leads automatic inspiration, end at neuron point an At begins. exhalation which to firing event decrease the of causes “off-switch” markedly, neuron in At increasing neuron expiratory inspiratory expiratory and of I inspiratory exhalation firing. (phase down the paradoxical phase a increase tone firing muscle the expiration), by of slows start and neuron of II This firing decreases stops during exhalation. phase inspiratory DRG cell ventilation, and specific appears are the in many in involved different VRG each neurons Although a to type function. have inspiratory-inhibitory muscles an the Hering-Breuer For reflex airways. from is example, the arises reflex stretch located smooth of receptors in that afferent the the inspiratory receptors early exhalation by associated with stimulating phase off-switch stretch of stimulates lung inflation the control. results these in and Increasing muscle neurons intermittent tracts (tonic) (phasic) Thus expiratory an the drive sensory the cranial in on from drive thalamus, depends and and cerebrum, ascending breathing cord. rhythmic DRG inspiratory from the a nerves, spinal continuous

composition A the chemical in to is a fluid or change around blood it. a responds of other receptor that chemoreceptor ventrolateral chemoreceptors specialized Central medulla. of cells surface the the are on extracellular fluid. the are Chemoreceptors surrounding of sensitive to the pH contact affect cerebrospinal fluid ventilation extracellular in fluid is chemoreceptors by in CSF (CSF), pH the with changes of on these acting Because this

by is the plasma CSF arachnoid that plexus secreted is is ultrafiltrate reabsorbed and of an choroid by villi. continuously the it and composition by influenced of the of the is the in blood. surrounding area metabolic composition is the of CSF in contact the cells activity the Because fluid in with the the extracellular brain, as because sites blood-brain between origin exists is the composition the the of ( plasma, two same of CSF barrier of Although the the not plasma that is CSF

Fig. ). 25.5 the cells, muscle, ions of barrier composed blood-brain regulates CSF. and smooth membranes, it blood movement and The is pial endothelial the and between arachnoid and of CSF transporting the and ions the composition choroid ionic In addition, determines by of of out CSF. into plexus also HCO3 and barrier CO2. impermeable by permeable by H+ it very relatively but The is is ions, blood-brain − PCO2 the Thus the arterial CSF parallels PCO2 tension. in product as by of CO2 also is brain the a metabolism. of produced cells is few in is more and ( the of acidic millimeters blood, a arterial the CSF usually PCO2 (7.33) than that than in As consequence, mercury higher in so plasma a CSF pH in slightly

•Fig. 25.1 Table 25.5 Carbon the Blood-Brain and Barrier. Dioxide ionscrossthebarrierslowly.Thepartialpressureofarterialcarbondioxide(PaCO2)combineswithCO2generatedbymetabolismtodilatethesmoothmuscle.Incomparisonwitharterialblood,thepHofCSFislowerandthePCO2ishigher,withlittleproteinbuffering. andHCO3− PaCO2crossestheblood-brainbarrierandrapidlyequilibrateswithCO2incerebrospinalfluid(CSF).H+

PCO2,partialpressureofcarbondioxide.

in afferent changes to center. (not transmit that control PaO2 to peripheral carotid and respiratory the bodies respond aortic content), O2 pH, are they information central chemoreceptors PaCO2, the The and and chemoreceptors chemoreceptors The PaO2. are peripheral only that to changes respond the in The for responsible also are peripheral ventilatory response the approximately chemoreceptors to PaCO2. 40% of chemoreceptors structures. These are highly small, vascularized are in and They of I cells consist rich reticulum. type endoplasmic (glomus) mitochondria that also types dopamine, vesicles) have They granules including norepinephrine, of and (synaptic that contain neuropeptides. cytoplasmic neurotransmitters, several acetylcholine, various nerve (carotid and the body) they I sinus type brainstem and cells, through synapse fibers vagus carotid information transmit nerve to Afferent with the

TheHenderson-Hasselbalch relatesthepHofCSFtotheconcentrationofbicarbonate([HCO3−]): isthesolubilitycoefficient(0.03mmol/L/mmHg)andpKisthenegativelogarithmofthedissociationconstantforcarbonicacid(6.1).TheHenderson-HasselbalchequationdemonstratesthatanincreaseinCSFPCO2causesthepHofCSFtodecreaseatanygiven[HCO3−].ThedecreaseinpHstimulatesthecentralchemoreceptorsandtherebyincreasesventilation.ThusCO2inbloodregulatesventilationbyitseffectonthepHofCSF.TheresultinghyperventilationreducesthePaCO2,andthereforethePCO2ofCSF,andreturnsthepHofCSFtowardanormalvalue.Furthermore,cerebralvasodilationaccompaniesanincreaseinPaCO2,andthisenhancesthediffusionofCO2intoCSF.Incontrast,anincreaseinCSF[HCO3−]causesanincreaseinthepHofCSFatanygivenPaCO2. equation whereα

ChangesinPaCO2thatresultfromalterationsinpHactivatehomeostaticmechanismsthatreturnthepHbacktowardanormalvalue.Theblood-brainbarrierregulatesthepHofCSFbyadjustingtheioniccompositionand[HCO3 −]ofCSF.ThesechangesinCSF[HCO3−],however,occurslowly,overaperiodofseveralhours,whereaschangesinCSFPCO2canoccurwithinminutes.ThuscompensationforchangesinthepHofCSFrequireshourstodevelopfully.

patterns arise wall that the and ventilatory ( chest lungs reflexes and Several affect ventilation from

25.2 ). Table by lung both an reflex ventilatory inspiratory-inhibitory The with stimulated and Hering-Breuer is in associated increase volume. volume, in increases tidal especially rate those nerve mediated body). when stretch is (aortic This by vagal fibers, reflex and I Type cells cells sensing PaCO2, responsible pH. the PaO2, primarily are for and in decreases in enhances which respiration. there discharge, increase response In even chemoreceptor PaO2, an small is to when 75 response is PaO2 The robust decreases Hg. mm below CSF and regulated central ( through by peripheral and arterial chemoreceptors changes is effects on ventilation pH Thus in

Fig. 25.6 •Fig. (PaCO2) Dioxide and ([H+]) Brainstem Response is Affected Cerebrospinal Fluid The Ventilatory (CSF) Fluid. Carbon to by of in of Concentration Interstitial Partial Pressure Hydrogen Arterial the 25.6 Duringchronicmetabolicacidosis(e.g.,diabeticketoacidosis),the[H+]inCSFisincreased,andtheventilatoryresponsetoinspiredPaCO2isincreased(steeperslope).Conversely,duringchronicmetabolicalkalosis(arelativelyuncommoncondition),the[H+]inCSFisdecreasedandtheventilatoryresponsetoinspiredPaCO2isdecreased(reducedslope).Thepositionsoftheresponselinesarealsoshifted,whichindicatesalteredthresholds.

[(760− CO2producedbymetabolismofbraincells),andHCO3− 95mmHg.IntheCSF,pHwouldbeapproximately7.33,PaCO2wouldbe44mmHg(PaCO2+ 0.21]− [40/0.8]= 100mmHg− ).Ifthealveolar-arterialPO2difference[AaDO2]is5mmHg,PaO2= 5mmHg= ImagineflyingfromNewYorkCitytoDenver.ThebarometricpressureinNewYorkisapproximately760mmHg,whereasinthemountainssurroundingDenver,Colorado,itis600mmHg.Atsealevel,thePaO2isapproximately95mmHgandPAO2= wouldbeapproximately22mEq/L. 100mmHg(accordingtothealveolarairequation;see 47)×

116− (600− 47)× 0.21= (40/0.8)= [30/0.8]= 66mmHg,andPaO2= 0.21]− 61mmHgifthereisnochangeinAaDO2).ThisdecreaseinarterialO2stimulatestheperipheralchemoreceptorsandtherebyincreasesventilation.TheincreaseinventilationdecreasesPaCO2andelevatesarterialpH.TheresultofthisincreaseinventilationistominimizethehypoxemiabyincreasingPAO2.Forexample,assumethatPACO2decreasesto30mmHg.ThenPAO2= 116mmHg;therearealsodecreasesinthepartialpressuresofalveolarandarterialO2:PAO2= [(600− 47)× 78mmHg,a12–mmHgincreaseinPAO2. WhenyouarriveinDenver,thereisanabruptdecreaseinthepartialpressureofinspiredO2(PiO2):PiO2=

isgraduallyexcretedfromplasmabythekidneys.ThisresultsinagradualreturnofarterialpHtowardnormalvalues.PeripheralchemoreceptorstimulationincreasesfurtherasarterialpHbecomesnormal(peripheralchemoreceptorsareinhibitedbytheelevatedarterialpH).Finally,within36hoursofarrivingathighaltitude,minuteventilationincreasessignificantly.Thisdelayedresponseisgreaterthantheimmediateeffectofthehypoxemiaonventilation.Thisfurtherincreaseinventilationisduetobothcentralandperipheralchemoreceptorstimulation.Thusafter36hours,botharterialpHandCSFpHareapproachingnormalvalues;minuteventilationisincreased,PaO2isdecreased,andPaCO2isdecreased. ThedecreaseinPaCO2alsocausesadecreaseinthePCO2ofCSF.Because[HCO3−]isunchanged,thepHofCSFincreases.ThisincreaseinthepHofCSFattenuatestherateofdischargeofthecentralchemoreceptorsanddecreasestheircontributiontotheventilatorydrive.Overthenext12to36hours,[HCO3−]inCSFdecreasesasacid-basetransporterproteinsintheblood-brainbarrierreduce[HCO3−].Asaconsequence,thepHofCSFreturnstowardnormal.Centralchemoreceptordischargeincreases,andminuteventilationisfurtherincreased.Atthesametimethat[HCO3−]inCSFdecreases,HCO3−

),arterialpHreturnstoanormalvalue,andminuteventilationreturnstoanormallevel. Younowreturnhome.WhenyoulandinNewYork,thePiO2returnstoanormalvalue,andthehypoxicstimulustoventilationisremoved.PaO2returnstoanormalvalue,andtheperipheralchemoreceptorstimulationtoventilationdecreases.Thiscausesanincreaseinarterial[CO2]towardnormalvalues,whichinturncausesanincreaseinCSF[CO2].ThisincreaseisassociatedwithadecreaseinthepHofCSFas[HCO3−]inCSFisreducedandventilationisaugmented.Overthenext12to36hours,theacid-basetransportersintheblood-brainbarriertransportHCO3− backintoCSF,andthepHofCSFgraduallyreturnstowardnormalvalues.Similarly,thepHofblooddecreasesasPaCO2risesbecausearterial[HCO3−]decreases.Thisstimulatestheperipheralchemoreceptors,andminuteventilationremainsaugmented.Overthenext12to36hours,blood[HCO3−]increasesinthekidneys(see

elicited, by off-switch results inspiration the cessation it in in medulla. of neurons the stimulating to newborns. reflex during inactive and be quiet is appears This breathing important in most the initiates diving cold nasal with of or receptors facial water Stimulation reflex. bradycardia reflex is apnea, elicited, of or occur. breathing, cessation When and this from individuals water This of the aspirating reflex drowning. stages protects in initial in sneeze nose responsible the the receptors for reflex. of is Activation

sniff aspiration by receptors of pharynx. nasopharynx The stimulation mechanical the be reflex can or in and elicited swallowed the brings nasopharynx inspiratory effort expectorated. short-duration material from a This or that it is to the strong, be where can pharynx, laryngeal mechanical in by causing responsible also receptors respiration are The inhibiting and reflex closure. important the swallowing sniff for newborns can only and simultaneously, For which breathe rapid more anatomical ingestion swallow allows of nutrients. reasons,

receptors. larynx The and deep contains superficial both superficial cough, and apnea, that respiratory the expiratory protect lower tract receptors of in the results Activation aspirating material. foreign from movements located receptors the as of activation, they and skeletal in deep control fiber muscle The the muscles. muscles other in are skeletal larynx,

in in respond major pattern, of symptoms. different types lung’s in those receptors in respiratory a the the located tree and the sensory responses of the changes and to result tracheobronchial stimuli, alterations of development Three properties, variety respiratory mechanical smoke gases, stimulate noxious large irritant transmit cigarette Inhaled that and vagal in information receptors and through the myelinated trachea airways dust, fibers. afferent airway apnea, results resistance, Stimulation these coughing. and in receptors an increase reflex of in also stretch pulmonary receptors receptors. rapidly These as adapting are known by receptors Slowly stimulation, respond inflation. mechanical stretch are to adapting they lung and activated pulmonary They information myelinated, vagal through afferent also transmit fibers. the people stretch increase stimulates delays pulmonary The next and lung volume these the COPD receptors onset in effort. with of inspiratory in it minimize expiratory affected individuals, explains compression. essential to effort airway expiratory in is dynamic, and This the slow long,

the parenchyma in respond lung stimulation In or receptors chemical in specialized located to mechanical interstitium. lung sensory the addition, receptors. (or receptors juxta-alveolar, These called J) are through vagal transmit their C fibers. unmyelinated, input They afferent be sensation and edema interstitial and responsible breath) dyspnea rapid, patterns that They lung of some of lung shortness the may states. (abnormal for inflammatory shallow in ventilatory the occur

(L/min) VO2 . VCO2 1.5 1 . 2 PaO2 Ventilation •Fig. PaCO2 Lactate pH of Main 25.8 Apnea. Categories The Two Sleep A, Obstruc-tivesleepapnea,thepleuralpressureoscillationsincreaseasCO2levelrises.Thisindicatesthatresistancetoairflowisveryhighasaresultofupperairwayobstruction.B, Centralsleepapneaischaracterizedbynoattempttobreathe,asdemonstratedbynooscillationsinpleuralpressure.

•Fig. 25.7 (V̇ Function Occur That Oxygen Exercise. Consumption a Changes During Metabolic O2) the of as consumption. Theanaerobicthreshold(arrow) isthepointatwhichtheillustratedvariableschangeandisduetolacticacidosis.PaCO2,partialpressureofarterialcarbondioxide;PaO2,partialpressureofarterialoxygen;VCO2,carbondioxide

and of the muscles tension the also joints, in they receptors located respond in respiration, of tendons, Somatic length to muscles, respiratory changes and muscles. and accessory are intercostal the rib they lung respiration, control Although do information volume in role directly and they terminating do provide a not play about inspiration. increased can with breath. airway pulmonary same the within individuals in and especially decreased muscle are because augment They compliance important force resistance they who in help receptors during the Somatic also minimize newborns, compliant chest cages. inspiration very have wall rib distortion

and to increase to body. cardiac the to the and CO2 tissues capacity exercise depends the from The O2 remove on of systems respiratory of ability delivery that consumption increases in exercise CO2 closely production accompany matches when immediately ventilation Ventilation the increases this begins, minute in O2 and and exercise increase (

Fig. 25.7 ). to consumption both (see linearly related production moderate low at to is CO2 and O2 levels Ventilation

Fig. 25.7 ). L/minute, maximal almost ventilation can a During of 120 exercise, physically fit the which individual times is volume minute achieve 4 15 L/minute with consumption level. of an resting a O2

remarkable gases. of lack Exercise the changes in blood is of significant because exertion, minimal PaCO2 maximal are in PaO2 during changes Except and exercise. at moderate during within exercise. values normal pH remains Arterial from is lactic liberated During to strenuous anaerobic metabolism. during muscles fall pH arterial as exercise, acid begins out to ventilation is of proportion pH decrease stimulates of in exercise. level arterial that the This the exercise metabolic (lactic) The at sustained of threshold begins acidosis is called which anaerobic (see level

Fig. 25.7

the Abnormalities Control of Breathing in

primary occur can reasons. the and both for Changes pattern in ventilatory secondary of hypoventilation or effects on or approximately significant have PaO2 apnea brief individuals no episodes sleep, third have During PaCO2. that one normal of lasts lighter than it in (REM) usually and eye 10 less of rapid seconds, stages the and slow-wave The occurs sleep. apnea movement prolonged, PaCO2. changes abnormally the apnea In of and PaO2 duration apnea is it sleep syndromes, and There sleep apnea two major categories of are (

Fig. ). 25.8 upper inspiration. when and first, sleep sleep apnea it the hypopharynx) the The airway most is syndromes, of obstructive during closes apnea the the common (generally (OSA), occurs Although more snoring, during is and similar as the process the is happens obstructs cessation it inasmuch severe, to it airflow. airway of causes what

apnea sleep second syndrome is sleep central The apnea. to when the occurs ventilatory drive of This variant apnea

TheclinicalhistoriesofindividualswithOSAareverysimilar.Aspouseusuallyreportsthattheaffectedindividualsnores.Thesnoringbecomeslouderandlouderandthenstopswhiletheindividualcontinuestomakevigorousrespiratoryefforts(see

Fig.25.8 ).Theindividualthenawakens,fallsbacktosleep,andcontinuesthesameprocessrepetitivelythroughoutthenight.IndividualswithOSAawakenwhenthearterialhypoxemiaandhypercapniastimulatebothperipheralandcentralchemoreceptors.Respirationisrestoredbrieflybeforethenextapneiceventoccurs.IndividualswithOSAcanhavehundredsoftheseeventseachnightthatinterruptsleep.ComplicationsofOSAincludesleepdeprivation,polycythemia,right-sidedcardiacfailure(corpulmonale),andpulmonaryhypertensionsecondarytotherecurrent,hypoxicevents.OSAiscommoninindividualswithobesityandinthosewithexcessivecomplianceofthehypopharynx,upperairwayedema,andstructuralabnormalitiesoftheupperairway.

neurons the decreases. motor respiratory of they episodes night repeated central effort, time every make have which (see sleep with apnea no Individuals during respiratory apnea,

Fig. ). 25.8 with is in OSA, degree recurrent same with can and is occur when complications individuals apnea central less apnea of polycythemia) (e.g., in that than hypoxemia individuals sleep hypercapnia central but the and The severe. sleep

is Cheyne-Stokes tidal abnormality of frequency another characterized and ventilatory by breathing ( volume varying ventilation that is

Fig. ). 25.9 and they and apnea, over several tidal breaths, of apnea a until progressively then increase volume decrease period recurs. After frequency progressively respiratory nervous central pressure. individuals head and seen increased intracranial is trauma, This with pattern diseases, breathing in some system irregular at on in occasion during altitude. It high sleep also normal present individuals is underlying Cheyne-Stokes not respiration known. is mechanism The to be flow effort appears slow brain of some association to due in in the In PCO2. to in in undershooting overshooting response periods and with it blood individuals, changes ventilatory

isararediseaseinwhichvoluntarybreathingisintactbutabnormalitiesinautomaticityexist.Itisthemostsevereofthecentralsleepapneasyndromes.Asaresult,peoplewithcentralalveolarhypoventilationcanbreatheaslongastheydonotfallasleep.Fortheseindividuals,mechanicalventilationor,morerecently,bilateraldiaphragmaticpacing(similartoacardiacpacemaker)canbelifesaving. hypoventilation, alveolar curse, alsoknownasOndine’s Central

breathing inspiration brief is sustained ( by separated breathing of exhalation is periods another by periods abnormal Apneustic that pattern of characterized

Fig. C •Fig. 25.10, Breathing, Wax Wane. Arterial and and, Tidal Blood Levels Gas a 25.9 Consequence, Cheyne-Stokes Volume as In Ingeneral,Cheyne-Stokesbreathingisasignofvasomotorinstability,particularlylowcardiacoutput.PaCO2,partialpressureofarterialcarbondioxide;PaO2,partialpressureofarterialoxygen.

input B volumeRemove vagus and nerves from sensory A thalamus, from cortex, Remove lungs input •Fig. Lung Breathing. of Some Patterns 25.10 Whensensoryinputisremovedfromvariouslungreceptors(mainlystretch),eachbreathingcycleislengthenedandtidalvolumeisincreased,sothatalveolarventilationisnotsignificantlyaffected.C, A, Normalrateofbreathingisintherangeof12to20breathsperminute.B, Wheninputfromthecerebralcortexandthalamusisalsoeliminated,togetherwithvagalblockade,theresultisprolongedinspiratoryactivitybrokenafterseveralsecondsbybriefexpirations(apneusis).

in the loss be ventilatory The activities of to a augmentation appears pattern mechanism this inspiratory-inhibitory drive. underlying inspiratory that results of central in occurs The nervous system individuals injury. pattern sometimes with

infant 1. syndrome (SIDS)isthemostcommoncauseofdeathininfantsinthefirstyearoflifeaftertheperinatalperiod.AlthoughthecauseofSIDSisnotknown,abnormalitiesinventilatorycontrol,particularlyin Sudden death

respiratory pulmonary chemoreceptors, central mechanoreceptors/ nerves. center, of the control composed peripheral and Ventilatory sensory is control chemoreceptors, ventilation. is PaCO2 major influences the that factor

2.

center the of The dorsal respiratory group. is group composed ventral respiratory respiratory control and the cord on input from intermittent cerebrum, ascending cranial expiratory sensory respiratory dorsal from nerves, the Rhythmic depends breathing thalamus, on tracts. and (tonic) a drive and continuous spinal the inspiratory (phasic) group and changes peripheral in and respond central pH. The chemoreceptors PaCO2 to in bodies) chemoreceptors peripheral chemoreceptors and respond (carotid are that to PaO2. The only changes aortic the

Koulouris NG. Calverley PMA, concepts in modern limitation dynamic and Flow physiology. hyperinflation: key respiratory Eur J. Respir 2005;25:186-199.

BJ. Canning of nerves cough disease. in mechanisms mediators cough and the reflex: regulating Afferent Am. N Clin Otolaryngol 2010;43:15-25.

Leff Schumacker AR, PT. Applications. and Basics Physiology: Respiratory Philadelphia: Saunders; WB 1993. and treatment. Dyspnoea T. underlying mechanisms Nishino J Br Anaesth. 2011;106:463-474.

CO2responsiveness,havebeenimplicated.Placinginfantsontheirbackstosleep(whichreducesthepotentialforCO2rebreathing)hasdramaticallydecreased(butnoteliminated)therateofdeathfromthissyndrome.

3.

breathing alter sensitivity because in hypoxia slow [H+] to adjustments CO2. affect Acute and hypoxia hypoxia in CSF differently chronic the chronic

4.

lower factors, respiratory inducing the primarily protect tract particles, Irritant receptors cough. physical and from by chemical vapors, receptors or edema). of alveolar fiber by J congestion distortion C walls are units (by stimulated in the the lung terminal respiratory

5.

of clinical two apnea. The obstructive central are abnormalities breathing sleep and important most

6.

pH remain exercise, which relatively strenuous and ventilation, PaCO2, during remain whereas PaO2, limits and however, falls, pH within moderate PaCO2 exercise; during PaO2 normal normal. stimulates

AB. Otis mechanics. A respiratory of perspective Appl Physiol. J 1983;54:1183-1187.

LM. Sheel Romer AW, Ventilation mechanics. and respiratory Compr Physiol. 2012;2:1093-1142.

BI. Beaver WL, Whipp K, Wasserman Gas theory acidosis the (anaerobic) exchange and threshold. lactic Circulation. suppl):1114-1130. 1990;81(1

Wine JJ. airway nervous glands: the reflexes control and central submucosal system. of airway intrinsic Parasympathetic Auton Neurosci. 2007;133:35-54.

Upon the to student be of questions: able this answer the chapter, completion 1. following should

clearance components of their xenobiotic the of removal system particulates. in and the mucociliary Describe and the role substances

2.

how their deposition Explain particle properties clearance. and characteristics and influence

3.

and the deposition. major contrast mechanisms Compare particle of

4.

and systemic responses. contrast immune Compare the and mucosal

5.

well the it unique immunoglobulin is why suited Describe and for of mucosal protection. A features environment and

6.

Compare innate respiratory the contrast and cells adaptive and immune in system.

7.

processes in metabolic various the Describe lung. the

primary a defense host n between their of outside lungs the the inside exchange, of the to act addition function with primary as gas and barrier body, the functions. world of compounds. metabolism active endogenous also organs in are and xenobiotic the They

the conducting structural To and, unique the with substances, system innate specialized particular, the inhalation respiratory of mechanisms. system foreign response immune and and airways have features: the developed clearance in cope mucociliary adaptive

addition particulates in organic bacteria, and and removing toxic protects (e.g., from conducting inhaled by airways mucociliary trapping clearance The spores, the nontoxic to mineral lungs. system ash, particles), dust, and the pollen, viruses mold and pathogenic are each breath removed. inhaled be particulates These and with must and (mucus) two system to The are clearance bronchial positioned on as mucociliary and the (periciliary the referred gel of cilia, surface which epithelial the three fluid) major are of sol components cells layers, fluid ( layers,

Fig. 26.1 ). Inhaled freely on and from an flow lung. establish periciliary to material the fluid the move allows to mucus trapped whereas watery (sticky) is particulates layer, the viscoelastic clear upward cilia the and of periciliary both mucus. the and fluid requires balance clearance appropriate ciliary activity Effective

is which produced that composed periciliary airways. serous cells line pseudostratified is nonviscous the epithelial by fluid columnar of ciliated layer fluid, the The cells follows secretion have by across is process reabsorb (Cl−) that tight secrete by tight junctions). passively cystic the (CFTR) passively ion epithelial sodium chloride cells of a between the a regulator (ENaC; follows between that of fluid, fibrosis absorption across or either junctions) mediated activation These the mediated ability activation (Na+ Cl− cells channels transmembrane to is fluid, process channels across secretion or the reabsorption water temporarily gradient NaCl pseudostratified passive establishes epithelium, which force movement. the an driving for osmotic provides regulated periciliary by the a fluid, 6 and the ENaC-mediated beating to secretion the a between is of variety and that healthy and balance the deep, mucociliary optimal cilia lung The µm for of Cl− Na+ in absorption volume which of rhythmic level is clearance. 5 hormones determines is CFTR-mediated

mucus layer macromolecules composed electrolytes. of the complex The on and periciliary mixture and a lies fluid layer of is top of contact with substances, is it the pathogens. Because inhaled in direct mucus entraps air, layer including mucus discontinuous a blanket The islands is mucus). to as thick to of (i.e., 97%), exists and water 10 layer 5 (95% µm predominantly and composed elasticity to with is Mucus oligosaccharides glycoproteins has protein of a high and viscosity backbone. low groups of attached Healthy •Fig. 26.1 the the Tracheobronchial Epithelial Overview Lining Tree. Innervation of and of Theciliaoftheepithelialcellresideinthepericiliaryfluidlayer,andthemucuslayerisontop.Interspersedbetweentheciliatedepithelialcellsaresurfacesecretory(goblet)cellsandsubmucosalglands.Sympatheticandparasympatheticnervefibersdescendintothesubmucosalglandsandsmoothmuscles.

reabsorption,whichinturnresultsinareductioninthevolumeofthepericiliaryfluid. genehavebeendescribed,but70%ofaffectedindividualshaveadeletionofphenylalanineatcodon508(ΔF508-CFTR)inatleastoneallele.ThismutationresultsinalackofCl− (CF)isthemostcommonlethalinheriteddiseaseamongwhitepeople.ItisanautosomalrecessivediseasecausedbymutationsintheCFTR secretionandanincreaseinENaC-mediatedNa+ gene.Itischaracterizedbychronicbacteriallunginfection,progressivedeclineinlungfunction,andprematuredeathatanaverageageof38years.Morethan1000mutationsoftheCFTR Cystic fibrosis

genecauseCF,andthishasledtothedevelopmentofdrugsthattargetspecificmutationsandreversethe DetailedstudyofthedifferentCFTR mucus day. produce 100 approximately individuals of mutationshasresultedinanunderstandingofvariousdisease-relatedphenotypes,someofwhichareassociatedwithmilderdiseaseandsomewithmoreseveredisease.Sincethe1980s,researchfindingshaveelucidatedhowmanyofthemostcommonmutationsintheCFTR each mL within the contribute cell tracheobronchial the layer: Clara and cells cells the mucus quantity tracheobronchial glands. goblet types epithelium, cells the and submucosal Four serous to and of and within mucous composition cells division. tree secretory approximately are as of also 15% tracheobronchial cells, the to the found to cells, 12th up Goblet tracheobronchial and the referred epithelium, 20% to in represent surface more tracheobronchial cells channeldoesnotreachtheplasmamembraneofairwayepithelialcells. susceptible tree; down smaller the thus goblet secretionviatheG551D-CFTR,therebyimprovinglungfunctionanddecreasingtherateofdiseaseprogression.WhentheallelesarehomozygousfortheΔF508CFTRmutation(whichaffects≈50%ofpatientswithCF),theCFTRCl− airways many the appear .Throughprecisionmedicine,adrug,ivacaftor(Kalydeco),hasbeenfoundtostimulateCl− further progressivereductioninlungfunction.Forexample,inonemutation(G551D-CFTR,whichaffects≈5%ofpatientswithCF),theCFTRCl− to channelreachestheplasmamembraneofairwayepithelialcellsbutdoesnotsecreteCl− In respiratory obstruction are diseases,

In2015,theU.S.FoodandDrugAdministrationapprovedacombinationdrugtherapy,lumacaftor/ivacaftor(Orkambi),thathasbeenshowntocorrectthegenedefect,increasetheamountofΔF508-CFTRintheplasmamembrane,andimproveCl− transport.Clinically,bothivacaftorandlumacaftor/ivacaftorhavebeenshowntoimprovelungfunctionsignificantlyandtodecreasetherateofdeclineinlungfunction.

by plugging. mucus secrete and sialic rich chemical response neutral acid to glycoproteins in Goblet stimuli. acidic cells in infection or increase of the of copious 12th with above and amounts extend can the size chronic presence smoke the cells number, of division tree, goblet In tracheobronchial mucus. bronchitis, in cigarette in or and patients secrete by mucociliary and inhaled reduces cells, of viscosity Injury clearance secreted particles mucus infection and increase goblet the pathogens. which the of

Submucosal airway tracheobronchial ions, of and duct glands ciliated in regions into cartilage mucus a airways, the lumen through upper wherever is there and secrete present the (see water, are conducting they the

Fig. 26.1 ). and composition mucus, are different cells their ( serous mucus mucous both and cellular distinctly structure secret Although

26.1 ). Table to and mucus leads several mucus and of are in elasticity), of including viscosity formation production, (i.e., of increased, which increased the obstruction. In diseases, plugs chronic that mucus submucosal the composition decreased lung increases size cause airway and alterations bronchitis, number chemical in glands parasympathetic substance tracheobronchial sympathetic and polypeptide. such as is Mucus as compounds stimulated by by vasoactive from norepinephrine (cholinergic) and compounds P submucosal acetylcholine such inhibited secretion intestinal (adrenergic) and glands and also acid production. histamine as metabolites arachidonic inflammatory Local mediators mucus stimulate such

of composition the in of contribute also carbohydrates and through nonmucinous secretion material located proteins. mucus Clara of a epithelium bronchioles, containing cells, the to play regeneration a role injury. bronchial cells These after in

pseudostratified, is columnar epithelium the the lined respiratory bronchioles As of a tract ciliated the (see level to noted by previously,

Fig. 26.1 ). system which the the These and of cilia cells the maintain level function. in mucociliary fluid transport periciliary airways by the inhaled cilia. rhythmic beating from of Mucus are and the the removed particles cilia in 5 µm is approximately airway epithelial 250 length. each are cell, to and per There 2 two of nine arms, together that Cilia composed links, microtubules spokes. microtubular are nexin central surround and by held dynein doublets (ATPase) for of contains The cilium. an microtubule central triposphatase contractile the beat responsible is the adenosine doublet that called a biphasic, a with oscillation metachronism. characteristic, beat wave-like and rhythm Cilia coordinated in They beat approximately at

thinmucusisconsiderednormal;however,ifamountsandthicknessareincreased,itmayrepresentanearlysignofinfection.Thickwhitemucuscanbetheonlyidentifiablefeatureofgastroesophagealrefluxdiseasecausedbygastricacidrefluxintotheairways.Yellow mucusistypicallyassociatedwiththebreakdownofeosinophilsinindividualswithallergies.Gray,brown,andblackmucusisoftenassociatedwithcigaretteormarijuanasmoking,cocaineuse,airpollution(workplaceenvironment,suchascoalmines),andoldblood. andgreen colorationofmucusisduetothepresenceandbreakdownofneutrophilsandeosinophilsininfectiousandallergicdiseases.Yellowistypicallyassociatedwithmoreacutedisease(infection,allergy)andgreenusuallyindicatesamorechronicstagewiththepresenceofbacteria(chronicbronchitis,bronchiectasis,cysticfibrosis,andlungabscess).Red mucusindicatesthepresenceofredbloodcellsintheairwaysandisassociatedwithpneumococcalpneumonia,lungcancer,tuberculosis,andpulmonaryemboli.Pink secretions),andextrabronchialsecretions;includingnasal,oral,lingual,pharyngeal,andsalivarysecretions.Thecolorofsputumismorecloselycorrelatedwiththeamountoftimethatithasbeenpresentinthelowerrespiratorytractthanwiththepresenceofinfection.Althoughnotpreciselyidentifiablewithdiseasediagnosis,thecolorofsputumcanbeinformativeinhelpingleadtoadiagnosisandstageofdisease.Mucushasmanycolors:white,yellow,green,red,pink,brown,gray,andblack.Thecolorationiscommonlyduetothetypeofcellpresentintheairways(inflammatorycells,suchasneutrophilsoreosinophils,orredbloodcells)andhowlongtheyhavebeenthere.Clearorcloudywhite ,DNAfromdegeneratedwhitebloodcells(collectivelyknownasbronchial Sputumisexpectoratedmucus.However,inadditiontomucus,sputumcontainsserumproteins,lipids,electrolytes,Ca++

minute, strokes recovery per 1000 stroke forward power stroke. a and slow or with a return viscous the stroke, the the layer extend upward mucus and it cilia the into of forward power particles. tips and move their entrapped thereby During completely mucus sol the beat, release reverse the layer. the and into the cilia On withdraw where trachea that direction in pharynx, nasopharynx mucus pharynx, toward the the is in it propels the upward cilia the the mucus whereas in into swallowed. the propel beat Cilia

it to particles distance particle’s In size, the speed; density, relative airflow of shape; has humidity air. in of the lung on the over which the the general, depends deposition and travel; and for major mechanisms brownian four movement. The deposition are sedimentation, and impaction, interception, and Particle in influence listed are characteristics which the . mechanism properties, of 26.2 deposition, impaction 10 passages into do µm In deposited particles and general, not tract. the respiratory the larger by in lower nasal than are penetrate 2 to µm Particles in size 10

Sedimentation0.2to2.0InterceptionNABrownianmovement<0.2

NA,notapplicable.

airflow lower a their the changing direction bronchi) rapidly. points by and trachea, predominantly at are because in straight (i.e., move to bifurcations and deposited from tract directions inertial airway of at turbulent them impaction prevents respiratory tendency in nasopharynx, on to surface In result are as particles distal deposited more (0.2 is smaller of µm) sedimentation 2 by gravity. a where the slower, airflow areas, deposition shapes asbestos, of interception. silica), For elongated (i.e., is the with mechanism substances the of cell The when air; of particle’s however, of with distal deposition is elongated particulate tip with a gravity flow comes in layer, or mucus the center contact the facilitated. is compatible by mainly influenced airways smaller coefficient and diffusion µm alveoli are motion. than Particles 0.2 smaller deposited and their are in brownian and the of deposition smaller in density particles upper airways, of these deposition influence particle not larger diffusion with and does size. decreased the enhanced the particles, Unlike is system the where epithelium, subsequent do with transport or contact and drainage. in of by These alveolar phagocytic are macrophages thus the exist; come alveolar they cilia activity with into by clearance mucociliary particles removed the lymphatic absorption the interstitium not smaller some the located of macrophages adjacent airways most terminal alveolar epithelium to and the interstitial are space. in Although are the alveolus,

from expectorated to mucociliary terminal the the deposited or conducting particles airways, the major system In and transports coughed where the airways, bronchioles they up are either swallowed. clearance minutes of a be matter to particles can hours. removed in Deposited the µm/minute). main (0.5 clearance is trachea but and In the to bronchi, it the rate is of slower bronchioles 5 in particle to µm/minute, 20 1 the material lung greater in the inhaled the longer is remains cause the airways, the material general, In an will damage. probability that of bronchioles a is the The “Achilles otherwise cells to in system. is alveoli ciliated region effective and from highly heel” the what considered the is devoid terminal rate macrophages, location The occupational common by relatively which this many area, for renders particle mediated is slow lung it most clearance in the diseases. of

Insomelungdiseases—forexample,thosecausedbyinhalationofsilicaparticles(silicosis) orcoaldustparticles(pneumoconiosis, the“blacklung”diseaseofcoalminers)—alveolarmacrophagesphagocytizetheparticlesbutareunabletodestroythem,andthemacrophageseventuallydie.Alveolarmacrophageshavelocalizedandconcentratedtheparticlesinthe“Achillesheel”regionofthelung.Theseparticlesarenotremovedviamucociliaryclearanceandeventuallyenterthelunginterstitium.Theensuinginflammatoryresponseleadstoagranulomatouslikelesionwithfibrosis,arestrictivelungdisease.Silicosisandpneumoconiosisareclassicalexamplesofdiseasesoriginatingthroughenvironmentalworkplaceexposure.Increasedawarenessofthecauseofthesediseasesandimprovedworkplaceenvironmentshaveledtoreductionintheincidenceofthesetypesoflungdiseases.

Immunity Mucosal System: Adaptive and Immune Innate

(e.g., proinflammatory is efferent classical local spleen, afferent and lymph primary the the In tissues orchestrated response flow. immune the liver, lymph in adaptive, draining defense antigen-specific kidney), with body’s nodes nonmucosal T that synthesize induce which (IgM) B G for specific cells) receptors M immune with The immunoglobulin antibodies, lymphocytes plasma adaptive and antigen system cells immunoglobulin cells (IgG) complement–binding inflammation. (TCRαβ T αβ recognition cell major the are can T in and immune systemic and of what usually those is inflammation urinary normal between tissues absolutely desirable and processes must constantly throat, and eyes, the (i.e., the gastrointestinal, is physiologic disrupts not, as well is what as and necessary. unless discriminate nose, mucosal although However, protective, respiratory, it mouth) the is not harmful and systems, independently function Accordingly, immune and of defense mechanisms, tissues the which basis mucosal systemic immune “noninflammatory” mucosal developed form the specialized of the can have system system. immune cells, A a B complement-binding cell innate lymphoid that cells adaptive cells lymphocytes cells) nonclassical T plasma system antibody. [DCs]) and specialized both (TCRγδ killer receptors synthesize and The T with immunoglobulin dendritic contains (IgA), T mucosal (macrophages, cells γδ natural innate pathological responses limit can no nonpathological agents/substances foreign agents adaptive eliminating with little responses or These inflammation. to and while or unique prevent is the system a the this main or to lymphatic defense bypassed, bifurcation. via in addition, located lymph which thoracic mediastinal the response is classical system of have drainage node region if the front-line immune adjacent left-right In the in lungs lung adaptive upper cavity fails do

distinctive immune true than rather through antigens lymph system through node. are lymphoid is a aggregates of A the processed feature mucosal that flow, lymph the only aggregates Unlike has node, afferent flow. lymph a into have lymphoid of which without afferent material and true aggregate drainage efferent efferent as referred tract, the gut-associated network tissue This known as mucosa-associated as tissue commonly referred to in it gastrointestinal lymphoid is lymphoid tissue lymphoid to bronchus-associated is it lymphoid is and (MALT); lungs, (GALT); the (BALT; in

Fig. 26.2 ). airways, ciliated of is BALT with in consistent where present mucus epithelium mainly composed cells the is flow. conducting the mucus of a interesting lymphoepithelium, to in its feature in substances/ BALT ciliated; However, airway allows particulates creates to it a epithelium aggregate referred and drain) that processed an is the as the lymphoid be a is break which not follicle). (like (or is flow the

and is that there tissues to appears communication mucosal organ that between drainage sensitization all It transposed via tissues a one is network. MALT/BALT lymphatic-like via each not work is The systemic the immune that other, of other. sensitized and and be independently may system the may MALT/BALT fact of true one to limiting defense only mechanism as in This a mucosal serve may tissue. sensitization numbers Lymphocytes density ectopic can cluster in (TELT), referred smaller in what lymphoid also tertiary antigens also which in they tissue is and to process as (see

Fig. 26.2, ). A feature is of solitary a the submucosal and and innate scattered respiratory tract. lymphocytes network lymphoid Another prominent intraepithelial cells throughout diffuse overall and lungs. of play are and tract, cell and roles each the Because the throughout TELT, type particles inhaled (BALT, dispersed tissue in broadly unique the lymphocytes) solitary important defense respiratory lymphoid of

features is the in One specialized antibody unique system and specialized MALT, features which Fig. a • of GALT, BALT of M cells, in organized membrane, mucosal Bronchus-Associated and Representation (BALT)/Tertiary Ectopic processing showing lymphocytes a endocytosed antibodies to located Tissue 26.2 (TELT). IgA for it and Immunoglobulin transport B, in pockets and epithelium of of macrophages cells endocytose cells. antigen to Lymphoid antigen Tissue Diagram predominantly secretion Synthesis.A, of lymphoid by mucous in Cells, lumen (TELT), submucosal M response (IgA) M a Lymphoid loosely the of densely organized lymphoid differentiate cells and B they the IgA. nearby secret tissue (in lymphoid [BALT]) follicle (lymphocytes) into plasma Activated bronchus-associated migrate submucosa, cells to where the IgA-producing from

of dimeric antibody lumen) transport, airway chain and J in the are IgA used. stability structure the for (non–complement-fixing, for areas, binds secrete migrates In plasma protein IgA, submucosal synthesize surface cells, to to cells submucosal it surface and of which a epithelial the •Fig. where and a Formation 26.3 (IgA). Secretory Immunoglobulin of Structure SecretoryIgAconsistsofatleasttwoIgAmoleculesthatarecovalentlylinkedviaJchainandcovalentlyassociatedwiththesecretorycomponent.Thesecretorycomponentcontainsfiveimmunoglobulin-likedomainsandislinkedtodimericIgAthroughbindingtoanIgAheavychain.B, A, SecretoryIgAisformedduringtransportthroughepithelialcells.Poly-Ig,polymericimmunoglobulin.

immunoglobulin polymeric receptor, (poly-Ig;

Fig. 26.3 ). the its poly-Ig epithelial eventual pinocytosis lumen. the into secretion cell into IgA receptor The aids airway in of the and remains complex. of portion associated the is cleaved, it, with a the exocytosis of piece, the During poly-Ig secretory enzymatically IgA and the complex, The airway protect cleavage. and the complex attached IgA from secretory proteolytic stays helps piece to in it the manner same in classical other thus bind properties The immune and IgA-antigen does immune not complement do its complex limited. as are the complexes, proinflammatory binding before and form a IgA-antibody system via removal very is cells. promotes complex, large they system, mucociliary viruses particulates effective which epithelial invade to The the in its clearance

chains classical adaptive cells). composed and T are TCRs cells CD3+ lymphocytes T are that β α Most (TCRαβ of with immune thymus mostly the nodes egress and lymph cells the to spleen. and mature These in to usually typically inflammatory histocompatibility via presentation, The processing/ response. complex, cells a activation major DC, antigen induce an in requires classical TCRαβ of the skin) these T to only egress mature T (i.e., mucosal but of lymphocytes tissues a and γ with chains cells the of δ minority also and cells) in in thymus, TCRs lymphoid the tissues. blood systemic expressing represent CD3+ (TCRγδ and peripheral the cells and lung, majority T intestines, intraepithelial cells, often sites and preferentially to T to lymphocytes, as TCRγδ referred submucosal localize

BALT,bronchus-associatedlymphoidtissue;IFN-γ,interferonγ;IgA,IgE,IgG,andIgM,immunoglobulinsA,E,G,andM;IL-10,interleukin10;iNKT,invariantnaturalkillerT;NK,naturalkiller;TCR,Tcellreceptor;TELT,tertiaryectopiclymphoidtissue;Th1andTh2,Thelper1andThelper2.

are of line and surfaces. first considered epithelial of a defense epithelium

of cells, not or the processing antigen In does DCs. require to T antigen presentation activation TCRαβ classical cells TCRγδ T by contrast molecular in pathogen-associated cellular (PAMPs, in later interest of that some response, to either via have of cells T this response. or, capable Of innate classical TCRαβ in shown be is the manner patterns in the circumstances, to chapter), TCRγδ antigen cell responding of been a manner an described T responsiveness this of due variation to of is to the T presence is same plasticity (alterations) the not subpopulations or cells TCRγδ cell of Whether in clear. innate and they between immune duality, these adaptive this responses. express be are a Because unique to cells considered link respond memory. antigen and Furthermore, demonstrate do to TCRγδ not immediately generally can cells T In contrast typical T the to provide protection TCRαβ inflammation. cells response, proinflammatory can cell without TCRγδ inducing and and in expand interferon been bacterial to TCRγδ response factor cytokines [IL]–17, (interleukin lymphocyte-activation proinflammatory suppressive cells synthesize (transforming either β 3). growth to [IFN]–γ) T regulatory/ gene cytokines [TGFβ], shown or viral have infections further allergen-induced antigen, T (IgE) the response also cells to preventing inhaled suppress TCRγδ inflammation. immunoglobulin E

(NK) ). lymphoid dendritic generally cells Innate each and into T subpopulations cells, killer of macrophages, four (DCs), categories, natural cells, fall 26.3 cells ( (ILCs) TCRγδ the from ILCs different cells immune the of on non-self are through present agents lack to pathogens. for ability specificity recognition and distinguish PAMPs “antigen” adaptive distinctively their of offending their from by self inhaled most substances nonpathogenic, pathogenic Since recognition specialized identify are harmful organisms. has the a to and system substances developed body by family system recognition, are the receptors self (i.e., cells on recognition host of pattern specific discrimination from than called receptors (PRRs). which antigen PAMPs Rather the recognized of organisms/substances, a ILCs) through this material non-self pathogenic defense enables recognition on of then features peptidoglycans, of composed 5′-C-phosphate-G-3′ many distinguishing corresponding and unmethylated common DNA, (CpG) pathogens and to are on ILCs. which their are PPRs on bind lipopolysaccharides, PAMPs major PRRs: are on two are cytoplasma receptors, the in classifications (TLRs), receptors cell of for nucleotide-oligomerization toll-like which are domain ILCs. and which surfaces, expressed There (NOD) expressed mainly intracellularly cytokines, well the nuclear interferons and factor stimulates Both proinflammatory these of as pathways (IFN-α activate Kβ a which antiviral transcription of type I (NFKβ), IFN-β). factor, release for TLRs a with of The specificities various proteins different family pathogens. are transmembrane bacteria, is is associated gram-positive whereas TLR-4 product lipopolysaccharide a gram-negative for with specific of for acids specific (endotoxin), bacteria. lipoteichoic TLR-2 alveolar type epithelial macrophages, cells cells, and and both eosinophils, epithelial bronchial lung, the cells, TLR-2 TLR-4. DCs, express In mast II TLR-8 and specific to viruses: viruses, bind RNA TLR-7 TLRs to double-stranded single-stranded RNA are and for TLR-3 Other binds viruses. TLR-3, TLR-8 DCs, cells TLR-7, plasmacytoid eosinophils, cells and express TLR-7. and express B and NK cells in lung the phagocytic TLRs. and also DCs variety mucosal and of A other express tissues by means host active PAMP-PRR of play nexus. cells addition in alveolar in roles epithelial bronchial defense phagocytic the classical and Thus to cells,

classical to system aspect defense and immune the opposed or of takes Perhaps specialized immediately, unique as TCRαβ mucosal response intriguing is the the this with it cell clonal adaptive days to most and pathogens ILCs a respond expansion T weeks memory. ability of to mount to which the are innocuous lack in highly tissues, toxic parasitic for common the chemical advantageous response, fast exposure. invasion The and mucosal sites for thereof substances, are and by of functionality or to be regulatory addition, (i.e., meaning they many cytokines) their to In proinflammatory that a either induced (suppressive) ILCs can environment the demonstrate the alter phentoype. plasticity,

the progenitor mast DCs macrophage develop differentiation progenitor bone neutrophils), through with other cells either in in lineage: their linage the DCs but and (basophils, develop common Both marrow cells, the through vary myeloid progenitor myeloid-granulocyte/ eosinophils, originate or common somewhat macrophages common and the lineages. Macrophages lymphoid granulocytic respond substance. the Macrophages and are cells a and to foreign to first DCs contact nonepithelial types (conventional there In of two (alveolar, major the [proinflammatory], plasmacytoid). of and lungs, are types M-1 [regulatory]) M-2 three macrophages DCs and and

airspace the in the probably it inhaled stays be will phagocytized within alveoli), ducts macrophages. lower system (alveolar alveolar and material foreign respiratory by the If or areas, if plasmacytoid into DCs. penetrates the However, M-2 contact come will submucosal M-1 or reaches it foreign conventional with macrophages and and material/organism to terminal frequently the interstitial alveolus airways the in and and found in less are mostly macrophages Alveolar epithelium space. adjacent the alveolar spaces alveoli. freely a line terminal throughout and defense They as first of the migrate in and the bronchioles serve particles phagocytize as foreign substances, and and surfactant well dead as from They cells. debris cellular For is destruction of a formation macrophage, particle/organism major mechanisms within lysosomes. radicals, include enzyme by phagocytized a the and of halogen O2 activity, that derivatives

macrophage the the the epithelium their interstitium. to of the alveolar and binding phagocytic The penetration activity particulates into inhibits of subsequent ciliated bronchiole spaces, system elimination the alveolar regions provides postterminal alveolar “Achilles to mucociliary the of important an for region, macrophage heel” between and system. and The transports thus also mucociliary clearance engulfed the particles link transport the

soluble cell factors also can TGF-β). secretion nitric by acid, and immunosuppressive such and T by E2, direct or submucosa suppress (IL-10 the prostaglandin as of activity contact and addition, In the alveolar the macrophages present cytokines macrophages in M-2 submucosal cell, killing with as phagocytic of are classical sites located alveolar similar those represent “proinflammatory” macrophages. the also macrophages in and capabilities M-1 cells. of these the addition, proinflammatory (and proasthma) which promote cytokines helper into (Th2) been T demonstrates to M-1 M-2 have macrophages and of differentiation plasticity macrophages, IL-13 IL-4 shown the 2 regulatory/suppressive the In a demonstrate a enhances lung material considerably is or response either dispose these populations of plasticity defense system contributor with of unique rapidly mucosal foreign proinflammatory overall ability macrophage to the system. and regulatory defense to and the The

antigen-presenting other tissues of major lung the and mucosa DCs in Conventional reside submucosa and are cells. the considered state in they and migrate lungs). resting node local to the process as for draining sentinels and which antigen, usually the mature to which are function after immature capture a They node they lymph in (mediastinal cells, initiates present which At antigen response, an depending or and on DC. they proinflammatory adaptive this to the immune suppressive, either node, T antigen to secretion have and dioxygenase. indoleamine TGF-β shown by means DCs and induce been cells their T synthesis of of CD103+ regulatory/suppressor Plasmacytoid but antiviral presentation; in antigen activation, cytokine the DCs are more rapidly upon IFN-γ. similar an in secrete located viral antiviral they opposed to areas as role, submucosal function DCs and T Macrophages vascular cells such IFN-γ Th1 synthesize activates on and enhances activates (which cells, IL-6 similar depending necrosis endothelium vascular permeability), commonly (which tumor increases (which activates IL-1β and antiviral endothelium cytokines, basophils, and cells), lymphocytes and α include antibody IL-8 recruits IL-12 T lymphocytes), (which cytokines neutrophis, stimulus; and CD4 and to has many T (which activates NK secrete production), the effects). (which cells), factor

the . bone and lymphoid NK common cells differentiate the through in marrow progenitor lineage originate lung active interstitium. populations functionally mucosal are of killer or natural NK T and (iNKT) invariant They are cells in the neither and T sites cells, present B resident and herpesviruses, pathogens cells. such as cells innate NK component the bacterial and various tumor against of invading major system of body’s a are defense immune infections, other be cells IL-18), their NK IFN-β) (IL-12 macrophage-derived enhances by which activated capabilities. can (IFN-α and cytokines and interferons killing and and pores cause and death. holes of create mechanism the within serine membranes thereby perforins, release through cell esterases), granular the is or cell target of killing (granzymes, enzymes which The CD4 is responses. viral T synthesize CD8 inhibiting which capable cell infections and of can addition, cells stimulating IFN-γ, NK and In

wide a complicated and bacteria a recognize cells viruses. of set array NK receptors to have of infectious prone recurrent very are lack who to and have Individuals often NK herpesvirus cells infection. infections with of mucosal cells. in unlike diversity, cells iNKT to with innate-like immune reside have cells category TCRγδ termed limited belong antigen receptors cells lymphocytes, lymphoid the The together and a tissues, adaptive are These cells adaptive and between innate be thought of to immunity. types links must faster limiting the damage that adaptive than stronger response, mobilize can is adaptive can these cells response a aspect early critical until of the link immune cells of defense. classical the A respond activation, IFN-γ. the invariant on an secrete T have The IL-10 cells cell and, iNKT α receptor cytokines regulatory and chain

Lumen Epithelial the Cells Airways and of Commensal Microbiota Protect the

cell produce amphipathic secret cell generally enzymes and and antimicrobial wall which peptides, leads Airway epithelial cells which disrupt bacteria, and charged) antibacterial of (hydrophilic–positively target the both death. can to components at elastase, pathogens. phospholipase of hydrolases, secretory enzymes and various A2 Lysozyme, examples antibacterial targeted are activated typically synthesized peptides cationic peptides propiece. cleavage Antimicrobial an anionic and as are through propeptides of fluid, epithelial secreted macrophages enter peptides secreted mucosal the typically cells submucosal and within Peptides tissue. from usually local whereas macrophages alveolar from stay the

peptides: classes antimicrobial are cathelicidins, of three defensins, and There histatins. bacteria, β can categorized very are minutes fungi, cell which disrupt membranes as and α on Defensins, effective viruses. are and within and alveolar component synthesized in in stored II β–Defensins cells, bodies, of and are type are surfactant. lamellar are a synthesized are and epithelial and within cells, macrophages, α–Defensins neutrophils. stored are Cathelicidins the with activated intracellularly phagosomes by directly and the in elastase. also secondary by granule granules or fusion of stored the are macrophages. cathelicidins II as In from type as lung lungs, cells, and well neutrophils from epithelial secreted are fungi. pathogenic in more present are oral for the specific Histatins mainly and cavity Gram-positive gut they in their (lectins) the walls. Although directly binding clear tract, exist proteins not can in kill cell respiratory bacteria to it carbodydrate-binding the is by whether the cells postulated this understood, and synergistically precise calcium. effects; it is clearly they have occurs work that present mechanism bactericidal which is not lysozyme with and iron to although Furthermore, lactoferrins and have the shown bacteriostatic may by in been epithelial

has these into of of role and in is exploration microbiome, developing. the health commensal a the gut, The received attention, disease and lot especially human rapidly microorganisms known explore. gut lung been to the is much difficult microbiome, the has about microbiome Although a a surfaces sampling reasons, and of variety sample. for subject to the that thought site the sterile available bacteria of tract, and complexity sample remains respiratory variety procedures), environment, simple during to be difficult a to epithelial the (invasive including fewer throughout are lung safety Once far fact bacteria respiratory the these differ is to airways along the tract types and epithelium also lumen respiratory and the upper likely Furthermore, tract, the considerably the of the residing it of density various differ. alveoli; from in that ecosystem regions have however, Neisseria, primary Bacteroides), appear is three Acinetobacter). Firmicutes represented: a phyla (Veillonella, Bacteroidetes to Haemophilus, does that and Streptococcus, and (Prevotella, Proteobacteria Staphylococcus), Moraxella, the clear, (Pseudomonas, microbiome, It lung be

been with disease) asthma, pulmonary transplantation. and several in Alterations associated and shown to pulmonary lung lung have cystic (including with be microbiome conditions fibrosis, chronic the obstructive increased which of The rate the has has vast the of use, been rate children increased antibiotic asthma to effect a on in microbiome. linked with Organisms Proteobacteria have Firmicutes Moraxella) to (Haemophilus, asthma. correlate the in been (Streptococcus) and shown phyla when cells asthma. study with with cytokines in increase organisms regulatory An the Bacteriodetes mice the suppression an showed Th2 and T in Proteobacteria of proinflammatory replaced asthma prominent coincided organisms, were experimental improvement of which an in in pathogenesis

use useful the treating have and been tract of with proved in infectious microbiome a therapeutic of upper maintain patients respiratory fibrosis, infections the has (e.g., to therapy in gut, infections) diseases use in “normal” cystic standpoint, probiotics a the probiotic From promising. lung chronic varies precise but lungs “protect” still to microorganism. probably the mechanism poorly is the or The the understood by may bacteria according considerably which mechanisms

secrete shown mediators inducing that to T IL-10 acid, of DCs regulatory downregulate activate been inflammatory and Th2 cells, Bifidobacterium capable has which the TLRs can It and response. retinoic asthma. to and individuals granules component from stimulate organisms, as From in causative of has perspective, a seen a Lactobacillus with priming cell to DCs have shown major Th2 secreted responses, been with association an histamine, mast inflammatory pathogenic microorganisms influencing play epithelial their colonization or and to microbiome possibly the the bind through a either receptors thus can the altering the microorganisms. ILCs role promoting In interaction of epithelium ability it on in of to has cells, with nonpathogenic addition, shown been that to Much learned microbiome. studies absorbed future and still from of is lung the be

associated (e.g., common rhinitis, most responses mucosal By the pathological allergies). conditions food asthma, and allergic skin far and with allergic allergic are tissue peanuts. bee house common Some and and well of human cat as include dust inhaled mites, dander, as components of stings allergens ingestion cockroaches, of penicillin, One to their allergens antigenicity. common and endogenous also drug the alter is bind can most proteins many which

predominant an in IgE in response, described, response IgA; is antibody however, is antibody. allergic As the MALT predominant the previously T of by from cells. is switchover by It mechanism generated Th2-primed induced CD4 the synthesis a IL-4 cells IL-4 IgE. switch induces to the to synthesizing B from antibody-producing antibodies IgG over The region surface antibody binds fragment IgE its crystallizable mast (constant) of in through submucosa the to molecule. the of cells the region the submucosa, the of antigen then from reexposure forms fragment its IgE the lumen the (IgE-Ag) binds to of an immune the surface to on the complex cell. and allergen the Upon molecule, which mast subsequent antigen-binding migration to the inhaled airway

step degranulation prostaglandins, which of (histamine, surface the IL-13, crosslink the of to intracellular induce is other with and heparin, complexes preformed mast initiate immediate signaling release that IL-4, Th2 complexes IL-5, proteases). IgE-Ag final must The leukotrienes, IgE-Ag cell, on pathways mediators mediators asthma: the classical induce of These smooth muscle signs constriction

result spontaneously of response can therapy inflammatory or or a as anti-inflammatory corticosteroids). resolve drugs, The (bronchodilator such as hypertrophy. manifested such irreversible remodeling, result called in inflammation may a smooth airway and permanent, process fibrosis airway and muscle changes structural Low-grade as submucosal persist by mechanisms roles. cytokines for are play understood, a but important as responsible in such TGF-β, allergic remodeling clearly The not potent profibrotic diseases cytokine, airway chemokines and the initiates infectious organisms defensive harmful airway allergic result elegant, and its Thus defenses; allergen, an “tricked” were is highly very an and as innocuous into to system substance, responding a if disease. effective is parasitic against it

Metabolic of Lung the Functions

The lungs variety to a xenobiotic are metabolize wide of exposed substances. and large and have metabolize developed high surface to endothelial receptors within a that receives very have cells flow, The xenobiotics. endothelial surface the cells cell capillary lung mechanisms blood area and lung various bed of CYP2, compounds of P-450 (CYP) within cytochrome Most (e.g., ingested enzymatically or the occurs of metabolic and with CYP3). intestinal the tract families CYP1, processing members xenobiotic inhaled liver the enzyme lower the organs processing of enzymes. typically other participate in selectively also cytochrome lungs have P-450 The and and levels of xenobiotics high which is Prominent levels P-450 of the in CYP2J2, cytochrome CYP2E1, people the CYP3A5, lung cigarettes. present enzymes smoke in last CYP1A1, who include CYP1B1, in CYP2B6, and

for the leukotriene chronic receptor and methylxanthines—are disease—such and β2 antagonists, receptor of treatment degraded lungs. in corticosteroids, enzymatically agonists, asthma as the obstructive long-acting Drugs pulmonary within capillary and In including metabolized pulmonary substances mediators, lipid the wide array cells cytokines, proteins. a are of bed, endothelial by addition, vasoactive endogenous amines,

a provides lung. metabolized list 26.1 compounds Box of the in remodeling. connective eosinophil BOX (inflammation), (bronchoconstriction), 26.1 and tissue and recruitment Lungs occur can the Metabolized • Compounds activa-Vasoactiveaminestion Metabolism in Cytokines

of of shortness airway eosinophilia coughing, response followed breath occur by of a wheezing, inflammation. and Symptoms late and within minutes,

though by intracellular endothelial extracellular direct substances capillaries processing endogenous pass synthesis or and secretion by the of cells. either that or through is the is example, For which endothelial of enzyme, angiotensin I on activated surface by cells. angiotensinconverting is Serotonin, binds a on a surface internalized metabolized receptor and to endothelial cells. cells the inside of vasoconstrictor, and specific a capillary entering through Approximately pulmonary in the bed. serotonin 80% lungs the is pass of single metabolized the

for molecules. factor, surface crystallizable bradykinin, the Endothelial immunoglobulin adhesion system, cells tumor also necrosis fragments, have receptors and complement of components secrete In cytokines. endothelin, prostaglandins, factors, and synthesize cells addition, and endothelial clotting oxide, vascular nitric prostacyclin, leukotrienes however, lack Vascular cells, muscle endothelial and (smooth constrictors). to able are not synthesize 5-lipoxygenase substance and bed dopamine, histamine, epinephrine, pulmonary P. angiotensin include Compounds the by isoproterenol, metabolized II, capillary not

Angiotensin-convertingenzyme(ACE)ispresentinsmallindentations(caveolae)onthesurfaceofpulmonaryendothelialcellsandcatalyzestheconversionofthephysiologicalinactiveangiotensinItotheactiveangiotensinII,apotentvasoconstrictor.Thisisamajormechanisminthebody’sabilitytosupplysystemiclevelsofangiotensinIIandthusinfluencebloodpressure(see

Chapter36).

ThetherapeuticuseofACEinhibitorsisimportantinthemanagementofpatientswithhighbloodpressure.

Thelungsplayakeyroleinthemetabolismofmanyprodrugs,whichareinactive,intoactivedrugs.Administrationofprodrugsimprovestheamountofactivedrugdeliveredtotheirtargetsinthebody.Inmanycases,inactiveprecursorprodrugsaredeliveredsystemicallyorlocally(throughinhalation)tothelungs,wheretheyareactivatedinsitu.Anexampleofthisisbeclomethasonedipropionate(Qvar,BeconaseAQ),amedicationinhaledbypatientswithasthma,whichisactivatedbyesteraseswithinthelungtotheactiveform17-beclamethasonemonopropionate.

1.

structural inhibit to or substances; environmental the constant system cope respiratory transport immunological system) features these exposure and (mucosal to has inflammation. developed with system) (mucociliary unique limit features immune The foreign

2.

gel The transport cilia. the sol fluid), phase of mucociliary and components the (periciliary system (mucus), are three phase the

3.

absorption the maintained by secretion ciliary to the fluid and layer beating. is is The Cl− depth essential Na+ between balance periciliary normal and of

4.

a Mucus composed electrolytes, macromolecule water. complex and proteins, of is glycoproteins, high has It low viscosity properties. elastic and mechanical

5.

the tracheobronchial Clara residing and serous Goblet mucus. cells the mucous cells, in and produce glands cells,

6.

the lung and deposition traveled; the Particle size, and dependent distance density, shape; humidity. relative their is airflow on in speed; alveoli). movement in in 0.2 in lower the (particles deposition size, distal µm, smaller airways), nasopharynx, mechanisms the and brownian 0.2 to bronchi), are than µm particles 2 airways), larger in passages, and The than (particles shape, in trachea, and µm, for to particle (particles 10 10 interception (particles sedimentation major the 2 µm, nasal elongated in impaction with

7.

urinary respiratory immune tract is (BALT), of intestinal respiratory (GALT), the composed system system, and part of which the systems. the is mucosal The true drainage. These composed with not nodes contain systems lymph do of lymph nonencapsulated and they afferent lymphatic without flow; are nodules lymph efferent true mainly

8.

mucociliary to in airways. conducting immune the foreign of BALT and of establishes that break nonciliated blanket a The lymphoepithelium the collection acts a as facilitate throughout processing drain particulates the

9.

IgA tissues. anti-inflammatory lung NK cells, macrophages innate and and the T alveolar and defense immune system cells, are TCRγδ unique other plasma cells, the mucosal synthesizing cells specialized adaptive highly in to

Cua Tato DJ, CM. IL-17–producing system. the of the sentinels cells: Innate immune Nat Immunol. Rev 2010;10:479-489.

JR, FJ, GB. RP, Huffnagle Dickson Erb-Downward Martinez microbiome The tract. the respiratory and Rev Physiol. Annu 2016;78:481-504.

Frevert Martin CW. TR, lungs. the Innate in immunity Thorac Proc Soc. Am 2005;2:403-411.

cells AN, G. McKenize Innate Eberl Spits immunity. lymphoid H, and inflammation in Immunity. 2014;41:366-374.

MC, al. Sonnenberg et Monticelli GF, Abt LA, with lung-tissue infection Innate after lymphoid virus. cells homeostasis promote influenza Immunol. Nat 2011;12:1045-1054.

Bondesson Olsson al. E, L, B, et Borgström drug adsorption. Pulmonary metabolism, and clearance, Smyth Hickey AJ, eds. HDC, In: Controlled Drug Pulmonary Delivery. 2011:21-51. New Springer; York:

M, al. Spits D, et Artis Colonna H, nomenclature. cells—a proposal Innate lymphoid for uniform Immunol. Rev Nat 145-149. 2013;13:

P, Vantourout Hayday A. innate-like lymphocytes. The inbetweeners: of γδ to cells of best: T contributions the immunology. unique Six Rev Nat Immunol. 2014;13:88-100.

JJ. Wine airway and reflexes submucosal nervous the control of central Parasympathetic intrinsic system. glands: airway Neurosci. Auton 2007;133:35-54.

RAYBOULD E. 6Gastrointestinal AND HELEN Physiology SECTION BARRETT E. KIM

Chapter Gastrointestinal Functional Anatomy Principles Tract of the Regulation and 27 General in

The 28 to Chapter Cephalic, a Response Meal Phases the Integrated and of Esophageal Oral,

Meal a Response to Chapter Gastric 29 Integrated of Phase The the

the Meal Chapter Intestinal Integrated a Phase Small of Response The to 30

31 Phase The Colonic Response a to Meal Integrated of Chapter the

Metabolic Functions 32 Chapter the Transport and of Liver

chapter be the of 1. questions: should this answer student completion to the following able Upon

What the innervation how is tract, regulated? function is neural the and GI GI of

2.

GI regulation neural, function? of humoral are of some paracrine, and What examples

into that tract anus alimentary organs empty mouth and includes the from the to glandular the their contents consists he of associated (GI) tract. gastrointestinal the the tract and to absorb function and circulation eliminate of waste The is overall water the nutrients products. into GI tract the digestion, occur processes motility, physiological GI The the that absorption. are and major secretion, tract in the of and taken membranes diet readily the circulation. enter are as to transported mammals of macromolecules in that nutrients as solids the not are Most cell across in intestinal digestion occur physical of and of Thus food epithelial absorption can such across chemical cells. that modification consists food absorption muscular the tract tract GI wall with to to the of require the contents the the mix motility of and move along Digestion and secretions. an for digestion Secretions provide from associated environment ions tract GI enzymes, detergents, consist and and of organs the that absorption. and biological optimized intraluminal complex and endowed ensure absorption, tract systems occurs. highly digestion regulatory physiological processes is are and GI regulated the this These maximize to with to or tract rectal In addition the the drugs administered absorbs GI oral by routes.

tract important substances. organ excretion also for of serves GI as an The and common waste It the (all excretes and lipid-soluble of and drug from stores food the molecules). materials metabolites cholesterol, sharing as steroids, such excretes being substances products from liver property ingested

in is physiology that with GI body’s it remember is long contact tube the it important the external environment. of a When the to that is considering tract, As microorganisms is along food it with can vulnerable to that enter infectious water. such, and and protect of other system consisting of a cells the itself mechanisms. possesses complex GI nonspecific defense immune defenses To tract the the largest tract represents fact immune the of body. organ GI In This functional chapter the GI of principles regulation and system. of general an anatomy in overview the provides

greatly organization GI the The to common of from features there the tissue. region, structure are region the varies but of overall in tract stomach, divided colon, a is the ( segments; are duodenum, the jejunum, mouth, Essentially tube into and tube tract anus along functional esophagus, major the pharynx, ileum, the major rectum, structures hollow GI

Fig. 27.1 ). ileum is the the sometimes up jejunum, Together intestine, intestine. and small large colon make to referred the duodenum, the as and secretions in of gut glands the copious HCO3 these of amounts of into lining the are secrete are the glandular tube the invaginations that structures duodenum, tube; (e.g., their Associated −). Brunner’s with which glands blind-ending lumen the empty organs ducts gut through attached and pancreas. tube the Additionally via example, glands the which into the salivary are lumen—for glandular to empty there secretions

along many The structures have tract functions. the GI major important to functional them specialization and contractions) function colon storage organs of this function anatomy mechanisms and (characteristics both for terms the exhibit (also important (e.g., in of stomach enable size) and shape to processed perform smooth to chyme) their produce that referred tonic One storage; is efficiently. and as food are muscle control surface tract and area can the small the digestion The specialization function GI absorption occur. of large intestine is absorption; predominant over region the a is major of of which this ions The eliminated water the get ensure body. reabsorbs do colon they and from to not along is the in moved Ingested by of GI muscle food action walls. its tract the muscle the the structures of sphincters. tract Separating regions also called specialized are GI both. region of one or backflow, isolate from These retention to selective prevent next function provide or and the contents

is body. for carrying supply the The absorbed to rest of important blood the the to intestine nutrients Fig. to • directly enters heart does GI the but body, return the other the not drainage systems organ venous Unlike tract from first of and 27.1 anatomy its system the functional segments. GI General division into of

circulation to liver. the leading portal the in the than other receiving liver the circulation. a part Thus its arterial blood unusual from supply is of considerable blood notable also dynamic GI its flow is regulation. for flow amount mass the output, supplies. of 25% tract blood GI an it Splanchnic to the cardiac of about disproportionate receives meal, the to blood subserve also of from to needs metabolic tract remove diverted wall gut a muscle to After the GI the also and can absorbed nutrients. be

of is of the the that tract substances GI for wall. lymphatic GI important across are tract absorbed the lipid-soluble The drainage transport drugs) (including to wall. instead vessels other later, capillaries are some pass see As lipid-soluble too the into intestinal and and in lymph and into that large into particles molecules we are pass will the lipids packaged vitamins finally side. into into systemic circulation duct lymph the thoracic vessels the drain drain These and on which lymph thus arterial ducts, into the larger physiological This ability straight metabolism major implications the delivered lipid systemic be drugs and also the has of to in in circulation. into

consisting tubular The specialized layers is made of of wall cells up of ( the gut

Fig. 27.2

GI mucosa layer tract. of is the the The innermost It propria, the and the mucosae. muscularis epithelium, of consists the lamina of specialized the that lumen epithelium tract. layer of cells is a The single line the GI the continuous that and the lumen glands tube. It into organs along of the the drain and forms layer a tube with are cell layer • Within Fig. this the tract. of 27.2 layers composing GI of wall the organization General the

which termed enterocytes, proteins most express digestion of epithelial many cells absorptive absorption and of are abundant number a specialized the macronutrients. important cells; for secretory peptides Enteroendocrine regulatory help to release that cells amines granules GI contain regulate function. and contents. and throughout lubricate cells mucosa glycoprotein protons, produce gastric the (mucin) in production specialized protect addition, helps for of cells luminal and that tract the In the tract a GI mucin-producing the are GI

connections called tight junctions. by epithelial are The cells linked together intercellular columnar throughout postprandial proteins, the period. the these of complexes of junctions is and intracellular tightness and junctions regulated are These transmembrane the The epithelium function varies predominant one tract part digestive of the on depending from to another, that of of greatly region. nature the the and cells water. intestinal For ions, designed is these mediate uptake example, selective epithelium nutrients, absorption; of for esophagus has squamous role. no contrast, has the absorptive that a In epithelium and as protection, food for such thus conduit the by food provided needs rough transportation from swallowed of some a is fiber. squamous epithelium, It

crypts into is the (Fig. villi arranged surface The and epithelium of area ). 27.3 area serve the of increase are surface to that the projections finger-like Villi mucosa. Crypts or are the in epithelium. invaginations folds The tract is process epithelium 3 and GI humans lining days. about by renewed continuously this cells; replaced dividing the takes in of intestinal proliferating where are crypts, the is to cells a proliferative stem zone These localized there cells.

•Fig. 27.3 Comparisonofthemorphologyoftheepitheliumofthesmallintestineandcolon.

below that The largely lamina loose the collagen contains (see epithelium and tissue consists connective elastin of propria immediately fibrils

Fig. ). 27.2 fibers. lamina several nodules, and and rich is nerve propria types in of and vessels capillaries, lymph contains glands The layer The mucosae is muscularis smooth intestinal innermost thin the muscle. of muscularis and mucosa an of folds When that contractions are ridges the mucosae. the endoscope, by seen caused through has

is submucosa layer the next The (see

Fig. and with fibrils. largely elastin consists ), of 27.2 which loose connective collagen tissue present glands the of folds or in of the some the In are tract, submucosa. regions mucosa) (invaginations GI The the submucosa, lymph submucosal of vessels, (ENS), together system the and trunks, plexuses the of with intestinal the one vessels larger enteric the of nerve plexus. lie in blood wall nervous

muscle and layer two layer an (see layers muscularis smooth of externa, inner muscularis longitudinal propria, typically of cells: an consists circular or The outer substantial

Fig. 27.2 ). Muscle muscle the circumferentially, circular the fibers along layer longitudinal whereas of oriented the tube. fibers the longitudinal muscle oriented are in are layer in axis muscle and an muscle that more inner cells, of of packed an humans intestine small outer layer and smaller, subdivided closely circular is circular dense circular consists the mammals, layer layer. In most the into of the the the ENS, circular plexus. other longitudinal myenteric lies Between muscle and the of layers plexus circulate the the externa muscularis propel GI the of them the tract. mix lumen Contractions and and contents of along

interconnected wall many The of neurons. contains tract GI the The Meissner’s network the plexus). referred as submucosal nerve submucosa contains plexus to called cells (also of a dense the smooth plexus) between and myenteric longitudinal layers. prominent plexus is circular muscle located The (Auerbach’s the These ENS. intramural constitute plexuses and secretory the ENS integrate of GI motor the system. helps The activities sympathetic and the activities nerves motor because ENS If controls secretory cut, directly are and parasympathetic the to many these gut processes. the continue

a of the outermost layer of the GI (see is adventitia, layer of squamous cells and serosa, mesothelial The consists or tract

Fig. 27.2 ). the of surface mesentery organs of the the the cavity. within that and abdominal It wall suspends lines is the abdominal part movement the and The can thin occur a the the so helps layers fluid muscle organs abdominal relax. contract viscous secrete mesenteric that as organs of lubricate membranes

in Regulatory the Gastrointestinal Tract Mechanisms

respiratory period) period). (intermeal relative GI activity intake intense Unlike the after cardiovascular (postprandial of and of of food or quiescence systems, tract the the undergoes periods periods to Consequently intake. and tract food appropriately detect GI the respond has to to have macronutrient be this the and considerably, In can vary appropriate meal can there physiological that addition and detect mount responses. of mechanisms content a has organs the the associated pancreas. Thus such tract with communicate to GI as GI be and in the a by occurring which have because there to Finally, more long the tract mechanisms tube, is signaled distal GI essentially vice of are versa. proximal to the the parts, events portion tract

in There three are paracrine, GI of and mechanisms regulation principal function: the neurocrine control involved (Fig. endocrine, 27.4

peptide the point whereby sensing of GI from Endocrine a the in stimulus cell regulatory removed cell by bloodstream via that enteroendocrine to or cells secreting regulation a travels the (EEC), tract, the describes secretion. an process to target the hormone responds specific a Cells receptors the to express hormone for GI hormone. responding Hormones pancreas. other have associated located of on cells tract with such the released in the effects glandular tract, the GI tract from GI structures also the as and on GI regions cells liver In GI absorption, addition, hormones on brain. effects in have including endocrine other direct digestion and in and have no tissues that role

products stimuli and released the are from to (Fig. response the cell GI to are wall of packed tract with EECs chemical the in which secretory of mechanical granules, the

). 27.5 other can stimulated be input or not by neural EECs with meal. associated factors In a addition, basolateral an membrane the lumen that occurs) with the most referred (generally these where as and wall through which to tract as in common “open” EECs have occurs. the membrane the regarded apical a secretion sensing in are GI location is the of gut The cells contact type; enterochromaffin-like secretes histamine. in membrane gastric contact part the EECs not the is epithelium, luminal which do There that an in (ECL) surface of also “closed”-type of with cell gut; their the are example the have

are There many hormones of (see secreted tract GI by the examples

secretin. Table remembering worth the identified that 27.1 was hormone ever is ); the first GI it hormone GI of part of wall is which cells gastrin, hormones One the released of the located distal most endocrine in from the is well-characterized the stomach. and stimulated is gastrin acid the parasympathetic potently in postprandial activation outflow the to by of GI stimulates of secretion Release gastric tract, period. gastrin

•Fig. ThethreemechanismsbywhichfunctionintheGItractisregulatedintheintegratedresponsetoameal. 27.4

the regulation is Paracrine describes messenger whereby space. the cell target acts a by chemical diffusion process in intestinal interstitial an on wall peptide cell regulatory through a sensing or a the EEC) that from (often released nearby even several cells, glands, the their in types exert in the on of cells EECs. absorptive GI secretory and on Paracrine enterocytes, other actions muscle different wall cell smooth including tract, agents they several There are paracrine listed agents, and are in important

with Table action, 27.1 their site and production, along of site function. of histamine. wall important in gut paracrine mediator An is the the histamine stored the ECL glands. stomach, cells and is in released located In by gastric through of Histamine stimulates production and propria parietal interstitial cells space to neighboring in lamina acid. the the diffuses smooth wall. mast (5-hydroxytryptamine absorption cells, called and from function the specialized EECs and water neurons, across Serotonin enteric regulates [5-HT]), muscle intestinal released cells, enterochromaffin mucosal the including these adenosine, in prostaglandins, nitric paracrine (NO); GI mediators described, changes but mediators they of function. of oxide There not well are and are capable functions other the wall, in are producing gut

Fig. Electronmicrographofanopen-typeendocrinecellintheGItract.Notethemicrovilliattheapicalprojectionandthesecretorygranulesinthebasolateralportionofthecell. 27.5 (FromBarrett

K.

[Lange Physiology Gastrointestinal Series]. Physiology NewYork:McGraw-Hill;2005.)(CourtesyofLeonardR.Johnson,Ph.D.)

of endocrine function. and substances GI regulators can Many be both paracrine example, the For protein locally to also duodenum lipid, and in on paracrine in acts from nerve a the and fashion which released response dietary cholecystokinin, terminals pancreas. is affects detail in will more This discussed in be

Regulation Function of Gastrointestinal Neural

important Nerves the and in an tract. role the GI function play of regulating neurotransmitters located on from when simplest terminal its the occurs the In has released an and that neurotransmitter GI form, is a innervated. is cell neural a in the regulation effect nerve tract neurotransmitter motor nerves synapses between in there However, no and some cells are in GI cases the tract. effector tract. Neural as the is GI GI important within regulation of distant as of very function between an well organ, parts

Therearemultiplereceptorsubtypesfortheregulatorypeptidehormonesreleasedfromendocrinecellsinthewallofthegut.Theselectivityofreceptorstopeptidehormonesisdeterminedbyposttranslationalmodifications,whichthenconfersreceptorselectivity.AnexampleofthisispeptideYY(PYY).TherearemultiplereceptorsubtypesforPYY,classifiedasY1toY7.PYYisreleasedfromendocrinecellsinthewallofthegut,mainlyinresponsetofattyacids.Itisreleasedasa36–aminoacidpeptideandbindstotheY1,Y2,andY5receptors;however,itcanbecleavedtoPYY3-36bytheenzymedipeptidylpeptidaseIV,amembranepeptidase.ThisformofthepeptideismoreselectivefortheY2receptor.ThusthepresenceoftheenzymethatcleavesthepeptidecanalterthebiologicalresponsetoPYYsecretion.

Glucagon-likepeptide1(GLP-1)isaregulatorypeptidereleasedfromEECscellsinthegutwallinresponsetothepresenceofluminalcarbohydrateandlipids.GLP-1arisesfromdifferentialprocessingoftheglucagongene,thesamegenethatisexpressedinthepancreasandthatgivesrisetoglucagon.GLP-1isinvolvedinregulationofthebloodglucoselevelviastimulationofinsulinsecretionandalsoinsulinbiosynthesis.AgonistsoftheGLP-1receptorimproveinsulinsensitivityindiabeticanimalmodelsandhumansubjects.AdministrationofGLP-1alsoreducesappetiteandfoodintakeanddelaysgastricemptying,responsesthatmaycontributetoimprovingglucosetolerance.Long-actingagonistsfortheGLP-1receptor(e.g.,exenatide)havebeenapprovedforthetreatmentoftype2diabetes.

regulation Neural surprisingly GI complex. is tract the of extrinsic innervated intrinsic is the nerves, of The systems. nervous two and sets gut by the innervate the (ANS). the part cell that autonomic gut, The wall; gut as nervous with bodies extrinsic located outside nerves defined system is are nerves nervous extrinsic these system of (submucosal The as referred the gut enteric bodies of that system, wall has to are the system, also contained and nervous cell within nervous the plexuses). myenteric intrinsic extrinsic GI system, mediated nervous are highly ENS. of can yet the and the place by system take extrinsic independently others functions Some the nervous on are dependent entirely ( function intrinsic can nerves extrinsic often system modulate However, nervous

Fig. 27.6 •Fig. HierarchicalneuralcontrolofGIfunction.StimulitotheGItractfromameal(e.g.,chemical,mechanical,osmotic)willactivateboththeintrinsicandextrinsicsensory(afferent)pathways,whichinturnwillactivatetheextrinsicandintrinsicneuralreflexpathways. 27.6

gut innervation Extrinsic parasympathetic the neural of ( is two innervation the via major subdivisions the ANS, to namely, and sympathetic

Fig. 27.7 ). innervation is pelvic nerves. via Parasympathetic vagus gut and the the to the the esophagus, the pancreas, the stomach, first colon. intestine, of part of cranial cecum, gallbladder, the The innervates nerve, proximal nerve, and part 10th vagus pelvic other GI not colon tract. distal addition in nerves the organs The innervate of region, the of and the pelvic part anorectal the are part the that to

the lie the Consistent organization brainstem sacral (vagus) spinal the parasympathetic the system, or (pelvic). with the bodies nervous in preganglionic typical cord cell nerve of neurons run organ, and neurons nerves enteric are the which postganglionic of this the (vagus with case gut nerves, wall. gut in synapse in in the where the to from these the wall neurons respectively), in Axons they pelvic these nerves wall is the no transmission a the is of ENS. neuron to gut; within innervation cells efferent always the the There in direct effector pathway via of

preganglionic between obligatory postganglionic the synapse the ANS, in Consistent an is with and neurons transmission synapse. nicotinic between neuron. nicotinic receptors is intrinsic terminal neuron, postganglionic postganglionic acetylcholine localized via the and an in is case from on That the released this at nerve mediated which acting and the is, preganglionic synapse neurons

fibers that these are and mesenteric (celiac, neurons. and inferior the ganglia); by in the Sympathetic cord prevertebral innervation terminate superior, bodies spinal supplied in the is cell ganglia preganglionic vessels fibers synapse in and leave nerve fibers the branches. the along end ganglia organ and and their major the blood the neurons postganglionic These reach with ganglia, the there a systems. of sympathetic the as other is ganglia, organ innervation seen Rarely paravertebral in synapse (chain) with of GI structures fibers the the of Some sympathetic innervate wall vasoconstrictor blood in other vessels tract, innervate gut. the glandular fibers and directly sympathetic

[CNS]) the nervous neurons; system both (toward also are ANS, these sensory and The the fibers parasympathetic central of afferent in carries nature. sympathetic, vagal in for The the afferents the bodies cell nodose are

SuperiorcervicalganglionPrevertebral ganglia1. Celiac2. mesenteric3. Superior •Fig. mesenteric 123 Inferior ExtrinsicinnervationoftheGItract,consistingoftheparasympathetic(A)andsympathetic(B)subdivisionsoftheautonomicnervoussystem. 27.7

ganglion. terminating tractus other central the brainstem gut and projection solitarius These neurons terminal the the have of in nucleus in the a in wall. the dorsal and of the are root that the the with neurons afferent in segmentally run cell pathway bodies sympathetic organized The ganglia. found are spinal located are all afferents the layers of terminals about of Peripheral and gut. information in the the of wall, gut the they where state detect vagal spinal this information neurons CNS. to Afferent send the smooth CNS luminal or stretch Information the the nutrient the acidity, as to the osmolality contraction degree sent of contents), of of in relays content, luminal contents well the muscle. as nature (e.g., painful to transmitting is innervation stimuli Afferent responsible CNS. also the for

inter-neurons, a pathway—afferents, extrinsic components GI the within and tract. efferent reflex The the neurons—exist innervation of to can which reflexes efferent mediated (termed has vagovagal and nerve entirely fibers. These afferent be the vagus both via reflex), a information neuron. CNS, they vagal then drives an sensory synapse The the to where with afferents in send activity interneuron, motor the efferent which very extrinsic in are after GI important meal. of function ingestion These reflexes a regulating of stomach to the vagovagal filling an allows relaxation the reflex this reflex, increase receptive an the the example relaxation is smooth in in of distention intraluminal without pressure. important stomach gastric which in of of stomach; in An the muscle results occur

In opposition. parasympathetic general, sympathetic nervous systems, with as other to in organ and work systems visceral the tend in example. simple system, for as as cardiovascular is not this However, the chapters. the to meal is a and the nervous is in response the discussed following Activation integrative of important system in parasympathetic processes of exceptions. gut parasympathetic are activation nervous The generally in notable the there wall, physiological results although in system contrast, nervous more the GI sympathetic be tends is In and system function inhibitory frequently to circumstances. in to activated pathophysiological sympathetic inhibits function. smooth activation Overall, muscle this of of is smooth to muscle. activation exception the in tends GI contraction innervation induce sympathetic which sphincters, sympathetic to The flow the of system nervous Moreover, in blood regulation important GI sympathetic notably is tract. in the

of all up originating of which The are bodies in of is ( (ganglia) the cell and gut their wall made major two ENS the nerve collections plexuses, fibers,

Fig. 27.8). plexus layers, submucosa. lies the the longitudinal The muscle the plexus myenteric in and submucosal and circular between lies the link plexuses. Interganglionic neurons in strands two

part ANS. ENS the interneurons, as efferent in Neurons the are similar characterized neurons, to neurons, functionally afferent or in the neurons extrinsic of within contained of reflex pathway ENS. be can Thus all the components a in and neurons, are Stimuli activate afferent of gut which function. neurons alter the wall interneurons by to efferent the then detected ENS innervation. this the from extrinsic act autonomously In can way have we extrinsic by the seen, system. However, nervous thus can extrinsic are the neurons, these by innervated be neurons function the ENS, pathways of reflex modulated in and as already “little brain gut” the the complex it of to performing its the and Because reflex is of referred as and complexity. importance own in integrative as is result ENS pathways, a functions capable sometimes its the are It the in is neurons ENS cord. there that as estimated many as spinal in in addition, regions brain also the and ENS in involved outflow. In many autonomic neurotransmitters in in GI as the hormones act and Fig. mediators are These • thus regulatory peptides the tract. the 27.8 system The wall in nervous GI of enteric

brain-gut peptides, gut intrinsic innervating components the axis. the sometimes referred extrinsic the as to and to referred as brain-gut and are

GI to the Response Meal a of Tract

mechanisms the of introductory in regulatory tract. the broad provides a and chapter This overview anatomy GI to discussion meal there a details GI to of the the In of integrated physiology. be will chapters provide the following response to esophageal, oral, gastric, cephalic, meal response duodenal, phases: is into a The classically and intestinal. divided in pathways that osmotic) different certain paracrine, meal humoral result in neural, the presents chemical, activate (e.g., motility). (e.g., (e.g., and In changes and reflexes) each and mechanical, secretion function effector that stimuli phase is and will the between regulatory that in considerable the discussed There this have crosstalk chapters. mechanisms next be been outlined, dynamic other in of requires maintenance control in regulatory to and act a the homeostasis systems body, mechanisms complex with function GI sense of fashion. As of

1.

subserve absorption. regions tube is associated into with a tract that functions digestion subdivided The and GI different

2.

is lining layers— subdivided layers. submucosal, mucosal, of tract the into muscle GI The the and

3.

and neurocrine. paracrine, three major are hormonal, mechanisms: There control

4.

particularly intrinsic. GI because The interacting is it tract and components, of extrinsic two innervation consists of interesting the

5.

the wall subdivisions two outside the the (cell consists tract) of bodies of GI innervation the of Extrinsic

GS. Baldwin peptides. gastrointestinal modification Posttranslational of ed. Johnson LR, In: GI Tract. Physiology of the ed. 5th Waltham, 2012. Press; Academic MA:

al. Brierley SM, et by Innervation nerves. spinal vagal gastrointestinal the tract of and afferent Johnson LR, In: ed. Tract. Physiology the GI of 5th ed. Waltham, MA: 2012. Press; Academic

al. SJ, Brookes et the in gut. afferent Extrinsic primary signalling Nat Gastroenterol Hepatol. Rev 2013;10:286-296.

MR. peptides: and somatostatin Hellmich gastrin, cholecystokinin, Chao C, ghrelin. Gastrointestinal In: ed. LR, Johnson

ANS: and sympathetic. parasympathetic (afferent) have important an sensory Both component.

6.

of extrinsic wall innervation. independently enteric intrinsic of in the act (cell the neural nervous bodies GI can system tract) The or

7.

the tract, physiological nutrients a presence the regions as in regions. is of more and mechanisms of as meal that detect the distal different well appropriate When sensory the mount in responses of tract, in region endocrine, paracrine, neurocrine are pathways. mediated responses These by and

the Tract. of Physiology GI ed. 5th Waltham, Press; 2012. Academic MA:

Furness JB. enteric nervous The and system neurogastroenterology. Rev Nat Hepatol. Gastroenterol 2012;9:286-294.

GA, Gomez al. et gastrointestinal peptides. Postpyloric ed. LR, In: Johnson Physiology of Tract. the GI 5th ed. Press; Waltham, MA: 2012. Academic

HE, et Parker al. control role cells endocrine metabolism in appetite. and The gut of of Physiol. Exp 2014;99:1116-1120.

D’Alessio DA. Sandoval DA, of disease. in role peptides: proglucagon health Physiology of and glucagon and GLP-1 Rev. Physiol 2015;95:513-548.

to and Oral, of Phases Meal 28 Cephalic, a Response Integrated Esophageal The the

student the to should questions: able 1. answer of the be completion chapter this Upon following

functional the anatomy their of secretory of are glands, the salivary including structures What elements?

2.

how a it the oral and to What phases of cephalic (what, are why, happens) meal? response the

3.

along the the of come are the general principles are from, what gastrointestinal (GI) (where What tract do secretions components)? secretion

4.

the How tract? of or the components GI of do region vary with secretion gland the

5.

the What between the functions salivary and is correlation secretion? composition of

6.

within generated primary and regulated? How and glands are secondary secretion salivary

7.

in of sequence the is swallowing? What events

8.

and are neural What secondary and stimulus the peristalsis? primary generating pathways esophageal

9.

place during What take in significance? the what changes gastric swallowing, and motility is

10.

esophagus the protection What structures the associated terms in and are of propulsion? and of functions major

to integrated in in describe that chapter a will his stages meal. gastrointestinal (GI) the the the tract of early response occur the processes tract from the (the the esophageal esophagus food (3) is (the before phase), food the oral (1) in There changes (2) physiology in ingested mouth phase), and are cephalic when transferred ingested GI to food is phase). is mouth (the when presence and The mainly GI preparing tract the absorption. associated responses GI food tract of to the are of digestion the with for

phase is the GI feature tract the cephalic activation The of in of the readiness meal. main for input. olfactory anticipation cognitive hungry), include input, are and about visual food food, (seeing smelling when stimuli of thinking appetizing auditory involved The the input or or and consumption food dogs; The of be an paired the demonstrated he link stimulus eventually conditioning presentation stimulus stimulate could was to latter an in which classic may in secretion. experiments unexpected clearly to the of the auditory but auditory Pavlov, alone is presumably dinner is told real-life ready. that being analogy A gut. result All in stimuli excitatory neural outflow these in increase parasympathetic an to the nerves outflow smell) (e.g., parasympathetic activate input sensory that Sensory brainstem. stimulates the from also hypothalamus, limbic in of the brain response. (e.g., sites Higher components this cognitive involved system, are cortex) to person’s thus the such and anticipation be psychological response status, food negative; a a positive anxiety, of alter meal. cognitive can both response and can as The in the where is brainstem, cell arise. region motor preganglionic of bodies the common dorsal of activation the However, the neurons the vagal pathway the nucleus final increased efferent nerve. the Activation in passing to the tract to of activity leads vagus GI fibers the nucleus in function fibers of motor postganglionic the turn an activation In effector as in the results change activate neurons of their motor (referred cell). efferent because to secretion, parasympathetic salivary bile of Increased enzyme gastric between contraction, and pancreatic outflow common sphincter enhances relaxation secretion, and gallbladder the acid the duct Oddi sphincter of (the secretion, duodenum). of to GI All the responses ability enhance receive and these incoming food. the digest the tract mediated are mediated the nerve; is nerve. the cranial responses salivary ninth the vagus via response The via remaining

cephalic indistinguishable the of the features oral phase from of are the Many phase. The tract. contact difference of surface food is only the that in with the is GI mouth, both additional stimuli there (taste). generated from chemical the and are Thus mechanical However, of many

efferent is to in responses phase, cavity CHAPTER Oral, the same. oral 28 Phases Integrated identical cephalic a are those the Esophageal by in the because food the presence initiated the the of Cephalic, to pathway The and of Response Meal the initiated The discussed will initiated be specifically stimulation consist salivary secretion, of the mouth, which of responses in next. the mainly

important digestion. for the is and mechanical The initiation of food mouth disruption for of for chewing mucin, the and subdivides and which and food amylase and glycoprotein with food lingual enzymes salivary lipase the lubricates Chewing mixes swallowing. with the cavity, absorption some and from mouth, Minimal absorbed the oral can alcohol this in be drugs important. occurs clinically are although the and the and of the Oddi, it via the However, phase, contraction, as gallbladder relaxation of is distal more initiates cephalic with to acid tract, secretion, pathway. that efferent realize gastric responses enzyme mediated oral the pancreatic secretion, in cavity of stimulation GI vagal increased increased important including the sphincter

Properties Secretion of

(salivary itself Secretions the glands tract submucosal the glands duodenum), formed pancreas, glands, itself. from gut mucosa wall associated with come by in from and the and glands tract GI in intestinal esophagus and from the (e.g., liver), secretory can tract. on tremendously, The exact function GI the of products of nature region the the of that depending vary characteristics However, have secretions in these several common. and associated the GI protein, Secretions tract from electrolytes, humoral water, and glands include agents. essential generating an for efficient Water aqueous for is environment action. enzyme important is to drive of of osmotic gradients of for movement the generation water. Secretion electrolytes of ingested macronutrients in food. catalyze secreted in breakdown the enzymes fluid Digestive such mucin such those specialized others of GI have are functions, proteins well of as additional secreted Moreover, many only just the tract understood, and fairly understood, are as which be trefoil those that of and to beginning some immunoglobulins, along peptides.

including associated chemical, multiple by the Secretion osmotic, meal, is initiated mechanical and signals with components. is the by specific Secretion called secretagogues substances action acting secretory on of cells. elicited effector three ways of described already in been that Secretagogues have one work in the

Chapter paracrine, 27—endocrine, neurocrine. and

of Constituents Secretions

or in on conditions secretory that Inorganic of the are required tract. the depending region GI particular specific, part gland components inorganic electrolytes, H+ . The including are − components and HCO3 of acid intestine. secretions start action and for and small (HCl) enzymes pepsin conditions HCO3 in neutralizes different the and − provides stomach, the protein digestive Two optimal of in which in gastric important the to is digestion, acid the examples activate include duodenum, which

depend of secretory and function the of are on the or that gut. organ components Organic specific region gland also bile growth (for as mucin are organic and protection), immunoglobulins, digestion), such enzymes and (for mucosal and acids, factors constituents factors, The lubrication absorptive other factors.

meal, salivary stimulation of considerable phases and secretion During oral the cephalic place. takes the of physiological to including meal functions, processes ( has a of integrative important those for a Saliva for other the responses variety and

28.1 ). Box for The include and material esophagus. solubilization clearance saliva of main food and digestion, functions for neutralization in of in of initiation carbohydrate of the moistening secretions and of refluxed digestion swallowing, lubrication taste, gastric cavity are Saliva the important actions overall oral also antibacterial that of for has teeth. and health

Anatomy Glands Salivary the Functional of

sublingual. salivary of and major three submandibular, There glands: parotid, pairs are found lips, smaller tongue, on glands many are In the addition, and palate. glands located These the GI typical of tract glands are structures tubuloalveolar ( in the

Fig. ). 28.1 according (“watery”), mixed. major is its to serous portion classified of mucous, secretion: or gland acinar The the gland a gland the gland submandibular The secretion. mixed and parotid the mainly sublingual secretion, produces produces mucus, mainly serous secretes

acinar cells by nuclei, abundant called end secretory Cells amylase acini, are endoplasmic that basally located proteins. and apically enzyme located or in secreted reticulum, rough characterized secretory pieces, the contain and the other are and granules contain the mucin. granules the the larger specialized are There acinus; in and glycoprotein these are mucous cells cells in also the mouth gland larger secretion: the opening into of from the secretions There 28.1FunctionsofSalivaandChewing that ducts in are the intercalated ducts fluid in acinus and the kinds •BOX transport three also acinar to modify drain

swallowing action bolus growth Neutralization antibacterial digestive Fig.28.1General smaller of the associ-ated intake food pancreas) Physiology • digestion of glands, of of Cleansing ingestive tubuloalveolar Disruption the particles of gastric in tract. intraluminal Initiation SECTION6Berne selective Facilitation Production & Regulation protection produce tract to a taste stimuli stomach speech the structure in GI the of of of behavior mouth rest lipid and with secretory Mucosal in and 522 salivary Aid starch glands of (e.g., Formation for refluxed of and and food contents the Levy Salivary the cell Serous (secretory) serous ducts, striated duct which cell Mucous cells Demilune excretory membrane then Basement even ducts, duct Intercalated into larger of ducts. empty a mouth. duct single gland In to drains each large the from saliva addition, the saliva. in ductal particular, and ionic ducts, cells of composition the lining modify The osmolarity striated

Composition of Saliva

of rate enzymes properties organic growth to concentration, flow the mucin, low relative important including (amylase, lipase), factors. saliva a gland, high mass osmolarity, and and are The large constituents, K+ of for GI long-term not lining are The integrated to are maintenance meal the important tract. of the in the essential response but latter a of

on composition rate flow. the The the of stimulus salivary entirely inorganic and dependent is hypotonic. In is salivary humans, secretion always components , major − Mg++ are Ca++ , The

K+ HCO3 , and Cl− , Na+ , . the oral of Fluoride dental basis of caries. secretion treatment secreted for fluoride be in forms fluoride can and prevention saliva, is stimulated of with during ions salivary secretion rate of the the period. rate flow postprandial concentration the secretion; The varies of

saliva is is the and The cells end pieces passes through secretion primary by cells produced by in modified duct the acinar secretory (or ducts. as acini) plasma. similar of in major isotonic, ions the that the secretion The is and is concentration to primary Cl− channels the Secretion Ca++-dependent signaling, predominantly which opens in is driven cells. acinar apical by and osmotic the gradient. duct out electrical an lumen into Cl− therefore flows establishes and tight the relatively water via transport). the leaky, via junctions Because of is paracellular Na+ then epithelium the follow acinus (i.e., epithelium and the across may water by aquaporin 5 Transcellular channels. movement water mediated also occur, vary and with fluid and level type of content rate of stimulus. The secretion the amylase primary composition ducts, to cells the passes striated along the As the the of secretion. excretory ionic fluid and the produce duct the secretion modify secondary reabsorb lumen. cells into and , K+ duct The secrete and and Cl− HCO3 the Na+ − is reabsorbed the in for are but some protons, protons of K+ Na+ secreted . exchange exchanged for then the secretion. for is alkalinizing only Cl−, − on exchange other salivary thereby hand in HCO3 secreted

rest, slightly salivary final hypotonic secretion alkaline. is and At growth gastric in refluxed the saliva as of in acid mouth, is important microbial saliva alkalinity swallowed. well as restricting is The the once neutralizing in the increase, secreted Cl− decrease Na+ it thus small increases fluid is above toward there becomes the a and is − salivary plasma concentration more in concentrations the When and always (but stimulated, K+ concentration concentrations), plasma levels, even alkaline ( secretion remains HCO3

Fig. ). 28.2 of directly be duct − stimulated the secretagogues can HCO3 secretion Note that by on action cells. expression isotonicity cannot or moderate during follow the rapidly therefore rates enough to tight flow epithelium lacks and The high salivary ions maintain of stimulated at is aquaporin, relatively secretion. and water duct with Thus

The K+ the CHAPTER and Cl– 3 3 HCO– Phases HCO– a Response 28 Cephalic, to 2.0 Saliva Meal Cl– 4.0 Flow of of 1.0 K+ saliva Plasma 3.0 Esophageal Oral, Integrated Na+ Na+ (mL/min)

similar and PRIMARY to Amylase-containing (nearly isotonic; Na+, of levels K+, probably SECRETION plasma) Cl–, HCO3

ionic Modification of Fig. • content of function the salivary flow of as a secretion of compared rate A, ions in 28.2 concentration the composition salivary plasma. with The Saliva plasma is flow rates. hypotonic at to all saliva very that −] low [HCO3 at in except rates. exceeds plasma in flow of two-stage representation the model of B, Schematic secretion. salivary the is electrolytes in produced and containing secretion acinar cell. The amylase primary absorb − Cl− to is of and . in through it plasma electrolytes secretion, in HCO3 and and concentration that primary that secrete is K+ modified ducts as it but Na+ the The passes similar

time resembles increase rate, secretion by resulting the ionic there saliva cells, is plasma. closely and the modification and for the less therefore primary more duct secretion an in duct However, secretion high remains −] acinar from cells cells [HCO3 possibly because stimulated (see is and

Fig. 28.2).

cells. and by acinar organic the secreted and constituents The stored, glycoproteins—are synthesized, of saliva—proteins starch glycoprotein when (attacks the in bacterial bacteria to mucus limit cell digestion), (important mouth). The that major lysozyme digestion), colonization walls (mucin, of hydrated), enzyme and for lipid products amylase (an which lipase are forms initiates amylase of the digestion salivary in the of healthy is carbohydrates, adults pancreatic Although not of because required amylase. it of begins excess process lipase of lingual Similarly the unclear. importance is

and Blood Flow of Metabolism Salivary Glands

glands saliva. produce prodigious The flow a salivary of saliva own are min/g production mL/ weight humans thus their the at glands producing of is maximal saliva this in gland; minute. rate, rate The about 1 each of in the high rate flow; rate both high saliva glands a of to proportional and have blood Salivary metabolism are formation. of an of to maximally salivary times is skeletal that of approximately secreting flow contracting mass equal muscle. 10 Blood actively glands salivary glands parasympathetic of of vasculature the the glands. nerves by Stimulation flow the blood increases dilating to during and (VIP) terminals are secretion. from parasympathetic released intestinal in and salivary are glands Vasoactive acetylcholine polypeptide nerve the vasodilatory

of Salivary Secretion Regulation

secretion Control is neural. salivary exclusively of secretions GI most In control primarily hormonal. is other contrast, of parasympathetic autonomic secretion and by subdivisions the sympathetic stimulated of Salivary the is nervous both system. Excitation or secretion. stimulates the nerves sympathetic either salivary salivary of glands to parasympathetic system. Primary control parasympathetic is during by response meal of nervous salivary the glands a physiological the to the severely salivation parasympathetic supply the impaired is the atrophy. If and interrupted, glands salivary is

from salivary stem fibers Sympathetic ganglion. superior the cervical glands the to and via VII fibers and nerves respectively). Preganglionic parasympathetic IX, glossopharyngeal branches the nerves travel (cranial of facial These glands. in fibers form with the salivary neurons postganglionic ganglia or near synapses in endings. acinar The supplied cells ducts and are parasympathetic with nerve

the stimulates enhances transport synthesis flow Parasympathetic glandular glands, mucins, stimulation to epithelium, and increases activities and secretion of of the blood metabolism the amylase salivary greatly ductular and growth. and increases

Ionic of Mechanisms Secretion Salivary

Fig. a by simplified view shows acinar of secretion mechanisms 28.3 the serous ion of cells. and membrane basolateral an symporter. contains of the The Na+,K+-ATPase Na+-K+-2Cl− cell Na+ for dependent is The gradient on K+ cell. for which the the the membrane, and of entry Cl− , force across basolateral driving Na+ , concentration into provides Na+,K+-ATPase, anion cell acinar the leave and acinar apical in via channel located an of the and HCO3 cell. − lumen the Cl− the enter membrane Na+ across of drives and entry This water junctions. into of thus lumen anions relatively the tight secretion the leaky the acinar

enhanced as for of fluid receptor acetylcholine. a is strongly Acinar of muscarinic in the response activation cell in intracellular elevations to secretion result [Ca++]

Fig. excretory of striated cells transport epithelial 28.4 ion and simplified a ducts. of the model shows in processes processes and membrane most in for maintains basolateral electrochemical located drive K+ of the Na+,K+-ATPase the cell. transport the of ionic that Na+ other the gradients antiporter, Cl−/HCO3 In the into secretion operation the results and of the the of and H+/K+ the − of lumen in absorption parallel membrane Cl− from the the − antiporter antiporter, K+ lumen. and Na+ HCO3 Na+/ and H+ apical water much The of impermeability the absorbing ducts relative by water from osmosis. too to the prevents ductular epithelium

amylase mechanism in electrolytes Fig.28.3Ionic acinar cells. the involved • salivary transport and in of secretion ATP2Cl–HCO3LumenofacinusNa˜Na˜Na˜Cl°Na˜K˜K˜K˜K˜°H˜

initiated control. can it is entirely but reflex under voluntarily, almost be thereafter Swallowing propel ordered to is the reflex events there sequence from The of the stomach. pharynx that swallowing and food mouth to the rigidly a from trachea This also inhibits and entrance of food during into prevents respiration reflex the swallowing. the The touch the afferent opening reflex most when near the receptors, limb stimulated. notably pharynx, are of of swallowing begins those swallowing the the these Sensory transmitted from called an medulla lower area pons to receptors in impulses are center. and cranial and from and by the center neurons. musculature the to Motor travel motor via the the various upper to remainder of the esophagus impulses pharynx vagal esophagus nerves of swallowing

swallowing of shown The events timing in in is

Fig. . 28.5 of the of phase is the in separates of The swallowing food food from the a initiated of bolus mouth. mass voluntary the tongue when tip palate. tongue tip posterior tongue more of of First the the the against portions press hard later the and the The and backward tongue of upward the the action the into bolus mouth. moves then forced pharynx, is the stimulates into The it the receptors where touch bolus

mechanism Response transport absorption epithelial salivary Integrated striated in The Oral, of a Esophageal the Meal Fig.28.4Ionic • 28 and cells and gland. of in secretion of and the the duct CHAPTER to Cephalic, involved excretory Phases ATPHCO3LumenofductNa˜Na˜Na˜Na˜Cl°Cl°K˜K˜K˜°H˜H˜H˜

agonists. to adrenergic both The glands respond salivary of acinar and and the cholinergic duct cells cells hormones VIP the the substance acetylcholine, P, these and release by salivary and increase glands, amylase stimulate Nerves of norepinephrine, secretion of the flow saliva. and of These (cAMP) neurotransmitters and of elevating Ca++ the the adenosine concentration monophosphate cytosol. by in the increasing concentration mainly cyclic intracellular by act of P, the in cytosolic respectively, Acetylcholine acting and tachykinin receptors, of Ca++ substance serous concentration and cells. muscarinic on acinar increase on in cAMP VIP, elevate β acinar cells. norepinephrine, the In concentration receptors, acting contrast, receptor, binding and to its a voluminous concentration Agonists amylase; secretion cells serous concentration is the that a a secretion amylase. in Ca++ of in elicit acinar that cAMP is elevate more but that has that lower elicit mobilize rich agonists monophosphate may by agonists cyclic trophic elevate the agonists. guanosine evoked (cGMP), also of effects these concentration Ca++-mobilizing may which the mediate

the swallowing reflex. that initiate less following swallowing sequence 1 in of events, 1. involves the The occur than second: which pharyngeal phase of pharynx upward 1.2 pulled one 1.0 0.2 open Nasopharynx the up through • Time Tongue Fig. and thrust folds Airway UES elevated UES closed Bolus Pharynx palate in and esophagus another; Bolus The mouth soft toward contracts Bolus 0.6 moves back palatopharyngeal 0.4 is inward Larynx movements and (sec) enters these closed 0.8 move and of Timing the a UES in swallow. pharynx motor during events 28.5

Xerostomia, secretion. impaired salivary or by mouth, is dry caused of can congenital It or as develop part autoimmune process. be an reduces cavity, esophageal causes The which tooth the erosions. the decrease is and oral secretion in with decay pH in associated difficulty secretion also causes swallowing. Reduced

molecular components overall ability a useful health wide and in of of range The measure is and diagnosis monitor indicative are monitoring. to that to is is easy Saliva collection and noninvasive. access, it of biomarkers) under to individuals identify (presence of monitor to the progress individuals is and used affected It with treatment. of disease the stress levels form estradiol, the cortisol in and be form, In free testosterone). free hormones steroids measured sex endocrinology, the in hormone bound rather and than progesterone, (e.g., can as and of as the plasma can infections chain human polymerase virus virus and hepatitis Viral reaction C, by Epstein-Barr be (HIV), such detected infection immunodeficiency as herpes, techniques. (PCR) likewise also pylori, used saliva, levels. for infections, drug as detected saliva in is and monitoring Helicobacter be can Bacterial such

pharynx. through narrow a nasopharynx the moves which and into reflux into open of prevent the food food passage

2. entering upward trachea help pulled and are forward cords epiglottis; is against the food moved sphincter actions from these upper (UES). prevent the and larynx the vocal the esophageal and open together The

3.

food. receive UES of The the to bolus relaxes

4.

bolus pharynx the constrictor strongly to of superior into the deeply The then muscles pharynx. contract the force wave the moves of contraction muscles, superior esophagus. the A peristaltic toward pharyngeal initiated the is with wave constrictor and relaxed the bolus UES. of This the through food forces wave respiration the swallowing, is pharyngeal reflexively also inhibited. stage During of food the constrict. of the to sphincter reflex action causes a bolus UES, the passes After

referred or heartburn commonly (GERD) to indigestion. reflux as Gastroesophageal is disease the contents sphincter part esophageal It the into acidic to reflux allows the lower occurs the when of esophagus. distal back stomach of the esophagus, This the region mucosal does the to unlike of system stomach, protect robust lining. not the a have will fibers and discomfort in thereby the pain and pain. acid activate result Thus uncommon even an phenomenon, is This individuals. healthy not in in term, long mucosa. damage can to esophageal reflux the the In continual result pump and proton reduce omeprazole In can case, this [Zantac]) (e.g., as ranitidine GERD gastric antagonists by secretion inhibitors H2 is by receptor be condition [Prilosec]). or this acid (e.g., that classed treated

two esophageal functions ( and lower (LES) the sphincter serve main The esophagus, the UES,

Fig. ). 28.6 propel from the the mouth they to food First, stomach. from the sphincters protect esophagus the protect and Second, acidic the during gastric secretions. airway swallowing

distention and that functions changes and stimuli itself. consist these muscle in stimulation and in smooth The propulsive the activity of during the initiate mechanical are wall esophageal pharyngeal protective of swallowing result that exclusively pathways and both are neural extrinsic intrinsic involve reflexes. and The nerves pathways neural to the Mechanosensitive and esophageal both afferents extrinsic respond intrinsic in (vagus) distention. via reflex These include pathways solely intrinsic pathways activated the or (extrinsic, brain-stem pathways. vagus) The vagus the outflow nucleus the regulated brainstem, parasympathetic in via nerve. striated regulated muscle by from the is the ambiguus is and muscle smooth of reflex the stimuli in of peristalsis relaxation portion of and stomach. function pathways the of resulting mechanosensitive and LES, from smooth activation muscle, the changes relaxation striated proximal of and The are

the Structures of Functional Esophagus Associated Anatomy and

layers—circular gut tract, striated has The in the occurs, two being longitudinal—but muscle like and places of other esophagus sphincter. the esophagus, is one the anal two of the GI the muscle rest external where the The in of its type varies muscle length. esophagus the along or (striated smooth) are and by muscle, of thickening respectively. The or formed striated LES circular smooth UES

Activity Phase Esophageal the During Motor

the stomach. a pharynx The act material from LES esophagus, UES, manner in the propel and coordinated to to presence called of the that via swallow, and initiates a UES, a and contraction ( passes through of esophagus (alternating the bolus along mechanoreceptors the of muscle) bolus, primary is and relaxation wave the end stimulation peristalsis a the pathways, the peristaltic reflex of At

Fig. ). 28.7 This cm/s). esophagus slowly wave down the moves (3–5 sphincters initiates mouth Fig.28.6The and esophagus the movement involved to another functions from and and of the moving also protection multiple Distention the of by • bolus airway the esophagus. esophagus food of stomach the in associated have in food swallowed reflux entry from UES food from LES transfer Esophagus reflux PropulsivefunctionsProtectiveeffectsFood airway from from gastric from esophagus into material stomach Pharynx Allows pharynx stomach to Allows Protects Protects refluxed Transports stomach bolus gastric to entry of Clears airway into material of esophagus esophagus Protects

Phases Oral, 28 Cephalic, to and a the Integrated Esophageal The Response Meal of • CHAPTER Fig. and of regions the different pharynx, associated Changes in esophagus, pressure the in swallow. initiated 28.7 during a sphincters obtained during from a that pressure in The an human. trace manometry representation diagrammatic is awake initiates by the and bolus the of along the wave of of contraction peristaltic (= a opening) presence decrease a pharynx pressure Stimulation UES esophagus. a of in the of to prepare also smooth the pharynx muscle relaxes entry food. LES of the the of for Stimulation

Fig. • of neural the of the entry part LES stimulation of of the allow the pharyngeal relaxation food. form stomach to proximal Swallowing induces and in 28.8 reflex

peristalsis. called secondary wave Frequently, esophagus is repetitive of the clear the to peristalsis bolus. secondary required most stomach. the produces bolus the of reflex by the and also the of of relaxation LES swallowed pharynx the Stimulation region proximal already into allow bolus reaches LES, of bolus the the is the the Thus it relaxed when passage to stomach. of portion is bolus receives the the the stomach relaxed. Similarly that distention In esophageal produces relaxation the of addition, stomach. receptive further this the occurs function accommodate the volumes pressure. part relaxes rise and same large the its each a time as intragastric minimal proximal stomach The allow to with at the is to LES; stomach of with in swallow, ( This receptive called is relaxation process

Fig. 28.8

The LES also has protective important functions. acid involved It preventing reflux in from stomach back the the into esophagus. is with duodenal a reflux associated of protected is well esophageal the of not the mucosa. as disease, erosion and An LES as mucosa, the tonic is insufficient contraction which gastric gradual is of peristalsis) also absence in There important refluxed peristalsis evidence the contents. swallowing that gastric for clearing is some (secondary

1.

many predominantly cephalic GI responses The are of oral vagus nerve. phases share tract the neurally the the remainder prepare of and these characteristics meal meal; efferent the by the for mediated, and

2.

functions Salivary that along swallowed the together the stomach. can the and, chewing and passed has secretion of a important the food, allows esophagus formation with to be bolus of

3.

varies salivary stimulated rate, composition with flow the ionic which The is secretion during of meal. a ducts. comes through passes from modified as in and epithelial The cells acini the the primary it secretion is cells by

4.

the food. response salivary Regulation in exclusively neural; secretion innervation to most is of is important parasympathetic

MA, al. et Catalan gland secretion. Salivary Johnson ed. In: LR, of Tract. the Physiology GI 5th ed. Waltham, Press; MA: 2012. Academic

5.

swallowing and events from The rigidly propel is food the mouth stomach. of there ordered sequence the pharynx from that reflex a the to to

6.

mouth from major of the The food propel the stomach. to the to esophagus function is esophageal and The in mucosa. involved the at has esophagus that preserving end integrity of important sphincters the either in protective are functions swallowing

7.

(primary) peristalsis wall. is by and stimulated the by pharynx, mechanical distention stimulation is esophageal stimulated Esophageal the of peristalsis of secondary

8.

by extrinsic Esophageal function and intrinsic pathways. regulated neural are sphincters and the associated

Lee al. MG, et fluid HCO3 of and and secretion. pancreatic Molecular mechanism gland salivary Physiol Rev. 2012;92:39-74.

Mittal RK. Esophagus, Motor Sphincters. its Function and of the Pharynx, Claypool Life 2011. Morgan Rafael, San CA: & Sciences;

chapter Upon questions: student completion to this 1. able of answer be should the the following

the are functions stomach? monogastric What major of the

2.

stomach? What are regions the gross the of functional

3.

epithelium What in the the role gastric is of and absorption? digestion

4.

function? the pump What the in is proton parietal of cell role

5.

the examples regulated is What acid some during how period? are postprandial gastric secretion of

6.

defense? protection between are What gastric and the differences mucosal

7.

of anatomy muscle? the smooth are What components functional the GI of

8.

cells in of the of functioning pacemaker significance junctions, of interstitial the and gap What cells is smooth muscle? Cajal, GI

9.

it the neurotransmitters), is (hormones, messengers rhythm electrical and with paracrine, generated, how How wave to regulated associated is (slow occur? by chemical the wave) causes slow contractions basic what

10.

in What gastric gastric physiological occur the phase? in motility events

will of this phase discussed. be food gastrointestinal stomach digestion) in is the (i.e., physiology the chapter, n tract (GI) when gastric occur its addition in gastric in changes the tract. in regulation, This distal that includes regions function of more GI and to function to secretion main functions protein acid of digestion through initiate to a precursor as for stomach the meal temporary enzyme the the are and of act pepsinogen. and reservoir The Other listed are in functions

Box 29.1

the entering stomach stimulation stretching distention esophagus the and Food smooth of via gastric causes from mechanical wall of the muscle. when in Food—predominantly present chemical provides and lumen. amino stimulation acids—also the oligopeptides gastric endocrine, gastric and of dependent is Regulation the pathways. during on function neural phase paracrine, gastric result in for and and These activated intrinsic extrinsic neural regulation by of are that which stimuli, gastric important chemical pathways mechanical pathways reflex are function. the lesser to tract stimuli central activate via system these the and a Afferent the extent that spinal nervous neurons cord) vagus nerve chemical to the mechanical outflow. respond pass (and to from to parasympathetic and GI

secretion, secretion. which pathways release acid gastrin, and of gastric the somatostatin, the which stimulates of endocrine gastric The inhibits include release stimulates secretion. Important paracrine histamine release, include gastric which pathways acid and include . acid, pepsinogen, responses factor, intrinsic and − motor secretory responses gastrin, by of activation HCO3 pathways secretory elicited lipase, both these of mucus, secretion responses; The include digestion gastric initiate protect protein these Overall and secretions the mucosa. the stimulation of (changes stomach the of in include of motility inhibition smooth causes of distal relaxation) activity of (receptive and peristalsis. of antral Motor stomach, proximal part the motility responses the part muscle) which of storage flow of important roles with of These motility changes contents meal are stomach. play out the and also regulating involved and the in in mixing secretions in the of

Functional Anatomy the Stomach of

or as the into stomach the regions: antrum cardia, to (also fundus ( corpus and divided is the referred body), the three The

Fig. 29.1 ). it distal functional and physiology parts it of regions: two of stomach, helpful to into subdivided of discussing as However, stomach. think the when the is proximal the the away proximal of (called quite it different meal, be will to the stomach from most The which later. functions because is of the the mouth) cranial) proximal (furthest the a postprandial stomach the discussed have response in the and portion distal portion

one folded empty with more glands columnar The stomach which into a gastric epithelium each of duct the the a gastric lining is or is pit into of (Fig. pits; covered opening

). 29.2 gastric surface of the significant gastric for of The pits total mucosa. account fraction the area a gastric mucosa based is into regions the divided the The of on glands. distinct three structure (LES), below gland mucus-secreting the located lower esophageal glandular primarily cells. small contains cardiac The region, just sphincter the located stomach), and part (equivalent The the gland mucosa (acid-secreting) region, the stomach). below to remainder notch into of to above oxyntic gland the notch parietal the region, the of of the distal gastric (equivalent pyloric or the divided gastric is the located proximal part

is region the structure in illustrated The oxyntic of gastric a from glandular gland

Fig. 29.2 . cells into the extend Surface slightly opening. epithelial duct of cells is lined parietal a the The is surface and gland few cells. and with called opening mucous isthmus the narrow neck located the the of Mucous gland. neck cells are in B12), in HCl gland. absorption cells, and intrinsic factor in or secrete peptic chief located Parietal are or secrete pepsinogens, deeper which (involved of which vitamin and the oxyntic cells, contain enterochromaffin-like cells and secrete also that Oxyntic glands secrete D somatostatin. (ECL) histamine, cells that are cells more glands are the mucus-secreting particularly 29.1FunctionsoftheStomach numerous Parietal in numerous cells in glands in whereas •BOX fundus,

for Storage—acts meal reservoir the temporary as

to kill to of convert H+ active microorganisms its Secretion form and pepsinogen

absorb B12 factor (cobalamin) of Secretion to intrinsic vitamin

mucosa − to mucus Secretion of the HCO3 protect and gastric

of Secretion provide aqueous to lubrication water for and suspension nutrients of

mixing for Motor secretions food (H+ activity pepsin) ingested and with

the motor regulate Coordinated the (antral) contents emptying pyloric of of activity region. to glandular the duodenum into In secrete contain pyloric glands gastrin. cells hormone the the addition G that into parietal the parietal cells). neck cells and The divided the regions: neck cells) also base glands parietal (peptic/chief and are and (mucous cells the glands. throughout are scattered Endocrine

stomach called The fluid juice. gastric the is secreted into the cells mixture secretions the of a epithelial juice glands. and is gastric of the Gastric secretions surface of most gastric is of secreted of is important gradient. concentration One juice components a H+, very which the against large energy-intensive parietal process. is Thus an H+ by the secretion mucosa 40% with the which cell estimated to densely mitochondria, the to packed parietal cell’s volume. 30% have is fill The of been of cytoplasm major the the major digestion in of H+ One stomach. of enzyme stomach) protein pepsins, inactive to pepsinogen which conversion function of (the is initiate product that important ingested Additionally, pathogens ions other and are by bacteria the preventing invasion for with be food. of may and colonization gut H+ also secretes the stomach acidic protection mucosa environment. The peptic important significant of amounts and HCO3 of are the luminal − which and for against gastric mucus, vitamin secretes for (cobalamin). absorption factor, of also The necessary B12 intrinsic which is gastric epithelium juice are redundant in of distally provided The gastric GI functions more tract. secretions the with of components other

Composition Gastric of Secretions

other together secretions, juice inorganic and constituents of Like organic consists with water. gastric GI components three of important stomach. of functional HCl, the juice are Among regions the salts, gastric • Fig.29.1The in regions have The indicative and of different their luminal unique muscle secretions smooth to activity food. patterns of functions response

29 Gastric 531 the Phase Meal to The CHAPTER Integrated a Response of

of Opening pit gastric

Fig. Opening of gastric • pit the 29.2 types stomach wall detail (A) section of cell structure a of gastric and the the showing the glands of of mucosa the Representation (B). structure mucosa and in gastric through the of

intrinsic pepsins, factor, − mucus, . and HCO3 a after of meal. these all components increases Secretion

Gastric Constituents of Juice Inorganic

of gastric of depends composition The rate juice the secretion. ionic on ions. H+ the rate, of higher the The concentration higher the secretory increases. lower and At [H+] rates, [Na+] secretory decreases [K+] than in is juice gastric in higher always plasma. to Consequently, prolonged lead may hypokalemia. vomiting of anion is major At Cl− gastric juice. rates of secretion, all the provides active HCl to converts which acid Gastric pepsins at the pepsinogens active. are and pH pepsins

varies of H+ among The rate individuals. gastric secretion considerably In 1 5 gastric from humans, basal (unstimulated) to production of typically mEq/hr. about range H+ rates HCl rises production stimulation, maximal to mEq/hr. During 40 to 6 morning. and is lowest rate The night at the early basal in greater cells wide of basal of HCl variation total and the stimulated this parietal responsible in is for secretion. rates number normal varies the range greatly, of in The stomach and individuals partly

Organic Juice Gastric Constituents of

inactive of juice of pepsin. is pepsinogen, constituent organic predominant the gastric proenzyme The the cells often called Pepsins, a “pepsin,” are proteases group of the gastric of chief collectively glands. secreted by contained membrane-bound in in Pepsinogens granules are cells. zymogen chief the to secrete release Meal their granules chief a are stimulated 29.1 to by cells Response contents when exocytosis Zymogen

). 29.1 Table are acid-labile of converted active the linkages. to pepsins by Pepsinogens cleavage more conversion. rapid the lower The the pH, the pepsinogens proteolytically act also on Pepsins more pepsin. form to pH most and Pepsins active 3 are at proteolytically below. by proteases. digest are 20% may Pepsins their typical much not required meal for as can as replaced of the pancreatic in be digestion, protein function because of a but that When the is pH by are the of inactivated duodenal pepsins neutralized, the neutral lumen pH.

factor, Intrinsic secreted normal required parietal of the by stomach, is absorption of for a vitamin glycoprotein cells B12. same secretion stimuli released parietal Intrinsic of the in factor to that cells. by HCl elicit is response

Mechanisms of Gastric Cellular Acid Secretion

Fig. ). 29.3 the Fig. through canaliculi • cytoplasm secretory Branching course 29.3

Parietal ultrastructure. cell apparatus cell showing the intracellular parietal A, tubulovesicular cytoplasm the the resting and A in canaliculus. B, parietal cell acid. that is secreting activated An lined the of the and of membranes canaliculus, with the open have fused gland now The abundant tubulovesicles with intracellular lumen to is which microvilli. the long

Fig. • 29.4

cell the by gastric and activated H+ of secretion Cl− in parietal mucosa. Mechanism an adenosine ATP, triphosphate.

a common outlet surface. cell’s by are connected and luminal to the line of the the secretory canaliculi. Microvilli surfaces and numerous unstimulated of contains parietal tubules called cytoplasm cells vesicles the system. tubulovesicular The transport proteins of for membranes Cl− of secretion responsible gland. The into contain lumen H+ the tubulovesicles the the of and to are stimulated (see parietal secrete HCl cells When

Fig. tubulovesicular membrane canaliculi. membranes secretory fuse plasma the 29.3 ), the of with the plasma the of This in membrane the of H+/K+ greatly increases extensive fusion number antiporters membrane canaliculi. secretory against is cells parietal a secrete at H+ gradient pumped million–fold. the about acid concentration gastric When rate, maximal that is 1 the the of the in cell and Thus 7 cytosol in pH gastric parietal the is lumen 1 gland.

H+ secretion by of the depicted mechanism The is cell in parietal cellular

Fig. . 29.4 the by of Cl− the cell exchange generated HCO3 membrane anhydrase, . the HCO3 in − action across enters which in basolateral the and produces − cell H+ for carbonic luminal across for membrane by H+ the . secreted in K+ H+,K+-ATPase exchange is channel. the across K+ a via K+ recycles luminal membrane an enters in (a CLC channel Cl− ion family lumen Cl− channel) the membrane. via the luminal located monophosphate of K+ and Increased intracellular cyclic Ca++ adenosine (cAMP) Cl− and . luminal membrane conduction stimulate luminal hyperpolarizes K+ Increased the membrane conductance

Gastric driving The the Response for luminal the force across of CHAPTER of membrane. the efflux 29 Phase to a Integrated increases 533 Meal which Cl− potential, of also cell of the K+ activity accumulates efflux membrane mediates parietal channel H+,K+-ATPase. The in basolateral in the the that the via K+ (see cAMP and as of In Ca++ promote H+,K+-ATPase Cl− the containing of with the tubulovesicles membrane, of channels well as secretory into addition, trafficking fusion membrane the luminal canaliculi cytosolic

Figs. 29.3 ). 29.4 Parietal bloodstream accompanied by to maintain is HCO3 − secretion intracellular cell also the of H+ of transport pH. into

HCO3 of Secretion −

and in Na+ similar a those that Cl− surface but epithelial cells contains also concentrations. and fluid K+ − plasma with watery secrete higher concentrations The in HCO3 to the coats by the sticky thus surface lines coat. stomach that a alkaline is with − the HCO3 resting the entrapped of secreted viscous stomach; mucus by mucosa mucus the the eaten, When both mucus of − secretion HCO3 is of increase. rates and food

Mucus Secretion of

and viscous mucus. termed contain Secretions and are sticky mucins are collectively that by located the the mucous are of epithelial necks cells surface glands the by cells Mucins gastric secreted of in neck and stomach. is is epithelial large cells apical cytoplasm and by in Mucus cells granules neck in stored surface mucous and the released of exocytosis.

that about consist mucins by Gastric 80% of about weight monomers and (Fig. linked each are together bonds Da similar carbohydrate 500,000 disulfide of four are by 29.5

tetrameric stomach. surface gel sticky a form These of to the mucins the adheres that tetramers. gel the pepsins near to center cleave This the proteolysis disulfide is of by subject bonds that layer. releases thus dissolves Proteolysis not the do mucous protective fragments gels form that and the mucins new of of layer tetrameric protective by replace to synthesis requires the mucous mucins cleaved Maintenance continuous pepsins.

a the resting stomach. secreted in rate at significant Mucus is Secretion from parasympathetic acid is the nerve of pepsinogen the stimulated endings acetylcholine glands. near gastric and that by enhance especially of mucus released some stimuli secretion, same evoked If secretion. to enhance is mucosa deformed, reflexes neural mechanically the are gastric mucus

Gastric Regulation Secretion of

is nerve stimulant the gastric Parasympathetic innervation vagus the via H+ secretion. strongest of Extrinsic efferent the gastrin. mediator that cells on the secrete neurons fibers secrete paracrine terminate innervate intrinsic and histamine, cells hormone that that cells, endocrine ECL parietal secretion stimulation , mucus, factor. addition, of HCO3 results vagal intrinsic pepsinogen, − in In and meal. and Stimulation oral parasympathetic occurs of cephalic phase system the of also the the during nervous of largest phase However, ( postprandial period secretion produces the of gastric gastric the the stimulation

Fig. 29.6

an that is (or paracrine, of excellent endocrine, response pathways. secretion Stimulation and neural uses a of gastric acid “feed-forward” cascade) example activity efferent release of in results intrinsic neurons vagal Activation by

to proteolysisGlycosylated protected further peptide part by of from core: carbohydrate Protein chains cores (resistant

mucins structure cores with by before joining part representation gastric the (site chains of 15 of of after Nonglycosylated of with hydrolysis subunits carbohydrate disulfide per of Sheath peptide proteolysis) of proteolysis) average sugars branched bridges Fig.29.5Schematic and chain pepsin. • monomers four Intact mucins 500,000 of tetramers about similar are Da. of is monomer that chains side covered by largely carbohydrate proteolytic from protect Each it degradation. is the tetramer, proteolytic cross-links, of disulfide mucin near to portion The susceptible the central digestion. more monomers. cleave fragments the tetramers the the size of of about Pepsins center near to release bonds

acid gastric is regulation of gastric the meal the secretion the in mediated by of phase nerve. Fig.29.6Neural vagus • chief stimulation and parietal occurs (before oral cephalic in stimulation food acid in phases pepsinogen. the The and cells the reaches of cells secrete to results to that secrete stomach) digestion Thus the mucosa reaches hydrolysate, by further the when antrum. stimulates gastric gastrin which secretion from the stomach, of generating protein of is initiated protein food further activates that distention a addition, and acid vagovagal pepsinogen stimulates gastric reflex gastric In secretion. which Endocrine Pepsin complex Intrinsic ˜ H+ H+ in Pepsinogen from nerve activated pH (gastrin) of ˜ Oligopeptides 2.0 acetylcholine also Pepsinogen Dorsal ˜ cells Gastrin Distention • (vagovagal) distention by Pepsin gastric activates vagal pathways Protein neural Pepsinogen epithelium. ˜ Neural terminals, ˜ the are to vagal H+ activity. secrete to efferent express nerve cells response muscarinic are Parietal activated in receptors and glands antrum G in neurons, addition, the gastrin cells In gastric gastrin-releasing via the releases (see peptide located in parasympathetic intrinsic activation, from gastric from

Fig. 29.6 ). secrete an cell endocrine to via enters . and, parietal bloodstream H+ Gastrin further stimulates mechanism, the the Parietal (CCK2) type for cholecystokinin express gastrin. cells 2 receptors cells muscarinic in nerve to receptors. express stimulation, gastrin also and and Histamine vagal secreted response ECL is potentiates histamine, of parietal cell. Thus effects the both induce and gastrin acetylcholine and gastrin of on activity efferent the vagal release which parasympathetic ( of the activation stimulating is cell the very acid (vagal) efficient stomach parietal at secrete to outflow to Hence

Fig. 29.7

phase stomach gastric is the of detected In reflexes stimulate food activates and in secretion. vagovagal the to the presence are distention Food in endings the nerve in wall. detected in gastric stretch, which stomach results sensory) (or the by and afferent brainstem are in that efferent vagovagal terminals nerves the fibers, transmit afferent of information These reflex and a to drive activity the peripheral vagal thereby vagal (see

Fig. 29.6 ). by of are and chemosensors digestion the amino addition, the gastric in proteins mucosa. free In the increases lumen, of which concentration acids in oligopeptides detected vagal acids also stimulate afferent amino and activity. Oligopeptides the exact of The nature

by STIMULATE is • neural, pathways. paracrine CELL hormonal, THE parietal and cell Fig.29.7The PARIETAL HISTAMINE ACETYLCHOLINE, AND GASTRIN, regulated Activation stimulate gastric three preganglionic in to vagal outflow the of stomach acid secretion. acts ways parasympathetic to is the of There parietal enteric from of via via (A) neural receptors. acetylcholine cell activation on parietal cell acts release the innervation direct neurons, which and muscarinic which the of activation In neural (H), ECL acts of parietal to stimulate stimulates paracrine histamine cell cell. via release addition, pathway a the glands the acts the located (GRP) from of which G Finally, in activated enteric are gastrin-releasing gastric gastric stimulate to G cells on neurons, in (G). peptide by cell release release of gastrin antrum thereafter pathway cell. the acts humoral stimulate parietal Gastrin to via a

involve nerve that cells but endocrine to release is clear activate chemosensors contents may endings. their not more topic will in This discussed in detail be

30. Chapter

(antrum) mechanism unchecked. also part go in acid whereby H+ parietal inhibit There feedback an the that meal-stimulated a of secretion the cell is presence negative such the loop does induces of feedback distal to not stomach important the a mucosa. reaches concentration certain endocrine the threshold in the lumen from H+ is 3), cells When antral released of somatostatin in (<pH the has gastric the release G decrease on secretion Somatostatin (Fig. a to of paracrine action thereby and neighboring gastrin acid cells decrease 29.8

cell well histamine, are The intracellular acetylcholine, receptors shown which for secretagogues messengers parietal in act, these gastrin, as on and by membrane second the as the

Fig. . 29.9 Histamine whereas acid regulation release strongest and is the and H+ by of secretion, much on the gastric action of its agonist cells antrum. in secretion are gastric somatostatin • acetylcholine gastrin of G Fig.29.8Feedback the the mucosa presence Endocrine secrete of somatostatin. sense antrum the in of cells gastric H+and thus secretion. inhibition and inhibit to acid acts gastric receptors on specific in This release turn of gastrin cells of bring on about G + GastrinSomatostatin cell G D weaker Circulation agonists. Antral cell lumen – parietal potentiate and acetylcholine, on histamine, one actions However, gastrin cell. another’s the of histamine acid (e.g., [Tagamet]) Antagonists cimetidine secretion. receptors H2 secretagogue-stimulated block gastrinstimulated from Thus gastrin the much of results release to of response histamine. ECL effects; of Gastrin and cells causes number. in size has increase also gastrin elevation trophic levels important to activates Binding the cyclase concentration cell on cytosolic of parietal plasma and histamine elevates to receptors adenylyl of membranes H2 cAMP. and Cl− apical stimulate and Cl− channels apical into the and secretion by H+ to plasma These events more by K+ H+,K+-ATPase basolateral causing inserted channels membrane molecules activating (see be channels

Fig. 29.4 ). membrane. in Acetylcholine plasma channels binds muscarinic and receptors apical M3 opens the Ca++ to of by Cl− membrane. also to activating secretion be and apical elevates plasma from Acetylcholine release H+ which channels intracellular and stores, inserted the enhances [Ca++] H+,K+-ATPase K+ by channels into more intracellular causing Ca++ promoting basolateral molecules CCK2 Gastrin to secretion binding by receptors enhances (Fig. acid 29.10

in Digestion the Stomach

of the in nutrients digestion stomach. Some occurs meal; digestion for full intestinal not required digestion of is sufficient. a However, is this amylase-mediated carbohydrates occurs the digestion Some in stomach. of to stomach substrate some of even active at is gastric the protection. Amylase because however, amylase low acidic and in of the pH pH; inactivated sensitive is environment Thus protects it amylase, when the occupies carbohydrate degradation. site of active the from enzyme

Fig.29.9Vagal enteric secretions via of parasympathetic neurons. gastric stimulation • preganglionic plexus. the myenteric innervate Vagal submucosal and neurons many function about changes in The terminals described bring innervate in vagal enteric the thus neurons preganglionic as of neurons and

Fig.

. 29.7 gastrin-releasing acetylcholine; GRP, ACh, peptide.

action showing Fig.29.10Signal that of mechanism • secretion transduction the agonists antagonists mechanisms cells. parietal in and regulate of (secretagogues) binds receptors. M3 (ACh) to muscarinic Acetylcholine the receptor. H2 acts Histamine via the cholecystokinin to type Gastrin binds 2 (CCK2) receptor. Ca++ stores of in an CCK2 results [Ca++]. thus Activation and channels of from M3 of and and Ca++ opening release intracellular increase receptors in cytosolic of intracellular increase activates levels receptors Activation of cyclase H2 adenylyl cAMP. to transforming lipase phosphatidylinositol triphosphate; C; protein ACh, α. epidermal kinase adenylyl 4,5-diphosphate; growth Ac, PGE2, C; acetylcholine; growth PKC, EGF, PLC, TGF-α, inositol CCK, cholecystokinin; E2; diacylglycerol; cyclase; PIP2, factor; IP3, DAG, protein factor prostaglandin

the lipids Digestion also starts stomach. in of generates triglyceride. the motility of which result surface in of droplets of formation emulsion The and dietary and fatty monoglyceride an in emulsion gastric lipids patterns mixing of acids attaches lipid gastric to the and lipase, from free triglyceride essential extent of the absorption dietary hydrolysis hydrolysis for However, of of approximately digestion and lipids. normal is is 10%, not and because available its for lipolysis as luminal not products pH. the the of discussed are stomach in chapter, of Moreover, in low next the absorption

stomach H+ and the the effects protect and HCO3 pepsins. from the Mucus of of − surface a that The protective gastric as mucosa constitute within as secretions gastric the to contents on by barrier it, the the mucus mucosal damage prevents of surface luminal alkaline gel well forms stomach, that entrapped (

Fig. ). 29.11 mucus cells mm the surface is the about layer, gel 0.2 lumen. effectively separates acidic thick, contents of HCO3 which secretions The the −-rich from gastric of the epithelial pH maintained about a epithelial of cells the of neutral be pH despite 2. The nearly mucus at luminal allows to Mucus surface. also epithelial slows pepsins of the and cell acid diffusion to the Protection the gastric epithelium HCO3 on both of mucus secretion. depends and −

review smooth it understand some is properties To muscle of to function. GI motility necessary of along motility flow main the luminal (segmentation) of governs of patterns The length; are the gut wall mixing propulsion motion the contents its (peristalsis). and the storage In activity and smooth in addition, colon stomach subserves muscle function. a the

protected the gastric the of barrier. • by stomach mucosal Fig.29.11The is surface juice secretions allow viscosity HCO3 layer whereas the the pH −-rich gastric the is in of the at 7, pH lumen the surface in cell Buffering the 2. remain the by mucus to of and high the near

of Muscle Functional Anatomy Smooth Gastrointestinal

body. in similar structure smooth found is the other to in muscle the The in muscle GI smooth tract cells sheath. in together connective are Fusiform surrounded a tissue packed by bundles Gap cells bundles junctions synchronously. muscle contraction so couple of functionally that smooth the occurs the transmission cells information wall Cajal muscle neurons The cells in of cells are are in a intestinal to group interstitial enteric involved that specialized of of (ICCs) smooth from (

Fig. ). 29.12 “pacemaker” generate rhythm, feature smooth muscle that cells thought basic have are the is the It also consistent to GI that activity, ( of ICCs is that or slow-wave capacity a electrical

Fig. 29.13).

Gastrointestinal Smooth Muscle Electrophysiology of

basic the wave. rhythm slow muscle resting membrane is of cyclic The variation called in GI smooth or electrical potential 8 the stomach about per the in waves it per minute to 20 the slow to is frequency 6 decreases 12 5 in in intestine; minute The small of colon. to per to minute and 3 region by (see is the The of regions set the wave GI of frequency slow different in pacemaker tract a the

Fig. 29.13 ). by to ICCs. waves are thought be generated Slow located the longitudinal are a and thin in These layer cells between

Slow waves generated are Cajal interstitial of cells in

interstitial the Slow cells Fig.29.12Diagrammatic • in muscle of wave the smooth GI cells wall of network muscle Cajal of conducted the representation to smooth tract.

externa circular tract. muscularis and the places other the of wall in the GI layers of in and cells. have muscle fibroblasts smooth of both Interstitial cells properties the longitudinal smooth junctions the with gap long junctions gap rapidly cells; be muscle processes muscle Their both waves circular enable slow the to to and layers. form conducted each cells the longitudinal the circular layers, of Because muscle spreads electrically junctions chemically the and smooth slow smooth both gap the GI and tract. throughout muscle of couple segment of wave

538 Physiology contraction. strength SECTION6Berne Fig.29.13Amplitude wave • Levy of of slow the muscle & determines in it a slow muscle reaches when a initiate amplitude. wave will The contraction smooth threshold amplitude of neurotransmitters wave from by enteric of slow neurons. The release is altered the tone Muscle potential potential Membrane Muscle tone At Membrane Membrane Inhibited potential tone rest Stimulated Muscle

barrier fails. mucosal the when There times are gastric are lining submucosa called erosions. not involving the of GI Superficial the breakdowns heal without intervention. They generally GI deeper contrast, called the lining breakdowns and are ulcers. the involving of muscularis In layers that and imbalance result break ulcers down. a between and duodenal it occur mechanisms that the an and mucosa protect erosions factors as aggressive can the of Gastric stomach/duodenum effects H+ the ample destructive against . A natural healthy of has protection (NSAIDs). magnify on known pepsin, the and class from of separately Helicobacter or the stomach/duodenum bacterium H+ as include act pylori, the antiinflammatory bile, Factors nonsteroidal the H+ of drugs effect harmful drugs that such complaints non-GI population ages becoming NSAIDs the common and more as is ulcer need arthritis. of disease more as for Indeed, has tobacco, are risk factors caffeine for also ulcers. and Alcohol, gastric Infectious the agents (inflammation cause can also of epithelium). gastritis ulcer bacterium humans, become to and carcinoma. gastric can gastritis, widely formation, pylori factor is that has that as lead H. now one spiral recognized in a pylori is converts secretes in it H+ which NH4 that stomach H. the by because NH3, exists to an to enzyme, + . urea buffer forming urease, used the of and which combination improve. aggressive symptoms with eliminate in gastritis treatment, after ulcer antibiotic regimen inhibitor, H+,K+-ATPase can sometimes the An often an infection,

by The to be hormones nerves the frequency of of a extent, the lesser intrinsic substances. amplitude extrinsic by and, and the slow and modulated wave activity paracrine can and threshold, wave. of the a potentials the the depolarization of exceeds during of may be If peak train action the the slow slow wave triggered

muscle Action little potentials no or in those (10–20 than in are smooth overshoot. have skeletal prolonged msec) muscle more GI and Na+ is of caused the conduct slow ions channels that are through relatively of flow by action Ca++ both and open. to and rising potential phase The contraction. cell Ca++ helps action potential The enters the initiate that during the by by the acetylcholine and paracrine enhanced of the frequency agonists hormones extent and and (e.g., nerve are potentials enteric The from some action endings P). of depolarization of neurotransmitters cells excitatory substance and and nitric intestinal neuroeffector hyperpolarize smooth hormones and muscle action Inhibitory spikes. and abolish may or substances vasoactive polypeptide potential cells the diminish oxide) (e.g.,

waves little the potentials Slow by of smooth are elicit not no contraction accompanied cells. action that or muscle by are Much presence evoked potentials. stronger action contractions the of wave, the the the of slow The the of smooth intense at of potentials muscle. that occur number more greater a peak the contraction action in contractions skeletal level of potential muscle (about a the rather they train as sum fast contract a increasing to action produce do as Because tension. cause slowly cells individual 10th rather muscle temporally smoothly cells), caused not twitches; each a smooth distinct by

developed but smooth potentials, tension muscle zero. the of by the trains GI falls, not Between action to or called tone. nonzero tension smooth muscle is This resting, baseline, of stomach in drugs and as such altered is and muscle is and the GI by of tone storage colon. contents paracrine is substances, The important, in of sphincters and the neuroeffectors, important smooth regions where also hormones,

Specialized Motility of Patterns

along contraction propels ring tract. moving GI the is Peristalsis a that material of and involves layers. contraction both mediated neurally muscle It of relaxation intestine. the and and esophagus, Peristalsis small antrum, gastric large pharynx, the in occurs

narrow relaxed contractions between segments. contracted Segmental of areas produce segments the contents mucosal increase absorption and surfaces occurs. allow These secretions of exposure with tract movements the mixing luminal to GI where intestine. the large occurs predominantly and small Segmentation in

pathological of also characteristic patterns There motility. are maximal contractile During a in continuously occurs activity dysregulated manner. spasm, or peritonitis, as such pancreatitis. markedly from peritoneum, often occurs and activity ileus, the in contractile results irritation surgery, of it decreased In is absent;

the Stomach Anatomy of Functional

functional distal, regions—proximal end. divided the at two stomach is discussed, As into with sphincters and either as the of the and stomach the important LES) The functions. region immediately (defined cardia LES surrounding have called and into entry of the Relaxation and gas, of the belching. allows food stomach cardia release of LES from the esophagus the the esophagus maintaining is tone, into of the stomach prevented. By back reflux contents from

reservoir of together produces tone compatible with with the body) in part or the (the its fundus proximal changes function. stomach corpus The slow mixing receiving food for storing and with is for and It ( important contents gastric the juice

). 29.2 Table gastric also force in stomach an the in important portion is regulation the of emptying. of the Generation of proximal driving tone low with emptying, and for tone region consequently tone in increase delayed an in required gastric and pressure occur. associated is emptying intragastric to are this or slow gastric Low

part pylorus important mixing the into for and the in the through stomach duodenum. distal is the gastric of of and The contents propulsion regions of muscle the capable layers the stomach, in strong are the thicker of much proximal and gastric antrum producing in the phasic of more is than The antrum thus region contractions. the the pylorus. the and slow Contractions toward in begin stomach of wave move the midportion initiated the by the period. varies of during strength contractions The these postprandial the closed, phase mix the contents of gastric serve reduce the gastric these antral the solid is of and and (grinding). In size the to pylorus particles contractions usually meal contractions important However, also of antral contents. are emptying stomach these the its in eventually

is The defined junction sphincter as and an gastroduodenal circular the muscle. pyloric area thickened is of generated smooth pressure a This contraction. of tonic region by high is muscle emptying. important regulating in gastric is It

Control in the Gastric Phase Motility of Gastric

coordinated regulated to the functions mixing. and is of highly and perform Gastric motility storage duodenum. of the be of are into intestine, in the discussion small in phase controls gastric the meal, because important duodenal part function, emptying in an of of the the generated detail will considered motor of the Regulation contents

and and include mechanical presence products digestion result that both in distention The small and peptides). protein chemical the the meal gastric stimuli and regulating the stomach motor from acids function of (amino the presence of of are neural mucosa. that vagovagal terminate the these are extrinsic fibers predominantly reflexes regulating of muscle processes consist and in The afferent vagal pathways and by initiated of afferents muscle. to contraction Mucosal smooth respond afferents and respond mechanosensitive and to distention stimuli, chemical neurons This vagal that reflex smooth innervate outflow activation afferent (parasympathetic) enteric and efferent of the muscle. results activation of in stimulation enteric muscle; vary stomach. smooth the gastric and excitatory on on effects region of of the effects these Activation both inhibitory depending neurons produces smooth pressure. inhibition stomach in results of with proximal of increase wall storage accommodation, of of in meal intragastric the allows and entry portion gastric which the occur muscle the Thus distention and the reflex minimal in to subsequent

and contractions. antral the muscle pattern is contrast, strengthen to the smooth phase of stomach the the produce gastric predominant the meal distal of of of motor In activation the part in antral is smooth is including contractions P however, contractions increase produce of therefore the substance of neurotransmitters from by regulated stronger which gastric of The of by and magnitude the release of set the the pacemaker; depolarization acetylcholine, contractions. rate level enteric muscle neurons, the and the In phase pylorus the this of mostly meal closed. is to to the returned is toward contractions because part stomach. however, antral will be the Thus pylorus pylorus; will contents closed, more proximal the tend the of the contents the move contents gastric this the will be In mixed. way thus antral can dispersed, the particles will ( occlude larger lumen, a contractions to and grinding process as be referred In addition,

Fig. 29.14

for • of as antral Onset terminal antrum retropulsion the pylorus. approaches increased Complete terminal contraction antral in terminal contraction antral the pressure Force contraction is closed

the grinding and in of activity pyloric mixing results antrum. in the portions and •Fig.29.14Coordinated distal the gastric in stomach the of and muscle smooth proximal the sphincter the and toward the gastric body The down antrum pylorus. peristaltic moves wave are proximal the the part contents is back closed, of stomach. If pylorus retropulsed the gastric antrum of the more into the into leads wall secretions and and of that digestive in size grinding to and presence particle in results of food This from gastric reduction eventually mixing motility the with empty products the a duodenum. pattern the will the of

1.

stomach storage the digestion. main are The initiation of protein functions and of

2.

mediators. with gastric neural of key Regulation (histamine) by humoral and paracrine extrinsic (gastrin) driven and is intrinsic pathways together function

3.

which acid digestion. and together are key secretions pepsinogen, begin the stomach from protein The

4.

apical across secreted is of via cells membrane H+ H+,K+-ATPase. the parietal plasma

5.

of is stomach vitamin B12. intrinsic in secretes absorption involved The also factor, which

Huizinga JH. JD, Chen clinical on Cajal: science. of Interstitial update cells and basic Rep. 2014;16:363. Gastroenterol Curr

Hunt al. et RH, The stomach and disease. health in Gut. 2015;64:1650-1668.

et H, Said al. Gastroduodenal defense mechanisms. mucosal Gastroenterol. Opin Curr 2015;31:486-491.

6.

The and mucosal epithelium the luminal − against a that peptic mucus and HCO3 form to protects contents. it secretes acidic barrier gastric gel-like

7.

or basic potential, the in electrical of the The termed cyclic the smooth wall undergoes changes slow wave. rhythm membrane gut muscle

8.

the gut wave. wall, set interstitial the cells of Cajal they are of in slow pacemakers frequency the and The

9.

tone proximal the of function. stomach compatible slow a part change its The in undergoes with storage

10.

can in vary of strength. contractions the phasic distal part undergoes that considerably stomach The

11.

Gastric by emptying reflexes. regulated is vagovagal

Sanders al. et KM, of function smooth cells. Regulation gastrointestinal interstitial by muscle Physiology (Bethesda). 2016;31:316-326.

Schubert ML. of anatomy Functional physiology secretion. gastric and Gastroenterol. Opin Curr 2015;31:479-485.

ML. Schubert acid Regulation gastric of secretion. ed. In: Johnson LR, the Tract. of GI Physiology 5th ed. 2012. MA: Waltham, Press; Academic

the this 1. able answer questions: should be to student of Upon following completion chapter the

How components a the digested mixed various absorbed meal intestine? are in and small the of

2.

and is pancreatic controlled? What their secretion and how the functions are juice, of constituents

3.

lipids? bile and acids assimilation with do How of digestion assist

4.

mechanisms intestinal levels the are contents? What that appropriate of provide the of fluidity for

5.

what motor patterns the of patterns the functions do fasting, are and period well in these small as during What the subserve? postprandial intestine as

of assimilation he for intestine small intestinal the the is of critical nutrients. tract portion meal the a that and ensure and and mixing In intestinal of functions adequate the mixed is to the (chyme) site secretions surface. absorptive digestion its this absorption, variety contents motility permit of exposure with that functions its has The perform small intestine specializations efficiently. to it enable many in the ways. most One of obvious the is the mucosa; this is specializations area different achieved of substantial a surface of number is the thickness mucosa villi, on a of folds finally, mucosa that submucosa, epithelial intestine and small cell The tube the cavity, each is of finger-like coiled abdominal the long has has surface. called apical inside projections essentially full there the are and its microvilli occur. surface absorption area exists which and a over large Thus digestion

of of match characteristic to main chyme controlled capacity the of intestinal response phase delivery digestive meal small of the absorptive The stomach a from the is and the intestine. the to into secretion biliary and small secretions stimulation pancreatic these emptying the is intestine. further addition and of there of In this mechanisms neural regulated Therefore by of the region and highly feedback is hormonal, paracrine, involve function that pathways.

presence osmolarity, lumen. are chemical processes distention intestinal of mechanical include and wall the and the high regulate of The [H+], both in stimuli increased that the and nutrients these and intestinal set inhibition (3) complex increased of represent of emptying, the secretion, in sphincter pancreatic increased secretion, Oddi, the (MMC). motor (5) response contraction, gastric of meal: These gastric migrating phase relaxation stimuli and (6) (1) result the intestinal of interruption the acid changes of gallbladder (2) of to (4) that the a of regulation about how they are such and of assimilation is this changes how result in discuss goal to ultimately nutrients. chapter of The brought small the through meal in occur will after be intestinal also Changes that has function passed addressed.

Gastric Emptying in Intestinal Phase the Small

empty to after of will contain stomach that slowly intestine. into material meal a the the liter small up Immediately may a emptying of macronutrient content of of on the contains. dependent is The meal and amount the rate gastric it solids the rates. composition liquids nutritional similar at Thus will and empty of different solids rapidly, time which occurs a only lag a emptying solids (Fig. during solid a meal, but is do after after phase, empty that little there which so or means Liquids no of period 30.1

as (fundus in duodenum. stomach the and achieved part stomach proximal in alterations (antrum the of pylorus) distal is of motility the well emptying of and gastric Regulation the of by as and corpus) part is these regions function highly Motor in coordinated. that of the Recall the is gastric esophageal during reflex receptive meal, and phase the predominant relaxation. response gastric more mix of distal (antrum) At movements with the in same part stomach contents the secretions. the time, the gastric peristaltic The closed. sphincter largely is pyloric (antral antral very if proximal relaxed is contractions) Even opens stomach and occur, pump portion because is little the it periodically, will not the strong. the emptying of the brought tone increased strength (intraluminal of •Fig. portion the emptying an in stomach, of of about pressure) in the contractions proximal by antral is Subsequently, gastric (increased increase strength 30.1 Ratesofemptyingofdifferentmealsfromadog’sstomach.Asolution(1%glucose)isemptiedfasterthanadigestiblesolid(cubedliver).Notethelagphaseforemptyingofthesolids,whichisrelatedtothetimeneededtoreduceparticlesbelow2mminsize. Physiol (AdaptedfromHinderRA,KellyKA.Am 1977;233:E335. J 20 )100 40 21 3 Hours400 4 mL Glucose % g 1% Protein 80 glucose 50 emptied 60 cubed liver

Thegastrointestinal(GI)tractplaysamajorroleinthesensingandsignalingofingestednutrientsbyactivatingneuralandendocrinepathwaysthatconnectwithothersignals,suchasfatenergystorageandutilization,whichtogetherregulateenergyhomeostasis.SatietysignalsfromtheGItractaregenerallyinvolvedinshort-termregulationoffoodintake,suchasindividualmealsizeandmealduration.Forexample,theluminalcontentsactivatevagalafferentpathways,leadingtosuppressionofmealsize.Inaddition,severalGIhormonesreleasedbynutrientsalsoinfluencefoodintake.Cholecystokinin(CCK)isawell-describedsatietyhormone;itisreleasedbynutrientsanddecreasesfoodintakeafterexogenousadministration.OtherGIhormonesinthisclassincludeglucagon-likepeptide1(GLP-1)andpeptideYY(PYY).Inbothleanandobesehumans,injectionofexogenousPYYinhibitsfoodintake.Along-actinganalogueofGLP-1,exendin-4,iscurrentlybeingusedasanagentforweightcontrolinhumans.

contents opening segmental and the duodenal pass, simultaneous pylorus pump), the contractions. allow of to antral to of inhibition to the and semiliquid flow the the down Liquids the gradient pressure chyme duodenum. from stomach

to regulate meal via pathways on the enters emptying the the hormonal rate and the of gastric chyme. back small physical both chemical feeds composition of and intestine, it neural based As the it as chyme nutrients, content the enters respond neurons, of to vagal duodenum. and hyperosmotic origin, of Afferent predominantly [H+], the of motility gastric vagal a decreases in contractions, in of intragastric gastric the emptying. inhibition pressure), thereby (with strength (slowing) proximal the pylorus, activation contracts antral Reflex resulting decrease efferent of outflow and decreases that inhibition when in secretion lumen. acid the This gastric are pathway the of nutrients responsible occurs for is duodenal same such nutrients. cells is in Cholecystokinin duodenal mucosa (CCK) from endocrine to in the response released emptying, role physiologically pathways, in Oddi, contraction, to pancreatic sphincter the and of gallbladder hormone its regulation This secretion. of neural relaxation in important, of addition is the in gastric vagovagal afferent in decrease fiber to emptying) an reflex–mediated both emptying). directly CCK produce indirectly suggests Recent (inhibits (stimulates gastric evidence that discharge acts indirect gastric and vagal

the can then gastric emptying inhibitory pathways? these in proceed How face of it of into is strength down small duodenal further decreases of sensory the the in The there mechanisms intestinal passes by chyme the inhibition feedback as duodenum fades amount less the activation thus of nutrients. as jejunum; intestine toward antral the material the pressure increases, antrum proximal and thereby this intragastric time, pump. the of portion into stomach the At in moving gastric contractions again release pylorus of into culminate and of contents the peristaltic the deepen and duodenum. opening Antral in

theremovalofasubstantialpartoftheabsorptivesmallintestine,butthisprocedureisassociatedwithmalabsorptionandsubsequentundesirablesequelaesuchasdiarrhea.Avarietyofrevisedsurgicalapproachestoobesityhavebeendevised,includingRoux-en-Ygastricbypassandverticalsleevegastrectomy.Themechanismsbywhichtheseproceduresarethoughttobesuccessfullieinthesmallsizeoftheresidualgastricpouch,wherebymealsizeisdecreasedbecauseofearlysatiety,andabeneficialeffectofthebypassontheprofilesofGIhormones.Recentdataimplythateffectsofsurgeryonbileacidsandthemicrobiomemayalsocontributetobothweightlossandmetabolicbenefits. Surgicaltreatmentofobesity,so-calledbariatricsurgery,canachievesubstantialandlastingweightlossandalsohelpameliorateassociatedhealthproblemssuchasinsulinresistance,hyperlipidemia,andelevatedbloodpressure.Initially,surgeryinvolvedjejunoileal bypass,

by ingested Most of nutrients of macromolecules. humans the the chemical are form in enzymatic are must broken molecules However, cells line by into of epithelial digestion. too down chemical across the to therefore that assimilated and intestinal processes large constituents be such be smaller and tract their the enzymatic from are the contributors of pancreas quantitatively digestion arising the Secretions to largest the meal. that digestive are pancreas for important normal The also vital provides function. secretory additional products include regulate as that water other Such and as (or or both) ions. products of substances secretion pancreatic well bicarbonate products, function the latter 7.0. acid small has that intestinal in approaching so The gastric involved the pH a neutralizing lumen are of pepsin. of likelihood and also acidity is will inactivated This acting reduces with high pancreatic such in levels gastric because enzymes injured neutralization by be are mucosa the intestinal important acid because combination small by that acid the the duodenal gastric needed epithelial also ductules and neutralize the the bicarbonate acid pancreas contributor the ions to contribute. is of load, supply to biliary although largest cells the Quantitatively

of salivary pancreas ducts the a glands, acini. and in structure has the that As consists empties acinar small the the The of control eventually pancreatic from line blind main ductular pancreatic and under the sphincter branching Oddi. a of into system of cells ends into duct intestine that the there ducts. in through secretion primary modified Also in salivary the acini, which passes pancreatic as arises glands, the subsequently with a it common is the juice secretion the whose to and In in plasma, a the cells is constituents juice alkalinize supply whereas while acinar composition organic primary (Fig. chloride that pancreatic ionic the comparable pancreatic dilute general ducts of the reabsorbing ions of 30.2 ). 1.5 to juice, of which in in The listed constituents amounts pancreatic L/day major adult are humans, approximately

30.1 . Box functions pancreatic the also secretory of products. list This outlines inactive enzymes as Many the precursor particularly digestive are proteolytic pancreas, forms. produced by the enzymes, the produced of pancreas Storage important digesting from is inactive these critically forms the in in itself. preventing

canresultwhenenzymessecretedbypancreaticacinarcellsbecomeproteolyticallyactivatedbeforetheyhavereachedtheirappropriatesiteofactioninthesmallintestinallumen.Indeed,pancreaticjuicecontainsavarietyoftrypsininhibitorstoreducetheriskofprematureactivation,becausetrypsinistheactivatorofotherpro-formsofenzymessecretedinpancreaticjuice.Asecondlevelofprotectionliesinthefactthattrypsincanbedegradedbyothertrypsinmolecules.Despitethesedefenses,someindividualsaresusceptibletohereditarypancreatitisthatoccursspontaneouslyintheabsenceofknownriskfactors.Insomeofthesepatientsthereisamutationintrypsinthatrendersitresistanttodegradationbyothertrypsinmolecules.Othersharbormutationsintrypsininhibitors,renderingtheinhibitorsinactive.Inanyevent,ifotherdefenseshavebeenbreachedandtrypsinbecomesactiveprematurely,aviciouscycleofenzymeactivationensuesandboutsofpancreatitisfollow. Pancreatitis

of and Control Ductular Characteristics Secretion

juice section this we pancreatic ductular the flow cells how and composition to postprandial period. in contribute the consider the pancreatic In of can The the be regulatory the effector of a pancreas of considered arm pH ducts

parenchyma Lobules ductal and acinar of

and H2O of – Secretion

Cl˜ Extralobular absorption of in Cl˜ system ductal response to HCO3

movement of Direction •Fig. fluid thantheacinarsecretionbecauseofCl−/HCO3− .SecretionofacinarfluidandtheproteinsitcontainsisstimulatedprimarilybyCCK.Thehormonesecretinstimulatessecretionofwaterandelectrolytesfromthecellsthatlinetheextralobularducts.Thesecretin-stimulatedsecretionisricherinHCO3− ,Cl− Locationsofimportanttransportprocessesinvolvedintheelaborationofpancreaticjuice.AcinarfluidisisotonicandresemblesplasmainitsconcentrationsofNa+ ,andHCO3− exchange. 30.2 ,K+ 1973;62:407.) Physiol Gen (AdaptedfromSwansonCH,SolomonAK.J respond pH luminal neutrality to to just intestine system bicarbonate small and acid the to ( designed in restore enough to secrete

Fig. 30.3 ). ductules the epithelium pH convey (e.g., regulatory as other sense information duodenal and the to bicarbonate. mechanisms this itself) as requires of function This and capable also epithelia secreting luminal pancreas to biliary well small specialized known localized the embodied endocrine is The cells as in intestinal within epithelium. S pH-sensing cells, mechanism pH falls luminal in approximately to response in [H+]. increase below triggered S release secretin cells to the 4.5, When are self-limited system. components The constitute this regulatory loop of a in secretion lumen the Thus be of from intestinal the will small pH bicarbonate, cells evokes for secretin release terminated. of as S and secretin will rise signal

level, bicarbonate paracellular secrete the osmotic water At cellular lumen, into equilibrium. ductular stimulates epithelial cells the with following via route to secretin maintain to the transmembrane (cAMP) Cells adenosine thereby 30.1 Pancreatic monophosphate fibrosis and regulator in cystic of cyclic increases Acinar the (CFTR) • Secretin cells BOX conductance Products opens ductular

(Fig. channels of Precursors Proteases 30.4 Cl− outflow the duct of into causes ) an lumen. and exchanges for drives chloride antiporter the This the activity that of secondarily ions bicarbonate. adjacent an bicarbonate. is to CFTR also permeable the in dependent provides CFTR an which CFTR, which in cystic process explanation Thus pancreatic in secretory for on seen the fibrosis, function bicarbonate disease is the mutated. is defects for two is derived from The secretory sources. this needed process bicarbonate the sodium-bicarbonate cells symporter. basolateral taken of membrane type Some ductular the is the (NBC-1) 1 via up epithelial across cotransporter serve Recall bicarbonate ions, the circulating to in pancreas. increase as bicarbonate an acid in by source that of secretion results secreted of process the can gastric be a which the intracellularly bicarbonate activity enzyme However, anhydrase. carbonic be also generated via of can the increase lumen volume the − HCO3 net and into is and thereby juice. The effect move to pancreatic the of pH

•Fig. ParticipationofsecretinandHCO3−secretioninaclassicnegative-feedbackloopthatrespondstoafallinluminalpHintheduodenum.˜ pH Ductular cells duodenum S secretion Secretin in 30.3 •Fig. ˜°°° release bicarbonate H2O H2CO3 °Na˜K˜H2O Cl °HCO3 Na˜Na˜3Na˜2HCO3 NHE-1 CA ˜ H2O lumen CO2 Duct 2K˜Cl 30.4 ˜CO2 HCO3 CFTR ˜H˜H2CO3 Duct °H˜˜ °2HCO3 °°HCO3° Iontransportpathwaysinpancreaticductcells.CA,carbonicanhydrase;CFTR,cysticfibrosistransmembraneconductanceregulator;NBC-1,sodium/bicarbonatecotransporter(symporter)type1;NHE-1,sodium-hydrogenexchanger(antiporter)type1.NBC-1 cell

of Secretion Characteristics Acinar Control and

physiological the pancreatic the most predominant secretin is In role contrast the agonist, CCK acinar the the of ductules, important to cells. at plays level where how during controlled a the release is phase CCK small meal. to of is response the understand it Thus important intestinal to of

whichinthegutimpairstheabilitytohydrateandalkalinizetheluminalcontents.IntheGIsystemspecifically,thiscanresultinintestinalobstruction,duodenalmucosalinjury,anddamagetotheliverandbiliarysystemaswellasthepancreas.InmanyCFpatientstheendocrinepancreasisdysfunctional,andtheymustbegivendigestiveenzymesupplementstomaintainadequatenutrientdigestion.Inotherpatientswithmildermutations,pancreatitismaydeveloplaterinlifeintheabsenceofotherclassicCFsymptoms,presumablybecauseofretentionofdigestiveenzymesinthepancreas.Ineithercase,improvedrecognitionandtreatmentofthepulmonarycomplicationsofCFmeanthatGIsymptomssuchasliverfailure,reducedbileflow,pancreatitis,obstruction,andmaldigestion/malabsorptionofnutrientsareacquiringincreasedimportanceasfacetsofthediseasethatmustbemanagedinadults,oftenbymultidisciplinaryteamsofphysiciansandotherhealthcareprofessionals. Cysticfibrosis(CF)isageneticdiseasethataffectsthefunctionofavarietyofepithelialorgans,includingthelung,intestine,biliarysystem,andpancreas.Previouslythediseasewasalmostuniformlyfatalduringadolescenceasaresultofsevererespiratoryinfections.However,improvedantibiotics,drugsthatimproveclearanceofmucusfromthelungs,correctionofpancreaticinsufficiencyandundernutrition,andrecentUSFoodandDrugAdministration(FDA)approvalofdrugssuchasivacaftor(Kalydeco)andlumacaftor/ivacaftor(Orkambi)nowextendlifeintothefifthdecadeorlaterinsomepatients.CFiscausedbyamutationinCFTR,

cells, the which epithelium. in also the intestinal I product are of small is localized CCK in free release particularly present amino components food lumen, CCK are when enteroendocrine the certain space acids the These into cells fatty acids. interstitial specific classic and may or with acids amino cells. Release acids, of both, of I direct fatty the or following CCK occur interaction Release can CCK releasing regulated stimulate is also by two acting factors that luminally I of the cell. fat response the The to in small CCK-releasing •Fig. within is peptide, secreted by of these, paracrine epithelium into first of products intestinal cells the lumen 30.5 MechanismsresponsibleforcontrollingreleaseofCCKfromduodenalIcells.ACh,acetylcholine;CCK-RP,CCK-releasingpeptide;GRP,gastrin-releasingpeptide.Solidarrowsrepresentstimulatoryeffects,whereasdashedarrowsindicateinhibition. (RedrawnfromBarrettKE.Gastrointestinal Physiology. NewYork:McGraw-Hill;2006.) protein digestion. and The juice. factor, peptide, cells second releasing by pancreatic into released pancreatic monitor is acinar during gastric and can phases, cephalic enters small it soon peptide as monitor CCK-releasing to input, Both be and important the also particularly neural which as pancreatic intestine. preparing response peptide the secretion system is meal released in the to in the initiating digest thereby

factors? significance these the What is of CCK-releasing primary availability as meal in these the to the well enzymes, resulting role pancreatic to of lumen intestinal CCK for to as ( the release, the Their match enzymes need digest small is

Fig. 30.5 ). by proteolytic degradation are to the factors as Because same in protein. be as exactly the pancreatic will peptides, they subject way such dietary trypsin releasing enzymes much in ingested, with lumen the present for when releasing factors factors amounts than it greater and the thus proteolytic is in protein is “competes” releasing degradation. the dietary However, protected CCK effect is meal The is stimulation the I cells. factors releasing in continue from breakdown therefore of release available will net are the the from intestine and small be that while to absorbed, the been the meal digested has and are for off. shut and However, the of releasing release CCK is factors once degraded signal

secretion by pancreatic evokes in ways. two CCK cells acinar that cell CCK1 through classic the acinar travels hormone receptors. bloodstream it to First, a encounter is on However, pathways impinge also the neural reflex pancreas. that CCK stimulates endings in Vagal •Fig. nerve afferent Receptorsofthepancreaticacinarcellandregulationofsecretion.ThethickblackarrowindicatesthatCa++-dependentsignalingpathwaysplaythemostprominentrole.ACh,acetylcholine;CCK,cholecystokinin;GRP,gastrin-releasingpeptide;VIP,vasoactiveintestinalpolypeptide;M3,M3muscarinicreceptor;CCK-1;CCKreceptortype1. 30.6 (RedrawnfromBarrettKE.Gastrointestinal Physiology. NewYork:McGraw-Hill;2006.) by CCK CCK1 small their virtue expression to intestine receptors. the responsive of wall the of are of on that binding polypeptide of as neurons pancreatic gastrin-releasing As vasoactive reflex enteric of intestinal can series acinar the gastric cell and neurotransmitters and of via CCK release a peptide, secretion (VIP). of activates such effect described a enhance vagovagal for further earlier of emptying, activation CCK acetylcholine,

largely acinar cells pancreatic The of pole presynthesized products granules are cluster acinar toward that the in secretory and ( stored apical of cells

Fig. ). 30.6 CCK, of Ca++ gastrin-releasing acetylcholine, mobilizing stimuli secretion, act (GRP), including . peptide by potent intracellular acinar most The cell and the the Stimulation granules membrane, cell results within and with closer granules of plasma to a acinar of phosphorylation structural in regulatory apical where series that cytosol of the the membrane. proteins the fuse cells move the acinar and crossing then into acinar the an secretions. by ductular plasma subsequently washed The granule cells tight of the by and junctions, the linking out together, are of lumen exudate discharged contents the then meals cells period digest granule resynthesized needed the stored meal. between the to by acinar In the and constituents are next until may the evoke be response. by secretory that stimulated the same agonists initial Resynthesis

mixed is with that important digestive small intestinal the meal in Another the is lumen juice bile. transport the liver, are will as be address and of the discussed constituents, metabolic detail specific greater in and is as liver. produced in involved, mechanisms the that we well when the by the functions Bile the and in lipids. serves for digestion of a aid that bile of However, current discussion, secretion to is purposes absorption stored is and to in the in gallbladder is ingestion released of flowing until it concentrated Bile a the of response liver meal. out Oddi, Contraction sphincter CCK. the gallbladder, of by as of the as well are evoked of relaxation predominantly

the of most meal acids. are constituents bile we the small are concerned bile with the considering When phase assimilation, intestinal the to lumen. of digestion environment of products known lipid shield the that aqueous as hydrophobic serve the form structures from These micelles large a and biological Bile 2 1 as detergents, acids basis for lipid g/day. are optimal needed on to daily essence in are absorption—as much quantities meal majority enterohepatic acid pool circulation each recycled bile from The after is back of the liver the the the (Fig. via to intestine

). 30.7 acids •Fig. synthesized form epithelium the ability Thus passively that are in their limits cross to conjugated a bile 30.7 Enterohepaticcirculationofbileacids.Activeuptakeofconjugatedbileacidsoccursviatheapicalsodium-dependentbileacidtransporter(asbt).

that they in (discussed to so the participate in retained the that lumen lining in detail intestine heading). are assimilation lipid under conjugated when has (asbt), up ileum, symporter, conjugated are specifically bile terminal meal by the a Na+-dependent reabsorbed absorption the after takes However, contents lipid bile bile that the in ions. acids completed, with reach acid acids been the apical transporter sodium association bile pool left portion into the reabsorption spill acid minor and passive subject health, in become colon acids of to the to (see over and bile is a Only here deconjugated

Fig. 30.7).

basis, effect is signals the period. bile liver pool of a the net and the postprandial to in arising coincident The between cycle the intestine on daily acid majority with of exert types cell cell detergents variety in receptors and body. both throughout acids binding actions also a as by the beyond surface Bile role their nuclear biological to as well own this metabolic as their In synthesis processes. they way other regulate

physiological take The of to is the the nutrients. small of digestion function of products intestine up ingested important most significant carbohydrates, the (macronutrients) nutrients and proteins, most Quantitatively three lipids. classes: into fall is The only intestine small critical not

Meal for Phase to the body for Integrated a into into the their Response epithelium. digestion Small intestinal be transported simple final the of nutrients The Intestinal across but are the of stages that of enough also absorption to molecules consider will these processes involved in carbohydrates. each of assimilation of beginning the nutrients with We in turn, phases: and a the digestion. of digestion border the in surface two lumen known process on the Carbohydrate as of brush intestine occurs then in in enterocytes where point latter absorbed. generating in sugars the they is important only simple at absorbable The be can lumen may exposure these therefore small otherwise limit present of nutrients. bacteria their as number the the intestinal This might that use to small in sugars

Carbohydrates Digestion of

Dietary different of are carbohydrates molecular several composed classes. Starch, the polymers of first glucose. is both straightand branched-chain these, of a mixture of called the are (Fig. molecules amylopectin called and The straight-chain amylose polymers branched-chain are

30.8 ). developing especially predominantly important in in Starch particularly calories, is found and products. is cereal source a of countries, and of carbohydrate a and important sucrose (consisting and that infants. an fructose) source galactose), nutrients of in glucose the includes class of (consisting lactose glucose being Disaccharides caloric are latter second intestine a It and larger that the only monosaccharides carbohydrates. key is, absorb however, not can principle contain vegetable dietary origin by fiber, of digested human enzymes. cannot consists items Finally, carbohydrate which food be polymers that many of their caloric the bacteria by are lumen of value. colonic polymers in largely allowing salvage present digested instead ), (see thereby These

by epithelial a heavily cells border their component by of brush the Dietary small disaccharides hydrolyzed directly are small monomers intestinal synthesized mediated enzymes on intestinal by digestion, of surface cells. epithelial glycosylated family to membrane-bound, hydrolytic Brush of ( border to carbohydrates dietary isomaltase, glucoamylase, the hydrolases include critical and lactase sucrase, digestion

Table 30.1). them to Glycosylation pancreatic some hydrolases by protect luminal believed to of these degradation proteases. extent from is resynthesized and meals participate carbohydrate between must degraded hydrolases digesting the However, in by meal. to the the are next enterocyte be therefore for (see Sucrase/isomaltase in of of and synthesized is body the excess the requirements, into these of are assimilation monosaccharides specific membrane their glucoamylase that availability are by in limited products quantities transporters and

Uptake of Carbohydrates). contrast, a in shows after in Lactase, decline developmental weaning. expression means The of the that of lactase paucity than rate rather limiting assimilation. digestion for uptake resulting of lactose, is relative products, intolerance the disease results. a lactose threshold, certain levels lactase of fall below If

•Fig. 30.8 Structureofamylopectinandtheactionofamylase.Thebluecirclesrepresentglucosemonomerslinkedbyα-1,4bonds.Theblackcirclesrepresentglucoseunitslinkedbyα-1,6bondsatthebranchpoints.

isrelativelycommoninadultsfromspecificethnicgroups,suchasAsians,AfricanAmericans,andHispanics.Thedisorderreflectsanormaldevelopmentaldeclineintheexpressionoflactasebyenterocytes,particularlywhenlactoseisnotaconsistentcomponentofthediet.Insuchindividuals,consumptionoffoodscontaininglargequantitiesoflactose(e.g.,milk,icecream)canresultinabdominalcramping,gas,anddiarrhea.Thesesymptomsreflectarelativeinabilitytodigestlactose;thusitremainsinthelumen,andwaterisretained.Somelactose-intolerantpatientsbenefitfromoraladministrationofabacteriallyderivedlactaseenzymebeforeingestingdairyproducts. intolerance Lactose

occurs Digestion two phases. of in starch place takes the of salivary via first . the the The oral initiated actually in lumen and in is activity discussed as cavity amylase, in output however, or of in it amylase, digestion, patients although enzymes in assume may for pancreatic importance neonates is is impaired not disease. essential by the greater whom starch Salivary the starch digestion contributor to amylase. luminal pancreatic the Quantitatively of is most significant but amylose enzymes in bonds the not external the and in Both the α-1,6 that bonds internal (see hydrolyze branch amylopectin nor both form α-1,4 molecule points amylopectin, bonds

Fig. ). 30.8 glucose, branching structures, the incomplete called necessity short simplest dimers are well starch Thus of is and (maltose) of as including oligomers α-limit and of (maltotriose), amylase results dextrins. in digestion which trimers as by of border allow also undergo absorption Thus starch digestion. to brush its constituent must monosaccharides,

be the can glucoamylase, brush (see hydrolases straight-chain isomaltase oligomers or digested At glucose the border, by sucrase,

Table 30.1 ). free glucose mechanisms be then discussed can monomers, later. which All absorbed the yield by cleave on the can hand, points it that because enzyme as other is well as only α-limit α-1,6 bonds activity α-1,4 branch For the up is dextrins, make that the critical bonds. isomaltase

Carbohydrates of Uptake

across the the be must plasma of next resulting digestion from membrane transported hydrophobic monosaccharides Water-soluble enterocyte. 1 transporter concentration up to symporter Na+ of (SGLT1) its ( by its a is that galactose) takes coupling that The sodium/glucose (and glucose against gradient transport

Fig. ). 30.9 galactose via retained GLUT2. metabolic for the or the can can epithelium’s Once as needs across transporter and the glucose be pole basolateral cytosol, its cell a known exit inside across the by apical in up Fructose, taken membrane GLUT5. contrast, is •Fig. However, are ingested. its transport this GLTI?K+ATP and Absorptionofglucose,galactose,andfructoseinthesmallintestine.GLUT,glucosetransporter;SGLT1,sodium/glucosetransporter1.GlucoseGalactoseFructoseFructoseGLUT2GLUT5 fructose can large uptake 30.9 that easily relatively inefficient to not Na+, containing be food of is is of quantities sugar overwhelmed if because coupled who consumes this The occur lactose. symptoms that a those malabsorption are experienced by patient lactose-intolerant from similar to

also polymers are their must absorption be is constituents water-soluble before smaller digested into Proteins possible. that is acids of perhaps be these even than and complicated by can enterocytes. different short because absorption tetrapeptides) tripeptides, oligomers (dipeptides, that acids amino they transported amino Their also more of contain 20 carbohydrates and subject to the The substantial interconvert liver (see the body, body’s amino needs. acids various has to particularly ability ), be must acids some synthesized the diet. However, acids, the body be other termed by either acids, amino essential from amino thus cannot amino de obtained novo from and the or acids this be humans must The obtained are that shown in amino in in way

Fig. 30.10

genethatresultinafaultyorunexpressedproteinor,morecommonly,failureoftheproteintotrafficappropriatelytotheapicalmembraneofenterocytes.Inpatientscarryingsuchmutations,malabsorbedglucosecontributestodiarrhealandothersymptoms,asdiscussedearlierforlactoseintolerance.Despitetherarityofthedisease,itisimportantintermsoftheinsightitprovidedintoacriticalprocessofintestinalepithelialtransport. Araregeneticdisorderresultsinaninabilityoftheintestinetoabsorbglucoseorgalactose.ThisdiseasehasbeenmappedtoavarietyofmutationsintheSGLT1

•Fig. 30.10 Naturallyoccurringdietaryaminoacids.Thoseinboxesareessentialaminoacidsthatcannotbesynthesizedbyhumansandthusmustbeobtainedfromthediet. (RedrawnfromBarrettKE.Gastrointestinal Physiology. NewYork:McGraw-Hill;2006. HisLys , , AcidicGlu, lleVal Phe HydroxylSer Ala AllphaticGly, Asn )Amino AromaticTyr Asp, Try Gln acids IminoPro HydroxyproLeu , NeutralBasicArg Thr Met SulfurCys ,

of Proteins Digestion

in the of gastric hydrolyzed be virtue long lumen. exists Proteins simply pH to the peptides acidic can by that are the of However, required body, enzymatically ( into proteins phases assimilation three mediated for digestion of

Fig. ). 30.11 of pepsin, to lumen of mediated is and the the by product these the chief hydrolysis, glands. acid takes phases cells localized gastric place the in Like gastric first meal, cells with inactive secretion signals ingestion is coincident as the When by from gastric chief is a of the pepsin released activated precursor pepsinogen. to cleaved yield active is autocatalytically At pH, acidic this precursor the enzyme. highly Pepsin stomach, low activated specialized act the pH. by since is is it in to enzyme side aromatic a for acids, neutral at The sites aliphatic large with or preference of amino chains. cleaves proteins infrequently into a not protein can amino only such acids fully that intestine. of is the a be by in pepsin Because occur digesting given absorbed protein, relatively form capable majority), of it of peptides amino limited large yields protein, mixture a (the a free intact acids. number Instead and

proteases On the moving digested small encounters juice. pancreatic the intestine, partially provided into protein the in these enzymes are Recall secreted in inactive that forms. the protein of are to they begin then process How digestion? activated of presence until only the activating these intestinal the by border an fact, of lumen enzyme, enterokinase, proteases the delayed on is activation brush of small in are cells In enzymes epithelial of ( virtue localized

Fig. ). 30.12 cleaves yield to active Enterokinase trypsin. trypsinogen proteins. completely enzymes digest all protease by mixture turn a Trypsin secreted of thereby the in cleaves that can resulting pancreas, vast dietary the in precursors almost other the of majority the chain. Trypsin endopeptidase the releasing acids an within only that bonds amino chain of individual end the cleaves than from is peptide proteins rather at internal at their cleavage in a shorter basic for results peptides C-terminus. a acids, and specific is acid cleavage at amino of amino set Trypsin with basic such a of similar mechanism but and sites action chymotrypsin at •Fig. pancreatic The elastase, endopeptidases, of have cleave two other neutral Hierarchyofproteasesandpeptidasesthatfunctioninthestomachandsmallintestinetodigestdietaryprotein.Proteinsareabsorbedaseithersingleaminoacids(70%)orshortpeptides(30%). 30.11 (AdaptedfromVanDykeRW.In:SleisengerMH,FordtranJS[eds].Gastrointestinal Disease. 4thed.

Philadelphia:Saunders;1989.) •Fig. 30.12 Conversionoftheinactiveproenzymesofpancreaticjuicetoactiveenzymesbytheactionoftrypsin.Trypsinogeninpancre-aticjuiceisproteolyticallyconvertedtoactivetrypsinbyenterokinaseexpressedonthesurfaceofepithelialcellsoftheduodenumandjejunum.Trypsinthenactivatestheotherproenzymesasshown.

amino acids. peptides result activity pancreatic The on that are acted by ectopeptidases. from endopeptidase then for at those acids from situated neutral pancreatic B) amino in of are These basic present enzymes juice peptide chain, amino specific the (carboxypeptidase the (carboxypeptidase cleave and C-terminus. acids end either a or A) single amino carboxypeptidase and of products result meal have to a acidic include peptides after acids the at thus by A C-termini resistant that digestion or secretions protein gastric amino well short pancreatic are and their Thus as neutral as acids, that basic and

(Fig. B 30.13

phase protein takes of border. The at digestion brush place final the peptidases brush a uptake variety amino-peptidases products membrane on across both including of Mature enterocytes that generate their borders, and suitable carboxypeptidases express apical for (see the

Fig.

). 30.11 are hydrolysis. noted of proteolytic resistant substantial complement dietary However, either with relatively enzymes, peptides or the totally be that to it some should active even glycine are In or digested particular, containing slowly. very either peptides proline single intestine addition the up take to acids. peptides in short amino Fortunately can the cytosol to the the up then constituent in body subjected enterocyte majority to acids a intact peptides stage their cell the digestion in the of The in use enterocyte liberate their of or taken for form are elsewhere into of in final (Fig. amino 30.14 ). also into intact their in be some di-and tripeptides may blood form. the However, transported

•Fig. Luminaldigestionofpeptidesresultingfrompartialproteolysisinthestomach.AA,aminoacid. 30.13 (RedrawnfromBarrettKE.Gastrointestinal Physiology. NewYork:McGraw-Hill;2006. neutral C-terminal SerArg Peptide AA Elastase •Fig. neutral Large B Short Ser )Peptide free AAs and peptides Carboxypeptidase Arg peptides AA basic C-terminal basic Carboxypeptidase AChymotrypsin with Trypsin with 30.14 (PepT1).Theprotongradientiscreatedbytheactionofsodium/hydrogenexchangers(NHEs)intheapicalmembrane.Peptidesarelargelydigestedinthecytosoltotheirconstituentaminoacidsforexporttothebody,butasmallproportionmaybeexportedintact. 1 transporter Awidevarietyofdipeptidesandtripeptidesaretakenupacrossthebrushbordermembranebytheproton-coupledsymporterknownaspeptide

Amino of and Uptake Peptides Acids

of with body of capable products The promoting of digestion. protein uptake water-soluble plasma series also is transporters the membrane of a endowed number Given number the large of transporters amino a of is specific large (see there relatively acids,

Figs. ). 30.14 30.11 of acid transporters amino variety in absence a diminished Amino or ability clinical interest transport results in because acids. disorders to the relevant acid are their genetic of form because the transporters often in are such clinically the least overlapping mutations assimilated a specificity peptides. question can or by However, in silent, at acid other from be standpoint, with amino nutritional of does rule organ out This in not other pathology in the possibility of systems

the the expressed of of Small Response transporter (e.g., The Intestinal Phase interest to Meal Integrated which a may normally be cystinuria). and specificity general, amino anionic, have (e.g., acid with neutral, particular reasonably amino but broad transport of usually for in their subset or affinity transporters In some cationic) amino overlap a acids. acids the not some all) . their Furthermore, conjunction in symporters substrate transporters amino of acids uptake are of (but with obligatory acid carry that amino Na+

peptides ability short notable (see for to up The also is its take intestine small

Fig. ). 30.14 conjunction is a transports with The peptides peptide transporter called in that is uptake responsible (PepT1) such transporter and protons. 1 for symporter primary are enter transported be the membrane peptides via that the not these across exported blood Amino in the are the basolateral required from capillaries turn by to liberated to and vein. acids liver enterocyte portal uptake also can of PepT1 interest because is drugs, antibiotics of which cancer clinical agents. well so-called include chemotherapeutic as the it mediate variety of as a peptidomimetic transport additional fully which amino acids are The but mechanisms by and exit enterocyte presumed the involve proteins. peptidomimetic to understood not drugs are

Theredundancyinuptakemechanismsfortheproductsofproteindigestionunderscorestheimportanceofthisprocessandalsomeansthatdeficienciesinspecificaminoacidassimilationacrosstheintestinearerelativelyrare.However,undercertaincircumstances,mutationsinproteinsresponsibleforspecificaminoacidtransportcanleadtopathologyinotherorgans.Oneexampleisthediseaseofcysteinuria,whichisamolecularlyheterogeneousdiseaseinvolvingmutationsinavarietyofaminoacidtransporterscapableoftransportingcysteine.Becausecysteinecanalsobeassimilatedacrossthegutintheformofpeptides,nutritionaldeficienciesdonotoccurdespitealackofintestinaluptakemechanismsforthisparticularaminoacid.Incontrast,cysteinecanonlybepoorlyreabsorbedfromtheurineofpatientssufferingfromcystinuria,andkidneystonescanformbecausethisaminoacidisrelativelyinsoluble.PathophysiologycanalsoarisesecondarytomutationsinSLC6A19, aNa+-independenttransporterofneutralaminoacids,andresultinaconditionknownasHartnup disease, arelativelyrareinbornerrorofmetabolismthatcauseslossofneutralaminoacidsinurine,resultinginpsychiatricissues,intellectualdisability,shortstature,headaches,andunsteadygait,althoughnotnutritionaldeficienciesperse.

solvents soluble more of as in are the third making in are than class Lipids, defined that substances diet. human macronutrients organic the major water, up if of Lipids propensity on do than in nutritional supply a basis excessive calories have to consumed obesity carbohydrates thus amounts. to major a or they significant per-gram more are and contribute significance; proteins also volatile and aroma. also that dissolve compounds taste to food’s contribute Lipids

The found and oils other fats. triglyceride, lipid the human diet is predominant form of in in the The > majority long-chain fatty (carbon triglycerides these 12 acids chains esterified to carbons) glycerol have backbone. of in of from phospholipids membranes. mostly lipid cholesterol, and form the supplied cell arising Additional is also is daily with to but intestine as the not lipid only described dietary biliary presented It consider in . also detail that secretions, more is liver in the originating important lipid in from with most the individuals. provided the in all Indeed, on daily egg-loving supplied the in that exceeds basis but in diet a cholesterol bile the D, (A, the present fat-soluble supplied amounts, trace in though avoid in Finally, vitamins only are diet E, nutrients should disease. that to be K) essential the thus to almost These substances special are handling insoluble water entirely promote into and body. their in uptake require

Emulsification Lipids of and Solubilization

liquefied gastric surface ingested, floats temperature the a the meal When body of the fatty contents. at and lipid on is becomes lipid of breaking the access thus the gastric the capable the phases that area enzymes would and of restrict and to of can aqueous contents down lipid of be between forms This interface absorbed. the limit because is aqueous the This proteins, lipolytic as in reside enzymes, phase. the in assimilation early Therefore of its an the emulsification. is lipid stage The increases suspension phase. which lipid dietary surface the into a droplets, action fine lipid churns stomach the mixing of the vastly the of of area

in Lipid with is of a secretions. supplied facilitated the absorption bile of aid formation by micellar solution acids biliary also subsequently. process of Details this be will discussed

Lipids Digestion of

stomach. begins Lipid digestion in the to fatty Gastric component in dispersed is cells; the it fat released and lipase chief and large triglycerides gastric the in gastric hydrolyzes surface of contents free diglycerides quantities from adsorbs to acids. droplets in However, can gastric little the the pH because acidic results place the lipase. take stomach assimilation fatty of lipid the free by which in acids lumen, of of protonation released position the of hydrolyzing that which of catalytic the despite optimum fully triglyceride is in into the molecule the can its ester, the activity incomplete pH, body. into because broken down Lipolysis be at lipase, is cannot stomach second acidic gastric absorbed components that not capable means be also fat-soluble if of esters cholesterol is little also any There of esters or the vitamins. breakdown Indeed, of pancreatic individuals lipolysis gastric because the is dispensable enzymes. in excess of healthy marked

place small intestine the majority health. of The lipolysis in in takes for that at juice lipolytic are three pH. contains important Pancreatic enzymes optimized activity neutral first pancreatic The lipase. these is of This enzyme a triglyceride hydrolyzing in the positions monoglycerides. 2 large acids free it of is of quantity yield of differs both capable enzyme stomach 1 the to that fatty and and from At oil are these pH, droplets. migrate surface to the the molecules and neutral of acids charged, thus head fatty groups the free of the apparent small an part is that it by contents. Lipase in also displays which acids, of intestinal paradox inhibited the also form bile the to oil to Bile and of surface lipase the adsorb dissociate. acids cause droplets is important by in pancreatic sustained is which also an lipase activity However, colipase, juice. cofactor, supplied a anchors oil it to bridging the the is binds bile droplet acids. molecule of in lipase bile presence acids even to lipase; to and Colipase that

in additional that also two are fat digestion. important juice contains enzymes Pancreatic as first present phospholipids cell A2, which these The in those hydrolyzes such is membranes. phospholipase of enzyme activated the only is secreted an it intestine. the pro-form that this small absence dietary inactive in is it thus when of Predictably be as quite and would reaches toxic substrates, fat-soluble of well esters pancreatic juice implies, a Furthermore, break of cholesterol, triglycerides. down and esters esterase even as that cholesterol as contains can vitamins nonspecific its relatively as name bile lipase, this it that breast Interestingly role acids earlier), to neonates. is enzyme plays an requires for activity lipolysis milk discussed and (contrast enzyme with in produced related in in an important

(membrane) as into and into phase the lipid bile lamellar as well abstracted are the from mixed products acids. As micelles subsequently first droplet, lipolysis a lipolytic proceeds, products composed of both a serve the aqueous ( faces their face) from while products bile hydrophobic to have hydrophilic they the shield of amphipathic The own presenting (meaning to environment acids hydrophobic hydrophilic water lipolytic regions and

Fig. ). 30.15 lipid contents. markedly increase are the solubility Micelles and truly thus in in intestinal solution such molecules increases as rate which diffuse This at epithelial to the fatty acids the surface. absorptive of solubility micelles are of hydrolysis, absorption the the molecular given appreciable Nevertheless, small the of triglyceride not of surface triglyceride. and intestine for area large the products the essential very show that of output do by bile acids malabsorption. a patients (caused, who have Thus bile example, obstructs gallstone normally fat for insufficient output) not to vitamins even almost been and are and the micelles insoluble after water require fat-soluble On the totally hand, be have cholesterol accordingly absorbed digested. other they in fat-soluble if bile concentrations luminal can critical in the Thus vitamins. acid concentration, become fall patients micellar below deficient

•Fig. Schematicdepictionofbileacids(A)andmixedmicelles(B).Bileacidsinsolutionareamphipathic.Mixedmicellesarecylindricalassemblagesofbileacidswithotherdietarylipids. 30.15

Subsequent Handling Uptake and Lipids of

cell of The fat capable products readily digestion lipophilicity. believed membranes crossing are their be of of because to recent that regulated transporters. uptake via membrane However, their suggests or activity additionally alternatively may evidence of the specific be long-chain the A fatty brush fatty (MVM-FABP) the provides border. of across membrane protein uptake acid–binding microvillus acids for increases 1 enterocytes (hypercholesterolemia). an Niemann-Pick Likewise, (NPC1L1) therapeutic from identified C1–like has in as uptake may recently a for circulating pathway in pathological target patients who cholesterol suffer in be cholesterol been and this with is into molecule, back because and from two the plant of sterols, uptake a cassette G5 inefficient be (ABC) ABC G8. enterocytes along However, can heterodimeric ATP-binding relatively also cholesterol cytosol overall effluxed termed actively transporters of by complex glycerol aquaglyceroporins. Finally, may different a be the by intestinal of cells backbone of number epithelial transported triglycerides into

Arelativelynewtreatmentforhypercholesterolemiatargetsabsorptionofcholesterol,eitherderivedfromthedietorinbile,acrossthesmallintestinalepithelium.EzetimibeisadrugthatspecificallyblockscellularuptakeofcholesterolbyinhibitingtheactivityoftheNPC1L1proteinexpressedintheapicalmembraneofenterocytes.Inconjunctionwithotherdrugsdesignedtocounteratherosclerosis,thismaybeausefuladjunctinthatitcaninterrupttheenterohepaticcirculationaswellaspreventabsorptionofdietarycholesterol.Clinicalstudiessuggestthatezetimibemaysynergisticallyimprovetheefficacyofotherstrategiesdesignedtoreducecirculatinglevelsoflow-densitylipoproteincholesterolinthoseatriskforcardiovasculardisease,suchastheuseofstatindrugs.

also and enterocyte. in Lipids into from carbohydrates the differ their proteins terms of fate absorption after to the in enterocyte form reesterified portal the the and leave and in which form products are amino molecular the monosaccharides triglycerides, Unlike enterocyte phospholipids, and cholesterol esters. enter of lipolysis acids, circulation, take endoplasmic in metabolic events reticulum. the smooth place These as rough reticulum. known proteins enterocyte synthesizes the apolipoproteins endoplasmic of Concurrently the series in a much a a esters) coated consists chylomicron, triglyceride core known form apolipoproteins. lipids phospholipid, less (predominantly as structure lipid then vitamin by resynthesized cholesterol, the with with and to which the These of proteins combined fat-soluble a are exported chylomicrons exocytosis. by enterocyte from The then of a the process are the permeate diameter) large spaces the propria, through in they on to capillaries. entering of Å However, (≈750–5000 the too lamina mucosal intercellular are portal circulation the bypass are first they the propria Instead lymphatics lamina and in liver. up at taken therefore pass, into for the their and, least enter organs. via duct in other transport body Eventually, around chylomicrons for serve the lymph to vehicle in cells thoracic and use the as then the the the bloodstream lipids by fatty transport The exception to is medium-chain only acids. chylomicron-mediated for this into appreciably, chylomicrons. the enterocyte intracellular which acids are relatively that These also are and packaged can water steps described permeate processing and junctions tight earlier they bypass means soluble not readily to other circulation enter They available are therefore portal and the tissues. more be benefit A pools. in rich patients of diet may bile medium-chain in triglycerides inadequate with acid particular

foregoing digestion these •Fig. place description has in of intestine in stressed aqueous take processes small the The that an 30.16 OverallfluidbalanceinthehumanGItract.About1to2Lofwaterisingested,and8LofvarioussecretionsenterstheGItract.Ofthistotal,mostisabsorbedinthesmallintestine.About2Lispassedontothecolon,thevastmajorityofwhichisabsorbedinhealth. Physiology. (FromVanderAJetal.Human 6thed.NewYork:McGraw-Hill;1994.) milieu. meal of nutrients in fluidity in along intestinal length intestine the The especially to site important absorption. be digested the of contents, intestine, the diffuse to to propelled small and the permit of their to allowing is from this 1 consists only (Fig. intake, food Part and derived L/day derived from in fluid about adults of both of this drink but 2 is most to oral 30.16 ). supplied fluid organs well the themselves, into the that as Additional stomach the by small tract. GI as is the intestine drain and 8 the which a presented 9 approximately another L, L total, In of daily secretions is 10 basis. to with these intestine fluid means on add that for in of 200 colon to reabsorption, 2 to mL the is only this about health and L eventually passed stool. exits 100 However, only in load Thus the intestine overall. water absorbs period, nutrient intestine of is promoted predominantly the absorption in small such absorption. the effects via osmotic the postprandial During An of tight gradient drives intestinal water epithelium junctions. across across simultaneously is movement that the osmotic established the water the generic small diagrammed Na+ and is nutrient-driven in in intestine mechanism The absorption for

Fig. 30.17 . absorption fluid nutrients of antiporter via mediated (NHE-3) occur (see by a meals, interaction when and Na+ of Cl−/ HCO3 coupled are still absent, the can Moreover, antiporter uptake Cl− period the between cooperative a the and − in Na+/H+

Fig. 30.17

transport electrolyte predominantly is the net small not tissue to water though in Even participate absorptive, electrolyte this in imply that does fails the intestine and secretion. of contents deformation luminal distention. and intestinal in regulated and is response to from the Secretion the to derived in signals response mucosa VIP, include prostaglandins, serotonin. and acetylcholine, secretagogues Critical the contents intestinal passage of the digestion and are that ongoing appropriately to food the of is important lubricate are while Secretion absorption particles and along length intestine. fluid ensures the evidence constipation can latter clinical and fibrosis, abnormally For the result observed is cystic some secretion in obstruction, when example, intestinal low. that suggests of The intestinal •Fig. the majority 3DRA?PAT1?ATPHCO3°GLUT2Glucose mechanism secretory driven secretion active the flow the of lumen in via chloride fluid of by is MechanismsofNaClabsorptioninthesmallintestine.DRA,downregulatedinadenoma;GLUT2,glucosetransporter2;KCC1,potassium/chloridecotransporter1;NHE-3,sodium/hydrogenexchanger3;PAT1,putativeaniontransporter1;SGLT1,sodium/glucosetransporter1.SGLT1H˜2K˜KCC1NHE 30.17 ions diagrammed into

Fig. 30.18 . as of channels, in by calcium. fibrosis channels that is the In the TMEM16A can compensated by for cystic accessory Cl such channel be activated CFTR loss chloride elevations cytoplasmic partially additional of secretion Some ions mechanisms, the the of via engage may in shown in intestine secretory mechanisms segments such as bicarbonate

Fig. 30.19.

protects acid pylorus, pepsin. proximal duodenum the epithelium, the secretion Bicarbonate downstream most damage of the the portions from immediately from in and particularly caused by

and Water-Soluble Vitamins Minerals of Absorption

small calcium, and also The important C, water-soluble cobalamin) and an intestine vitamins such magnesium, for absorption minerals (e.g., of iron. site is vitamin as the contents taken are In of via specific from transporters. the luminal up these activity general substances is •Fig. Their uptake the of 30.18 the and circulation feedback mechanisms molecules of and controlled the also substrate transporters relevant sense concentration by expression accordingly. in accessory the adjust that MechanismofCl−secretioninthesmallandlargeintestines.CFTR,cysticfibrosistransmembraneconductanceregula-tor;NKCC1,sodium/potassium/2chloridecotransporter1.Notethatadditionalchloridechannels(notshown),suchasthoseregulatedbyintracellularcalciumconcentration,mayalsoexistintheapicalmembraneandcontributetooveralltransport.˜Ca˜˜Cl°2K˜˜˜cAMPNKCC1ATP˜

Motor Patterns the of Intestine Small

the muscle that with propel along the can and the length and (along the intestine in absorbed. various layers nutrients digestive smooth with produce motility water intestine electrolytes) chyme of mix fluid The be so secretions patterns that small predominantly of contractions consist the retard segmenting postprandial Motor largely toward of retropulsive digestion the while directed intestine small and is are the still ongoing. mixing meal during period that patterns and is is in that contractions pattern stereotypical a rhythmic displayed of Segmentation

Fig. basic reflects nervous rhythm. 30.20 activity presumably electrical system of on and superimposed enteric programmed the the fed this poorly contributes. of defined, motility CCK are mediators although Hormonal of pattern described emptying in when meal in as CCK roles chapter. intestine, at plays the beginning slowing small of important this the gastric the also is and a absorb makes of available to nutrient meal. mechanism the sense as delivery capacity match components the This to to the digest

•Fig. 30.19 NHE-1 DRA? Mechanismsofbicarbonatesecretionintheduodenum.CA,carbonicanhydrase;CFTR,cysticfibrosistransmembranecon-ductanceregulator;DRA,downregulatedinadenoma;NBC-1,sodium/bicarbonatecotransporter1;NHE-1,sodium/hydrogenexchanger-1;PAT1,putativeaniontransporter1.3Na˜Na˜Na˜H˜Cl°Cl°K˜NBC-1 PAT1? + ATP CO2 °HCO3 H2O HCO3 CA ° CFTR

the been desirable digested and undigested meal. prepare next for to intestine it the lumen has absorbed, to After meal the residues is any from clear the by ( clearance peristalsis is Such effected

Fig. the that contents occurring below permits 30.21 and coordinated conveyed a contraction contents of sequence above distances. be over relaxation intestinal ), to considerable the nitric reflects the to orad well the and of contract VIP site intestinal muscle, distention, a caudad to action oxide released which effects as Peristalsis and substance serves the acetylcholine on of side. circular the as inhibitory of P basic superimposed originates depolarization by generated potentials action when segmentation, on the innervation peristalsis cellular of Like dictated rhythm. sites by are intrinsic electrical are motor sequence patterns as complex ( The motor a occur known phases moreover, of fasting, that migrating the during into peristaltic organized

Fig. ). 30.22 the whereas MMC relative by II. quiescence, characterized during begin small contractions of disorganized I Phase occur is to phase minutes, contractions about 10 During which that phase lasts III, •Fig. large 30.20 A,Radiographicviewshowingthestomachandsmallintestinefilledwithbariumcontrastmediuminanormalindividual.Notethesegmentationoftheintestine.B,Sequenceofsegmentalcontractionsinthesmallintestine.Lines1to4representsequentialtimepoints.Thedottedlinesindicatewherecontractionswilloccurnext;thearrowsdepictthedirectionofmovementoftheintestinalcontents. A Regional Structure. of Human Study (A,FromGardenerEMetal.Anatomy: 4thed.Philadelphia:Saunders;1975;B,redrawnfromCannonWB. Am J 1902;6:251.) Physiol •Fig. 30.21 Peristalticmotilityintheintestinepropelsintestinalcontentsalongthelengthofthesmallintestine.

of intestinal by gastric contents the into the remaining are intestine length the propagate colon. sweep and along and out the stimulated any hormone motilin this eventually large body. The during so pylorus items open valve pass undigested the and even from ileocecal can fully phase, minutes the ingested, in I in MMC, taking is the is entire of cycle meal intestine phase with suspended. of MMC adults 90 unless reverts then the a which Motility about case the to the After and levels be resumed rise meal, until MMC again. motilin the they cannot fall,

1.

small stomach, of On leaving intestine, jejunum, which enters and the consists the ileum. duodenum, the (sequentially) meal the The the absorb the meal. is function digest the small of nutrients to principal and in contained intestine

2.

nutrient ability additional substances. intestine the thus of digest in the the emptying, duodenum absorb chyme and retards gastric match The to of presence delivery to small helping such

3.

from and the by small Digestion in liver juices intestine aided two and digestive the (pancreatic juice) (bile). absorption derived pancreas are by small hormonal activated neural These in the intestine. are secretions the the by and of triggered signals meal presence

4.

proteins meal secretions various Pancreatic and acini from acting contain capable or the arise important the of cofactors. digesting as pancreatic and through The it ducts. is the alkalinized as passes secretion diluted

5.

the period. postprandial the and by liver needed the is in Bile gallbladder stored in until produced important products of that Bile the detergents acids, bile, solubilize lipid digestion. of components are biological

•Fig. Migratingmotorcomplexesintheduodenumandjejunumasrecordedfromafastinghumansubjectbymanometry.D1,D2,J1,J2,andJ3indicatesequentialrecordingpointsalongthelengthoftheduodenumandjejunum.Theintensecontractions(phaseIII)propagateaborally.(RedrawnfromSofferEEetal. 30.22 Am Gastroenterol J 1998;93:1318.) 6.

and are mechanisms. Carbohydrates analogous by water-soluble absorbed broadly macromolecules, digested and proteins, can require the of the third transfer absorbed. lipolysis they products mechanisms to macronutrient, epithelial Lipids, special to surface be where the as magnesium, iron. calcium, The well small as absorbs and fatand water-soluble vitamins, as intestine also minerals such

7.

of intestine basis nutrients, on The into a absorption digestion of transfers of and electrolytes. the out driven daily active volumes and ions transport by facilitate lumen of large to and fluid other small

8.

whether motor small The a intestine has meal ingested. on depending vary been patterns of the time is of to nutrients. digestive retaining Immediately with meal, the mixing in motility providing a after directed it juices, and meal the absorption for sufficient small intestine, motor of sweeps intense stomach small a to “housekeeper” the the length along During residues. periodically of undigested clear complex and migrating them fasting, of intestine (the complex) contractions

NO. Davidson NA, Abumrad Role of in homeostasis. gut lipid the Rev. Physiol 2012;92:1061-1085.

al. BE, Argent et the of ducts. physiology pancreatic Cell ed. In: LR, Johnson GI Tract. the Physiology of 5th ed. MA: 2012. Waltham, Press; Academic

SJ. KE, Keely Barrett the absorption and in secretion intestine small colon. and Electrolyte eds. Podolsky In: al., et DK, Textbook of Gastroenterology. Yamada’s 6th ed. NJ: Wiley Hoboken, 2015. Blackwell;

AE, Hasler Bharucha WL. of Motility the intestine and colon. small et al., Podolsky DK, In: eds. Yamada’s of Textbook Gastroenterology. 6th ed. Hoboken, Wiley Blackwell; 2015. NJ:

Protein Ganapathy absorption. V. digestion and LR, ed. In: Johnson Tract. the GI of Physiology ed. 5th Academic 2012. Press; MA: Waltham,

RA. Liddle secretion. of pancreatic Regulation LR, ed. In: Johnson Physiology Tract. GI the of 5th ed. Waltham, Academic MA: 2012. Press;

BA. EM, M, Loo Wright Hirayama DDF, Sala-Rabanal absorption. Sugar In: LR, Johnson ed. Physiology Tract. of the GI ed. 5th 2012. Press; Waltham, MA: Academic

of following the to answer completion questions: be able the should Upon chapter student 1. this

are meal? is intestine of the What desiccating and the a anatomy the storing of the and in what and the structures the of rectum, colon large of role residues

2.

and from provide that the motility reflexes function, the proximal of the the its What of more tract? patterns GI to what portions storage colon colon signal are for

3.

intestinal the defense? of is in role and metabolism What microorganisms host

4.

can it are until What how for the mechanisms defecation, be provide that convenient? delayed and

the Overview Large of Intestine

segment gastrointestinal and The transverse, of intestine, portions of the cecum; ascending, the comprises colon; the (GI) the rectum; anus distal descending tract, most ( and large

Fig. 31.1 ). of the be be products movement the waste used more from conveniently absorbed of proximally, remaining until to they was the the during meal the and digest of body. store the can primary the cannot or GI the that absorb The fluid digested tract, intestine along are reabsorb meal meal functions components and large eliminated of that and the of mechanisms drive other solutes fluid, In large fulfilling electrolytes, the and intestine expresses from uses these motility patterns transport characteristic the absorption that functions, stool. other microorganisms of trillions contains relationship of with microbiota, The the also that their a and in human host. known as large engage intestine commensal biological unique many a ecosystem consisting lifelong bacteria symbiotic via are that meal of a host known as body make components available not the their metabolize to These process can the and by microorganisms products fermentation. digested enzymes their endogenous thereby such also bile substances bilirubin, acids influencing bacteria disposition. as and metabolize Colonic other colonic emerging promoting the development its differentiated normal in evidence microbiota epithelium of stimulating the critically involved that and is There colonic in functions. is

In outside infection protect detoxify invasive body, pathogens. from addition the drugs) by the (substances the colonic originating epithelium such microbiota xenobiotics can as and is allow to integrate source other segments the recipient Finally, to signals that with optimally GI communicate of it and colon both the function. the make the the food, eventually gastrocolic of evacuation reflex colonic meal of that motility presence residues the long the meal. of way colonic the example, filled the to (the a reflex) increased and masticated contents when with next For stomach freshly arc triggers results is in for the mediators motility Similarly of electrolyte secretion luminal that small slow and the in presence decrease neurocrine in and endocrine contents causes both colon propulsive intestine. the of release feedback This to the capacity to absorb and components. the of matches contents of segment’s delivery useful colonic rate the mechanism process negative next components Details the of of GI between reviewed the this that system section. mediate the and in crosstalk signals colon other the are

colon primarily, neural is by regulated pathways. The exclusively, though not of is by motility influenced filling of initiating that the and distention by local stretch lumen, generated reflexes the are thereby activation receptors. Colonic These pathways system. nervous involve regulatory the enteric exclusively bolus of cells produced, epithelium enteroendocrine fecal distortion material and by (5-HT) passage colonic of enteric from and acetylcholine triggered stimulate for nerves. reflexes by from by fluid Local short Cl− mediated secretion example, a of of bursts 5-hydroxytryptamine the secretomotor and On are motility originating and body other colonic by also systems. the GI or other regulated the long more in reflex function in arcs tract proximally in particular responses hand, One reflex. example is gastrocolic the Distention the movement more activates a fecal generalized motility colonic in and of in mass of increase stomach detail later. described material, as and has This release both chemosensitive involves origin of mechanosensitive its of reflex components at and 5-HT acetylcholine. and site in bed to reflex and activated is many a from Similarly on urge the promotes rising defecate orthocolic morning individuals.

poorly The relatively regulatory with and factors. peptides release other that colon is supplied bioactive cells that tyrosine release so two sequence Exceptions which named peptide and synthesize cells, YY, contains are enterochromaffin residues. cells 5-HT, because adjacent its to ileum by and lipid enteroendocrine the is cells lumen. synthesized colon Peptide terminal released in YY the in localized and in response is and propulsive emptying decreases motility. intestinal gastric It also by thus cells. secretion Peptide and epithelial intestinal fluid reduces YY Cl− terminal is reaches it by part the ileum Thus fat, the the that characterized an brake” if not peptide meal time of has as and been especially released in colon. the proximal are YY nutrients, “ileal absorbed limiting in YY nutrients absorbed. for where propulsion more intestine distention-induced time provides meal part constituent the to fluidity peptide contents, its be By digested and be in motility, and by the retained their can reducing small of the intestinal

of Patterns Colonic Motility

of musculature the will discussion followed colonic reviewed To of the motility. a first, be motility of by colonic functional regulation anatomy appreciate the colonic

Functional the of Musculature Colonic Anatomy

layers, with and the propria, lamina columnar the intestine, then closely the underlaid functional a is apposed consists of layers. the segments by epithelium colon muscle As other in lumen, of serosa, which to most mucosa can by continuous that is of occlude Similarly the layers circular surrounded the lumen. muscle colonic intervals •Fig. Indeed, at ileum Majoranatomicsubdivisionsofthecolon.Sigmoid Cecum colon valve •Fig. Rectum 31.1 Terminal Ileocecal Radiographshowingaprominenthaustralpatterninthecolonofanormalindividual. 31.2 of Variants. (FromKeatsTE.An Normal Roentgen Atlas 2nded.StLouis:Mosby–YearBook;1979.) circular called divide into the the segments haustra. contracts to colon muscle shown is These laparotomy or appreciated at by colon in if the readily as viewed are x-ray imaging haustra

Fig. . 31.2 The the majority •Fig. is distinct longitudinal arrangement from however, fibers, of of the muscle Anatomyoftherectumandanalcanal. 31.3

small that the in intestine. as the extend Three the the muscle of length bands taeniae longitudinal known colon. coli along of nonoverlapping

the colon Although less circular this the muscle layers the intestine. coupled, process of electrically than and in small is efficient longitudinal are Thus motility less in the effective small the is propulsive intestine. than in colon of the enteric system that haustra. also Activity the provides form contractions the nervous for segmenting is moved the of a and can Contents passage of and contents means colonic retarding their with forward between which be haustra, epithelium. contact maximizing back the time is the the called smoothened. In forming propulsion colon the contractions rapid relax when contrast, and is of haustra for, the contour

is colon to an (the terminates at junction angle the the in ) The rectosigmoid joined colon (Fig. rectum, which acute

). 31.3 muscle by surrounded only rectum The longitudinal muscle circular lacks is fibers. and It feces be defecation. before wherein is can a stored reservoir that and of important the in feces adults. least contractions convenient, retard delaying at “valves” functional also feces of the movement rectum are loss in form in it Muscular is until only by canal, that distinguished is in by the muscle (skeletal) surrounded joins by turn striated it the but The not rectum fact muscle. anal smooth also key for these and layers functionally two from flatus The the muscle sphincters of evacuation of combination body. that accounts control solid waste cavity sphincter structures circular of The is made the anal in three different external thickened the internal is pelvic canal. muscle band wrap composed up anal muscle, striated anal the around of a whereas sphincter of that when abdominal These distinctive and a because further reflexively when heavy level a contracted significant latter pressure muscles are lifting tone be (e.g., voluntarily either abruptly of or basal can object). increases they maintain

Hirschsprung’s disease isaconditioninwhichasegmentofthecolonremainspermanentlycontractedandresultsinobstruction.Itistypicallydiagnosedininfancyandaffectsupto1in5000livebirthsintheUnitedStates.Thebasisofthediseaseisfailureoftheentericnervoussystemtodevelopnormallyduringfetallife.Duringorganogenesis,cellsdestinedtobecomeentericneuronsmigrateoutfromtheneuralcrestandpopulatethegutsequentiallyfrommouthtoanus.Insomeindividualsthismigrationterminatesprematurelybecauseofabnormalitiesinthemechanismsthatwouldotherwisedrivethisprocess.Mutationsinglial-derivedneurotrophicfactorandendothelinIII,aswellasintheirreceptors,havebeendescribedinindividualssufferingfromthisdisease,andtheaffectedsegmentcompletelylackstheplexusesoftheentericnervoussystemandassociatedganglia.ArelativedeficiencyofinterstitialcellsofCajalisalsoseenintheaffectedsegment,andoverallcontrolofmotilityismarkedlyimpaired.Inmostindividualsthesymptomscanbecompletelyalleviatedbysurgicalexcisionoftheaffectedsegment.

layers muscle Contraction input stimulated colon the in of the vagal the enteric as smooth well by part of nervous the proximal is system. by as anal the control colon internal remainder innervated the pelvic the the of nerves, caliber sphincter. which by the is hand, On also of other the input floor. the of contraction and sphincter the muscles external of the the spinal cord Voluntary branches via pelvic of nerves pudendal anal from regulates structures learned these ability toilet during is to The control training. distinguishes of most the that the anal swallowing. with GI system, exception voluntary in from esophagus This of the muscle regulates canal the striated control the

of patterns two propulsion movement, with contact providing the not primary intestine of directed epithelium. are time to with its their but predominant function, contents them of rather the the the the motility thereby with colonic and Consistent to large in contents mixing retarding ample identified. colonic motility been Two forms have distinctive of contractions, is to short-duration The designed first as provide referred which mixing. are for to circular the seconds for persist contractions average. originate and pressure waves These 8 muscle stationary that in are on coli, short to are in 20 for may 60 the contrast, Long-duration propagate produced over and distances. seconds, by last taeniae contractions, propagation more colon. the of aborally, Notably, particularly as move in segments well as proximal the however, orally may such Both to local distention. thought originate are patterns to response conditions motility as in largely not valve does small sites basal colon. the that Note into that the ileocecal and the to intestine contraction governs origination the electrical of the smooth in traverse muscle rate rhythm continue

rectum. hand, arcs, probably a the approximately times the large On of the of long intestine of as result engages the colon per motility intensity individuals cecum day in influences in sweeps reflex pattern is and high other both healthy length 10 and a the the along to that from local aboral colon an are move propagating contents. of contractions, to contractions, direction exclusively its the designed Such in and clear called high-amplitude discussed be pattern result can motility it for reasons a defecation associated later. necessarily However, in although with not defecation, does clearly such

contents with rectum. transported at rate which individuals to also the respect there that is colonic among is from note the considerable variability cecum to It are important to the anywhere constant may small are retained large without contents dysfunction. signifying times hours healthy transit days the from be the in Although to intestine in adults, intestinal relatively patient’s and accounts of mandates This elicitation of careful a variation significant individuals patterns history bowel defecation before in dysfunction. their also diagnosing normal among for

the Mechanisms Colon Transport in

nutrients. The the secrete of to either is than and colonic electrolytes major rather or epithelium absorb water role the stagnant. Secretion, to which otherwise which become the of crypts, is maintains the might confined sterility crypts, epithelium that the important renew base the This located the because is stem of crypt. are the at cells crypts daughter and of electrolyte the the that absorption. differentiated properties surface and that cells are for cells cells acquire of The give rise migrate stem water responsible out to carbohydrates absorbs nonabsorbed from acids colonic short-chain by also bacteria. The fatty salvaged colonic epithelium acid, fatty critical Indeed, colonocytes. a short-chain butyrate, for source is such energy one in by antibiotics) A result caused lumen of levels in in microbiota dysfunction. the administration may epithelial changes induce butyrate broad-spectrum a of colonic (as reduction

day of and 200 each stool. fluid receives 1.8 absorbs colon leaving in of fluid 2 to L thus lost The mL be L, its fluid The fluid up the stool. and absorb reserve considerable load without times capacity to excessive loss normal for fluid of can has colon in three a absorption fluid capacity active is any diarrhea stimulation secretion Therefore small will to reserve the of illness of exceeded. intestine results cause only when the in in 6L 4 that

of passive and Absorption driven solutes. water other processes and by colon the secretion secretion of or are electrolytes absorption by Quantitatively, fluid absorption by the

inwhichtheindividualperceivesnormalsignalsoriginatingfromthebowel(e.g.,inresponsetodistention)aspainful.Thishypersensitivitymaybeattheleveloftheentericorcentralnervoussystem(orboth)andcanbetriggeredbyavarietyoffactorssuchaspreviousinfections,childhoodabuse,orpsychiatricdisorders.Mosttreatmentsfocusonsymptomaticrelief,butthereisthepromiseofmoreeffectivetherapiesaswelearnmoreabouttheunderlyingcausesofthecondition.Treatmentofpatientswithirritableboweldisorders,whichareoftenrefractorytotherapy,formsamajorpartofthepracticeofmanygastroenterologists. syndrome isthenamegiventoaheterogeneouscollectionoffunctionaldisorderswhosesuffererscomplainofdiarrhea,constipation,oralternatingpatternsofboth,oftenwithaccompanyingpainanddistention.Theetiologyofthesedisordersisstillnotfullyunderstoodbutmayinvolveinpartaconditionofvisceral bowel hypersensitivity Irritable

Thecolonicepitheliumturnsoverrapidlyinhealth,thuslimitingtheaccumulationofgeneticdamage.However,thisrapidturnover,aswellasfrequent/prolongedexposuretobacteriallysynthesizedorenvironmentaltoxins,orboth,makesthelargeintestineespeciallyvulnerabletomalignancy.ColoncancerissecondinprevalenceonlytolungcancerinmenintheUnitedStatesandthirdbehindlungandbreastcancerinwomen.Withthedecreasedincidenceofcigarettesmokingandthereforelungcancer,coloncancermayassumeevengreatersignificance.Coloncancerariseswhennormalgeneticcontrolsontherateofepithelialproliferationaresubverted;initiallythisleadstogrowthofapolypandeventually,ifnotremoved,toaninvasivetumorthatmaymetastasizetootherpartsofthebody.Coloncancercanbesubdividedaccordingtothebasicnatureoftheunderlyingmoleculardefect,whichcanincludeoverexpressionofgrowthstimulatoryfactorsoramutationthatpreventsthecellsfromrespondingtofactorsthatwouldnormallybegrowthsuppressive.However,coloncancermortalitycanbereducedverysubstantiallybyearlydetectionandremovalofpolypswithmalignantpotential.Thishasdrivencurrentguidelinesforincreasedscreeningofevenasymptomaticmiddle-agedindividualsforcolonicabnormalitiesviacolonoscopy(inwhichaflexiblefiberoptictubeisinsertedintothecolontoinspectitsinterior),screeningforthepresenceofso-calledoccult(orhidden)bloodinthestoolderivedfromableedingpolyportumor,ornoninvasiveimagingtechniquessuchascomputedtomographyscans.

driven by colon transport processes. three is that The the absorption mechanism mediated same by which absorption, (see first the drives electroneutral is intestine in is NaCl NaCl

Fig. ). 30.17 such epithelial NaCl surface factors, by that growth absorption hormones neurotransmitters by is growth adenosine of in inhibited monophosphate various (cAMP) as colonic levels is factor, cells. stimulated epidermal and increase cyclic and

•Fig. for ATP colonocyte 31.4 metabolism by used SCFA Mechanismofshort-chainfattyacid(SCFA)uptakebycolonocytes.ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;SMCT1,sodium/monocarboxylatecotransporter1.3Na˜SMCT1 intracellular

acids, short-chain including butyrate. second colon the of that The propionate, drives in process absorption fluid and is transport fatty acetate, absorption small symporter to crypt) intestine, the perhaps in absorbed as Na+-glucose molecules a These sodium-monocarboxylate cells symporters fashion family epithelial known (and in from surface transporters related of (SMCTs). lumen Na+-dependent the by by and are an the plasma in Na+,K+-ATPase low by acids is by established SMCTs of the ( basolateral Uptake [Na+] short-chain apical driven by located intracellular membrane the the fatty

Fig. ). 31.4 acids energy for fatty are by used These short-chain colonocytes. malignant specific In regulates expression butyrate colonic genes addition, suppress may development a in phenotype. epithelial of and cells of in cancers, identified SLC5A8) contribute transformation. to malignant butyrate a uptake, is leading colon reduction thereby may in Expression some to SMCT1 of which (also as reduced

significance of absorptive colon of ( third The is absorption major Na+ in process the

Fig. ). 31.5 Na+ Na+ This of by channel predominantly in is is which kidney. part epithelial involved the driven is of colon reabsorption the the also in process (ENaC), to localized the and distal transport response in Na+ channel to When the and into by by cytosol across neurotransmitters opened is the Na+,K+-ATPase. both, basolateral transported hormones, or flows the membrane activation colonocyte is or then passively Cl− intercellular electrical neutrality. to follow ions via junctions tight maintain the absorbed a is as of junctions transepithelial osmotic the solute due the gradient to absorption. tight Water result across is This •Fig. the mode absorption of Na+ 31.5 absorptioninthecolon.ENaC,epithelialsodiumchannel. ElectrogenicNa+

to of defense in last of stool, strategic water part distal given colon. of location the the prevent in excessive line its loss bowel diarrheal patients Indeed, inflammation symptoms. diminished perhaps markedly accounting suffering show of their expression often ENaC, for from of expression can regulated Na+ whole-body be in We to response that acutely balance. ENaC also know reduced expression of ENaC of situations hormone Na+ retention . colon kidney, the in intake, Thus and the increases both in promoting aldosterone thereby Na+

and the between Adequate determined absorption is by balance of colonic water contents hydration secretion. the subject in regulation fluid to intestine, colon mechanism the by same driving is the same ion secretion small and Fluid the secretion, Cl− the (see driven is in by secretion

Fig. 30.18).

Indeed, constipation motility be constipation that agents that from transport, secretion. and cases treated some Cl− abnormally slow stimulate abnormalities by epithelial results can may reflect in of diarrhea. excessive Conversely, one can Cl− be underlying secretion mechanism

the entering a of colon the The assortment and microorganisms. with of vast remnants bacteria meal interact other birth, as fluctuates healthy predictable and matures as after rhythms. This ways ecosystem in shortly grows, enteric individuals is microbial such or the diet circadian established factors depending on child in or antibiotics to the perturbations take More provoked by an microbiota may introduction then resolve. aggressive pathogen and drastic time of can considerable be in physiology enteric to ecosystem The a GI in ways. contributes number bacterial of surprising such portion body relationship it intestine) other (and the unusual are compartments sterile. a that extent intestine maintains of the whereas organ largely to small distal lesser the an Indeed, in an microbiota, is symbiotic extensive large a with

absorptiveprocessestypicallyremainintact.Thisprovidestherationalefortheeffectivenessoforalrehydrationsolutions,whichareprepackagedmixturesofsaltandglucose.UptakeofNa+ coli)capableofelaboratingtoxinsthattriggerexcessiveincreasesinactiveCl− absorptionaredownregulatedatthesametimeCl− ),restoresfluidabsorption.Thesesolutionssavelivesinareaswherediarrheaisprevalentandtheabilitytorehydratepatientswithsterileintravenoussolutionsislimitedorabsent. andglucosefromthesesolutions,mediatedbySGLT1(see secretionbysmallandlargeintestinalepithelialcells.Diarrheacanalsoresultwhennutrientsarenotappropriatelydigestedandabsorbedinthesmallintestine(e.g.,lactoseintolerance)orasaresultofcolonicinflammation.Inmostdiarrhealdiseases,colonicNaClandNa+ Diarrhealdiseasesareamajorcauseofinfantmortalityworldwideandareusuallytheresultofinadequateaccesstocleanfoodandwater.Evenindevelopedcountries,diarrhealdiseasescausesubstantialsufferingandoccasionalwell-publicizeddeathsandcarryasubstantialeconomicburdenbecauseoftheirprevalence.Infectiousdiarrheaiscausedbyanumberoforganisms,withseveral(e.g.,choleraorpathogenicstrainsofEscherichia secretionmaybestimulated,thusfurtherworseningfluidloss.Ontheotherhand,nutrient-linkedNa+

to to life animals because apparently develop are The colonic in able essential not microbiota raised reproduce. is conditions and normally germ-free cells animals system immature, more differentiate and immune the is However, epithelial mucosal such slowly. intestinal in of provides cells. microbiota constituent reactions are Importantly capable benefits take that in that not performing metabolic do to microbes the the in host colonic the mammalian place and substrates. both Bacterial endogenous exogenous enzymes act on They uptake acids have form deconjugate in escaped ileum, so bile and reabsorbed. that can acids secondary bile be they terminal the are fiber. hydrolases, as into bilirubin (see resistant convert border nutrients pancreatic to that They salvage brush and urobilinogen and ) dietary such in provided A contributions microbiota summary metabolic of colonic the of is the

. 31.1 Table can exploited Microbial be purposes. for also pharmacological metabolism colon, conjugated only targeted in become on way is the acted it will enzymes. that to for bacterial such example, by be it after a can drug A bioavailable some equally they dietary detoxify compounds substrates. or generate dietary may carcinogens, enzymes may but from toxic Bacterial also carcinogenic

limiting both) microorganisms role a or the pathogenic critical of invasion in also Commensal growth play microorganisms. (or microbicidal, to a function. barrier number and of or by triggering mechanisms—by synthesizing the of their into by the physical different inhibit as pathogens pathogens and epithelium in growth functioning epithelial this fulfill epithelial cells, effects that that colonic expression organisms are antimicrobial counteract They attachment role on of via of prevent subsequent a competitor of and entry patterns secreting adverse that gene compounds the for who have intestinal provide antibiotics, microbiota, organisms overgrowth pathogenic These which colonic understanding systemic broad-spectrum and basis of why to patients disrupt associated susceptible mechanisms infections. and temporarily received the a are bacteria variety gastric selected ingested their shed intentionally on proteolysis disorders. They commensal to a acid also are light treat efficacy that may to for resistance probiotics, or prevent of digestive and of the

orSTa,isamajorcausativeagentoftraveler’sdiarrhea,whichcanbecontractedbyconsumptionofinfectedfoodorwater.Thistoxinbindstoareceptorontheapicalsurfaceofintestinalepithelialcellsknownasguanylyl secretionviaactivationofthecysticfibrosistransmembraneconductanceregulator(CFTR)Cl− coli, of cyclase C (GC-C).Inturnthisenzymegenerateslargequantitiesofintracellularcyclicguanosinemonophosphate(cGMP)thattriggerincreasedCl− channel.However,onecouldofcoursequestionwhyhumansexpressareceptorforthistoxininasitethatwouldbeaccessibletoluminalbacteriaandtheirproducts.Indeed,thisledtothehypothesisthatthereisanativeligandforGC-Cthatcouldplayaphysiologicalrole.Researcherssubsequentlypurifiedandidentifiedguanylin,ahormonesynthesizedintheintestine.Togetherwitharelatedmolecule,uroguanylin,secretedbythekidney,guanylinisanimportantregulatorofsaltandwaterhomeostasisinthebody.STahasstructuralsimilaritiestoguanylin,butithasmodificationsthatpermitittopersistintheintestinallumenforprolongedperiods.Thisisanexampleofmolecularmimicry,inwhichabacterialproducthijacksareceptorandassociatedsignalingforitsownpurposes(presumablytopropagatethetoxin-producingbacteriatoadditionalhosts). E. toxin Atoxinknownasheat-stable

also contribution The colonic microbiota its intestinal notable of to gas. formation is for large meals, of conjunction this via in gas the swallowed belching. may majority up Although volumes with air returns of esophagus the be generates of However, dioxide. fermentation unabsorbed dietary of hydrogen, and microbiota components, large nitrogen, the carbon volumes during individuals, the gases of is complain even of all these via flatulence. L nonodorous in 1 basis Approximately on who daily a excreted not those do anus concentrations Some individuals generate of may methane. appreciable indole, sulfide, also compounds are odorous present, Trace hydrogen skatole. amounts and such of as

is residues from The as in its by journey final expulsion stage defecation. known the ingestion in meal of the body process indigestible its a after taken the a amount remnants epithelial for and of also have [see targeted specifically ]), water. intestine, dead dead of of dying excretion the and (e.g., The that been biliary from the metabolites lining conjugates of cells the contain xenobiotics small desquamated feces bacteria, contains the if stool useful any health, nutrients. few In as or steatorrhea), The presence particularly lipid both. of maldigestion, signifies malabsorption, nutrients in stool, (known loss is of marker because sensitive Fat carbohydrate poorly stool of stool seen can if used the by protein in dysfunction colonic but small underlying the be a it condition also worsens. is intestinal the and in microbiota,

action pelvic the and of well in muscles. anus, rectum coordinated muscle as The requires process surrounding as striated floor structures such of the smooth layers as the and defecation rectum propagating contractions, material. produced with During of high-amplitude the mass the by feces fills movement fecal sphincters, tone by is from 30% of 80% the anal material 70% this and contribute controlled internal and body Expulsion anal approximately which of rest, respectively. 20% the at to external to relaxation internal via vasoactive oxide. sphincter polypeptide the of generation of of anal the causes release and Filling rectum of nitric intestinal whether distinguish which contents Relaxation of gaseous mechanism, are sampling sphincter can solid, or inner the rectal the liquid, in nature. permits the anal reflexes permit external sensory either nerve of generate in of the mucosa After appropriate (e.g., endings expulsion then anal flatus). that toilet sphincter training, rectal voluntary contents the the to activity or initiate retain prevent external stool. to sphincter of defecation If the not contracts loss convenient, the is its internal again, to the contracts external the sphincter Then the sphincter accommodates and rectum relaxes with anal anal ( new volume, time

Fig. 31.6

position feces. by and desired, sitting defecation or of a of on the the other When squatting is orientation or path surrounding intestine hand, adoption for the relative straightening alters muscular liquid the solid exit either structures of the muscle increases of angle. puborectalis Relaxation rectoanal likewise the proximal the After fecal relaxation sphincter, mass voluntary of feces the out of by move rectal the body, followed additional more the colon contractions material external sometimes movements ( of anal of from segments

Fig. ). 31.7 as assisted is abdominal muscles the contraction pressure, by of Evacuation that simultaneous increase such diaphragm. Voluntary involves relaxation hand, there that expulsion no except other flatus, of a on similar of sequence puborectalis of events, muscle. is the the the past to This be permits retaining rectoanal fecal material. angle while acute flatus squeezed

appropriate, is puborectalis activity defecation to is endings anal sensory or acutely sharply. external it anal the is distended if Cooperative with sphincter, delay the rises even rectum canal in stool required intraabdominal the and until of muscle, pressure nerve trauma, in explains of the diseases injuries, such as incontinence structures develop prolapse as rectum, This obstetrical after why of diabetes. individuals integrity in compromised, neuropathic long-standing whom such can the or or surgical such has been external exercises. condition to necessary the sphincter patients helped in with distressing the of increase incontinence, tone although biofeedback many be with abnormalities may of Surgical be intervention muscle use fecal anal correct to can

•Fig. Responsesoftheinternalandexternalanalsphincterstoprolongeddistentionoftherectum.Notethattheresponsesofthesphinctersaretransientbecauseofaccommodation. 31.6 1965;116:79.) Johns Hosp (RedrawnfromShusterMMetal.Bull Hopkins •Fig. Motilityoftherectumandanalsphinctersinresponsetorectalfillingandduringdefecation.Notethatfillingoftherectumcausesaninitialdecreaseininternalsphinctertonethatiscounterbalancedbycontractionoftheexternalsphincter.Theinternalsphincterthenaccommodatestothenewrectalvolume,therebyallowingtheexternalsphinctertorelax.Finally,defecationoccurswhentheexternalanalsphincterisrelaxedvoluntarily. 31.7 Hepatobiliary (DatafromChangEBetal.Gastrointestinal, and Physiology. Nutritional Philadelphia:Lippincott-Raven;1996.) 1.

the which is traverses colon, the the is meal and large rectum, The cecum, intestine, intestine of anus. of final the through which segment composed convenient. store role is primary digestion and and reclaim the of absorption during to defecation meal of process the the until is used of socially intestine large water to The the residues

2.

the luminal than primarily during serves contractions of the that fecal to Colonic mix large-amplitude passage and convey rectum. contents, delay other periodic motility to material

Bharucha SJR. AE, Brookes human intestinal of mechanisms motility. Neurophysiologic large LR, ed. Johnson In: of the GI Tract. Physiology 5th ed. MA: Waltham, Academic 2012. Press;

Bharucha AE, Hasler WL. colon. small intestine and the Motility of Podolsky et In: eds. DK, al., Yamada’s Textbook Gastroenterology. of ed. 6th Hoboken, Wiley Blackwell; 2015. NJ:

3.

colon and as well components colonic electrolytes highly bacteria. transporting of by water from The undigested as in products salvaged is the active meal

4.

maintains nutrients, a with a metabolizes colon from substances, pathogens. that microbial host vast and relationship lifelong with beneficial mutually ecosystem infection the protects The and endogenous drugs

5.

reflex muscle control the and and anus of structures both involves structures. involuntary surrounding voluntary relaxation that pathways these Defecation

Kau AL, al. et gut and the Human the immune microbiome system. nutrition, Nature. 2011;474:327-336.

motility. Grider colonic and Kendig JR. DM, Serotonin Motil. Neurogastroenterol 2015;27:899-905.

Ley Koren RE. A, and intestinal human microbiome. The microbiota eds. et In: al., Podolsky DK, Yamada’s of Gastroenterology. Textbook ed. 6th Wiley NJ: 2015. Blackwell; Hoboken,

1. to of be completion chapter student following able answer this questions: the should the Upon

are functions metabolic, the How that liver vital to detoxification, contribute life? and excretory does

2.

up liver’s what liver, the types arrangement, is cell supply? what unusual and portal make is the What unique blood their

3.

the role and mechanisms an is of the fluid, of enterohepatic the what what its function formation, excretory is that What bile circulation? as are underlie the

4.

gallbladder with emptying gallbladder, How meal? are is concentrated what of coordinate a mechanisms ingestion and is that and the bile in stored the

5.

bilirubin the body? are eliminated and How ammonia from

the of and Liver Overview Functions Its

that abdominal large associated of located whose gastrointestinal cavity multilobed organ is in a the system. intimately liver is with the The function serves from role The for which the lipids liver nutrients in a the processing of as critical first most also absorption diet. as play absorbed acids, secretes and in , site we of bile learned body a waste addition disposing xenobiotics be of by a critical products In for excreted. forms is can them the from liver the and variety powerhouse, that converting metabolic to of metabolic plasma the proteins. acids, and by liver glucose, as stores numerous or substances needed body, amino The produces such of whole-body of general, waste be divided (1) can contributions protein-bound/lipid-soluble In areas: detoxification, and products. the (2) to functions into excretion liver (3) key metabolism, three their and of system this chapter regulation. subserve the these as molecular as that the structural functions, discuss In biliary and well features liver we discussion the the status, reactions the all whole-body scope biochemical liver pivotal of a chapter. beyond underpinning complete to this contributes is a in the of way of maintenance Although confine to gastrointestinal relate functions physiology. primarily hepatic will discussion to that We our

the Functions Metabolic Liver of

lipids, carbohydrates, of major nutrients: metabolism and Hepatocytes proteins. to contribute the plays glucose. to in glucose role important the engaging conversion sugars of metabolism by Thus gluconeogenesis, an in liver other glucose stored is liver the into excess stores of glucose it needed. glycogen (e.g., bloodstream The period) at times as glucose postprandial then also releases and as buffer referred process glucose function as liver. This of the is the to carbohydrate; is interconversion after blood conversely, because rise in of impaired, inability contribute to ingestion carbohydrate another. seen concentrations of may an of between meals, hepatic liver When function to the metabolism excessively sugar be hypoglycemia of may to and one glucose

participate metabolism. lipid in Hepatocytes also metabolic enzymes for rich are other to supply energy fatty source They body particularly a acid of the functions. in oxidation engaged and being of also convert in cholesterol, carbohydrate cell adipose biogenesis phospholipids, the synthesize large tissue of metabolism products stored lipoproteins, latter that and to two quantities membranes. lipids of be the important in can Hepatocytes in in chapter. acids, which discussed addition, cholesterol later to hepatocytes considerable bile this more In of convert synthesized a portion detail will be

The also in protein role a vital liver plays metabolism. synthesis. that nonessential and amino diet, acids The addition so ) not carbohydrate need pathways do amino to products biosynthetic all synthesizes in liver (see deaminating in interconverting can participating supplied enter in acids the for the be to the exception plasma clotting all as albumin, liver of proteins as (especially almost With synthesizes pressure) plasma the determines oncotic of important the the well most which in the immunoglobulins, factors. present liver disorders. also develop are from hypoalbuminemia may disease edema Patients susceptible suffering bleeding to and to secondary peripheral the disposal ammonia catabolism. generated critical Finally, the the for liver from is of site protein urea, ammonia is accomplished converting which This is by to •Fig. 32.1 Typicalbloodflowthroughthesplanchniccirculationinafastingadulthuman.

by the excreted kidneys. this process later chapter. discussed The of will in this details be

Liver and Detoxification The

substances by disposal, bloodstream, produced limiting the converting them can toxic forms metabolic by liver entry and The into body to of products extracting and chemical as serves the potentially elsewhere toxic be a gatekeeper, a excreted. both that in as garbage part fulfills its liver unusual The these supply. functions blood because of in other liver Unlike via supplied intestine the nature portal arriving all venous majority the the vein at organs, from is in the ( and of blood is

Fig. ). 32.1 located harmful potentially to absorbed is liver nutrients As and receive strategically drugs the and as toxins. bacterial such absorbed such, molecules both by may little which systemic metabolism, or to and extracted circulation. into make none absorbed on the of hepatocytes efficiency are subjected the the molecules Depending these it substance first-pass with pharmaceutical the administered orally. is bloodstream a This not in all why achieve major can therapeutic reason concentrations agents if

Functions Transport the and 32 CHAPTER of Metabolic Liver

levels which liver and portal two metabolizes/detoxifies from originating The substances circulation. it has removes the at The first is of these physical. Kupffer percolates in macrophage the among of liver arriving known as Blood cells. the lineage, cells phagocytic may removing normal under including particulate enter from even cells important from blood colon These blood, that particularly and material portal conditions. in bacteria are the second The is of level defense biochemical. endowed array broad in of so a enzymes more susceptible the toxins by reuptake Hepatocytes modify intestine. general water are with products less endogenous soluble that the and and both are exogenous to involved two metabolic are into divided The broadly classes. reactions Phase sulfate, with followed glutathione) cytochrome reactions II acids, and acid, resulting catalyzed to are other by (oxidation, excretion. another hydroxylation, P450 promote molecule their reactions by conjugate (e.g., enzymes) that amino glucuronic products phase the reactions I bile by to kidneys. be then are reactions the into or to returned excreted the ultimately excreted products bloodstream The of these to in some key will of chapter. the precise later in mechanisms metabolic We detoxification waste involved products this return

Role Excretion of the in Liver

kidneys of discussed play water-soluble excretion in section. renal as The catabolites, in an the role important excreted glomerular relatively Only be by filtration. the small process of water-soluble can catabolites proteins, water-soluble metals, to metabolites the and larger filtered hormones, lipophilic catabolites cannot bound be However, by glomerulus. and xenobiotics, heavy steroid plasma molecules and including harmful must excretion. to accumulate, All exist if a their these are mechanism substances allowed for so potentially bile. excretes liver, mechanism substances involves these The the which in up these basolateral with high the transporters, are take Hepatocytes an the substances at and level metabolized in of substances array affinity microsomes cytosol and the of ( by virtue membrane of subsequently

). 32.1 Table bile for substances different via array Ultimately, membrane of are a canalicular in hepatocytes of destined excretion exported across the transporters. body can lipophilic of the ultimately The then and leave solubilization be excreted feces. bile substances, allow into even the in of intestine which features

of System Liver Biliary the Structural and Features

blood ( major that circulate liver, of cell in anastomosing cords which large are volumes plates the form type arranged around Hepatocytes, in the

Fig. 32.2 ). hepatocytes its The that receive O2 receives to that blood both flow of a quantities and high disproportionate mass, liver high ensures which nutrients. is receive of more •Fig. 70% than their Hepatocytes 32.2 Diagrammaticrepresentationofahepaticlobule.Platesofhepatocytesarearrayedradiallyaroundacentralvein.Branchesoftheportalveinandhepaticarteryarelocatedontheperipheryofthelobuleandformthe“portaltriad”togetherwiththebileduct.Bloodfromtheportalveinandhepaticarterypercolatesaroundthehepatocytesviathesinusoidsbeforedrainingintothecentralvein. of (ModifiedfromBloomW,FawcettDW.A Histology. Textbook 10thed.Philadelphia:Saunders;1975.) portal the to supply via more (rising postprandial blood period). rest 90% in at vein than the

which of portal series are hepatic are hepatocytes cavities sinusoids, constitute both by the The parenchyma liver branches plates a supplied supplied low-resistance vein that by of artery. and of the The perfuse the sinusoids are capillaries organs. other unlike that blood the During during flow are portal as period a be but meal absorbed liver. nutrients the gradually collapsed, fasting, increases sinusoids many after when are more recruited transported to can of increase cavities can liver the The blood the •Fig. without flow considerably through low that means sinusoidal resistance Interrelationshipsofthemajorcelltypesintheliver. 32.3

concomitant increase in a pressure. into the central branches Eventually of drains blood vein. the hepatic

( the unusual that terms also cells endothelial are walls their line The in sinusoids of

Fig. 32.3 ). specialized permit as albumin. of known endothelial are as passage enough cells fenestrations as molecules contain openings Hepatic large that big to might basement lack a otherwise diffusion pose cells a also Sinusoidal which endothelial barrier. membrane, albumin-bound that hepatocytes up. These access eventually substances allow take will features them the of to Kupffer sinusoids contain cells. The also endothelium poses large layer to the resistance loose Disse, as little is albumin. likewise health of the of from separating the molecules the tissue in which as a hepatocytes even called of space thin connective the and Beneath endothelium movement sinusoidal The cell. space stellate another Disse is type, of location cell important hepatic also the of the the retinoids cells for and addition storage growth Stellate sites in are hepatocytes. factors for key of serve source as

contributes stellate which the to abnormal synthesize quantities dysfunction. large activated collagen, Under cells hepatic to conditions, are of

Ifthecirculationoftheliver(particularlyitssinusoids)iscompressedbyfibrosis,theliverlosesitsabilitytoaccommodatetheincreasesinbloodflowthatoccurafteramealwithoutaconcomitantincreaseinpressure.Becauseofthefenestrations,albuminescapesfromthecirculationandalbumin-richfluidweepsfromthesurfaceoftheliverintotheabdominalcavity,whereitoverwhelmsthelymphaticdrainage.Thisconditionisknownasascites andisreflectedinaconsiderableincreaseinthegirthofmanypatientswithliverdisease.Aspressureintheliverbuilds,newcollateralbloodvesselsforminanattempttocircumventtheobstructionandreducetheportalhypertension.Someofthesevesselsaredirectedtoabdominalstructuresand,becauseoftheirthinweakwalls,arepronetorupture.Aparticularexampleisformationofhigh-pressurecollateralstotheesophagus,whichcanthenbecomevaricesthatbleedintothelumen.Bleedingintotheesophageallumenisveryhardtocontrolandisthusamedicalemergency.Evenintheabsenceofbleeding,moreover,theformationofcollateralbloodvesselsbypassestheremainingmetaboliccapacityoftheliver,andlevelsoftoxinssuchasammoniaareincreasedandcanexertadverseeffectselsewhereinthebody.

Infectionoftheliverwithcertainvirusesoroverexposuretotoxicsubstancessuchasalcoholkillshepatocytesandactivateshepaticstellatecells,whichsynthesizeexcessiveamountsofcollagenthatresultinthehistologicappearanceoffibrosis.Iftheinsultischronic,thefibrosiseventuallybecomesirreversible,aconditionknownascirrhosis. Thefibroticscarredareascrowdoutthehepatocytemass,therebyreducingthesynthetic,metabolic,andexcretorycapacityoftheliver.Fibroticmassespressonthesinusoidsandpreventthemfromexpandingasportalbloodflowtotheliverincreasesduringthepostprandialperiod.Edemamaydevelopinpatientswithchronicliverinjuryasaresultofreducedlevelsofalbumininblood,andascitesmaythendevelop,inwhichfluidaccumulatesintheperitonealcavitysecondarytoincreasedportalpressure.Eventually,accumulationoftoxicsubstancesinthebloodstreamcanleadtojaundice,itching,andneurologicalcomplications.Ifhepaticfunctionbecomescompromisedbeyondacertainlevel,theonlyeffectivetreatmentislivertransplantation.

for are point the origination system. biliary also the Hepatocytes tract. seen as that arrangement Although differs from to be membranes, in cells cell that epithelium, domains such with the spatial considered the columnar and epithelial of simple lining are these basolateral apical gastrointestinal two hepatocytes fraction the each and form apical a only cells the small (see canaliculus channel membrane, to as cell Rather, liver the apical between the a of in the of known the adjacent oppose other the surface occupies membranes of hepatocyte cells

Fig. ). 32.3 The cells drain are liver, columnar canaliculi drain to cholangiocytes. is that of by canaliculi lined biliary and the from into classic ductules bile known as these epithelial role the left of and into from bile the hepatic large ducts coalesce ducts that the Ultimately biliary liver. into ductules to permit drain exit right bile can which form from (via These common hepatic gallbladder duct; common (via the intestine in the or either into the flow the the duct) turn duct, bile bile cystic

Fig. on basis relationships. ) 32.4 prevailing pressure the of

liver other because of clinical its One emphasis the significance. structural of feature the organization bears of Branches hepatic ducts and of hepatic the run artery, in bile triad. parallel vein, in hepatic so-called the of Hepatocytes greatest this referred the closest are to have supply zone lying nutrients. oxygen and triad and or 1, periportal, as to the closest contrast, or as of branches zone lying vein hepatocytes referred are In pericentral, to 3. hepatic to the injury. cells sensitive more sensitive former latter more are are ischemia, whereas The to to oxidative location of of the liver provide may the case of injury. to damaged given Thus cause on cells biopsy a clues but in •Fig. cells circumstances, normal most in detoxification are 1 active functions Zone of Sphincter zones liver Cystic duct liver from hepatic 2 can and Common in Functionalanatomyofthebiliarysystem.Right and cells and between ducts hepatic Gallbladder 1 Duodenum progressively Oddi duct duct of 32.4 zone cases 3) bile zone Common 3 (intermediate left disease. be recruited thought Conversely, bile active in synthesis. 3 to acid most zone are cells be

excretory the lipid liver the plays important digestion. an role is of Bile in fluid that apical bile across actively hepatocytes, transport formation their in canaliculi membranes. solutes Bile which begins into an acids, is solution which in the major cholesterol approximate of are and respectively. 10:3:1, bile micellar in solutes a ratio phosphatidylcholine, Bile water bile. of that these canalicular electrolytes of form drives adjacent to concomitant solutes and hepatocytes tight link movement Secretion junctions across the driven bile adenosine is the triphosphatase transporter (ATPase) by via an hepatocytes acids pump the membrane of secretion The apical as bile flow see bile majority known of export (BSEP; across the salt of

Table 32.1 ). the further fluid the can in further in on bile). be (gallbladder flows of as modified The bile) gallbladder through (resulting it composition resulting and the still storage biliary ductules hepatic at concentrated lipids rate the solution to of Ultimately of intestinal absorptive thereby lipid solubilization biological a aids of in of the the bile surface. which that lumen, the environment aqueous digestion the products becomes detergents in enhancing epithelial are transferred medium as metabolic a waste products the It from exported also which serves body. are in

(PFICII)hasbeenmappedtoamutationinBSEP Thoughrare,avarietyoffamilialsyndromesthataremanifestedasprogressivecholestasishavetaughtusagreatdealaboutthemolecularnatureofthetransportersthatdeliverbileconstituentsintothecanaliculus.Forexample, resistance protein thatresultsinanalmosttotalabsenceofbileacidsinbile.Cholestasisdevelopsinpatientswiththisdisorder,buttheyhaverelativelylittleifanyevidenceofbileductinjury.TypeIIIPFIContheotherhandisamuchmoreaggressivediseaseinwhichcholestasisisaccompaniedbyearlyincreasesincirculatingγ-glutamyltranspeptidase.Themolecularculpritisamutationthatabolishesexpressionofmultidrug (MDR3).Intheabsenceofthistransporter,phosphatidylcholineisnolongerabletoenterbile,thusillustratingtheimportanceofthislipidinprotectingcholangiocytesfromtheinjuriouseffectsofbileacids,becausemixedmicellescannotforminitsabsence. 3

acids of produced hepatocytes end are products cholesterol metabolism. as by Bile selectively that of by is result formation a Cholesterol ( acid enzymes in series bile metabolized of

Fig. ). 32.5 position initial a group 7α-hydroxylase. of 7 and to step the enzyme steroid is the cholesterol rate-limiting of hydroxyl addition the by nucleus The the chain reaction product shortened side and carboxylic acid C27 bile a dihydroxy then added of this yield chenodeoxycholic to is dehydroxylase function of acid. acid, a by The is acted position the and trihydroxy 12 dehydroxylase acid. yield further cholic product by Alternatively C27 the on then to a acid, bile hydroxylated at up-or depending synthesis the can be requirements on body’s acid Bile (Fig. downregulated

32.6 ). be up reduced to levels to the if are liver, the in 10-fold. acid increased For flowing can bile blood example, synthesis suppresses bile of new profoundly feeding synthesis acids Conversely, bile acids hepatocytes. of by involved. these underlying in enzymes of to changes synthesis The expression mechanisms in relate acid bile the changes activate factors that to ultimately nuclear of transcription Bile variety activation regulate hepatocytes, in and cell specific leading acids surface of enzyme abundance. receptors a

bile Chenodeoxycholic the are acid acid synthesized primary cholic are by hepatocyte they defined because as and (see acids

Fig. ). 32.5 enzymes acid, be yield in and However, respectively. by colonic lumen the to can ursodeoxycholic deoxycholic bacterial metabolized each lithocholic is enzymes converted Chenodeoxycholic to bacterial form relatively acid, by also which acid cytotoxic. is as bile bacterial three to of these secondary products acids. metabolism referred are Collectively secondary hepatocyte biochemical important occurs modification the additional One and bile acids for in (see primary both

Fig.

). 32.5 pKa. conjugated are molecules These or their glycine which significantly depresses taurine, either with the is totally small almost and acids pH prevailing conjugated bile thus The result lumen cell the are intestinal that in passively cannot traverse at ionized membranes. apical conjugated bile in absorbed the lumen the ileum salt acids via intestinal Consequently sodium-dependent are transporter retained are (asbt). the the terminal in until actively bile they passively are no are this forms charged. they resulting are by and in epithelium unconjugated Conjugated reabsorbed bacterial that enzymes step the acids across colonic colon, uptake longer the the because bile deconjugated escape

Circulation Bile Aspects Acids Hepatic Enterohepatic of of

rather solubilize and by required in lipids. digestion all is enzymes, than assist absorption Bile acting lipids a acids of of to detergents these molecules dietary thus significant mass and as up taken circulation, portal they or back be where by the basolateral actively transporters enterohepatic efficiently that independent to acids travel (see reabsorbed conjugated through the the blood may are hepatocyte, bile Via dependent Na+

32.1 ). Table hepatocyte, return be colon they bile also acids secreted where are the Similarly, are in bile. to that reconjugated deconjugated into the to In circulating secondary of primary and pool this way a

of (bacteria) dehydroxylase acid SO2O–HN Secondary 7˜-Hydroxylase pKa˜3.7 HO O HO C Cholic Liver CH2CH2 COOH OH OH COOH OH O OH acids (12˜-hydroxylase) Deoxycholic COOH OH HO CH2N acid COOH Glycine, C bile Primary C27 Taurine, HO OH acids acid Conjugation Major Colon O–H 12 HO Lithocholic HO COOH acid 3 Ursodeoxycholic •Fig. OH OH bile pKa˜1.5 Cholesterol HO H H 7 or Chenodeoxycholic acid Structuresofthemajorprimaryandsecondarybileacidsofbile.Primarybileacidsaresynthesizedintheliver.Secondarybileacidsareproducedwhenintestinalbacteriaactonprimarybileacids.Atthebottomofthefiguretheconjugationofcholicacidwithglycineortaurineisshown. 32.5

lost 200–400 only uptake synthesis ( produced, equal and and or is then fraction mg) the (≈10%/day, minor acids daily to that in bile stool is is escapes

Fig. 32.7 ). the with hepatocyte to is taurine. than sulfated this is only rule in being rather which conjugated exception acid, or preferentially glycine The lithocholic body of not toxic after sulfate asbt, the because conjugates from are a are potentially they for majority The the each accumulation of molecule. thereby meal substrates avoiding lost

bile in cholesterol should be comment homeostasis. whole-body also made to role acids the respect Some of with occur derived its body health the daily The minor as via as body, dietary can loss from relatively uptake, reflects component in balanced which against only cholesterol synthesis ( pool in of well from bile inefficient the the

Fig. ). 32.8 excreted forms, two as native Cholesterol its either molecule or bile after conversion can to the be in acids. The of recycling. the day cholesterol for account per latter to despite a excreted up enterohepatic third one then body bile treating in circulation enterohepatic the interrupt of strategy bile increased acids, which acids; hypercholesterolemia conversion to of for lost are cholesterol acids drives feces. to the from bile Thus is the

bile cholesterol noted and earlier, contains phosphatidylcholine. As also (see a transporters epithelial namely, in in as of and part the least cells, Cholesterol active ABC transport ). the is 32.1 the of mediated by across discussed membrane intestinal participating in at G5 G8 ABC from cholesterol we small efflux heterodimer canalicular the and membrane the is from inner resistance 3 ABC derives “flipped” another called (MDR3). of leaflet specifically Phosphatidylcholine by the family membrane across the transporter protein multidrug canalicular 5.0 Furthermore,

0.25 30 cholesterol As 0.75 Cholesterol 0.0 bile health, intestinal (g/day) input of 1.25 absorption To Hepatic acids •Fig. and Limit extra-hepatic Diet = 0.5 0.5 In As synthesis bile output 1.0 0.5 32.6 Relationshipbetweenratesofbileacidsynthesisandsecretion.Thebileacidsecretionratenormallyaverages30g/24h,whereasthesynthesisrateaverages0.5g/24h.Thepairsofverticalandhorizontaldottedlinesdepictthenormalrangeforbileacidsecretionandsynthesis,respectively.Increasedsecretion(simulatedbybileacidfeeding)increasestherateofreturnofbileacidstotheliverviaportalblood,whichexertsanegativefeedbackonsynthesis.Conversely,interruptionoftheenterohepaticcirculation,suchasafterilealresection,canincreasesynthesistovaluesmorethan10-foldhigherthannormal.(FromCareyMC,CahalaneMJ.In:AriasIMetal. [eds].The Liver: and Pathobiology. Biology 2nded.NewYork:RavenPress;1988.) •Fig. 32.8 Dailycholesterolbalanceinhealthyadulthumans.

•Fig. Pathwaysforentryofsolutesintobile. 32.9 Physiology. (ModifiedfromBarrettKE.Gastrointestinal NewYork:McGraw-Hill;2006.) tight adjacent urea) link the phosphatidylcholine, well relatively and that concentrations as and •Fig. bile essentially mixed approximating junctions the lumen, as (e.g., of water hepatocytes plasma acids, active other is because glutathione, osmotically amino drawn into acids, are canalicular are solutes leaky, composed at micelles cholesterol glucose, Ca++, theenterohepaticcirculation.Therelativeamountsareindicatedbythe widthofthegreenlines.Thusthefigureillustratesthatthemajorityof 32.7 thebileacidpoolcirculatesbetweentheliver,gallbladder,andsmall Relativeamountsofbileacidsindifferentbodypoolsand

Fig. 32.9 ). bile apical a secreted the hepatocyte. additional soluble, are conjugated water across into organic and and intestine,ratherthanbeinginthesystemiccirculation.membrane the variety of Finally, xenobiotics of bilirubin, which is

•Fig. 32.10 Themajortransportprocessesofcholangiocytesthatsecreteanalkaline-richfluidandreclaimusefulsubstances.AQP,aquaporin;CFTR,cysticfibrosistransmembraneconductanceregulator;GGT,γ-glutamyltranspeptidase;NKCC1,sodium/potassium/2chloridecotransporter1;NBC,sodium/bicarbonatecotransporter;NHE1,sodium/hydrogenexchanger1,SGLT-1,sodium-glucosecotransporter1;GLUT1,glucosetransporter1.

bile modify specifically biliary composition lining cholangiocytes designed The ( are ductules of to the the

Fig. ). 32.10 activity of amino acids) Useful specific the glucose, by solutes (e.g., are transporters. reclaimed Ca++ precipitation Chloride exchanged , − bile alkaline in ions for rendering of slightly of are bile also risk . the the reducing and HCO3 constituent and its (GGT), the amino transpeptidase acids reabsorbed. γ-glutamyl the products the is surface on are into by down Glutathione enzyme of broken cholangiocytes and increase a with in HCO3 apical of the Bile secretin stimulate of aquaporin to water diluted insertion site, such is concert hormones secretion ingestion into meal, membrane. as response − in this that at channels also cholangiocyte’s of Flow the are is lipid. assimilation increased in when postprandial of bile period thereby aid acids to bile needed during

Role Gallbladder of the

the ducts and intestine. Finally, toward enters is conveyed the bile bile redirected sphincter is the meals, gallbladder. However, of Oddi, of by in is constriction to the period thus between and outflow blocked the with cells. high-resistance The epithelial lined a muscular sac is gallbladder concentrated because as across the (Fig. bile becomes the acids, in bile epithelial storage, are exchange are protons, actively for anions, absorbed gallbladder and During large gallbladder ions tight exit sodium major too junctions to

). 32.11 However, •Fig. bile rise acids concentration 10-fold, can than of isotonic because a the although bile more remains 32.11 Mechanismsaccountingforconcentrationofbileduringstorageinthegallbladder.NHE,sodium/hydrogenexchanger;BA−,bileacidanion;AQP1,aquaporin1.

as acts only single osmotically active micelle particle. one mixed additional result bile micelles. are concentration Any as incorporated become acid into that thus existing a monomers available immediately of the cholesterol This risk also some bile. reduces extent from will that precipitate to with cholesterol many is proteins. antinucleating being adults, the of normally However, inhibited the by supersaturated precipitation of presence in bile perhaps disease can of making Prolonged humans. never the storage gallstone a for that case chance thus in relatively occur, bile is prevalent explaining and skipping breakfast increases why good nucleation

Humansareunusuallysusceptibletogallstones, whichrepresentprecipitatedbileconstituentsthataccumulateinthegallbladderorelsewhereinthebiliarytree.GallstonesarecomposedpredominantlyofcholesterolorCa++ bilirubinate(cholesterolvs.pigmentstones,respectively).Theirsignificanceliesintheirpropensitytoobstructbiliaryflowandtherebyresultinpain,poortoleranceoflargefattymeals,retentionofbiliaryconstituents,and(ifleftuntreated)liverinjury.Insusceptibleindividuals,mechanismsthatnormallypreventnucleationofsaturatedbileareeitherdefectiveorovercome,andsmallcrystalsformandcangrowintogallstones.Humanbileisoftensupersaturatedintermsofitscholesterolcontent,thusincreasingtheriskforstoneformation,particularlyduringprolongedfasting.Cholesterolgallstonesareespeciallycommoninmiddle-agedwomenwhoareobese,particularlythosewhohavebornechildren.Thisincreasedprevalenceisapparentlydueatleastinparttotheabilityofestrogentoincreasehepaticcholesterolsecretion.Inseverecasesofgallstonediseasethegallbladdermayberemovedsurgically,whichisusuallyaccomplishedlaparoscopically.SmallgallstonesthathavelodgedinthebiliarytreecansometimesberetrievedendoscopicallybyinsertingasmallsnarethroughthesphincterofOddifromanendoscope.

simultaneously to of that and muscle from smooth the encircles signals relax sphincter gallbladder in Oddi contract the the gallbladder is Bile response epithelium that ( the secreted

Fig. 32.12 ). critical response is mediator A of this cholecystokinin. contractility. pathways, stimulated vagal to bind contribute neural the are some themselves of and ability to also reflexes of cholecystokinin In which to afferents, gallbladder intrinsic addition, by vagal lipid lumen, duodenal result micelles the can ejection of where net into concentrated of aid constituent The mixed is the bile uptake. in a bolus are cycle the reenter when circulation the needed, longer acids no to begin bile reclaimed enterohepatic again. the Then, and of providing bile their in thus from components However, the lost stool, largely the body. for are other excretion

Bilirubin by Liver and Excretion Formation the

liver is potentially the body. important metabolite The that heme for of toxic also bilirubin, to is a is excretion of which excess Bilirubin cells. an red way released hemoglobin also serves and antioxidant a eliminate the of senescent the as is to blood heme from liver. cells muscle of for the heme-containing bilirubin blood additional such red skeletal 80% from account coming in production, as remainder and Indeed, proteins the other with tissues Bilirubin the barrier can in and, if blood-brain •Fig. present cross excessive results levels, Neurohumoralcontrolofgallbladdercontractionandbiliarysecretion.ThepathwayalsoinvolvesrelaxationofthesphincterofOdditopermitoutflowofbileintotheduodenum.ACh,acetylcholine;CCK,cholecystokinin;NO,nitricoxide;VIP,vasoactiveintestinalpolypeptide. 32.12

dysfunction activation and and fatal if in the neuronal it can untreated. death brain be of astrocytes secondary cell left microglia; to fact a notable metabolites they are urine. also the bile, and to feces, provide extent for lesser its and that Bilirubin color to or the the conjunctiva. accumulates circulation the in is as a bilirubin token, disease, it of By common and jaundice, skin of same yellowing liver for of the responsible when symptom result

takes of ( Bilirubin including by place is spleen heme a in system, from and phagocytic cells reaction Kupffer in cells the synthesized cells the that reticuloendothelial two-stage

Fig. 32.13 ). pigment present is produces The biliverdin. oxygenase these the liberates in heme iron heme green that molecule the cells enzyme and from yellow bilirubin. can This turn to form in reduced be through transported at in to pH, aqueous albumin. solutions bloodstream is is insoluble essentially bilirubin the bound it Because neutral Disse, hepatocytes transporter the up of membrane the basolateral enters of an space where the bilirubin taken across this is selectively via (see When reaches it OATP complex liver,

Table ). 32.1 bilirubin with aqueous solubility. one enhance acid compartment, In of two the glucuronic its or conjugated is to then microsomal molecules glucuronyl catalyzed (UGT). is The transferase reaction by UDP common explains after mild enzyme which slowly This jaundice is •Fig. only synthesized why relatively birth, is in 32.13 Conversionofhemetobilirubin.Thereactionsinsidethedashedboxoccurincellsofthereticuloendothelialsystem.NADP+,oxidizedformofnicotinamideadeninedinucleotidephosphate;NADPH,reducedformofnicotinamideadeninedinucleotidephosphate.

newborn infants. into resistance–associated The multidrug canalicular located the conjugates bilirubin by are protein a membrane. (MRP2) in then secreted bile be from of thereby they bilirubin the Notably intestine, conjugated ensuring can cannot reabsorbed be the excreted. forms transport indeed some bilirubin the normal inefficient, under conditions. initial so present (and even However, is conjugated from its relatively of across hepatocyte unconjugated uptake bilirubin is plasma in and bloodstream) the bound and the thus albumin, more circulate the but bound is form enter urine. can conjugated Both to loosely

and bacterial the conjugates by stercobilins, is In urobilinogen, which which the excreted. urobilins is colon, liberated enzymes, by are bacteria and are reabsorbed, deconjugated whereupon bilirubin bilirubin metabolized to yield to reconjugated, excreted. and turn be the in another taken Absorbed yet be by can thus molecule urobilinogen up giving chance hepatocytes

Measurement well plasma, disease. of in it the is assessment as of evaluation whether unconjugated conjugated, liver or bilirubin in tool is an as of important the in Rhesus-incompatible bound bilirubin, albumin fully oversupply mechanism essentially overwhelms The presence conjugation sudden as which delay of of heme newborns). transfusion (or of temporary cannot in reactions in reflects a be UGT infants) in is urine, that and maturation (such normal unconjugated either excreted a or its loss in occurs or which a of the is coloration. imparts to dark urine, the other it in hand characterized bilirubinemia presence by Conjugated on bilirubin This the due that in to be secretion transporter flow it canaliculus, of defects indicative bilirubin of into blockage mediates is may the to glucuronide/diglucuronide perhaps or bile, genetic the

Functions Transport obstructing of gallstone. caused by an Metabolic Liver and 32 the CHAPTER excretion. cases, with formed in are for into urinary bilirubin the but liver, both exit of they regurgitate means back plasma conjugates no In

syndrome Crigler-Najjar isaconditionassociatedwithmutationsinthehepatocyteenzymeUGT.IntypeICrigler-Najjarsyndrome,acongenitalmissensemutationresultsincompletelackofthisenzyme,whereaspatientswithtypeIICrigler-NajjarsyndromehaveamildermutationthatreducesUGTlevelstoabout10%ofthoseseeninnormalindividuals.Thuswithvaryingdegreesofseverity,Crigler-Najjarsyndromeimpairstheabilityofhepatocytestoconjugatebilirubin.Theunconjugatedbilirubinregurgitatesbackintothecirculationandbindstoalbumin,withanassociatedriskofneurologicalinjuryiflevelsriseprecipitously.TheonlyeffectivetreatmentoftypeICrigler-Najjarsyndromeatpresentislivertransplantation,althoughgenetherapymaybeapromisingoptioninthenearfuture.ThosewithtypeIIdiseasecansometimesbemanagedeffectivelywithbluelight.Thisconvertscirculatingunconjugatedbilirubintoformsthataremorewatersolubleandthuslessfirmlyboundtoalbumin,whichcanbeexcretedinurine.

Handling Liver by the Ammonia

neutral permeant. membrane catabolism metabolite arises from Ammonia activity is protein and is a that bacterial and highly (NH3) small accumulation system. nervous because is important prevention the is a bilirubin, the liver is central ammonia contributor critical ammonia to of in toxic like to The which circulation, of series urea to Krebs-Henseleit, or from (Fig. eliminates urea, ammonia the body a cycle The the via enzymatic as by reactions it converting known liver 32.14 ). can liver to that in is tissue The only the body ammonia convert the urea.

from is major Ammonia derived sources. two the Approximately colon produced bacterial is 50% by in ureases. allows therefore of ion which the slightly be is to ammonia stool. ammonium the epithelium +), it excreted in lumen Because this normally acidic, some impermeant converted the (NH4 colonic is to it to colonic and renders liver the the portal the the and circulation. is colonic passively ammonia to crosses the transported of via However, epithelium generated remainder The source of (see kidney is ). other the ammonia major (≈40%) red glutamine cells, deamination processes muscle metabolic derived from (≈10%) from of and in of in senescent amino cells. is amount liver, blood release the A ammonia acids by small of via

The ammonia a is in for “mass handling balance” healthy presented in adult

Fig. 32.15 . just some ammonia, aquaporins. without is the ammonia membranes certain benefit specific that of transporter, neutral although As transport including crosses a noted, a readily small cell molecule membrane proteins circulation systemic extracted the properties of it portal transport, •Fig. ammonia Whatever the ensure efficiently physicochemical mechanism and for from is that 32.14 Theureacycle.ADP,adenosinediphosphate;ATP,adenosinetriphosphate.

can compromised the is metabolic the rapidly death If coma of acutely, liver and ensue. capacity toxins chronic a cannot as condition and ammonia cleared function a other may reflects of both hepatic decline by liver, the be action that liver in that gradual In patients mental known encephalopathy. the disease, in experience in a with dementia, evidence these untreated. of coma progression, fatal and significant liver symptoms prove left of and can disease if Development is patient eventually confusion,

of Assessment Clinical Function Liver

tests function importance for the of homeostasis, Given the liver liver of clinical diagnosis. a of mainstay are and several bile evaluate excretion or whether have been dysfunctional, whether have injured whether been (2) dysfunctional. been (1) are Such cholangiocytes are hepatocytes assess has (3) injured to have interrupted, to to determine tests goals: or also therapy to used responses to tests are monitor function trans or Liver liver reactions after •Fig. rejection 32.15 Ammoniahomeostasisinhealth. (RedrawnfromBarrettKE.Gastrointestinal Physiology. NewYork:McGraw-Hill;2006.) (see where be hepatocytes, enters urea urea the by to then converted to it cycle

Fig. systemic back and subsequently circulation. the ) is transported 32.14 into is filtered kidney that small tubules urine and that glomerulus, excreted in 50% a at it is by readily of filtered Urea is (see the the is molecule such urea reabsorbed ). the approximately neutral ammonia or excreted. being Urea either reabsorbed the excreted or resulting metabolized enters the that colon colonic to ammonia via bacteria, is with

plantation. However, tests not all such measure directly. function liver to Nevertheless, their tests are of because physiology. briefly discussed hepatic function link

rely on Tests markers that injury type. this cell hepatocyte specific for for are include they are release aminotransferase hepatocytes (ALT) and When aminotransferase enzymes killed that example, responses by or to aspartate inflammation for (AST). alanine infection, necrotic released are be interconvert are tissues, amino including and serum to hepatocyte to heart. the indicate easily essential may acids, injury enzymes, also measured other after These although AST injury, in which system. of other the are to biliary injury Two tests markers to Alkaline elevations in bile canalicular enzyme this of phosphatase obstruction plasma membrane, suggest the expressed is localized flow. and in cholangiocytes. increased is Similarly, are there of seen when GGT to damage levels

Measurement liver in provides into in insight of circulation bilirubin also the function. urine or any be products can of liver characteristic diagnose of to addition, measurement of disease. other the liver secreted used the In and tests parameter, the measurements albumin most a clotting prothrombin blood time. the serum of common Clinically are considered aspects results when these If together the of are liver a clinical of picture, other of abnormal, tests with diagnosis

CHAPTER Transport of and the established. disease Metabolic Liver may Functions be 32 glucose monitored Blood frequently levels liver chronic are and ammonia with in patients disease. disease. biopsy obtained are parenchyma, important also usually monitoring of examination suspected imaging of tests liver percutaneously, and or proven liver histological Finally, with evaluating patients and specimens in

1.

unwanted synthesis; substances; that lipid, bloodstream carbohydrate, Vital and soluble in the detoxification lipid of functions excretion to circulating albumin. include carried are the and and metabolism bound liver of substances of and protein of also majority plasma including the liver proteins, synthesizes albumin. The

2.

function Liver anatomy, cell and types of on its blood hepatocytes), arrangement the depends its its unique supply. (especially constituent unusual

3.

Substances excreted in are liver bile. the from are Bile is bile which of driven presence flow by the acids,

AP. Feranchak cholestasis. and Bile secretion et DK, eds. In: al., Podolsky Textbook Gastroenterology. of Yamada’s ed. 6th Blackwell; Wiley 2015. Hoboken, NJ:

Kanel GC. anatomy, and Liver: structure, types. cell microscopic et eds. DK, Podolsky al., In: Gastroenterology. of Yamada’s Textbook ed. 6th Hoboken, Blackwell; NJ: Wiley 2015.

are by amphipathic hepatocytes. end of that cholesterol products metabolism produced metabolites the of (e.g., between and are the in form Bile acids circulate to in water-insoluble liver carried conserve mass, micelles. bile their and intestine cholesterol) mixed

4.

meals, the signals hormonal between neural sphincter when it gallbladder simultaneously is Oddi. where is contract concentrated the Bile gallbladder of and stored relax released and and the in

5.

allowed to would The if certain disposing be and toxic bilirubin critical of in is ammonia. bloodstream, for the substances liver that accumulate including

Parekh PJ, LA. Balart pathogenesis encephalopathy. in hepatic its the of Ammonia and role Liver Dis. Clin 2015;19:529-537.

Wolkoff AW. anion uptake hepatocytes. by Organic Compr Physiol. 2014;4:1715-1735.

al. Wu T, et enteroendocrine and Gut secretion. motility Opin Pharmacol. Curr 2013;13:928-934.

A. AND KOEPPEN Renal M. System SECTION STANTON 7The BRUCE BRUCE

Calcium, Potassium, 36 Phosphate Chapter Homeostasis and

Function Renal of Elements

Transport Along Solute Function Chapter 34 and Tubular Water the Nephron:

Volume of 35 Control Body and Chapter Fluid Osmolality

the of Role Kidneys in Regulation Chapter the Balance 37 Acid-Base of

student chapter Upon this able the the of questions: answer to following should 1. be completion

are filtration proteins? the to plasma in Which barriers glomerulus structures

2.

significance apparatus? physiological the What is the of juxtaglomerular

3.

vessels the supply What kidneys? blood

4.

kidneys? innervate nerves What the

5.

the what their What anatomical are the is of kidneys, gross location features? and

6.

nephron, cortex What and and of are locations within is what the their medulla? parts the the different

7.

of components and What the are types the the cell major component? in each are located glomerulus, what

8.

the How to of measure rate can (GFR)? glomerular filtration balance mass the used concepts be

9.

and clearance clearance inulin can be used Why creatinine GFR? measure to

10.

concentration clinically is used Why creatinine plasma GFR? monitor to

11.

the do glomerular filtration elements and barrier, What how space? Bowman’s they determine protein are of enters much how

12.

in each of forces GFR? ultrafiltrate, involved Starling glomerular the affect are how and What changes do in force formation

13.

autoregulation? GFR, are and renal What is responsible which factors hormones of autoregulation blood and for flow and

14.

flow? blood Which hormones renal regulate

15.

flow autoregulation? renal hormones despite influence Why do blood

Renal Function of Overview

one which a that to stimuli in endowed organism; with power the kidney direction, survival appropriate highest idea in of power component of is various parts its the degree the must the almost phenomenon of a sensibility, gives for reacting be of intelligence. the adaptation the The which presents

E. STARLING—1909

is and independent Certainly, integrity sine mental life. the qua a of free non even and tasks, the internal suffer composition let environment to fulfill short let kidneys mental or their our our our for personality of a But is change, integrity, fail time destroyed.

W. SMITH—1939 HOMER

kidneys excretory Smith and rather more organs. considered regulatory recognized, Starling appropriately both than the As are (2) and The regulate kidneys balance. fluid acid-base (3) volumes, (1) and body electrolyte balance, osmolality In and metabolic addition and secrete products excrete hormones. substances foreign the kidneys produce and

all body of maintenance is osmolality of in body. of tissues the for Control important volume normal cell fluid is normal the fluid necessary volume of cardiovascular body system. for of Control function important bicarbonate in ions kidneys also Cl−, hydrogen essential inorganic regulating amount including of the Ca++ The , Na+, and in −), inorganic (HCO3 (Pi). the phosphate several K+, body, (H+), are maintain be body must daily these electrolytes intake of balance. to equal Excretion to appropriate total If for the this electrolyte the increases excretion, of electrolyte. positive and body intake the amount electrolyte of is exceeds that its individual balance an in in exceeds its electrolyte decreases the the that its amount for excretion intake, of if in individual in electrolyte. negative balance is and an body Conversely sole the kidneys excretion electrolytes principal route body. from for many the For are the or

kidneys regulation Another acid-base important is of function balance. the of body sensitive Many to of pH. exquisitely functions metabolic the are the limits. narrow maintained within body pH must fluids be Thus of body by the pH liver, fluids kidneys. within action lungs, Normal and of coordinated and is the maintained buffers by

excrete the number kidneys metabolism. products of The end a of (from hormones. creatinine products (from metabolism, urea acids), amino These (from of uric nucleic waste acids), muscle acid and hemoglobin creatine), products end metabolites include of these that substances The the eliminate a matches rate their at from production. kidneys body fluids. regulate kidneys the hormone body Thus concentrations within as substances route kidneys the an from also important toxins other represent for such chemicals drugs, (e.g., elimination foreign pesticides), and of The body.

and calcitriol, kidneys are endocrine and Finally, secrete erythropoietin. organs produce the renin, important that the activates is regulate Renin and a pressure and K+ system, helps an Na+ but balance. which that enzyme hormone renin-angiotensin-aldosterone blood not a in tract normal bone metabolite by and of for of deposition absorption vitamin for is its the D3, ). (see necessary gastrointestinal Ca++ Calcitriol, disease the In to renal calcitriol this ability of with levels is are reduced. impaired kidneys’ patients produce and hormone is Ca++ to As abnormalities chronic patients intestine the disease. over which renal in absorption a time result, by decreased, the with seen bone contributes formation many a secretion. kidney consequence erythropoietin diseases production in reduction is of Another and marrow. cell blood stimulates red by Erythropoietin formation bone kidney or loss of a anemia disease (CKD), in occurs Decreased function production that over period the kidney in progressive a to years. months erythrocyte chronic contributes

impair result in function kidney of failure. variety diseases and renal A large declines impairment instances in progressively. some function In function but in is renal transient, renal many cases the or (GFR) to rate glomerular are form (ESRD) therapy transplantation and of the Patients whom than either less receive said of dialysis to in end-stage replacement renal normal 10% is renal must in have the disease survive. kidney filtration

that renal is first renal of it function. mechanisms physiology the understand necessary the to To disease, to normal understand contribute renal chapters of section various of following aspects function this in Thus considered. book, the the are in

of Anatomy Functional the Kidneys

and the in function are linked kidneys. Structure closely of kidneys histological for the the their an is a and prerequisite anatomical of gross features Consequently appreciation functions. understanding

paired lie vertebral are of the either behind The kidneys wall of peritoneum organs the the column. the on that side abdomen on posterior each long, between and cm and kidney In adult an wide, approximately cm cm and human, 11 115 is thick. weighs 170 6 3 g

of in kidney anatomical are the gross illustrated features The human

Fig. 33.1 . and pelvis. side and medial the contains nerves, kidney which artery renal indentation of an each vein, pass through The called the be called half, and cortex would kidney cut an evident: If region outer region inner in a medulla. the were regions an two nerves. vessels, medulla the blood composed lymphatics, and (the and are kidney), cortex of of functional The units nephrons The

worldwide. major Kidney disease problem a is health States United alone: the In

accounts annually. deaths over CKD patients million 23 for and than affects 90,000 more

leading of diseases cause ninth death. Kidney the represent

Medicare year. in CKD cost alone for patients care health The $44 per billion exceeds

Each new patients. kidney in disease is 3 million over diagnosed year,

treated year. every are people for ESRD Over 500,000

dialysis. are either peritoneal hemodialysis ESRD on or Approximately 275,000 maintained with patients

hypertension Diabetes causes are of ESRD. and leading the

secondary to an diabetes ESRD increasing 11% is per at annual than more rate year. of

17,000 are year. kidney More performed than transplants each 100,000 patients in are Unfortunately, transplants. awaiting kidney of excess

are million affected, inflammation incontinence (i.e., and cystitis problems. (8.3 kidney visits infections urinary (13 care Urinary tract 700,000 tract (i.e., bladder; the urinary mostly of patients), million adults stones; 65) older major visits and health million than urinary 1.3 also annually), annually), interstitial urolithiasis replacement transplantation. ESRD renal and kidney which must includes dialysis, therapy, with peritoneal undergo Individuals hemodialysis, thereby removed a metabolic rely their small into diffusion blood—including lacking ability substances, adverse across both on and accumulation mitigating waste to hemodialysis, selectively normally by health from names associated membrane Both products the dialysis molecules peritoneal these effects. remove the intact kidneys—via their solution as permeable and dialyzable suggest, a removal of normalization and via of fluid of fluid, acid-base In excess reestablish changes, both dialysis helps addition, and concentrations). electrolyte correction plasma balance electrolyte acts the peritoneal dialysis, lining membrane a membrane. cavity In the abdominal as dialyzing peritoneal abdominal iteratively into dialysis in introduced solution across which Several molecules blood be the solution, diffuse membrane into a then and peritoneal liters small typically the can cavity, are of defined and replaced. the discarded, removed, membrane molecules into in an blood semipermeable separated which artificial patient’s defined diffuse solution blood extracorporeal patients blood the kidney solution, the small that from thereby a molecules in to with allowed if to pumped through hemodialysis, down In concentration is their associated functioning a without allows artificial gradient removing from is effects an adverse health accumulate kidneys. by dialysis dialysis small be donor can with dialysis for treated until candidates procured. kidney appropriate often are are Patients who renal an transplantation human this erythropoietin). agents in now has (e.g., endogenous administration ESRD problem undergoing erythropoietin problem be dialysis corrected can Although a in significant to via severely reduced chronic anemia easily historically been production, patients recombinant patients of owing erythropoiesis-stimulating

CHAPTER • Function of 33 Fig. Renal 583 Elements kidney, show cut Structure open human internal a structures. to of the 33.1 EL. WF, From Boron Boulpaep (Modified Medical Physiology. ed. 2nd 2009.) Saunders Philadelphia: Elsevier; pyramids. the called divided medulla into is masses kidney renal conical in human which minor the lies of The papilla, base apex pyramid corticomedullary in each a originates a within border, at terminates calyx. the and collect papilla. from calyces urine Minor each expand minor into the numerous or calyces. open-ended two calyces The major pouches, three The into turn the major in pelvis. feed calyces region ureter, the carries urine the urinary of to which the expanded The pelvis upper represents from pelvis bladder. the The of calyces, smooth bladder. toward the ureters contain and the contracts urine walls the propel urinary to muscle pelvis, that

to resting kidneys the to Blood is in equivalent of two flow the (1.25 25% about L/min) cardiac individuals. output of 0.5% than weight. total However, kidneys body constitute less the illustrated As in

Fig. glomerular into arcuate interlobar 33.2 renal artery artery, the and to the progressively the afferent branches arteriole, interlobular the artery, the capillaries. artery, the (left), form which leads together capillary come a capillaries which capillaries, leads supply form peritubular to into which blood the network, glomerular the efferent arteriole, to the second The nephron. interlobular the parallel system run form courses interlobar the vessels The vessels the of the vein, vein, beside which venous arcuate vein, to and progressively ureter. vein, renal arterial and

of Nephron Ultrastructure the

functional is nephron. of unit the the kidneys The hollow are tubes nephrons, epithelial cell which human composed 1.2 essentially Each a contains of layer. single kidney approximately million distal collecting corpuscle, tubule, and proximal Henle, The of a loop consists (Fig. duct of renal tubule, nephron system 33.3

Fig. 33.2 ). enclosed of capsule. The within Bowman’s renal corpuscle glomerular consists capillaries coils, The toward exits proximal the and initially followed piece tubule structure medulla. descends this straight a that by several forms composed complicated organization presented The aThe Henle, is actually here. loop next than is more of is the the which segment of of nephron for is presentation However, segments. clarity subsequent chapters, of the simplicity in five nephron divided into and part collecting actually of the nephron. duct system is not The of consider collecting again the nephron. we However, the system part for duct simplicity, and described to commonly term of capsule, renal corpuscle used glomerular the capillaries is composed bAlthough renal is Bowman’s the glomerulus corpuscle. the

• Fig. system of Left, vascular human Organization the the of kidney. 33.2 arteries; 2a, arcuate arterioles; glomerular 2, arteries; interlobular 5, descending ascending 4, 7a, 7b, afferent capillary interlobular recta. 1, interlobar 3a, stellate 8, vein; arterioles; efferent veins; 3, 1a, networks; recta; veins; vasa interlobar arteries; 6, vasa vein; arcuate 9, Right, nephron. the of human Organization left superficial nephron illustrated right. a on juxtamedullary is on (JM) the the nephron is illustrated and A thin ascending descending limb ascending of thick tubule Henle straight limb and of limb (PT), loop portion includes the (DTL), (ATL), the proximal thin (TAL). The B, MD, cortical medullary CCD, collecting medullary distal OMCD, collecting collecting capsule; DT, outer inner duct; macula IMCD, densa; duct; duct; tubule; Bowman’s P, pelvis. (Modified from W, Kriz LA. Bankir Function. Am J Structure, Physiology: Renal 1988;254:F1; Physiol and Koushanpour W. and Kriz Principles, E, 2nd ed. Springer-Verlag; York: New 1986.) hairpin tubule, ascending the of ascending (only the with limb thin limb. the part nephrons the thin thick turn), descending (which long straight limb Henle), and loops the a in proximal in of ends ascending the the and nephron. of between efferent limb, the the same thick the end passes of afferent arterioles Near nephron the of (see abutting limb the thick ascending segment glomerulus macula the is called short This densa

Figs. 33.3 33.2 ). two where more densa and extends the duct. or collecting point beyond begins short The a nephrons the cortex distance to cortical distal a in tubule the form macula to join collecting medullary inner cortical and medullary the The becomes the then collecting and duct. duct outer collecting enters the duct medulla

that uniquely suited perform Each made segment (see transport cells is specific of functions up to are nephron

Fig. 33.3 ). extensively urine an border, or of ultrafiltrate amplified the membrane have brush only tubule. which proximal the called cell) apical is the in (the side present tubule Proximal cells or membrane of interstitial blood (the the side highly invaginated. The is cell) basolateral invaginations These mitochondria. many contain descending few and In contrast, loop apical the poorly Henle ascending thin and the basolateral have of surfaces developed limbs mitochondria. of and and extensive of have membrane. distal of infoldings thick and tubule the basolateral ascending abundant limb the the The mitochondria cells

of composed collecting cells two and duct types: cells. cell The principal intercalated is mitochondria few a invaginated basolateral cells Principal have (see membrane moderately and contain

Fig. ). 33.3 (see reabsorption play an role Principal NaCl of (see of important ) secretion ). in cells and K+ important in a Intercalated an have play role acid-base density cells, regulating balance, (see mitochondria of which high

Fig. ). 33.3 −), population intercalated reabsorbs (i.e., secretes HCO3 second One secretes cells and (see ). a − population of H+ HCO3 nephron, the composed final collecting collecting and apical segment of cells, developed duct duct, which of the medullary have and few The surfaces is inner inner medullary mitochondria. poorly basolateral

their a the nephron into primary tubule that ( All fluid nonmotile except single protrudes the intercalated in cells membrane cells cilium have plasma apical in

Fig. 33.4 ). chemosensors or including and proliferation, and rate changes (i.e., pathways, respond and Primary tubule kidney flow of control that sense fluid), the signaling to they Ca++-dependent programmed mechanosensors (i.e., surrounding they sense those (i.e., are they compounds cilia cell in differentiation, function, of apoptosis the cell initiate fluid) in death).

Fig. 10 superficial for approximately nephron. each 33.2 with juxtamedullary nephrons ), • 585 Fig. The of 33.3 ultrastructure. cellular including nephron Diagram a Proximal cell collecting Distal ascending medulla Cortex limbThick • thin Cortical duct Inner densa Descending duct medulla Macula cell Ascending Fig. Intercalated Principal limb OutermedullaInner tubule collecting tubule thin limb the primary cortical in 30 duct. µm diameter) 33.4 ≈2 Scanning plasma electron micrograph long in to apical membrane and collecting of illustrating cilia cells (C, 0.5 in principal the µm not intercalated have Note do cells that cilia (IC1 IC2) microvilli. but and have numerous principal with borders cells the arrow) collecting cells; straight (arrowhead); represent cell in principal apical short CD, duct and between IC1 microvilli microvilli (open with IC2, ridges numerous cells long the intercalated membrane. B. Kriz W, Kaissling (From Structural organization mammalian kidney. of the DW, Seldin G In: Giebisch [eds]. Kidney: Physiology Pathophysiology. and The 3rd ed. & Lippincott Philadelphia: Williams 2000.) Wilkins; nephron the cortex. in the of glomerulus outer of superficial each region is located peritubular surround branch of short, adjacent as Henle nephrons. efferent are its associated well segments into that as associated loops nephron arterioles The corresponding and capillaries nephron return and reabsorbed delivers circulatory and secretion a substances segments in to fluid), nephron a the cortex, This into from individual important as substance nutrients of to for tubular pathway to network blood segments oxygen the serves capillary movement of the and conveys for (i.e., system. solutes water including humans, species, A few

gene) expressed gene) (encoded PKD1 and cells. by the the in (encoded 2 Polycystin Ca++ 1 by membrane into and of cilia entry the are of mediate primary polycystin PKD2 role cells flow-dependent to thought K+ PKD2 and are principal the collecting play secretion of an by important in PKD1 duct. more described in in detail As

of of strong increased collecting K+ fluid duct for . in the stimulus Chapter a flow 36, is tubule secretion cilium the Increased to activates bends in and cell flow enter PKD1/PKD2 increase which channel cells, and Ca++ primary [Ca++]. the complex allows Ca++-conducting principal the intracellular [Ca++] into the cell increase apical membrane, in channels from tubule fluid. the K+ activates plasma the enhances The in K+ secretion which of

about 1000 kidney inherited kidney most dominant disease, 1 Autosomal is common the occurring disease people. polycystic (ADPKD) in in have (85%–90% which in mutations PKD2 is (≈15% cases) 12.5 primarily PKD1 ADPKD, worldwide cases). of of caused million or Approximately people by phenotype cysts presence thousands The enlargement large or that space-occupying ADPKD as renal of 20 due in of hundreds kidneys of of can as is major to cm the diameter. the be seen organs also liver condition. other this are and the in in Cysts patients of with to 60. of About 50% failure by age ADPKD the progress renal Ca++ pathways, controlling defects apoptosis. in Although cell differentiation, it mutations those from formation uptake kidney ADPKD, including PKD1 in signaling cause that proliferation, how cyst renal Ca++-dependent clear and may is alter result and PKD2 not

nephrons enter the Henle medulla. never whose very superficial also loops of possess short

the the adjacent to The located each region medulla of juxtamedullary in the nephron of (see cortex glomerulus is

Fig. right). 33.2, important recta. series of also vasa vascular called When ways: and loop Henle a compared of not differ anatomically superficial with but the the and the peritubular nephrons, of forms is efferent loops network deeper juxtamedullary arteriole longer accompanying nephrons medulla, in capillaries two into a extends only the

Fig. of that loop capillary (left), where the surround limbs they vasa the Henle. of 33.2 descend ducts collecting medulla, and the form ascending networks recta into the The to ascending the recta. the cortex returns via blood vasa circulatory 0.7% (2) more to substances the dilution recta, and for to that (urine urine important and nephron in the of return important vasa delivering concentration renal (1) (4) are renal concentrating substrates (RBF) the of serve than for support the the flow and in serving vessels in oxygen diluting pathway metabolic include water these system, and detail solutes enters blood nephron function, functions as secretion, reabsorbed a medulla and (3) to less Although discussed conveying

the of Glomerulus Ultrastructure

ultrafiltrate Bowman’s movement begins with in from a capillaries plasma space. The of glomerular formation first glomerulus) (i.e., the step into urine passive composition space. into the plasma, except concentration the much that than lower term ultrafiltration passive refers in that in for fact of the ultrafiltrate fluid—similar movement plasma—from the capillaries protein Bowman’s is to The to glomerular this supplied and process, the by one a by appreciate of consists of which capillaries understand drained afferent To of the must ( glomerulus, the efferent network arteriole this the arteriole anatomy

Figs. 33.6 33.5 ). into the of the During end closed Bowman’s capillaries glomerular forming capsule. development, embryological press proximal tubule, the of circumference cells the outside (see capsule, Bowman’s the form epithelial As on the thin epithelium parietal they

Fig. 33.5 ). the The thicken ( which cells and contact the in Bowman’s develop form into podocytes, with capillaries of capsule epithelial visceral layer

Figs. ). 33.7–33.9 enter the visceral and (i.e., where pole efferent vascular to the Bowman’s exit and of parietal afferent capsule) form outward face at capsule. arterioles cells layer Bowman’s The capsule) space, layer visceral Bowman’s proximal at the is (i.e., and layer the Bowman’s The urinary of glomerulus lumen parietal space pole which where the of joins the the proximal becomes the the tubule between tubule.

podocytes. The by covered a are of membrane endothelial capillaries cells by basement surrounded glomerular The the foot basement of filtration (see capillary processes form podocytes endothelium, and barrier membrane, so-called

Figs. ). 33.7–33.9 33.5 and endothelium is fenestrated The

Fig. and glomerulus the 33.5 juxtaglomerular apparatus. Anatomy of juxtaglomerular mesangial (AA). renin-and the is macula afferent angiotensin limb, and of (EGM), arterioles extraglomerular composed of apparatus densa thick cells the (MD) ascending (G) cells II–producing granular The the of cell; foot between EA, capillaries; proximal arteriole; efferent tubule of cell podocyte cell. basement BM, BS, endothelial membrane; epithelium; the FP, mesangial podocyte; layer); EN, M, Bowman’s (visceral parietal space; processes PT, cell PE, cells body P, Kaissling W, B. Kriz from (Modified mammalian of organization the kidney. Structural The Giebisch’s M Moe ed. 5th In [eds]: OW, Seldin and Kidney, Alpern RJ, Caplan London, Elsevier, 2013. that on al. Figure based in Sakai source et T, Kriz W, [1988]. of Morphological aspects glomerular function. A. M. In Vol. Davison, “Nephrology,” Nephrology, 10th International Congress of 1, the of Proceedings 323. London.) Bailliere Tindall,

Fig. (ef), glomerulus. of and efferent arteriole Scanning electron artery, arteriole micrograph afferent 33.6 interlobular (af), the indicate efferent are µm bars arterioles 15 they white The the 20 and on in that diameter. to about afferent K al. Kimura et (From Am J 1990;259:F936.) Physiol • Fig. a micrograph glomerular podocyte A, 33.7 surrounding of a Electron capillary. the with cell podocyte a body nucleus The three of large contains indentations. foot the (FP). processes form Cell the of podocyte processes interdigitating in asterisks cytoplasm indicate space. the indicate Bowman’s the the and the podocyte Golgi well-developed The of apparatus, arrows glomerular capillary C, GBM, lumen; basement membrane. of Electron glomerular filtration capillary. barrier B, a micrograph of the endothelium, basement three membrane, composed the of foot of podocytes. filtration the barrier and The is processes layers: Note floor slits filtration (arrows). the slit filtration diaphragm the of the bridging lumen. capillary CL, Structural kidney. of Kriz B: W, (From Kaissling the mammalian organization Seldin ed. RJ, Moe OW, The Giebisch’s Alpern and [eds]: Caplan 5th Kidney, M In: Elsevier, 2013.) London, freely m) blood (e.g., permeable 10−10 = permeable 700-Å is to most and water, not but Na+ Å cells, holes, small and white platelets. where contains (i.e., 1 blood glucose), to red proteins , solutes urea, or cells, the negatively filtration cells glycoproteins plasma protein, charged space Bowman’s of minimize most they Fig. • on their albumin, endothelial abundant express Because into the most and surface, outer electron of A, Scanning 33.8 capillaries. micrograph the surface glomerular showing from space. would Bowman’s the that seen is view This be split cell of body the ultimately they Processes into where podocytes (P) foot processes. (CB) from run toward the capillaries, the foot the creates slits. filtration of processes Interdigitation of of electron the inner surface (blood B, Scanning micrograph a side) glomerular capillary. the seen capillary. view the from be of This would lumen small holes. fenestrations as 700-Å endothelial The the cells are of seen organization Kaissling (From W, B: the kidney. Kriz of Structural mammalian In: OW, 5th ed. RJ, Giebisch’s Alpern Moe The M Kidney, Caplan Seldin and [eds]: 2013.) London, Elsevier, proteins. plasma other synthesize number nitric In vasodilator, [NO], a addition substances cells endothelin in flow oxide are and as controlling vasoactive [ET-1], a vasoconstrictor) the plasma 1 barrier a role their endothelial (RPF). to important (e.g., that renal a to of filtration, • Fig. basement The the the the containing capillaries 33.9 glomerular Electron micrograph of between mesangium, cells. mesangial area of surrounded mesangial and basement by glomerular by foot C, mesangial processes, cells; some processes capillaries; membrane processes glomerular cell cGBM, capillary of space. rise mGBM, by podocytes marked gives podocytes (PO) surrounded glomerular foot mesangial stars; and M, membrane several basement that endothelial US, cells; urinary to Note the extensive cells extracellular mesangial (×4100). matrix surrounded by (triangles) the W, of Kaissling B: Structural (From kidney. Kriz organization mammalian The and M OW, Seldin Alpern RJ, 5th [eds]: Giebisch’s ed. Caplan In: Moe Kidney, 2013.) Elsevier, London, proteins. the charged a an is proteoglycans proteins membrane, of IV agrin (type and to collagen, barrier which laminin, is plasma porous important filtration matrix and negatively perlecan, fibronectin), filter function charge. as the a in the basement based to cross on which filter The is is thought proteins ability charge-selective of membrane primarily to

the surface that the (see endocytic, which finger-like The capillaries podocytes, have processes long are encircle completely outer of

Figs. 33.8A 33.7 ). by the interdigitate The apparent basement of (see separated called processes filtration to podocytes the membrane cover gaps and slits are

Figs. 33.7 33.8A ). diaphragm that pores Å. a dimension is Each filtration a contains by slit of × 140 bridged with 40 thin electron a viewed when structure microscopy diaphragm, The slit appears by which (see filtration as continuous

Fig. and diaphragm, ( (NPHS1), including is nephrin of podocin the proteins ), (ACTN4) several NEPH-1, slit including that and (NPHS2), proteins, with intracellular CD2-AP composed α-actinin-4 associate and 33.7B

Figs. ). 33.10 33.11 membrane function space. as minimize Filtration proteins that Bowman’s basement macromolecules the the entering size-selective which filtration from filter, slits, and a cross of primarily charged (i.e., the into space) size of not filtration filtered and basement slits membrane basis charge. glycoproteins, negatively back on proteins are Because Bowman’s the and some both contain held Å, 18 42 more For effective an molecules molecules between with anionic molecular radius cationic molecules. and are readily than filtered

and mesangial the is corpuscle important which cells the component consists mesangium, Another of (see mesangial renal the of matrix

Fig. ). 33.9 and cytokines. Mesangial of cells, the the extracellular possess muscle cells, exhibit support activity from provide matrix, removing mesangium, for macromolecules prostaglandins proinflammatory many which glomerular secrete capillaries, by and structural smooth phagocytic secrete properties adjacent altering blood influence GFR area. and the contract mesangial they also surface are cells or capillaries, capillaries to capillary by glomerular the by glomerular Because may flow regulating through located extraglomerular are cells. Mesangial arterioles) the outside (between glomerulus afferent mesangial efferent called the and cells

(i.e., effacement by of a is produced nephrotic podocyte and permeability foot syndrome by capillaries by increased including proteins processes. The the structure, glomerular loss of variety disorders is and thinning) of characterized normal to of proteins increased to permeability in The excretion results (proteinuria). urinary protein augmented indicate Thus in urine can proteins disease. kidney appearance the of the develop with often this syndrome proteinuria. as a result hypoalbuminemia of Individuals edema is in nephrotic seen commonly individuals. generalized addition, In Mutations in either genes slit (see proteins several diaphragm encoding

Figs. kidney as with that including 33.11), (ACTN4), nephrin, proteins such interact and and 33.10 disease. in α-actinin and functionally NEPH-1, podocin, proteinuria diaphragm or 4 result slit intracellular CD2-AP proteins, diaphragms, abnormal in or mutations nephrin (NPHS1) example, slit For and congenital renal gene in failure. to syndrome the causing massive lead proteinuria absent nephrotic (NPHS2) podocin cause autosomal mutations In addition, steroid-resistant syndrome. the gene nephrotic in recessive, demonstrate podocyte podocin, occurring mutations knockout NEPH-1, structure mice and function. and naturally and glomerular roles nephrin, normal in that studies These CD2-AP, α-actinin-4 key in play

• Fig. podocyte Anatomy 33.10 foot processes. of diaphragm foot make up the between figure adjacent This proteins illustrates two that slit processes. the domains and are Nephrin interact. large NEPH1 that have membrane-spanning that extracellular proteins the NEPH1 microdomains integrity protein, membrane, membrane-spanning processes. that of a the important plasma in which podocyte determine foot also signaling organizes and in specific nephrin Podocin, for structural is events the compose proteins diaphragm CD2-AP. including cell, interact adapter proteins slit the Many with inside that the of The which basement that bind turn in (F-actin) directly MAGI-1 proteins indirectly proteins expressed glomerular interact α3β1 (GBM). and actin binds proteins filamentous with the membrane as to cytoskeleton, by such adapter the or either to P, 4; protein; 2; vinculin; a organizes membrane-associated talin; proteins; α-actinin to a Na+-H+ actin Synpo, that protein and regulatory zona FAT, links α-DG, exchanger CD2-AP, nephrin α-act-4, NHERF-2, paxillin; integrin; protocadherin V, synaptopodin; factor kinase podocin P-Cad, MAGI-1, P-cadherin; an polymerization; T, α3β1, α-dystroglycan; occludens. intracellular adapter Z, guanylate that α3β1 (Adapted Mundel from P, SJ. Shankland J 2002;13:3005.) Soc Am Nephrol

disease. complex–mediated of in cells glomerular are development immune involved Mesangial membrane glomerular (see Because glomerular surround basement all capillaries the does completely not

Fig. escape ), and crossing mesangium blood can the the 33.9 enter some immune the membrane. glomerular basement complexes without of Accumulation complexes production. cytokine and proinflammatory mesangial cells and immune local infiltration induces autocoid inflammatory promotes of ultimately response, autocoids expansion, mesangial scarring, glomerulus. the to immune which and initiated lead and These cytokines of enhance the obliteration complex– inflammatory can

the Apparatus of Juxtaglomerular Ultrastructure

the later chapter. described mechanism, important tubuloglomerular component is an in mechanism, feedback one of juxtaglomerular feedback The this apparatus the make Structures apparatus (see juxtaglomerular that up

Fig. ) include: 1. 33.5

thick densa ascending of limb the the macula 2.

3.

afferent angiotensin granular II–producing the reninand of arteriole cells

of capillaries), glomerular the blood it characterized and the in by cases to accounts all of Alport 2% ESRD. (i.e., syndrome (i.e., for and urine) 1% inflammation progressive is glomerulonephritis hematuria of is the component in by membrane. collagen, type glomerular caused IV Alport syndrome major mutations basement a of with disease Alport is the X-linked the with syndrome In 80% about of in gene. COL4A5 patients mutations but also been of autosomal type the and genes recessive. mode identified, have Some of collagen is patients six in (COL4A3 COL4A4); have IV mutations inheritance 15% genes. syndrome that or in mutations of The remaining autosomal disease patients COL4A3 5% heterozygous COL4A4 have arises the dominant from Alport with to syndrome, thickness in effective blood cells becomes glomerular fails In and Alport the to and an irregular as membrane protein. serve barrier basement filtration

of cells the represent the The ascending region of a distinct limb. densa morphologically macula thick of This the afferent and the arterioles by nephron. region efferent the angle through same passes formed and granular the afferent cells cells the contact macula extraglomerular mesangial cells The the the of of densa arterioles. to • arterioles granular Fig. muscle release with decreased response effective cells afferent smooth and—importantly—manufacture, in of store, and renin signals associated myofilaments contain the The 33.11 major Overview the that proteins of diaphragm. slit form the from of the processes Nephrins foot slit. in opposite interdigitate center (red) the slit, and with FAT2 FAT1 nephrin P-cadherin. NEPH2 In and interacts (green), and (blue), the NEPH1 CD2-AP, The which these nephrin, and intracellular with domains podocin NEPH1, ZO-1, proteins and with NEPH2 diaphragm 4, slit α-actinin interact actin. connect of and al. (Modified from et K Tryggvason Med N J 2006;354:1387.) Engl circulating renal volume and perfusion. reduced of generation ). angiotensin and in proteolytic Renin aldosterone ultimately is secretion II of involved (see in GFR. feedback is in and component one of apparatus mechanism RBF of The tubuloglomerular autoregulation involved juxtaglomerular the

Kidneys of Innervation the

water and and nerves RBF, GFR, regulate salt the nephron. reabsorption by Renal nerve the kidneys consists supply celiac fibers to of nerve The in sympathetic plexus. originate the that There corresponding innervation. no parasympathetic is the major kidneys well arterioles. arteries) release as of efferent innervating branches and as afferent muscle interlobular fibers norepinephrine to lie the and arcuate, artery renal (interlobar, and the cells the adjacent smooth Adrenergic the of innervate addition, the renin-producing the sympathetic arterioles. afferent nerves granular of In cells secretion is by sympathetic activity. increased Renin stimulated the also innervate Na+ fibers by enhances loop tubule, distal proximal Nerve and tubule, Henle, segments. of collecting these these reabsorption duct; nephron of nerves activation

Function Renal of Assessment

the final coordinated of appears a nephron’s of urine. determine substance segments the in actions various The that amount This glomerular processes general represents (1) three

CHAPTER Renal Function 33 of Elements

blood. substance permits returned relationship the renal of the to excreted in in of x systemic the venous urine amount amount circulation This quantification versus to leaves amount enters nor kidneys in neither that metabolized, venous for any plus equal amount that is the Thus that the the the the that renal substance amount is leaves in synthesized urine kidneys the kidneys blood.

rate the its the into circulation excreted the the systemic is urine it of renal a emphasizes only kidneys; principle the substance excretory renal in of considers and vein. function to of clearance rate The return not at which Therefore balance mass of in ( terms

Eq. substance of × x ) proportional V̇ rate ( 33.1 the (Ux concentration x to excretion the plasma of ) urinary substance is

33.2 Equation

to urinary Fig. x equate excretion of the substance To rate • 33.12 Mass balance the kidney. relationships for text for definition of symbols. See

concentration, arterial which the its kidneys. plasma is by it it of (2) necessary is from at substance from reabsorption determine removed the renal rate the to filtration, plasma tubular is clearance (3) of fluid and cases) (in some This rate blood, into (Cx): the removal secretion back

the from substance fluid. blood 33.3 tubule Equation into first of urine production in across P kidneys The × = glomerulus. C V˜ is step formation of by trate x plasma an × the U x the ultrafil-xa of process The glo-If

Eq. ( plasma RBF and assumed of this 33.3 ) and in merular chapter. renal substance x to and concentration artery is filtration GFR of regulation is discussed later in rearranged beare the in presented clearance, section. which the measurement of renal the GFR and of is RBF, is following concept basis for The theoretical chapters. are and subsequent discussed secretion Reabsorption in

principle or Fick on conservation based The mass). balance the is of concept renal of clearance (i.e., mass

Fig.

required mass the the a describe relationships kidney. to balance 33.12 illustrates of factors various vein output substances the synthesized kidney renal not principal input the the single two renal this routes. the ureter and is to for by The constitute organ, whereas artery source unfiltered filtered plus the blood) a other fraction renal nonmetabolized words In vein entering ureter this the the only reabsorption). tubular any exit filtered renal via the or fractions into (i.e., circulation amount subsequently and circulation substance the less secreted artery reabsorbed (the may any combined back via renal The mass balance relationship: the equation following defines

vessel Equation its concentration sample to peripheral where identical plasma is obtained: (Px), any relationship the following a 33.1 from blood in

Equation 33.4

unit volume/time, of urine and per the excreted from all substance been and it plasma Clearance into has volume dimensions of represents the time. a removed which has last point by following the is considering illustrated This example. best urine a substance is urine concentration calculated for mg/mL this the 1 present and excretion rate of as in substance follows: is is a 100 the at mL/min, rate If flow

33.5 Equation

is to in substance clearance mg/mL, its at If concentration present according of plasma this a 1

Eq. as is 33.4 follows:

the 33.6 renal the plasma, vein artery respectively concentrations substance in x Equation are renal of and

completely flow Ux artery minute. of and RPFv RPFa will urine in respectively rates and plasma vein, of each the x is substance the In substance 100 of in x are renal concentration words, cleared plasma mL be other definition clearV̇ of from is plasma volume urine rate the flow as The ance the a all of substance which . UCr V x

filtered V PCr Amount GFR UCr = excreted x . Amount x

• Fig. creatinine. Renal 33.13 of handling by glomerulus secreted, metabolized freely is approximation, to and the first is, Creatinine across a the not filtered or reabsorbed, nephron. at kidney creatinine the the the artery not 15%–20% glomerulus renal filtered (normally, creatinine to filtered). of is Note the that plasma all does in get coming renal the is The to not vein. in returned filtered is systemic circulation that portion the plasma plasma creatinine; Ucr, PCr, rate. V., flow; flow concentration concentration; urine of renal creatinine RPF, urinary

unit volume is a and been not real it it because a is rather into removed somewhat of time virtual is excreted per plasma; has urine volume. misleading

nephron. important RPF measure and and whether along be or clearance GFR the reabsorbed because a is it substance of is The concept used can to determine secreted

GFR rates equal all to the The the functioning is of nephrons. of sum filtration of it function. is Thus aggregate index kidney an kidney progressing, disease A generally suggests in fall generally is whereas recovery means recuperation. GFR the of Thus assessment GFR essential is a serial disease. the and patient’s evaluate severity of kidney to course

normal Bowman’s is the skeletal byproduct filtered into and a metabolism muscle across is of Creatinine space. glomerulus freely creatine by approximation—it filtration. nephron the a not after the or cells constant generated is of by body fairly at first metabolized its appreciably is secreted, rate, and—to the a normally It reabsorbed, is the minute when in and creatinine minute at urine [creatinine] constant) steady excreted filtered per at is the the amount ( creatinine equals constant amount fairly Accordingly of state each (i.e., glomerulus of

Fig. pass excreted a kidneys, and portion 33.13): through actually from most removed cleared the in a substances by only single is cFor kidneys. plasma the

plasma = PCr V̇ of Equation where = flow 33.7 creatinine concentration of concentration urine = creatinine urine UCr

Eq. is solved for GFR: 33.7

Equation 33.8

(see the is clearance that as equation This same form for

Eq.

33.4 ). creatinine measured used determine GFR be (CrCl) at can state. to Thus steady clinically clearance from it into of and represents an urine removed Clearance dimensions and substance has of of excreted plasma time. unit the the per been volume/time, which has volume equivalent all

as criteria GFR; that the serve meets substance measure used the is that any appropriate Creatinine can following an substance to only marker. not can be 1. must: The substance

2.

the freely 3. across filtered be space glomerulus Bowman’s into

by nephron reabsorbed not be or secreted the 4.

not kidney produced by metabolized 5. be the or

renal arterial glomerulus. GFR) kidney that other to at substances the measure is plasma all in enters used creatinine filtered Not (or the plasma filtered. is not coming into the all Likewise kidneys renal kidneys all Although approximately nearly passes artery the in through the 10% does enters glomerulus, that not. the plasma is is portion plasma and determined as: the termed of filtration fraction filtered The

Equation 33.9

the which 20% to conditions fraction 0.15 glomerulus the filtered. is enters actually plasma the of averages only means that that 0.20, Under to filtration 15% normal renal through into and before finally and vein. on the systemic efferent capillaries the remaining arterioles to capillaries returning 85% the the circulation peritubular 80% to The via glomerular continues

formation The plasma ultrafiltration urine glomerulus. is the in by of the of step first males 125 females. in and min mL/ 90 normal to from GFR 80 mL/min 140 ranges from to in adults, In in the is as of much 180 Thus plasma L glomeruli. by filtered as hours 24 ultrafiltrate devoid cells elements is The and plasma and of (i.e., blood red cellular white

clearance in used is GFR (CrCl) clinical estimate practice. to Creatinine synthesized is the the to mass. a at amount rate, relatively It is muscle proportional total produced constant and secretory extent small substance is However, it proximal (see perfect a a creatinine to for secreted the not organic cation the system GFR because tubule measuring ). by is in this error introduced component The approximately by is 10%. secretory in excreted of the by exceeds from the filtration amount urine creatinine Thus alone amount 10%. expected 10%. true (PCr) However, concentration plasma overestimates by used the to the creatinine method the measure value and two measure each errors clinical most accurate GFR. situations, a other, Consequently the provides in of cancel reasonably CrCl

be fall only kidney of sign and disease. clinical in first the may A GFR is measuring disease important is Thus when kidney GFR suspected. 25%. 50% reduces functioning GFR of loss A by nephrons only about not the is nephrons remaining decline 50% The GFR compensate. in because measurements creatinine cumbersome, measuring the is of by GFR are in (PCr),which is usually to function GFR plasma assessed inversely kidney related setting the of concentration clinical Because (

Fig. ). 33.14 However, as

Fig. be GFR PCr can in clinical a substantially an setting. 33.14 increase in before detected shows, decline must from in accompanied increase 1.0 to PCr by 1.2 mg/dL. fall is GFR 100 120 a mL/min example, from For to in an but has appear to almost change a in be actually fallen PCr, This not 20%. does by GFR significant clinical body in concentration to In the consideration (eGFR) including of and several the sex, setting, also size, other plasma race. age, creatinine, includes addition GFR factors of estimated to calculate is eGFR be free downloaded essentially can platelets) protein and at: A app https://www.kidney.org/apps/professionals/ free. • concentration The Fig. Relationship plasma GFR (Pcr). 33.14 and [creatinine] between excreted; × creatinine be constant maintain creatinine must the balance. PCr equal = UCr GFR × of Because is is The filtered of production constant, to V. creatinine the excretion to amount amount thus increase if to PCr Therefore and from the 2 its equal from excretion 120 to 1 must to creatinine mg/dL keep of GFR rate. falls production mL/min, 60 filtration to

and similar organic is salts and (e.g., amino plasma of ultrafiltrate. 0.8 1.0 acids) 0.6 glucose, in molecules the 0.4 ultrafiltration Starling glomerular alter across changes drive these forces forces GFR. in and capillaries, the phenomenon called narrow and GFR by very normally a ranges are autoregulation. within held RPF formation, relationship glomerular next and dynamics the of filtrate, review the this between the the chapter and of sections composition The its GFR. RPF of are autoregulation GFR that factors of contribute to addition, regulation discussed. In and and RBF

Composition Ultrafiltrate Determinants of

the filtration determines of the plasma The glomerular barrier ultrafiltrate. composition on filtration the of restricts of It and charge both molecules ( electric basis size

Fig. 33.15 ). In than 0.2 neutral molecules • general, about Fig. a smaller with radius and of the on Influence of its electric 33.15 size filterability. charge dextran value of of filtered. A a it that freely, is zero indicates whereas filtered it 1 that not indicates value is charge. between of 18 and on Å The 42 filterability depends approximately dextrans not Dextrans regardless and polycationic than 42 freely than filtered. neutral smaller dextrans larger charge, dextrans are 18 Å filtered of and Å are albumin The in and plasma are immunoglobulins. major proteins of Å) (Ig)G (53 42 Å, and molecular radii not they greater are Because IgM (>100 than the are filtered. effective immunoglobulin Å) Although the so it is a the degree. albumin 35 protein, Å, it of polyanionic does cross significant molecular is barrier not filtration radius effective to a

Å freely about to Å filtered not 42 molecules than and varying larger are 42 between are Å about degrees. 18 molecules are filtered, 18 and filtered,

Fig. the 33.15 how glomerulus. filtration electric macromolecules by affects shows charge of (e.g., dextrans) polysaccharides Dextrans various molecular exogenous a are in weights. family of manufactured They (polycationic) either negative positive or electrically have charges. (polyanionic) can or be neutral is decreases. (i.e., molecular increases, effective at the rate As dextran which size filtered the molecule of it radius) a are readily cationic more molecular molecules. molecules radius, any given filtered For anionic than surface barrier. glomerular of anionic explained filtration all negatively presence by on the is molecules components of glycoproteins filtration the rate charged the of reduced The for repel similarly These glycoproteins charged molecules. charged Because anionic barrier most molecular radius proteins a the to negatively on charge approximately proteins plasma Å. more of filtration filtration polyanionic 18 are restricts and filtration the than 42 neutral between negative the charged, with proteins of albumin, that an poorly molecular anionic radius example, protein filtered. of has 35.5 For serum Å, an is effective tubule, reabsorbed small urine. albumin the of almost Because the filtered proximal is avidly appears in by amount no normally albumin

restricting proteins The barrier importance the charges of in plasma on is filtration negative shown filtration in of the

Figs. 33.15 33.16 . effective basis filtration causes from radius barrier Removal filtered of be charges molecular ( negative of to the their solely the on proteins the

Fig. 33.16 ). 18 at charges). the between 42 anionic filtration which Hence normal in will molecular proteins polyanionic has filtration that exceed Å, (in and prevails approximately the of radius state the any filtration barrier filtration because immunological glomerular a and the diseases the charges on of negative reduced are barrier inflammation. damage of In number 42 a As filtration and is in increased. between of result, 18 proteins anionic radius Å approximately marker exceed which in the ability catabolize begin proteins a tubule the to proximal is When kidney reabsorb to disease. (proteinuria), of the and anionic filtered appear of them, proteins urine

Ultrafiltration Dynamics of

plasma as same are of forces filtration other The in the capillary for those responsible glomerular beds. of barrier Bowman’s Ultrafiltration and occurs glomerular the from fluid the forces hydraulic ( combine into and drive to pressures) capillaries oncotic because Starling lumen across space the filtration (i.e.,

Fig. ). 33.17 of hydraulic The inside promote fluid glomerular into capillary to the Bowman’s the oriented space. is from (PGC) movement pressure glomerular capillary normal in serum 0.4 • glomerular 1.0 free than ultrafiltrate smaller under 0.2 proteins in 0.6 to radius protein owing Å 0.8 0 essentially of in paucity conditions, is 18 large the Because Fig. the part the of the on results basis negative only. proteins on 33.16 of glomerular of size in wall filtration the charges Reduction radius. molecular on this of proteins the In filterability relative depends only situation the proteins size more of filtered. excretion urine polyanionic are (18–42 increases in Accordingly, proteins of because Å) this

effectively capillary the is reflection can coefficient across glomerular proteins (σ) filtered, that essentially be the for 1. (πBS) in Thus is oncotic the Bowman’s pressure space near zero. filtration. principal the is PGC Therefore force favoring and Bowman’s glomerular (πGC) both capillary in space the (PBS) In contrast, the hydraulic oppose filtration. in pressure the oncotic pressure

Fig. it at 17 mm PGC pressure (where at afferent Hg ultrafiltration the a end end 33.17 of the is − 8 the −πGC). of , (PUF) Hg net efferent exists glomerulus, PUF mm PBS whereas = are this pressure important. concerning points forces change Starling additional Two and slightly to along capillary of decreases resistance First, the the along of length capillary. of PGC the because length flow the the filtered plasma concentration while protein protein glomerular as within πGC Second, the capillary, of along the is progressively the retained increasing increases thereby the capillary. is length exist multiplied to coefficient GFR is of −σ(πGC across (Kf). by ultrafiltration forces sum the the proportional PBS) capillaries − the −πBS)] that the Starling [(PGC is: That

Equation 33.10

area intrinsic Kf surface of product permeability glomerular the of available is the capillary and for glomerular the the filtration. greater systemic capillaries than mainly greater considerably glomerular approximately The in in is capillaries. Kf capillaries, rate glomerular in because 100 glomerular is of times filtration the Furthermore capillaries. great as as is twice PGC hydraulic approximately in pressure systemic

altered any GFR Starling of forces. be changing or Kf by by changing can the mainly that individuals, mediated PGC normal by are changes • is GFR in Fig. In by regulated alterations capillary it. across 33.17 Idealized the Starling and forces glomerular the coefficient for (σ) protein capillary glomerular 1. is The across approximately reflection the pressure; glomerular pressure πGC, capillary; in in Bowman’s PGC, oncotic space; ultrafiltration oncotic PUF, PBS, pressure pressure in the hydraulic glomerular pressure space; πBS, net capillary. Bowman’s in hydraulic indicate the πGC PBS oppose glomerular The filtrate. that for of forces these negative and formation signs

resistance. in arteriolar efferent or afferent three in 1. ways: is affected PGC

increase an PGC decreases GFR, and decrease afferent resistance A GFR. arteriolar and increases Changes resistance: in in PGC resistance in whereas

2.

resistance efferent elevates in increase in PGC an and reduces A and PGC decrease in Changes GFR, resistance resistance: arteriolar GFR. whereas

3.

(which enhances (which pressure: transiently pressure blood PGC Changes blood renal GFR). GFR), increase in increases pressure whereas in in decreases PGC a reduces An decrease transiently arteriolar

1. flow important several through functions: the kidneys Blood serves

2.

the rate reabsorption by the and tubule modifies 3. proximal water solute of

in participates concentration 4. dilution and of urine

to delivers and 5. the reabsorbed hormones to and CO2, nutrients, the nephron along cells circulation fluid, returns O2, solutes and general

may the any following flow Blood through by organ be equation: represented

Kf A disease in filtration decreases in states surface due GFR area. in loss most of because the to is often reduction of in GFR of pathophysiological changes PGC, πGC, conditions and in also changes PBS. because

1.

Kf in GFR, Kf: decreased Increased GFR. whereas reduces enhances Kf Changes diminished filtering surface (i.e., the of by Kf reduce area). kidney decreasing number diseases Some glomeruli increase that glomerular the hormones Some Kf. and dilate also drugs arterioles also drugs Kf. constrict the decrease Similarly, arterioles that glomerular hormones and

2.

PGC: Changes in renal perfusion, because declines PGC With GFR falls. decreased resistance. a in in resistance, an by decline efferent renal afferent arterial in a PGC a is arteriolar or pressure, discussed, As in increase decrease previously reduction caused arteriolar

3.

πGC Changes πGC: An exists relationship in and inverse GFR. between kidneys. the protein πGC in in from result synthesis Alterations outside changes caused in to can concentration renal and protein decrease the lead πGC. plasma some a protein by In the in urine loss thus addition in diseases

4.

Changes whereas PBS PBS reduces Increased PBS: GFR, decreased GFR. in enhances the increases urinary ureter) of (e.g., a PBS. tract stone the occluding Acute obstruction kidney

Equation flow to that organ = R resistance organ through 33.11

between vein is RBF difference renal artery the to renal resistance: the Accordingly, renal by the and vascular divided equal pressure

33.12 Equation

resistance and afferent artery thereby in renal interlobular are vascular determine arteriole, the vessels and The major kidneys resistance. arteriole, the efferent response Like by flow their vascular arterial in organs, adjusting to other blood resistance in changes pressure. the regulate most kidneys in As shown

Fig. pressure precise are Hg. so 180 relatively constant changes these remains 90 and that flow adjustments as arterial blood between 33.18 blood mm is also over the range GFR arterial pressures. regulated of same resistance, constant namely mainly of the kidneys. the is are afferent vascular arterioles relatively pressures between of by and autoregulation, phenomenon achieved Hg, 180 mm GFR The and in RBF 90 changes through whereby maintained blood Because • Fig. RBF regulated are over GFR and the both blood and and between RBF between Relationship pressure blood arterial and 33.18 arterial pressure GFR. constant mm 180 relatively GFR maintains Autoregulation and from blood Hg. to changes RBF 90 pressure as

the of RBF regulate not important of it is pressures that determinant GFR, and same an mechanisms because flows. both surprising is same range

and mechanism to and changes changes another autoregulation that to pressure mechanisms that RBF in in in of responsible [NaCl] GFR: fluid. for one are Two responds tubular responds arterial arteriole. the afferent of tone regulate the Both the to of intrinsic when muscle: is an the tendency vascular pressure-sensitive related contract myogenic The mechanism, mechanism, smooth to so-called stretched. property arterial in arteriole when afferent response. and Accordingly, smooth the stretched, is contracts renal pressure muscle the rises in pressure, Because resistance therefore the constant. and increase GFR, arteriole RBF, of offsets in increase the remains the if [see is ΔP/R RBF (That constant is constant kept is,

Eq. 33.11

tubuloglomerular of autoregulation RBF [NaCl]-dependent second the and mechanism The is responsible as mechanism known for GFR feedback. thus which arteriolar change mechanism into in afferent and GFR by alteration the This signals GFR NaCl involves is apparatus the of a loop of densa and feedback that in fluid, resistance which a tubular juxtaglomerular in leads sensed concentration the (Fig. converted affect in the macula to ). 33.19 loop in NaCl in enters example, the the tubular the causes segment macula and [NaCl] For fluid GFR in this rise, to more increases when densa of (Fig. Henle cells ). 33.20 metabolite which (ATP) (a causes to triphosphate of and the leads densa of GFR. vasoconstriction of an adenosine by arteriole release This of formation macula in cells, adenosine and ATP) normalization and afferent increase less In enters GFR when and ATP [NaCl] the cells, fluid and in contrast, NaCl • decrease, densa both adenosine tubule Fig. macula and 33.19 Tubuloglomerular feedback. An (1) loop [NaCl] (2). GFR tubule in in increases fluid Henle the in increase of signal which sensed macula [NaCl] the The (3) by afferent the resistance densa the increase arteriole a converted is (RA) to (4), increases in and GFR. decreases that of A the in decrease opposite effects. has GFR MG. and Electrolytes: and from Cogan Pathophysiology. (Modified Physiology Fluid Lange; Appleton & Norwalk, 1991.) CT: production decline. release and arteriolar The afferent results [adenosine] vasodilation, returns in and in [ATP] which to GFR fall normal. macula II densa, whereas enhances NO, the vasodilator tubuloglomerular feedback. produced feedback, a tubuloglomerular attenuates by angiotensin and at release and action afferent that oppose each vasoconstrictors other’s ATP adenosine) vasodilator NO) the macula the may (e.g., level of both (e.g., arteriole. a densa Thus the either ensures plus tubuloglomerular feedback. Production release vasoconstrictors of vasodilators exquisite over or control

Fig. controlling in the also granular of by role arteriole. the 33.20 densa illustrates macula renin afferent secretion the cells of in function is in This considered apparatus juxtaglomerular detail the of of aspect

maintain relatively and that engage can mechanisms changes that Because blood desirable. activities pressure, many RBF GFR constant highly arterial arterial animals pressure despite change in are in to in change changes of to suddenly and blood pressure, fluid proportion If in also and were rise RBF suddenly. excretion solute urinary or would fall GFR solutes electrolyte in which balance in ). for intake excretion comparable of in is changes without Such and would discussed water reason (the changes alter fluid and arterial from means for remain effective and an function uncoupling that pressure, ensures excretion and provides it Accordingly, autoregulation GFR RBF fluid solute relatively of and renal constant.

be 1. concerning Three autoregulation should points noted: than is less absent Autoregulation mm is 90 Hg. pressure arterial when

• Fig. delivery increase feedback). causes the whereby of Cellular tubuloglomerular nephron the afferent macula 33.20 mechanism in the vasoconstriction (i.e., arteriole same an densa NaCl of to of densa. macula in fluid elevates GFR [NaCl] the tubule in at increase An release. turn cell densa in of via (ADO) cells symporter, and across membrane increase NaCl an of 1Na+-1K+-2Cl− to apical the macula [adenosine] (NKCC2) enhances uptake leads This in the which [ATP] the adenosine to adenosine cells intracellular binds both to binds plasma [Ca++]. membrane receptors P2X muscle in of which ATP of A1 arteriole, increase surrounding the and smooth receptors afferent thereby returning [Ca++] afferent rise induces in to GFR vasoconstriction The of levels. arteriole, normal the Note in that ATP the and afferent adenosine renin cells by inhibit arteriole. granular release also [Ca++] intracellular from coupling cells. muscle smooth too reflection vascular This (VSM) the electrical an and as a in increase granular of results of fluid falls, NaCl in as cells. reduced, When macula into of does GFR uptake [NaCl] is tubule densa increases in decreases cells. in intracellular ATP GFR and adenosine muscle by release granular release densa, stimulates and [Ca++] turn and renin the macula This of decreases smooth cells which thereby by granular into NaCl of also production decrease secretion macula in of by cells. In enhances a densa stimulates cells renin PGE2, addition entry which NaCl that detail kidneys. renin water II], in the a , discussed retention by increases hormone and [angiotensin in plasma As enhances Persson from AEG al. et (Modified Scand Physiol 2004;181:471.) Acta 2.

slightly varies. arterial do GFR RBF is change and perfect; pressure blood as Autoregulation not

3.

alterations sympathetic hormones in and activity extracellular volume RBF alterations response the several autoregulation, and Despite change ( by that to be in can by in GFR (ECFV) nerve changed fluid

Table 33.1

Rate and Filtration Renal Flow of Glomerular Regulation Blood

Table ). 33.1 pressure myogenic and blood As is already ECFV the when and the normal roles mechanism is greater maintaining GFR tubuloglomerular mm Hg that in discussed, range. in constant RBF 90 feedback and key play major endothelin, and the nerves, RBF over adenosine prostaglandins, However, ECFV NO, bradykinin, exert and changes ATP, control sympathetic angiotensin II, GFR. when

Fig.

mediated and in by resistance, 33.21 afferent the hormones arteriolar in shows listed changes how in efferent changes

modulate 33.1 RBF GFR. and , Table both

sympathetic and ). neurons; however, is normal is The arterioles minimal innervated are when efferent sympathetic (see ECFV tone afferent by catecholamine-like adrenal is epinephrine secreted medulla. by nerves norepinephrine dopamine) is dopamine, ECFV When and reduced, (a circulating norepinephrine sympathetic the release and and vasoconstriction epinephrine Norepinephrine and cause by

↓↓ ↓↓ nerves bradykinin, Endothelin II ECFV ↓↓ Angiotensin ECFV ↓ ↑ ECFV Stretch, ↓ Sympathetic ↓ epinephrine; A-II,

stress, Shear (PGE1, bradykinin, ECFV; histamine, (NO) ↑ No oxide PGI2) ↓ A-II ↑↑ Nitric PGE2, change/↑↑ stress, shear acetylcholine, ↑ Prostaglandins

(ANP, Prostaglandins, BNP) No ↓ ACE peptides Natriuretic ↑ Bradykinin change ↑↑ ECFV ↑ ATP ↑

volume. extracellular A-II, ACE, angiotensin-converting angiotensin enzyme; ECFV, fluid II;

mice do Tubuloglomerular not receptor (A1). absent express adenosine (TGF) that is feedback in the importance This TGF. underscores the adenosine signaling of in membrane located NaCl 1Na+-1K+-2Cl− concentration and at fluid shown the rise, increases (see of cells enters to plasma the macula more symporter that GFR have in densa Studies causes via the in (NKCC2) when tubular NaCl apical the

Fig.

). 33.20 located in cells. Increased ion macula basolateral release membrane ATP-conducting stimulates [NaCl] ATP intracellular of via densa channels turn the in of enhanced. adenosine In addition, production also is to ATP receptors the located receptors plasma in binds A1 binds membrane smooth P2X to on cells afferent of and the muscle arteriole. Adenosine hormones intracellular in of therefore increase a afferent Both artery causes vasoconstriction which the fall [Ca++], and GFR. in Although the constricts vascular is other the vasodilator arteriole most beds, afferent kidney. in a adenosine it

α1-adrenoceptors, arterioles. located to binding are in which mainly afferent RBF GFR. α1-adrenoceptors of Activation and decreases sympathetic Dehydration activate strong stimuli or RBF also emotional pain) reduce (e.g., and fear, nerves and GFR.

produced is the locally as within Angiotensin kidneys. well as II systemically arterioles It constricts and RBF efferent decreases and afferent and the GFR. both

Fig. epinephrine, shows arteriole arteriole and 33.22 efferent and GFR is II. than to and more act the sensitive decrease dThe angiotensin together II angiotensin afferent RBF how thereby norepinephrine, to of low predominates, and RBF arteriole increases Therefore and with GFR decreases. efferent angiotensin of the constriction concentrations II, high and and occurs, GFR However, both (see and constriction of decrease with both arterioles of efferent II, concentrations angiotensin RBF afferent

Fig. 33.21

often for atherosclerosis, elevated (narrowing arterial lumen of with example, of by mediated caused artery the artery) blood by stenosis the systemic Individuals have pressure system. renin-angiotensin renal the artery increased, the the in proximal stenosis or normal to is distal reduced. stenosis the is but Pressure pressure renal to this important and in presence is maintaining the PGC, Autoregulation GFR in of stenosis. RBF, accordingly, and distal systemic PGC, lowers pressure GFR to lower RBF, pressure also of the fall. to Administration blood the stenosis; drugs

pressure therefore the via activates sympathetic blood hemorrhage arterial innervation and of reflex ( ECFV and baroreceptor Significant decreases the kidneys

Fig. ). 33.22 causes and glomerular Norepinephrine the and thereby efferent both afferent arterioles decreases vasoconstriction GFR. of RBF and intense vasoconstriction The epinephrine RBF. which in further rise increases in sympathetic cause II, release angiotensin and activity a of fall and also in other increases peripheral vascular kidneys and the of resistance. The beds resistance rise vascular total = increase of output The to cardiac in blood offsets blood pressure tendency the pressure response tendency total to (blood × resulting peripheral decrease hemorrhage. resistance) to pressure for the pressure GFR. at RBF expense normal system of preserve and maintaining arterial this works Hence to

ECFV increase (e.g., hemorrhage). as pressure blood would and with occur

in Prostaglandins a RBF play healthy resting in not role major do regulating individuals. Fig. However, • during and either arteriole 33.21 arteriole on Relationship resistance selective the changes afferent GFR. of RBF or in the between efferent resistance, according or and arteriole increases of to efferent afferent the either Constriction

Eq. (Q (Q) RBF). (i.e., flow decreases resistance in =ΔP/R), (R) 33.11 an increase (i.e., afferent of the or arteriole Dilation flow afferent RBF). either increases of Constriction pressure (A) glomerulus, arterial to afferent GFR. PGC the arteriole thereby decreases of the is less the reducing transmitted because PGC increases GFR. the contrast, (B) elevates In efferent of constriction and thus arteriole of PGC Dilation (C) decreases arteriole the thus and decreases GFR. efferent more of increases the the GFR. is PGC to arteriole glomerulus, thereby transmitted increasing of arterial (D) pressure afferent because the Dilation from Rose (Modified BD, Rennke KG. The Pathophysiology: Essentials. Renal Baltimore: 1994.) & Wilkins; Williams and such prostaglandins and RBF within without the and increase serve PGE1, PGE2) reduced hemorrhage conditions are (PGI2, ECFV, produced changing to kidneys locally GFR. pathophysiological as II. the sympathetic both vasoconstrictor dampening angiotensin activation of RBF effects Prostaglandins increase by and ischemia. These renal vasoconstriction they potentially prevent are and severe and harmful important because effects and and is angiotensin sympathetic II, by Synthesis surgery, nerves. of stimulated prostaglandins ECFV stress depletion (e.g., anesthesia), and naproxen, as Nonsteroidal ibuprofen drugs antiinflammatory such potently inhibit synthesis. (NSAIDs), prostaglandin during the renal they administration of ischemia is these renal blocking of and contraindicated increase by because, hemorrhagic production and ischemia. drugs shock prostaglandins, Thus RBF decrease RBF an and also Prostaglandins GFR increasingly play important individuals maintaining as age. role in in NSAIDs Accordingly, elderly. GFR the significantly can RBF and reduce

II is endothelium-derived factor, and important vasodilator the catecholamines. angiotensin vasoconstriction by conditions, under counteracts NO, basal it relaxing produced an an and on arterioles the When blood acts increases, force in NO. and flow shear of production increases greater endothelial cells cells. number from acetylcholine, addition NO In histamine, endothelial hormones, facilitate and of including release of ATP, bradykinin, a vasoactive and Increased of the efferent dilation the causes production kidneys. NO afferent of arterioles in resistance. of NO increases total peripheral total peripheral increased Whereas decrease inhibition resistance, levels of production NO

is Abnormal of NO mellitus individuals production diabetes and with hypertension. observed in GFR) of the be production Excess diabetes renal NO to and disease. problems hyperfiltration may increased characteristic in glomerular glomerulus, this responsible damage (i.e., for Elevated arteriole. afferent levels in NO the pressure of secondary capillary fall a glomerular increase to resistance glomerular damage. is cause to The hyperfiltration ensuing thought an blood which pressure. renal to stimulation increase includes intake normal in salt NO increase The production, in response an dietary prevents of increase however, some in salt elevation not may individuals, In blood intake, response pressure so to an in rises. NO production appropriately

II, vasoconstrictor cells angiotensin bradykinin, cells and endothelial response a renal epinephrine, is cells, in shear and distal mesangial stress. by potent Endothelin endothelial vessels, to of secreted tubular the the vasoconstriction decreases Endothelin GFR RBF. efferent and arterioles profound and afferent and of causes and potent (e.g., in elevated may RBF of with diabetes renal states is vasoconstrictor mellitus). Although disease number glomerular a of in influence production not GFR resting associated subjects, endothelin this disease

is kidneys. proteolytic the in Kallikrein enzyme a produced cleaves stimulating acts is the bradykinin, circulating by and which Kallikrein prostaglandins. to release NO kininogen of vasodilator that a GFR. and RBF increases Bradykinin

Physiology Fig. Levy • 600 SECTION7Berne & sympathetic hemorrhage renal and activates which nerve stimulates by angiotensin production Pathway of 33.22 activity II. from AJ. (Modified Vander Renal Physiology. 2nd ed. 1980.) York: McGraw-Hill; New water Renin sodium nerves pressure Arterial water and Activity secretion ° (Intrarenal RBF receptors) of ° excretion arch ˜ ° ° ˜ renal angiotensin Constriction ° and of sinus GFR Plasma and Tubular II renal renal arterioles and and blood renal aortic sodium ° Renal reflexes and Carotid renin Plasma of sympathetic reabsorption ˜ Hemorrhage

Adenosine arteriole, produced and kidneys RBF and is of the causes within GFR. the reducing thereby vasoconstriction afferent role previously adenosine mentioned, tubuloglomerular important feedback. in plays an As

by tension wall natriuretic increased. brain atrial is expanded peptide Secretion by cardiac when myocardial the peptide the ECFV cardiac (ANP) increases ventricle atria (BNP) of natriuretic and is and the and dilate and afferent efferent the ANP arteriole. Both BNP constrict arteriole change RBF. and produce ANP with Therefore increase in a GFR in little BNP modest

ATP release the fluid. interstitial Cells renal into have RBF ATP and on effects can bidirectional both GFR. may afferent play and GFR, ATP arteriole, RBF role the and tubuloglomerular a reduces Under conditions, constricts some feedback. in ATP directionally stimulate both increasing and GFR. have opposite production may effects, Under conditions, RBF other and NO

glucocorticoids and of GFR increases doses of Administration RBF. therapeutic

inflammation and Local and state during release of the during modulates RBF resting histamine injury. of increases the thereby resistance RBF arterioles GFR. elevating the Histamine afferent and decreases without efferent and

proximal substance vasodilator The tubule produces dopamine. the such inhibiting Dopamine as within the increasing secretion. kidney, and RBF renin several has actions

Fig. • cells smooth mesangial 33.23 the and endothelial muscle of interactions cells. Examples with of enzyme; angiotensin-converting angiotensin AI, II. I; AII, ACE, angiotensin (Modified et LG from al. Navar 1996;76:425.) Rev Physiol Nitric oxide I Acetylcholine Vasoconstriction ATP Endothelin Histamine cellVasodilation PGI2 Endothelial PGE2 A C or A muscle cell Smooth Bradykinin cell Stretch II mesangial E A

Finally, illustrated as in

Fig. by an role hormones, and resistance efferent paracrine important 33.23 NO, and the a afferent of (PGI2), renal of cells arterioles endothelial play the II. endothelin, producing angiotensin , including in number regulating prostacyclin arterioles in hormones relaxation muscle smooth and of regulate and contraction cells cells. mesangial These efferent or afferent ATP histamine, stress, stimulate production and RBF. Shear of GFR and which NO, increases acetylcholine, bradykinin, decreases to on which arteriole cells and RBF. GFR angiotensin converts the glomerular II, capillaries, and lining (ACE), surface located Angiotensin-converting the of endothelial I afferent angiotensin enzyme and produced Angiotensin cells. II afferent proximal the tubular locally granular is cells arteriole in by also by release in PGI2 angiotensin and both increased PGE2 endothelial RBF. II, stimulated sympathetic cells is nerve and resulting GFR by and activity by endothelial endothelin both from release decreases RBF cells and GFR. Finally,

proteolytically and angiotensin vasoconstrictive inactivates hormone active inactive converts bradykinin ACE hormone, the angiotensin II, an I, hormone. vasodilatory to an levels ACE II levels. and bradykinin increases Thus decreases angiotensin inhibitors clinically elevating by angiotensin ACE levels with enalapril, decreasing hypertension reduce II patients and pressure captopril) are levels. systemic to used lisinopril, bradykinin and blood (e.g., in RBF. lower pressure, Both blood effects vascular renal decrease increasing systemic thereby resistance, and and resistance, GFR reduce vascular are (e.g., also II receptor hypertension. Angiotensin antagonists to used treat losartan) angiotensin receptor their II the suggests, II As block they of name (AT1). the angiotensin to binding of GFR. RBF they antagonists thus These arteriole; effects vasoconstrictor and afferent on the increase the block angiotensin II (e.g., kinin bradykinin). do metabolism ACE II angiotensin not inhibitors, contrast receptor antagonists In inhibit to

1.

space. into glomerular from of Bowman’s is movement formation a step ultrafiltrate capillaries The urine plasma the passive first in passive that from term capillaries low has concentration plasma-like proteins Bowman’s very a space. glomerular into The fluid the a of to refers movement of ultrafiltration cells are a membrane basement surrounded The that by is podocytes. capillaries of endothelial covered glomerular by podocytes barrier. form processes membrane, foot and the The so-called capillary filtration of endothelium, basement

2.

that tubuloglomerular apparatus RBF an GFR. of important and feedback one feedback) The is mechanism regulates component juxtaglomerular (i.e., the mesangial angiotensin The II–producing cells. that make structures extraglomerular granular apparatus macula densa, juxtaglomerular cells, the up and reninand include

3.

Clinically, CrCl. using of frequently GFR estimated or plasma measures is [creatinine]

4.

mm Hg. despite blood GFR between Autoregulation 90 pressure to and 180 in arterial and changes allows remain RBF constant endothelin, catecholamines, ECFV adenosine sympathetic When angiotensin prostaglandins, II, NO, bradykinin, and over altered, RBF. GFR substantial exert is nerves, peptides, and natriuretic control

A. Patel The sensing. calcium cilium flow primary role in their channels and Pflugers Arch. 2015;467:157-165.

Pollak al. et MR, The glomerulus: of the sphere influence. Soc Clin Nephrol. J Am 2014;9:1461-1469.

Schlondorff J. Achilles’ have? How heels does many podocyte a biology. update on podocyte An Transplant. Nephrol Dial 1091-1097. 2015;30:

J. multiple signaling Schnermann caused in tubuloglomerular assessment. of feedback: quantitative vasoactive pathways Concurrent by activation vasoconstriction a Annu Physiol. Rev 2015;77:301-322.

Moore AE, TM. Taylor fluid exchange. Capillary Educ. Adv Physiol 1999;22:s203-s210.

WJ, LG. Navar Arendshorst glomerular circulation and Renal hemodynamics. eds. et RW, al., Schrier In: Urinary and Kidney Diseases Tract. the of ed. 9th Lippincott Philadelphia: & Williams Wilkins; 2012.

Dworkin al. et LD, The renal circulations. al., et Taal eds. In: MW, Kidney. The Brenner Rector’s and 9th ed. 2012. Saunders; Philadelphia:

W, Kriz B. Kaissling Structural organization the mammalian kidney. of RJ, et al., Alpern In: eds. The Giebisch’s Physiology Kidney: Seldin and and Pathophysiology. 5th ed. 2012. Philadelphia: Academic Press;

et RA, Lafayette al. evaluation Laboratory renal of function. eds. et Schrier In: al., RW, of Urinary Diseases the Kidney and Tract. 9th ed. Lippincott 2012. Williams & Philadelphia: Wilkins;

K, et al. Madsen Anatomy kidney. the of al., eds. et In: MW, Taal The Brenner and Rector’s Kidney. 9th ed. 2012. Philadelphia: Saunders;

able this should answer the chapter of following completion student the questions: Upon 1. to be

in three the of production are involved What processes urine?

2.

urine? of What is the composition “normal”

3.

What responsible the transport nephron? reabsorption are NaCl for mechanisms by located are the they nephron? Where along

4.

NaCl “coupled” How the in reabsorption proximal to water reabsorption is tubule?

5.

of Why Henle’s solutes water the by loop? not are ascending limb reabsorbed but thick

6.

of transport involved cations? and What mechanisms secretion organic in are anions is these relevance What processes? transport of physiological the

7.

What glomerulotubular balance, its what physiological is and importance? is

8.

that What reabsorption are the the and regulate NaCl hormones by kidneys? major water each of site What the is of action nephron hormone?

9.

What paradox? the is aldosterone

processes: reabsorption plasma and the of of by fluid. involves ultrafiltration basic he the solutes (3) urine three solutes formation of selected glomerulus, of and water tubular secretion ultra-filtrate, (1) (2) from into are urine in to in men 130 glomeruli chloride human and than ( essentially day, average L/day of fluid an (NaCl) and by each other protein-free and the amounts sodium 115 excreted less variable of is 1% women 180 200 to the solutes filtered of typically of filtered L/day Although in water

34.1 Table ). secretion, the reabsorption tubules renal volume composition and of the of determine processes urine By ( the and

34.2 115–180 which Table women (GFR) filtration the rate glomerular turn ), men. averages in L/day in 1Normal in and allows L/day 130–200 volume volume of the times the a represents approximately fluid ultrafiltrate the that of that 10 extracellular (ECFV). volume is Thus we 180 is assume throughout this GFR remainder of For section L/day. the simplicity, that

extracellular to the kidneys compartments. osmolality, precisely and control intracellular of pH fluid composition, volume, the and the cell kidneys. membranes and in secretion proteins and in of mediate of solutes Transport nephron water reabsorption the cause acquired ( all and proteins, of kidney and of many 5% are 10% the diseases genetic genes to code proteins in defects Approximately for transport human transport

). Table 34.3 drug important proteins addition, In numerous are transport targets. water cations, NaCl transport, hormones the reabsorption, and NaCl regulate transport and the and factors in This and and solute of chapter of anions transport transport. involved that water proteins organic discusses some regulation 37. transport and inorganic in , and K+ phosphate acid-base , transport their on on (Pi) Ca++ provided and are Details through

Solute Along Water and the Nephron Reabsorption

solute of were and in The across discussed principles epithelial transport cells water general

and water of nephrons. the major of represent function Quantitatively, NaCl reabsorption are the L/day of Approximately reabsorbed (see and tubules of by water mEq/day 25,000 renal Na+ 179

34.1). Table

Na+ indirectly other transport linked reabsorption to of directly of important . many or renal either is In solutes addition, other presented. transport are each nephron their following water and segment In of the and and sections, hormones the factors NaCl by processes regulation

Cl− and approximately solutes. tubule most , filtered K+ reabsorbs The other Na+ , , 67% water, of proximal the addition HCO3 filtered virtually the well amino In . the as most as by proximal all tubule glucose the reabsorbs − glomerulus, and of acids in membrane. basolateral The Na+,K+-ATPase the proximal key is reabsorption in tubule element to of every substance, including of linked in Na+,K+-ATPase. the operation Reabsorption water, some manner is

× as = the aThe any the (180L/day) glomerular substance the that example, multiplying of 25,200mEq/day. for filtered mEq/day25,20015025,05099.4K+ ultrafiltrate mEq/day5401053098.2HCO3− [Na+]ultrafiltrate is mEq/day18,00015017,85099.2Glucosemmol/day8000800100.0Ureag/day56282850.0 amount mEq/day72010062086.1Ca++ Na+ (GFR); by concentration (140mEq/L) load calculated filtered is in calculated GFR Cl− substance by of rate WaterL/day1801.5178.599.2Na+ filtration of mEq/day43202431899.9+ the

the urine vary can healthy The in volume composition and of widely state. values ranges. These represent average HV. and typically Normal Valtin ranges 0.5 between 1.5L/day.Data from excretion water Physiology. Renal 2nd ed. Boston: 1983. Brown; Little,

of different tubule. mechanisms halves and reabsorbed the the proximal the first second Na+ is by in acids, Pi, (e.g., the proximal other In amino of first half and (HCO3 glucose, the with number is Na+ a −) reabsorbed tubule, solutes lactate). of primarily bicarbonate Cl− Na+ in . reabsorbed In mainly second with half, contrast, is the tubular of the at differences by the in the halves composition mediated systems proximal the in differences second disparity Na+ in of first tubule is This these by transport and and fluid

Bilirubin50–130mEq/L20–70mEq/L30–50mEq/L5–12mEq/L2–18mEq/L50–130mEq/L20–40mEq/L200–400mmol/L6–20mmol/L5.0–7.0500–800mOsm/kgH2O0000000 sites. the significantly terms the reabsorbs In than Na+ proximal tubule the of absolute first half second more half.

In into solutes, with tubule, or organic of proximal the half the uptake includ ing cell is first the H+ Na+ (Fig. glucose coupled either ). 34.1 membrane. into entry the mediate Na+ of across the cell apical proteins transport Specific example, For the antiporter, NHE3, (see Na+/H+

Fig. Na+ the H+ of cell. with from of 34.1A extrusion ) entry couples H+ sodium (NaHCO3) of secretion bicarbonate in ). results (see reabsorption lactate tubule mechanisms, symporter cells enters also several Na+/Pi, Na+ acid, Na+/ (SGLT2), Na+/amino and via including proximal (see Na+/glucose

Fig. 34.1B ). membrane transport leave the the mechanisms. organic passive glucose basolateral that and across enter the solutes Na+ with other The cell via cell leaves across Any cell cell Na+,K+-ATPase. apical the blood enters enters the that Na+ and the via the membrane proximal driving reabsorption voltage − the and to reabsorption that Thus the the the tubule across of is that first proximal HCO3 in negative for organic paracellular of tubule Na+ of this provides coupled a and force Cl− a number . half transepithelial molecules, generates the of of the almost molecules, ( of the half tubular removed many proximal they so is avid lactate, fluid including and completely from the glucose are first of tubule in organic Reabsorption

Fig. 34.2 ). NaHCO3 of reabsorption side the the of osmolality higher water osmotic tubule Reabsorption Na+–organic bathing that interstitial the fluid) a is tubule the across for driving a (i.e., proximal transtubular the of the the and force by provides passive of of mOsm/L gradient solutes basolateral few establishes fluid the than cells osmolality osmosis. [Cl−] water reabsorbed (see length half the Cl− tubule, the the of proximal proximal rises more tubule tubular fluid in first is the than the along of in Because

Fig. 34.2

proximal pathways the reabsorption tubule, accompanied is Na+ and by ( Cl− transcellular largely both half second of reabsorption the In paracellular via

Fig. 34.3 ). primarily than with mechanisms as anion proximal accompanying the second Na+ the organic or − Na+ because in rather transport reabsorbed half Cl− of the tubule is solutes the HCO3

the TAL, XLR, RJ. X-linked SLC family so-called recessive.Modified solute thick of AR, are genes that Nachman genes.AD, of There loop; autosomal Henle’s ascending limb from transporter Glassock different (solute 300 recessive; form dominant; autosomal RH, carrier) over 2010;9(3). NephSAP

that half because half, in differ acids. contains the glucose second tubular amino those the first or enters very fluid little and from the high [Cl−] addition mEq/L) the (140 In

and acquired, proteins. Pi, the of − first due reabsorb organic disease − or proximal HCO3 low-molecular-weight half in tubule of the reabsorption to syndrome, ability reabsorption impaired facilitates to is is and results hereditary that Na+ glucose, renal amino tubule, Fanconi of of from the which proximal tubule Cl− a HCO3, an solutes preferential either acids, with in fluid, Na+ other . downstream with Because segments and these nephron reabsorb solutes cannot

of syndrome acids, the in glucose, Pi, mechanism reabsorption of low- second and shown The excretion in amino proximal urinary , results tubule protein, the Na+ half in HCO3− transcellular Fanconi is increased of

Fig. proteins. 34.3 molecular-weight

the the enters the primarily Na+ operation antiporter across of •Fig. via cell Na+/H+ parallel a luminal membrane (NHE3) Na+ the 34.1 transport proximal processes first of half the tubule. in all the the transport half first into simplify of to proximal These tubule cells present separated in different are cells are the in but discussion. mechanisms HCO3− reabsorption membrane mediates Na+/H+ of also apical NaHCO3. and Operation (NHE3) the the membrane transporters, the including see in (NBC1; A, the ) the basolateral of and in Na+,K+-ATPase Na+/HCO3− antiporter symporter to dioxide a Carbon combine the form enzyme water carbonic anhydrase HCO3− and H+ in reaction (CA). cells the and by facilitated inside Na+/glucose Na+-glucose conjunction (SGLT2) in of in membrane, glucose (GLUT2) in membrane, the symporter the transporter with Na+,K+-ATPase Operation the mediates the reabsorption. apical B, and basolateral GLUT2 lead the and to tubule decreased glucose Inactivating gene mutations glucose the proximal (i.e., in in urine). in reabsorption the glucosuria solutes, amino and including Pi, Though with coupled not shown, other also lactate. Na+ acids, is reabsorption the these located membrane. acid, respectively, transporters, apical basolateral the lactate the in Na+/lactate in Pi, symporters, and amino by and respectively, mediated the is located Na+/Pi, Na+/amino and membrane Reabsorption solutes of acid, Na+,K+-ATPase, been amino two either amino Three or in basic amino in acids transporters conjunction does basic acids. require Na+ identified of tubule: Na+ that with classes transport the acid and transports that have proximal not one and acidic

•Fig. tubule. of function in the 34.2 of fluid along solutes tubule length proximal Concentration as a the tubular is is [P] concentration [TF] concentration the plasma. in the the fluid; of of substance substance in

solute indicate below than that the is and Values relatively that of 100 more values water less substance water above reabsorbed. 100 is of the relatively than reabsorbed, indicate

•Fig. the second proximal of transport tubule. 34.3 in half the processes Na+ parallel cell operation the (NHE3) Cl− (CFEX). membrane and across of the enter Na+ apical oxalate, antiporters Cl−-base through bicarbonate) the formate, and (e.g., Na+/H+ and but depicted. in one is is Cl−-base one only antiporter than involved this process, More and an form H+ the the base can across tubular in plasma secreted complex The to H-base recycle combine membrane. fluid that Accumulation the into gradient across the fluid the complex plasma concentration in recycling apical H-base of that membrane tubular H-base establishes H-base favors a cell. membrane. back Inside plasma H+ dissociate cell, apical the recycle base across and and the the uptake result net NaCl membrane. apical of is across the The may formate (HCO2−), , ions base sulfate. be HCO3− hydroxide oxalate, or (OH−), The in voltage blood) across the to the tubular Cl− circle lumen, by positive sign of the tight (lumen the plus generated The indicated by transepithelial diffusion lumen, is in inside the junction. of . The tubular diffusion [Cl−] the force fluid driving for of Cl− provides high that the that proximal than the half first except (SGLT1 also Na+/glucose symporter capacity and gene) tubule, and half reabsorbed has by the first proximal one higher depicted in of in similar in lower tubule, with the Some glucose the the tubule Na+/glucose a is symporter second the proximal affinity of of the in transports 2Na+ glucose described to part mechanism

Fig. . 34.1 in via rather addition, of cell basolateral proximal membrane first the (not tubule In as the part via than across GLUT1 shown). exits the the glucose GLUT2 KCl symporter. KCC,

peptide aAtrial and vasopressin inhibit (AVP)-stimulated water (BNP) permeability. natriuretic peptide (ANP) brain natriuretic

(e.g., and antiporters more or Cl−-base CFEX). one uptake tubular in and equivalent the cell. NaCl secreted of Na+/H+ fluid Because tubular cell, the antiporters is H+ the base the reenter Cl−-base to and of combine fluid operation and into the from the Cl− and (KCC) membrane. enters a in via K+/ channel Na+,K+-ATPase, the the Cl− and cell Cl− blood and leaves leaves cell the symporter basolateral via a Na+

NaCl across is proximal a route. also the of second reabsorbed the Some paracellular half via tubule first tubule in (140 occurs the proximal tubule the [Cl−] a NaCl the gradient because in the reabsorption in and in interstitium). 105 Paracellular mEq/L lumen in fluid half tubule mEq/L creates rise [Cl−] of the favors lateral lumen concentration the Cl− junctions across the into the tight diffusion of tubular gradient intercellular This from space. blood. becoming to of charged positively negatively charged fluid the Cl− tubular Movement in results relative the of transepithelial across out voltage the causes charged junction diffusion into blood. This fluid tight of Na+ the positive tubular positively Thus via junctions across tubule, the Na+ proximal passive diffusion. in are some the second reabsorbed Cl− the and half tight of

reabsorption both via Cl− and in the and paracellular summary, occurs Na+ transcellular pathways. In of proximal tubule reabsorbed of proximal tubule. is the in the each filtered day 67% Approximately NaCl remaining amount, across this Of moves paracellular moves whereas ( pathway, two-thirds the pathway the transcellular across one-third the

34.4 Table

The proximal the 67% water filtered reabsorbs ( of tubule

34.5 ). Table driving of is NaCl, gradient force for reabsorption The reabsorption osmotic (e.g., Na+-glucose). a solute by water established transtubular HCO3 tubular fluid with and Cl− reduces of lateral space. of solutes, the spaces from , along − into the the intercellular the and Na+ osmolality increases of tubular Reabsorption osmolality lateral organic fluid the intercellular these the only ( mOsm/L osmotic The across is few processes by gradient transport a established tubule proximal

Fig. ). 34.4 basolateral in (AQP1) apical to membranes, of is cells across the Because channels reabsorbed expression aquaporin water the is primarily tubule permeable and water proximal water, by osmosis. highly owing to in the proximal between proximal across tight addition are the also so junctions is reabsorbed tubule In also cells. some tubular water permeable, the paracellular pathway water within space lateral of pressure and intercellular solutes compartment. increases Accumulation the hydrostatic fluid in this and the increased capillaries. solutes pressure hydrostatic into fluid The forces

capillaries pressure in 2In of glomerular (see elevated oncotic because (πpc) the process the filtration peritubular is protein ). of addition, πpc into uptake The facilitates capillary. of elevated solute fluid and the

•Fig. Routes 34.4 across reabsorption tubule. and solute of of the water proximal of force , establishes this solutes, increases solutes, the which of driving across , Cl− the Na+ space reabsorption including and osmolality proximal organic Transport compartment, the for lateral water intercellular tubule. osmotic of into the This some and deposit HCO3− and organic some Na+,K+-ATPase of these are , membranes and between located solutes occurs the on transporters because cells. cell solutes, lateral Cl− the junction lateral pathway). the NaCl paracellular across Furthermore, (i.e., enters tight space via also intercellular diffusion some the across fluid water the of An solutes, the drag. transcellular paracellular reabsorbed proximal in , pathways the K+ consequence some in thereby entrained Ca++ tubule solvent and by that is reabsorbed especially and osmotic of flow process and important are

tubule. the in reabsorption proximal fluid to reabsorbed hyperosmotic is relative The slightly plasma. it ≈67% isosmotic that proximal osmolality is the said load of filtered are difference reabsorption tubule solute small this in and is water so However, (i.e., both commonly reabsorbed). is of the of little start difference and end is the Indeed, osmolality proximal in there tubular at tubule. of the fluid process reabsorbed the solutes, the and , water flow fluid entrained some osmotic and drag in thereby Ca++ of of are solvent (see proximal is consequence K+ tubule An by important that across the reabsorbed especially

Fig. 34.4 ). to of other all virtually Reabsorption and coupled organic Na+ water ions, solutes, reabsorption. Cl− and is influence the reabsorption of reabsorption other in changes and Therefore Na+ water by solutes proximal tubule. in when contraction notably by increased HCO3 is This discussed be will increase metabolic to by is volume parallel during alkalosis). tubule which depletion Na+ , especially − later, in can the contribute relevant (i.e., point reabsorption, proximal alkalosis accompanied and reabsorption volume a

are the reabsorbed Proteins tubule. proximal in filtered by the glomerulus filtered such the of previously, peptide larger small hormones, as mentioned glomerulus. amounts proteins, albumin As proteins small by are and and the only glomerular the of proteins Bowman’s the glomerulus 40 enter ≈ Overall, only concentration proteins ultrafiltrate a in space is cross (i.e., small percentage mg/L). of (GFR) significant However, so high: filtered is of amount total protein because the filtration glomerular per day rate the is

Equation 34.1

in 7200 7 the ×[Protein] or = ultrafiltrate g/day protein GFR 2. = mg/day, Filtered

surface endocytosis proximal by degraded in being either proteins by tubule or proximal on proteins are partially tubule enzymes Filtered of cells. reabsorbed the as the after intact the membrane are proteins constituent to acids, the cell, the are their returned and amino enzymes digest the cell by them the and proteins then basolateral into Once across leave which inside transport peptides blood. reabsorbs essentially protein filtered, mechanism this Normally and urine the proteins the free. virtually all is hence mechanism proteins filtered However, because result in protein in (appearance urine). in an is proteinuria easily can the increase of saturated, 34.1 cGMPBile 34.2 the • Disruption increases the filtration Organic and Organic Proximal BOX Physiology ascorbate, BOX of filtration PGF2α cAMP, of 610 Secreted barrier by PGE2, Tubule Cations SECTION7Berne Levy proteins Secreted glomerular • by folate Proximal Tubule Some saltsHippuratesOxalateProstaglandins: to Some & UrateVitamins: Anions proteins

AcetazolamideAcyclovirAmoxicillinCaptoprilChlorothiazideFurosemideLosartanPenicillinProbenecidSalicylate drugs (NSAIDs): guanosine antiinflammatory indomethacin cyclic (aspirin)HydrochlorothiazideSimvastatinBumetanideNonsteroidal cyclic cGMP, monophosphate; cAMP, adenosine monophosphate.

in is results with seen kidney which disease. proteinuria, frequently

Anions Cations of and Secretion Organic Organic

fluid. also and into cations the tubule organic organic anions of tubule proximal the secrete Cells of by cations nonsteroidal and antineoplastics, anions of the and endogenous in and neurotransmitters, antivirals, of levels compounds the sources. from a regulating Secretion derived key proximal and toxic antiinflammatory antibiotics, variety drugs (e.g., [NSAIDs]) role immunosuppressants, plasma tubule statins, xenobiotics a diuretics, plays organic exogenous ( organic anions the of cations and Many

) the are end tubule 34.1 by proximal of secreted plasma. metabolism circulate in that Boxes 34.2 products not thus are proteins organic to bound are these plasma compounds readily filtered. of Many and are body filtration resulting a potentially only small excretion substances alone. these the from by fraction from Therefore eliminated of toxic the Thus organic entering of fluid, into cations, these compounds secretion from toxins tubular plasma peritubular many the elimination from kidneys. promote the of capillary including and anions these plasma removed both and Hence by filtration secretion. from are substances reduced, excretion anions and of increased is urinary lead by note kidney organic severely when anions to is which is to levels accumulation organic cations. of It reduced plasma and function can of toxic and disease, xenobiotics important cations that potentially

mediate water many Water across of transcellular aquaporins called segments. channels (AQPs) nephron reabsorption have date, been aquaporins 13 To identified. AQP their is groups family permeability on divided characteristics. two The based into and AQP8, permeable AQP5, group is water AQP2, AQP6, (aquaporins) AQP12). AQP4, (AQP0, One AQP11, to AQP1, other AQP9, and group AQP10). AQP7, permeable especially (aquaglyceroporins) is The small (AQP3, water to solutes, glycerol plasma channel. membrane form each subunit water of the cells, in forming a tetramers with Aquaporins of and expressed of kidneys, loop. limb descending Henle’s In AQP1 is portions proximal the basolateral of in the apical and thin the tubule membranes in the which AQP1 water gene “knocked AQP1 studies mice. out” The is in of by the was reabsorption renal underscored in in importance These ability to reduced exhibit mice (polyuria) increased concentrate output urine. and urine in In in osmotic APQ1 lacking is less proximal addition permeability the than tubule of the mice normal mice. water fivefold AQP7 tubule. proximal are AQP8 in expressed and also the vasopressin membrane the collecting is is the of regulated the and in principal apical membrane (see its ). by cells AQP2 arginine in duct, abundance in plasma (AVP) expressed collecting basolateral in urine AQPs defects AQP4 and (see ability in in AQP3 (i.e., concentrate membrane knockout have in the to of cells and the ). mice the expressed AQP4 AQP3 these principal duct, deficient and mice) are AQPs in including organs they the in glands, roles. skin, secretory where expressed many lung, key play eye, body, and are the other also brain, physiological AQP4 expressed barrier. For is form example, that cells blood-brain the in such Knockout that acute affects of blood-brain after of of hyponatremia. subsequent mice water and permeability loading the the AQP4-deficient AQP4 barrier brain development water is in reduced edema

ATP ADP ATP 1,2,3 K+ BCRP OAT4 OA– MRP2/4 ˜-KG NaDC3 •Fig. ˜-KG OAT Secretion anion the proximal 34.5 (OA−) across tubule. of organic basolateral one transporters, OAT3). across of antiporter cell anion OAT1, enter membrane the (α-KG) (organic OA−s three OAT2, the by mechanisms OA−/α-ketoglutarate of into its gradient Na+ cell Na+-dicarboxylate the the against driven transporter Uptake movement cell the into chemical (NaDC3). is of α-KG by concentration via cell which transports because for membrane, cell [Na+] . is K+ Na+,K+-ATPase inside The out Na+ the in of the the basolateral exchange in low of the across OA− membrane the basolateral for The OATs α-KG recycles in on exchange . the resistance (MRP2 OA−s resistance by (BCRP), the leave cell multidrug 4), by protein which membrane proteins breast and the drug require cancer ATP. apical across and urate, anion. organic the reabsorbs OAT4 apical membrane in an

proteins of that is proximal fluid. the specifically tubule membrane bind endocytosis by and The by in peptides apical tubule proteins mediated proteins receptors, endocytosis. proteins peptides can wide range of a receptors, bind and endocytic called mediate thereby These their and multiligand and peptide protein proximal cubilin and the in tubule. mediate endocytosis Megalin Both receptor low-density the lipoprotein with a are megalin member being gene family. glycoproteins, of

Fig. proximal mechanisms transport of 34.5 organic the tubule. the (OA−) anion illustrates across are have low for listed secretory responsible many they (i.e., specificity These of OA−s), maximum secretion and in rates, pathways OA−s the transport transport

34.1. Box

(α-KG) chemical against via membrane across including OAT1, OA−s up into exchange the basolateral the several cell and in OAT3. OAT2, their antiporters, taken are α-ketoglutarate OA−/α-KG for gradient [NaDC3]) Na+/dicarboxylate α-KG symporter basolateral in also metabolism cells (i.e., the and accumulates membrane. a the Na+/α-KG of transporter present inside by the glutamate via coupled uptake into an of gradient OA− against electrochemical Thus the the is cell to

Urinalysis an tool detection important and for of kidney routine is disease. analysis macroscopic, urine and biochemical thorough includes microscopic, assessments. of A urinary visual evaluation performed microscopic of using examination composition is of This urinary sediment, dipstick reagent biochemical and of assessment strips. the by urine, presence both the blood, substances ketones, of many (e.g., both for (i.e., pH minutes) The tests and glucose, inexpensive <5 is protein). test urine and and bilirubin, fast dipstick trace normal amounts to It urine, urine. particularly is concentrated in find protein of loop. and Urinary (2) proximal the limb two ascending thick from secretion proteins by capacity synthesis of tubule and filtration sources: principal the glycoprotein (1) of Tamm-Horsfall derived are exceeding Henle’s reabsorptive of the Tamm-Horsfall tubule), secreted is in ascending glycoprotein protein “upstream” the limb for the proximal the urine. (i.e., reabsorption the in mechanism thick Because of appears However, in renal trace is proteinuria greater often than of amounts indicative disease.

the of down chemical the mechanism. cell, exit by α-KG its symporter out Na+/α-KG generated of gradient proteins the which tubular into exit mediated (BCRP), protein operation. across adenosine are The for breast the membrane multidrug triphosphate of 2 OA−s by fluid (ATP) their cancer 4 (MRP2/4) and require and resistance resistance 1 luminal by purine Recent catabolism, the OAT4 anion end proximal of the tubule studies organic urate, reveal of (see product the that mediates reabsorption

Fig. •Fig. 34.5 Organic proximal 34.6 secretion across the (OC+) cation tubule. across the cell membrane OCT2. OC+s basolateral by the enter primarily concentration cell-negative gradient the driven cell is into chemical their the difference. Uptake of potential OC+s by against and toxin cell which and and by exchange apical transporters resistance in membrane requires (MATE1 MATE2-K) H+by neutral ATP. across multidrug with OC+s the (MDR1), the electrically protein multidrug leave ADP Na+ Blood K+ OC+ OC+ OCT2MATE MDR1 Tubular H+ fluid OC+ ATP ATP

Fig. mechanism across the (OC+) organic proximal transport cation tubule. of illustrates the 34.6 agent important including the and and many including xenobiotics lamivudine, cations, dopamine, anticancer tubule. agent proximal monoamine histamine, oxaliplatin, neurotransmitters the and secreted epinephrine, by the Organic metformin, antidiabetic are antiviral such the as drug norepinephrine primarily organic the (OCT2). are cation membrane, 2 up by Organic cell cations transporter the basolateral across the taken into difference driven cell-negative the across cations the of the magnitude organic basolateral Uptake of membrane. is potential by the luminal in secretion, transport MDR1 is for primarily extrusion tubular which is P-glycoprotein), Organic cation ATP mediated and transporters as known and (also operation. by rate-limiting fluid, its electroneutral step multidrug across into membrane (MATEs) requires which the the toxin secretion transport mechanisms organic usually compete via pathway. transport given nonspecific, a These cations for several and are

15% the water. approximately 25% reabsorbs of filtered of NaCl the Henle’s filtered and loop NaCl of Reabsorption

anions same inhibit Because the of organic for elevated anion others. the many often compete secretory of pathways, levels one secretion transported plasma of reduce can acid tubule. proximal (PAH) p-aminohippuric For infusing penicillin example, the secretion by infusion responsible into PAH for of penicillin, and kidneys the individuals eliminating half-life. biological penicillin extends Because excretion penicillin are receiving thereby reduces its World effect. extend when to given penicillin short with In in penicillin was therapeutic supply, were hippurates its II, War competing inhibit cation tubule, and elevated the competition by cations. proximal species Similar of is levels can observed transported secretion other organic of one plasma secretion for cation the via cimetidine gastric example, tubule. used For H2antagonist the organic the to proximal histamine treat cation mechanisms transport in ulcers is secreted excretion common (also drug arrhythmias), for secretory used by pathway. competition cimetidine procainamide treat procainamide a cation) reduces is receiving organic If to direct of to given urinary cardiac cimetidine an patients (a consequence, increase plasma alone. drugs given the of higher much a drugs concentration of those drugs observed can competing same are cationic for the than to levels both As the when pathway coadministration to effect drug This lead can toxicity.

•Fig. the Transport the 34.7 for thick NaCl loop in of mechanisms ascending reabsorption Henle. of limb passive The a in of the role voltage reabsorption driving in paracellular major cations. plays lumen the positive apical the resulting K+ negative and to , which the , lumen membrane transepithelial a conductive is in voltage apical thereby than conductive is positive the voltage, basolateral Because membrane membrane potential. is K+ more primarily Cl− to Mutations box Bartter basolateral syndrome). (see in Cl− (ClCNKB) cause clinical the channel (ROMK), K+ channel Bartter the symporter (NKCC2), the 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− apical the membrane membrane on apical or syndrome CA, anhydrase. carbonic

in and thin reabsorb in loop both of NaCl. thin Henle not limbs, ascending whereas thick the the descending the does limb occurs water water In is exclusively to restricted mediated impermeable to whereas AQP1 the reabsorption contrast, ascending by limb, thin is limb the water. descending channels reabsorbed for (see of divalent also cations addition, and are loop and (e.g., details). Henle the − Mg++) In in Ca++ HCO3 more

mechanism. NaCl thin reabsorbs by ascending passive The a limb in in the Reabsorption increases but fluid the limb tubule limb. of the descending ascending thin not [NaCl] water, thin entering NaCl, and details). medullary gradient As the cortex, tubule a the to the interstitial fluid directed for NaCl ascending limb down toward (see the into NaCl-rich moves thin diffuses fluid, interstitium the of out across fluid the concentration tubule the lumen from

of thick element in solute Na+,K+-ATPase (Fig. is limb by key The ascending basolateral the in the membrane reabsorption 34.7 ). tubule, of the by reabsorption every in to Na+,K+-ATPase thick As activity. solute with limb is the reabsorption ascending proximal linked the cell. tubular a the transporter provides maintains Na+ movement intracellular from a gradient [Na+], low for which of This fluid favorable chemical into of apical the This the couples which cell 1Na+ . 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− into movement symporter movement of by across with the Na+ is mediated 2Cl− (NKCC2), membrane 1K+ the and movement the into drives of of uphill cell. the energy symporter downhill the movement and , by K+ potential released this the Cl− Na+ Using role plasma an by reabsorption apical in in thick NaCl ascending play membrane Maxi-K) the K+ important of limb. and (ROMK the channels the into K+ back into to the the channels allow transported These tubule recycle symporter K+ fluid. 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− via cell Because recycling of is [K+] 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− K+ relatively the is required for symporter. low, the in tubule fluid continued operation − as also anti-porter (see (NHE3) limb thick ascending well in ). as reabsorption in the mediates also reabsorption) Na+/H+ secretion (HCO3 the cell Na+ H+ membrane A apical in membrane apical Na+/H+ Na+ in The in operation of H+ . the exchange antiporter cellular of results the for uptake Cl−/HCO3 basolateral (AE2). membrane the cell − of inside a via the H+ −, cells generates production exits across antiporter which The HCO3 K+/Cl− the Na+ leave Cl− cell separate Na+,K+-ATPase, in channels symporter). and cell across Cl− and membrane (i.e., membrane K+ pathways whereas basolateral basolateral via and the the K+ via the the the leaves

Physiology 614 SECTION7Berne Levy •Fig. & segment of distal the mechanism Transport in 34.8 for reabsorption tubule. NaCl the early This impermeable is water. segment to the apical syndrome. NaCl symporter in cause membrane Gitelman (NCC) Mutations K+ Cl– K+ K+ H2O Blood Na+ Tubular NCC fluid Na+ ATP Cl–

limb important ascending voltage across reabsorption The the thick of cations. for is several apical proteins tubular charged basolateral is the of unique because fluid the to in location membranes. blood The positively and relative of transport the this NaCl important the by and the force of including magnitude ascending are the of transport positive pathway and reabsorption voltage is K+ Two , , (2) increased increases paracellular several (see an points cations, for important: in , thick lumen, Mg++ driving , limb across Na+ voltage Ca++ the (1)

Fig. ). 34.7 the pathway lumen positive and thick of underscored mutations by Ca++ paracellular ascending reabsorption that presence importance claudin-16 of voltage. of is observation by tight of inactivating solute The junction Mg++ the protein in the a reduce the the even transepithelial limb, reabsorption to

across reabsorption paracellular pathways. occurs ascending limb via transcellular summary, and the NaCl In thick 50% reabsorption NaCl of is is percent Fifty and paracellular. transcellular, of the osmolality solutes NaCl H2O. AQPs), water, than to ascending reabsorb 150 lack to the owing channels kg limb fluid does thick of mOsm/ reduces Because a reabsorption water (i.e., and less not other tubular of (as limb segment because “diluting ascending dilute this often a that loop the produces Henle’s next) Thus is plasma, the collectively fluid the referred thick segments.” adjacent discussed tubule as to distal to are and relative of

of The tubule approximately variable amount amounts 8% collecting and and reabsorb , of distal reabsorb (≈8%–17%). the variable NaCl, water of H+ a and secrete filtered K+ duct and water and is ( tubule Na+, initial impermeable reabsorbs tubule) distal of the Ca++ distal segment to The (early Cl−,

Fig. ). 34.8 mediated symporter, by Entry of cell apical into the a the membrane Na+/Cl− is across NaCl

joined are cells apical surfaces their occludens). epithelial (zonula at tight by 2, junctions Chapter extracellular the the identified adjacent one to portion of the proteins (e.g., the the and (e.g., same of claudins), number link of junction, as as and cell proteins tight ZO-1, link the ZO-3) that that ZO-2, well cytoplasmic the components been cell. membrane cell A as span have molecule the occludin membrane-spanning proteins cytoskeleton now linker proteins of in to including of and proteins, to major junctions. determinants tight be Of these of of appear permeability claudins the junctional characteristics ascending tight For the critical permeability are the in Henle’s thick claudin-19 loop. junctions cation example, claudin-16 limb determinants of divalent of of and urine) calcification and (i.e., low plasma hypercalciuria Ca++ in (i.e., (i.e., with claudin-16 in and [Mg++]) kidney). increased hypomagnesemia cause nephrocalcinosis claudin19 Mutations the the human familial of tubule. water the be reabsorption to for Claudin-2 responsible and paracellular is water may across proximal permeable permeability whereas been or in junction kidney to cultured control permeable junction shown of has , cells whether a tight is cations tight Claudin-4 the determines anions. to to claudin-15 Na+ the the at the segments Thus least by by junctions characteristics the claudins that specific segment. are in in cells nephron determined expressed part of in different permeability tight the

AVP, is water reabsorbed. contrast, absence reabsorb late the and tubule in little collecting the AVP distal duct of By

of recessive set syndrome is autosomal hypokalemia, diseases hyperaldosteronism characterized genetic by and Bartter (see metabolic a alkalosis,

Table ). 34.3 ascending reabsorption thick the limb, which in (ROMK), turn Inactivating hypokalemia and decrease and ECFV. [K+]) low symporter decrease (NKCC2), a (i.e., the or K+ the Cl− apical 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− (ClCNKB) for causes both channel channel coding the plasma the reabsorption NaCl mutations gene basolateral K+ in in by and by reabsorption and ECFV in aldosterone in stimulates The secretion fall which secretion, tubule the H+ collecting NaCl distal duct. turn stimulates

Fig. ). 34.8 action the and the the Cl− diffusion Cl− channels Na+ leaves symporter cell (KCC4). and through K+/Cl− a of cell via Na+,K+-ATPase, leaves via continues limb the dilution and Thus in fluid ascending segment in thick of early tubule. begins of the the distal tubular

and cells distal intercalated types: last collecting The composed and two three tubule cell types cells. segment distal tubule) the of are duct principal the (late of of As in illustrated

Fig. . and cells NaCl water principal reabsorb secrete 34.9, and K+ these in activity by membrane. the K+ secretion cells basolateral and Both of Na+ the Na+,K+-ATPase depend reabsorption on of cell. movement for By provides tubular the a maintaining favorable Na+,K+-ATPase into [Na+], intracellular a the gradient Na+ fluid from chemical low entry (ENaCs), via the enters inside Because channels exits basolateral cell voltage blood the cell facilitates epithelial enters Na+ and the membrane Na+,K+-ATPase. diffusion negative the Na+-selective apical the via Na+, which cell through then membrane the the across of across provides Na+ luminal reabsorption collecting Reabsorption Cl− a of for force of paracellular late duct, which generates tubule and voltage driving distal the . the negative acid-base important or (see in and secrete HCO3 play either − homeostasis H+ Intercalated roles cells ). (see cell The α-intercalated

Fig. regulating − thus K+ and (see center) and HCO3 ). H+ , acid-base is and 34.9 in balance reabsorbs both important secretes cells apical by of in (HKA) reabsorb H+,K+-ATPase plasma the the operation K+ located α-Intercalated membrane. an In cells (see β-intercalated contrast,

Fig. − both reabsorb HCO3 and . bottom) and , 34.9 H+ secrete Cl− β-intercalated the Cl−/HCO3 via and Chloride cell membrane leaves channel. antiporter enters membrane via apical the (pendrin) basolateral Cl− a the across cell a − across the late water and distal the reabsorbed tubule in is of amount collecting duct. A variable cells principal across by in by mediated located of Water in AQP4 in segments apical AVP-regulated membrane basolateral the and water membrane AQP2 cells. plasma the these principal is located the reabsorption channel and AQP3 (see presence of In water the

is into K+ fluid secreted (see in principal from by cells blood steps two tubular

Fig. top). 34.9,

mediated by is Na+,K+-ATPase. the basolateral across membrane action the of First, uptake of K+ via cell diffusion. Second, K+ the passive leaves BK) fluid. diffuses through channels down K+ tubular (≈10 mEq/L) (≈150 is apical K+ high cell cells concentration is and fluid Because tubular membrane principal in [K+] its [K+] into low mEq/L), inside and (ROMK gradient into favors negative gradient the the retention, Although fluid (see these cell inside secretion the across K+ apical promotes the electrochemical membrane of cells intracellular potential K+ tubular from ). cells contrast, cell located mediated by In (HKA) is H+,K+-ATPase membrane the apical in (see reabsorption K+ by an α

Fig. center). , 34.9 the along reabsorb and both K+ secrete mechanisms, ability nephron these regulated nephron segments to possess reabsorb general the most contrasts consequence with independently to tendency which As segments. distal Na+ via a

Water of NaCl Regulation and Reabsorption

the II, Quantitatively, catecholamines, regulating urinary NaCl ( are uroguanylin and reabsorption and hormones peptides, important thereby natriuretic angiotensin aldosterone, excretion most NaCl

34.6). Table

adrenomedullin), also phenomenon of and (including NaCl and glomerulotubular other the balance hormones Starling However, reabsorption. forces, dopamine influence the AVP kidneys. only directly hormone excreted is amount water by the major of the regulates that

and water of tubule. NaCl potent has in proximal effect Angiotensin the a stimulatory on reabsorption II the isosmotic in of It also well Na+ limb as distal stimulates loop, ascending duct. and reabsorption late collecting tubule of as the thick Henle’s the A the in of system thereby for more concentration ECFV angiotensin the activates plasma renin-angiotensin-aldosterone decrease (see increasing II. details),

glomerulosa by thick the limb synthesized and late stimulates NaCl the tubule, distal cells Henle’s cortex duct. collecting of ascending adrenal is the the and the Aldosterone by reabsorption of of loop, aldosterone’s and action reabsorption NaCl of reflects distal its on effect collecting tubule duct. Most on late the (3) apical the in and expression (ENaC) four cell cell of the also of segments which kinase; increasing in Aldosterone the (serum in Na+,K+-ATPase expression (1) across NaCl see in levels, (4) basolateral molecular of Sgk1 stimulating enhances membrane; principal membrane; by ENaC (2) the elevating cells sodium increasing membrane; apical box) of these •Fig. channel the increases reabsorption amount the mechanisms: the glucocorticoid-stimulated pathways cells, of β-intercalated in principal Transport 34.9 and α-intercalated duct. the and the cells tubule of collecting cells, late distal segment carbonic CA, anhydrase. K+. secrete cells reabsorb Principal Na+and a types secreted and of K+is K+channels (KCC1). (ROMK two BK) K+/Cl−symporter by and by HCO3−and cells H+and reabsorb Cl−. and HCO3−and secrete reabsorb β-intercalated α-Intercalated H+and secrete cells K+, Blood 3 CA CO2 ˙-Intercalated Pendrin cell Cl− + V-ATPase H2O H+ HCO− Cl−

by (channel-activating protease, activates serine protease CAP1 proteolysis. ENaCs a prostatin), also called directly that actions cell apical together, the from into increase interior facilitate membrane across uptake the Na+ and blood. cell these Taken Na+ exit transepithelial distal in a late and The the the Na+ tubule collecting increase reabsorption generates voltage luminal negative duct. of across force electrochemical driving across Cl− provides lumen the the voltage tight the of junctions. for reabsorption This in negative distal the nephron distal referred (collectively late of as secretion stimulates and collecting to K+ the (ASDN) duct by also aldosterone-sensitive Aldosterone tubule

TAL, ↑[K+]pTAL, and II↑ReninPT, DT/CD↑NaCl II, reabsorptionAldosterone↑Angiotensin Angiotensin H2O DT/CD↑NaCl and H2O reabsorption

BNP, NaCl NaCl and ingestion reabsorptionUroguanylin, urodilatin↑ECFVCD↓H2O nerves↓ECFVPT, of and ANP, NaClPT, guanylinOral H2O TAL, CD↓H2O reabsorption DT/CD↑NaCl and reabsorptionSympathetic

these a hormones Dopamine↑ECFVPT↓H2O 1 with action aldosterone, minutes, hour. delay of reabsorption except aAll NaCl its on of NaCl reabsorptionAVP↑Posm, exerts which ↓ECFVDT/CD↑H2O and reabsorption within act plasma concentration; days.bThe reabsorption pressure; Posm, not ascending [K+]p, duct; K+ a plasma tubule; atrial BP, DT, after thick CD, maximal TAL, PT, ascending fluid peptide, natriuretic on effect limb. proximal Aldosterone few collecting achieves blood osmolality; BNP, natriuretic peptide; does brain thick H2O effect extracellular its ECFV, the volume; limb.ANP, distal of tubule; include

36]). Chapter

renin-angiotensin hypovolemia the for activation see ECFV more [RAS]; angiotensin Aldosterone and details). hyperkalemia following secretion increased increased of by II via by (i.e., system reduced is Aldosterone secretion decreased and natriuretic more by (discussed hypokalemia detail next). is peptides in collecting also its by this of NaCl in water segment. stimulation nephron Through reabsorption reabsorption the increases indirectly duct, aldosterone

paradox. The aldosterone by collecting earlier, duct. stimulates noted and the NaCl As aldosterone reabsorption both secretion K+ conditions. both levels, the response in the see physiological kidneys increase these two ) ECFV in differs (i.e., hypovolemia, a Although reduction the aldosterone of by without K+ reduced kidneys in accompanying to NaCl excretion the In is change excretion. of setting the ECFV depletion, an ECFV, restore normalize [K+], K+ in without during accompanying kidneys excretion is excretion. hyperkalemia, plasma NaCl By to by change contrast, an the albeit increased urinary apparent and phenomenon—the effects aldosterone independent K+ This the excretion—is paradox. on aldosterone called of Na+ a whereas by aldosterone hyperkalemia that aldosterone directly without observation paradox activation. release ECFV adrenal release The requirement of can RAS, stimulates the explained depletion be via for the activation RAS of increases whereas and II hyperkalemia. ECFV angiotensin levels during such, aldosterone only during increase As not increases both depletion conditions, in tubule aldosterone processes II the collecting that paradox. for transport accounts of is and distal angiotensin and the by in regulation It this differential duct depicted physiological response is The in integrated to reduction in ECFV a

Fig. 34.10A . shown stimulates reabsorption in During by proximal tubule hypovolemia, (not NaCl II the angiotensin

kinase), lysine and ), reabsorption the early the which (NCC). Na+/Cl− activating distal Figure tubule by by (with enhances activating by [K] no WNK 34.10A NaCl symporter the activating in reabsorption duct membrane. increases of stimulates ENaC-mediated ENaC SGK1, by cells collecting Na+ in abundance which plasma apical principal the Aldosterone would levels, aldosterone K+ be cells, expected K+ which In via activates ROMK, despite to preventing excretion elevated K+ secretion thereby II secretion. WNK in parallel, increased which angiotensin promote principal inhibits segment fluid II duct, NaCl and reabsorption NaCl delivery in proximal this which details). secretion of the also suppresses more water to for and stimulation collecting also Angiotensin (see of reduces tubule K+ physiological The in is to integrated response depicted corresponding hyperkalemia

Fig. . 34.10B by collecting cells activating stimulates mediated principal in ROMK by During the secretion aldosterone duct WNK. hyperkalemia, K+ this NaCl Because reabsorption to in segment. directly does the responsive tubule not aldosterone, early stimulate hormone distal not this is resulting via the reabsorption elevated low, decreased (see NCC is in WNK the by distal angiotensin are activity hyperkalemia, II in early of not In NaCl levels basal tubule because fact,

Fig. 34.10B ). reabsorption effect of reabsorption effect in tubule aldosterone, early SGK1, collecting stimulatory duct. distal the principal This of cells via of offsets on ENaC-mediated NaCl WNK on the Na+

brain peptide water (BNP) and NaCl and natriuretic Atrial (ANP) natriuretic inhibit peptide reabsorption. both by stimulated by wall the BNP Secretion ECFV cardiac and the of are atria by ventricles myocardial ANP increased pressure. increased cardiac and pressure of total and primarily and blood by peripheral reduce RBF both enhancing GFR. NaCl decreasing urinary and ANP water, by excretion and resistance BNP increasing NaCl, increasing efferent later which and balance vasodilate afferent GFR thus for of arterioles mechanism). excretion arterioles, discussion These the peptides vasoconstrict the natriuretic and the filtration thereby NaCl glomerulotubular of (see increases the interstitium, the decreases NaCl turn •Fig. by of increase addition which the RBF ascending medullary reabsorption in concentration reduces thin the passive NaCl In in in details). (see paradox for Aldosterone text 34.10 ENaC, NCC, with stimulate; channel; epithelial K+ angiotensin −, kinases. AII, symporter; lysine[K] channel; NaCl sodium no ROMK, inhibit; II; WNK, +, elucidated. clarity the not WNK of figure some not given are four been kidney; for in details WNKs of NCC, regulation and and the have There of ROMK the details in ENaC, are because

earlier of for NaCl (see on Henle’s by details this loop discussion segment). limb reabsorption collecting inhibit duct. inhibit NaCl and by also BNP of and the water the medullary across duct the portion ANP reabsorption AVP-stimulated collecting reabsorption BNP and Moreover, of also secretion from pituitary. ANP reduce posterior the AVP of guanylyl actions membrane-bound which second of the increases intracellular (cGMP). receptors, are These mediated monophosphate guanine by messenger and the ANP levels BNP cyclase cyclic activation of profound a agent is ANP more BNP. diuretic natriuretic and than

gene have by ANP the sequences. and same Urodilatin encoded amino and acid similar are acids four Urodilatin that addition of amino amino acid to is ANP the differs the from 32–amino terminus. a hormone by and Urodilatin is only influences present duct in systemic of function secreted collecting the is kidneys. and the thus circulation; distal the not the by urodilatin tubule Secretion rise in in of stimulated increase ECFV. is blood by and urodilatin an a pressure medullary collecting portion reabsorption NaCl and the water across It inhibits the of duct. neutral a some urodilatin. ANP is endopeptidase and corresponding is of the natriuretic than no effect blood Urodilatin in that diuretic degraded because a ANP has more the enters on kidneys hormone that by potent

Uroguanylin to guanylin NaCl. intestine are by in in ingestion produced and neuroendocrine of response cells oral the inhibit NaCl membrane-bound water receptors, These activation reabsorption the and enter and guanylyl hormones circulation which of by the cyclase via kidneys

kinase, kidneys. of an and K+ important NaCl a both role plays kinase), the (serum NaCl and K+ maintaining by serine/threonine glucocorticoid-stimulated excretion by homeostasis regulating in Sgk1 to restriction kinase K+ in that severe Sgk1 survive animals and Studies loading. for is knockout mice reveal NaCl required this K+ which NaCl phosphorylation. loading minutes) restriction (in increases rapidly and Sgk1 and expression protein plasma [aldosterone], enhance primarily and ENaCs membrane. principal increasing by number membrane cells Sgk1 of increasing reabsorption Na+,K+-ATPase in the ENaC-mediated Na+ plasma the enhances pumps the apical by collecting in the duct, also of basolateral number of in the Phosphorylated ENaC subunits, Phosphorylated inhibits removal a and destruction targeting monoubiquitinylates the thereby from ubiquitin Sgk1 subsequent in plasma that membrane for ligase them Nedd4-2, lysosomes. endocytic number Nedd4-2 of thereby the of Inhibition the monoubiquitinylation increasing by the in membrane. Sgk1 endocytosis reduces and reducing of channels ENaC, membrane, and Sgk1 intracellular K+ pool from channels the the (ROMK) plasma K+ secretion enhances principal induces an translocation thereby ROMK-mediated to by of cells. transport collecting the effects These NaCl by duct. leads to a Na+,K+-ATPase delayed Sgk1 precede abundance, aldosterone-stimulated increase ENaC, hours) in K+ and increase in ROMK, which (>4 and the secondary of an pressure, polymorphisms by in Activating thereby by NaCl increase cause duct, reabsorption enhancing the presumably pressure. which ECFV in Sgk1 blood increases the blood collecting and

intracellular increase [cGMP]. response explain involvement is helps than load pronounced of oral gut-derived to intravenously. natriuretic when the of delivered NaCl an kidneys these why hormones the more The

of reabsorption NaCl. Catecholamines stimulate distal from thick limb of medulla of released by (norepinephrine) duct. tubule, the Catecholamines the ascending of the collecting nerves Henle, water stimulate loop the (epinephrine) tubule, adrenal sympathetic and reabsorption proximal and and NaCl (e.g., segments. Although active hemorrhage), and not nerves stimulates reabsorption activity NaCl nerve when are ECFV declines water of dramatically rises after ECFV sympathetic by four normal, and these sympathetic when nephron is

also from by the of in cells kidneys synthesized catecholamine, released tubule. proximal Dopamine, a and dopaminergic the nerves is is The dopamine is action of norepinephrine that opposite of and epinephrine. is the ECFV, of inhibits in and stimulated dopamine in secretion of NaCl water and an proximal tubule. by Secretion increase its reabsorption directly

hormone is organs, Adrenomedullin a peptide produced acid that is the a 52–amino by kidneys. including of variety congestive and and is marked secretion failure hypertension. natriuresis, its and a stimulated diuresis by induces heart Adrenomedullin blood renal and is adrenomedullin of increase kidneys major on effect flow to and GFR the The

genetic by in an pressure syndrome to increase characterized is hypertension) blood increase in disorder secondary an rare ECFV. Liddle (i.e., a in activating γ mutations caused subunit β (ENaC). either or Liddle by Na+ channel is the syndrome of the epithelial of Na+ channels increase in Na+ reabsorbed. the mutations membrane the of thereby number cells These amount and the cell principal of apical leads of high, is which reabsorption increase Na+ syndrome, hypertension. and the rate Liddle to ECFV In an renal in inappropriately are reabsorb elevated). do aldosterone NaCl levels low; (PHA) levels of when as aldosterone pseudohypoaldosteronism PHA, forms different There in kidneys two are (i.e., the they are however, autosomal by γ in mutations caused α, recessive is of β, the inactivating The subunit or form ENaC. is receptor. of dominant inactivating the an The mutation the cause form mineralocorticoid in autosomal excretion, is by Pseudohypoaldosteronism in reduction an in a and hypotension. characterized Na+ increase ECFV, hyperkalemia, ECFV pressure thereby volume treated individuals elevated with are pressure. lisinopril) (e.g., Some that angiotensin-converting inhibit blood expanded drugs enzyme fluid and lower captopril, (ACE) and enalapril, and with blood I of plasma degradation Inhibition thereby ACE II of lowers blocks angiotensin angiotensin levels. II angiotensin and to II concentration in effects. plasma decline three angiotensin has The water reabsorption and nephron proximal falls. NaCl the tubule) (especially the First, by decreases, distal and reducing limb, collecting NaCl reabsorption the duct. thick Second, thus tubule, aldosterone secretion ascending in Third, in lower pressure. blood a dilate thereby the angiotensin permits vasoconstrictor, concentration is to arterioles a reduction potent arterial because systemic and its of vasodilatory hormone vasodilator degrades hormone. ACE thus inhibitors bradykinin; increase the concentration a the also ACE bradykinin, and and renal NaCl arterial resistance. reducing by blood and peripheral promoting ECFV by decrease excretion ACE inhibitors pressure water total the

earlier and water indirectly discussion stimulate NaCl about and BNP). (see excretion of ANP thereby

Arginine reabsorption. (AVP) regulates water vasopressin the of ). the It is (see important regulates kidneys that in water hormone most reabsorption by increase This decrease gland or to ECFV posterior an pituitary in is osmolality response or (1% more) in in of the (>5%–10% secreted plasma normal). a hormone the collecting AVP the water. duct increases of permeability to It the the water reabsorption the duct by (see the duct collecting across because of of gradient collecting increases wall that of osmotic exists

35). Chapter on excretion. little urinary effect NaCl has AVP

across Starling and tubule. the reabsorption NaCl water proximal regulate of forces water transported space the , Na+ −, As HCO3 glucose, of the tubule. previously Cl−, are described, into proximal and intercellular amino acids, fluid this space reabsorbed of between and the the into peritubular facilitate Starling the capillaries. capillaries movement forces wall Starling •Fig. forces peritubular of capillaries the across modify Starling proximal and tubule reabsorption. water solute forces 34.11 (1) membrane. Solute the reabsorbed water across and are apical solute cell the lateral and membrane. then This cross water the space water (3), and into interstitial capillary flows remainder and tubule fluid and (2). the Some then enters the the reenters solute proportional 3. to the of is pathways and the amount by to directly The solute arrows moving water width 1 of forces the pathway Starling fluid determine through amount 2 of flowing capillary across 3. the versus pathway wall mechanisms entering cell water in amount (pathway and membranes the solute the Transport the determine apical cell of 1). capillary peritubular capillary pressure; interstitial Ppc, Pi, fluid peritubular hydrostatic oncotic oncotic pressure. hydrostatic πi, pressure; interstitial πpc, pressure; movement in the response indicate direction capillary arrows wall of Thin water across each the force. to

lateral (Pi) (πpc) space and of lateral (Ppc) peritubular peritubular hydrostatic intercellular capillary the in oncotic (πi). in consist intercellular pressure and capillary the pressure space and is lateral as result the of reabsorption transport modified of space from forces. of into intercellular Thus a Starling the by Na+ tubular water fluid Accordingly:

space 34.2 (positive indicate where numbers flow from into Equation intercellular flow blood). is J the forces and interstitium from Pi favor the peritubular movement are that the capillaries Starling πpc into (Fig. ). 34.11 opposing πi are and The Ppc. forces Starling favors the forces space the Normally Starling and the movement of the solute interstitial into from water capillary. of sum the space of lateral fluid and However, intercellular proximal solutes that the some into leak tubular enter back the fluid. tubule, and less transport the is. because Henle, forces water Starling duct tubule proximal by permeable these are than collecting loop do not distal segments to of the affect

the proximal of surrounding tubule. can Starling forces capillaries A the number factors peritubular alter the across the of For efferent whereas dilation it. arteriole Ppc, arteriole efferent example, the of increases decreases constriction

decrease increase NaCl junction, tight decreasing Ppc reabsorption and and reabsorption inhibits by back-leak whereas water water across tight the by in back-leak increasing solute a across junction. An the of stimulates

by pressure (πpc) of formation glomerular rate is of oncotic the Peritubular capillary determined the partially ultrafiltrate. as arteriole GFR plasma one ultrafiltrate the the and (i.e., peritubular proteins the arteriole, less example, assumes formed plasma if less a is become For that constant decreases). as afferent plasma efferent in flow the enters in capillary concentrated decreases. πpc Hence, directly is fraction to flow πpc filtration [RPF]). GFR/renal related plasma the = (FF Thus decrease FF in GFR, resulting at a RPF, constant fall A in the from decreases πpc. and tubular NaCl into This backflow of lateral in tubule. of space net reabsorption and and the the thereby fluid decreases water the proximal from turn water across solute increases intercellular has in FF opposite effect. An increase the

underscored by and proximal solute tubule in glomerulotubular of (G-T) reabsorption the phenomenon of the balance. water regulating is forces Starling importance The by filtered alter GFR in changes GFR the amount Na+= (filtered [Na+] filtered markedly × Spontaneous fluid). the Na+ of in pressure thus and in for details). counter adjustments and and rapid to alter changes Na+ body reabsorption blood Without ECFV widely (see of in would fluctuate Na+ of Na+ of the filtration urinary the disturb the excretion more , balance Na+ of alter not because GFR when balance. Na+ However, excretion in balance do spontaneous of is ECFV urine G-T phenomenon changes the Na+ or normal in of proportion body to Na+ the normal in to the When Na+ reabsorption . and Na+ balance increase of water ECFV in normal), that refers fact G-T balance GFR is amount is (i.e., increases and filtered of filtered from tubule variations the water is and Na+ fraction reabsorbed constant a despite in the proximal GFR. Thus in and is G-T balance GFR in amount when of normal. urine to water excreted is the changes net the Na+ of ECFV result reduce The impact of on

balance. responsible G-T Two for are mechanisms hydrostatic to oncotic the related peritubular (i.e., pressure and space One differences intercellular the is the capillaries Starling lateral forces). and between plasma (at raises For the protein GFR example, increase an normal. concentration constant capillary RPF) in in glomerular above the arterioles, the and efferent peritubular enters protein-rich the through the plasma capillaries. This capillaries, leaves glomerular flows increased The augments movement πpc 1. of the

the solutes. processes duct) major four of collecting tubule, and urine volume water the of solutes reabsorption some loop, The the by of secretion Henle’s and tubule, of and and distal segments determine of composition selective (proximal nephron

2.

by glomerulus essential retain allows levels of the the reabsorbed. by in kidneys and regulate the Tubular plasma are their substances substances they are filtered to reabsorption that degree altering which to cations of constitutes , and major organic , water nephron. with of Reabsorption function the and together Cl− the other anions, Na+ anions Na+ Approximately each L and are reabsorbed of 179 mEq day. 25,200 water of of 67% tubule that was filtered of 15% Henle’s cells loop NaCl of about was and reabsorb the that about filtered. ultrafiltrate, 25% the reabsorb and water glomerular the of Proximal cells of (distal segments duct a the nephron reabsorptive capacity. system) limited The have more and collecting tubule distal the proximal reabsorbs although However, tubule

Brown D, et al. by acid-base renal regulation dynamic epithelial water New cells. into insights and the balance of Cell Am Physiol. Physiol J 2012;302:C1421-C1433.

et al. Dantzler WH, the limbs of thin mechanism Urine-concentrating inner loops medulla: Henle. in function of of the the Soc Nephrol. Clin Am J 2014;9:1781-1789.

the space intercellular from and into solute lateral peritubular capillaries. fluid the This increases reabsorption tubule. net by action solute proximal the and water

acids. responsible of mechanism second the glucose initiated amino is The increase amount and G-T by in filtered for an balance coupled half glucose the reabsorption amino in the earlier, of to Na+ acids. and discussed of of is first As that tubule proximal the and amino rate Na+ filtered acids. amount of of reabsorption depends The on therefore partially glucose amount reabsorption acids amino of As and and Na+ filtered glucose rises. also of the increase, GFR and water

changes the amount Na+ filtered of another In minimizes in to addition mechanism . G-T balance, filtered thus discussed increase an tubuloglomerular the , the mechanism. activates Na+ of As glomerulus) GFR the in by in feedback in amount (and and the Na+ This normal action to values. filtration returns of GFR caused minutes. in a posture Na+ blood few Thus filtered (e.g., changes increase pressure) in by the for only amount GFR changes spontaneous and of homeostasis maintain ECFV maintain to The mechanisms GFR blood that the constant G-T underlie and until and excretion thereby returns balance pressure) urinary normal. (and Na+ Na+

distal final and of occur primarily solutes fraction water hormones by the and duct. volume adjustments tubule and the in and urine and (i.e., the of the regulation filtered the factors in of other collecting largest 67%), composition most

3.

the Secretion is byproducts various fluid to of of tubular toxins eliminate anions and into substances metabolism, cations a from means and for drugs) excreting it blood also (e.g., and the exogenous from body. serves organic ultrafiltration. proteins are plasma Many for organic to cations bound are and unavailable anions and therefore in secretion route is of their major Thus urine. excretion

4.

peptides and hormones of and dopamine, (including uroguanylin, AVP, aldosterone, NaCl Various urodilatin], BNP, angiotensin and [ANP, guanylin), nerves, forces the natriuretic Starling by II, regulate reabsorption sympathetic kidneys. is the major AVP water hormone regulates reabsorption. that

J, Freedman BI. Divers genes disorders. renal susceptibility kidney and in disease in for urological 2013: Genetics Nat Rev Nephrol. 2014;10:69-70.

Zeidel ML. Hoenig MP, nephron. the the of and wisdom the interieur, Homeostasis, milieu Nephrol. Soc J Clin Am 1272-1281. 2014;9:

Knepper et MA, al. of balance. Molecular physiology water Engl N Med. J 2015;372:1349-1358.

Kortenoeven ML, al. et nephron collecting sodium transport regulation of distal in Vasopressin duct. the and Physiol. J Renal Am Physiol 2015;309:F280-F299.

Ellison McCormick DH. JA, convoluted tubule. Distal Physiol. Compr 2015;5:45-98.

DB. Mount ascending Thick of loop the Henle. limb of Nephrol. J Clin Soc Am 2014;9:1974-1986.

Palmer BF. of potassium homeostasis. Regulation J Am Clin Soc Nephrol. 2015;10:1050-1060.

Schnermann LG, Palmer J. along Integrated control of Na the transport nephron. Clin Soc J Am Nephrol. 2015;10:676-687.

et al. Pearce D, transport processes and duct cell their Collecting regulation. principal Nephrol. J Am Soc Clin 2015;10:135-146.

Wright RM, Pelis SH. transport and of anions cations. organic Renal Physiol. Compr 2011;1:1795-1835.

JL, Caplan Pluznick MJ. and sensors of in regulation function. physical Chemical the renal Clin Am J Nephrol. Soc 2015;10:1626-1635.

et Roy A, al. duct Collecting regulation. cell function and intercalated Soc J Nephrol. Am Clin 2015;10:305-324.

ANP-induced its pathophysiology. Wu F, cascade renal in Q. Theilig implications and signaling Physiol J Renal Physiol. Am 2015;308:F1047-F1055.

et Weiner al. ID, of excretion. the and Urea nitrogen renal and ammonia metabolism control J Nephrol. Soc Am Clin 1444-1458. 2015;10:

cell D, S. of action. biology Brown Nielsen The vasopressin Taal eds. MW, al., In: et Rector’s Kidney. and The Brenner 9th ed. 2012. Saunders; Philadelphia:

Burckhardt Organic and elimination transporters H. anion of renal in G, drugs. cation Koepsell al., In: et Alpern RJ, eds. Physiology and Kidney: Seldin The and Pathophysiology. Giebisch’s ed. 5th 2012. Press; Academic Philadelphia:

et EI, Christensen al. filtration, albuminuria. Renal and albumin transport, of and metabolism In: RJ, et Alpern eds. al., and Pathophysiology. Kidney: Seldin and Physiology Giebisch’s The 5th ed. Press; Philadelphia: Academic 2012.

convoluted collecting duct. in distal tubule, transport loop Schild chloride and Sodium Henle, the L. Gamba G, of In: eds. RJ, al., et Alpern Kidney: and and Giebisch’s Seldin Physiology The Pathophysiology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: 2012. Press; Academic

Giebisch Regulation excretion. L. potassium of G, Satlin et RJ, eds. Alpern In: al., Kidney: The Seldin and Physiology and Giebisch’s Pathophysiology. 5th ed. Academic Press; Philadelphia: 2012.

OW, Moe al. et transport of and chloride, acids, Renal sodium, water. amino glucose, eds. Taal In: MW, et al., Brenner The Rector’s and Kidney. ed. 9th Saunders; 2012. Philadelphia:

P, Preisig et al. mechanisms Cellular renal acidification. tubular of In: Alpern al., eds. et RJ, Physiology Pathophysiology. Giebisch’s and Kidney: The and Seldin ed. 5th Press; 2012. Academic Philadelphia:

Sands H. JM, The mechanism transporters. Layton and concentrating urine urea al., In: RJ, eds. et Alpern Kidney: Physiology Seldin The Pathophysiology. and Giebisch’s and 5th ed. Philadelphia: 2012. Press; Academic

be should following questions: the student completion of the chapter Upon this 1. to able answer

extracellular alterations do result changes Why the balance in water in of the in fluid [Na+] (ECF)?

2.

vasopressin and volume fluids controlled the in body of in is of changes osmolality (AVP) How blood pressure? the by and secretion arginine

3.

water do duct, action are the associated the of lead AVP to cellular this events increase of with the the in permeability and how the they collecting What of on segment nephron? an

4.

the loop and role is urine? of in concentrated of What the dilute both production Henle’s

5.

does process urine? composition fluid, of the participate the is medullary the how of and interstitial it What producing in concentrated

6.

and in vasa recta diluting roles What process of concentrating the of urine? are the the

7.

the ability quantitated? of is diluting concentrating and How kidneys the

8.

fluid? volume alter changes balance in of do Na+ the extracellular Why

9.

influenced Na+ balance, and does circulating is Na+ how excretion? by volume, influence the renal it in What changes it effective how is

10.

What monitors volume? which the by circulating are mechanisms effective the the body

11.

kidneys alter Na+? signals to the are the acting major of excretion What on their

12.

fluid volume transport extracellular renal segments the how do changes excretion? of changes nephron, in regulate Na+ and in do Na+ different transport alter in these How the

13.

edema, play the this mechanisms in role do formation of kidneys are process? What involved and the in what

water a he kidneys of and NaCl, osmolality volume the respectively. narrow body by range the within of and excretion maintain regulating fluids This discusses regulation renal of the chapter and excretion. concentration water dilution) and NaCl (urine excretion composition in compartments and reviewed The body fluid the volumes of are various

and constitutes Urine Body Control water adult the Fluid of of , approximately 60% body. human Osmolality: healthy Concentration Dilution AQP1). compartments—intracellular is the major in high via (e.g., and membranes (ECF)—that permeability fluid divided equilibrium (ICF) of extracellular are to two cell fluid water of water osmotic most into because aquaporins Body into generally orally. body Water the intake occurs well This as ingested carbohydrates). contained water water may foods metabolism during (e.g., generated as be of beverages in intravenous situations, infusion of clinical In an entry. route is many important water

most The ( water balance kidneys for and for from regulating major elimination of conditions body the water under route the are are responsible

). 35.1 Table the the respiratory of evaporation water skin include loss from Other cells body of passages. and from routes insensible the water unaware occurrence. is loss loss routes by water these is individual of termed because its Collectively, the for additional of of loss Production water. accounts sweat by fever exercise, 35.2 presence loss hot in increase ). environment, this Water ( with the mechanism of a can dramatically in or gastrointestinal lost be from the water Finally, tract. can small can day cholera). L/ normally increase loss (≈100 with mL/day) water is diarrhea with 20 Fecal (e.g., but dramatically cause gastrointestinal Vomiting also can water losses.

and the these pathological loss by from loss of and sweating, regulated. cannot water environmental can conditions from skin on lungs water evaporation be vary routes during or Although defecation, conditions, the depending regulated is tightly balance. contrast, to water In renal excretion maintain of water whole-body water precisely matched. the intake of requires from loss water that body Maintenance be balance and intake If losses, positive exceeds balance water exists. less anions these is −), (with of steady-state and disorders losses, balance). for also Cl− HCO3 Conversely, its than intake when review result in in [Na+] alterations serum or plasma (

Fig. ). 35.2 One

with kidneys respect by plasma. producing is hyperosmotic losses water conserve to volume urine increase, water a or low small of intake the When is that water urine volume produced. is large When high, hypoosmotic of is a water intake L/day. urine H2O, to approximately 0.5 osmolality vary from urine 50 to can a normal volume and individual, can In L/day approximately mOsm/kg from 18 the (Uosm) corresponding vary 1200 Importantly excretion kidneys excretion water solute regulate separately from the ( can of total of

Fig. 35.1 ). from (e.g., etc.) to , solutes separate ability water of The excretion Na+ urea, regulate excretion K+ , balance because kidneys. survival upsetting homeostatic necessary the allows functions achieved water it for without of the is to other be

is measured balance by changes are It recognize osmolality manifested which that (POSM). are fluid by in important osmolality, alterations disorders usually to in water of plasma body social major for is both reasons. Because intake widely determinant and Na+ varies plasma aFluid the cultural osmolality of

most the common fluid [Na+]. is seen an in of practice and disorders clinical alteration serum electrolyte in a an problem individual, abnormal to Na+ When in found an tempting is it is suspect in [Na+] balance. serum problem most water Na+ often balance. not However, balance, to the relates later, in osmolality. in the changes balance Na+ ECF, in not described its volume As alterations result of

(concentrated) excrete urine. sections either hyperosmotic kidneys mechanisms or The hypoosmotic following (dilute) which discuss the the by and important regulating are by kidneys Fig. role (see Control explained arginine in of also secretion • of the also excretion vasopressin its water rate, levels, plasma and AVP and 35.1 excretion. total urine urine osmolality, flow between solute Relationships minimum. Max, Min, maximum; Koeppen BM, Stanton BA. (From Physiology. Renal 5th ed. 2013.) Philadelphia: Elsevier; balance hot and ingestion. water aIn maintained by increased is water weather prolonged during heavy exercise, maintain is of water water Decreased kidneys alone excretion the by to balance. insufficient

restoring volume urine Kidneys water, returning the osmolality returning 1 excrete L individual Kidneys urine, osmolality hypoosmotic [Na˜] L and restoring L as excrete water and of [Na˜] drinks and and volume to to 14 normal. hyperosmotic 14 in to to normal.

Fig. • in to water 35.2 balance. Response changes of of or effects water from 70-kg 1 individual. the a adding L are the removing ECF of Illustrated Water water reduces (1) Balance: of the increases L ECFV and Positive 1 of Addition its osmolality. is The decreased (hyponatremia). also [Na+] of to L renal as water 1 is normal hypoosmotic The (2) response urine. excrete and ECFV, As water, of returned osmolality, normal. of are renal [Na+] excretion the a (3) the result to from Water water L increases Balance: its of Negative 1 (4) its of The loss volume ECF and osmolality. decreases the is also (hypernatremia). [Na+] The increased urine. (5) water of response small hyperosmotic by conserve to is a volume The renal excreting by water water, of the and thirst, of ECFV, kidneys, normal. [Na+] the returned (6) With to osmolality, and by conservation stimulated are ingestion boxes Size the indicates of relative ECFV. (From Koeppen BM, Stanton BA. Physiology. Renal ed. 5th 2013.) Elsevier; Philadelphia:

cells, in and hypoosmolality clinical plasma process results swelling water In (see osmolality) ). reduction shifts setting, into cell in the (a this of hypoosmolality with primarily Symptoms to associated swelling cells. brain are related For lethargy, function and cause nausea, thereby coma. and Posm seizures, can neurological a fall in example, confusion, headache, alter rapid malaise, from Posm When is cells. is hyperosmolality), increased lost (i.e., water of also and lethargy, in are weakness, death. seizures, Posm and even neurological primarily include Symptoms coma, increase an

associated depending changes body Symptoms how is on fluid in osmolality changed. osmolality quickly with vary osmolality over more changes in (i.e., well than are (i.e., less weeks). that hours) over tolerated to Rapid gradually occur days changes fluid period their an over of who have extended entirely alterations may time asymptomatic. Indeed, individuals be osmolality body in developed urine. reflects response in to as osmoles, changes the osmoles of ability This (V2) the different hypoosmolality, and hyperosmolality nephron or intracellular several with to intracellular volume express new in that regulate either over kidneys’ cell neurons volume mediates of (see receptor segments osmolality the generate cells thus the of to ability occurs eliminate a to minimize AVP and time urine low, of than volume is excreted plasma levels the urine a AVP plasma osmolality (diuresis), less of large (i.e., that When is and are dilute).

(antidiuresis), urine are When osmolality small excreted the urine levels (i.e., high, than greater a plasma plasma AVP volume is that concentrated). is and of of of

length position acids found a that is amino (arginine is small AVP 8). is in peptide at 9 in supraoptic of nuclei located hypothalamus. the It is paraventricular the neuroendocrine within synthesized and cells

that the and the stored The are synthesized in transported pituitary). cell (posterior terminals down packaged hormone the of granules in neurohypophysis axon located nerve is in shown gland are pituitary hypothalamus and anatomy of in the The

Fig.

35.3

AVP the influenced of can by be factors. Secretion posterior several by pituitary of system secretion (osmotic) of The osmolality and volume primary body are the AVP fluids or (1) and regulators the (hemodynamic, (2) vascular pressure of the physiological nonosmotic). Other secretion AVP alter that can include atrial nausea (stimulates), factors

which vasopressin human antidiuretic The is is as arginine (AVP), form known vasopressin (ADH). also hormone of contraction. V1 acting smooth muscle causes vascular AVP, receptors, though As term of a the described large excretion urine. volume subsequently, aDiuresis is of used for may solute reflect volume diuresis), amount diuresis). of of of either excretion This excretion water large large of a (solute a or (water the or peptide the within either related supraoptic oxytocin. and AVP bNeurons paraventricular nuclei synthesize cells primarily nucleus. found the predominate whereas paraventricular in the are supraoptic oxytocin-secreting AVP-secreting in neurons nucleus,

• SECTION7Berne Levy 626 & Fig. Physiology depicting pituitary gland the for pathways 35.3 Anatomy section) AVP hypothalamus of (midsagittal the and section. pathways in are Also regulating shown AVP involved secretion. in and are glossopharyngeal from the Afferent the carried baroreceptors nerves. vagus fibers an expanded inset the gland. and pituitary illustrates The box of hypothalamus view lobe oblongata) input AVP and Optic center Paraventricular peptide Cerebellum neuronsOsmoreceptors Posterior II natriuretic Anterior and (inhibits), glossopharyngeal nerves Vasomotor Vagus neurons Pituitary (medulla Baroreceptor chiasm (stimulates). Supraoptic angiotensin lobe prescription secretion. and affect drugs, A also of nonprescription, number AVP secretion, For nicotine example, secretion. stimulates ethanol whereas inhibits

AVP of Osmotic Control Secretion

minor the of Changes as in important most fluids as role osmolality regulating secretion. body play AVP sufficient) (changes in are 1% the terminalis (termed and cells body of monitor lamina and from AVP, in are the vasculosum changes secrete of hypothalamus. of organum The fluids the osmolality that receptors located synthesize that the are osmoreceptors) (OVLT) the distinct in

shrinking or changes in osmolality either The fluid sense swelling. body osmoreceptors by cells studies fluid vanilloid (TRVP) in receptor to channels body that in transient Recent provided the have changes the response osmolality. of potential cation involved are evidence in (see solutes osmoreceptors only ). The respond plasma osmoles to effective are that of when is considered. function example, the For osmoreceptors ineffective osmole is an urea concentration plasma on the effect Thus has elevation AVP alone little of urea secretion.

secretion and and increases, of send supraoptic hypothalamus, cells the of When AVP AVP in the paraventricular the nuclei the the to located effective synthesizing/ plasma are signals synthesis and osmoreceptors secreting stimulated. osmolality the located organ cells subfornical the the this response when that also the effective (SFO). stimulates mediate AVP are II cAngiotensin secretion; in Conversely,

for on found AVP 20. gene The chromosome is three contains and base two exons 2000 with pairs introns. approximately It that of gene The preprohormone the and for molecule, neurophysin, a AVP polypeptide, codes glycopeptide a consists (copeptin). a signal the preprohormone As off processes cleaved reticulum. peptide in signal the rough endoplasmic cell the the is and into in neurophysin, packaged cleaved preprohormone neurosecretory granules, AVP, is the molecules. copeptin further Once The endings the in posterior released. stored the and pituitary transported are nerve down to axon granules the until neurosecretory then raises the of potential neurons When action which the the Ca++ intracellular channels terminal, opens are in the stimulated neurosecretory causes to secrete nerve AVP, and granules. the exocytosis [Ca++] this process. three secreted are peptides All in do copeptin and an identified function. Neurophysin have physiological not

plasma reduced, is the is inhibited. osmolality secretion of zero the after is plasma, within AVP is reduced be levels secretion degraded circulating minutes can in Because rapidly inhibited. to a the system in respond result AVP rapidly to osmolality. can body fluid As fluctuations

Fig. on illustrates changes of 35.4A levels. AVP osmolality the circulating effect in plasma steep quite for of accounts The of slope the relationship this is system. the sensitivity and increase. begins at osmolality plasma the AVP The secretion which of is point set to value system the is set AVP virtually released. point, no Below this set The point varies

35 and and is Fluid genetically individuals CHAPTER among Volume Control determined. Body of Osmolality (average from 280–285 mOsm/kg 290 varies H2O to adults H2O). it 275 ≈ healthy In mOsm/kg Several physiological individual. set given the change factors can in also a point volume later, can shift pressure As alterations discussed in it. blood and In the with pregnancy point. a is associated decrease addition, in set relaxin understood pregnancy. shift but the is set-point with to chorionic pregnancy responsible is completely hormone elevated that are likely The during levels (e.g., due and mechanism for not gonadotropin)

of (Nonosmotic) Control Secretion Hemodynamic AVP

volume or secretion. decrease AVP A in also pressure blood stimulates sides located arch system. both The are responsible response for pulmonary in circulatory (left and the large the low-pressure carotid receptors of this the (aortic and vessels) high-pressure sinus) and atrium side volume. of can the as low-pressure the system, the these vascular located majority the venous low-pressure high-compliance the to system in of overall circulatory are Because be of in receptors because (i.e., and receptors is side blood venous), responding viewed the circulatory arterial The pressure. to high-pressure respond receptors the are groups atrial in and cardiac aortic and are the structure termed Both baroreceptors. stretch of wall arch) which of of receptors located to (e.g., are sensitive they and afferent fibers the the in these the from glossopharyngeal are carried center (solitary brainstem of to vagus receptors oblongata), Signals of which tract is of part nerves that the medulla nucleus ). to the from are then the relayed Signals brainstem

hypothalamic secretory the and cells of supraoptic AVP paraventricular nuclei. is of decrease the volume AVP sensitivity a required pressure stimulated. of than to in osmoreceptors, and system secretion is or the less 5% that 10% is baroreceptor The before blood is This in illustrated

Fig.

35.4B . of alter of been to AVP have their effects pressure. number substances the A shown on through secretion blood norepinephrine, stimulate and include which increases inhibits lower blood and pressure pressure bradykinin secretion. secretion, AVP AVP thus which and and histamine, These

affect Alterations fluid changes the response and pressure also (see to in body osmolality in blood volume

Fig.

). 35.4C a the relationship lower is set slope the blood in volume and values the of is steeper. to osmolality decrease With pressure, shifted point or survival doing that reduce of terms conserve the the faced kidneys of with though will individual fluids. body of so means this water, In even collapse, to by they circulatory osmolality the continue the blood an pressure, With volume opposite occurs. increase the in or is shifted set point slope The higher values decreased. to and is the osmolality

AVP the on Actions Kidneys

by the increasing AVP kidneys absorption from of fluid on tubular to of action The enhance is water primary the Fig. • and secretion. hemodynamic AVP 35.4 Osmotic (nonosmotic) of control blood and changes on of osmolality (constant in Effect A, pressure) levels. AVP plasma volume plasma osmolality) of plasma (constant changes levels. volume in AVP B, plasma Effect blood on or pressure blood AVP Interactions plasma pressure between volume osmolar on C, levels. and and stimuli

a posterior results Inadequate of pituitary of AVP dilute from large in release of urine volume excretion the (polyuria). (polydipsia) individual ingest this compensate body water water a volume the To of fluid constant must maintain large loss for to osmolality. of If water, of is will the become body fluids hyperosmotic. individual deprived diabetes insipidus diabetes central called condition insipidus. is or This pituitary this can rare. diabetes insipidus is be inherited, although Central It more and with infections. neoplasms or after occurs commonly trauma head brain by corrected diabetes AVP. have Individuals administration insipidus of urine-concentrating be that with can exogenous central a defect and insipidus of (autosomal is gene dominant) mutations copeptin of in numerous (i.e., the regions neurophysin). AVP due The inherited form central AVP, diabetes all to aminopeptidase placenta The that a human produces cysteine AVP. degrades the levels insipidus. this in result some vasopressinase diabetes of In women the analogue can The treated desmopressin be by polyuria synthetic of (DDAVP). AVP administration associated

(ADH) The of plasma the named AVP the a is (this syndrome basis elevated are AVP levels above characterized is that AVP be fluid clinical inappropriate (ADH) and secretion by body term [SIAD]). pressure—hence problem expected blood antidiuresis osmolality of would secretion inappropriate inappropriate on (SIADH) alternatively common volume what syndrome and of thus AVP water below), the duct In collecting kidney. water by stimulate the channels to the of (see augmenting overexpresses effect addition retention and progressively Individuals body their with retain fluids hypoosmotic. water, become SIADH body-fluid their more on hyperosmotic than urine expected is based In addition, osmolality. low the (e.g., pulmonary drugs), neoplasms the SIADH the of be drugs of antitumor carcinoma and diseases, and lung. caused can infections brain, by Many the stimulate AVP secretory to these neural input cells. secretion conditions by AVP altering of the of carcinoma secretes cell including contrast, a of lung and produces small number By AVP. peptides by [Samsca the tolvaptan occurs (e.g., retention to antagonists nonpeptide and hepatic antagonists congestive conditions SIADH conivaptan failure be receptor [Vaprisol] in kidneys water and (e.g., Recently, have which heart treat can that AVP the cirrhosis). and AVP-dependent and other used developed Jinarc]) been

of and of the the collecting distal latter duct. tubule the water permeability portion collecting urea. AVP of the the portion of medullary to In importantly, permeability the increases and duct addition, stimulates NaCl and of Henle’s tubule, reabsorption duct. distal Finally, the thick collecting limb AVP ascending by loop,

principal apical to the the ), (see water. of of along membrane relatively impermeable of tubule collecting In absence the portion distal in the duct, is cells and latter located the AVP, these absence reflects (aquaporins). membrane few fact the contains in apical water This of the that of the channels AVP cells the Thus segments. AVP, absence reabsorbed these in of little by nephron is water cell to the the of located lumen. apical from cells of water aquaporin to basolateral enter in principal tubule the membrane, the (AQP2) results into AVP in Binding channels water the insertion V2 of receptor the allowing membrane This the freely always across AQP4 permeable the water membrane, AQP3 basolateral then which to channels. presence owing and the of is water to cell water exits AVP, of is Thus reabsorbed the in water presence tubule lumen. from the

for The is X on chromosome. the V2 located gene the receptor and the coupled to is receptors have codes heterotrimeric It that that protein seven in spanning acid proteins. of membrane domains 371–amino a family G are for in shown As

Fig. , on 35.5 AVP to membrane adenylcyclase. the its of basolateral activates receptor binding protein cyclic the activates A phosphorylation gene also of (PKA), adenosine in The cAMP-response of which increase water and via intracellular of results AQP2 a in (cAMP) increased transcription channels results kinase monophosphate in then AQP2 activation (CRE). element the motor the dynein. by driven phosphorylated move Vesicles toward containing microtubules along apical AQP2 membrane molecular facilitate vesicles of the apical near the AQP2 containing membrane, vesicles these with called proteins and SNAREs Once with interact membrane. fusion allows by the osmolality osmotic membrane water < cell Addition (lumen of driven enter gradient osmolality). the to AQP2 cell the to then water membrane. cell present exits AQP4 The the membrane the in basolateral and which channels, through basolateral water the are across AQP3 constitutively water rendering membrane apical not thus are membrane clathrinmediated the from is to apical V2 AVP, channels endocytosis, receptor occupied the impermeable by by the AQP2 the water. When removed degraded. increase, membrane be levels the ready apical endocytosed vesicles, The cytoplasmic AQP2 molecules AVP for may into plasma either in the when reinsertion in stored or

AQP3). of AVP (and AQP2 expression long-term regulates also AQP3 extended of in cells is AQP2 polydipsia), ingested period are reduced. abundance water When an psychogenic volumes of large of time and (e.g., over principal the maximally individuals a urine. cannot As these restricted, when ingestion concentrate their consequence, is water excretion protein of AQP3 states AQP2 maximally in expression Conversely, facilitating cells and increases, in concentrated restricted of principal ingestion, thereby water urine.

dilution. also is urine some expression associated concentration AQP2 conditions with also in that and in pathological AQP3) in of varies clear disturbances (and instances It (e.g., hypokalemia). concentrating ability is with associated urine impaired expression of hypercalcemia, a reduced conditions AQP2 number in (e.g., contrast, in congestive is failure, retention with AQP2 associated expression By hepatic heart water cirrhosis, increased. conditions pregnancy)

35 629 • Body Volume Fluid Osmolality Control and of Fig. CHAPTER via cell receptor tubule 35.5 principal late the the AVP on the of Action and of collecting V2 duct. distal text for See details. CREB-P, phosphorylated gene. cAMP, adenosine AQP2, cyclic response 2 aquaporin phosphorylated P, element; adenylcyclase; protein; aquaporin binding cAMP cAMP CRE, response element proteins; 2; AP2, monophosphate; AC, action. of S. Brown Nielsen from The (Adapted D, biology cell vasopressin [ed]. Brenner In: BM Kidney. The 7th ed. Saunders; 2004.) Philadelphia:

collecting permeability urea. also the of duct the inner to of medullary increases AVP the terminal portion an fluid, medullary and concentration. which This needed osmolality increase reabsorption in increase interstitial urea an is described as maximal in for below urine the of results in the duct of urea two UT-A1 express of cells collecting the types transporters, UT-A3. and The and to membrane. basolateral UT-A3 to membrane, is localized primarily the apical localized is the UT-A1 through cAMP/PKA AVP, cascade, increases and of UT-A1 expression UT-A3. both acting the fluid medullary collecting the of increases of osmolality the also the interstitial the urea. the medulla of permeability renal to Increasing inner duct C/protein This UT-A3 phospholipase and UT-A1 pathway, C the by kinase effect is increases mediated which (PKC) expression.

by thick collecting reabsorption by NaCl segment the the also Henle’s stimulates tubule of the and distal ascending loop AVP of and of cortical limb duct. duct). symporter Na+ of collecting the portion tubule), Na+ the abundance 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− three and the increase the distal Na+/Cl− tubule of in reabsorption symporter transporters: (thick channel increased of Henle’s and (ENaC, limb loop), This the latter is ascending associated (distal with in Na+ interstitium NaCl ascending water necessary (see of hyperosmotic of of is duct medullary for absorption limb from thick the transport the portion maintain the below). Stimulation may medullary help that collecting

to AVP, of addition volume changes pressure perception secretion of plasma thirst. in osmolality and to or In in the affecting the blood alterations lead is or individual is thirst. osmolality increased the or volume body fluid the perceives reduced, When blood pressure Of the hypertonicity more these potent. is stimuli, to produce the plasma only An the in and pressure to 3% drink, of response. required blood produces 10% same desire 15% a are in to increase osmolality 2% in volume whereas of strong range decreases to

which for As body already osmolality is genetically a determined above a AVP increases). threshold fluid secretion AVP secretion discussed, there (i.e., of is determined the thirst. for there Similarly sensation a threshold triggering genetically the secretion. the higher is threshold threshold for AVP than thirst However, is approximately mOsm/ for H2O. threshold approximately average thirst the On whereas threshold AVP kg H2O, 285 secretion mOsm/kg 295 the is is maximal. fluid difference, of thirst Because stimulated secretion osmolality AVP this already where at body a is

in thirst in regulating involved center) regulating with AVP (the located centers region the intake The same the neural are involved water of hypothalamus secretion. whether functions. the it cells same However, not serve certain is both response, thirst Indeed like regulation the the of

respond some AVP. of normally to not The ducts do individuals collecting maximally individuals have consequently urine These their polydipsia. polyuria concentrate and and cannot to clinical central entity is nephrogenic insipidus This from diabetes insipidus. it termed diabetes distinguish insipidus more of a result of and number diabetes disorders inherited can as occurs a systemic result rarely Nephrogenic disorders. from in AQP2 of decreased diabetes the are the acquired expression of of insipidus collecting the forms Many result nephrogenic duct. of with hypercalcemia. low-protein AQP2 has for of some of degree individuals nephrogenic concentrating lithium of lithium who (35% expression ureteral hypokalemia, Decreased and associated develop been insipidus), take in disorder urine diabetes ingestion bipolar diet, defects the obstruction, documented in AQP2 AVP insipidus gene. gene the nephrogenic receptor) The mutations of diabetes (V2 reflect or forms the receptor inherited Approximately result forms result of the the mutations V2 mutations the nephrogenic the in gene, hereditary gene. of receptor insipidus with of 90% other are diabetes of AQP2 in the 10% gene Since chromosome, diabetes X the forms V2 nephrogenic are for inherited located of the X-linked. insipidus these receptor on is the is AQP2 inherited for 12 located as as dominant recessive autosomal The well coding autosomal an and is an on as defect. chromosome both gene As noted aquaporins exist homotetramers. in as , homotetramer difference of AQP2-related the nephrogenic two formation the explains This diabetes between insipidus. forms recessive AQP2 In both and defective normal molecules. produce the AQP2 form, heterozygotes AQP2 of the defective only do retained endoplasmic molecules. homotetramers The and in is that monomer cell, normal contain reticulum the the form thus mutations in to Thus are alleles required diabetes nephrogenic produce both insipidus. normal form, the autosomal form defective can defective monomers monomers as well as with In tetramers the monomers. dominant to However, to containing membrane. unable are tetramers defective monomers traffic the apical

activating receptor been have (gain-of-function) have the in found mutations gene. that V2 individuals Recently, even of Thus is in constitutively the AVP. the activated receptor absence plasma body including osmolality, have reduced SIADH, [Na+]), plasma those and seen findings from laboratory to fluid urine (reduced concentrated These reduced individuals more similar hyponatremia than would the in expected be osmolality. undetectable AVP the in are AVP where by However, have elevated unlike kidneys, for levels plasma. levels circulating thus SIADH individuals responsible and retention of their these of water termed entity inappropriate syndrome new This of has nephrogenic been clinical antidiuresis.

(e.g., AVP NaCl). effective to secretion, osmoles occurs response in only that Even those pressure-related AVP the volume involved volume of regulation or in response decreased the are thirst pathways is pressure, less blood known to about the the it as involved secretion. same the is and in but believed pathways thirst. Angiotensin II of evokes cells thirst of sensation also acting the the on center at reduced, when increased maintains volume their II II pressure contributes restores normal to the and response fluids Because blood of homeostatic effect angiotensin this and volume. angiotensin are that body are levels

The tract even satisfied to water by osmolality. plasma drinking, the is of is sufficient before the act of the from sensation gastrointestinal absorbed correct thirst to It more water is the thirst interesting sensation. effective cold is note that in reducing response. receptors gastrointestinal and Oropharyngeal in to this be involved upper appear satisfied corrected. or is via only or the relief of osmolality However, completely pressure thirst and short the lived, these thirst when is sensation receptors plasma is blood volume

thirst should systems apparent and be AVP maintain in balance. the to that water It work concert AVP via increase of water. in evokes on plasma drinking action An and, kidneys, the osmolality conservation renal when the is suppressed in excretion water osmolality is of is decreased, thirst absence Conversely, enhanced. plasma AVP, and, situations. cultural and the factors by of However, time is dictated fluid most social intake stimulated. thirst This when the especially not is is case solely relies osmolality body kidneys fluid In the maintaining water. on to ability the of situation, normal excrete this sections How is in detail in this kidney of the chapter. discussed following accomplishes this the

Mechanisms of Concentration Renal Dilution and for Urine

water excretion. already is regulated As excretion solute noted, separately from be hyper-osmotic fluids. with urine hypoosmotic either kidneys this to For the must or respect body able to is to excrete occur that turn separated osmolality some to point water nephron. urine requires in of that from the excrete along solute at varying ability be This the a proportional of in As discussed results proximal in , solute of in reabsorption reabsorption amount water. tubule of in water of the solute portion separated not Hence and are nephron. this whether this of urine. excrete proximal Moreover, the or between solute regardless occurs proportionality water reabsorption and dilute tubule concentrated kidneys the or and the concentrated solute of a Thus but tubular reabsorbs large amount water, of it fluid. tubule produce dilute filtered portion does proximal not and solute water thick of separated. the Henle, limb, ascending in where loop site the is major The are particular Thus Henle. of urine normal the requires function and both loop of of dilute excretion concentrated

urine easy is to hypoosmotic understand. relatively Excretion of occur. not tubular simply also and reabsorption the from nephron solute must The reabsorb to water allow fluid reabsorption in of without described concomitant detail solute of reabsorption in water loop. Henle’s greater As ascending limb occurs noted, later, the as just and the AVP) appropriate tubule by duct absence tubular (i.e., solute Under distal fluid dilute the collecting not also water. but conditions in the reabsorbing of and

understand. hyperosmotic difficult is urine thus Excretion and more to complex more of process This essence in

hyperosmolality. the of prevent to adequate can mechanism water, thirst With development access mechanism This central the to diabetes both of is insipidus. polyuria nephrogenic for polydipsia seen responsible response and the in Most the thirst water/beverages ingest of absence sensation. in even the individuals can the water up this to excrete because excrete excess L/day 18 of kidneys they urine. to Normally able are exceeds capacity short kidneys’ periods However, of ingested instances, the volume especially time. in to over water the water, excrete of some hypoosmotic. become this body fluids occurs, When

An excrete intake the to can water of long-distance capacity water running. kidneys how the is example exceed of the the that of of A 13% race. of Boston hyponatremia during runners Marathon course the study found in developed the participants

water from practice produced the glycogen the is reflected exercising “well or other water some to of during used remain triglycerides the of metabolism addition, This ingesting the In hydrated.” race muscle. by drinks as and fuels hypotonic of runners their the by able through over race than sweating, kidneys hyponatremia lost water or metabolism) to more developed. was were ingested excrete generated (and they Because the of course severe previously. described the hyponatremia to enough was In some neurological symptoms elicit racers the

that depends excreted the in The depends amount of on 18 of on (e.g., excreted, which intake. kidneys can food by maximum L/day) amount solute the water turn be solute mOsm/kg achieved will the mmol/day: the if (Uosm dilute is L/day example, rate For urine with maximum urine maximally output = only 900 H2O), of excretion 18 50 be

intake, will elderly is excretion output with in reduced, reduced the as decrease. the urine commonly occurs maximum solute If food output be (at 8 maximum = can Uosm achieved. mOsm/kg L/day example, if urine of only only is solute For H2O) 50 mmol/day, excretion a 400 a with individuals have water. intake capacity excrete reduced reduced Thus to food

CS et al. dAlmond among the Boston Hyponatremia Marathon. runners in Med 2005;352:1150-1556. N J Engl

removing without involves water the solute. tubular fluid from from compartment movement into osmotic is a reabsorbed, tubular fluid. which the is must an water without hyperosmotic Because by driven water kidney osmotically solute, passive, gradient, generate the in interstitium compartment kidney hyperosmotic the the of that function this medulla. is renal The the serves Henle’s for is generating the hyperosmotic critical loop interstitium. medullary water compartment concentrates drives urine. the thereby this collecting and Once hyperosmotic from reabsorption established, duct

Fig. summarizes at the 35.6 fluid osmolality absence the presence points both nephron, and along tubular several in

Volume 35 Osmolality Fluid and of of Control AVP. Body CHAPTER isoosmotic that fluid the Note of so plasma Henle of of respect from is presence tubular proximal tubule entering absence or AVP. and to the with the is loop regardless thick to fluid ascending presence leaving both in with Also, AVP. limb is the hypoosmotic and the absence plasma, of tubular respect of osmolality duct of progressively tubular the respect is fluid medulla) (i.e., becomes absence cortex collecting to with AVP. hyperosmotic the The of hypoosmotic AVP the from and in along in plasma inner presence to

maintenance than study years. of for 50 Establishment hyperosmotic of a subject has medullary been more interstitium and the the established, experimental intense accepted of regarding study, kidney. region how for nephron model the properties medullary recent Despite segments and not this within is medulla, in consistent most especially transport is gradient findings incomplete this the inner with the the of the osmotic more is presented concepts the that current embodies the because here the some With needs refinement, fundamental underlie caveat model it that it process.

process model by the termed In established gradient is medullary a multiplication. current interstitial countercurrent the osmotic surrounding ascending water solute Henle’s without from By the the NaCl) interstitium. reabsorbed is limb of medullary loop into this process, (principally osmolality this decreases the the This the raises of the at point. and interstitium osmolality in tubular fluid reabsorbed descending interstitium in be the thus loop, increasing the Henle’s of then from of to segment. increased osmolality the causes water tubular limb The fluid this osmolality Thus limb the the limb. the the at Henle adjacent has ascending in of an fluid than point fluid along osmolality less any loop in descending termed was the This single osmotic difference effect. ascending papilla descending medulla) gradient junction. where an fluid effect at 300 and to be medullary single Because could an into tip 1200 the flow flowing osmotic the has of countercurrent H2O the of multiplied, of H2O the compared the medulla) out interstitium, (fluid the the in osmolality of of (fluid in within the this flow tubular limbs, mOsm/kg mOsm/kg corticomedullary resulting

Fig. diuresis) dilute urine 35.7 for schematically well concentrated excreting depicts a (antidiuresis). processes the urine as (water as a underlie 1. these Three concepts key processes:

of the Urine concentrated by is AVP-dependent duct. reabsorption water from collecting

2.

to papilla), duct. ascending tubular the mmol/L the and loop from the the dilutes water of then same Reabsorption the collecting a medullary tip (up at of Henle’s the drives fluid reabsorption 600 of at limb the in NaCl [NaCl] interstitium generates which high time from

3.

to the to urea medullary the in high with which concentration. excrete Urea 600 interstitium mmol/L), same (up accumulates urine allows kidneys the of large urea allows relatively with excreted This be little to amounts water. is or how First, diure the zero AVP dilute (water when considered. levels excrete kidneys low urine sis) are following those The refer encircled numbers to in

Fig. AVP: 140 + 600 − AVP: 140 50 AVP: − 1200 − 1200 + Cortex + AVP: AVP: 35.7A 290 + • AVP: Fig. AVP: absence in nephron (+AVP) the Tubular the the along vasopressin. fluid 35.6 and of (−AVP) osmolality presence arginine in See details. text for Sands et (Adapted JM from al. dilution. concentration Urine and In: The Kidney. and Rector’s Brenner ed. 9th 2012.) Saunders; Philadelphia: 1.

of Fluid plasma. is from loop descending the the entering tubule isosmotic respect thin with to of Henle proximal limb the ). of (see tubule water the nature reabsorption essentially in isosmotic solute This and the proximal reflects from segments Water tubule the is proximal of AQP1.) via (NOTE: the reabsorbed 2.

loop. of reabsorbed limb thin the from is Water descending Henle’s this is and deepest added preserving water the interstitial space of medullary inner limiting to medulla. of thereby hyperosmolality in of of this water the the part thus Most the the region medulla, of outer the reabsorbed amount (NOTE: reabsorbed Water is AQP1.) via 3.

the impermeable to thin thin limb descending of and of ascending portion is terminal the limb the water. all medulla In inner the is AQP1 (NOTE: expressed.) not nephron same segments Na+ These paracellular mediates which express with Cl− via the reabsorption, CLC-K1, the pathway. channel following Cl− water process reabsorption the the concomitant tubular passive of begins diluting of without fluid. This NaCl reabsorption

4.

). the limb dilutes ascending actively and impermeable also fluid and of NaCl it reabsorbs of The (see is tubular Henle the from loop water thereby to further thick that such to the occurs is as Dilution a segment to referred of often kidney. segment this the degree diluting leaving with ascending thick limb plasma is the to (see Fluid hypoosmotic respect

Fig. 35.6 5.

of portion actively The cortical the distal reabsorb duct collecting tubule and NaCl. water AVP is are permeable of the not in segments absence present apical AQP2 the membrane not the to cells). In of (i.e., these fluid in reduced osmolality is tubule decreased Thus low NaCl osmolality), without is segments is water. the further when of absent at AVP levels reabsorbed because these or present plasma (i.e., portion duct Under hypoosmotic collecting with of the fluid (see leaving is plasma cortical respect the to condition, this

Fig. 35.6 6.

NaCl. medullary actively reabsorbs duct collecting The permeable slightly in AVP, Even some reabsorbed. this of is absence water the is segment to water and

7.

low low an contains approximately NaCl. as urine 50 mOsm/kg H2O The concentrations has and osmolality as of The excreted volume much glomerular as rate as approximately L/day, 18 of or can the filtration (GFR). be urine of 10% (antidiuresis) the high osmolality AVP and plasma when concentrated levels is considered. are urine how plasma kidneys Next, excrete encircled The to numbers following those in refer

Fig. : 35.7B 1–4. These dilute of those to urine. similar for steps are production Henle the in of a thick osmolality in of medullary is how ascending dilutes NaCl produced concentrated the the to urine of that understanding is tubular the reabsorption accumulates An the of fluid, and recognize compartment. by point thin reabsorbed NaCl limbs raises interstitium and loop while this the important

Fig. • nephron dilution and concentration. in of 35.7 involved urine segments Schematic juxtamedullary loops are nephrons Henle’s shown. of (water Mechanism of dilute for urine A, diuresis). excretion and essentially absent is is impermeable water. duct AVP) collecting the to diuresis the during that vasa water the entry collecting Note duct. of is interstitium into and blood result osmolality a a as of the some medullary of also increased reduced urea medullary flow recta urine concentrated Mechanism for of (antidiuresis). a excretion B, the collecting permeable highly maximal and to AVP are Plasma levels is duct water. this interstitial the Under is gradient medullary condition maximal. See for details. text

collecting urine crucial force Accumulation for reabsorption driving production because by medullary osmotic medullary it in is the hyperosmotic duct. provides water plasma, for of the the of NaCl interstitium to noted, reabsorption ascending already NaCl stimulates of Henle’s limb As by loop. thick AVP the time added to compartment from which is when being interstitial the gradient the would medullary a medullary tend at water collecting This thought to this maintain the dissipate is gradient. duct, to

5.

the interstitial of reabsorption the with ascending limb fluid. Henle, surrounding by the the to collecting loop the fluid NaCl of of respect duct is Because hypoosmotic reaching is Thus collecting osmotic gradient an the across established duct. luminal which the AQP2 lumen duct collecting the the causing of diffuses tubule tubule In of membrane osmolality increases the AVP, water tubule latter insertion the the by water of cells, the fluid permeability into distal portion presence and of out the and increases. of of the lumen of collecting duct of This the process water the the out diffusion begins of urine concentration. of of 290 the the is same is attain mOsm/kg which osmolality the can fluid cortical collecting approximately (i.e., maximum of plasma osmolality the kidney. and the plasma), the tubule The cortex of fluid interstitial duct H2O the in distal the as within portion and

6.

tubular the increasing be fluid deeper water to continues from 1200 tubular collecting into As medulla, fluid mOsm/ the H2O to the descends kg reabsorbed osmolality papilla. of at duct, the the tip the

7.

and 1200 AVP solutes. levels urine of produced nonreabsorbed when an H2O urea mOsm/kg concentrations elevated of high has osmolality contains The are other and L/day. can Urine as be this volume 0.5 as under low condition

the portions a duct). tubule that (latter be apparent In collecting volume relatively just conditions of nephron tubular the the two portion and distal delivered described, to of is AVP-sensitive the it fluid should constant of dilute comparing amount water of reabsorbed then segments. determine Plasma levels by AVP these the segments the of these filtered volume is and small to low, by is of excreted a AVP of large When hypoosmotic water). are urine 10% reabsorbed relatively a volume (up levels water and excreted water). filtered is hyperosmotic of are segments reabsorbed levels small When volume of these a large high, a is urine of by AVP same (<1% water volume distal cortical of is most the antidiuresis, portions the of and medullary During duct. collecting the in water tubule reabsorbed and outer reabsorbed. relatively medullary small collecting fluid duct it inner where volume Thus reaches a then is the of distribution water length the collecting of of of in > for by a allows inner inner medulla along compartment. This this duct environment outer reabsorption the cortex (i.e., the > the interstitial medulla entering hyperosmotic amount minimizing of water medulla) maintenance

Fig. • urea. comprises 35.8 gradient medullary interstitial NaCl and The primarily in for depicted those urea and urine). found of state (i.e., excretion the concentrations NaCl The reflect antidiuretic hyperosmotic for See text details. (Adapted JM al. Sands from et and concentration dilution. Urine Brenner and The Kidney. In: Rector’s 9th ed. Elsevier; 2012.) Philadelphia: llaUreaNacl 100200300400500600Concentration(mmol/L)CortexO termed llaInnerMed

medulla earlier, noted concentrating renal of fluid As critically urine. is the interstitial important the in and The water the the fluid of for the loop the of force provides descending interstitial reabsorbing driving limb from pressure duct. both the of collecting thin osmotic Henle the NaCl to exists fluid from throughout solutes interstitial these the are papilla). solutes of a but medullary is The not (i.e., of gradient medulla and urea, uniform concentration the cortex principal in (e.g., also + the and urea. Other are accumulate and K+), NH4 the solutes interstitium but medullary NaCl solutes abundant most urea and solutes. discussion only For that are the assumes simplicity, NaCl this

Fig. of reaches (300 and (600 attributable the a mOsm/ papilla at urea 35.8 mmol/L). medulla, 1200 and 600 urea accumulate renal tip to attributable and H2O to H2O , H2O, the mmol/L) of kg the medulla with interstitial NaCl fluid osmolality 600 approximately the inner the mOsm/kg of NaCl maximum mOsm/kg in inner the is gradient complete essentially NaCl medulla. Establishment between the at outer transition of the and

the results accumulation the multiplication. by reabsorbed countercurrent nephron of NaCl The segments medullary medulla gradient from NaCl for in during ascending in limb of is regard loop important this of the Henle. segment the most The effectively occurs complex more hyperosmotic when within most the is interstitium excreted urine medullary accumulation Urea is and antidiuresis). (i.e., interstitium the of osmolality periods, medullary especially extended the produced, dilute When urine is declines (see over

Fig. 37.7A ). urea. a concentration in caused reduced the by of almost is osmolality entirely decrease This reflects the in of within to and This AVP. the urea the vasa of recta of which fluid even urea medullary into diffusion by duct, is interstitium the collecting tubular later) the portion decrease (discussed absence from permeable washout the the the urea, urea permeability UT-A1 the collecting The the inner medullary portion of low presence cortical (NOTE: have by medullary and and which the is outer relatively transporters permeability portions duct because a whereas a UT-A3, AVP.) of of of high to increased has expression this transporter. via loops enters limbs of urea Henle’s via some reabsorbed vasa and urea Some transporter the is UT-B the thin recta UT-A2, the the secreted of into descending where the trapped the loops until in that of the nephron limbs reenter it The can it into reaches interstitium. collecting is secreted medullary medullary then the is duct, Henle’s descending urea thin again recycles the to urea interstitium back nephron Thus the the and from into interstitium. of facilitates of it the mmol/L. papilla of the urea can urea tip medullary accumulation 600 a concentration attain of process at in recycling This interstitium, where the

described, for collecting duct. the the fluid medulla within is As concentrating tubular hyperosmotic essential the is in more duct Because of the interstitium, never be urine papilla. osmotic the can the gradient the driven interstitial than medullary water by established the that collecting concentrated from reabsorption in fluid Thus maximally condition reduces any kidneys of interstitial impairs osmolality the the that to ability urine. the medullary concentrate to the total Urea interstitium the of osmolality the contributes urine. within medullary urea, However, this inner permeable AVP, the reabsorption especially because collecting nephron the segment. across in cannot medullary is urea presence water highly to of drive duct volume Instead, the high urine interstitium concentration excreted. fluid a small with of tubular medullary and urea and of equilibrate, a urea is in

is duct responsible that NH4 interstitial solutes concentrating the K+ reabsorbing (e.g., the NaCl salts, water concentration is medullary + nonurea in medullary and from creatinine) salts, It thereby the collecting for urine. the

water. permeable vasa solute medulla, blood that capillary highly the the are supply to and recta, The networks to (see form of vasa set medulla parallel loop with hairpin recta the As a the ). the loops Henle, of within but nutrients bring to typical urea. importantly excrete of nephron by recta do water they the excess nephron added the that also remove vasa oxygen these medullary more continuously is and a solute kidneys eOn Not 450 the interstitium and diet medullary to mmol/day must only the the segments, seg [urea] 600 L this At of less maximal of urine amount than in urea can urine. mmol/L a be of 1 excreted to mM). 450 larger only L of 2.25 required urine of [urea] mmol/day a would excrete 200 [urea], be urea (e.g., However, the if would urine fluid in the because is needed was interstitial urine be medullary urine the volume of maximal if maximal reduced the decrease [urea] a

Volume of Fluid and ments. Control CHAPTER Body Osmolality 35 The the recta dependent. maintain gradient vasa ability the medullary flow is of to interstitial A of vasa medullary medullary gradient osmoles dissipates interstitium). (i.e., in from substantial flow recta the blood washout the increase delivery to oxygen medulla. segments Alternatively, nephron flow the within reduces reduced the blood Because and medulla. by requires transport solute decreases the salt medullary nephron salt solutes flow segments and transport ATP, and in blood of oxygen other reduced be interstitial a the As osmotic result gradient maintained. medullary cannot

Renal of Concentrating Assessment and Ability Diluting

volume water urine the includes excreted. renal and handling measurements of of of Assessment osmolality urine 50 The osmolality of urine from to is mOsm/kg range 1200 H2O. little as L/day. corresponding volume as The is urine 0.5 18 range L in to individual from ranges are to vary individual. fixed These not and on are also by as the affected kidneys They previously the disease noted they and excrete. can of solute processes, be also dependent amount must

the (i.e., water The requires dilute the ability separation of countercurrent of multiplication process). and effect the single or of concentrate urine kidneys the to solute from essence This body. of the of water excreted dilute, in volume water solute solute-free and a is separation When generates that of water is is “free solute.” urine solute-free (i.e., returned concentrated, the conserved). When water urine is to is body

water must (i.e., 1. conditions excrete solute-free For be the 18 to following L/day) kidneys maximally the met:

AVP water. of duct amount without must not absent; collecting significant it the a reabsorb be does

2.

that The structures solute the normally. (i.e., from must dilute separate water fluid) tubular function tubule luminal fluid: limb thin limb segments Henle’s In of ascending thick absence of dilute nephron loop following Henle’s can the loop ascending of AVP the the

thick involved most the transport of and nephron limb separation the of important its quantitatively ascending water. the solute Because in is segment high rate,

3. sites and adequate separation water. of to the must aforementioned fluid maximal amount tubular delivered for nephron be of solute An Factors or maximally decreased water. excrete delivery that proximal the enhanced solute-free to kidneys’ reabsorption) reduce ability (e.g., tubule impair GFR by requirements to Similar of water the apply also kidneys. conservation to following conserve be met: water For 1. L/day) maximally must the kidneys (6–8 the conditions delivered amount separate be solute of segments that the regard adequate must most from the important segment is water; nephron fluid those tubular this in to An

of and 1 returning to In levels kidneys osmolality osmolality In [Na˜]to retain water and but levelsthe AVP ECF of L [Na˜] volume. response excrete increasing decreased 1 to kidneys response waterreturning AVP elevated the normal, L

ECF to but reducing normal, volume.

Fig. • in of 35.9 Impact on balance ECFV. changes Na+ ECF osmolality. increases (without NaCl to the (1) and water) [Na+] the Addition of the of than acts the increase osmolality which kidneys water. AVP (2) to The on ECF posterior stimulates in secretion conserve pituitary, from of with [Na+] restore plasma and ingestion renal to water normal. osmolality together water plasma (3) Decreased excretion the osmolality. Removal L. ECF and water) ECFV from of decreases the plasma (without NaCl [Na+] increased 1 by is However, now plasma (4) (5) inhibits ECF AVP secretion. decrease in The osmolality excrete response the to plasma in AVP In the kidneys decrease water. water [Na+] plasma plasma (6) osmolality of to excretion normal. the and returns Increased renal in ECFV L. As the to AVP osmolality. ECFV by is 1 system of balance alter illustrated, However, normal Na+ because body of efficiency the changes maintain now fluid decreased (Adapted from BM, BA. Koeppen Stanton Physiology. Renal 5th ed. 2013.) Elsevier; Philadelphia: limb of loop. ascending thick Henle’s tubule GFR tubular Henle’s depends loop on Delivery reabsorption. proximal to of fluid and

2.

most is ascending Reabsorption of nephron the loop. be by of segments again, segment the important limb NaCl the Henle’s must thick normal;

3.

present. must A medullary hyperosmotic be interstitium by and and osmolality (conditions maintained loop of fluid by The interstitial 1 urea. reabsorption by 2) Henle’s effective NaCl accumulation is turn in on protein Urea depends accumulation dietary adequate intake.

4.

the collecting must levels to and AVP. of must Maximum be normally duct present respond AVP

Extracellular and NaCl Renal of Regulation Excretion Control Volume of Fluid

commonly to Na+ osmolality, balance solutes determinant salts major of are in The ECF osmolality. (see ECF also of assumed major disturb are the alterations the ECF of Na+ is body case normal However, earlier). the range AVP a systems (discussed fluid thirst this the narrow under within osmolality because not maintain and circumstances very As in illustrated

Fig. (compare removing initial not and the compartment’s this final NaCl fluid , or changes 35.9 from adding and volume condition [Na+] conditions). body ECF of NaCl of For increases example, the [Na+] addition osmolality (without compartment. this water) the and to ECF also osmolality ECF.) equilibration increases the because of osmotic with (ICF ingested a In and thirst is are response, renal AVP as and is reduced. water result loss secretion stimulated, and water osmolality (and now restores but to is their This plasma serum volume ECF of [Na+]) values, the increased. initial the NaCl occurs lost from is ECF. opposite the when The Changes because ). of can kg measuring monitored 1 ECF equals volume in (ECFV) by L body 1 of ECF weight, be is these, NaCl most the Of abundant. weight. is NaCl Because body

NaCl excretion the the for body. The are major of route kidneys from and (e.g., nonrenal the of Na+ perspiration by lost routes body about feces). day Only from 10% so does each the in are in the regulating such, ECFV. critically kidneys As important by normal conditions termed match the NaCl excretion ECFV of diet. amount the kidneys state in keep the ingested adjusting the to constant euvolemia) (a Under occurs above ingestion (volume expansion), ECFV increases contraction). ingestion normal exceeds excretion, If exceeds the whereas if (volume excretion opposite

140 about excretion typical The g is mEq/day. in approximately Na+ daily contains of urine mEq/day of (8 diet NaCl), 140 thus Na+ also and can However, vary a over range. Na+ excretion wide kidneys of the as when attained on mEq/day low Excretion are can a rates placed be low-salt as diet. 10 individuals more Conversely, kidneys their increase high-salt than ingestion can a to when excretion of diet. mEq/day challenged 1000 by the rate body. only These content in Na+ can ECFV the changes in of with changes and the excretion occur modest Na+

of in of response The several kidneys the intake several to the magnitude changes takes change. to the typically hours on depending NaCl days, abrupt of as transition are are they the and steady intake in this state. During excretion period not the matched Na+ Thus > excretion) or Na+ negative experiences excretion). balance (intake (intake balance positive the either < individual Na+ state However, intake period new the again a steady of equals end excretion. is and transition by once established the

and various regulate section thereby receptors the signals act kidneys of that ECFV that This reviews excretion the the the explains on physiology NaCl to monitor and ECFV. of these In responses to the portions various is of considered. nephron the addition, signals

fluid. the Concept interstitial of Volume plasma two is subdivided ECF compartments: Effective into blood Circulating and , of and cardiac and Plasma thus determinant is pressure vascular volume a output. blood volume and act primarily signals balance, sensors regulate and complex a excretion. Na+ ECFV, that effector on involves of Maintenance the NaCl kidneys to thus system of and ECFV, blood designed on vascular adequate system complex can appreciated pressure, cardiac perfusion. volume, output the dependency from this tissue be ensure is to As of the located vessels the output blood this Because are principal in pressure, the regulating (discussed excretion the system, primary in factors system large NaCl and renal cardiac vascular volume, are of later). changes sensors of vascular result blood individual, pressure, cardiac in changes changes in parallel healthy in and output. volume, ECFV In vascular a in and volume, ECFV results vascular Thus cardiac decrease in pressure, output. a reduced blood increased ECFV output. vascular in in blood Conversely, an increase results cardiac volume, pressure, and cardiovascular which The to parameters these degree

cardiovascular ECFV degree expansion effectiveness Control 35 ). of of mechanisms Body is reflex Fluid (see Osmolality Volume change contraction and CHAPTER or and upon dependent the of the reduced. excretion Na+ NaCl is person balance, renal is in ECFV and When decreased is a negative increase Na+ balance excretion in (i.e., Conversely, in which natriuresis). there an ECFV, with results renal NaCl positive is enhanced

conditions failure, in ECFV. pathological of cirrhosis), some congestive renal reflect excretion not hepatic the heart NaCl (e.g., does However, the is ECF of In both the increased. volume situations of these renal NaCl excretion, of of is excretion instead reduced. expected, be as increased would NaCl renal However, to in the necessary is situations, effective explain renal understand concept these of (ECV). circulating it volume To Na+ handling body fluid not distinct ECF, Unlike ECV and measurable a is compartment. other is of blood the refers system is perfusing portion the volume that Effective are within contained that the effective blood commonly terms). vascular circulating “effectively” and tissues volume (effective volume used and ECF to arterial volume system vascular activity later). specifically More reflects of the (discussed the the in sensors located ECV

manifests accumulation in edema) plasma heart tissues increased failure increase in an Patients fluid (pulmonary interstitial the frequently that of congestive as lungs peripheral (generalized edema). volume with have and and ECFV the result excess fluid kidneys. retention water of and NaCl is the This by and is is paradoxical response kidneys’ NaCl (i.e., of The increased. retention ECFV because the water) the system not fluid in compartment. this interstitial in rather However, fluid vascular the is but addition, poor cardiac cardiac pressure may reduced of and performance. because blood In be output ECFV and system cause sensors do contraction kidneys. vascular as Therefore retention the by and they NaCl water the in in located respond the is the this situation by the In sensors, decreased. monitored volume as ECV,

(arterial directly pressure, in the with of system vascular particular ECV cardiac individuals, the and volume venous), In blood the output. arterial healthy varies ECFV and and is certain conditions. case noted in as pathological this However, not the and between remaining ECFV the in and in of renal relationship ECV examined. healthy In adults—where this chapter sections ECFV changes parallel—are occur in NaCl excretion the

by monitored ECV) (or sensors. is ECFV multiple pressure. vascular located they and the these monitor system, and fullness its number A are sensors in of the receptors are respond located which receptors, of atria or stretch vessels These vascular to blood also and typically in they or the they called of walls structure are baroreceptors. pressure-induced as are referred the (e.g., because volume ventricles), cardiac they to

Circuit Low-Pressure Sensors Cardiopulmonary the Volume in

vessels, within of right sensors baroreceptors) 19). the (see distention respond walls ventricle, to atria, they are and right and the located and these pulmonary (i.e., left of Volume structures large

circulatory of of sensors Because the to respond the low-pressure the system compliance, high mainly these a has the side system. “fullness” vascular nerves signals X). afferent in to (cranial glossopharyngeal vagus and the brainstem the fibers and IX baroreceptors nerves send These via modulates outflow AVP secretion. these both sympathetic of nerve and The activity sensors atria and of cardiac sympathetic in AVP increases example, nerve decrease secretion. filling a activity the and pulmonary For vessels stimulates structures decreases Conversely, these activity. sympathetic of distention nerve in to 10% general, to evoke and 5% necessary response. are a volume In pressure changes blood

to additional possess NaCl excretion. related mechanism control of renal cardiac atria The an of atria atrial synthesize a (ANP). peptide peptide store and myocytes natriuretic the The hormone, is in of by later and increases via water the this It and, NaCl excretion and kidneys. distended reduces atria pressure chapter, when blood outlined released are mechanisms the brain. a produce natriuretic was isolated it first named so the peptide of also natriuretic the from ventricles peptide, (BNP), The brain heart because distention the ANP, of ventricles. by Like myocytes is from BNP released ANP. are those Its similar to actions of

Sensors High-Pressure Circuit Arterial the in Volume

in arterial afferent wall the of Baroreceptors and kidneys. are the of present sinus, aortic arterioles located the the the system, also arch, in of circulatory side carotid and brainstem fibers nerves afferent nerves in vagus (cranial glossopharyngeal and carotid send the input to via IX and aortic arch baroreceptors The the X). response input and outflow this AVP to alters secretion. The sympathetic Thus decrease secretion. AVP nerve pressure and increases sympathetic in blood activity a pressure in nerve nerve activate sympathetic activity). reduce tends parasympathetic increase activity An to (and the of pressure to that in to a sensitivity in the changes system; 5% low-pressure vascular high-pressure 10% needed are baroreceptors the side similar The is of response. to evoke

fThe in and the of the arteriole, responds to pressure alter also kidneys ), have sensors blood liver The [Na+] nervous (see that afferent and juxtaglomerular kidneys changes apparatus then central respond excretion. signal to the particularly and system (JGA) NaCl not vascular here. considered be and effecting receptors changes important ECFV not as in monitoring appear and These excretion in to NaCl renal in as systems changes are do

to directly changes pressure. in the pressure the released cells. perfusion in arteriole reduced, renin granular is is afferent from If is suppressed contrast, is By pressure perfusion increased. when secretion renin both chapter, in determines this NaCl As and aldosterone, levels of blood renin later of described excretion. II renal which reduce angiotensin

to a by Constriction atherosclerotic perfusion an reduces pressure plaque) renal artery of that kidney. (e.g., in and This pressure reduced perfusion the JGA is results by renin afferent sensed the secretion. arteriole of blood increases systemic levels renin production vascular of its arterioles which increase system. via the vasoconstrictor the throughout turn pressure on elevated angiotensin affect II, The in without systemic kidney increased stenosis suppressed. and renal its by from renin the blood of the secretion kidney is JGA pressure artery), (i.e., sensed that the contralateral The is kidney of secretion of renin addition contralateral inhibit In levels angiotensin II by the (negative feedback). kidney also the high administration of angiotensin-converting surgical receptor of inhibitor an Treatment of enzyme includes II of arteries patients angiotensin blockers, administration constricted renal with repair (ACE). or of the artery, stenotic angiotensin blocks ACE The angiotensin to II. I of conversion inhibitor

volume the results the an they adjustment to signals have sensors in in vascular which When and kidneys, change detected appropriate ECFV, water send a NaCl in excretion. the NaCl expanded, renal Accordingly, water excretion increased. is and ECFV when are excretion is Conversely, are contracted, renal water reduced. and ECFV when the NaCl kidneys signals are The volume and the the neural to hormonal. both involved sensors coupling in These summarized are in

NaCl 35.1 renal , Box are effects and on their as excretion. water

sympathetic fibers the nephron. as of well cells the afferent innervate the and of arterioles the efferent nerve as glomerulus , activation of the fibers contraction, high-pressure ECFV stimulation sympathetic nerve vascular kidneys. including activity, baroreceptors in the of lowand results With innervating those effects: has This stimulation following 1. the

receptors). (mediated The efferent constricted by α-adrenergic and arterioles are afferent greater the glomerular hydrostatic in decreases the vasoconstriction on the (the afferent is within GFR. a which This effect pressure arteriole) decrease results in capillary lumen, decrease reduced. filtered is Na+ this With GFR, amount in of the

2.

by of the Renin is (mediated arterioles cells afferent the β-adrenergic secretion by stimulated receptors). Renal Control Involved and • of Excretion Water BOX 35.1 NaCl in As Signals

Sympathetic Renal along reabsorption nephron (↑Activity: Nerves the

Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone (↑Secretion:

stimulates collecting Henle’s II ascending duct along tubule a and the and Na+ lesser thick limb stimulates reabsorption nephron in the the loop degree distal in Na+ to of reabsorption

Urodilatin Natriuretic duct ANP, duct and AVP by secretion the collecting distal (↑Secretion: tubule & inhibition collecting of action Peptides: on ↑NaCl reabsorption the water Excretion) BNP and and

reabsorption (↑Secretion: of ↑H2O angiotensin duct and increases renin Na+ ultimately by II aldosterone, reabsorption levels collecting later, nephron. by AVP Excretion) the stimulate distal the and ↓H2O both which of the tubule circulating described

3. stimulated by of the NaCl the α-adrenergic the nephron). cells receptors (mediated along on reabsorption nephron is directly nerve of increased tubule, effect by large important proximal Na+ this of sympathetic reabsorbed Because most the activity the segment. the of quantitatively for amount is As nerve sympathetic decreases an renal increased works ECFV restore excretion, to response these actions, that of result adaptive a activity NaCl to normal. sympathetic activity expansion, nerve reduced. With renal is ECFV This generally effects just the described. reverses

Cells proteolytic storage, cells) afferent in site of release known as the the and of arterioles synthesis, are granular enzyme renin. also cells, (juxtaglomerular the secretion: important Three are factors in 1. stimulating renin

Perfusion pressure. The behaves arteriole a high-pressure afferent baroreceptor. as pressure reduced, When is to kidneys the renin perfusion secretion stimulated. is perfusion an release. renin pressure in increase inhibits Conversely,

2.

activity. Sympathetic nerve innervate increases receptors). secretion Activation the β-adrenergic nerve afferent of the fibers renin by (mediated sympathetic that arterioles

Volume of 35 Control Body Fluid CHAPTER and Osmolality

activity decreased. is decreased sympathetic nerve is renal Renin secretion as

3. macula NaCl densa. the to Delivery of GFR feedback to Delivery tubuloglomerular NaCl the densa a of by ). macula regulates (see termed process addition role plays densa macula in In renin the secretion. a secretion renin to enhanced. decreased, the densa delivery NaCl is is macula When delivery renin an NaCl increase inhibits Conversely, secretion. in under that reduced maintain conditions densa–mediated helps secretion renin likely systemic of pressure It a vascular macula is volume. arterial body of the reduced, perfusion For example, (including kidneys) tissues vascular when decreases. is volume in This decreases the NaCl. amount turn GFR filtered and of II stimulates pressure The of secretion, and maintain NaCl perfusion. which macula (a the to blood renin increase thereby acts delivery through tissue vasoconstrictor) angiotensin densa potent reduced to

of express renin; many renin are the tissues circulating (e.g., adrenal juxtaglomerular cells Although (JG) they are of source located heart, afferent kidneys. in gland), the the arterioles brain, primary secretory that where opposite a stimulated cells, Renin secretion is increase of most intracellular response intracellular is [Ca++], decrease a [Ca++]. secretion by in stimulated an in by levels. secretion by cAMP in also stimulated Renin is intracellular increase an inhibit increases will [Ca++] renin anything that intracellular secretion. Conversely, by (cGMP). cyclic Renin monophosphate guanosine is increases intracellular inhibited also secretion in

inhibit secretion angiotensin-II, and cells. thus [Ca++] JG the arteriole, increase endothelin Stretch of renin and by intracellular afferent on (via stimulatory The by cAMP is intracellular of nerve norepinephrine, receptors). renin secretion sympathetic activity which β-adrenergic increases mediated effect levels renin and E2 also JG cell Prostaglandin therefore cAMP increases stimulates secretion. peptides nitric renin by Natriuretic (NO) cGMP. increasing and inhibit secretion intracellular oxide

factors, E2 the macula renin of including complex densa adenosine, several and by prostaglandin ATP, Control and secretion to appears paracrine is involve (see

Fig. components (RAAS). 35.10 summarizes the of renin-angiotensin-aldosterone the system essential have function; functions does solely a enzyme. not Renin physiological as a alone proteolytic it Its by protein, is is a substrate angiotensinogen, which produced circulating liver. the is I. Angiotensinogen function, to angiotensin-converting physiological the renin surface known has 8–amino an cells. by I by cleaved and it angiotensin vascular on peptide, angiotensin found also a acid endothelial Angiotensin 10–amino cleaved is to acid of yield II, (ACE) no peptide, enzyme for are I renal the angiotensin important endothelial and sites cells angiotensin conversion of to Lung II. also ACE Fig. • components 35.10 of essential renin-angiotensin-aldosterone of the Schematic the (RAAS). system representation kidneys. and water of excretion a Na+ results system decrease of in in this the by Activation all to NOTE: present by converted angiotensin-converting angiotensin II I on is an vascular cells. is enzyme that endothelial Angiotensin a this in significant shown, the conversion within cells endothelial play process. role lungs As the text for See details.

degrades bradykinin, vasodilator. potent a 1. Angiotensin important physiological functions: has several II

stimulation aldosterone secretion adrenal the 2. by of cortex

which 3. vasoconstriction, increases arteriolar blood pressure

4. secretion of and stimulation AVP thirst

Henle’s segments duct tubule, tubule reabsorption proximal distal largest.) quantitatively is the these (Of the loop, proximal collecting and tubule, NaCl ascending enhancement of effect on the limb the by of thick the the for secretagogue aldoste important is II rone. an Angiotensin K+ in the is for (see increase aldosterone other concentration ). important An secretion plasma stimulus steroid a by ways cortex is the of glomerulosa on adrenal also a number hormone (see produced in kidneys of Aldosterone and the the cells acts

36, Chapters and 34, ). its aldosterone With regulation by regard reabsorption of reduces nephron several by segments. the excretion ECFV, NaCl stimulating to of the of portion latter importantly which the tubule stimulates collecting nephron distal and it consists NaCl duct. Most reabsorption aldosterone-sensitive the in distal the (ASDN), thick NaCl it the a early ascending tubule. the by of extent lesser of and Henle’s distal also stimulates reabsorption the limb To portion loop

11β-hydroxysteroid presence dehydrogenase well mineralocorticoid (11β-HSD2). conferred receptors enzyme as as the is 2 by of the sensitivity Aldosterone binds for 11β-HSD2 them mineralocorticoid aldosterone mineralocorticoid receptor also it binding metabolizes Because specificity prevents glucocorticoids the required the because to and glucocorticoids, is thus receptor. from mineralocorticoid aldosterone-sensitive and the receptor The distal 11β-HSD2. expresses both nephron

). principal cells. the it apical ASDN activity membrane of ENaC increases of In the and the abundance in This increases apical Na+ across the into cells entry membrane. from occurs by of membrane across also basolateral is the aldosterone. the of cells which Extrusion abundance Na+ by increased Na+,K+-ATPase, increases whereas segments, NaCl reabsorbed from fluid distal of decreases of nephron these aldosterone amount tubular aldosterone reduced Thus of NaCl segments. by by reabsorption the the levels thick symporter the Although Henle’s tubule distal the of ascending and the aldosterone in symporter increases of also Na+/K+/2Cl− of is limb site aldosterone in abundance Na+/Cl− loop. action principal of the ASDN, the the the

as depletion, RAAS, Box NaCl occurs with the of 35.1 decreases of , ECFV activation excretion

the cortex adrenal of euvolemia. can maintain alter the levels Na+ kidneys of aldosterone impair and and Diseases ability the balance thereby to is urine. NaCl nephron, With decreased reabsorption the is aldosterone aldosterone-sensitive distal reduced the by in mainly secretion NaCl, lost of and the (hypoaldosteronism), of NaCl the negative can NaCl diet, ECFV amount Because decreases. balance ingested loss exceed urinary in ensues of and Na+ the elevated. are and and In ECFV to levels AVP contraction, renin, sympathetic tone response II, angiotensin of is increased reduced. excretion increased the NaCl enhanced opposite; With are reabsorption the aldosterone-sensitive aldosterone (hyperaldosteronism) and distal is of NaCl is secretion the effects nephron by are sympathetic renin, increased, II, Consequently, tone angiotensin and AVP ECFV levels decreased. is of decreased, is and ANP also elevated As in setting. described levels this are and later, BNP

the kidneys. by therefore with ECFV enhanced. and NaCl expansion, suppressed RAAS is excretion is renal The

a The excretion of (see the substances on number NaCl produces ). increase body to act kidneys that these, kidneys are following be will Of focus and produced peptides the best heart understood by the natriuretic discussion. of and the

peptides. two produces The heart natriuretic ventricular produce Atrial myocytes hormone ANP, myocytes store and produce and BNP. and the store peptide kidneys. by (i.e., dilates and promote and relax secreted NaCl and the volume with are Both water during the failure), peptides expansion, smooth heart vascular they excretion heart when muscle also termed related a urodilatin. produce The peptide natriuretic kidneys NaCl by actions the to Its kidneys. promoting excretion limited are and In they excretion as peptides general to the water relate of antagonize of actions these renal RAAS. natriuretic NaCl the those These include: 1. actions

vasoconstriction and the arterioles efferent of the the of of Vasodilation glomerulus. afferent increases This and GFR the the filtered amount of NaCl.

2.

the by Inhibition afferent arterioles. secretion renin of

3.

the cells secretion of adrenal Inhibition aldosterone cortex. by the of glomerulosa direct secretion the II– via (a) of secretion angiotensin the secretion, occurs cells two by This inhibition (b) reducing renin the of induced juxtaglomerular aldosterone mechanisms: adrenal aldosterone by thereby and glomerulosa inhibition of cortex. cells,

4.

by also of NaCl Inhibition which by duct, caused collecting is of aldosterone. the in levels reduced reabsorption part inhibits channels and thereby collecting duct in peptides membrane cells cGMP, reabsorption. of decreases which NaCl increase medullary natriuretic apical the However, cation

Control Volume 35 5. Fluid of CHAPTER Osmolality Body and action and pituitary AVP the posterior the Inhibition duct. on collecting secretion by of AVP of by thus increase the effects These decrease water water the urine. reabsorption duct in and collecting excretion by and tion natriuretic water NaCl to The excre of of effect increase the is peptides net kidneys. decrease in been but Hypothetically this would to of reported. water expected be a peptides for excretion, levels reduction NaCl circulating has convincing not and evidence these

the stimulates by previously, As posterior discussed AVP ECFV decreased a secretion pituitary. to euvolemia. Elevated by AVP serves decrease levels water excretion reestablish of which kidneys, the

Excretion of NaCl Euvolemia Control During

Na+ body. euvolemia NaCl therefore amount excreted the and with of matching precise Maintenance of ingested amount the balance requires of from the noted the route the are kidneys As for major NaCl already excretion. can with daily NaCl NaCl we urine in intake. individual euvolemic Accordingly, a daily equate excretion

noted, of excreted amount vary widely. As kidneys the NaCl by the can virtually NaCl conditions (i.e., Under no low-NaCl the restriction salt of diet), in urine. appears 1000 Conversely, NaCl mEq/day. large of ingest exceed NaCl, individuals who in quantities can excretion renal intake. NaCl excretion of time The days) and depends course magnitude varies in NaCl on adjustment the for the change renal (hours of to time small longer than intake. acclimation changes to in NaCl to intake changes large Acclimation requires a in

The nephron features of are NaCl in illustrated transport general along the

Fig. 35.11 . proximal Most filtered by the the of tubule. glomerulus by Na+ reabsorbed (67%) is the by the ascending thick An and loop tubule of collecting distal the reabsorbed duct. remainder Henle, 25% by the of the additional limb and is

is adult filtered amount In the a 25,000 approximately normal (load) of mEq/day: Na+

35.1 Equation

× (140 , (GFR) L/day) [Na+ Filtered mEq/day = (Plasma Na+= ]) load × (180 mEq/L) of

excreted diet, (≈140 filtered mEq/day). load is than a typical With in urine this of 1% less

load by the thus affect Because reabsorption and Na+ balance , changes large nephron Na+ of can filtered ECFV. of the in profoundly small its from 1% filtered excreted urine fractional excretion. excretion For in percentage example, Na+ the termed gThe increase in is load of an = example ÷ excretion 140 0.5%. is fractional or Na+ of In this mEq/day 0.005, mEq/day the 25,200

• Fig. Segmental 35.11 reabsorption. Na+ percentage filtered of The segment the load is each nephron reabsorbed Na+ indicated. by of proximal tubule; duct. limb; CD, distal thick TAL, collecting ascending PT, tubule; cortical DT,

of 500 mEq/day Na+ approximately additional load . of filtered of loss to 3% the an represents 3 Na+ 500 concentration the more = Na+ mEq/L, constant: of maintain excretion Because of by body L/day L a parallel (i.e., would would the ÷ 140 mEq/L ECFV than is ECF fluid loss water 3.6 decrease 140 osmolality mEq/day fluid to the such loss). Na+ loss individual a fluid ECFV. represent in decrease would in loss a Such 26% 70-kg

excretion of for (distal distal appropriate a maintain In are intake. segments and loop the duct) nephron Na+ reabsorption segments to nephron individuals main level the collecting euvolemic adjusted to is Henle at tubule dietary the where the are the of process. involved in portions this does However, not not nephron mean other this the Henle) of of of collecting Because . portions of loop must and other tubule the is Na+ these limited, distal bulk the load duct the proximal nephron reabsorb tubule capacity of the reabsorptive (i.e., filtered and during explained nephron be can by Na+ general handling Thus the by two euvolemia, processes: 1.

of delivered reabsorption of is of distal Henle loop regulated constant is proximal the Na+ portion to a the by the Na+ so relatively filtered load tubule tubule. that and distal the filtered Na+ 8% tubule. and the of filtered load the action proximal approximately thus of The , Henle loop and the load reabsorbs combined tubule delivered is to of of of 92%

2.

Na+ Na+ the amount ingested duct load matches remaining regulated the amount this by Reabsorption the of the portion so tubule the of and diet. in that distal of the of in is urine collecting filtered excreted state. Thus in Na+ the euvolemic to make these nephron maintain final excretion segments adjustments later

Distal Constant the NaCl to of Delivery Maintaining Mechanisms Tubule for

a of A the maintain mechanisms to Na+ delivery beginning distal of constant of tubule. number the the (and balance, filtered of loop dependency Na+ processes of Na+), autoregulation load load GFR glomerulotubular Henle. of and reabsorption thus These of by the the are

perfusion maintenance rate of a (see range pressures. of filtration of allows relatively constant ) wide the over a GFR Autoregulation rate is Na+ is constant. the load filtration of constant, Because the filtered also

variations small the occur. of control autoregulatory Despite GFR, an change nephron, by would in are Na+ adjustment for compensated appropriate by Na+ not excretion these the changes reabsorption markedly. If the state, GFR. reabsorption in the Na+ parallel especially tubule, Fortunately, with changes euvolemic by in proximal changes in This is termed phenomenon balance. glomerulotubular if amount proximal of Thus Na+ by the GFR the tubule increases, reabsorbed also increases. for balance). description (see GFR a glomerulotubular of if opposite detailed more The occurs decreases

The distal that of response in Henle reabsorptive mechanism loop Na+ final tubule of to Na+ increase involves of the helps and collecting maintain increased constant delivery to the duct to of delivery ability the rate . its

of Collecting Duct Distal Reabsorption Tubule NaCl and Regulation

is to When primarily constant, with adjustments excretion small balance intake. ASDN, in the by Na+ Na+ reabsorption, are sufficient delivery of of reabsorption regulator NaCl Na+ by of and Aldosterone the is excretion. primary thus the ASDN segments aldosterone levels reabsorption decreased). Na+ increased is elevated, (Na+ by are When these excretion is excretion Na+ (NaCl is decreased, levels aldosterone is When reabsorption are decreased increased). have to during euvolemia their II by natriuretic shown and peptides), is unclear. the alter factors Na+ role (e.g., angiotensin Other been ASDN reabsorption but

maintain long intake as the variations are appropriately regulate of in dietary and described euvolemia. Na+ renal As previously mechanisms NaCl can excretion minor, thereby cannot NaCl However, changes mechanisms effectively handle intake. in significant these contraction ECFV intake NaCl changes or occurs. significantly, When expansion the and cases, such factors euvolemic excretion act the state. on kidneys reestablish additional thereby adjust Na+ In to

Control With of Volume NaCl Excretion Expansion

the and sensors vascular NaCl low-pressure high-pressure the During water. and to in increased volume kidneys excretion result expansion, that signals send ECFV of ˜ 3 expansion The Fig. BNP ˜ and Volume Lung = I signals Na+, the acting ˜ ° activity ˜ II °GFR 2 include: Urodilatin UNa+V ˜R • H2O kidneys ˜ Sympathetic excretion ˜ on Angiotensin Brain ° ° ˜PNa+ Adrenal AVP ANP – Renin Heart Angiotensin 1 gland Aldosterone to expansion. 35.12 ECFV response Integrated Numbers the refer response text. the of the description in to filtration BNP, natriuretic brain UNa+V, peptide; natriuretic plasma glomerular Na+; R, Na+ of rate. PNa+, peptide; ANP, rate; GFR, excretion atrial [Na+]; tubular reabsorption

1.

renal 2. decreased nerves activity of sympathetic

of the in and 3. kidneys release BNP heart from ANP the and urodilatin

pituitary 4. from on duct AVP inhibition secretion and decreased action collecting of posterior AVP the the

renin secretion II 5. of decreased decreased angiotensin thus production and

levels, response levels which nephron secretion, these to decreased is of natriuretic integrated is caused aldosterone II reduced and The by signals angiotensin the elevated peptide

Fig. 35.12 . encircled to occur those numbers expansion ECFV responses in (the general Three match

Fig. 35.12 1. increases. GFR result a activity. the nerve GFR as mainly of sympathetic in decrease increases their fibers efferent the the and glomerulus innervate afferent arterioles of control diameter. and Sympathetic an increase to dilation activity plasma (RPF). arteriolar flow leads nerve sympathetic Decreased in renal and appears the hydrostatic Because afferent the pressure capillary on the glomerular greater be increased, the is thereby within increasing arterioles, the GFR. to effect than increases to GFR, decreases. degree a filtration Because greater (GFR/RPF) the RPF fraction also efferent arterioles. constricting dilating the and peptides Natriuretic the increase afferent GFR by arterioles the contribute that increased expansion peptide during ECFV to this natriuretic Thus response. levels occur GFR, With increases. in the Na+ the of load increase filtered

2. Henle. in reabsorption tubule the of The of and loop decreases proximal Na+ reduce the mechanisms Several proximal tubule. Na+ reabsorption by nerve nerve sympathetic activation Na+ nephron sympathetic reabsorption, decreases the proximal from fibers decreased this Because results expansion reabsorption. ECFV Na+ that segment activity innervate tubule the of stimulates that tubule. Na+ directly by addition, the reabsorption angiotensin stimulates proximal II In reabsorption decreases angiotensin this are under result. Na+ tubule reduced a proximal levels also condition, II Because as proximal the forces change. tubule Starling also across glomerular the tends ECFV pressure peritubular The to increase capillaries. hydrostatic within the pressure expansion in the hydrostatic capillaries within also elevated in reduces oncotic peritubular addition the filtration decrease fraction In the pressure. (e.g., a the oncotic) and description (see absorption reduce NaCl) solute from capillary this thus for forces hydrostatic lateral and and mechanism). reabsorption These the water space complete of (i.e., the of alterations in of Starling NaCl tubular reduce intercellular Henle. reabsorption proximal NaCl Both in result loop decrease and more filtered tubule the the of NaCl of in the by in increase load the the to delivery ECFV stimulate NaCl limb by sympathetic of Because occur limb. activation the reabsorption and reduce and II activity low angiotensin II the that and by nerves levels ascending ascending and with NaCl aldosterone loop angiotensin thick expansion reduced the nerve reabsorption Henle, of the aldosterone of thick tubule distal load is to the fraction the Thus filtered the delivered increased. of

3. and decreases reabsorption in collecting distal the Na+ tubule duct. that tubule of distal degree the in of to varies As observed the of amount ECFV in delivered tubule Na+ the euvolemic to to the the expansion). exceeds the state delivered proportion distal (i.e., amount noted, Na+ peptides. levels overwhelms increased this II by of is distal natriuretic aldosterone, as load the of and and of the reabsorptive Na+ and levels increased well the reduced of capacity collecting also impaired tubule duct, angiotensin This capacity as is excretion component The water. ECFV increased response to expansion final of the in As increases, to excretion Na+ begins plasma fall. osmolality decreases secretion This of AVP. also elevated to the is peptides. AVP in response natriuretic secretion decreased of levels on peptides of addition, In AVP the inhibit duct. action collecting natriuretic the by decrease by the Together, and excretion kidneys. effects these the duct collecting water reabsorption water increase thereby constant. in osmolality Thus and water euvolemia and occurs remains excretion concert; NaCl of restored body is fluid time days) to ECFV The (hours magnitude expansion. of the course depends on response of the this hours. Thus 24 the ECFV euvolemia degree small, expansion just is restore the within if generally of described mechanisms However, large with ECFV can degrees response days. the of take several expansion,

increased, balance duct under this by nephron; action condition), all tubule amount and and (while does distal the In ECFV reabsorption Na+ the parts of integrated to of in delivery (2) the secondary (glomerulotubular the of reabsorption the loop response a proximal (3) not decreased reduction Na+ of (1) brief, by Na+ is increased), renal Na+ collecting and Henle occur primarily is the involves is aldosterone. tubule of of filtered reduced is the expansion to larger the in a restoring tubule expansion In of summary, the a by fraction proximal to the , Na+ leads Na+ thereby filtered both reabsorption in ECFV which results reduction ASDN, and euvolemia. excretion of

NaCl With Volume Excretion Control of Contraction

and high-pressure kidneys During reduce signals water NaCl low-pressure to to and thereby the vascular ECFV. excretion and the sensors send volume ECFV restore contraction, on signals The act that the 1. kidneys include:

2.

levels II aldosterone which angiotensin by adrenal in thus increased secretion renin, 3. and the results elevated of increased of secretion cortex

and BNP of the 4. kidneys heart production and by inhibition by urodilatin the secretion ANP

posterior AVP by pituitary secretion of stimulation the

nephron response The in integrated of illustrated the to signals these is

Fig. 35.13 . (the those follows in The general is response with encircled numbers correlate as

Fig. 35.13): 1.

GFR decreases. renal result arteriolar as constriction a Afferent activity. efferent nerve increased and occurs of sympathetic appears capillaries the because the on on hydrostatic fall, effect pressure decreases to efferent be glomerular in the which afferent the than arteriole, The greater GFR. thereby more RPF decreases filtration increases. fraction GFR, than Because reduces in The . filtered of decrease amount Na+ GFR the

2.

the increased. by Na+ loop Henle of reabsorption proximal tubule and is proximal augment in Several the mechanisms tubule. reabsorption Na+ levels increased sympathetic activity stimulate II example, nerve For directly and reabsorption. Na+ angiotensin the peritubular hydrostatic within capillaries glomerular the The a to in the hydrostatic also decrease leads capillaries. pressure within decreased pressure just noted, peritubular an increased in the increase filtration in as pressure. oncotic results fraction addition, the In tubule and the a description facilitate proximal by thereby capillary of into NaCl alterations of this fluid the (see water reabsorption for complete lateral These capillary movement Starling forces from space mechanism). intercellular and the of in stimulate the activity elevated the by of thick II stimulate as reabsorption sympathetic limb. ascending aldosterone levels angiotensin Na+ as well and nerve Increased

3.

duct distal enhanced. Na+ reabsorption collecting tubule is by the and in of transport is the ASDN delivered reabsorbed enhanced. completely proximal by decreased that to loop to The tubule is reabsorption and almost and because the owing the Na+ filtration Henle, ASDN, the of segments of amount increased small is also result sympathetic reabsorption response. II of Na+ aldosterone angiotensin and this may the to ASDN although primarily increased is increased activity the by levels increased contribute nerve Stimulation of levels, reabsorption, natriuretic peptides, levels duct of which are collecting reduced. inhibit Lastly, enhanced and of water the by the which angiotensin lowand vascular AVP, II. the elevated of the are well activation through tubule sensors collecting levels levels of the Finally, portion reabsorption the distal of as high-pressure by is as by volume latter duct elevated result, reduced. As is water a excretion activity and in and BNP the ° water 1 retained Heart 2 Because ˜ Angiotensin are II ˜ ˜ Volume AVP proportions, gland equal excretion Na+, • Angiotensin and Sympathetic euvolemia 3 ANP is ˜ H2O contraction reestablished kidneys I both Brain ° Fig. by ˜ Adrenal Aldosterone ˜ Na+ Renin Lung contraction. Integrated ECFV to response 35.13 of text. to in the Numbers the response the refer description peptide; glomerular peptide; plasma UNa+V, ANP, reabsorption atrial rate. tubular natriuretic brain BNP, rate; of GFR, Na+ excretion Na+; [Na+]; filtration PNa+, natriuretic R,

osmolality body remains fluid constant. depend course and days) . dietary contraction the The ECFV as ECFV (hours magnitude which to attained on of as degree time restoration intake well the of the of euvolemia is Na+ this to of the additional NaCl ingested is if rapidly can diet. restored in Euvolemia be more

ECFV response the its In all segments: 1. brief, the contraction action involves nephron’s of integrated (1) the to

fluid body balance) water amount to osmolality of (i.e., added body. the the from Regulation the steady-state body requires matches of amount lost the that exactly feces). by in routes sweating, respiration, during and body (e.g., is with several lost Water from the route of kidneys the The water regulated are only excretion. secreted of kidneys the posterior regulated water by is pituitary. the Excretion AVP by from are the a When small high, kidneys levels AVP volume excrete urine. of hyperosmotic a low, of volume are excreted. When hypoosmotic is levels urine large AVP

2.

balance osmolality. fluid water alter of Disorders body occur reabsorption of not Na+ of thus amount anions Na+ the and determinant this Because and of decreased, the filtered is and the are to is glomerulotubular is (3) Na+ tubule major under enhanced decreased, proximal with delivery proximal does its (GFR condition), (2) reduced. increased, Henle whereas in balance loop reabsorption is ASDN is the urine decreased by together This volume. the and urine eliminates Na+ from ASDN, delivery, reabsorption and water virtually with Na+ reduces enhanced

[Na+]. as disorders water ECF of of balance manifest in ECF osmolality, changes decrease balance > body water (intake osmolality excretion) results and Positive hyponatremia. fluid a in in in water osmolality fluid < in Negative results an hypernatremia. (intake excretion) balance body increase and

3. this ECF the in the The of volume of amount Na+ determined by compartment. is maintain NaCl euvolemia) must intake. match a (i.e., excretion ECFV To NaCl constant the are the for The excretion body. from regulating NaCl kidneys route major of monitor vascular Volume primarily the volume pressure. and located in system sensors increase are neural hormonal signals NaCl occurs, and expansion restore to euvolemia. of ECFV water When the to and sent and kidneys excretion thereby ECFV When excretion water and and are decrease the occurs, signals neural hormonal kidneys NaCl and to to sent contraction

antagonists. Berl Vasopressin T. Engl N Med. J 2015;372:2207-2216.

Bichet DG. and Polyuria diabetes insipidus. et eds. Alpern al., In: RJ, and Physiology Seldin Kidney: and Pathophysiology. The Giebisch’s ed. 5th Philadelphia: Academic Press; 2013.

D, RA. Fenton Brown action. of biology vasopressin cell The al., Taal MW, eds. et In: and Kidney. The Rector’s Brenner ed. 9th Saunders; Philadelphia: 2012.

et WH, Dantzler al. Urine-concentrating medulla: of the inner Henle. in thin mechanism loops of the of the function limbs Clin Nephrol. Am J Soc 2014;9:1781-1789.

Zeidel Osmotic M. J, homeostasis. Danziger Nephrol. J Am Soc 2015;10:852-862.

al. MA, et Knepper balance. Molecular physiology of water Med. Engl N J 2015;372:1349-1358.

et Nielsen S, al. water mammalian kidney. Aquaporin in channels RJ, eds. al., et In: Alpern Seldin and The and Kidney: Giebisch’s Physiology Pathophysiology. 5th ed. Philadelphia: Press; 2013. Academic

Robertson GL. and vasopressin. Thirst al., In: eds. Alpern RJ, et Giebisch’s Kidney: The Seldin and Pathophysiology. Physiology and ed. 5th Academic Philadelphia: Press; 2013.

al. JM, et Sands concentration dilution. Urine and MW, Taal In: eds. et al., Rector’s and Brenner Kidney. The 9th ed. 2012. Philadelphia: Saunders;

JM, HE. Sands Layton transporters. concentrating urea The urine mechanism and In: eds. Alpern RJ, et al., The Kidney: and Physiology Giebisch’s Seldin and Pathophysiology. 5th ed. Press; Academic Philadelphia: 2013.

JM, HE. Sands Layton urine-concentrating in mechanism. the Advances understanding Annu Physiol. Rev 2014;76:387-409.

RW. Schrier in vasodilation, and vasopressin, vasopres pregnancy. arterial Systemic sinase Am J Nephrol. Soc 2010;21:570-572. Sterns RH. correction. of Disorders plasma consequences, sodium–causes, and Med. Engl J N 2015;372:55-65.

thereby euvolemia. restore Na+ system nervous and system, The that maintain components balance. peptides important the of are RAAS, sympathetic natriuretic steady-state the

JG. Verbalis Disorders of balance. water MW, et al., Taal eds. In: The Rector’s and Kidney. Brenner 9th ed. 2012. Philadelphia: Saunders;

al. et D, Eladari the electrolyte at in look tubule. transport new distal A Rev Annu Physiol. 2012;74:325-349.

al. Gamba et G, of Henle, duct. and the distal Sodium transport convoluted tubule, chloride in loop collecting Alpern al., RJ, et eds. In: Kidney: Physiology and Giebisch’s Seldin and The Pathophysiology. ed. 5th Academic Philadelphia: 2013. Press;

DB. Mount sodium, of chloride, potassium. and Transport Taal In: eds. MW, al., et and Rector’s Brenner The Kidney. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012.

Mount DB. Henle. of Thick loop the of ascending limb Am J Clin Nephrol. Soc 2014;9:1974-1986.

J. Schnermann Palmer LG, of Integrated Na the nephron. control transport along J Clin Soc Am Nephrol. 2015;10:676-687.

Pearce D, et al. transport. of regulation Aldosterone Taal In: et MW, eds. al., Brenner and Rector’s The Kidney. 9th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012.

al. D, Pearce et and Collecting duct processes transport cell principal their regulation. Soc Nephrol. J Am Clin 2015;10:135-146.

IN, KL. Skorecki Slotki sodium of balance. Disorders et eds. Taal al., MW, In: Rector’s Kidney. The and Brenner 9th ed. 2012. Philadelphia: Saunders;

aldosterone Loffing sensitive action O, Staub J. in Mineralocorticoid distal nephron. In: eds. RJ, al., Alpern et and and Pathophysiology. Giebisch’s Physiology The Seldin Kidney: 5th ed. Philadelphia: 2013. Press; Academic

Ellison Subramanya DH. AR, convoluted Distal tubule. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014;9:2147-2163.

Vesley DL. Natriuretic hormones. Alpern et In: al., eds. RJ, Seldin and The Giebisch’s and Kidney: Physiology Pathophysiology. 5th ed. Press; 2013. Academic Philadelphia:

Weinstein AM. chloride proximal and transport: Sodium nephron. RJ, eds. et Alpern In: al., Pathophysiology. The Kidney: Seldin Giebisch’s and Physiology and ed. 5th Philadelphia: 2013. Academic Press;

Homeostasis Potassium, Calcium, Phosphate and

able this questions: completion answer of should the be chapter to 1. following Upon the student

How homeostasis? body maintain the does K+

2.

the K+ the body distribution What of compartments? within is Why is important? this distribution

3.

are that What levels? plasma K+ factors the regulate hormones and Why is regulation this important?

4.

the and K+ the , by of nephron how transport K+ How transport K+ the segments segments these in excreted of the determine various mechanism does is how urine? much do

5.

tubule the so regulating are in collecting duct and K+ distal important Why excretion?

6.

do and excretion? acid-base aldosterone, K+ tubular influence rate, levels, How balance fluid K+ vasopressin, plasma flow

7.

the calcium is importance phosphate What (Ca++) of physiological inorganic (Pi)? and

8.

and Pi does maintain the body homeostasis? How Ca++

9.

What plasma roles and bone play do kidneys, intestinal in the levels? Ca++ and tract, Pi maintaining

10.

Ca++ What and hormones plasma Pi factors regulate levels? and

11.

responsible mechanisms Ca++ Pi the along and the are What cellular nephron? for reabsorption

12.

by and kidneys? renal regulate Pi Ca++ What hormones excretion the

13.

(CaSR)? the the calcium-sensing role receptor is What of

14.

common are clinical What Ca++ and more homeostasis? disorders Pi some of the of

15.

calcitriol (active the of of role production form the What in is kidneys D)? of vitamin the

16.

What have effects thiazide Ca++ and excretion? do loop diuretics on

the body, is of (K+) of functions, activity. many regulation cell the and for neuromuscular regulation of cell abundant most protein, intracellular one including growth, and critical cardiac volume, cations enzyme is potential, and in Potassium it synthesis and resting function, DNA pH, membrane of Despite remains remarkably K+ intake, [K+] constant. fluctuations in and fluid (ECF) dietary wide cells in extracellular of mechanisms homeostasis. sets regulatory K+ Two safeguard several the First, [K+] ECF. in mechanisms regulate constant to intake. Second, the maintain in dietary amount K+ of K+ K+ match renal other body by excretion adjusting mechanisms the kidneys regulate . of that excretion the It K+ is

70-kg is or body mEq/kg body mEq [K+] for Total 3600 of individual. weight, 50 a mEq/L. the average Ninety-eight within percent the body K+ 150 where located is [K+] of the cells, in is growth required and volume for functions, regulation. division High cell including and cell intracellular many is [K+] mEq/L. [K+] in normal concentration 2% is body 4 total ECF, approximately is Only where of located the its 5.0 ECF exceeds hyperkalemia. mEq/L that constitutes in A [K+] constitutes ECF [K+] mEq/L in of hypokalemia. Conversely, a than less 3.5

Hypokalemia many clinical as be disorders can as patients. hospitalized of the practice common is in one observed 20% in of most and electrolyte severe bulimia), of and (e.g., hypokalemia vomiting include diarrhea. diuretic administration frequent most The drugs, causes of surreptitious distal Na+/ the defect also (a in genetic 36). in apical Chapter cells) membrane the syndrome hypokalemia Cl− Gitelman of (see causes tubule symporter electrolyte Hyperkalemia 1% common also a in is of 10% to is seen disorder and patients. hospitalized angiotensin-converting elderly. diuretics, the high and (ACE) in Hyperkalemia as K+-sparing failure, renal in drugs in enzyme patients in (i.e., taking sugar), hyperglycemia inhibitors often and patients with such with patients occurs blood lysis a Pseudohyperkalemia, of blood traumatic falsely [K+], during plasma cells caused red high by is drawing. blood contain K+ , elevating and releases thereby blood blood red cells, cells, K+ lysis like of plasma artificially cells Red [K+]. all into plasma,

The maintained by concentration across K+ is of of Na+,K+-ATPase. operation mEq/L) (≈146 cell difference the large membranes [K+] This • is Fig. important in gradient • Electrocardiographs Fig. individuals plasma from with varying 36.2 of variations plasma of 36.1 resting Effects [K+] skeletal muscle. in membrane on potential the of responsible membrane fast become decreases inactivating less negative, Hyperkalemia by action channels depolarizing causes Na+ the to excitability potential for which phase the potential. stimulus potential. to a the membrane is required thereby potential Hypokalemia excitability membrane the reduces threshold potential depolarize the hyperpolarizes to because larger and Resting membrane potential. resting “normal” indicates membrane the threshold indicates threshold Normal potential.

difference across potential cell membranes. the maintaining K+ ( for muscle as as smooth for cells, the nerve muscle is and and of cells of well Thus the excitability skeletal, critical contractility cardiac,

Fig. 36.1 [K+]. details. See text for al. et (Modified L Barker from Principles Medicine. Ambulatory of 5th ed. Baltimore: & Wilkins; Williams 1999.)

tissues, activity is excitable effects [K+], prevented deleterious plasma by (minutes) the uptake heart into K+ of could This rise the of electrical other on rapid in and the cells. which have Because by K+ kidneys excretion the of

both are arrhythmias hyperkalemia. by produced hypokalemia and Cardiac electrocardiogram (ECG; The

Fig. activity determine [K+] heart of the way cells. other to influence heart the 36.2 fast in plasma monitors excitable easy a electrical changes the and whether and ) is and blood often available. not [K+] values In and by requires the immediately a are plasma laboratory clinical contrast, sample, measurement of appearance waves The the sign hyperkalemia T first of ECG. is on of the thin tall, the in segment, QRS lengthen of ECG. the the increases interval, interval and Further ST plasma the depress [K+] prolong PR P contractions plasma ECG uncoordinated wave [K+] as the interval Finally, fibers). ventricles muscle approaches appears wave, mEq/L, (i.e., rapid, the the as of QRS broadens, and 10 the fibrillate sine disappears, manifest a ST the T QT and Hypokalemia the prolongs the ECG. interval, of the wave, lowers inverts segment

within minutes K+ the the enters gastrointestinal (GI) (Fig. absorbed meal the After tract ECF a by ). 36.3 were a during by 2.4 (14 mEq If to mEq) (≈33 L), normal (33 [K+] mEq/L added ECF 14 increase ECF): compartment to ingested meal plasma would the K+ remain in L the of

life-threatening a K+ uptake by hyperkalemia. (hours), is Equation mEq prevent of is 4. 36.1 cells = 14L slow to 2 meal relatively after essential GI the requires kidneys. total Maintaining the tract by the be body all excreted that K+ eventually constant by [K+] absorbed about process 6 This requires hours.

Plasma [K+] Regulation of

increase K+ 36.1 of blood hormones, into cells muscle, aldosterone, and uptake epinephrine, skeletal and including Several bone, red liver, (Box insulin,

Fig. 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− and these the cells. 36.3 by in symporter symporter, the Na+,K+-ATPase, ) Na+/Cl− stimulating Na+,K+-ATPase. by of of the and Acute increased 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− existing is days) chronic increase (i.e., mediated in minutes) K+ by within uptake (i.e., K+ mediated stimulation to Na+,K+-ATPase, a quantity hours an Na+/Cl− increase within , uptake is activity in whereas of transporters, that from insulin follows tract cortex, the from by absorption (see from adrenal secretion the aldosterone GI [K+] of release pancreas, The rise of stimulates and adrenal secretion the in the K+ epinephrine of medulla plasma

Fig. 36.3 ). In [K+] of contrast, inhibits a plasma hormones. release in decrease these uptake K+ act epinephrine insulin an of Whereas to minutes, few within cells. into about hour and stimulate a aldosterone requires

of Major Fluid Influencing • and Hormones, Drugs BOX Intracellular Distribution Compartments Factors, Extracellular 36.1 K+Between and

Physiological: Keep [K+] Constant Plasma

Plasma Displace Pathophysiological: Normal From [K+]

CHAPTER and Phosphate Potassium, 36 Calcium, Homeostasis

α-and of membranes activating across by distribution cell Catecholamines affect K+ the receptors. β2-adrenergic Stimulation α-adrenoceptors stimulation of in uptake β2-adrenoceptors releases cells, K+ whereas liver, of from cells. K+ by especially the promotes

β2-adrenoceptors activation is example, hyperkalemia. For after important preventing of in exercise after meal greater if β-adrenoceptor been pretreated has K+-rich with rise antagonist. a propranolol, The plasma the in [K+] a is patient [K+]. release plasma myocardial during rapidly stress of ischemia) lower can epinephrine Furthermore, (e.g.,

of K+ cells. stimulates into also Insulin uptake is illustrated importance by of two observations. insulin The deficiency) than mellitus greater is meal diabetes people. in (i.e., a with First, [K+] healthy the plasma in in rise after K+-rich patients insulin can correct hypoglycemia) (and prevent glucose insulin be hyperkalemia. infused Second, insulin-induced to to cells is into most shifts meal. ingestion that the important K+ Insulin of a K+ hormone after in is K+ normal. although glucose uptake uptake is disease, into stimulation kidney into impaired, cells with patients chronic of insulin-stimulated In insulin cells

Fig. • of Overview 36.3 K+homeostasis. in of decreases of in increase hormones and opposite whereas effect K+into or plasma [K+]. increases An plasma these plasma a aldosterone movement stimulates insulin, fall concentration has cells the epinephrine, [K+], and plasma amount K+in the by body is the of The kidneys. determined by in equal. when is intake the (plus K+balance urinary GI tract) dietary output and are An output individual of regulated aldosterone, AVP. by [K+], K+by and the Excretion is plasma kidneys mEq Aldosterone of of Epinephrine 90–95 Diet of mEq mEq K+/day AVP K+/day Feces of K+ K+/day Tissue mEq K+ of Plasma [K+] 90 stores K+/day Urine fluid of 100 mEq absorption Intestinal 3435 Extracellular 65 5–10 Insulin Aldosterone mEq

promotes and insulin, also of into uptake catecholamines like cells. Aldosterone, K+ aldosterone Addison’s levels a primary aldosteronism) causes fall in (e.g., A in levels (e.g., whereas aldosterone hypokalemia, disease) causes rise hyperkalemia. As illustrated and later in as discussed

Fig.

stimulates K+ excretion. urinary 36.3 , also aldosterone [K+] by urinary plasma into altering excretion. K+ alters on Thus aldosterone and of cells acting K+ uptake

36.1 ). Box rather not thus are factors in movement ECF fluid of hyperkalemia. development hypokalemia between the intracellular or involved (ICF) the These regulation and [K+] but of K+ plasma of and cause alter

increases metabolic decreases [K+], alkalosis it. Metabolic plasma acidosis whereas alkalosis Respiratory hypokalemia. causes respiratory little effect contrast, no plasma [K+]. or on In acidosis has much produced equivalent organic [K+] plasma (e.g., acids lactic acidosis of (e.g., acid, inorganic produced addition H2SO4) acids of acetic more acid, increases by acidosis ketoacids). Metabolic by than HCl, accumulation an cells reciprocal the to (i.e., pH electroneutrality. [H+]) K+ of maintain of out reduced cells of into The movement movement and promotes H+ increased inside in occurs This including that the K+ acidosis cells, 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− effect of accumulate part the and transporters acidosis inhibits because symporter. Na+,K+-ATPase (see into the In H+ movement the of addition, ECF changes occurs of [H+] in buffer as cells cells

Chapter 37).

K+ direction, lost cell across across As nor the H+ in and opposite membranes, neither are thus gained moves moves cell cations membranes. effect; plasma cells [K+] the moves into opposite alkalosis Metabolic exits. has K+ and decreases as H+

acids produce do metabolic organic significant acidosis, a hyperkalemia. they not Although cause Two to suggested hyperkalemia. for explanations organic of been ability cause reduced the acids have across and organic the for enter membrane. the with cell anion K+-H+ First, exchange eliminate the need the thereby H+ may K+ moves insulin secretion, may Second, anions cells. into which organic stimulate cells. movement direct effect counteract of This the out moves the which K+ acidosis, may of

across the membranes. also of plasma influences of osmolality distribution The cell K+ the increase release increases cells by ECF osmolality [K+]. thus in of enhances and An K+ extracellular the of elevation 10 0.8 0.4 to in mEq/L [K+] mOsm/kg with may a plasma H2O Plasma by osmolality. increase to high and of cases), of mg/dL plasma in as In in dL take elevated, 100 value 1200 of mg/ part part ≈ from as who in do [K+] the which lack often osmolality. mellitus with insulin in a increase diabetes plasma normal because insulin, some of [glucose] the because is increases not plasma patients ≈ (i.e., has the opposite action. Hypoosmolality to changes cell The changes related osmolality [K+] in associated volume. in are with plasma alterations in because across of (see leaves plasma example, gradient the For increases, membrane water plasma cells the as osmotic osmolality

Chapter 1).

the leaves that until of equals osmolality cells intracellular Water ECF. in [K+] and of loss rise. to water cells shrinks cells This causes The K+ from driving in intracellular cells. exit of provides rise the [K+] a force for [K+]. plasma This sequence increases the effect. has plasma fall opposite in osmolality A

hyperkalemia result Cell intracellular of K+ lysis a to addition ECF. as of causes and cells tumor as syndrome destroy destruction (i.e., Severe trauma solutes some ECF. destruction and K+ conditions other and of such lysis (i.e., release into of burns) skeletal muscle) rhabdomyolysis cell tumor and chemotherapy-induced (e.g., cells) blood addition, cells seepage of may cause tract. In the gastric ulcers into red GI K+ cause hyperkalemia. cells The blood absorbed from can and and released the cells are is the digested,

during skeletal from is muscle released exercise than cells K+ rest. More during hyperkalemia The on ensuing exercise. the of depends degree people In slowly, increases [K+] mEq/L. 0.3 by plasma walking mEq/L. more [K+] or by plasma With increase exercise, 2.0 vigorous may

K+ by Kidneys the Excretion

maintaining role in K+ play major kidneys a balance. The As illustrated in

Fig. the 36.3 ingested diet. kidneys excrete 90% to 95% of the K+ in the when intake as as increases 10-fold. equals by intake much even Excretion kidneys of This in urinary K+ the underscores excretion intake the importance balance and dietary homeostasis. in maintaining in K+ excreted Although small essentially and in feces less diarrhea amounts of (≈5%–10% relatively not ingested therefore kidneys. by constant, of except important the are diet), than sweat severe amount is is the lost during and the the is this day K+ K+ each regulated, determining into collecting cells system the factor blood fluid ( K+ urinary key tubular distal the tubule in from secretion by is K+ excretion duct and of

Fig. 36.4

to and 30% Potassium, 36 50% 9% Fig. CHAPTER • Phosphate 3% 5% to Calcium, Homeostasis 10% the nephron. K+ transport 36.4 along rate of K+ tubule by and the segment the K+ transport distal depends duct. the on of direction Excretion late collecting and of K+ filtered secreted of nephron segment. Percentages each the reabsorbed amount refer or by to transport. direction indicate Arrows of depletion. Dietary K+ Left, of load K+ of An filtered the amount of excreted. 1% K+ is equal to Normal intake. and increased K+ dietary Right, amount 15% of 80% An K+ of equal excreted. is to filtered to load the cortical CCD, collecting collecting tubule; proximal medullary inner duct; distal DT, tubule; duct; PT, IMCD,

limb. ascending TAL, thick

Exercise-induced usually minutes are not do in of several changes produce rest. after [K+] and symptoms reversed plasma K+ to such in β1-adrenergic who (2) lead β-adrenergic life-threatening have aldosterone; as of ability blockers. renal release medications, who is epinephrine or disorders that (e.g., to impaired vigorous excrete However, endocrine individuals affect (a can hyperkalemia certain or (1) whose exercise failure); (3) insulin, take agonist), 4 in at may [K+] 2 receptor exercise, antagonists mEq/L by plasma For take least for β1-adrenergic example, increase individuals vigorous during who hypertension. to acid-base Because value, exercise not not and (see contribute a K+ maintain homeostasis balance, plasma to osmolality, do they [K+] cell do at normal lysis, plasma

). 36.1 Box and [K+] aldosterone). extent states that these [K+] on of epinephrine, homeostatic The mechanisms depends of insulin, plasma plasma secretion integrity regulate (e.g., alter the which pathophysiological to the

filtered freely by bound proteins, glomerulus. it the not to is K+ plasma is Because excretion of K+ of mEq per is 100 urinary K+ amount individuals day, ingest When 15% the about filtered. must the Accordingly reabsorbed along K+ nephron. be however, When dietary the increases, filtered. can K+ K+ exceed amount excretion intake can secreted. also Thus be K+

The of the under conditions. filtered K+ 67% about proximal tubule most reabsorbs K+ with Approximately of fraction amount amount loop filtered. by the as 20% reabsorbed and is constant is the of the Henle, reabsorbed a tubule, the filtered the of proximal reabsorb duct reabsorb are tubule these to , . can distal contrast segments, or the collecting able K+ to secrete In K+ and which only reabsorption the or by a collecting factors. distal and variety The K+ hormones of duct rate on depends secretion of tubule and segments. 100 it by nephron of K+ ingested, these mEq/day secreted is is When in secretion. A K+ intake K+ increases rise dietary (see the appears it 80% can of increase so that that amount amount the K+ secretion of K+ filtered in urine approaches

Fig. right 36.4 , panel). the duct urinary falls of K+ 1% excretion by activates contrast, (see a along the diet the filtered K+ and reabsorption glomerulus low-K+ distal so In to collecting about tubule that

Fig. 36.4 left , panel). can kidneys same as low Na+ reduce The 0.2%). to the for levels excretion they (i.e., K+ cannot can K+-deficient Therefore on a diet. hypokalemia individuals in develop placed excretion the and variable, urinary by magnitude is the K+ segments. are overall duct rate and distal tubular collecting Because of determined of K+ the by tubule transport direction these

of Cells and Principal by Intercalated Cellular Cells K+ Secretion Mechanism

Fig. by the in cells of secretion late Fig. distal mechanisms • segment cellular of the 36.5A illustrates the K+ principal and late by duct. and K+ in segment tubule α-intercalated (B) Cellular the the 36.5 cells (A) collecting principal distal cells of of secretion mechanism Na+,K+-ATPase very cells shown). basolateral α-Intercalated (not low levels of in contain the membrane depletion K+ cells H+,K+-ATPase (HKA). stimulating increases K+ the α-intercalated by by reabsorption

disease, ingested body. the from are In unable to advanced eliminate with renal the individuals kidneys K+ Therefore rises. [K+] plasma resulting membrane muscle potential decreases neurons, reduced depolarization for excitability of inactivating the channels, cells The potential the which phase becomes of potential (i.e., the voltage Na+ hyperkalemia resting the this fast cells, by (see cardiac negative), reduces and and are critical less the action

Fig. 36.1 ). cardiac in [K+] plasma increases can death. and arrest Severe rapid to lead diuretic urinary intake. dietary for in taking hypertension, drugs K+ K+ contrast, exceeds patients In often excretion develops. and negative balance Accordingly K+ is hypokalemia voltage This the membrane (i.e., neurons, muscle hyperpolarizes negative) decline resting excitability more in cardiac and [K+] and becomes the cell the reduces cells, of extracellular cells. paralysis, Severe and to lead death. hypokalemia can cardiac arrhythmias, Hypokalemia NH4 acid-base also ability kidneys production (see concentrate stimulate ). of the which , balance can to urine impair affects of and can renal + the gradient of membranes high [K+], high essential maintenance functions. cell and number [K+] low across [K+], intracellular for a cellular of Therefore a extracellular is

and CHAPTER collecting Homeostasis duct. Phosphate tubule and the Potassium, Calcium, 36 K+ the into (1) uptake from diffusion Na+,K+-ATPase fluid membrane and (2) tubular two-step K+ tubule of blood is into BK). the from blood a by of the (ROMK lumen from channels and cell K+ across basolateral Secretion via process: plasma K+ membrane A . (KCC1) the K+/ also in symporter secretes Cl− apical chemical exit a force for high [K+] through the channels. the K+ provides Na+,K+-ATPase driving apical K+ across intracellular membrane of that creates the cell in leaves also K+ tubular fluid. channels K+ enters basolateral the preferentially membrane the apical are present Although the membrane, across and for transport follows two reasons. this K+ route across apical the downhill its K+ fluid. electrochemical membrane favors into First, of movement the gradient tubular that Second, is membrane. basolateral of than the to greater of membrane apical K+ the the permeability preferentially apical across fluid. membrane diffuses the K+ Therefore into tubular is concentration across secretion the the membrane by tubular and between the the symporter gradient favorable via K+/Cl− fluid. of driven cell K+ K+ apical the of segment major that tubule the K+ of The secretion and by distal are: collecting duct the three the control factors rate 1. late

activity Na+,K+-ATPase the 2. of

K+ for gradient the apical K+/Cl− membrane symporter) gradient channels K+ driving movement (electrochemical across and of 3. the chemical the the force for concentration for

membrane Every the K+ more K+ an secretion or permeability factors alteration in (Fig. results these one change of of by from in channels principal cells K+ apical to K+-ATPase (HKA) H+ the by transport 36.6 membrane (see apical reabsorb , mechanism cells α-Intercalated located K+ in a

Fig. ). 36.5B in for H+ . transporter apical mediates plasma This membrane exchange across uptake K+ the a the K+ intercalated into by cells mediated is exit K+ from blood channel. diet. low-K+ by of Reabsorption activated is K+ a

Tubule the K+ by and Collecting Regulation of Duct Secretion Distal

duct. K+ alterations the K+ and by of collecting late by in achieved segment of cells secretion tubule of principal excretion mainly the Regulation distal is the Plasma and K+ [K+] physiological aldosterone secretion. of are regulators major by K+ excretion of meal unknown involving mechanism. renal mechanism a K+-rich also stimulates Ingestion an gut-dependent a less stimulates is K+ it also (AVP), however, Arginine and secretion; [K+] than vasopressin important aldosterone. plasma including fluid rate tubule secretion duct. flow by and tubular acid-base of influence K+ of distal factors, collecting balance, Other the and the they because disturb ( not balance mechanisms, However, K+ are homeostatic they

36.2 Box

of K+ an by [K+] duct. and important distal determinant the collecting Plasma secretion is tubule rhabdomyolysis) diet (e.g., from high-K+ resulting from Hyperkalemia or a

Fig. 36.6 K+ secretion by of Cellular mechanism principal cells. secretion K+ where regulated. The is indicate numbers to the gradient membrane apical . 3, K+ permeability membrane; of of apical K+ 2, 1, the across electrochemical Na+,K+-ATPase;

Fig. and K+ of of 36.7 on cells the Effects principal the duct. in collecting distal by late of tubule segment secretion aldosterone to in text. of discussed aldosterone refer Numbers the effects five

ENaC ˜Na+,K+-ATPase Na+ 2 SGK˜ ATP 1 CAP + K+ K+ ˜ + permeability 4 K+ ˜ 5 ˜ + 3

Factors CLINIC IN THE Hormones and Influencing • 36.2 Major BOX K+Excretion

Balance Constant Physiological: Keep K+

Pathophysiological: K+ Balance Displace

fluid Flow K+ stimulates of disorders rate tubule secretion Glucocorticoids of within minutes. Acid-base involved. Several are mechanisms the uptake basolateral hyperkalemia across and First, membrane. K+-ATPase thereby stimulates increases , K+ Na+ [K+] the uptake of apical electrochemical for increases membrane. and intracellular the K+ exit driving force across raises This also Second, to apical K+ . hyperkalemia the increases the of permeability membrane cortex, of hyperkalemia to Third, the aldosterone secretion synergistically [K+] K+ secretion acts stimulates by which later, of plasma stimulate discussed as adrenal with . by duct. rate later, of as fluid, stimulates tubular and Fourth, K+ the also the distal discussed secretion hyperkalemia which of collecting increases tubule flow

for caused diet by K+ decreases hyperkalemia. actions a diarrhea described (e.g., via fluid) Hypokalemia K+ those opposite in or secretion loss of low-K+ hypokalemia decreases to across driving of Na+,K+-ATPase, levels. K+ aldosterone of membrane inhibits reduces , decreases apical K+ the the for efflux electrochemical the permeability Hence apical and force plasma membrane,

most hypertension. mEq/L) who occurs receive diuretics patients for often in [K+] < (plasma Chronic 3.5 hypokalemia have vomit, diarrhea, laxatives, who Hypokalemia have also abuse suction, or hyperaldosteronism. occurs undergo patients in nasogastric Hypokalemia occurs the because by dietary excretion of kidneys intake exceeds . K+ K+ of ECF (ECFV), suction, diarrhea diuretics, ). and which can aldosterone secretion nasogastric stimulates volume Vomiting, (see decrease of all turn in the aldosterone its by kidneys, excretion Because stimulates of contributes K+ action hypokalemia. of development to

glomerular 5.0 frequently rate renal filtration levels, (plasma (GFR) flow, individuals the Chronic most hyperkalemia reduced below mEq/L) [K+] 20% in and in disease which falls occurs of normal. urine low with plasma > aldosterone dietary these of K+ than . individuals, of because excretion kidneys hyperkalemia less by K+ occurs intake In is the in insulin, and Less with in by caused with people aldosterone epinephrine, secretion of deficiencies metabolic people common hyperkalemia causes acidosis occur inorganic in or acids.

across of late aldosterone-sensitive (i.e., hours) levels via in duct tubule secretion elevated and ≥24 principal of aldosterone enhance nephron the [ASDN]) (Fig. the (i.e., mechanisms collecting plasma cells distal Chronically distal segment five K+ activates of apical directly of the (3) channels; of ENaC; in ENaC . apical (4) membrane; kinase) sodium by CAP1 SGK1 (ENaC) elevating increasing K+ permeability the stimulating basolateral membrane; levels, to increases of by amount cell channel by membrane (channelactivating (serum 36.7 the Na+,K+-ATPase by which K+ ): (5) also the glucocorticoid-stimulated expression in which and also called in membrane the (2) (1) apical the protease, and epithelial increasing prostatin), by the expression stimulating activates the channels number membrane. permeability membrane by to increases K+ the apical of in Aldosterone of the K+ the increasing response this completely involved mechanisms the known. However, are in cellular not and uptake across into K+ elevates facilitates intracellular membrane Na+,K+-ATPase thereby Increased expression of basolateral [K+]. cells of the enhances activity of apical channels an entry into voltage. increase of from The tubular the number that membrane in depolarizes fluid, the the Na+ and Na+ effect cell and Depolarization intracellular the of into increased driving the cell tubule for [K+] force apical electrochemical fluid. of secretion the from membrane the K+ enhance the basolateral of cell actions the increase membrane. the from uptake K+ of K+ the enhance membrane and cell Taken across exit across together, these apical into (after by increased of angiotensin hyperkalemia by of renin-angiotensin Secretion and is system). II the aldosterone activation by from hypokalemia heart. and natriuretic Secretion peptides the is decreased of released aldosterone

Phosphate Homeostasis Calcium, and Potassium, CHAPTER 36

within hours) not immediately. increase (e.g., excretion levels the Although in an does of K+ aldosterone increase enhances activity Na+,K+-ATPase, acute effect of reason reabsorption on flow. relates Na+ and the to The for tubular aldosterone this decreases water thus tubular reabsorption of Na+ Aldosterone flow. stimulates and and decreases in discussed in Reduction detail in turn secretion flow later). more K+ (as increases ECFV the stimulation and flow of to returns thereby tubular However, Na+ normal. chronic reabsorption allow ASDN aldosterone on actions These effect enhance direct excretion. stimulatory to K+ of the a

urinary Although (Fig. the excretion, this hormone does K+ affect by K+ promote secretion AVP not ASDN does of

). 36.8 across for stimulating electrochemical across force of driving of the by increases the membrane the principal of of cells membrane exit these uptake apical Na+ apical AVP cells. K+ of less uptake Na+ negatively becomes difference membrane electrical the cell charged). the across the apical interior increased The the reduces (i.e., potential by Despite nephron does this segments. change not these AVP effect, secretion K+ relates fluid the on reason The flow. effect for to of this tubular AVP reabsorption. fluid stimulating AVP flow by tubular of water decreases reduces secretion K+ of (explained in turn in The flow tubular decrease later). apical decreased for of effect offsets flow (see fluid of on driving force The exit K+ effect across of the stimulatory inhibitory tubular the of the electrochemical AVP membrane

Fig. 36.8 ). gradient K+ the not increased favoring fall levels as secretion, urinary would K+ and excretion AVP rates AVP If flow increase did electrochemical decreased. urinary balance in change K+ would Hence Fig. • of of K+by ASDN. effects rate Opposing AVP the and secretion urine 36.8 on flow K+secretion levels. stimulated rate is and fall flow in an by reduced in a increase by AVP urinary and by AVP K+secretion in by reduced a decrease is levels. urinary In contrast, rise rate a in increased flow the of each net water or is by not and Because K+secretion oppose other, effects flow affected antidiuretics. AVP diuresis diuresis balance. + ˛ DT/CCD Urinary Antidiuresis rate Water secretion Constant secretion ˜ AVP AVP flow _ ˛ levels K+ water response rate + balance K+ DT/CCD ˜ to _ alterations in Urinary flow K+ levels electrochemical of water K+ on urinary on exit excretion. force in be AVP enable across fluctuations Thus flow excretion the apical constant K+ driving the effects of tubule despite the membrane and wide maintained for to

perturb in balance; hormones (see discussed play and next and K+ roles the important Plasma factors however, aldosterone, regulating balance AVP K+ [K+],

Box 36.2

Flow Tubular of Fluid

tubular ECFV caused the secretion in secretion within by fall (e.g., K+ with flow treatment, rise or a fluid segment A vomiting, of K+ the of late ECFV reduces of diuretic stimulates hemorrhage, ASDN. the contraction expansion) of (e.g., by whereas severe minutes, diarrhea) more Increments secretion effective increased. fluid are flow stimulating in dietary K+ K+ tubular as in intake is of mechanisms primary studies in increased elucidated cilium K+ of secretion on ( flow of the Recent stimulates principal whereby the have cells some

Fig. ). 36.9 bends principal PKD1/PKD2 channel Increased flow primary cilium which cells, complex. the activates Ca++-conducting in the Ca++ increases and cells enter more principal intracellular This [Ca++]. to allows the which increase into apical tubule in channels BK The plasma [Ca++] cell secretion from membrane, K+ the fluid. K+ activates the in enhances secretion stimulate by flow K+ of other mechanisms. may Increased also As as of administration increases, [Na+] increase fluid. tubule ECFV, so after such as of the diuretics or the in an does result of flow of thereby of Na+ ASDN entry cells’ [Na+] in decreasing increase the apical This across facilitates membrane the cells,

PKD1/PKD2 ° 25 3 entry stimulates K+ which entry, ° ° Ca++ Flow activates Ca++ bend Flow activates and Na+ Fig. reduces Na+ K+ 4 cilia Flow 1 Vm ° Cilia ATP Ca++ • bends fluid Cellular whereby principal secretion tubule rate mechanism increased of K+ flow by of stimulates cells. an 36.9 See for text details.

potential. negative interior membrane tubule across of increases the secretion membrane membrane into K+ potential fluid. that the promotes depolarization This the cell cell of driving force apical electrochemical thereby elevating addition, of into K+ in across consequently increased uptake of membrane, [K+]. and In the cells basolateral Na+ Na+,K+-ATPase uptake membrane basolateral the the increasing activates effect to rises. in during flow water significant of , not rate during tubule likely that increase because not a a However, a it important as water diuresis K+ excretion does an flow most [Na+] diuresis have on does is note increase fluid the of

[H+] K+ Another of of is that factor the modulates ECF. secretion secretion alterations plasma K+ the hours) influences of of pH the by Acute in to ASDN. (within minutes (i.e., whereas Alkalosis increases plasma K+ normal) below it. acidosis plasma above normal) secretion pH (i.e., of pH , decreases the K+ secretion acute reduces [K+] via . membrane the apical the Na+,K+-ATPase force mechanisms: reduces and (1) and two of and for the driving An across thereby apical membrane, of to electrochemical acidosis it (2) reduces K+ K+ permeability it cell exit inhibits Alkalosis the opposite has effects.

K+ metabolic of is on The time dependent. excretion effect acidosis of already and noted, illustrated As in

Fig. acute 36.10 , excretion. acidosis reduces K+ metabolic stimulated lasts for when K+ urinary is (see days, several acidosis However, metabolic excretion

Fig. ). 36.10 (e.g., and acidosis occurs decreases metabolic the because This water reabsorption by by chronic of NaCl) tubule solutes proximal

secretion. apical of membrane that the in is primary mediates channel cells K+ ROMK principal the channel. Four subunits make up a ROMK single intracellular BK In is elevations the addition K+ channel, in in the by [Ca++], also activated is expressed apical which membrane. discussed increase mediates in BK the The K+ secretion flow-dependent earlier. channel Interestingly, the to leading and K+ of gene by ECFV causes knockout excretion KCNJ1 kidneys, thereby reduced and increased of (ROMK) hypokalemia. the NaCl membrane in thick the for the also K+/2Cl− the in effect a it is it K+ role is recycling plays very that this critical of loop, apical expressed (TAL) that effect across Although of should limb an important noted apical somewhat Na+/ of ascending of where is perplexing, Henle’s membrane, symporter (see operation ROMK be the

Fig. 36.7 ). the of the NaCl In loss of of is reduced, urine. ROMK, leads absence reabsorption by NaCl which in TAL to by segment. of voltage, luminal transepithelial nephron the TAL the reduces Reduction is K+ reabsorption the for by also which NaCl driving of reabsorption force this positive channels. ROMK in a reabsorption the urinary K+ paracellular TAL when because the excretion normal amount the K+ to Thus even K+ of reduction the of lack duct by increases secrete unable collecting is of cortical flow Ca++-dependent in BK secrete mice membrane cortical of duct, K+ collecting channel in cells. K+ knockout even ROMK however, the the and expressed principal via The apical does

inhibiting Na+,K+-ATPase. flow Hence of is the augmented along the ASDN. fluid tubular and and Inhibition water NaCl of tubule stimulates the decreases thereby secretion aldosterone. ECFV by of proximal also reabsorption increases In acidosis aldosterone. which acids [K+], addition, plasma secretion of inorganic chronic caused by stimulates secretion The fluid offsets levels membrane aldosterone tubular in flow, acidosis of permeability, rise and the on apical [K+] and plasma rises. cell K+ [K+], and effects inhibit depending or , duration stimulate disturbance. acidosis excretion on of Thus K+ metabolic the either the of may K+ . alkalosis metabolic acute excretion As noted, of stimulates with contraction, association K+ associated levels aldosterone. especially renal increases excretion ECFV the of Chronic in significantly metabolic of increased alkalosis, because

and Phosphate CHAPTER Fig. Potassium, Calcium, Homeostasis • 36 of metabolic acidosis Acute excretion of chronic K+. versus effect on 36.10 text See details. for effective circulating volume. ECV, K+ exchange Na+,K+-ATPase K+ ˜ cells membrane ˜ Na+,K+-ATPase H2O Distal cell apical Plasma Acute K+ ˛ rate excretion Apical tubule and permeability ˛ K+ tubule NaCl ˜ K+ ECV ˜ Metabolic acidosis Skeletal excretion activity ˛ of Chronic cells and [K+] apical secretion K+ principal of flow activity ˛ Aldosterone and ˛ collecting duct Tubule K+ gradient fluid Distal cell ˛ ˜ Aldosterone reabsorption collecting ˛ ˜ duct tubule principal H+/K+ membrane muscle Proximal membrane ˛ ˛ ˛ secretion permeability

urinary Glucocorticoids K+ increase excretion. enhances K+ is increase SGK1 in which in flow rate, stimulation a This potent effect urinary GFR, of excretion, by (see part mediated of activity the by stimulus and an earlier).

simultaneous frequently tubule rate flow of ( is or acid-base 36.1 excretion balance, As determined changes discussed, urinary of K+ hormone the ). rate levels, in the by fluid or The response hormones opposes enhances acid-base the to of the powerful ASDN of flow changes and effect often in balance. flow the be of This excretion restores in increase the which enhances in and can interaction homeostasis. beneficial of thereby in K+ hyperkalemia, K+ case flow case changes the However, as which in in in can of also this and be interaction alter alkalosis, status detrimental, homeostasis. K+ acid-base

that Overview complex Inorganic Calcium many and subserve multivalent Phosphate ions functions. of are Homeostasis vital and cofactor matrix, it is an signaling pathways; many role in is important and and bone. in it messenger is reactions; numerous of important neural key enzymatic contraction; teeth, clotting, transduction, an second a extracellular and plays cartilage, critical blood muscle it in component a the Ca++ like , Pi, a key Ca++ is bone. component of physiological (pK as exists inorganic for 6.8). aAt Pi essential phosphate H2PO4 − and HPO4 = − pH, is metabolic as For these Pi. we simplicity, collectively refer to species ion

MJ al. Field from et Modified Narins In (ed). R Electrolyte Fluid Disorders Metabolism. of of Textbook and Nephrology: Clinical 5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1994.

whereby ASDN segment balance the in been have changes of The of acid-base early content the recently regulate cellular K+ the the secretion mechanisms elucidated. and of by K+ diet increased mechanisms, all of Elevated by K+ several serum related K+ secretion increases [K+]. intake to channel Hyperkalemia increases plasma principal the of the membrane ROMK of apical activity cells. in the of water by increasing tubule, reabsorption K+ to Moreover, secretion hyperkalemia rate, flow . NaCl the the stimulus a thereby proximal inhibits ASDN of and potent K+ by enhances mechanisms. secretion three also increases Hyperkalemia which [aldosterone], the of number channels apical increases membrane. plasma aldosterone the in First, K+ enhancing across of the pumps, membrane. basolateral Na+,K+-ATPase number membrane aldosterone the across of uptake apical stimulates the K+ the secretion gradient driving increasing by thereby Second, K+ electrochemical of movement apical and Third, plasma across apical of K+ gradient, promoting secretion increases membrane, membrane aldosterone the increases which voltage of thus the . depolarizes Na+ the electrochemical thereby increasing dramatically K+ endocytosed channels ROMK causes ASDN by which A be apical K+ kinase, membrane, low-K+ secretion. diet protein reducing the the to by the of from secretion of tyrosine plasma reduces activity stimulates Acidosis of alkalosis by K+ channels, activity. ROMK ROMK of secretion the whereas activity by of enhancing secretion decreases inhibiting K+ channel

an phospholipids. adenosine important triphosphate of processes, is and of it nucleosides, nucleotides, component formation (ATP), including and is of plasma, proteins important is cellular buffer Pi cells, urine. and an important an signaling, mechanism Phosphorylation in of and

release Ca++ from, and kidneys remodeling Pi no total amount Ca++ addition (normal absorbed Pi the in roles that by intestinal play and Pi in the by or Ca++ adults net important Pi tract bone results excreting body to, of Ca++ bone). regulating the and of is In and If plasma return of decline Pi Ca++ and and Ca++ increase resorption (i.e., levels. renal to Pi tubular loss and reabsorption Pi bone from Ca++ and and plasma normal intestinal concentrations bone), absorption, of substantially, of concentrations urinary newly ions fetal and formed accumulate During excretion, bone. growth pregnancy, in and and tissue intestinal these absorption exceeds loss intestinal in body osteoporosis) in lean and contrast, or a change without a In urinary disease bone increases Pi decline mass absorption. (e.g., Ca++ of from and Pi produce the net conditions These Ca++ loss a body. during the exceeds accumulates renal the tract in body the absorption failure, by Pi chronic Finally, because excretion in urine. intestinal In discussion The to bone in Pi (see chronic can of the and failure). box body renal This of lead accumulation the in changes Clinic

reveals with and the Pi Ca++ Ca++ brief maintaining and in as major ). that (see kidneys, Pi a in well plasma levels and role play balance as tract the conjunction introduction GI This bone, and factors the section and handling regulate an urinary Pi by Accordingly of the hormones discusses that on Ca++ chapter kidneys, emphasis excretion. the this with

(e.g., division processes neurotransmitter hormone-response and blood coupling, coagulation, an release). Ca++ and in which electrical include contraction, stimulus-response muscle formation, important growth, bone cell role Cellular plays coupling stored bone ICF, is in approximately teeth, in Nearly 1% ECF. 0.1% is Ca++ in 99% of and found and is in (2.5 5 is plasma total mg/dL The very or ([Ca++]) its narrow concentration 10 limits. maintained concentration and Ca++ normally mM within mEq/L), 10% to Ca++ to SO42− proteins citrate, ionized, including is and − is in the , HCO3 plasma Pi, anions, is 50% complexed (mainly albumin), of plasma 40% and Approximately bound several (Fig. 36.11 ). this of plasma influences pH The ( distribution

Fig. 36.12). Acidemia the increases

Calcium, and mmol/L 1.0 S Phosphate E Potassium, Fig. mmol/L D 36 R A 0.25 1.25 • Homeostasis CHAPTER mmol/L [Ca++]. plasma pH 36.12 of Effect on Stanton (From Koeppen BM, BA. Physiology. Renal ed. 5th Elsevier; Philadelphia: 2013.) • Fig. plasma. of Distribution 36.11 Ca++ in Stanton BM, BA. Koeppen (From Physiology. Renal 5th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013.) • Fig. and nerve muscle of on excitability. Ca++ Effect 36.13 BM, (From Koeppen Stanton BA. Renal

Physiology. ed. 5th Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013.) of at by decreases proteins, of to again percentage alkalemia the percentage whereas ionized altering proteins. the the Ca++, Ca++ Ca++ bound ionized of Ca++ expense to bound when even to to (tonic individuals spasms), with whereas susceptible reduced. acidemia total levels tetany are muscular susceptible with Ca++ Individuals are alkalemia less are tetany, plasma displacing thereby to − SO42− to in increase . with causes more in H+ [H+] and The proteins, HCO3 Ca++ Pi, citrate, acidosis , bind plasma metabolic patients , the of displacement ionized Ca++ increases . concentration plasma This [H+] In decreases. of plasma alkalemia the ions . proteins, ionized the plasma citrate, dissociate in Pi, − exchange Ca++ of , and for SO42− HCO3 Ca++ from thereby concentration , plasma decreasing Some H+ also In [Ca++]. albumin plasma addition, plasma ionized the concentration affects

[Ca++]. hyperalbuminemia [Ca++], decreases the plasma whereas increases ionized Hypoalbuminemia ionized The measured plasma ionized [Ca++]. [Ca++], measure does which the the not physiologically relevant reflect of [Ca++] plasma total is total and lead of [Ca++] muscle ionized can hypocalcemic to nerve (hypocalcemia) increases and plasma A the excitability cells tetany. low causes potential closer ( more resting occurs the threshold membrane the Tetany because shift to voltage) (i.e., with values hypocalcemia to negative associated hypocalcemia to

Fig.

36.13). plasma • ionized elevated An [Ca Fig. of Ca++ homeostasis. 36.14 Overview PTH, hormone. parathyroid (From BA. Stanton BM, Koeppen Renal Physiology. 5th ed. 2013.) Philadelphia: Elsevier; death. disorientation, lethargy, arrhythmias, and even

farther voltage). values shift This to because membrane from less resting potential [Ca++] causes occurs negative the to plasma of hypercalcemia effect (i.e., threshold elevated the an of plasma regulated will (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin narrow active Plasma D3, [Ca++] this next. is vitamin and discussed Ca++ , (PTH), within calcitriol D), by regulation the a hormone range, very be and parathyroid primarily metabolite

cells, reticulum and is to proteins. the mitochondria, or Ca++ is sequestered in it bound endoplasmic Within is the nM). [Ca++] low very Thus free (≈100 intracellular cell by pump maintained a membranes (NCX1) 3Na+/Ca++ and across all Ca++-ATPase The for gradient cells cells. is by in in (PMCa1b) concentration large [Ca++] some exchanger a

Homeostasis of Calcium Overview

two Ca++ and amount in on factors: of total of between and (1) body Ca++ distribution the depends Ca++ the bone the homeostasis (2) ECF. Ca++ absorbed body excreted The is the total (Fig. by tract amounts relative by level of and kidneys the intestinal the determined Ca++ by

). 36.14 D3 the of is active by kidneys. of absorbs mechanism proximal the Ca++ is in active calcitriol, carrier-mediated tract that stimulated vitamin tubule intestinal metabolite The the produced transport through an that 200 intestine to absorption 600 it is the mg/day increase Net calcitriol but levels rise. can when mg/day, Ca++ by normally [Ca++], by the kidneys of though hypercalcemia (200 low the physiologically terms GI this changes amount usage and hypocalcemia. bIn a the equals hypocalcemia it absorbed often plasma In and is clinical are Ca++ practice or correct mg/day), by excretion not used to in usage total tract adults, hypercalcemia and even the high respectively, describe the

with absorption. parallel intestinal tract) mg/day). the in the is amount maintained mg/day) average amount absorption Thus in lost adults, that (800 by of (1000 excreted because in amount in (200 amount feces balance the Ca++ urine escapes ingested intestinal the plus equals diet Ca++ an the mg/day,

of Ca++ between ECF distribution homeostasis controls Ca++ (see that bone the and is second The factor

Fig. ). 36.14 bone regulate with the Ca++ Two regulate and plasma hormones between of thereby, calcitriol and the in [Ca++]. distribution and ECF kidneys, (PTH concert ) in glands, plasma (i.e., by its stimulated decline parathyroid is secreted by secretion PTH the hypocalcemia). a is and [Ca++] in sensing of Ca++ is membrane parathyroid an chief cells calcium of Plasma receptor glands plasma located the is the in later). agonist (discussed (CaSR), which that PTH CaSR, release. which activates PTH whereas in increases reduces hypocalcemia Hypercalcemia activity the CaSR turn decreases release, the Ca++ calcitriol, reabsorption intestinal and bone distal facilitates by: by the (2) (3) absorption Ca++ plasma of by the increasing tract (1) resorption, PTH-mediated kidney, bone and tubule resorption. increases of stimulating the increases stimulating turn production PTH in [Ca++] which Production calcitriol in hypophosphatemia. of kidney is stimulated the by and hypocalcemia primarily tract. the plasma increases stimulating Calcitriol absorption from [Ca++], Ca++ intestinal by kidneys in discussed in on proteins transport increasing action bone by and of expression reabsorption binding kidneys (details key and Ca++ enhances PTH Ca++ the the It facilitates of later). also the In and secreted by its cCalcitonin secretion cells), (parafollicular stimulated is cells by is thyroid C addition, hypercalcemia. deposition formation bone in decreases (i.e., bone). [Ca++], by plasma of mainly Ca++ stimulating Calcitonin role further. humans, Ca++ only not lower plays important in Although it an minor Ca++ in a in be plays so homeostasis homeostasis discussed role calcitonin vertebrates, will it in

reabsorption increase of reduction in [Ca++]. CaSR excretion in activates the this plasma hypercalcemia an Ca++ a in the segment, loop, thereby urinary TAL and Henle’s inhibiting Ca++ in resulting in the Hypocalcemia has opposite effect. ways major the kidneys the plasma Ca++ of Importantly, [Ca++]. excretion is one regulates body regulation the by of

cause tetany for hypocalcemic PTH that parathyroidectomy muscular (intermittent hypoparathyroidism [Ca++], contractions). after reduce levels can lower adenoma) Conditions (i.e., an plasma which hypocalcemic In tetany by death cause severe cases, can asphyxiation. also and lethal excitability. decreased arrhythmias neuromuscular can Hypercalcemia cardiac cause common of hyperparathyroidism primary most the Clinically are malignancy-associated hypercalcemia. hypercalcemia causes and hyperparathyroidism tumor a often overproduction of caused of benign from results glands. parathyroid the by PTH most Primary which a peptide malignancy-associated hypercalcemia, organs. is to 20% of by in secreted occurs (PTHrP), secretion contrast, carcinomas In patients PTH-like in with all cancer, 10% caused of various hormone–related parathyroid hormone by and cause Increased levels hypercalcemia PTH of and hypercalciuria. PTHrP

the Nephron Along Calcium Transport

anions. The consists fraction for filtration the available and with ionized of Ca++ amount glomerular the complexed for Thus filtration. 60% glomerular available the is about of in Ca++ plasma (Fig. Normally of reabsorbed filtered is the nephron 99% Ca++ by 36.15 ). reabsorbs tubule of filtered 50% 60% the to proximal Ca++ . about The is 15% cortical • Another reabsorbed the in Henle loop (mainly the of Fig. Overview of 36.15 along nephron. transport the Ca++ each amount segment. of reabsorbed to refer by filtered Percentages Ca++ ascending duct; DT, inner cortical tubule; duct; collecting PT, CCD, tubule; IMCD, distal thick medullary collecting limb. proximal TAL,

the portion than 15% Calcium, 10% 1% about and by the and Phosphate distal is is TAL), Potassium, of reabsorbed duct. tubule, by reabsorbed to 36 collecting the CHAPTER less Homeostasis in is About mg/day) (200 urine. 1% excreted amount is to tract. equal fraction the absorbed daily intestinal net the This by

the paracellular Ca++ occurs by via tubule reabsorption primarily pathway. proximal the is gradient established half trans-epithelial of which This passive the first , by concentration favorable of Ca++ reabsorption lumen-positive the in across transcellular the are proximal paracellular of both of (Vte) half and water sodium tubule the by and reabsorption driven the of (see second voltage by a Ca++ proximal tubule

paracellular occurs the of also pathway. by primarily via loop reabsorption the Henle Ca++ the proximal other. and in Ca++ Na+ the tubule, TAL parallel reabsorption each Like that a because are the lumen-positive to These processes parallel Na+ via Vte. passive component that secondary reabsorption reabsorption paracellular occurs of significant Ca++ generates of reabsorption diuretics loop lumen-positive so the the by of the of and magnitude TAL ). the of Henle, (see reabsorption Vte reduce Loop inhibit doing Na+ in reabsorption the paracellular pathway. of via Ca++ This in action turn inhibits increase Thus Ca++ hypercalcemia. with used to renal excretion in are diuretics patients loop

paracellular protein (CLDN16) the TAL to the the the reabsorptive and tight across movement of of Mutations and in in claudin-16 loop. Mg++ reduce of permeability Ca++ junction reduce tight Ca++ thereby and junctions diffusive pathway Mg++ the Henle’s a the junctions tight mutations which hypercalciuria claudin-16, is by component caused in is of Familial TAL in cells. hypomagnesemic in in paracellular passive excretion across the due Mg++ characterized the fall TAL. pathway Ca++ This by reabsorption to ions is enhanced a and these of disorder of leads Affected (nephrolithiasis). high levels of in to Ca++ stone individuals their which urine, have formation

gradient voltage with reabsorption lumen distal negative respect reabsorbed is because the electrically to In its Ca++ electrochemical tubule tubule entirely of where Ca++ is the against in is (Fig. the active blood, 36.16 ). Thus the is by transcellular. distal reabsorption exclusively Ca++ tubule Calcium ion cell apical Ca++-permeable membrane across channels epithelial enters the (TRPV5). the through to the binds Ca++ cell, calbindin-D28K. Inside (PMCA1b) Ca++ extruded primarily however, (NCX1); membrane, to The antiporter delivers the membrane contribute. the carries the complex 1b also calbindin-Ca++ basolateral it across 3Na+/1Ca++ cell where cell may from by Ca++ plasma Ca++-ATPase isoform and is the parallel. Ca++ change excretion Urinary and Na+ usually in differentially change always distal parallel, in of However, because independent of Ca++ by Fig. tubule • is not Na+ ions and does excretion and reabsorption the these Cellular reabsorption tubule. by distal of 36.16 Ca++ the mechanism is reabsorbed exclusively Ca++ by cellular pathway. a cell enters the (TRPV5). apical a across channel Ca++ ion via the Ca++-permeable membrane basolateral diffuses to complex and to Ca++-calbindin the cell Ca++ Ca++ Inside binds the membrane. calbindin to the cells, (calbindin-D28K), across deliver antiporter also (PMCa1b). by primarily Na+/Ca++ transported (NCX1) is the Ca++-H+-ATPase and basolateral across by membrane a Ca++ (or 3 a 4) blood tight cell. to tubule the of is Ca++ (CLDN8) the prevents into side that and the across 8 which tight negative the electrically lumen, is impermeable diffusion is the junction junction a of Claudin thereby compared Ca++ back protein to

regulated. tubule reabsorption thiazide Na+ the reabsorption segment. this and stimulate diuretics distal For by inhibit by Ca++ example, are urinary to and excretion. urinary effects the net thiazide Ca++ Na+ excretion Accordingly of increase diuretics reduce urinary given stones. individuals they excretion, Because thiazide Ca++-containing in diuretics kidney produce are who urinary reduce reduce often [Ca++] to Ca++

Calcium Urinary of Regulation Excretion

Table ). 36.2 on excretion; exerts hormone/ powerful homeostasis. it Ca++ for is responsible factor Of primary Ca++ control most these, renal the maintaining the PTH stimulates (i.e., Ca++ this the reduces Overall hormone Ca++ by excretion). reabsorption kidneys and PTH distal NaCl the by reabsorption stimulates inhibits fluid, of reabsorption of and Ca++ the therefore tubule, the proximal Although Ca++ tubule. Henle and loop by PTH TAL of the reabsorption Thus reabsorption. enhance effect renal the of net PTH is to Ca++ excretion. excretion, increasing regulate with in excretion decreasing urinary and Changes Ca++ [Ca++] hypercalcemia hypocalcemia plasma also thereby paracellular the these and (1) inhibiting due increased lumen-positive by cells the tubule to of TAL in (reduced reabsorption of Ca++ reabsorption located magnitude the decreased, Henle by: [Ca++]); the via of loop by basolateral (NaCl tubule reducing Ca++ Vte); levels. is by reabsorption increases (2) the PTH excretion of the activation Hypercalcemia reabsorption urinary interstitial membrane the (3) proximal of fluid Ca++ CaSR reducing reabsorption reducing suppressing distal Ca++ result, Ca++ excretion As urinary a increases. the has by increasing the Ca++ on Ca++ tubule effect opposite excretion, by reabsorption TAL. proximal urinary primarily and Hypocalcemia is PTH. the reabsorption it Calcitriol distal effective but Ca++ by tubule, less than enhances

excretion. factors Ca++ disturb Several An function) elevates (e.g., or increase levels dietary caused a reduced plasma intake Pi the by directly and plasma PTH excretion. by and in thereby in kidney decreases of by both [Pi] [Ca++] decreasing increase Ca++ dramatic concentration ionized plasma plasma caused opposite on decline effect effect in in A Pi has dietary the [Pi]). (e.g., Pi range over kidney sevenfold by has no function, dietary intake changes a normal depletion) with (NOTE: [Pi] proximal the affecting and by alter excretion tubule. ECFV in NaCl in Ca++ mainly reabsorption Changes fluid and Volume Ca++ reabsorption. by reabsorption increases proximal NaCl and contraction the water thereby tubule enhances Accordingly, declines. Ca++ excretion urinary Volume expansion the opposite has effect. Ca++ decreases whereas excretion. increases alkalemia Acidemia excretion, reabsorption by pH Regulation of Ca++

by the Ca++ reabsorption Homeostasis tubule proximal reabsorption Potassium, inhibits and Phosphate by TAL and the aPTH tubule. Calcium, CHAPTER 36 stimulates distal but is thereby reduce to the net Overall reabsorption Ca++ effect excretion. urinary and Ca++ increase CaSR, calcium-sensing receptor. Modified Yu DB, from A. Mount and inorganic of calcium phosphate. potassium, chloride, magnesium, sodium, Transport solutes: Brenner In: (ed). BM Rector’s Brenner Kidney. and The 8th ed. 2008. Philadelphia: Saunders;

tubule. the in distal primarily occurs Ca++ apical increasing reabsorption. (TRPV5), membrane thereby stimulates the channel Ca++ Alkalosis reducing channel, Ca++ inhibits acidosis reabsorption. thereby contrast, same By the tubule. inhibit and reabsorption the stimulate noted thiazide TAL, diuretics as distal Finally, the loop by Ca++ earlier, by diuretics reabsorption Ca++

small the it (CaSR) in expressed of regulating [Ca++]. cells in is changes receptor membrane in calcium-sensing homeostasis; receptor The extracellular Ca++ a senses involved plasma in Ca++ the calcitriol-producing CaSR gland to proximal the cells of receptors tubule. PTH-secreting cells of parathyroid binds and inhibition tubule. in an results of plasma in the the proximal secretion of and Activation [Ca++] by production of by calcitriol increase PTH receptor PTH decreased calcitriol a is Moreover, also PTH contributes to because calcitriol production of potent secretion of in synthesis. stimulus reduction on By and has PTH the secretion. effect in calcitriol opposite plasma a fall contrast, [Ca++]

excretion homeostasis the Ca++ by directly maintains kidneys. regulating Ca++ by CaSR The also [Ca++] in regulate respond absorption. to TAL the changes CaSRs in plasma and Ca++ directly excretion. Ca++ An [Ca++] Ca++ increase thereby plasma CaSR the activates stimulating urinary inhibits TAL in absorption, in and fall in corresponding increase urinary in a to excretion. [Ca++] Ca++ By contrast, TAL leads by plasma in absorption an the Ca++ and decrease a reabsorption Ca++ of PTH, changes in direct the Ca++ the with Ca++ plasma the acts effect in and homeostasis. CaSRs urinary maintain [Ca++] excretion regulates Thus thereby tubule by which in distal TAL to on regulate concert

CaSR Mutations Ca++ gene in for disorders homeostasis. coding in cause the is caused an of CaSR. Familial inactivating haploinsufficient hypocalciuric (FHH) by state a mutation hypercalcemia suppressed at PTH elevated hypercalcemia and of hypercalcemia). is [Ca++], not set (i.e., the such for of shifted PTH Ca++-regulated PTH The that levels the level plasma point deranged are is Ca++-regulated setting any secretion secretion caused in by are defective transport CaSR regulation TAL PTH in and the in elevated enhanced tubule to The Ca++ levels the hypocalciuria caused distal of and owing Ca++ kidneys. is reabsorption by caused in mutation an by CaSR. hypoparathyroidism Autosomal-dominant is activating PTH Activation of level shifted Ca++-regulated secretion of levels point such for that causes is CaSRs PTH Ca++-regulated [Ca++]). the at set secretion PTH are any decreased deranged (i.e., plasma is Ca++ transport Hypercalciuria the defective caused by levels kidneys. PTH results and CaSR-regulated decreased in and

of DNA, organic is including nucleosides, of important RNA, and ATP, intermediates and many pathways. an component molecules, phospholipids nucleotides, metabolic Pi a constituent Like Ca++ of major bone. is it resorption. is determinant plasma Its and bone formation important of concentration in an of important (see acid-base Pi the it is one urinary acids) many addition, is maintenance involved of an titratable (i.e., ). buffer in In balance Pi is and 14% and located ECF. located is the Some located of is in bone in teeth, ICF, 85% 1% in the • Normal plasma Fig. homeostasis. of Overview 36.17 Pi (From BA. Stanton BM, Koeppen Renal Physiology. ed. 5th Elsevier; 2013.) Philadelphia: mg/dL [Pi] 4 is mM). to 3 (1–1.5 (45%), (30%), ionized in Pi plasma (25%). is complexed and to protein bound mineralization rickets children) causes weakness, resulting osteomalacia and in muscle reduced (in and bone adults). deficiency rhabdomyolysis, Phosphate (in

Phosphate Homeostasis of Overview

of is shown homeostasis general Pi scheme in A

Fig. 36.17 . of and two between Pi Pi homeostasis (2) in Maintenance body depends amount Pi the and on compartments. distribution the factors: ECF of the the of (1) ICF excreted amount the by levels Total are Pi by relative absorbed amount kidneys. versus the Pi by body tract the of intestinal the determined and absorption Pi by mechanisms; is rises, increases tract dietary by calcitriol. Pi it Pi and stimulated active passive intestinal via the occurs as absorption Pi no constant body Pi in the the by kidneys bone adults an results (i.e., Despite Pi of 1500 or the intake state) to in remodeling in Pi addition of release and Pi urine 800 equal total amount absorbed variations (normal net tract excreting balance between the by the maintain amount from, bone). intestinal mg/day, to, steady in during in accumulated Pi the growth, is contrast, body. By thereby balance which is the and Pi primary body Renal regulates excretion mechanism Pi by the homeostasis. Pi

ECF of The maintains among is distribution and that and second Pi factor homeostasis compartments. Pi bone ICF the by is PTH calcitriol, kidneys [Pi] in plasma controlled of hormones, (see with concert Regulation and two the

Fig. 36.17 ). by from Pi is Release same stimulated pool. release from calcitriol) hormones (i.e., that and of the Ca++ bone PTH this release by bone release is from of Thus Pi accompanied . Ca++ always of

narrow (1–1.5 maintaining plasma range mM). within make a an also contribution to [Pi] important kidneys The

Pi excretion (see PTH and kidneys by is by calcitriol the regulated

Fig. ). 36.17 Pi calcitriol Pi increases inhibits excretion, whereas PTH excretion. bone, Plasma absorption, by: (2) is by the in and excretion (3) Pi storage determined [Pi] intestinal kidneys. (1) vascular tissues. for deposition required is without for Ca++-Pi mineralization of essential plasma [Pi] formation soft in complex bone Maintenance optimal other and of Ca++-Pi

its release PTH stimulates and ionized rise plasma [Pi] also which stimulates and interaction decreases directly PTH [Ca++], in CaSR. release with the synthesis the A by by urinary Pi excretion tubule Pi reabsorption. inhibiting PTH proximal enhances reduction also Pi leads in the absorption Hyperphosphatemia tubule, production intestine. decreases calcitriol to a the by proximal which by Both and PTH plasma in the calcitriol decrease the [Pi]. increase reduce in

the Phosphate Transport Nephron Along

Fig. the by various the 36.18 transport of Pi portions summarizes nephron. negligible the by Pi. amounts tubule filtered reabsorb glomerulus; of Henle, reabsorbs collecting proximal the The the tubule, Pi distal duct of 80% loop and of excreted in Therefore urine. of capillaries across glomerular the approximately 20% is Pi filtered the

reabsorption by occurs transcellular proximal the Pi a route by ( tubule

Fig. 36.19 ). Na+/Pi via Pi symporters and apical across occurs uptake tubule IIc). the the proximal (IIa of two membrane (HPO42−), and Type one into positive transports 3Na+ the charge IIa divalent with Pi cell. carries IIc electrically neutral. −) one Type transports and with 2Na+ Pi (H2PO4 monovalent is by membrane anion been a not exits has antiporter that the Pi Pi-inorganic across characterized. basolateral

Phosphate Homeostasis 36 Potassium, Calcium, and Fig. • CHAPTER Pi transport the along 36.18 nephron. proximal Pi is by tubule. the reabsorbed primarily refer Pi each the of filtered segment. by the Percentages nephron amount to reabsorbed Approximately the filtered 20% of Pi is excreted. distal proximal medullary collecting cortical inner duct; PT, thick TAL, CCD, tubule; IMCD, duct; DT, collecting limb. tubule; ascending

with kidneys patients Pi. renal In cannot the chronic failure, excrete accumulates Because and absorption Pi rises. body plasma in Pi intestinal [Pi] tract, of by continued the the plasma and with excess the reduces ionized Ca++ Pi The complexes [Ca++]. decreases Pi production of calcitriol. also accumulation response reduces This reduces the by that an further intestine, Ca++ effect absorption plasma [Ca++]. bone. This release in PTH secretion reduction plasma and increases [Ca++] Ca++ from renders to by result renal These osteodystrophy susceptible tissue, in (i.e., which resorption fracture). replacement bone with bone actions more increased fibrous lead in (i.e., and Chronic PTH due in [Ca++]) soft arteries, Pi calcifications which fall levels tissues, can hyperparathyroidism chronic the elevated during in failure precipitate metastatic viscera. renal to plasma and Ca++ failure. Pi may Deposition the myocardial cause of Ca++ heart and in low-Pi an and Pi and forms retention renders the intestinal include diet. by that agent Pi (i.e., of insoluble hyperparathyroidism “phosphate and diet or administration Prevention tract) of a unavailable Pi in binder” absorption for thereby treatment the a salts increase and calcitriol [Ca++]. prescribed also Supplemental are Ca++ plasma to

• Fig. Pi 36.19 Cellular by of tubule. the proximal mechanisms reabsorption and transports one two Na+for The two symporters, that (IIc). Na+for each transport apical transports Pi one each Pi that pathway Na+/Pi contains (IIa) three unknown across membrane mechanism. an the leaves Pi basolateral by cell the ATP, adenosine triphosphate. TubularfluidBloodPiPiK˜Na˜2Na˜Pi3Na˜ATPIIaIIc?

excretion (see increases Fibroblast renal (FGF-23) thereby to [Pi] of Pi growth contributes 23 plasma factor regulation and

Fig. 36.17 ). tubule. and by production calcitriol proximal FGF-23 the reabsorption inhibits Pi is osteocytes and by secreted osteoblasts and sustained by PTH, is hyperphosphatemia, and FGF-23 calcitriol. Secretion of stimulated Activating inactivating rickets/osteomalacia, low cause hypophosphatemia, soft cause the calcitriol, of mutations serum tissue. and calcification in gene calcitriol, mutations hyperphosphatemia, high and FGF23 whereas plasma

Regulation of Urinary Phosphate Excretion

Table 36.3

Fig. 36.20 ). Increased reduces Pi plasma

Pi Affecting by Summary of Proximal Factors Tubule and TABLE Hormones Reabsorption 36.3

Metabolic acidosis: Increase Decrease chronic Decrease FGF-23 alkalosis: • Decrease PTH Decrease Phosphate expansion Fig. Increase hormone loading Phosphate Increase Decrease Metabolic chronic Growth depletion Decrease ECFV Glucocorticoids of [Pi]. plasma regulating Overview major 36.20 hormones the fibroblast FGF-23, 23; parathyroid factor hormone. growth PTH, Dashed negative lines feedback. indicate Stanton BA. Koeppen (From BM, Renal Physiology. ed. 5th 2013.) Elsevier; Philadelphia: increases Pi kidneys. and the [Ca++] which therefore increases plasma PTH, by plasma excretion excretion. most increases PTH, excretion, proximal Pi that and tubule inhibits hormone the thereby Pi Pi reabsorption the important by controls border the proximal the Na+/Pi stimulating Pi by of from membrane brush removal PTH transporters reabsorption of tubule. endocytic reduces calcitriol which FGF-23, tubule. inhibits plasma Pi increases Pi Increased by the production proximal also reabsorption and in production, reabsorption. decrease suppresses also Pi Pi calcitriol a which in plasma intestinal results Elevated excretion mechanisms by in Pi Dietary Pi also to intake changes unrelated regulates levels. PTH it. excretion, whereas increases depletion decreases Pi Pi loading each of modulate the tubule. Pi the in the membrane intake and in Na+/Pi rate of of symporters Changes transport by number Pi the dietary proximal transport apical altering symporter

ECFV affects Pi excretion. also of the coupled Expansion [Ca++], plasma reabsorption reabsorption, Pi in inhibits of and PTH, proximal ECFV, increasing decreasing ECF GFR reduces thereby the reducing Pi; filtered by: which and (3) (1) excretion (2) load Na/Pi thus increasing tubule. the enhances Pi which also and alkalosis Acid-base excretion; Pi acidosis chronic increases excretion, chronic Pi influences decreases it. balance by symporters These effects mediated Na expression the of are /Pi of like of PTH, the apical effect acid-base the changes of in membrane. balance, tubule. increase the acidosis glucocorticoid excretion Systemic Pi increases glucocorticoids and reabsorption Pi proximal of inhibiting by by secretion, tubule urinary important acidosis by H+ This because to is proximal an of direct more inhibition, secrete the titratable generate together buffer. HCO3 the and on and reabsorption enables the tubule, Pi effect distal more with Pi duct to − collecting acid as Growth decreases hormone Pi excretion.

1997, Klotho, was of the expressed distal is in highly which kidney. tubule early the identified in kidney that chronic elevated and Klotho knockout have including soft mice disease calcification, phenotype (CKD), a resembles tissue plasma FGF-32. hyperphosphatemia, and a both a exists as protein. soluble Klotho membrane-bound Klotho the D3. of FGF-23, membrane-bound 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin and The reduces promotes for coreceptor serum a excretion thus by kidneys form levels Pi is including has production. a Wnt Klotho inhibiting ion additional transport signal FGF-23 Soluble of and PTH of signaling, functions, modulating modulating and reninangiotensin regulation transduction, number circulating of biomarker to of and Klotho body Klotho contribute experimental may that be deficiency development suggests CKD. considerable that a A may CKD, data for Klotho also experimental progression suggest may data Moreover, the of that therapy slow CKD.

• Calcium, Phosphate and CHAPTER Fig. Homeostasis 667 36 Potassium, the regulating Overview hormones plasma [Ca++]. of major 36.21 indicate negative lines Dashed feedback. 23; FGF-23, growth factor hormone. fibroblast PTH, parathyroid Koeppen (From Stanton BM, BA. Renal Physiology. ed. 5th 2013.) Elsevier; Philadelphia:

Calcitriol Parathyroid Integrative of Review Hormone Ca++ and Homeostasis and Pi on

Fig. homeostasis. on 36.21 has effects numerous , PTH and Pi Ca++ Hypocalcemia the PTH is secretion. stimulus of major urinary of absorption excretion, stimulates Ca++ Pi intestine. increases calcitriol, PTH the Pi urinary resorption, Ca++ by which stimulates excretion, and production and decreases bone stimulates bone, plasma while balance little handling tend PTH plasma changes kidneys increases and in [Ca++] out, Because to [Pi]. on in Pi having intestines, effect hypocalcemia returns response in plasma the Overall rise a PTH normal levels in [Ca++] to to plasma range. in A [Ca++] plasma opposite has decline the effect.

in role D) ( active also form important an homeostasis and vitamin plays Ca++ Pi of (the Calcitriol

Fig. 36.22

calcitriol Ca++ is absorption action intestine. by The to the primary Pi of and stimulate To excretion release degree Ca++ from and lesser with Ca++ by PTH and to acts bone kidneys. to it a decrease Pi the of and effect [Pi]. plasma is increase to [Ca++] The calcitriol net calcitriol the production hypocalcemia are major stimuli low PTH via hypophosphatemia and [Pi]). plasma Thus of (i.e., a

− . titratable as of Pi new ability to of is (e.g., in the to is Addison’s the absence disease), In excretion generate of acid excrete depressed, HCO3 glucocorticoids the and kidneys reabsorption increases of proximal tubule. Pi the Growth hormone by a bone for adults, children As elevated positive growing than result, [Pi] in and [Pi] are this have formation. important and higher balance Pi is plasma a

Fig. • effect calcitriol D3) on Pi of homeostasis. its Ca++ Activation 36.22 and (vitamin and PTH) of the stimuli major the kidneys. calcifediol and calcitriol in of (via the hypophosphatemia metabolism to are Hypocalcemia [Pi]. The is effect [Ca++] to and plasma increase of net calcitriol BM, Stanton (From BA. Koeppen Physiology. Renal ed. 5th Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013.) 1.

K+ K+ ECF homeostasis and adjust kidneys, maintained by K+ aldosterone, of the ICF distribution intake, match regulate and excretion dietary the epinephrine, is to which by hormones the and K+ insulin, which the between compartments. disturb [K+]. and and cell such osmolality, Other plasma exercise, events, in as lysis, plasma K+ homeostasis acid-base balance changes and

2.

duct. determined Excretion the by the kidneys distal transport of rate by tubule of direction collecting K+ the is and K+ and by Secretion [K+], by aldosterone, tubular is by plasma of these regulated and K+ segments AVP. in tubular by fluid kidneys. disturbances and In excretion changes contrast, perturb acid-base flow K+ the and states, inhibited K+-depleted reabsorb distal the In secretion tubule is duct K+ collecting and . K+

3.

and intestinal in in a play with bone, [Pi]. [Ca++] regulating role kidneys, The plasma and tract the conjunction vital

4.

Plasma PTH by [Ca++] is calcitriol. regulated and major a regulatory in hormone humans. not is Calcitonin changes status, the acid-base and Ca++ altered and is in Pi. is regulated ECFV, [Ca++], excretion and plasma PTH, by by plasma kidneys by calcitriol

5.

both by and and stimulate Ca++ regulated the distal calcitriol, plasma tubule which reabsorption, are PTH [Ca++]. and of Ca++ TAL by reabsorption by

6.

[Pi] is regulated FGF-23, calcitriol. and Plasma by PTH, expansion, Pi phosphate, is balance, and by ECFV base and is hormone by growth regulated and dietary FGF-23, glucocorticoids. PTH, acid excretion altered Bone excretion a which bone hyperphosphatemia, (i.e., FGF-23, secrete osteomalacia). thereby and tumors and mineralization hypophosphatemia, in causes enhances renal defect Pi

et J, Biber al. their and function. Phosphate transporters Annu Physiol. Rev 2013;75:535-550. homeostasis. of Insights disorders Juppner from H. M, Christov genetic phosphate Semin Nephrol. 2013;33:143-157.

excretion T. renal electrolyte, by Miller phosphate, water receptor. of Control the and calcium-sensing calcium, Best Clin Metab. Pract Endocrinol Res 2013;27:345-358.

BF. Palmer homeostasis. of potassium Regulation Clin Soc Nephrol. J Am 2015;10:1050-1060.

Patel A. in calcium flow cilium sensing. channels primary and The their role Arch. Pflugers 2015;467:157-165.

al. et Pearce D, duct and their processes regulation. Collecting principal transport cell Am Nephrol. Soc J Clin 2015;10:135-146.

Friedman PA. JF, calcium Renal Bernardo metabolism. In. et al., In: Alpern eds. RJ, Seldin The Kidney: and Giebisch’s

Calcium, Potassium, Phosphate CHAPTER 36 and Homeostasis

and Physiology Pathophysiology. 5th ed. Elsevier; Waltham, 2013:2225. MA:

phosphate R. disturbances TJ, homeostasis. Clinical Berndt Kumar of eds. RJ, et In: Alpern al., Seldin Pathophysiology. and and Giebisch’s Kidney: Physiology The ed. 5th MA: Elsevier; Waltham, 2013:2369.

al. Malnic et G, Regulation K+ excretion. of Alpern In: et RJ, al., eds. Giebisch’s Seldin Pathophysiology. and and The Kidney: Physiology ed. 5th 2013:1659. Waltham, Elsevier; MA:

al. H, Murer et handling of phosphate. tubular Proximal In: RJ, Alpern al., et eds. Physiology Pathophysiology. and Giebisch’s The and Kidney: Seldin 5th ed. 2013:2351. Waltham, MA: Elsevier;

et al. MJ, Smogorzewski phosphate and calcium, magnesium, of balance. Disorders Taal et In: al., eds. MW, Kidney. and Brenner The Rector’s ed. 9th Philadelphia: 2012:689. Saunders;

W, CL. Huang Wang K+ channels. renal biology The molecular of Alpern al., eds. et RJ, In: Physiology Giebisch’s The and Pathophysiology. Seldin Kidney: and 5th ed. 2013: Elsevier; MA: Waltham, 1601.

of questions: this 1. should chapter the to following able be the completion student answer Upon

is why − an a of as HCO3 buffer and important How extracellular it does fluid? buffer, operate the

2.

does diet produce and does acid-base on the alkali, How balance? acid food metabolism composition of and the of effect systemic what have

3.

production between nonvolatile and What is acid difference volatile endogenous the acids, and (NEAP)? what is net

4.

and what net (RNAE)? How contribute acid-base to excretion the balance, is and renal systemic kidneys acid do lungs

5.

urinary by are excretion buffers acid for of kidneys? the Why necessary

6.

are the mechanisms nephron, how for mechanisms transport of in are segments and regulated? What these various the H+ the

7.

the do of −? process various the reabsorbing the contribute How HCO3 to filtered nephron the segments of

8.

new do produce kidneys HCO3 How −? the

9.

and to acid kidneys, produced is contribute how excretion? renal How its by ammonium does excretion the

10.

itself against balance? body are which acid-base changes major the by in defends What the mechanisms

11.

respiratory arterial and differences the metabolic and blood they What acid-base gas measurements? are simple how between differentiated are disorders, by

he body in low that ions. is concentration fluids with of other of compared H+ is at present example, of 40 three mEq/L; 140 some times Na+ million greater For than ([Na+] nEq/L). concentration = = a [H+] that H+ pH. as of Because of is low fluids, the [H+] or it body the negative logarithm, commonly expressed the

tissue, cellular, sensitive all and Virtually pH. are organ processes to extracellular a of Indeed, nEq/L outside from H+). fluid 6.8 (ECF) (160–16 of exist to of 7.8 life cannot pH range pH ECF and the maintained 7.45. between of Normally is 7.35 (ICF) but As of described fluid tightly pH (7.1–7.2) in regulated. is lower slightly intracellular the also

ingested in alkali and acid day, Each are diet. the pH the number impact body of cellular an that metabolism fluids. on Also, produces a have of substances Without thereby acid many maintain this appropriate necessary daily mechanisms acid-base could occur. life to deal not balance, processes for and and with alkali load the This whole-body balance. reviews of maintenance chapter acid-base is Although process, considered. this and role of the the emphasis kidneys on of liver the in roles also the lungs are the acid-base balance presented. and impact is metabolism the of on diet In addition cellular acid-base illustrate primarily Finally, involved. physiological are of balance to processes considered, disorders the this removes is adds any H+ body from substance as a is acid as substance alkali defined fluids, defined body Throughout to that fluids. H+ whereas chapter, that

System − The Buffer HCO3

of buffer (HCO3 important Bicarbonate ECF. an is −) the [HCO3 can a (for of 70-kg mEq/L the individual) L −] potentially volume buffer 25 . normal 350 and mEq plasma 14 23 of of a a With to H+ ECF from kidneys. other system the is both − buffer systems the by HCO3 lungs (e.g., the regulated of because buffer differs phosphate) and it body The best This the reaction: following by considering is appreciated

37.1 Equation

(hydration/dehydration As is the reaction first of rate-limiting CO2) indicated step. the the is reaction slow presence anhydrase. This in greatly of accelerated carbonic normally

H+ virtually ionization and of − is instantaneous. HCO3 second The reaction, H2CO3 , to

catalyzes anhydrase (CA) aCarbonic (e.g., actually reaction: the following citrate) •Fig. 37.1 lossinfeces)fromthebody.Seetextfordetails. Overviewofacid-basebalance.Thelungsandkidneysworktogethertomaintainacid-basebalance.ThelungsexcreteCO2(volatileacid),andthekidneysexcreteacid(renalnetacidexcretion[RNAE])equaltonetendogenousacidproduction(NEAP),whichreflectsdietaryintake,cellularmetabolism,andlossofacidandalkali(e.g.,HCO3− (FromKoeppenBM,StantonBA.Renal Physiology. 5thed.Philadelphia:Elsevier;2013.)

equation effect used and quantitate in The to changes is HCO3 Henderson-Hasselbalch pH: − how CO2

37.2 Equation

[HCO3 6 1. Equation ]pH − 37.3 = 03. 0 + log PCO2

(α) CO2 solution. solubility In of amount of the partial is and its these (PCO2) determined in pressure CO2 equations from the has 37°C, at For 0.03. value α plasma a of dissociation reaction the of overall Also, constant the logarithm the for is pK′ negative in

Eq. plasma value at 37°C a 37.1 and has of 6.1. for HCO3 can relationship the the follows: between − Alternatively and as be determined on CO2 [H+]

37.4 Equation

of Eqs. Inspection PCO2 or that vary [HCO3 36.4 and [H+] show when −] are 36.3 pH either and altered. from that Disturbances a in metabolic acid-base result those from are balance disorders. termed a are whereas [HCO3 change PCO2 of acid-base termed acid-base disorders, in respiratory −] resulting change subsequent in These section. a disorders detail considered in are more regulating are lungs the primarily whereas The the for kidneys ECF, −] the PCO2. responsible [HCO3 of control

of Acid-Base Overview Balance

acid contains or diet many humans are alkali. of constituents that either The produces addition, metabolism cellular acid and alkali. In is in feces. each alkali normally lost day Finally, addition diet body the these to effect dependent, net is described although acid later, of of fluids. processes As the from a equivalent rate For be its to body acid-base must balance the maintained, be at addition. to acid excreted acidosis addition acid results. If excretion, exceeds acid addition, if exceeds Conversely, excretion results. alkalosis

Fig. the , carbohydrates fats. constituents and the 37.1 of diet major are tissues, tissue normal carbohydrates O2 insulin perfusion is metabolized H2O. are is present and adequate, is available and levels, When to at to fats CO2 and moles through are On process. 20 daily 15 to a CO2 this basis, of generated from by CO2 large is eliminated body lungs. Normally the effectively quantity this the of CO2 has no balance. metabolically Therefore on this derived acid-base impact potential to is CO2 termed has usually H2O hydration it the H+ (see acid with volatile after generate because

Eq. ). 36.1 directly Acid not from nonvolatile acid). lactic (e.g., CO2 acid is derived termed hydration of

an on of constituents metabolism dietary also The cellular impact other balance. acid-base has arginine, cysteine acids, histidine. and from when acid methionine, sulfuric example, For metabolism whereas sulfur-containing hydrochloric amino results of and acid metabolized, yield lysine, this offset acids portion of production acid by and nonvolatile of A metabolism aspartate HCO3 glutamate. amino load through of the − is On acid average yields nonvolatile acids net amino of metabolism the dietary production. acid which Metabolism anions − of degree. offsets production production (e.g., nonvolatile in some citrate) , HCO3 to results organic certain of in individuals a acid exceeds ingesting diet, production Overall HCO3 meat-containing − production. produces diet acid. less vegetarian In contrast, nonvolatile a alkalis, the alkali. foods the derived acid ingested contain In to metabolically acids addition and and −) phosphate the acid of presence the increases load. example, For (H2PO4 in dietary food ingested HCO3 is Finally, feces. digestion, during some − in lost normally is of to nonvolatile This the the loss addition equivalent acid to body. 1.0 a HCO3 of in weight to each body − fecal approximately loss to In cellular the most of result 0.7 (50–100 ingesting intake, nonvolatile mEq/kg meat-containing for individual adults). day addition body an diet, mEq/day acid and dietary metabolism, replaced. must − HCO3 referred (NEAP), in equivalent loss from that body the of acid endogenous be net as an production results acid, to This

Wheninsulinlevelsarenormal,carbohydratesandfatsarecompletelymetabolizedtoCO2+ H2O.However,ifinsulinlevelsareabnormallylow(e.g.,diabetesmellitus),cellularmetabolismleadstoproductionofseveralorganicketoacids(e.g.,β-hydroxybutyricacidandacetoaceticacidfromfattyacids).

H2O,whichconsumesH+ IntheabsenceofadequatelevelsofO2(hypoxia),anaerobicmetabolismbycellscanalsoleadtoproductionoforganicacids(e.g.,lacticacid)ratherthanCO2+ H2O.Thisfrequentlyoccursinnormalindividualsduringvigorousexercise.Poortissueperfusion,suchasoccurswithreducedcardiacoutput,canalsoleadtoanaerobicmetabolismbycellsandthustoacidosis.IntheseconditionstheorganicacidsaccumulateandthepHofbodyfluidsdecreases(acidosis).Treatment(e.g.,administrationofinsulininthecaseofdiabetes)orimproveddeliveryofadequatelevelsofO2totissues(e.g.,inthecaseofpoortissueperfusion)resultsinthemetabolismoftheseorganicacidstoCO2+ andtherebyhelpscorrecttheacid-basedisorder.

− the throughout in the are do Nonvolatile ECF. but immediately body circulate not neutralized by HCO3 acids

Equation 37.5

Equation 37.6

removes acids process the − the yields the Na+ strong and of ECF. This from salts HCO3 neutralization Thus − minimizes strong ECF. effect the pH of HCO3 the acids these of on . As approximately contains HCO3 noted of ECF mEq − previously, 350 nonvolatile production If daily ECF mEq/day) 5 HCO3 of the not deplete this were (≈70 would − of replenished, HCO3 within − acids the days. a balance the renal lost HCO3 To − must replenish (RNAE). termed excretion kidneys acids, the nonvolatile neutralization process maintain the net acid acid-base of by

Net Acid Excretion the by Kidneys

Under conditions, to must NEAP maintain RNAE steady-state equal balance. acid-base individual and individual, day anyone to regulated. day not varies to NEAP Although in individual is from from it the of − lost Instead the to so regulate −) acids. by NEAP and nonvolatile neutralization HCO3 kidneys in doing replenish RNAE match (new HCO3 In the the must prevent in − HCO3 addition kidneys urine. loss of latter needed quantitatively of more 4320 NEAP. the is − with L/day 50 180 to = balance mEq/day because (24 4320 load HCO3 important is only This × approximately compared mEq/day), to 100 task mEq/L mEq/day filtered

nephrons. accomplished − secretion filtered acid of by are HCO3 and via of reabsorption excretion Both the H+ into fluid. tubular of Thus must mEq in day single nephrons a H+ approximately 4390 the secrete the secreted HCO3 serves reabsorb the the of . of filtered load Most to to of , 50 in H+ 100mEq amount to excreted Only an is NEAP, urine. equivalent acidic. urine a As of normally is this acid excretion, result

urine 4.5. kidneys to more cannot The 4.0 pH excrete acidic than 4.0, of pH only 0.1 can a at excreted. Even H+ of mEq/L be with phosphate excrete buffers sufficient such Therefore (Pi). acid, kidneys H+ excrete to as the urinary

Other urine than important also Pi. less creatinine), is although as (e.g., buffers constituents their can role serve of buffers Collectively acid. titratable termed various the urinary are is these in from buffers are term the quantitated method This which by the laboratory. derived plasma its is to (i.e., to that titrate added Typically, a sample of alkali pH to urine (OH−) 7.4). and titratable by amount titrated equal to urine H+ alkali is added these of termed The acid. the buffers is

Excretion acid titratable to insufficient a balance as H+ is NEAP. of +). important excretion of and ammonium and the contribute through is kidneys by to which mechanism of additional maintenance (NH4 synthesis An acid-base balance this process chapter. The involved are discussed more this detail in mechanisms in later in of balance, urine return to which With replenishes regard − acids. to each NH4 the acid-base of in neutralization HCO3 − one excreted during lost HCO3 regulation the of systemic in nonvolatile the results + renal circulation, the of equivalent acid + kidneys. is excretion Thus the acid, to like NH4 of by production titratable of excretion and excretion ,

. an is: filtered acid-base HPO42−+ and load to contribute H2PO4 − bThe In brief excreting titration kidneys by of reabsorbing the − H+↔ homeostasis reaction the HCO3 6.8. a reaction This of pK has approximately

amount of acid equivalent to NEAP. This be follows: as process can quantitated

is adding − the (TA), the H+ (mEq/day) Equation the body). rates are and and in (equivalent ) urine + HCO3 V˜ titratable V˜ ) and V˜ × (UHCO3−× lost ) of to where to excretion (UTA of NH4 acid 37.7 of amount (UNH4+×

production. of maintenance acid-base equal excretion means acid Again, acid balance must that nonvolatile net HCO3 in little very conditions, excreted − is Under most urine. excretion. reflects Thus titratable + acid net NH4 acid and excretion essentially + for NH4 for approximately two-thirds titratable Quantitatively, RNAE. accounts and one-third of acid

− Reabsorption Along HCO3 Nephron the

Eq. in HCO3 when net maximized , or excretion no urine. − is excreted acid 37.7 little is appears urine. little circumstances, very in Indeed, under HCO3 most − at and reabsorbed. nephrons − approximately is to the is filtered then is delivered freely mEq/day 4320 glomerulus, the Because HCO3

Fig. 37.2 each segment of the of to nephron − . HCO3 contribution filtered summarizes reabsorption

proximal of the load filtered The largest tubule HCO3 portion of the reabsorbs − .

Fig. ignores urine. H+ excreted 37.3 free the of primary in amount summarizes the cThis small equation a with noted, urine pH only already H+ = of mEq/L . 0.1 As 4.0 contains

transport processes involved. H+ and Na+/H+ of membrane apical across H+-ATPase both a by the the antiporter cell occurs secretion (V-type). predominant (i.e., the Na+/H+ lumen-to-cell uses secretion − HCO3 and process antiporter (NHE3) of gradient [Na+] ≈ reabsorption) pathway the is drive this to for for H+ (accounts •Fig. The two-thirds 37.2 isreabsorbedandlittleornoHCO3− SegmentalreabsorptionofHCO3− .ThefractionofthefilteredloadofHCO3− reabsorbedbythevarioussegmentsofthenephronisshown.NormallytheentirefilteredloadofHCO3− appearsintheurine.CCD,corticalcollectingduct;DT,distaltubule;IMCD,innermedullarycollectingduct;PT,proximaltubule;TAL,thickascendinglimb.

•Fig. 37.3 bycellsoftheproximaltubule.OnlytheprimaryH+ andHCO3− transportersareshown.ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;CA,carbonicanhydrase. CellularmechanismforreabsorptionoffilteredHCO3−

active secretion H+). of secondary in HCO3 are the Within cell, catalyzed by anhydrase reaction carbonic − and a H+ (CA-II). produced to into the H+ The membrane returns exits peritubular fluid, the the whereas the − across blood. the tubular basolateral is cell and secreted HCO3 − is of movement the membrane ions. to other basolateral across the cell coupled out HCO3 a − − couples symporter Na+ majority (sodium with symporter, of efflux of the The HCO3 bicarbonate that exits HCO3 NBC1). via other by as not − Na+/HCO3 the symporter. the are important they exits transporters, Some HCO3 as but cell − As noted in

Fig. the basolateral also 37.3 brush anhydrase membrane is in (CA-IV) carbonic and border present of , the cell. the the cell. border luminal enzyme fluid, exit catalyzes basolateral enzyme the in HCO3 − to brush of from H2CO3 The dehydration whereas facilitates membrane localized and of into localized occurs cell basolateral and luminal out to of via the is which CO2 The AQP1, movement the both membranes.

The thick for (TAL) ascending limb HCO3 the by Henle very − reabsorption proximal to similar in cellular mechanism the loop of that tubule. is the of secreted antiporter a is by H+ Na+/H+ and H+-ATPase. is for in the secretion. tubule, antiporter H+ the the Like pathway proximal (NHE3) Na+/H+ predominant a − cell AE-2). Cl−/HCO3 (anion (NBC1) exchanger, involves HCO3 and Na+/HCO3 the exit symporter a both − − from antiporter through − Some membrane. Cl− channels present exit also basolateral HCO3 the in may the cell

the collecting that The reabsorption loop escapes tubule small − of Henle. the by and reabsorb HCO3 proximal tubule and distal duct of amount

Fig. within (see located the mechanism of − the 37.4 segments cells intercalated H+/HCO3 transport these shows also by cellular

and α-intercalated is called cell One A-or HCO3 −) of cell. type the secretes (reabsorbs H+ intercalated are anhydrase reaction HCO3 this (CA-II). by and carbonic hydration this H+ by Within cell, − of CO2; is catalyzed produced H+ into secreted tubular is two mechanisms. the fluid via (V-type). an involves H+-ATPase membrane The apical first of in and to found second reabsorption couples similar H+-K+-ATPase an H+ and HKα2). via the with secretion colon The stomach of those (HKα1 membrane basolateral antiporter, for AE-1) (via capillary Cl−/HCO3 cell and peritubular enters in exits blood. HCO3 the exchange − across Cl− the the a −

fluid population remainder on rather focus function second cells. we the than B-or intercalated the the chapter of and − HCO3 into H+ A intercalated of dHere the secretes cells in (also of tubular called not of . tubule, early also portion which the The does distal intercalated cells, HCO3 contain − reabsorbs (AE2). an involve a (NHE2) mechanism Cl−/HCO3 and The basolateral apical appears antiporter to Na+/H+ membrane − antiporter cellular

cells). β-intercalated

H+-ATPase and the Cl−/HCO3 In in the the basolateral is membrane these − is located located the membrane antiporter (see apical cells in (V-type)

Fig. 37.4).

in identified However, apical different membrane Cl−/HCO3 as basolateral one antiporter is found been from has of and the pendrin. intercalated − cells H+-secreting the the membrane the the intercalated −-secreting during . excess metabolic of − activity increased HCO3 is alkalosis, must excrete cell The the when kidneys HCO3 predominates diet) a conditions these segments. of ingestion secretion However, under H+ meat-containing (e.g., in most

can very fluid the permeable collecting become tubular apical is to duct , cells not of H+ thus quite membrane of pH The acidic. and fluid the most Indeed, along produced the nephron acidic there. (pH tubular = 4.0–4.5) is tubule in falls tubular proximal permeability the comparison − to much higher, H+ the and and the of HCO3 pH is segment. In fluid 6.5 to only this acids + for excretion and titratable of the explained As . urinary duct ability to NH4 tubular the of the pH is of critically lower fluid collecting important the later

H+ Secretion of Regulation

cells HCO3 of nephron. thus filtered and factors reabsorption of number influence H+ the of − secretion of by the A physiological systemic H+ secretion acid-base a a that by nephron the is perspective balance. primary in the factor change From regulates is RNAE alkalosis. RNAE, acidosis reduced stimulates whereas during Thus

transporters. includes synthesis changes of in kidneys in in of membrane immediate the to changes activity the of and The both number longer-term changes response transporters acid-base the balance the in and/or is multiple example, with metabolic by H+ depending stimulated segment. For the secretion mechanisms, acidosis, nephron particular on favorable. with and energetically gradient pH H+ across more occurs that the cell-to–tubular favorable in a apical H+ secretion acidosis fluid decrease membrane the intracellular more will make First, create thereby of decrease may transport the kinetics. their to proteins, changes lead allosteric in pH Second, thereby in altering to Lastly, transporters from shuttled the may be vesicles. membrane intracellular long-term increased or genes by of by of transporters abundance of increases, appropriate the acidosis transporter transporter transcription increased With either translation mRNA.

intercalated features cells. of cells H+-secreting both and intercalated third HCO3 group eA shares of −-secreting fully not this precise understood. type acid-base transport cell function is The of in transport. involved it believed intercalated fTraditionally only acid-base was were that in cells type). now cells (B also NaCl reabsorption out that There intercalated is carried is by evidence good an by operation antiporter of (pendrin) (NDCBE). Cl−/HCO3 of − apical membrane Reabsorption membrane and apical anti-porter Na+/HCO3 tandem the occurs an −/2Cl− NaCl inhibited NaCl thiazide diuretics. reabsorption by of This mechanism is

•Fig. byintercalatedcellsofthedistaltubuleandcollectingduct.OnlytheprimaryH+ 37.4 CellularmechanismsforreabsorptionandsecretionofHCO3− andHCO3− transportersareshown.ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;CA,carbonicanhydrase.

•Fig. andHCO3− sensors.ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;cAMP,cyclicadenosinemonophosphate;GPCR,Gprotein–coupledreceptor;IRR,insulinreceptor–relatedreceptor;Pyk2,nonreceptortyrosinekinase;sAC,solubleadenylylcyclase. ExamplesofcellularH+ 37.5 (Adaptedfrom:LevinLR,BuckJ.Annu Rev Physiol 2015;77:347.)

reabsorption.Alsointheproximaltubule,thenonreceptortyrosinekinase(Pyk2)sensesintracellular[H+].Whenitisactivatedbyanincreaseinintracellular[H+],H+ appearstoalsoplayarollinregulatingcollectingductH+ channel[ROMK])iseffectedbychangesineitherECForICFpH.Thesetoohavethepotentialtoserveascellularacid-basesensors. Fig.37.5 secretion.Alsointhecollectingduct,HCO3−-secretingintercalatedcells(B-orβ-ICs)expressabasolateralinsulin-relatedreceptor(IRR)thatisatyrosinekinase.ItisactivatedbyanincreaseinECF[HCO3−]andstimulatesHCO3− ).Forexample,aGprotein–coupledH+ receptor(GPCR–GPR4)hasbeenlocalizedtothecollectingduct.ActivationofthisreceptorbyanincreaseinECF[H+]stimulatesH+ secretion.Intheproximaltubule,basolateralmembranereceptortyrosinekinases(ErbB1andErbB2)sensechangesinECFPCO2.ActivationofthesereceptorsbyanincreaseinPCO2resultsingenerationofangiotensinII,whichactingfromthelumenviaAT-1Areceptors,stimulatesH+ reabsorptionisstimulated.Finally,thegatingofseveralionchannels(e.g.,therenaloutermedullaryK+ secretion/HCO3− secretionbythecell.Asolubleadenylylcyclase(sAC)regulatedbyintracellularHCO3− secretion/HCO3−

are to acidosis, factors. effects of just other these be some mediated cellular directly described in H+ of by attributable changes the many transport may or hormones Although endothelin, cortisol, angiotensin are acidosis response and II. to the known mediators renal of Three Endothelin (ET-1)

Intheproximaltubule,metabolicacidosisincreasesthetransportkineticsoftheNa+/H+ antiporter(NHE3)andincreasesapicalmembraneexpressionoftheNa+/H+ symporter(NBCe1).Inthecollectingduct,acidosisleadstoexocyticinsertionofH+-ATPaseintotheapicalmembraneofintercalatedcells.Withlong-termacidosistheabundanceofkeyacid-basetransportersisincreasedintheproximaltubule(NHE3andNBCe1)andincollectingductintercalatedcells(H+-ATPaseandAE1).Lastly,acidosisdecreasesexpressionoftheCl−/HCO3− antiporterpendrininHCO3−-secretingintercalatedcells. antiporter,H+-ATPase,andthebasolateralNa+/3HCO3−

cells. and by produced tubule endothelial proximal is secretion enhanced. acidosis, is ET-1 With antiporter Na+/3HCO3 into insertion membrane, membrane. into the In and of symporter and ET-1 the apical − tubule, insertion stimulates phosphorylation of proximal basolateral the subsequent the Na+/H+ the ET-1 segments other response acidosis as in nephron may well. the to mediate the of glucocorticoid adrenal secretion hormone stimulates cortisol by Acidosis the cortex. also the symporter and antiporter the H+ − Cortisol tubule. the proximal Na+/ Na+/3HCO3 in of increases abundance tubule proximal Angiotensin in response acidosis. to in produced cells II is angiotensin stimulates receptor fluid, the binds H+ proximal − secretion/HCO3 by secreted tubule. it into and tubular is reabsorption It to where I the thereby the stimulate of proximal to kidney’s as acidosis. and NH4 production cortisol the later secretion also + tubule, important the angiotensin Both component and of which response described is an II by

Acidosis of parathyroid (PTH). stimulates secretion hormone also PTH proximal reabsorption inhibits ). phosphate tubule by (see the (Pi) In thus it to kidneys titratable so and delivered increases the is acid. urinary the a capacity to where buffer of as Pi more nephron, the doing, excrete distal serves

to characterized. of alkalosis is The the less well response kidneys excretion is and acid and reduced. of urinary increased RNAE − excretion of titratable + decreased because NH4 HCO3 because are factors not this are The that regulate characterized. well response

cells necessarily can balance nephron. acid-base maintaining to secretion related the Other of not by influence the of H+ factors H+ affect nephron secondarily factors in Because that the alter is Na+/H+ Na+ antiporter, reabsorption the H+ secretion. can significant a transporter via example, Na+/H+ is Na+ volume the Na+ antiporter. increased (see reabsorption with the by Na+ nephron (negative including For contraction reabsorption balance), ), of is secretion enhanced. H+ result, As a mechanisms. This by several occurs involves system, contraction. One volume by which is activated mechanism renin-angiotensinaldosterone the membrane acts the − earlier, as the well noted symporter. II the angiotensin basolateral on to Na+/3HCO3 as proximal stimulate Na+/H+ tubule apical antiporter As the H+ degree, Henle’s distal the Na+/H+ stimulates loop lesser tubule, the secretion the process angiotensin and in II early mediated of portion by antiporter. To also a a of TAL collecting to cells is the and Na+ primary tubule principal Aldosterone’s ). action distal reabsorption on stimulate duct (see by also H+ to in stimulates . it segments intercalated secrete However, these cells both effect indirect is direct. This and by stimulating hyperpolarizes becomes negative). (i.e., Na+ cells, By principal reabsorption electrically lumen the more the voltage transepithelial aldosterone secretion voltage transepithelial by in facilitates intercalated This change of cells. then H+ indirect on directly act II) this and H+ In cells H+,K+-ATPase. addition via secretion to intercalated to stimulate (and angiotensin effect, H+-ATPase aldosterone

forces. contraction which H+ ECF volume (HCO3 (ECFV) changes in capillary − through Starling peritubular by mechanism is enhances reabsorption) secretion Another proximal tubule is forces in capillary reabsorption alters contraction that peritubular As , ECFV overall such enhanced. Starling described the of load is reabsorbed. − With this reabsorption, enhanced more filtered of the HCO3

balance the of tubule. proximal secretion H+ Potassium by influences inhibits secretion. stimulates hyperkalemia H+ and Hypokalemia acidifying for responsible effect, hyperkalemia at hypokalemia K+-induced changes pH alkalinizing is in part are least and cells. this that in It with intracellular thought the duct. stimulates the Hypokalemia collecting secretion also H+ by increased result in cells. occurs of expression H+,K+-ATPase the of as intercalated a This

HCO3 New of Formation −

for HCO3 the of important RNAE. previously, reabsorption load is As − of filtered discussed maximizing not during − − metabolism. lost replenish the during produced alone HCO3 acids nonvolatile does reabsorption However, the HCO3 of neutralization maintain HCO3 − the this replace must kidneys new lost with acid-base HCO3 . balance, − To HCO3 . and of of NH4 excretion and acid synthesis + occurs titratable by by − Generation excretion of new

Production of as − acid result new in of depicted is titratable a excretion HCO3

Fig. . 37.6 and reaching Because of distal the normally HCO3 proximal of little and by contains loop duct − . Henle, collecting HCO3 tubule tubule the fluid − reabsorption − be (primarily when H+ non-HCO3 is acid. secreted with Thus Pi) and will as excreted combine buffers titratable it produced. was CO2, HCO3 is of also inside hydration the a cell Because from H+ − the produced HCO3 . ECF to is returned − as This the HCO3 − new excretion noted, Pi acidosis. As with increases is new the this HCO3 Pi titratable . increased available with insufficient of response − acid for even formation, required generate amount However, to a of as and HCO3 The − NH4 remainder of generation generation result excretion. + new occurs

and synthesis and by adds HCO3 to the NH4 its is produced subsequent ECF. − excretion + kidneys, acid-base of regulated requirements body. process this in the the to is response Importantly,

the is produced in NH4 kidneys via + of glutamine. metabolism to + , the add and Essentially metabolize the − excrete kidneys NH4 glutamine, body. HCO3 HCO3 the to NH4 kidneys’ process on this depends + in ability urine. formation via excrete new − However, of enters into the in NH4 is instead liver. urea it converted but not by the circulation, systemic excreted urine is + If buffered generates which HCO3 , conversion H+ then . − This by process is urea − consumes negates and + the HCO3 and through of + excretion renal-generated of − production formation HCO3 Thus by from NH4 synthesis of NH4 kidneys. new the NH4 + kidneys in thereby urine − normally produce However, . HCO3 excrete and

the which excrete NH4 by The kidneys is + process complex.

Fig. essential 37.7 of the process. illustrates this features tubule, process + in ammoniagenesis. proximal the glutamine is NH4 a from the termed cells produced of Each two the of and anion molecule NH4 molecules glutamine . + divalent produces 2-oxoglutarate2− . ultimately of HCO3 two molecules Metabolism provides this of − anion peritubular as . across HCO3 HCO3 membrane basolateral the cell the the − and exits new blood − enters and + tubular enters cell exits the the membrane apical the across fluid. NH4 with substituting primary the NH4 involves NH4 + . + The antiporter, H+ tubular for secretion for mechanism into Na+/H+ fluid the the diffuse cell where tubular it some the into In of NH4 . out can addition, is fluid, + to NH3 protonated

the tubule A + significant secreted the NH4 by of is Henle. the reabsorbed by loop proximal portion of reabsorption, this NH4 + the The primary substituting NH4 site is TAL K+ the on of symporter. + for with 1Na+/1K+/2Cl− of voltage reabsorption this transepithelial NH4 In lumen-positive paracellular drives segment the addition + in .

SECTION7Berne Levy •Fig. & 678 Physiology + H˜ATP H+ + GeneralschemeforexcretionofH+withnon-HCO3−urinarybuffers(titratableacid).Theprimaryurinarybufferisphosphate(HPO42−).AH+-secretingintercalatedcellisshown.Forsimplicity,onlytheH+-ATPaseisdepicted.H+secretionbytheH+,K+-ATPasealsotitratesluminalbuffers.ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;CA,carbonicanhydrase.Tubular H2O Blood CO2 Cl– HCO3 – – fluid HCO3 CA Buffer 37.6 H-Buffer

NH4 The medullary TAL reabsorbed the the of Henle interstitium. of by + in loop the accumulates fluid the the duct. From then into tubular is by collecting it secreted there

transporters The express glycoproteins membrane as known cells (RhBG collecting NH3 (Rh) duct the two RhCG). of and Rhesus

H+-secreting apical of cells. cells membrane the and and the both membranes basolateral in present these present is is in intercalated basolateral RhBG RhCG and cells, of principal As depicted in

Fig. collecting termed traditionally the process diffusion. is a transported across NH3 nonionic 37.7 , duct, in secretion. intercalated tubule protonated of The lumen a result H+ is secreted NH3 as the Because + trapped process trapping. termed NH4 tubular to a the has effectively membrane permeability is it in diffusion the low traditionally a apical lumen,

duct by critical the . H+ is for NH4 excretion + collecting of secretion of reabsorbed excreted by If + not duct urine. the TAL Henle’s collecting H+ be the in inhibited, the is NH4 loop secretion will be it as the circulation, returned described will be systemic HCO3 the consume process. the by to will Instead and liver − to previously, in it converted urea where − produced Thus of new cells proximal during by the is glutamine of metabolism tubule. the HCO3 production is overall process from excreted is until + liver (i.e., NH4 + urea NH4 not prevented). the However, the complete of is the by in as Thus marker metabolism excretion urine in used NH4 the can of tubule. be a + proximal glutamine

willappearinurine,urinewillbeacidic,andNH4+ ,K+ excretionwillbeincreased.Toassessthis,andespeciallytheamountofNH4+ excretionbythekidneysisdoneindirectlybecauseassaysofurineNH4+ AssessingNH4+ excreted,the“urinarynetcharge”or“urineaniongap”canbecalculatedbymeasuringurinaryconcentrationsofNa+ arenotroutinelyavailable.Considerforexamplethesituationofmetabolicacidosis,whereintheappropriaterenalresponseistoincreasenetacidexcretion.Accordingly,littleornoHCO3− ,andCl−:

productionandexcretion. ,andNH4+ ispresent).AsaresulttheurineaniongapwillyieldanegativevaluewhenNH4+ 6.5,virtuallynoHCO3− (withurinepH< isbeingexcreted.Indeed,theabsenceofaurineaniongaportheexistenceofapositivevalueindicatesarenaldefectinNH4+ ,K+ TheconceptofurineaniongapduringametabolicacidosisassumesthatthemajorcationsinurineareNa+ andthatthemajoranionisCl−

transport RhBG RhCG NH3. gBoth and is may also some NH4 + There RhBG transport some evidence that .

•Fig. NH4 + + NH4 Na+ Tubular NH4 NH4 fluid Production,transport,andexcretionofNH4+bythenephron.GlutamineismetabolizedtoNH4+andHCO3−intheproximaltubule.TheNH4+issecretedintothelumen,andtheHCO3−enterstheblood.ThesecretedNH4+isreabsorbedinHenle’sloop,primarilybythethickascendinglimb,andaccumulatesinthemedullaryinterstitium.NH3issecretedbythecollectingductviarhesusglycoproteins,andH+secretiontrapsNH4+inthelumen.ForeachmoleculeofNH4+excretedintheurine,amoleculeof“new”HCO3−isaddedbacktotheECF.CA,carbonicanhydrase.Tubular NH4 + + + 2NH4 H+H+ 37.7 Glutamine + – CO2 + H˜NH3HCO3 CA NH4 NH3 H2O + NH3 NH4 NH4 NH4 H+ + + Na+ + fluid NH3 Blood 2HCO3 A= Blood + –

in excreted HCO3 circulation the systemic the new urine. − for net, + returned is each In one to NH4 the

the important system renal that An NH4 regulated + balance. by is systemic of it is acid-base feature increase described, with levels the II tubule. acidosis, into cortisol angiotensin of the secretion as proximal does already As lumen angiotensin ammoniagenesis NH4 II from (i.e., and stimulate cortisol glutamine). + production Both metabolism of proximal During enzymes tubule acidosis, stimulated. cell in responsible are glutamine the the for systemic requires enzyme new complete several synthesis adaptation. of involves and for This days increased is of enzymes, allowing these . production new + production increased, HCO3 of With enhanced levels − NH4 alkalosis. metabolism with Conversely, glutamine reduced is RhCG in the RhBG of abundance and Acidosis increases duct. the collecting also ability enhanced. NH4 Thus to secrete also is the +

Response Disorders Acid-Base to

ECF the within of maintained The pH narrow is range a very (7.35–7.45).

of Inspection

Eq. for the is in pH normal, body that shows normal 7.40 simplicity though fluid range even used 37.3 7.35 hFor value of 7.45. the is as pH the from to presentation this of of chapter, the 35 for PCO2 45 to range normal mm is Hg. Similarly mm However, a is as PCO2 value. Hg of the used normal 40 normal ECF to mEq/L a mEq/L. Finally, value the considered is of normal 24 though 28 even 22 [HCO3 −], a range is

are or PCO2 ECF when altered. [HCO3 −] varies either acid-base in of whereas result ECF balance disturbances As [HCO3 a from that a metabolic those PCO2 are are of acid-base acid-base from termed −] disorders. noted, termed in already respiratory change resulting change disorders, primarily the PCO2. regulate lungs for whereas [HCO3 The regulating −], kidneys are responsible

against change When develops, uses disturbance pH. mechanisms an body in acid-base the the ECF several defend to in defense mechanisms disturbance. do the not by acid-base the correct merely minimize imposed change but pH These disturbance the value the requires disorder. acid-base underlying its the of or produced correction that to of Restoration blood process the normal processes pH defend and and lungs, adjustments ventilatory body (3) The the blood buffering, adjustments produced of pH general mechanisms extracellular in via by (2) to alterations RNAE. three against intracellular the has PCO2 changes acid-base disturbances: body rate fluid in in in (1)

against defense and intracellular extracellular disorders line buffering. of The first is acid-base the to virtually the slower whereas response several is response minutes. extracellular instantaneous, The is buffering can buffers and take intracellular of

from both intracellular in body fluids result nonvolatile alkali disorders of and compartments. addition that Metabolic or acid the extracellular are to buffered the system − buffer. principal The buffer HCO3 is ECF acid process nonvolatile added from the −] is reduced. − [HCO3 body the (or load, consumed is the When is of alkali and the acid HCO3 is lost to of neutralizing ECF during fluids body), to HCO3 the is added H+ body), to body consumed, alkali (or from is the Conversely, − of dissociation from acid is more when H2CO3. be nonvolatile lost produced fluids causing Consequently, [HCO3 increases. −]

additional buffer, buffer is principal the and proteins ECF plasma Although the system Pi HCO3 − buffering. provide extracellular of HCO3 a processes action , The and acid for of protein 50% of alkali load. combined load buffering of 70% Pi, for plasma the nonvolatile buffering and nonvolatile approximately a accounts the − The under occurs these two of conditions buffering the intracellularly. remainder of out of of nonvolatile involves or (during alkali). (during buffering nonvolatile H+ movement Intracellular into of acid) cells of buffering buffering cells H+ movement , and H+ on by HCO3 Pi, the titrated cell inside − the proteins. groups histidine is

of buffering. extracellular an additional Bone source represents in buffering its However, demineralization. acidosis, results bone by with

in of a of result fluid respiratory occur, the acid-base as alterations PCO2. body changes pH disorders When in buffering all intracellularly. disorders acid-base Virtually respiratory occurs CO2 rises H2O moves where combines cell, PCO2 with acidosis), to into it form the H2CO3. (respiratory When . dissociates H2CO3 and then H+ HCO3 − to H+ HCO3 −]. and cellular − cell [HCO3 Some proteins, the ECF buffered and exits the by the of is raises reversed reduced This (respiratory is process when alkalosis). PCO2 is to (H2O hydration is CO2 decrease shifted + H2CO3) ↔ condition reaction PCO2. the left the Under in this by the to [HCO3 left, the HCO3 a ↔ dissociation ECF reaction As reducing shifts the H++ −]. (H2CO3 the −) result thereby also

of line the are lungs disorders. second The against acid-base defense the As indicated equation by (see Henderson-Hasselbalch

Eq. the alter pH: a changes decreases a rise pH, blood and increases the pH. PCO2 reduction 37.2 in ), the

The determines the PCO2. ventilatory rate PCO2, decreased (Fig. it ventilation whereas decreases increases Increased ventilation ). 37.8 PCO2 pH and The important the blood ventilatory of rate. are regulators changes (ventral appropriately. located the Chemoreceptors of sense in and and surface and medulla) aortic [H+] and the bodies) brainstem rate alter in (carotid periphery PCO2 ventilatory the the a in when stimulates metabolic (decrease rate. [H+] ventilatory occurs, Thus rise acidosis pH) in the pH) reduces the a during in ventilatory decreased alkalosis, [H+] metabolic (increase rate. Conversely, maximal approximately reduced PCO2 hyperventilation, be •Fig. With to the can 37.8 EffectofventilatoryrateonalveolarPCO2andthusarterialbloodPCO2.

10 Hg. mm potent the be Because hypoxia, can which the PCO2 a stimulator increased also of develops is to limited. degree with ventilation, hypoventilation, the mm 60 hypoventilation otherwise raise In an PCO2 Hg. cannot above normal individual, but hours may complete. response be require minutes The initiated disturbances to may metabolic within acid-base several respiratory to

line acid-base disorders third kidneys. final of defense The and the involves against and appropriate excretion In the in the alteration in adjustments an of kidneys PCO2, make to RNAE. plasma pH response increase synthesis hours of response NH4 reach to because completion tubule The production. days enzymes proximal + the and takes it to renal several activity require in may days to involved the nephron load is of the by stimulated entire the secretion PCO2), In and is the reabsorbed. the or acidosis (increased of filtered − case of [H+] HCO3 H+ is increased thus ( excretion also is and Titratable production and is increased stimulated, RNAE acid excretion of + NH4 and

Fig. 37.9). HCO3 plasma process new of The and acid body, the the excretion − −] is [HCO3 added the to net increases. during generated

increased (decreased elevated). When HCO3 is [H+]), −] − (plasma alkalosis of load filtered the [HCO3 metabolic exists is −] thus is With and filtered load respiratory [HCO3 the decreased (decreased plasma is decreased. alkalosis PCO2), H+ both of by conditions, secretion inhibited. nephron is the In excretion a result, increased. is − As HCO3 the NH4 is both of time, At same and + acid excretion decreased. titratable Thus is in HCO3 decreased and urine. − RNAE appears collecting HCO3 cells into the urine HCO3 distal Also, − tubule is the intercalated secreted duct. and of −-secreting some by −] HCO3 With plasma − [HCO3 excretion , decreases. of enhanced

•Fig. 37.9 Responseofthenephrontoacidosis.Pi,phosphate;PTH,parathyroidhormone;Rhbg&Rhcg,rhesusglycoproteins;RNAE,renalnetacidexcretion;TA,titratableacid;V,urineflowrate.

secretiongeneratesnewHCO3− excretiontocorrecttheECFVcontraction.Asdescribedpreviously(see reabsorption)bytheproximaltubule.InthissettingtheentirefilteredloadofHCO3− secretion(HCO3− reabsorptionoccursviatheNa+/H+ byenhancingtitratableacidandNH4+ antiporter,thisresultsinanincreaseinH+ ,andtoincreaseNa+ secretionbyintercalatedcells.ThisstimulationofH+ reabsorptionbutalsoH+ excretion.Thusinindividualswholosegastriccontents,metabolicalkalosisandparadoxicallyacidicurinecharacteristicallyoccur.Correctionofthealkalosisoccursonlywheneuvolemiaisreestablished. isaresultoftheneedtoreduceNa+ tocompensateforthemetabolicalkalosis.TheinabilityofthekidneystoexcreteHCO3− isreabsorbedandnewHCO3− generationmayevenbeenhanced.Thelatterresponseoccursbecausealdosterone,thelevelsofwhichareelevatedinvolumecontraction,notonlystimulatesdistalNa+ fordetails)theresponseofthekidneystovolumecontractionistoreducetheglomerularfiltrationrate,whichreducesthefilteredloadofHCO3− Lossofgastriccontentsfromthebody(e.g.,vomiting,nasogastricsuctioning)producesmetabolicalkalosissecondarytothelossofHCl.Ifthelossofgastricfluidissignificant,ECFVcontractionoccurs.UnderthisconditionthekidneyscannotexcretesufficientquantitiesofHCO3− reabsorptionalongthenephron.BecausealargeamountofNa+

mechanisms and alterations the primary various 37.1 subsequent the the or disorders. Table defense of simple summarizes acid-base compensatory does compensatory In the disorder disorders the in of response acid-base reduces underlying not change pH. the correct but all the magnitude simply its acid-base Correction cause. of treatment disorder the of requires

Types Disorders of Acid-Base

acidosis ECF a Metabolic characterized decreased and by pH. [HCO3 is −] develop and diarrhea), via failure). − acid + loss nonvolatile renal titratable can acid the It (e.g., ketoacidosis), addition by body excrete the or (e.g., loss kidneys failure of HCO3 caused of to base (e.g., of NH4 to diabetic the the nonvolatile described, the As occurs of ECF compartments. and the buffering in both previously H+ ICF respiratory and are ventilatory compensation). rate stimulated (respiratory centers increased the falls, When the is pH the

Finally, acidosis, is RNAE in increased. metabolic (enhanced via all (enhanced elimination titratable − + increased HCO3 excretion This and of HCO3 via reabsorption urine acid and of HCO3 production −). of −) new from NH4 filtered occurs the to is will the ultimately [HCO3 return enhanced the If disturbance acid-base and process corrected, initiated pH normal. that RNAE the −] returns the After normal. ventilatory the correction pH, of to rate also

and −] by an increased characterized [HCO3 is alkalosis Metabolic pH. ECF (e.g., can (e.g., the ingestion of via of or of It loss of nonvolatile prolonged of result the to HCl of body loss as volume a base (e.g., from gastric nonvolatile occur more because addition commonly antacids), hemorrhage), vomiting). acid contraction in to a degree and predominantly occurs Buffering in lesser the the ECF

ECF,extracellularfluid;ICF,intracellularfluid;RNAE,renalnetacidexcretion Respiratoryacidosis↓ Respiratoryalkalosis↑

Whennonvolatileacidisaddedtobodyfluids,asindiabetic ketoacidosis,the[H+]increases(pHdecreases),andthe[HCO3−]decreases.Inadditiontheconcentrationoftheanionassociatedwiththenonvolatileacidincreases.Thischangeinanionconcentrationprovidesaconvenientwayofanalyzingthecauseofametabolicacidosisbycalculatingwhatistermedtheanion gap. TheaniongaprepresentsthedifferencebetweentheconcentrationofthemajorECFcation(Na+)andthemajorECFanions(Cl− andHCO3−):

Undernormalconditionstheaniongaprangesfrom8to16mEq/L.Itisimportanttorecognizethatananiongapdoesnotactuallyexist.Allcationsarebalancedbyanions.Thegapsimplyreflectstheparametersthataremeasured.Inreality:

(e.g.,lactate,β-hydroxybutyrate),theaniongapwillincrease(i.e.,thedecreasein[HCO3−]isnotmatchedbyanincreasein[Cl−]butratherbyanincreaseintheconcentrationoftheunmeasuredanion).Theaniongapisincreasedinmetabolicacidosis–associatedketoacidosis(e.g.,diabetesmellitus)withrenalfailure,lacticacidosis,oringestionoftoxinsorcertaindrugs(e.g.,largequantitiesofaspirin).Thuscalculationoftheaniongapisausefulwayofidentifyingtheetiologyofmetabolicacidosisintheclinicalsetting. ,theaniongapwillbenormal(i.e.,thedecreasein[HCO3−]ismatchedbyanincreasein[Cl−]).Metabolicacidosisassociatedwithdiarrheaorrenaltubularacidosis(i.e.,defectinrenalH+ secretion)hasanormalaniongap.Incontrast,iftheanionofthenonvolatileacidisnotCl− IftheanionofthenonvolatileacidisCl−

Albuminisanegativelychargedmacromolecule,anditmakesaconsiderablecontributionto“unmeasuredanions.”Asaresulttheaniongapmustbeadjustedinpatientswhohaveanabnormalserum[albumin].Foreach1g/dLchangeinserum[albumin],theaniongapneedstobeadjustedinthesamedirectionby2.5mEq/L.

ICF. ventilatory elevated centers, which (respiratory respiratory compensation). reduces rate, thus the in The is PCO2 increase the the the inhibits pH

to along of excretion is to metabolic response HCO3 reabsorption renal − reducing its The compensatory nephron. the alkalosis by increase rapidly quite (minutes this to hours) and occurs Normally effectively. the provided − initial excretion the of disturbance returns −] corrected. renal normal, Enhanced of and pH is [HCO3 acid-base HCO3 underlying cause to eventually the ventilatory rate the also When normal. the corrected, to is returns pH

and is PCO2 pH. ECF by elevated characterized acidosis Respiratory an reduced inadequate ventilation centers) edema, the or impaired and gas across It result decreased (e.g., cardiovascular results (e.g., of occurs pulmonary respiratory the diffusion lung from as disease). either gas of as drug-induced such exchange in a alveoli depression occurs acidosis disorders, to almost in ICF entirely the respiratory during compartment. buffering contrast In the metabolic reabsorption and pH in increase excretion compensation). − decrease in by nephron NH4 + the the both PCO2 and HCO3 and The stimulate (renal acid titratable and . increase Together these generate RNAE HCO3 − new responses days several takes renal occur. response to compensatory The acute acid-base into respiratory and disorders divided commonly are chronic phases. Consequently, the ICF in is on phase renal sufficient, and to acute not change compensatory relies the the time body response for minimize the buffering In the pH. the occurs. compensation renal phase, chronic In normal RNAE initial disorder PCO2 decreases to of to and returns the level. its underlying Correction the

increased pH. an by characterized ECF a and alkalosis PCO2 reduced Respiratory is the It respiratory the central from the caused stimulation or via in increased (e.g., disorders of usually system). lungs, ventilation gas by from centers exchange of results drugs nervous increased pain, high at fear. result of also Hyperventilation and as altitude anxiety, occurs or a ICF in is Buffering compartment. primarily the for to chronic alkalosis phases compensation occur. respiratory and with respiratory reflecting time acidosis, required renal both has the acute As renal chronic whereas reflects alkalosis respiratory buffering, intracellular acute of The phase the reflects compensation. phase elevated titratable PCO2 reabsorption by With pH excretion. reduce HCO3 inhibit and and + acid NH4 reduced and the compensation, renal the − nephron result is a effects, RNAE reduced. these As of initial PCO2 the of acid renal of to level. increases and returns its normal, Correction underlying the then to disorder excretion

Disorders Analysis of Acid-Base

an acid-base of so initiated. at cause can therapy directed is underlying appropriate be identifying the Analysis disorder findings about patient’s and The the clues physical history acid-base provide disorder. valuable medical of an nature origin associated and often In addition, an arterial is blood sample analysis of required. frequently Such an systematically. if approached straightforward analysis is consider the = data: For following example, . pH

the approach: set acid-base represented following be other values disorder these or of 1. can three-step using values The determined by any

pH. the of Examination as When is or the acidosis either pH underlying be disorder classified an considered can first, an alkalosis. correct acid-base mechanisms themselves. the defense body disorder an The cannot of by defense if even operative, are pH mechanisms the in disorder. acid-base completely the Thus the change indicates of acidosis. the pH provided, indicates the 7.35 example In

2.

disorder. metabolic versus of Determination respiratory disorders Simple acid-base or either are metabolic

of Acid-Base the Balance Regulation respiratory. of the Kidneys Role in is present To ECF −] must the [HCO3 disorder examine and which clinician next determine the PCO2. PCO2 of result [HCO3 the previously acidosis (metabolic) an be could As a or increase in decrease in discussed, −] (respiratory). of PCO2 or decrease Alternatively, be (metabolic) in −] the increase alkalosis in (respiratory). ECF could [HCO3 an a result = the provided, mEq/L), is the example reduced is (normal = For [HCO3 PCO2 −] Hg). normal mm ECF 24 as (normal the from 40 be acidosis is be must because therefore PCO2 a acidosis; it metabolic cannot the disorder reduced. respiratory The

3. Analysis compensatory response. a of −] changes ECF in Metabolic [HCO3 in result and changes ventilation result disorders in in RNAE thus compensatory compensatory and thus disorders ( PCO2, whereas respiratory in in

Table 37.2 ). alkalosis. metabolic metabolic is the In compensated whereas appropriately compensated is decreased, an acidosis, elevated in PCO2 it respiratory −]. compensation in With results an elevation the [HCO3 acidosis, of reduced [HCO3 Conversely, alkalosis. ECF respiratory in is response to −] decrease and ECF in Hg in example, expected reduction from In mm is reduced as −]) mEq/L is 8 [HCO3 the this decrease of the PCO2 for PCO2 (10 (see this magnitude an normal,

Table ). 37.2 a appropriate the metabolic compensation. simple acid-base respiratory is acidosis with disorder Therefore of acid-base presence A disturbance. causes the acid-base for more the or mixed two reflects underlying disorder example, the consider following 96 data: For pH = .6

> evident (PCO2 acidosis approach mEq/L) 40 that three-step is Hg). both is < metabolic that [HCO3 an When the 24 (ECF a −] followed, mm has respiratory disturbance the it a component is component and disorder this Thus is mixed. acidosis) a and as (i.e., acid-base develops an who for with occur, disease illness history such has an disorders of emphysema Mixed in chronic chronic example, diarrhea. acute respiratory pulmonary gastrointestinal can who individual a − the its from the fluid development , in diarrhea HCO3 contains results metabolic of Because acidosis. body loss

disorder pH is but also is mixed indicated patient when has a acid-base PCO2 abnormal the normal. ECF [HCO3 and A values −] in can a large a a develop who quantity Such of aspirin. ingested has patient condition respiratory respiratory same the acidosis time in acid and ingredient hyperventilation at and the causing centers, Salicylic stimulates (active produces metabolic alkalosis. aspirin) the [HCO3 ECF PCO2. a patient and a reduced −] Thus reduced has occur lower compensation a The normal acidosis.) respiratory metabolic is would with PCO2 (NOTE: than of 1.

and balance acid amount excretion acid of the nonvolatile acid produced through (termed amount [RNAE]). the the an of in ingested net by The to metabolism acid-base of maintain renal diet kidneys excretion equal quantity all reabsorbing glomeruli. virtually also the urine in prevent at the HCO3 of by filtered loss HCO3 − − The kidneys acid accomplished by by H+ are nephrons. Both filtered − of secretion the and HCO3 excretion of reabsorption of (primarily kidneys the of the in Pi) Acid is . as NH4 + form by and acid excreted titratable during result of − of HCO3 nonvolatile HCO3 and the generation acids. acid lost − NH4 titratable Both new + replenishes , excretion ECF which neutralization in

2.

minimize (1) acid-base to uses ECF compensation, (2) (3) pH: respiratory ICF buffering, The and lines renal compensation. fluid of and body body disorders three impact on of the defense

Curthoys NP. excretion. production ion and ammonium Renal eds. et Alpern al., In: RJ, Seldin and The Giebisch’s Physiology Pathophysiology. and Kidney: 5th ed. Waltham, Elsevier; MA: 2013.

Jr. TD Dubose Disorders acid-base of balance. eds. In: MW, Taal al., et and The Brenner Kidney. Rector’s ed. 9th Philadelphia: 2012. Saunders;

Hamm al. et LL, renal Cellular mechanisms of tubule acidification. RJ, Alpern eds. et In: al., Seldin Kidney: Giebisch’s and and Pathophysiology. The Physiology ed. 5th 2013. MA: Elsevier; Waltham,

Verlander Weiner JW. ID, acidification mechanisms. Renal In: MW, Taal eds. et al., Kidney. The Rector’s and Brenner ed. 9th Saunders; Philadelphia: 2012.

al. Berend et K, assessment acid-base approach Physiological to of disturbances. Engl N Med. J 2014;371:1434-1445.

3.

alkali body. to from [HCO3 addition result loss −], primary acid or turn from disorders in the which ECF results Metabolic of alterations of from in acid-base which PCO2. is ventilation decreases metabolic pulmonary acidosis, increased, In to response of to acid-base metabolic response in a occurs matter The minutes. pulmonary disorders increased, RNAE but days. this takes is also several alkalosis. −] ECF [HCO3 An in causes increase decreases compensatory PCO2 rapidly ventilation, a pulmonary This hours) (minutes elevates to as which response. decreased, but this several takes RNAE days. is also

4.

primary PCO2. in Respiratory disorders alterations acid-base result from PCO2 kidneys with an Elevation respond and increase the acidosis, produces of RNAE. in and a of reduced. PCO2 alkalosis, is produces Conversely, RNAE reduction to respiratory disorders days. acid-base respond several hours to over The kidneys

liminal V-ATPase. D. Regulation by the S, Brown acidification Breton of (Bethesda). Physiology 2013;28:318-329.

Brown Wagner CA. D, mechanisms Molecular in kidney. sensing acid-base the of Soc Nephrol. J Am 2012;23:774-780.

Moe Curthoys NP, OW. acidosis. function and Proximal to response tubule Clin Am Soc Nephrol. J 2014;9:1627-1638.

et LL, al. Hamm Acid-base homeostasis. Clin Nephrol. Am J Soc 2015;10:2232-2242.

Buck of J. sensors. Physiological LR, acid-base Levin roles Annu Physiol. Rev 2015;77:347-362.

al. Roy et A, cell regulation. function intercalated duct and Collecting J Soc Nephrol. Clin Am 2015;10:305-324.

Seifter JL. disorders. electrolyte acid-base and Integration of N J Engl Med. 2014;371:1821-1831.

Verlander JW. Weiner ID, transport in Ammonia kidney glycoproteins. by the rhesus Physiol J Renal Physiol. Am 2014;306:F1107-F1120.

8The Reproductive SECTION A. Systems and BRUCE Endocrine WHITE JOHN R. HARRISON AND

Regulation Chapter Hormonal Metabolism 39 of Energy

to Introduction Endocrine System the

and Hormonal Phosphate of 40 Chapter Metabolism Regulation Calcium

Gland Chapter 41 The Hypothalamus and Pituitary

The Gland Thyroid

The Adrenal Gland

44 Reproductive Chapter Female and The Male Systems

student the completion should this following 1. be able questions: Upon to chapter, the answer of

major and Name endocrine product glands the hormonal their products. or

2.

each list the involving loop. type feedback Map glands and endocrine peripheral a one simple anterior out feedback loop and of endocrine the hypothalamus, and under and gland, endocrine pituitary negative major differentiate

3.

a hormone and releasing hormone. a Define tropic

4.

chemical the Explain hormones, the hormones, nature hormones, of and and steroid (thyroid characteristics protein/peptide catecholamine iodothyronines hormones). hormone regulation receptor, such Include (synthesis metabolic characteristics form of site clearance. or circulating and of as hormone, of secretion), localization subcellular

5.

hormone. the Integrate function/action with of a peripheral secreted concept the conversion of

6.

response the associated with hormone a in intracellular target steps cell. Integrate a

ability biology. human an other each underpinning communicate of with is of cells he to cell-to-cell in at and of exists levels complexity , discussed As distance. communication various into fluid; of into molecule, of diffusion and (1) regulated and receptor of extracellular the a a within out specific signaling Endocrine extracellular hormone extracellular compartment secretion hormone hormone, of target the the the binding the vasculature into its space diffusion vascular of involves (3) and (2) called organ. a the signaling circulation an the the cells to body; throughout activity throughout of hormones of body, spread of organs. one hormone the the the several target Because often regulates receptors hormones. frequently for Conversely, multiple cells express

to (1) body including stress. is fluctuations function of glands within environment, of various system the to within and of The the the to collection meet whose (2) reproductive is internal multiple needs the regulate organism respond and organs growth types a endocrine system the comprises endocrine major ( glands following The

Fig. 38.1

the Endocrine of glands pancreas Parathyroid tissues

Pituitary gland nuclei) with hypothalamic association (in

which hormones endocrine functions, and synthesize and, secrete to gonads, perform production both ( or gametogenic of dedicated (testes These glands exception ovaries) hormone and are with Gonads the bioactive endocrine

Table ). 38.1 endocrine function. transitory organ, also a performs major A placenta, the

cells not dedicated In there is addition glands, primary whose function are endocrine to (see organs endocrine endocrine within

). Table 38.1 gastrointestinal (IGF-1), These types natriuretic erythropoietin, produce within kidney tract include numerous produce within cell insulin-like cells the produce peptide, that factor hormones. heart cells type gastrointestinal that the cells growth produce 1 atrial that that liver and within the peptides, There within called of neurohormones, the bodies also that capillaries pituitary nuclei) gland. into collections the (called secrete associated cell exist hypothalamus with

numerous (see system secreted or A active types or represented endocrine subset active express modify of intracellular cell is by that third enzymes inactive ectoenzymes, less hormones that hormones highly enzymes, into the precursors

Table 38.1). subsequent (see is ). example the from II the by two cleavages polypeptide angiotensinogen inactive of proteolytic generation An angiotensin liver Another by in hormone produce hydroxylation is to (vitamin D). two 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin example reactions vitamin of D kidneys activation D the the and subsequent bioactive highly

System Endocrine Within Loops the Feedback of Configuration

feedback. predominant glands The negative feedback a loop mode is endocrine of closed among one this the target loop, in and negative in (either acts change specific organs a then secretion decrease change to hormone on of a more of a circulating a In inhibits hormone. induce or the feedback levels component component, a or increase) blood by normal a within a keeping physiological Negative confer stability feedback range. parameter glucose loops (e.g., level) positive examples a There few of also are feedback

687 • the Fig. to 38 CHAPTER System Introduction Endocrine of Glands 38.1 the system. endocrine

endocrine regulation. in increases a A component instability. feedback the hormone, component secretion and levels which this stimulates of hormone closed in confers specific loop, of a positive loops, of or fetus processes control that the control example, something expulsion for a of a loops Under feedback to from through the ovarian give; wall positive feedback uterus. rupture lead to of follicle has the positive got

loop) and a an loops endocrine loop system: physiological two feedback simply to as basic feedback configurations of feedback negative axis–driven response-driven response–driven ( feedback a (referred the are within endocrine loop There

Fig. 38.2).

Ca++ blood (zona levels Na+ feedback and osmolarity and kidneys), H+ that (pancreatic blood in the glands volume levels blood adrenal (parathyroid gland), glomerulosa cortex observed cells). of glucose levels loop , response-driven cells), K+ pituitary The blood atrial control glands, , is Pi islet and and and endocrine (hypothalamus/posterior level insulin configuration, parameter secretion of the of hormone by an in the a glucose blood secretion). In stimulated extracellular (e.g., response-driven specific a change inhibited stimulates is level in increase or a by hepatic levels physiological (e.g., glucose in the decreased directly muscle) in to target changes blood in that this hormone increased lead uptake case, Alterations (in of regulate parameter of glucose organs the question. characteristics level) gluconeogenesis, change insulin drops inhibits The as then blood (i.e., glucose level) secretion hormone level the falls). in glucose parameter blood of secretion the further (decreased

endocrine pituitary endocrine the of into of organized glands consists axis (see peripheral Much the the is and system endocrine hypothalamus, gland, axes; each the

Fig. 38.2 ). feedback configuration. a the endocrine involves loop Thus axis–driven three-tiered hormones. neuroendocrine releasing tier that by is represented hypothalamic secrete The first neurons stimulate production tropic pituitary hormones cases, gland (second the tier). (or, secretion in the inhibit) of Releasing few from a and hormones of production peripheral (third glands Tropic tier). and hormones stimulate hormones from endocrine the secretion effects) and cell pleiotropic hormones—namely, steroids, have IGF-1—typically cortisol, sex hormone, actions (e.g., on The phenotypic numerous produced thyroid types. multiple peripherally tropic pituitary the in peripherally hormones hypothalamic axis–driven by of produced feedback, feedback the and loop involves inhibition feedback releasing endocrine However, hormone. hormones primary hormone loops. endocrine within minor In a of regulation physiological responses only feedback feedback, in feedback to play the response-driven the axis–driven contrast peripherally produced to role hypogonadism). a (e.g., secondary From primary, or diseases tertiary tertiary perspective, hyperthyroidism, described diseases endocrine secondary, clinical are as hypothalamus. endocrine is is lesion the secondary the in a peripheral in gland; in is pituitary a Primary disease gland; anterior the disease a disease lesion tertiary lesion and

release An activity of important hormones axes the signals of modulate the thereby axis. the ascending is control endocrine hypothalamic of aspect to and the descending releasing and the ability of neuronal neurons input from nucleus region comes major to A releasing another (SCN). called neuronal hypothalamus the of hormone–secreting the suprachiasmatic of and control the releasing circadian a rhythm, impose a the they secretion daily axes endocrine on hormones neurons hypothalamic SCN rhythm, that ( called

Fig. 38.3).

the circadian every of 24 at activity an to SCN time evidenced they intrinsic clock, hours. a as demonstrate spontaneous electrical fact the neurons by represent same that 25 peak clock The periodicity can so the to appears by be “entrained” the earth’s created controlled cycle ( that light-dark by cycle be the environmentally environmental normal of rotation, the 25-hour 24-to

Fig. 38.4

Peripheral a Significant by Conversion Produced Degree Hormones to

Liver,sebaceousgland,otherorgansTestosteroneGenitalskin,prostate,otherorgans5-Dihydrotestosterone(DHT)ManyorgansTriiodothyronine LungsAngiotensinIIKidney1,25-DihydroxyvitaminD(vitaminD)Adipose,mammaryglands,otherorgansEstradiol-17β •Fig. gland 38.2 NEGATIVE Physiological Negative endocrine effects Physiologicalresponse–drivenandendocrineaxis–drivennegativefeedbackloops.Endocrine Target PHYSIOLOGICAL ENDOCRINE Pituitary NEGATIVE hormone Physiological AXIS–DRIVEN Target RESPONSE–DRIVEN feedback organ(s) organs glucose) (e.g., feedback FEEDBACK Hypothalamic Peripheral Negative Tropic Circulating blood effects FEEDBACK neuroendocrine Hormone Hormone gland hormone gland component Releasing neurons

the that is from via distinct are the tract. light-sensitive and SCN generated signals to cells rods retinohypothalamic and cones from input retinal Neural specialized from from SCN light clock day. and or dark, away 24-hour running” becomes conditions “free cycle slightly however, constant the of drifts each a Under

link and physiological circadian SCN gland the that control. The various pineal a forms processes require neuroendocrine between the the This neurotransmitter hypothalamus, melatonin close synthesizes gland, tryptophan hormone from the of which precursor. to is the serotonin, tiny synthesis rate-limiting melatonin The N-acetyltransferase. for enzyme is in of and the of plasma secretion levels. a pineal amount gland this markedly vary and for the which its melatonin manner, enzyme cycling accounts cyclic The activity in inhibited markedly stimulated darkness melatonin is Synthesis light by (see by and of

Fig. ). 38.4 are functions accordingly. the and arrived, melatonin nighttime that transmit has Thus body may regulated information 24to the dawn to entrainment of evoke SCN clock. the dusk day-night Melatonin at or feedback also may SCN help 25-hour induction including actions, sleep. of other Melatonin has numerous

hypothalamic hemorrhage, inflammation) stress (e.g., is neurons the or gland fear, and (e.g., as processive stress stress, anxiety). important Another systemic to as input pituitary either organs. Major a mobilizes of persistent and delivery hormone stress critical overrides free the release and augments clock fatty causes endogenous fuels, metabolism as medical acids, or exaggerated pattern such circadian and their that surgical and glucose to and Growth in processes, contrast, suppressed. are and reproductive release or In directly cytokines immune inflammatory addition, of or the hormones hypothalamic during releasing responses, hormones. released regulate pituitary and both,

Chemical Hormones of Nature

are biochemically proteins/peptides, classified Hormones hormones, iodothyronines. or catecholamines, as steroid chemical its is it hormone transported and it biological of a stored, released; of synthesized, determines (4) The mode of is nature in (2) and (3) mechanism how how (1) and blood; clearance; its action. half-life cellular

Protein into structurally grouped gene families. and are peptide that be hormones related molecules by can encoded especially from obtain sequence and posttranslational their glycosylation. modifications, amino acid primary from their Protein/peptide specificity hormones

to within outside are to Because their the of destined remain to and ( the added continuously the be synthesis processing are hormones cell, from protein/peptide for differently membrane destined proteins or cell those secretion

Fig. 38.5 ). larger prehormones. preprohormones synthesized polyribosome hormones on as the or are These peptide. peptides have 30 The of signal called at acids their amino to a N-terminus 15 group nascent the interacts pore chain growing The signal the ultimately with peptide a •Fig. peptide a which ribonucleoprotein directs particle, through 38.4 Originofcircadianrhythmsinendocrineglandsecretion,metabolicprocesses,andbehavioralactivity. Prog Horm (ModifiedfromTurekFW.Recent Res. 1994;49:43.) secretory subsequently is that cytoplasm. into vesicle released the membrane-bound a moiety the Golgi carbohydrate in The is added apparatus. of glycoproteins

hormones prohormones. are produced Most as primary of sequence their the Prohormones harbor active within the sequence. hormone peptide However, are and less neighboring inactive trim inactive action away the endopeptidases or active to the of sequences. prohormones require

vesicles D Protein/peptide Plasma stored exocytosis and the as released secretory pathway. through regulated hormones by are ACTH in secretory membrane-bound the gland are Thus secreted. continually these are not hormones of a through Rather, stimulus are secreted a mechanism to they response stimulus-secretion in coupling. an coat the and requires energy, membrane. presence cytoskeleton exocytosis specifically proteins secretory (microtubules, , vesicles intact that cell microfilaments), of deliver Ca++ to the Regulated

and reticulum rough the is membranes hormone–producing secretory cells by •Fig. of Golgi presence vesicles of The characterized protein and abundant endoplasmic ultrastructure Acircadianpacemakerdirectsnumerousendocrineand 38.3 bodyfunctions,eachwithitsowndailyschedule.Thenighttimerise inplasmamelatoninmaymediatecertainothercircadianpatterns.ACTH,adrenocorticotropichormone. Intern (DatafromSchwartzWJ.Adv Med. 1994;38:81.) the the surface of on of membrane cisternal located the inner) (i.e., the reticulum endoplasmic in endoplasmic reticular membrane. a signal cisternae a the or prohormone, signal ( of peptide reticulum peptidase where then is the the Removal Golgi endoplasmic from into which hormone packaged by of generates the it apparatus, transported to is

Fig. 38.6

predominantly are and and, hormones with body an soluble unbound exceptions the form of half-lives. and therefore Protein/peptide fluids short in in in notable growth circulate blood hormone, have biological IGFs hormones lysosomal “ by primarily section complexes and blood hormone-receptor Protein from degradation of (see are endocytosis removed the

to Hormones”). Responses Cellular physiologically protein form. in hormones urine in enough a are to appear Many active small in urine. follicle-stimulating and are For hormone present hormone luteinizing example,

Fig. of Representation Schematic Synthesis. 38.5 Hormone Peptide end,andadditionofpolyadenylation(poly-A)atthe3′ end.TheresultantmaturemessengerRNAentersthecytoplasm,whereitdirectsthesynthesisofapreprohormonepeptidesequenceonribosomes.Inthisprocess,theN-terminussignalisremoved,andtheresultantprohormoneistransferredvectoriallyintotheendoplasmicreticulum.TheprohormoneundergoesfurtherprocessingandpackagingintheGolgiapparatus.Afterfinalcleavageoftheprohormonewithinthegranules,theycontainthehormoneandcopeptidesreadyforsecretionbyexocytosis.NH2,amidogen. Inthenucleus,theprimarygenetranscript,amessengerRNAprecursormolecule,undergoesexcisionofintrons,splicingofexons,cappingofthe5′

Fig. Protein Ultrastructure 38.6 a Cell. Hormone–Producing of Notethepresenceofsecretoryvesiclesandroughendoplasmicreticulumintheproteinhormone–secretingcell. Introduction and Pathology. (FromKierszenbaumAL.Histology to Biology: An Cell 2nded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007.) •Fig. 38.7 Chemicalstructuresofcatecholamines.

tract the digested readily if administered orally. Proteins/peptides in are gastrointestinal must of mucous (sublingually administered membrane the by through or they Hence small intranasally). injection be in case peptides, or, a not membrane membranes do (see cell receptors Because they proteins/peptides cross through readily, signal

and and synthesized neurons norepinephrine, and adrenal Catecholamines the ( include by dopamine epinephrine, are medulla

Fig. 38.7 ). lesser epinephrine medulla adrenal are The of norepinephrine. primary a extent, and, the hormonal to products acid of the tyrosine. Catecholamines amino specificity obtain their through enzymatic modifications part vesicles secretory are in pathway. the secretory that are of regulated stored Catecholamines proteins called are with copackaged adenosine triphosphate, and Ca++, chromogranins. They components the the biogenesis a role vesicles within play and of of in in vesicles. secretory Chromogranins organization the unbound to either blood Catecholamines are and albumin. or in bound loosely circulate soluble they membrane in not are actions cell receptors. their cross and readily protein/peptide through They to produce hence cell similar membranes hormones do that primarily cell blood from half-lives to by Catecholamines enzymatic removed short uptake and modification. have minutes) and (1 are 2 biological

ovaries, the hormones cortex, and testes, placenta. by Steroid are made adrenal estrogens. categories: Steroid from androgens, hormones to glucocorticoids, progestins, belong and these mineralocorticoids, glands five Progestins,

(alsocalledproprotein)convertases. Bioactivehormonesaregeneratedfromprohormonesthroughproteolyticcleavageoftheprohormonebyprohormone thatcontainmultiplecopiesofthesamebioactivepeptide.Forexample,thesequenceforthyrotropin-releasinghormoneisreiteratedsixtimeswithintheprepro–thyrotropin-releasinghormonesequence.RaremutationsinPC1havebeenidentifiedinhumansandareassociatedwithextremeobesityinchildhood,defectsinglucosehomeostasis,lowglucocorticoidlevels,lossofmenstrualcyclesandhypogonadism,andproblemsingastrointestinalfunction. Theseenzymesareexpressedinacell-specificmanner.Forexample,insulin-producingcells(betacells)ofthepancreaticisletsexpressbothPC1andPC2.Insulinisproducedaspreproinsulin,cleavedtoproinsulinintheendoplasmicreticulum,andpackagedinsecretoryvesiclesasproinsulin.Whileinthesecretoryvesicle,aportionofthecenterofthesinglechain(connectingpeptide)iscleavedsequentiallybyPC1andPC2.Thematuresecretoryvesiclecontainsandsecretesequimolaramountsofinsulinandconnectingpeptide.Sometimesprohormonescontainthesequenceofmultiplehormones.Forexample,theproteinproopiomelanocortin(POMC)containstheaminoacidsequencesofadrenocorticotropichormone(ACTH)andmelanocyte-stimulatinghormones(MSHs).PituitarycellsexpressonlyPC1andreleaseonlyACTHasabioactivepeptide.Incontrast,certainneuronalcelltypesandkeratinocytesexpressbothPC1andPC2andcanproduceMSHs.Therearealsoprohormones,calledpolyproteins,

androgens steroids steroids, are ( are 21-carbon and estrogens 18-carbon glucocorticoids and steroids mineralocoricoids, 19-carbon are whereas

). Table 38.2 a an (see secosteroid (i.e., conformation). hormones of has open rings the also ), one Steroid of active is which the metabolite D vitamin include

arebasedonimmunologicaldetectioninurineofthehCGspecificβ ),whichhasthesamecommonα subunitandauniqueβ tests Gonadotropinsarepituitaryhormones,whichareluteinizinghormoneandfollicle-stimulatinghormone.Thesehormonesareheterodimersthatconsistofacommonα subunit(see subunit.Itisanextremelystablehormone,andbloodhCGlevelsdoubleevery2daysduringthefirsttrimester.Accordingly,urinarylevelsofhCGalsoincreaserapidly.Pregnancy ),andthehormonesarefilteredandexcretedasintactmoleculesinurine.Athirdgonadotropinistheplacentalhormonehumanchorionicgonadotropin(hCG;see subunitandanhCG-specificβ subunitaspartoftheintacthCGheterodimer. ).Theurineofpostmenopausalwomenisanexcellentsourceofgonadotropinsbecausepostmenopausalserumgonadotropinlevelsarehighasaresultofthelossofnegativefeedbackbyovariansteroids(see

cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene cholesterol, enzymatic hormones by ( ring modifications Steroid (or a and series are a core derivative synthesized of their serves a of thereof) as

Fig. 38.8 ). reduction, types: of of lyase general and are modifications hydroxylation, cholesterol enzymatic reactions. three dehydrogenation/ The specific derivative purpose that sufficiently The modifications be recognized a is by a produce these of to cholesterol receptor. is unique to bind mineralocorticoids D vitamin the binds the receptor, bind receptor, androgens to to the Thus metabolite vitamin active and D androgen to to estrogens receptor. to bind progestins the receptor, estrogen the bind the to glucocorticoid glucocorticoids receptor, the progesterone mineralocorticoid receptor, bind of complexity of is steroid each action increased the hormone by expression multiple The forms of receptor. receptors the degree which there bind. In between and addition, hormones steroid to nonspecificity they of is some with androgen and example, degree. glucocorticoid, receptor can receptors high to progestins, and interact glucocorticoids progesterone, and with androgens For bind mineralocorticoid the glucocorticoids, some affinity, all to the steroid hormones cell are pass and As discussed hydrophobic easily. later, membranes through receptors act steroid localized regulating by gene and hormone are intracellularly Accordingly, classic expression. receptors rapid, juxtamembrane presence evidence plasma that and of membrane steroid nongenomic of mounting hormones. is of mediate hormone There the actions steroid

steroidogenic to convert types cholesterol cell the as Steroidogenic are pregnenolone, cells first to reaction is which that common pathways. all can defined and obtain lipoproteins). lipoproteins cholesterol-rich synthesis some (low-density cholesterol cholesterol have Steroidogenic often lipoproteins capacity from for but cells high-density modified further enzymatic then several reactions. is by Pregnenolone steroid nature, steroidogenic hydrophobic Because and and cell easily hormones the leave stored. are precursors can not their thus of expression steroidogenesis mobilization level uptake, activity. and at the of gene storage, and enzyme steroidogenic regulated of is of at level the and Therefore, cholesterol Steroids regulated not are •Fig. the at 38.8 A, Structureofcholesterol,theprecursorofsteroidhormones.B, Structureofsteroidhormones.

cristae tubular with Nucleus Mitochondria •Fig. 38.9 Cell. Steroidogenic of Ultrastructure a Notetheabundanceoflipiddroplets,smoothendoplasmicreticulum,andmitochondriawithtubularcristae. (FromKierszenbaumAL.Histology Pathology. to Biology: Cell An Introduction and 2nded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007.) of the secretion hormone. of level preformed of pathway when inactive of within of enzyme are implication absent. a high is clinical a steroid easily hormone levels this given precursors or blood secretion A released is steroidogenic mode that into distinct catecholamine-secreting cells. from proteinand ultrastructure The of cells is steroidogenic mitochondrial inner membrane reside smooth within membrane Steroidogenic enzymes endoplasmic the the the reticulum. of or smooth Thus endoplasmic contain reticulum typically ( and mitochondria steroidogenic extensive cells

Fig. 38.9 ). lipid also of esters. These droplets, store cells contain a cholesterol represent which

feature often and further undergo excretion) that cell. (apart involved release their hormones the original steroidogenesis in from from steroidogenic modifications steroid deactivation important after An those is of two to of For complete ovary cell the types at by cholesterol example, synthesis conversion the and to estrogen placenta requires least estrogen. a second precursor and to that the secretes This means one a converts estrogen. cell cell precursor steroid active conversion There peripheral is also hormones. considerable of example, For the estrogen. secrete testes little potent tissues express (a other for estradiol-17β estrogen). androgen) potent (a However, to and converting testosterone the muscle, adipose, enzyme hormone steroids this type hormone of particular overall the steroid equivalent of from and ( peripheral to hormone the steroidogenic steroid a conversion steroid Thus the particular cell of a is of production sum to the secretion other

Fig. ). 38.10 cortisol active D the by different conversion estrogen). class to to hormone of hormone produce adipose testosterone cortisol by a of (e.g., reversibly can another (3) of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin a of conversion conversion hormone in less tissue); but to kidneys, active be abdominal Peripheral a cortisone or activated tissue conversion 25-hydroxyvitamin followed more (2) cortisone can conversion that to (e.g., (e.g., similar (1) in of class of D); of several Peripheral plays (see endocrine conversion role disorders an important steroids in

are of not in Because steroid blood. nature, soluble nonpolar their readily hormones the but binding and the proteins to specific globulin (see transport Therefore, “ corticosteroid-binding including section transport bound proteins, also hormones hormone– albumin, sex globulin circulate steroid

of ”). Circulation the in Hormones Transport biliary modifications, from or glucuronide body conjugation Excretion hormones coupled often by liver, followed the is sulfate involves in the of to inactivating excretion. which typically excreted be water solubility the inactivated modifications steroid its the and thereby also hormone the for steroid the decrease increase These allowing of transport to affinity proteins, kidneys. by absorbed in Steroid fairly and therefore are orally. gastrointestinal readily may tract the be compounds administered

(Fig. hormones iodothyronines Thyroid are residues tyrosine made by 38.11 an coupling ether ) through linkage. that are iodinated of the structure, the by the thyronine is as Their specificity thyronine by as determined well is iodinated. where Thyroid membranes cross hormones cell •Fig. by 38.10 Peripheralconversionofsteroidhormones.

3,5,3˜5˜-Tetraiodothyronine T4) (T3) •Fig. (thyroxine, or 3,5,3˜-Triiodothyronine Structureofthyroidhormones,whichareiodothyronines. 38.11

systems. transport stored part glycoprotein of in the thyroglobulin. thyroid an molecule are They as the integral extracellularly proteins. are Thyroid blood sparingly hormones fluids soluble in transported and are in to aqueous (>99%) blood bound and serum-binding that is thyroid transport hormone–binding is A major protein globulin. thyroxine; have Thyroid (7 long half-lives days for for hormones 18 triiodothyronine). hours hormones the and as to transcription in similar hormones hormone acts receptor factor. steroid thyroid Thyroid a intracellular that are is that D the and belongs steroid hormone receptor. to same family hormone In gene receptor thyroid vitamin the fact, includes receptors hormones an administered of sufficient orally; is effective this be for intact absorbed mode Thyroid amount can therapy. be to the

Circulation Hormones Transport the in of

A blood hormones to by in regulated is in liver. of the bound fraction is are transported thyroid steroid proteins plasma a and produced that significant that manner are polypeptide free transported blood. Protein in hormones and generally and free plasma bound hormone, transport are of The equilibrium. hormone, concentrations protein in proteins. levels If drop, hormone hormone transport released the will free from be as may This expressed follows: relationship be

hormone, K of concentration bound dissociation and 38.1 protein, [P] the [HP] of plasma constant. = of = transport Equation where = concentration = [H] hormone, concentration free

the the metabolism. cellular control, Free for clearance biologically by target active uptake feedback form and organ, and on action is hormone be As in determined hormone status sometimes evaluated, levels. a consequence, is must levels free when hormone total hormonal addition to altered This transport particularly are important hormone regulated by is endocrine themselves proteins because states. disease and

binding Protein serves purposes. several hormone. of half-life the It circulating the prolongs they cells either not readily membranes the hormones if by cell would kidneys enter and protein bound. were Many or be cross excreted can to hormone hormone such, secretion. in serve of buffer The reservoir hormone and, represents as acute a changes bound such are blood, binding Some steroids, facilitates and protein in as hormones, sparingly soluble their transport.

to Hormones Cellular Responses

the as a in the ligands, binding, to to context agonists, transduced is response. in of as binding ligand-receptor cellular into receptor referred Hormones are also and that their antagonists Receptor bind in is which and response. typically inactive unable the induce an receptor a in state, receptor to cellular it to a lock receptor a hormonal resistance. of inactivation Loss results in or receptor cellular a processes. activation Constitutive of of hormone-independent activation to unregulated, leads

Hormones aspect function of every major cellular system. regulate essentially organ in every of division. cell ultimately Hormones competency control their and for growth size cells, the determining and ability death. cells to regulate or Hormones undergo cell of differentiation programmed survive the their to of composition metabolism, fluids, They ionic and body cell influence the membrane cellular potential. division, Hormones several exocytosis, including shape, cytoskeleton-associated events, cell-matrix and adhesion. complex cell-cell recycling/endocytosis, migration, cell and orchestrate function its Hormones a other receptors or the receptor of proteins, of cytosolic and membrane and hormone the specific regulate and level the expression determine may own for hormones.

given every of hormone cell coordinated, function function, does Although exert aspects any in pleiotropic type. cell every can multiple control on regulate not hormones that receptors express single Rather, only hormone. types a of in a cell subset that cellular controls hormone the functions for hormone. receptor expression given which respond to a selective cells determines Thus the state a cell differentiated to of it how Moreover, a hormone. responds determines the itself, the is structure specificity in the the of the in the resides Thus receptor of expressed. hormonal type receptor cell for and responses the hormone which hormone, typically hormone mol/L). Serum are to extremely 10−9 (10−11 concentrations low must specificity, have Therefore, affinity, as a for receptor as hormone. its cognate high well

get binding hormone-receptor response? transduced does a cellular How into receptor conformational Hormone binding changes induces in to receptor. a the changes referred to are as signal. collectively These a one intracellular The messengers. or into transduced more signal is the activation of molecules to effector cellular turn bind Messenger proteins, modify functions. in which then specific and or one final binding activation of outcome the signal pathway), and of to transduction to is (also regulation more signaling (signal), called as simply proteins cellular a the pathway The response. (transduction), hormone-receptor a of combination effector as is referred messengers referred

usually following pathways 1. characterized properties: by Signaling are the

hierarchical proteins by transducers, and effector driven in “downstream” proteins. and steps which are dependent on receptors, “upstream” effector Multiple, to or means in hormone, the constitutive within leads a pathway one that an manner. of overexpression whereas drive This general activation or can pathway unregulated components of loss the or more inactivation to resistance components

2.

the binding. of Amplification initial hormone-receptor response can is binds so to of be that achieved great when to hormone percentage small maximal a receptors. Amplification the hormone a

3.

pathways, cell least binding or multiple regulation of hormone-receptor of at one functions, multiple from Activation event. binding its signaling pathways. of For separate insulin example, activates three receptor to events activation fairly phosphorylase in functions Even cyclase), activation (e.g., transcription). downstream increased gene post-translational allow divergent multiple of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase regulation glycogen pathways (e.g., glucagon adenylate the simple of and of

4.

reactions. constitutive negative by Antagonism feedback regulated and both) reactions a a pathway and terminated by that dampened components is or can hormone or function activation This opposing (or gain loss specific of hormone-independent means signal opposing resistance. that or of cause of discussed cells or in hormones through As receptors. signal to membrane intracellular , arrangement) Membrane that the cytoskeletal have of of receptors protein. effects (e.g., are activity, synthesis rapid new enzyme on cellular processes independent kinases and (e.g., [STATs], mobile mitogen-activated Membrane (e.g., homologs of signal transcription rapidly either monophosphate–dependent cyclic transcription [Smads]). gene also can protein [MAPKs]) adenosine through mobile proteins Mothers transducer kinases kinase receptors factors decapentaplegic or [PKA], activator protein against expression regulate longer expression. gene involve chromatin remodeling in changes have effects Steroid hormones that and term slower, still that evidence pathways nongenomic Increasing effects being elucidated. steroid indicates are these well, rapid, as have but hormones

as hormone the of loss of receptor and produces essentially a is a of action, same loss functional presence absolute hormone. The for symptoms requirement an receptor proteins. the effector fairly are numerous complex intracellular addition In there and receptor, to involving pathways messengers of abnormal any diseases Accordingly, of components. abnormal transduction endocrine these pathway from both, expression can signal activity, or or arise phosphorylation/ internalization, of generation terminated be several hormonal can feedback and signals including ways, receptor, Finally, dephosphorylation, of proteosomal in hormone/receptor inhibitors. destruction

asaresultofinactivationofhormonereceptorsorpostreceptordefects.Testicular Endocrinediseasescanbebroadlycategorizedashyperfunctionorhypofunctionofaspecifichormonalpathway.Hypofunctioncanbecausedbylackofactivehormoneorbyhormone resistance 1. isadramaticformofhormoneresistanceinwhichtheandrogenreceptorismutatedandcannotbeactivatedbyandrogens.Inpatientsinwhomthediagnosisisnotmadebeforepuberty,thetestisbecomeshyperstimulatedbecauseofabrogationofthenegativefeedbackbetweenthetestisandthepituitarygland.Theincreasedandrogenlevels syndrome feminization

called a and into into organ. regulated within signaling and receptor hormone, a hormone the the extracellular of vasculature to (1) a diffusion extracellular out cells target specific space (3) binding an into of diffusion extracellular molecule, the of involves body; Endocrine signaling vascular (2) circulation secretion of the hormone of throughout and the fluid; the compartment the

2.

gland, endocrine the or the of composed of pituitary adrenal (testes tissue the glands, and pancreas, parathyroid glands, the system thyroid gland, ovaries). the gonads is the endocrine the The

3.

systems. endocrine represents feedback stability an mechanism on that control confers important Negative rhythms imposed negative loops. feedback are on Hormonal

4.

in secretory in granules. are hormones membrane-bound cells Protein/peptide and produced stored ribosomes endocrine on typically cross do They not cell

of mechanisms globulin: its cortisol J. of modulating bioavailability and implications. Corticosteroid-binding YJ, Kratzsch Bae clinical Best Metab. Endocrinol Clin Pract Res 2015;29:761-772.

havenodirectbiologicaleffectasaresultofthereceptordefect.However,theandrogensareperipherallyconvertedtoestrogens.Thusaffectedindividualsaregeneticallymale(i.e.,46,XY)buthaveastronglyfeminizedexternalphenotype,afemalesexualidentity,andusuallyasexualpreferenceformen(i.e.,heterosexualinrelationtosexualidentity).Treatmentinvolvesremovalofthehyperstimulatedtestes(whichresideintheabdomenandposeariskforcancer),estrogenreplacementtherapy,andcounselingforthepatientand,ifoneexists,thepartner/spousetoaddressinfertilityandsocial/psychologicaldistress.

and membrane– readily receptors. act cell associated membranes through

5.

and cytosol are secretory Catecholamines readily do the synthesized not cell and membranes. cross in granules membrane– associated through cell receptors. They act

6.

not hormones and stored cell membranes tissues relatively Steroid readily. cross in generally are intracellular through act They receptors.

7.

and follicular synthesized Thyroid cells in follicular thyroglobulin. stored are in hormones as colloid and cross with cell associate membranes They nuclear receptors.

8.

mediated and are receptors, intracellular act their responses hormones Some signaling membrane by pathways. rapid through

9.

Other by directly and regulating receptors transcription. hormones bind to gene nuclear act

D. Testicular Vija histological case these Ferlicot in deficiency: 5 patients. 2 post-pubertal with of a fertility patient immunohistochemical review report aspects literature of perspective in the potential S, Paun alpha-reductase evaluation L, and of of and a type Endocr BMC Disord. 2014;14:43.

this 1. Upon student questions: chapter completion the should to able the be of following answer

phases. the phase fasting requirements of opposed to digestive Explain during interdigestive the utilization different for as and by and cells the fuels different

2.

circulating secretion insulin of Integrate with structure, levels, especially glucose. and synthesis, the fuel

3.

different to level. to pathways itscellular insulin link insulin the regulated by effects at Utilize molecular the signaling

4.

insulin, fuels, synthesis, and secretion the of Integrate circulating catecholamines. and glucagon of structure, levels with the

5.

fatty the the by acids actions and storage phase. insulin free integrate the on (AAs) and during adipocytes and skeletal (FFAs), out and hepatocytes, of of glucose, digestive amino acids Map utilization muscle,

6.

adipocytes utilization counterregulatory glucose, actions by during of of (glucagon, phases. the hepatocytes, and and FFAs Map integrate the fasting the of muscle, out AAs the interdigestive catecholamines) hormones sparing the utilization on of skeletal and glucose, and and

7.

signaling ketogenesis. allow the in fuel promote phases and in interdigestive the hepatocytes and glucose and Integrate hepatic that for changes hormonal during and production utilization fasting

8.

via anorexigenic actions hypothalamus. and orexigenic Compare that signaling have pathways the

9.

by and related or Link the by relative of to several absolute absence especially pathologies obesity. those caused insulin metabolism,

The Challenge Energy Continual Demand: and Supply

including cells 40 not There that the microbiome. human nonhuman body, cells the in approximately trillion are 40 an human the trillion estimated comprise stay these alive. All to must continually cells work perform turnover) composition along of and breakdown macromolecules and work includes maintenance integrity, with structural the organelles. (i.e., and synthesis This of integrated cellular contraction fibers of work involves cells the human to diaphragm). a muscle body functions the the whole as of This that the contribute of (e.g., also and of a limited when labor, and cells Additional at tissues/organs required the spurt body maturation not bone (e.g., the pregnancy including activities, of infection exercise, outdoor puberty; growth and from to) combating manual a broken the surgery). or play; engaged serious variety cancer; systems is a damaged human breastfeeding; or is of reproductive in body and work healing of healing (but awake, energy stationary, a the average about metabolic healthy of relaxed, 70% On resting human total for rate expenditure adult their of each day ( accounts

Fig. 39.1

adenosine potential the of fuels chemical energy into this convert with (ATP). fuels, need cells perform to in work, the triphosphate form along capability To chemical convert energy work and ATP (see Cells into then mechanical the within

Fig. ). 39.1 cells continually all means need synthesize ATP and ATP. the immediate living must is and for consequently unending, This that humans weight produce in body about ATP fact, the daily. equivalent their of In on supply in form the demand to body cells. fuel all a continually some This places to in originates humans All diet, long. nonstop from fuel not day all a but the do eat manner of is to fuels. fuels intermittent paired with an intake Thus work the perform demand for constant and ATP cellular make oxidized are ATP, and cell are stored in are other used by also to the for fuels fuel, some that phase, some but for future Diet-derived on use, question. converted type types, and metabolic type depending other cell be of can fuels

metabolism, important trying In it the sense 1. organize following: thinking to of energy is make one’s around to Metabolic phases. Metabolic largely fuel fuels metabolism, hormones. in and certain energy by and daily dictated or to orchestrated phases differences abundance are by and which hourly the scarcity refer of the phase-specific usage ( general are In three metabolic there phases

Fig. or (1) the normally a hours (2) phase, ): occurs the which absorptive between interdigestive occurs meal; during the postabsorptive meals; 3 the 39.2 digest phase, digestive to (3) which takes it and 2 or to

of Sources fuels 1.

2.

during on or sleep Diet—Release stage a postabsorptive basis, of during stored exercise) prolonged (especially fast a fuel or during daily

constant stress AAs, not stored fuels division amount stimuli of ketone ATP = •Fig. 60%–70% and integrity FFAs, = Response Differentiated universal Structural metabolic 60% 40% function Resting 25%–30% and rate Growth Glucose, Output to bodies Heat EnergyOxidation Movement Overviewofenergymetabolism. 39.1

•Fig. Bloodglucoselevelsduringthethreemetabolicphases:D,digestivephase;F,fastingphase;I,interdigestivephase.B,break-fast;D,dinner;L,lunch.Red the last before arrow fasting which phase, indicatestheupperlimitfornormalfastingglucose;green 39.2 breakfast. between commonly most occurs snack and indicatesthelowerlimitfornormalfastingglucose.FFB150100BloodGlucose(mg/dL)50LDDDDII bedtime arrow if blood (In has are abstains to AM; eating fasting glucose,” fasting.) more drawn after patient extreme forms of “fasting fact, about and blood as blood physicians refer starvation a 8 the midnight “fasting,” prolonged from and value e.g., some exertion, heightened demand, occurs metabolic individuals. imposes energy regularity which of type is some that a for with and phase Physical frequency another and differs the how metabolism metabolic phase, chapter phase orchestrate This and between primarily compares these digestive differences. fasting hormones how the different

adipocytes, 2, and Metabolic skeletal of actions hepatocytes, myocytes. All in involved metabolism, cell profound three but energy on metabolism. have are these types whole-body cells impact a three cell to metabolism in of these listed are respect types with Key features

hormones. Insulin and 39.1 3, Table counterregulatory the almost digestive Metabolism orchestrated during is phase insulin. by entirely the the with During adaptions insulin drops fasting alone the associated metabolic low levels, fasting. to some of and for this allows phase, to the response fuels. integrate norepinephrine) absorbed In an absence body’s of metabolic ingested and glucagon (epinephrine, addition, catecholamines pathways stimulate that and insulin. counterregulatory their referred as based to on to hormones opposition These are hormones Growth metabolism. (see somewhat also fasting-phase contribute hormone ) to

Overview of Metabolism Integrated Energy

the diet the digestive enter Fuels the from during phase. body to (2) forms during and free converted fructose, as monomeric chapter monomeric acids in (referred glucose, both fuels: latter (3) of (the and galactose; long-chain the are diet (AAs). Our includes simply following and amino into and (1) polymeric monosaccharides, fatty forms absorption) including digestion acids FFAs); this other ethanol. The as also fuels include such diet may

Glucose,fed•UtilizationforATPphase•Storageasglycogen

Glucose,fasting•Breakdownofglycogenandphasereleaseofglucoseintoblood

FFA/TG,fedphase•MakeFFAsfromglucosebyDNL

FFA/TG,fasting•UtilizationforATPphase•UtilizationtoproduceKBs

pathwaysAAs,fastingphase•Utilizationforgluconeogenesis SecretionofVLDLAAs,fedphase•Utilizationformultipleanabolic

UtilizationforketogenesisKBs,fedphase•ShouldbeabsentKBs,fastingphase•SynthesisfromFFAsandsome

AA,aminoacid;ATP,adenosinetriphosphate;DNL,denovolipogenesis;FFA,freefattyacid;G3P,glycerol-3-phosphate;KB,ketonebody;TG,triglyceride;VLDL,verylow-densitylipoprotein.

and partitioned digestive used different purposes. the fuels absorbed During are for phase, during in Insulin every phase. metabolism the later) aspect essentially detail regulates digestive (discussed of Glucose ( (i.e., phase primary used the production) fuel energy during ATP for digestive is the

Fig. ). 39.3A is fuel universal perform a Glucose following: 1. most in that considered can cells the

2.

(G6P) “activate” hexokinases. or by through converting glucose and glucose-6-phosphate into one more the imported “trap” of glucose activity pass now (“activation”). is substrate GLUT several a enzymatic through (“trapping”) cannot for transporters pathways G6P and

3.

metabolize or ATP a requiring mitochondria without via to pathway, the pyruvate which glycolytic small O2. G6P of yields amount to Cells export lactate as lactate ferment without mitochondria pyruvate waste. and it then to acetyl Most form oxaloacetate and by dehydrogenase, pyruvate with pyruvate CoA into citrate. mitochondria, import condense CoA convert acetyl to cells tricarboxylic (TCA) the to Citrate cycle oxaloacetate. is through acid back cycled (NADH). pyruvate This dinucleotide metabolism TCA nicotine triphosphate CO2 the generates dinucleotide of along with waste through flavin cycle guanosine as adenine and hydride adenine (FADH2) releases (GTP) hydride and through are absolutely ultimately of and to FADH2 that system process large and phosphorylation generate by the used O2. amounts relatively ATP oxidative transport on dependent electron is a NADH eye) energy. with (e.g., or lens absolutely erythrocytes, dependent cells for mitochondria the of are no few very Cells glucose on (KBs), normal use use no only fuels. bodies ketone has FFAs brain it as glucose under and can in of marginal of lactate, oxidation AAs essentially for the the that capacity conditions, for only and capacity Additionally phases, nausea, in caused absolutely blood minimal cardiac nervous (CNS)-related response sweating, threshold autonomic metabolic a Thus (e.g., a glucose is of above system avoid all symptoms, hypoglycemia-activated central beginning arrhythmias). necessary those with to maintenance by certain loss coordinated blood even symptoms by cognitive glucose coma caused neuroglycopenia continues progression dysfunction, function, ultimately and of (e.g., fall, motor to to If

PROT 1 FFA A,4,5 A,4,5 ATP GLY G4-mG4-mG4-m •Fig. ATP GLY LACT 2,3 10 ATP G4-iG4-i 12 Digestive Fasting 3 11 1 G2 G1G1 B. A. HEPATOFFA Phase B,4,5 CNS2,4,5112 ATP Phase HEPATOADIPOSKM2,4,5 G6P KBs 12 G’OL G6P 6 RBCSKMG6P G6P ATP GLY ADIPOB,4,5 TG 2,4,5 ATP13 G6P TG 6 G3G3 G3G1 G2G2 1 B,4,5 G4-iG4-i Glucose G6P G6P ATP GLY 8 9 RBCCNSDietG6PG6P G’OL3P 11 GlucoseATP A,4,5 11 ATP 7,82,4,52,3,4,5 11 ATP KBs TG AAs glucose digestive phase. the 39.3 utilization of A, Overview during of pyruvatedehydrogenase;5,oxidativephosphorylation;6,glycogensynthesis;7,denovolipogenesis;8,esterificationofFFAstoG’OL3PtoformTG.B, energy phase. during fasting GLUTtransporters:G1,GLUT1;G2,GLUT2;G3,GLUT3;G4-m,functionalGLUT4localizedtocellmembrane.Celltypes:ADIPO,adipocyte;CNS,centralnervoussystemneuronsandglia;HEPATO,hepatocyte;RBC,redbloodcell;SKM,skeletalmyocyte.Metabolites:G6P,glucose-6-phosphate;GLY,glycogen;G’OL3P,glycerol-3-phosphate;TG,triglyceride.Metabolicreactions/pathways:1,hexokinase/glucokinase;2,glycolysis;3,lactatedehydrogenase;4,TCAcycle± metabolism Overview the GLUTtransporters:seelegendforA,plus:G4-I,inactiveGLUT4withintracellularlocalization.Celltypes:seelegendforAMetabolites:seelegendforA,plus:AAs,aminoacids;FFA,freefattyacid;G’OL,glycerol;KBs,ketonebodies;LACT,lactate;PROT,protein.Metabolicreactions/pathways:seelegendforA,plus:9,glycogenolysis;10,gluconeogenesis;11,G6Pase;12,ketogenesis;13,proteolysis;A,β-oxidation;B,ketolysis.

can death) occur. and blood phases maintaining metabolism the interdigestive of dL that meet above challenge 60 (see and must glucose during This fasting the means mg/ whole-body

Fig. 39.2 green arrow). ,

osmotic avoid to as imbalances reactions glucose 100 On as glucose-induced lead maintained damage that function the to fasting a (see side be forms < (i.e., nonenzymatic) glucose of must (both certain below to cell mg/dL) well hand, blood multiple maximal threshold other levels and enzymatic

Fig. , arrow). 39.2 red

mellitus. tolerance, retinopathy, peripheral andvaluesat125mg/dLandaboveareevidenceofdiabetes and glucose thatoccurinpoorlycontrolleddiabetesmellitus.Thereforewhole-bodymetabolismduringallmetabolicphasesmustmeetthechallengeofminimizingthemagnitudeanddurationoftheriseinbloodglucoseassociatedwithingestionofamealandmustmaintainbloodglucosebelowasafemaximalthresholdof100mg/dLduringallothertimes.Fastingbloodglucosebetween100and124mg/dLisindicativeofimpaired causepathologicalchangesinintracellularandmembranecomponentsaswellasinsecretedmoleculesthateithersignaland/ormakeuptheextracellularmatrix.Indeed,glucotoxicityistherootcauseofthenephropathy, neuropathy Theendotheliumofthemicrovasculatureofthekidneyandretina,aswellastheendotheliumofthevasanervosumoftheautonomicnervoussystem,areparticularlysensitivetohyperglycemia.Chronicallyhighbloodglucoseresultsinpathologicallyhighintracellularlevelsofglucoseintheseendothelialcells,resultinginalteredproteinandlipidstructure,oxidativestress,andalteredsignalingpathways.Theseinsults,collectivelyreferredtoasglucotoxicity,

and all by throughout continually is erythrocytes metabolic Glucose brain consumed phases. the during skeletal digestive primarily adipocytes and the only. In contrast, myocytes, use phase glucose hepatocytes, into ATP pyruvate production oxidative and product hepatocytes, glycolysis myocytes, (see of (end in Insulin TCA stimulates phosphorylation of and adipocytes the glycolysis) and cycle skeletal entry for

Table 39.1).

into its not membrane. glucose the the the Hepatocytes insulin isoform by regulated of insertion for GLUT2 cell which express transporter, is adipocytes contrast, skeletal myocytes isoform. GLUT4 express In and the with vesicles inactive GLUT4 state storage in intracellular synthesized exists an GLUT4 Newly in (G4-i

Fig. 39.3B ). the it an where in as to glucose membrane, GLUT4 can transporter function of cell translocation (G4-m active induces Insulin

Fig. 39.3A).

(see the glycogen, of phosphorylation phase during digestive its by convert After the glucose to storage hepatocytes the into form, glucokinase, some imported G6P

Fig.

). 39.3A of Similarly, glycogen. converts some glucose from imported G6P the muscle skeletal into store Hepatocytes can glycogen. only a glucose finite amount of as (DNL). of FFAs Hepatocytes novo through the into lipogenesis convert also glucose de excess process (TG), TG esterified (see to to glycerol-3-phosphate as intrahepatic during the form FFAs digestive triglyceride typically phase (G3P) are These accumulates which

Fig. ). 39.3A signaling, steatosis) intrahepatic As hepatic discussed result insulin fatty for resistance. liver, accumulation an excessive TG later of insulin in can (i.e.,

nucleotides and acids, are lipids. anabolic molecules, the used regenerate degraded multiple proteins, in complex pathways digestive to During AAs AAs, other glutathione, nucleic including and phase,

fuel type terms carbon most the of fuel. in efficient molecules per FFAs ATP of made represent in However, mitochondria. of the effectively with utilization utilization FFAs competes glucose High a and hyperglycemia. of glucose would thereby levels surge, digestive during to contributing the FFA duration greater magnitude promote the phase their FFAs enterocyte. packaging prevented within TG chylomicrons of intestinal and circulation an in from entering the average by most Thus the into reesterification are meal into the the Chylomicrons enter enter vessels, are and ultimately lymphatic blood. secreted, adipose adipocytes, FFAs circulation, the TG tissue reesterified they (discussed imported as TG Once chylomicrons detail from where chylomicronassociated convey the for in intracellular are (as released through in by later). storage general to TG) the and lipolysis,

independently phase, digestive myocytes, adipocytes of During other. function the skeletal largely each hepatocytes, and cell the during the phase integrated three to blood for maintain alternative fasting cell adequate glucose providing contrast each become type while these levels highly of substrates types actions In energy (see

Fig.

39.3B

39.1 Table

that maintain cells body the ATP without a food mg/dL all fasting glucose CNS blood during after (an to earlier, ingestion stated phase). during weeks thus can of exception last require brain days must or phases, the of production As prolonged KBs for [discussed glucose (e.g., and the is erythrocytes) metabolic mitochondria and use later] 60 even above rule the cells this blood the fasting and sparing. of glucose to maintenance glucose phase: processes contribute hepatic Two glucose general production during metabolic based glucose is turn pathways. in Hepatic production on two rapid of process in is the first catabolic The glycogenolysis 9 (pathway

Fig. ). 39.3B the (pathway enzyme in Hepatocytes (G6Pase) express glucose-6-phosphatase 11

Fig. glucose, a transporter. can G6P the through GLUT back them 39.3B cell allowing to bidirectional convert exit then ), which to derived Release glycogenolysis from of glucose short is relatively

Source blood of

24.00Glycogenolysis 12.00 DietaryGluconeogenesis0 Breakfast •Fig. Relativecontributionsofthethreesourcesofbloodglucoserelativetomealsandtimeofday.Theinsetboxstressesreplacementofglycogenolysiswithgluconeogenesisduringthefastingphase(i.e.,sleep). 39.4 Biochemistry. (AdaptedfromBaynesJW,DominiczakJH[eds].Medical 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby/Elsevier;2009.) lived exhausted hours. glycogen becomes 8 liver supply by because about the to glucose gradual the gluconeogenesis second production fasting the 10 contribution in pathway (pathway The of hepatic phase metabolic is during

Fig.

39.3B ). throughout glycogenolysis, The gluconeogenesis gluconeogenesis of but slower during ( phase than continues a fasting essentially is fasting onset nonstop

Fig. ). 39.4 “gluconeogenic” especially AAs, Gluconeogenesis glycerol. requires lactate, and precursors, fasting How phase? these precursors the during supplied are produced Lactate is continually erythrocytes. by and glycolytic this exercise. muscle and aerobic interdigestive Lactate stomach”), by cardiac is muscle more “on exercise to is also phases skeletal much although a skeletal during fibers fasting lactate of full by frequently during muscle to as produced opposed occur (exercise tends during utilized the phase of the the overall the phase (see during over catabolism switches to fasting anabolism additionally digestive But general a

Fig.

). 39.3B FFAs AAs lipolysis with general of to proteolysis net and state. TGs glycerol, fasting undergo release during is the a adipocytes there and the within liver, they gluconeogenic glycerol are where AAs gluconeogenesis. used from for subsequently The circulate are released and and cells the to anabolic adipocytes Thus with myocytes hepatocytes. catabolic integration an requires gluconeogenesis skeletal in and of gluconeogenesis in pathways as eventually into Gluconeogenesis precursors liver. the continue flow as and can glycogenolysis supplants long

that sparing fasting circulating Glucose other general process of the maintenance levels during to contributes glucose adequate phase. the represents of potentially Glucose but skeletal the switching glucose glucose. sparing nongluconeogenic utilization the represents of a to fuel means types, in most consumer single fuel from largest which especially muscle, in cell intracellular transporter muscle skeletal of exists because adipocytes isoform by the greatly the in uptake an glucose reduced and is GLUT4 First,

Regulation 39 CHAPTER Metabolism Energy of Hormonal

Fig. fasting phase. the during 39.3B)

muscle and be Thus to need to alternative delivered adipocytes. fuels skeletal

gluconeogenesis KBs. (i.e., nongluconeogenic be the FFAs are cannot used The for and fuels by liver) are FFAs

Fig. cussed later). 39.3B packaging intrahepatic after TGs into released also of are hepatocytes are KBs produced from by acetyl

FFAs and ketogenic which in from originates CoA, turn

AAs, both the fasting of become which abundant during phase. sparing of lipolysis Thus FFAs. release stored depends metabolism, and on which of in TGs results catabolic adipocyte glucose acetyl hepatocytes, CoA. imported produce FFAs to FFAs by use are which available in degradation Protein for ketogenesis. pyruvate to for carbons for and sion of High intramitochondrial to: not of promote (2) of synthesis CoA to promote oxaloacetate acetyl (3) serves the KBs (1) conver in CoA, gluconeogenesis, synthesis levels hepatocyte of conversion only provides ample pyruvate inhibit but ATP (see acetyl

Fig. ). 39.3B CNS After sparing energy, further start several can glucose KBs days fasting, thereby the of for erythrocytes. for using muscle. other mitochondria with Many especially use production, ATP cell for along types skeletal KBs with FFAs

and glycogenolysis, and that as by well drive lipogenesis, liver The the catecholamines. esis, phase during are production VLDL gluconeogen as hormones hepatic fasting ketogenesis the glucagon the glucagon. removes insulin low of levels another pancreatic the the glucose, secretion that In and inhibition presence of insulin fall, hormone, by of a ratio. the glucose causes diminished in rise circulating glucagon-to-insulin blood Thus hepatocyte the of by Hepatocytes primary glucagon, organ glyco and ( directly the target FFA oxidation, are genolysis, which gluconeogenesis, ketogenesis drives

Fig. 39.5B).

reinforce epinephrine of glucagon. ) and can actions the innervation from sympathetic the from the hypoglycemia, well in the as glucagon to Adipocytes express or to stresses. that receptors β2-and certain receptor, catecholamines also respond response β3-adrenergic as exertion, is muscle does respond target but to glucagon stimulation Skeletal a receptors. of not catecholamines through β2-adrenergic intracellular Ca++ responsive is activates the during increases which ratio, intracellular to adenosine an AMP (AMP):ATP physical in muscle which and to Skeletal exertion/movement, increase very , kinase. monophosphate

are by during are active digestive phase upregulated that the later). insulin-dependent most Finally, important it to pathways phase that fasting the during opposed is the pathways understand (discussed myocytes, and the challenges insulin the skeletal phase. hepatocytes, contributes signaling metabolic to also to adipocytes ability Thus integrated response of an the display to of attenuation of fasting

•Fig. 39.5 Stainingofendocrineisletforinsulinwithinbetacells;thesearethemostnumerouscelltypeandareprimarilylocatedcentrallywithintheislet.C, TheisletsofLangerhans(endocrinepancreas)fromrat.A, Stainingofendocrineisletforglucagonwithalphacells;thesearemuchlessnumerousthanbetacellsandareprimarilylocatedalongtheperipheryoftheislet. Pancreashistologyshowingexocrineaciniwheredigestiveenzymesareproducedtobedeliveredtotheduodenumviathepancreaticduct,andanendocrineisletwhereinsulinandglucagonareproducedanddeliveredtothecirculationuponuptakebyarichcapillarybed.B,

•Fig. ProinsulinisprocessedbyprohormoneconvertasesintoamatureinsulinmoleculewithtwopeptidestrandslinkedbyH-bondsandaCpeptide.Botharesecretedinequimolarratios. 39.6 and (FromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP[eds].Endocrine Reproductive Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby/Elsevier;2013. Secretory S S A Insulin C S S Proinsulin S S Converting S bonds B formed S-S reticulum S peptide S A S )C Endoplasmic Golgi peptide S “folded” enzymes S granule B

islets of the ( pancreas constitute Langerhans The endocrine

Fig. ). 39.6 ). making spread the 2% to exocrine islets mass up of pancreas million Approximately are pancreatic 1% 1 throughout about the (see islets cell each different are composed types, The a several producing of hormone. insulin up Beta of islets produce of the the cells (see make the three-fourths cells about and hormone

Fig. 39.5B ). cells islet secrete glucagon about cells (see and 10% of Alpha account for

Fig. ). 39.5C within Other cell endocrine hormone will further. respective of discussed types are products their thus be importance reside or but and unclear islets, marginal not

the pancreatic from tissue. to the islets flow blood to flow surrounding somewhat is exocrine Blood autonomous cells, islets which alpha cells, the predominate center of passes and flow predominate beta which the the the from delta in periphery (see through islet, Blood to in

Fig.

). 38.5B-C first affected secretion. cells are circulating cells, alpha insulin insulin by the inhibits Consequently the glucagon which in

metabolism primary anabolic during digestive hormone the is that Insulin regulation of phase. dominates the Insulin IGF-II) that insulinlike and hormone (IGF-I, a factors growth is to II gene includes family the belongs I protein and relaxin. that encodes insulin preproinsulin. The gene endoplasmic Insulin the preproinsulin, is the which enters reticulum. synthesized proinsulin as hormone as is to converted packaged the is Proinsulin in

Fig. of Regulation Energy CHAPTER cell Metabolism 705 39 Hormonal of (-) ATP • 4 membrane sulfonylurea is the well stimulus insulin enhanced of as as 39.7 primary secretion drugs GLP-1 inhibitors. Glucose and analogues/DPP-4 by is explanation for secretion in See of insulin numbered steps (GSIS). text glucose-stimulated

Golgi into granules. membrane-bound apparatus secretory contains peptide. insulin AA of the plus (connecting) sequence C Proinsulin the vesicles. secretory The packaged within (proprotein proinsulin are proteases proinsulin with convertases) that cleave chains, of connected generates disulfide which Proteolytic a peptide two hormone, clips out and bridges the mature an by consists processing α β chain, ( and two C chain the

Fig. 39.7). A disulfide chain. bridge is the α third within contained in stored in crystals. is secretory Insulin zinc-bound granules are granule’s contents stimulation, to the by outside the the cell released of On exocytosis. along Equimolar are of peptide amounts amounts released, of and C proinsulin. mature with insulin small biological peptide assessing activity known has insulin C production. no useful in endogenous but is from easier (making been insulin insofar stable in peptide as distinguish more to than blood peptide. it injected the C assay) helps production insulin endogenous latter purified from insulin, C is has and

cleared 5 a of and short about circulation. rapidly the has from half-life minutes is Insulin liver, the is degraded tissues. in by It other and (IDE; kidney, insulin-degrading also called enzyme insulinase) enters the liver hepatic it circulation. vein, is to exposed insulin the peripheral secreted into portal IDE Because is it before insulin half degraded is liver. leaving the About before the to insulin are less significantly tissues serum liver. peripheral concentrations than the exposed Thus activity now human insulin duration analogues and and action and of with of characteristics Recombinant of are available. insulin onset different speed peak to 30 10 after reach food insulin Serum to levels peak and of rise normally in 45 a begin minutes ingestion minutes. within to lowers The values. insulin higher blood level serum baseline rapidly glucose

that stimulus to glucose-stimulated the follows Glucose insulin the is in secretion insulin secretion in primary of discussion (“steps” refer described

Fig. 39.8 ). cells the glucose by facilitated (step 1). transporter is of Entry beta into GLUT2 phosphorylated Once cell, (step the to glucokinase glucose it enters 2). by the is G6P low-affinity hexokinase beta directly is glucose cell insulin secretion. correlated turn the to phosphorylation, rate of the beta is to rate sensor” the glucose as to the is entry which Glucokinase because of related in of “glucose referred K+ : increases oxidative (step of ratio ADP phosphorylation an 3) glycolysis, through and G6P cells and closes intracellular Metabolism 4). (step the cycle, ATP by ATP-sensitive channel the TCA beta in membrane the 5), voltage-gated which cell Ca++ opens This beta depolarization (step 6). channels of results (step activates 7). Increased exocytosis of intracellular insulin/proinsulincontaining (step [Ca++] microtubule-mediated secretory granules

has effect glucose greater insulin glucose. than a secretion injected on Ingested due effect, This called phenomenon, glucose incretin hormones incretin gastrointestinal is by from of to the stimulation the tract. lumen the in ( the 1 peptide L by released to is of relevant which clinically glucose hormone incretin glucagon-like cells One (GLP-1), ileal in is ileum response

Fig. ). 39.9 cells. hormone, beta to a binds on circulation enters (GLP1R) receptor the GLP-1 and ultimately Gs-coupled As the GLP1 A pathway This on (PKA) cyclase/protein secretion. the of insulin Ca++ amplifies effects intracellular kinase signaling GLP1R/Gs/adenylyl is peptidase the 4 degraded rapidly by in GLP-1 circulation dipeptidyl (DPP-4).

Physiology & 706 Levy SECTION8Berne •Fig. AA adrenal (Eating CELL Hypoglycemia) (Exercise, °cAMP acids a innervation innervation Norepinephrine, ingesting Secondaryregulatorsofinsulinsecretion.Seetextforexplanationofabbreviations.Specific amino 39.8 transporter meal) M3R a epinephrine (Gq)ACh & Parasympathetic ATP ˛ ˜CA2+ Sympathetic (Anticipating meal) medulla ? ˜cAMP ˛2AR Agonists Agonists ˙2AR ˙2AR (Gi) (Gs) ˛2AR Insulin

Fig. 39.10 ). is dampened receptors. primarily α2-adrenergic through sympathetic secretion Insulin by regulation autonomic adenosine or by norepinephrine Binding channels decreases (cAMP), cyclic of Ca++ possibly closing receptors α2-adrenergic to mono-phosphate epinephrine (see

Fig. ). 39.6 Adrenergic hypoglycemia, of insulin especially against inhibition protect to during exercise. serves also in β2-adrenergic Gs-coupled express receptors Beta cells play insulin secretion. role promoting minor a that normally oppose the insulin the however, antagonize administered in and diabetics. insulin on of actions of agonists overall actions Note, may metabolism receptor β-adrenergic that the receiving exogenous may β-adrenergic receptor patients Conversely, episodes β-blockers antagonists) in increase of insulin. severity hypoglycemic (i.e.,

subunits. TheATP-sensitiveK+ channelisanoctamericproteincomplexthatcontainsfourATP-bindingsubunitscalledSUR drugs, channelandarewidelyusedasoralhypoglycemicstotreathyperglycemiainpatientswithpartiallyimpairedbetacellfunction.Hypoglycemiaisasignificantsideeffectofsulfonylureadrugsifusedinexcessorincorrectlyincombinationwithotherdrugs,owingtoinappropriatelyhighreleaseofinsulin. Thesesubunitsareboundbysulfonylurea whichalsoclosetheK+

arecurrentlyapprovedfortreatmentofpatientswithtype2DMwithsomebetacellfunction.Importantlythesedrugsarepermissive BothDPP-4–resistant DPP-4 andinhibitors of analogues of GLP-1 totheactionsofglucoseonthebetacellandthusonlyweaklyincreaseinsulinsecretionintheabsenceofglucose.ThusGLP-1analoguesinducehypoglycemiamuchlessfrequentlythansulfonylureadrugs.

the is ). family tyrosine The of kinase a (RTK) (InsR) gene insulin member receptor receptor (see protein activation in which kinase on on cell of has Most the involve turn pleiotropic actions metabolism insulin of Akt, of metabolism. the actions

InsR expressed with each homodimer, the membrane a containing tyrosine monomer cell kinase a as The on is

• • protein • • formation for DNA, as synthesis from AAs synthesis Macromolecular actions RAF Akt pathways lipids) Anabolic Mitogenic actions • Cell of Metabolic ERK MAPK/ FFAs actions Storage proliferation/renewal & Merabolic PI3K RNA, B of actions insulin PIP2PIP3 of TG glucose (e.g., anabolic Utilization RAS/ IRS Protein ATP • Organelle InsRec

Protein ˜ SREBP-1C Gluconeo-genesis, PDH, Glycogenesis, phoshatases Akt PPP, Translocation Ketogenesis FFA mTORC1 Glucogenolysis Gluconeogensis DNL Gycolysis, •Fig. autophagy Glycolysis, GLUT Protein oxidation FOX01 VLDL DNL Glucose 4 Lipolysis synthesis export import Proteolysis 39.9 A,Structureofdimerizedinsulinreceptorincellmembrane.B,SimplifieddiagramoftheAktkinaseandMAPKpathwaysdownstreamoftheInsR.C,Summarizedactionsofinsulin/InsR-activatedAktkinase.

differentiation promoter cell and (NeuroD1/β2). 2 nuclear (IPF-1), 1 E-box trans-activator HNF-1β, factor neurogenic insulin 1/beta Insulingeneexpressionandisletcellbiogenesisaredependentonseveraltranscriptionfactorsspecifictothepancreas,liver,andkidney.Thesetranscriptionfactorsincludehepatocyte 4α HNF-1α, factor (HNF-4α), of Aheterozygousnullmutationofoneofthesefactorsresultsinprogressivelyinadequateproductionofinsulinandmaturity-onset alsogiverisetoMODY. the young diabetes beforetheageof (MODY) 25.MODYischaracterizedbynonketotichyperglycemia,oftenasymptomatic,thatbeginsinchildhoodoradolescence.Inadditiontothefivetranscriptionfactors,mutationsinglucokinase

•Fig. 39.10 Divergentproteolyticcleavagepatternsoftheproglucagonmolecule.GLUC,glucagon;GLP,glucagon-likepeptide;GRPP,glucagon-relatedpolypeptide.

(see side cytosolic domain the on

Fig. 39.10A ). Binding the to induces of insulin the subunits. of receptor cross-phosphorylation These the InsR). are proteins then IRS receptor substrate phosphotyrosine insulin bound are by proteins (i.e., the residues (IRS) to “recruited” InsR the phosphoinositide-3-kinase The the the themselves by IRS then to are which (PI3K) recruits to IRS InsR bound protein on tyrosines, specific proteins (see phosphorylated

Fig. 39.10B ). converts to (PIP2) phosphoinositol-3,4,5-trisphosphate PI3K phosphoinositol-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP3). the proteins recruits that lipid is to membrane. PIP3 an informational kinase where cell this protein membrane becomes Akt activated. it the pathway, PIP3 recruits to In in kinase signaling numerous insulin actions muscle, protein of adipocytes, including skeletal This (see and Akt orchestrates pleiotropic metabolic the pathway hepatocytes,

Fig. 1. 39.10C

to glucose of glucose the adipocytes; cell import thereby 2. translocation skeletal membrane, and into transporter GLUT4 of myocytes the allowing

which in protein the enzymes phosphatases, target activation multiple regulate of insulin activity turn in metabolic of cells; all 3.

the (mTORC1), inhibit rapamycin promotes protein insulin in may which 1 target target complex protein cells; of and mechanistic complex of synthesis proteosomal-mediated activation 4. degradation protein

sterol protein activation 1 element of transcription binding factor response (SREBP1). the

and is FAs, glucose from effects important lipogenesis the SREBP1 orchestrates it and especially for where on excessive phospholipids, novo (DNL) for and TGs fructose. ingested de liver, production glycolysis of insulin which activation as stimulates activates well as InsR/Akt through also directly SREBP1. indirectly signaling mTORC1, of SREBP1 the induces also catalyzes pathway arm that pentose the the first enzyme of phosphate in SREBP1 (PPP). the oxidative reaction This generates reaction required DNL. for the coenzyme is which NADPH,

the FOXO1. inactivation of transcription factor 5. nuclear promotes of of FOXO1. FOXO1 Aktmediated phosphorylation exclusion absence the expression insulin/Akt of signaling, In genes encoding of FOXO1 induces

VLDL and export. assembly of will All detail be Akt more discussed actions later. these in of cells pathway InsR proliferation/renewal the kinase through also some (see protein Ras/Raf/mitogen-activated promotes (MAPK) target The

Fig. 39.10B ). some The in participates pathway metabolic also MAPK regulation.

primarily liver blood that hormone on Glucagon primary levels, effects its counterregulatory through is output. the glucose increases glucose also oxidation Glucagon in ketogenesis enhances intramitochondrial fatty hepatocytes. and acid

family. Glucagon secretin is a member the gene of The GLP-1, harbors for sequences preproglucagon glucagon, the AA ( and precursor GLP-2

Fig. ). 39.11 a is the produce to the cell-specific in alpha cell in Preproglucagon proteolytically glucagon. peptide cleaved manner circulates half-life unbound of has minutes. 6 a Glucagon and short form in an about of one as The glucagon is much degradation glucagon site in liver, as the pass. which predominant of 80% circulating degrades to hepatic hormone before reaches the never enters and the systemic glucagon carried circulation, of portal the systemic portion a reaching vein Because is large liver circulation. the the liver with glucagon, effects The of lesser adipocytes. organ target the primary on is muscle express not the glucagon receptor. Skeletal does

cyclase glucagon that levels. receptor increases adenylyl G The thus activity and receptor coupled is a Gs-linked is cAMP protein– Glucagon PKA actions through signaling. exerts rapid many transcription transcription also as element such exerts response some through CREB factors protein. Glucagon phosphorylation binding) activation effects and (cAMP of

The net glucose. insulin-glucagon pathways of determines metabolic ratio the effect blood on in of secretion decline for blood major glucagon A a is glucose. stimulus so glucagon blood low Insulin has secretion, an glucose inhibits

removal of ( glucagon Cell Energy secretion Insulin inhibition insulin of by Metabolism indirect effect CHAPTER on 709 Hormonal 39 ˜ Regulation through

Fig. ). 39.12 direct on effect secretion. recent alpha glucagon a indicates glucose also Some increase low has that (+) evidence cells to

inhibit which catecholamines, of via stimulate of α2-adrenergic receptors, via Circulating glucose (see secretion glucagon receptors insulin secretion β2-adrenergic

Fig. of promote 39.12 secretion AAs Serum low) (If glucagon. protects a meal only stimulates whereas a This glucagon insulin will of meal insulin. against both (which carbohydrate means protein and hypoglycemia), levels increase glucose postprandial

(–) Catecholamines: and Epinephrine Norepinephrine

catechol- are epinephrine factors norepinephrine. amines counterregulatory the major The and other is released ). nerve adrenal the postganglionic Epinephrine primary endings ), is (see product the norepinephrine whereas sympathetic (see from of medulla Catecholamines and concentrations, are decreased exercise. of forms in response to various glucose stress, released (i.e., hypoglycemia) glucose Decreased Fig. are • primarily levels neurons Integrated an catecholamines and sensed which integrated the initiate 39.11 epinephrine). factors and CNS, regulation in of insulin by by (norepinephrine, blood the counterregulatory glucagon glucose

Fructose-1,6-bisP • OA Fig. Acetyl CoA (“D” phases. hepatocytes digestive (“F” 39.12 Metabolic and in numbers) fasting during numbers) pathways carboxylase; synthase; fatty and Reactions/pathways: glycogen acetyl 2F, glucose-6-phosphate in 10D carnitine/palmitoyl CoA CoA CoA malonyl glycogenolysis; inhibition transporter, phosphate/fatty synthesis; and carboxykinase; 3F, phosphoenolpyruvate 5D, of G6Pase; pyruvate into 11D, 2D, lyase; involved acid dehydrogenase; 9D, fatty 13F, CoA mitochondrial glycerol CoA) fatty glucokinase; CPT1 carboxylase; acyl esterification on fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase; (Mal 9F, 6D, outer membrane; acetyl acyl to other 12D, acyl enzymes dehydrogenase; 1D, decarboxylase; 1; CoA. formation 6F, ATP-citrate (CPT1) 7F, of transporter kinase; 4D, 3D, CoA 1 1F; movement pyruvate 8D, mitochondrion by through CoA and malonyl phosphofructokinase pyruvate TG; beta-oxidation transferase of

through the response hypothalamus. sympathetic β3-adrenergic located adipose, later). receptors metabolic of on liver primarily β2-, by (see direct actions are and The α1-, and tissue catecholamines mediated muscle, intracellular receptors β-adrenergic cAMP. increase and Like receptor, β3) (β2 glucagon the by expressed the liver. organs, is some especially The receptor also α1-adrenergic

Regulation Pathways Metabolic Specific Hormonal and Reactions of

main that contribute and in section pathways discusses the to adipocytes myocytes, metabolism. integrated skeletal This hepatocytes, is more the textbooks. student description, referred detailed For biochemistry even to

vs. Fasting Hepatocyte Metabolism: Digestive Phases

catecholamines) in key of (and insulin steps metabolic the to glucagon are (refer by follows the as and regulated liver Some

Fig. phase): denotes denotes phase, D fasting F 39.13 digestive reactions; numbered 1. for glucose. Trapping intracellular vs. releasing (reaction glucokinase hepatic expression utilization glucose increasing of increases transporters, 1D). retention Although by enters through insulin-independent insulin glucose of and hepatocytes GLUT2 a and as expression factor through in the element–binding state several fed involved increase which 1C TG increased the of in protein synthesis. “master switch” activation regulatory glucokinase acts of sterol Insulin (SREBP1C), increases and transcription glucose expression coordinately utilization levels enzymes gene to the the 1F), then (reaction the express via Hepatocytes glucose, hepatocyte G6P G6Pase exit to which enzyme transporter. converts GLUT2 can which also back by gene prevents glucose G6Pase. of phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cycle the enzyme the repressing futile of Insulin expression expression The stimulates transcription G6Pase. factor of FOXO1 gene Akt phosphorylates inactivates FOXO1. and Insulin-activated kinase stimulate fasting active whereas phase, inactive does and During the expression. G6Pase is not FOXO1 expression, and promotes is SREBP1C glucokinase SREBP1C FOXO1 by The absence are of the and regulated or regulation thus insulin. presence reciprocal of primarily

2.

synthesis Glycogen vs. breakdown. increased of activity. synthesis expression Insulin through increase high synthase indirectly levels increases allosterically glycogen glucokinase glycogen of because G6P stimulation protein thereby phosphatases, of (reaction 2D). specific of and insulin Through activation synthase glycogen dephosphorylation promotes of glycogen also 2F). through inhibition (reaction phosphorylase the glycogenolysis synthesis glycogen prevents Insulin cycle futile to of and glycogen turn phosphorylates phosphorylase. phosphorylase activates Glucagon-activated phosphorylates PKA kinase, in which

3.

Increasing glycolysis.

and A. 1 fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase. inhibiting phosphofructokinase Activating (PFK1) •Fig. Insulin increases the activity phosphorylates of PFK1, which Insulinandcounterregulatoryhormoneregulationofphosphofructokinase1(PFK1;reaction3Din 39.13

andfructose-1,6-bisphosphatase(F1,6BPase;reaction3Fin Fig.39.12)

(–) kinase F6P throughchangingtheactivityofthebifunctionalenzymephosphofructokinase2/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase(PKFBP)andthusthelevelsoftheallostericregulatorymetabolitefructose-2,6-bisphosphate(F-2,6-bisP).Insulin/Akt-activated NE/E-activated & F-2,6-bisP (+) F-1,6-bisPATP, HepatocytecytoplasmPKFBP (–) citrate •Fig. Fig.39.12) AMP PFK2 protein PFK1 F-1,6BPase A (PKA) phosphatase F-2,6BPase PKFBP-P protein Glucagon Skeletal (reaction 1D 1F Metabolisminskeletalmuscleduringdigestive(“D”reactions)vs.fasting(“F”reactions)phases.Reactions/pathways:1D,translocationofGLUT4transportertocellmembrane;1F,lossoftranslocationofGLUT4transportertocellmembrane;2D,glycogensynthesis;2F,glycogenolysis;3D,glycolysisandlactatedehydrogenase,orpyruvatedehydrogenase/TCAcycle/oxidativephosphorylation(OxPhos),dependingonmusclefibertype;3F,β-oxidationofFFAsorketolysisfollowedbytheTCAcycleandOxPhos.GLUT4 storage CoAATP vesicle to Transporters 3D 2F Cell 3D). myocyte GlucoseGlucoseGlycogen fructose-1,6-bisphosphate fructose-6-phosphate GLUT4 FFAs, 3F 2D 39.14 membrane GLUT4 GLUT4 KBsAcetyl (F6P) for “commitment” This reaction glycolysis. referred reaction is to the as gluconeogenic reaction, the inhibits also by reverse Insulin enzyme as fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase. the catalyzed Insulin through in these diagramed mechanism an indirect regulates two-step two that is enzymes

Fig. 39.14 . (PKFBP; fructose bisphosphatase mechanism bifunctional enzyme the see phosphofructokinase-2/ This involves

Fig. ). 39.14 promote phosphatase activating function. dephosphorylation of lessening the protein PKFBP, Insulin/Akt-activated and the phosphatases kinase thereby function This F6P phosphorylates to (F-2,6-bisP). fructose-2,6bisphosphate allosterically driving turn in F-2,6-bisP activates PFK1, glycolysis. thereby inhibits thereby competitively the fructose-1,6-bisphosphate to to F6P. fructose-1,6bisphosphatase, of also blocking cycle F6P futile F-2,6-bisP

B. Activatingpyruvatekinase(PK).PKcatalyzestheirreversibleconversionofphosphoenolpyruvate(PEP)topyruvate(seereaction5Din

Fig.

).Again,insulin/AktkinaseactivationofaproteinphosphatasedephosphorylatesPK,whichactivatestheenzyme.InsulinalsoincreasesPK 39.12 geneexpressionthroughSREBP1C.Finally,fructose-1,6-bisphosphate(productofreaction3D)allostericallyactivatesPK.

4.

(PDH) Activating dehydrogenase pyruvate complex. citrate. which upon the converts (OA) form pyruvate to then oxaloacetate condensation enter PDH acetyl with TCA can to CoA, cycle in PDH Insulin activity dephosphorylates activation increases kinase of activates turn and through PDH phosphatase, 6D). which Akt PDH (reaction

5.

synthesis TG. intrahepatic Increasing of CoA by acetyl the digestive ATP-citrate cytosolic from cytosol to enzyme CoA citrate, is back form 8D). transferred the oxaloacetate mitochondria phase, to converted is the and the (reaction the acetyl of During which in some then lyase SREBP1C. lyase factor Insulin transcription ATP-citrate gene increases expression through cytoplasm, fatty enter Once the synthesis. in can acetyl CoA acid of acetyl carboxylase The step by CoA involves 9D). enzyme to CoA the first malonyl conversion acetyl-CoA (reaction factor expression acetyl-CoA SREBP1C. stimulates Insulin gene through the transcription carboxylase activates which the also Insulin promotes acetyl-CoA dephosphorylation of enzyme. carboxylase, by CoA CoA) (FASN) groups is 10D). complex by 16-carbon the of palmitoyl CoA synthase converted acetyl to Malonyl fatty malonyl additions (contributed acid (reaction fatty the repetitive acid by the transcription factor FASN by is gene expression insulin SREBP1C. through enhanced also to that FFAs transferases which fatty acyl intrahepatic Insulin to esterify stimulates produces desaturase, unsaturated phosphate–fatty palmitoyl-CoA and G3P TG. form glycerol acids,

coenzyme NADPH. the Palmitate synthesis requires (PPP; NADPH A major source pentose is see the of phosphate pathway

Fig. ). 39.12 G6P (G6PD; The glucose-6-phosphate 4D). to reaction converts 6-phosphogluconolactone by first dehydrogenase enzyme reaction the G6PD Insulin through expression gene the transcription increases SREBP1C. factor

that oxidation insulin of CoA, indirectly By FFAs. malonyl generation inhibits steps lead to of activating (reaction CPT-I, FFAs inhibits CoA activity the of the mitochondria Malonyl transports 12D). which the from into cytosol As transported by they into a β-oxidation result, be (reaction DNL where undergo cannot FFAs 13F). mitochondria, are that synthesized cycle futile increased Thus malonyl FFA FFA prevents the of to synthesis CoA oxidation.

or are to in and the (reaction liver VLDL in converted and TGs to the adipose liver stored 11D) muscle are later). of by the transported (see tissue FFAs either form of acutely apoB-100. VLDL degradation apoprotein promotes the Insulin secreting is VLDL keeps meal the rich chylomicrons. liver when blood with during the from This a muscle. meal source in skeletal the cardiac important an during energy as lipid response of phases provides VLDL and to is to and a during made released insulin Thus the fasting and interdigestive

6. (PC) pyruvate carboxylase the gluconeogenic carboxykinase of (PEPCK). Activation phosphoenolpyruvate vs. enzymes and inhibition by be also to 6F). Pyruvate PC (reaction can OA converted this indirectly in several reaction ways. by inhibited is However, insulin activates First, PDH reaction. pyruvate PC the just from discussed, as thereby insulin away diverting Additionally, activated is PC by levels acetyl of CoA. intramitochondrial allosterically high of intramitochondrial promotes which from DNL, the Insulin CoA acetyl via activation levels by of low removal citrate acetyl CoA of keeps cytosolic mitochondria. is Another which β-oxidation mitochondria, to within acetyl of the CoA. high FFAs key prevent generates levels mechanism of the also DNL, mitochondria CoA, insulin stimulating increases By FFAs malonyl 12D). into (reaction inhibits levels of of which transport cytosolic and release prevents by into tissue and FFAs of of adipose Also, actions TG within their insulin lipolysis secretion of hepatocytes. inhibitory on import on adipocytes glucagon

of high (see contrast, insulin glucagon and/or during adipocytes later), the phase, FFAs catecholamines hepatocytes. the FFAs which release fasting low into coupled stimulate In with of from flow increases to the and Glucagon 9F). CoA back malonyl malonyl also activates (reaction decarboxylase, phosphorylates acetyl converts CoA which enzyme levels insulin, transporter. decarboxylase, on with to reduces generally CPT1 CoA Enhanced the due removes CoA low the thus DNL and low along malonyl inhibition malonyl (reaction intramitochondrial PDH generating inhibiting also and PC levels undergo FFAs activating allosterically mitochondria CoA, This 13F), of 6F) (reaction 6D).). β-oxidation acetyl (reaction high the allows enter to and involved activated signaling. PKA The are by β-oxidation in enzymes Glucagon factor of the activates also transcription which involved induces PPARα, expression enzymes in β-oxidation. further TG intrahepatic Fibrate drugs resistance. and activate oxidation insulin promoting PPARα, ameliorating of

represses out (by Insulin PEPCK the of to of of pyruvate way gene which also expression enzyme the phosphoenolpyruvate. transferase converts mitochondria) malate 7F), (reaction gluconeogenic level primarily is PEPCK the of transcription. at regulated and to its insulin/Akt digestive transcription inactivates stimulates during G6Pase, of fasting during signaling kinase FOXO1 phase, the Similar PEPCK actions on phase. FOXO1 the fasting Glucagon catecholamines PKA-CREB the also and during expression increase phase. signaling gene PEPCK through

Skeletal Digestive Metabolism: Phases 1. Muscle Fasting Adipose and Tissue vs.

Fig. 39.15 ). the concentration a to glucose refers blood ability in Glucose an increase to meal. tolerance the minimize after individual of insulin is promotes glucose tolerance in skeletal A which activation glucose by muscle. of way transporters primary stimulates preexisting 1D). (reaction GLUT4 cell Insulin to membrane of the transporters translocation muscle of 3D). also glucose through (reaction promotes promotes as (reaction glucose glycogen Insulin oxidation storage 2D) and of in glycolysis insulin these the number the (reaction at low cells membrane fasting 1F), GLUT4 transporters During of so (glucose less low results consume glucose phase, sparing). in a switch of (reaction to mitochondria the muscle and FFAs from fibers with from hepatocytes use 3F). KBs adipocytes Skeletal Skeletal glucagon do receptors. not myocytes express for ratio. levels of and and a intracellular KBs is Uptake AMP:ATP ATP high and upregulated by FFAs oxidation largely their Ca++ (reaction pathways, also as receptor these Exercise through stimulation. 2F), glycogenolysis activates adrenergic does

2.

(Fig. ). 39.16A glycolysis 1D in glucose adipose tissue and 2D). stimulates GLUT4-dependent subsequent Insulin and uptake of (reactions also (reaction uses esterification is for tissue of G3P Adipose (reaction generating for into energy TGs glycolysis also which but required 3D), 4D). for FFAs needs membrane to low, (reaction insulin so 1F). fasting the is movement the During is phase, cell blocked GLUT4

2. FFAs (see and Adipocytes → TG

Fig. ). 39.16B Insulin stimulates expression •Fig. of (LPL) lipoprotein lipase adipocyte metabolism digestive (“F” during 39.15 fasting Glucose phases. A, reactions) reactions) in and an (“D” Reactions/pathways:1Dand1F(alsosee

Fig.39.14 adipocyte fasting (“D” metabolism reactions) during digestive Lipid reactions) phases. legend);2D,glycolysis,pyruvatedehydrogenase/TCAcycle/OxPhos;3D,glycerol-3-phosphatedehydrogenase;4D,esterificationofFFAstoG3Ptoformtriglyceride.B, in (“F” and andmigrationtoluminalsideofcapillaryendothelialcell;2D,lipolysisofchylomicronTGandreleasingfreeFFA(afterdigestion,chylomicronremnantisclearedfromcirculationbyliver);3D,activationofimportedFFAsbytransfertoacetylCoAtoformfattyacylCoA;4D,esterificationoffattyacylCoAstoG3PtoformTG(TGdropletsarecoveredandstabilizedbyperilipins[PL]);5D,dephosphorylationandinactivationofhormone-sensitivelipase(HSL),whichpromotesstorageofTG;1F,phosphorylationandactivationofHSL,whichcontributestocompletelipolysisofTG(ATGL,adipocyteTGlipase;HSL,diacylglyceridelipase;MGL,monoacylglyceridelipase);2F,finalstepinTGlipasebyMGLreleasesFFAandglycerol. box), Reactions/pathways:1D,synthesisoflipoproteinlipase(LPL)andLPLsecretionintosubcapillaryspace,bindingtoGPI-anchoredprotein(red

714 & Levy •Fig. SECTION8Berne Physiology sugar Roleoflipoproteinsinenergymetabolism.A,Digestivephase.B,Fastingphase.Dietary KBs IDL muscle Liver ATP Liver CR fats Adipocyte to 39.16 & skeletal fructose Cardiac and FFAs muscle the Adipocyte Cardiac Cardiac adipose carbs its LPL FFAs & capillaries endothelia migration within (reaction LDL LPL Adipose ATP FFAs Cardiac TG FFAs in IDL TG 1D). capillaries muscle Skeletal B Glucose TG CHOL cells VLDL FFAs Growing capillaries TG ATP LPL apical Dietary skel of capillaries adipocytes capillaries CM side ATP Glucose muscle muscle A Steroidogenic & cells fructose Adipose This capillary from to action 2D). extract of within adipose insulin chylomicrons beds (reaction tissue LPL FFAs allows removed (discussed remnants by are the chylomicron later) liver. The FFAs conversion fatty by imported Insulin activation their 3D). of also stimulates acyl (reaction CoAs to which the FFAs TGs of required adipocytes, (reaction in Insulin G3P for generates 4D). reesterification into stimulates glycolysis 5D), as to (HSL; thereby their lipase hormone-sensitive promoting reaction Insulin directly of opposed release. inhibits FFAs storage release and (reaction activate fasting stored 1F), promoting HSL phase, glucagon from glycerol of (reaction During TG thereby and and FFAs catecholamines the 2F). phosphorylate In of the absence these blood. two insulin into lipolysis exported are the of products

Phases Fasting Hormone Cells: vs. All Protein Digestive Metabolism Target in

Insulin promotes synthesis stimulating protein in tissue mRNA translation. adipose uptake and by muscle AA and Insulin proteolysis. inhibits also also of for activity proteins liver promotes attenuates during AAs the phase insulin synthesis and in digestive ATP of urea liver. the Although enzymes the the synthesis, cycle uses degradation proteosomal activate release during of fasting AAs proteins and catecholamines phase. and Glucagon of the

Roles Lipoproteins: Metabolic Digestive of Phases Fasting vs.

deals in detail. lipoproteins section some with This consult For a textbook. more details, biochemistry

FFAs the albumin. to blood circulate bound primarily in cells are by and lipid-soluble through which cholesterol instead However, mix phospholipids free the above) would aggregations of TG, vitamins, bound circulating, cholesterol, esters, hydrophobic transported apoproteins. lipid a of membranes of are partition endothelial all and some (i.e., into blood of the within specific referred as complexes lipid-protein to lipoproteins. These are (as The and are to to primarily FFAs for TG) skeletal TG-rich function and for and energy deliver chylomicrons cardiac storage. lipoproteins muscle VLDL adipocytes and to cells, cells, (LDL) hepatocytes. lipoprotein bile-producing cholesterol-rich high-density proliferating deliver The low-density and steroidogenic lipoprotein lipoproteins include (HDL), which to and cholesterol from excess removes macrophage-engulfed the periphery. cells) dead HDL (i.e., from also cholesterol cleared have digested the There also and by “remnants” that the partially lipoproteins circulation cargo of liver. their are from lipid then

Phase: and Chylomicrons Digestive Remnants Chylomicron

the in 2-monoglycerides meal intestine. FFAs lumen digested are TGs a enzymatically the to of and within

•Fig. Leptinandhypothalamiccentersinvolvedinregulationofappetite.Seetextforexplanationsofabbreviations. 39.17

Intestinal to form enterocytes lipids TGs. and import both these reesterify them of vitamins, with to form complexed the cholesterol esters, ApoB48 chylomicrons. protein with fat-soluble along phospholipids, are and cholesterol, TGs, and move into ultimately then are Chylomicrons secreted, the enter circulation. lymphatics, (one the in to to ApoC2 is a particles HDL and reservoir circulating apoproteins blood, chylomicrons other HDL various transferred of from of as ApoE apoproteins). function provide While such the are nascent This converts mature chylomicrons. into chylomicrons

digested capillaries phase, lipoprotein during chylomicrons the lipase digestive they tissue are the enter by adipose (LPL). partially of When and space. LPL is adipocytes secreted by synthesized the into subendothelial transports cell. endothelial surface of membrane protein LPL which to to LPL capillary endothelial the then (apical) GPI-anchored the the luminal binds GPIHBP1, into position, molecules Once come in this with contact chylomicrons. LPL and activity. of within chylomicrons ApoC2 LPL an is activator dimerization from TG. FFAs LPL-mediated are by chylomicrons released lipolysis of discussion earlier (See and

Fig. to 39.16B explanation stored FFAs for adipocytes. TG processing the of of within an

in skeletal cardiac LPL muscle. and also is expressed muscle preferentially obtains most energy lipoprotein and uses ( for FFAs particles FFA Cardiac from

Fig. ). 39.17 chylomicrons FFA extracts also muscle phase. digestive cardiac during the Thus from capillary beds. in The cardiomyocytes the concentration the as FFAs by LPL highly such of local of local factors coronary activity within is regulated the relatively muscle phase. activity digestive low is in during LPL skeletal

to reduced TG smaller, now (CR) remnants lipolytic content. converted capillary adipose that within have tissue chylomicron chylomicrons are digestion After beds, denser are with thus to penetrate atherogenic. CR vessels the blood sites and particles dysfunction endothelial of are able intima at tunica that associated ApoE. with still them, recognize to protein ApoE bind several receptors one have membrane Because they they of can can glycolipids. CRs specific also bind to endocytosed then hepatocytes (see are Bound CRs by

Fig. ). 39.17 CRs Remaining reesterified endocytosis TG. intrahepatic into released that are after of are FFAs

IDL, LDL Fasting Phase: and VLDL,

of during (see the fasting primarily TG circulating The source phase the is liver

Fig. 39.17 ). the digestive TGs citrate and During accumulate CRs. endocytosed novo from de phase, from using in carbons the cytosolic lipogenesis intrahepatic and exported lipids cholesterol hepatocytes as cholesterol TG, by VLDL. other along with esters, including is Intrahepatic ApoB100 as are the VLDL particles complexed assembled lipids protein. to assembly, factor is in ApoB100, transcription components by Expression stimulated other with along of FOXO1. VLDL involved in FOXO1 pathway. by signaling turn insulin inhibited is the when VLDL means in is time minimal blood production that chylomicrons. This the rich is hepatic during is VLDL low, insulin fasting FOXO1 high, phase, secretion and so During activity are levels resumes. and the assembly circulation, accept ApoC2) VLDL mature ApoE, the VLDL. apoproteins enter and other particles (e.g., become they Once

fasting phase, Adipocytes in activity display low levels. LPL part owing to insulin the low during digests and phase. which and express fasting cardiomyocytes the skeletal types muscle to VLDL However, provides myocytes these during LPL, FFA cell extraction called VLDL from FFAs (IDL). intermediate-density Lipolytic some particle lipoprotein remnant of a generates IDL liver, in the s two one (see where it ways circulates to processed of

Fig. ). 39.17 About several receptor-mediated one in receptors, the is IDL undergoes of and ApoErecognizing endolysosomes. binds half endocytosis, of digested to and lipids particles to fuel into be progresses. and the the for returned reassembled fasting circulation to cardiac as VLDL skeletal muscle phase provide Released can further hepatic enzyme lipase. from of hepatocyte-specific The the half other the undergoes digestion IDL LPL-related IDL, most the of final Hepatic TG the LDL. in lipase remaining the forming extracts VLDL, remnant of but LDL TG poor cholesterol rich. is content particles cholesterol (ChyR, the ester VLDL while can LDL) the so IDL, through receive can protein be cholesterol vary. of transport remnant It and (CETP), of from should mature HDL and the chylomicrons both cholesterol additional in circulation noted that action cholesterol-rich particle in LDL In very face atherogenic is is that dense, endothelial small, damage. potentially the any particle the a of case cells imported the particles LDL receptor. into through are LDL safely the in protein LDL, conversion the noted should IDL be to particle. ApoE It from of the disassociates that is a ApoB100 which that receptors blood. LDL the remove from ligand means This can for only to only contrast receptor, In receptor, recognize one can ApoE and ApoB100. bind LDL receptors, the the multiple or Thus of a significant decrease consequences (see loss functional clinical has LDL receptor

Cellular box). the At need cancer cells, is some including on LDL to synthesize cell new expressed cells, membranes. proliferating receptor which which cholesterol to on use hormones. LDL steroidogenic expressed cells, is make receptor steroid also biliary as tree. bile well as liver, uptake LDL acids, major cholesterol-based secretes cholesterol into the the is which as bile site of The Some is cholesterol the excreted by intestines. cholesterol steroid are hormones) at the excreted (e.g., byproducts Other primarily kidney.

adipose tissue composed of White is (WAT) cell types. several adipocyte. TG-storing the called is cell The cells in humans. develop gestation from preadipocytes These during may by factors. throughout is This of differentiation, life, which continue adipocyte promoted transcription process several cytokines. is growth and well by One lipids SREBP1C, as is of which factors factors activated as these several and insulin in transcription PPARγ. Another factor is important WAT of promotes storage. PPARγ Activated in TG genes involved expression activation upregulation and Thus leads PPARγ, adipocytes SREBP1C an consumption of storage into the these to within of and small preadipocytes allow cells differentiation of to excess enzymes which fat. of increase food increase in

factors, endocrine and including and angiotensinogen, protein. acylation-stimulating paracrine resistin, produces interleukin-6, tissue TNF-α, Adipose adiponectin,

in expenditure. that the eating nutrition, an and protein adiposity energy adipocyte-derived turn of behavior to degree controls the hypothalamus about signals which information is Leptin and become obese. morbidly humans and mice Leptin-deficient therapy could findings combat to used hope that morbid leptin be These originally obesity. raised a suffer or effect. who energy-consuming not have anorectic leptin of significant However, from does obesity diet-induced to administration individuals In levels resistance. to developed and appear of obese fact, already have have leptin circulating elevated individuals leptin endogenous

Leptin peripheral liporegulation an in role in has tissues. important much adipose muscle, tissue. from protects cardiac skeletal too directing by tissues liver, intake of peripheral caloric excess cells) into storage (e.g., beta lipid Leptin accumulation muscle, of in of insulin, of action insulin-dependent glucose insulin the lipogenic to contributes uptake) significantly This opposing (as actions though peripheral maintenance leptin, tissues. defined sensitivity of by myelopoiesis. reproduction lymphopoiesis, enhance acts also the has as sufficient allow to erythropoiesis, body that and stores to signal energy and a Leptin extremely dysfunction. steroids, from from of levels women bleeding), blood cell anorexia are low nervosa, leptin result For in immune production, amenorrhea red anemia suffering example, in menstrual and low ovarian low and (lack

Synthesis, and Structure, Secretion

related is by 16-kDa protein structurally a adipocytes, mature secreted cytokines. to Leptin, sometimes is Thus it

gene,withcleavageinducedbypolyunsaturatedfattyacidsandactivationbytheMAPKpathway. SREBP2 (SREBPcleavage–activatingprotein).Inresponsetodepletedsterols,SCAPescortsSREBP2totheGolgi,whereSREBPiscleavedsequentiallybyproteasesandreleasedintothecytoplasm.SREBP2thentranslocatestothenucleusandincreasesthetranscriptionofgenesinvolvedinsynthesisanduptakeofcholesterol.AmorerecentlydiscoveredmemberofthistranscriptionfactorfamilyisSREBP1C, wasdiscoveredasatranscriptionfactorthatresidesinthemembraneoftheendoplasmicreticulum(ER).Inthepresenceofhighintracellularcholesterol,SREBP2isheldintheERbyalipid-sensingproteincalledSCAP whichishighlyexpressedinadiposeandliver.IncontrasttoSREBP2,SREBP1CstimulatesgenesinvolvedinsynthesisofFAandTG.RegulationofSREBP1CoccursatthetranscriptionalleveloftheSREBP1C

receptors activator proliferation (PPARs) belongtothenuclearhormonereceptorsuperfamilythatalsoincludessteroidhormonereceptorsandthyroidhormonereceptors.PPARsheterodimerizewiththeretinoid receptors X (RXRs). Peroxisome inmiceandPPARγ-dominantnegativemutationsinhumansgiverisetolipodystrophy ishighlyexpressedinadiposetissueandatalowerlevelinskeletalmuscleandliver.Itsnaturalligandsincludeseveralpolyunsaturatedfattyacids.PPARγ (i.e.,lackofwhiteadiposetissue),whichleadstodepositsofTGinmuscleandliver(calledsteatosis),insulinresistance,diabetes,andhypertension. Unlikesteroidandthyroidhormonereceptors,PPARsbindtoligandsinthemicromolarrange(i.e.,withloweraffinity).PPARsbindsaturatedandunsaturatedfattyacidsaswellasnaturalandsyntheticprostanoids.PPARγ regulatesgenesthatpromotefatstorage.ItalsosynergizeswithSREBP1Ctopromotedifferentiationofadipocytesfrompreadipocytes.Tissue-specificknockoutofPPARγ

to an as adipocytokine. referred nutritional with levels relationship of leptin status. have and Circulating direct a adiposity of Leptin incoming output body by insulin, prepares for increased which nutrients. correct the partitioning is inhibited and increased is by by weight loss cAMP Leptin fasting signals (e.g., lipolytic and β3-agonists). and

age, with resistance. T2DM obesity, associated advanced and leptin Diet-induced are that turn targets. mechanisms potential leptin are off therapeutic Thus signaling

expended per determined by stored as an intake The amount day. caloric and energy of is individual calories by energy output many relatively remains balance, In constant. weight in input and so individuals, are the contributing including pathological lifestyles, is with high-carbohydrate obesity T2DM more disease. of currently food, and to inexpensive pandemic obesity, high-fat, a sedentary the sequelae cardiovascular abundance of and However, of along

the fat, of and stored amount individuals consists The greatly of percentage in and energy vary preponderance

hasapositiveeffectonlipoproteinmetabolismbyincreasingproductionofApoAapoproteinsandthenumberofHDLparticles. Thethiazolidinediones alsostimulatessecretionofadiponectin, isabundantlyexpressedinliverandtoalesserextentinskeletalandcardiacmuscleandkidney.PPARα promotesdevelopmentofslow-twitchoxidativemusclefibersandincreasesmusclestamina.PPARδ promotesuptakeandoxidationofFFAs.ThusPPARα isanantisteatoticmolecule.Thefibrates areexogenousligandsofPPARα areexogenousligandsforPPARγ.Althoughtheypromoteweightgain,moderatelevelsofthiazolidinedionessignificantlyimproveinsulinsensitivity.PPARγ similarlypromotesfattyacidoxidationinadiposeandmuscletissue.PPARδ andareusedtoreduceTGdepositsinmuscleandliver,therebyimprovinginsulinsensitivity.Athirdmember,PPARδ, whichpromotesoxidationoflipidsinmuscleandfatandtherebyimprovesinsulinsensitivity.PPARα

isubiquitouslyexpressed.LXRsarerelatedtoPPARsinthattheyaremembersofthenuclearhormonereceptorfamilyandheterodimerizewithRXR.LXRsarecholesterolsensors.Inhigh-cholesterolconditions,LXRsupregulateexpressionofATP-bindingcassette(ABC)proteins.Inthefaceofexcesscholesterol,LXRsalsoincreaseABCproteinexpressioninthegastrointestinaltract,whichpromoteseffluxofcholesterolfromenterocytestothelumenforexcretion.Mutationsinthesetransporters(ABCG5andABCG8)causesitosterolemia, characterizedbyexcessiveabsorptionofcholesterolandplantsterols.Intheliver,LXRspromoteconversionofcholesteroltobileacidsforexcretionortocholesterolestersforstorage.Inthelatteraction,LXRsincreaseSREBP1Cexpression,therebyincreasingthefattyacylCoAsneededforesterification. family,whichiscomposedofLXRα receptor Anotherfamilyoflipid-sensingtranscriptionfactorsistheliver isexpressedprimarilyinadiposetissue,liver,intestine,andkidney,whereasLXRβ andLXRβ.LXRα X (LXR)

tissue. that by adipose for accounted body of is weight appears in genetic to the factors. About to body variance of 25% be due total fat fraternal the twins supported are of of obesity. cause by when body of adipose in discovery for they and than (dizygotic) parents similarity (monozygotic) several whether in on the (1) identical a with the body apart, with excess; to twins, in influence reared between than fat twins; and genetic correlate or is tendency that gains that that correlation weight children A the than caloric adopted twins of their fraternal identical abdominal the better in parents; (4) together genes stores (3) in mass of fed greater biological mass adoptive greater fat (2) their

In adult. profound effect on the the a environment gestational mass has addition, of body of the The diet composition on of weight body and maternal programming. called fetal offspring effect is obesity, correlate diabetes. birth with increased weights disease, risk for and cardiovascular Low plasticity in fetal These altered can by the findings that efficiency be environment. and metabolism utero has of the suggest individual a metabolism The an “thrifty” to development be would born of a mother advantageous to

Diabetes isadiseaseinwhichinsulinlevelsorresponsivenessoftissuestoinsulin(orboth)isinsufficienttomaintainnormallevelsofplasmaglucose.Althoughthediagnosisofdiabetesisbasedprimarilyonplasmaglucose,diabetesalsopromotesimbalancesincirculatinglevelsoflipidsandlipoproteins(i.e.,dyslipidemia).Majorsymptomsofdiabetesmellitusincludehyperglycemia,polyuria,polydipsia,polyphagia,musclewasting,electrolytedepletion,andketoacidosis(inT1DM).Withnormalfasting(i.e.,nocaloricintakeforatleast8hours),plasmaglucoselevelsshouldbebelow110mg/dL.Apatientisconsideredtohaveimpairedglucosecontroliffastingplasmaglucoselevelsarebetween110and126mg/dL,andthediagnosisofdiabetesismadeiffastingplasmaglucoseexceeds126mg/dLon2successivedays.Anotherapproachtothediagnosisofdiabetesistheoralglucosetolerancetest.Afterovernightfastingthepatientisgivenabolusofglucose(usually75g)orally,andbloodglucoselevelsaremeasuredat2hours.A2-hourplasmaglucoseconcentrationgreaterthan200mg/dLon2consecutivedaysissufficienttomakethediagnosisofdiabetes.Thediagnosisofdiabetesisalsoindicatedifthepatienthassymptomsassociatedwithdiabetesandhasanonfastingplasmaglucoselevelgreaterthan200mg/dL. mellitus

(T2DM). (T1DM) Diabetesmellitusiscurrentlyclassifiedastype ortype 2 1 cell T2DMisbyfarthemorecommonformandaccountsfor90%ofdiagnosedcases.However,T2DMisusuallyaprogressivediseasethatremainsundiagnosedinasignificantpercentageofpatientsforseveralyears.T2DMisoftenassociatedwithvisceralobesityandlackofexercise—indeed,obesity-relatedT2DMisreachingepidemicproportionsworldwide.UsuallytherearemultiplecausesforthedevelopmentofT2DMinagivenindividualthatareassociatedwithdefectsintheabilityoftargetorganstorespondtoinsulin(i.e.,insulin resistance),alongwithsomedegreeofbeta deficiency. failure. InsulinsensitivitycanbecompromisedattheleveloftheInsRoratthelevelofpostreceptorsignaling.T2DMappearstobetheconsequenceofinsulinresistance,followedbyreactivehyperinsulinemia,butultimatelybyrelative hypoinsulinemia (i.e.,inadequatereleaseofinsulintocompensatefortheend-organresistance)andbeta cell

muscle. skeletal Theunderlyingcausesofinsulinresistancedifferamongpatients.Threemajorunderlyingcausesofobesity-inducedinsulinresistanceare: uptake of ability glucose, increase especially insulin of to 1.Decreased GLUT4-mediated by Thisfunction,whichisspecificallyapartofglucometabolic by regulation insulin, maybeduetoexcessiveaccumulationofTGinmuscleinobeseindividuals.Excessivecaloricintakeinduceshyperinsulinemia.Initiallythisleadstoexcessiveglucoseuptakeintoskeletalmuscle.Justasintheliver,excessivecaloriesintheformofglucosepromotelipogenesisand,throughgenerationofmalonylCoA,repressionoffattyacylCoAoxidation.ByproductsoffattyacidandTGsynthesis(e.g.,diacylglycerol,ceramide)mayaccumulateandstimulatesignalingpathways(e.g.,proteinkinaseC–dependentpathways)thatantagonizesignalingfromtheInsRorIRSproteins,orboth.Thusinsulinresistanceintheskeletalmuscleofobeseindividualsmaybeduetolipotoxicity.

2.

ability Decreased to hepatic insulin glucose production. of repress steatosis).Visceraladiposetissueislikelytoaffectinsulinsignalingattheliverinseveralways,inadditiontotheeffectsoflipotoxicity.Forexample,visceraladiposetissuereleasesthecytokinetumor liver necrosis (TNF)-α, factor whichhasbeenshowntoantagonizeinsulinsignalingpathways.Also,TGinvisceraladiposetissuehasahighrateofturnover(possiblybecauseofrichsympatheticinnervation),sotheliverisexposedtohighlevelsofFFAs,whichfurtherexacerbateshepaticlipotoxicity. Thelivermakesglucosebyglycogenolysisintheshorttermandbygluconeogenesisinthelongterm.Theabilityofinsulintorepresskeyhepaticenzymesinboththesepathwaysisattenuatedininsulin-resistantindividuals.Insulinresistanceinthelivermayalsobeduetolipotoxicityinobeseindividuals(e.g.,fatty orhepatic

3.

to LPL or tissue Inability (or of increase in lipase adipose repress insulin hormone-sensitive both). mellitus. HighHSLandlowLPLaremajorfactorsinthedyslipidemiaassociatedwithinsulinresistanceanddiabetes.AlthoughthefactorsthatresisttheactionsofinsulinonHSLandLPLarenotcompletelyunderstood,thereisevidenceforincreasedproductionofparacrinediabetogenicfactorsinadiposetissue,suchasTNF-α.ThedyslipidemiaischaracterizedashypertriglyceridemiawithlargeTG-richVLDLparticlesproducedbytheliver.BecauseoftheirhighTGcontent,largeVLDLsandIDLsaredigestedveryefficiently,therebygivingrisetosmall,denseLDLparticlesthatareveryatherogenic.Inaddition,HDLtakesonexcessTGinexchangeforcholesterolesters,whichappearstoshortenthecirculatinghalf-lifeofHDLandApoAproteins.ThustherearelowerlevelsofHDLparticles,whichnormallyplayaprotectiveroleagainstvasculardisease.T1DM diabetes ischaracterizedbydestructionofbetacells,almost alwaysbyanautoimmunemechanism.T1DMisalsotermedinsulin-dependent 1. CharacteristicsofT1DMare:

PeoplewithT1DMneedexogenousinsulintomaintainlifeandpreventketosis;virtuallynopancreaticinsulinisproduced.

2.

Thereispathologicaldamagetothepancreaticbetacells.Insulinitiswithpancreaticmononuclearcellinfiltrationisacharacteristicfeatureattheonsetofthedisorder.Cytokinesmaybeinvolvedintheearlydestructionofthepancreas.

3.

PeoplewithT1DMarepronetoketoacidosis.

4.

Ninetypercentofcasesbegininchildhood,mostlybetween10and14yearsofage.Thiscommonobservationledtoapplicationofthetermjuvenile diabetes tothedisorder.ThistermisnolongerusedbecauseT1DMcanariseatanytimeoflife,althoughjuvenileonsetisthetypicalpattern.

5.

Isletcellautoantibodiesarefrequentlypresentaroundthetimeofonset.IfT1DMisinducedbyavirus,theautoantibodiesaretransient.Occasionallyantibodieswillpersistlongterm,particularlyiftheyareassociatedwithotherautoimmunedisorders.About50%ofT1DMisrelatedtoproblemswiththemajorhistocompatibilitycomplexonchromosome6.Itiscorrelatedwithanincreasedfrequencyofcertainhumanleukocyteantigen(HLA)alleles.TheHLAtypesDR3andDR4aremostcommonlyassociatedwithdiabetes.

into nutrition a meant received poor who that chronic life undernourishment. and

(BMI). of index A mass the adiposity body is measure individual calculated The of is as: an BMI

Equation 38.1

25. from The BMI to individuals healthy lean 20 of ranges individual BMI the than higher indicates whereas 30 A than is indicates a greater overweight, 25 obesity. BMI that The of resistance, obese disease, is condition for dyslipidemia, and risk multiple insulin being factor or overweight including a cardiovascular diabetes, pathologies, hypertension.

divided into WAT tissue and intraabdominal is subcutaneous (visceral) depots. two depots. fat WAT omental mesenteric of primarily the is to Intraabdominal refers smaller and the and hepatic supplies receive return venous in depots intraabdominal leads in way blood are from drained that different portal that the into fundamentally a system. These fat different Thus is cleared fat FFAs are primary liver, FFAs mostly for exercise muscle site to by the providing whereas during or fasting. intraabdominally derived subcutaneous the tissue and subcutaneous differs. adipose also Regulation of intraabdominal has by greater neurons Abdominal a is highly and rate. innervated fat turnover autonomic these depots in production enzyme differences hormone activity. two display Furthermore, and

(gynecoid in the particularly whereas in to (android fat buttocks adiposity), adiposity). depot, depot tend the gain [apple-shaped] and Men gain in intraabdominal tend the fat thighs to subcutaneous women [pear-shaped] fat an mentioned greater for poses risk factor Clearly earlier. the abdominal of excess pathologies a the indicator waist around exhaling) side). the ribs viewed point when largest point of the between the of where hips from of the and the are circumference the from the divided after when front body is at narrowest Thus composition viewed hips buttocks by inches (measured circumference in the (measured another risk of BMI, of better indicator it may diseases. than relates development fat waist-hip This to especially a ratio as be body for men for in linked risk waist-hip and A of cardiovascular or disease. to significantly ratio a development women of than in diabetes 0.95 greater 0.85 is higher

expenditure years, acute satiety, and have hormones neuropeptides appetite, of in recent and energy been In implicated chronic numerous regulation humans. both and in One

two Energy model of leptin hormones, Hormonal involves 39 Regulation simplified Metabolism CHAPTER peptide

Fig. already ), discussed. 39.17 least Leptin on in acts the hypothalamus. of nucleus at neuron the two arcuate types a an inhibitor intake) represses Y seeking (energy food- of very of first, (NPY), potent In the energy leptin stimulator neuropeptide production expenditure. of behavior and NPY Norepinephrine, co-localizes these of another appetite with stimulator, neurons. some in endogenous agouti-related of time, an At represses that antagonist peptide leptin same production the (AGRP), on acts

the food inhibits hormone peptide a α-melanocyte–stimulating intake. anorexigenic hypothalamic (α-MSH), receptor for MC4R, which which one neuron, both intake. of cocaine-amphetamine–regulated products, another arcuate proopiomelano which production (POMC) food of leptin inhibit type transcript production (CART), of α-MSH, In is of stimulates cortin and of α-MSH and by leptin the NPY Thus inhibiting simultaneously diture

Fig. ). 39.17 and are in receptors the neuropeptides transmitted with These and lateral second-order interact (“hunger” hypothalamic to of nucleus neurons neurons). In function, (especially with endo and diverse gland crine sympathetic actions reproduction, growth. thyroid outflow) activity on

is stores Another intake melanin-concentrating energy hormone food and (MCH). of body regulator the α-MSH of the satiety MC4R interaction with of its effect α-MSH downstream antagonizing from This receptor. actually demonstrated the gene by of ablation that results regulator this fact molecule by The in is leanness. is probable importance knockout the only whose it

energy intake system oxidation. with the must overall carbohydrate To example, maintain carbohydrate homeostasis,

responses meals. neurotransmitter to ingestion satiety after produces of glucose. Serotonin in their in caloric local regulation. nutrient as by production but satiety humoral effects, such hormones cholecystokinin Gastrointestinal participate the and produce and GLP-1 may brain that in glands cells ghrelin with of stomach. arises acylated is orexigenic potent an recently oxyntic The the peptide hormone in the discovered activity precede hours 1 their rise levels 2 meals. the in ghrelin of in to that Plasma normal humans

fall about to hour drastically Plasma minimum after ghrelin eating. 1 values of levels that Ghrelin receptor food with appears neurons hypothalamic in by NPY. express to stimulate reacting intake its

1.

needs. Cells their make energy meet ATP to TCA phosphorylation. cycle glycolysis oxidative the coupled is by made by and ATP to

2.

ATP. FFAs AAs, form (primarily can make and Cells carbohydrate oxidize in of the glucose), to tissues to oxidize other for makes of Additionally fasting. the energy for in times KBs liver

3.

can limited in they Some types energy cell for the substrates are oxidize energy. for glucose The on brain exclusively dependent energy. is normally be Thus glucose blood function. must for 60 and normal mg/ maintained above autonomic CNS dL mg/dL) fasting glucose Conversely, long-term inappropriately complications (i.e., of the diabetes. glucose and lead > to promote of glucotoxicity 100 levels high thereby

4.

The hormones insulin, endocrine polypeptide. glucagon, the gastrin, pancreas and produces somatostatin, pancreatic

5.

is anabolic of Insulin excess that secreted hormone is times in an availability. nutrient energy to nutrients. and body It use carbohydrates store the allows sources as

6.

stimuli secretion insulin AAs. include some and increased serum glucose for Major cholinergic of receptors insulin secretion. (muscarinic) of insulin receptors α2-adrenergic increases Activation secretion, whereas activation also inhibits gastrointestinal stimulate incretin secretion. insulin that tract The pancreatic releases hormones secretion particularly (GSIS). glucose-dependent stimulation in is potent insulin of GLP-1 augmenting (DPP)-4. degraded GLP-1 dipeptidyl is by peptidase inhibitors DPP-4– to and resistant patients are GLP-1 diabetes. DPP-4 analogues GSIS of increase with used currently 2 type in

7.

to growth linked binds Insulin which the multiple (InsR), the is insulin. insulin (Akt kinase) (MAPK) effects receptor mediate of to that pathways metabolic and

8.

the digestive of promote glucose to G6P. acts During the trapping phase, as on liver insulin glycogenesis, and (DNL) de Insulin liver. increases glycolysis, in the lipogenesis novo also VLDL. gluconeogenesis, Insulin and inhibits of assembly lipids into glycogenolysis,

9.

adipose uptake glucose and Insulin increases in GLUT4-mediated muscle tissue.

10.

glycogenesis, lipogenesis in glycolysis, increases Insulin presence of muscle. caloric in and the excess,

11.

of and adipocytes. increases G3P in glycolysis Insulin generation cells. of Insulin endothelial to transport capillary LPL expression the of luminal its side induces and G3P FFAs esterification fatty and to of and form to acyl CoAs of uptake Insulin promotes activation

it adipocytes. activity lipase hormone-sensitive decreases in TG, and

12.

cells. increases AA also synthesis all and target protein skeletal but essentially uptake in muscle insulin Insulin mTORC1 promote mRNA S6K of to signaling as proteins Insulin/Akt activates involved translation, of and kinase other well and ribosomal as proteins synthesis types in proteins. inhibits proteosomal degradation Insulin of protein.

13.

catabolic Glucagon hormone. counterregulatory is a it secretion periods reserves. and increases deprivation, acts nutrient of mobilize food during to Its even also protein. and It fat, glycogen, mobilizes

14.

AA is serum β-adrenergic released decreased insulin) serum Glucagon to in glucose therefore and levels response increased decreased and signaling. (and

15.

PKA-dependent to the is pathways. Glucagon linked to receptor, binds glucagon which for The target organ liver. glucagon the primary is increases liver and Glucagon glucose output increasing by gluconeogenesis. glycogenolysis increases of ketogenesis. fatty and β-oxidation It acids

16.

hepatic through pathways. posttranslational by regulates both PKA-dependent regulation Glucagon expression of and gene metabolism

17.

and adipose factors in epinephrine neurotransmitter adrenal The and major tissue hormone muscle the norepinephrine. sympathetic counterregulatory the are cAMP to through increase receptors β3-adrenergic These factors levels. act two β2-and Epinephrine fatty increase glycogenolysis in and oxidation hormone-sensitive muscle and tissue. norepinephrine lipase enhance and acyl adipose in

18.

(T1DM) 2 1 classified mellitus and Diabetes as (T2DM). type type is pancreatic and of exogenous by required T1DM beta is insulin is characterized treatment. for cells, destruction coupled cell degree deficiency. T2DM insulin be characterized of can is usually to resistance due numerous but as factors some to beta may levels. point glucose insulin require blood with exogenous Patients some T2DM to maintain at

19. to hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance and adipose due characterized produced cytokines worldwide and tissue. by inflammatory lipotoxicity, by T2DM currently is epidemic at proportions Obesity-associated is resistance, associated T2DM insulin hypertension, and coronary disease. often obesity, artery with is risk to factors constellation This referred the as of metabolic syndrome. is

20. diabetes wasting, mellitus muscle T1DM). depletion, polyphagia, electrolyte include symptoms and ketoacidosis (in polyuria, hyperglycemia, Major of polydipsia,

21. are peripheral long-term (glucotoxicity), in complications glucose and of to especially nerves. the excess diabetes The controlled kidney, poorly due retina, intracellular This and nephropathy, neuropathy. to retinopathy, leads

al. Bailey CJ, et diabetes. drugs Future type 2 glucose-lowering for Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2016;4:350-359.

et JA, al. Davidson era for a diabetes care. Glucagon dawn therapeutics: new of Res Rev. Diabetes Metab ahead 2016;doi:10.1002/dmrr.2773; of print]. [Epub

et al. J, Font-Burgada the cancer: oil the feeds and that flame. Obesity Metab. Cell 2016;23:48-62.

22. tissue has energy terms especially an of homeostasis. endocrine in function, Adipose leptin and produced include adiponectin. by tissue Hormones adipose satiety. on promote acts the to hypothalamus Leptin

research type Metabolomics Shearer J. translating basic 2 into clinical and Klein MS, application. diabetes: J Diabetes Res. 9]. 2015 [Epub Nov doi:10.1155/2016/3898502; 2016;2016:3898502.

R, et al. Marion-Letellier eicosanoids gamma. and PPAR acids, Fatty Eur J Pharmacol. 2016;785:44-49.

Pawlak al. M, et action of nonalcoholic metabolism, in Molecular lipid mechanism disease. and its fatty impact fibrosis inflammation liver on PPARα and J Hepatol. 2015;62:720-733.

should following completion able student the this to be questions: the of Upon chapter 1. answer

and calcium protein phosphate, ionized, serum including of and bound. complexed, the Describe pool ions normal of the concentration these ranges of Describe routes and and influx major efflux. the

2.

of parathyroid the role calcium-sensing hormone and regulation Discuss the receptor gland parathyroid (PTH) in the secretion. regulation serum calcium of explain of the of role the the in

3.

blood. vitamin in sources of sites key 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin hydroxylation, of D of the including D metabolites precursor, regulators the Describe and and D D, of transport production vitamin vitamin

4.

effects or and List organs mobilization each sites. of these of phosphate the handling describe on its at target and PTH calcium

5.

the organs D. actions key and target of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin List

6.

the by Discuss regulation phosphate FGF23. metabolism of

7.

or hormone of discuss consequences Predict by serum triggered compensatory of that would and these and the responses hormone D deficiency, vitamin phosphate actions. calcium the by perturbations be

structural and and phosphate metabolic roles bones and roles alcium in hard they are essential tissues because to life teeth) (i.e., (Ca) play signaling and regulatory important in human pathways. important (HPO4 (H2PO4 phosphate dihydrogen of In of −) −). systems, phosphate phosphate and biological mixture (Pi) inorganic a consists hydrogen Ca sources skeleton circulating of The the ( two the and Pi are and diet primary

Fig. 40.1 ). (also bone and circulation 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D Pi intestinal parathyroid regulate of and release hormone called (PTH), into calcitriol) absorption of Ca Two Ca after Pi hormones, and the and resorption. removal mineralization and are primary for Ca renal (see from The and of bone blood excretion Pi processes

Fig. ). 40.1 PTH D regulate both 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin processes. and Ca homeostasis. and hormones paracrine factors also and Other growth regulate Pi

of and Crucial Calcium Physiology in Roles Phosphate Cellular

essential Ca element. dietary is an Ca store increased diet, Ca levels contain the the called pregnancy from normal in in kg) circulating nursing. can during bone times to be addition demands >1 a restriction maintain In and humans of and obtaining which mineral, vast of upon of dietary of to (i.e., Ca three ( forms in Circulating Ca exists

(e.g., HCO3 with − Ca free citrate). complexed and 40.1): anions phosphates, , ionized Ca++ Table protein-bound Ca, , The 50% of represents about ionized Ca. circulating form to cellular critical and is the intracellular controlled. many is it so Since compartments both functions, in tightly extracellular [Ca++] under normally within maintained relatively and is Ca++ hormonal control narrow Circulating direct a range. tissue, neuromuscular too or mM]) little much 8.7 Ca in total of changes, calcium total Either including pathology. dysfunction, calcification system a mg/dL soft serum broad and lead nervous can serum central renal < range mM]) calcium to too of skeletal insufficiency, Ca > pathophysiological dysfunction, mg/dL (hypocalcemia; blood (hypercalcemia; 10.4 [2.2 [2.6

also and Pi dietary essential element, in an large mineral. quantities it stored is in is is (<20%) complexed protein-bound circulating Pi in the some Most or form (see as a cations circulates Pi but with ionized form, free

Table ). 40.1 can with soft 10-fold Pi tissues more in result damage Because (e.g., muscle injury cause complexes tissue increased whereupon acute than with death) Pi hyperphosphatemia, contain Ca, hypocalcemia. cell crush Ca++ massive the to

key intracellular component. is a Pi adenosine life. maintain phosphate the (ATP) it bonds high-energy that Indeed, of forms triphosphate represent serves metabolic key steps acids. as backbone signaling and Phosphorylation and regulatory lipids, for nucleic the proteins, pathways, and cofactors second in and numerous dephosphorylation of also phosphate messengers,

•Fig. DailyCa++ andPiflux. 40.1

Ca8.5–10.250%45%5%Pi3–4.584%10%6%

Ca++ Physiology. isbound(i.e.,complexed)tovariousanionsinplasma,includingHCO3− andK+ .Piiscomplexedtovariouscations,includingNa+ ,citrate,andSO42− .FromKoeppenBM,StantonBA.Renal 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007.

C Physiological and of Parathyroid Hormone Regulation Phosphate: Calcium and 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D

PTH the hormones and in mainte- 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin Pi most two nance of Ca D physiologically are normal important humans. blood dedicated and to As as are to referred hormones. they calciotropic such of be and discussed hormones synthesis, two first. structure, will The receptors their secretion these and are following kidney) of of PTH the the D gut, bone, the discussed. sites In Ca/Pi on 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin three (i.e., and key detailed and actions section, homeostasis

(also predominant principal the The is cell parenchymal cell chief) type gland ( in B parathyroid the called

Fig. 40.2

against the protects primary PTH hormone that hypocalcemia. is kidneys. the and PTH The targets primary of bone are D. production a in feed-forward functions loop of also PTH 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin stimulating by positive

•Fig. 40.2 AandB,Histologyofparathyroidglands.A,adiposetissuewithinparathyroidglands;C,capillaries;O,oxyphilcells;P,principalorchiefcells. Histology. (FromYoungBetal.Wheater’s Functional 5thed.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.)

and Synthesis, Secretion Structure,

secreted a prepro-PTH, and proteolytically vesicles. the which is as the pro-PTH and as secretory is processed 84–amino PTH PTH is to Golgi in and synthesized then polypeptide acid reticulum in endoplasmic to an half-life PTH has (2 regulation the a plasma of in role with minutes), calcium. minute-to-minute short its in circulation consistent

to also it the (PTHrP), PTH/PTHrP receptor PTH is receptor. the referred as Because usually binds PTH-related peptide PTH. that receptor on distal is the proximal receptor is actions bone mediates PTH/PTHrP and and the tubules and expressed of kidney, systemic in osteoblasts of the The it the in functions. has the is developing in PTHrP receptor PTH/PTHrP important organs in expressed However, paracrine many also which such the One proliferation of example regulation is growth in growth. endochondral during plate bone chondrocyte

must two or calcitriol Vitamin active a form undergo known hydroxylation to successive prohormone ( reactions that D the as 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin is D become

Fig.

). 40.5 Ca role in plays absorption a hormone This critical

(CaSR). Extracellular[Ca++]issensedbytheparathyroidchiefcellthroughaplasmamembranecalcium-sensing receptor TheprimarysignalthatstimulatesPTHsecretionisadecreaseincirculating[Ca++](

).Conversely,increasingamountsofextracellularCa++ bindtotheCaSRandstimulatesignalingpathwaysthatrepressPTHsecretion.AlthoughtheCaSRbindstoextracellularCa++ Fig.40.3 withrelativelylowaffinity,theCaSRisextremelysensitivetominutechangesinextracellular[Ca++].Therelationshipbetween[Ca++]andtherateofPTHsecretionisdescribedbyasteepinversesigmoidalcurve.A0.2-mMdifferenceinblood[Ca++]spansthefullrangeofthecurve,alteringPTHsecretionfrombasal(5%ofmaximum)tomaximumlevels(

Fig.40.4).Thesteady-state“setpoint” willvarybetweenindividualsbuttypicallyresidesbelowthemidpointofthecurve(i.e.,half-maximalPTHsecretion).ThustheCaSRisarapid,robust,andcontinuousregulatorofPTHoutputinresponsetosubtle[Ca++]fluctuations.

InadditiontoinhibitingPTHsecretion,activationoftheCaSRalsopromotesdegradationofstoredPTHintheparathyroidchiefcell.Asaresult,biologicallyinactivecarboxyterminalPTHfragmentsaresecretedfromtheparathyroidglandandarealsoproducedbyperipheralmetabolismofPTHbytheliverandkidney.ThereforecurrentPTHassaysusetwoantibodiesthatrecognizeepitopesfrombothendsofthemoleculetoaccuratelymeasureintactPTH[1-84].

Overalongertimeframe,PTHproductionisalsoregulatedatthelevelofmRNAstabilityandgenetranscription(see

Fig.

geneexpressionincheckisreinforcedbythecoordinatedupregulationofCASR geneexpressionbypositivevitaminDresponseelementsinthepromoterregionoftheCASR gene(see 40.3 genetranscriptionisrepressedby1,25-dihydroxyvitaminDinanegativefeedbackloop(actingthroughvitaminDresponseelements—seelater).Theabilityof1,25-dihydroxyvitaminDtoholdPTH ).Decreased[Ca++]leadstoproductionofproteinsthatbindthe3-untranslatedregionofPTHmRNAandstabilizeit,leadingtoincreasedPTHtranslation.PTH

Fig.40.3 ).Itshouldbenoted,however,thatduringahypocalcemicchallenge,thedecreasein[Ca++]overridestheinhibitoryeffectof1,25-dihydroxyvitaminDonPTHtranscription,allowingbothofthesehormonestobeelevatedsimultaneously.

•Fig. RegulationofPTH geneexpressionandsecretion. 40.3 Physiology. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007. Parathyroid preproPTH gene PTH CaSR D PTH (–) membrane preCaSR (+) •Fig. )Gq 1,25 Nucleus CaSR Vitamin mRNA PTH gene CaSR CaSR proPTH Gi + Ca++ PTH Downstream signaling (–) pathway (–) mRNA cell Sigmoidalrelationshipbetweenserum[Ca++]andserumPTH,whichreflectstherateofPTHsecretion. 40.4 Physiology. (ModifiedfromPor-terfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007. 1.00 Serum 1.301.201.10 1.40 in blood Ca++ 50 maximum) (mM) PTH )100 (% of Free 5

familial reabsorptionwhenbloodCa++ hypercalcemia rises.ThehypocalciuriainthefaceofhypercalcemiainFHHisduetothereducedabilityoftheCaSRinthekidneytosenseandrespondtoelevatedblood[Ca++]byincreasingCaexcretion. hypocalciuric (FHH) Patientswithbenign areheterozygousforinactivatingmutationsoftheCaSR.Inthesepatients,becauseofcompleteorpartiallossofoneCaSRallele,higherlevelsof[Ca++]arerequiredtosuppressPTHsecretion.Thisresultsinanelevated[Ca++]setpointforPTHsecretion,accountingforthehypercalcemia.TheCaSRisalsoexpressedinthethickascendinglimboftherenaltubule,whereitnormallyinhibitsCa++

malignancy (PTHrP) of hormone–related peptide Parathyroid andsymptomsthatresemblehyperparathyroidism. andnormallydoesnotplayaroleinCa/Pihomeostasisinadults.However,certaintumorssecretehighlevelsofPTHrP,whichcauseshypercalcemia isapeptideparacrinehormoneproducedbyseveraladulttissues(skin,hair,breast),whereitmayregulateproliferationanddifferentiation.Italsoplaysaroleinrelaxationofsmoothmuscleinresponsetostretchinbloodvessels,uterus,andbladder.Duringlactation,PTHrPpromotesmaternalboneresorptionandthetransportofcalciumintomilk.Duringdevelopment,PTHrPregulatescalciumtransportacrosstheplacentaandisakeyregulatorofchondrocyteproliferationanddifferentiationinthegrowthplateoflongbones.The30aminoacidsattheN-terminusofPTHrPhavesignificantstructuralhomologywithPTH.PTHrPisnotregulatedbycirculatingCa++

24,25-(OH)2D3 Calcium and Regulation Phosphate •Fig. 1,25-(OH)2D3 of Hormonal Metabolism 40.5 Biosynthesisof1,25-dihydroxyvitaminD. Physiology. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007.) extent a Pi by the absorption and intestine. to small lesser regulates Pi. and of It remodeling Ca reabsorption bone also renal and

Synthesis, of Active D Metabolites Vitamin Structure, and Transport

synthesized D3 is via Vitamin •Fig. called of (also B by cholecalciferol) conversion 7-dehydrocholesterol ultraviolet VitaminDmetabolism. 40.6 Physiology. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007. effects Peripheral UV-B Vit D-DBP gut, D Vit and D 24-Hydroxylase25-Hydroxyvitamin Vit 25(OH) 24,25-Dihydroxyvitamin kidney, at blood etc. D-chylomicron D 24-Hydroxylase D3 )7-Dehydrocholesterol D3 vitamin D-DBP Vit 1, Dietary D D 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D-chylomicron Lymphatic D 1,24,25-Trihydroxyvitamin Biological Hepatocyte 25-Hydroxyvitamin Vit Portal D blood 25-Hydroxylase Vit and vitamin 25-Dihydroxyvitamin D-DBP Enterocyte D2 Vit Caval Vitamin D bone, blood in (Fig. 1˜-Hydroxylase basal layers light skin the of more (UVB) the ). 40.6 one is D3 vitamin a the cholesterol Chemically, is rings (see opened in which of secosteroid

Fig. ). 40.5 is D2 Vitamin plants. produced (ergocalciferol) in active vitamin diet after a to forms. extent to from hydroxylated are the lesser equally and D3 Vitamin are conversion effective absorbed and D2 The absorption situations. in vitamin balance between synthesized vitamin forms the dietary of important and D3 endogenously becomes D UVB-dependent certain of sources who higher Individuals fortified, milk). skin vitamin higher less in are with dietary thus at dependent e.g., latitudes on or to more live 7-dehydrocholesterol supplements vitamin convert D (natural melanin vitamin or and D3 content of Institutionalized elderly at products dairy avoid patients indoors stay for particularly deficiency. and development of risk vitamin D are who

the transported liver. from the Vitamin in is skin to D blood in indirectly directly vitamin circulation transport and liver via chylomicrons D (see reaches Dietary via portal the the

Fig. 40.6 ). D. amount The liver, of at is hydroxylated levels so unregulated, reflect the is D to of 25-hydroxyvitamin circulating D and the vitamin position available constitutively 25-hydroxylation. expressed the yield 25-hydroxyvitamin precursor for 25-carbon In 25-hydroxylase hepatic status. to levels circulation D of in used half-life For vitamin relatively reason, assess weeks), the measurement this its because long is D 25-hydroxyvitamin and of (2–3

hydroxylation D the undergoes the 25-Hydroxyvitamin in further (see tubule proximal of kidney

Figs.

40.6). 40.5

D, Hydroxylation 1α position most major inactivation serves the Hydroxylation which D. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, generates at a and 24,25-dihydroxyvitamin an play as biological vitamin the of 24 at does form role position generates active the pathway. not

a number regulated ( Renal factors of tightly by is 1α-hydroxylase

Fig. 40.7). resulting activity, 25(OH)D3 and primary the CYP27B1 are 25(OH)D3 FGFRKIotho 1α-hydroxylase •Fig. in of 1,25(OH)2D3 1˜-hydroxylase hypophosphatemia PTH inducers Regulationof1α-hydroxylasegene(CYP27B1) expressionintheproximaltubule,showingstimulationbyPTHandinhibitionbyFGF23and1,25-dihydroxyvitaminD.Hypophosphatemiaprobablystimulates1α-hydroxylasebyreducingFGF23levelsatleastinpart. 40.7

levels 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin inhibit increased [Ca++] enzyme and it. D. D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin product, Conversely, the of Fibroblast growth a on a D metabolism factor later), of 1α-hydroxylase in (see production (FGF)23, represses levels part. 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin of at Pi FGF23 reduction hypophosphatemia the effect mediates of likely major activity; also regulator least

bound D D–binding circulate vitamin blood its Vitamin to (DBP). metabolites primarily in protein and that is DBP liver. by glycoprotein synthesized is the a serum binds of 24,25-dihydroxyvitamin free 1,25-hydroxyvitamin hormone. to circulates D. and of proteins, 0.4% of only than 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D D more binding other DBP as Because 85% of D transports protects highly reservoir against vitamin deficiency. lipophilic vitamin provides and DBP that a the vitamin in D blood D

exerts Receptor the hormone binding primarily which its 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin receptor member receptor (VDR), a through D the family. to of nuclear nuclear 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin vitamin actions D D is a heterodimer receptor VDR sequences response a is elements) with The DNA as transcription to factor cognate the binds (RXR). ligand-dependent D retinoid that (vitamin X and target intestine, gene the the gland. bone, kidneys, D 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin action tissues, regulate small in Thus primary parathyroid its including expression is of to

period 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin over days. to The VDR by of a the of occur actions genomic hours D mediated rapid (seconds to has effects minutes). 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D also induces 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin absorption rapidly example, by D the For Ca++ of duodenum. G expressed rapid and is signaling in proteins, is phosphatidylinositol-3′-kinase). plasma VDR cells (e.g., to The of the membrane also pathways linked ligands bind molecular to of specifically modeling Current that development has led

actions versus D Phosphate D rapid vitamin the the membrane-localized synthetic Hormonal and 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin Regulation of treatment way Calcium to Metabolism nuclearversus the VDR, slow paving analogues. the to with disorders selective for related of of

Regulation Bone of Intestine [Pi] by and [Ca++] Small and

Pi] the glands and of of is and the summarized [Ca++] the in intestine, action PTH small on D 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin and of An overview parathyroid regulation by bone,

in and paragraphs. Table 40.2 following the on , handling For details of renal consult Ca++

Chapter 36.

disease isapeptidehormoneproducedbythemedullarycells,orC-cells,ofthethyroidgland.Calcitoninsecretionispositivelyregulatedbyserum[Ca++]viatheCaSR.Thecalcitoninreceptorisexpressedinosteoclasts,wherecalcitoninactsrapidlyanddirectlytoinhibitboneresorption.However,inhumans,calcitonindoesnotappeartoplayamajorroleinregulatingserumCa.Insupportofthisview,productionofexcesscalcitoninorcompleteabsenceofcalcitonin(e.g.,followingthyroidectomy)doesnotperturbserumCalevels.Morepotentformsofthehormone(e.g.,salmoncalcitonin)havebeenusedtherapeuticallyasanantiresorptiveinthetreatmentofPaget’s Calcitonin (characterizedbyexcessiveosteoclasticboneresorption)andinosteoporosis.Calcitoninisalsoausefulhistochemicalmarkerofmedullarythyroidcancer.

to Dietary vary among widely can day. and of Ca intake day individuals from absorbed, mg. 350 net be intestine, by would 150 intake mg intake the typically mg mg (the for a for 19–50), Assuming of 200 secreted an by counterbalanced of ages 1000 RDA intestine. in small absorption Most the Ca++ takes proximal place face . D, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin Importantly, dietary Ca++ so by efficient more absorption stimulated Ca++ of is in of is the declining absorption

Ca++-regulated by and hormonally both a route. is and route and paracellular regulated transcellular jejunum absorbed a passive from Ca++ the by duodenum a in The Ca++ route summarized of absorption transcellular is

Fig.

40.8 . electrical enterocyte, occurs gradients, calcium chemical called Movement gastrointestinal the is of channels the from TRPV5 which and via driven into apical by both lumen and TRPV6. Ca++ calbindin-D9K, which a cell, Ca++ Once Ca++ transluminal the favorable cytoplasmic to inside [Ca++], membrane bind ions gradient. preserving low maintains the gradient transported ATPase Ca++, calcium basolateral Calbindin-D9K is in role which plasma against across membrane electrochemical the (PMCA). apical-to-basolateral by membrane shuttling a an of also plays the (NCX) contributes Na+/Ca++ to also The exchanger

CASR,calcium-sensingreceptor;M-CSF,monocytecolony-stimulatingfactor;NPT2,Na+/Picotransporter;OPG,osteoprotegerin;PTH,parathyroidhormone;

RANKL,receptoractivatorofnuclearfactorκ-B.

•Fig. 40.8 IntestinalabsorptionofCa++viathetranscellularroute. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine Physiology. 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007. transport out enterocyte. indin9KPMCA indin9KCal Ca++ of )LuminalsideTRPV5/6SerosalsideCa++Ca++Ca++Ca++-cal of Ca++ the involved 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin intestine. absorption D all of by components stimulates of expression the in small

by the transport cotransporter The absorption which control hormonal relatively mediated D. is at is Na+/Pi process in and remains Pi apical of Pi The dietary about constant transcellular by brush minor limiting the jejunum absorbed 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin by the under border, (NPT2). is fraction across 70%

Ca and Bone stores of amounts vast Pi. remodeled activities achieved mass concerted skeleton been Once through adult, an bone is bone cells. peak of in has constantly the the a active, are The of individual. and well-nourished bone physically balance processes resorption in bone in formation and healthy, the from of 1 Ca is in kg 0.5%) into bone 500 day. mg mobilized about bone, deposited Of (i.e., and each immobilized into hormonal blood However, of remodeling is and loss of modulated process net be (loading), to to responsive age, bone diet, physical a the and gain regulation. Pi provide can or and Ca++ activity ions on pathological changes or the regulate in dysregulation bone of bone. and lead the hormones of Pi, to dependent absolutely that them these integrity chronic is Ca Because

of Physiology Bone

is and chapter. pattern skeleton this the beyond scope remodeling formation, and growth, complex The of of the processes of key role and for the regulation bone of Ca The required adult hormonal discussed. elements are the Pi of metabolism in understanding

resorption, microdamaged (yet osteoid synthesis into and adults, the form (2) remodeling of at site followed of the Pi, to controlled by new fragments bone the and with of destruction bone hydrolyzed bone to Ca++, fatigued matrix) involves of In and bone. release osteoid mineralization blood bone mineralized of matrix of by be Ca++ (1) or Pi cells the sites to Bone the occurs discrete continually remodeling multicellular referred bone basic as million at 2 throughout (BMU). skeleton by about of units packets

bone into fall classes: bone bone form involved or cells two The resorb cells cells major that in (osteoblasts) that destroy and remodeling (osteoclasts). is process bone highly process integrated of a remodeling ( The

Fig. ). 40.9 cells also express progenitors function. of induce lineage monocyte/ osteoclast Osteoblast-lineage differentiation from mature promote and factors the macrophage that osteoclasts of surface express (receptor Osteoblasts a factor called •Fig. early that differentiates hematopoietic cell colony-stimulating RANK (M-CSF), expands receptor progenitors which release monocyte preosteoclasts and (CFU-GM) into 40.9 Osteoblastregulationofosteoclastdifferentiationandfunction. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine Physiology. 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007.) [NF]-κB). factor nuclear activator of ligand (RANKL) surface. display on RANK cell their cells Osteoblast-lineage osteoclastogenesis. induces to RANK binds on RANKL preosteoclasts then and involves large giving to precursors, osteoclast multinucleated process of fusion osteoclast. rise This a several osteoclast-bone of tightly to the facing bone seals (see off perimeter mineralized area bone membrane contact osteoclast the adheres the The and of

Fig. 40.9 ). hydrolytic highly border, enzymes zone the secreted. ruffled a membrane lysosomal invaginated called forms are The sealed from within the HCl region and which The Pi also microenvironment the and bone dissolves acidic thereby mineral, osteoclast into Ca++ matrix. the releasing degrades blood, the bone enzyme-rich and beneath the an system. is of component additional inhibitory There RANK/RANKL osteoclast (OPG), can cells and inhibits factor Osteoblast-lineage (see called RANKL differentiation receptor produce and acts function decoy which a for soluble also osteoprotegerin a as

Fig. ). 40.9 between how osteoclast much osteoblasts expression bone RANKL balance resorption differentiation determines and occur. and OPG the Therefore by will

area the osteoid. Following reversal brief resorption a migrate to resorbed bone in then phase, is down and the BMU, adjacent there lay osteoblasts into begin process controlled and alkaline removes osteoid Ca++ that phosphatase, blood. slow, (pyrophosphate, glycoproteins) within a specific components Several from promote Pi mineralization, within osteoblasts within become lacunae. by that spaces become the sit they surrounded As called bone, and osteocytes entrapped small and communicating remain canaliculi through Osteocytes within cell adjacent with run that form processes cell junctions processes. interconnected new interconnected along osteon. or The with collectively as system canal, the osteocytes a layers bone, the concentric and Haversian referred are to central of formation bone additional are able to and in is signal Emerging mechanical osteocytes that needed. that bone sense stress local evidence indicates remodeling that to location. They can detect microdamage serves also bone that in at initiate

Asacalciotropichormone,PTHisapotentregulatorofboneresorptioninadults.ThePTH/PTHrPreceptorisexpressedonosteoblastsbutnotonosteoclasts.ThereforePTHactsonosteoblaststoincreaseexpressionofosteoblastparacrinefactors(i.e.,M-CSF,RANKL)thatupregulateosteoclastdifferentiationandboneresorption.1,25-DihydroxyvitaminDalsostimulatesboneresorptionbyupregulatingRANKLexpressioninosteoblasts.

ItisimportanttorecognizethatPTH(alongwith1,25-dihydroxyvitaminD)willpromoteboneresorptionwhenPTHlevelsarehigh(i.e.,duringahypocalcemicchallenge).WhenPTHlevelsarenormal,however,boneremodelingisalocallycontrolledprocessbywhicholddamagedboneisreplaced.Interestinglyithasbeenshownthatintermittentadministrationoflow-dosePTHpromotesosteoblastsurvivalandboneanabolicfunctions,increasesbonedensity,andreducestheriskoffractureinhumans.

DiscoveryoftheRANK/RANKL/OPGsystemhaspresentednewtherapeuticopportunitiesfortreatingosteoporosis.AbiologicalantiresorptivedrugbasedonahumanizedantibodydirectedagainstRANKLisnowavailablefortreatmentofpostmenopausalosteoporosis.Thishasproventobeaneffectivetreatmentthatimprovesbonedensityandreducestheriskoffracture.

whichischaracterizedbypoormineralizationofnewlyformedosteoid,visibleonradiographsaspseudofractures.Inseverecases,osteomalaciaresultsinweakness,bonepain,andincreasedriskoffracture. )producesahypocalcemicchallengebydecreasinggastrointestinalabsorptionofCa++ geneexpression,PTHsecretion,parathyroidcellproliferation,andPTH-mediatedupregulationofrenal1-hydroxylase.Intheabsenceofsufficient25-hydroxyvitaminDprecursor,however,1,25-dihydroxyvitaminDlevelsfall.ThesecondaryelevationofPTHmobilizesCa++ andPi.Adropinserum[Ca++]increasescompensatoryPTH Piproductinserumislow,bonemineralizationisimpaired.Inchildrenthisleadstorickets, × fromboneandkidneybutpromotesrenalexcretionofPi,causinghypophosphatemia.BecausetheCa++ Fig.40.10C inwhichthegrowthoflongbonesisabnormalandimpaired.Theribcage,wrists,andanklesshowcharacteristicbonedeformities,andtheimpairedmineralizationcausesbowingofthelegs.Inadults,vitaminDdeficiencyleadstoosteomalacia,

°PTH ˜1,25(OH)2D3 °1,25(OH)2D3

by Serum FGF23 Phosphate of Regulation

hypophosphatemic regulator by produced metabolism. a discovery the Pi to disorders of has hormone peptide osteocytes, a Study is of led FGF23, that to receptor FGF23 a like complex and, excretion. PTH, proximal in binds promote to cells tubule NPT2 Pi inhibits and osteomalacia secondary in production children in are excess adults. including to rickets FGF23, with hypophosphatemia of Several associated diseases in prevents (ADHR), hypophosphatemic cleavage inactivation. mutation In its dominant autosomal a and rickets FGF23 a endopeptidases by with on to is X-linked caused which the gene chromosome), mutation X the (protein FGF23. overproduction of homology PHEX rickets hypophosphatemic causes of (XLHR) also occult a produced FGF23 hypophosphatemic tumors, mesenchymal is slow-growing causing by syndrome. sometimes paraneoplastic ectopically Finally, thereby of to hypophosphatemia. Pi In production inhibition also reabsorption, addition inhibiting the D proximal exacerbating expression tubule, and of inhibits 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin of FGF23 1α-hydroxylase in not absorption and pathway many °GI completely role •Fig. physiological this is questions °1,25(OH)2D3 The of understood, remain, IntegratedhormoneresponsestoperturbationsofCa++ 40.10 (A),Pi(B),andvitaminD(C).

Pi are including sensed. where and levels how but of is of tightly temporally long-term increased calcium, that suggest as elevation recent Pi to evidence either respect FGF23. as Pi range, with production not with is associated or concentration regulated of D FGF23 an loop, by negative 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin feedback to appears osteocytes. what emerging production decreases In be

and hormones Gonadal adrenal have on bone. profound effects steroid bone on 17β-Estradiol is anabolic of regulator (E2; important has osteoclast and osteoblast a effects and function. see potent apoptosis over favoring of resorption. and bone formation osteoclasts, Estrogen of osteoblasts survival thereby promotes testosterone conversion of to men some of local have effects are to effects, E2 although in also due ). anabolic bone these Androgens (see of bone and The for account the combined effects in mass testosterone men. peak higher E2 observed women, rapid in initial years, is estrogen both about that phase a in an lasts sexes. slower bone similar bone results postmenopausal followed loss of of phase age-related by that loss 5 second deficiency In susceptible osteoporosis. women postmenopausal to this are For reason,

promote intestinal at inhibit therapeutic Ca bone Glucocorticoids resorption absorption. and doses high formation. the differentiation, effect which However, most of adverse osteoblast impairs is bone critical inhibition and patients levels risk at as treated should with carefully. for monitored are an high a or Therefore immunosuppressive be antiinflammatory osteoporosis glucocorticoid-induced glucocorticoid drug of

of Ca++/Pi Metabolism Integrated Physiological Regulation

shown hypocalcemic of a challenge in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin to D response is integrated PTH The and

Fig. 40.10A . on stimulates [Ca++] PTH. of detected decrease CaSR by in A secretion the parathyroid chief serum cells the distal extent and Henle. loop in Ca++ thick to in distal the of In lesser limb tubule the kidney, ascending increases the PTH a reabsorption of Pi blood. to increases PTH Ca++ bone, to stimulates bone osteoblast and elevated In of release resorption leads express into lineage activity cells osteoclast and which increased and RANKL, levels. in expression thereby increasing the stimulates tubule, 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin proximal 1α-hydroxylase renal D PTH of RANKL, the Pi in resorption. amplifying and effect 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin Ca stimulates on PTH of of bone expression D small and upregulates thereby the osteoblast intestine absorption increase the Pi bone clearance, PTH and lower from the reabsorption inhibits the mobilized In counterbalancing Pi and Pi gut. to tubule thereby proximal kidney, NPT2 in

Pi , serum as elicit in will regulated hormonal Ca++ responses as tightly not (see Although perturbations also

Fig. 40.10B ). kidney, and Pi the stimulates intestine. serum mobilize Low production of the which will Ca 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin turn in Pi from in D in will suppress prevent Ca++ to secretion hypercalcemia. rise PTH The in in enhance reabsorption tubule Pi. This to will Pi proximal drop the restore serum PTH help Pi course, favor Pi decrease which time tubule. FGF23 reabsorption the serum proximal inhibit a will production, a in will in Over longer allow hypophosphatemia correction of These maintaining integrated while responses will normocalcemia. In the hormonal see responses Clinic box to For the deficiency, D and vitamin

Fig. 40.10C

isaresultofboneresorption,increasedgastrointestinalCaabsorption(mediatedby1,25-dihydroxyvitaminD),andincreasedrenalCa++ Primary iscausedbyexcessiveproductionofPTHbytheparathyroidglands.Itismostfrequentlycausedbyasingleadenoma confinedtooneoftheparathyroids.OwingtoelevatedPTH,patientswithprimaryhyperparathyroidismhavehighserum[Ca++]and,inmostcases,lowserum[Pi].Hypercalcemia hyperparathyroidism reabsorption.Themajorsymptomsofthedisorderarerelatedtoincreasedboneresorption,hypercalcemia,andhypercalciuria. Theseincluderadiographicmanifestationsofexcessiveboneresorptionandpsychologicaldisorders,particularlydepression.Progressiveneurologicalsymptomsincludefatigue,mentalconfusion,andatveryhighlevels(>15mg/dL),coma.Kidneystones(nephrolithiasis) composedofcalciumphosphatearecommonbecausehypercalcemialeadstohypercalciuria,andincreasedPiclearancecausesphosphaturia. Fortunately,routinebloodchemistryscreeningoverthepastseveraldecadeshasresultedinearlierdetectionofprimaryhyperparathyroidism,precludingdevelopmentofseveresymptomsinmostcases.

1. [Ca++] is by rate 2. of determined the Ca Serum rate the and [Pi] renal absorption gastrointestinal by absorption the resorption, bone and tissue of determined by influx tract, Pi and formation the by tract, gastrointestinal Serum is soft excretion. very a bone [Ca++] Serum and excretion. resorption, formation within and narrow is efflux, renal maintained normally fluctuates normally range. Serum [Pi] over a range. wider relatively

3.

The and PTH, major [Pi] [Ca++] regulating and hormones (calcitriol), serum D 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin physiological are FGF23.

4.

synthesized of 7-dehydrocholesterol is UVB light in from in the D or skin presence acquired the Vitamin diet. in in is activated 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D. 1α-hydroxylase by liver It renal hydroxylated the to to 25-hydroxycholecalciferol and

5.

promotes D and increases absorption Ca++ modestly intestinal Pi absorption. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin

6.

The out flux by and relative determined the bone Pi is osteoblastic Ca++ rates into of of of and

Bhattacharyya al. N, et growth and the factor future Fibroblast field directions. of state 23: Trends Metab. Endocrinol 2012;23:610-618.

BF. Boyce and osteoclast the osteoclasts in Advances of regulation functions. Res. Dent J 2013;92:860-867.

et al. Christakos S, action, Vitamin effects. metabolism, of pleiotropic and mechanism molecular D: Rev. Physiol 2016;96:365-408.

formation bone resorption. osteoclastic bone and

7.

on not is receptor on The PTH/PTHrP osteoblasts, expressed osteoclasts. on catabolic has and dose the both anabolic actions in bone and depending administration. PTH of timing promotes bone of RANKL and resorption osteoblasts. upregulation in M-CSF PTH by

8.

by differentiation and osteoblasts 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin osteoclast bone serum the mineralization [Ca++] binds and D support to maintaining RANKL [Pi]. in VDR via promotes appropriate to

chapter be 1. should answer completion following the this questions: the student Upon able of to

and parvicellular the relationship its functional of Describe composition and structural hypothalamic and neurons. the pituitary gland and to magnocellular structure

2.

neurohormones the magnocellular which mechanisms and by transported, and oxytocin released (ADH) Discuss synthesized, are hormone by the antidiuretic neurons.

3.

scheme gland. a axis, factors, illustrating hormones, including loops pituitary typical a peripheral endocrine central and and input, feedback endocrine basic a releasing the components hypothalamic of Diagram set the point. Explain of concept a

4.

List types a hormones adenohypophysis tropic they produce, the endocrine that and of share noting hormones cell the the common subunit.

5.

classic Contrast explain they of differ. somatotropes endocrine the and how and axes with the lactotropes axes

6.

regulation of of state. growth growth (GH) Discuss growth, role I the in and insulinlike hormone the hormone factor (IGF-I) inthe the growth and fasted actions of

7.

lactation. and of the in role prolactin maintenance of Describe the initiation

( called g hypophysis) base the yet the is in complex the small a structure forebrain of (≈0.5 endocrine gland at (also weight) pituitary he

Fig. ). 41.1 adenohypophysis called neurohypophysis. called the composed an and neural epithelial is It of the structure component a composed of cell adenohypophysis hormones. is six five secrete that types The neurohypophysis releases neurohormones. The several gland the of by hypothalamus regulated and endocrine loops. All the negativeand are positive-feedback by pituitary functions

types of of examination two ( epithelial neural Microscopic reveals tissue: the and distinct pituitary

Fig. 41.2 ). pituitary is The the epithelial called human portion of the adenohypophysis. gland and adenohypophysis pituitary up as the are The referred anterior anterior pituitary, pituitary anterior the the of referred and lobe is its hormones. makes portion often to to hormones of as the which pars pars (1) distalis, regresses adult The adenohypophysis, around tuberalis, parts: composed stalk, (2) makes three intermedia, which wraps about 90% and of which in the the and the adenohypophysis humans. up is is the (3) of absent pars the

represents portion is downgrowth and neurohypophysis the a hypothalamus. the The called of neural of pituitary the nervosa, The inferior the the called most lobe portion called simply posterior the pituitary). of pars neurohypophysis pituitary also the is posterior of (or end funnel-shaped of a median eminence neurohypophysis, swelling called the the develops. At the superior extends median the the the neurohypophysis of the that The pars down infundibulum. from is eminence called nervosa to portion infundibulum up (see make the the The and tuberalis connection between pars the hypothalamus physical pituitary and stalk—a gland pituitary

Fig. 41.2).

The called gland and turcica. pituitary situated is bone within lobes) of sella a the (anterior the depression sphenoid posterior only up have brain is expand, one of against and Generally, into the cancers the pituitary way which chiasma. the to optic associated increase pituitary headaches. visual abnormalities of visual with Thus acuity and size field the or is any commonly in sellae. the turcica sella called sealed brain The a diaphragma is from the membrane off by

The Neurohypophysis

neurohormone of is that bed. pars structure nervosa a neurovascular a site rich is adjacent the release to The capillary peptide arginine (ADH, or that are antidiuretic are released hormone vasopressin) oxytocin. hormones and The located to neuronal a collection that residing the within outside neurons collection nuclei ganglion cell cell (PVN) the hypothalamus refers pars in the bodies neuronal system of nervosa (SON) (a residing the nucleus (CNS); central nuclei bodies and the the nervous bodies CNS). a a project The supraoptic of is to are cell paraventricular of of cell the of and these as are large stalk neurons axons project hypothalamohypophyseal down as magnocellular, The bodies the infundibular described they tracts. •Fig. are Individual magnocellular hormone producing neurons specific, 41.1 Cross-sectionalimageoftheheaddemonstratingtheproximityofthehypothalamusandpituitaryglandandtheirconnectionbyaneurohypophyseal(pituitary)stalk.

oxytocin. or either ADH ( the in These nervosa axons pars terminate

Fig. 41.3 ). In addition glial-like termini called to SON there and PVN, pituicytes. support processes are axonal from cells and the capillaries circulation. is extensively thereby are of hormones and The systemic vascularized the into fenestrated, the pituitary diffusion posterior facilitating

of Oxytocin Synthesis and ADH

small amino amino limited two activity. overlapping oxytocin that have are and in (nine acids, differ only yet they acids) peptides ADH and synthesized ( ADH oxytocin preprohormones are as

Fig. ). 41.4 of prohormone (associated neurophysin (associated ADH) or a Each oxytocin with co-secreted neurophysin harbors the ADH II I structure peptide, with oxytocin). or and either preprovasophysin and These preprohormones preprooxyphysin. called are endoplasmic as The is reticulum. transported cleaved into peptide the is signal peptide the N-terminal and the reticulum bodies ( prohormones the In in in membrane-bound SON endoplasmic and granules packaged apparatus within PVN, are the Golgi secretory cell

Fig. ). 41.5 stalk The pars triphosphate nervosa. transport mechanism down millimeters termini hour) “fast” (i.e., granules (ATP)-dependent secretory per the a are axonal to conveyed infundibular through adenosine axonal the in of to hormone secretory neurophysin. prohormones cleaved are amounts the equimolar and of granule, the During produce proteolytically transit processed granules in are termini. axonal containing peptides the stored fully Secretory of light Herring be to by stored of Expansions can termed presence due bodies. granules the observed secretory the microscopy and are termini

the its SON are primarily stimuli and response detected at oxytocin nervosa ADH in to the that the released and dendrites and pars are cell PVN. body from in the of released mainly interneurons. are form hypothalamic These stimuli from in neurotransmitters axon. sufficient will action depolarize propagate an stimulus down potential the and With neurons the extracellular of the and in [Ca++] into pars intracellular axonal potential oxytocin results (see with action exocytosis ADH fluid increases of a neurophysins or nervosa the along At response, termini the stimulus-secretion with the

Fig. 41.5). the enter Hormones and neurophysins be peripheral blood. circulation, can both measured in and

of and ADH Oxytocin Actions Regulation and

(antidiuresis). at kidney acts water primarily retain the to ADH in of were regulation The and ADH ADH described of actions secretion . and labor acts promote letdown the of milk Oxytocin breast to myoepithelial on cells the nursing. primarily during pregnant uterus on to induce oxytocin actions are of in discussed regulation and The

The Adenohypophysis

The cell six composed is that endocrine pars five produce types hormones ( of distalis

). Table 41.1 lactotropes types, staining pituitary referred the and whereas Because as of the corticotropes, to histological the to basophils, thyrotropes, referred (see and properties as gonadotropes somatotropes the are cell of are pituitary acidophils

Fig. 41.2B

hormones the Before the it adenohypophysis, understand individual the of •Fig. important structural discussing to is A,Grossstructureofthepituitarygland.Thepituitaryglandisbelowthehypothalamusandisconnectedtoitbythepituitarystalk.Theglandsitswithinthesellaturcica,afossawithinthesphenoidbone,andiscoveredbyaduralreflection,thediaphragmasellae.Theparsdistalismakesupmostoftheanteriorpituitary.B,Theparsdistalisisderivedfromepithelialtissuethatiscomposedofacidophils (A)(somatotropesandlactotropes)andbasophils(B)(thyrotropes,gonadotropes,andcorticotropes).C,Theposteriorpituitaryisderivedfromneuraltissueandhasahistologicalappearanceofnonmyelinatednerves.Cp,chromophobes;H,Herringbodies. 41.2 Histology. (A,ModifiedfromStevensA.In:LoweJS[ed].Human Histology. Functional 3rded.Philadelphia:Elsevier;2005.BandC,FromYoungBetal[eds].Wheater’s 5thed.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.) •Fig. 41.3 Magnocellularneuronsofthehypothalamus(paraven-tricularandsupraopticnuclei)projecttheiraxonsdowntheinfundibularprocessandterminateintheparsnervosa(posteriorlobe),wheretheyreleasetheirhormones(eitherADHoroxytocin)intoacapillarybed. of (ModifiedfromLarsenPRetal[eds].Williams Endocrinol-ogy. Textbook 10thed.Philadelphia:Saunders;2003. neurosecretory Optic of cells chiasm )Capilary pituitary lobe Hypothalamus bed lobe Posterior of Anterior pituitary Magnocellular

Becauseposteriorpituitaryhormonesaresynthesizedinthehypothalamusratherthanthepituitary,hypophysectomy (pituitaryremoval)doesnotnecessarilypermanentlydisruptsynthesisandsecretionofthesehormones.Immediatelyafterhypophysectomy,secretionofthehormonesdecreases.However,overaperiodofweekstheseveredproximalendofthetractwillshowhistologicalmodificationandpituicyteswillformaroundtheneuronterminals.Secretoryvacuolesareseen,andsecretionofhormoneresumesfromthisproximalend.Secretionofhormonecanevenpotentiallyreturntonormallevels.Incontrast,alesionhigheruponthepituitarystalkcanleadtolossofneuronalcellbodiesinthePVNandSON.

the the of and functional of ( the organization adenohypophysis axes context endocrine in

Fig. 41.1 ). 41.6 levels pituitary Each glands. peripheral is of three cells: (1) axis (2) composed cells, neurons, anterior endocrine and hypothalamic of endocrine endocrine (3) scheme) pituitary releasing (XTH). tropic specific of neurons hormones XRH secretion stimulate Hypothalamic this hypothalamic in specific (designated generic hormones release that secondarily release-inhibiting a cases, regulated some hormone (XIH). is of production In pituitary tropic hormone by a hormones (X). tropic endocrine then stimulate hormones and Pituitary target to glands peripheral peripheral act on specific release them and on the production several it and functions: physiology, it hormone regulates of has back tropic pituitary aspects of X to respectively hormones and general feeds inhibit gland releasing secretion The human (see peripheral hormones, hypothalamus and negatively two

Fig. 41.6

pituitary deficiency. isexpressedsoonafterRathke’spouch(embryologicalprecursoroftheadenohypophysis)formsandpromotesthecelllineagesofsomatotropes,lactotropes,thyrotropes,andgonadotropes.Inhumans,raremutationsinthePROP1 generesultinatypeofcombined hormone Significantprogresshasbeenmadeinunderstandingthedifferentiationofthefiveendocrinecellsoftheparsdistalisfromoneprecursorcell.ThehomeodomaintranscriptionfactorPROP-1 genedisruptadrenalandgonadalfunction,includinglossofgonadotropesinthepituitarygland.TPIT ACTH generesultinisolated (SF-1) gene(seeCorticotropessection).MutationsinthehumanTPIT mutationshavedwarfismandintellectualdisability.Thenuclearhormonereceptor–relatedtranscriptionfactorsteroidogenic TheseindividualsdisplaydwarfismduetolackofGH,cognitivedeficitssecondarytohypothyroidism,andinfertilityduetolackofgonadotropins.Asubsequentlyexpressedpituitary-specifichomeodomaintranscriptionfactorcalledPOU1F1 deficiency. wasoriginallyidentifiedintheadrenalcortexandgonadsasaregulatorofsteroidogenicenzymegeneexpression.SF-1isalsoexpressedinGnRHneuronsinthehypothalamusandinpituitarygonadotropes,whereitregulatestranscriptionofLHandFSH.MutationsintheSF1 factor-1 isatranscriptionfactorinvolvedinthedifferentiationofcorticotropes.TPIT,actingwithothertranscriptionfactors,promotesdifferentiationofcorticotropesandexpressionofthePOMC (formerlyknownasPit-1)isrequiredfordifferentiationofthyrotropes,somatotropes,andlactotropes,anditdirectlystimulatestranscriptionandexpressionofTSH,GH,andprolactin.AffectedindividualswithPOU1F1 insufficiency adrenal Thisresultsinaformofsecondary thatrequireslifelongreplacementwithglucocorticoids(see

neurohormonal. hypothalamic pituitary regulation is anterior The function of An composed or of cell collectively hypothalamus nuclei hypophysis) referred small, area (i.e., of to hypophysiotropic to region bodies project the the to contains stimulatory that the as the parvocellular, axons

splicing Transcription, •Fig. excision, 41.4 Synthesisandprocessingofpreprovasopressinorpreprooxytocin.

eminence. median magnocellular the distinct SON the They the project pars are PVN neurons of nervosa. and from that to at their termini (Fig. secrete hormones eminence releasing median Parvocellular the axonal neurons from

41.7 ). portal The vessel is a enter releasing plexus the by as capillaries the heart). fenestrated pars and without in conveyed portal in going hypothalamohypophyseal are then and through distalis a that hormones vessel second defined capillary (a plexus primary ends located of capillaries vessels begins the to a of the plexus, the to secondary out and types cell capillary At on cognate their within diffuse the distalis. receptors hormones releasing the pars vasculature specific bind fragile between can hypothalamic disrupted be hypothalamus the pituitary is or by surgery, somewhat and link pituitary neurovascular physical The and trauma, disease. stalk) (i.e., functional later). tropic anterior decline isolation stalk of the to hormones Damage and prolactin anterior except in pituitary pituitary result (discussed in all a subsequent the

of axes. the of endocrine up level the make the cells intermediate adenohypophysis The (see hormones—adrenocorticotropic (ACTH, and hormone (TSH), The hormone (FSH), corticotropin), hormone referred called hormone thyroid-stimulating as follicle-stimulating prolactin (PRL) are protein adenohypophysis tropic growth hormone secretes that to (LH), (GH), luteinizing also hormones

41.1). Table peripheral on exceptions, hormones few cognate With to their bind a receptors endocrine tropic glands. not Because pituitary generally of hormones arrangement, do tropic directly physiological (see this regulate responses

38). Chapter

The 1. endocrine the important following features: have axes

to specific individual a range. maintained individual, set from point, usually which activity is The a normal a normally at within varies axis of peripheral point stimulation and determined the by feedback. The integration negative hypothalamic hormone of set is regulated responses generally acting the the by negative endocrine is hormone but pituitary by hypothalamus Importantly, (see not peripheral feedback itself by on the specific and physiological a axis exerted

Fig. ). 41.6 if and Thus of pituitary hypothalamic the will tropic secretion hormone releasing hormones a level drops, peripheral increase. of hormones negative level pituitary As decrease of hypothalamus and hormone the feedback. the secretion because of will rises, peripheral some with parameters to Although produce. hypoglycemia) can regulate they nonendocrine function the respect endocrine axes physiological semiautonomously the axes, (e.g., acute physiological changes certain exerting hormone. the competing a regulate of configuration multiple without hormone organ organ thyroid regulation these peripheral can This means systems negative-feedback hormone) (e.g., systems mercy autonomy of means within Clinically axis. aspects a derangements the might multiple specific whatever are exist that of physiology patient’s this a at partial

2.

CNS and and seasonal are often through pulsatile in a hypophysiotropic to Hypothalamic are entrained secreted rhythms input. manner neurons daily lower hypothalamic brain. from of and levels inputs higher neuronal variety receive nuclei of a the Additionally, These be Fig. • can and Synthesis, 41.5 transport processing, preprovasopressin. of in five NP is provasopressin hormone active. the a axonal the synthesized biologically arranges molecules. (NP), intraaxonal fragments Larsen to cell the al cleaved [eds]. process three pars = magnocellular systemic (ADH) from termini All et bodies (GP). that (also nervosa, infundibular of During packaged secreted down in from blood. granules. glycoprotein called (posterior AVP tetramers AVP neurophysin PR granules active and the transport arginine ADH is Human (AVP (Modified pituitary) and bind C-terminal and is [AVP]) ADH), proteolytically nervosa neurosecretory the the into Only hypothalamic are pars the enter into vasopressin into 10th Endocrinology. ed. 2003.) of Textbook Philadelphia: Williams Saunders;

cortex, liver) gonads, •Fig. (Thyroid, X Primary Disease adrenal Endocrine 41.6 Negative-feedbackloopsregulatinghormonesecretioninatypicalhypothalamus-pituitaryperipheralglandaxis.X,peripheralglandhormone;XIH,hypothalamic-inhibitinghormone;XRH,hypothalamic-releasinghormone;XTH,pituitarytropichormone.

function (e.g., (e.g., or onset reproductive puberty) at short-term inputs. stress/infections) various long-term of endocrine set allows for amount an of changing setting axis that of the of hypothalamus axis. of information the considerable point inclusion a Thus in integration or can pituitary of neurogenic states broad alter range function. means a complex Clinically this striking lower of emotional a dwarfism hormone or pituitary as children a rates Psychosocial have intense secretion subject is growth example stress abuse which the to in result decreased gland. by growth

3. to endocrine at the a thyroid or or low a peripheral gland level may (e.g., be of of levels peripheral pituitary Abnormally high hormone thyroid), hormone) the gland, hypothalamus. (e.g., defect due the the disorders, referred (see secondary, primary, and lesions respectively as Such endocrine tertiary to are

Fig. 41.6 ). allows axis where A feedback lies. the relationships of physician defect thorough the determine understanding an the to within hormone. endocrine severe complete to tend the of absence often Primary because involve deficiencies they most peripheral be the

Endocrine of Adenohypophysis Function the

The following the types: cell lactotropes of corticotropes, and thyrotropes, endocrine gonadotropes, (see somatotropes, adenohypophysis consists

Table 41.1

hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal the axis. stimulate cortex part adrenal as Corticotropes the (HPA) of ). (corticotropin), produce stimulates two of which hormone the zones ACTH the cortex Corticotropes (see adrenal peptide called a prohormone proopiomelanocortin (POMC). is synthesized as larger part a 39–amino that acid is of ACTH are also Thus as referred POMC to cells. corticotropes melanocyte-stimulating POMC for ( hormone opioids), ACTH, enkephalins and isoforms two peptide sequence (MSH), the (endogenous harbors endorphins of

Fig.

41.8 ). which only secreted human hormone the expresses corticotrope sole However, active pro-hormone cells. convertase-1, as produces by ACTH the these and cleaved The physiological from β-lipotropic neither fragments N-terminal which (β-LPH), of plays are are POMC role other humans. the that in a fragment hormone

Physiology 740 & Levy SECTION8Berne •Fig. Neurovascularlinkbetweenthehypothalamusandtheanteriorlobe(parsdistalis)ofthepitu-itary.Parvicellular“hypophysiotropic”neurosecretoryneuronswithinvarioushypothalamicnucleiprojectaxonstothemedianeminence,wheretheysecretereleasinghormones(RHs).RHsflowdownthepituitarystalkinthehypothalamohypophysealportalvesselstotheanteriorpituitary.RHs(andrelease-inhibitinghormones[seetext])regulatesecretionoftropichormonesfromthefivecelltypesoftheanteriorpituitary. 41.7 Textbook Endocrinology. (FromLarsenPRetal[eds].Williams of 10thed.Philadelphia:Saunders;2003. Hypothalamus Hypophysiotropic transport Anterior Stimulation of Hormone blood endocrine pituitary or anterior on release Action in pituitary cells glands vessels in released of beds Hormone lobe hormone transport Hypothalamohypophyseal cells blood Parvocellular in portal Hormone eminence )Hormone-secreting Median neurosecretory inhibition Capillary transport axons hormones

and of about as ACTH unbound has circulates hormone short minutes. 10 a an half-life on (MC2R) in melanocortin-2 adrenal the the receptor binds ( cells cortex to It

Fig. 41.9 ). genes. expression and ACTH androgen of enzyme steroidogenic acutely adrenal increasing increases by cortisol production ACTH zones within growth adrenal long of the In two the term, survival cortex and (see promotes

ACTH is under by the hypothalamus. control stimulatory of procorticotropin-releasing hormone peptide parvocellular neurons expresses (pro-CRH) the (see A hypothalamic subset

41.1). Table

peptide. CRH, an to 41–amino acid processed is Pro-CRH amidated increases secretion the of acutely ACTH and POMC CRH gene. transcription stimulates CRH action that express which The the of CRH also ADH, on neurons potentiates corticotropes. express parvocellular ACTH and peak pronounced nadir diurnal a morning pattern, a has in a secretion with early

onmelanocytes.Atveryhighlevels,ACTHcancross-reactwiththeMC1Rreceptoronskinmelanocytes(see insteadofACTH.Keratinocytessecreteα-MSHinresponsetoultravioletlight,andα-MSHactsasaparacrinefactoronneighboringmelanocytestodarkentheskin.α-MSHbindstotheMC1R causesdarkeningoftheskin(e.g.,inCushing’sdisease).KeratinocytesinthebasallayeroftheepidermisalsoexpressthePOMCgenebutprocessittoα-MSH Atsupraphysiologicallevels,ACTH

Fig.41.9 ).ThusincreasedskinpigmentationisoneindicatorofexcesscirculatingACTH.

Fig. 41.10).

pulsatile. ACTH—is CRH—and of of hence In addition, secretion secretion

( many axis, the regulators of CNS mediated There and through are the of multiple them are HPA

Fig. 41.11). and both types of (e.g., neurogenic Many stress, fear) systemic

TABLE 41.1

Hormonal Hypothalamic •Fig. Action, Feedback Cell Regulation and Production and Types: Adenohypophysis Regulation, 41.8 Theoriginalgenetranscriptofproopiomelanocortincontainsstructuresofmultiplebioactivecompounds.ACTH,adrenocorticotropichormone;CLIP,corticotropin-likeintermediatepeptide;MSH,melanocyte-stimulatinghormone.NotethatACTHistheonlybioactivepeptidereleasedbythehumancorticotrope.

•Fig. 41.9 NormallevelsofACTHactontheMC2Rtoincreasecortisol.SupraphysiologicallevelsofACTHduetodecreasedcortisolproductionactonboththeMC2RandtheMC1Ronmelanocytesandcauseskindarkening. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine Physiology. 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007. (physiological MC2R of CRH and Skin in CRH ACTH Cell high Steroidogenesis Melanin Release expression secretion response median expression infection), glucose PKA Loss levels) ˝-MSH eminence (−) High Cortisol Pituitary )UV particular affinity dispersal CRH-R1 Low (−) Cortisol darkening • ° stimulate in cortex PKA binding feedback Physiological, growth Blood affinity POMC to neurons CRH physiological skin of disease PKA (supraphysiological ACTH. Adrenal at (e.g., binding In synthesis corticotrope Inflammatory Melanocytes ˛ Cortisol light Addison’s effects Keratinocytes skin ACTH ACTH to levels) MC1R affinity POMC ° in Diverse ° the CRH and are stress The CNS. effects via ADH through mediated stress from many response severe high can negative of forms feedback levels. cortisol persist The despite to ability axis stress. the means to HPA set hypothalamus to the alter of This the has the response in point Severe the the hypercortisolism. is as hypersecretion can depression axis tertiary and a chronic a result of development of factor HPA CRH in reset of

where gene feedback gene expression pituitary, decreases and it pro-CRH POMC of suppresses release and and ACTH it Cortisol exerts the negative hypothalamus, on the expression secretion, CRH. on where Because cortisol and system the HPA the axis on immune system are (see closely coupled. effects has ), profound immune the interleukin IL-2, axis. HPA the cytokines—particularly IL-6—stimulate (IL)-1, and Moreover,

secreting TSH axis. function the the (thyrotropin) hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid Thyrotropes part by regulate hormone of thyroid as one three pituitary of TSH glycoprotein (see hormones is

Table that 41.1) also include

later). and LH FSH (discussed (α-GSU), β called ( heterodimer a (β-TSH) α-glycoprotein is subunit, TSH an the subunit of composed and α subunit a

Fig. ). 41.12 (i.e., is all β-TSH, subunit the α-GSU whereas FSH, TSH, LH, β-FSH, is and unique). hormone β β-LH specific The are common and to and receptors. of specificity enhances the hormones circulation Glycosylation their affinity the stability the increases subunits for of and their in TSH, relatively half-lives glycoprotein placental FSH, of of (and ranging are and human [hCG]) LH long, from tens hormone, chorionic minutes The an hours. several LH-like to gonadotropin

to TSH receptor (see cells thyroid binds TSH on the follicle

Chapter 42). As discussed in

Chapter TSH 42, thyroid complex stimulates every essentially is aspect multistep thyroid hormones and of of production a function. process, of tropic cells. TSH a stimulates also hypertrophy, epithelial effect strong survival thyroid and hyperplasia, has and levels feedback. elevated is of the TSH the iodide geographical required negative of because of In for thyroid are availability limited hormone), regions where (iodide is synthesis reduced levels can goiter. growth in of a called neck striking the producing thyroid, the bulge produce Elevated TSH a

•Fig. DiurnalpatternofserumACTH. 41.10 Physiology. (ModifiedfromPor-terfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007. level Serum Sleep ACTH )Awake

hormone releasing hormone thyrotrope (see The is stimulated (TRH) pituitary the thyrotropin-releasing by

Table 41.1). by TRH, of a parvocellular •Fig. produced subset 41.11 Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenalaxisillustratingfactorsregulatingsecretionofcorticotropin-releasinghormone(CRH).ACTH,adrenocorticotropichormone. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine Physiology. 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007. feedback ACTH feedback Short •Fig. )CRH point (cortisol) Chemical rhythms (hypoglycemia) Others Set Physical Diurnal Corticotroph (ACTH) Emotional Long TSH subunit receptor ˜-FSH subunit receptor LH subunit LH subunit Plus (°-GSU) receptor TSH )andbindstotheLHreceptor.FSH,follicle-stimulatinghormone;hCG,humanchorionicgonadotropin;LH,luteinizinghormone;TSH,thyroid-stimulatinghormone.˜-TSH °-glycoprotein Pituitaryglycoproteinhormones.hCGismadebytheplacenta(see subunit LH FSH hCG ˜-hCG FSH ˜-LH receptor 41.12

receptor PKC All • Thyroid Cell and secretion epithelial thyroid CNS TRH TSH 3 TRH T3 receptor synthesis T4, (−) Ca++ • thyrotrope T3 cell T hormone Pituitary (−) and aspects Diurnal inputs PKA of growth TSH TSH rhythm synthesis secretion TSH •Fig. 41.13 Hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroidaxis.PKA,proteinkinaseA;PKC,proteinkinaseC;T3,triiodothyronine(activeformofthyroidhormone);T4,thyroxine;TRH,thyrotropin-releasinghormone;TSH,thyroid-stimulatinghormone. Physiology. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007.) of (pyro-Glu) neurons, is tripeptide at amidated its glutamine and cyclization with N-terminus a an a hypothalamic C-terminus. sequence. within is contains copies TRH as synthesized its of a larger TRH prohormone that six on to the receptor binds It thyrotropes TRH (Fig. ). 41.13 lowest hours, is rhythm a released TRH overnight TRH regulated dinner numerous CNS-mediated time). and (highest to neurons around are diurnal stimuli, according by during CRH, secretion contrast to is by TRH in but of also stress, secretion stress regulated inhibits TRH. infection. and stress, includes This physical starvation, latter 2 ) pituitary both neurons. to Triiodothyronine feed see type thyroxine back TRH-producing (the via conversion negatively deiodinase-mediated thyrotropes and on and T3; (T4) (T3) by and β-TSH secretion production pituitary inhibiting TRH expression to parvocellular Thyroid hormone the both also of represses while sensitivity TRH and neurons. thyrotropes

whichresultsinfailureoftheGnRHneuronalprecursorstoproperlymigratetothehypothalamusandestablishaneurovascularlinktotheparsdistalis. Duringembryonicdevelopment,GnRHneuronsmigratetothemediobasalhypothalamusfromthenasalplacode.PatientswithKallmann hypogonadism, oftenassociatedwithlossofthesenseofsmell(anosmia).ThisisduetoamutationintheKAL syndrome hypogonadotropic havetertiary gene,

The Gonadotrope

sexes. The secretes the gonadotropins) (collectively called and gonads regulates of function LH and FSH in both gonadotrope role such in the integral the and As the ( axis gonadotrope axis hypothalamic-pituitary-testis plays hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian an

Fig. 41.14

different not and co-secreted and into ADH granules are secretory example). equimolar LH in segregated neurophysin, (in and for are to contrast amounts FSH of independent and by gonadotropes. regulation secretion FSH/LH This allows LH FSH gonadal on are in function will actions be discussed complex, of in The and and especially detail in women, . In gonadotropins estrogen men secretion and testosterone general, in in women. promote and secretion progesterone both inhibin growth hormone protein also called FSH sexes. transforming in of (TGF)-β–related factor increases a secretion

hormone (GnRH; releasing formerly FSH gonadotropin-releasing hormone, regulated are by and one hypothalamic called LHRH). LH secretion 10–amino subset neurons acid parvocellular by peptide a GnRH hypothalamic of (see produced a GnRH is

Fig. 41.14 ). processing as is and, a N-terminus cyclized decapeptide, of a an produced prohormone its its larger and with part a is modified to GnRH glutamine C-terminus. at as (pyro-Glu) amidated

a is manner in GnRH pulsatile released (

Fig. of and gonadotrope. important the have the the effects pulsatile secretion ), the pulses both frequency 41.15 on and Continuous in a in secretion. of decrease the GnRH FSH thereby resulting GnRH infusion LH and receptor, downregulates GnRH, In pulsatile secretion contrast, is LH FSH desensitize the and and to gonadotrope normal. does secretion not preferentially frequency GnRH pulse a one increases hour, LH ( per secretion At of

Fig. ). 41.16 At slower frequency one FSH 3 preferentially of increases GnRH pulse per secretion. a hours, synthesis sex steroid Gonadotropins (see increase

Fig. ). 41.14 men, of and In and back the level hypothalamus. testosterone at the negatively estrogen pituitary the feed

other Ca++, pathways? PKC, SlowFast GnRH GnRH GnRH cell synthesis Steroidogenesis (+) Stress FSH gonadotrope median receptor Sex (−) FSH receptor and PubertyCNS Inhibin FSHLH synthesis at inputs GnRH Prolactin receptorLH pulses (−) steroids PKA steroids eminence Opioids Pulsatile Gametogenesis neurons (−)Sex GnRH of Gonadal secretion Pituitary release LH pulses secretion and (+) GnRH types •Fig. 41.14 Hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadalaxis.FSH,follicle-stimulatinghormone;GnRH,gonadotropin-releasinghormone;LH,luteinizinghormone. (ModifiedfromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine

Physiology. 3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007.)

a Exogenous pill. been also men a function possible male and contraceptive gonadotropin component has progesterone as in of inhibits considered on negatively back inhibin in selectively and men Additionally, secretion FSH women. feeds the feed progesterone the and gonadotropic level pituitary. In negatively women, function testosterone back of at hypothalamus and on doses, FSH feedback low secretion. and exerts also on At LH estrogen negative days to lesser LH cause in surge a for levels However, and estrogen extent high a FSH secretion. maintained 3 and positive ovulation, observed feedback, which the is at critical hypothalamus promoting in is pituitary. This pulse frequency amplitude the and At hypothalamus, GnRH increase. by gonadotrope enhancing signaling levels both greatly of estrogen levels increase and GnRH, pituitary, GnRH the increasing to At (see receptor by the high sensitivity postreceptor the

Somatotrope The

The produces ( (somatotropin) somatotrope the of part is axis and GH hypothalamic-pituitary-liver

Fig. ). 41.17 of where the it target major growth acid 191–amino lactogen GH is these liver, GH factor there placental is of to is human a PRL (IGF)-I. is and (hPL); A accordingly that protein in some insulinlike similar production hormones. overlap stimulates among activity 1.2 Multiple 1600 10 forms Physiology min) SECTION8Berne 1300 0 1400 1200 & GH LH(ng/mL) 1.8 6 Hours 0.6 8 GnRH(pg/10 Levy 746 of 1500 12

Fig. FluctuationofperipheralveinplasmaLHlevelsandportalveinplasmaGnRHlevelsinunanesthetized,ovariectomizedfemalesheep.EachpulseofLHiscoordinatedwithapulseofGnRH.ThissupportstheviewthatpulsatilityofLHreleaseisdependentonpulsatilestimulationofthepituitarybyGnRH. 41.15 1982;111:1449.) (FromLevineJetal.Endocrinology

Fig. Frequency-encodedregulationofFSHandLHsecretionfromgonadotropes.AhighfrequencyofGnRH(1pulse/hr)preferentiallystimulatesLHsecretion,whereasaslowerfrequencyofGnRHpromotesFSHsecretion. 41.16 of Endocrinology. (FromLarsenPRetal[eds].Williams Textbook 10th ed.Philadelphia:Saunders;2003.) GH. are acid circulating 75% (22-kDa) representing present of 191–amino with form approximately serum, in the member erythropoietin the receptor receptor as family to cytokine/GH/PRL/ and linked signaling such GH JAK/STAT pathway is the of ). a is (see The of GH also agonist an act can as the receptor. Human PRL the to bound GH receptor. of from portion is GH-binding About GH derived in extracellular of (GHBP), is domain) serum protein 22-kDa N-terminal 50% the form which (the the of lack their Laron syndrome, do GHBP receptors normal but normal with have in GH not Individuals GH detectable who serum. have secretion, clearance biological GHBP GH, reduces half-life and renal is thus increases the of about which minutes. 20 liver major The degradation. and sites kidney of GH are

is GH positive/negative by dual control secretion (see hypothalamus the under

Fig. 41.17 ). via secretion growth •Fig. The predominantly the stimulates GH hypothalamus peptide 41.17 Hypothalamic-pituitary-liveraxis.ALS,acidlabilesubunit;GHBP,growthhormone–bindingprotein;GHRH,growthhormone–releasinghormone;IGFBP,insulinlikegrowthfactor–bindingprotein;IGF-I,insulinlikegrowthfactorI;SS,somatostatin. (FromPorterfieldSP,WhiteBA.Endocrine Physiology.

3rded.Philadelphia:Mosby;2007.) hormone hormone–releasing (GHRH). with vasoactive and larger of processed (VIP)/ C-terminus. secretin/glucagon the is from hormone is prohormone intestinal amidated a into family 44–amino an a member polypeptide a acid This peptide gene GHRH expression. and GH secretion enhances GH inhibits hypothalamus synthesis somatostatin. the and release peptide via pituitary The GH release and GH inhibits anterior of somatostatin In the pituitary, TSH. secretion the stimulated through secretagogue is somatotropes. which by receptor ghrelin, also GH GH acts on but in is stomach primarily produced also the hypothalamus. is the by expressed Ghrelin may increases growth. and a as serve nutrient to coordinate Ghrelin with acquisition appetite signal

feedback by on the IGF-I negative exerted primary The (see is somatotrope

Fig. 41.17). feedback” GH IGF-I pituitary liver, stimulates and synthesis a the then loop. and and GH classic by the secretion hypothalamus inhibits duction IGF-I “long by in pro GHRH GH on addition, through In a of itself release negative exerts “short feedback” feedback loop. also increases somatostatin GH release.

awakening. diurnal peak rhythms, in before GH the ACTH, with like occurring just secretion prominent secretion, shows early morning Its III (stages IV). slow-wave secretion stimulated and deep sleep is during lowest is the secretion during GH day. shifts. entrained people night rather shift occurs light-dark sleep-wakefulness so who phase a than in rhythm work patterns patterns, to is This pulsatile. hormones, GH pituitary secretion of is is typical anterior As ng/ (0–30 usually 3). with widely of GH mL, between most Levels vary 0 in falling values and serum this marked of limited of measurement serum of circulating utility. Because the is clinical levels and variation GH GH, heterogeneity of GH a by pulsatile especially the patients. longer half-life regulated changes that is GH axis, assess in to Since may in used be possesses of diurnal and the status buffers secretion it young and secretion, IGF-I GH

differentially regulated physiological is on depending secretion GH state. the “stress is as one the classified is GH physical of and by neurogenic hormones” stress. and increased lipolysis, antagonizes insulin ability levels. and increases promotes the synthesis, protein blood of reduce It to glucose that GH and is hypoglycemia acute a is hormone. therefore, as secretion GH is surprising, stimulus not It a for hyperglycemic classified administration GH of the rise testing of some for provocative GH secretion. amino also used A is concentration serum in of acids arginine secretion; stimulates inhibits or free In an of fatty glucose increase secretion blood contrast, in GH. acids insulin increased (relative resistance and fatty hyperglycemia) circulating Obesity because of inhibits acids. part GH secretion, in also free and Conversely, starvation exercise secretion. stimulate GH

is GH of lifetime in secretion The pattern shown

Fig.

. 41.18 increases period GH secretion IGF-I neonatal growth the becomes as dependent. in and GH males females when high secretion. also during via peaks GH higher promotes and of It rates aromatization) childhood remains and even throughout (in puberty, estrogen hormone enhances and bone also GH maturation. to support and secretion growth Thyroid IGF-I during fall metabolism, senescence. to levels Adults consistent GH, its in continue with role produce before

multifunctional proliferation, are IGFs and differentiation, metabolism. cellular regulate hormones that in structure function. resemble protein and hormones insulin These family, paracrine, produced The in IGF-II, actions. and autocrine, endocrine this two and are in and hormones have IGF-I many tissues is major most produced form tissues. in adult the IGF-I the it placenta a regulates major both fetus, the and form IGF-II is the produced growth manner. in fetus where the in GH-independent of exhibiting 42% Both hormones with to structural with are proinsulin. similar proinsulin, structurally IGF-I homology actions IGFs mimic cross-reactivity; the receptor in insulin. high IGFs and show of insulin concentration metabolic and contain kinase factor activity. I epidermal through insulin to are Both (EGF) growth IGF-I IGF-II receptors type receptors, and intrinsic IGF tyrosine similar and which act However, binds IGF/mannose-6-phosphate receptor. type the IGF-II II to also tyrosine limit signaling receptor. probably This the insulin IGF-II through and have the functions kinase not receptor type resemble does intrinsic receptor, to I not activity, does DNA protein synthesis. amino IGFs and stimulate uptake and glucose and acid organs. because called were actions initially and somatomedins bone, cartilage, of They on their other growth-mediating upon GH It originally that in liver is produced the was proposed stimulation. IGF-I exclusively when puberty, increase GH ( During levels

Fig. IGF-I parallel. levels increase in ), 41.19 paracrine is extrahepatic now autocrine many exhibiting that both produced tissues, actions. in IGFs it However, are known and are whereas Some these others under GH, of of are not. the control effects some In both endocrine which are on and bone, IGF-I GH has paracrine growth, of example, linear for independent. IGF-I as production stimuli by (PTH) such for osteoblasts. parathyroid hormone are Hormones also estradiol and effective the that IGF-I. plate stimulatory effects exerts independent the are of time, on At same growth GH to liver predominant circulating of appears IGF-I of the The (see the pool be source

Fig. 41.19 •Fig. LifetimepatternofGHsecretion.GHlevelsarehigherinchildrenthaninadults,withapeakperiodduringpuberty.GHsecretiondeclineswithaging. 41.18

bound Essentially IGF binding all to (IGFBP). serum transported are in circulating proteins IGFs then binds acid IGF another with the subunit labile IGFBP-3 (ALS) (see called to protein associates

Fig. ). 41.19 stimulates GH IGFBP-3, of and hepatic IGF-I, ALS. production complex and bioavailability IGF-I. IGFBP-3/ALS/IGF-I transport The mediates of inhibit (up biological to action, half-life the IGFs 12 IGFBPs IGF greatly of increase generally Although they hours). role IGFBP locally proteases and free generating a active) play degrade IGFs. IGFBP in (i.e., (e.g., interest overexpress more context is This one or of in prostate IGF-responsive cancer), cancers IGFBP proteases. the which may of

on dependent in context. plays highly is a metabolism GH that physiological role dual At lipids, protein nutritional when is to: switch the anabolism favorable, fasted roles state. risk dual sparing in of the and consumption (1) and fuel its oversimplification, growth are glucose (2) promote to status

•Fig. RelationshipofGHandIGF-I.GHhasdirectendocrineactionsongrowthandstimulatestheproductionofIGF-I,IGFBP-3andALSintheliver.CirculatingIGF-Iexertsendocrineactionsontargetorgans.IGF-1isalsoproducedlocallyinbone,whereitexertsparacrineeffects.Part,butnotallofthislocalIGF-IproductionisGH-dependent. 41.19

receptor the of a specific is GH GH acts a that member through receptor cytokine family. (GHR) dimer JAK/STAT the pathway of A to signaling which GH, GHR binds triggers activation (see

Fig. 41.17 ). translocates stimulate of STAT5b, phosphorylation nucleus This transcription results in GH-responsive to the which to genes. of activated PI3K GH signaling among pathways by and others. include MAPK Additional

fed amino uptake protein. that the incorporation GH acid cellular a and increases anabolic protein hormone state, into In is decreases and Consequently urea retention produces production. nitrogen nitrogen balance) (positive it has wasting during to part been occurs decrease that GH that proposed by least muscle secretion The the in at be senescence. caused with aging in concomitant occurs GH muscular, and stunting growth; visceral growth In increases children, skeletal, children GH show dwarfism. without or linear promotes of both ( appositional and growth cartilage and growth GH bones long

Fig. arrowheads). green , 41.20

an receptor expression response IGF in GH supports effective of production, is hepatocytes. and GH stimulator which this Although signaling requires insulin, high serum secretion supply secretion insulin serum and When acid a glucose levels of ( available, stimulate promote amino levels is GH balanced nutrients high

Fig. 41.21, ). top turn in growth, the conditions IGF-I for and These stimulates appropriate production GH liver. by are effects and bone. and including profound IGFs have organs are tissues, and on muscle, many cartilage, anabolic mitogenic Together, (see ossification IGF-I and promote of the process endochondral GH differentiation, hypertrophy chondrocyte proliferation, and during

Fig. 41.20, arrowheads). green of closure epiphyses, appositional growth bones of but growth longitudinal continues. ceases After the long osteoblast synthesis collagen stimulates bone and IGF-I matrix. of and replication surprisingly, in IGF children. levels correlate well with growth Not serum The GH changes status. of alteration nutritional of role with in amino calories GH production low but and for promotes carbohydrate serum acid availability secretion (see high inhibit high amino but If insulin low the levels in acids, is IGF diet example,

Fig. middle). 41.21, but stored, conditions allow for unfavorable be responses and are growth. carbohydrates to These dietary fats

to GH rise on in insulin serum the wanes, (see levels when fall state, levels the and fasted In hand, nutrient hypoglycemia availability serum response other

Fig. 41.21, bottom). the glucose of essential conserving decreases, as tissues insulin, glucose absence thereby brain. peripheral In the such utilization for these Levy •Fig. in Physiology rise In & circumstances the 750 SECTION8Berne and ˜ tissue •Fig. Chondrocytes Cell ˜ acid Bone, Protein body Lean synthesis size Organ Glucose ˜ ˛ number acid ˜ synthesis synthesis ˜ ˛ ˜ ˜ ˜ Liver uptake IGF-I Gluconeogenesis and ˜ state mass ˜ ˜ ˜ ˜ Protein synthesis ˛ lipids) uptake fasted growth Pancreas DNA synthesis Kidney Amino Muscle synthesis lung state ˜ heart, Organ Caloric uptake sulfate synthesis tissue Protein Amino ˜ Linear DNA function BiologicaleffectsofGHandIGF-I.Anabolicgrowth-promotingeffectsthatoccurwhennutritionalstatusisfavorableareindicatedbygreenarrowheads.MetaboliceffectsofGHthatmobilizefatwhilesparingglucoseandproteinduringfastingaredenotedbyredarrowheads.IGFBP,insulinlikegrowthfactor–bindingprotein.Adipose Lipolysis RNA Intestine mobilization Protein size Skin 41.20 ˜ Glucose Collagen ˜ Chondroitin Islets ˜ IGFs RNA uptake ˜ Adiposity number ˜ ˜ ˜ Cell RNA synthesis IGFBP (e.g., size synthesis fed GH ˜ Parathyroids ˜ Connective 41.21 DifferentialregulationofGH,insulin,andIGF-Isecretioncoordinatesavailabilityofnutrientswithgrowthandproteinanabolism,caloricstorage,orcaloricmobilization(primarilylipids).

lipid conserving protein. carbohydrate GH is beneficial to energy and it metabolism source, an because secretion shifts as thereby the and This GH (see of tissue actions involves on direct muscle, liver, adipose coordinated

Fig. 41.20 , arrowheads). red

lipolytic is GH a hormone. lipases. adipocytes triacylglycerol from and and In direct adipocyte combined by of acids fatty indirect it mobilizes activation glycerol indirect during of An of also GH actions action catecholamines, are important to is sensitization adipocytes elevated fasting. of lipolytic which the production. acid GH as fatty energy a used and fats of for more are levels rise result action, Serum increase muscle uptake skeletal in and Fatty liver. acid β-oxidation and in oxidation be when acid of the GH as fatty absent. ketogenic a increase insulin can is result causing levels GH metabolism, also alters carbohydrate to rise. glucose blood mobilization fat be may actions and secondary of to its oxidation. Many increased increase example, serum muscle inhibits an adipose fatty uptake acids free tissue. of For in skeletal and glucose in of GH are those of epinephrine. hyperglycemic effects glucagon slower and mild than and The Liver glucose this glycogenolysis. an on of but GH effect is increases, output not acetyl gluconeogenesis. stimulate hence oxidation The liver the CoA rise and in in acid fatty increase enzyme directly of the gluconeogenic of activation stimulates also GH expression STAT5b. PEPCK through These glucose production and such from increase liver glycerol. substrates lactate actions as by the the result lipolysis The GH-induced released circulation adipocytes. of into a as is latter in

antagonizes the level and insulin tissue postreceptor in GH (but of not the action liver). adipose the skeletal at muscle like of because the can decreases GH, improve cortisol, pituitary insulin Hypophysectomy management (removal diabetic sensitivity. gland) is GH it diabetogenic insensitivity, hormone. considered produces a Because insulin in normal levels increase. cause insulin acromegaly), when excess and the necessary to secreted can diabetes GH metabolism (e.g., mellitus, Therefore maintain in an GH beta secretion of resulting from excess Excessive insulin damage cells. can cause to pancreatic absence secretion GH, In declines. of the insulin required and normal pancreatic secretion. normal Thus levels function for of insulin are GH

GH becoming adults syndrome. a deficiency in as pathological recognized is impaired. the epiphyses deficiency close, occurs If after not GH is growth deficiency one GH causes of hypoglycemia. many possible of is lead that GH in changes Recent body to composition. extended of shown deficiencies studies have as declines. body increases, weight Fat lean body mass of percentage a whereas weakness of deficiency. GH muscle addition, In are exhaustion symptoms early and There but populations have of benefits, decline no physical to shown small has in been functional body reverse age-related GH using interest events. changes adverse increased studies elderly risk in date to in body composition, and and composition,

characterizedbyinsidiousenlargementofthehandsandfeet,coarseningoffacialfeatures,insulinresistance,anddiabetes.GeneticdisordersoftheGH–IGF-Iaxiscauseseveregrowthimpairment.IdentifiedmutationscausingisolatedGHdeficiencymostcommonlyoccurintheGHandGHRHreceptorgenes.ThesepatientscanbetreatedwithrecombinanthGHtorestorefunctionofthedownstreamaxis.InLaronsyndrome,amutationoftheGHreceptorcausesGHresistance.InthisinstancetheliverdoesnotproduceIGF-I;thisisduetoalackofresponsivenesstoGH.ThesepatientscanbetreatedwithIGF-I,butwithoutthedirectactionsofGH,theeffectivenessofthetreatmentislimited.OtherdownstreamgeneticmutationsthathavebeenreportedincludethoseinSTAT5B,IGF-I,andALS. GHisnecessaryforgrowthbeforeadulthood.GHdeficienciesresultinseveregrowthdeficits,andexcessesresultingigantism.ExcessGHinadulthoodafterepiphysealclosurecausesacromegaly,

Lactotrope The

protein. single-chain which hormone produces acid The a the is prolactin, lactotrope 199–amino GH is (see related PRL hPL and structurally to ). JAK/STAT signaling the coupled Like family receptor member to pathways. is PRL the GH, a of cytokine the PRL action in in prolactin in pregnancy of humans of the regulation during actions breast be and is discussed and lactation, the development Because will to function detail primary related and

major the of the the adenohypophysis in it the gland, two In should context from 1. other types endocrine lactotrope the ways: of cell that appreciated be pituitary differs

not axis. endocrine The is part lactotrope of an means changes. physiological acts on This directly PRL nonendocrine of the breast) to (primarily cells induce

2.

Production and under control by PRL are hypothalamus. predominantly inhibitory the secretion of Thus the a PRL GH. ACTH, stalk TSH, hypothalamohypophyseal in levels LH, of vessels increase decrease in FSH, physical to an disruption in surgery secondary or (e.g., and the but portal trauma) and pituitary results and short about has half-life unbound proteins 20 PRL serum to minutes. of thus relatively circulates a women. similar Normal in men are concentrations basal and serum of tonic inhibition the hypothalamus. by Release normally is under PRL dopamine dopaminergic This eminence. by exerted in that the median secrete is tracts factor a is existence (PRF). evidence for There prolactin-releasing also of inhibitory [GIP]) VIP, the compound known, and of gastric although is polypeptide not of glucagon glucagon, stimulate many this family and release factors, in including can TRH hormones The exact (secretin, nature PRL.

PRL released stress. is to hormones in many of one the response arousal, are Surgery, fear, stimuli causing exercise and

to student answer 1. the of this the be completion able questions: should chapter following Upon

of and follicle. thyroid the of the histology the structure including thyroid gland, anatomy the Describe

2.

and thyroid T4 of hormones of and T3. the thyroid iodine iodination how peroxidase/dual oxidase, are gland, to synthesized residues by thyroid form Explain coupling processes uptake, including thyroglobulin tyrosine in within the

3.

and by from the is are of to endocytosis and T4, thyroglobulin circulation. secreted the which T3 follicle process processed into the lumen yield which Describe retrieved

4.

regulate and hormones feed to thyroid thyroid how axis. back to the how Diagram regulates function the axis TSH show hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid the central List examples axis. point of alter how input the of set can

5.

of of peripheral stability activation the of thyroid-binding deiodinases reverse and the of inactivation in Discuss the transport to hormones, thyroid role proteins to and T3 T3. role the in or T4 cellular location deiodinases. function and of D1 and Contrast D2 the the

6.

the hormone ability including mechanisms nature repress its location and and action, activate transcription. the target of Describe thyroid receptor to the or either thyroid of hormone gene

7.

especially nervous consequences of Discuss actions system central of thyroid severe on skeleton, and the hypothyroidism. during the including (CNS) the hormone development,

8.

on tract). on rate systemic organ thyroid metabolic thermogenesis, the the vascular on cardiac Describe cardiovascular hormone basal (skin, skeletal other muscle, systems resistance), (heart and and rate, output, system digestive of effects

called hormone he triiodothyronine active also and (T4, thyroid produces prohormone (T3). the the thyroxine) gland tetraiodothyronine of Synthesis of parts can factor and a which the world. some T4 limiting iodine, requires in be T3 by made Much conversion to peripheral of also T3 is T3. of T4 primarily that regulates through Thyroid transcription. acts receptor hormone a nuclear gene in effects T3 development metabolism critical on and broad function has bone for is brain and and normal cardiovascular adults.

Thyroid Histology of the Anatomy Gland and

right sit that ( the of gland trachea thyroid left anterolateral and to composed The is lobes

Fig. 42.1). connected are lobes isthmus. by two a Typically the midventral The thyroid receives rich a supply. blood gland the side: sets on thyroid three each It veins and superior, middle, veins. by of drained is inferior innervation The not receives is thyroid vasomotor secretomotor. sympathetic that gland but

the cells The gland 200 a single in spherical is about follicle, unit to a of ( functional structure is layer thyroid µm of by thyroid that the thyroid diameter surrounded 300 epithelial

Fig. 42.2 ). structure by the supply. sits a and The rich outermost a capillary follicle, basal is epithelium on surrounded lamina, of the follicle. follicular side the epithelium apical faces of The the of the lumen lumen thyroglobulin. colloid, with is follicular composed filled of The which is itself the scaffold secreted for This the is into cells, thyroid by of thyroid protein iodinated epithelial a as kDa) lumen serving and large (660 production hormones. the the with and size colloid activity of epithelial gland. the features of amount The are cells that dynamic of change cells. The cell in of gland thyroid type contains to another follicular addition within which the C calcitonin cells, the hormone gland are are parafollicular Scattered (see source polypeptide the of or cells,

of Production Hormones Thyroid

of ( the gland The thyroid iodothyronines secretory are products

Fig. iodinated coupling molecules. class 42.3 ), tyrosine by two a formed the of hormones of the thyroid 90% 3,5,3′,5′-tetraiodothyronine output is or T4). of (thyroxine, Approximately prohormone. T4 is a primarily About 3,5,3′-triiodothyronine is active hormone. which (T3), thyroid form is 10% the of than thyroid or 1% 3,3′,5′-triiodothyronine output rT3), which of Less T3, inactive. is is (reverse proportions these are the in they the which in three at are Normally gland. same stored products secreted

of T3, yet active deiodinases of through form the is the hormone of Because gland product peripheral primary conversion the (see T4, the thyroid axis on action heavily thyronine-specific thyroid thyroid the relies is

Fig. ). 42.3 Fig. Most • and RL Image 42.1 thyroid (Modified B, a normal the C, thyroid Drake uptake from of et Anatomy gland. A al. of by gland. pertechnetate Students. Gray’s Churchill for 2005.) Livingstone; Anatomy Philadelphia: such deiodinase high by 1 of (D1) with kidneys. rapid T3 plasma, occurs with liver in and T4 conversion to flow type tissues and the blood exchange as low basal tissues generation or local T3 T3 in by process is This which absent. other circulating supplies for uptake affinity (again, (i.e., of a the is where low expressed T4 1 Km T4. µM) for has D1 thyroid relatively also abundant) is in and to levels elevated in Levels contribute hyperthyroidism T3 of in this are disease. circulating the D1 paradoxically increased and

T3 called in high-affinity brain type intracellular levels glial that constant deiodinase of the CNS. a by cells (D2) of The expressed 2 deiodinase is maintains a of D2 intracellular nM has maintains and T4 levels. of falls low concentrations Km when to 1 T3 circulating even is also in pituitary D2 thyrotropes. present thyroid feed stimulating sensor” acts circulating There, that “thyroid (TSH). on back ability a D2 to mediates as hormone secretion the T4 of of axis constant increased hypothyroidism, during T3 the D2 maintain of brain. is helps Expression in levels which

is an (D3). deiodinase also deiodinase There called type 3 “inactivating” high-affinity that inner deiodinase ring a rT3. to D3 the is T4 inactive converts Type increased which overproduction is T4. hyperthyroidism, of 3 deiodinase during blunt helps noniodinated further of thyronine. eventually are forms All deiodinated iodothyronines to

requires some of Because turnover thyroid role a in hormone synthesis unique of understanding plays thyroid a physiology, iodide description iodide (

Fig. 42.4 ). for the µg of is and United 150 women. An 120 400 200 children, for per a of versus person 90 µg daily ingested daily for µg pregnant in States, µg requirement average minimum iodide of to adults, In urine. state, the the µg, steady in same amount, 400 is excreted mammary the Iodide lacrimal in is glands, plexus. concentrated and gastric salivary actively glands, glands, gland, glands, choroid thyroid of 750 up that to µg a the taken to from of pool iodide. by approximately daily 70 is About 80 gland 250 contains circulating µg thyroid iodide thyroglobulin. The form 7500 averages of all in total which iodothyronine is colloid in of gland the stored of content thyroid µg, virtually the iodide is iodide, daily. or 80 from state, 1% released about the steady of 70 total, In gland the the to µg of as iodide. is hormone this as and thyroid Of free secreted amount, the remainder 75% over form ratio 2 the against (100:1) The stored months. amount for of iodide turned of about large iodide in protects deficiency daily to hormone the also as of concentration conserved reduction its serum renal is falls. iodide marked in Iodide a excretion by in

•Fig. panel) panel) 42.2 andhigh(lower Histologyofthethyroidglandatlow(upper magnification.C,colloid;F,thyroidfollicles;S,connectivetissuesepta. Histology. Functional (FromYoungBetal.Wheater’s 5thed.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.)

The CHAPTER 42 Gland Thyroid

Synthesis Hormone Overview Thyroid of

understand To polarized synthesis ( to thyroid hormone each one it directionality must epithelial appreciate as secretion, of thyroid relates and cell the the process

Fig. 42.5 ). iodide requires precursors: of Synthesis hormone two thyroid thyroglobulin. and is cells epithelium. thyroid across (follicular the transported Iodide luminal) (vascular) basal from to apical side the of side the is into follicular the and lumen. across the secreted apical membrane synthesized Thyroglobulin Thus movement synthesis lumen of into (see involves the basal-to-apical a precursors these follicular

Fig. 42.5 ). (see of synthesis within the apical the Actual iodothyronines cells occurs of to the membrane lumen enzymatically close follicular epithelial

Synthesis on Iodothyronines ). of hormone and thyroglobulin with thyroid the fuse of of movement endocytotic lysosomes. involves apicalto-basal of endocytosis which iodinated Secretion vesicles, by Thyroglobulin of thyroglobulin from enzymes, degraded the lysosomal release in resulting backbone. hormones enzymatically is thyroid Finally, across the a specific and probably through membrane, basolateral move ultimately hormones thyroid transporter, into the blood. involves (see secretion movement apical-to-basal Thus

Fig. 42.5

on Thyroglobulin Backbone Synthesis Iodothyronines a of

into basolateral electrical gradients in against of cells thyroid chemical transported symporter a Iodide sodium-iodide and epithelial (NIS) membrane gland located the actively (see by the is

Fig. 42.5 ). actively the breast. the expressed thyroid is it but at gland, lower and NIS lactating in is placenta, salivary in highly levels expressed also glands, gradient thyroid sodium uphill gradient One fluid iodide ions is electrochemical iodide their down transported into against while two extracellular cell. an ion the from move force by Na+,K+-ATPase. for driving transporter this is The secondary provided membrane active plasma is inhibited TSH. gene stimulated Expression iodide and NIS the by of by of enhances circulating iodide pool A greatly the trap. iodide iodide depletes intake and activity the reduction dietary in the dietary uptake When low, of percentage to of thyroid is the iodide can 90%. iodide reach intake 80%

in thyroid The steps synthesis shown in hormone are

Fig. . 42.6 After gland, apical epithelial entering rapidly plasma the moves cells. iodide of to the membrane the sodium-independent of by is pendrin. a the called iodide iodide/chloride there, into transporter From transported follicles lumen into oxidized incorporated within immediately Iodide residues thyroglobulin and (see tyrosine is

Fig. ). 42.5 second monoiodotyrosine produces (DIT) single same a (see diiodotyrosine of a forms residue the iodination (MIT); A iodination

Fig. ). 42.6 one to form coupled T4; are molecules and MIT to DIT DIT are coupled iodination, T3. form two one After part structure occurs Coupling iodinated remain the primary of of that between tyrosines

I 3,5,3¢ I O or I I (thyroxine, I -Triiodothyronine 3,3¢ Inner Outer I type type I -Tetraiodothyronine 3,5,3¢ ring HO and 5¢ NH2 ring NH2 CH2CHCOOHHO CH2CHCOOH 2 3 -Triiodothyronine 1 O deiodination (T3) NH2 I CH2CHCOOHO (activation) •Fig. T3) deiodination Deiodinases (inactivation) T4) Deiodinases (reverse 5¢ StructureoftheiodothyroninesT4,T3,andreverseT3. 42.3

•Fig. I50 µg 10 HIUrine µg IDiet Extracellular Iodinedistributionandturnoverinhumans.HI,hormone-associatediodine.Stool HI60 µg 320 I20 Thyroid µg µg I µg thyroglobulin. HI80 µg I400 42.4 390 fluid µg ITissues 10 µg that sequence the spans membrane. This by reactions entire (TPO), is peroxidase an catalyzed of complex apical thyroid enzyme peroxide immediate the (H2O2). acceptor) for The oxidant reaction hydrogen (electron is apical of H2O2 DUOX2) membrane. lumen dual the (DUOX1, by oxidases also are Generation the that follicular in catalyzed in is localized plasma

availability is favored. restricted, T3 When iodide formation is of as more molecule hormone potent T3 Because iodide. of as this organified provides active times three is per response T4, or proportion activators. T3 the other when thyroid is The of gland hyperstimulated increases by also TSH

Secretion Hormones Thyroid of

as the has it in stored been (see thyroglobulin follicle Once lumen colloid is iodinated, the of

Fig. ). 42.2 is by T4 follicular T3 of of Release the macroand of by colloid from micropinocytosis. initiated into lumen the endocytosis and the processes bloodstream with and ( then is fuse degraded vesicles lysosomes Endocytotic thyroglobulin

Fig.

42.7

Fig. ). 42.5 also released molecules, of by iodotyrosine MIT cell deiodinated follicular enzyme during which deiodinase within are the DIT are rapidly the (see thyroglobulin, proteolysis and

Fig. 42.5 ). is and as MIT specific T4 T3 substrates. for cannot and deiodinase and This use DIT synthesis T3. of into is and iodide recycled then The T4 pool and intrathyroidal Amino acids protein reused thyroglobulin the of be from amino for synthesis. the acid can reenter digestion cell of minor intact follicular Only circumstances. normal thyroglobulin leave amounts the under the transported blood. the side basal across the T4 cell of released are Enzymatically and enter T3 and

•Fig. Synthesisandsecretionofthyroidhormonesbythethyroidepithelialcell. 42.5

CH2CHCOOHHO NH2 CH2CHCOOHI2 Tyrosine + (MIT) CH2CHCOOH CH2CHCOOHHO -Tetraiodothyronine DIT CH2CHCOOHHO or I CH2CHCOOH Diiodotyrosine or 5¢ HO I T4) I I O I (thyroxine, NH2 I I NH2 NH2 O CH2CHCOOHHO I NH2 3,5,3¢ Monoiodotyrosine I CH2CHCOOHHO I + DIT CH2CHCOOHHO NH2 I + (DIT) I I NH2 NH2 NH2

DIT (T3) 3,5,3¢ -Triiodothyronine •Fig. MIT Reactionsinvolvedinthegenerationofiodide,MIT,DIT,T3,andT4. 42.6

feedback hypothalamus. and in Transport exerting the to tissues Metabolism negative pituitary addition on and molecule the T3 T3. liver in and thyroxine-binding circulate in the or bloodstream T4 and binding of major binds T4 which is Secreted (TBG), is globulin almost The synthesized one protein bound entirely to About 70% proteins. of only T3 called specific the bound about free another plasma to of 0.03% 10% protein T4 is Normally is of and 15% state to total and circulating ( exist T4 in T3 plasma bound TBG; to total thyroid-binding 0.3%

Fig. ). 42.8 and is transthyretin active (TTR). Free biologically T3 to on mediates peripheral 3% 15% and hormone thyroid to effects binds of is lipoproteins. 20%, Albumin bound the ).CirculatingthyroidhormonesfeedbackonthepituitaryglandtodecreaseTSHsecretion,primarilybyrepressingTSHβ subunitgeneexpression.Thepituitaryglandexpressesthehigh-affinityD2,whichconvertsT4enteringthesecellstoT3.ThusfeedbackinthyrotropesmediatedbyintracellularT3representsanintegratedmeasureofcirculatingfreeT4andT3(see ).BecausethediurnalvariationinTSHsecretionissmall,thyroidhormonesecretionandplasmaconcentrationsarerelativelyconstant.OnlysmallnocturnalincreasesinsecretionofTSHandreleaseofT4occur.Thyroidhormonesalsofeedbackonhypothalamicthyroid-releasinghormone(TRH)secretingneurons.Intheseneurons,T3inhibitsexpressionoftheprepro-TRHgene. in Ordinarily only alterations

effect. Autoregulationofthyroidglandfunctioniscausedbyiodideitself,whichhasabiphasicaction.Atrelativelylowlevelsofiodideintake,therateofthyroidhormonesynthesisisdirectlyrelatedtotheavailabilityofiodide.However,iftheintakeofiodideexceeds2mg/day,theintraglandularconcentrationofiodidereachesalevelthatparadoxicallysuppressesTPOactivity,blockinghormonebiosynthesis.ThisphenomenonisknownastheWolff-Chaikoff AdaptationtohighiodideintakenormallyoccursbyreducingexpressionofNIS,whichcausestheintrathyroidaliodideleveltofall.TPOactivitythenreturnstonormal,andthyroidhormonesynthesisresumeswithindaystoweeks.Inunusualinstances,failureofNIStodownregulateleadstoprolongedinhibitionofhormonesynthesisbyiodideandresultanthypothyroidism.Thetemporaryreductioninhormonesynthesisbyexcessiodidehasalsobeenusedtherapeuticallyinhyperthyroidism.

andincorporateiodineintothyroglobulin(calledorganification),theactivityofthethyroidcanbeassessedbyradioactive uptake (RAIU). iodine Becauseofitsabilitytotrap Inthistestatracerdoseof123IisadministeredandRAIUismeasuredbyplacingagammadetectorontheneckat4to6hoursandat24hours.IntheUnitedStates,wherethedietisrelativelyrichiniodine,RAIUistypicallyaround15%after6hoursand25%after24hours(

Fig.42.9 ).AbnormallyhighRAIU(>60%)after24hoursindicateshyperthyroidism.AbnormallylowRAIU(<5%)after24hoursindicateshypothyroidism.Inindividualswithextremechronicstimulationofthethyroid(Gravesdisease–associatedthyrotoxicosis),iodideistrapped,organified,andreleasedashormoneveryrapidly.Inthesecasesofelevatedturnover,6-hourRAIUwillbeveryhighbut24-hourRAIUwillbelower(see

afteritsuptakebythecell,administrationofoneoftheseanionswill,byblockingfurtheriodideuptake,causerapidreleaseofiodidefromthegland(see defect) ).Anumberofanions,suchasthiocyanate(CNS−),perchlorate(HClO4−),andpertechnetate(TcO4−),arecompetitiveornoncompetitiveinhibitorsofiodidetransportviaNIS.Ifiodidecannotberapidlyincorporatedintotyrosine(organification Fig.42.8

Fig.42.9

Thisreleaseoccursasaresultofthehighthyroid-plasmaconcentrationgradient.

Thethyroidcanbeimagedwitharectilinearscannerorgammacameraafteradministrationofatracer,123I,131I,ortheiodine-mimicpertechnetate(99mTc).Imagingcandisplaythesizeandshapeofthethyroid(see

)aswellasheterogeneitiesofactiveversusinactivetissuewithinthethyroidgland.Suchheterogeneitiesareoftenduetothedevelopmentofthyroid aspiration nodules, nodules nodules whichareregionsofenlargedfollicleswithevidenceofregressivechangesduetocyclesofstimulationandinvolution.“Hot” (i.e.,nodulesthatdisplayhighRAIUonimaging)arenotusuallycancerousbutmayleadtothyrotoxicosis(hyperthyroidism).“Cold” biopsy. Fig.42.1C are10timesmorelikelytobecancerous.Suchnodulescanbesampledforpathologicalanalysisbyfine-needle

Thethyroidcanalsobeimagedbyultrasonography, whichissuperiorinresolutiontoRAIUimaging.Ultrasonographyisusedtoguidethephysicianduringfine-needleaspirationbiopsyofanodule.Thehighestresolutionofthethyroidisachievedwithmagnetic (MRI). imaging resonance

•Fig. in A of lumen thyroid in vesicles B endocytic follicle Colloid Colloid 42.7 Before(A)andminutesafter(B)rapidinductionofthy-roglobulinendocytosisbyTSH. Cell 1964;21:191.) (FromWollmanSHetal.J Biol

levels. plasma TBG total and concentration T3 T4 affect significantly TBG. have biological important Two ascribed been functions to any in gland it maintains First, acute a reservoir that buffers circulating T4 function. of changes large thyroid of proteins T4 T3 hormone thereby of iodide. and in and to loss molecules plasma these conserve relatively helps prevents urine Second, binding small thyroid and to provides T4 TTR transports in fluid the CNS. cerebrospinal hormones

Regulation Thyroid of Function

and hypothalamic-pituitary thyroid •Fig. growth thyroid releasing is function important of the gland regulator The most 123I Albumin T3 T3 ng/dl µg/dL 0.42 8 • Activation actions Free – Transthyretin Free Feedback T3 Protein-Bound 42.8 • Free TransportofT4andT3inserumbytransportproteinsandpercentagesofboundandfreehormone.Thyroid to • T3 Excretion µg/dL • T4 • (% •Fig. ng/dl secretion Total T4 (99.7%) (99.98%) Inactivation & Excretion Tissue Inactivation Uptake • • • globulin dose) 0.14 1.6 Feedback T4 & of T4 (TBG) T4 Total (0.3%) T3 Thyroid-binding (0.02%) T3 (TTR) Thyroidglandiodothyronineuptakedefectiveorganificationstates. 42.9

). TSH of thyroid function. aspect every stimulates the long-term actions on and immediate, TSH has epithelium. thyroid intermediate, thyroglobulin the pinocytosis represent within cytoplasm, droplets of colloid which endocytic (see in of TSH vesicles Rapid include actions

Fig. 42.7 ). of T4 the proteolysis T3 and release of from TSH gland. the thyroglobulin stimulates and activity increase. and TPO Iodide uptake phosphate of entry monophosphate hexose the reduced pathway, stimulates (NADPH) the dinucleotide shunt the adenine for into generates also reaction. glucose nicotinamide peroxidase needed TSH which occur including protein TPO. TSH encoding after genes, on and those NIS, synthesis of thyroid expression of hours thyroglobulin, Intermediate days and effects involve numerous and to the gland Sustained TSH of leads the hypertrophy effects follicular stimulation cells. hyperplasia to of and long-term blood flow and thyroid proliferate Capillaries increases. effects of factors. gland, underlie of by actions, local production which growth on TSH supported the These the are growth-promoting enlarged thyroid is noticeably gland called goiter a ( A

Fig. ). 42.10 of due diet, thyroid hormone to levels. results TSH the elevated and iodine is lack which in Endemic goiter low in adequate

Thyroid Effects of Hormone Physiological

on the all and tissues, cells in and hormone Thyroid endocrine constitute of essentially thyroid diseases. most common imbalances acts some function and more to but neurotransmitters. ways has the acts optimize it direct of other several actions, Thyroid many subtle in hormone actions hormones also

•Fig. curvesfornormal,hypothyroid,hyperthyroid,and 42.10 Thethyroidglandislocatedintheanterioraspectoftheneck,whereitiseasilyvisualizedwhenenlarged(goiter).

˝/˙ Na+, Cardiac chain muscle Sarcoplasma heavy stimulatory/ G-protein Myosin signaling K+-ATPase ˜ •Fig. ˙-Adrenergic ratio Ca-ATPase Mechanismsbywhichthyroidhormoneincreasescardiacoutput.Theindirectmechanismsareprobablyquantitativelymoreimportant. 42.11

isthemostcommonformofhyperthyroidism. disease Graves Itoccursmostfrequentlybetweentheagesof20and50andis10timesmorecommoninwomenthaninmen.GravesdiseaseisanautoimmunedisorderinwhichactivatingautoantibodiesareproducedagainsttheTSHreceptor.Hyperthyroidismdrivenbytheantibodyisoftenaccompaniedbyadiffusegoiterasaresultofhyperplasiaandhypertrophyofthegland.Thefollicularepithelialcellsbecometallcolumnarcells,andthecolloidshowsascallopedperipheryindicativeofrapidturnover.

TheprimaryclinicalstatefoundinGravesdiseaseisthyrotoxicosis—thestateofexcessivethyroidhormoneinbloodandtissues.Apatientwiththyrotoxicosispresentsoneofthemoststrikingpicturesinclinicalmedicine.Thelargeincreaseinmetabolicrateismanifestedasweightlossdespiteincreasedfoodintake.Excessheatproductioncausesdiscomfortinwarmenvironments,sweating,andgreaterintakeofwater.Theincreaseinadrenergicactivityproducesarapidheartrate,hyperkinesis,tremor,nervousness,andawide-eyedstare.Weaknessiscausedbyalossofmusclemassaswellasimpairedmusclefunction.Othersymptomsincludealabileemotionalstate,breathlessnessduringexercise,anddifficultyswallowingorbreathingbecauseofcompressionoftheesophagusortracheabytheenlargedthyroidgland.Themostcommoncardiovascularsignissinustachycardia.There

are actions Perhaps clinically on hormone the thyroid important most cardiovascular of those physiology. thereby ( delivery T3 sufficient O2 tissues increases to output, ensuring cardiac

Fig. 42.11). volume rate resting heart The and increased. are stroke and (positive edema. relaxation of contractions the enhanced and are respectively), force inotropic isincreasedcardiacoutputassociatedwithawidenedpulsepressuresecondarytoapositiveinotropiceffectcoupledwithdecreasedsystemicvascularresistance.AmajorclinicalsigninGravesdiseaseisexophthalmos and myocardial diastolic (abnormalprotrusionoftheeyeball)andperiorbital The chronotropic effects, speed ThisiscausedbyautoantibodybindingtotheTSHreceptorexpressedonorbitalfibrocytes,leadingtoproductionofinflammatorycytokines.

GravesdiseaseisusuallydiagnosedbyelevatedserumfreeandtotalT4andT3andtheclinicalsignsofdiffusegoiterandophthalmopathy.SerumTSHlevelsarelowbecausethehypothalamusandpituitaryareinhibitedbythehighlevelsofT4andT3.Inmostcases,radioiodineuptakebythethyroidisexcessiveanddiffuse.AssayofTSHlevelsandthepresenceofcirculatingthyroidstimulatingimmunoglobulinwilldistinguishGravesdisease(aprimarydisorder)fromarareadenomaofpituitarythyrotrophs(asecondarydisorder)thatproduceshighlevelsofTSH.

TreatmentofGravesdiseaseisusuallyremovalofthethyroidtissue,followedbylifelongreplacementtherapywithT4.Thyroidtissuecanberemovedeitherbyradioablationwith131Iorbysurgery.Withsurgicalremovalofthegland,precautionsmustbetakentoavoidamassive,potentiallylife-threateningreleaseofthyroidhormonesknownasthyroid storm. thatinhibitTPOactivity. drugs Analternativetoremovalofthyroidtissueisadministrationofantithyroid

(positive is time effect). shortened lusitropic blood and modestly Systolic blood diastolic augmented pressure is pressure decreased. is of widened increased effects skin, the vascular in reduction the combined vessel systemic pressure resistance stroke reflects and muscle, secondary in The the volume resultant to dilation blood and heart. pulse Thermogenesis). the (see tissue due of effects production Rate heat increase Metabolic turn and hormone that partly in induces thyroid and in Basal CO2 are to These on decreases circulation. peripheral thyroid resistance In in arterioles systemic hormone dilating by however, the addition, Total axis, is renin-angiotensinaldosterone tubular activation renal thereby increasing (see the by increased reabsorption of volume blood sodium

The are and inotropic both indirect. T3 of effects cardiac direct to catecholamines to primarily enhanced responsiveness (see are The due latter ). inotropic effects Direct (see

Fig. enhance proteins membrane of including 42.11 heavy expression the regulation that exchanger. α-myosin chain inhibition of contractility, involve Na+/Ca++ plasma increased ) multiple and whereas reticulum T3, by phospholamban Ca++-ATPase (SERCA) increased Sarcoplasmic is is decreased. is a enhanced calcium time result, diastole relaxation of during sequestration the As and shortened. is sarcoplasmic reticulum the reticulum during promote release ryanodine the channels systole. Ca++ in Ca++ Increased sarcoplasmic of from

peaksystolicbloodpressure]isdecreasedtoagreaterextentthanmyocardialoxidativemetabolism.Theriseinsystemicvascularresistancemaycontributetothiscardiacdebility.Incontrast,excessthyroidhormoneenhancescardiacoutputbyincreasingbothheartrateandstrokevolume.Pulsepressureiswidenedbyincreasedsystolicpressureanddecreaseddiastolicpressureduetodecreasedsystemicvascularresistance.Thyrotoxicosisisassociatedwithpalpitations,atrialfibrillation,andmitralvalveprolapse(see Thyroidhormonelevelsinthenormalrangearenecessaryforoptimumcardiacperformance.Adeficiencyofthyroidhormoneinhumansreducesstrokevolume,leftventricularejectionfraction,cardiacoutput,andtheefficiencyofcardiacfunction.Thelatterdefectisshownbythefactthatthestrokeworkindex[(strokevolume/leftventricularmass)×

use Increased ultimately oxidation. O2 on for depends of substrates supply increased an increases synthesis). uptake, the from T3 glucose glucose and gastrointestinal tract augments and absorption (glucose oxidation, turnover enzymes In synthesis fatty for adipose number carboxylase Nervous including Autonomic ). of synthase, fatty acids, β-adrenergic increasing lipolysis by (see the hormone enhances thyroid the receptors induces acetyl-CoA and tissue, and the acid System of Thyroid chylomicrons. enhances of also hormone the clearance adipose and tissue acid fatty release augmented. turnover lipid from (free oxidation) is Thus

and muscle is also lesser urea protein (release a increased. degradation, Protein extent of and to amino turnover acids, synthesis formation) protein gluconeogenesis, norepinephrine, cortisol, of epinephrine, T3 and glucagon, on respective stimulatory the hormone effects potentiates growth

ketogenesis, 42 The pool. protein proteolysis CHAPTER Thyroid and the Gland lipolysis, of labile described the as accelerating has overall The starvation. metabolic been aptly thyroid to physiological hormone response effect of and cholesterol promotes addition, acids of In secretion. bile from thyroid synthesis biliary hormone stimulates decrease plasma the net low-density body lipoprotein pool is and total The of and a effect levels in cholesterol. B increased also vitamins, hormone. clearance certain administered adrenal thyroid some of hormones, steroid Metabolic and drugs by gonadal is and

adenosine of (ATP) synthesis. by efficiency hormones and stimulate both thermogenesis triphosphate ATP utilization affecting Thyroid the including muscle, by the and ATP in uses utilization generates where cytoplasm skeletal particularly energy-dependent several and is ATP enhanced reticulum cycling upregulation of heat. calcium processes, sarcoplasmic SERCA, Na+,K+-ATPase and between role demonstrated Recently that only thought once fat neonates, in facultative be in humans, in adults. in brown been appears to thermogenesis to has it play important a brown mediastinum, metabolic enhanced is Imaging fat of in in lean particularly exposure by cold. the and individuals, presence studies to activity in brown have fat the demonstrated dissipated the by called also circulation. rest Brown the inner the body gradient heat, protein-1 the expresses causes membrane proton mitochondrial be uncoupling which to which as to the disseminated across then thermogenin, is of (UCP1), fat providing and UCP1 hormone, intracellular is T3. expresses conversion to brown D2, regulated by thyroid of T4 fat and Brown involves thyroid sympathetic nervous thermogenesis a between hormones system. synergistic interaction the fat upregulate of D2. promote and expression lipolysis Catecholamines T3 upregulates turn in catecholamine receptors enhances and responsiveness. adrenergic is by accompanied is heat by intolerance. intolerance, cold hypothyroidism accompanied whereas Hyperthyroidism

Thyroid delivery. O2 utilization stimulates hormone enhances and O2 the ventilation, Appropriately, respiratory hypoxia. resting minute increases rate, and to and response T3 hypercapnia ventilatory the increased and actions PO2 increased. when a when is CO2 These maintain PCO2 normal a production O2 arterial is normal utilization increases capacity. O2-carrying the Additionally to enhance slightly hematocrit stimulation kidney. production increase by results the from of This erythropoietin

Normal hormone. thyroid of optimal of also muscles skeletal function requires amounts be energy This may storage. production of and requirement related regulation to are creatine excess. and increased, Glycolysis glycogenolysis whereas thyroid glycogen by hormone and phosphate are reduced its to to phosphorylate up of The increased leads creatine muscle excretion. and take urinary inability

Catecholamine on Effects and Autonomic Nervous Action System the

catecholamines synergism between hormones. mentioned, and thyroid As there important already is of CNS. heat rate, activity, hormones catecholamines motor the Thyroid excitation increasing are synergistic heart and production, metabolic in rate, with the generation cyclic sympathetic receptors enhance increasing by as such the muscle intracellular adenosine may β-adrenergic messengers system nervous second of the and (cAMP). monophosphate heart number activity of T3 in

of thyroid effect hormone and maturation. growth is to major promote A and at becomes but axis the the placenta, crosses midgestation. hormone amount A crucial small fetal thyroid of thyroid functional is neurological for hormone normal formation in the development bone Thyroid important fetus. and proper extremely (see Clinic irreversible intellectual infants, In hormone disability thyroid the characterized causes insufficient congenital In stature and short box). by fetal hypothyroidism,

Bone, Tissue, on Dermis Effects and Hard

linear centers. promotes bone of Thyroid endochondral epiphyseal ossification, maturation hormone and growth, the bone in action. in the cartilage activity maturation growth increasing factor of T3 production local and by enhances part plate, and growth chondrocytes growth (IGF)-I, the During linear supports growth factor hormone, growth and of T3 actions postnatal factors. other insulinlike growth, remodeling. T3 bone normal supports adult also

nails. The and the normal hormone, progression depends of on epidermis, tooth as growth of and its eruption development maturation hair and of does thyroid cycle the follicles, normal hormone. thyroid and integumentary The stimulated structural are tissues these degradative in processes by thyroid too to lead nail formation. hormone loss either or and abnormal can much Thus too hair little inhibiting and of hormone description of extracellular degradation in the (glycosaminoglycans) synthesis myxedema). (see Thyroid of mucopolysaccharides the increasing by connective fibronectin tissue subcutaneous and later tissue regulates structure

System the Nervous on Effects

of timing development hormone pace regulates the Thyroid of and CNS. the of of axons cortex, utero and branching myelination, cell of infancy deficiency and and early synaptogenesis, cerebellar inhibits Thyroid in dendrites, cerebral the migration. in hormone proliferation and growth promptly. recognized neonatal CNS impairment results not and when Irreversible is thyroid treated deficiency hormone biochemical paralleled by morphological These defects abnormalities. are content, hormone protein RNA production tubulinand myelin, cell thyroid lipid of growth and protein, protein reduce size, local Decreased levels of and of factors, and rates protein synthesis. microtubuleassociated critical content

awareness wakefulness, responsiveness of hormone enhances to various auditory memory, alertness, Thyroid also hunger, stimuli, capacity. learning and sense, addition, availability. depends on thyroid proper In normal emotional tone hormone the motility Furthermore tract. as reflexes of speed of by peripheral thyroid nerve hormone, increased and are the amplitude is gastrointestinal

In hormone function. important regulation both and of role plays men, an thyroid women permissive in reproductive of maintenance follicular the and development, ovulation, thyroid significant deviations spermatogenesis, pregnant cycle and of testicular range. the The all levels the by normal ovarian process state normal disrupted hormone healthy of in maturation, from are homologous these metabolism part In in the or hormones. be steroid by alterations of may availability deleterious effects caused stimulates release of For globulin. and thyroid sex hormone hepatic example, steroid–binding synthesis

Hypothyroidism referstoinsufficientproductionofthyroidhormonesandcanoccurasprimary,secondary,ortertiaryendocrinedisease(see ).Inprimaryhypothyroidism,T4andT3levelsareabnormallylowandTSHishigh.Insecondaryandtertiaryhypothyroidism,boththyroidhormonesandTSHarelow.TheresponseofTSHlevelstosyntheticTRHcanbeusedtodistinguishbetweenpituitaryandhypothalamicdisease.

]).Affectedindividualshavesevereintellectualdisability,shortstaturewithincompleteskeletaldevelopment,coarsefacialfeatures,andaprotrudingtongue.Themostcommoncauseofhypothyroidisminchildrenworldwideisiodidedeficiency.Historically,iodidedeficiencywasviewedasamajorcauseofhypothyroidismincertainmountainousregionsofSouthAmerica,Africa,andAsia,butrecentevidencesuggeststhattheproblemisevenmorewidespread.Thistragicformofendemic canbepreventedbypublichealthprogramsthataddiodidetotablesaltorprovideyearlyinjectionsofaslowlyabsorbediodidepreparation.Congenital hypothyroidism gland arealesscommoncauseofneonatal/childhypothyroidism.Inmostcasesthethyroidglandsimplydoesnotdevelop(thyroid Fig.42.12 dysgenesis). defects •Fig. Lessfrequentcausesofchildhood fromthesamevillageinanareaofendemichypothyroidism.Notetheshortstature,obesity,malformedlegs,anddullexpressionoftheintellectuallydisabledhypothyroidchild.Otherfeaturesareaprominentabdomen,aflatbroadnose,ahypoplasticmandible,dryscalyskin,delayedpuberty,andmuscleweakness.Radiographsofthehandcomparinganormal13-year-old(B)tothatofa13-year-oldsufferingfromhypothyroidism(C).Notethatthepatientwithhypothyroidismhasamarkeddelayindevelopmentofthesmallbonesofthehands,ingrowthplatesateitherendofthefingers,andinthegrowthplateofthedistalradius. 42.12 andacongenitallyhypothyroid17-year-old(right) A,Normal6-year-oldchild(left) Ingbar’s Thyroid. and The (A,FromDelangeFM.In:BravermanLE,UtigerRD[eds].Werner 7thed.Philadelphia:Lippincott-Raven;1996.B,FromTannerJMetal.

Skeletal Assessment of Maturity Height Method). Adult and (TW2 of Prediction Diseases of Childhood NewYork:AcademicPress;1975.C,FromAndersenHJ.In:GardnerLI[ed].Endocrine Genetic Adolescence. and and Philadelphia:Saunders;1975.) screening hypothyroidismaremutationsingenesinvolvedinthyroidhormoneproduction(e.g.NIS,TPO,thyroglobulin,pendrin)orblockingantibodiestotheTSHreceptor.Theseverityoftheneurologicalandskeletaldefectsiscloselylinkedtothetimingofdiagnosisandthyroidhormone(T4)replacement,withearlytreatmentresultinginanormalcognitiveabilityandsubtleneurologicaldeficits.Ontheotherhand,ifhypothyroidismatbirthremainsuntreatedforonly2to4weeks,theCNSwillnotmaturenormallyinthefirstyearoflife.Developmentalmilestonessuchassitting,standing,andwalkingwillbelate,andsevereirreversiblecognitivedeficitscanresult.Hypothyroidbabiesusuallyappearnormalatbirthbecauseofprotectionbymaternalthyroidhormones.Neonatal (T4andTSHlevels)hasthereforeplayedacriticalroleindiagnosisandpreventionofcongenitalhypothyroidism.

HypothyroidisminadultswhoarenotiodidedeficientmostoftenresultsfromanotherautoimmunedisorderknownasHashimoto’s disease (formerlycalledlymphocytic thyroiditis).IncontrasttothestimulatoryeffectofautoantibodiesseeninGravesdisease,thyroidautoantibodiesinHashimoto’sdisease(againstTPO,thyroglobulin,orTSHreceptor)causeapoptosisofthyroidcellsanddestructionofthyroidfollicles.Theseantibodiesfixcomplementandpromotelysisofthyroidcells,causingreleaseofthyroglobulinintothecirculation.ThethyroidglandbecomesinfiltratedbybothBandTlymphocytes,whichmaycauseenlargementofthegland.

Othercausesofhypothyroidismincludeiatrogeniccauses(e.g.,radiochemicaldamageorsurgicalremovalfortreatmentofhyperthyroidism),nodulargoiters,andpituitaryorhypothalamicdisease.Treatmentofpatientswiththeantiarrhythmicdrugamiodarone,whichcontainsalargeamountofiodine,maycauseeitherhypo-orhyperthyroidism.Thyroidfunctionmustbecarefullymonitoredinpatientstakingthismedication.

producespuffyfeatures,anenlargedtongue,hoarseness,jointstiffness,effusionsinthepleural,pericardial,andperitonealspaces,andpressureonperipheralandcranialnervesentrappedbyexcessgroundsubstance.Constipation,lossofhair,menstrualdysfunction,andanemiaareothersigns.Inadultslackingthyroidhormone,positronemissiontomographydemonstratesageneralizedreductionincerebralbloodflowandglucosemetabolism.Thisabnormalitymayexplainthepsychomotorimpairmentanddepressedaffectofhypothyroidindividuals. Theclinicalpictureofhypothyroidisminadultsisinmanyrespectstheexactoppositeofthatseeninhyperthyroidism.Thelower-than-normalmetabolicrateleadstoweightgainwithoutanappreciableincreaseincaloricintake.Thedecreasedthermogenesislowersbodytemperatureandcausesintolerancetocold,decreasedsweating,anddryskin.Adrenergicactivityisdecreased,andthereforebradycardiamayoccur.Movement,speech,andthoughtareallslowed,andlethargy,sleepiness,andloweringoftheuppereyelids(ptosis)occur.Accumulationofnegativelychargedmucopolysaccharidesinconnectivetissuesattractssodiumandfluid.Theresultingnonpittingmyxedema

ReplacementtherapywithadailydoseofT4thatnormalizesTSHlevelsisusuallycurativeinadults.Inmostpatients,T3isnotneededbecauseitisgeneratedasneededbyperipheralD1andD2.Furthermore,administrationofT3iscomplicatedbyitshighpotencyandshorthalf-life,requiringfrequentdosingandcausingdifficultyinmaintainingconsistentphysiologicallevelsofT3.

)isincreasedinmen(inwhombreastenlargementmayoccurwithhyperthyroidism).Decreasesinbothparathyroidhormoneand1,25-(OH)2-vitaminDproductionarecompensatoryconsequencesoftheeffectsofthyroidhormoneonboneresorption(see Thyroidhormonealsohassignificanteffectsonotherpartsoftheendocrinesystem.Pituitaryproductionofgrowthhormoneisincreasedbythyroidhormone,whereasthatofprolactinisdecreased.Adrenocorticalsecretionofcortisol(see )aswellasmetabolicclearanceofthishormoneisstimulated,butplasmafreecortisollevelsremainnormal.Theratioofestrogenstoandrogens(see

Chapter40).Kidneysize, renalplasmaflow,glomerularfiltrationrate,andtransportratesforanumberofsubstancesarealsoincreasedbythyroidhormone.

(NTIS), patients sick severely ill who as hospitalization. known frequently syndrome, in Non-thyroidal euthyroid syndrome occurs require also illness is axis. CNS-mediated characterized and TSH hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid both of by thyroid suppression NTIS caused by of circulating the decreased levels hormone In to increased. rT3 is of metabolism T4 peripheral addition, inactive also prolonged upon A fasting. similar is pattern seen represent chronic Although to NTIS a been illness to understood, starvation. physiological adaptation or it incompletely has proposed remains energy-sparing

of Mechanism Thyroid Hormone Action

Formanyyearsitwasthoughtthatthyroidhormonesdiffusepassivelyacrosscellmembranes,butthisisnowknowntorequiretransportproteins.TheseincludethemonocarboxylatetransportersMCT8andMCT10,whicharecapableoftransportingbothT4andT3acrosstheplasmamembrane(

Fig.

42.13

Fig.42.5 ).Recently,mutationsinMCT8havebeenshowntocauseanX-linkeddevelopmentalsyndromeinhumanscharacterizedbyelevatedT3levels,musclehypoplasia,andsevereneurologicalimpairment.Anothertransporter,OATP1C1,appearstoplayaroleintransportofT4acrosstheblood-brainbarrier.

receptor (TR) family. ManybutnotallT3actionsaremediatedthroughitsbindingtooneofthemembersofthethyroid hormone whicharehigh-affinityreceptorsforT3.ThetissuedistributionofTRα1andTRβ1iswidespread.TRα1isstronglyexpressedincardiacandskeletalmuscle.TRα1istheprimarymediatorofthyroidhormoneactionontheheart.Incontrast,TRβ1isexpressedmainlyinbrain,liver,andkidney.TRβ2expressionisrestrictedtothepituitaryandcriticalareasofthehypothalamus,aswellasthecochleaandretina.T3actingviaTRβ2isresponsibleforinhibitingexpressionoftheprepro-TRHgeneintheparaventricularneuronsofthehypothalamusandtheβ ).Inhumanstherearetwothyroidhormonereceptorgenes,THRA whichisalternativelysplicedtoformtwomainisoforms.TRα1isabonafideTR,whereastheotherisoformdoesnotbindT3.THRBencodesTRβ1 TheTRfamilybelongstothenuclearhormonereceptorsuperfamilyoftranscriptionfactors(seealso andTRβ2, locatedonchromosomes17and3,respectively,thatencodethenuclearthyroidhormonereceptors.THRAencodesTRα, andTHRB, subunitTSHgeneinpituitarythyrotropes.Thusthenegative-feedbackeffectsofthyroidhormoneonbothTRHandTSHsecretionarelargelymediatedbyTRβ2.

•Fig. 42.13 Mechanismsofthyroidhormoneaction,includingtheroleofMCTtransporters,D2deiodinase,andTR-RXRheterodimers.CoA,coactivator;CoR,co-repressor;RXR,retinoidXreceptor.

Fig.42.13 ).UnligandedTR-RXRbindstothyroidresponseelementsintargetgenesandrecruitsco-repressorsthatinhibitgenetranscription.UponT3binding,theco-repressorsarereleased,andcoactivatorsarerecruitedtothehormone-receptorcomplex,inducinggenetranscription.

hormone syndromes.ThemostcommonmutationsoccurintheTRβ2subtype,resultinginincompletenegativefeedbackatthehypothalamic-pituitarylevel.ThusT4levelsareelevated,butTSHisnotsuppressed.Whenresistanceispredominantlyatthehypothalamic-pituitarylevel,thepatientmayexhibitsignsofhyperthyroidismduetoeffectsofelevatedthyroidhormonelevelsonperipheraltissues,particularlyontheheart,mediatedbyTRα1.TRisoformsmayalsoofferpotentialtherapeutictargets.Forexample,researchisunderwaytodevelopTRβ-specificagoniststhathavebeneficialeffectsonlipidandcholesterolmetabolismwithouttheriskofadversecardiovascularsideeffects. AnunderstandingofTRsubtypesisimportantbecauseinactivatingTRmutationshavebeenfoundtocausethyroid resistance

ThereisemergingevidencefornongenomicactionsofT3andT4thataremediatedbyreceptorsactingintheplasmamembrane,mitochondria,orcytoplasm.Insomecasesthesearemodifiedversionsofthenuclearthyroidreceptors.Forexample,truncatedisoformsofTRα1havebeenreportedthatbindT3intheplasmamembranetomediatenongenomiceffectsinboneorthatbindT4inthecytoplasmtoregulatemicrofilamentorganization.Ithasalsobeenreportedthatanintegrin,αvβ3,canactasaT4receptoratthecellsurfacetoregulatecellularproliferationandangiogenesisbyanongenomicmechanism.Theinterplaybetweentheclassicalgenomicandnongenomicactionsofthyroidhormonesislikelytobeanotheractiveareaoffutureresearch.

1.

neck and connected thyroid gland trachea of situated The is right to is lobes the the composed in and and by anterolateral ventral of left an aspect isthmus. the

2.

the The T4) (thyroxine, tetraiodothyronine is (T3). gland thyroid source of triiodothyronine and

3.

of or cells central spherical the The consists endocrine single in contains a of unit lumen a basic layer a follicle colloid is that surrounding that hormone. epithelial stored gland

4.

by plasma a up thyroid basolateral the is sodium-iodide cells Iodide symporter in taken into membrane.

5.

tyrosine thyroid T3 of and are enzyme oxidase by the T4 complex dual iodide peroxidase. from synthesized and and in iodothyronines. after coupled molecules thyroglobulin Tyrosine two which residues iodination, yield the iodotyrosine undergo to are

6.

of T4 retrieval of thyroglobulin and the requires Secretion from by lumen follicle endocytosis. T3 stored in liberate Thyroglobulin and then degraded is to endolysosomes T4 T3. thyroglobulin. not is that conserved iodotyrosine coupling recycling molecules did any Iodide within undergo by

7.

the plasma of stimulate in steps to receptor gland via thyroid on membrane the production T3. T4 its acts all and TSH retrieval and iodide steps include uptake, and These thyroglobulin. from iodination coupling, growth and oxidation, protein also TSH stimulates synthesis, glucose cells. of epithelial

8.

of following and circulates proteins: More globulin, thyroid-binding T3 T4 than bound to 99.5% the

et al. J, Bernal Thyroid clinical hormone and implications. transporters–functions Endocrinol. Nat Rev 2015;11:406-417.

AC. Bianco for thyroid cracking code hormone the signaling. metabolic Minireview: Endocrinology. 2011;152:3306-3311.

albumin. transthyretin, and Only and active. the T4 of T3 are free biologically fractions

9.

disposition prohormone T4 deiodinases. whose functions regulated largely as is of types three a by is of production of yields active 75% the which the T3, outer daily Monodeiodination hormone. ring of the principal Alternatively, is inner ring the reverse biologically inactive. yields monodeiodination which T3, of active T4 thyroid of T3 and regulates the of between reverse hormone. availability Proportioning T3

10.

is regulator hormone of metabolic and rate Thyroid a positive the basal thermogenesis. major ventilation are output, rate, systemic and vascular Other actions increased decreased of important cardiac thyroid hormone heart resistance. and enhanced. mobilization are products disposal of Substrate metabolic and

11.

normal growth the Thyroid development. CNS skeleton and hormone crucial action are and on for the immature by hormone stature, characterized congenital of causes Absence skeletal and short development, hypothyroidism, poor brain development. and remodeling degradation adults, In skin hormone and bone thyroid hair. supports of

12.

T3 to thyroid for thyroid actions responsible hormone subtypes various the binds receptor of hormone. The thyroid with the receptor heterodimerizes of thyroid target respectively. or in T3, absence in RXR resulting genes, response induction repression or elements presence to on regulate hormone

GA. Mechanisms hormone action. of thyroid Brent Clin Invest. J 2012;122:3035-3043.

de et al. EM, Vries the basis syndrome. of molecular illness non-thyroidal The Endocrinol. J 2015;225:R67-R81.

al. et H, Krude congenital dysfunction: challenges. thyroid and of Treatment achievements Endocrinol Clin Res Best Metab. Pract 2015;29:399-413.

of able questions: to student following this be Upon 1. the should chapter completion answer the

and including Describe adrenal of the cells the of the anatomy medulla zones of microscopic cortex. three the the anatomy adrenal and chromaffin the adrenal gland,

2.

epinephrine involved the norepinephrine the with regulation and Explain synthesis epinephrine secretion of adrenal reactions and integrate the reactions medulla. enzymatic by and generating in those

3.

an to imposed response explain actions on body. of Utilize overall the a sympathetic to specific catecholamines stress the

4.

the first the reactions steroidogenic their and common StAR in the pathway, two function of reaction. and Describe locations, subcellular the first protein of

5.

and reticularis glomerulosa, with zona fasciculata, common respect the zona zona within pathways zona-specific reactions. Compare to and the steroidogenic

6.

mechanism and of to the including glucocorticoids the Describe cross-reactivity and with of cortisol mechanism prevent the of the mineralocorticoids, receptor, this. mineralocorticoid action

7.

disease and development role to the during explain the throughout to hormone’s of normal multiple the actions describe pathophysiology Cushing’s of cortisol aspects and Integrate Addison’s the body multiple the syndrome. and of physiology,

8.

out the “loophole” congenital an face zona androgen the leads the including production of mechanisms in hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal the axis, adrenal specific hyperplasia) (e.g., in feedback enzyme Map that to to the cortisol excessive fasciculata deficiency in synthesis. and

9.

aldosterone. actions the of Review and regulation

steroids of glands structurally n adrenal fairly produce hormones: catecholamines. structures the and complex classes adults two distinct emerge that as endocrine a including and of exercise metabolism acts parameters hormone hypoglycemia to and output. cardiac energy as rapid epinephrine multiple regulate such The as responder catecholamine stresses to physiology, and major glucose secretagogue steroid a utilization, the is also processes. regulates numerous cortisol, immune Stress and inflammatory homeostasis, of hormone which other longer-acting volume In hormone aldosterone. glands through regulate the homeostasis and steroid addition salt the adrenal Finally, women. amounts secretes large sulfate dehydroepiandrosterone synthesis a (DHEAS), estrogen of the for in precursor in fetoplacental plays which as role synthesis a substrate the adrenal major gland androgen androgen peripheral and

kidney) kidneys glands located renal, The structures are immediately bilateral adrenal (ad, ( near; the above

Fig.

43.1 ). the on referred are each sit as glands humans to because superior they kidney. suprarenal pole of they In the also and (or from similar are both are to they epithelial tissue. derived adrenal epithelial-like) that glands in tissue the neuronal pituitary The of ( outer gland, the adrenal the adrenal cortex called portion The

Fig. superior 43.2 vicinity the in of of kidney. cells pole from developing the ), the develops mesodermal cells. epithelial cells cords endocrine form of These cortex The of cells develop (see into the ). steroidogenic cells zones—the glomerulosa, adrenal zona the In and produce zona androgens, three of (see adults adrenal the glucocorticoids, is zona and fasciculata, cortex reticularis—that composed the respectively mineralocorticoids,

Fig. 43.2B

after chromaffin by cells encapsulated forms, the ganglia, cortical cortex migrate called become the and Soon the cortex sympathetic cells, associated crest–derived into with cells. neural called the Thus portion cells is establish gland, inner the chromaffin the the medulla adrenal (see adrenal which of

Fig. 43.2). develop sympathetic neurons. have of the the adrenal potential cells The to medulla chromaffin into postganglionic and cholinergic innervated They tyrosine. from synthesize catecholamine sympathetic neurotransmitter are preganglionic norepinephrine can neurons the by norepinephrine group catecholamine that (PNMT), epinephrine, hormone the cortisol expression of which medulla cortex adrenal produce of primary a the adrenal the to high induce (see the phenylethanolamine product transfers drain hormonal onto medulla enzyme methyl of N-methyl into However, the transferase levels the from

Fig. 43.2B).

Fig. • 767 43 CHAPTER Adrenal The Gland kidneys on inferior, by supply vein. The the are (Modified middle, from suprarenal glands arteries. arterial suprarenal The a single superior et al. and the receive superior RL sit of rich adrenals and adrenal poles drained from the Drake a 43.1 2005.) Anatomy Livingstone; Churchill Philadelphia: Gray’s Students. for

a secreted organ and and neurotransmitters, blood as as near act catecholamines being secreted adrenomedullary acting are hormones. of target Instead into 80% the norepinephrine. medulla secrete adrenal About cells the epinephrine, secrete the and of of 20% remaining about circulating of from from medulla. comes entirely adrenal the circulating the Although derived norepinephrine the medulla, epinephrine 30% is only is into the The 70% nerve sympathetic postganglionic from remaining and released diffuses system. terminals vascular the catecholamine production, life. not of adrenal sole the source this is tissue essential not is for medulla Because

Epinephrine Synthesis of

synthesis epinephrine enzymatic in in The steps shown are

Fig. . 43.4 chromaffin acid cytoplasm of rate-limiting by hydroxylation of enzyme the tyrosine Synthesis hydroxylase (DOPA). tyrosine subsequent with tyrosine the into cell dihydroxyphenylalanine begins produce and transport amino the to aromatic enzyme, transported a the dopamine (also is vesicle into called granule). is amino then to cytoplasmic chromaffin DOPA secretory converted decarboxylase, acid the and by to the Within by converted β-hydroxylase. completely all enzyme granule, is dopamine dopamine the norepinephrine out granule the chromaffin by cytoplasmic diffuses facilitated all by cells, is norepinephrine enzyme PNMT epinephrine. of methylated the essentially of most to In adrenomedullary the transport and form

local concentration cortisol the The medulla in maintained adrenal configuration within of gland. the vascular the high by is middle, arteries the three the tissue from penetrated outer connective inferior, branches: a by adrenal rich main coming The is (see arterial capsule of suprarenal and arterial supply gland superior

Fig. 43.1 ). to the carry to cortex give of from two (Fig. blood blood that These the rise types vessels medulla adrenal cortex types to of through vessels (1) them to oxygen- the secrete cortisol entering cells ultimately fuse cells, in so the single a sinusoids neuronal that Both medullary bathe suprarenal medullary fail into directly differentiation concentrations vena of which cava. nutrient-laden hormones cells, high cortical few 43.3 leaving blood rise drains to (2) inhibits cells the of and relatively provide the cortical and ): vessel give (including they gland numerous cortisol). and percolate into and to secretions the Cortisol form axons. vein. the Thus before arterioles, relatively inferior medullary steroid high medullary chromaffin of dendrites chromaffin which and plexus the the converts to norepinephrine epinephrine Additionally, enzyme cortisol which ( of induces PNMT, expression

Fig. ). 43.4 Glucocorticoid PNMT of receptor–knockout is but activity decreased an is medulla cortex, size mice and undetectable. the enlarged the have

transported then is for back to into exocytosis. Epinephrine the granule and storage regulated undergo

signals to hypoglycemia, forms regulated hemorrhagic of including the is response and adrenal and Secretion from descending of various primarily hypovolemia epinephrine •Fig. sympathetic medulla in stress, exercise, norepinephrine by Histologyoftheadrenalgland.A,Lowmagnificationillustratingtheoutercortex(C)andinnermedulla(M;notethecentralvein[V]).B,Highermagnificationclearlyillustratingthezonationofthecortex.Thecorrespondingendocrinefunctionandthedifferentzonesofthecortexandthemedullaarenoted. 43.2 (FromYoungBetal.Wheater’s Functional Histology. 5thed.Philadelphia:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.)

Fig. 43.5 ). hypothalamus in initiate input sympathetic limbic and cerebral of autonomic from regions the brainstem, centers brainstem. the the they and cortex, other receive reside hypothalamus primary that system, responses and the The and

receptors sympathetic preganglionic cells chemical acetylcholine secreted adrenal secretion from (see nicotinic binds for is which to catecholamine medulla on the The and from chromaffin signal neurons (ACh), is of

Fig.

43.5 ). of enzyme cells ACh chromaffin tyrosine rate-limiting activity hydroxylase the the (see increases in

Fig. 43.4 ). chromaffin also activity of and the increases exocytosis dopamine It granules. the β-hydroxylase stimulates of significantly changing do is not coupled even so norepinephrine sympathetic catecholamines change levels closely intracellular and Synthesis to secretion face epinephrine of the that of activity. of in

Mechanism Catecholamines of of Action

as • receptors with classified Adrenergic α-and the receptors Fig. α-adrenergic β-adrenergic receptors, are generally Capsular the medulla. gland. from that arteries give through et Young the to rise cortex through flow Blood carry sinusoidal to adrenal al. blood vessels the centripetally 43.3 (Modified B Wheater’s Livingstone; Histology. ed. Churchill Philadelphia: Functional 5th 2006.) further divided and α2 receptors and receptors α1 β1, divided β-adrenergic β3 ( receptors and into β2, into the

). 43.1 Table These 1. according receptors can be characterized to:

endogenous potency agonists Relative and and antagonists. pharmacological of than agonists for norepinephrine receptors, potent and whereas more β3 β2 epinephrine Epinephrine receptors are is and potent and norepinephrine receptors. for for α β1 number nonselective large A and of agonists synthetic selective now adrenergic exist. antagonists and

2.

pathways. Downstream signaling

different coupled are primary pathways the shows that to receptors. adrenergic 43.1 the Table is the signaling in to differences been for oversimplification, receptor pathways This of a and an type. cell have linked given because agonist duration exposure

3.

density of and receptors. relative Location Importantly, types different predominate receptor different in tissues. predominant by receptors. receptors α2 pancreatic are sympathetic and response discharge example, mediated although β α the expressed beta a For to both is by cells, islet

Catecholamines of Physiological Actions Adrenomedullary

system, nervous is adrenal directly innervated medulla are responses the by rapid. the autonomic Because very adrenomedullary notably the because anticipated) in of can they of adrenomedullary precede (i.e., several Furthermore, nervous the the of cortex, responses most central actual the involvement onset cerebral (CNS), stress centers system (see can be

Fig. 43.5 ). postganglionic activity many by from sympathetic output, adrenomedullary which with sympathetic In coordinated cases norepinephrine as nervous the release the neurons. epinephrine, of is primarily determined is some hypoglycemia) vice sympathetic (e.g., stronger adrenomedullary However, evoke than nervous a stimuli and versa. response

a organs tissues sympathoadrenal response by are ( and affected Many

43.2). Table major response of the of physiological informative example the is to sympathoadrenal roles catecholamines An exercise. subjective (i.e., role element endocrine a response a sympathetic without it “fight-or-flight” but the and similar greater response nervous Exercise epinephrine) of to involves role of than response the norepinephrine). fear, (i.e., adrenomedullary neurotransmitter is of to oxygen increased energy glucose sympathoadrenal the of while goal maintaining and cardiac muscle and system of the meet exercise overall the supply to demands sufficient is brain. The during skeletal response to actions physiological ( exercise includes The the following of epinephrine major

Fig. 1. 43.6): by splanchnic) beds. muscles (e.g., flow the and arteriolar muscular achieved and nonmuscular epinephrine heart, Increased and blood and on action veins norepinephrine lymphatics, the integrated to of is

•Fig. Stepsinsynthesisandsecretionofcatecholaminesfromadrenalmedullarychromaffincells. 43.4

2. Epinephrine in promotes muscle. glycogenolysis (FFAs), and acids tissue. free muscle fatty promote and Exercising norepinephrine in also can adipose epinephrine lipolysis utilize increases increasing glycogenolysis and by blood hepatic Epinephrine glucose gluconeogenesis. an The in tissue increase in of promotion ketogenesis. also coordinated is with hepatic adipose lipolysis epinephrine-induced on effects Finally, fact receptors). secretion of receptors) that catecholamines secretion are reinforced they stimulate and insulin the (β2 metabolism glucagon by the (α2 inhibit adenosine normal •Fig. during Efficient of production (ATP) exercise triphosphate Stimulithatenhancecatecholaminesecretion. 43.5

cAMP,cyclicadenosinemonophosphate;DAG,diacylglycerol.

Arteriolardilation:↓ BP(α1)(splanchnic,renal,cutaneous,genital) (β2)(muscle)↑ Arteriolarvasoconstriction; BP↑

BP,bloodpressure.

also to requires gases an oxygen of supply 1-hour (i.e., of adequate exchange workout) exercising a efficient with muscle. this smooth muscle. bronchiolar promote by of relaxation Catecholamines

3. by Catecholamines demand decrease energy smooth muscle. visceral (GI) gastrointestinal tracts, is the immediately response decreases it in muscle a the conserving not where overall sympathoadrenal motility and urinary needed. smooth general energy of In thereby

Catecholamines of Metabolism

involved Two degradation in (COMT). oxidase (MAO) of are the monoamine enzymes primary catecholamines: and catechol-O-methyltransferase terminal. degraded and by after COMT The neurotransmitter MAO the presynaptic uptake norepinephrine is into the is involved in catabolism adrenal mechanism of This circulating also catecholamines. such kidney. fate is and However, predominant the as by COMT the in catecholamines of tissues adrenal liver methylation nonneuronal are and (VMA) a Urinary production of level metanephrine used vanillylmandelic patient. sometimes the assess clinically in catecholamine acid to derived urinary than VMA of catecholamines. adrenal from neuronal metanephrine the rather and Much is

).Consequentlythebaroreceptorresponsetobloodshiftsthatoccursonstandingisblunted. Pheochromocytoma isatumorofchromaffintissuethatproducesexcessivequantitiesofcatecholamines.Thesearecommonlyadrenalmedullarytumors,buttheycanoccurinotherchromaffincellsoftheautonomicnervoussystem.Althoughpheochromocytomasarenotcommontumors,theyarethemostcommoncauseofhyperfunctioningoftheadrenalmedullary.Thecatecholaminemostfrequentlyelevatedinpheochromocytomaisnorepinephrine.Forunknownreasonsthesymptomsofexcessivecatecholaminesecretionareoftensporadicratherthancontinuous.Symptomsincludehypertension,headaches(fromhypertension),sweating,anxiety,palpitations,andchestpain.Inaddition,patientswiththisdisordermayshoworthostatichypotension(despitethetendencyforhypertension).Thisoccursbecausehypersecretionofcatecholaminescandecreasethepostsynapticresponsetonorepinephrineasaresultofdownregulationofthereceptors(see

glucocorticoid cortisol. zona fasciculata hormone The the produces steroidogenic tissue of of cords an cells. straight actively This composed large is zone cholesterol cells are filled “foamy” (CEs). esters a that cytoplasm because stored have represent droplets with These they lipid make cholesterol import of cholesterol blood some form but amount significant in low-density lipoprotein the from the a (LDL). of de cells These novo receptor LDL their (LDLR) particles are and endocytosed. bind to the and free is by the FC of Within C Niemann-Pick out CEs is a from (NPC) proteins. by transported endolysosome lysosomal lipase, released (FC) endolysosomes, cholesterol cholesterol acyl stored the droplets cytoplasm esterification after (ACAT) CoA-cholesterol by in ( in is lipid acyltransferase Free

Fig. ). 43.7 is process cholesterol a (ACTH; see free by that stored lipase response adrenocorticotropic to continually increased (HSL), back is hormone hormone-sensitive turned The in into cholesterol

Regulation of

the membrane. synthesis attached the begins CYP11A1, in to first mitochondria, hormone is mitochondrial where steroid the enzyme, All inner the process transfer protein (StAR in matrix, acute called inner Although FC appear in (see is regulatory the of involved be protein) steroidogenic to proteins into several mitochondrial protein indispensable one this

Fig. 43.7). StAR tropic transcriptionally (phosphorylation) and short-lived is rapidly protein posttranslationally by hormones. pituitary and activated laden with StAR inactivating mitochondria the fasciculata become CYP11A1 accessed (“lipoid”) and of because •Fig. cholesterol patients mutations for cells protein, cortisol with in used lipid within In be excessively the cannot by zona 43.6 Someoftheindividualactionsofcatecholaminesthatcontributetotheintegratedsympa-thoadrenalresponsetoexercise. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Reproductive and Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. ° oxygen Glucose Skeletal (+)ˆve CO2 ˝ uptake ˜ Cells flow ˝ ° (˜2) ˝ ˝ (˜2) Motility to Hormonal to return ° GI ketones to ˝ Heart Ketogenesis Blood (˙) FFAs Glucagon Blood muscle ° usage skeletal glucose ˝ Vasoconstriction Nutrient ° glucagon/insulin ° (+)ˆve Glycogenolysis output Lipolysis Cells •Fig. (˜2) supply Blood Splanchnic (˜2) O2 secretion glucose ° (˜2) glycerol (+)ˆve (˜2, Gluconeogenesis GI arterioles Veins Inotropic and ° lymphatics (˙) and muscle and ° ° uptake and Dilation reinforcement ° Glycogenolysis Skeletal Adipose Vasoconstriction brain and Exchange urinary secretion Blood Vasodilation )Bronchiole Glucose tracts tract adequate Chronotropic ° lactate Venous muscle of muscle Liver Blood Energy to ˙ Insulin (˜1) Blood (˙2) Blood ° ° Cardiac arterioles flow supply (˜2) ratio ˜3) Blood Lusitropic ° ° ° of cleavage side-chain FC,freecholesterol;HSL,hormone-sensitivelipase;LAL,lysosomalacidhydrolase;LDL,low-densitylipoprotein;LDLR,low-densitylipoproteinreceptor;P5,pregnenolone;StAR,steroidogenicacuteregulatoryprotein. Eventsinvolvedinthefirsttworeactionsinthesteroidogenicpathway:conversionofcholesteroltopregnenolone;conversionofpregnenolone(P5)toprogesterone(P4)inzonafasciculatacells.ACAT,acylCoA:cholesterolacyltransferase;3β hydroxysteroiddehydrogenase;CE,cholesterolesters;CYP11A1alsocalledP450 HSD,3β 43.7 enzyme; Reproductive Physiology. and (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) •Fig. 43.8 Summaryofthesteroidogenicpathwaysforeachofthethreezonesoftheadrenalcortex.Theenzymaticreactionsarecolorcodedacrosszones.sER,smoothendoplasmicreticulum. Reproductive and (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) synthesis. cannot steroid synthesize individuals hormones. these gonadal Moreover, not utero. steroid placenta in so does StAR, express individuals production The normal placental these have

11-deoxycortisol, 17-hydroxyprogesterone, and Inthezonafasciculata,cholesterolisconvertedsequentially pregnenolone, to (Figs. cortisol progesterone, 43.9 ). 43.8 in A progesterone fasciculata is the (DOC) and involves pathway zona then to 17-hydroxylation, bypasses that parallel in (see pathway 11-deoxycorticosterone corticosterone converted which to a

Fig. 43.9C ). production in absence of the in pathway This activity), humans, minor active of but DOC is CYP11B1 is the significant. (11-hydroxylase levels hypertension. DOC acts weak DOC mineralocorticoid elevated as Because ( a ), cause of 43.3

Transport Cortisol and Metabolism of

transported cortisol. in to and bound blood 5% transcortin), 7% called Cortisol albumin, which of about to which 90% [CBG] corticosteroid-binding predominantly of cortisol, is (also binds binds globulin the site liver The predominant of inactivation. is steroid both and excreted with readily be It cortisol more glucuronide and they steroids sulfate or so the conjugates kidney. that inactive active inactivates can by 70 about The minutes. is cortisol circulating half-life of

conversion by reversibly Cortisol is inactivated to cortisone. 2 This type 11β-hydroxysteroid catalyzed enzyme (11β-HSD2). is action dehydrogenase by the (MR)and receptor of express cortisol also the by occurs 11β-HSD2 mineralocorticoid in Inactivation that cells are

P-450 monooxidase Steroidogenicenzymesfallintotwosuperfamilies.Mostbelongtothecytochrome gene andarethusreferredtoasCYPs. family synthase, hasthreefunctions:11-hydroxylase,18-hydroxylase,and18-oxidase. Theseenzymesarelocatedeitherintheinnermitochondrialmatrix,wheretheyusemolecularoxygenandaflavoproteinelectrondonor,orinthesmoothendoplasmicreticulum,wheretheyuseadifferentflavoproteinforelectrontransfer.DifferentCYPenzymesactashydroxylases,lyases(desmolases),oxidases,oraromatases.Twooftheseenzymeshavemultiplefunctions.CYP17hasbotha17-hydroxylasefunctionanda17,20-lyase(desmolase)function.CYP11B2,alsocalledaldosterone

dehydrogenase position.AllactivesteroidhormonesmustbeconvertedtoΔ4structuresby3β-HSD.The17β-HSDs havetwoisoformsthatconvertthehydroxylgrouponcarbon3ofthecholesterolringtoaketoneandshiftthedoublebondfromthe5-6(Δ5) havetwoisoformsthatcatalyzetheinterchangebetweencortisol(active)andcortisone(inactive). (HSD)families.3β-HSDs haveatleastfivemembersandcanactaseitheroxidasesorreductases.17β-HSDsprimarilyactonsexsteroidsandcanbeactivatingordeactivating.Finally,the11β-HSDs Theotherenzymesinvolvedinsteroidogenesisbelongtothreehydroxysteroid positiontothe4-5(Δ4)

•Fig. 43.9 A,Reaction1,catalyzedbyCYP11A1,inmakingcortisol.B,Reactions2a/bandreactions3a/b,involvingCYP17(17-hydroxylasefunction)and3β-hydroxysteroiddehydrogenase(3β-HSD),inmakingcortisol.ThisfigureshowstheΔ5versusΔ4pathway.

•Fig. 43.9, C,Reactions4and5,involvingCYP21BandCYP11B1,inwhichthelasttwostepsincortisolsynthesisarecarriedout.Alsoshownistheminorpathwayleadingtocorticosteronesynthesisinthezonafasciculata. cont’d Physiology. and (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Reproductive

4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) target (see cells aldosterone below). of prevents and cortisone of binding having the the MR to these cortisol conversion inappropriate cortisol on of The cells. mineralocorticoid actions to 11β-HSD2 of cortisol reversible to that in enzyme, cortisone cortisol. converts by Inactivation is back 11β-HSD1, another well liver, skin. occurs (GR), the the tissue, tissues in expressing and CNS, as This as glucocorticoid conversion receptor including adipose in

Action Cortisol of of Mechanism

). primarily Cortisol through which acts gene transcription regulates the glucocorticoid (see receptor, shock cytoplasm In stable chaperones, and proteins resides heat molecular in of in the cyclophilins. the hormone, complex GR a the absence several with including the promotes followed by: Cortisol-GR proteins, binding aAllvaluesarerelativetotheglucocorticoidandmineralocorticoidpotenciesofcortisol,whichhaveeachbeenarbitrarilysetat1.0.Cortisolactuallyhasonly1/500thepotencyofthenaturalmineralocorticoidaldosterone. dissociation chaperone of

1.

translocation of rapid complex into cortisol-GR nucleus, 2. the the

and near basal GREs glucocorticoid to “negative” promoters elements genes, cortisol-regulated “positive” binding the response both (GREs, GREs) and 3. dimerization and of

targeted genes. recruitment decreased transcription coactivator of transcription proteins to increased or of factors leading general the assembly and of

transcription nuclear with the some the factors, interacts cases In factor activate as other proinflammatory ability to gene GR factor, and such (NF)κB their with expression. transcription interferes

of Actions Cortisol Physiological

muscle is protein. during as during a Cortisol increases blood broad glucose and fasting In CNS and at levels, hormone.” characterized range the function, blood cortisol general, cardiovascular often actions a has maintains stress “stress function and of glucose expense of inflammatory unbridled responses. against self-injurious of Cortisol immune and effects body the the protects function. energy stress with Cortisol also inhibiting cope to by reproductive partitions has functions. several the that developing stress-related of the later, fetus are GI stated bone, its skin, tissue, on connective As and effects cortisol independent other tract,

glucocorticoid the a adrenal hormone steroid the glucose. from blood term that implies, cortex regulates As cortisol is glucose ( stimulating It gluconeogenesis increases by blood

Fig. 43.10 ). of gluconeogenic the gene Cortisol phosphoenolpyruvate (PEPCK). enhances hepatic key enzyme carboxykinase expression Cortisol skeletal and muscle adipose decreases GLUT4-mediated in uptake also tissue. glucose cortisol period ratio), sparing sources. thereby promotes on as energy catecholamines by the effects lipolysis, potentiating FFAs making interdigestive During the glucose (low insulin-glucagon available of gluconeogenesis. rich especially proteolysis, carbon increases Cortisol of protein thereby providing for skeletal hepatic and in a synthesis muscle, inhibits source

Fig. cortisol effects to contrasts also elevated stress role conditions. 43.10 the of normal pathological chronically as response and cortisol the of of a in result overall important two metabolism. with in are cortisol discussed metabolic As of differences there effects states, to particularly between lipid the later, these respect response gluconeogenic, to appropriate and to with catecholamines catecholamines stress, cardiovascular promote lipolytic, an and During while glucagon synergizes metabolic a synergizing cortisol glycogenolytic promote response. with ketogenic, in context During (abdominal/ levels synergizes to insulin secondary glucose truncal elevated the (from of (from glucose and visceral) increased to elevated adiposity. and elevated promote and glucose pathological hyperinsulinemia with intolerance) overproduction, of appetite) chronically cortisol cortisol lipogenesis

system. effects its Cortisol cardiovascular by on blood its positive glucose the effects on reinforces blood has contributes on and pressure. output to cardiac increasing Cortisol by thereby actions receptor and catecholamines adrenergic expression permissive blood and hence stimulates Cortisol red production. synthesis erythropoietin cell increases deficient, excessive. levels are when when cortisol occurs cortisol polycythemia Anemia is and occurs

and Inflammation immune part to stress. responses are of often the response homeostatic and they have responses not death balance. the However, potential may in for if are immune and inflammation harm held cause significant important homeostasis. role in plays maintaining stress cortisol As an immune hormone, a of Cortisol, and cytokines of along stimulates proinflammatory production cytokines. epinephrine and production represses with norepinephrine, antiinflammatory

person Glycogenolysis elderly on during slips period Gluconeogenesis hip) (e.g., and Stress ice dislocates ˜ Liver ˜ interdigestive

adequate to energy stress conscious, for on responses levels deliberate body, maintain blood by individual. meet Metabolic will demand increased glucose sufficient to necessary ensure the and action (see The by ones, induced cardiovascular by supported are the metabolic those by first output sympathoadrenal responses Fig.

which but adrenergic function. receptor also by optimizes cortisol, 43.6) to will the Cortisol the but will also for this unregulated the of inflammation. providing energy protect contribute individual immune damage inflammatory also to from response stress, incipient potential and

tend cortisol with otherwise healthy promote to who disease elevated Metabolic and to extremities. responses the and localized especially in at chronically wasting weakness, obesity (abdominal, patients with neck, are muscle Cushing’s face), usually ratio. elevated of an occurs Note context elevated cortisol case this in insulin/glucagon in the that the appetite, insulin/glucagon which Elevated cortisol ratio. the increases stimulates skeletal Cushing’s effect with a is into cortisol intolerance High uptake on tissue, symptom in levels glucose so of insulin’s glucose muscle that antagonize disease. GLUT-4mediated frequently and patients adipose and hyperglycemia contributes to This hyperinsulinemia. further of promote differentiation into lipogenesis. cortisol the Both adipocytes, preadipocytes and and insulin

of (e.g., •Fig. disease) in well-fed person cortisol levels Cushing’s Chronically elevated otherwise panel) 43.10 andcontrastedtotheactionsofchronicallyelevatedcortisol(integratedwithinsulin)inanotherwisehealthyindividual(lower Metabolicactionsofcortisol(integratedwithcatecholaminesandglucagon)inresponsetostress(upper panel). and Reproductive Physiology. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.)

resultant to white injury capillaries inflammatory edema response and dilation blood cells. of local local accumulation of increased and consists The capillary of with permeability, by mediated leukotrienes. steps thromboxanes, are prostaglandins, These and Cortisol enzyme key in inhibits and synthesis. prostaglandin, a A2, phospholipase leukotriene, thromboxane the enzymes that Cortisol decreasing of stabilizes local lysosomal proteolytic membranes, augment release also swelling. thereby to response injury, In of leave site normally and system migrate vascular the leukocytes to the injury. activity by is inhibited from marrow bone generally This neutrophils as the release of of is stimulated. although phagocytic neutrophils, complex is process cortisol, frequently because used are pharmacologically of of antiinflammatory Analogues their glucocorticoid properties.

the have in transplants. for been reason immunosuppressants response, glucocorticoid organ used as and this analogues immune Cortisol inhibits to circulating helper their ability and lymphocytes (particularly migrate reduce T the the of to antigenic of High levels decrease site cortisol lymphocytes) T number stimulation. and the promote Glucocorticoids lymphoid thymus tissue. other of atrophy production corticosteroids B impaired. not is cellular-mediated Although by inhibit immunity, antibody lymphocytes

Reproductive the on Effects Systems Cortisol of

on considerable exacts Reproduction the cost organism. a anabolic behavior In dampened reproductive response humans, function to are in and stress. of Cortisol function levels. pituitary, axis at the the gonadal and decreases hypothalamic, reproductive the

Bone on Cortisol of Effects

resorption. increase Glucocorticoids bone bone multiple that have actions They metabolism. alter and renal reabsorption. intestinal Glucocorticoids decrease absorption Ca++ Ca++ serum Both [Ca++]. to serve lower mechanisms bone increases, hormone PTH As parathyroid (PTH) from bone. drops, secretion [Ca++] mobilizes of resorption Ca++ stimulating and of by serum In osteoblast this addition glucocorticoids ). (see directly functions action, to inhibit bone-forming are use Although bone result arthritis, excessive will the treating associated for inflammation useful glucocorticoids with in (osteoporosis). loss

Connective on Cortisol Actions Tissue of

fibroblast and Cortisol formation. inhibits collagen proliferation amounts of damaged. the thins readily of is skin cortisol, more excessive and presence In the bruising, tissue connective impaired, and is injury, is or support of capillary increased. The capillaries

Kidney on of Cortisol the Actions

secretion is of thus and Cortisol antagonist. and inhibits action ADH hormone it the (ADH), antidiuretic an of increase the in water difficult is potentiated, increases water In load absence which free the water it cortisol, and to action response intoxication. of makes of to clearance likelihood the a ADH Although receptor binds high normally of by cortisol is to to blocked action the 11βHSD2. cortisone the enzyme mineralocorticoid with affinity, inactivation cortisol by this mineralocorticoid 11β-HSD2. of H+ and the activity activity the of (i.e., glucocorticoids) renal excretion) retention, relative and of However, amount depends cortisol and the Na+ synthetic cortisol (or K+ H2O on licorice) increase the thereby cortisol. agents and (e.g., mineralocorticoid inhibit of compounds Certain black 11βHSD2 in activity on directly Cortisol kidney. the increases and by glomerular the filtration acting rate increasing cardiac both output

on Cortisol of Actions Muscle

pain levels When muscle excessive, and weakness are are common symptoms. cortisol origins. The has weakness multiple produces. excessive it the is In result a proteolysis part of cortisol muscle High and stabilizes membrane and levels can actions), hypokalemia makes cell result in muscle hyperpolarizes which it cortisol thus mineralocorticoid (via the weakness stimulation difficult. more produce because can

of the Cortisol on Gastrointestinal Actions Tract

the mucosa. exerts trophic Cortisol effect on a GI GI GI the and acid absence and mucosa decreases, degenerates, In cortisol, enzyme motility of decreases. GI production frequently appetite, is weight gain. Because stimulates hypercortisolism cortisol with associated increases of gastric stimulation the and pepsin of for secretion The risk acid ulcers. development cortisol-mediated

Psychological of Cortisol Effects

excessive either deficient associated disturbances levels corticosteroids. or of with are Psychiatric initially continued corticosteroids Excessive emotional leads to but well-being, feeling depression. lability a eventually of and produce exposure can excessive hormone. or occur either with psychosis can deficient Frank excessive and the (REM) for movement increases eye tendency Cortisol decreases rapid sleep. insomnia irritable. tend and apathetic, in who to depressed, deficient People are be corticosteroids

During Effects of Cortisol Fetal Development

for development is required skin, tract, GI retina, Cortisol lungs. normal of the and CNS, and is II maturation type studied cells. lungs, best differentiation The induces alveolar in the of which system cortisol lungs produce thus and onset in the cells birth. tension at reduces surface which the allows these breathing During late of gestation surfactant,

Regulation Production Cortisol of

is ). (CRH), the (see involving standard hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal regulated fasciculata ACTH, production cortisol axis hormone zona Cortisol a by and by corticotropin-releasing The hypothalamus hypothalamus stimulate the and set back to its pituitary and and maintain point. pituitary feeds cortisol production, cortisol negatively on release CRH. cytokines) of of stimulate systemic (e.g., fear) Both hemorrhage, forms (e.g., hypoglycemia, neurogenic and stress regulation early cortisol day the diurnal also surge evening. nucleus, predawn during and and continually then decline the that CRH suprachiasmatic morning from the is such throughout strong and under emerging hours rhythmic levels ACTH and gene chronically acutely corticotrope release (POMC) expression of hypertrophy CRH and increases stimulates proopiomelanocortin and proliferation. coexpress CRH. actions the ADH, CRH Some potentiates of parvicellular which and neurons

fasciculata ( the 2 receptor in melanocortin to binds located (MC2R) on cells zona ACTH the

Fig. ). 43.11 can into ACTH be effects 1. The phases: subdivided of three

occur effects acute ACTH within minutes. of The of mobilized mitochondrial cholesterol ester membrane. activation outer Cholesterol to posttranslational and the from droplets lipid by rapidly transported hydrolase is protein kinase A gene phosphorylation. and through (PKA)-dependent expression ACTH StAR both protein increases rapidly activates protein StAR these levels. pregnenolone increase acute Collectively, actions of ACTH

2.

chronic period of effects several hours. occur The a over ACTH of the of enzymes encoding These increasing steroidogenic the transcription involve their effects coenzymes. and genes increases also the expression BI HDL receptor ACTH receptor). (SR-BI; of and receptor scavenger LDL the

3.

zona of reticularis a trophic ACTH the period of occur over and actions on •Fig. weeks The fasciculata and zona OverviewoftheactionsofACTHontargetadrenocorticalcells.Notethatthemajorsecondmessenger,cAMP,activatesimmediateproteinmediatorsandalsoinducesproductionoflaterproteinmediators.HDL,high-densitylipoprotein;LDL,low-densitylipoprotein. 43.11

months. glucocorticoid analogues the receiving therapeutic of is for This patients levels by fasciculata atrophy weeks. at exemplified zona supraphysiological) 3 in least (i.e., of effect Under conditions endogenous repress completely a of the ACTH production, thereby corticosteroids and and resulting CRH the in decline fasciculata production exogenous atrophy these ( cortisol in zona

Fig. 43.12 ). of itself these allow patients of reestablish off cortisol. and axis At enlarge to the to be produce need end to to glucocorticoids the adequate weaned zona slowly the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal and fasciculata therapy, amounts exogenous Cortisol gene hypothalamus. expression at the at expression the gene pro-CRH POMC both inhibits corticotropes and point” “set the and at hypothalamus a the of at negative-feedback However, intense higher stress can override level. reset cortisol effects the

zona birth innermost the of after begins reticularis, about years to age. 5 The zone, appear at main reticularis, years 6 the Adrenal DHEAS, become of about in especially androgens, product age. the circulation of detectable the at zona and to of the contributes appearance is adrenarche, adrenal This androgen called hair of onset at about production pubic 8. axillary age it and with age. and the decline to mid-20s, progressively increase, levels DHEAS then continue peak during

by the Androgen Zona Synthesis Reticularis

differs zona reticularis respect The steroidogenic several with ways in activity (see from fasciculata to enzyme zona important the

Fig. ). 43.8 pathway thus the reticularis; reticularis. Δ5 First, is expressed zona 3β-HSD zona in the predominates the levels very at low in precursor Second, enhance the cofactors of thereby dehydroepiandrosterone that (DHEA) 19-carbon 17,20-lyase generating CYP17, reticularis the molecule androgen the or from expresses 17-hydroxypregnenolone. function conditions zona which DHEAS reticularis converts (SULT2A1 DHEA the zona expresses sulfotransferase ( gene), Additionally into DHEA

Fig. ). 43.13 the A reticularis. made limited the also amount androstenedione in androgen of Δ4 zona is 18-carbon primarily of or the estrogens normally of small produced human androgens active conversion by cortex, androstenedione. DHEAS most amounts from peripheral (e.g., Although steroids are are testosterone) and sex potent adrenal produced

and of DHEA DHEAS Metabolism and Fate

active both can (testosterone, androgens DHEAS DHEA back to sulfatases, in sexes. and can be androstenedione peripheral DHEA to peripherally converted converted and be dihydrotestosterone) by by other with blood efficiently in globulins it DHEA to the affinity, is albumin binds so and excreted low kidney. The 15 of to minutes. 30 is DHEA half-life to binds with hours. DHEAS contrast, affinity and to 10 of has 7 half-life high albumin very In a

axis with glucocorticoid axis in undergoing treatment Quiescent Normal (>3 wk) HPA patient long-term HPA

actions Hypothalamus levels) ACTH immunosuppressive) Hypothalamus fasciculata Zona Cortisol antiinflammatory Biological actions (supraphysiological Pituitary •Fig. fasciculata (–) or (–) and therapeutic Biological (–) CRH zona Exogenous Atrophied corticosteroid Pituitary (e.g., actions (–) 43.12 Comparisonofanormalhypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal(HPA)axistoaquiescentHPAaxisinindividualreceivingexogenousglucocorticoidtherapy.Thelattercausesthezonafasciculatatoatrophyafter3weeks,thusrequiringacarefulwithdrawalregimentoallowrebuildingoftheadrenaltissuebeforetotalcessationofexogenouscorticosteroidadministration. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. and Reproductive 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.)

Physiological of Androgens Actions Adrenal

of adrenal androgens to active is men contribution In the androgens negligible. hair contributes pubic about women libido. are the for adrenal axillary required 50% circulating active for and the in androgens, and However, to of of which growth

not it Apart roles clear any from zona or role other androgen in humans. what adult plays precursors, the providing reticularis is if young abundant hormone the DHEAS adults. most is circulating in It and steadily the increases in then steadily it thereafter. mid-20s until declines peaks process. been Thus in in DHEAS the of role considerable the possible has aging interest there poorly in impact understood. and adults function of this of the aging abundant young on still potential gradual are the its steroid disappearance However, It use DHEAS the the be these even dietary studies noted recent supplements, beneficial popular in steroids led effects. though no that decline should as and DHEA has indicate of to age-related

women canoccur.Thisinvolvesmasculinizationoftheexternalgenitalia(e.g.,enlargedclitoris)inuteroandexcessivefacialandbodyhair(calledhirsutism)andacneinadultwomen.Excessiveadrenalandrogensalsoappeartoplayaroleinovariandysovulation(i.e.,polycysticovariansyndrome). of Duringadrenalandrogenexcess(e.g.,adrenaltumor,Cushing’ssyndrome,congenitaladrenalhyperplasia),masculinization

Acrucialclinicalaspectofregulationofthezonareticularisisthatneitheradrenalandrogensnortheirmorepotentmetabolites(e.g.,testosterone,dihydrotestosterone,estradiol-17β)negativelyfeedbackonACTHorCRH(

Fig.

adrenal hyperplasia ).Thismeansthatanenzymaticdefectassociatedwiththesynthesisofcortisol(e.g.,CYP21Bdeficiency)isassociatedwithadramaticincreaseinbothACTH(nonegativefeedbackfromcortisol)andadrenalandrogens(becauseoftheelevatedACTH).Itisthis“loophole”inthehypothalamic-pituitary-adrenalaxisthatgivesriseto 43.14 (CAH). congenital

of Regulation Reticularis Function Zona

is the primary reticularis. regulator of ACTH zona the Both the diurnal as cortisol not its of display DHEA same (DHEAS rhythm circulating long does half-life). and because androstenedione little in zona same fasciculata by or atrophic zona changes the as the shows Moreover, the no typified reticularis conditions ACTH. androgen regulate other function. factors However, adrenal must DHEAS associated not or face of and ACTH is the in Adrenarche occurs constant pattern a similar cortisol and cortisol levels, rise the with decline production. of ACTH and of or extraadrenal factors, other intraadrenal, whether remain unknown. the However,

zona mineralocorticoid homeostasis regulates adrenal, aldosterone, glomerulosa, and the the outermost volume of produces thin ). the (see The which zone salt ACTH. zona glomerulosa The is minimally influenced by reninangiotensin natriuretic [K+], it regulated by and is Rather peptide (ANP). plasma the primarily system, atrial

An important does feature the steroidogenic of express CYP17. that capacity zona it glomerulosa is in not the cortisol, never make any do they make nor in form. glomerulosa Therefore cells adrenal androgens zona is DOC Pregnenolone progesterone and 3β-HSD by converted and •Fig. to Steroidogenicpathwaysinthezonareticularis.Thefirstcommonreactioninthepathway,conversionofcholesteroltopregnenolonebyCYP11A1,isnotshown.Expressionof3β-hydroxysteroiddehydrogenase(3β-HSD)isrelativelylowinthezonareticularis,soandrostenedioneisaminorproductincomparisontoDHEAandDHEAS.Thezonareticularisalsomakesasmallamountoftestosteroneandestrogens(notshown). 43.13 and (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Reproductive Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.)

( respectively CYP21,

Fig. 43.15 ). the from within steroidogenic feature aldosterone A three DOC the to completely zona glomerulosa the last zona unique among reactions of glomerulosa. expression glands of different corticosterone, CYP11B2, form form regulated is its to by reactions signaling is DOC are of 18-hydroxylation pathways. to 11-hydroxylation which These form the Furthermore to CYP11B2, catalyzes synthase, aldosterone and 18-oxidation by (see the aldocoded sterone enzyme 18-hydroxycorticosterone,

Figs. 43.8 43.15).

•Fig. The“loophole”inthehypothalamic-pituitary-adrenalaxis.ACTHstimulatesproductionofbothcortisolandadrenalandrogens,butonlycortisolnegativelyfeedsbackonACTHandCRH.Thusifcortisolproductionisblocked(i.e.,CYP11B1deficiency),ACTHlevelsincreasealongwithadrenalandrogens. 43.14 Physiology. and Reproductive (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.)

whichsuppressesACTHandthusexpressionofthehybridgene. aldosteronism, anditisinheritedinanautosomaldominantmanner.Thisdiseasecanbeconfirmedbythepolymerasechainreactiontechniqueandbymeasurementof18-hydroxycortisoland18-oxicortisolina24-hoururinesample.Thediseaseistreatedbytheadministration glucocorticoid, gene.ThisarrangementleadstoaldosteronesynthasebeingexpressedinthezonaefasciculataandreticularisunderthecontrolofACTH.Becausealdosteroneisnolongerunderfeedbackcontrolbytherenin-angiotensinsystem(see endoftheCYP11B2 geneisfusedtothe3′ of endoftheCYP11B1 ),aldosteronelevelsarehighandhypertensionensues.Thisformofprimaryaldosteronismiscalledglucocorticoid-remediable CYP11B1(expressedonlyinthezonafasciculata)andCYP11B2(expressedonlyinthezonaglomerulosa)arelocatedonchromosome8inhumans,display95%similarity,andareseparatedfromeachotherbyonlyabout50kilobases.Thisincreasesthepossibilityofunevencrossingoverduringgametogenesis,withtheformationofhybridgenes.Inonecasethepromoterregionand5′

Metabolism Aldosterone of and Transport

corticosteroid-binding and has 20 biological protein Aldosterone low a binds affinity therefore albumin about with and in to half-life of minutes. blood inactivated by liver group, pass, kidney. is glucuronide to in Almost all by aldosterone conjugated and one the the a excreted

Action of Mechanism Aldosterone

primary other acts is mechanism hormones) steroid of by its intracellular (i.e., to specific receptor binding a like action that cortisol much receptor Aldosterone in mineralocorticoid [MR]). mediated (and chaperone (see binding complex the response nuclear to of After element regulates genes (MRE), aldosterone-MR proteins, translocation, of specific and mineralocorticoid the ). dissociation expression dimerization, with earlier, As discussed binds the significant to affinity. MR cortisol However, ( inactive cortisol the discussed, to express MR which also as steroid cortisone converts that also 11β-HSD2, express cells

Fig. 43.16 ). to several cortisol be including glucocorticoidresponsive back 11β-HSD1, liver in by tissues, expressed and can which converted is Cortisone skin. the

effect onthecardiovascularsystemandcausesleftventricularhypertrophyandremodeling.Thiseffectofaldosteroneisassociatedwithincreasedmorbidityandmortalityinpatientswithessentialhypertension. Clinicalstudiesinhumanshaverevealedadeleteriouseffectofaldosteroneoncardiovascularfunctionindependentofitseffectsonrenalsodiumandwaterreabsorption.Aldosteronehasaproinflammatory, profibrotic

of Aldosterone Actions Physiological

The are regulation actions and aldosterone discussed of in

The CHAPTER 43 •Fig. Gland Adrenal 43.15 Steroidogenicpathwaysinthezonaglomerulosa.Thefirstcommonreactioninthepathway,conversionofcholesteroltopregnenolonebyCYP11A1,isnotshown.NotethatthelastthreereactionsarecatalyzedbyCYP11B2.(ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.EndocrineandReproductivePhysiol-ogy.4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. CH3 CH2OH CH2OH HO Progesterone 18(OH) CH3 O CH3 CH2OH CH3 Corticosterone CH3 Pregnenolone O CH3 11-Deoxycorticosterone CYP11B2 )CH3 CH3 CH CYP11B2 O (DOC) C CH3 O O O O CYP11B2 CH3 C CH2OH CH3 CH3 CYP21B C Corticosterone Aldosterone HO C O C O CH3 HO HO 3˜-HSD O C

cortex. adrenal of withbothmineralocorticoidsandglucocorticoidsusuallybeingdeficient.InNorthAmericaandEurope,themostprevalentcauseofAddison’sdiseaseisautoimmune adrenal disease insufficiency, destruction isdefinedbyprimary the Addison’s Becauseofthecortisoldeficiency,ACTHsecretionincreases.ElevatedlevelsofACTHcancompeteforMC1Rinmelanocytesandcauseanincreaseinskinpigmentation,particularlyinskincreases,scars,andgums(see

).Thelossofmineralocorticoidsresultsincontractionofextracellularvolume,whichproducescirculatoryhypovolemiaandthereforeadropinbloodpressure.Becauselossofcortisoldecreasesthevasopressiveresponsetocatecholamines,peripheralvascularresistancedrops,therebyfacilitatingthedevelopmentofhypotension.IndividualswithAddison’sdiseasearealsopronetohypoglycemiawhenstressedorfasting,andwaterintoxicationcandevelopifexcesswaterisingested.Becausecortisolisimportantformusclefunction,muscleweaknessalsooccursincortisoldeficiency.Lossofcortisolresultsinanemia,decreasedGImotilityandsecretion,andreducedironandvitaminB12absorption.Appetitedecreaseswithcortisoldeficiency,andthisdecreasedappetitecoupledwiththeGIdysfunctionpredisposestheseindividualstoweightloss.Thesepatientsoftenhavedisturbancesinmoodandbehaviorandaremoresusceptibletodepression. Fig.43.14

•Fig. 43.16 Themineralocorticoidreceptor(MR)isprotectedfromactivationbycortisolbytheenzyme11β-hydroxysteroiddehydrogenasetype2(11β-HSD2),whichconvertscortisoltoinactivecortisone.Cortisonecanbeconvertedbacktocortisolinglucocorticoidtargetcellsbytheenzyme11β-HSDtype1.GRE,glucocorticoidresponseelement;GTF,generaltranscriptionfactors;MRE,mineralocorticoidresponseelement. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine and Reproductive Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. Dimerization Cortisone response • Dimerization biological 11˜-HSD2 transport 11˜-HSD1 target • biological • • proteins of chaperonesMR-aldosterone complex of GTFs of • )Aldosterone to MREs to Mineralocorticoid Nuclear of Cortisone Recruitment Glucocorticoid-specific • transcription target • and Altered Binding • Glucocorticoid Cortisone GTFs chaperones complex genes transcription Altered • coactivator Recruitment Dissociated cortisol-regulated coactivator complex Cortisol transport response Nuclear aldosterone-regulated Binding GREs GR-cortisol Dissociated • Cortisol cell and cell Aldosterone MR-chaperone proteins Mineralocorticoid-specific Cortisol Blood complex genes GR-chaperone

Adrenocortical hormone excess syndrome. istermedCushing’s tumors. Pharmacological useofexogenouscorticosteroidsisnowthemostcommoncauseofCushing’ssyndrome.ThenextmostprevalentcauseisACTH-secreting TheformofCushing’ssyndromecausedbyafunctionalpituitaryadenomaiscalledCushing’s disease. resultingfromafunctionaladrenaltumor.Ifthedisorderisprimaryorifitisaresultofcorticosteroidtreatment,secretionofACTHwillbesuppressedandincreasedskinpigmentationwillnotoccur.However,ifhypersecretionoftheadrenalistheresultofanACTH-secretingnonpituitarytumor,ACTHlevelssometimesbecomehighenoughtoincreaseskinpigmentation. hypercortisolism ThefourthmostcommoncauseofCushing’ssyndromeisprimary

Increasedcortisolsecretioncausesweightgainwithacharacteristiccentripetalfatdistributionanda“buffalohump.”

Thefaceappearsrounded(fatdeposition),andthecheeksmaybereddened,inpartbecauseofthepolycythemia.Thelimbsarethinowingtoskeletalmusclewasting(fromincreasedproteolysis),andmuscleweaknessisevident(frommuscleproteolysisandhypokalemia).Proximalmuscleweaknessisapparent,sothepatientmayhavedifficultyclimbingstairsorrisingfromasittingposition.Theabdominalfataccumulationcoupledwithatrophyoftheabdominalmusclesandthinningoftheskinproducesalargeprotrudingabdomen.Purpleabdominalstriaeareseenasaresultofdamagetotheskinbytheprolongedproteolysis,increasedintraabdominalfat,andlossofabdominalmuscletone.Capillaryfragilityoccursbecauseofdamagetotheconnectivetissuesupportingthecapillaries.Patientsarelikelytoshowsignsofosteoporosisandpoorwoundhealing.Theyhavemetabolicdisturbancesthatincludeglucoseintolerance,hyperglycemia,andinsulinresistance(see

).Prolongedhypercortisolismcanleadtomanifestationsofdiabetesmellitus.Becauseofsuppressionoftheimmunesystemcausedbyglucocorticoids,patientsaremoresusceptibletoinfection.Themineralocorticoidactivitiesofglucocorticoidsandthepossibleincreaseinaldosteronesecretionproducesaltretentionandsubsequentwaterretentionthatresultinhypertension.Excessiveandrogensecretioninwomencanproducehirsutism,malepatternbaldness,andclitoralenlargement(adrenogenitalsyndrome). Fig.43.10

(CYP21). AnyenzymeblockagethatdecreasescortisolsynthesiswillincreaseACTHsecretionandproduceadrenalhyperplasia.Themostcommonformofcongenitaladrenalhyperplasiaisduetodeficiencyoftheenzyme21-hydroxylase DOC,corticosterone,oraldosterone(see Theseindividualscannotproducenormalquantitiesofcortisol,deoxycortisol,

Figs.

1. 43.10C ).BecauseofimpairedcortisolproductionandresultantelevatedACTHlevels,steroidogenesisisstimulated,therebyincreasingthesynthesisproducts“upstream”ofthemissingenzyme,aswellasproductsofthezonareticularis.Becausethelatterincludetheadrenalandrogens,afemale 43.8

origin. is a cortex neuroectodermal adrenal that origin The of gland composed is of medulla and a of that mesodermal is and The hormones, catecholamines. the steroid produces medulla produces cortex

2.

The dopamine hydroxylase synthesis by and enzymes rate-limiting sympathetic induced and are in is phenylethanolamine-Nmethyltransferase, induced by are stimulation, which which medullary cortisol. catecholamine β-hydroxylase, tyrosine

3.

serum glucose and fatty levels. increase Catecholamines acid stimulate and They glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis, lipolysis. cardiac but organs. Catecholamines different blood effects on flow increase output to have selective

4.

tissue chromaffin that tumor Pheochromocytoma catecholamines. excessive produces a quantities is of of hypertension, of sporadic palpitations, are anxiety, include sweating, headaches, chest orthostatic and pheochromocytoma often pain, hypotension. and Symptoms

5.

clear structural adrenal zona glucocorticoid the mineralocorticoid reticularis produces the and cortex fasciculata zona cortisol, glomerulosa androgens the the zona aldosterone, and weak zonation: produces the and The DHEA DHEAS. displays produces functional the

6.

the binds receptor. Cortisol glucocorticoid to down increases protein increasing gluconeogenesis by the blood to muscle breaking liver in supply precursors. gluconeogenic During cortisol stress, and glucose and also tissue and uptake glucose and catecholamines. muscle adipose decreases on by has actions Cortisol permissive glucagon tissue. effects multiple other Cortisol on has the important effect. pharmacological view, point is the most a of immunosuppressive/ antiinflammatory From

7.

Cortisol the is regulated by CRH-ACTH-cortisol axis. hypothalamus both at CRH-producing corticotropes. the Cortisol feeds negatively back neurons pituitary and on (CYP11B1),DOC several fetuswillbemasculinized.Becausetheyareunabletoproducethemineralocorticoids,aldosterone,DOC,andcorticosterone,patientswiththisdisorderhavedifficultyretainingsaltandmaintainingextracellularvolume.Consequentlytheyarelikelytobehypotensive.Iftheblockageisatthenextstep,11β-hydroxylase regulated is by willbeformedandlevelsofDOCwillaccumulate(see CRH

43.9C anditslevelsbecomehigh,theseindividualstendtoretainsaltandwaterandbecomehypertensive. Figs.43.8 ).BecauseDOChassignificantmineralocorticoid activity

and hypoglycemia, of forms and hemorrhage, stress, including input. by cytokines, neurogenic proinflammatory diurnal stress,

8.

DHEA, adrenal androstenedione The androgens androgen precursors. are and DHEAS, active of can and to women. androgens about androgens in provide 50% circulating converted peripherally be They androgens the men obscure. of any if In role remains adrenal and androgens adrenal axillary promote and growth pubic In hair libido. women, adrenal of women virilization lead and dysfunction. androgens in various can Excessive to degrees ovarian

9.

of the aldosterone is adrenal of glomerulosa site The cortex the production. zona Aldosterone mineralocorticoid is in strongest the humans. naturally occurring and promotes It while secretion. H+ water collecting Na+ reabsorption promoting and distal tubule duct the and by renal K+ promotes absorption and in water salivary Na+ Aldosterone glands. and colon the system cardiovascular profibrotic ventricular also on the and remodeling. and has It hypertrophy effect causes left a proinflammatory,

10.

angiotensin the increased of cortex of on increased activity, are adrenal increased and the synthesis. and aldosterone Major enzyme actions vascularity growth II StAR CYP11B2 zona glomerulosa, and

11.

[K+]. aldosterone serum rise for stimuli a angiotensin in in II production a Major rise are and major is inhibitory The ANP. signal

12.

is disease insufficiency. Addison’s adrenocortical weakness, include hyperkalemic hypotension, Common muscle hyperpigmentation, hypoglycemia, anorexia, and symptoms acidosis.

13.

results hypercortisolemia. from syndrome Cushing’s is disorder If secretion, is disease. basis the the Cushing’s of the increased pituitary called adrenocorticotropin disorder resistance, striae, abdominal and polycythemia. Common centripetal skin muscle capillary syndrome proximal wasting, thin symptoms distribution, of include fat muscle weakness, insulin Cushing’s with fragility,

14. enzyme adrenal of hyperplasia cortisol. that caused deficiency congenital production by is Congenital a blocks enzyme The elevated results in blockage

et K, al. De Bosscher inflammation: of receptor acute the the in glucocorticoid SEDIGRAM concept. Activation Sci. Trends Pharmacol 2016;37:4-16.

Guerineau NC, et al. to focus plasticity nicotinic, and Functional channels. on Ca2+ stress: cell in response gap junction, voltage-gated chromaffin Mol Neurosci. J 2012;48:368-386.

synthase diseases. and cardiovascular P, Unger inhibitors in T. Aldosterone Namsolleck renal Transplant. Nephrol Dial i62-i68. 1): 2014;29(suppl

secretion, produced of stimulates the which cortical precursors secretion and ACTH adrenal growth block. before (CYP21B) most is 21-Hydroxylase the common deficiency form.

A, et Rafacho al. and implications homeostasis, endocrine function: diabetes. glucose Glucocorticoid treatment resistance and insulin pancreas for Endocrinol. J 2014;223:R49-R62.

N, Sundahl al. et modulation: receptor scaffolds. new non-steroidal Selective directions with glucocorticoid Ther. Pharmacol 2015;152:28-41.

RJ. AF, Turcu Auchus and Adrenal hyperplasia. steroidogenesis congenital adrenal Metab Clin North Endocrinol Am. 275-296. 2015;44:

Saag X, Whittier KG. Glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis. North Clin Am. Dis Rheum 2016;42:177-189.

Upon this completion the 1. to should of following be chapter able student the answer questions:

the female components Describe the system. of general anatomical male reproductive and

2.

compartment. the within the intralobular plexus cells and the within compartment, capillary the of with Leydig out the and Map cells Sertoli developing testis, the cells and interlobular/interstitial sperm organization

3.

the and processes Describe of spermiogenesis. spermatogenesis

4.

Sertoli the List of cell. functions the

5.

of and Diagram within the or of testosterone conversion cells, the the estradiol testosterone process Leydig synthesis to peripheral dihydrotestosterone.

6.

and types hypothalamus/pituitary/testis hormones involved. Diagram cell axis, including male all the

7.

ovulation the and various luteum the of describe ovary, and Map development, the formation. follicular stages of corpus out organization

8.

List control cell oogonia to of and female from progression stages egg. germ the

9.

corresponding pathways types the and lead steroidogenic cell Map estrogen the progesterone that out androgen, synthesis. in to

10.

types Diagram hypothalamus/pituitary/ovarian all female involved. the hormones axis including and cell cycle, the during menstrual

11.

cycle. menstrual in the Explain tract, changes during the the emphasis uterine on endometrium, female with

12.

in fertilization. List the involved events

13.

and placenta. of the Describe the development function

14.

gonads the components of mammary most glands and the development function reproductive reproductive tract. he the are of basic system two the Describe and the regulated within perform ovaries) an The a (testes is hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal gonads endocrine that and axis. function they endocrine that other in from gametogenesis. perform also gonads glands are The distinct and in is reproductive aspects The several involved women of and implantation, and gamete in fertilization, development, tract allows function, gestation. transport the gametogenesis and dependent physiology Normal absolutely are development gonads. on in tract and of the the the of reproductive endocrine function gonads hormone-responsive men. genitalia ramifications sex of receptor production, this face hormonal expression, in prostate in dysregulated the in The hormone infertility dependence cancer uterine cancer of especially and women hormone or and low clinical breast and cancers, in include ambiguous

insemination 106/ coupled male gametogenesis with internal mL high 3–5 mL system in × a semen). continuous reproductive for lifelong evolved has with The of of occasional sperm density (>60 characteristics secondary gonadal and semen, libido. (3) and of maintenance roles adult tract reproductive of of male (spermatogenesis), In the production gametogenesis are of and the men (1) sex support hormones of (2) basic maintenance of in activity cyclicity no this There men. overall is

Testis The

scrotum the the ( in abdominal outside cavity Unlike ovaries, testes reside the the

Fig. 44.1). testicular crucial which for is location This sperm at 2°C lower temperature, maintains body optimal about development. than temperature and about ( lobules covered by connective by septa The fibrous 300 human into testis divided is a capsule tissue

Fig.

44.2 ). Within are to four two seminiferous lobule loops each of tubules. tubules anastomosing loop network the called empties of an testis. into rete Each with is testis of epididymis (see ducts, the superior into the of ductules, lead that small testis of out the head on continuous the the testis the efferent the rete The pole sperm

Fig. 44.2 ). body, the head, (ductus) the then and the epididymis, in the vas the pass the Once of epididymis to the to deferens. sperm from to tail Viable several in be and of stored vas can deferens epididymis sperm months. the for tail the

• Fig. 44.1 system. et Anatomy male al. the of Drake reproductive (Modified RL from Philadelphia: Anatomy Churchill Students. Livingstone; for Gray’s 2005.)

of intratubular seminiferous to is two compartment, which connective main seminiferous avascular epithelium interstitial the an the peritubular a seminiferous cells cells, each composed of and tissue is cells, within is produce of which of immune testosterone ( presence elements, function creates tubule, compartment, and Leydig, the compartments of whose tubules The composed the neurovascular lobule:

Fig. 44.3).

cell the types: (Fig. The with stages complex tubule a by sperm composed epithelium lined which is “nurse of cells cells and intimate spermatogenesis Sertoli sperm seminiferous a seminiferous various of in all is contact cell, in cell” two 44.4

of processes meiosis. the mitosis involves Spermatogenesis and called seminiferous reside the basal the epithelium at cells spermatogonia of level (see Stem

Fig. 44.4,

and SA SB). daughter divide mitotically spermatogonia Spermatogonia generate to (spermatocytogenesis). adherent remain stem the firmly the population, within more cell spermatogonia or to lamina. basal One completion However, on daughter meiosis. division, which results spermatozoa spermatogonia majority the in of these of enter meiotic haploid bridge. such These that a divisions incomplete cells cytoplasmic remain by daughter are cytokinesis interconnected by all accompanied of the contributes of synchrony configuration to sperm This development of population cells. a clonal apically they meiotic Spermatogonia lamina as enter migrate away prophase. from the first basal the spermatocytes called this are primary (see At they time

Fig. 44.4 S1). , chromosomal reproduction sexual homologous recombination crossing synapsis, prophase the take involving place. over, of hallmark During meiotic processes first and the reduplication, spermatocytes, the Completion gives secondary (i.e., the second rise first to meiotic which meiotic 20 complete quickly division. within minutes) division of meiosis products of The initial are spermatids (see haploid

Fig. 44.4,

S3).

( cells undergo are a Spermatids spermiogenesis called small metamorphosis round remarkable that

Fig. 44.5). spermiogenesis are products the of The streamlined spermatozoa see

Fig. S4). 44.4 , spermatid spermatozoon of is a decreases and the As matures tail a prominent into the nucleus formed. the size microtubular to sperm, a similar structures flagellum. The contains that propel tail The cytoplasm nucleus the is in sperm most the condenses, chromatin and material lost. of the structure acts sperm a of lysosome the is a The membrane-enclosed as on that acrosome head

Reproductive Female and The Male 789 Systems CHAPTER 44

remnant processus vaginalis of Ligamentous deferens Vas

Head epididymis of Fibrous septum

epididymis Body of

epididymis Fig. • Tail of B Histology of 44.3 a Young testicular etal. lobule. (From Functional Histology. Wheater’s A ed. and 5th Atlas. Colour Text London:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.) that enzymes for fertilization. are contains hydrolytic important and (see reaction inactive These remain until occurs acrosomal enzymes the

Fig. seminiferous , of at S4) luminal the surface the found tubule. are 44.4 controlled of is cells. by or sperm, Sertoli spermiation, Release • of The process Fig. outside S1, 44.4 a cell just myoid spermatogonia; lamina; seminiferous M, SB primary the spermatozoon; mature St,Sertolicell. of spermatid; S3, spermatocyte; S4, SA, and tubule. Histology or spermatid basal Functional (FromYoungBetal.Wheater’s Histology. Atlas.5thed.London:ChurchillLivingstone;2006.) and Text A Colour spermatogenesis takes days. 72 about one the so a of point adjacent the days is that enter process process cohort staggered at seminiferous along every tubule. 16 A spermatogonia along process the a at the In enter is process of along staggered the the (i.e., of spermatogenesis seminiferous all addition not spermatogonia time length the same •Fig. tubule 44.5 Structureofspermcellsduringtheprocessofspermatogenesisandspermiogenesis.

see per in testis; or tubule 500 synchrony every seminiferous of later). there tubules are other the tubule; length with entire about at continually are are testis time. testis sites seminiferous at about in length, within m the one within being any the spermatozoa generated 400 many given tubules Because

The Cell Sertoli

lamina and the epithelium Sertoli the extend epithelial the from of true (see cells seminiferous are cells to basal the lumen

Fig. 44.4 , St). and within structural surround junctions all with gap stages and cells Sertoli epithelium, cells and provide they the sperm sperm form adhering cells. of support lumen advance guide they later to stages formation Through the toward cells sperm junctions, breakdown cells of and Sertoli spermatogenesis. these as of Sertoli–sperm Spermiation cell junctions. final breakdown requires of the

Sertoli feature the of between Another cells Sertoli formation ( tight is structural adjacent junctions cells important of

Fig. 44.6 ). an spermatocytes subsequent compartment spermatocytes divide basal containing primary junctions These and cell sperm stages compartment and the and spermatogonia the adluminal all Sertoli-Sertoli a cells. into seminiferous of later-stage primary epithelium occluding containing early-stage disassembled spermatocytes reassembled. move basal the adluminal primary compartment, to and As early need to be junctions from apically tight the the basis the form for These (see the junctions barrier tight physical blood-testis

Fig. immunologically developing creates ), 44.6 for sperm. specialized a safe which microenvironment Sertoli tight developing between of transport the blood cell and blocking cells of manner cell diffusion movement restrict paracellular to the junctions germ control trans–Sertoli this and the to nutrients in a the cells. through By pathway availability substances germ allow

for development. cell Sertoli Healthy sperm cell is and function viability essential addition, spermatogenesis dependent by produced (see cells peritubular on testosterone is In Leydig absolutely

androgen yet and it Leydig Sertoli cells. is testosterone, the respond that not cells the the receptor developing Cell to ), sperm The express also required cell is for Sertoli hormone receptor, production, and that the not the the (FSH) is the sperm maximal Similarly expresses it again sperm. FSH developing hormone follicle-stimulating pituitary Sertoli hormones of cell support Thus spermatogenesis indirectly function. stimulation these through

have additional Sertoli multiple cells functions. cell–derived converts ). called the potent testosterone enzyme CYP19 which (see aromatase), estrogen the to (also express Leydig They estradiol-17β This may estrogen local of production humans. spermatogenesis enhance in of the and protein high (ABP), adluminal of the within the compartment, lumens a reproductive the also androgen-binding part level cells tract. androgen seminiferous the produce Sertoli maintains male tubules, which proximal produce large of fluid. a cells Sertoli also amount from provides for moving seminiferous bathing in fluid the epididymis. immotile into spermatozoa appropriate the assists the medium the This tubule and sperm an engulfing cytoplasm spermiogenesis. represent spermatozoa by phagocytic cells perform Sertoli by shed which bodies, function during an residual important

cell an the Sertoli endocrine has Finally, important role. cells programmed produce antimüllerian female to hormone substance), called to that give inhibitory induces of Sertoli which regression is müllerian müllerian (AMH; (discussed the later). embryonic reproductive During the also tract duct rise development, produce hormone Sertoli also The cells inhibin. the heterodimer a protein is transforming factor-β hormone to family. related growth the Inhibin FSH which stimulates to production, gonadotropes feeds inhibin FSH production. negatively inhibit back on then keeps within levels Thus set a FSH inhibin point.

contains of peritubular testis, the Leydig endocrine compartment cell the primary the The ( cell

Fig. ). 44.7 nutrients capillary tissue away testosterone cell cells) an extremely to of way network common of to seminiferous also the conveying provides This peritubular compartment connective from the (by contains peripheral rich while Sertoli types tubules circulation. testes the loose and the that

Cell Leydig The

are steroidogenic stromal cells cells. Leydig scavenger cholesterol These synthesize lipoprotein (LDL) and as receptor cholesterol and acquire store lipoprotein well receptors as BI as called cholesterol receptors (HDL) high-density de novo, it as through (also cells esters low-density [SR-BI]),

and • Systems CHAPTER Reproductive 44 Male Fig. The 791 Female Carlson cells seminiferous tubule spermatogenesis they progress (From Placement of BM. germ 44.6 through as within Mosby; Developmental Human 2004.) Biology. Embryology Philadelphia: and ). CYP17 dione by cholesterol dehydrogenase androstenecholesterol the ester hydrolase a to by membrane mitochondrial (3β-HSD) 17-hydroxyprogesterone, then transferred and generated progesterone, outer and is ( 3β-hydroxysteroid Free to and and

Fig. 44.8).

the to CYP17 acute (StAR) bifunctional membrane with a steroidogenic inner enzyme regulatory activity protein–dependent manner. in mitochondrial a is 17-hydroxylase and 17,20-lyase activity. the level both to of robust cell. converted in activities displays all As CYP17 Leydig cholesterol in cells, steroidogenic a is respect pregnenolone this by CYP11A1. In the 3β-HSD, ultimately pathway cell reticularis so processed it that expresses of level similar the Leydig higher a the is cell, is favored. then Δ4 is Pregnenolone to except zona the difference cell is isoform Leydig that a of expresses major cell–specific Leydig Another •Fig. 44.7 Histologyoftheperitubularspace(betweenthreesemi-niferoustubules)containingLeydigcells(L)andrichlyvascularizedbyperitubularcapillaries(cap). (ModifiedfromYoungBetal.Wheater’s Functional Histology. Atlas. Colour Text A and 5thed.London:ChurchillLivingstone;2006. androstenedione testosterone to (see converts )capSeminiferoustubuleSeminiferoustubuleSeminiferoustubuleLcapSeminiferoustubuleSeminiferoustubuleSeminiferoustubuleL efficiently (17β-HSD 3), which type dehydrogenase 17β-hydroxysteroid

Fig. 44.8

of Androgens Actions and Fates

has actions. produced testosterone Leydig fates and by The several cells multiple proximity Leydig the the diffuse tubules, and into of by within to adluminal the Because the of amounts tubules testosterone (see of concentrated seminiferous become ABP significant cells compartment seminiferous

Fig. ). 44.8 the testosterone concentrated are Testosterone tubules for within than spermatogenesis. seminiferous than times more absolutely required are levels that levels greater normal 100 circulating earlier, small As CYP19 of highly enzyme testosterone into (aromatase), mentioned the converts estrogen express cells Sertoli potent estradiol-17β. amount which a the aromatase-deficient men produced from optimizes spermatogenesis cells isoform that some this express of at the estrogen estrogen least Human and humans. one is in locally evidence sperm receptor, there

Peripheral Conversion Estrogen to

testosterone adipose (see converted (especially tissue), tissues In estrogen to several is

Fig. 44.8 ). inability produce with Studies well of long epiphyseal in bones, that an as osteoporosis. to deficiency shown tall closure men stature because have in results the involving lack aromatase of estrogen as in role estrogen and an biology important men. maturation Thus bone plays peripheral in increasing estrogen HDL, triglycerides promoting feedback the pituitary and implicated insulin hypothalamus. LDL), gonadotropins improving and sensitivity, lipoprotein exerting in studies also These at on and (i.e., profiles decreasing negative

Conversion Peripheral Dihydrotestosterone to

potent by a converted into 5αα-dihydrotestosterone androgen, nonaromatizable can 5α-reductase also (DHT), the (see enzyme be Testosterone

Fig. ). 44.8 are two 1 There isoforms and of 2. type 5α-reductase, type skin, the genital 2 tract, and Major liver. expression 5α-reductase urogenital male follicles, of sites are hair the pubic which prostate and of facial the darkening scrotum, 5α-Reductase and associated including growth folding 2 for mass changes and (see external and DHT, with puberty, ( growth of increased of hair, body activity ), axillary of growth and genitalia is masculinization gland muscle growth the of for of utero the in hair, the and of many penis, required generates

Fig. ). 44.9 occurs expression puberty. at 1 onset of 5α-reductase The contributes to with in activity the associated and acne gland and primarily the This isozyme expressed is skin puberty. sebaceous has trophic) 5α-reductase DHT selective (i.e., hypertrophy target benefited organs, and 2 effects on of of strong inhibitors cancer. growth-promoting has prostatic treatment its Because development the prostatic

(i.e., types action (see direct without has in a DHT) Testosterone to cell several conversion

Fig. 44.9).

mentioned As Sertoli function. testosterone earlier, regulates cell the 5α-reductase. development in It absence mesonephric from the induces of of duct male the tract (VLDL) including red LDL increasing lipoprotein and cell deposition health, anabolic Testosterone exerting abdominal effects, and several blood metabolic very has HDL, adipose bone a decreasing tissue, of protein low-density while effect production, growth and promoting increasing promoting muscle. on is maintain function libido. sufficient erectile Testosterone and to

Mechanism of Androgen Action

through DHT Testosterone the receptor androgen act and same (AR). chaperone the The the in ligand.Testosterone-AR absence cytoplasm bound proteins in resides AR of to

• SHBG CH3 Estradiol-17˜Leydig CH3 OH T T) OH (adipose HO •Fig. O Into skin, + + C tissue) Dihydrotestosterone Androstenedione ABP O Progesterone CH3 cell O CH3 CH3 (17-hydroxylase) SHBG • CH3 CYP19 O Testosterone T tubule (predominantly OH Pregnenolone as (T) prostate) Into (DHT) T III CH3 CYP17 CH3 CH3 3˜-HSD HO C seminiferous O O peripheral ABP O CH3 C O CH3 O (genital CH3 CH3 circulation CH3 CH3 OH T 17˜-HSD H 5°-Reductase CH3 Type 17(OH) Progesterone (E2). 44.8 SteroidogenicpathwayinLeydigcells(thefirststepofconvertingcholesteroltopregnenoloneisomitted).Testosteroneissequesteredbybindingtoandrogen-bindingprotein(ABP)withintheseminiferoustubulesorcirculateswithintheperipheralcirculationboundtosexhormone–bindingglobulin(SHBG)andcanbeperipherallyconvertedtodihydrotestosterone(DHT)orestradiol-17β (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) gene’s binding promoter. DHT-AR of causes binding specific of dissociation the a or vicinity (ARE), response recruitment activate proteins androgen-AR testosterone It translocation factors transcription is different to element followed context their the and nuclear cell general ence the different although how remains cell AR binding unclear the in chaperone involved. DHT and different proteins pres-androgen probably complex, differ of by to dimerization, in coactivator types proteins, ability in an of types, the the and coactivator of to of proteins have would coactivator Such

suppression secretion of Feedback gonadotropin

male drive, • Fig. behavior sex gonadotropins, pattern of Imprint are after result of (T). testosterone mediated are some effects from they whereas testosterone. dihydrotestosterone effects (DHT) itself, of that others and produced Note (E2) from action by estradiol Spectrum testosterone 44.9 of the high-density low-density, HDL, LDL, VLDL, very-low-density, and lipoproteins, respectively.

of versus configuration different DHT-induced affinities for the the the the AR AR. testosterone-induced configuration of

of Androgens Transport Metabolism and

quickly serum to equilibrium it binds with As proteins. the and reaches enters circulation, peripheral testosterone About bound sex hormone–binding of is is testosterone bound to to 60% “free” as remains 38% hormone. circulating about albumin, 2% globulin (SHBG), and Testosterone and metabolites in primarily are excreted urine. its 50% remainder being most found of conjugated the 17-ketosteroids, are urinary androgens androgens or excreted triol of as derivatives. Approximately diol with or rest 30% testis; Only androgens. produced are of are the from the about urine from the in 17-ketosteroids adrenal with steroids are Androgens are excreted glucuronate and the in conjugated conjugated these or liver, in urine. sulfate

is by regulated testis axis (Fig. endocrine an The gonadotropin-releasing hypothalamic (GnRH) pituitary gonadotropes ) that hormone follicle-stimulating hormone produce hormone involving (LH) luteinizing parvicellular neurons 44.10 and both (FSH). and

of Cell Function Regulation Leydig

). The acts (see the adrenocorticotropic on in (ACTH, zona the like adrenal which hormone fasciculata cortex expresses cell on or receptor, Leydig much cells does cells LH corticotropin) Leydig protein. new effects StAR cholesterol and expression Rapid of include hydrolysis esters of increase include steroidogenic expression in gene of an the and acute effects Less enzyme expression LDL. proliferation. cell the long growth LH promotes Leydig and term, Over

•Fig. Thehypothalamic-pituitary-testicularaxis.Abbreviationsasinotherfigures.Kisspeptin (–)(–) LH T DHT cells Sperm cell (–) neurons B hypothalamic (–) T Pituitary Inhibin GnRH GnRH neurons E2 Sertoli hypothalamic cell Leydig 44.10 gonadotropes (–) FSH

testosterone, inhibition kisspeptin-producing from back neurons Testosterone, GnRH hypothalamic feed conversion peripheral and of estradiol produced on (see through of negatively neurons indirectly

Fig. 44.10 ). back feed on estradiol gonadotropes. Testosterone and also negatively pituitary DHT, or effect of of other on product levels. has testosterone, major little LH the peripheral FSH conversion

of Cell Function Regulation Sertoli

testosterone Sertoli cell stimulated both The is FSH. by and involved to of (e.g., cell addition dimeric the in of In “nurse protein synthesis Sertoli cell” inhibin. stimulates ABP), stimulating synthesis of FSH aspect the function proteins feeds Inhibin on FSH the inhibit selectively to and back (see gonadotrope induced by FSH is negatively production

Fig. 44.10

ductules, the gonad emerge male enter (see they tract efferent spermatozoa from leave the Once the reproductive and

Fig. 44.1 ). tract The deferens, of urethra, membranous tail), (head, urethra. are the prostatic urethra, ejaculatory and segments body, the: vas epididymis penile and duct, the the to (i.e., male tract reproductive and distal the urethra). the Unlike contiguous a tract of (i.e., urinary female is the tubule there male connects tract, end the male lumen urethra), penile tract of tip the to the seminiferous from 1. are: the the primary In reproductive conveying male sperm, tract of addition to functions maturation. Sperm maturation. Sperm they further a about month spend undergo epididymis, the in where

ofspermatogenesis(Fig.44.11 Thereisanimportant“loophole”inthemalereproductiveaxisthatisbasedonthefactthatintratesticular testosterone ).This“loophole”iscurrentlybeinginvestigatedasapossiblestrategyfordevelopingamale of contraceptive. needtobegreaterthan100-foldhigherthancirculatinglevelsofthehormonetomaintainnormalratesofspermatogenesis,yetitisthecirculating thatprovidethenegativefeedbacktothepituitaryandhypothalamus.ThismeansthatexogenousadministrationoftestosteronecanraisecirculatinglevelsoftestosteroneandestradiolsufficienttoinhibitLHbutnotsufficienttoaccumulateinthetestisattherequiredconcentrationfornormalspermatogenesis.However,thedecreasedLHlevelswilldiminishintratesticularproductionoftestosteronebyLeydigcells,whichresultsinreducedlevels estradiol) levels oral testosterone (and levels of inmen. Itisalsothebasisforsterility insomecasesofsteroid abuse

is seminal numerous the of the to components epithelium The epididymis secretory and fluid. adds they but weakly motile the Spermatozoa the time epididymis head strongly are by the tail. the exit motile are enter that unidirectionally of (see from undergoing reaction the which undergo changes to also the acrosome spermatozoa the cell later). of before egg contact an Spermatozoa with in process membrane prevent decapacitation, involves the by become within oviduct. Sperm the reproductive capacitated female tract testosterone of luminal function seminiferous testosterone-ABP the complexes blood. tubules the come is dependent from and on The on that epididymis from

set low of by T circulating determined Normal not levels •Fig. relatively point T, intratesticular panel, Feedbackloopinanormaladultman.Lower Thedifferenceinintratesticulartestosteroneversuscirculatingtestosteroneconcentrationsanditsimportanceinthehypothalamic-pituitary-testisaxis.Upper panel, 44.11 Administrationoftestosterone(oranandrogenicanalogue)increasescirculatingtestosterone(androgen)levels,whichinturnincreasenegativefeedbackonreleaseofLH.DecreasedLHlevelsdiminishLeydigcellactivityandintratesticularproductionofandrogen.Loweredintratesticulartestosteronelevelsresultinreducedspermproductionandcancauseinfertility.(Theinhibinfeedbackloophasbeenomittedfromthisdiagram. )(ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) 2.

and storage Sperm emission. the a deferens vas muscularis is that richly nerves. the several of deferens epididymis sympathetic thick tail and months in Sperm innervated vas for The stored are by very has without in loss Normally of response viability. is urethra. stimulation the penis to propel of to of repeated muscularis The intercourse the tactile of into sexual deferens coitus, bursts function storage receives site, providing during the of besides symsperm vas vas deferens, the a primary the during male stimulation cause that contractions. peristaltic pathetic

contents the deferens prostatic vas urethra of the of emission. Emptying the called is into out is the of the immediately which ejaculation, male urethra. of propulsion semen precedes Emission

3.

Production sperm and mixing with of contents. seminal seminal the the emission, prostate left) (which and accessory coats of vesicles the sex contraction (right the vas the urethra). and glands, gland with the of surrounds muscular contraction prostatic During two deferens coincides of the semen. mixed this all sperm become of point, with components At secrete of 60% vesicles the approximately The seminal volume. primary are for a nutrient fructose, critical of These glands the source sperm. which after vesicles The of also coagulation ejaculation. immediately induce secrete semen semenogelins, seminal are about zinc, volume, acid phosphatase. which spermine, the high of 30% the secretions alkaline in prostate, up citrate, of The make and few antigen minutes. Prostate-specific (PSA) semen that is after serine protease a coagulated liquefies a conditions as of in health. detected one benign hypertrophy, and used can indicator under be prostatic and PSA carcinoma prostatic of blood is infection, currently prostatic prostatic phosphate and semen The are in buffers predominant bicarbonate. glands penile before excitement (also to in third sexual empty the emission Cowper’s glands), response and called into ejaculation. bulbourethral A gland, accessory urethra the cleanses, mucus, buffers the lubricates, and in secretion urethra. which high is This semen. 60 counts between Average and 100 million/mL are sperm million/mL, or sperm, sperm are motile less than with 20 than usually below less 60% conformed Men sperm normally 50% counts infertile.

4.

ejaculation. Erection, and penetration, associated by male penis to tract and the of the ejaculation stimulation and the musculature Emission a followed sensory somatic to arc with involves during base to occur that (via stimulation coitus pudendal penis. the motor sympathetic of stimulation from muscle smooth reflex in motor the nerve) the response the the has to first an achieve for place, intercourse man and in erection the to of maintain sexual penis. occur However, the penis the lumen vaginal the of the through an semen designed has cervix. vaginal deposit the as at intromittent to distal walls the organ space lumen, evolved of and near pass of vagina, end potential the the The separate This internal process stiffened penis insemination be the process performed the only of can if from erection. of is Erection neurovascular a event. is composed is one of two and corpus (Fig. three corpora erectile The spongiosum bodies: cavernosa penis 44.12A ). spongiosum. penile urethra the corpus through The runs spaces vascular loose continuous erectile three network composed tissue endothelia These anastomosing of of potential lined tissue—an a bodies are with cavernous support. connective within the minimal to flaccid cavernous (see spaces state, flow blood the During is

Fig. 44.12A). is This due

vasculature helicine 44 spaces. cavernous arteries) away CHAPTER Systems blood the The of (called and the Female shunting flow from of the Reproductive Male and the oxide arteries innervating the cavernous release response to nerves muscle smooth the helicine nitric of In (NO). parasympathetic arousal sexual vascular decreases (cGMP), thereby cyclase, guanylyl causes (see activates NO relaxation [Ca++] which guanosine muscular cyclic monophosphate intracellular and increasing

Fig. ). 44.12B to cavernous induce blood the erection. to into spaces flow allows Vasodilation engorgement and presses on in and venous drainage penis the also veins reduces (see It

Fig. 44.12B

Inabilitytoachieveormaintainanerectionistermederectile (ED) andisonecauseofinfertilityinmen.MultiplefactorscanleadtoED,includinginsufficientandrogenproduction;neurovasculardamage(e.g.,fromdiabetesmellitus,spinalcordinjury);structuraldamagetothepenis,perineum,orpelvis;psychogenicfactors(e.g.,depression,performanceanxiety);andprescribedmedicationsandrecreationaldrugs,includingalcoholandtobacco.AmajordevelopmentinthetreatmentofsomeformsoferectiledysfunctionisuseofselectivecGMPphosphodiesteraseinhibitorsthatassistinmaintaininganerection(see dysfunction

Fig.44.12B

in There andropause men. distinct no is gonadal men LH decreases drops. androgen and to However, sensitivity as age, production and rise. LH occurs, serum this levels FSH As sperm throughout many typically age life. decline after production function to begins spermatogenesis can men 50, Although and reproductive maintain

and of genitalia. gonads, includes oviducts, female system tract, which external composed the ovaries, reproductive uterus, reproductive The female the cervix, called the vagina, and is

The Ovary

the close the pelvic fold The usually peritoneum located ovary a within ligament, cavity called of wall broad is ( the of to lateral

Fig. 44.13 ). are within the into captured before the they ovulated the peritoneal oviducts. the Because extends ovary eggs cavity, by cavity reside briefly peritoneal

cortex divided inner medulla into ( an ovary and The outer is

Fig. 44.14 ). the Neurovascular innervate ovary. medulla of the elements cellular The stroma. a is densely ovary of the composed cortex of Within reside ovarian stroma follicles (see this the

Fig. primary by which ), contain F 44.14, follicle cells. oocyte a surrounded is (tactile, tunica auditory, the covered connective psychic) albuginea, tissue cortex capsule, visual, by a The

from of venous Collapse spaces cavernous return

Fig. Contraction around muscles of penis • base of of (A, S cavernous In: is [eds]. penis. erection. within Outline events the helicine vasculature flow al. neurovascular contraction Arrangement From and cavernous et et to P tissue al state, 44.12 the the limited penile leading into the arteries. B, flaccid Bhasun During the of Larsen blood spaces by of A, Philadelphia: Williams Saunders; of 10th Endocrinology. Textbook 2003.) ed.

Male CHAPTER Female 799 and The 44 Reproductive Systems

Labia of pouch • minora douglas Fig. Recto-uterine 44.13 of female reproductive al. RL the Anatomy (Modified et Drake system. from Philadelphia: Churchill 2005.) Livingstone; Anatomy Gray’s Students. for • Fig. CL, follicle. ovary. et F, al. luteum; B the (Modified Histology 44.14 Young of from corpus Functional Histology. Wheater’s 5th A Churchill 2006.) London: Text ed. and Atlas. Livingstone; Colour layer a ovarian simple consisting cells. of surface and epithelium epithelial of its ovary the are gametes There reproductive emerging the ducts tract. no to from convey to of event the inflammatory ovary. of ovulation wall involves the Thus that the erodes an process divide ovarian repair wall. rapidly ovulation the surface the cells After epithelial to from The originates this epithelium. of majority cancer highly ovarian proliferative

Growth, Function Ovarian of Development, the Follicle and

unit endocrine and follicle gametogenic the The performs ovary, it and functions. of is both the functional ovarian from development. different stages histological of many at a the cycling of A premenopausal contains section follicular ovary woman structures of life a The following 1. follicle history can stages: into divided be the

2.

3.

4.

dominant (preovulatory, 5. graafian) follicle

within 6. period periovulatory follicle the dominant

luteum menstruation pregnancy) of (of or corpus 7.

Fig. and represent ) ovary. the earliest simplest in the follicular structure 44.15 cells. the follicles through of interaction midgestation during gametes Primordial and appear somatic continue the Primordial to as the month that have gonad migrated fifth germ to divide gestation oogonia humans. in cells of mitotically until the approximately meiosis primary point oocytes. become oogonia this process million and enter the At of 7 surrounded of cells, primordial the primary thereby the somatic follicle time simple oocytes follicles by (see become During a creating this epithelium

Fig. ). 44.15 oocyte. junctions gap the and each other The establish with follicle cells avascular themselves by represent a lamina. cells epithelium a true basal surrounded The follicle the Similar remains granulosa their of attached cells intimately development. to oocytes cell–sperm a to subpopulation interactions, throughout Sertoli oocyte amino to nutrients pyruvate nucleic provide as acids, cells and acids, maturation. support such Granulosa

•Fig. Developmentofaprimordialfollicleuptoasecondarypreantralfollicle. 44.15 Physiology. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. Zona follicle Stratified granulosa Basal follicle Theca )Primordial cells oocyte granulosa preantral Germinal lamina nucleolus cells Secondary follicle vesicle Primary with Primary Pregranulosa Cuboidal cells pellucida

( ovarian reserve follicles primordial follicles of The the represent

Fig. 44.16). about reserve is 7 follicles than a of million This less at from reproductive number reduced maturity. 300,000 to starting cycles). (cessation between menstrual menstrual menarche Of a cycle) and will of menopause ovulate 450 these, woman (first about are 1000 follicles primordial left ovary. At in the menopause, than less follicular death Primordial lost as primarily a are result from follicles atresia. of subset in of will a growth However, waves. enter primordial small follicular follicles determine which will a represents follicular follicles resting develop (or rate of die at to the a both) number, fixed finite begin ovarian primordial woman. the reproductive life the or Because span reserve component environmental a but at factors. by is strong the Age of influenced has onset genetic menopause also example, significantly cigarette smoking For ovarian depletes the reserve. the ovarian premature rapid development or reserve will atresia overly give rise An of and insufficiency. rate deplete to

Pituitary normal reserve general maintain a ovary. gonadotropins health the by ovarian promoting the of which the gonadotropins. the independent of rate appears follicles at growth primordial resting to be process pituitary enter However, decision of early oocytes. paracrine and produced The enter follicle intraovarian to primarily dependent the on is a cells phase both the by factors follicle resting growth

Gamete The

derived from that follicles are oogonia primary referred first gamete In is such entered the division; as primordial oocytes. meiotic the have to oogonia the prophase progress through of meiotic division Primary oocytes of first most

primordial Growth primordial Ovarian reserve 30,000 dominant primary, at menarche ~30,000 tertiary Atresia primordial follicles Ovulation follicles or follicles •Fig. follicles ~450 About secondary, ~300,000 follicles ~270,000 Atresia Fateofovarianfollicles. 44.16 Physiology. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) and then 2-week prophase I) a arrest over period stage. (termed the diplotene in characterized This which decondensation by the stage is supports oocyte of transcription the for maturation. needed chromatin, of the needed lack to to incompetence,” “maturational of up or cycle to may appears for to arrest which the support be proteins years, last cell meiosis. completion 50 due this Meiotic at stage, nucleus of The at oocyte, the called this stage. remains the germinal intact vesicle,

first that before the of is growth the follicular antral development fluid-filled stage occurs which refers The cavity. of preantral, to formation a visible cells. of One appearance follicle of of the first signs is the granulosa cuboidal growth follicle to this a the as primary (see referred is point At follicle

Fig. 44.15 ). oocyte. (i.e., form around multilayered a they epithelium stratified) granulosa proliferate, the cells As the a At secondary follicle stage follicle referred this as (see to is

Fig. 44.15

stromal cells. a cells it induce to six Once to epithelioid cells, that factors secretes nearby paracrine differentiate thecal into of layers follicle granulosa secondary three acquires a of around layer form flattened cells the follicle. cells Thecal layer referred follicle to a the forms, (see as is a mature thecal Once preantral follicle

Fig. ). 44.15 several takes primary preantral months to stage. humans In it a reach follicle mature the for

medulla. the follicle to ovarian an inner associated the to closer of movement development with outer the inward cortex from cortex, the is of vasculature Follicular the of to that one factors two follicle. vascular angiogenic development arterioles a around form Follicles that induce wreath the release

Gamete The

the oocyte cellular During stage, secreted and begins preantral produce and the proteins. to grow (see the secretion form ZP2, pellucida zona extracellular of initiates glycoproteins ZP1, matrix ZP3 called The and that oocyte

Fig. ). 44.15 for site a during provides fertilization pellucida zona species-specific and The binding in thickness increases ). sperm (see and via the oocyte junctional zona cellular maintain gap the cells granulosa through pellucida. contact projections Importantly, secrete regulate continues The paracrine to and also differentiation. factors growth that follicle cell oocyte

cells oocyte the on FSH are express this they during to factors period, but grow. from dependent primarily receptor the Granulosa this They development. follicular at of not early ovarian hormones do stage produce thecal they The epithelial in and “nurse” cells the express LH androgens. that cells, testicular reside the Leydig are cells outside receptor, acquired produce to newly analogous main The •Fig. difference Developmentofanearlyantralfollicletoamaturepreovulatoryfollicle. 44.17 (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) high thecal express between thecal that is cells not levels of Leydig and cells 17β-HSD. do cells to major is of as androstenedione the theca product Thus opposed cells testosterone. is at Androstenedione this minimal. stage production

Fig. days, a to mm of a over of which mm. from 0.2 a grow they diameter ) about of period during diameter about 25 0.1 44.17 to spaces the epithelium increases six layers, antrum. appear into to seven and coalesce between Once the granulosa cells fluid-filled to to recruitable period of small 45 to about will wave grow of antral large Over continue antral days, 5mm in that 2 diameter. this a follicles are follicles 10,000 1,000,000 cells by about is increase cells). granulosa characterized (from 100-fold This about period a in growth of to granulosa and the of discrete swelling divides is characterized It cells cells into antral increasingly cumulus cavity, two mural by which (see cells populations: the also granulosa

Fig. 44.17

cells granulosum) called of the follicle. outer wall (also granulosa the form Mural the stratum & SECTION8Berne but is and of completion low for required too of in levels prophase the basal to arrests I proteins begins, adherent at layer Primary meiosis 802 oocyte at Oogonium basal prophase Physiology proximity – Levy I. close The oocyte are to arrested Meiosis lamina

to As B) it levels but arrest. generated complete CDK1, grows, enough synthesizes meiosis competence), GPR3 actively maintain high meiotic (i.e., oocyte by cyclin proteins (e.g., cAMP

I polar extrudes the few ovulation, hours first body. oocyte A the completes and meiosis before proteins has metaphase pathway MAPK arrest at to It enough II. synthesized

fertilization meiosis body. at polar oocyte extrudes and second The completes secondary Haploid ovum •Fig. Eventsinvolvedinmeioticarrestandmaturationoftheoocyte.MAPK,mitogen-activatedproteinkinase. 44.18 Physiology. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) the thecal layers. outer-lying corpus Mural highly cells the luteum. remain steroidogenic granulosa ovulation into differentiate the to become and after in ovary

that oocyte cells and inner the Cumulus cumulus are the as are radiata). surround also the to corona (they cells oophorus referred maintains the cells innermost adhesion of layer with The gap oocyte. cumulus and junctions the cells process Cumulus to are released oocyte cumulus-oocyte with the referred (collectively during the as ovulation. complex) of (see site “capture” the cells the the oviduct fertilization are of the the ciliary to Cumulus fimbriated end and of of oocyte the ability along a mechanism crucial of the transport length by move for to oviduct

on are pituitary follicles for growth. normal Early dependent FSH antral on growth follicles pituitary dependent and for their FSH highly antral Large become sustained viability. 2to increase cycle. As are that discussed the of enter recruited rapid occurs FSH the the transient via follicles later, phase in end to growth a menstrual previous toward 5-mm

The Gamete

of rapidly stages oocyte larger the in early antral The follicles; grows then follicles. slows in growth meiosis at to it I During the the ovulation. becomes amounts of components stage oocyte complete cycle sufficient antral cell synthesizes so competent until at by egg fertilized (Note sperm.) after second that II, is a the ovulation human metaphase arrests it point, because complete proteins. oocyte early of I the Thus fails follicles, to primary in a meiosis-associated dearth secondary of and specific meiosis LH meiotic but follicles meiotic larger However, antral still competence arrest until the surge. maintain midcycle gain monophosphate of Meiotic mature maintenance the cyclic in adenosine ( oocyte elevated is achieved by (cAMP) levels arrest

Figs.

•Fig. (–) 44.19 PKA SURGE (–) GPR3 LHSURGEcGMPcAMPMEIOTICRESUMPTIONGsACPDE3AcGMP MEIOTIC 44.19 cumulus cells ARREST 44.18 AMP ). PDE 3A LH cGMP cAMP ModelofhowLHsurgeleadstoresumptionofmeiosis.PDE,phosphodiesterase.Granulosa cGMP & ZP active constitutively The a GPR3 protein-coupled ligand) not receptor (i.e., maintains high requiring cAMP. Gs inactive AMP. PDE3A to The oocyte-specific degrades phosphodiesterase cAMP junctions. the granulosa via oocyte is which enters produced is inhibited and PDE3A LH surge, cells by cumulus and within gap cGMP, the Before

•Fig. Two-cellmodelforsteroidogenesisinthedominantfollicle.Top MG,muralgranulosa;T,theca. 44.20 panel: Physiology. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. (OH) (aromatase) HDLR-mediated LH a enzymes CYP19 Testosterone CYP17 steroidogenic lamina T Expression uptake cell Basal vessel )LHreceptor FSH Cholesterol Progesterone MG receptor cell activation receptor C CYP19 17˜-HSD LDLR C LH and of Pregnenolone FSH Progesterone CYP17 Androstenedione and protein of Granulosa CYP11A1 Expression of Testosterone Estradiol-17˜3˜-HSD receptor 17˜-HSD Acetate 17˜-HSD EstroneAndrostenedione CYP19 StAR StAR A Expression Blood Expression LH 17 Thecal protein of

less of follicles thecal cells significant antral produce amounts androstenedione large and testosterone. The of are by the ( estradiol-17β Androgens cells to granulosa converted

Fig. ). 44.20 induces the proliferation cells (aromatase) for this of and CYP19 required expression granulosa stimulates stage, synthesis. of estrogen At FSH of of the cells inhibin during early mural produce antral large increasing the phase. follicular Additionally granulosa the amounts follicles the with on contributing of secretion, back negatively of selection follicle feed inhibin most to FSH-responsive estrogen cells. thereby the and Low levels FSH

previous (see cycle, crop already at menstrual mm) of the a antral of (2–5 large As end follicles discussed, a

Fig.

) are rapid recruited 44.17 gonadotropin-dependent FSH rise begin to in development. a by follicles total both old) can 20 be number as recruited years at but older in ovaries as declines ages. The woman a high in of (<33 rapidly younger selection. of in is ovulation The number humans) the (one to follicles reduced recruited quota of process the by left. atresia until levels undergo is progressively decline FSH growing As one rapidly follicle the follicles of the recruited the receptors follicle. becomes the the follicle dominant FSH most crop largest Generally with phase. Selection occurs the during follicular early midcycle becomes about the 20 cells contains a is the 50 dominant preovulatory diameter mm granulosa By surge. in large million that midcycle gonadotropin and follicle by follicle

Gamete The

LH complete surge. until to meiosis but oocyte remains competent in arrested the The follicle is I the dominant ovulation rate at by continues erythrocyte). about (i.e., a of ≈20 of an of a oocyte until µm reaches but Growth the oocyte diameter the times diameter 140 the slower

follicle steroidogenic steroidogenesis as granulosa newly significant Ovarian requires “gland.” and theca a both cells. emerges selected The thecal As earlier, (see discussed cells

Fig. produce express LH T receptors 44.20, ) androstenedione. primarily and steroidogenic stimulate expression of Basal LH of enzymes levels thecal cells. in to cholesterol vascularized and thus HDL. lipoprotein and the richly cells within thecal are LDL access articles The have receptor promotes cholesterol. LDL receptor (SR-B1), which LH of expression the and import HDL activity. CYP11A1 and (side 3β-HSD, 17,20-lyase CYP17 robust 17-hydroxylase chain and promotes with cleavage LH of both expression also enzyme), activity (primarily the vasculature androstenedione some enter also Androgens diffuse granulosa follicle. the testosterone) mural theca cells the into or from surrounding but released the

(see The mural granulosa cells

Fig. expression to FSH, and 44.20, FSH have are (aromatase) sensitive a of very selected CYP19 upregulates number which receptors activity. of follicle the and MG) gene high and converts androstenedione estrogen the potent estrogen to estrone testosterone converts weak the to estradiol-17β. CYP19 to activating isoforms active which estradiol17β. Granulosa active the highly less express converts cells estrone 17β-HSD, of phase. of during expression FSH addition, In induces the inhibin follicular B

also (see mural receptors the cells of induces second during in FSH LH of half Importantly, follicular expression phase the granulosa

Fig. 44.20). FSH maintain the declining cells face allows levels levels. in mural LH, CYP19 Thus of acquire granulosa these ability to to high respond cells the which of to also ensures the cells granulosa receptors respond LH LH mural that of Acquisition surge. to

Period Dominant The Follicle During the Periovulatory

the cumulus-oocyte (i.e., the period the onset the out defined from the surge of The complex of LH time as periovulatory is ovulation). to of expulsion ovary 36 hours This in women. lasts 32 to process for change ovulation superimposed the time same on process cells. a and function Starting steroidogenic at is in the the theca of of and mural granulosa in capable within progesterone, a after corpus estrogen, This luteinization producing with luteum of few called of days amounts ovulation. a process that of is formation high along culminates is and complete the complex function onset the and of a given the female prepare gametogenic the implantation switches LH ovary that tract and for Thus reproductive period endocrine induces surge the to processes during the function gestation. of month periovulatory for the

the induces the biogenesis changes new of LH structure thecal called the granulosa surge The mural cells. and dominant from in its involves follicle and luteum the complex, remaining a that corpus of dramatic cumulus-oocyte ovulation structural rupture, transition: occur Major changes this structural 1. during and a stigma. presses ovarian follicle called vascularized ovulation surface the against ovarian generates of the preovulatory the the bulge wall poorly Before large hydrolytic LH cytokines and the release enzymes surge inflammatory The induces theca granulosa of from cells. and tunica vicinity epithelium the and of the lead secreted of surface breakdown ( These stigma in components the wall, to albuginea, follicle

Fig. 44.21 ). cavity. end At the this cavity becomes process the the of antral peritoneal with continuous

•Fig. Ovulation.GVBD,germinalvesiclebreakdown. 44.21 Physiology. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadel-phia:Mosby;2013. antrum Ruptured cavity )Surface oocyte body mural basal Zona pellucida Peritoneal vessels without granulosa Tunica 2° albugineaLuteinizing lamina Expanded GVDB granulosa Blood 2. polar epithelium Luteinizing First after theca cumulus invading

The the the cells the attachment cavity mural within complex free-floating degenerates, antral and cells cumulus to becomes of (see granulosa cumulus-oocyte the

Fig. 44.21 ). components. by Cumulus extracellular acid matrix and surge respond to other hyaluronic LH cells the secreting also substances process expansion complex, cumulus enlarge cumulus-oocyte entire a These the called (see

Fig. 44.21 ). is This the complex oviduct. more and captured transported cumulusoocyte enlarged by easily The spermatozoa complex for cumulus-oocyte makes find. cumulus to easier expanded the also that cumulus. hyaluronidase a the express membrane them penetrate Sperm allows to expanded ruptured through cumulusoocyte process. relatively the through released a is stigma The complex slow

3.

basal broken down so mural of outer-lying vessels cells theca granulosa is push that granulosa blood can and lamina into The the cells cells. angiogenic factors new Granulosa growth luteum. growth 2, supply the as significantly to blood vascular fibroblast endothelial (VEGF), factor corpus cells angiopoietin increase and which (bFGF), basic such factor secrete the

The Gamete

I it ovulation meiosis, is to (see the oocyte competent primary but Before is arrested in prophase complete

Fig.

44.18 ). granulosa inhibits The LH the thereby inhibition PDE3A. and oocyte-specific cells, removing cGMP cumulus surge by of of production to PDE3A removing to on meiotic inactive progression. thereby AMP, degrade the proceeds cAMP brake and then arrests II at meta-phase oocyte subsequently metaphase fertilization. II progresses The to until

time at of the Both and granulosa mural LH express theca receptors LH the cells surge. differentiation of that LH cells—a after granulosa surge days for the several ovulation. The continues process induces (now LH shifts period, turning granulosa steroidogenic During granulosa following into in the the activity periovulatory cells mural of the lutein cells). surge the induces

1.

expression estrogen production. of CYP19 inhibition Transient and consequently feedback decline secretion. rapid The on the helps estrogen turn in off LH positive

2.

the vascularization Breakdown lamina of cells. basal granulosa and the of cholesterol and makes This for LDL to HDL steroidogenesis. cells these accessible also LH and receptor of the receptor surge The in HDL expression (SR-BI) increases cells. granulosa LDL

3.

(side enzyme), StAR chain CYP11A1 cleavage protein, Onset of of ( expression and 3β-HSD

Fig. ). 44.22 cells. these are of progesterone high Expression production enzymes levels to the these by of onset key of of progesterone high later, maintenance necessary pregnancy. is absolutely for As of synthesis discussed progesterone further is metabolized enters activity, and instead especially granulosa steroid in but 17,20-lyase its another the CYP17 lutein the to exits cells is absent Because cells, largely circulation. not function,

•Fig. 44.22 Steroidogenicpathwaysinthecorpusluteum(ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. LH uptake steroidogenesis and Stimulation steroidogenesis StAR receptor protein Progesterone Stimulation Cholesterol HDLR-mediated HDLR-mediated receptor Cholesterol LDLR LH LH CYP11A1 Androstenedione Pregnenolone Estradiol-17˜3˜-HSD uptake Androstenedione Acetate LDLR of of and )LH

Luteum Corpus The

stigma. vicinity of blood in the cavity from antral After remnant blood the ovulation the the damaged of fills vessels with a This to gives hemorrhagicum. corpus rise cavity in removed and and days, fibroblasts fill are Within with a debris macrophages, extracellular antral few by cells a the matrix. hyaline-like red blood In mature granulosa enlarge granulosa with cells, become luteum the and filled lutein lipid esters). corpus now called (cholesterol cells, the The cells and partially in lutein granulosa fill antral old collapse into the enlarged cavity. mast cells, The macrophages, granulosa other the multiple vessels, layer at infiltrate resident with theca leukocytes, along sites. blood cells tissue and connective

embryo. (hCG), an luteum menstruation), by “rescued” minus 14 originates human which programmed unless is (corpus days, LH-like from gonadotropin human the plus The hormone chorionic implanting or luteum days for corpus of to live 2 rescued, corpus pregnancy during of the viable 9 If pregnancy the ≈ remain (usually will luteum months). days menstruation regresses which 14 The understood. not of mechanism luteum the corpus by in is fully that of basal function the to of hCG become luteum. The receptor for LH, binding less needed corpus health to is continued appears corpus the luteum levels LH progressively to and sensitive so phase. involve PGF2α response cells declining during from of second to both prostaglandin of release in the uterus lutein granulosa appears the the progesterone the luteal to of week and levels Regression Several lutein demise likely protein-1) (endothelin, chemotactic to a removal and immune play vascular role cells. the from of factors are cells in and granulosa monocyte paracrine the ultimately the ovary corpus a The absorbed. albicans, into the corpus medulla into is turned is of slowly and luteum called scarlike sinks which body

Gamete The

parallel induces and two surge The events, luteinization. LH ovulation corpus a gamete. ovulation luteum If occurs the devoid normally, of is

have very hormone. convert Before surge, cells capacity cholesterol a the low LH granulosa into to the steroid granulosa CYP11A1, cholesterol convert of of The cells expression onset lutein the and into to progesterone. protein, StAR allowing surge 3β-HSD LH induces and is lutein moves accumulates the of CYP17 enters progesterone the cells expression vasculature. low, Because out extremely granulosa and Progesterone luteum the corpus by (see production

Fig. steadily the the during onset and the LH of 44.22 from midluteal ) increases phase. peaks surge pregnancy. main early to this into lining and and The structure adhesive transform an of uterine timing is purpose the for implantation supportive synchronized so with cycle. is optimally blastocyst midluteal As the phase discussed day is uterus the tumbles uterus the primed the embryogenesis when a 22 early later of into around menstrual granulosa cells. to lutein be and cells theca continues Estradiol lutein by produced transiently midluteal response to Estrogen surge LH peaks phase. then rebounds but at the decreases in the and production progesterone the response receptor cells, target as endometrium, such the and in a progesterone. full uterine to ensures induces progesterone Estradiol

dependent (see Luteal levels on output LH hormonal is absolutely basal

Fig. 44.22 ). LH with of is women. output In progesterone correlated pulsatile release pattern in the fact, closely and during are by reduced from Both basal progesterone levels phase negative to and LH luteal the estrogen. feedback FSH lutein which In secrete granulosa selectively represses cells inhibin, addition, FSH secretion.

implantation and progesterone large to early The support of must amounts pregnancy. corpus generate luteum life very infertility. to corpus luteal typically luteum of is phase regular, leads and the a Accordingly the shortened dependent follicle of the turn it during hypothalamic which on follicular corpus developed, the The dependent pituitary in luteum which of largely dominant and stimulation is normal the phase. quality the health from and size on is during perturb factors phase phase, starvation, output high heavy and luteal the to can infertility. that Numerous thyroid including pituitary hypothalamic lead exercise, abnormal prolactin and function, follicular deficiency levels, and

to follicle. atresia of refers Follicular demise ovarian the an undergo cells and apoptosis. During the granulosa oocytes atresia cells typically cellular the repopulate persist The the stroma of thecal ovary. and the retain of ability referred the gland” LH receptors and to the cells are androgens and produce as “interstitial to The collectively thecal ovary. at undergo any atresia development. Follicles time can during

the Monthly Cycle Respect to With Menstrual Follicular Development

(a menses) discharge flow to discarded of The menstruation later). cycle human menstrual referred as as through (see menstrual lining process period or monthly the strictly of to menstrual uterine blood refers the of to pregnancy evidence woman (e.g., the duration fact is as and/or menopause) change the for primary the or menstrual or a herself, it the detected that onset menses, or thereof the the frequency lack in cycle. of In of is due menstruation cessation by endocrinological the as is with former. cycle an an the ovarian and menstrual consider latter perspective by human to the cycle, driven useful uterine being it having from However, a cycle cycle. the menstrual also vaginal are there As of later, human discussed and components pituitary, hypothalamic, oviductal, fertilizable from for pregnancy, (2) uterine (4) from is functions pituitary, prevent uterus, embryogenesis, the vagina—and a of hormones function moving implantation) occurring, the cycle a menstrual prepare by the second (3) of (egg), ovarian provide oviduct, gamete and vagina. reproductive the an infection for ascending even to fertilization superimplantation the hypothalamus, reception the from of and of egg up a environment produce (i.e., collective The and the ovary placentation the a implantation, lining early orchestration and/or cervix, possibility minimize sperm, supportive of and (1) itself—to: the uterus intercourse, of

of monthly dominant characterized is referred until of follicle, of follicle, growth menstrual of as the The growth phase first the and is the ovary antral the and ovulation. dominant large to of follicular the a follicle selection by cycle half and recruitment a follicle levels of estrogen. must that dominant developed secrete follicle cells fully high somatic oocyte contain The and

as the ovary second is referred luteum. the menstrual luteal hormonal the of monthly is of corpus secretions the of The half to and by dominated cycle phase normal progression of progesterone The the estradiol secrete must corpus and for both luteum cycle.

Luteinization: of Late Follicular Cycle and Stages Human Regulation Development, Menstrual Ovulation, The of

pituitary development luteal and on hypothalamic late function earlier, As and function. stages are of stated absolutely follicular dependent normal in hypothalamic neurons pulsatile in male, a As the manner. GnRH secrete by LH and pituitary in gonadotropes. GnRH turn FSH production stimulates slow frequency whereas GnRH high (1 minutes) FSH pulse frequency LH production. production, of promotes 60–90 pulses per A promotes a selectively axes and difference level the high estrogen the A which between dependent constant follicle. gonadotropin coming of from is reproductive female male dominant surge, on is a the midcycle major

luteal pituitary, previous the and menstrual ovary ( ovary, of of “conversation” hypothalamus which a the end cycle dynamic beginning in phase cycle the highly among with the nonfertile of A the the events are orchestrated, occurs at

Fig. 44.23 ). follow to Events are that numbered according

Fig. implantation, 44.24 absence In the fertilization and : (called luteum of the Event and luteolysis). corpus regresses dies 1: 24 of in estrogen, the leads progesterone, to levels day This a dramatic of menstrual by and decline cycle. inhibin

feedback negative function 2: luteal as of Event end perceives gonadotrope a from The release the (see pituitary

Fig. Late , 44.23B Luteal Phase). the before about This of in an to increase 2 leads onset menstruation. days FSH luteal due during the basis high selective be in to turn may of FSH the which increase is understood, progesterone but The levels. the due it incompletely is frequency GnRH in phase, to for pulses slow

44 Systems Female The Male CHAPTER and Reproductive

in (2–5 Event The rapid, growth. diameter) to of begin gonadotropin-dependent a 3: mm FSH rise highly large in crop antral recruits follicles levels produce estrogen B. levels follicles These and low inhibin of

estrogen slowly responds decreasing gonadotrope Event the FSH inhibin B secretion levels rising to 4: by (see and of The

Fig. 44.23A , Phase). Follicular Early of synthesis secretion and in gonadotrope. absence the The increase thereby LH frequency selectively of by the GnRH promotes increasing progesterone an pulses, throughout slowly Thus phase. the ratio follicular LH:FSH increases the

The follicle FSH dominant declining all the levels is response for of 5: ovary’s to of except atresia (see one Event recruited follicular follicles

Fig. Follicular Phase). 44.23A Early , extreme an Thus face selection process declining of on the follicles of of by dependency is driven in FSH FSH the secretion. largest best the FSH follicle the receptors supply blood Usually and most can only survive. with increasing follicle estradiol-17β inhibin This amounts and produces B. of this receptors at follicle of action in dominant is granulosa (see of LH cells induction FSH of time the critical of A expression the mural the

Fig. Late Phase). , 44.23A Follicular

50 pg/mL midcycle a the estrogen exceed dominant for the 6: circulating produce to to feedback LH about 200 follicle surge. levels women, in on exerts estrogen the hours positive Once Event causes gonadotrope small enhanced of secreted progesterone amount the is midcycle. by This at level pituitary. positive largely the but of occurs The of feedback at the the it is mechanism unknown, exact the increase in to dramatically and GnRH sensitivity gonadotropes. signaling GnRH receptors the The frequency by the surge hypothalamus gonadotropin of the pulses. to contributes GnRH increasing

cells maturation, Event (see into meiotic ovulation, and cells 7: The progesterone-producing granulosa drives LH of differentiation surge

Fig. 44.23A , Phase). Follicular Late

estrogen, feed mature Rising pituitary Event of and the gonadotropes. A inhibin corpus by levels on back 8: luteum negatively progesterone, feedback estradiol corpus any levels of threshold though estradiol. positive feedback, luteum now the positive levels produced progesterone exceed high by block 200-pg/mL the for Even the decline to (see levels both LH levels and FSH basal Consequently

Fig. , 44.23B Phase). Mid-Luteal

Event not LH levels are function. Basal normal corpus required luteum of 9: (but FSH) for absolutely (i.e., activity the an increases. insensitive luteum becomes LH-like will However, signaling hCG and corpus to from implanted embryo) LH die progressively unless cycle (see corpus will will to and to and menstruation start progesterone by 10 14 thereby regress estrogen days, event decline nonfertile cycling days, back a in levels In about the 1 of luteum

Fig. Luteal , 44.23B Late Phase).

•Fig. Physiology 808 & Levy SECTION8Berne of Luteinization Ruptured GnRH of E2 • (d17-24) rapid antral corpus (–)(–)High recruits • albicans) level complex luteum feedback Large A,Endocrinesignalingleadingtotheovulationofadominantfollicleattheendofthefollicularphaseofthemenstrualcycle.B,Endocrinesignalingduringthelutealphaseofanon-pregnantmenstrualcycleleadingtothedeathofthecorpusluteumandrecruitmentoffolliclestobeginnextcycle.LATE ovulated Phase GnRH negative (–) pulses B. P4 new of Loss dominant inhibition cumulus-oocyte pulses neurons GnRH pulses (+) P4 recruitable causing at LATE If GnRH (d25-28) Decreasing Follicular A. FSH maturation follicles follicles midcycle Selection GnRH inhibin • luteum atresia of LH Phase cycle Increasing Dominant Kisspeptin FSH hCG & MID-LUTEAL FOLLICULAR rapid neurons pituitary E2 FOLLICULAR Gonado-tropes from luteum Kisspeptin Maintains neurons EARLY • neurons GnRH Gonado-tropes & surge by Corpus & No luteum slow Gonado-tropes follicle or Kisspeptin corpus corpus to Dying implantation FSH ovary P4 FSH feedack neurons to sensitivity no neurons Growing follicle neurons pulses rescue lower d8-14 Peak COC @ follicle Basal no pulses LH GnRH from LUTEAL d3-7 FSH feedback-especially E2 Luteal dies active neurons P4 large Gonado-tropes Kisspeptin (corpus rapid antral • basal antral 44.23 moderate Meiotic large Ovulation (COC) starts GnRH Follicular • slow Moderate GnRH dominant FSH by LH recruited follicles (–)(–)(+)(+)High Switch follicle no inhibin no after

Male Systems CHAPTER and 809 Reproductive 1. 44 The Female dies, E luteum and P fall. levels Corpus 5. of produces Declining but atresia all 1 of follicle, of which progressively E. – FSH leading high dominant cause levels levels 9. to selection follicle to if corpus progressively increase. do sensitive hCG) The (i.e., activity dies of levels not less LH-like luteum basal – becomes LH 3. enter rapid antral of phase. recruits follicles cohort growth a FSH large to Follicles low E secrete and amounts inhibin. of 7. LH maturation, meiotic induces surge ovulation and luteinization. produces E with high P, luteum corpus The inhibin. along and

4. inhibin on feed back negatively E and FSH. LH FSH Pituitary

Progesterone OvaryEstradiol-17˜2. Pituitary responds increasing and to P falling by FSH E secretion. 6. LH gonadotropes— (and High positive some has FSH) surges. on feedback E 8. returning them basal and inhibin levels. back FSH, High on and E negatively LH P, to feed

•Fig. Thehumanmenstrualcycle,withemphasisonthe“dialogue”betweenovaryandpituitarygonadotropes.NotethattherelativechangesinthelevelsofE2andinhibinareshownbythesameline. 44.24

menstrual is of this the events From ovary primary that the it clock the is cycle. for sequence evident by timing two pituitary-based that of in surge induces that large FSH events—the events. follicles antral ovarian rise the two determined main The recruits ovulation—is and transient LH the life follicle 14 the and positive are can switch luteum at of days, to after a the feedback induces of regular high corpus a These the pituitary. highly which production span growth and its that demise sustained the it maintain dominant point the to of at estrogen respectively it essence is and luteinization. undergo ready the dominant In ovulation to the follicle tells pituitary

Oviduct The

ends uterine each to the tubes) (also oviducts tubes the ends the and fallopian uterus. the of of the The close distal wall called the proximal muscular ovary tubes the with surface are and traversing are ampulla, extends folding lumen the a which the ( intramural fingerlike relatively (going which of has surface sweep at over a uterine less uterine corners the oviduct, uterus fimbriae end open relatively which of of the lumen the or the has ovary; into folding; of and projections wall the the divided through wide the four the has called oviducts to sections extensive narrow isthmus, which from mucosal that superior distal The the or mucosa; proximal): and segment, infundibulum, and

Fig. 44.25

of are The to: oviducts the 1. main functions

cumulus-oocyte a ampullary-isthmus transfer to fertilization at midway place. junction), takes point (the and Capture complex ovulation complex where the the and and required for cumulusoocyte and secretions coat viability complex the are infuse Oviductal fertilizability. likely

2.

Provide storage. a sperm site for after 5 sexual get can days who ovulate Women intercourse up to pregnant. the by adhering Sperm to epithelial isthmus. viable cells the lining remain of hyperactivity The of and secretions the capacitation induce oviduct sperm. also

3.

Secrete preimplantation to fluids nutritional that embryo. support the provide

of implantation of uterus is into embryo movement because critical uterus of The the the window an about timing 3 has days. the fertilization) the cavity. the the blastocyst uterine needs it pass allow days into embryo stage The hold oviduct (5 until early reaches after to it to and then

810 •Fig. Physiology Levy SECTION8Berne & Schematicofthefemalereproductivesystem. 44.25 (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. Clitoris Internal Uterine Labia minora uterus (fallopian) (corpus) Labia uterusIsthmusAmpulla External of pubis Cervix Body of Ovary genitalia of Infundibulum Opening Vaginal Vagina genitalia uterus fimbriae tube Mons of urethra introitus female majora )Fundus with

connective and is of perisalpinx). the mucosa a (the endosalpinx), outer-lying The wall (called two-layered the muscularis of tissue a composed an myosalpinx), oviduct (called the endosalpinx cells and up lumen epithelium folds, two extent cells. into is of is thrown cell is simple a that the secretory types: many by made lined almost and The obliterated, to the ciliated uterus. the at the most cumulus-oocyte complex cilia the propel are end and toward infundibular numerous The complex. on the cilia fimbriae ovulated sole for transport the cumulus-oocyte are of mechanism The the Once enters the through contractions cilia by the ostium peristaltic of the the the both complex muscularis. and is it moved and oviduct passes of ampulla,

the mucus uterus cilia. the the protein-rich oviduct that is conveyed to cells The by along secretory produce a for swimming provide cues uterus, epithelium, moves a ciliary-mucus and cumulus-oocyte escalator healthy the may maintains sperm. This complex toward the directional the junction, slows takes place. at normally Movement fertilization the complex of ampullary-isthmus where cumulus-oocyte in of appears to produced tone muscularis isthmus. the part due This increased be of thick to and mucus by the the isthmus and glycoproteins. is secretions growth factors, composition The enzymes, complex includes and oviduct-specific of oviductal fertilization the in fertility. are of has Note necessary of absolutely clinical secretions not the for oviduct shown vitro that that process both required and in (i.e., insemination However, vivo sexual intercourse). fertilization natural oviductal for function normal implantation after absolutely is the and minimizes ectopic often oviductal function most occurs which ectopic pregnancy, Normal also risk of the oviduct. implantation within

Menstrual Hormonal Cycle the Regulation During

endosalpinx. increases in phase cell during In and epithelial height the size follicular secreted the estrogen general, the flow oviduct-specific lamina oviducts, (whose poorly of the understood), ciliogenesis oviduct. glycoproteins increases blood propria increases production throughout functions the of and Estrogen to promotes are thick for of of ampullary-isthmus the at in the isthmus increases fertilization. tone and complex muscularis the the keeping mucus the junction cumulus-oocyte secretion the of isthmus, thereby promotes Estrogen decreases along phase luteal to size progesterone, the function. with cell estrogen, High early midluteal and during epithelial deciliation. Progesterone promotes and also decreases of in isthmus. the tone the secretion mucus relaxes thick the It periovulatory may cells that period. oviductal should with express noted which be to it the during LH oviductal optimize the addition epithelial estrogen In function synergize receptor,

The Uterus

the pelvic of cavity bladder the in midline a sits that organ rectum. the uterus single the The and is between the called the called the of myometrium, called and are mucosa outer is muscularis and serosa endometrium, three-layered connective thick tissue the the uterus is perimetrium. the The cervix, which (1) (2) the (see uterus, oviducts, the Figs. a the that portion parts part vagina of its into (4) makes The (3) superiorly isthmus, the inferior the of of narrowed at the extends entrance the fundus, body end, of the uterus which of body which the most and the the up the from is rises are uterus, short and 43.25). 44.13 process be rest does not Because is the separately it will uterus the menstruation, mucosa cervical discussed from of later. distinct and the undergo of the

(discussed and later). related established of The the uterus pregnancy functions fertilization to are all functions 1. The of uterus are the main to:

to from 2. the sperm the assist of vagina oviducts movement

provide and the implantation for nutrient-rich 3. attachment a suitable site thick including blastocyst, stroma a of

it of the 811 the endometrium stays implanting •Fig. does and myometrium so invasiveness embryo the limit not in reach the 44.26 Diagramoftheorganizationofglandsandbloodflowwithintheuterineendometrium. (FromStrausIII.In:YenSSCetal[eds].Reproductive Endocrinology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Saunders;1999. artery )Radial Uterine ENDOMETRIUM Uterine artery MYOMETRIUM Venous Zone Basal Spiral Arcuate Functional Zone lakes gland branch

4. The and CHAPTER Female 44 Male Reproductive Systems

the after intervillous of maternal placental attaches, the plate the a mature basal which side blood the maternal including with fetal spaces to 5. and side that large first architecture, provide become filled trimester

6. within nonadhesive growing fetus it so the environment expand develops and with an grow aqueous

the strong and of of uterine the contractions and placenta the relationship provide cycles, to muscular uterine at the term understand expel to uterus (Fig. endometrium be nonfertile during the reviewed function fine supply To structure fetus blood menstrual the and endometrium the will changes of 44.26). covered endometrium of surface cuboidal/columnar the The simple epithelium. luminal a with is epithelium is The •Fig. Themenstrualcycleoftheuterineendometrium. 44.27 (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) endometrium. glands with extend (called continuous the uterine glands) mucosal that into deep vascularized The of the through mucosa run the spiral by is are myometrium. branches arteries, uterine which artery that The terminal arterioles spiral epithelium. of arteries beneath surface project the just the These thin-walled of a lacunae. venous to plexus or called give rise have arterioles that segments lakes venules capillaries and ballooned subepithelial cellular. propria densely lamina itself The is cells stromal the propria both lamina menstruation. play of during important pregnancy roles The and

functionalis) (also of two-thirds of during stratum called functional endometrium (see menstruation the zone About side is the called lost luminal the and is the

Fig.

). 44.26 is stratum the endometrium basal third that basale). (also the of The remains menstruation after basal called the zone called the endothelial cells, The straight fed the stromal spiral types the contains from from separate basal epithelial cell zone of cells). arteries endometrium arteries, the cells all by are and and that (i.e., of is it glands, remaining tips

Cycle Menstrual Uterine Endometrium Regulation of the During the Hormonal

Monthly different uterine enter steroids to in the induce ovarian stages. oscillations endometrium the its of menstruation. endometrium the is production time uterine just dominant of follicle ending elevating the selection At estradiol, and of stratum and only ( The the shed has remains been basale functionalis stratum

Fig. 44.27).

to late levels uterine follicular the during rising the phase mid of estrogen The of the of the phase ovary proliferative induce endometrium. divide. to cell stratum all in types and grow induces the Estrogen basale regulate and has the receptors which through increases proliferation ( Estrogen fact “estrogenic” ER-β), cell (ER-α an cognate been compound that In one of directly expression “uterotropic.” definition is its gene historically

Fig. 44.28 ). uterine indirectly growth of through factors. local controls production growth Estrogen also “priming” In of respond of luteal endometrium during progesterone it can progesterone thereby estrogen addition, ovary. so phase induces the expression the to uterine receptors, the

been has ovulation, the stratum functionalis of the proliferative thickness reestablished By of (see actions under estradiol-17β the

Fig. 44.27 ). with ovulation produces progesterone high of levels the corpus estradiol-17β. luteum along After of endometrium phase the the The uterine proliferative the phase of ovary luteal to secretory phase. switches the cells. of In differentiation epithelial general, growth induces progesterone and stromal further and endometrial inhibits viability. uterine Progesterone that product secrete the nutrient-rich induces a supports glands blastocyst to As secretory sacculated glands phase (see and corkscrewed mucosal proceeds uterine the become the

Fig.

44.27 ). for the “window thereby surface the generating implantation receptivity” in embryo induces changes epithelium, of an (see adhesivity of of Progesterone also nancy). to absence the of cells cells,” must prepared promotes differentiation decidua which be to of or orchestrate stromal the pregnancy. Additionally, of pregnancy menstruation in “predecidual into form progesterone

•Fig. Molecularmechanismbywhichtheestrogenreceptor(ER)regulatesgeneexpression.Left, Estradiol-17β 44.28 bindstotheERandchangesitsconformationsothatitbindsasadimertoestrogen-responseelement(ERE)andrecruitscoactivatorproteins(Co-Act),whichleadstostimulationofgeneexpression.Right, Selectiveestrogenreceptormodulators(SERMs),suchastamoxifeninthebreast,alterERconformationsothatitrecruitsco-repressorproteins(Co-Rep),therebyinhibitinggeneexpression.InthiscasetheSERMactsasanERantagonist,butinsometissuesthesameSERMcanactasanERagonist. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.)

isoforms towomensignificantlyincreasestheriskforuterinecancer. byprogesteroneisimportanttoprotecttheuterineendometriumfromestrogen-induceduterinecancer.Incontrast,administrationof“unopposed therebyconvertingtheactiveestradiol-17β anddownregulatestheestrogenreceptor(ER).Progesteronealsoinducesinactivating intotheinactiveestrone.Thisoppositionofthemitogenicactionsofestradiol-17β Progesteroneopposestheproliferativeactionsofestradiol-17β estrogen” of 17β-HSD,

isusedasanERantagonistforthetreatmentofbreastcancer(whoseearlyprogressionispromotedbyestrogen).BindingofSERMtotheERinducesconformationalchangesthatallowco-repressorstobindtotheERorpromotedegradationoftheER(orboth;see Fig.44.28 ).Forexample,theSERMtamoxifen

Fig.

44.28 ).Becausetamoxifenhassomeuterotropicactivity(i.e.,makesuterineendometrialtissuegrow),newerSERMssuchasraloxifene havebeendevelopedtohaveERantagonistactivityonthebreast,beneficialERagonistactivityonbone(seelater),andnoactivityorERantagonisticactivityontheuterineendometrium.

Fig. of death in loss lamina functionalis endometrium which sudden of in the luteum leads to nonfertile withdrawal progesterone, the (see corpus results changes of cycle, uterine in the result that a In 43.27). blood the (called for 5 lasts normally volume 25 a 35 from of period), days 4 loss and to Menstruation to mL. ranges early coincides the phase ovary. the with follicular of Menstruation

the Myometrium of Regulation Hormonal

in changes steroid also hormones. are responsive the of The muscle smooth myometrium cells to at of from the bulk the of luminal play these from cervix cervix the the contractions to the transport probably fundus contractions role ovulation, Peristaltic of a sperm ejaculated the to oviducts. favor in contents rapid movement myometrium and of functionalis. from propagate cervix, thereby to the the sloughed menstruation, promoting contractions During expulsion fundus stratum size estrogen determined number The of cells muscle by progesterone. are and smooth and whereas women women. myometrium, robust maintain postmenopausal myometrium a Healthy in the thins cycling progressively changes muscle drastic when µm most seen The are the length. to cells in pregnancy, 500 from during increase 50 smooth The myometrium more cells extracellular and matrix. pregnant has of a smooth number muscle greater also

(painfulperiods).Theexistenceofafewirregularperiods,calledoligomenorrhea, irregularandsometimesprolongedmenstrualflowbetweennormalperiods),anddysmenorrhea Disordersofmenstruationarerelativelycommonandincludemenorrhagia areoftenduetodysfunctionofthehypothalamic-pituitary-ovarianaxisasopposedtolocalpelvicpathophysiology. (heavymenstrualflowleadingtolossofmorethan80mLofblood),metrorrhagia andtheabsenceofperiods,calledamenorrhea,

and in gains associated access sloughed oviducts, cells, tract pouch ovary), fragments in as is shown rectouterine parts endometrial of contain (e.g., tissue structures female viable well as abdomen naturally the the of Because part (e.g., lower other that Douglas, of endometrial the tissue occasionally as to

Fig. ). 44.13 outside of implants rise endometrial to foci responsive give endometriosis—a These hormonally the tissue uterus. tissue oviducts movement due of into tissue through lymphatics, of be of or to The reflux may both. spread the endometriosis or menstrual pain intercourse, pain with infertility, exhibits Endometriosis associated on sexual and generalized defecation, pelvic with urination, pain. cyclic or bleeding frequently on pain is

The Cervix

the vagina that extension projects cervix of the the inferior into is The uterus (see

Figs. ). 44.25 44.13 the a has continuous muscularis lamina elastic propria mucosa is canal, has endocervical which a the lines with It that a that highly and myometrium. the the the canal is the whereas called that the part ectocervix, vaginal the into endocervical vault surrounding endocervix. The called cervix part of is extends os, are at os The and respectively. vagina the the cervical uterus canal external internal the the endocervical called of cervical openings and canal the and facilitates viability as acts gateway tract—at upper midcycle female to a The endocervical cervix the sperm entry. thereby microbes, the sperm During ascending or and fetal superimplantation and phase inhibiting the a second passage into of membranes, infection of fetus. canal the endocervical placenta, embryo luteal impedes supports growing the The fetus. cervix of weight physically the and vagina. the the softening the dilation of from At allow uterus into placenta term, cervical newborn and passage

Hormonal Menstrual the Mucus Cycle During Regulation of Cervical

hormonally is cervical The in simple manner. lined responsive mucus that epithelium canal secretes columnar by a endocervical is of for stimulates an environment quantity slightly ideal a alkaline production thin, that mucus Estrogen of watery, copious sperm. slightly hostile sperm. a Progesterone acidic scant, to production is mucus stimulates that viscous, of viability are ideal mucus normal menstrual the conditions sperm at cycle cervical the and During the of the time penetration for of ovulation.

The Vagina

one the structures is women The as canal vagina (see acts in of birth copulatory the and

Figs. ). 44.25 44.13 is by Its a nonkeratinized stratified epithelium. lined mucosa squamous vascularized. enriched well The a thick propria fibers is lamina mucosa elastic has and with transudate vessels the glands There vagina, (especially lamina propria, lubrication of ultrafiltrate) from (1) in glands. (3) mucus from and during the occurs with the vestibular are intercourse blood intercourse comes cervical (2) a midcycle), no the so that (i.e., the connective The outer an a muscularis to mucosa relative cervix) is uterus relatively thin by surrounded and tissue. and (i.e., two-layered branches the pleasure innervated nerve, which pudendal and vaginal by intercourse. to during contribute orgasm is The sexual of wall

Menstrual the During Regulation Cycle Hormonal

by nature superficial epithelium these continually the the the are influenced hormonal The environment. of desquamating, cells is of and vaginal cells proliferation humans, or increases true its Estrogen not and in occur). as to cornification (referred vaginal does “cornification”—but content glycogen stimulates of epithelium keratinization the lactobacilli, an commensal is lactic environment. metabolized thereby by glycogen acidic to The maintaining acid by fungi. and inhibits bacteria This infection noncommensal of cells. Progesterone epithelial increases the desquamation

The Genitalia External

mons of majora by external labia and The are anteriorly laterally genitalia the (homologues pubis scrotum) the the female surrounded (see

Fig. ). 44.25 the and mons labia clitoris, the and includes the pubis minora, external majora orifice. labia vestibular to urethral plus an area vulva that the vagina, The bulbs the (glands), the the refers vestibule collectively of to as also by is pudendum the clinicians. vulva referred The the the functions of the climax, thereby and vulva the sexual pathogens. serve vagina, inhibiting flow of entry and of arousal of opening structures urine, of the covering partially directing The

clitoris and rami, clitoris corpora homologue ischiopubic cavernosa, glans. and which two to penis is the the the The is attach embryological the of composed of a and manner These as of penis. in undergo structures of erection composed the process same the are the tissue essentially erectile is urethra. from tissue completely Unlike penis, separate clitoral the the at arousal climax sexual involved is and orgasm. in the clitoris Thus but copulatory in likewise organ involved satisfaction the also sexual birth serves The and as canal. is vagina

Regulation Hormonal During the Menstrual Cycle

changes the show menstrual structures of do not cycle. the during vulva marked The of health dependent are However, these hormonal structures support. on the and function external androgens The responsive are and and dihydrotestosterone) estrogen. (testosterone and vagina to genitalia system nervous in on (CNS) libido increase central the women. Androgens act to also

and Progesterone of Biology Estradiol-17β

Estrogen and Progesterone of Effects Biological

effects they related the to multiple cycle, according whether and fluctuate are reproductive they Estradiol-17β directly or that can categorized and menstrual have be to during not. the system progesterone ovary, hypothalamus Both on pituitary. external and and on the profound and uterus, cervix, the oviduct, effects hormones genitalia have vagina, Estrogen on required and of closure both nonreproductive long is have epiphyseal tissues: Bone: in of progesterone important effects the also for bones plates sexes. Estrogen ). calciotropic has (see a bone Estradiol-17β anabolic effect and Ca++ stimulates It absorption. intestinal is osteoclast function. potent Estradiol-17β of also of and regulators osteoblast most the one bone osteoclasts, and formation favoring survival resorption. promotes of Estrogen apoptosis over osteoblasts thereby of levels estrogen with menopause leads bone loss osteoporosis. Low and to associated

improve liver on of The profiles. is overall circulating Liver: the effect to estradiol-17β lipoprotein thereby expression cholesterol-rich increasing increases of liver. receptor, clearance the LDL Estrogen the particles of by LDL Estrogen increases also circulating levels HDL. of several including proteins, thyroid regulates SHBG. cortisol-binding protein, hepatic transport Estrogen of and hormone–binding protein, production

44 Female Systems CHAPTER Reproductive and The Male

organs: do. post-menopausal men cardiovascular disease than have women significantly less or women Premenopausal Cardiovascular Estrogen activation. vasodilation oxide, promotes relaxes smooth increased and platelet inhibits vascular nitric muscle of production through which Single-nucleotide polymorphisms the in cardiovascular estrogen have disease. associated receptor been with increased

healthy smooth maintain skin with dermal and and normal Estrogen Integument: epidermal thickness. progesterone of apoptosis keratinocytes. Estrogen and stimulates inhibits proliferation progesterone In estrogen by the of suppressing collagen increase inhibit collagen breakdown matrix metalloproteinases. and and synthesis dermis, also wound production and the in Estrogen dermis healing. and deposition promotes glycosaminoglycan increases

Estrogen or in CNS: insults. inhibits death it hypoxia cell neuronal other response to is, is neuroprotective—that account may CNS. some Estrogen’s the angiogenesis of the on of beneficial for estrogen stimulant-like actions and positive effects on increase 0.5°F. thermoregulation, the to body set elevating Progesterone on for the point thereby temperature hypothalamus acts approximately for temperature to has using body basis determine the This whether measurements occurred. ovulation is depressant. a Progesterone is CNS of (premenstrual for luteum the Loss on of basis dysphoria the progesterone of syndrome is menstruation corpus [PMS]). demise premenstrual to brainstem increases so the ventilation sensitize acts to PCO2 response ventilatory on and the Progesterone PCO2 also decreases. that

lipolytic a it lipase by and hormone-sensitive Estrogen tissue has adipose lipase activity tissue: decreases increasing decreasing effect). lipoprotein Adipose (i.e., in in adipose the results estrogen Loss tissue, accumulation of especially of abdomen.

Steroids of Ovarian Transport Metabolism and

and plasma to bound in soluble are slightly blood proteins. Steroid are hormones bound Approximately 60% 20% the SHBG, to of the is in estrogen to form. 20% bound transported free and is albumin, is globulin binds to (transcortin) Progesterone albumin. primarily cortisol-binding and relatively half-life proteins, about circulating low affinity binding 5 minutes. Because has it these for its is

some levels generate to of estradiol-17β of is production, aromatization can peripheral Although tissues. androgens ovary locally the estrogens site primary high estrogen in of the conversion (discussed source serves Peripheral and androgens of estrogen adrenal ovarian important an menopause of later). as after of breast basis that aromatase (aromatase) in The the for postmenopausal estrogen-dependent the is treatment expressed use inhibitors in is of cancer the women. fact the CYP19 breast in

•Fig. Patternofgonadotropinsecretionthroughoutlife.Notethetransientpeaksduringgestationandearlyinfancyandthelowlevelsthereafterinchildhood.Womensubsequentlyhavemonthlycyclicbursts,withluteinizinghormone(LH)exceedingfollicle-stimulatinghormone(FSH);mendonot.Bothgendersshowincreasedgonadotropinproductionafterage50,withFSHexceedingLH. 44.29

and to and conjugated glucuronide, in degraded metabolites, with inactive in are or the progestins urine. liver excreted sulfate Estrogens metabolites 2-methoxyestrone). of include (2-hydroxyestrone estrone, catecholestrogens Major and estradiol estriol, and and progesterone excreted in metabolite major is The is which conjugated urine. of glucuronide with pregnanediol,

Ontogeny of Systems the Reproductive

in activity life the significant reproductive woman their Unlike systems, during organ most of man systems the ( span a or other undergo changes

Fig. 44.29 ). occurs reproductive or systems utero female the Development fetuses. in in and of results male infancy, After systems birth during quiescent. and are the reproductive largely in producing steroids, and and dimorphic the appearance sexually men in gonads “wake associated induce puberty and the women. which hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal up” axes begin At changes the sex turn behavior with menopause, follicular decade at their The ovarian ends and in development life. women of degree of span reproductive by earlier) and (see life fifth reserve the is set of usually has estrogen clear the many on impact postmenopausal clinical production by of ovaries Loss a women. throughout sperm production is produce associated sequelae. to which with continue but own experience (andropause), its clinical can in androgen decline life a Men

of system pregnancy. undergoes changes women The reproductive dramatic during steroids which strongly and placenta. the pregnancy, from fetal Production to of the switched axis, repressed gonadal maternal is gonadotropin is hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian during fetal (3) function in physiology development (also placental parturition). ensure to Indeed, maintains after called mammary uterus, maternal and gravid of the fetal function to maternal it determines and delivery gland and of fetal time is birth, alters endocrine nutrition tissue the (2) pituitary nutrition labor utero, that quiescent ensure ongoing a alters axis. male differentiation the production reproductive a before pituitary an fetal and fetal placenta the hypothalamus testosterone into functional in plays The develop also important and system of role

Implantation, Early Placentation and Embryogenesis, Fertilization,

menstrual cycle with gestation synchronized human and the all implantation, are Fertilization, early embryogenesis, ( early

Fig. 44.30 ). estrogen. stage the and the ovulation ovary is levels high of produces Just follicular before late in progesterone receptor. endometrium and growth expression the of induces of Estrogen uterine promotes the the induces complex. which ovulation LH in maturation the and the meiotic ultimately Estrogen oocyte turn of cumulus-oocyte of surge, induces

about so menstrual events and between The days about occurs 6 to day the implantation at of implantation complete, cycle. take fertilization 22 in the amounts secreting is the phase ovary At and progesterone. large of this time midluteal from the embryo. Progesterone which glands, uterine provide to nutrients stimulates the secretion an referred is important is to as histiotropic nutrition This and

and Reproductive •Fig. Male 817 Female The 44 CHAPTER Systems 44.30 Synchronizationofeventsofthemenstrualcycle(ovaryandendometrium)withfertiliza-tion,earlyembryonicdevelopmentwithintheoviduct,andimplantationofembryo(blastocyst)intotheuterineendometrium.E2,estradiol;P4,progesterone. Physiology. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. surge First d7 Late period replaced Early later). and Decreased of after of Ovary adhesion d13 hemotropic trimester Growth nutrients functional d28 primary by implantation by Uterine and it 2-cell stage hours at Blastocyst oocyte receptors surge on from Late embryo d24 nutrition follicular secretory 22–23 phase opposition about for effects of interstitial hCG phase Blastocyst polar maternal-to-fetal protein Early Increased d23 Egg hatches of E2 fertilization) which E2 LH expression of metaphase of uterus meiosis Induction Completion from of protein LH d21 of luteal and zona d16 (6–7 d22d17 Onset transfer P4 Late of d15 of output )d13 arrest E2-primed pituitary phase induces pronuclear Peak Rescue E2 after d20 and CL phase after Late expression implantation Arrested Fertilization body levels days Resumption phase follicle-high proliferative day endometrium d20 onset begins in mitogenic of pregnancy, Dominant Receptive secretion d15 the antiadhesion and luteal mode embryo zone 35 d26 first secretory pellucida (see P4 II is d14 phase glands, and cytokines, chemokines, (e.g., that vasoconstrictors) myometrial Progesterone of prostaglandins, inhibits and prevents paracrine lead menstruation. to factors release contraction cycle. uterine about to induces the Progesterone endometrium, day day 20 which the exists menstrual 24 receptivity” of in of “window from the decreased adhesivity called surface and increased apical pinopodes extensions apical cadherins) adhesive of is proteins the along and mucins) (e.g., associated endometrial cell the the expression formation increased integrins, of epithelia, epithelium proteins membrane. endometrial phase This of of cellular involves (e.g., on with of receptive expression in antiadhesive with

uterus, implants a endometrium and embryo. the implanting capable adhering secreting, thickness, full is to is When in at actively egg tightly the the is uterine its of fertilized

genetic organism material begin that and of recombination of both embryonic Fertilization events distinct to form a accomplishes new development. genetically initiation occur Several (Fig. (unassisted) fertilization must successful to steps achieve 44.31 Zona membrane 3,4 ZP2 Egg • ˜Ca++ 3 Fig. plasma pellucida from involved for fertilization 44.31 (see details). BA, Events SP. White in Porterfield (Modified text Endocrine ed. Mosby; 2013.) 4th Physiology. Philadelphia:

Step Penetration the cumulus by the sperm. expanded of 1: matrix hyaluronidase, the This involves PH-20. cumulus membrane the of digestion extracellular a of by

2: Step by zona sperm. Penetration pellucida the the of This ZP3 involves (step the which (called the to zona 2b). 2a), of reaction the enzymes induces release of (step protein acrosomal acrosomal sperm binding through (step digested ZP2 2d). to 2c), the swims pellucida bind secondarily sperm The egg zona sperm the protein, as another is (step zona to and the

place. Step 3: sperm of the membrane egg Fusion takes and

cascade Step Ca++ signaling occurs. (see 4: A

The reside vesicles egg. the enzyme-filled signaling 5: cortical, in activates called Step outermost, the or that cortical of cascade the region unfertilized granules exocytosis of are the exocytosis. to outside enzymes egg of The cortical the contained released in upon the granules and modify sperm. such acrosomereacted that capacitated longer acrosome-intact of ZP3 These pellucida no longer and enzymes zona bind bind ZP2 sperm, both can no the ZP3 ZP2 can Thus only the sperm egg. enters one usually the than Occasionally, more one egg. sperm does enter triploid in further. develop that cell unable a is This results to egg. polyspermy of prevention normal fertilized critical is for development of the Therefore

sperm egg enters the during fusion. The Step entire 6: and the mitochondria is The cells so most disintegrate, of derived. in flagellum maternally DNA mitochondrial of occurs. the sperm Once DNA egg, the decondensation inside A second membrane pronucleus called the activated sperm the as newly the division. around the meiotic DNA forms egg completes In hours. is series by of fol mammalian of eggs last large a a can initial subsequent release for Ca++ that oscillations lowed Ca++ smaller that signaling pathway of major up” “wakes quiescent it the consequence is •Fig. this metabolically A Overviewofgeneticeventsafterfertilizationuptothefirstembryoniccleavage. 44.32 (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013.) meiosis embryonic it and resume begin egg development. so can activation. This is egg called process

decondenses activated the ( the The and sperm around it forms division completes pronucleus egg meiotic DNA second as a

Fig. 44.32). completed egg the meiosis, Once has

CHAPTER and Female The around Male a as 44 female pronucleus forms Reproductive chromosomes the Systems well. which a from sperm organizing contributed extend microtubule they until by microtubules pronucleus. centrosome center becomes female the contact the A The male are as two and DNA the replicate female pulled together. pronuclei chromosomes down, and first the cleavage common pronuclei membranes the plate, the other, Once on the occurs. align nuclear break each a metaphase contact

Fertilization men the occurs and later. 6 of about 16 day cycle, occurs implantation to days on strual 17 typically

oviduct uterus. embryogenesis the within place lumens of and Thus takes first week the of the remains the the For time embryo by zona encapsulated of pellucida. this most

and 16-cell The embryo take about days. days, a morula by the cleavages two reaches first 3 2 each embryonic outer The with fluid morula adhesive and transporting of other become tightly begin cells mass. into the the embryo now the a called 5 blas transport 4 During the called fluid of cavity, days generates blastocyst and and a cavity the is

Fig. ). 44.33 composed mass is subpopulations two and outer layer an an of of eccentric cell epithelial-like blastocyst of inner cells: The trophoblasts. the pole, inner to region endometrium the cell embryonic and to is The as at referred region adjacent layer immediately attaches to the this of the is trophoblast mass it uterine that

Fig. 44.33

resides the the days uterus. within The then during oviduct and first embryo enters the 3 proteases to the secrete 6 trophoblasts outer-lying blastocyst 5 that By ment the the of develop of pellucida. zona digest days the 22 about “hatched” this to At of able point, the receptive adhere into the implant blastocyst endometrium corresponding menstrual day to uterine is (see cycle, and to

Fig. 44.33

into types: two implantation of attachment the layer and tro the an phoblasts an multinuclear/ cytotrophoblasts outer of of and At cell inner layer time differentiate

Fig. 44.33).

layer feeder provide of continu initially a The cells. dividing cytotrophoblasts ously endocrine. three of perform types adhesive, initially invasive, general function: Syncytiotrophoblasts and uterine and, as and of integrins) bind surface to nents the uterine (i.e., extracellular cadherins to surface implants, proteins matrix. that adhesive compo express epithelia embryo the Syncytiotrophoblasts of the (see In completely embryo burrows into humans layer the superficial the endometrium

Fig. 44.33). tion, of is implanta interstitial the This most placental mammals. called mode implantation, among invasive Invasive the secretion involves by of endometrium, implantation along migration matrix and of syncytiotrophoblasts into lular metalloproteinases breakdown hydrolytic extracel matrix adhesion-supported the with of other enzymes.

onset endocrine viability which the begins protein maintains the syncytiotrophoblasts of of secreting the LH-like function when with hCG, start implantation, The

Secondary sac Extraembryonic yolk coelom Remains forming mesoderm Primary •Fig. sac yolk of primary sac yolk Extraembryonic and layer forming of syncytiotrophoblast primaryyolksac),andwillformaninnerlayerofthevilli,forming“secondaryvilli”.Ultimately,themesoderm implantation B, willgiverise size Interstitial deeper, layer maternal to in will formed villus,therebyformingtertiaryvilli. with this layers. is C, complete. 44.33 erode Extensions lacunae that have cytotrophoblasts As filled becomecoveredbyalayerofsyncytiotrophoblast.Atthispoint,theyarecalled“primaryvilli”.D,Interstitial begins A,Beginningofimplantation.Thetrophoblasthasdifferentiatedintocytotrophoblastand the syncytiotrophoblast toumbilicalbloodvesselswithinthecoreofthe increases vessels, implantationiscomplete.Extraembryonicmesodermalhasdevelopedfromtheepitheliallayers(amnion, invades blood. and maternal almost surround and CarlsonBM.Human Biology.Philadelphia:Mosby;2004.) Developmental (From Embryology corpus progesterone luteum the secretion. and thus also implantation highly syncytiotrocytiotrophoblasts steroidogenic. become and placentation Syn-As progress, pregnancy transfer phagocytosis weeks progesterone the bidirectional take sufficient of gases, acquire at the make nutrition) of 10 ability (during nutrients, placental histiotropic syncytiotrophoblasts to and important maintain to on functions phoblasts By the levels wastes. and a independently across Exchange corpus of luteum. involves (e.g., enzymes that diffusion hormones. Syncytiotrophoblasts (e.g., as gases), syncytiotrophoblasts facilitated well as hormones modify produce transfer GLUT1-mediated several transport of the other transporters), (e.g., irontransferrin pinocytosis/transcytosis acids of transport specific complexes). active glucose), (e.g., and by amino

maternal transformation a the involves implantation to that There of stroma. is response also endometrial decidualization, become lipid-and decidua). called cells referred involves to cells an is This they as endometrium as of stromal this glycogen-filled enlargement response, (at time the decidual the embryo. an the adhesive The junctions with that inhibit decidua forms sheet epithelial-like implanting migration of secretes matrix. as of decidua enzymes The hydrolytic such in that moderate the inhibitors the metalloproteinases syncytiotrophoblast-derived tissue (TIMPs) also endometrial factors activity of regulated Consequently, invasion during decidualization implantation. allows embryo to the myometrium. implanting the involve extend placenta and not and Normally do

Placenta istheburrowingoftheembryocompletelythroughtheendometriumandadhesionoftheplacentatothemyometrium,aconditionassociatedwithpotentiallylife-threateningpostpartum accreta hemorrhage. implantation. Thedecidualresponseoccursonlyintheuterus.Thusthehighlyinvasivenatureofthehumanembryoposesconsiderablerisktothemotherinthecaseofectopic inflammatory pregnancy disease)andobstructionofthetube.Inatubalpregnancythehighlyinvasivenatureofthehumansyncytiotrophoblast,whichisnormallymoderatedbytheuterinedecidualresponse,usuallyleadstoburrowingoftheimplantedembryothroughthewalloftheoviduct.Althoughabdominalpregnanciescanproceedtoterm,undetectedoviductalpregnanciesusuallyleadtoruptureoftheoviductalwall.Theresultinginternalhemorrhagecanbecatastrophictothemotherandrequiresimmediatesurgicalintervention. pregnancies),buttheycanalsooccurintheovaryandabdominalcavity.Implantationintheoviductsisoftenassociatedwithlong-terminfectionandinflammation(calledpelvic Ectopic referstoadevelopingembryoatasiteofectopicimplantation.Mostectopicpregnancies(>90%)occurwithintheoviducts(calledtubal implantation referstoimplantationofanembryoatasiteotherthantheuterus,andectopic

(see the produced hormone which glycoprotein by pituitary first is to is structurally related syncytiotrophoblasts hormones hCG, The ). subunit such, (β-hCG). As a a and β is hCG hormone-specific (α-GSU) common of subunit α-glycoprotein composed assays designed in to hCG used β subunit. and to over-the-counter laboratory tests) the detect pregnancy are detect specifically Antibodies (i.e., LH similar to affinity high hCG binds the with most is to and receptor. LH LH glycosylation, sites hCG β for that subunit which to of the of greatly The hCG longer than hours. more increases to and 30 contains 24 of is half-life hours to accumulate is rapidly 24 in that maternal detectable allows implantation. hCG it stability of hCG maternal of serum circulation within such within The the 6 levels peak at every days the weeks 2 Serum hCG and weeks. first for 10 double about hCG (Fig. constant to peak the of level then declines a Serum value at about 50% 44.34A •Fig. 44.34 CirculatinglevelsofhCGandhPLinmaternalbloodduringpregnancy. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. 80 20 B gonadotropin(mIU/mL)40 60Human gestation 0 10 gestationA Weeks 30 8Human 10 0 20 10 )100 Weeks chorionic lactogen(µg/mL)6 2 40 of 40 4 placental of 30 20 10

action primary of on The stimulate the is hCG luteum. receptors to corpus LH during luteal-derived high This progesterone the level weeks. luteolysis maintains of a prevents 10 and production first pregnancy. nausea responsible of hCG sickness” the with associated early in for is The rapid increase “morning (i.e., enters hCG circulation. 1%–10%) small fetal of the A amount before Leydig produce axis fetal the fetal mature. fully testosterone hCG to gonadotropic stimulates is cells later) (see first stimulates the cortex the also fetal adrenal hCG during trimester.

progesterone, uterus. placenta quiescent absolutely and which required maintain myometrium amount a The a produces high pregnant to is a of as is as 3β-HSD ( of the production unregulated—the much cholesterol and Progesterone CYP11A1 levels and placenta the largely produces placenta by progesterone of the allow supply

Fig. 44.35 ). adrenal steroidogenesis in cholesterol that placental by placental mechanism is of differs Notably, StAR into and mitochondria ovaries, is cortex, from transported that the that the testis a in independent protein. the a is as it first other step placenta rate-limiting regulated Thus this steroidogenic in in in steroidogenesis glands. not step is StAR normal develop will fetuses This have produced ) placenta. in means their lipoid mutation with progesterone by hypogonadism inactivating hyperplasia but congenital (see levels protein an adrenal and that will tissue. by not production does require the Progesterone placenta fetal levels fetal of a health are used progesterone and largely Consequently, be cannot of fetal measure health. as independent Maternal to progesterone throughout continue levels pregnancy. increase

•Fig. (Maternal) 16OH Cholesterol CYP19 pregnenolone conversion Actions 16OH Aromatase CYP17 A'DIONE Pregnenolone E2 3˜HSD MC2R CYP19 Actions lyase) 16OH 3˜HSD Peripheral in (Hydroxylase) Fetal ACTH compartment cortex Sulfo-Transferase 17˜HSD Productionofprogesteronebysyncytiotrophoblastandestrogensbyfetoplacentalunit.Intervillous DHEAS DHEA Sycytiotrophoblast 17OH-Pregnenolone-s protein CYP11A1 DHEAS Fetal (17/20 Aromatase compartment Star-related Cholesterol zone pituitary E1 E2 Progesterone protein space maternal liver T Fetal DHEAS adrenal maternal Star 44.35 DHEAS in Sulfatase E3 DHEA CYP17 16OH DHEAS CYP11A1 DHEAS16OH T A'DIONE Pregnenolone-s to

into is released Progesterone for required the primarily and and maintenance pregnancy. of circulation maternal implantation is several also physiology induces breast and on differentiation. effects and has maternal Progesterone growth as to progesterone luteum–derived pregnancy. the corpus about complete the placental-derived to of from switch eighth The week (referred shift) is luteal-placental progesterone at by pregnancy. cortisol late (and transitional Progesterone used zone the to in of the are make pregnenolone) cortex fetal

by are Estrogens produced syncytiotrophoblasts. also aromatization for to to type similar (see Syncytiotrophoblasts cell they cells on lack another 19-carbon dependent are provide granulosa in and that CYP17 ovarian androgens are

Fig.

44.35 ). fetal cortex. reside adrenal the in ancillary cells The androgen-producing

and fetal definitive zone, fetal zone. transitional middle zone, a an contains cortex The inner adrenal an outer zona rise to transitional The and definitive give respectively. glomerulosa zones fasciculata, the zona and synthesis to close is parturition. Aldosterone initiated and late cortisol months begins Synthesis of at about gestation. increases during 6 much of site steroidogenesis. adrenal the in it constitutes fetus; zone of of fetal and the 80% adrenal as most the The portion is large the is predominant adrenal the fetal of bulk fetal the cortex as the zone resembles reticularis in little that expresses The strongly 3β-HSD fetal (see no zona it or

Fig. 44.35 ). most androgen sulfate fetal dehydroepiandrosterone primarily inactive throughout releases zone the of of form sulfated The gestation. the (DHEAS) DHEAS of the ACTH from absolutely end fetal from fetal first the pituitary adrenal the trimester. is the Production fetal by dependent of on

zone has the fates. released two The DHEAS fetal from directly sulfatase a syncytiotrophoblast, DHEAS the estrone is can steroid used go as desulfated estradiol-17β the and and to substrate synthesis where (see placental First, by 19-carbon of for a it

Fig. ). 44.35 enzyme liver CYP3A7. fate by 16-hydroxylation The of DHEAS fetal in is the second the estriol pregnancy, converted by major syncytiotrophoblasts then to estrogen 16-Hydroxyl-DHEAS the (see of is

Fig. ). 44.35 is steroid of low ichthyosis, or in by X-linked active sulfatase In desulfated) the resulting estrogen (i.e., missing, production the fetoplacental unit. loss is and because the with labor. physician-induced parturition, Pregnancy but usually estrogens is promote normal, pregnancy ends prolonged of ichthyosis (scaly skin), stratum degrees is corneum. boy severity The skin to owing shed the of has cells baby a of layers within that varying called buildup disorder of of treatable readily form creams. by is ichthyosis This topical

levels throughout pregnancy. increase estrogen Maternal estrogen levels used one dependent as is health. a production be measure healthy Because on of fetal can estriol fetus, used and collective term in production syncytiotrophoblasts for the fetal The estrogen context organs the is fetoplacental of placental unit. the Estrogens expression syncytiotrophoblasts, oxytocin enhance uteroplacental (e.g., in receptors) LDL and in flow, parturition. components involved receptor several blood increase prostaglandins, induce production. and breast growth through of Estrogens directly stimulation maternal pituitary prolactin indirectly increase increase thereby by more term. twofold increasing than overall number, also and by Estrogens pituitary lactotrope size mass also aspects affect of other maternal several Estrogens physiology.

placental (GH) to (hPL), that structurally hormone chorionic in is somatomammotropin a protein (PRL). acid prolactin Human 191–amino human also similar and produced the called is hormone growth syncytiotrophoblast lactogen (hCS), and function PRL. overlaps GH both of those Its after the and It syncytiotrophoblast weeks’ detected by within in 10 (see conception be maternal by serum 3 gestation days can

Fig. ). 44.34 remainder the rise levels pregnancy. progressively throughout Maternal serum the of hPL grows quantity placenta related such as is the the hormone of produced to The secretion that size placenta, increases. gestation, during of directly the much of As as be secreted gestation. g/day hPL 1 can in late

lipolytic. anabolic protein hPL and GH, Like is action to Its diabetogenicity antagonistic is basis pregnancy. the for of insulin the major mammary gland PRL, growth development. Like stimulates and it development estrogens, Mammary hPL, pregnancy of progestins. PRL, and gland in actions from the results levels. uptake use, serum maternal glucose thereby and hPL inhibits glucose increasing hPL is increases substrate major Glucose fetus, a the glucose for and availability. energy fetal

and CHAPTER The Male Female 44 Reproductive Systems

is the hCG, As maternal circulation found in far the in fetal than circulation. with less hPL in mother the a important may that play the fetus. more hormones in the suggests role This than the for pregnancy. is not hPL essential

and growth production growth-promoting growth act and (IGF)-I factor as fetal fetal of hormones PRL stimulate the insulinlike hPL Both hormones and IGF-II.

growth, does GH Ironically, not and have to normal weight. appear regulate fetal birth

Diabetogenicity Pregnancy of

Fig.

44.36 ). catabolic maternal to described state stored During energy starvation, which in metabolism in anabolic metabolism from sometimes hPL nutrients are the last levels shifts fat a of which sparing as half state shifts maternal accelerated pregnancy toward glucose. of energy utilization are when highest, an with increases sources. use energy of maternal and acids As lipolysis glucose energy fatty major for become decreases, Peripheral pancreatic insulin to and responsiveness increases. secretion insulin decreases hyperplasia in cell occurs Beta pregnancy. in Although aggravates lead pregnancy diabetes can existing pregnancy. does to diabetes usually the and a time not clinical condition, first develop for mellitus, this as condition with delivery, diabetes. the spontaneously is resolves referred the diabetes If gestational to sensitivity. to pregnancy hormones diabetogenicity the both insulin estrogens are because these hormones contributing and of Other decrease progestins,

lasts of the (gestational weeks menstrual Human period the last 40 age). from pregnancy beginning an of average

weeks. corresponds of age fetal This an average 38 to the Par uterine turition to whereby childbirth. is contractions process lead that (<10 halt (<1 to the with placenta, of with hour); uterine hours); minutes). myometrium the force of bleeding and of three Labor contractions consists against fetus of the the thinning cervix, the along fetus (several delivery delivery stages: and cervix of contractions dilation the strong

exact well understood. are parturition control in Control and complex, the mechanisms of not humans is its underlying

the Placental and Adrenal CRH Fetal Axis

produces corticotropin-releasing the the acid identical to which placenta The produced 41–amino (CRH), hypothalamus. is hormone by peptide levels late Placental pregnancy labor. maternal and and production during CRH serum increase CRH rapidly Moreover, the either or circulating bioactive, to complexed is is in CRH-binding free protein. of CRH form which a CRH, free levels during Maternal of plummet CRH-binding late levels CRH labor, and so protein increase. pregnancy fetal and in secretion. Placental CRH circulation accumulates stimulates fetal also the ACTH stimulates adrenal cortisol fetoplacental production. both estrogen fetal ACTH and production of to production. the CRH inhibitory cortisol CRH production, cortisol hypothalamic effect contrast stimulates placental In on establishes This a positive feedback. self-amplifying itself the by uterus contractions ). prostaglandins (see to promotes and CRH sensitizing oxytocin myometrial indirectly directly myometrial stimulate and Estrogens also contractility. lungs the parturition gastrointestinal and systems, correlates of model onset Moreover, including cortisol-induced maturation fetal this tract. of with the

Physiology •Fig. Levy 824 & SECTION8Berne 44.36 Overviewofenergyusebythematernalandfetalcompartments. Physiology. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. hPL acidsFatty use maternal action maternal Amino acids Proteolysis Placenta Amino Glucose Antiinsulin use Lipolysis glucose for )Decreased acids Fetus

seen no in serum human late serum. a the progesterone in drop occur ratio is in maternal of in and a estrogen some change in hormones in rise levels the two species, Although gestation proposed. metabolism in withdrawal progesterone been progesterone progesterone uterine changes receptor and However, has involving “functional”

from (posterior pars the is ). pituitary) secreted nervosa (see Oxytocin uterine progression in contractions, Oxytocin, plays a powerful major which role and stimulates parturition. completion of of stretch response delivery. reflex; through thereby it in facilitates stimulates the a Oxytocin cervix released contractions to neuroendocrine is and uterine to to be increases parturition, induce Oxytocin parturition. used sensitivity and before oxytocin uterine can after initiate oxytocin not oxytocin increase Because parturition. serum has until do thought not to maternal parturition is begun, levels rise decrease serum levels increases. inhibits However, do although human estrogen maternal oxytocin synthesis and receptors, parturition, before of oxytocin progesterone synthesis immediately levels stimulates receptor estrogen and and progesterone not

Prostaglandins delivery. compounds parturition, motility, of increase during and and uterine thereby these increase facilitating cytokines other levels Their is known. initiating exact parturition not in role decidua Prostaglandin fetal the onset amniotic increase before fluid, and in of uterine membranes, levels labor. motility. uterine and prostaglandin Prostaglandin E2 increase F2α been used of induce these to doses have compounds labor. Large late uterine rising estrogen increase amnion, levels in estrogens the prostaglandin stimulate synthesis parturition. and the in Because gestation before chorion, uterus, formation prostaglandin can

a size parturition be regulating including contraction. thought stretch muscle, smooth the because uterus, is factor Uterine of muscle to increases production. In addition, prostaglandin uterine stimulates uterine stretch Multiple prematurely. generally births occur uterine increased or can both. delivery tendency The early result be delivery, fetal stimulating for of a chemicals of size, increased production

• Female CHAPTER Reproductive 825 The Fig. and Male Systems 44 and Diagram of breast, V et 44.37 conditions al. breast Kumar occur. et the [eds]. (From where of pathological CP with structure In: some of along the al they the Crum Philadelphia: Pathology. Saunders; ed. Robbins 2003.) Basic 7th

Mammary Structure Gland of the

20 at that an with opens the duct of mammary composed nipple to ( is gland 15 excretory lactiferous lobes, each The

Fig. 44.37 ). composed secretory lobes portions alveoli contain are lobules turn terminal called structures that ducts. the of the in and The several of composed of apical and layers: cells. epithelium luminal cell ducts alveoli is cells two basal myoepithelial epithelial The the of and the adult is presence epithelium. There mammary within strong for stem of this cells evidence and milk, cells producers alveoli modify cells and ducts the The the epithelial luminal the the of of the milk. of convey are secreted luminal (i.e., response of milk a contraction ducts. smooth these in are the cells, to and lumens cells the from Myoepithelial alveoli stellate stimulus and milk of cells expels muscle–like let-down) and are connective Lobes matrix. a tissue lobules supported within tissue the other The is tissue. adipose breast major of component empty infant. suckling designed by an the ducts protrusion of at the innervated lactiferous nipple, The highly hairless a breast for is glands. nipple areola by The pigmented hairless sebaceous that is surrounded by a lubricated of suckling response is and and of sympathetic cold. in by mechanical erotic nipple, stimulation stimulation, smooth erection, fibers Protrusion to mediated called the other muscle stimulation,

Mammary Development Gland Hormonal of Regulation

branching. increases At ductal and estrogen growth puberty, formation estrogen ductal the With growth ovary, induce and luteal of phases progesterone and of of the rudimentary onset alveoli. cycles then regress. breasts somewhat develop the During nonpregnant and tissue, size contribution increases Estrogen a which of overall to breast major and makes adipose form. also deposition local increases Adipose from CYP19/aromatase, so circulating tissue in androgens. this tissue breast expresses the estrogens accumulation production of of

by lobuloalveolar is which growth extensive Breast branching development and pregnancy, occur. during ductal and development facilitated of at room breast the for stroma, The occurs to during which structures. enlarging the degraded development is make parenchymal growth lobuloalveolar expense of a (GH-V). placental placental stimulate including progesterone, variant hormones and development, Several breast lactogen, hormone growth estrogen, and breast through PRL. acts indirectly increasing pituitary on the both maternal directly Estrogen pituitary from Estrogen secretion PRL lactotropes. increases also pituitary accounts proliferation, and volume in humans. hypertrophy in increase pregnancy lactotrope Estrogen which stimulates twofold the for during onset •Fig. cells and Physiology production, production milk Levy of inhibits epithelial protein the & SECTION8Berne in enzymes progesterone genes 826 encoding express secretion involved milk and Although milk 44.38 Neuroendocrinereflexcausedbysucklingatthenippleandleadingtosecretionofoxytocinandprolactin.Inturnthesehormonesinducecontinuedmilkproduction(galactopoiesis)andmilklet-down.Prolactinalsoinduceslactationalamenorrhea. (ModifiedfromWhiteBA,PorterfieldSP.Endocrine Physiology. 4thed.Philadelphia:Mosby;2013. nervosa Parvicellular Gonadotropes Dopamine Hypothalamus Lactational Breast neurons )Magnocellular amenorrhea distalis Pars ˜ Pars PRF?? ° GnRH˜ neurons FSH Parvicellular Ovary Lactotropes LH and ˜ neurons ° Prolactin Galactopoiesis